F2455 11742430 48509
Lector, scias faetum hunc nostrum in ipso partu prie dolore nimio (sumptum putà immodicum) ex∣piraturū fuisse, si Maecenalū aliquot inanus benevolae com̄ode conatibus nostris non ob∣stetricas-sent
A Pisgah-sight of PALESTINE and The CONFINES thereof, with the HISTORIE of the old and new TESTAMENT acted thereon. By Thomas Fuller B. D. Gen. 43. 11. Take of ye. best fruits in ye land in your vessels, and carry downe ye man a present, a little balm, and a little honey, spices and Myrrhe, nuts and Almonds. Ierem. 8. 7. Yea, ye stork in ye heaven knoweth her appointed times, and ye turtle, and ye Crane, and ye Swallow observe ye time of their coming, but my people know not ye iudgment of ye Lord. Votum Authoris Terrestres Solymas mihi quiscrípsisse de disti, Coelestes tandem ds habitare, Devs. Printed by M. F for Iohn Williams at ye Crowne in St Paules Churchyard
A PISGAH-SIGHT OF PALESTINE AND THE CONFINES THEREOF, WITH The History of the Old and New TESTAMENT acted thereon. BY THOMAS FVLLER B. D. GEN. 43. 11. Take of the best fruits in the land in your vessels, and carry down the man a present, a little balm, and a little honey, spices and Myrrhe, nuts and Almonds. JER. 8. 7. Yea, the Stork in the heaven knoweth her appointed times, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow observe the time of their coming; but my people know not the judgment of the Lord. LONDON, Printed by I. F. for Iohn Williams at the signe of the Crown in Pauls Church-yard. MDCL.
To the Right Honourable ESME STUART, Earl of March, and Darneley, Lord Leighton &c. Son and Heir to the Illustrious JAMES Duke of Richmond and Lennox. MY LORD, COnsulting with my self about a Patron for this Book, I concluded to make choice of such a Person as should be both of most noble extraction, and of spotless innocency: So that in this captious Age, none should presume to charge him with the least offence in thought, word, or deed. For justly fearing too many faults might be found in the book it self, I desired to make some amends by dedicating it to One free from all exception. Your Honour is the first in our Nobility, whom I finde qualified according to my desire; descended from the
best Houses in England, Scotland, and France. And as it happeneth in a Constellation, that the Lustre there∣of, amounting from many Stars together, darkeneth the light of those particulars, which produced it: So in your Honours Pedegree, the collective splendour obscureth the distinct brightness of those severall families whence the same re∣sulteth. Now that your Honour cannot be taxed with any actu∣all offence, your tender Moneths not as yet compleating a Year; do sufficiently evidence. Whose innocence is the most entire Relique of our Primitive integrity; and most per∣fect pattern of our future felicity. Yea some admiring what motives to mirth Infants meet with in their silent and solitary smiles, have resolved (how truely I know not) that then they converse with Angels, as indeed such cannot amongst mortals finde any fitter Companions. One, or more of these three main Ends are aimed at by Authors in all ingenuous dedications; Hope to receive pro∣tection; Desire to derive instruction; and Zeal to express affection. For the first, though you cannot by your Power, yet you may by your Innocence be an excellent Patron to protect our en∣suing Work. In these civill wars, some have saved themselves from the sword, with no other shield then bearing a Babe in their armes, which rebated their enemies fury into compas∣sion. So, when some shall be ready to wound our Book with their censuring Darts, they will be mollified into mercy finding your innocent Name prefixed in the Front thereof. As for deriving instruction, I confess your Honour as yet incapable thereof. But seeing Infants clothes are providently
made with the biggest, to which they will grow up in process of time; why may not books (the clothes of the minde) be pro∣portioned above their present capacity, in hope they will seaso∣nably shoot up to the understanding thereof? And untill such time as your Lordships judgment can reap profit from our De∣scriptions herein, may your eyes but take pleasure in the Maps which here are presented unto you. But the last, not least consideration in my choice of your Honour, is my ambition to tender my humble service thereun∣to; The rather because ESMEOr Amedcus the Toplll Saint of Aul∣igney. your auspicious Name promiseth, in my apprehension, some good success, now at the third return, as long since at the first imposing thereof on your Ancestour. For Esme Lord Aulbigney (a place of great priviledges in the Province of Berry, first by the King of France bestowed on [and still possessed by] your Family, in reward of their signal service to that Crown) about two hundred years since proved the happy reviver of your family almost extinguished for want of a Heir, and by his virtuous demeanour added much honour thereunto. The same Name now returns on your Lordship, who found your Fathers house in point of posterity in as low a Condition. Indeed your Grandfather left a numerous off-spring, whom I may fitly compare to the many strings of some musicall Instru∣ment. But amongst his male-issue (for the rest I pass by as si∣lent strings, sending no sounds to posterity, but losing their own Surnames in their matches) One was soon fretted in pieces with sickness; Three more, cut off in these wars; One absent be∣yond the Seas, and not easily to be tuned to a married estate; and the other single string remaining [His Grace your Father] left
altogether issueless untill your Lordships welcome Nativity. But O! what melody can Heavens hand make on a Mono∣chord? which since hath sent your Lordship on a good message I hope, to the Honest house of LENNOX. But I grow tedious in a long Letter to a little Lord, and therefore turn my Pen into Prayers, that Christ would be plea∣sed to take you up into his Armes, (whose embraces are the best swadling-clothes, as to streighten, so to strengthen you in the growth of Grace) to layMark, 10. 16. his hands upon you and bless you, that you may grow in stature and favour with God and with Man; The daily desire of YOUR LORDSHIPS humble Oratour Tho. Fuller. Waltham Abbey Iuly 7. 1650.
To the READER. WHen Iacob had served Laban full seven years for his daughter Rachel, and now promised himself the possession of what he had long looked and much laboured for; his hopes were frustrated by theGen. 29. 23. substituting of Leah in the room of her sister. And although it may be pleaded that Leah was not well qualified and highly meriting in her self, yet still Leah was not Rachel, and Iacob remained both deceived and injured thereby. Many have long patiently waited, that I should now accor∣ding to my promise set forth an Ecclesiasticall History; who now may justly com∣plain that their expectation is abused, finding a Changeling in the place thereof, a Book of a far different Nature tendered in stead thereof. And should I plead with Laban the Custome of the Countrey, that it is not fashionable toGen. 19. 26. give the younger before the first-born; should I alledge for my self that this Book, containing matter of more ancient date, ought to precede the other, yet this, like Labans answer, will be taken rather as a , then solid satisfaction. But, Reader, let me plead in my just defence, that if you be pleased to peruse my In my Epistle to the Reader before the Holy State. promise, you will finde the same conditionall, and not obligatory, except (besides other requisites there expressed) Peace be first setled amongst us. And indeed the subject challengeth the same, seeing Truth cannot be matched to Safety in such Rela∣tions, till Peace shall first contract them. Now herein I make my severest Creditour my sole Iudge, appealing to him whe∣ther the Premises be performed. True it is we have no Wars at this instant, yet we have Rumours of wars; and though the former onely doth destroy, the latter also doth distract. Are these gloomy dayes already disclouded?(to use my own expression in myIbidem. Promise) or rather is it not true in the Scripture phrase, that theEccles. 12. 2. clouds return after rain? Indeed I am sorry that I can say so much in my own defence, and should account my self happy, if all other Breaches were made up, and I onely to be punished for my breach of Promise. Which, notwithstanding all the difficulties of the subject, and distractions of our days, I hope in God, in competent time to effect, might but my endevours meet with a quiet residence, and proportionable incouragement for such undertakings. Mean time accept of these my Labours, which by Gods blessing, and the bounty of my friends are brought into the light: Usefull I hope for the understanding of the Scriptures. What I have herein performed, I had rather the Reader should tell me at the end, then I tell him at the beginning of the Book. For the manifold faults herein, I doubt not but the ingenuous Reader (finding in Palestinee six Cities of Refuge, by Gods own appointment, for the safeguard of such as slew one unawares without malice prepense) will of his bounty build a seventh in his own bosome for my protection, when guilty of unvoluntary mistakes in so great a work. If thou reapest any profit thereby, give God the glory; To whose providence thou art commit∣ted byJosh. 20. 7. Thine in Christ Iesus THO. FULLER.
. ; ; , . , . JOH. RIDLEY.
THE GENERALL DESCRIPTION OF JUDEA. CHAP. 1. The Designe asserted from causlesse Cavils. § . BEing now by Gods assistance to undertake the De∣scription of Iudea,Three grand objections a∣gainst this sub∣ject. my condition appeares not un∣like to the Israelites atNumb. 13. 23, & 28. Kadesh-Barnea, who were much pleased with the report that the Spies brought of the fruitfulnesse of the Countrey, un∣till they told them of Ahiman, Sheshai and Talmai, the three sonnes of Anak: which quite appaled their courage and dead∣ed their desire thereof. In the like manner whilest I am invited with se∣verall pleasing considerations, and delightfull motives, to adventure on this work, three Giantlike objections, which must be encountred, do in a manner dishearten me from further proceeding. For some will lay to my charge, that the description of this Countrey 1 Hath formerly been done by many. 2 Cannot perfectly be done by any. 3 If exactly done, is altogether uselesse, and may be somewhat superstitious. § 2. Yet we fear not,No disgrace to adventure on the same work after ma∣ny others. by Gods blessing, and the Readers favour, seve∣rally to enter the lists against them all. For the first: Whereas it is ob∣jected, that many formerly have performed the same; this cavill is not planted particularly against my indevours, but is levelled against the industry of all Posterity, in any future designe.Eccles. 1. 9. Solomon saith, there is no new thing under the Sunne. Except therefore men were Gods to create new subjects to write upon, groundlesse is the first exception against us. It never disheartened S. Luke to write his Gospell, for as much as many had taken in hand to set it forth before. Yea the former endevours of many in the same matter, argue the merit of the work to be great. For sure
there is some extraordinary worth in that face, which hath had so ma∣ny Suitors. Wherefore although we cannot with Columbus, finde out another world, and bring the first tydings of an unknown Conti∣nent or Island, by us discovered, yet our labours ought not to be con∣demned as unprofitable, if setting forth an old subject in a new edition enlarged and amended. This I dare say, though many have written discourses without Mappes, and more Mappes without discourses, and Adricom. puts Zabulun Issachar & Manasses in one Mappe, Ephraim, Dan & Benjamin in another. some both, (yet so that three tribes are joined in one Mappe) none have formerly in any tongue (much lesse in English) presented us with di∣stinct Mappes and descriptions together. § 3. But in the second place it is objected,2. Object. that certainty in this sub∣ject is unattainable;Certainty here∣in not to be ob∣tained. so that the most studious therein, after they have travelled the whole day, through many tedious difficultie, must bee fain to take their hard lodging at night on a bare uncertainty. The bowels of the best Mappes are puffed up with the humours of fancy, and a scepticall windinesse, so that a conjecturall Earthquake shakes the foundations of the strongest mountains, in the point of their exact si∣tuation. Such are the irreconcileable differences betwixt Geographers in their descriptions. § 4. For answer:2. Answ. I could wish that this objection also, lay onely a∣gainst the work in hand,This should not quench but quicken our in¦dustry. and might not [almost] equally be enforced against other liberall undertakings: for he that holds a reed in one hand to mete the Topography, and an houre-glasse in the other to measure the Chronology of the Scripture, shall meet with as many, if not more uncertainties, in the latter as the former. And yet the learned pains of such-as labour therein, justly merit commendation. If all conjectu∣rall results should be cast out for weeds, few hearbs would be left in the Gardens of most Arts and Sciences. Saint Paul1 Cor. 13. 9. hath a passage, We know in part, and prophecy in part; which is a good curb for our curiosity: And the same Apostle hath a precept,1 Thes. 5. 21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good; which is as good a spurre for our diligence. As for the differen∣ces betwixt Geographers, they ought not to make us carelesse to follow any, but carefull to choose the best; except with the fluggards drowzie fancy, we tune the Alarums to our industry, to be Lullabies to our lazinesse. § 5. In the last place it is objected,2. Object. that the designe, if exactly finished, amounts but to a difficult trifle,It is a difficult trifle. hard to doe, uselesse when done. And who will pity the aking of his teeth, who hath wilfully hurt them, with cracking that shell, wherein he knew was no kernell? It matters not to any mans salvation, to know the accurate distance be∣twixt Iericho and Ierusalem; and he that hath climbed to the top of mount Libanus, is not in respect of his soul, a haires breadth nearer to heaven. Besides, some conceive they heare Palestine saying unto them, as Samuel to Saul endevouring to raise him from his grave,1 Sam. 28. 15. Why hast thou disquieted
me to bring me up? Describing this Countrey is but disturbing it, it being better to let it sleep quietly, intombed in its owne ashes. The rather, because theRevel. 21. 10. New Ierusalem is now daily expected to come down, and these corporall (not to say carnall) studies of this terrestriall Canaan, be∣gin to grow out of fashion, with the more knowing sort of Christians. § 6. It is answered,3. Answ. though these studies are not essentiall to salation, yet they are ornamentall,It is ornamen∣tall to divinity. to accomplish men with knowledge, contri∣buting much to the true understanding of the History of the Bible. Re∣markable is that passage of the Apostle, Acts 17. 26. And hath made of one bloud all nations of men, for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath de∣termined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation: wherein we may see Divinity the Queen waited on by three of her principall Ladies of honour, namely, skill in 1 Genealogies, concerning the persons of men and their Pede∣grees, of one bloud all nations. 2 Chronology, in the exact computation of the times afore appointed. 3 Geography, measuring out the limits of severall nations, and the bounds of their habitations. Our work in hand is a parcell of Geography touching a particular description of Iudea; without some competent skill wherein, as the blind Syrians2 King. 6. 19. intending to goe to Dothan, went to Samaria; so ignorant per∣sons discoursing of the Scripture, must needs make many absurd, and dangerous mistakes. Nor can knowledge herein, be more speedily and truly attained, then by particular description of the tribes, where the eye will learn more in an hour from a Mappe, then the eare can learn in a day from discourse. § 7. But this last objection being forked,No danger of superstition in this subject. hath the sharper point there∣of still behinde, challenging this our subject to be guilty of superstition. A sinne always detestable to God, but now adayes grown odious to man. And well it were if the edge of their Zeal were equally whetted against Profanenesse. Sure if this our work were faulty in this kind, I my self would send it the same way with the EphesianActs 19. 19. conjuring bookes. Not all the water of Kishon, of Iordan, of the Red, of the Dead, of the Middle-Land Sea, described in these Maps, should serve to quench the fire, but all should be burnt to ashes. But no such haste I hope, to condemn this innocent book, wherein studiously we have abstained from all such pictures as come within the bounds of danger, yea borders of offence, and have onely made choice of those, which the most precise approve usefull for the illustration of Scripture.
CHAP. 2. The different names and bounds of Judea. § 1. THis Country which we now come to describe,Six generall names of Iudea. was successive∣ly called by severall names. 1 The LandGen. 12. 5. of Canaan, from the sons of Canaan that first posses∣sed it. 2 The Land of Promise, which name after four hundred and odde years honourably ended, and was swallowed up in performance. 3 The Land of Iudah and Israel, consisting of these two Kingdomes. 4 Iudea, so called of Iudah the most puissant Tribe of the twelve. 5 Palestine (from the Philistines.)In Clio. cap. 105. & in Tha∣lia cap. 5. & 91. & Polymnia cap. 8. Herodotus being the first Author, which I find so tearming it, and all Greeks and Latins after him. 6 The Holy Land, because our Saviours Passion was acted thereon. But fear makes me refrain from using this word, lest whilest I call the Land holy, this Age count me superstitious. § 2. In bounding this Land,The bounds of the larger Canaan. a necessary distinction must be premised, the neglecting (or at least not observing) whereof hath engaged many in inextricable difficulties. Cannan was twofold, 1. The Larger. 2. The Lesser. The Larger is described Deut. 11. 24. Every place whereon the soles of your feet shall tread, shall be yours: from the wildernesse, and Lebanon, from the Exod. 23. 31. river, the river Euphrates, even unto the uttermost sea, shall your coast be. This Land in full latitude was never peaceably possessed by the Iews as pro∣per owners thereof any considerable time. Say not, God fell short of his promise. Oh no: the Iews fell short of his precepts, who being narrow hearted in piety, and straitned in their own bowels, contracted their soil by their sinnes; and obstructed the bounty of God intended unto them, by their ingratitude. For the Promise ran onely conditionally, If ye shall hearken diligently to myDeut. 11. 13. & 22. Commandements. And had not Gods mer∣cy to them been more then their obedience to him, their country had been narrowed to nothing, and shrunk to an indivisible punctum: or at the best and biggest had been but a prison, fit for the punishment of so rebellious a people. § 3. And yet in somemanner in a qualifyed sense,In what sense the Jews pos∣sessed it. we may observe the Iews did stretch their dominion to the bounds aforesaid in a double con∣sideration. 1 By victorious Salleys and Incursions. Thus the Children of Reuben having1 Chro. 5. 22. conquered the Hagarites, inhabited east-ward unto the entring in of the wildernesse, from the river1 Chron. 5. 9. Euphrates. 2 Per Gentes in amicitiam receptas. By the nations which by amicable compliance (though having absolute command in themselves)
accepted of the Jewish King to be honourary feodaries unto him. Thus where2 Sam. 8. 3, &c. David took some Kings by conquest, as his Vassals, more took him by composition as their Protectour. And it is plainly said of2 Kin. 4. 24. 2 Chron. 9. 26. Solomon that he had Dominion over all the region on this side the river from Tipsa even to Azzah, over all the Kings on this side the river: and e had peace  all sides round about. See we here an Essay of Gods goodnesse made to the Israelites. That froward people worshipped him by fits and girds, starting aside like a broken bow: and therefore God to admonish them of the unconstancy of their service, vouchsafed onely to the  a cursory and unsetled Tentdwelling to Euphrates. Whereas, had that people solidly and serious∣ly set themselves constantly to serve God; no doubt, their Incursions had been turned into fixed Habitations, and the whole Nation (not one∣ly by the Synecdoche of this one tribe) had peaably possessed the large limits allotted unto them. And whereas now onely David and Solomon (whom I may more fitly style Emperours then Kings of this larger Canaan) rather commanded then possessed to Eupbrates, God, no doubt, had ex∣tended their full Dominions to the same dimensions. § 4. But the lesser Canaan was contented with narower bounds,The limits of the lesser Ca∣naan. con∣taining onely those Nations which God had designed for utter destru∣ction, and is described, Gen. 10. 19. , and Admah, and Zebojim, even unto . And whereas in the lar∣ger Canaan, when the Israelites besieged any City, GodDeut. 20. 10. commanded them to profer peace, before they proclaimed war against it, in this lesser Cana∣an, they were finally to rootDeut▪ 7. 24. them out. And where God commands men to destroy people, (but first let us be sure that God commands us to destroy them) the foulest quarter is too fair for them, and those have not lesse pity, but more piety, which  their tter destruction: as the Iews were to serve the Inhabitas of this lesser Canan, with∣out any ceremony of peace once tendred unto them. § 5. This lesser Canaan extended from the wildernesse in the South to mount Lebanon in the North,The length threof 1600. furlongs. and from Iordan on the East, to the Mid∣land Sea on the West. The length thereof sixteen hundred furlongs (so far the bloud ran out of the wine-presse, Revel. 14. 20.) which, allowing ten furlongs to the mile, according to the Eastern account, (whereof largely hereafter) amounts to an hundred and threescore miles. The breadth thereof generally fifty; to which if the kingdome of Sihon and Og be added on the other side Iordan (parcels of Canaan the larger, and possessed by Reben, Gad and half Manasses) it will make up the breadth to eighty miles. § 6. Having thus aigned the small bounds of Canaan,The matchlesse fertility of the land. some perchance will place their scorn, where they ought to plant their wonder; and will beginne to contemn, what they should justly admire: because
all Canaan seems but oneGen. 19. 20. Zoar; Is it not a little one? Yea, some proud Geographer will scarce stoop to take up so small a Ragge of land into his consideration. But let such know, that extracted Spirits, and Elix∣ars are small in bulk in comparison of great and grosse bodies; and the land may passe for the quintessence of fruitfulnesse it self. So that what it lacked in length and breadth, it had in depth, as if nature had heaped one acre upon another in the matchlesseEzek. 20. 6. fertility thereof. Our age barren in beliefe, affords not faith so easily to the story, as this land afforded food to2 Sam. 24. 9. thirteen hundred thousand men, besides women, children, impotent persons, and all the1 Chron. 2. 5, 6. See also 2 Chron. 13. 3. Levites and Benjamites left un∣numbred. In generall, it is charactered to be a countrey flowing with milk and honey, that is, having plenty of all things both for necessity and delight. § 7. More particularly it is described byDeut. 8. 7, 8, 9. Moses,Moses his ca∣racter thereof. A good land, a land of brookes of water, of fountaines and depths that spring out of vallies and hills, a land of wheat and barly, and vines and figtrees, and pomegranates: a land of oile-olive and honey; a land wherein thou shalt eate bread without scarceness, thou shalt not lacke any thing in it: a land whose stones are iron, and out of whose hills thou maist digge brasse. For the further clearing of which description, we will ex∣actly observe the severall commodities of Canaan, which nature boun∣tifully bestowed upon it. Onely the land seems unhappy herein, that the fruitfulnesse thereof must come under our barren style to describe it. And yet on second thoughts I perceive, lean pens are fittest to describe fat Countes. The soile of the county of Armagh in Ireland is so rank of it selfe, that if any compost or artificiall improvement be added un∣to it, it turns barren out of sullennesse, andCamb. Brit. in comitat Armach. indignation, that men should suspect the native fruitfulnesse thereof: and Fat upon Fat is false Heraldry in husbandry. Lest in like manner we should offend this Country of Cannan with additionall ornaments of Rhetorique, and lest all lourishes of Eloquence be misinterpreted distrusts of the reall worth of this Country, a plain style and simple relation best becomes our pre∣sent subject. CHAP. 3. Of the underground wealth of Canaan. § 1. SHips when sailing are generally conceived to have one moity of them invisible under water,Iudaea's invlsi∣ble treasure. and some countries in like manner are counted to have their wealth equally within the earth as upon it. But the proportion holds not exactly in Canaan; whose visible wealth farre transcended her concealed substance, and yet we finde some mi∣nerals therein of considerable value. § 2. First, Salt,Sat. so necessary in it self, that without it neither sustenance
is avoury to man, norMar. 9. 49. Levit. 2. 13. Sacrifice acceptable to God. Yet had not the Iews more use, then plenty thereof. It seems it was a very cheap commo∣dity, when Abimelech (not hoping to reap any harvest thereby) sowed the city of Sechm withJudg. 9. 45. falt. This was of two sorts in Iudea▪ sal fossilis, which was digged out of the earth, whereof great store about the dead, otherwise called the Salt Sea, and sal coctilis, which was boiled out of water, atJosh. 11. 8. & 15. 62. Mizrepoth-maiim neare Zidon. § 3. Secondly, materials of Glasse,Materials of glasse. whereof the best in the world, al∣most to the purity of crystall, is found in thePlin. nat. hist. Cendevian lake, and river Belus, whereof largely hereafter in the tribe of Asher. And yet we read not in Scripture that the Iews ever used glasse for drinking vessels, either because the invention of them was not so ancient, or because of the plenty of cups they had of purer metall. We in England know that glasses are but the seconds, which succeed on the Cupboard, when Plate the principall is otherwise disposed of. § 4. Brimstoe.Brimstone and lapis Iudaicus. How usefull this is in Physique and fire-works I need not relate. It is one of the parents of most metals and inclined the wa∣ters of Iudea to be soveraign Bathes, and have other medicinall quali∣ties. Marble also was digged up in great plenty in mount1 King. 5. 17, 18. Lebanon, con∣ducing much to the adorning of Gods temple and many princely pala∣ces in Ierusalem. Precious stones they had none, except Lapis Iudaicus be counted for one, commended by Galen, and is prescribed as excellent to cure the Stone. Where by the way it will not be amisse to observe, that amongst the many maladies to which the Iews bodies were sub∣ject, I finde not the Stone mentioned in Scripture, though I dare not a∣scribe it to the plenty of this stone, as a preservative against it. § 5. Brasse andDeut. 8. 9. IronBrasse & Iron. abounded in this Country.Deut. 33. 25. Moses blesseth Asher, Thy shooes shall be Iron and Brasse, prognosticating the plenty of those me∣tals in that tribe. If any except, that brasse is no originall, but a com∣pound metall of Copper and other ingredients; the answer is easie, by a frequent and familiar Metonymie, it being put for the materials where∣of it was composed. § 6. As for the two principall metals, IudeaNo gold in Iudea, and why. may say of them as Saint Act. 3. 6. Peter to the Cripple, Gold and silver have I none. And it will be no lesse pleasant, then profitable to recount the reasons thereof. 1 These metals are generally granted by nature in compensati∣on to barren countries. Now whereas Iudea had plenty of o∣ther commodities, it was too much that Leahs fruitfulnesse should shine with Rahels fairenesse, and glister with the lustre of gold and silver. 2 God would have his peoplePsal. 121. 1. look to the hills, from whence their help cometh:Mat. 6. 19. To lay up their treasure in heaven, where rust and moth doe not corrupt: sursum corda, sursum oculos, and not that their eyes by a re∣trograde motion should be peeping and poring on the earth,
where the treasures concealed, are by Poets consigned to Pluto King of hell: and modern authors avouch, that malignant Spirits haunt the places, where these metals are found. As if the Devill did there sit abrood to hatch them, cunningly pretending an unwillingnesse to part with them; whereas indeed he gains more by one mine minted out into money, then by a thousand concealed in the earth. 3 Because it stands not with the State of a Prince to be his own purse-bearer. God would not have this Lordly land of Canaan to be incumbred with carrying such a burden. Let Ophir, and Tarshish, and Havilah have the place of Iudas, to beare the bagge for Iudea. 4 Because there might be left unto the Gentiles an opportunity to gratifie the Iews, and to testifie their duty and service to God and his Temple.Psal. 72. 10. The Kings of Tarshish and of the Isles shall bring pre∣sents, the Kings of Sheba and Seba shall bring gifts. Now these nati∣tions would have been wholly disheartened if they could have brought Iudea no novelty, and onely presented her with such things, whereof she had plenty before. And yet whosoever shall observe the1 King. 10. 27. abundance of gold and silver in Solomons time in the city of Ierusalem, will conclude this Country not to be the cistern, but fountain of those metals. As if divine providence had so di∣vided it, that other lands should be at the care & cost to bear, dig out and refine, and Iudea have the honour and credit, to use, expend, yea neglect, such glittering need-nots to humane happinesse. More minerals no doubt were in the land of Iudea, and let not either our ignorance, or the Iews idlenesse be interpreted the lands barrennesse, the upper fruitfulnesse of whose soil made them the more negligent in digging into the bowels thereof as those need not to play beneath board, who have all the visible game in their own hands? CHAP. 4. Of the wealth accruing to Judea from the vegetables therein. § 1. AMongst the native and proper commodities of Iudea, Balm,Balm a proper∣ty of Iudea. or Balsam most justly challengeth the principall place. For when Iacob advised his sonnes to provide a present for Ioseph, Take (saith he) of the best fruits of the land in your vessels, a littleGen. 43. 11. balme, and a little honey, spices &c.Ios. hist. Antiq. lib. 8. cap. 2. Hereby appears the improbable error of such as report how amongst other rich presents the Queen of Sheba brought to Solomon, the first plants of Balsam, which afterwards grew in Iudea. Whereas in∣deed her bringing of those into that Countrey, had been no better then carring of water to the fountain. § 2. Heare the judgment of Pagan writers altogether unconcernedCommended by heathen writers.
in this businesse.Pli. nat. hist. lib. 12. cap. 25. Pliny saith, Balsamum uni terrarum Iudaeae concessum, un∣derstanding that Iudea alone was the Primitive place where it grew, though afterwards colonies thereof were transplanted into Egypt and other countries. With him agreeth Theophrastus, Dioscorides andGal. de Antid. li. 2. ca. 3. Galen, who professeth that he went on purpose to Iudea, to observe the distilling thereof, and carried a small portion of balm about him, by comparing thereof to discover and confute the frequent impostures of such as coun∣terfeit the same. This Balsame was principally twofold. 1 Xulo-balsamum, being the parent, namely the shrub, (or in com∣plement call it the tree) out of which it proceeded. 2 Opo-balsamum, being the daughter, which trickled like teares from the former, usefull for men Sound, making a most odoriferous and pleasant perfume; Sick, being a soveraign salve for their wounds; Dead, being an admirable preservative a∣gainst corruption. So that their embalmed bodies seem'd in some sort to typifie the eternity of their soule. § 3. But this Balm was not so fixed to Gilead or any other part of Iudea, but that it was moveable thence upon the sinnes of the people. For after some flittings of this plant to Iericho (whereof afterwards) it was first by Pompey, and finally by Vespasian carried captive to Rome. Where it thrived so well that it was never (saithAlor  & procerior. Plin. nat. hist. l. 12. c. 15. Pliny) fairer or fruitful∣ler. Which passage may serve as a parable, whereof our Saviour him∣self is the sense. Who being formerly confined to Palestine alone, did afterwards effectually extend himself for the good of all nations. But enough hereof, if not too much. Yet seeing the reader, if being to fill his viall with this precious liquor, would not complain of overmuch measure, I trust he will not be displeased with our larger description thereof. § 4.Deur. 8. 8. Oil-olive,Oil-olive. so called to difference it both from seed, and train-oile. Hereof three kindes, or rather degrees. The coursest imploied for lamps; a finer sort used for meat, and the most refined of all com∣pounded with various spices; whereof ointment was made, where∣with great Persons on solemn festivals used to anoint themselves, and upon other occasions, many others. § 5. Honey.Honey.Exod. 3. 8. & 1 Sam. 14 25. 26. This was the Sugar, as Salt was the Pepper of the anci∣ents. And although Sugar canes grew in Iudea (whereof some conside∣rable store at this day) yet the use thereof was either unknown to, or neglected by the Iews in Scripture, preferring honey in their daily diet. And it may seem strange, that honey being so delicius in taste, and a staple commodity in Canaan, wasLevit. 2. 11. forbidden to be used in any sacrifice. Learned men trouble themselves about the reason of this prohibition.
Some conceive voluptuousnesse thereby is forbidden; others, lip-lu∣sciousnesse and hypocrisie in divine service; others, pride and ambi∣tion; (because honey turnes into choler)Hugo Groius in locum prae∣dictum. others, that it is forbidden in opposition to the Persian sacrifices, wherein honey was principally offer∣ed. And whereas the varieties of fancies herein are infinite, some sober∣ly rest themselves on no other reason; but divine pleasure. As for Wax, the cask of honey, it was used the lesse for lights, because lamps were so much in fashion. § 6. Wheat.Wheat. They are called theDeut. 32. 14. Kidneys of wheat, because the grains therein were so plump and swelling, as if all out of Pharaohs seven full eares. Yea our modern Merchants will tell you (provided they be first out of the Turkish dominions; otherwise it is death to be caught in the manner) that even at this day they carry much wheat out of Palestine into Italy it self. Say not, wheat was not so plentifull in this Countrey, be∣cause our Saviours constant fare was on barly loaves: this argues the humility of Christ, not the barrenness of the Countrey; otherwise by the same consequence it might be inferred, that there were no houses in Iudea, because he wanted where to lay his head. These four aforesaid were the elementall Commodities of Canaan, whereof that Countrey had not onely a self-sufficiency, but also sent plenty thereof toEzk. 27. 17. Tyre, thence to the whole world. Iudah and the land of Israel they were thy Mer∣chants, they traded in the market wheat of Minnith, and Pannag, and Honey, and Oil, and Balm. § 7. WineWine. may follow in the next place, whereof such plenty, that IacobGen. 49. 11. Numb. 13. 23. prophecyed of Iudah, that he should binde his foal unto the vine, and his asses colt unto the choice vine &c. That is, having occasion to dismount his Asse, and tye him for a time, vines should offer themselves as most obvious to fasten him unto; and those so great (Adjectives in other Countreys, but Substantives here) that he might safely tye his beast to them, which with us are tyed to other trees for their support. Nor were their grapes less good then great, as aSidonius. Poet (the most competent Judg of the matter in hand) doth bear witness, Vina mihi non sunt Gazetica, Chia, Falerna, Quaeque Sareptano palmite missa bibas. I have no Gaza, Chios, Falern wine, Nor any flowing from Sarepta's vine. Thus making a quadripartite division of good wine, two members thereof, that of Gaza and Sarepta, the one falls in the tribe of Simeon, the other of Asher, both in the countrey of Palestine. § 8.Josh. 2. 6. Flax. Hereof great plenty. And pity it was so good a commo∣dity should be prostituted to idolatry, which caused God to threaten that he would rescue and recover hisHose. 2. 9. flax againe. The Jewish women were excellentProv. 31. 13. houswives, and hereof made great profit, venting it into forein parts.
§ 9. Wood of all sorts; so that Palestine was a continued grove of trees, covered over with streight Cedars, strong Oakes, shady Palmes, sweet Firres &c. If the body of Hercules may be guessed from his foot, take the Mustard, the little Toe of trees, into consideration, and thence collect the vast proportion of great woods. Some perchance may count it a Rabbinicall vaunt whatRab. Ioseph. in the Babylo∣nish Talmud, Ketab. fol. 3. 6. one writes: A certain man of Sichem had bequeathed by his Father three boughs of Mustard, one of which was broken off from the rest, and it yeelded nine Kabs of seed, and the wood thereof was sufficient to co∣ver over the Potters house. One may also suspect an Hyperbole in whatJerusalem Talmud. a∣nother saith, I had a stemme of mustard in my garden, into which I could climbe as into a Figtree. However, ourMat. 13. 31, 32. Saviours words of the extraordinary growth of this plant must needs be true; and by the same proportion (surely the Iews had not more sawce then meat) other trees must be allowed to be of unusuall greatness. § 10. Here I omit to speak of the Dates, Almonds, Nuts, (at this day called Pistachioes, and most cordiall in Physick) Figs, Pomegranates and other severall fruits, whose particular description I passe by on purpose, lest our book should light on some hungry man or longing woman to read, whose appetites I may unhappily raise, but cannot satisfie again. And to leave a good sent behind at the close of the chapter, we must not forget the great store of Frankincense, Myrrh, and otherGen. 43. 11. Spices which were plentifully afforded in Palestine. CHAP. 5. Of the store of beasts for food, service, and pleasure in Palestine. § 1. WE step now a stair higher from vegetable to sensible crea∣tures: wherein this countrey was no lesse happy, such was the variety it afforded therein. Which will appear, first, if we furnish forth a feast of the flesh, fish, and fowl in Palestine; these particulars be∣ing premised. First, that no exception be taken at our false ranking of dishes. The Apostles said, it was not their office toAct. 6. 2. serve tables, and such mistakes are none at all in Divines Secondly, we name onely solid and substantiall meat, whereon a cunning Cook (besides sawces and sallets) may with compounded and forced dishes descant to indefinite∣nesse. Lastly, know the Law forbad the Iews the feeding on severall meats, so that their life was a Lent, to abstain from such food, to which Christianity allows us a licence:Levit. 11. 4. 5, 6. &c. Hogges-flesh, Conies, Hares, Swans, Herons, Lapwings, all fishes in armour, fenced with shels, recoun∣ted amongst the dainties of our diet, were prohibited unto them. Which very prohibition speakes their plenty in that country, otherwise the law had been needless to forbid such things which the land did not afford.
§ 2. Fetching Salt, Bread and Wine from the former chapter, (all of the Quorum to every feast) first Veale is brought in, (food for Angels when Gen. 18. 6, 7. Sarah dressed it) Beef of the bulls of Basan, or if that be too course, of the stalledProv. 15. 17. Oxen; Lamb, Mutton and Kid, savoury meat, ifGen. 27. 9. Rebecca have the cooking thereof; Venison both red and fallow, for so we find in Solo∣mons bill of fare,1 King. 4. 23. Harts, Bucks and Bugles. § 3. Fowl of all sorts follow, Hennes, andMat. 23. 37. & 26. 24. Chickens. Capons I dare promise none, as uncertain whether mutilating of birds was then in fashion, to make them barren, that mans luxury might fructifie the more upon them. Next plenty ofLevit. 14. 22. Pigeons, the poor mans lambs; For such as could not goe to the cost of the one, was to provide the other for a sacrifice.Numb. 11. 31, 32. Quails in abundance; for though their plenty in the wilder∣nesse was miraculous, when a cloud of them tendred themselves to be taken by the hands of the Israelites, yet ordinarily there was store of them in Palestine. Let Locusts for their wings sake be ranked amongst the fowl, onely to fill up an empty place of the table, for otherwise none but the stomach of the mortifiedMat. 3. 4. Baptist would feed on so course a fare. § 4. Fishes come in the next place, whose severall sorts in Sea, Rivers, and lakes were so many, that onely Adam, whose memory was the No∣menclator of the names of all creatures by him imposed, can summon them by their proper denominations. Of these all that hadLevit. 11. 9. Finnes and scales were permitted the Iews to eat. Butter the sawce-generall to fish, must not be forgotten. A staple dish of our Saviours whilest an infant, Isa 7. 15. Butter and honey shall he eat. Cheese concludes all; such as1 Sam. 17. 18. David brought to his brethren, such as2 Sam. 17. 29. Barzillai provided for David. Let not any dain∣ty dairy women object, that Jewish cheese must needs be course, where milke ofDeut. 32. 14. sheep andProv. 27. 27. goats was so much in use: For a mixture of such milk is in Parmizan it self, so delicious to the palat. And now for Grace before and after meat, might not Palestine thankfully say with Psal. 3. 5. David, Thou dost prepare a table before me in the sight of mine adversaries, thou dost anoint mine head with oil, and my cup runneth over? Yea, what is said of the earth in generall, is most properly applyable to this Country, O Lord howPsl. 104. 24. manifold are thy works! in wisdome hast thou made them all, the earth is full of thy riches. § 5. Besides cattell for food, there were others for labour, Asses, Mules, Camels, Dromedaries, whereof in due place. Birds also and beasts of prey, Eagles, Hawkes, Lions, Beares, Boares &c. Some will say this was a mis∣chief in Palestine, whose inhabitants might be said to dwell daily like Daniel in the Lions den, such the store of ravenous beasts freely roaving up and down the countrey. But let such know, that by these beasts conti∣nued of purpose, God kept his people in an awfull dependence upon him; whilest they feared God, these beastsGen. 9. . dreaded them; and mans piety muzled up the mouth of these ravenous creatures. Otherwise
when these Iews rebelled against their Master, the beasts (one of Gods Ezek. 14. 21. four sore judgments) were let loose, and became the just executioners of divine vengeance on a wicked nation. To conclude, such the variety of cattell herein, that from hence Noah might have fraught his Ark with a couple of most creatures, some few onely excepted (useless for mankind, save for rarity and fancy) as Apes and Peacocks, (perchance ra∣ther Parrats) which Solomons navie1 King. 10. 22. fetched in, and supplied from Tarshish. CHAP. 6. Objections against the fruitfulnesse of Judea answered. BUt seeing we live in so unbeleeving an age, that some have brought the happiness even of heaven it self into question, no wonder if such as doubt of the truth deny the type, and (though Scripture be po∣sitive in the point) flatly argue against the fruitfulness of Iudea.1 Object. The first sort of their objections are taken from some passages scattered from pagan pennes, sleighting Iudea as an unconsiderable countrey. Thus Lib. 16. fol. 523. Strabo speaking of Moses, winning it from the first inhabitants, , easily (saith he) he obtained it, being a land of which none need be ambitious, and for which none would studiously engage themselv to fight: for it was a stony countrey. To which we answer first in generall.Answ. Heathen writers knew little, and spake less good of the Iews, because of the grand distance of Reli∣gions betwixt them. My people (saith God) are like aIer. 12. 9. speckled bird; and there∣fore being of a different feather from other fowl in point of divine wor∣ship, no wonder if their neighbours flocked about them, to flout at them, hooting at their strange devotion: though such mocked at by men for Owles, may be made of by God as Nightingales. Excellent∣ly Iosephus in his book against Apion the Grammarian doth prove that no credit is to be given to Pagan reports against the Iews. And as they lo∣ved not that people, so they liked not their place, causlesly raising slan∣ders upon it. More particularly Strabo, in his rash censure counting Iu∣dea not a prize worth the contending for, is confuted by the course of history. Let the Romans (too cunning Merchants to venture on worth∣less ware) tell how much the City of Ierusalem cost them, paying an ounce of bloud for every inch of ground therein. 2 Object.2 Object. It is said in the Scripture it self, Numb. 13. 23. that it was a land which eateth up the inhabitants thereof. It seems it was a very lean, hun∣gry, and barren land, which in stead of feeding the dwellers therein, fed upon them. Answ.Answ. It is said so indeed, but by whom? The false spies whose tongues were no slander. Now (whatsoever they meant by this their expression)
certainly their words intend not any barrennesse in that countrey, ha∣ving formerly (vers. 27.) confessed the transcendent fertility thereof. Ex∣cept any will say, that these Spies did now revoke their former witness; and if so, we look no longer on the land of Canaan as devouring her inhabi∣tants, but on these unconstant liers as eating their own words. However their first testimony (when, untampered with by the people, they spake their own sense, and gave in their true verdict, of the Land) is to be beleeved, before their second character of this Countrey, when infected with po∣pular discontentments, they studied cavills against the same. Besides, if the meaning of their words, [a land eating up the inhabitants thereof] be, as it is generallySee the Ge∣neva note on the text. interpreted, a land whose inhabitants by civill warres mutually destroy one another, it tends more to the credit, then disgrace of the Coun∣trey. It is no fault in that rich pasture, if the grasse thereof, be Provender in goodnesse, so that the horses fed therein, wax so wanton as to fight one with another. 3 Object.3 Object. Water is a staple commodity for mans support, whose life, lame in it self, soon falls to the ground, if not held up by the Staffe of bread in one hand and water in the other. Now Iudea had great want of this Element, a Well being counted such a treasure amongst them, that greatGen. 26. 18. strivings have happened about it. Answ.Answ. Iudea wanted no water, though dry in comparison of England. We northern nations are ready to suspect the southern parts as afire with a Feaver; whilest southern Countreys may fear lest our lands be drowned with a Dropsie; such the superfluity of rain and Rivers a∣mongst us. Let Iudea be compared with her neighbours in the same Climate, and she would be found not onely to equall, but to exceed them in conveniency of water. The ScriptureDeut. 8. 7. describes it a land of brooks of water, of fountains and depths that spring out of valleys and hills &c. And be∣cause many now adays will beleeve the Maids word before the Mistres∣ses, I mean, humane before divine testimony, hear howLib. 16. fol. 523. Strabo speaks to this point, . The Countrey it selfe indeed was well watered, but the coasts about were base and ill wa∣tered. Besides Rivers Iudea had constantly (save when the windowes of heaven were miraculously shut up) the former and the later rain, which like Trade winds on some seas, came at set seasons, at Seed-time and before Harvest. So that heaven may be said to have kept an Ordina∣ry for Iudea, and to have fed it at eating hours with set meales of water, whereas other countreys have no such standing Table kept for them, be∣ing left at large to the uncertainty of weather, and not always drinking when they were athirst, but when they could get moisture. 4 Object.4 Object. AmmianusLib. 14. . 7. Marcellinus reports, that therein were no navigable ivers, which must needs be a great hindrance of commerce in the Countrey. Answ.Ausw. The term navigable must be distinguished on. Confesse we
that Iudea had no vast streames in it, like Nilus or the Danw, whose chanels are capable of Boats, ships fllows; yet wanted it not Rivers to carry vessells of considerable burthens. Every Tribe therein did bor∣der on the Mid-land sea, or on the river of Iordan, up which river, even a∣gainst the streame, they used to sail, in vessells bearing burdens (not un∣like our western Barges) by the confession of other. Strab, lib. 16. p. 75. authors. 5. Object.5 Object. It was full of mountains, which generlly are conceived destructive to the fruitfulness of a countrey. Answ.Answ. Such dwarf-mountains or Giant-hills made the land insensi∣bly larger in exten, no whit lesser in increase. Was ever a great belly brought for an argument of barreness▪ especially seeing these moun∣tains in Iudea did not swell with a mock-mother Tympany, but were pregnant with speciall commodities. Some cattell, as Gotes; and plants▪ as Vines are never more triumphant on their throne, then when advan∣taged on the sides of such hills. TheStrao, li. 16. p. 755. Geographer speaking of Trachonitis, the coursest list, and most craggy ground about the countrey of Iudea, acknowledgeth there were , grassie and fair fruitfull hills; which as they afforded a delightfull prospect, so they conduced much to make the cities impregnable which were built amongst them. 6. Object.6 Object. Mention there is in Scripture of many deserts in Iudea, as if the countrey were nothing else but a heap of wildernesses hudled up to∣gether. Answ.Answ. Indeed the word Desert sounds hideously to English eares: it frights our fancies with the apparitions of a place full of dismall shades, salvage beasts, and dolefull desolation, whereas in Hebrew it imports no more then a woody retirednesse from publick habitation; most of them in extent not exceeding our greater Parks in England, and more alluring with the pleasure of privacy, then affrighting with the sadnesse of solitariness. 7. Object.7 Object. Frequent famins are mentioned in this land, and some most prodigious. In the siege of King. 6. 28. Samaria a woman eat her own child, unexampled almost in other histories, and all things were sold at exces∣sive rates. Answ.Answ. The instances alledged argue not the barrenness of the coun∣trey, being extraordinary Punishments inflicted immediately by divine Justice. This we confesse, that as merry men, when sad, are very sad; so this pleasant land, when God frowned upon it, was extremely de∣jected, and the famins therein were famins with a witness. 8. Object.8 Object. SaintOn Isaiah cap. 44. v. 14. Hierome, who lived himself long in Palestine, and must be acknowledged so skilfull in this matter, that others could not deceive him, & so honest, that he would not deceive others, speaketh very mean∣ly thereof. It is ragged with craggy mountaines, and suffereth the penury of thirst, so that it preserveth rain water, and supplieth the scarcity of wells by building of cisterns.
Answ.Answ. Saint Hierome in the same place (and none fitter or abler to do it) answers himself, Neque hoc dico in suggillationem terrae Sanctae, sed ut decu∣tiam supercilium Iudaeorum. &c. I say not this to disgrace the land of Iudea, (as the hereticall Sycophant doth belie me) or to take away the truth of the history, which is the foundation of spirituall understanding, but to beat down the pride of the Iews, which enlarge the straits of the Synagogue, further then the breadth of the Church. This Father did dery the literall, to raise the mysticall Canaan; and they that know Saint Hierome, know that when he intends to praise or dis∣praise, he will doe it to the purpose. 9 Object.9 Object. Modern travellers which have lately surveyed the countrey, report it to be a bare surface of sand at this day. Answ.Answ. Who can guesse what Naomi was by whatRuth 1. 20. Marah is? The stump indeed stands still, but the branches are withered; the Skeleton re∣mains, but the favour and flesh thereof is consumed. Iudea is, and is not, what it was before; the same in bulk, not blessing; for fashion, not fruitfulness; the old Instrument is the same, but it is neither strung with stock, nor plaid upon with the hand of skilfull husbandry. The Cant. 2. 1. Rose of Sharon is faded, her eaves lost, and now nothing but the pric∣kles thereof to be seen. See what sinne can doe, or undoe rather, and the guilt of our Saviours bloud: A fruitfull land maketh he barren, for the wicked∣nesse of them that dwell therein. As therefore the cleare and lovely com∣plexions, the handsome and proper persons, the bold and valiant Spirits, the comely and courtly behaviour of the ancient Iews, are not to be mea∣sured by the suspicious and louring looks, the low and crooked statures, the slavish and servil conditions, the base and sordid demeanour of the Iews now adays; no more are our judgments to contract the former fruitfulness of their soil to the present sterility thereof. And yet as the sheep which fell toGen. 30. 35. Iacobs share, had strakes or speckles scattered here and there in their skins: so, granting the generality of Iudea barren, yet by the confession ofBrocard de terra sancta, & M. George Sands. Travellers some spots and parcels of ground tran∣scendently fruitfull, are every where to be found, retaining and trans∣mitting to posterity the memory of the universall fruitfulness of Iudea, before God had justly cursed it for the sinnes of the people. CHAP. 7. Of the ancient division of the land betwixt the seven Canaanitish Nations. HAving done with the description of the commodities of this Countrey, we come now to the serverall divisions thereof; which thing seriously considered conduceth much to the right understanding of the Scripture. In severall ages the land fell under different divisions. 1 In Abrahams time it was parted betwixt the seven Nations of Canaan.
2 Afterwards the same was subdivided into one and thirty petty Kingdomes. 3 By Ioshua it was parcelled into twelve portions, betwixt so ma∣ny tribes. 4 In Rehoboams reigne it was rent into two kingdomes, Iudah and Israel. 5 After the Captivity it was divided into three Provinces, Iudea, Samaria, and Galile. 6 In Christs and his Apostles time it was carved into four Tetrar∣chies, and some other appendent dominions. We will first survey it in the originall condition thereof, as it con∣sisted of a Heptarchy, or seven ruling nations of Canaan, whose number, names, extraction, and severall habitations require much care and dili∣gence to rank and order them aright. The first difficulty we meet with, is in the number of these nations, so variously reckoned up. They are counted up thus: two, Gen. 13. 7. three, Exod. 23. 28. five, Exod. 13. 5. sixe, Exod. 3. 8. 17. seven, Iosh. 3. 10. ten, Gen. 15. 19. eleven, Gen. 10. 15. & 1 Chron. 1. 13. and seventeen, if a collective number of them all be cast up. Now how come they to be so differently computed where one and the same Spirit is the Auditour to state their account? It is answered, that seven was the compleat and solemne number, whereon God himself emphatically insists when re∣peating his favours to the Iews,Deut. 7. 1. Seven nations greater and mighter then thou. And perchance the beast in the RevelationRevel. 13. 1. with seven heads, beareth some allusion thereunto. Wherefore when these seven nations are summed up defectively, under that number, we must conceive such of them as are omitted to be implyed under the Genericall name of Cana∣anites. But on the other side, when above seven are brought, then the inhabitants of the larger Canaan, are cast into the account: whose coun∣trey was promised too, but never peaceably possessed by the Israelites, as we observed before. We finde three severall Editions (as I may call them) of the nations of Canaan, whereof the most authentick and common is Deut. 7. 1. which we will principally peruse, as followeth. 1 Hittites. These come forth first as if it were to usher and make room for the rest; as well they may, being Giants of such strength and stature, the Anakims being descended from them: so formidable to their foes, that Sam. Bochar∣tus Geog▪ sacra. lib. 4. cap. 35. some conceive them named from  hittah, which signifies to scare and frighten: such the terrible impression of them on their enemies. As stout their men, so their women were notable domineering dames, witness Rebecca's complaint, that she was weary of her life for theGen. 27. 46. daughters of Heth which Esau had maried. They lived about Hebron and Beer∣sheba, and their countrey was afterwards possessed by Iudah and Simeon.
2 Girgashites. It is hard to determin their exact habitation. Wise Agur confesseth that he knew not the way of aProv. 30. 19. Serpent upon a stone, so invisibly he slides away on a smooth place. Such the clear conveyances of the Girga∣shites going into Africa, as the IewsTalmud Hie∣os. tract. de uram. cap. 35. will have it, after Ioshua's, time▪ that they cannot be traced by any memory left behind: except some reliques of them remain in the countrey of the Gergesens (whose swine the de∣vills Ma. 8. 28. drawned by Christs permission:) whenceSir Walter Raleigh la ca. 8. pa. 138. Authors collect them to have lived on the east of Iordan near the Sea of Cinnereth, after∣wards in the juncture of the tribes of Gad and Manasseh. 3 Amorites. These sometimes are taken by a Synecdoche of eminency for all the seven nations: The sins of theGen. 15. 16. Amorites are not yet full. Here we behold them as a particular people, so called, asGregoiu Ggorii in verbo. some conceive, from  Amar, to speak, as confident talkers, such as thePsal. 12▪ 4. Psalmist describes, We ought to speak, who is Lord over us? Yea some carnall cause they had to boast, being compared by theAmos 2. 9. Prophet to Cedars for their height, and Oakes for their strength. Their originall habitation was in the mountainous Countrey, which fell afterwards to the lot ofJudg. 1. 34. Dan, and the west part of the possession ofIudg. 1. 35. Ephraim. Hence they made a ally over Iordan, and setled themselves under Sihon their King eastward in the countreys which they had gained from Moab and Ammon, afterwards possessed by Reuben and Gad. 4 Canaanites. These also generally taken include all the seven nations, growing from the root of Canaan. Consider we them here as one branch of that tree. Now though the false report of the spies was in some respect but a libell of this land, yet they may be beleeved for the situation of the people therein, that the Canaanites dwelt by theNumb. 13. 29. Sea, and the coast of Iordan, that is, all the breadth of the Countrey northward, which came after∣wards to be possessed by Asher, Nephthali, Zebulun, and Issachar. 5 Perizzites. By interpretation Villagers, as dwelling in dorps and Hamlets, not walled towns. Which as it abated their civility, so it advanced their manhood. Their habitation not far fromGen. 13. 7. Bethel, where the children of Ioseph afterwards received their portion; whose land byIosh. 17. 15. Ioshua was be∣stowed upon them, in case the country allotted proved too little for them. Judg. 1. 4. Some of them also were dispersed in the northern part of the Tribe of Iudah. 6 Hivites. Their name in Hebrew signifieth Serpents. So called, as the learned conceive, from their delight to live under-ground in caves, whereof plenty in the sides of mountains. I find two Colonies or plantations of the Hivites. One in the center of the land, where afterwards the tribes of Benjamin, and Ioseph met together. For the Gibeonites (who put a new
cheat on the Israelites, with their old clothes) wereIosh. 9. 7. & 11. 19. Hivites, as also the inhabitants of Sichem were of the sameGen. 34. 2. nation. Their other planta∣tion was under mountIosh. 11. 3. Hermon, or in mount Lebanon, asIudg. 3. 3. Iosh. 11. 17. severall Scrip∣tures doe place them. Now rather then any difference should a∣rise herein, Hermon will humbly confess it self parcell of Lebanon, and so the seeming contradiction is reconciled. 7 Iebusites. Their abode is notoriously known to have been in, and about2. Sam. 5. 6. Iebus or Ierusalem, where they defied all Davids power to dispossess them, and yet at last by Ioabs valour were ejected. So much of the heathen Heptarchy in Canaan. Come we now to consider a second edition of these nations, as God gave in a list of their names toGen. 15. 19. Abraham, promising withall to give his posterity their coun∣trey in possession. Here we find them tenne in number, the Hivites being omitted, and four more added, namely, 8. 1 Kenites. Of these no mention ever after in Scripture. For the Kenites descen∣ded from Iethro (part whereofIudg. 4. 11. flitted from the South of Iudah to the North of Nephthali) were a different nation from these Kenites the sub∣ject of our enquiry: we conceive therefore one of these two things most probable. 1 Either after Abrahams and before Ioshua's time, by famine, sword, and pestilence they were utterly deleted, and their land shared betwixt the former seven nations of the Canaanites. 2 Or within the term aforesaid, being perchance too few and feeble alone to maintain the dignity of a distinct nation, they lost their names by listing themselves under some other people. 9. 2 Kenizites. As deep silence of these in holy writ as of the former; as if they had lived inPsal. 88. 12. the land where allthings are forgotten. And probable it is, that betwixt Abrahams and Ioshua's time (if a day may bringProv. 27. 1. forth much, what alte∣rations may four hundred years produce?) they were extinguished. All flesh is grasse, and not onely particular men, like single blades, may be mowed down by death, but even whole nations plucked up by the roots, never to grow again, being buried without other monument over or epitaph upon them, then that of the Psalmist,Psal. 9. 6. their memoriall is perished with them. 10. 3 Kadmonites. That is, by the notation of the word, men of the east, or Easterlings if you please. These a learnedBochartus Gog. Sac. l. 4. c. 36. p. 347. man with great likelyhood conceives to be the Hivites; both because (as aforesaid) the Hivites are omitted in this Catalogue, and because they lived in the eastern part of Canaan, under mount Hermon. As for the opinion, that Cadmus the Phenician with Hermione his wife were Hivites (Serpents their name sounds in Hebrew,
as we observed before) and therefore fabled by theOvid. Met. lib. 3. Poet, to be turned into Dragons; such as exclude it their judgment, because no solid truth, may admit it into their fancy as a pleasing conceit. 11. 4 Rephaims. Their position is undoubtedly known, living about AshtarothGen. 14. 5. Car∣naim in the half tribe of Manasseh beyond Iordan. But though here was their principall nest, we find some of their feathers scattered in other places, in a2 Sam. 5. 18. valley near Ierusalem of that name, and another in the tribeJosh. 17. 15. of Ioseph, whither perchance they fled, when smitten at home by Gen. 14. 5. Chedorlaomer. But the last and largest volume of these nations of Canaan, is Gen. 10. 15. where sixe more are added, dwelling in those parts of Canaan which the Israelites never fully possessed. The former nations were as I may say under the first qualificationDeut. 7. 2. to dye without mercy, but these had more favour afforded them, according to the honour of Martiall proceed∣ing. These latter were never Servants in ordinary to the Israelites, ne∣ver wholly subdued by them, but were onely retainers at large, doing them homage at great solemnities, and high festivalls: understand thereby all the victorious reignes of David and Solomon. We take them in order. 12. 1 Zidonians. Eminently known by their famous City, whereof largely here∣after. 13. 2 Archites. These dwelt at Arca, or Arce, a City in Libanus over against Tripoly, whereof mention in Ptolomeus. 14. 3 Sinites. In searching after their proper place, we are at a losse, like Ioseph when sent to seek his brethren; onely he, when wandring,Gen. 37. 15. met with a man to direct him, we with many to distract us. Some place them near the mountain of Sinai. But that barren desert affords no more livelyhood, then the Law there delivered could give life unto men. Others seat them neare Sin (by Ptolomy Simyra) in the northern bound of the land. And a thirdBochartus ut priùs. sort, whom we will follow, in the very south point thereof, at the entrance of Egypt, near Pelusium, called Sin in theEzek. 30. 15, 16. Scriptures, whence the desert of Sin hath its nameExod. 16. 1.. 15. 4 Arvadites. These lived north of the Zidonians, whereof largely in the description of mount Libanus. 16. 5 Zemarites. More uncertain for situation then the former, because no more mention of them. Had the land whereon they lived, like the floor of BelsHistor. Bel. ver. 14. Temple, been strowed with ashes, some print of their footsteps would have remained, whereas now no marks, to discover
them. Learned men thus groping in the dark, some seek (for lack of other light) to light a candle from a glow-worm; their conceit being no better, who from the vicinity of the sound, make these Zemarites in∣habit mount Shemir (afterwards, Samaria) which is confuted by the Hebrew Orthography. More probably they may be placed atJosh. 18. 22. Zema∣raim, a City afterwards of Benjamin. 17. 6 Hamathites. As formerly we had too little, here we have too much direction, finding two eminent places eqully probable for their habitation▪ Ha∣math on the north of Nepthali, and another many miles off, called Ha∣mah the great, and afterwards Antiochia. And perchance they might re∣move from the one to the other. So much of the nations descended from Canaan, amongst whom the Philistims are not reckoned, (whose five Satrapies possessed the South-west part of the land) because they came not from Canaan, but from Mizraim his elder Brother, of whom God willing largely hereafter in the descriptions of the tribes of Dan, and Simeon. To conclude▪ Let the reader beware lest deceived with the similitude of sounds, he condemne the generation of the righteous, and mistake true Israelites by birth, to be Canaanites by descent; as namely, 1 Caleh theJosh. 14. 14. Kenite, undoubtedly of the tribe ofNum. 13. 6. Iudah, onely his grandfathers name was Kenaz. 2 Vriah the Hittite 3 Ornan the Iebusite so loyal so liberal to Da∣vid: The first might be a Proselyte Hittite, but more likely an Is∣raelite whose Father was cal∣led Heth; and the latter of the tribe ofIosh. 15. 63. Iudah orIudg. 1. 21. Benjamin, who lived promiscuously with the Iebusites in the City of Iebus or Ierusalem. 4 Hushi the Archite, who out-achitophelled Achitophell in his policy, was probably an Ephraimite of theJosh. 16. 2. borders of Archi, otherwise unlikely that David would have chosen a stranger to have been his Cabinet counsellour. 5 Simon theMat. 10. 4. Cananite, Christs Disciple, certainly a Iew, (other∣wise our Saviour would not have entertained him in so near a relation) born it seems inJohn 2. 1. Cana of Galile. So much for caution, lest Demetrius who was well3 Iohn 1, 2. reported of all men, suffer for Demetrius, Diana's silver-smith; and these reall Iews be mis∣represented under the notion of heathen extraction.
CHAP. 8. The second solemn division of the land of Canaan into thirty one King∣domes. § 1. NExt to the distinguishing of this land into seven nations,Anciently an Amy of Kings in Canaan. we must observe the division thereof amongstIoh. 12. 9. one and thirty Kings. Strange, that their scepters (except very short) did not justle one another, in so narrow a Countrey. But, we must know, that the Ge∣nius of that age, delighted not so much, in scraping much together, as in having absolute authority in that little, which was their own. Pride is commonly the sinne of young men, covetousness of old folk. The world in the youth thereof, more affected honour, then wealth, high titles, then large treasure. And these Royolets contented themselves, that their crowns (though not so big) were as bright, their scepters (though not so great) were as glistering, as those of the mightiest Monarchs, being as absolute Soveraignes in their own small terri∣tories. § 2. Let us consider,The 31 king∣domes how dispensed to the severall Tribes. how these one and thirty kingdomes were afterwards disposed of, and how they were shared amongst the seve∣rall Tribes. In reckoning up their names, we observe the method in Iosh, ibid. Ioshua, as he marshalls them upon order following; Kingdomes of 1. Iericho. 2. Ali. 3. Ierusalem. 4. Hebo. 5. Iarmuth. 6. Lahish. 7. Eglon. 8. Gezer. 9. Dber. 10. Gder. 11. Hormah. 12. Arad. 13. Libnath 14. Adulla. 15. Makkeda. 16. Bethel. 17. Tappuah. 18. Hepher. 19. Aphek. 20. Lasharon. 21. Madn. 22. Haor. 23. Shimrn-Mron. 24. Achshaph. 25. Taah. 26. Megiddo. 27. Kedesh. 28. Ieam of Camel. 29. Dor in the coasts of Dor. 30. The nations of Gilgal. 31. Tirza. allotted to 1. Benjamin. 2. Benjamin. 3. Benamin. Iudah. 4. Iuda. 5. Iudah. 6. Iudah. 7. Iudah. 8. phraim. 9. Iudah. 10. Iudah. Simon. 11. Simeon. 12. Iudah. 13. Iudah. 14. Iudah. 15. Bejamin. 16. Benjamin. 17. Manasseh cis Ir. 18. Mnascis Ir. 19. Aser. 20. Zebulon. 21. Nephhali. 22. Nephthali. 23. Zebulon. 24. Asher. 25. Manas. cis Ir. 26.  cisor. 27. Nephthali. 28. Zebulon. 29. Manasseb. Issachar. 30. Bnjain 31. Ephraim. By the King of the nations of Gilgal, understand a Soveraign over a miscellaneous company of people, the master-bee of a swarm not yet fixed in an hive, having a sufficient territory for his men, but no
considerable Metropolis of his kingdome. In this Catalogue, Sihon and Og are not reckoned, whose dominions lay ast of Iordan, and they make up thirty three Kings in all. So much of these Cities for the present; whereof largely hereafter in those respective Tribes to which they belong. § 3. Amongst these Kings one may visibly discover two distinct combinations.Two distinct combinations of thes Kings. 1 In the southern circuit of Canaan, Adoni-bezek King of Ierusalem seems to be chief of this knot, at whoseIosh. 10. 3. sending the Kings of Hebron, Iarmuth, Lachish, Eglon &c. assembled themselves against Ioshua, and were destroyed by him. 2 In the northern Association. ThereIosh▪  1, 2, 3. Ibin the King had the precedency, with whom the Kings of Madon, Shimron, and Achshaph &c. confederated themselves against Ioshua with the same success. Had all at once ingaged against Ioshua, the task had been hard; had he fought them all severally, the work had been long to subdue them. For, these thirty and one Kings, who made up a full moneth in their number, how many years would they have made up in their resistance? Whereas now divine providence fitting the strength of Ioshua's arm, parcelled his foes into two bundles, that he might the more easily at two blows, strike through both of them. § 4. And here we present the Reader with a draught of the land,Necessary dif∣ference betwixt the two maps of Canaan. as it was in the days of Abraham, and continued till the time of Ioshua; not well satisfied, whether more properly to term it old, or new Canaan. If we count from the beginning of the world downwards, it was young or new Canaan, because nearest the creation; if we reckon backwards from our time, the old Canaan. If the Reader discover any difference betwixt this, and the next Map of the same land, as it was consti∣tuted after the days of Ioshua, let him consider, 1 How the same face is disguised by different dressing. Palestine afterwards (when divided betwixt the twelve Tribes) being tricked and trimmed with many new Cities, had the favour thereof quite altered. 2 How the pictures drawn by the same exact Artist, of the same person, first when a youth, afterwards when an old man, must have much difference betwixt them; and the distance of some hundreds of years, causeth a necessary variation in the de∣scriptions of the same Countreys. It will be objected, that though age and accidents may alter the old, and induce new lineaments in mens faces, yet the Simile holds not in the description of Countreys, where the same chanels of sea, cour∣ses of rivers, falls of vales, flats of plains, ridges of hills, must re∣main. As for mountains, time, for want of carriage, must be forced
to leave such luggage behind her; and therefore that such land, and water-marks, must always continue, without any considerable altera∣tion. But it is answered, that even these seeming Standards of nature, are moveable with time and casualty, inundations, tempests, and earth∣quakes; in the last (being the earths violent cough) sometimes she spits up her own lungs, casting up great hills where never were any before. What the Apostle speaks in an higher sense, is true of the materiall world, and the severall countreys therein,1 Cor. 7. 31. The fashion of this world passeth away; so that to the very view of the eye, the shape, form, and garb thereof is meta∣morphosed. Besides, other Anagrams hapning in the land of Canaan, lands afterwards transposed for water, and water for land; one is most remarkable, namely, when the pleasant vale ofGen. 1. 3. Siddim nigh the banks of Iordan, was turned into the salt-sea, or noisome Asphaltite-lake. This was the work of the Lord, and it may justly seem marvellous in our eyes. But of the cause, time, and manner of this alteration, largely God willing here∣after. Here the Map of old Canaan it to be inserted.
CHAP. 9. The third division of the land into twelve Tribes, some of all which Tribes re∣mained untill, at, and after the time of our Saviour. § 1. THe third solemn division of Palestine, was made by Ioshua in∣to twelve Tribes, of whose severall bounds largely in our en∣suing discourse. This partition remained untill Shalmaneser2 King. 17. 6. carried ten Tribes away captive, and in exchange, brought in his own colonies to possess their conquered Countrey. However, although the main body of the ten Tribes were thus transplanted, without any hope to return to their native soil, yet some competent representation of every Tribe, re∣mained behind in their own countrey, even untill, at, and after the time of Christ, and his Apostles. § 2. Alledge not to the contrary, that it is said, after Shalmaneser's car∣rying them away captive,2 King. 17. 18. there was none left but the Tribe of Iudah onely. Understand it, that Iudah onely remained in the flourishing condition of a kingdome. That onely was the visible standing-corn, amongst which, others of Israel, like loose eares were scattered. But to the point, that some gleanings of these ten Tribes, remained in their countrey, af∣ter the Assyrian captivity, may be proved; 1 From the very nature of a generall calamity, which lighting on a populous nation, cannot so particularly apply it self to every individuall person, but that some will escape. TheIsai. 7. 20. hired rasor made not such clean work, as to shave every hair, but that some small down might creep under the edge thereof. ThatIsai. 14. 23. Besome of destruction swept not so clean, but that some dust may be presumed left behind in the small crevices of the countrey. Some (no doubt) by timely flight, casuall absence, especiall fa∣vour, secret concealment, might escape; and others, through age and sickness unable to travell, might be permitted to re∣main behind. 2 Mention is made of a2 Chr. 30. 6. remnant which escaped out of the hands of the King of Assyria. And when iezekiah kept his solemn passover, he sent2 Chron. 30. 10. 18. messengers to Ephraim, Manasseh, Issachar, Zebulun, Asher, some of whom made a mock at his courtesie, and others thankfully em∣braced his gracious invitation. 3 Iosiah in his passover (celebrated in the eighteenth year of his reign, ninety and odde years after the banishment of the twelve Tribes) assembled there2 Chr. 35. 18. all Iudah and Israel that were present, or found. § 3. Such remnants of the ten Tribes, being afterwards carried cap∣tive with Iudah to Babylon, returned thence with the rest of their bre∣thren; as probably is insinuated, 1 By the sacrifice at the dedication of the second Temple,Ezra. 6. 17. A sin
offering for all Israel, twelve hee-goats according to the number of the Tribes of Israel. In expression (no doubt) of gladness, of some of every Tribe present thereat. 2 By the number of such as returned, amounting toEzra 2. 64. forty two thou∣sand three hundred and threescore. Now, whosoever shall be plea∣sed, to cast up the particular sums, of the severall families of Iudah and Benjamin set down there, will find them fall short twelve thousand of the foresaid number. Where therefore shall we sup∣ply the account? Hear how the great Jewish-Chronicle (set forth not long after our Saviours time) resolves this question; Vbi rgo sunt 12000? in iis sanè qui ascen∣derunt dereliquis tribubus. Seder olam Rabba. cap. 29. Surely, they were made up of those who came up from Babylon to Ierusa∣lem, of other Tribes. 3 The1 Chron. 9. 3. Scripture saith, after the captivity of Babylon that there dwelt in Ierusalem (besides those of Iudah and Benjamin) of the children of Ephraim and Manasseh. Nor is the testimony of Iosephus to be slighted herein, though Ios.In Animad ver. in Euseb. numero. 1734. Scaliger causlesly condemns it, affirming that the King of Egypt em∣ployed seventy two Iews to translate the Bible into Greek, taking six out of every Tribe, which compleat that number. § 4. That such fragments of the ten Tribes returning from Babylon, were reestated in their ancient possessions, I dare not affirm, but rather be∣lieve the contrary. For there was no inducting them into their former inheritances, because no vacancy or avoidance therein; terra plena, the land was still full with the plantation of Medes and others brought in by Shalmaneser. So that this remnant of the ten Tribes, were (for the main) fain promiscuously to make their habitations where they might, whilst Iudah and Benjamin were restored to their ancient, intire, and distinct possessions. Yet there is some probability, that some of Zebulun and Nephthali in our Saviours time had recovered part of their ancient patri∣mony. Otherwise the force of Isaiahs prophecy, and Matthews applica∣tion is much impaired:Mat. 4. 14. &c. The land of Zebulun and the land of Nephthali &c. The people that sate in darkness saw great light. That is in a genuine and un∣strained sense, their posterity had the day of deliverance first dawning unto them, whose ancestors were first overtaken with the night of af∣fliction. § 5. That in the time of Christ, and his Apostles, some pious people of all Tribes, were extant in Iudea, plainly appears, 1 ByLuk 2. 36. Anna the Prophetess, which was of the Tribe of Asher. 2 By Saint Pauls expression,Acts 26. 7. Unto which promise, our twelve Tribes in∣stantly serving God day and night, hope to come. This cannot be meant of those departed this life, before Saint Pauls time, (which were past hope and in possession of the promise) but of such as served God then, when this speech was uttered. 3 By the superscription of S. Iames his Epistle,James 1. 1. To the twelve Tribes
which are scattered abroad, greeting. Being Christian Iews probably, Acts 11. 19. dispersed from Ierusalem, after the martyrdome of Saint Stephen. § 6. To conclude, what in the Law God prescribed concerning the fields, he was pleased graciously to practise upon the persons of the Israelites. Levit. 19. 10. Thou shalt not glean thy vineyard, neither shalt thou gather every grape in thy vine∣yard. He suffered a small racemation to remain, still preservingActs 26. 7. , and not wholly discomposing the solemn Jury of the twelve Tribes, which untill Christs time were made the thinner, but not the fewer, by all their calamities. For, although thorough continuance of time, suddain and great changes in their condition, laziness and neglect, casuall losing, and spightfull embezeling of their Records, mixt ma∣riages with heathens, and many other accidents the intireness of their Pedegrees was much perplext and interrupted; yet by tradition from their parents, they knew in generall their extraction from those Tribes, though unable particularly, to clear the immediate series of their de∣scents. CHAP. 10. Of Palestine rent into two kingdomes, under Rehoboam; and their severall strengths balanced. § 1. THe next solemn division, the land of Canaan fell under, was, when it was cloven by the ten Tribes1 King. 12. 19. defection, into the king∣domes of Iudah, and Israel. § 2. The kingdome of Iudah consisted chiefly of the Tribe of Iudah, which alone was so powerfull, and populous, that the men thereof, in the muster made by King2 Sam. 24. 9. David, amounted in number to moe, then the half of all the other Tribes there expressed. Besides the body of this Tribe, very considerable were the appurtenances thereof, namely, Some of Simeon,Josh. 19. 1. 9. whose inheritance was in the midst of the inheritance of the Tribe of Iudah. Dan, part of whose possession was taken out of what ori∣ginally was assigned to Iudah. These must be presumed, to beare a State-sympathy to the kingdome of Iudah, ingaged thereunto by the position of their countrey. Yea, we finde it expressed in Scripture, that1 King. 19. 3. Beersheba a City of Simeon; and2 Chr. 11. 8. Gath, 2 Chr. 11. 10. Zorah, andIbidem. Ajalon, Cities of Dan, did belong to, and were fortified by the Kings of Iudah. § 3. Besides these, two thirds of the Tribe of Benjamin, pertained to the same kingdome; as also all the Levites2 Chr. 11. 14 which left their Cities in Israel, and clave to the house of David. These, though properly the eyes of the land, had hands also, and contributed to the strength of the king∣dome. Adde hereunto all the well-affected, which out of all the Tribes
of2 Chr. 11. 16. Israel resorted to Ierusalem. For, the by-ditches of Dan and Bethel, did not so drain the peoples devotion, but that much thereof ran in the right chanel to the Temple; and no doubt, many violently kept at home, had their hearts at Ierusalem, and their bodies in Israel, to which king∣dome all the rest of the Tribes did belong. § 4. Here it will be richly worth our pains, to enter on a compara∣tive estimate of these two Kingdomes, which of them exceeded in puis∣sance: Herein we shall carry an impartiall hand; and indeed, though the controversie be betwixt two Kings, there is nothing to be got by flattering of either. § 5. We will compare them first in that, wherein Solomon placeth the honour of a King,Prov. 13. 28. the multitude of their subjects. And here any clear judgment will find for the Kings of Israel. § 6. Secondly, if the extent of their dominions be surveyed, and our eye in the Map made umpirer therein, the case is clear in view without measuring, that Israel was the greatest. § 7. Thirdly, if their Cities be numbred, the result will be this, Iudah had the Sun, Ierusalem; Israel had the Moon, Samaria, and most Starres of the first magnitude, Ieriho, Iezreel, Mahanaim &c. § 8. Fourthly, if their ports, and naval power be considered, neither will be found very active that way, contentedly yeelding their sea-tra∣ding to the Phenicians. Yet Israel had the advantage of havens, and marine accommodations, bordering most on the Mediterranean; Iudah also (to hold the scales even) had Ezion-Gaber, a considerable port on the Red-sea, as may appear by Ahaziahs request to Iehosaphat,1 King. 22. 49. Let my servants goe with thy servants in the ships; plainly importing, that the men of Iudah were the Cape-merchants and prime mariners in those seas, by whose courtesie the subjects of the Kings of Israel, were admitted to trafique there. How∣ever, Ezion-Gaber on the Red-sea was but a key to the back-door (little of the East-Indies being then known, and less traded to) whereas the havens on the Midland-sea opened the broad gates of commerce to the most and best frequented parts of the world. § 9. Fifthly, if the absoluteness of their Kings power be stated in their respective dominions, here in the opinions of some the upper hand must be adjudged to Iudah. The Kings whereof in administration of justice (or rather revenge) often exercised arbitrary power, making use of their prerogative above law. As appears by Solomons proceedings against the lives of Shimei, Ioab, and Adoniah; and more plainly in Ieho∣ram's 1 King. 21. 13. executing his own brethren, by his peremptory pleasure, with∣out legall conviction of them. Whereas no monument is extant, of such arbitrary proceedings in the kings of Israel, more confining them∣selves to legall courses. Yea, the very murder of Naboth carried the face of a judiciall process, wherein legall n formalities of witnesses, though suborned, were observed in a solemn Session. The reason why the Kings
of Iudah were more unlimited in their power, was, say they, because they derived their title immediately from the God of heaven, confir∣med in Davids familie by severall descents. But the Kings of Israel, be∣ing Creatures of their own subjects, made by popular election, on con∣dition to remit their taxes and burdens, (and seldome above three of the same stock in a direct succession) were fain to ingratiate themselves, with remitting much of that royall rigour used by the Kings of Iudah. And this is assigned by a judiciousSir Walter Raleigh Hist. World 1 part. 2600. cap. 19. Sect. 6. Author as a principall cause why Israel never returned to their former subjection to Davids family, because the scepter of Iudah was too heavy for them, and they lived under more liberty in their own kingdome. § 10. Sixtly, if their forain impressions, made by them on neigh∣bouring Princes be considered, the balance is so even, it is hard to say, on which side the beam breaketh. For, as memorable were the victo∣ries of the Kings of Israel against the Syrians, so no lesse fortunate the fights of some KingsAsa, 2 Chron. 14. 13. & Ichosaphat, 2 Chron. 20. 23 of Iudah against the Ethiopians, and other enemies. And as the kingdome of Moab, till the death of Ahab, was2 King. 3. 5. tributary to Israel: so Edom, untill the end of the reign2 Chr. 21. 8. of Iehosaphat, was in subjecti∣on to the crown of Iudah. § 11. Seventhly, if their home-achievements each against other, be recounted, (the truest touch-stone of their severall strengths) God often made them alternately hold up one another, whilst he whipt them both for their sinnes. But although Abijah once got a remarkable2 Chr. 13. 19. conquest of Ieroboam, yet generally Israel worsted Iudah, overpowering them with multitude of men. Thus Baasha2 Chron. 16. 1. cooped up Asa in his own land; Ioash 2 Chr. 25. 23. overcame Amaziah, and took Ierusalem; and Pekah almost utterly2 Chr 28. 6. con∣sumed Ahaz, and his kingdome. § 12. To conclude, if their lasting and continuance be measured, herein Iudah clearly carrieth away the preheminence. Grant, Israel beat Iudah at hand, yet Iudah beat Israel at length, even out of distance. For, whilst the Babylonish captivity did onely snuffe Iudah, for seventy years, (blazing the brighter when they returned from banishment) the Assy∣rian conquest utterly extinguished Israel, from ever appearing again, in a formed Common-wealth, in their own Countrey. CHAP. 11. Of the partition of the Land into the Provinces of Galilea, Samaria, and Judea. § 1. WHen these two kingdomes had determined, & the division of the twelve Tribes was out of date, Palestine began to be distinguished into three Provinces, whose number and posture we find in the Evangelists, being traced in order by the feet of our Saviour,
John. 4. 34. 1. He left Iudea. 2. And departed again into Galilee. 3. And he must needs goe through Samaria. It being denied to our Saviour himself, to travail per saltum, à termino ad terminum sine medio, so that he could not ordinarily pass from Iudah in the south, to Galilee in the north, without traversing Sa∣maria, which lay in the midst betwixt both. § 2. To begin with Iudea,Iudea with the appurtenances thereof. or Iury; it is not taken here in that large acception, wherein it contained the whole Countrey, and entire sub∣ject of this our book (in which sense Herod the great is styledLuke 1. 5. King of Iudea) but is taken, asEzra 5. 8. elsewhere it is termed, the Province of Iudea, for a third part of the whole land, consisting of the ground formerly belonging to Iudah, Benjamin, Simeon, Dan, and Reuben. For, that this Province reached eastward, beyond the River, plainly appears in theMat. 19. 1. & Mark 10. 1. Evangelists, affirming, that Christ came from Galilee into the Coasts of Iudea beyond Iordan. A spacious Countrey it was, and in our Saviours time, the proper habitation of the principall Iews. Nor is it amiss to observe, that a portion of land (with the governments of Lidda and Ramah) ly∣ing in the juncture of Benjamin and Ephraim, was in the time of the Mac∣cabees, taken from Samaria, by King Demetrius, and by him1 Macc. 11. 34. assigned to Iudea, in reward of the friendship, and faithfulness of the Iews in his service; which gore, or gusset of ground, was called Apherema, that is, a thing taken away, because parted from Samaria, and pieced to Iudea. § 3. Samaria succeeds,Samaria peo∣pled with colo∣nies of Medes &c. whereby we understand not, the City of that name, for a long time, Metropolis of the kingdome of Israel; but a coun∣trey (formerly pertaining to Ephraim, and Manasseh, andSo D. Heyly. Gad) peopled after the Assyrian captivity, with colonies brought thither from2 King. 17. 24. Babylon, and the neighbouring Dominions. At first this land did not fadge well with these new inhabitants, Lions sent by God disturbing their quiet possession; untill a Priest of the Israelites was remanded, to teach them 2 King 17. 27 the manner of the God of the land. But, what betwixt an ignorant Master, and indocible Scholars, nothing was learnt to purpose. He taught them no true worship, but onely Ieroboams divinity (as appears by their2 King. 17. 32. ap∣pointing out Priests of themselves for their high-places) and they jum∣bled together their own numerous Idols, with the service of God. In so much, as they are said to2 King. 17. 34. fear the Lord, and in the next verse, not to fear the Lord: not that there is any contradiction in the text, but an open op∣position, betwixt their pretence, and practise; seeing such as fear God otherwise, then his will in his Word prescribes, fear him not in effect. § 4. However, afterwards the Samaritans quitted their multitude of Idols,The Articles of the Sama∣ritan Creed. and patched up a religion amongst themselves, wherein, 1 They adored one Deity, but him so erroneously, that Christ flatly told them,John 4. 22. yee worship that which you know not. 2 They acknowledged onely the five books of Moses for Canoni∣call. 3 They had a Temple on mount Gerizim, stickling for the ho∣nour
and holiness thereof to equall, yea exceed that at Ierusalem 4 They expected a Saviour, beleeving him as able, so willing to re∣solve all important difficulties;John 4. 25. When Messiah is come, he will tell us all things. 5 They falsly accounted themselves extracted from the ancient Hebrew Patriarchs. Thus the Samaritan woman had it rise in her mouth,John 4. 12. our Father Iacob, though in very deed, he was no more her Father, then the man she kept company with, was her husband, being neither lineally descended from the one, nor lawfully maried to the other. Hear what Iosephus hath to this purpose; The Samaritans, says he,Ant. Ind. lib. 11. sub si∣nem, pag. 386. & lib. 12. ca. 7. pag. 410. are of this nature, that when the Iews are high in fortune and success, presently they embrace society with them, and deduce the series of their own descent from the Patriarch Ioseph, and his sonnes Ephraim and Manasseb: But when the Iews are depressed and low in estate, then they disclaim all kindred, defie all affinity with them, professing themselves (as indeed they are) to be originally Medes and Persians. § 5. Generally great was the Antipathy betwixt the Samaritans and Iews.The Antipathy betwixt the Sa∣maritans and Iews. The former persecuting every face that did but look towards Ie∣rusalem; on which bare account they churlishly denied our Saviour en∣tertainment in their town, becauseLuke 9. 53. his behaviour was as though he would goe to Ierusalem. Nor came the Iews behind them in hatred, so far from familiarIohn 4. 9. conversing with them, that a Iew would rather contentedly endure thirst, then, to quench it, crave drink of a Samaritan, lest such hands should defile the water, with the very drawing of it. Yea when the malice of the Iews meant mortally to wound our Saviours re∣putation, they said, he was aJohn 8. 48. Samaritan and had a Devill. However, the deluge of sin did not so generally drown all the Samaritans, but that some dry Islands, some good men were found amongst them. One eminent for his gratitude to God, being the tithe of the lepers cleansed by Christ, whoLuke 17. 16. alone returned to give him thanks; & another no less com∣mendable for his charity toLuke 10. 33. man, being Physitian, Surgeon, Host, and in a word, neighbour to the unknown traveller wounded by theeves in his journey to Iericho. § 6. Galilee remaines, so called (asGalilee two∣fold, why one of them sur∣named of the Gentiles. Melanchthon will have it) because in Hebrew signifying a bound or limit, lying in the northern marches of the land. It was twofold, The Upper formerly belong∣ing to the tribes of Asher, Nephthali, and Manasseh be∣yond Iordan. The Lower, formerly belong∣ing to the tribes of Zebulun, and Issachar. The upper Galilee is also calledIsa. 9. 1. & Mat. 4. 15. Galilee of the Gentiles, or, Galilaea Gojim, whereof many reaasons are rendred by learned men. These two most considerable, either that it was so called, because very populous, in which consideration it is termed byBell. Ind. li. 3. ca. 4. pag. 833. Iosephus ; affirming, that the least  village therein had fifteen thousand inhabitants. So
that, Galilea Gojim, or of the Gentiles, is the same with populous Galilee. (If any except that Gojim in Scripture is onely taken for Heathen, never for the people of the Iews, may he be remitted to learnedExcit. 114.  25. c. . Rivet, by in∣stances to the contrary to have his judgment rectified herein) or else, it was called Galilee of the Gentiles, because it bordered on them, and lay in the passage through which travellers journied to the Gentiles. Thus the gate of2 King. 14. 13. Ephraim in Ierusalem got the name thereof, not that it stood in, but led toward the Tribe of Ephraim. § 7. The Galileans were high spirited people,The character of the Gali∣eans Iosephus ut pris. , fighters from their infancy, impatient of wrong, lovers of liberty, and prone to re∣venge. Much of their nature may be read in their countrey-man Saint Peter, forward (not to say furious) in hot bloud, to draw hisIohn 18. 10. sword though at great disadvantage, and after, at leasure to repent it. Apt they were to raise tumults against the Romans, but always with ill success. Witness especially, when they pretended sacrifice to cloak their Rebelli∣on, but Pilat was too quick and cunning for them, who subduing them, Luke 13. 1. mingled their bloud with their sacrifices. They were distinguishable by their Dialect from other Iews, speaking a broader, or (as I may say) a Dorick Syriack, whereof the maid minded Saint Peter, ThouMar. 14. 70. art a Galilean, and thy speech agreeth thereunto. They were accounted courser, and less refined Iews, as appears by the expression of the Evangelist,Iohn 4. 45. The Galileans received him, having seen all the things that he did at Ierusalem at the feast, for they also went up vnto the feast. Where those words, for they also, though they admit the Galileans to the communion of the same Religion with the Iews, yet set them at a second table, as inferiour to the other. Yea, the Iews called our Saviour in disgrace, at least wise in diminution, a Galilean. Might I presume to interpose my opinion, I should conceive these Galileans were chiefly extracted from the remainder of the ten Tribes, left behind in the land, after the Assyrian captivity, as we have shewed before. § 8. If these three Provinces be in severall respects,The three Pro∣vinces how compared. compared toge∣ther, they behave themselves as followeth, For Antiquity; Galilee the first, (mentionedIosh. 20 7. in Ioshua) Iudea the next, Samaria the youngest. Extent; Iudea the greatest, Galilee the next, Samaria the smal∣lest. Honour; Iudea the highest, (because Ierusalem therein) Samaria the next, Galilee the meanest. Safety; Samaria the first (best secured in the middle) Iudea next, Galilee last, and most exposed to enemies. Fruitfulness; Galilee the first, Samaria second, Iudea mountainous, and less fruitfull, by the testimony of Saint Hierom. This distinction of these three Provinces lasted till the destruction of the second Temple, but abated in the solemnity thereof, by the ensuing partition into Tetrarchies.
CHAP. 12. Of the division of this land into four Tetrarchies, and some other small territories. § 1. MUch about the time of our Saviours birth,The originall and nature of Terarchies. this land was di∣vided into four Tetrarchies. A Tetrarchy is conceived by Suidas & Stephanus in Thesaro. some to be a dominion, wherein are  coors, . : i.e. four squadrons and sixty four men. Others, with Pliny, take it to be a countrey, with four Cities therein. But learnedPlinian. exer∣cit. ol. 576. Salmasius, to whom we refer the reader, confutes these for erroneous, where he proveth a Tetrarchy to be a fourth part of a kingdome; be the men, or Cities therein more or less. These Tetrarchies in Iudea, took their originall from the Testament of Herod the great, who leaving severall Sons, bequeathed unto them par∣cells of his Kingdome. § 2. Afterwards,Why  Ro∣mans continu∣ed Tetrarchies. with some alteration of their limits, these Tetrar∣chies in Iudea were continued by the Romans (as also elsewhere in the Countrey of Galatia) on very politick considerations; 1. Hereby they had the advantage four to one, to gratifie and ingage more friends, with Princely honour; seeing one kingdome thus thriftily managed, afforded four Tetrarchies; as he may be charitable to moe, who changeth his pence into farthings. 2 As they gratified moe; so they trusted less, it being no wisdome to venture too much power, in one and the same person. 3 The restless nature of the Iews required many overseers; and a small territory amongst them, would yeeld the Governour thereof plentifull employment. InLuke 3. 1. Saint Luke, we find the number and order of these Tetrarchies, namely, when Iohn Baptist began to preach, Pilate was Governour of Iudea. Herod was Tetrarch of Galilee. Philip was Tetrarch of Iturea, and Trachnitis. Lysanias was Tetrarch of Abilen. Pilate is styled Governour, having precedency of the rest, as residing in Ierusalem the principall City, and (perchance) had a superintendency over the other Tetrarchs, by vertue whereof he suppressed the rebelliousLuke 13 1. Galileans, which were otherwise of Herods dominion. Howsoever they observed their distinct jurisdictions; for, Pilat hearing that Christ was of Galilee,Luke 23. 7. sent him to Herod, to be tried before him: either out of civility, because he would not incroach on anothers jurisdiction; or out of policy, to decline so distastfull, and dangerous employment; at leastwise to divide the Odium betwixt them, that Herod should have his share, if not his half thereof. § 3. Concerning the bounds of Iudea and Galilee (Samaria being so swallowed up betwixt them,Why Abilene mentioned by Saint Luke. that the southern part thereof belonged to Iudea, the northern to Galilee) largely in the last Chapter. Of Iturea here∣after more fully in the Description of Nephthali. As for Abilene, we are
less solicitous in assigning the accurate bounds thereof, because it lay wholly out of the land of Canaan, the proper subject of our discourse. Abilene, called by Ptolemy Abilene Lysaniae, being a fair City in Coelosyria, where the dominions thereof ranged far on the north of Libanus. If any demand, why the Tetrarchy of Abilene is mentioned by Saint Luke, see∣ing it was an exotick, and forain territory, out of the pale of Palestine; let them know, it was done out of the over aboundant exactness of the Evangelist, for these reasons: 1 The more exquisitely to notifie the particular time of his histo∣ry, not onely by the date of the Governours of Iudea, but also of contemporary neighbouring Princes. And the harmony in chronology is the sweeter, the more are brought into the consort. 2 Because many dispersed Iews, equally concerned in Christ, and the benefit of the Gospell, lived scattered in Abilene. 3 Because having formerly mentioned three Tetrarchs, the num∣ber had not been perfect, and entire, without adding the fourth. Thus some English coines being quarter-pieces, cannot be put away in payment without loss, except four of them be joined together. 4 Because, though Abilene was not within the compass of the lesser Canaan, possessed by the Iews; yet it was within the bounds of the larger Canaan, that Countrey once belonging to the Archites, and Arvadites the sons of Canaan. § 4. Now whosoever shall with a Compasse in his hand,The inequality of these Te∣trarchies in ex∣tent and reve∣nue. survey the extent of these Tetrarchies, will finde them to fall out very uneven in their dimensions, some much larger then others. Indeed they were measured with no other scale, then the favour and friendship of the Emperour, so that the best befriended at Rome, got most dominion in Palestine. Yet were these Tetrarchies as justly divided, as our English Hundreds, (and those perchance equall in their primitive institution, for number of men) seeing we count threescore and eight hundreds in See peeds Maps. Kent, and but six in Lancashire, accounted little less in the compass there∣of. Nor was the Revenues of these Tetrarchies, less unequall then their extent, the  or yearly income of Trachonitis, with the appurte∣nances belonging to Philip, amounting,De Bll. Iud. lib. 2. cap. 9. as Iosephus computeth it, but to an hundred talents; whilest Galilee, with its appendents, returned two hundred; and Iudea, advantaged with the friendly City of Ierusa∣lem, yeelded four hundred talents yearly to the Governour. § 5. Indeed exactness in observing the bounds of these Tetrarchies,The word Te∣trarchies vari∣ously taken. is not to be expected; which, in process of time, passed under all parts of numeration; Multiplied, Subtracted, Added to, new Divided, made moe, made fewer, made other then in their primitive establishment. Let not therefore the Reader be moved, if sometimes he find moe Tetrarchies, sometimes fewer then four, mentioned by good Authours
in Palestine, seeing asSalmasius ut prius. Salmasius informs us, the word Tetrarchy in after∣ages was negligently taken, for a part or parcell of dominion, without relating to the exact proportion of a fourth part. Thus it is usuall for barbarous tongues, to seduce words (as I may say) from their native purity, custome corrupting them to signifie things contrary to their ge∣nuine, and grammaticall notation. Who knows not, but that the word Moity, both inLittleon ol. 135. & Cow∣els interpr. in litera C. law, and true language▪ importeth the just midst, and true half of a thing? though small moity in ordinary discourse is taken for any Canton, or small portion. And in a more proper instance, though the Cinque Ports are notoriously known to be five, as the name signi∣fieth; yet reckoned up with their members they make seven, as I doubt not, but six, yea moe Tetrarchies, may sometimes be told in Palestine. § 6. And now to take our farewell,Idumea, Pera, & Decapolis. of the severall divisions of this land, mentioned in Scripture, (for on such onely we insist) it will not be amiss to minde the Reader, that besides the foresaid partitions, we finde some other territories in Iudea, having proper names and bounds to themselves, but the latter so excentricall, that they fall out neither even with any one Tribe, nor adequate to any of the Provinces, or territories formerly described. Such are, 1 Idumea, sometimes taken more strictly, for the south partMark 3. 8. of Iu∣dea; sometimes more largely (as always in the oldIsay 34. 5. & Ezek. 35.15. Testa∣ment) for the land of Edom, and the adjacent Dominion. 2 Perea, ( to cross the water is frequent in the travels of our Saviour) being a countrey containing all the land once belong∣ing to Reuben, Gad, and Manasseh on the east of Iordan. 3 Decapolis, that is, a land with ten Cities therein; the just propor∣tion of command given to the good servant, who improved his five to ten pounds, Take thou authorityLuke 19. 17. over ten Cities. However, such is the variety even betwixt good authors, that a∣mongst them the ten Cities of Decapolis, are almost ten severall ways rec∣koned up. We will onely set down two, the most authentick com∣putations of them. PlinyNat. Histor. lib. 5. c. 18. his account. 1 Damascus. 2 Opoton. 3 Philadelphia, once Rabba. 4 Raphana. 5 Seythopolis, once Bethsan. 6 Gaddara. 7 Hippon. 8 Pella. 9 Galasa, for Gerasa. 10 Canatha. BrochardItin▪ ab Acho∣ne versus Eu∣rum. his account. 1 Tiberias. 2 Sephet. 3 Kedesh-nepthali. 4 Hazor. 5 Capernaum. 6 Caesarea Philippi. 7 Iotopata. 8 Bethsaida. 9 Chorazin. 10 Scythopolis.
The reason of their great difference may be this, that in continuance of time, some of these ancient Cities fell into decay, or disfavour to for∣feit their franchises, whilst later places might succeed to their lost im∣munities. § 7. Here we pass over in silence,Hil-countrey, and low-countrey in Iudea. the division of Iudea into the Luke 1. 3. Hill-countrey, and the2 Chr. 26. 10. Low-countrey; because this distinction is not ap∣propriate to Palestine, but usuall, and obvious in all other kingdomes. I remember whilest I lived in the West of England and confines of Sum∣merset-shire, hearing a labourer speak much of his long living in the low-countreys, I demanded of him, whether he had ever been at Amsterdam? He answered, that he had never been there, but often at Taunton. Whereby I plainly perceived, what low-countreys he meant, namely the flat and levell of Summerset-shire, under Quantock-hills, according to the language of the people in those parts. Thus when the Tribe of Iudah is said to conquer the Cananites in theJudg. 1. 9. low-countrey, we understand the champion and plain-field in Iudea, which lay at the foot of the mountains. § 8. We meet in Scripture with many other petite tracts of ground,Petite lands in Palestine. honoured with names of lands; as, the land of1 King. 4. 10. Hepher, the land of1 King. 4. 11. Dor, the land of1 Sam. 9. 5. Zuph, the land of1 Sam. 13. 17. Shual &c. and in the new Testament the land ofMat. 14. 34. Gennesareth, with many other. These may be compared to our Gilsland in Cumberland, Cleveland in York-shire, Marishland in Norfolk, Lovingland in Suffolk, Portland in Dorset-shire: places which sound so big, that if measured by the ear, and length of syllables, they would be accounted Kingdomes, or Counties at least, whereas surveyed by the sight, and scale of miles, they appeare like the aforesaid lands in Palestine, very small, and little parcells of ground, whereof largely as we light on them hereafter in our severall descriptions. CHAP. 13. How the Hebrews measured places. Of their cubits, furlongs, miles and Sab∣bath-days-journeys. § 1. THe Hebrews distanced their places by severall measures,Hebrews di∣stanced places, by paces, & bow∣shoots. some arbitrary, casuall, and uncertain; others certain, as reduced to a constant standard. Of the former was their measuring of land by paces, for we2 Sam. 6. 13▪ read, when David solemnly brought the Ark into Ierusalem, when he had gone six paces he offered oxen and fallings. But here we are left at a loss in point of certainty, taking it rather for an ambulatory, then a Geometricall pace, and then how vast the difference herein? For Saul being higher from the shoulders1 Sam. 10. 23. upward, then the rest of Israel, by the symmetry of parts, his pace must be presumed proportionably lon∣ger then other men. Nor more certain was the Hebrews measuring their land by a bow-shoot, as Hagar is said, to set her son Ihmael a good way
off, as it wereGen. 21. 16. a bow-shoot; which if at rovers, or randome, admits of va∣riation, according to the strength of the bow, might or sleight of the archer, weight or fashion of the arrow. § 2. As little certainty is also to be had, by measuring of ground by days-journeys.And by days-journeys. Moses in the name of his countrey-men requested Pharaoh, that they might goeExod. 5. 3. three days journey into the wildernesse, and sacrifice unto the Lord their God. And I have seen some Dutch-maps, in their Scale, in stead of miles, measured by days-journeys. A computation most un∣certain, especially when it is not agreed, whether the day be in Summer, or Winter; the traveller on horse-back, or on foot: not to speak of the goodness, or plainness of the way, (by which advantage,2 Sam. 18. 23. Ahimaaz beat Cushi) the speed and diligence of the traveller. For instance; Iacob being in the prime of his youth, sole and single with God, and his staffe, tra∣velled in a day from Beer-sheba toGen. 28. 10. Bethel, no less then sixty English miles; a tough journey, and yet the wonder is lessened, if we observe, 1 No doubt, he set forth early (probably in the dark to prevent discovery) and travelled till after the SunGen. 28. 11. was set. 2 He fled from his brother Esau; and fear makes good foot-men. 3 He went to fetch a wife; and so welcome an imployment made him mend his pace. Thus early up, and active in himself, and assisted by God, and driven with fear, and drawn with love, and freed from any luggage; no won∣der, if he went fast and far in a day. But the same Iacob, when he re∣turned from Padan-Aram, bringing with him flocks, children, and the impediments of a family, foundSee the Map of Gd. fifteen miles from Mahanaim to Peniel (if he went so far in one day) to be a sufficient journey. However, I deny not, but perchance anciently, the foresaid paces, bow-shoots, and days-journeys were reduced to a certain proportion, though now to us unknown. And yet hence no imperfection in Scripture-History is justly inferred, because the point is of no such concernment, and the holy Spirit inten∣ded not exactness therein, as not important to the truth of the story. § 3. Come we now to their certain measures of ground:Cubits the cur∣rent measure of the Hebrews. amongst which the cubit challengeth the preheminence, as most common and current in all Iudea, yea and in other eastern countreys. For we finde even in Persia, that the gallowes provided by Haman for Mordecai (but hanselled by himself) was fiftyEsther 7. 9. cubits high. Except any will say, this was extraordinary, that in the greater scorn and derision, that the gal∣lows might the better fit a Iews body, it was framed and fashioned ac∣cording to a Jewish dimension. By cubits they were commanded, to measure the suburbs and lands of the Levites, which were to reach from theNumb. 35. 4. wall of the City, and outwards, a thousand cubits round about. Say not this was a long and tedious work, to mete by so small a measure, God here∣by shewing, that the least parcell of so fruitfull a land, was of conside∣able valuation. Thus precious drugs are not weighed out by hundreds,
or pounds; but by drams, scruples, and graines; so soveraign is the smallest particle thereof. § 4. A cubit (in the Hebrew ,Two kinds of Cbus. Amah) is so called from cubitus the elbow (as that from cubo to lean, or  to bow) because properly the space betwixt the elbow, and tip of the middle finger. It was two-fold, the great, and the lesse, which may be cleared out of Scripture, against such as levell all cubits alike, and conceive this distinction lyeth not in the thing it self, but mens bare opinion. For, 2 Chron. 3. 3. we finde cubits according to the first measure, and the Prophet 41 8. expresly mentioneth a full reed of six great cubits. The lesser cubit generally is adequate to our foot and half, or half yard, the great double as much, commensurate to our full yard or three foot. But Rabbi Cami in his comment onCap. 46▪ v. 2. cited by Arias Montanus de Mensur. Sac. Ezekiel assignes the great cubit a larger proportion, so that a thousand Emoth, or cubits make a mile, whom we have followed in laying out the bounds of the Levites suburbs. § 5. Forbear we here to speak of fathoms,Furlongs how long. but once mentioned in ScriptureActs 27. 28. (and then in the Adriatick sea) because onely used to sound the depth of water, nor measure the length of land. A furlong comes next to be considered, so called quasi furrowlong, being so much as a teme in England plougheth going forward, before they return back again. I say in England, otherwise in the east parts of Poland, where Lords have large lands in a continued champion-countrey, uninterrupted with inclo∣sues, they make but two urlongs (and those some miles in length) in a whole day, the one going forth, the other coming back, so to save time and toil of often turning. We finde no mention of furlongs in the old Testament, and indeed the Grecian sheers first cut the land of Cana∣an into the fashion of furlongs, after Alexander and the Asian Kings be∣came Masters thereof. Hereupon we first meet with them in2 Mc. 12. . Mac∣caees, which afterwards in the new Testament, became the constant computation of distances, both by sea and land. Now although some difference be in the dimension of severall urlongs, the Italian is conclu∣ded to contain an hundred and five and twenty paces, and to be the eight part of a mile. § 6. A mile consists of a thousand paces,A Rman mle made the sam wih▪  Hbrew Brah. whence in Latine it takes its denomination, and is a measure of pure Roman extraction. How∣ever some learned men conceive, that the Hebrew Berah, answereth to the proportion of the Roman mile, and so (saithIn msuris sacis. Montanus) is always rendered by the Rabbins; namely, when Iacob isGen 35. 16. & 48. 7. twice said, to want but a Berah to come to Ephrath; and when Naaman is said, to have departed2 King. 5. 19. a Berah from the Prophet Elisha. In all which places Tremelius hath it exiguum terrae spatium, whom our translation following, readeth it, a little way. A mile is said to contain eight furlongs, though others in these eastern parts,Hw  Sa∣viours precept s to b under∣stood. will have ten to concurre to the compleating thereof. § 7. But, be a mile more, or less; longer, or shorter; the sense, ra∣ther
then the sound, is to be heeded in our Saviours precept,Mat. 5. 41. And who∣soever shall compell thee to goe a mile, goe with him twain. Not that hereby he meant to make Christians the lackeys to every mans insolence, but one∣ly to beat down in them vindicative dispositions, to gain on their op∣pressours, by submission, not violence, seeing resistance would invite ruine upon them, during their present condition. Indeed, clothes are straitest when first put on, which afterwards widen with wearing; and so some think the strictness of this precept, was onely at the first giving thereof. Yea, they compare this, and the like prudentiall coun∣sells, rather then positive commands, to the shells of birds, which when they are hatched fall off of their own accord, conceiving onely infant Christianity obliged to the keeping thereof. Whereas an eternall tye is therein contained; but, with what circumstances it is to be observed, comes not within the Scale of miles in our Maps to determine. § 8. The Sabbath-days journey remaines,A Sabbath-days journey how much. and great difference there is amongst good authors about the proportion thereof. Some count it so much as was betwixt each mans proper habitation, and the next Synago∣gue, or place of publick worship, to which he was to repair; Others, that distance, which one might goe after the Morning, and return before the evening sacrifice was offered. But let us attend to the text which directs us to some certainty therein;Acts 1. 12. Then returned they to Ierusalem from the mount called Olivet, which is from Ierusalem a Sabbath-days journey. By the Mount here we understand not the verge, or bottome; but the summity, top, or ridge thereof, whence our Saviour made his ascension. Secondly, both going thither, and returning thence are computed in the compass of the journey. Now, Bethany which was on mount Olivet, is elsewhere said to be nigh to IerusalemJohn 11. 1. about fifteen furlongs, two miles on the matter; all which put together, the result is, that four miles, or there-abouts, make up a Sabbath-days journey. Provided, it was leasurely, and moderately paced, coming under the notion rather of recreation, then toil; a walk, then a work, both to man and beast; otherwise the day might be broken as well in going too fast, as too far. § 9. It will here be demanded,Whereon Sab∣bath-days jour∣neys were grounded. seeing this was flatly against the letter of the Law, (if not onely meant for the gathering of Manna) positive, and negative;Exod. 16. 29. Abide yee every man in his place, let no man goe out of his place on the seventh day: Whence then did this indulgence, or dispensation a∣rise? Some ground it on Ioshua'sJosh 3. 4. ordering, that the Ark should in its removall be distanced from the people about two thousand cubits by mea∣sure; which space is presumed, might be gone forward and backward by any on the Sabbath-day without offence. But others conceive this equity included in the very words of the Ordinance. For, surely God in∣tended not, that the Sabbath should nail the Iews as fast to their houses as the darkness did the EgyptiansExod. 10. 23. when none arose from their place; seeing such a sedentary stupidity had been a rack, not a rest; and a poor refresh∣ing
to the Jewish servants, that those who had been labourers six days, should be prisoners the seventh. Some necessary motion therefore must be allowed. And when the Disciples walked though the corn on the Mat. 12. 2. Sabbath-day, the Pharisees found fault, not with their feet, but their hands, not with their going, but gathering ears of corn as they went. As for the Pars quota, how far people might goe on that day, custome and tradition had decided it, about the days of our Saviour. § 10. For in the age of Elisha the nice restriction of a Sabbath-days journey was unknown.Unknown in the age of Elisha. For when the Shunamite requested of her hus∣band, 2 King. 4. 22. to send her one of the young men, and one of the asses, that she may run to the man of God, and come again, he rejoyned, Wherefore wilt thou goe to him to day? It is neither new Moon, nor▪ Sabbath. Intimating, that had it been Sabbath either weekly or annuall, it was her duty, and had been her custome to repair to the place where the Prophet lived; though Carmel, where Elisha resided, was from Shunem at least fifteen miles. As for the Iews in our Saviours time, they persisted in the rigorous observation of the Sab∣bath, even till, and after the destruction of the Temple, insinuated in our Saviours counsell,Mat. 24. 20. Pray that your flight be not in winter, nor on the Sab∣bath-day. Christ in the latter pitying that conflict, which would happen in the scrupulous conscience of ceremonious Iews, betwixt their love of saving their lives, and keeping the law; lest that, while the one spurred them to fly, and the other bridled them to stay, they would be at such a stand, that their enemies might easily knock them down in that stound of amazement, and their life be determined in this world, before the question decided in their conscience. § 11. As for latitudes and longitudes,Difference in the longitudes and latitudes. the light and life of all great Maps, we have onely observed them in our generall descriptions of Palestine and Egypt, omitting them in the draughts of particular Tribes, whose smalness render them incapable thereof, without very much pains, and with very small profit. In the latitudes we may attain a tole∣rable certainty, but so different are good Authors in assigning the longi∣tudes, that they accord no better in their testimonies, then the witnesses brought against Christ,Ma. 15. 29. not any two of them agreeing together. Nor doth this discord onely arise from the different meridians, whence the ancients and moderns doe start their computations, because this being easily arbitra∣ted according to just proportion, the difference almost remains as much as ever before. However, we have followed authors of the best authority, asIn our answer to the objecti∣ons of the Map generall of Palesine. hereafter God willing we shall give the Reader a particu∣lar account thereof.
CHAP. 14. Directions for the use of the Scale of miles in our Maps. § 1. WIthout a Scale of miles,The vast diff∣rence between miles of seve∣rall countrys. (or degrees equivalent) the livelyest draught of a Countrey is no regulated Map, but a paper full of names of places. However, vast is the difference betwixt the miles in severall Countreys. An Italian mile containeth seven, an English eight furlongs. A French is equall to two, a vulgar Dutch to three English miles, the large Dutch to four, the miles in Swizerland to five, not to say six of our English computation: so that, in that mountainous countrey, tra∣vellers have a double disheartning, the worst of ways, and longest of miles. Yea upon the Alpes in the juncture of Germany and Italy, in the self same mountain, on the north side the miles are the longest, on the south side the shortest in Christendome. § 2. Come over into England,And betwixt miles of the same countrey. and what difference is there betwixt a Middlesex and a Yorkshire mile? The former the shortest, because (as some will have it) every London-Lady when weary with walking, concludes the space though never so short to be a mile: whilest the well moun∣ted Rank-riders in the northern countrey, insensible of the length of the way, because of the swiftness of their horses, make miles of the largest proportion. Our scale of miles presented in all these Maps, is according to the English mile containing eight furlongs; to which we have redu∣ced (a task rather troublesome then difficult) the measures of other authours, giving allowance according to the standards of the severall countreys whereof they were. § 3. Here (if my complaint might finde any pity, and that pity give me any ease) I would complain of the irreconcileable difference betwixt Au∣thors (proceeding on one and the same scale of miles) in making their distances betwixt their severall places. We read of Saul that he so scatte∣red the army of the Ammonites so that1 Sam. 11. 11. two of them were not lest together▪ Such a dispersion we finde in the judgment of learned men, not two of them generally concurring in the measuring of miles betwixt eminent places. § 4. Now as Jurie-men, when severall witnesses swear point-blank one against another, make bold to beleeve his testimony who appears most credible unto them, such power we have assumed to our selves in these differences, to follow those, who we conceive have the best autho∣rity. Herein having a speciall regard to those that lived upon the place, and preferring their judgments above others, though otherwise of grea∣ter learning, because in matters of fact done in his presence, the eyes of a child are to be beleeved before the eares of a man. § 5. Where both authours appear of equall authority in themselves, and number of followers, we have umpired the difference by pitching
on a middle number betwixt both. For instance,Patest. Seig. f. 19. Seiglerus makes it fourteen thousand paces or fourteen miles betwixt Zidon and Tyre (emi∣nent Marts, and therefore the distance betwixt them might be notorious∣ly known) whilstVadian. Phax. f. 271. Vadianus makes it two hundred furlongs, or twenty miles. Here to part the difference equall, we have insisted on 17 miles. § 6. However when this, and much more caution is used by us, our Scale of miles is so farre from pretending to the exactness of those left-handed GibeonitesJud. 20. 16. to hit the mark at an haires-breadth and not misse, that a large and charitable latitude must still be allowed us in a subject so hard and full of uncertainty. Yea the holy Spirit it self speaks not po∣sitively of distances of places, but with words of qualification.Luke 24. 13. About threescore furlongs from Ierusalem to Emmaus;John 6. 19. About five and twenty or thirty fur∣longs they had rowed on the Sea; as if five in thirty made no considerable difference. If the same favour may be but allowed our scale of miles, I doubt not but it will acquit it self against all just exception. § 7. Now for the further managing of our Scale of miles we request the Reader not to extend it, therewith to measure all the properties, or History-pictures in our Map (for then some men would appear Giants, yea monsters, many miles long) expecting him rather to carry a scale in his own eyes, for surveying such portraitures. Yea in generall I undertake nothing in defence or excuse of those pictures, to be done according to the rule of Art, as none of my work, ornamentall, not essentiall to the Maps: onely this I will say, that eminency in English Gravers, is not to be expected till their Art be more countenanced and encouraged. Nor would I have the Scale applied to Cities drawn in Prospective, as to Rabbah in the Tribe of Gad &c. which then will fall out bigger then in∣deed they were; desiring the Reader onely to understand them to be fair and populous Cities, and therefore made more large and conspicu∣ous then the rest. § 8. Such Towns as stand (as one may say) on tiptoes,Townes on the upstroke how to be ac∣counted. on the ve∣ry umstroke, or on any part of the utmost line of any Map (unresolved in a manner to stay out or come in) are not to be presum'd placed accor∣ding to exactness, but onely signifie them there, or thereabouts. Nor is this without precedents in the best Geographers, so in their maps to make the generall continuation of neighbouring countreys clearer thereby. § 9. If any difference,What Maps most to be cre∣dited in mat∣ters of diffe∣rence. on accurate comparing, arise in the distances be∣twixt the same places presented in severall Maps, (some such will escape in defiance of all diligence) we hope the same will appear inconsiderable, & such moats (not being before the sight, but in the corner of the eye) will lit∣tle, if at all, hinder the light of a Geographical truth. Surely as in the strictest laws of Horse-racers, some wast of weight is allowed to the Riders: so me thinks some favour ought to be afforded an Author, in measuring and making many Maps, were it but for the shaking of his weary hand in so tedious a work. But if such differences appear somewhat great, let
those be relied on as the truest, where such places are set down datâ operâ, of set purpose; so that it is the very work of that Map to describe them: let those I say be credited before the distances in other Maps, where such places come in onely of complement, or are brought in by the by, to fashi∣on and fill up the (otherwise empty) borders thereof. CHAP. 15. How the different qualities of places in our Maps, are distinguished by their se∣verall Characters. § 1. MAy the Reader be pleased to learn the language of the severall Characters of the places used in our Map,How places are known by their sverall characters. which speak much in little, and are very usefull for the clearing of the history. 1 All Cities markt with Coronets were anciently the Royall seats of the thirty one Kings of Canaan, at and before the time of Ioshua 2 All Cities surrounded with double circles (the reason whereof hereafter) belong to the Tribe of Levi. 3 All Cities having banners or flags placed upon them, shew the conjecturall position thereof, when we have no assurance of their exact situation. One side of which flags humbly con∣fesseth our want of certainty, the other as earnestly craveth bet∣ter information. 4 When places are noted with Asterisks it imports difference of Divines, some making them proper names, others meerly ap∣pellative. 5 Places which have both flags and Asterisks upon them, are as I may say doublehatcht with uncertainty, not onely their posi∣tion being doubtfull, but it is questionable whether they be pro∣per names or no. 6 Places mentioned onely in the Apocrypha are signed with a Cre∣scent or half-moon inverted,The bdge of Apocrypha Cities. in some allusion to the difference of Armes of younger brethren, such books being accounted of the Fathers but of a second rank, and reputed but Deutero-canoni∣call by learned Romanists. Say not that a Barre of bastardy better befitted them being taken out of Apocrypha writings. For what though those writings were never penned by Prophets (of whom none betwixt Malachi and Iohn the Baptist) never written in Hebrew, never owned by the Iews, Gods people, for Canoni∣call, to whom the oracles of GodRom. 3. 2. were committed, (and, which is mainly materiall, Christ reproved them not for this neglect) never pro∣phesied of Christ toActs 10. 33. whom all the Prophets beare witness, never so∣lemnly quoted by Christ and his Apostles; yet because ancient, and because it may be said of them as of Abijah the sonne of
Ieroboam,King. 14. 13. in them there is found sone good thing toward the Lord, they deserve from unprejudic'd judgments a reverent respect. 7 Places noted with  cross in a circle, are such whereof no men∣tion in Scripture, but onely in humane writers, Iosephus, Pliny, and the like. 8 Such as have on them an half-moon with the points upward are modern places in the possession of the Turk. Of these very few, and those either of high note in themselves, or be∣cause seated on high rodes. We confess these no essentiall part, but con∣ceive them a fit copartment for our subject in hand. And thus among the flock of cities in our Map, by looking on their brand, their owner and nature are quickly known. § 2. Some will conceive these had better been thrown together with∣out any distinction, seeing the learned doe not need, and the unlearned will not heed the differences aforesaid. However we had rather offend on the right hand, and be censured for overmuch caution. Others will adjudge it fitter, that the severall towns had been set forth in sundry maps, not putting the new piece to the old so to make the rent the worse, not min∣gling modern with ancient places, but presenting them apart in entire descriptions. But this being a matter of great expence, we leave such mens judgments to be rectified by their purses, when they seriously con∣sider the price thereof. § 3. And now what remaineth, but that we humbly beg a measuring reed out of the Sanctuary to be lent us, that so by heavens assistance we may be enabled to perform this survey of the land of Canaan? This in the first place implored, we proceed to our task. It was Saint Pauls advice to the Corinthians,1 Cor. 1. 11. Be yee followers of me, as I am of Christ: my humble re∣quest to the reader is, that while I goe before him in this my description, he would follow me in his own pace, at his own pleasure, so fast, and so far as I follow the truth, at least the most probability grounded on Scripture, ancient Authors, and modern Travellers who have been eye∣witnesses of the countrey. Finis Libri primi.
To the Right Honourable HENRY LORD BEAVCHAMPE, Son to the Right Honourable WILLIAM MARQUES OF HARTFORD. MY LORD, AMongst many other meditations, my serious thoughts have made en∣quiry, concerning Government and Nobility, whence each of them de∣rived their originall. For the first, I finde it as ancient as Man, and extracted from God himself. Who because he was a Spirit, (and therefore invi∣sible) the better to try what Tribute of obedience, Men out of Conscience would pay unto him, stamped a character of do∣minion,
as his own visible Image (in the infancy of man∣kind) on the Father of the family, that so honour and duty might be given to God in yeelding subjection to him who represented him. These first Governours were termed Patri∣arches, that is, Father-Princes, their compounded name, speaking their mixt authority. AndAnt. Iud. . 1. cap. 2. Josephus writing of the death of Methuselah, saith , He left, or passed over his principality to Lamech his son; and this Prince-ship continued in the Primogeniture for many Ages, till the method thereof was discomposed, partly by the nume∣rosity of mankinde, partly by their far dispersed habitations. Thus was Government the Mistresse, first born in the world, whilest Nobility her Maide came in not long after to attend her. For such Persons, whose vertuous dispositions commended them to the speciall favour of Princes in Power, had in reward of their worth; markes of Honour fixed upon them: which afterward by succession descended unto their posterity. Of these, some imitating their Ancestours goodness, conti∣nued in the splendor of their Nobility, whilest others degene∣rating by their vicious courses, invited neglect and contempt upon themselves. Insomuch that in some the valour and spirit of their Progenitors (which advanced them by the sword in time of war) evaporated all into empty aire; turning into a wild and riotous animosity; And in others, the gravity and wisdome of their Grandfathers (which promoted them by the Gown in the days of Peace) settleth into feculent earth, leaving no∣thing but a tame and unactive stupidity behinde it. Herethe Nobility of such had expired, save that some of them seasonably perceiving the desperate Consumption thereof
did follow the prescription of Physick, and returned into the Native aire which first gave Honour her birth and being; and did so repair their lost reputation by practising the Primi∣tive vertues of Piety, Courtesie, Hospitality; Valour, Wisdome, and Learning; thus going home to the Climate wherein Nobility was first conceived. But thanks be to God, your Lordship is none of those personally guilty of any decay of dignity; whose vertues pre∣serve your Honour in the perfect health and strength thereof, which hath been the main motive to make me so desirous to present my book to your Honour, as a proper Patron, even to the height, for all purposes and intents. Whose Iudgment can ex∣amine the whole, Clemency Pardon what is amiss, and Great∣ness Protect the rest in defiance of opposition. Indeed Sir, besides desire to shelter my self under your Pa∣tronage, gratitude obligeth me to tender my service to your Honour. For all my Books, being my nether and upper milstone, (and such by the Leviticall Law, might not be taken to pledge, because a MansDeut 24. 5. life) without which I had been rendered unable to grinde any Grist for the good of my self or others, had been taken from me in these civill wars, had not a Letter from your Lady-mother preserved the greatest part thereof. Good reason therefore that the first handfull of my finest meale should be presented in thankfulness to your family. And now my Lord, bethinking my self of a blessing for your self and worthy Lady, that she-pattern of Meekness, Modesty Piety, and Patience; no fitter can be found then what the Psalmist pronounceth, that you may see your childrens children, andPsal. 128. 7. Peace upon Israel. Here is the finest of
wares, and withall the largest of measures, length of days, to enjoy them. Well may this prayer be read at Marriages, there being a marriage in the Prayer, wherein Long-life coupleth Posterity and Peace together. Otherwise it is wofull to multiply for war to subtract; and onely to be fruitfull for the Sword or Famine. May this Benediction of the Psalmist light on you and yours in the highest performance thereof: which is the desire of Your Lordships most humble servant THO. FULLER. Here followeth the Map of Reuben.
THE TRIBE OF REVBEN. The second Book. § 1. REuben eldest Son of Iacob by Leah, forfeited his Birthright byGen. 35. 22. defiling his Fathers bed. For which fact he was cursed,Gen. 49. 4. that he should not excell. Where∣upon came such a dearth of eminent Persons of this Tribe, that neither King, Judge, Priest, nor Prophet descended thereof. Yea, few men of fame, onely two notoriously infamous,Numb. 16. 1. & 26. 5, 8, 9. Dathan and Abiram, Generalls of the mutineers against Moses: haply in hope, because of their extraction, to recover the lost Birthright unto their Tribe. Yet these Reubenites, though not springing high, spread broad; little puissant, very populous, coun∣ting no fewer then forty sixNumb. 1. 21. thousand five hundred at the generall muster in mount Sinai: all which dying in the wilderness for their infi∣delity, their children descendedNumb. 26. 7. from them, being forty three thousand, seven hundred and thirty, possessed this land, east of Iordan. § 2. A land, that five times exchanged her owners in the old Testa∣ment. First, her originall inhabitants were theDeut. . 10. Emims, a younger house of the Anakims: accounted Giants, being great in stature and many in number. Secondly, Moabites, who, though less and lower, yet advanta∣ged by divineDeut. 2. 9. assistance, did overtop and overcome these voluminous Emims, and possessed themselves of their land. Thirdly, Amorites, under Sihon their King who (somewhat before Moses conducted the Israelites hither) acquired the soveraignty of this countrey,Numb. 21. 26. beating out the Moabites, and banishing them south of Arnon. Fourthly, Reubenites: on whom Moses bestowed it, after Sihon was conquered and killed. Fifthly, Moabites again. For it seems after the captivity of the Reubenites by Tilgath Pilneser 1 Chron. 5. 26. they made a re-entry on their old possessions: seeing those cities (formerly inhabited by the Reubenites) are propheci∣ed against byIsa. 15. & 16. a. ler. 4. 8. Isaiah and Ieremiah, under the notion of places belonging to the people of Moab, to be destroied by Shalmaneser, and Nabuchad∣nezzar.
§ 3. This Countrey had Iordan on the west, (dividing it from Ephra∣im and Benjamin) the River Arnon on the east and south (parting it from the kingdome of Moab) and on the north confined on the Tribe of Gad. The extent thereof from east to west may be allowed forty two miles, not exceeding thirty five from north to south. A Countrey excellent for grazing, not as if defective in corn and wine, wherein it shared with the rest of the Tribes, (besides the benefits of some Mineralls, and me∣dicinall waters, whereof in due place) but because exceeding in con∣veniencies for Cattell:Numb. 32.1. Pastures to feed, Woods to shade, and Rivers to wate them. Therefore was it bestowed upon the Tribes of Reuben, Gad, and half Manasseh, which much abounded in cattell. In which three we may observe some shadowes of Primogeniture, (which might im∣bolden them to petition to be first served) Reuben the eldest of Iacob by his wife; Gad eldest by Zilpah his concubine, and Manasseh first born of Ioseph. But these Tribes as first planted were first plucked up. God car∣ved unto them the first cut of the Land, and after called for the Voider to take it first from them. For they falling from the house of David, and following Ieroboam through rebellion to Idolatry, and not being warned with the terrible blow2 King. 10. 33. Hazael gave them, shroudly shrubbing their branches, God rent them up by the roots in the days of2 King. 15. 29. Pekah, by the hand of1 Chr. 5. 6. 26. Tilgath-Pilneser King of Assyria; some twenty years before the generall captivity of their brethren, at the end of the reign of Hosheah, 2 Kings 17. 6. § 4 Leaving the people, come we to survey the places, and memo∣rable actions in this Tribe. In the northeast corner thereof, near the banks of Arnon, we finde the tract or territory of Aroer. For though Aroer the City was undoubtedly entire in the Tribe of Gad; yet it1 Chron. 5. 8. plainly appears, that at least a Moity of the countrey adjacent (so called from the city) was possessed by the Reubenites. A populous place it was, theIsa. 17. 2. Pro∣phet mentioning the cities of Aroer, though their names or number is not expressed. Probably Arnon one of the principall, Tell yee it in Arnon (Icr. 48. 20. says Ieremy:) surely not to the fishes in the River, but to a City seated on the brink thereof, and thence denominated: as Hull in York-shire, so commonly called from the Rivolet running by it. § 5. Going south-west, having the stream of Arnon for our guide, we leave Kedemoth, not far from the north bank thereof. The Septuagin read Kedson for Kedemoth, and the Vulgar, without any warrant, read Iethson for Kedson: so procreative is one errour of another. This Kedemoth was Josh. 21 30. 37. one of the four Peculiars of the Levites, wherein they were accommoda∣ted with Safety, Pleasure, and Profit. Safety, in the City it self, within whose walls they dwelt in secure habitations: Pleasure in their suburbs, reaching aNumb. 35. 4. thousand Cubits from the wall round about, (little less then an English mile) where they had houses of retirement, with stalls and stables for their cattell: Profit in their glebe land, extending two thou∣sand
Cubits from their suburbs on every side, improved for pasture, tillage and vineyards. For thus the survey of the Levites lands, Numb. 35. 4, 5. (though the difficult place is capable of severall senses) is ex∣pounded by learned Rabbi Maimonie, and we in our Maps have described them accordingly. Now though herein we have given the Levites lands the largest and most favourable bounds (seeing I am unable to endow them, they shall lose nothing by my restrictive measuring thereof) yet know that narrower limits are assigned them by Tremellius, as shall hereafter be presented inIn our an∣swers to the objections on Reuben. Diagram we have prepared for that pur∣pose. § 6. Behold here Levi's curse turned into a blessing,Gen. 49 7. Divide them in Iacob, and scatter them in Israel. Now the dividing of them proved the dispo∣sing of them, for their own and others advantage. Their scattering was their ranking for the best behoof of the people, for whose instruction they were intended. They were the Salt of the earth, and therefore God sprinkled them here and there, the more conveniently to season the whole nation. Insomuch that some English Parishes are more remote from their Mother-church, then most places in Canaan were distant from the Cities of the Levites. We must not forget that in Ieroboams aposta∣sie, the religious Levites forsook their Cities and2 Chr. 11. 14. fled to Ierusalem, pre∣ferring voluntary exile before wealthy homes, on the condition of an Idolatrous compliance. It appears not in Scripture, how these Cities and lands thus left were disposed of. Whether Ieroboam himself seised on them, converting them into demeans of his Crown, or whether he suffered them to revert to those respective Tribes, from whom they were taken: so fastning his subjects affections unto him with nailes of gold of their own profit. Either course may be conceived a cause to hasten the captivity of the people; it being just that those, who swallow Gods morsels, should be spewed out of their own possessions. § 7. Round about this City, is the wilderness of Kedemoth, not wholly abandoned to solitariness, but as the rest of this kinde, more thinly inhabited. It abounded with wild beasts, Lions, Bears, Bores, Wolves, Foxes, where the pleasure in hunting the game, did not recom∣pense the pains and dangers of the shepheards lying constant Perdues in defence of their flocks. From this wilderness, Moses sent messengers toDeut. 2. 26. Sihon King of the Amorites, for peaceable passage through his coun∣trey. But Sihon (path-wise and land-foolish) by denying a civility, drew destruction on himself and subjects. For seeking in fight to tra∣verse it, for their pedibus ambulando, he was by a firme Ejection outed of his whole kingdome. § 8. To return to Arnon. Hereabouts the children of Israel passed o∣ver it, miraculously with dry feet, saithAdri. in theat. ter. sanct. fol. 51. Adricomius. But the miracle seems rather of his, then Gods making, the Scripture being silent therein, and the river not of that depth or breadth, but that it was fordable, espe∣cially
with the help of Camels, Mules, and Asses. Many miles hence this river solitarily runs on as sensible of its sad fate suddenly to fall into the dead-Sea, at Ashdoth-pisgah. Where all his comfort is, to have the com∣pany of two other Brooks: whereof the eastermost runs near toJosh. 20. 8. & 21. 36. &  Chron. 6. 78. Ier. 48. 24. Betzar or Bozra: A City of refuge belonging to the Levites Merarites, whereof there were six in the whole Countrey of Canaan, with aDeut. 19. 8, 9. provision that they should adde three more (mans mercy must increase proportiona∣bly with his means) if God enlarged their coast; though we read of no such addition, either in Davids or Solomons time. The Cities were so con∣veniently distanced by Gods appointment, that in half a day (men for their lives will take wide and thick strides) some one of them might be recovered from the remotest corner of the land. Let Historians relate the Laws of such Sanctuaries, whereof these most fundamentall. 1t.Numb. 35. 15. Strangers and sojourners in Israel were capable of the privi∣ledge thereof, as well as native Iews. 2ly. Any murderer that could, might fly thither without any hin∣drance or interruption;Deut. 19. 3. Thou shalt prepare thee a way: Otherwise such obstructions would have frustrated, and defeated the main intent of such priviledged places. 3ly. If the murderer could but reach theNum. 35. 27. & Rabbi Maimo. lb. cap. 8. sec. 11. border of such cities of re∣fuge (the very hemme of Christs garment had soveraign ver∣tue in it) distant as is aforesaid from the City it self, it was a suf∣ficient protection for him till his cause was examined before the Judges. 4ly. Upon examination, those were denied the benefit of refuge, andDeut. 19. 12. delivered up to Justice, who had committed murder out of malice prepense, or had killed one (as we may say) with a mali∣cious weapon: namely, if the bigness or sharpness thereof, be itNumb. 35. 17, 18, 23. iron, wood or stone, was mortall in view, carried death in the sight thereof, as probable, enforced with ones hand, to kill a man. 5ly. Others, who casually had killed their neighbour, might live safely in the City, till the death of the High-priest: typifying the suffering of our Saviour, whose execution is our gaol-delivery. 6ly. If the murdererNumb. 35. 26, 27. wandring out of the suburbs, was found by the avenger of bloud, he forfeited his protection, and might be killed with indemnity. 7ly. After the High-priests death (say theMaimo. on Numb. ca. 35. ver. 2. ca. 7. Sect. 14. Rabbines without Express from Scripture) the party was remitted to his innocence, not honour; restored to his liberty, not lustre; clouded the remnant of his life, because of the scandall that came by his hand. Forget we not here, that besides these six Cities, theExod. 21. 14. 1 King. 2. 29. Altar in the Tabernacle or Temple, was reputed the seventh and paramount place of murderers protection.
§ 9. The brook from the west, begins at Machaerus: one of the stron∣gest inland Forts in the world, nature having prevented Art therein, so im∣pregnable is the City and Castle upon the top of a steepIosep. 13. Aati. Iudae. cap. 22. hill, with a deep valley round about. HitherIos. 18. Antiq. cap. 10. Iosephus saith, Herod the Tetrarch sent Iohn the Baptist to be beheaded. For which fact, his great army was afterwards overthrown by Aretas King of Arabia. Hereabout,Idem bel. Iud. lib. 7. cap. 25. two springs arise of contrary natures. One hot and sweet, the other cold and bitter. Both which meeting together make a most excellent Bath, cordiall for severall diseases. As if nature thereby would lesson us, that moderation, wherein extremities agree, is the best cure for all distempers. These wa∣ters are approved excellent for the contraction of the nerves, either in∣wardly taken, or outwarldly applied. Herod the King being sick, (new∣ly come out of a Bath of bloud, of the innocent Bethlehem-babes) was hi∣ther directed in vain by his Physitians, the water refusing to be guilty of such a Tyrants recovery. On this stream stoodHier. quaest. Hebr. in Gee. Lasha mentioned Genesis 10. 19. afterwards called Callirrhoe or the Fair stream. And now what pity is it that such percious water should presently be spilt into the the Dead Sea! But what remedy? Fair and foul faces must meet together in the grave. § 10. As for the Dead sea, which onely peeps into a corner of this Tribe, but stedfastly faceth a whole side of Iudah more properly thereof hereafter. And as for Iosephus his valley ofLib. 7. bell. Iudae. cap. 25. Baaras, with the strange growing, gathering, & working of the famous root therein, we mention it, not to seem wholly ignorant thereof; and but mention it, not to seem over credulous therein. Hereabouts is plenty of Alum and Brimstone, the latter probably some stragling drops of that direfull shower, which was rained on Sodome, and Gomorrah, leaving some tincture in the adjacent Countrey as a remembrancer of so great a Judgment. § 11. It is now high time that we survey the west of this Tribe, which Iordan (as we have said) divideth from Ephraim, and Benjamin. This is the true meaning of Deborah's complaint, uttered and repeated, forIudg. 5. 15, 16. the divisions of Reuben were great thoughts of heart, namely because that Tribe separated by Iordan from the western continent of Canaan, could not come seasonably to the succour of Barak, and subduing of Sisera. This River used to overflow all his banks in the first moneth. 1 Chron. 12. 15. (parallel to the end of our March, and beginning of Aprill) or, as it is said Iosh. 3. 15. at the time of harvest. Which vast distance in our English Climate (as much as betwixt Spring and Autumn) is easily reconciled and made to meet in Iudea; where the Harvest t large is da∣ted from the first fruits, and those ripe in Aprill in that hot countrey. Let Naturalists discuss the cause, whence this inundation of Iordan pro∣ceeds; whether from the violence of winds, then blowing on its stream, and angring it beyond his banks; or from the influence of the Moon, Commandress over moist bodies, and their motions; or from the con∣fluence
of Snow dissolved from the mountains. But my discourse like Iordan overflowes, it shall return within its banks. § 12. In the northwest corner of this Tribe, Iordan first entring into it, is fordeable at Bethbara or Bethabara, that is, the house of passage. For Gideon having the Midianites in chace, sent messengers to all in mount Ephraim, (a service most proper for them, cause in their confines) to Iudg. 7. 24. take before them the water unto Bethbara and Iordan, which there with good guides and high Camels might be waded over; but more southward the river is fenced by its own breadth and depth against all Passengers. And here afterward didIoh. 1. 8. Iohn baptize our Saviour. As forIosh. 13. 4. Aphek hard by, we place it here rather in conformity toAdrich. theat. Ter. sanc. pa. 126. others, then convinced in our own judgment of the true situation thereof. § 13. The altar Ed, or witnesse, was hereabouts erected by the Reube∣nites, Gadites, and half Tribe of Manasseh, returning from the conquest of Canaan. This Altar was a bridge in effect, to conjoin these divided Tribes with the rest; severed by water, the same in worship; on the other side Iordan in position, on the same side with the other Tribes in Religion. But though there was a noon-day of Innocence in their inten∣tions, yet because (though not a night of guiltiness) a twilight of su∣spicion obscured their actions, it occasioned jealousies in their brethren, as if they had hatched some idolatrous designe. But when the matter came to be disputed in a military way, the controversie was ended by the right stating of the question, and a seasonable distinction well ap∣plied, that it was an Altar onely of memoriall, andIosh. 22. 23▪ 24. not for any burnt meat or Peace-offering. O that all differences between brethren might winde off, in so welcome a conclusion! § 14. And now he that shall cast his eye over the Plain on the east of Iordan, shall finde it well stockt with multitudes of goodly sheep, which caused Deborah'sIudg. 5. 16. expostulation, Why abodest thou Reuben amongst the sheepfolds, to heare the bleating of the flockes? And yet no wonder if he preferred such musick, before the clashing of swords, and sounding of trumpets in the battail against the Canaanites: seeing naturally men chuse profitable ease, before honourable danger. The tails of those sheep, both for fat and wooll, were incredibly great, some of them a Syriae cubitales ovium caudae, plurimúmque in a pare lanicii. Pm Nat. hist. lib. 8. cap. 48. Cubit long. So that nature who hath tyed the tails to other creatures, may seem to have tyed the Syrian sheep to their tails, which with great difficulty they drag after them. This is the reason, why it is expresly commanded in the law, that when a sheep is sacrificed for a Peace-offer∣ing, the fat thereof and the wholeLevit. 3. 9. tail (not observed in Kine, or Goats) taken off hard by the backbone was to be offered: that part being for bulk and value considerable in their sheep, which is contemptible in other creatures. § 15. To goe back to the River, having left that place behind us, where the2 Sam. 19. 18. Ferry-boat passed over to carry David and his houshold,
after his conquest of Absalom. We are now arrived at that memorable place, where God magnified Ioshua, heartened his own people, and shrivelled up the hearts of their enemies, by drying up the waters of Iordan, whilest the Israelites passed over in this admirable Equipage. 1 The Priests went into the river bearing the Ark; in homage whereunto Iordan reverently retreated; (very farre from the river Adam, which is besides Zaretan) and they stood on firm ground in theJosh. 3. 17. midst thereof, till all the Israelites were passed over. 2 Reuben, Gad, and half Manasseh led the Van, aboutJosh. 4. 13. forty thousand men of Armes, the residue of them (in all aboutNum. 26. 10. 18. 34. an hundred thousand) remaining at home to husband their ground, guard their houses, govern their families. 3 After them the other Tribes followed: and it is observed that theyIosh. 4. 10. hasted, not with a distrustfull haste (as suspicious that the returning waters might drown the hindmost of them) but an industrious speed, and mannerly quickness, as not willing to make God wait upon them in continuing a Miracle longer then necessity did require. 4 When all were over, the Priests with the Ark, who first entred, last left the water, (all dangerous designes are begun and finished by Gods assistance) and then Iordan, whose streams hitherto suspended, returned into his channell. 5 A duplicate or double monument was erected to perpetuate the memory hereof, being a Grand Iury of great stones. Of these, twelve were solemnely set up on the land in the Tribe of Ben∣jamin at Gilgal, and the other twelve (the counterpart of this deed) were left in the midst of the river. Some perchance may admire that Ioshua should set this latter invisible monument, in a place where it is drowned both in water and obscurity. But this River-mark was such, as possibly the tops of the stones might appear at low water; or if wholly hidden, and dangerous for boats to approach, the ailers constant care to avoid them in their passage, called the occasion of placing them there to their daily remembrance. § 16. We must not dissemble the difference betwixt Authors, about the situation of the aforesaid City of Adam, but once mentioned in Scri∣pture, and therefore (as the Hebrews have a Proverb of words but once named, that they have no kindred and alliance) more difficult to know the true posture thereof. The best is, this Adam, though having no kindred hath some company to notifie it; Adam besides Zaretan: and one Zaretan is sufficiently known to have been in the half Tribe of Manasseh west of Iordan, not far from the sea of Galilee. Hence learnedIn Iosh. pag. 6. Masius concludes, that the waters of Iordan were cut off, full seventy miles together, north of the peoples passage over it. To which opinion, under favour, we
can in no wise consent. Conceiving rather that just against Iericho, the river was dried up, for whereas the station of Iordan was most wonder∣full, the Israelites had lost all the sight of this wonder on their right side, if done out of distance so many miles from their view. Place we there∣fore on these reasons (and theAdric. de Ter. sanct. pa. 129. example of others) both Adam and Za∣retan in the Tribe of Reuben. § 17. Some difference also there is betwixt Divines concerning the latitude of their passage over the river: Some conceiving it onely to a∣mount to the proportion of a fair alley, lane, or path of such receit alone as admitted the Israelites in a full and free march a competent number a brest, and that the waters, as in the Red sea, standing still on both sides, Exod. 14. 2. were a wall to them on the right hand and on the left, as the Graver in our Map hath designed it. Others doe not onely make a gap, through Iordan, but pluck down the whole hedge thereof, maintaining that all the water of that river on the left hand, (betwixt their passage over, and the Dead sea) failed and were cut off, or dried up. Which latter opinion is most agreeable toJosh. 3. 16. Scripture, and reason: for seeing the stream of Iordan south of their going over, was not supplied with any reciprocall or refluous tide out of the Dead sea, the stopping of the waters above must necessarily com∣mand their defection beneath, and that the channell by consequence for the time being was dried up. § 18. Iordan, having now closed his streams together, runs by Livias, a City which HerodEusb. in Chron. Hio. in Ioel & . built, and so named, in honour of Livia the Mother of Tiberius Caesar. For to enfavour themselves with the Emperour, the Jewish Kings called many Cities by their names (Augusta, Tiberias, two Cesarea's, Iulias, Livias) as if Palestine had been a Register book of the Imperiall Roman family. § 19. Let us now take an account of the inland Parts of this Tribe, and return to the place where the Israelites passed over Arnon. Betwixt Egypt and Arnon they had forty severall stations, and then entred into the Promised land. In comemoration whereof, probably God did order, that an offender should receive but forty stripes (what Judge soever counts them too few, would think thirty too many, if he felt them him∣self) and then be freed from further punishment. Coming into Ca∣naan, their one and forty and first fixing there was at the foot of mount Abarim, and edge of the wilderness of Kedmoth. Hence they removed to Abelshittim, where Deuteronomie was made, the second Edition of the Law revised, and enlarged by God, the Author thereof. Here the peo∣ple of Israel were numbred the second time. And although some parti∣cular Tribes were encreased, amongst whom those three that pitched on the east side of the Tabernacle, Iudah, Issachar, and Zebulun, (God and the rising Sun make any thing fruitfull) yet in the whole, they were diminishedCompare Numb. 2. 3. with Numb. 26. 51. one thousand eight hundred and twenty. Let such, as ad∣mire hereat, that people being in slavery should multiply more then when they were at liberty, consider,
1 Some Plants, (Palme trees and Camomile) the more deprest, the further they expand themselves. 2 Infant Nations, like infants, grow more discernibly at the first, then when they approach their full stature. 3 God purposely to defeat the designe of Pharaoh, to destroy the Israelites, blessed them with transcendent fruitfulness. 4 The breeders in the wilderness, were visited with many casual∣ties, bringing them to untimely ends; whereas all those in Egypt, though painfull in their livings, were healthfull in their lives. But the most memorable Accident in this place, was the Idolatry of the Israelites to Baal-peor an Idoll, conceived by most learned men to be Priapus. And who could worship him with piety, whom none with modesty can describe? It seems that Moab and Midian (perceiving Shon King of the Amorites overthrown in battell) counterfeited amity with them, and pretending to shew them (being strangers) the courtesie of the countrey, made them an entertainment, which could not be court∣like and compleat without the company of their women. The Israelites beholding the Midianitish women, first liking their faces, then tasting their feasts, stepped from their Boards to their Beds, thence to their Altars, adding spirituall to corporall fornication. This was done by theNumb. 31. 16. ad∣vice of Balaam, whose counsell did more hurt then his curse. All his charmes could have done them no harm, had he not raised these female spirits to improve them, which cost the lives of twenty four thousand Israelites, dying of the Plague; till the Javelin ofNum. 25. 8, 9. Phinehas executing of judgment, stopped Gods fiery sword amongst them. § 20. Let us now request the Reader, to climbe up the hills of Aba∣rim, Nebo, and Pisgah. These are a ledge of mountains rising by degrees from east to west. So that some have compared Abarim to the Chancell, Nebo to the Church, and Pisgah to the steeple. In mount Nebo the Authour of the2 Macc. 2. 5. Maccabees, speaks of a Cave, wherein Ieremy laid the Tabernacle, and the Arke, and the Altar of Incense, and so stopped the door. But the same Authour in the conclusion of his book confesseth, that his work is like 2 ac. 15. 40. wine tempered with water: and we take this story to be no genuine juice of the grape, and value it accordingly. On Pisgah, Moses surveyed the whole land of Canaan, and although he was advantaged by the height of the place, and clearness of his eyes (no whit abated in their sight at an Deut. 34. 7. hundred and twenty years of age) yet much of miracle must needs be ad∣mitted, in so plain and far discovery. Here Moses was buried, being pri∣viledged above other servants of God (whose souls Angels convey to heaven) that an Angel was his Sexton, to cover his body in earth. Here he concealed Moses his grave, lest the Israelites should goe a whoring af∣ter it. Destroying Idolatry is a pious, but preventing it a more provi∣dent Act, crushing it in the occasions thereof. Let none condemn this for a needless caution, as if no fear that they who sometimes would
stone Moses while living, should adore him when dead. For the crooked nature of the Iews was bowed to Extremes, and had no mean betwixt hating, and adoring. Besides, when the memories of eminent men, hated or envied when living, have passed the purgation of death, it is usuall for their former enemies to fall in love with them. § 21. May the reader now conceive himself standing on the top of mount Pisgah. Where (though content with a narrower compass, then what Moses discerned) he descrieth a fair Prospect round about him. Not to repeat the places of the west, because mentioned before, looking south ward behold the City of Nebo, at the foot of its namesake moun∣tain: and both of them so called from Nebo and Idoll God, hereabouts worshipped. We read indeed howNum. 22. 38. Reuben changed the names of the Cities of Nebo, and Baalmeon (because their old names taken from false Gods resented of Idolatry.) But so hard it is to unhabit mens mouths from old ill customes, that it seems their ancient names still prevailed in common discourse.Voss. de origi. & progres. Idol. lib. 2. pa. 346. Criticks start many controversies concerning this Idoll of Nebo; as: First, whether not originallyIsa. 4. 1. a Babylonish Deity. Secondly, whether under it the Moon (as the Sun under Bell) was not mystically adored. Thirdly, whether the same with Chemosh and Baal-Peor (which is the opinion of Saint Ierome) and if not, wherein lay the difference? But it shall never trouble me, whether the fictitious Ser∣pents of Iannes and Iambres the Egyptian enchanters, were made alike, or did differ in some particulars, seeing the reall serpents of MosesExod. 7. 12. devour∣ed them all up. And seeing long since the service of the true God hath confuted and confounded all worship of false Idols, I list not to trade in the curiosities of distinctions betwixt them. § 22. Eastward behold Kiriathaim, or the two-towns (like Bridge-North in Shropshire) two lesser Cities being modelled into one. Here lived the Emims, shrowdly smote byGen.14. 5. Chederlaomer, which probably did facilitate the Moabites in their victory over them. Iahaza, a City of the Levites, where the Israelites in battell vanquishedDeut. 2. 32. Sibon King of the Amorites. A little further see the City of Medeba, before the walls whereof a1 Chr. 19. 7. double battell was fought and won at once, by Ioab against the Aramites, and Abishai against the Ammonites. And it seems that the latter of these had at this time the City in their possession, whither they retreated after their overthrow. For what else doe those words import; The children of Am∣mon likewise fled before Abishai his Brother,1 Chr. 19. 15. [and entred into the City,] except any (conceiving it inconsistent with the present potency of David, to have any of his enemies nestled in his dominion) will by the City under∣stand Rabbah the Metropolis of Ammon, next year besieged and sacked by Ioab. As for Medeba, there needs no other evidence to speak her ancient greatness, then that Ptolemy by name takes notice thereof (though pla∣cing it in Arabia) which name it retained in the days of Saint Ierome. § 23. But northward is the most pleasant Prospect over the fair and
fruitfull Plains of Moab. Nor need any wonder why the Plain is so cal∣led, seeing Moab had nothing on the north of Arnon (after the time of Moses) when they recollect, how lately all this land was possessed by the Moabites, before SihonNum. 21. 26. forcibly expulsed them. Now to prove that places sometimes are termed by their ancient Inhabitants, though some hundred years after: we that live in London, need not goe no further then the Old Iury; so called from the Iews once dwelling there, now banished thence three hundred years agoe. But we keep the Reader too long upon the top of this bleak and cold mountain. 'Tis time to come down, when we have told him, that though Pisgah here be taken for a proper name, yet it is often used as an appellative, for any eminent ridge of a hill, which aspires above his fellowes. Know also that all the Countrey hereabouts was calledHiero. de loc. Hebr. Pisgah in the days of Saint Ierome. § 24. Having now for a while reposed our selves in the pleasant Plains of Moab, let us not tire when our task in this Tribe grows so near to an end. Going a little northward we cannot misse the three Stations whither Balak brought Balaam to curse the Israelites. For ha∣ving first freely feasted Balaam at Kiriath-Huzzoth, his chief City in the land of Moab, he brought him over Arnon, onely to see the utmost skirts of the people, hoping if he could but kindle his curse in any cor∣ner, it would quickly burn all the house of Israel. But thrice he struck fire to no purpose. 1t. In BamothNum. 22. 41. Baal or the high places of Baal. 2ly. In the field ofNum, 23. 14. Zophim at the top of the hill. 3ly. In the top of Peor, which looks towardsNum. 23 28. Ieshimon: build∣ing in each place seven Altars, and sacrificing a Bullock, and Ram on every of them. What was the designe of the Sorcerer? Conceived he that heaven was covetous like himself, and might be bribed with sacrifices? Sure∣ly the stench of his hypocrisie out-sented all the smell of his burnt offer∣ings. Or thought he by often changing the scene to act the more upon God? He that is the same yesterday and to day, and for ever, receives no more impression from the shifting of place, then from the changing of time. Or did he hope with the mystery of his numbers, Thrice seven Altars; to flatter heaven into a consent? All numbers are but bare Cy∣phers to him, that is infinite. O how he sweats for the wages of in∣iquity? How is his tongue distracted between the Spirit of God and the spirit of gold. All in vain; the further he goes, the worser he speeds: but the better he speaks, falling at last from lenting, to down right blessing of Israel. However, though he did not his work, he re∣ceived his wages. And if Balak at that time did not pay him with gold; yet afterwards the Israelites did with steel, justly slaying him with the Num. 31. 8. sword.
§ 25. Pass we now, still more northward, by the place, where Elias ascending to heaven in a Chariot of fire, left his mantle and a double portion of his spirit to2 King. 2. Elisha his servant and successour: and by Mephaah a City of the Levites, to Sibmah, so famous for her fruitfull vinyards. Going through which, the Reader may eat grapes to the full at his ownDeut. 23. 24. pleasure: A liberty lawfully allowed him, but beware putting up any into his vessell, lest he be apprehended for a trespasser. For the same law which pro∣vides for his necessity, punisheth his covetousness. And what is this whole world with the wealth thereof, but a vinyard, wherein happy he, who hath enough to serve his turn, seeing when he dieth, he shallPsl 49. 17. carry nothing away with him. It seems in Sibmah there was some one signall vine eminent for greatness above the rest, or else that all her vines grew so close and uniform, that they resembled one entire and continued tree: TheIsa. 16. 8, 9. & Ier. 48. 32. Prophets always addressing themselves unto it in the singular number, O vine of Sibmah, I will weep for thee, &c. § 26. Our work is ended, when we have viewed the north part of this Tribe, where it confineth on Gad. Where we onely meet with one place of note Heshbon, anciently the royall Palace of Sihon King of the Amorites, & afterwards a City of the Levites. Which the Scripture placeth sometimes inNum. 32. 37. Reuben, and sometimes inIosh. 21. 39. Gad. To accommodate this difference without making of two Cities of the same name (such multiplication unwarrantable, save where absolute necessity enforceth it) I finde no fitter expedient, then by setting Heshbon so equally between these two Tribes, as partially in both, and totally in neither. Thus Bristoll is situated betwixt Glocester and Somerset shires; and yet challengeth to be an absolute Liberty of it self; as this Heshbon also was an entire demeans of the Levites. One fair gate it had, called Beth Rabbim gate, nigh to which were most clear and pleasant fishponds, to which theCant. 7. 4. eyes of the Spouse are compared by Solomon. Not that she was troubled with watery eyes like Leah, (the resemblance being recounted amongst her perfections, not defects) or that her eyes (as some may fancy) are compared to Pools, moistened with teares for her sins, but because of her clear and perspicuous vision and apprehension of heavenly Myste∣ries. § 27. As for the mountains of Emek, which Mr. More in his Map, without alledging any warrant from Scripture, (otherwise his con∣stant custome) makes the bounds betwixt Reuben and Gad; I have placed them accordingly, yet so that the Reader (without a miraculous Faith) may remove these mountains to some other place, when he finds just cause for the same. At which time also, when proceeding on more infallible principles for their situation, let him take down our conjecturall Flags from the tops of Mephaah,osh. 13. 19. Zerethshahar, &c. now placed but by guesse, and let him dispose of them, if he can, in a more exact position.
§ 28. So much for Reuben, not forgetting how in the days of Solomon when the land was divided into twelve Purveyer-ships to make monthly provisions for his Courts1 King. 4. 19. Gebar the son of Uri had al the country once of Si∣on King of the Amorites (but then possest by Reuben) in his circuit whence no doubt plenty of good fare out of this Pasture-countrey so abounding in cattell, was brought to Ierusalem. Now we have placed the name of Amorites on the sinister front of this our description, because they were the old inhabitants of this Countrey: our constant custome through this Book in the adverse page opposite to the Tribes name to insert one of the seven Nations of Canaan, (former owners of that land) conceiving it to conduce much to the illustration of Scripture. § 29. Modern Heralds, by Commission authorized from the Jewish Rabbines, assign to Reuben for armes, Argent, three Bars waveè azure, in allusion to Iacobs Legacy,Gen. 49. 4. Unstable as water, thou shalt not excell. For as water cannot hold it self, but as it is held in a vessell, so Reuben could not contain himself within the bounds of chastity, till shame and sorrow did reclaim him. Besides, as water once shed, is never to be gathered up again; so Reuben could never after recollect his lost credit, to recover the full favour of his Father. Though once he endevoured to gather up some spilt drops of his reputation by projecting the de∣liverance ofGen. 37. 21. Ioseph from his brethren: but his design miscarried. § 30. For mine own part, I cannot concur with the common opi∣nion, that these three Bars waveè were the Armes of Reuben; princi∣pally because Armes are honorary ensignes, assign'd, or assum'd for the greater grace of the bearer▪ Improbable therefore, that this Tribe to per∣petuate the infamy of their ancestour would always have water running in their shield, as if Reubens crime were the Reubenites credit; like such whom thePhilip. 3. 19. Apostle reproves, that glory in their shame. Rather let us hearken to Aben Ezra, who allots to the banner of Reuben a man or male child (others a mandrake, others put mandrakes in his hand) re∣lating to Leahs words at his birth, calling him Reuben, that is,Gen. 29. 32. See a Son, causing her to forget her pain, for joy that a man child was borne into the world. § 31. The proper place for the standard of this Tribe was to be theNum. 2. 10. first of the three Tribes which pitched on the south of the Tabernacle. Thus though Reuben lost the Primacy of power over all, he still kept the pre∣cedency of place before one quarter of his brethren. Whence parents may be taught, that though on just ground they disinherit, yet not so wholly to dishearten their eldest sons, but still suffer some re∣membrances of a birthright ever to remain unto them. FINIS. Here the Map of Gad is to be inserted.
The third Book. THE TRIBE OF GAD. § 1. GAd eldest Son of Iacob by Zilpah, so increased in Egypt, thatNumb. 1. 14, 25. forty five thousand six hundred and fifty males of twenty years old and upward of this Tribe were numbred at Mount Sinai: all which falling in the wilderness for their tem∣pting of God with this disobedience, a new gene∣ration of forty thousandNum. 26. 18. and five hundred entred the Land of Canaan. This Tribe affordeth very martiall men. For such of them as repaired to David in Ziglag are described,1 Chr. 12. 8. Men of war, fit for the battell, that could handle shield and buckler, whose faces were like to the faces of Lyons, and were as swift as the Roes upon the mountaines. Yet I meet not with any publick Ma∣gistrate extracted from Gad, though theSee Speeds genealogy of Gad extracted from M. Broughtons. Genealogists rank Iehu with four of his Posterity successive Kings of Israel amongst the Gadites; but on no other ground, then because at the first time he is found mentioned in Scripture he was2 King. 9. 1, 2. imployed a Commander at the siege of Ramoth Gilead a CityJosh. 20. 8. in this Tribe. It seems that as the English-law makes a charitable provision for children left by their parents, that the Parish wherein they are first taken up, must maintain them: so Genealogists, the better to methodize the pedegrees of the Iews in Scripture, reduce Persons of unknown Parentage, to those respective Tribes, in whose grounds they first light on the mention of them. But let Iehu pass for a Gadite: the rather because so puisant a Prince, will prove a credit, rather then a charge to that Tribe to which he is related. § 2. The land of this Tribe was of a double nature. For what lay north of the river Iabbok was anciently the possession of Og King of Basan. But what lay south of the river, had its property more intricate and in∣cumbred with often exchange of her owners, and on the right under∣standing thereof depends no less, then the asserting of the innocence of the Israelites, the confuting of the cavill of the Ammonites, and the re∣conciling of a seeming contradiction in Scripture; Take it thus briefly.
1t. It was the Land of certain Giants calledDeut. 2. 20. Zamzummims. 2ly. It was possessed by theSeriously per∣use Iosh. 3. 25. Ammonites, who destroied those Giants, and this Countrey was accounted a moity or one half of their dominion. 3ly. It was subdued byCompare Num. 21. 26. with Iudg. 11. 21. Sihon King of the Amorites, who cast out the Ammonites (when also he destroied the Moabites) such as were south of Iabbok, and dwelt in their stead. Lastly, after the overthrow of Sihon, Moses gave it to the Tribe of Gad, for their inheritance. Thus God by ringing the Changes of successive Lords in this Land made musick to his own glory. Behold we here what the PsalmistPsal. 80. 9. saith, Thou hast brought a Vine out of Egypt, thou preparest room before it; the method and manner of which pre∣paration is most remarkable. First, God in his providence foresaw that the Countrey of the Canaanites was without other addition too nar∣row, to receive the numerous people of Israel. Secondly, God in his goodness resolved out of love to righteous Lot, that his posterity should not totally lose their possession, nor would he suffer the Israelites their kinsmen to deprive them of any parcell thereof; giving them a flat command to the contrary.Deut. 2. 9. 19. Lastly, God in his justice permitted Sihon King of the Amorites should win part of the Countrey from Moab and Ammon; and suddenly sends the Israelites to conquer the conquerour; and now lawfully to inherit, what the other had wrongfully taken a∣way: And thus he prepared room for his Vine. § 3. By this time we plainly perceive, that in the Ammonites demand to Iephtha, there was some truth blinded with more falshood, that the countenance of the former might pass the latter unsuspected.Iudg. 11. 13. Israel took away (saith the King) my Land when they came out of Egypt from Arnon even unto Iabbok, and unto Iordan; now therefore restore these Lands again peaceably. True it was, that this Land was once theirs (and so it is plainly called Ioshua 13. 25.) but most false, that ever the Israelites took Inch of ground from them, save onely mediately and at the second hand, taking it from Sihon, who took it from the Ammonites. We report the rest to Ieph∣tha's answer (who first with a fair ambassie, and then with a famous victory confuted the Ammonites antiquated title to this territory) plea∣ding that the Israelites had threeIudg. 11. 26. hundred years peaceably possessed the same. Now, if upon a strict account, some years fall short of that sum, the matter is not much, because souldiers love to fill their mouths with a round number, and too hundred fifty and odde with a good sword may well be counted three hundred years currant, though not com∣pleate. § 4. The Tribe of Gad had the kingdome of Ammon on the east, the half Tribe of Manasseh on the north, Reuben on the south, and the river Iordan on the west. The length thereof from Aroer to Iordan may be computed thirty five miles: and the breadth thereof from Mahanaim to
Dibon, falls out a little less. A Tribe inferiour to none for fair rivers, fruit∣full Pastures, shady woods: superiour to most for populous Cities, and memorable actions atchieved therein. As for Balme or Balsame, it was a peculiar commodity of this Countrey. Thus the Prophet betwixt grief, anger, and pity demands, IsIer. 8. 22. there no balme in Gilead? and again, Goe up into Gilead, and takeIer. 46. 11. balm O virgin. In describing this Countrey we will follow the streams of Arnon, Iabbok, and Iordan, which (with some little help lent us besides) will afford us the conveniency to behold all remarkable mounts in this Countrey. § 5. In the eastern part of this Tribe the rivers of Arnon and Iabbok (though running contrary ways) arise not far asunder: according to the exact observation of. Iosephus, who saith that the land of Sihon King of the Amorites, lay in nature and fashion like an Island, betwixt the three rivers of Iordan, Arnon, and Iabbok, so near are the fountains of the latter to∣gether. The heads of their springs are found in a mountainous and rocky soil, affording great plenty of Iackalls; mungrell creatures of equivo∣call extraction, deriving cruelty from the Wolves their sires and craft from the Foxes their dams. These Iackalls are meant by our translatours Psalm 63. 10. Let them fall by the edge of the sword, that they may be a portion for Foxes: not for ordinary Foxes, which indeed are so dainty mouthed, that they will not feed on any carkasse, but what they kill themselves: but for these Iackalls (which may pass for Foxes, because so by the surer side) so ravenous, that they will not onely feed on carion above ground, but even dig holes into the earth, fetch forth, and feed on dead bodies of men, if not deeply interred. § 6. The river Arnon running full south passeth byNum. 32. 34. Aroer, a fair City whereof frequent mention in Scripture, but in no other notion, but onely as the eastern boundary of Canaan. Here Arnon entertaineth a river from the west, called the river of2 Sam. 24. 5. Gad, because rising, running, and falling within the compass of this Tribe. § 7. This river of Gad had formerly received into it another stream called the waters of Nimrim, threatned by theIsa. 156. Ier. 48. 34. Prophets to be dried up: on the banks whereof Bethnimrah a City was seated. At the conflux of these two, the Sea of Iazer is found, being no other then a Lake (about our Whit∣tlesey Meer in Hungtingtonshire, for greatness) as the Iews call the meetings of all waters, whether fresh, or salt, Seas. Nor let their language herein be challenged for impropriety, having a warrant from God himself,Gen. 1. 10. who at the creation, called the dry land Earth, and the gathering together of the waters called he Seas. Conformable hereunto is the expression of the modern Dutch; for in Helvetia a Province of Germany, yea in Argow (as I may say) a County ofSee Mercators Atlas in Hel∣vetia. Helvetia, I have told above sixteen Seas, Zuger∣see, Thuner-see, Ober-see, Rot-see, &c. though the biggest of them but lakes in effect. Yea the Iews did so far extend, or rather, so straitly contract the word Sea, that, that capable vessell of brass, used as a Lavatory for
the sacrifices in the Temple, was tearmed the1 King. 7. 23. Molten Sea. Iazer, which gave name to this Sea, was aJoh. 21. 39. City of the Levites hard by, whereat some sad accident had happened, though the particulars thereof are not dis∣covered in Scripture, for theJer. 48. 32. weeping of Iazer passeth in the Prophet as the expression of great lamentation. § 8. Hence the river of Gad passeth by Civitas interammis, or the City in the midst of the river, wherewith on all sides it is environed, never mentio∣ned in Scripture but with the company ofDeut. 2. 36. & Josh. 13. 9. Aroer: a clear evidence both of their distinction and vicinity. Hereabouts Ioab2 Sam. 24. 5. pitched his tent, when sent to number the people. Wonder not that having the conve∣nience of three Cities so near to receive him, he preferred rather to re∣side in a tent during that imployment. For (besides that such movable habitations comply best with military men) it was fittest for the work in hand; where the people to be reckoned might have full and free ac∣cesse in open aire; both wholsomer for the persons, and speedyer in dis∣patch, then when pent within the streets and walls of a City. Nothing else memorable remains in the southeast corner of this Tribe, save Dibon, a City sometimes assigned toIosh. 13. 17. Reuben, and sometimes toNum. 32. 34. Gad. To reconcile this, some make them different and distant Cities; which in my apprehension is rather to set up two marks then to hit the right one. For seeing these two Tribes confine together, and both lay claim to Dibon (like the two mothers challenging the living childe) we have onely, in stead of a sword, made use of pricks, setting it equally in the bounds of both. Here we advise the Reader (not out of distrust of his skill, but desire of his good) to beware, neither to confound this Dibon in Gad, withNum. 33. 45. Dibon-Gad, the thirty ninth station of the Israelites as they came out of Egypt; nor with anotherNeh. 11. 25. Dibon, which seems to be in Iudah, wherein the Iews dwelt after their captivity. § 9. The river of Iabbok arising out of the aforesaid stony countrey, first runs directly northward, and strengthened with an acceion of waters from the Kingdome of Ammon, turns his stream full west. In which course ere long he cometh to the ford which Iacob with his family pas∣sed over: and where we crave the Readers leave for a while to discon∣tinue our discourse of this river, and to attend that worthy Patriarch in his travels through this Tribe, which in form of a Belt crossed Gad athwart from northeast to southwest. Iacob first entring into this Tribe came to Nahanaim, that is, the two campes, because there theGen. 32. 2. Angels di∣gested into two armies (probably behind and before him) appeared to Iacob. Now asGen. 2. 19. Adams naming the Creatures argued his dominion over them; so the Patriarchs naming of places in Canaan, was an Earnest that their posterity should possesse them. Who no doubt, as curious to enquire, so were carefull to continue those names which their Ancestors had given them. Mahanaim was afterwards aIosh. 21. 38. City of the Levites, and in the reign of2 Sam. 2. 8. 12 Ishbosheth the son of Saul, it was made the chief City of his
kingdome. But with his2 Sam. 4. 7. life within three years expired the Metropolis∣ship of Mahanaim, which afterwards afforded refuge and residence to 2 Sam. 17. 24. David, when flying from Ierusalem for fear of Absolom. Hither the news of Absoloms death was brought to King David (joyfull to the King, but dolefull to David) which caused his patheticall2 Sam. 18. 33. lamentation over the gate, till the heat of2 Sam. 19. 7. Ioabs anger dryed up Davids teares; perswading him with cheerfull looks to countenance the conquerours. § 10. From Mahanaim, let us goe fairly, and softly on with an easie pace in the company of Iacob (not overdriving his children and cattell to the above namedGen. 32. 22. fords of Iabbok) and thence to Penil, where Iacob (the youngest warriourGen. 25. 22. fighting before he was born, and the strongest Conquerour) prevailed with God appearing like an Angell. Who in admonition to Iacob, that he overcame not with his own striving, but his opposites yeelding, gave him a gentle touch, being pleased, where he could have broken the bone, onely to shrink the sinew, whereupon Iacob carried an upright heart, and lame leg to his grave. Indeed learnedIn Genesin ex∣rcitatione 139. Rivet is of opinion, that God presently healed his halting, chiefly grounding it, because Esau at his meeting took no notice of his lameness: but doth not the negative follow with more probability, be∣cause the Scripture takes no notice of his curing? Besides, had the cure come so quick, the hurt had never left so deep and long lasting impressi∣on in the practise of the Israelites, abstaining, for that cause, from eating theGen. 32. 32. sinew in the thigh. Yea modern Iews (oh that they were as obser∣vant of the substantiall as ceremoniall parts of the old Testament!) not certain which sinew it was (so many meeting in the thigh) refrain from feeding onRivet ut supr ex Rabbinis. all Nerves in the hinder parts of a beast. § 11. From Peniel going southwest Iacob being to meet Esau his bro∣ther, thus marshalled his company. In the forefront his Concubines with their children, next Leah with hers, Rachel and Ioseph, first in his love and last in place, because furthest from danger; before all, like a valiant Commander taking the worst service on himself, marched Iacob in per∣son, having sent before him his presents to Esau, and dispatched before them his prayers to God. See what gifts & good words, a fair tongue and full hand can doe. Esau in stead of killing falls aGeu. 33. 4. kissing him. Behold how they hug! being now more twins, then in their mothers womb: for there they strove, but here they embraced. From Peniel Iacob travelled toGen. 33. 17. Succoth, in English Boothes, because there he erected tents for himself and his cattell: and so he went over Iordan, into the Tribe of Ephraim to the City of Sichem; whither (God willing) hereafter we will fol∣low him. And now seeing the way which we have come is both plain and pleasant, let me request the Reader not to begrutch his pains to goe some part of it back again, onely exchanging the company of plain dealing Iacob, for valiant Gideon: who in his march traversed this Tribe from the west to the east thereof.
§ 12. Gideon pursuing the flying Midianites with his souldiers, as faint as few for want of victualls, coming to Succoth, desired food from the inhabitants thereof. The Succothites were so far from granting him pro∣vision, they would not give him good words, not more niggardly of their victualls then prodigall of theirIudg. 8. 6. taunts unto him. Wherefore Gide∣on in his return (not then at leasure, that his wrath should hinder his work) with briars and thorns of the wood hard by, tare their flesh in pieces. The originall saith, he taught them with thorns, or made them to know, namely their own folly and his power. Dull Scholars must have sharp eachers: or rather like unto like, churlish crabbed dispositions, and prickly crooked thorns well agree together. Hence Gideon marched to Peniel, whose Citizens (neighbours to Succoth both in place and peevish∣ness) churlishly entertained him; which cost them at his return the breaking down of theirIudg. 8. 17. tower, which was afterwards1 King. 12. 25. reedified by King Ieroboam. From Peniel Gideon went forward, by the way of them that dwelt inIudg. 8. 11. tents, on the east of Nobah and Iogbehah against the Midia∣nites, unto Karkor, which being out of the Tribe of Gad, we shall hear more of it in our description of Midian. § 13. The mention of those that dwell in tents, puts me in mind, that it is as much my duty here to tender my conjecture to the Reader, as it is his liberty to receive or reject it. There was a Countrey, undoubtedly in this Tribe, called the2 Sam. 4. 6. Land of Tahtim-hodshi, that is, newly inhabited, where Ioab made his second station, when sent to number the people. Now may not this in probability be the very place, where the Israelites former∣ly dwelled in tents, and in Davids victorious reign were reduced to more stability, and incouraged to turn their tents into houses, more certain and solid habitations? § 14. To return now to the river Iabbok, half impatient for our long deserting it, save that running westward, it glides cooly and calmly un∣der the shade of the forest of Ephraim, so called, as learned men con∣jecture, (for otherwise Ephraim possessed not any thing on this side Ior∣dan) because thereIudg. 12. 4. Iephtha defeated the Ephraimites for their insolent mu∣tiny against him. But afterwards a greater slaughter happened in the same place, when Ioab, Abishai, and Ittai Generalls for David, routed Ab∣saloms army, and2 Sam. 18. 8. when the wood devoured more then the sword. Wonder not that sticks had a mouth more voracious then steel, understand it that some were devoured by beasts, others famished as lost in the labyrinths of the forest, and some staked on sharp piles in the fierceness of their flight. Well might such sad fate befall the common souldiers, which happened to Absalom himself. This was he that boasted how upright he would be when made a2 Sam. 15. 4. Judge, whereas now, if the length of his hair conduced any thing to his execution, it was the best, yea onely piece of justice performed by him. Yet more probable it is, that running in hast (not so minding which way to goe, as to be gone) he was snatched up
by the neck in a forked2 Sam. 18. 9. bough: How did the officious Oake act three parts, being the Gallows, Halter, and Hangman for a traitour? But this accident rather occasioned then caused his death: the Oake was rather his Gaolor then his Executioner. It was Ioab that dispatched him with three darts through his2 Sam. 18. 14. heart. Wherein through a treble orifice were discovered Disobedience to his Parent, Treason to his Prince, and Hypocrisie to his God, pretending a2 Sam. 15. 7. Sacrifice and inten∣ding Rebellion. § 15. Hard by was Absoloms Tombe, consisting of a great2 Sam. 18. 17. pit to hold, and a great heap of stones to hide a great Traitour under it. May they there lie hard and heavy on his Corpes, and withall (if possible) sink down his rebellious example for ever having a resurrection. No me∣thodicall monument but this hurdle of stones was fittest for such a causer of confusion. Indeed in his life time he had erected a stately2 Sam. 18. 18. Pillar near Ierusalem, intending it no doubt for the place of his buriall. But just it was that his dead carkass should be deprived of his own grave, who endevoured to dispossess his living Father of his king∣dome. § 16. And now a little to acquaint the Reader with the adjacent Countrey, two severall ways led hence to the City of Mahanaim. The one through the mountains, shorter but harder, which Cushi chose: The other2 Sam. 18. 23. by the way of the plain, which the furthest about was the nearest way home. Ahimaaz took this as the most ready Road, who being a messenger volunteer, would confess to David no more news then what he knew would be welcome, whilest Cushi a prest Post must relate the full of his message. And now the river Iabbok, who hitherto may seem to run slowly, as attending in suspence the issue of the Battell, cer∣tified of the success thereof hastens with all possible speed to fall into the river Iordan. § 17. Iordan had now some distance of miles escaped out of the sea of Kinneroth or Sea of Galilee: the edge whereof Iosh. 13. 26. is assigned for the utmost border of this Tribe. Through this lake (as Tacitus observeth) this river kept his ready course, preserving his stream intire from incor∣porating with the waters of the Lake. A thing no whit incredible to those Welshmen in Merioneth-shire, who have beheld how the river Dee run∣ning throughCamdens Bri∣tn. in Meri∣oneth shire. Pimble-meer continueth his channell without mixing with the Meer. On the east side of this Sea stood the City of Gadara; (the first syllable whereof is argument enough to place it in this Tribe) where the Legion of Devills cast out of the man entred into the herd of Swine: where a threefold difficulty appeareth in the relation of the story. 1 Whilest otherMar. 5. 1. & Luke 8. 27. Gospells mention but one, SaintMat. 8. 28. Matthew makes two men possest with a Devill. 2 The same tearmeth them Gergasens whom other Gospells name Gadarens.
3 Seeing Swine till killed, return their owners no profit, and then their flesh was forbidden to the Iews to eate, how came the Ga∣darens, being undoubtedly Iews (otherwise Christ would not have conversed with them) to keep such a company of useless cattell? But these difficulties accept of their severall solutions. 1 Though two were possest, one of them being Paramount in tor∣ture and unruliness eclipsed the mention of the other, the second not being named in the presence of the principall. 2 Gadara and Gerazen, though distinct, were neighbouring Cities, and so might have joint commonage of cattell betwixt them. 3 They kept Swine to truck and barter with other nations. Though their flesh was unclean in the mouths, yet their money was clean in the purses of the Iews. But if any conceive they kept Swine not onely ad usum but ad esum, such must acknow∣ledge the drowning of them to be the owners just punishment for their breaking Gods commandements. But when those Hogs were sunk in the sea, a greater herd of them remained in the City: swinish people, who preferred to wallow on the dunghill of their own wealth, rather then to possess the pearl of Christs presence, whom they requested to depart out of their coasts. So much of the Gadarens, and their neighbours the Gergasens, onely let me adde, that from the affinity of sound some have collected, the Girgashites anciently to have inhabited this countrey, (as we have formerly obser∣ved) and therefore in the title of every leafe we have divided this Tribe betwixt them and the Amorites, as the old possessors thereof. § 18. StraboGog. lib. 16. col. 764. reports how there is a little Lake near to the City of Ga∣dara infected with such malignant and pestiferous qualities, that it scald∣eth off the skin of whatsoever is cast into it. This may seem an effect of the Devills in the hogs, (Satan when he departs useth to leave such per∣fumes behind him) and semblably the possessed man stripped himself of all his clothes and went naked. But seeing the Scriptures say expresly that the hogs ran into the Sea, and not into this petty Lake, I dare not assign this as the cause of those mischievous waters. § 19. Iordan having got out of the aforesaid Sea of Galilee is presently crossed over with a stately Bridge. I conceive it of no great antiquity (no stone thereof appearing in the Scripture) but Mercators Maps take notice thereof. And a moderate Iesuite tells us (observe it Reader against the time thou travellest into those parts) that the way over this bridge, though somewhat further about and less frequented, is an easier and safer rode from Damascus to Ierusalem, then what is commonly gone over Iacobs bridge in the Tribe of Naphtali, whereof God willing here∣after. § 20. And now Iordan being enriched with the tributary waters
of Iabbok gows fair and large, yet not so deep but that it is fordable, espe∣cially at that place so fatall to theIudg. 12. 6. Ephraimites, where fourty two thou∣sand of them were by Iephthah put to the sword. Four-sold was the of∣fence of these Ephraimites. 1 They neglected on seasonableJudg. 12. 2. summons to assist Iephthah a∣gainst the Ammonites. 2 They falsly retorted the fault on Iephthah, and being wilfully deaf at his call accused him for dumbe not calling them. 3 They gave the Gileadites reproachfull language, calling them Iudg. 12. 4. Runnagates. 4 They menaced to burn Iephthah and his house with fire. Hereupon Iephthah defended himself, and defeated them in a memo∣rable overthrow. The Ephraimites being routed fled to these fords of Ior∣dan, so hoping to recover their own countrey on the other side. But all in vain. Iordan indeed might here be waded over; but no passage over the swelling Surges of their enemies anger▪ How willingly would those who called others Runnagates have been now Runnaways themselves; but could not be permitted? The Gileadites pursued, yea prevented them, and arraigned them all for their lives. Shiboleth is their neck-word (and as ratling in the throat is generally to sick men) so lisping of their tongues was a certain Symptome of their death. § 21. Some will accuse Iepthah of cruelty, that not contented with the honour of the Conquest he followed the Chace so furiously, as to suffer his sword not onely to drink to mirth, but to swill to drunkenness in the bloud of his brethren. But haply this execution without order from him might be done by the Gileadites in heat of anger: Souldiers in the Precipice of their passion being sensible of no other stop but the bottome. If done by Iepthah's command, surely his own security enforced this severity, as a dolefull, but needfull, a sad, but safe way to prevent the growth of another war, the seeds whereof Iephthah foresaw in the revengefull disposition of the Ephraimites. However some actions in the old Testament as they may not be imitated, so they must not be con∣demned, whose Actors might have immediate commission of divine inspiration. § 22. From hence Iordan casteth a glancing eye at the fair City of Iabesh-Gilead, sweetly seated at the bottome of Balm-bearing mountains. The Inhabitants hereof ingaged not with the rest of Israel against the Benjamites, for which offence they were all slain save four hundred youngIudg. 21. 12. Virgins, which were given to the Benjamites to wife. Thus the Benjamites being Gileadites by the mother side, it was not onely pro∣tection to his subjects, but also love to his kindred which invited Saul to succour this City, when Naash the Ammonite besieged it. Painfull and shamefull were the conditions of Peace which Naash offered them, namely1 Sam. 11. 2. if he might thrust out their right eyes, which was to render their
Souldiers stark blind in effect. For whereas the Iews were wont to wear in war broad shields on their left arme, which as it sheltered their body, so it hindred their sight on that side) when their right eye was put out by their enemies sword, and the left blinded by their own shield, they were, during the fight, deprived of the best fence of their body. But 2 Sam. 11. 11. Saul saved all this harm by a speedy march, suddenly surprizing the Ammonites, and delivering the City of Iabesh-Gilead. § 23. Gratitude to Saul for so great a benefit probably did afterwards put the people of this City on that honourable, but dangerous designe to rescue Saul and his sons bodies from the wall of Bethshan, where the 1 Sam. 31. 10. Philistines had hanged them up. It was no pleasant prospect to these men of Iabesh, Bethshan being opposite on the other side of Iordan over against them, some eight miles off. (Loialty hath a quick sight and a tender heart, at a distance to behold and bemoan affronts to her Sove∣raign) Did Saul preserve their right eyes to this end, contentedly to be∣hold his body abused? Out march all the valiant men in the City in the night over Iordan: Sauls and his sons corps they took down from Bethshan, bring them home, burn the flesh, and bury the bones thereof under a1 Sam. 31. 13. tree neare the City. The Iews generally interring their dead under some Oak, pleased perchance with the parallel, that as those plants seemingly dead in winter, have every spring an annuall resurrection: so mens dry bones shall have new sap put into them at the day of Judgment.2 Sam. 21. 14. Da∣vid afterwards removed the bones of Saul and Ionathan, & buried them in the sepulchre of Kish their father in Zelab in the Countrey ofJosh. 18. 28. Benjamin. § 24. From the fords of Ephraim, Iordan taketh his course by the Cities ofNum. 32. 34. Ataroth andJosh. 13. 26. Debir, of which we can say neither more nor less, but that they are called Ataroth and Debir. For these places (letNum. 32. 35. Ataroth-sho∣phan, Num. 32. 36. Beth-haran &c. march in the same rank) are so short-lived in Scri∣pture, that they live onely to be named, and presently vanish away, with∣out any more mention of them. Not long after Iordan leaving this Tribe runneth into Reuben. § 25. More inland in Gad lay the large and fruitfull Countrey of Gilead, whereof more fitly and fully in the next Tribe. For though this Tribe of Gad had South-Gilead in her borders; yet under favour I con∣ceive that North-Gilead (which belonged to Manasseh) was the firstand best Countrey of that name. Now whereas we read inJosh. 13. 25. Scripture, that Gad had all the Cities of Gilead, and few verses after, that Manasseh had half Josh. 13. 31. Gilead; know that Gilead is taken restrictively in the former, and gene∣rally in the latter acception. § 26. Ramoth-Gilead (called alsoIosh. 13. 26. vide Tremellium in locum. Ramoh-mizpeh) was metropolis of Gad-Gilead. It belonged to the Levites, and was also a City ofIosh. 20. 8. refuge, af∣terwards won by the King of1 King. 22. 3. Aram. Then, (alas) that city, which so often had saved others from the pursuit of their enemies, could not pre∣serve it self from the sword of the Syrians. Here it was verified, Quod non
capit Christus,2 Chr. 11. 14. rapit fiscus. For upon Ieroboams introducing of Idolatry, the pious Levites were outed of their possessions, and now the pagan Syrians, revenging their quarrell, ejected Israel out of this City, wrongfully wrested from the Levites. § 27. However not long after Ahab and Iehoshaphat with joint forces besieged it, when the army of the Syrians bad them both battell. Iehosha∣phat at Ahabs1 King. 22. 30. perswasion (pretending his honour, but intending therein his own safety) appeared in his Princely equipage, whilest the other dis∣guised himself in the army. Now the Syrians having received speciall or∣ders, 1 King. 23. 31. to fight neither against small nor great, save onely with the King of Israel, mistake Iehoshaphat for the King of Israel, directed in their conjectures un∣to him by the lustre of his royall Robes. Bravery betrays men to danger, and not onely sets up a fair mark, but giveth malice the right ground to throw at it. And was it not just with God, that Iehoshaphat, who in com∣plement had profest to Ahab, I am1 King. 22. 4. as thou art, should in realty be taken to be the same indeed? But upon his crying out the Syrians apprehend their errour, and desist from further pursuing him. § 28. But divine Justice continues the chace of Ahab. Guilt cannot hide it self in a croud, and there is no way for a notorious sinner, to dis∣guise himself from Gods eye, but by his sincere repentance. A man draws a bow at1 King. 22. 34. adventures, and all-seeing providence guiding blind chance to the joints of Ahabs armour, mortally wounds him. It seems not one∣ly the Corselet, but also the putting on thereof must be of proof to fence death out, which otherwise will creep in at a small cranny. Yet Ahab was staid up in his chariot til even, & then the Sun & his life set together. Some years after King Iehoram Ahabs son at the same place received2 King. 2. 14, 15. wounds of more honour and less danger, when forcibly he recovered this Ramoth-Gilead from the Kings of Syria. But of all Iehorams hurts here received, none went so near his heart, as that in this2 King. 9. 1. City, a son of the Prophets sent by Elisha, did anoint Iehu, a Captain of the Hoste, to be his successour and King of Israel. § 29. We had wholly forgotten (no shame to confess and amend our faults) the small Countrey of Sharon in the north-east part1 Chr. 5. 16. of this tribe. It seems it was parcell of the demeans of the Crown in the days of King David, where his heards1 Chr 27. 29. were fed under the care and charge of Shetrai the Sharonite. David we see was not onely a good man, and good King, but also a good husband, stocking this his land to his best profit, know∣ing full well, soon would the State of his Court-hall be abated, if the thrift in his countrey Kitchin were not preserved. Nor was Sharon a place less pleasant then profitable, where plenty of fragrant roses grew, to which Christ (the Churches spouse) is pleased to say 35. 2. Cant. 2. . resemble himself; not for any fading condition, but fair sight, sweet smell, and cordiall vertues wherein he excelled. § 30. Here some will inquire, In what capacity did David hold his
land in Sharon (and elsewhere) where his cattell was grased,1. Chron. 27. 25, 26. &c. seeing being Iesse's youngest Son, little land was left him from his Father, and none at all in the Tribe of Gad. The difficulty is increased, because in so pent and populous a countrey, scarce a foot thereof, but related to some owner not having power to alienate it from his heires, to whom at the farthest it was to revert at the year of Iubilee when all dead possessions had a resurrection to their proper owners. We conceive David held this land by one of the following Titles. 1 By the fundamentall establishment of the Crown. For sure when that Kings were made, publick provision was made for their Prince∣ly support, who (as Lords of Manors have commonage sance number amongst their Tenants) might feed their cattell any where in their own dominions. 2 By improvement of wast grounds, which fell to the King as Lord of the Soile. Yea seeing God made provisionary Laws for the Kings behaviour, (Deut. 17. 15, 16. four hundred years before any King was in Israel) why might not a reserve of land be also left, at the partition of the countrey by lot, for their Kings future maintenance? 3 By mutuall compact: some subjects on valuable consideration, (as perchance the relaxing the tribute due from every person to his Prince)1 Sam. 17. 25. might part (not with the propriety, but) present pro∣fit of their land for the Kings conveniency. 4 By attainder of Traitours: whose lands it seems were (at least for some term of time) at the Kings disposall; witness Davids grant∣ing all2 Sam. 16. 4. Mephibosheth had unto Ziba. 5 By conquest, as most probable it is this Sharon was won from the Ammonites, when2 Sam. 1. 29. Rabba was taken from them. However we may prefume that Davids title (though unknown to us) was undoubted in it self, free from the least suspicion of injustice, accor∣ding to his own counsell:Psal. 65. 10. Trust not in oppression, become not vain in robbery. Otherwise his tender conscience would as wel have smote him for cutting off a lap of his subjects ground, as of his1 Sam. 24. 5. Soveraigns garment. § 31. We have finished the description of this Tribe and all places therein mentioned in Cononicall Scripture, onely there remains behind some Cities which we finde in the Apocrypha, in one1 Maccab. 5. chapter where∣of we may spring a whole Covey of Cities, namely these follow∣ing: 1 Dathema, a fortress. 2 Bosora. 3 Bosor. 4 Alema. 5 Chasphor. 6 Mached. 7 Carnaim. 8 Ephron. The generall character given of these places consisteth principally in these particulars. 11 Mac. 5. 26. All these were Cities strong and great. 2 Situated al in the1 Mac. 5. 25. Land of Gilead, yea in this Tribe of Gad, Carnaim
onely excepted, whereof more properly in our next descri∣ption. 3 Inhabited by Iews, and threatned by the pagan Hoste under Timotheus, that they would take and destroy them all in1 Mac. 5. 27. one day. From which last clause we collect that these Cities must be placed somewhat near together, otherwise, how could an army probably pro∣pound to dispatch them all in one day? And though the Pagans might mingle much pride with their malice in projecting things high and hard to effect, yet surely they mixed some policy with their pride, not to pro∣pound to themselves meer impossibilities. But the seasonable coming of Iudas Maccabeus with his host frustrated all the Pagans designes. § 32. But the City of Ephron deserves serious consideration, for the sin∣gular situation thereof. For in Maccabeus his return from Carnaim this strong City stood so in his way, that he could not turn from it either to the right hand or to the left,1 Mac. 5. 46. but must needs pass through the midst of it. A place in so tyrannicall a position may seem an affront to mans naturall liberty. Yet such was the situation thereof near theVide tabulas Adrichomii. confluence of Iabbok and Ior∣dan (where perchance the way railed with Morasses on either side) and being a pass of importance, Maccabeus was onely free to go this or no way. The Ephronites senible of their advantage undiscreetly deny him pas∣sage. Surely if a flying enemy deserve a bridge of gold to be given him, a potent foe seriously proffering peaceably to depart, may merit a bridg of silver to be lent him. But Maccabeus being denyed forced his way through the city 1 Mac. 5. 51. over them that were slain. § 33. In the partition of the Land of Canaan into severall moneths for Solomons provisions the Tribe of Gad fell under three Purveyer-ships. 1 Of Gebar the son of Uri, who ranged over most of that land, once the kingdome1 King. 4. 19. of Sihon. 2 Of the Son of Geber, to whose jurisdiction1 King. 4. 13. Ramoth-Gilead did belong. 3 Of Abinadab the Son of Iddo,1 King. 4. 14. to whom Mahanaim did pertain. By Mahanaim here I understand not onely the Levites City so named, (poor purveying for victualls within the walls of that alone) but a large Territory of the same name round about it. And although to us it is unknown how far the bounds thereof extended, yet they must be concluded either very large or extraordinary fruitfull, acquitting it self as a twelfth part of the Kingdome, and affording Court fare for one moneth of the year. In the passage to this Mahanaim on the south (to retreive a place which otherwise had escaped us) lay Bithron, a petty Countrey it seems, through which Abner passed2 Sam. . 29. when by night he fled from Ioab. § 34. It will here be demanded, that seeing the land was by Gods own appointment formerly divided into twelve parts, (the twelve Tribes) adequate to the twelve moneths of the year, why did not Solomon
rather make use of this partition, which was jure divino, then make a new modell out of his own fancy. It is answered, this later division of the land, was found most convenient for house-keeping, and so more sub∣servient to this particular end for which it was ordained. If that any urge me to give a reason why in this division into Purveyer∣ships Ramoth-Gilead distanced some miles off, was added to the jurisdicti∣on of the Son of Geber, who was overseer in Manasseh, thereby mangling and mutilating the intireness of the Countrey; let such first satisfie me, why so many shreds and parcells of land (especially in WorcesterSee Camdens & Speeds Maps. & He∣reford shires) are cut off from those Countreys in situation, (yea are sur∣rounded with other shires) yet belong unto them in jurisdiction as ac∣counted members thereof. In all these Querees an ordinary eye might at the first institution discover an apparent reason of such fractions, though now, because long since time out of minde, the quickest sight cannot perceive the cause thereof. § 35. The Armes usually assigned to Gad are Gules on a Banner erected argent a Lion rampant sable: grounding their fancy (I can afford it no better term) on Moses his blessing;Deut. 33. 20. Blessed be he that enlargeth Gad, he dwelleth as a Lion &c. Bu how to accommodate the prophecy of Iacob to this Tribe of Gad,Gen. 49. 19. a troop shall overcome him, but he shall overcome at last, much imploy∣eth the industry of Divines. Most apply it to the situation of this Tribe, much exposed to the incursion of the Ammonites their vexatious neigh∣bours, till at last underJudg. 12. 11. Iephthah,1 Sam. 1. 11. Saul, and chiefly2 Sam. 12. 31. David freed from fo∣rein foes, they possessed their countrey in peace. Others in a mysticall meaning make Gad the embleme of Gods children, who after many inter∣mediate frights, fights and failings, come off with the conquest at last; I say at last, a word which fully recompenseth its long delays in coming, when come with eternity of continuance. Here followes the Map of the half Tribe of Manasseh beyond Jorda.
MANASSEH beyond IORDAN. CHAP. 3. § 1. MAnasseh eldest Son of Ioseph by Asernath daughter of Potipherah Prince-priest of On, was by his pro∣pheticall grandfatherGen. 48. 14. Iacob placed behind Ephraim his younger brother. Not that Reuben-like he was disinherited for any misdemeanour, but onely so it pleased al-disposing Providence to transpose him. However (though inferiour to Ephraim in power) he grew so great that thirtyNumb. 1. 35. two thousand two hundred of his body from twenty years old & upward as able men to goe forth to war came forth of Egypt, all which digging their graves in the wildernes by their own infidelityNum. 26. 34. fifty two thou∣sand seven hundred entred the land of Canaan. Many Worthies were extracted from this Tribe (for this Countrey was6sh. 17. 1. conferred upon them in Intu∣ition to their valour) as Gideon, and Iephthah the warlike, Iair the youn∣ger, the peaceable Judge of Israel, Eliah the Prophet; nor must the fiveJosh. 17. 4. daughters, and coheires of Zelophehad, be forgotten, who argued their case so strongly about their inheritance. Bashfulness it self will be bold rather then lose a rightfull possession, and a good cause when plainly told, is learnedly pleaded, especially if a meek Moses or just Ioshua be the judge thereof. § 2. We are now onely to describe that part of Manasseh which was east of Iordan. Some will say, was it not pity the possessions of this Tribe should be thus dismembred? Was it not enough that Ioseph was Gen. 49. 26. separated from his brethren, but Manasseh his Son must also be parted from himself? How came that wisdome who pronounceth itPsal. 133. 1▪ good and plea∣sant for brethren to live together in unity, to cleave this Tribe asunder? But let such know, that unity in affection may consist with locall separation. Besides, divine Providence might seem to have a designe herein, that this Tribe of Manasseh having a joint interest on both sides of Iordan, might claspe these Countries together: and the Manassites being (as I may say) Amphibii, on both sides of the River, might by visits amongst their
kindred, continue a correspondency and civill communion one with another. § 3. Manasseh had mount Hermon and Gilead on the east, parting it from the Ammonites, and Ismaelites, Iordan on the west, Gad on the south, Syria, and particularly the kingdomes of Geshur and Maachah on the north. In which compass of ground,Deut. 3. 4, 5. & Iosh. 13. 30. & 1 King. 4. 13. threescore Cities with high walls, gates and bars, besides unwalled towns, were contained. Many will be amazed at this number, & the wonder will seem the greater when they shall reckon butIosh. 19. two and twenty Cities in Asher, nineteen in Naphtali, seventeen in Simeon, sixteen in Issachar, & but twelve in Zebulun: unproportionable that half a Tribe should have treble the number of Cities to those that were bigger. All we can say herein is this, that being a frontier Countrey, and being exposed on the north and east to heathen enemies, it must have more fenced Cities, then the Tribes on the other side Iordan, which were better secured by their situation. Thus the hem is turned in, and sowed double, to prevent the ravelling out thereof. And if I reck on right, there be more Castles in our marches betwixt Scotland and Wales, then in all England besides. However, our eye shall not be evill at Manasseh be∣cause Gods was good unto it, who are so far from repining at, that we rejoyce for the plenty of strong places therein; onely grieving that we cannot give the Reader an exact account of their names, though we will endevour our best in the following description. § 4. Mount Hermon is the north-east bound of this Tribe, called by the SidoniansDeut. 3. 9. Syrion, by the Amorites Shenir, by humaneProlemee & Strabo. writers Hippus, and Trachones, being a branch of Lebanon bended south-ward. A stately strong mountain fixed on firm foundations, and yet the voice of the Lord (understand the thunder with an earthquake) makethPsal. 29. 6. Syrion to skip as an Unicorne; and well may mountains dance when God himself shall pipe unto them. ThePsal. 133. 3. dew of Hermon is highly commended by David, and brotherly love is compared thereunto, because (whilest heat of hatred like a drought parcheth all to nothing) fraternall kindness dew∣like gives refreshment and increase. But how this dew of Hermon fell upon the hill of Sion (mountains an hundred miles asunder) so troubled Saint Augustine, that at last leaving the literall sense, he is fain to fly to a mysti∣call meaning. Others interpret that the dew of Hermon fell upon the hill of Sion, because the fruitfull flocks fatted on that mountain came after∣wards to be sacrificed at Ierusalem; which is but a harsh construction; as if one should say, The fruitfulness of Linconcolne-shire which falls on London, because the fatted cattel thereof are sold and eaten in the City. But whilest sundry Interpreters have severall wit-engines to draw these two moun∣tains together, our last translation saves their needless paines, rendring it, As the dew of Hermon, & as as the dew that descended upon the mountains of Zion. Indeed it is the same specificall, though not individuall dew which lighteth on both mountains, flowing from heaven the same fountain, though falling on earth in severall channels.
§ 5. Now as Hermon is a chain of continued hills, so a principall link thereof is the mountain Amana. Christ courting his Spouse inviteth her to look from the top ofCant. 4. 8. Amana.Adricho. in thea. Ter. san. in Manassh. Some conceive thereby Amanus a mountain in Cilicia is meant; but seeing Solomon clean through that Poem, maketh use of onely native similitudes (whereof a self-sufficiency in his own land) it is improbable that herein he did borrow a forein and exotick expression. Know also, that the region hereabouts is called Trachonitis or Sharpland in English, from the steepness of many pointed hills (in shape not unlike the Rocks called Needles near the Isle of Wight) wherewith this countrey abounded; and it was a moity of theLuke. 3. 1. Te∣trarch-ship of Philip the brother of Herod. § 6. South of Hermon lay mount Gilead, famous for the interview of Laban and Iacob: the former keen with anger (save that God in aGen. 31. 24. vision took off his edge) overtaking Iacob charged him with a double action of felony, for stealing himself, and his Gods away without his privity. The first, Iacob confessed, yet pleaded not guilty to the second, but traver∣sed his innocency. Hue and Cry is made in vain after the thief and felons goods, (or Gods if you please) for she, whose conscience would per∣mit her to carry away, cunning did perswade her to conceal them. Ia∣cob thus cleared (as it were by Proclamation) of Defendant turns Plain∣tiffe, accusing the Accuser for his false accusation. At last all winds off in a good agreement, and an Instrument is drawn up betwixt them, not in paper but in stone, interchangeably sealed with solemn oaths. The Condition whereof, was to this effect; That if either of them should passe that place to doe any act of hostility to other, he should forfeit his fidelity, and be liable to divine justice for his perjury. § 7. This Pillar and heap of stones had a threefold name imposed on it, called 1 By Laban,Gen. 31. 47. Iegar Sahadutha, that is in the Aramite tongue, A heap of witnesse. 2 By Iacob,Ibid. Galeed, the same in effect in Hebrew. 3 By both Mizpah; that is, a Watch-tower, Iacob giving the name, and Laban the occasion thereof by that his expression, The Lord Gen. 31. 49. watch betwixt thee and me. Here was abundant caution, three names and two languages, and yet nothing too much. For Iacob having formerly been sensible of Labans notorious shuffling with him, knew the best way to finde sure was to binde sure; and Laban being guilty, and therefore jealous, thought no security sufficient. And therefore in their mutuall suspicions a Tripli∣cate was used in naming the places, that a threefold cable might not be broken. § 8. Gilead was at first onely appropriated to that heap and pillar, whence the name may seem to be translated to the adjacent mountains, and thence transmitted to the valley in the east of those mountains, and
thence imparted to some eminent persons born in that valley. For as 1 Chr. 7. 14. Gilead Son of Machir, grand-child of Manasseh, being born in Egypt, so called by a Propheticall Prolepsis, foretelling that his posterity should possess the Countrey of Gilead; soJudg. 11. 1. Gilead the Father of Iephthah, Gilead of Gilead, seems to take his denomination from the Countrey possessed. Thus as thePsal. 49. 11. Psalmist observes some called their lands after their own names, and some it seems were called after the name of their lands. § 9. A fruitfull Countrey Gilead was, till the people thereof were in∣fected with Idolatry, growen so frequent therein, that the Prophet com∣plains, TheirHos. 12. 11. Altars were as heaps in the furrows of the field. Thus falling into Gods displeasure they quickly fell under their enemies disposall. The Syrians of Damascus threshing them withAmos 1. 3. instruments of Iron, and theAmos 1. 13. Am∣monites ripping up their women with child that they might enlarge their border. This latter cruelty seems done in revenge of Davids usage of the Ammonites in taking of Rabbah,2 Sam. 12. 13. putting them under saws and harrows &c. And although some hundreds of years were betwixt that action of David and this of the Ammonites, yet we know malice hath a strong memory, long to re∣tain and at last to return injuries offered unto it. § 10. Under the hills of Gilead (famous for flocks of goats, to which for thickness and whiteness the hair of the Spouse isCant. 4. 1. compared) lay Rogelim a Manor of Barzillai the Gileadite. This was he who so bounti∣fully victualled David at Mahanaim, so civilly waited on him to Iordan, so equally requested, and so easily obtained a Writ of ease from Court at∣tendance, being now2 Sam. 19. 35. fourscore years of age: having first bequeathed his Court-pleasures to Chimham his Son (neither covetous to keep them himself, nor envious that another should enjoy them) because such ex∣cusable vanities might become his green youth, which would be bur∣densome to the withered winter of his Father. Pella seems to be herea∣bouts, whither many Christians warned by many prodigies fled for shelter from Ierusalem, before the Romans besieged it. As we congratu∣late their thus preventing persecution according to ChristsMat. 14. 16. precept, so we cannot but condole, that the sameVid. Epiphani um Haeresi 29. persons were afterwards poiso∣ned with hereticall opinions, contrary to the express word of God, and became Apostate Nazarites. Somewhat more north is2 Sam. 17. 27. Lodebar the pos∣session of Machir, a bountifull benefactor to David during his distress, and Guardian to2 Sam. 9. 4. Mephibosheth in his minority; and Thisbe the birth∣place of Eliah the Prophet, the Iohn Baptist of the old Testament. Great was the resemblance betwixt their persons and preaching (all simili∣tudes run like Pharaoh's Charets in the red-sea,Exod. 14. 25. wanting some wheeles) especially because both were born in bad times, when the world was generally infected with wickedness, both contented with plain clothes, and course fare, undaunted in reproving the faults of Princes, and impla∣cably persecuted for the same. § 11. But the principall City in Gilead was Mizpah the place of Ieph∣thah's
Judg. 1. 34. habitation. This is he whom his brethren banished for aJudg. 11. 2. Ba∣stard; but the elders of Gilead oppressed by the Ammonites, brought back for theirIudg. 11. 9. Generall. When they felt their own woe, they began to see Iephthah's worth, formerly exiled for his Fathers fault, but now restored for his own abilities. Vertue once in an age will work her own ad∣vancement, and when such as hate it shall chance to need it, they will be forced to prefer it. To Mizpah Iephthah returned, though a conque∣rour, yet a captive and a prisoner to his own rash vow, to sacrifice what∣soever came first forth of the doors of his house; it so happening that his onely daughter met him with a virgin-quire and musick, which was sad in the close. Here Divines both for number and learning are almost equally divided,Ioseph. lib. 4. anti. Iud. ca. 9. August. l. 7. quaest Iud. quaest. 47. Ambro. l. 3. de oiciis. cap. 12. Chrys. hom. 14. ad popu Ati. Origen. fo. 9. in lon. pa. 308. Peter Martyr in locum. Capel∣lus in Diatribe. Forbes or Per∣kins his case. Brodman Theog. Syst. tom. 2. 4034. &c. some avouching her really sacrificed according to the letter of the text, whereof some footsteps in the Fable of Agamemnon sacrificing Iphigenia (haply corrupted for Iephthagenia or Iephtha's daugh∣ter:) othersNicolas Lyra in locum, with most Roman commentators since his time in hope to found Nun∣nery thereup∣on. Im. & Tre∣mel. in locum. M. Perkins li. 1. cas. con. ca 15. Scharpius. Symph. p. 171. &c. maintaining that she was onely sequestred to perpetuall virginity. If any demand my judgment in this difference, I seasonably remember how one being asked in the Massacre of Paris, whether he was a Catholick or an Hugonite, answered he was a Physician. My return must be in this work, I am onely a Chorographer, and the controversie in hand concerns matter of fact, not of place, proper onely to us for this present. § 12. East of Mizpah lay the plain of Mizpah. Ioshua having con∣quered the Kings of Canaan (at the waters of Merom in the next Tribe) pursued them hither on the east and toIosh. 11. 8. Mizrepothmaim near Sidon west∣ward. A chace with a vengeance all the latitude of the land, the Ca∣naanites flying as far as sea or mountains would give them leave: so that their flight may pass for a Scale of miles for the breadth of this Coun∣trey, so smitten untill they left them noneibid. remaining, understand it, not in a con∣siderable body to make any resistance. § 13. So much of Gilead. We come now to Bashan: for these two provinces did the Tribe of ManassehIosh. 17. 1. contain, though it is impossible accurately to distinguish their bounds. Bashan was a grazing countrey (as indeed all Canaan east of Iordan was fitter for Abel then Cain, for pasturage then tillage) antiently called the LandDeut. 2. 20. & 3. 13. of Giants; which though now extirpated, Og being the last of that race, yet retained some foot∣steps thereof in the strength and greatness of her 1 Oakes, whereof zek. 27. 6. oares were made for the gallies of Tyre. 2 Rams,Deut. 32. 14. of the breed of Bashan, being the fattest and fairest of their kinde. 3 Bulls, so often mentioned in Scripture. But byPsal. 22▪ 12. Davids metapho∣ricall bulls of Bashan, strong, sturdy, curst, cruell men are under∣stood. This Province was subdivided into severall petty lands: as, first, the LadDeut. 3. 14. & 1 King. 4. 13. of Argob on the north next Syria. Secondly,Deut. 3. 14. Bashan-avoth-Iair:
where taking the first word for the Genus and the two latter for the Difference, we have the exact definition of the Countrey. § 14. Iair was a fortunate name in the family of Manasseh, and we must be carefull not to confound two eminent men of that name. 1 Iair the elder, contemporary with Moses, who, when the field-forces of Og were utterly destroied, smote theNum. 32. 41. & Iosh. 13. 30. small towns there∣of (being threescore in number, as Ioshua counted them) and called them Bashan-Avoth-Iair, that is, the Cities of Iair in Bashan. 2 Iair the younger, a peaceable Judge in Israel immediately before Iephthah, who as he came many years in age short of the former, so the number of his Cities were but half so many, viz.Iudg. 10. 4. thirty, which he left to his thirty sons, calling them also Avoth-Iair. It is further recorded of his thirty sons that they rode on thirtyIbid. Asse∣colts, i. e. they were itinerantIudg. 5. 10. Judges, say some, in their respective places, it being improper that they in their severall circuits should 1 Goe on foot. Authority would be contemned if not somewhat heightned above the comon people. 2 Or ride on prancing steeds. Marshall law may be so mounted, where the heels of the horses are as terrible to poor people, as the face of the rider. 3 Or ride on swift Coursers; seeing no such hast to execute suspe∣cted innocence. 4 Or be housed in covered chariots; which is a kinde of engrossing of justice, shutting that up, to which all ought to have open ac∣cess. 5 But ride on Asses: partly that Petitioners, though lame and weak, might keep pace with them on the way when relating their grievances; and partly by that patient creature to shew the slow but sure proceeding of justice; and indeed the Judges foot-pace to the sentence is the accused parties post-speed to his grave. We finde among these thirty cities, but one of them named, which is Iudg. 10. 5. Camon, wherein the body of Iair was buried. And it is probable, that Ira the2 Sam. 20. 26 Iairite so high in favour about King David, was an inhabitant of this countrey. § 15. More south lay Ashteroth-karnaim, or in English, the two horned Ashteroth, either so named from some forked building, or street therein; (Horn-church in Essex, and Horn-castle in Lincolne-shire so called on the like occasion) or because the Idol Ashteroth, that is, the Moon horned in her waxing or waning, was worshipped therein; or lastly because a fair and gallant City, and all strength, mirth, and jollity are called horns in the Hebrew. Yet may we say to the men of Ashteroth in the words of thePsal. 75. 5. Psalmist, Set not up your horns so high, neither speak presumptuous words. Horns, which first were well blunted by Chedorlaomer, when heGen. 14. 5. smote the Rephaims or Giants in Ashteroth-karnaim, and afterwards were bro∣ken
quite off, whenDeut. 1. 4. Og King of Bashan who reigned in this City was overthrown. For hard by is Edrei another City wherein Og resided, and neer which he bid battell to the children of Israel when he with all his Giant-like race, which peopled this place, was extinguished. For though the Countrey of Pigmies be a Poets-tale, thisDeut. 2. 20. Land of Giants is a Scripture-truth. However, no eye can now distinguish betwixt the ashes of Giants, and dust of dwarfs, death having long since levelled all alike in the grave. § 16. Such remarkable places as remain in this Tribe, will easily be found out, if we follow the stream of Iordan, and such rivolets as pay tribute thereunto. Iordan having newly recovered himself out of the waters of Merom into a competent channell, receiveth from the east Vide Tabu∣las Mercatoris. Hermon a small brook running by Golan, aDeut. 4. 43. & Iosh. 20. Levites City of refuge, (whence the neighbouring countrey in Iosephus called Gaulonitis) and after Iordan falleth betwixt Capernaum and Chorazin into the sea of Galilee. This Chorazin was the place where Christs miracles and preaching were sowen so thick; and where the peoples thankfulness for the one, and practise of the other, came up so thin, that it caused that curse,Mat. 11. 21. Woe be to thee Chorazin &c. A woe, which at this day hath wasted it from a popu∣lous city to a ruinous village. As for their conceit, that AntichristVide Adri∣chomium in Manasse tit. C. should be born in Chorazin, I take it to be a meer Monkish device, to divert mens eyes, from seeking him in the right place where he is to be found. § 17. More south-ward the brook Cherith (having viewed at some distanceIosh. 21. 27. Beeshterah, afterwards called Bosrah, a city of the Levites; called also1 Chr. 6. 71. Ashtaroth; And it is questionable, whether this, or Ashtaroth-Car∣naim (whereof formerly) were the Metropolis of Og King of Bashan) run∣neth into the Sea of Galilee. By the banks hereof the Ravens brought Eliah1 King. 17. 3. 5, 6. bread and flesh in the morning and evening, and he drank of the river. It seems Dinners are but innovations; whilest break-fasts, and suppers are mens most ancient and naturall meales. Here Eliah having the subance of sustenance, cared not for the ceremony of a Table, or complement of a Carpet. How little will preserve life, but how much must maintain luxury! After a while this River dried up. Collect not thence that the brook was inconsiderably little, but that the drought had been extraordinari∣ly long.1 King. 17. 7. § 18. As for the cities of Hippus, Iulias, and Gamala, whereof as deep silence in Scripture, as frequent mention in Iosephus, it is enough to name them. In the last of theseIud Ant. lib. 18. cap. 1. Iosephus reports Iudas of Galilee to be born, that grand impostor, whoAct. 5. 37. in the days of the taxing pretended himself the Champion of popular liberty, to protect them from such unreaso∣nable payments. Multitudes of men flocked after him; for, spare their purses, and win the hearts of the Vulgar. But Iudas having goten power, fell a pillaging all people, taking from them the whole griest of their estate, so to save the owners from paying toll unto Cesar. How
smooth and tender are the gums of Infant-treason, but oh how sharp are the teeth thereof when once grown to full greatness! However, he and his followers came afterward unto confusion, and is the second instance alleadged by Gamaliel to prove, thatAct. 5. 38. councells which are not of God will come to nought.1 King. 4. 13. The Son of Geber was Solomons purveyer in this half Tribe of Manasseh. § 19. The Armes assigned to Ioseph are, a tree proper growing by a Well, founded on the words of Iacob Gen. 49. 22. David may seem hence to have borrowed his Simile of a blessed man,Psal. 1. 3. He shall be like a tree plan∣ted by the waters side. But Ioseph had more, not onely a Well before to re∣fresh, but a wall behind to support him, and his boughs (may Heralds word it in their own language) grew over the wall. Partly foretelling the fruitfulness of Iosephs posterity, and partly pointing at the particular posi∣sion of his inheritance. For, as some think, Iordan was the wall on the east of the Land of Canaan properly so called; and the children of Ioseph ha∣ving their root planted, and main body growing on the other side of the river, spread their branches over this wall, half Manasseh having his portion on the east side of Iordan. To conclude, though those Armes did generally belong to the whole house of Ioseph, yet custome hath appro∣priated them to Manasseh alone: other Ensigns being assigned to Ephraim, whereof God willing hereafter. Here the Map of Naphtali is to be inserted.
THE TRIBE OF NAPHTALI. CHAP. 4. § 1. NAphtali Son of Iacob by Bildah his Concubine was multiplied during the aboad of his posterity in Egypt, to fifty and three thousandNumb. 1. 43. & 2. 30. four hun∣dred. All which dying in the desert, their Sons being fourty five thousand foureNum. 26. 50. hundred en∣tred the Land of Canaan. A Tribe acquitting it self considerable in relation to the rest, though we meet but with two, or rather but with one and a half Glories thereof. The formerIudg. 4. 6. Barak the son of Abinoham, who (acted by Deborah) did act so valiantly against Sisera. The half-one Hiram (a1 King. 7. 14. Naphtalite though hisSee the de∣scription of Da. 1. part. Father was a man of Tyre) that curious Artificer in Solomons Temple. Other eminent persons (though unknown) doubtless were of this Tribe, for in their martiall addresses to David in Hebron, none appea∣red in more excellent equipage for number and warlike accoutrements:1 Chr. 12. 34. And of Naphtali a thousand Captains, and with them with shield and speare, thirty and seven thousand. § 2. This Tribe bordered (plainly intimated though not expressed in the bounding thereof) on mount Libanus on the north,Iosh. 19. 34. and reacheth (as is plainly expressed) to Zebulun on the south-side, and to Asher on the west-side, and to Iudah upon Iordan toward the Sun-rising. True this must needs be, for Truth hath said it; the last words present us with a seeming impossibility. For how long an arme must Naphtali make to reach to Iudah, over the Tribes of Zebulun, Issachar, Manasses, Ephraim, and Benjamin interposed, Naphtali being distanced about an hundred miles from Iudah? Here some Commentators being not able to quell, never raise this objection: a commendable discretion in them, if unconcerned to meddle therewith; but seeing they professe their calling to be a satisfaction of difficulties, it is in them an unexcusable lazinesse. But let us hear what the learned resolve in this case. 1Tremel. in loca praedict. Some fancy a small Lace of land (or rather a thread for the nar∣rowness
thereof) whereby (though invisible in Maps) Naphtali is tyed unto Iudah. 2Masn Iosh. 19. 34. Nic. Scra. in . Quaest nona. Others, that Naphtali reacheth to Iudah upon Iordan, not imme∣diately in confines, but mediately by commerce; because the river Iordan runneth thence unto Iudah, and so they had the con∣veniency of Traffique into that Tribe. 3 Others more likely, that Naphtali reached toM. Arthur Iackson. in locū. Iudah on Iordan; be∣cause Iudah as a Tribe in chief had the Royalty of the river Iordan, as fishing, fowling, and perchance the impost on all vessells, sailing from the fountain to the fall thereof. 4 Let me cast my Mite into this Treasury. What if this Iudah was but the name of a town or village, and therefore that addition, Iudah upon Iordan, given for distinction sake? However Masius no less learned, then modest, pleaseth me with this resolution. In rebus tantâ vetustate obliteratis, & quae exploratè percipi nullâ jam ratione possunt, satius est non multa dicere, quàm incertissima pro veris absque ullâ dubitatione afferre. Such difficulties were not casually scattered, but pur∣posely placed to improve our industry, and teach us humility. For the best answer mans wit can produce, is no salve to the Text, which of it self is whole and entire, but a plaister onely to our own craized under∣standings. § 3. For the fruitfulnesse of this countrey, hear what Moses prophecy∣eth.Deut. 33. 23. O Naphtali satisfied with favour, and full with the blessing of the Lord. See also what was performed. For the land about Laish, which was in the confines of this Tribe is thus charactered,Iudg. 18. 10. A place where there is no want of any thing that is in the Earth.Ios. de bell. Iuda. li. 3. . Iosephus being almost this Country∣man, saith, : One may call this Countrey the Ambi∣tion of nature. StraboLib. 16. in Sy∣ria. pa. 755. a Pagan giveth it the Epithets of , A well natured land and bearing all commodities. But the best fruit it bare was our Saviour himself: by his corporall presence much conversant here; this Tribe being the Theatre whereon his most remarkeable Miracles were acted. § 4. From the foot of Libanus to the sea of Galilee may be allowed thirty five miles. Equall whereunto, by the favour of Iordan running crooked, (though northernly more narrow) is the breadth thereof, from east to west. In the time of our Saviour this Tribe was parcell of two Tetrarchies. The north-east part thereof, belonged to Iturea. The Virgill. Poet takes notice of the plenty of Yew in this Province. —Itureos taxi torquentur in arcus. Yew which in Iturea growes Is neately bended into Bowes. Hence their inhabitants became excellent Archers: and pity it was, rhat their arrows were so often shot at a wrong mark, to kill and rob passengers in their journey. Strabo calls the Itureans generally , and
their Countrey in some sort may seem accessary to their felonies (the Receiver is bad as a thief) which, as the foresaid Author observes, in her caves, woods, and inaccessible mountains protected those Robbers from justice proceeding against them. Insomuch that the Romans were fain to keep Souldiers in Garison against them (but who kept any a∣gainst the souldiers?) So that betwixt both, Iturea at that time may be conceived sufficiently miserable. § 5. The south-west of Naphtali was accounted part of Galilee the up∣per, otherwise called Galilee of the Gentiles, because, as some conceive, the people therein were commixed with heathens, and (being far from Ierusalem) were more drossie Iews then the rest. Which is a most errone∣ous opinion. For how improbable is it, that our Saviour, who sending his Disciples to preach gave them instructions,Mat. 10. 5. Goe not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter yee not, and himself never stayed in Samaria, save as he took it in his necessary passage in or from Joh. 4. 4. Iudea; should choose Galilee, if so debased with the mixture of Gentiles, for the place of his principall and constant residence? Far more true is it that it was called Galilaea Gentium, that is, Galilee the populous, because of the multitudes of people, especially near the sea, wherein was Decapolis (a member of Galilee.) And there one city, for want of room, may seem to tread on another. § 6. Before we come to the particular description of this Tribe, we will first dispatch out of the way, nine limitary Towns (which accor∣dingly are figured in the Map) and this will much facilitate our pro∣ceeding in the rest. 1 Heleph,Iosh. 19. 33, 34. in the northern bounds of this Tribe, from which the eastern coasts thereof southwardly are described. 2 Allon, that is in English, oake (as Oakeham in Rutland) so named from plenty of those trees growing therein. 3 Zaanaim. Note that Tremellius maketh these two latter, but one entire place, reading it the Oake-wood of Zaanaim. 4 Adami. Which as Ruthland in Flint-shire, probably was so named from the redness of the earth. 5 Nekeb: this is a ditch, where we may conceive Iordan was let out for the more convenient watering of other ground. And have we not more then twenty Dittons or Ditch-tons on the same occasion in England? 6 Iabneel: different from one of the same name in the Tribe of Dan. 7 Lakum. 8 Aznoth-Tabor. 9 Hukkok. We are not bound to beleeve all these nine to have been Cities of con∣siderable strength, or greatness, as not so note-worthy in themselves as in their situation. Because (though perchance otherwise poor villages)
they stood in the borders of this Tribe. Thus low shrubs growing on high hills, or crooked thorn-trees set by the high-way side, are more con∣spicuous in the eye, and frequent in the mouths of travellers, then streigh∣ter and fairer trees which are obscure in the midst of the wood. § 7. To come to the particular description thereof; Amongst the mountains of Libanus, we meet with one of eminent note, not onely having a name peculiar to it self, but which from it hath also denomi∣nated the adjacent Countrey. This is mount Paneas, wherein there is a deep hole or cave. And though places of this kind commonly have more horrour then pleasure in them, this, besides its naturall beauty, was adorned with artificiall structures in, and about it. Herein also was an unsoundable spring of water, conceived by some to be the primitive fountain of Iordan. YetIos. de bell. Iuda. li. 3. . Iosephus tells us of Phiala, a spring above two hundred furlongs off (and therefore out of the bounds of this Tribe) into which Philip the Tetrarch cast chae to try the experiment, and it was rendred up again in the streame of Iordan. Whence he concluded, that this river entertained an underground intelligence with that foun∣tain. But we are not to take notice where rivers are secretly conceived, but where they are visibly born: and therefore date the originall thereof from the apparent heads of Ior and Dan: which keeping themselves sole and single for a short time, are soon wedded together. And from the confluence of their names and streams, Iordan is begotten. § 8. To pass by Scripture commendations, it is called bySlin. Polyhist. cap. 35. olinus, eximiae suavitatis amnis, a river of excellent sweetness. But as if Rivers, as well as Men, were too prone to be proud of their good properties, it is very subject toIosh. 3. 15. Ier. 12. 5. & 49. 19. &c. overswell the banks; in which notion perhaps, it is also called by the aforesaid Solinus, Ambitiosus amnis, an haughty and ambiti∣ous river. But what saith theZach. 11. 3. Prophet? The pride of Iordan is spoiled: name∣ly, in some extraordinary drought (and thence dearth) which he there foretelleth. To keep the golden mean; As Iordan sometimes must be acknowledged to mount too high, so Naaman depressed it too low in his valuation: whose ignorance and passion preferred2 King. 5. 12. Abana and Phar∣phar, the rivers of Damascus, before it. § 9. At the aforesaid confluence stands the famous city of Laish, which at first it seems was a free State, living in subjection to none, and yet in slavery to their own intemperance. They wereIudg. 18. 28. far from the Zidoni∣ans, that is, asSir Walter Rawleigh Hist. World. one measureth it, about thirty miles: half that distance be∣ing too much to receive thence seasonable succour in their suddain sur∣prize by the Danites. In taking which town, theDeut. 33. 22. prophecy of Moses was fulfilled, Dan is a Lions whelp he shall leape from Bashan. It seems that the Danites came on the east-side of the City, and might for a time secret∣ly repose themselves in Bashan. Whence, on a suddain, Lion-like (saliant in his Posture, when he seizeth on his prey) they leaped on the city, and were felt being on them before seen coming towards them. The City
was afterwards called Dan, and the Danites possessed a tract or territory of ground, which otherwise seems to lie within the Tribe of Naphtali, but was not possessed by them. § 10. But as we must praise the prowesse and policy, so we detest the Idolatry of these Danites, who hither brought, and here erected, the gra∣ven Image stoln fromIudg. 18. 30. Micah, worshiping it untill the day of the captivity of the land: that is, asVid. ejus annot. in loc. praedict. Tremellius well expoundeth it, till the Ark was ta∣ken captive and restored, when there followed a generall reformation in the days of Samuel. This placeIudg. 7. 4. then purged, was not long after de∣filed again with the same sin. For here Ieroboam set up one of his golden Calves,1 King. 12. 29. & 13. 33. making Priests of the meanest of the people. And although where a Calfe is the God, a wispe of Hay is good enough to be the Priest, yet hainous was the offence, because done by Ieroboam in the disgrace of Re∣ligion. The erection of these Calves was pretended for the ease of the people of Israel, to spare their tedious travell thrice a year to Ierusalem; but in effect occasioned that they were sent a longer journey on a worse errant, even into irrecoverable captivity. Thus to spare a step in the path of piety, is to spend many in the ready road to misery. § 11. In the time of our Saviour, this Dan was called Cesarea-Philippi, built in honour of Tiberius Cesar by Philip the Tetrarch. Who in so name∣ing it, as wise to remember himself, was also mannerly to prefer the Emperour. This Philip being Tetrarch ofLuk. 3. 1. Iturea, and Trachonitis, made this Cesarea (as conveniently seated betwixt both) the place of his prin∣cipall residence. Neare thisMar. 16. 13. & Ma. 8. 27. place, Peter gave Christ that excellent testi∣mony, of his being the Son of God. As for the two statues of melted brasse which here are said to be set up by that woman, whose Fluxe of bloud Christ cured, the one resembling our Saviour, the other her self, in hum∣ble posture touching the hem of his garment, I had rather the Reader receive it from theEuseb. hist. eccles. lib. 7. cap. 14. & Niceph. hist. eccles. lib. 6. cap. 15. Authours themselves, then my relation. Chiefly be∣cause it seems improbable, that she, who so lately hadMar. 5. 26. & Luke 8. 43. sepent all her substance upon Physicians, should so quickly recrute her self, as to be able to goe to the cost of such a Monument. § 12. Leaving now the territory of Dan, we enter on Naphtali; and Iordan running hence, after some miles expatiateth it self into the wa∣ters of Merom or the Samoconite-lake. This was a Sea in winter, and in Sommer a thicket of reeds, affording shelter to Lions, and Wolves, and (which now a days are more dangerous to travellers, then either) wild Arabians. Behold (saith theIer. 50. 44. Prophet) He shall come up like a Lion from the swelling of Iordan, that is, most fierce and furious; who having lodged there quietly all sommer in the shade, is vexed to be rouzed by the rising of the waters in winter: and, therefore is ready to revenge this wrong on the next object he meets. Near these waters, Ioshua gave that famous overthrow toIosh. 11. 1. 4, 5 Iabin senior King of the Canaanites pursuing the chace as far as Zidon. On the west of this lake, where Daphnis a rivolet falleth
into it, they place Riblah, accounted a terrestriall Paradise, for the sweet situation thereof. But grant it pleasant in it self, it was a sad place to King2 King. 22. 6. Zedkiah, who having first beheld the slaughter of his Sons, had here his own eyes bored out. Thus mans tyranny accomplisheth Gods justice, whilest Zedekiah had now leasure enough to bethink himself how he deserved this punishment, who indevored to put out the eyes of Israel, by persecuting the Prophets, andIer. 38. 5, 6. imprisoning the Seers there∣of. Afterwards, Iordan recovering it self out of the lake, and contented with a competent stream, is passable at the ford of Iacob, so called because tradition reports that Patriarch there to haveGen. 32. 10. gone over this river with the company of God and his staffe. At this day there is aBiddulph's Tav. beautifull bridge built over, retaining the name of Iacobs bridge, kept in excellent re∣paire (as being the high-way betwixt Damascus and Ierusalem.) And well may te Turkes afford it, seeing the unconscionable toll, which they extort of Christian passengers for Caphar or custome, will serve almost to build all the arches thereof with silver. § 13. Here let us hold a while, and desiring to please all palats, let us temper the harshness of old matters, with the mixture of a modern passage. If the Reader should ever travell this way from Damascus to Ie∣rusalem and so into Egypt, he may repose himself for a night in the Cave east of this bridge, on the other side Iordan. A Cave is a publick building erected by some devout Turk in nature of an Inne, for the benefit of travellers, of more or less receipt & conveniency according to the bounty or fancy of the founder. But here the guest must be his own host to enter∣tain himself, seeing generally nothing but a bare lodging and water, is provided for him. And though we pity the Readers bad lodging this night, where (if not bringing better accommodations with him) he and his Camell must be bedfellowes in straw; yet we promise him next day a pleasant way and handsome entertainment. For about seven miles off he shall pass by Cave Ioseph, where a Well will be shewed him full of Biddulph's trav. p. 103. water, and adorned with marble Pillars, which common tradition a∣voucheth to be the pit wherein Ioseph was put, and a learned elucidat. Te. sanc. lib. 7. cap. 10. Frier very zealously stickleth for the truth thereof, though indeed the story is confu∣ted both by the distance and nature of the place. For it is sixty miles from Dothan nearGen. 37. 13. 17. Sechem, where Iosephs brethren kept their sheep. Be∣sides, that pit had no moisture in it (save what fell from the eyes of Ioseph) whereas this is full of water, so that Iosephs dreams▪ had been but dreams if put therein. But it is as good as a bait to tired travellers (whose cre∣dulity is swifter then the Camels they ride on) to be refreshed in the way with such relations. Some twelve miles off, the reader may lodge in a convenient Cave called Minium by the Moors, but by the TurkesBdduph. ut ptus. Missia: and if early up next morning, may, going south-westward, be∣fore noon enter the Tribe of Zebulun. Where we may in due time over∣take him, and hereafter give him larger direction for his travell.
§ 14. From Iacobs bridge the river Iordan sees nothing memorable besides rich meddows and pleasant pastures, untill he falleth into the sea of Cinnereth, so called (say some) because in form not unlike aHen. Buntu. Trav. of Christ. pa. 446. Kinnor in Hebrew a harp. harp: as indeed an active fancy in point of resemblance will fashion any thing to any thing. How well the similitude suits, the Reader will best judge when hereafter he shall behold the entire proportion of this Sea in the Tribe of Zebul, where he may feed his fill on the dimensions and se∣verall names thereof; till which time to stay his stomach, we here present him with such a parcell of this sea-lake, as falls to the share of Naphtali. At the influxe of Iordan into this Sea, stood the once famous City of Capernaum, called ChristsMat. 9. 1. com∣pared with Mar. 2. 1. own City. Note by the way, Christ had three Cities which may be called his own (if seven contended for Ho∣mer, well may three be allowed to Christ) Bethlehem where he was born, Nazareth where conceived and bred, and Capernaum whereMat. 4. 13. he dwelt, more then probably in the house of Simon Peter though born in Bethlehem. § 15. This Capernaum was the Magazine of Christs Miracles. Here was healed the servant of that goodMat. 8. 5. Centurion: who though a Gentile out∣faithed Israel it self, concluding from his own authority over his Souldi∣ers, that Christ by a more absolute power, as Lord high Marshall of all maladies, without his personall presence, could by his bare word of command, order any disease to march or retreat at his pleasure. Here Simon Peters wives mother was cured of aMat. 8. 14. Fever, andMark. 2. 1. here such as brought the man sick of the Palsie, not finding a door on the floor, made one on the Roof (Love will creep, but Faith will climb where it cannot goe) let him down with cords, his bed bringing him in, which presently he carried out being perfectly cured.Mat. 9. 18. & Mark 5. 22. Here also Christ restored the daugh∣ter of Iairus to life, and in the way as he went (each Parenthesis of our Saviours motion is full of heavenly matter, and his obiter more to the purpose, then our iter) he cured the Woman of her fluxe of bloud, with the touch of his garment. But amongst all these and more wonders, the greatest was the ingratitude of the people of Capernaum, justly occasi∣oning our Saviours sad prediction, AndMat. 11. 23. thou Capernaum which art exalted to heaven shalt be brought down to hell; for if the mighty works which have been done in thee, had been done in Tyre and Sdon, they would have repented long goe in sackecloth and ashes. O sad strapado of the soul, to be hoised up so high, and then cast down suddenly so low, enough to disjoint all the powers thereof in peeces!. Hieron. de loc. Hebr. Capernaum at this day is a poor village scarce consisting of seven fishermens Cottages. § 16. Some furlongs west-ward from this City stood the Receipt of custome, whence Matthew wasMat. 9. 9. & Mar. 2. 14. called from a Publican to be an Apostle. In Capernaum afterwards theMat. 17. 24. Toll-gatherers did civilly demand of Peter, Doth not your Master pay tribute? It being questionable in point of law, whether Christ were legally liable to such payments. And lt us inquire whence the doubt did arise.
Was it because he 1 Being a Physician, (such persons of publick im∣ployment for generall good were often exempted from taxes) who gave his paines gratis to others, it was but equall he should be priviledged from such pecuniary burdens? 2 Being poor, was under value in the Excise-book? And where nothing is to be had the Emperour must lose his right. Yea generally Almes folk who live on the charity of others (such the con∣dition of ourLuke 8. 3. Saviour) are not to be rated. 3 Being an inmate or under-tenant in the house of Peter, the question was, whether Peter or Christ was to pay the taxation? This last is most probable. For our Saviour taking order for the dis∣charging of the debt, Give the money (saith he to St. Peter) unto themMat. 17. 27. for me and thee. As rates in London are divided betwixt Land-lord and Tenant. Hence Peter was sent to sea, where a fish, which probably had plunde∣red a peece of money out of the Pocket of some shipwracked fisher∣man, lost his life for the fact, and the felons goods found in him were justly forfeited to Christ, Lord Paramount both of sea and soil. § 17. Going forward along the shoare, some will be so positive as to point at the place where after his resurrection, Christ took his repast with his Disciples on bread and broiled fish; yet we finde no express menti∣on of his drinking after he rose from the grave; and that, as some will have it, either in reference to his promise to his Disciples,Mat. 26. 29. I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the Vine untill that day, when I drink it new with you in my Fathers kingdome. Or because (though accepting of meat out of volunta∣ry conformity) yet he refrained from moisture, to manifest himself, though no less then a true, yet much more then a meer man: but this we leave with the Authors. § 18. Some miles hence towards the north is a mountain of a mo∣derate ascent and pleasant prospect, generally known by the name of Christs mountain. Here our Saviour made that excellent Sermon in the mount, which was the key of the Old Law. And here he chose his twelve Disciples, frequently repairing hither, when he affected retiredness. Here also. ca. 63. Concordance. learned men on good likelyhood (Scripture being silent of the particular place) conceive the miracle of loaves multiplied wrought by our Saviour. And to avoid confusion, we must carefully observe that this was twice wrought. Place. Guests. Meate. Fragments: Gospels. A desert nigh Tiberias 5000 men. 5 loaves, two fishes 12 baskets ful Mat. 14. 20 Mar. 6. 43. Lu. 9. 16. 10. 6. 23 Christs mountai 4000 men 7 loaves a few litle fishes 7 baskets ful. Mat. 17. 37. Mark 8. 1. Behold in the latter though the meat was the more, & the mouths few∣er, yet fewer fragments did remain. And good reason that our Saviour in working of miracles, should observe no other proportion then his own pleasure.
§ 19. Following still the Sea shore and going westward, we light on the CityIosh. 19. 35. Cinnereth, which some conceive gave the name to the lake ad∣joining, and also to the land thereabouts. For when Benhadad in favour to King Asa, to remove Baasha from besieging Ramah, inroded Israel, he smote1 Kin. 15. 20. Iohn 12. 21. all Cinneroth, with all the land of Naphtali. Some five miles westward we meet with Bethsaida of Galilee, in English ar sishing house rather, beaus on the lake; this word  will bear both. hunting house. Nor is it un∣likely, that at first it was a Mansion meerly made for recreation, the neighbouring Desert (frequently visited by our Saviour when desiring privacy) affording the pleasure of the Game. From a house it grew to be a village, so called by Saint Marke, and thence proceeded to be a City so graced in otherLuke 9. 10. Ioh. 1. 44. Gospells. Nor need learned men so trouble them∣selves about the difference, seeing in a short time (Hague in Holland may be an instance) a great town with addition of walls, may at pleasure commence a small City. It was theIohn 1. 44. native place of Peter, Andrew & Philip, and another staple City of Christs miracles, whose ingratitude forced our Saviours expression, Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto theeMat. 11. 21. Bethsaida &c. § 20. In the confines of Bethsaida Christ by the hand led forth a blind man out of the town, spat on his eyes, so restoring him to a confused and imper∣fect sight to see men walking asMar. 8. 25. trees, (well might his spittle give half sight, whoseGen. 2. 7. breath gave man whole life at the Creation) and then putting his hands upon his eyes compleatly cured him. But how came it to pass that he, who other whiles healed at distance by the Proxie of his word, Subveniens priùs quàm veniens, curing before coming to his Patients, should here be so long, not to say tedious, in working a miracle? Even so Savi∣our, because it pleased thee. Let us not raise cavills where we should rather return thanks, seeing Christ, that our dull meditations might keep pace with his actions, did not onely goe slowly on set purpose, but even stay∣ed in the mid way of a miracle, doing it first by halves, that our con∣ceptions might the better overtake him. § 21. To clear this Corner before we goe hence: north-east of Beth∣saida, on a tridented mountain standeth Saphetta, two parts whereof are inhabited by the Turks, and one by the Iews, and is at this day a very considerable Place. Here the Iews live in the greatest liberty (or rather in the least slavery) of any place under heaven: having some tolerable Priviledges allowed them by the Turk. So that they who get wealth enough elsewhere, here seem to have some shew of a common-wealth. Yea here there is aBiddulph trav. pa. 105. University of Iews. And though commonly that Nation count their children to have learning enough, if able to cheat Christians in their bargains, here they give them studious education: and the pure Hebrew tongue (as also at Thessalonica, now Salonichi in Greece) is here usually spoken, but industriously acquired, the Iews being neithe born to foot of land nor word of language then what they purchase by their paines. What shall we say if this little place be left still to keep pos∣session, as an earnest that God in due time upon their conversion may pos∣sibly restore the whole countrey unto them?
§ 22. Three Cities follow southwest, Naphtali, a city properly so called; Thisbe different from the native place of Eliah; and Naasson; all their credits depending on the two first verses of the book of Tobit. Now as Comoedians, though often they adorn their interludes with fancies and fictions; yet are very carefull always to lay their scene right, in a true place, which is eminently and notoriously known: so grant the book of Tobit guilty of improbabilities and untruths, surely the author thereof would be punctuall in describing the place, past possibility of confutati∣on. Yet since the same book presents us with the pedegree of the An∣gell Raphael, withTobit 5. 12. Ananias the great his Father, andTobit 5. 13. Sammajas his grand∣father, contrary to our Saviours character, that they neitherMat. 22. 30. marry, nor are given in marriage, and so by consequence can neither get, nor can be be∣gotten; we may as justly suspect his Geography, as Genealogy, and conceive him false in the position of towns, who is fabulous in the ex∣traction of Angels. And if Naphtali and Thisbe pass for reall places, yet not onely doubtfull, but desperate is the case of the City Naasson, not being founded on the rock of the Greek text, where no such town ap∣pears, but on the quick-sand of the erroneous Vulgar Latine translation. § 23. Having thus surveyed the east and south parts of this Tribe, lest the other coasts thereof should justly complain of neglect, we re∣turn to mount Libanus to give an account of the remainder. In this Map, though not in this Tribe (no trespass I hope to look over the hedge) behold Heliopolis, in English, the City of the Sun. But how well it brooks the name, they can best tell,Sir Walter Rawleigh hist. World. lib. 2. 1 part. pa. 290. who of certain report, that the height of the mountains adjoining shadow it from the Sun the better half of the day. Was it there∣fore by the same figure, that the mountains are so called from moving, that Helio∣polis got this name? Or because the Sun (as all other Blessings are valued) is most worshipped, where it is most wanted. Not far hence, the riverCant. 4. 15. Fons hortorum Libani, or the fountain of the gardens of Libanus, (with which the banks thereof on either side are enamelled) fetcheth his originall; running thence by Hamah, afterwards called Epiphania, often mentioned in Scripture. Thus far came the twelveNum. 13. 22. spies, sent to search the land; and this place passeth inNum. 34. 8. & Iosh. 13. 5. & Iud. 3. 3. Scripture from the entring of Hamah for the nor∣thern Boundary of the land of Israel, not onely before the expression of Dan came into request, but also long after theEzek. 47. 20. mention thereof in holy Writ was disused. We shall in due place speake, as of Hamah the great, so named by theAmos. 6. . Prophet, (since called Antiochia in Coelosyria, and by vul∣gar unskilfulness often confounded with this Hamah in Naphtali) so also of2 Kig. 17. 30. Ashimah, the topicall or peculiar Idoll of this place. § 24. Hence that river runneth by Hazor, anciently theIost. 11. 10. Metropolis of the Canaanites, where very many of their Kings met together against Ioshua, to his great advantage. Had he sought them in their severall Ci∣ties, to what expence of time and paines would it have amounted? Whereas now their malice did his work, all of them meeting together,
having but one neck in effect, which here they tendred to the Axe of di∣vine justice. Hazor by Ioshua was burnt, and more then an hundred years after was probably reedified by Iabin the Second, into whose hand God is said to have sold his people. Not far off this river of Gardens leaveth Naphtali, and visteth the Tribe of Asher. § 25. But before we leave the river, let this memorandum be entred, thatAdricho. in theat. Ter. sanc. in Naphta. some hold this is the same with the Sabbatariam river mentioned in Nat. hist. lib. . cap. 2. Pliny; which is said to run six days, and lie still the seventh, whence it gained the name. Were this true; as Solomon sent the sluggard to theProv. 6. 6. Pismire to learn industry, well might profane persons be remitted to this river, thereby to be instructed in the Sabbaths due observation. But most listen to it, as to a fable, and the Hurlers in Cornwall (menCamb. Brit. in Cornwall. meta∣morphosed into stones, as tradition reports, for playing on the Lords day) may fitly serve to build a bridge over this river. It much shakes the credit of this report, becauseIos. de bll. Iuda. . 7. c. 24. in latine & ca. 13. in grek. Iosephus relates it clean contrary, namely that this river lies still sixe days, and onely runs the seventh: adding how Titus the Emperour going from Iury to Antioch took a journey by the way to behold the same. But indeed learnedExr. 15. Diat. 20. ad∣vers. Baronium. Casaubon not onely observeth herein the Copies of Iosephus to be corrupted, but also giveth his advice for the amendment of the same. So that by right pointing his words, and some other small alteration, Iosephus and Pliny, may be made to a∣gree. However modern travellers bring us no intelligence of such alter∣nation or intermitting course of any river hereabouts, and some per∣chance will be ready to say, that since the Jewish Sabbath hath been swallowed up in the Christians Lords day, this river hath discontinued his former custome, lest what anciently was ceremonious, be now adays censured for superstitious. § 26. Let us now traverse this tribe southeast: where we cnot miss Abel a City, sometimes single, sometimes double represented unto us, namely 1t.2 Sam. 20. 15. Abel of Bethmaacah; as if the former were but parcell of the latter. 2ly.2 Sam. 20. 14 Abel and Bethmaacah; as if different, but bordering Cities. 3ly.2 King. 15. 29. Abel-Bethmaacah; as if both made up one and the same place. In this City, Sheba the rebell, pursued by Ioab and his own guiltiness, took covert, so that the storme of a furious assault was ready to fall up∣on it, when the breath of a wise woman blew it cleare away, who so ordered it, that2 Sam. 20. 22 Sheba's head was cast over the wall See how his head, which thought to turn all Israel upside down, when whirled in the aire, was tossed and tumbled about. And pity it is any bullets should be shot in∣to that city, which would cast such fireballs out of it. We know the wic∣ked mans, not the wise womans name, and yet when his vertueless name shall rot, her nameless vertue shall remain. But Abel wanted such another wise woman to protect it, when furiously1 King. 15. 20 taken by Behadad, and at last finally destroied by2 King. 15. 29 Tiglath-Pilesar. § 27. But in the very midst of this Tribe theJudg. 4. 11. oake-trees of Zahanaim
fair and far spread themselves: For Tremellius reads it Quercetum Zahana∣im, The oake-tree place of Zahanaim, where our translations render it the plain of Zahanaim. A difference not so great but that our age can accommodate, which being wastfull in woods hath expounded into plains, many places which formerly were dark with the thickest oake-trees. Here Iael the wife of Heber the Kenite dwelt in her tent, whither Sisera (who went forth with nine hundred charets, but was glad to come home on two legs) fled for security, having quitted his chariot. Not that he thought him∣self swifter, but safer without it; seeing his chariot which in fight was the strength to cover, in flight was the mark to discover him. And here Iael wth a hammer & nail dispatched him, for wch she was blessed by Deborah. § 28. The mention of her blessing minds us of the curse of Meroz, and consequently to inquire, where the same was seated. Well may we look for it in any Tribe, which we finde in no Tribe. Yea learned men doe so differ in their verdict, that some will have Meroz to be, 1 The De∣vill himself, asIn his nots on Iudg. 5. 23. Nicholas Lyra, whose opinion is rejected and refuted by all that mention it. 2 A potentMagell. in tex∣tum. Person in these parts having many Te∣nants and Reteiners. 3 A Countrey full of populous inhabitants. 4 A Pet Martyr. Srar. & ma∣jor pars com∣ment. City near the place where the battell against Sisera was fought Grant the last as most probable, new Quaere's are ingendred; whether a City of Ca∣ananites or Israelites; and where to be placed. For the exact position whereof we refer the reader to those our learned Divines, which in these unhappy dissensions have made thatIudg. 5. 23. Text so often the subject of their Sermons. We have placed it in this tribe not far from Kedesh, whence Barak first went forth with his men, in the place where Mercators Maps have a city called Meroth (a rush-candle is better then no light) our one∣ly motive for the situation thereof. Mean time consider, that as the Di∣sciples observed that the figtree cursed by ourMat. 21. 20. Saviour, was in their re∣turn withered away; so this city after Deborah's execration so dwindled by degrees, that nothing is left of Meroz, but Meroz, nothing surviving of the thing but the name. Which name, let the reader behold in our Map as the mast of that ship, whose keel is swallowed up in the quicksands. A Sea-mark to all posterity to beware, and not to be negligent when they are called to be auxiliaries to Gods cause in distress. § 29. And now our hand is in about conjecturall places, we must not forget Madon once a roiall city,Iosh. 12. 19. certainly hereabouts, because,Iosh. 11. 1. Iobab the King thereof, was conquered by Ioshua at the waters of Merom, though all our industry cannot discover the particular position thereof. Happy our condition that in things concerning salvation we have Christs gracious promise,Mat. 7. 7. Seek and ye shall finde, though in these meaner maters our search often wanteth success. We are bold to place it near Dan one of the foun∣tains of Iordan, the rather because1 In. . 2. Brocard findes a place thereabouts cal∣led Medan by the Turks at this day. Where I pray let it stand till better in∣formation, for rather then with Adrichomius we should leave it out of our
Maps, it is better to put it under any penthouse, then quite shut it out of doors. Let Dan-javan,2 Sam. 24. 6. the third station where Ioab pitched his tent when he numbred the people, be joined unto it. § 30. To return to the place where Meroz is set, with far more certainty we placeIudg. 4. 2. Harrosheth of the Gentiles, the native City of Sisera. But if the reader should chance to overlook the low situation thereof, he cannot oversee Kedesh Naphtali the habitation ofIudg. 4. 6. Barak, and a city of refuge belonging to the Levites; for observable it is that all the cities of refuge on this side Ior∣dan were advantaged on very high foundations. And theyIosh. 20. 7. appointed K∣desh in Galilee in mount Naphtali, and Sechem in mount Ephraim, and Kirjath-ar∣ba (which is Hebron) in the mountain of Iudah. Whether because those towns were to typifie Christ himself, who like the brazen Serpent was to be listed up, or to comfort the flying and fainting offender, whose eyes were at his journeys end long before his feet, which could not but much re∣vive his spirits. Say not, that it damped them again when his tyred legs after a long and tedious journey must at last limb up a steep mountain to the city of refuge: For (as hath been observedSee the des∣cription of Ke∣demoth in the Tribe of Reu∣ben. before) if the offender got but within the verge of the suburbs on either side of the city, he was secured from the Avenger of bloud. § 31. Kedesh was attended on each side with two smaller cities, Beth∣shemesh on the west, Beth-anath on the southeast, both assigned to, yet nei∣ther possessed by the Naphtalites, because theIudg. 1. 33. Canaanites though tributaries dwelt therein. Much is pretended in the excuse of the Israelites why ge∣nerally they drove not these heathens out of their Countrey. 1 None can act above their strength, and they were not able to drive out the Canaanites. 2 Had they strength, it had been cruelty, not valour, in cold bloud to kill quiet enemies. 3 God gave them a kind of toleration being only to drive them out by degrees. 4 Much good accrued by this remnant of Canaanites being touch∣stones to prove the Iews faith to their God. But these and many more palliations notwithstanding, unexcusable was the Iews connivence at them contrary to Gods flat command, and the foresaid pleas of no validity. For 1 The weakness of the Iews chiefly consisted in their want of in∣dustry, and uniting themselves against those heathen their com∣mon enemy. 2 It is onely cruelty to a mans own soul to disobey Gods positive command. 3 What's to be done by degrees, is to be done. Whereas the Iews not only reprieved these Canaanites for a time according to Gods per∣missiō, but finally pardoned their lives contrary to his injunction. 4 The good accidentally accruing from the remains of the Canaa∣nites,
argues not the innocence of the Israelites, but the exceeding goodness of God, ordering their negligence to his own honour. Yea the sad success shewed Gods displeasure with his people herein; these Canaanites eftsoons rouzing themselves from being couchant under tri∣bute to be rampant in tyranny, and the mixture of their persons infected the Israelites with their Idolatrous practises. Nor know I any thing else considerable in this tribe exceptIosh. 21. 32. Karthan or1 Chr. 6. 76. Kiriathaim, a city of the Levites Gershonites, of whose posture we are not so wel assured as we could desire. § 32. Ahimaaz1 King. 4. 15. was Solomons Purveyer in Naphtali, and had Basmah his daughter to wife. Say not it was poor preferment for the daughter of so mighty a Monarch to marry her Fathers subject. For Gods law forbad, heathen matches, and hereby she might keep a clear conscience and lead a comfortable life. Kings children too often wed where they neither affect nor are affected, to forain Princes (strangers as well in their lands as loves unto them) whilst here Solomons daughter, might have a softer Pillow, though not so sumptuous curtains in her home-marriage. By the way ob∣serve, we finde an army of Solomons wives and concubines, and but three scattered scouts of his children,Rehoboam, Basmah and Tashah. 1 King. 4. 11. a son and two daughters. Multiplying wives in mans sin, children, Gods blessing, and Solomon laid too many foundations at once, to build much posterity upon them. § 33. The usuall Armes of Naphtali are Vert a Hinde trippant proper ac∣cording toGen. 49. 21. Iacobs prediction: Naphtali is a Hinde let loose; he giveth goodly words. But how this character conformes to the Tribe, learned men much disagree;In his com∣ments on the place. Luther findes the analogy in Deborah, where in deed both her fe∣minine sex is proper, as also because she was an excellentIudg. 5. 1. spokeswoman; all the error is, she was rather extracted fromSee our de∣scription of Ephraim. Para∣graph the se∣cond. Ephraim then Naphtali. § 34. Others reade the resemblance in Barak, because Hindelike he was so fearful to come out to war. But surely these blessings were givē by pro∣phetical Iacob to his children as future badges of their honour, not brands of their infamy, and therefore the similitude is to be sought not in the disgracefull but commendable qualities of a Hinde, and more probably to be fetch'd not from their fear but fleetness in severall performances. Besides some conceive it too restrictive an interpretation of Iacobs bles∣sing to confine it to any particular (though eminent) person, which speakes rather the generall disposition of the whole Tribe, and may thus more largely be expounded Naphtali is a Hinde. No ravenous or beast of prey (cruell like the Benjamites, churlish like the Ephraimites) but a quiet creature: intimating the Naphtalites nature disposed to peacefulness. Let loose. Not pent within the pales of a Park, but having room enough to range in: implying the large and spacious possessions of this Tribe. He gi∣veth goodly words. They were men of fair speech and loving discourse, not querulous, nor captious, but preferring friendly compliance before brawles & contentions. The Standard of Naphtali in the Israelites pitching about the Tabernacle, was the last in the Reare on the northside thereof. Here the Map of Asher is to be inserted.
THE TRIBE OF ASHER. CHAP. 5. § 1. ASher youngest Son of Iacob by Zilpah his Concubine, carrieth blessedness in his name, and was so prospe∣red in his posterity, thatNumb. 1. 41. forty one thousand and five hundred were reckoned of this Tribe in the generall rendezvous at mount Sinah. All which punished in the wilderness with death, for provo∣king God with their disobedience, their sons beingNum. 26. 47. fifty three thousand four hundred entred the land of promise. Many no doubt were the emi∣nent Grandees extracted from Asher, though we mee with none of them in Scripture, save one, and that a woman in the new Testament,Luke 2. 36. Anna the Prophetess, that property of the Temple, as constant therein as the pillars thereof, she departed not thence but served God with fasting and prayer night and day. § 2. Asher had mount Libanus on the north, Naphtali on the east, Ze∣bulun on the south and southeast, the sea on the west containing welnigh forty miles in length, the breadth not exceeding sixteen. A fruitfull coun∣trey, Gen. 49. 10. Ashers bread shall be fat (so hearty as if it were bread and flesh too) and he shall yeeld royall dainties. Moses foretold that he should be wetshooed in oile, he should dip hisDeut. 3. 24. foot therein. Adding moreover that his shooes should be iron and brasse. Not that the ground in this Tribe parched by drought proved impenetrable, and rebellious to the commands of the plough, (as elsewhere God threatens the disobedient Iews,Deut. 28. 23. the earth that is under thee shall be iron) but that this land should afford plenty of those metalls, according to the testimony of Eumaeus inOdysso. 425. Homer, In Sidon I oast to be born where's brasse in aboundance. Besides the great commodities of the sea, with the convenient havens thereof, Debora complains that when Zebulun and Naphtali (most con∣cerned as nearest danger) ingaged themselves against Sisera,Iudg. 5. 17. Asher con∣tinued on the Seashore, and abode in his breaches. And no wonder if being Mer∣chants
they preferred profit before perill, especially being in a safe place where the iron chariots of Iabin King of Canaan could not approach them. § 3. The worst mischief in this Tribe was, that after the death of Ioshua, the Canaanites quartered so hard on the men of Asher, that they detained no fewer then sevenIudg. 1. 31. great cities from them. Yea perchance something may be pickt out of the expression of the holy Spirit, for whereas the Canaanites are said to dwell amongst those ofIudg. 1. 30. Zebulun, the Asherites (the phrase being altered) in the following verse are said to dwell among the Canaanites, as if those pagans were the principall Land-lords (ingrossing all memorable places in this Tribe to themselves) whilest the Asherites lived amongst them as Tenants at will by the others leave. Nor was this fully remedied untill the victorious reigns of David and Solomon. § 4. In the north-west part of this Tribe neer the sea side,Salt and glasse made in Asher. we first meet withIosh. 11. 8. Misrepothmaim, that is, the boyling of waters, though uncer∣tain whether done artificially by fire, or naturally by the Sun. Here great plenty of salt was made in brine-pits, a necessary, and gainfull commo∣ditie. However, Tremellius rendreth Misrepothmaim fornaces vitrarias, Glass-furnaces; and we know, store of thePlin. . 36. Nat. hist. ca. 2. best sort of that brickle ware was made hereabouts. Ioshua having foiled the Kings of Canaan at the waters of Merom, pursued them thus far to the shore of the Mediterrane∣an, where his foes had the free choise, whether they would be killed with the sword, or drowned in the sea. Hard by is Mearah, which signifieth a cave, (and so some translations render it, though others retain the He∣brew word) being theIosh. 13. 4. northern boundary of the land of Canaan, and an impregnable underground fortification of the Zidonians. Yea many hundred years after in the Holy War, when the Christians possessed Palestine, they manfully defended it untill the garison thereinTyr. li. 19 Bel. Sacr. ca. 11. corrupted with money, basely betrayed it unto the Saracens. § 5. Observe by the way,Vast caves in the land of Canaan. that the hills in Palestine generally had in their sides plenty of caves, and those of such laxity and receit, that ours in England are but conny-boroughs if compared to the palaces which those hollow places afforded. Neither wonder that the cave of Makkedah could contain fiveIosh. 10. 23. Kings together, or that Obadiah could hide an hun∣dred Prophets by fifty & fifty in a1 King. 18. 13. cave, or that about four hundred men abode with David in the cave of1 Sam. 22. 2. Adullam, or that six hundred Benjamites lurk't, for four moneths, in the rock ofIudg. 20. 49. Rimmon, whenGog li. 6. Strabo hath repor∣ted, that towards Iturea, (which beginneth not far off) there be sharp moun∣tains, having deep des in them, whereof one is able to receive four thousand Men. These caves (being only a cellar by nature) were by Art contrived into severall rooms, and by industry fortified even unto admiration. So well man'd, they could not be stormed, well victualled, they could not be starved, and (not having any combustible matter about them) fire-free they could not be burned, so thick, they could not be battered, so high, they could not be scaled, and so low, they could not be undermined.
But these Inns gave entertainment to any guests, and as sometimes they gave shelter to pious people in persecution, so often they afforded har∣bour to theeves and vagabonds. The Psalmist glanceth on such places, in that his expression, Thou art of more honour andPsal. 76. 4. might then the hills of the robbers; and our Saviour directly pointeth at them, when he complain∣eth, that they had turned the house of God into aMat. 21. 13. den of theeves. § 6. To proceed,The city Enoch wrong placed. hereabouts we can quickly discover an ancient City, wrongfully placed by the presumption of Authors, namely Enoch, built by Cain in the land of Nod, whichIo. Viterbien. apud Naucler. Vid. Adricho. in Asher. num. 39. one tells us was at the foot of mount Libanus, and that vast foundations thereof are at this day to be seen. Surely Cains wandring humour (bloudy hands are al∣ways attended with roving feet) seems to have possessed these Authors brains, stragling in the position of this place so far from the truth, and the text, which describeth it east ofGen. 417. Eden. But we may seek the City Enoch with more probability to finde it amongst the Henochii, a people seated byNat. hist. li. 2. cap. 16. Pliny neer the Bactrians in the east country. § 7. But before we goe farther, we will alter our former method, (hoping such variety will prove the more pleasant) and because most memorable Places in Asher, are mentioned in Ioshua, where the Posses∣sions of this Tribe were first allotted him; we will briefly comment on those verses, wherein the Bounds of his Inheritance are described. Ioshua 19. 24. And the fifth lot came out for the Tribe of the Children of Asher according to their Families. To prevent all Quarrels, the Land on this side Iordan was divided by lot, betwixt the nine Tribes and an half, much of providence being cou∣ched under the seeming casualty thereof; for although their Portions fell not to them in such seniority as they sate down at Pharaoh'sGen. 43. 33. Table, the first-born according to his Birth-right, and the youngest according to his youth, yet an excellent method was observed therein: For, The firstIosh. 15. 1. Lot fell to Iudah the Tribe Royall, of whom the1 Chron. 5. 2. Chief Ru∣lers and Christ himself was to descend. TheIosh. 16. 1. second, to the sons of Ioseph, Ephraim and Manasses, to whom (on Reubens forfeiting thereof) the Birth-right belonged.1 Chron. 5. 2. The third toIosh. 18. 11. Benjamin, Iacobs youngest, but next best beloved son, by Rachel his dearest wife. The fourth, fifth and sixth for SimeonIosh. 19. 1. 10. & 17. Zebulun and Issachar, his sons by Leah, so that all Iacobs children by his wives were provided for first, before those he had by his Concubines received any Pos∣sessions. The seventh for AsherIosh. 19. 24. Iacobs son byGen. 30. 13. Zilpah handmaid to Leah his first wife, and therefore her child in seniority preferred, Gad his elder brother being already provided for on the other side Iordan. The eight and ninth for Naphtali andIosh. 19. 32. 40. Dan born of Bilhah hand∣maid to Rachel, the younger sister, and Iacobs second wife.
We know who said in another case,Cant. 5. 2. I sleep, but my heart awaketh. So see here, though drowzie Chance in the Lot is commonly challenged to have slept out her eyes, and to become stark blind, yet is there a concealed vigi∣lancy therein, ordered by divine Providence. Verse 25. And their border was Helkah, and Hali, and Beten, and Ach∣shaph. In expounding these words for the maine we follow learned Masius, though loth to erre with any, willing to venture sooner on his then any other Authors judgement herein. May the Reader find out Helkah in our Mappe (in the South-east part thereof, not farre from the Sea) thence let his eies start, and with good successe (following the names in the Text, and the pricks in our Mappe for his direction) surround the Bor∣ders of this Tribe. Helkah was afterwards given to the Levites Gershonites, to be one of theirIosh. 21. 31. & 1 Chr. 6. 75. where it is cal∣led Hukok. foure Cities in this Tribe, had Achshaph and formerly been a Royall City of the Canaanites whose King had been conquered by IoshuaIosh. 12. 20.. Verse 26. And Alamelech, and Amad, and Mishael, and reacheth to Carmel Westward, and Shihor Libnah. Mishael or1 Chr. 6. 74. Mashal was another City of the Levites. By this the Bor∣der of Asher ran Southwestward to Carmell; understand thereby not the mountain so called (lying more South in Zebulun) but the Plain lying under the same, more towards the North. Shihor Libnah, that is, the whiteOr white Nilus. River. Now for streames to take their names from their colours, is no news to them that have heard of Albis in Germany, Melas in Thracia, and two Rivers called Blackwater, the one in the South, the other in the North of Ireland. But whether this River in Asher took the whitenesse from the foaming water therein, or Chalk-banks (like our Albion) on both sides, or from the materials of glasse or crystall growing there, let others dis∣pute, whilst we onely observe that Album Promontorium or the white Pro∣montory, is byNat. hist. lib. 5. cap. 19. Pliny placed hereabouts. Verse 27. And turneth toward the Sun rising to Beth Dagon, and reacheth to Zebulun, and to the Valley of Iiphthabel toward the Northside of Beth∣emek, and Neiel, and goeth out to Cabul on the left hand. The Map will make all these flexures plain. Beth Dagon, that is, the Temple of Dagon; but how came this1 Sam. 5. 2. Idol of the Philistims to travell thus farre almost to Phoenicia? Surely it never came hither on its own legges, as thePsal. 115. 7. Psalmist observes, Feet have they, but they walk not, but was brought by the Superstition of the Canaanites, which borrowed this Idol from their neighbours. Concerning Cabul, quaere whether it were the name of a particular place, or the same with the Land of Cabul, which I conceive lay more Northward, which1 King. 9. 13. Solomon afterward bestowed on Hiram King of Tyre.
Verse 28. And Hebron, and Rehob, and Hammon, and Kanah, even unto great Zidon. Hebron differing from a greater City of the same name in the Tribe of Iudah. Rehob, that is, large or spacious, this name speaking it a City of great receipt. Unto thisNumb. 13. 21. place came the twelve Spies sent to discover the Land, and this City was afterwards bestowed upon theIosh. 21. 31. Levites. This Kanah the great is conceived by some the birth place of Simon theMat. 10. 4. Canaa∣nite, the disciple of Christ. Great Zidon was given to, never gained by this Tribe, whose Borders reached to Zidon exclusively, so that Ashers lips might touch the cup, but not taste the liquor of so sweet a City. Verse 29. And then the Coast turneth to Ramah, and to the strong City Tyre, aud the Coast turneth to Hosah, and the outgoings thereof are at the Sea from the coast to Achzib. Turneth, namely towards the South; Rama, that is, an high place, as the name importeth, therefore seated by us on a Mountain; Such Maps as place Ramah in a valley are guilty of as great a Solecisme in Geography, as he in gesture, who speaking, O Heavens, pointed to the Earth. Wonder not that in Palestine we meet with so many Ramahs (Towns seated on a rising or advantage of ground) seeing it was so mountainous a Coun∣trey: Equivalent whereunto we have the frequent name of Upton in Eng∣land, whereof I have told, (Smile good Reader, but doe not jeer at my curiosity herein) no fewer then three and thirty in the Alphabeticall names of Speeds descriptions. Tyre like Zidon was never possest by the Asherites, neither was Achzib neer to Helkah where we first began our preambulation about this Tribe, and now redit labor actus in orbem, we have walked the Round, and encompassed the Bounds thereof. Verse 30. Ummah also and Aphek, and Rehob, twenty and two Cities with their Villages. This is the inheritance of the Tribe of the children of Asher, according to their families, these Cities with their Villages. All the former were limitary places in the Tribe of Asher, these three last were more Inland Cities in the heart of the Countrey. To avoid tau∣tology, ehob here, must be allowed a distinct City from that mentio∣ned before. § 8. But of all these Cities, Aphek was most remarkable, whose King Iosh. 12. 18. was killed by Ioshua, and neer whereunto Benhadad (lately beaten by A∣hab on the Mountains of Samaria) with his new model'd Army in a new place hoped for new successe. For in stead of the thirty two1 King. 20. 1. Kings, of more pomp then puissance to his Army, he placed so many Captaines, seeing it is not the shining of the hilt, but the sharpnesse of the edge of the sword must do the the deed. And resolved to fight in the Plain, con∣ceiving the Gods of the Israelites (though by Benhadads swelling words & lofty1 King. 20. 10 language one might rather have collected the Syrian Gods to have been) the Gods of the Moūtains. Then appeared he with a mighty Host, against whom the Israelites marched forth like two little flocks of1 King 20. 27 Kids. Behold here
a wonder, the Kids kill the Wolves, and a hundred thousand Syrian foot∣men were kill'd in one day. From the field they flie into the City of A∣phek. What, was it to try whether the God of Israel (concluded now God of the Countrey, be it hilly or plain) were God of the City also? They found it so by sad experience, when the wall of the City fell on twenty and seven1 King. 20 30. thousand of them that were left, which wall if cruell to kill, was charitable to bury them. § 9. Yet Ahab afterwards lost the advantage of this victory, when con∣trary to Gods flat command, on Benhadads feigned submission he indul∣ged life unto him, which caused his own death1 King. 22. 31. and destruction not long after. Thus foolish pity, in stead of breaking, whets the knife for it's own throat: and they who onely take out the teeth and sting of such ser∣pents which they should kill outright, shall finde the very stumps and tail remaining enough to bite and sting them to death. § 10. Baanah the sonne of Hushai was Solomons purveyor in Asher and in1 King. 4. 16. Aloth; What this Aloth should be, a deep silence is in all Comments. I conceive it a hilly Countrey, appendent to Asher, ascending with moun∣tains, according to the notation of the Hebrew word. Herein our guesse is seconded by plenty ofSe Ni▪ Fullr Misce l. lib. 4. cap. 6. Gradati montes, Staired mountains, which goe up by degrees, found in these parts, and one most eminent, whereofBel. Iud. lib. 2. cap. 9. Iosephus takes especiall notice, being an hundred furlongs north of Ptolemais, cal∣led scala Tyriorum, or the Tyrians Ladder. How neer our conjecture is bow∣led to the mark I know not, but hope the Reader before he knocks this away will lay a better in the room thereof. So much of Asher, whose countrey was much straitned by the Phoenicians, their mortall enemies (lying within his bounds, though never subdued) which we now come to describe. § 11. Phoenicia is often mentionedAct. 11. 19. 15. 3. in Scripture, and is so called as some will have it , from plenty of palm trees growing therein; as others  from the many slaughters formerly made in that warlike Nation. To omit other antiquated deductions thereof, prettiest (because newest) is that of a modernBoch. Geog. Sanc. parte 2d•. lib. . cap. 1. pag. 362. Author from  bhene-Anak, Pheanak, Phoenik, the sons of Anak, as the fathers and founders of the people of this Country. A long slender Country it is, having the bounds thereof by severall Authors variously assigned; but generally extended from the Sea to Mount Libanus in breadth, and in length from Carmel to the River Canis in the north; a tract of an hundred miles and upwards. § 12. The inhabitants hereof were transcendently ingenious; whose wits (like the gold wire they so much dealt with) were ductile and pliable to all inventions. From a pin to a pillar, nothing was so small but their skill could work, nothing so great but their industry could at∣chieve. Whatsoever was pretty for children to play with, or neat for women to weare, or necessary for man to use, in any one of these the Phoenicians were so expert, nature might seem to design them for that
alone, and so dextrous in all of them, it were hard to say wherein they excelled. They could weave clothes with the smallest thred, dresse them with the finest work, dye them with the freshest colours, embroider them with the richest cost, and then either sell them to others to their great profit, or weare them with as much pride themselves. They were excellent Architects; Solomon himself (who well knew the most cunning workmen in every craft) confessing to Hiram,1 King. 5. 6. 18. There is not amongst us any that can skill to he timber like the Sidonians. They are also conceived the first founders of Letters, Arithmetick, Astronomy, with the wor∣king in glasse, and severall other rare devices. § 13. Tyre was the chiefest city in Phoenicia,Ezek. 27. 3. situate at the entrance of the Sea. Elegantly theIsa. 23. 3. Prophet termeth the harvest of the river her revenue: an harvest lasting all the yeare long, every day sowing at the setting forth, and reaping at the return of her Ships. Tyre said of her self,Ezek. 2. 3. I am of perfect beauty, which coming out of her own mouth was rather proudly then falsly spoken. If it be accounted one of the stateliest sights in the world, to see a stout Ship under saile, how beautifull was it to behold the Tyrian Gallies with all their accoutrements; Planks ofEzek. 27. 5. the Fir-trees of Senir, Masts of the Cedars of Lebanon, Oares of the Oaks of Bashan, Hatches of the ivory of Chittim, Sailes with broidered work (oh vanity top and top gallant!) out of Egypt, blue and purple Carpets for covering from the Iles of Elisha, with Giblites for Calkers, Arvadites for Mariners, Persians &c. for Souldiers, and Tyrians, her own Townsmen for Pilots, so keep∣ing the honour, and haply seeking to preserve the mysteries of their har∣bour to themselves? § 14. Passe we from their Ships to their Shops, which we finde fraught with commodities of all kindes. WhoseIsa. 23. 8. Merchants are Princes, saith the Prophet; and it seems that Tyramus a good word for a good King (till customary using thereof in the worst sense infected it) had its originall from the Pride and Magnificence of the Tyrian Merchants. This city is termedIsa. 23. 3. a Mart of Nations, both because all Nations were there to sell, and there to be sold:Ezek. 27. 13. Ioel 3. 46. they traded the persons of men, and not onely armes but armies, were here to be bought, andEzk. 27. 14. horsemen as well as horses were chaffered in their markets. § 15. Now as Tyre was dispersed all over the world in the severall Colo∣nies planted by her in forein parts; so the World was contracted into Tyre, whither Merchants from all countries did repair. Compare Ezek. 27. with Gen. 10. and it will appear, that most of those nations which departed from Babel in a confusion, met in Tyre in such a method as now inabled through industry, observation, and entercourse, they could un∣derstand the languages and traffique one with another. We intend a little to insist both upon the commodities and countries of such as hither re∣sorted. For though I dare not goe out of the bounds of Canaan to give these Nations a visit at their own homes, yet finding them here within
my Precincts, it were incivility in me not to take some acquaintance of them. In setting down of their severall places, I have wholly followed (let my candle goe out in a stink, when I refuse to confess from whom I have lighted it) Bochartus in his holy Geography. Their severall trades we rank according to the twelve great Companies in London. Let not the comparison as ominous offend any, Tyre since being reduced to a rui∣nous heap; seeing the Parallel is onely intended to shew the like latitude of commerce betwixt them. However, it is neither unseasonable on this occasion, nor improper for my profession (every Minister in this respect being the Cities Remembrancer) to minde London1 Tim 6. 17. not to trust in uncertain riches; seeing pride and unthankfulness may quickly levell the highest bank of wealth, yea strongest mountain of outward greatness. 1 Merchant-Mercers. Such as traded in Silkes (Byssus in latine, though rendred fine-linnen in our translation) blue and purple, beingEzek. 27. 7. Egyptians,Ezek. 27. 16. Syrians, and from the IslesEzek. 27. 7. of Elisha. By ElishaGen. 10. 4. understand Peloponnesus, wherein an ancient & ample countrey called Elis, and part thereof termed Alisium by Homer, where the adjacent Islands Co, Carpathus, Cythera, Rhodes, Gyarus &c. are eminent for plenty of purple. Here some wil object it was a real tau∣tology to bring purples to Tyre, seeing by generall confession the best of the world were made in that place. In answer whereunto, know that these Elishian purples being of a different die and dress from those of Tyre, were a distinct commodity. It is so far from being needless pains, that it may bring considerable Profit, to carry Char-coals to New-castle. And these courser purples, though not for the Tyrians own wearing, might be for their barter with other Nations. Not to say, but that the peevish principle might possess the people of Tyre, to slight homebred, and prize forein wares, so that the Tyrians Ladies might prefer those purples best for their own use, which were fetched the farthest off. 2 Merchant-Grocers. Such as traffiquedEzek. 27. 22. Gen. 10. 7. Psal. 72. 10. with the chief of all spices being those of Sheba, and Raamah, both being places in Arabia the happy. Great no doubt was the fragrancy of these spices brought over land to Tyre, whereas such as are conveyed into England by ship from India, have the less vigour of that land where they grow, and the more moisture of the sea through which they are brought. The men also of Dan and Iavan (of whom hereafter) furnished Tyre withEzek. 27. 19. Cassia and Calamus, drugges of high worth and value. 3 Merchant-Drapers. Such as broughtEzek. 27. 20. precious clothes for (or with) chariots being the men of Dedan, which is an eminent countrey in Idumea. 4 Merchant-Fishmongers. Many of these must be presumed in Tyre, where fish was a staple commodity, which they transported into other countreys, and vented
for their own gain without any other respect of time or place. This caused Nehemiah's complaint that in Ierusalem there dwelt men of Tyre which broughtNh. 13. 16. fish and all manner of ware, and sold them on the Sabbath. 5 Merchant-Gold-smiths. Such as occupied in her FairsEzk. 27. 22. with all precious stones out of the Coun∣trey of Sheba and Raamah aforesaid. BesidesEzek. 27. 16. Emeralds, Corals and Agate brought out of Syria, Silver from Tarshish. i. e. Spaine (as ourBochar. Geog Sanc. lb. 3. c. 7. Authour irrefragably proves plenty of that metall therein) andEzek. 27. 22 gold from Ara∣bia. Yea, as some observe that though the body of the Sun ariseth in the East, yet his shining by reflexion is first discovered in theIust. l. 18. p. 196. west, so gran∣ting gold originally to grow in lands east from Tyre, yet in this City most gorgeous and glittering was the lustre thereof, beaten and drawn out in most artificiall embroideries and embosments. 6 Merchant-Skinners. Although no mention of their trade in this City, where the heat of the climate made furs not onely useless but burdensome, yet we may be confident there wanted not those therein which traded in such skins which were in valuation in these parts. 7 Merchant-Taylours. Such as dealt inEzek. 27. 24. all sorts of things, in blew clothes and broidered work, and in Chests of rich apparell bound with cords and made of Cedar. Those that traffiqued in these commodities wereEzek. ut. pri. of Haran and Canneh and Eden and Sheba, Ashur and Chilmad, all near one another (as appeares by their bundling up together) about the confluence of Tygris and Euphrates. 8 Merchant-Haberdashers. Great their number who by wholesale sold he fine manufactures wrought here, of Gold, Silver,Ezek. 27. 15. Ivory and Ebony, brought from Dedan (diffe∣rent from the former countrey of the same name in Idumea) at this day cal∣led Daden, situate on the Persian gulf. But oh the infinite varieties of preci∣ous toyes made thereof! Well didIliad. 23. 743. & 6. 289. Odys. 15. 114. & 4. 54. Homer give the Sidonians the Epithet of , or very much ingenious. Their fingers might seem all of bone, so strong and hardy to endure any labour; and yet all of flesh, so flexible and limber to any imployment. Those mysteries in manu∣factures which English men in our age gaze on as rare discoveries, the Phenicians of Tyre would but smile at as rude recoveries of what by them was most perfectly performed. 9 Merchant-Salters. Store of these may be concluded therein, not onely because salt is so needfull a commodity, but also because atIosh. 11. 8. Misrepothmaim or the boyling of waters, hard by Sidon, great store of salt was made. 10 Merchant-Iron-mongers. Such as barteredEzek. 27. 12. in Iron, Tin, or Lead Brought from Spaine or Tarshish, as also in13. vessels of brass from Iavan, Tuball and Mesech, that is, Ionia, Pontus
and Moscovia, as ourBrochart. Geog. Sanc. Authour will have it, though we are not at leasure severally to examine his judgment therein. 11 Merchant-Vintners. Such as traded inEzek. 27. 18. Wine of Helbon (no doubt most delicious to the Palate) brought hither by the Merchants of Damascus. Helbon we con∣ceive the same with Calybon a City in Syria whereof mention in Ptolemy, and from which the Countrey about it is denominated Calybonidis. 12 Merchant-Clothworkers. Such as from the Whitewooll brought from Damascus transmitted the same from the Spinsters wheel, to the Weavers loom, to the Fullers sheares, to the Dyers vat, and so to be worn by the greatest Princes in the world, who were beholding to Tyre the center of rich clothing, for all their holy-day apparell. Thus was their City fraught with com∣modities of all kinds, to say nothing of their Smithfield full ofEzek. 27. 14. horses, horsemen and mules from Togarma, or Cappadocia; their East-cheap full of the flesh ofEzek. 27. 21. Rams, Lambs, Goats, &c. from Arabia: their Leaden-hall where a market was kept with the wheat ofEzek. 27. 17. Minnith, and Pannag out of Iudea, so that all things save piety, humility, and thankfulness to God, were to be had in this City. § 16. Thus sate Tyre on her throne in a Princely posture, no less envious then proud: witness her rejoycing at the destruction of Ierusalem (the breaking of one Merchant is the making of another) when she said to her self,Ezek. 26. 2. Ierusalem is turned unto me, I shall be repleni∣shed now she is made waste; meaning that all trading divided before, should now be engrossed to her self alone. But God marred her mar∣kets, threatning by Isaiah toIsa. 23. 9. stain the pride of her glory, alluding to Tyres master-piece which was to fixe faire and fresh colours, which God would soil and blur, notwithstanding all her curiosity in that kinde. Ezekiel useth two maritime expressions as most proper for a Port; first that her enemies should come up against her as the Sea causeth hisEzek. 26. 3. waves to come up, and then that an east winde should break her, meaning Nebuchadnezzar (living north-east from this place) who af∣terwards besieged and sacked the City. § 17. It seems the taking thereof, called elswhere the strong City TyreIosh. 19. 29. did not quit cost for the taking thereof, the profit recei∣ved by it not countervailing the pains expended upon it; God himself confesseth that Nebuchadnezzar served a great service against Tyre and yet hadEzek. 30. 18. no wages.Sir Walter Rawlegh. 2 book 76. pag. 285. One tells us that the Tyrians after thirteen years siege, de∣spoiled of all hope of relief, abandoned their City, and in their ships transported their wives, children, and portable wealth to Carthage, Cy∣prus, and other Colonies, leaving Nebuchadnezzar their empty nest, when all the birds worth pluming, were flown away. However God after∣wards gave him the spoile of theEzek 29. 19. 20 land of Egypt for wages for his army. Thus, not onely those who doe Gods will in a direct line, but also such, who
collaterally (not to say casually) work his pleasure shall finde a reward, seeing in sacking of Tyre, Nebuchadnezzar went in the path and pace of his own pride and covetousness, though haply in his own way he met with Gods will, not onely besides his intention, but without the knowledge thereof. § 18. As the ruines, so theEsay 23. 15. restauration of Tyre was foretold by the Prophet; not the same numericall Tyre in place and position (for Pale∣tyrus or old Tyre ever after remained desolate according to the prediction, Ezek. 26. 14. thou shalt be built no more) but the same in name, countrey, convenience of site, wealth, and wickedness. Yea, she exchanged and improved her place for commodity and strength, removing from the entrance to the midst of the Sea, from the continent to almost an Island. Here to use the Prophets expression,Esay 23. 15. after seventy years (the end of the Babylo∣nish kingdome) Tyre began to sing as an harlot; Siren songs to allure Merchants to be her lovers, as before; counting trade and profit t be her richest pleasure. And so she did flourish againe as much or more then ever, during the Persian Monarchy, about two hundred six years; till Alexander the great made her change her tune, alter her notes, and turn her merry love songs into mournfull Elegies on her selfe. For being denied by the Tyrians in their City to sacrifice to Hercules the Tutelar God of that place, Alexander not so superstitious as ambitious, with vast pains and expence (as one whom no perill could affright, nor labour weary) sacked the City, putting such to the sword as resisted, and causing two thousand moe to be hung up in rank on the sea shore. At which time he built a Castle of his own name (now corruptly called Sandalium) two miles south of the City. § 19. Yet Tyre afterwards recovered it self to considerable greatness, like a cunning Broaker, though often proving quite bankrupt, she set up again, though having nothing to give her credit but the conveniency of her situation: as indeed an harlot needs no other wares then her self to set up her trading. Insomuch that the Poets fiction of the Phoenix springing again out of his own ashes, being disclaimed by naturall History for a falshood, may mythologically finde a truth in, and proba∣bly fetch its ground from this Phoenix or Phoenician City of Tyre, always arising fresh and fair out of his own ruines. In our Saviours time it was a stately place, and yet though with Dives it wasLuke 6. 19. clothed in purple; Tyre could not with him fare deliciously every day, unless beholding to Herods land of Galilee to afford it constant provision, because its countrey wasActs 12. 20. nourished by the Kings Countrey. Sensible hereof when Herod was high∣ly displeased with these of Tyre and Sidon, they politickly compounded the breach (knowing that to fight with him who fed them, was the ready way to be famished) and opening the breast of Blastus the Kings Chamberlain with a golden key, through that passage they made their access to pacifie King Herod.
§ 20.1 King. 16. 31. Tyre at this day is reduced almost to nothing. Here it is season∣ably remembred that Ethbaal Father of Iezebel was the King, as Tyre was the chief City of the Sidonians, and I finde a great conformity betwixt the fortunes of his daughter and this place: In their 1 Outward happiness. She a crowned Queen, and Tyre aEsay 23. 8. Crowning City, whose Merchants were Princes. 2 Inward wickedness; both of them styledEsay 23. 15. Revel. 2. 21. Harlots in Scri∣pture. 3 Finall wofulness; she eaten up by the dogs to the short re∣version of her2 King. 9. 35. skull, feet and palmes; and TyreSands Trav. li. 3. p. 216. so consumed by all-devouring time, that now no other then an heap of Ruines, yet have they a reverent respect, and doe instruct the pensive be∣holders with their exemplary frailty. Enough of Tyre, if not too much: fearing that long since the Rea∣der hath sadly sympathized with the sufferings of Nebuchadnezzar and Alexander, guessing their pains to be great in the long siege of this place by the proportion of their own patience in reading our tedious descripti∣on thereof. All I will adde is this, that though Tyre was a sink of sin, yet is thisMat. 11. 21. recorded in excuse of her profaneness, and mitigation of her punishment, that if the miracles done in Chorazin and Bethsaida had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have long since repented in sackcloth and ashes. § 21. Two bowes shoot from the east gate of Tyre the place is showen, where the woman made that spirituall-carnall exclamation, Luke. 11. 27, 28. Blessed is the wombe that bare thee, and the paps that gave thee suck; when Christ not disproving her words diverted his Auditours from this, and directed them to a more necessary trut, Yea rather blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it. A little mile south of old Tyre areBradenback de Te. Sanc. & Sand. Trav. pag. 217. four fair pits, the least twenty five cubits square, commonly called Solomons Cisterns. Surely the water of them is more clear then is the place alledged out of the Cant. 4. 15. Canticles, to prove Solomon the Authour thereof, where but obscure and oblite mention is made of those water-works. More probable some King of Tyre made these and the neighbouring Aqueducts, for the use of the City. § 22. Seventeen miles north of Tyre lay the City of Sidon, so named from the eldestGen. 10. 15. son of Canaan. A city of great antiquity, seeing Tyre is termed by theEsay 23. 12. Prophet, the daughter of Sidon. Sure here the Hebrew proverb held true,Ezek. 16 44. As is the mother, so is the daughter, both of these Cities being of great wealth and wickedness. Insomuch that to live carelesse, quiet, and secure, is in Scripture phraseIudg. 18. 7. to live after the manner of the Zidonians. § 23. It was also a place of very great extent, therefore termed in Iosh. 11. 8. & 19. 28. holy writ, Zidon Rabbah, or great Zidon. Not that there was ever a lesser Zidon, (though there be one grand Cairo, it followeth not there is also a pety Cairo) but it is emphatically so named in comparison of other
Cities. YeaLib. 16. Diodorus Siculus andLib. 1. . 12. Pomponius Mela make Sidon the grea∣test city of all Phenicia; understand then anciently, whilest as yet she suckled Tyre, her little infant, which afterwards outgrew her mother in greatness. This haply is the reason why Homer so often making hono∣rable mention of Sidon, is so silent of Tyre, because reputing this latter a parcell of the former. § 24. Many and great were the fortifications of Sidon: but in vain was the arme of flesh with it, when God himself saith,Ezek. 28. 22. Behold I am against thee O Zidon; whereupon in generall it felt the same destruction with Tyre, which here we forbear to repeate. Onely we will adde, that as bad a place as Sidon was; after Christs resurection a Church was quickly converted therein; and Saint Paul sailing to Rome touched here, and was courteously refreshed by hisAct. 27. 3. friends. § 25. Near the east-gate of Sidon they shew the place, where the Sy∣rophenician woman begged so importunately for the cure of her daughter, not disheartned though likened to aMat 15. 21. dog, by our Saviour. In deed she shewed one of the best qualities of a dog in keeping her hold where once she had well fastened, not giving over or letting goe, untill she had gotten what she desired. § 26. So much for the City of Sidon. The Countrey of Sidon was larger, adequate almost to Phenicia, and full of many fair harbours. Amongst theseObad. ver. 20. Zarephah or Zarepta, styled both in the1 King. 17. 9, old andLuke 9. 26. new Testament, a City of Sidon. The land round about it was fruitfull of the best Wine, as we haveLib. 1. cap. 4. formerly observed. During the three years drought in Israel here dwelt that widow, whose thrift had so evenly ordered her bread and oile, that a little of both were left, till she got a spring in her cruse by entertaining the Prophet Elijah. As for her sonKing. 17. 20 restored to life by Elijah, that he was Ionah that eminent Prophet, it may be ranked with the making of Dinah Iacobs daughter to be Iobs wife, and with Ruth her being daughter to Eglon King of Moab; all which three traditions are equally improbable in themselves, altogether ungrounded on Scri∣pture, and yet peremptorily affirmed of the Jewish Doctors. Nor have I ought else to observe of this City, save that the Hebrew name of Za∣rephah, signifieth a conflatory or melting place, where metals, (whereof plenty in this Province) were made fuil by the fire in their furnaces. § 27.Judg. 1. 3. Accho remains to be observed in the south part of this Tribe, and confines of Zebulun. A learnedStephanus . vid. Nic. Full. lib. 4. Misce. cap. writer conceiveth it called Ace by Grecians from affording medicine ( in Greek) to Hercules, when hurt in his conflict with the Lernaean Serpent. Whereas indeed Ace is plainly derived from Accho the Scriputre name of this City. Thus those who take aime from the Greek tongue to shoot at the Etymologies of Hebrew places, come wide of the mark. This city was afterwards cal∣led Ptolemais from one of the Kings of Egypt. Here I forbear to recite how Ionathan, through the perfidiousness of Tryphon and his own over
credulity, was1 Mac. 12. 4. trained into this city, taken and murdered. Saint Paul sailing from Tyre touched here,Act. 21. 7. saluted the brethren, and abode with them one day. As for Achzib a city of Asher whence they could not expell the Canaanites, it was seated nine miles north of Ptolemais, being a tolerable harbour, and called Ecdippa afterwards. § 28. Many were the rivolets in this Tribe, but those no sooner de∣livered out of the wombe of their fountains, but devoured in the grave of the Ocean; onely Belus hath got a name (though not in Scripture) running through the Cendevian Lake, famous for itsPlin. l. 5. c. 19. inexhausted sands, turning all things it toucheth into glass. As for the sepulcher of Memnon, whom the Poets feign the son of the Morning, andL. 2. Bel. Iud. cap. 9. Iosephus erects his monument near the river Belus; we take no notice thereof, being hereaf∣ter to finde his tombe,Psal. 110. 3. the dew of whose birth is as the wombe of the morning, in a far distant place. § 29. The Armes usually assigned to Asher are azure,The Armes of Asher. a standing cup covered Or, relating to Iacobs blessing,Gen. 49. 20. he shall yeeld royall dainties. A cup being taken here by a Synedochicall metonymie for all plentifull Provi∣sions, Asher otherwise affording dishes as well as cups, and esculents as well as variety of beverage. But should the shield of this Tribe be as full of charge as the land thereof was fruitfull of commodities, what was the credit of the countrey would be the disgrace of the Coate of Asher. Here the Map of Zebulun is to be inserted.
THE TRIBE OF ZEBVLVN. CHAP. 6. § 1. ZEbulun tenth son of Iacob by Leah his wise had his posterity so increased in Egypt,The populous∣ness and pu∣issnce of Ze∣bulun. thatNum. 1. 31. fifty seven thousand four hundred were extracted from him. All which dying in the wilderness for their manifold disobedience, their next genera∣tion beingNum. 26. 27. sixty thousand five hundred posses∣sed the land of Canaan. Honourable mention on all occasions is made of this Tribe in Scripture. How forwrd were they in their expedition against Sisera, in so much asIudg. 5. 14. out of Zebulun they came down that handled the pen of the writer; Gown-men turned Sword-men, Clerks became Cap∣tains, changing their penknives into swords. Thus the peaceableness of their profession can bail none to stay at home, when eminent dan∣ger arrests all at the suite of the Commonwealth to serve in person a∣broad. David calls them the PrincesPsal. 68. 27. of Zebulun &c. and well might he afford them that style of dignity, who attended him at Hebron with an army so absolutely accomplished For 1 Number,1 Chr. 12. 33. fifty thousand. 2 Skill, expert in war, which could keep ranke. 3 Weapons, with all instruments of war. 4 Loyalty, they were not of double hearts. Yet in all ages, of all the numerous Tribe of Zebulun, we finde but two Grandees expressed by name,Iudg. 12. 12. Elon a peaceable Judge, and Ionah an eminent Prophet. But what shall we say? A greater then Ionah was here, even Christ himself, the honour and dishonour (though not of the tribe) of the land of Zebulun: honor, because here miraculously conceived, poorly & painfully bread & brought up, here frequent in preaching & working of miracles: dishonour, because carelesly neglected and scornfully contemned, yea dispightfully persecuted of his own countreymen. § 2. Zebulun had Asher on the north-west,The situation and sea conve∣niences thereof. Naphtali on the north-east, Issachar on the south, the Mediterranean on the west, and Galilean sea on
the east thereof. This maritime position of this Tribe Iacob foresaw in his Prophecy,Gen. 49. 13. Zebulun shall dwell at the haven of the Sea, and he shall be for an haven of ships, and his border shall be unto Zidon. Which Charter of sea con∣veniencies is renewed, and enlarged by Moses in his blessing, Rejoyce Deut. 33. 18, 19. Zebulun in thy going out, and Issachar in thy tents. They shall call the people unto the mountains, and there shall they offer Sacrifices of righteousness, for they shall suck of the abundance of the Seas, and treasures hid in the sand. Where though these two Tribes be made Partners, and joint sharers in marine interests, and are promised equall profit thereby, yet Issachar it seems loved land and an home life best, imploying his canvase rather for Tents, then Sails, whilest the sea and going out in long voiages was rather Zebuluns delight. So have I seen chickens and ducklings hatched under the same hen, no sooner unhoused out of their shels, but presently the one falls a pec∣king on the ground, the other a padling in the water. § 3. Nor let any be staggered at the close of Iacobs Prophecy,Zebulun how bordering on Sidon. where∣in he foretelleth, Zebuluns border shall be untoGen. 49. 13. Sidon, finding this Tribe to fall many miles short and south of that place. For Sidon is not there to be taken for the City but CountreyBochar. Geog. Sacr. par. pri. pag. 342. so named. And the land of the Sidonians or Phenicians, extended to Accho or Ptolemais a city thereof, on which the north bound of Zebulun did confine. Greater will be the difficulty to assigne a cleare reason, why in the first book of Chronicles, where the Pedegrees of all the other Tribes are reckoned up; Zebulun and Dan (as considerable and deserving as the rest) is omitted. The best is, places not persons concern our present subject, and I hope I shall not betray such indiscretion to leave the plain and ready Rode of my work in hand, to enter into the wood (not to say the bog) of an im∣pertinent question. § 4. We begin with the sea of Galilee the eastern boundary of this Tribe,The severall measures and names of the Galilean Sea. called always a sea by three of the Evangelists, but generally a Lake by Saint Luke. Indeed amongst lakes it may be accounted for a Sea, such the greatness; amongst seas reputed for a lake, such the sweetness and freshness of the water therein. The extent thereof is most variously reported amongst Authors. Ios. l. 3. de bel. Iud. ca. 18. Iosephus makes it an hundred furlongs long, and sixe broad. Lib. 5. c. 15. Nat. hist. Pliny measures it to be sixteen miles long, and six broad. De Ter. sac. Munster assignes it to be twenty German miles (eighty English) in compass. Trav. of Patri∣archs. p. 446. Bunting contracts it to twelve in length, four miles and somewhat more in breadth. Trav. p. 104. Biddulph a late English Divine, and eye-witness thereof computes it eight leagues in length and five in breadth (three miles to all leagues) whom for the main we have followed. Others assigne it other dimensions, all agree it is not very great. But what it wants in bigness, it hath in variety of names, called the Sea
of 1 Cinnereth onely in the oldIosh. 13. 27. & Iosh. 19. 35. Testament from a City of that name in the Tribe Naphtali. Others conceive it so named from Kinnor, an Harp in Hebrew, which it is said in shape to resemble: sure the high winds, sometimes make but bad musick (to the eares of mariners) when playing thereupon. 2Luke 5. 1. Gennesareth 3Iohn 6. 1. Tiberias. cities of note in our Saviours time flourishing thereon. 4Mat. 15. 29. Galilee, the countrey which almost on all sides surrounded it. Small vessels sometimes termedLuke. 5. 2.  Ships, sometimes , Make 3. 9. Boates or Barges, went to and again in this sea, Gally-likeLuke 8. 23. sailing or Mark 6. 48. rowing (or perchance both) as they saw their advantage. They were little of strength, (because no Pirates to molest them) and not great of burthen, not comparable to the ship wherein Saint Paul sailed on the Mediterranean Sea, carrying twoActs 27. 37. hundred threescore and sixteen souls, which for the greatness thereof might be Admirall of all the Navy in the new Testament. The river of Iordan runneth through the midst of this Sea, and mingleth not therewith, but preserveth his own stream intire: which some impute to the swiftness, yea rapidness of his course, not at leasure to take notice of (much less to unite with) any water he meets in the way, before he come to his journeys end at the dead Sea. § 5. This was the onely and all the seas,Why our Savi∣our traversed sea as well as land. that ever our Saviour sailed upon. It is reported of wise Cato, that he repented he ever went thither by Sea, whither he might have gone by land. But see here Wisdome it self (who by going about might have passed to any place on the other side of the Sea) preferred the use of a ship, not to spare his own pains, (whereof none more liberall) but to 1 Shew natures intent of the Sea, made as well to be sailed, as the ground to be gone upon. 2 Take occasion to manifest his Deity in working of miracles thereon. 3 Comfort seafaring-men in their distresses, praying to such a Sa∣viour as had an exprerimentall knowledge of the danger on both elements. And here, amongst the many voyages of our Saviour (who often crossed the length and breadth of this sea-lake) let us take account of some most remarkable. And first in generall we may observe, that after the working of some extraordinary miracle, (which might have great influence on peoples affections) as the feeding of so many thousands, Christ presently put to sea (clouding himself in obscurity) and shun∣ning popularity so far, that it should venture a drowning, if offering to follow after him. § 6. The first voyage we will insist on,Christs first voyage. was when our Saviour sailed in SimonsLuke 5. 7. ship, who formerly had fished all night, getting nothing save a drowzie head and empty hands, untill casting his net at Christs
command, he caught such store of fish, both his and his partners ship began to sink. O when will any earthly thing fall out even to our de∣sires! We always finde fish, either none at all, or too many; and a sur∣feit of wealth is as dangerous as a famine thereof. The fish were now ready to return into the water from whence they came, and not by their wit, but weight had caught their fishermen, had not Christ by miracle brought all safe to shore. § 7. A second when the Disciples put to sea at the command,The second voyage saves Peter. but without the person of their Master. Tossed they were on the waves, rowing with great pains to little purpose, for the wind was contrary, till looking at lastMt. 14. 24. they see Iesus walking on the water; Then were the words of the Psalmist literally true,Psal. 77. 19. Thy way is in the Sea, and thy path in the great waters, and thy footsteps are not known. The Disciples unable to con∣ceive such a mystery conclude it was a Ghost. It is not worth our en∣quiry, what Ghost, or whence, good or evill, of man or devill, this wild guess being the effect of their fright, then which no more professed foe to a cleare judgment. Christ quickly discovering himself, Peter requests a commission to meet him: which granted, he walks for a while on the water, till his Faith first, then feet failing him, he began to answer the name of Cephas, proving himself a stone, not by the stability, but the heaviness thereof, and began to sink, till Christ saved him. Nor was Christ sooner in the ship, but the ship wasIohn 6. 21. at the land. Thus those many strokes at the oares which the Disciples had taken before, were not meerly lost, but onely laid up, and now restored them in their speedy arrivall. Yea the sails of the ship were not now on the mast, but in the keel thereof, Christs person did the deed. Thus projects driven on without Gods gracious presence are but driven on, whilest such designes fly to their wished end, which take God along with them. § 8. The third and last voyage we will insist on,The third voyage when Christ was fast a sleep. was when the ship was not upon but under the sea,Mat. 8. 24. covered with the waves. Yea, it was now full ofMark. 4. 3. 7. water, and the Disciples of fear, whilest Christ him self was fast a∣sleep, having a pillow under his head, and a softer under his heart, a clear conscience. See we here our Saviour a perfect, because an imperfect Man, his infirmities speake the reality of his humanity. Working had made him weary, weariness had caused him to sleep much out of a de∣sire to be refreshed, more out of a designe to be awaked. Here all cry out, Master save us, we perish. Danger will make the profane to pray, the wil∣full-dumbe to speak, who will finde a tongue, rather then lose a life. No doubt Iudas himselfe, who afterwards sold him, was now as clamorous as any to be saved by him. Christ awakes, and rebukes first the DisciplesMar. 4. 39, 40. for being too fearfull, and despairing, then the winds and waves, for being too bold and presumptuous. Both obey, owning their Creatours voice; as well may his words, who made them at first, make them now to be quiet.
§ 9. Many more were the voiages our Saviour made on the Sea,Why Christ never sailed af∣ter his resur∣ection. as when after the feeding of so many thousands, they had but oneMar. 8. 14. loafe in the ship, and on our Saviours caveat of the leaven of the Pharisees, their jealousies grew solicitous for food. Had they not besides that one loafe in their Cup-board, twelve moe in their memory (five at one batch, and seven at another) on the recollection whereof their mindes might feed, to depend on providence, especially whilest the founder of the feast was in their company. But we who condemne them, are too likely to commit the like distrust, if left to our selves, upon less occasion. To return to our Saviour, it is observable that after his resurrection, we read not that he sailed any more upon the Seas. For such a fluctuating and turbulent condition, which necessarily attends sea-voyages, was utterly inconsistent with the constancy, stability, and perpetuity of Christs estate when risen from the grave. The firme land therefore better agreeing with his fixed and immoveable happiness, thereon he stood, and onely gave the word of command to his disciples at Sea, on which side they should cast forth their net, when they caught soIohn 21 4. many fishes. And so much for the Sea of Tiberias, hoping that if the weakly reader be sea-sick by staying so long on the water, he will instantly be well upon our arrivall on the main land, to which now we proceed. § 10. As this Tribe did overflow in sea conveniences;The method of the future description. so it fell not short in the commodities of the land. The countrey thereof was ena∣melled with pleasant rivers, whose bankes were adorned with fair Ci∣ties. We will follow the chanells of those rivers, which will direct us to the most considerable places in Zebulun; beginning with little Iordan. Indeed so little, that there is no mention thereof at all in Scripture, and little in other Authors,Vid. Tabulam Ter. Sanc. Mercator being one of the first in my observation that takes notice thereof. It ariseth in the south part of the vale of Iephtael, and running full east is augmented from the south with the tribute of another brook, fetching his course by Naza∣reth an eminent place, and famous in the new Testament. § 11. NazarethLuke 4. 29. was seated on the brow of an hill, in the very center of this Tribe:The situation and denomina∣tion of Naza∣reth. so called (as SaintTom. 1. epi. 17. ad Marcellam. Hierom will have it) from a flower which it signifieth in Hebrew, because Christ, that PrimeCant. 2. 1. Rose and Lily, had here his conception. For though he saw his first light at Beth∣lehem, he sucked his first breath in Nazareth, where his mother lived till very near the time of her delivery. Also here he afterwards had his poor and painfull education, working on his Fathers trade (as it is probable from the words of the Evangelist,Mar. 6. 3. Is not this the Carpenter?) though who would not have rather looked for a Scepter, then an Axe in his hand, who was born King of the Iews? § 12. His short and secret abode at Bethlehem,A Vulgar error. long and publique living at Nazareth, gave the ground to the then vulgar errour, that he was born in this place. To foment this popular mistake, and disguise the
truth of Christs nativity (so to leave the Iews at the greater loss concern∣ing their Messiah) the devills (who knew full well that he was Iesus of Bethlehem by birth) publiquely called him IesusLuke 4. 34. of Nazareth, the re∣putation of that place running so low in common account, thatIohn 1. 46. no good could thence be expected. This nickname of Nazareth, first publick∣ly fastened (as some conceive) by Satan on our Saviour, stuck by him all his life, yea at his death, (fixed by Pilate in his title onIohn 19. 19. the Cross) yea after his ascension, so that such as believed on him, and embraced his doctrine, were opprobriously termed, the sect of theAct. 24. 5. Nazarens. § 13. Here also some (otherwise good and learned) men,Christ no ce∣remonious Na∣zarite. are guilty of another mistake, in making Christ one of the Legall Nazarites (whence groweth the length of his hair in most pictures) who by ver∣tue of theirNumb 6. 2. vow were tied to many ceremonious observances. Whereas our Saviour frequentlyMat. 11. 19. drank wine, familiarly touched the dead & took Luke 8. 54. them by their hands, (and probably therefore a Rasor touched his head) both the former being expresly forbidden the Mosaicall Nazarites, during the days of their separation. Yet how our Saviour is tearmed a NazarenMat. 2. 23. in reference, it may seem, amongst others, to that Prophecy,Isay 11. 1. And there shall come out a Rod out of the stem of Iesse, and a branch [] shall grow out of his roots, we leave to the learned Commentators on that Text. § 14. During our Saviours living at Nazareth after he entered into the Ministery,The first fruits of Christs prea∣ching in Naza∣reth. he bestowed a Sermon on this place of his education, and having found out his textLuke 4. 20., Isa. 61. 1. 1 He closed his book. Not in any vaine ostentation of his memory; but because either his Auditours were so well versed in the letter of the Scripture, that they could tell by heart any quotation he should cite therein: or rather, because out of his fulness of divine knowledge and wisedome, himself had no more need of it; and he would thereby fasten the more their eares, and his tongue to that one text which was of so maine concernment and importance unto them. 2 And he gave it againe to the Minister. Of him he received, to him he restored it, and coming in Reader by his leave, he would not undermine the Incumbent, of the place, but honoured him in the presence of his people. Hereby also he might haply shew that Ministers are to keep Gods word, not as hucksters in gross, but as Stewards to dispense it. 3 And sat down. Professor-like, to shew his authority, and the steadiness of his doctrine. In England the Pastour onely stands, whilest the people sit; yet we envy not their ease, nor begrudge our own paines; any posture shall please us, which may pro∣fit them. 4 And the eyes of all were fastened on him, (advantaged likely thereun∣to by the round and pillar-less structure of their Synagogue)
not sleeping there, nor gazing about, nor reading, an action (like Achitophel his2 Sam 17. 7. counsell) good, but not at that time: But thus fixing their eyes to help their attention, and express their longing desire to know how he would interpret that famous place of Scripture; as also for the fame that they had heard of him, who without study and ordinary meanes became so incomparable a TeacherJohn 7. 15.. And yet curi∣osity as much as true devotion may seem to cause this their attention; seeing they who out of novelty were ready to eate his words, soon after out of cruelty were more ready to devoure the speaker, contemning him for the poverty of his parentage, person and kindred, and hating him for the truth he delivered, that a Prophet is not without honour but in his own Countrey. § 15. How this comes to pass,Why Prophets without ho∣nour in their own countrey. let others largely dispute. We may in briefe conclude, it is partly because their cradles can be remembred, and those swadling-cloathes, once used about them, to strengthen them whilest infants, are afterwards abused against them, to disgrace them when men, and all the passages of their childhood repeated to their disparagement. Partly because all the faults of their family (which must be many in a numerous alliance) are charged on the Prophets account. Wherefore that Prophet who comes at the first in full growth from a far forein place (not improving himselfe amongst them from a small spark, to a fire, to a flame; but sunlike arising in perfect lustre) gaines the greatest reputation amongst people: Because in some respect he is like Melchisedek,Heb. 7. 3. without Father, without Mother, without de∣scent, whilst the admiring vulgar, transported with his preaching, and ignorant of his extraction on earth, will charitably presume his Pede∣gree from heaven, and his breeding, as calling, to be divine. § 16. The cruell Nazarites brought Christ to the brow of the hill,The murdering intents of the Nazarites de∣feated. with full intent to cast him down headlong. All in vaine. For Christs death was to come a clean contrary way, not by throwing him down, but byIohn 3. 14. lifting him up. And he passing thorow the midst of them went his way. Not that (as theSee them on the place. Rhemists interpret it, to make way for their transubstanti∣ation) he penetrated contrary to the nature of a body, thorow the ve∣ry breasts of the people, but that either he smote them with blindness, that they did not see, or else struck them with fear, that they dared not to stay him, the power of his Person wedge-like cleaving its way, and forcing a lane for his passage in the midst of the people. § 17. Expect not here hat I should write any thing of the opinions of the hereticall Nazarenes,The travels of the chappell of Lauretto. taking their name from this City of Naza∣reth, and are commonly (but corruptly) called Nostranes at this day. Much less will I trouble my self and the reader, with the severall stages of the Chappel of the Angelical-salutation. A Chappell which well may pity the pains and perils of such pilgrims as repair thereunto, having it self had an experimentall knowledge how tedious travail is
in its own often removealls: flitting first fromSee Trelli∣nus his historia Larettana. Nazareth to Flumen a City in Illyrium, thence for the unworthiness of the inhabitants transla∣ted to a wood in the Picene field, and thence again (because the wood was infected with theeves) carried by Angels into the ground of two brethren, who falling out about parting the profit thereof, was the fourth and last time conveyed into the high way, where ever since (not because weary but welcome) it is pleased to make its abode. But I remember the precept of the Apostle,1 Tim. 1. 4. nor give heed to fables; and there∣fore proceed to more profitable matter. § 18. To returne to Nazareth, the nameless rivolet arising near thereunto,Ioseph sold by his brethren. runneth north betwixt Dothan on the east, and Sephoris on the west. At the former Ioseph was conspired against by his brethren. The cause of their hating of him (besides his Fathers loving him) was the reporting what he saw in his sleep, (dreames of his future pre∣ferment) and what he saw waking, (no dreames of his brethrens presentGen. 37. 2. debauchedness) who resolved to murther him. O how they Gen. 42. 21. saw the anguish of his soul, made visible in his bended knees, held up hands, weeping eyes, wailing words, and all to no purpose! Into the pit he is put, whilst his brethrenGen. 37. 25. fall a feasting: oh with what heart could they say grace, either before, or after meat, whilst it was so sad with Ioseph! Stars they say are seen the clearest (even in day time) by those that are in deep pits. Surely divine providence appeared brightest to Ioseph in that condition. Indeedverse 22. Reuben endevoured his restitution to his Father;verse 26. Iudah his preservation from death; but neither being privy to others designe, unwittingly countermined one another, had not God wrought all for the best. Ishmaelitish Merchants, and Midianites in their company, pass by, bearing Spices, and Balm, and myrrh to carry down intoGen. 37. 25. Egypt. To them Ioseph is sold, of whom we take our leave for the present; not doubting in due time and place to meet him a∣gain. Mean time may those merchants be carefull to carry him safe; for among all the spices they were laden with, none more fragrant and precious, then the perfume of this captives innocence. So much for Dothan, onely I will adde that I have placed it here, out of a peace∣able compliance with the judgements of learned men, otherwise I shall not spare to manifest my private opinionSee descripti∣on of Ephraims Tribe. Sephoris the greatest city in Galilee. on just occasion. § 19. On the west of this rivolet, was Sephoris, afterwards called Dio-caesa∣rea; not to be omitted (though not mentioned in Scripture) because ac∣counted byDe bel. Iud. lib. 3. . Iosephus, the greatest City in Galilee, where the Jewish San∣hedrin for some time had its residence. Let the same Authour inform you, how this City was burned by Varus, how molested by the sediti∣ous, how basely it deserted Iosephus, was bravely recovered by him, plundred by his souldiers, and the spoile thereof restored again, with severall passages of high concernment in the Jewish history. A little more northward, this brook falls into Iordan the less, which afterwards payes its tribute to the sea of Galilee.
§ 20. Which sea runneth Southward byJosh. 19. 13. Gittah-hepher, or Gath-hepher as most place it, the birth-place ofThe birth plac of Ionah. 2 King. 14. 25. Ionah the Prophet. His name in Hebrew a Dove, to which he answered rather in his speedyIonah 1. 3. flight from Gods service, then in any want of Gall, whereof he manifested too much in hisIonah. 4. 9. anger without cause or measure. Iona therefore being born here in the heart of neather Galilee, no less untrue, then uncharitable was that assertion of the high Priests and Pharisees;Iohn 7. 52. Search and look, for out of Galilee cometh no Prophet. Except their words herein referred to the future, not to what was passed, and that also onely in relation to the Prophet Paramount, the Messiah of Israel. More south, the sea ran by Magdala a turreted town (as the name thereof imports:) and common tradition is all the argument we have, that Mary surnamed Magdalen that eminent penitent, was so called from this place, because living (o∣thers say richly landed) therein. Into the coastsMat. 15. 39. of Magdala Christ came from sea, when the Pharisees tempted him to shew them a signe from heaven. In the parallel place in the Gospell of Saint Mark the same Countrey is called Dalmanutha;Mar. 8. 10. different names (it seems) for the same territory. § 21. Going forward on the sea side,Bethulia the stage of the tragedy of Ho∣lofernes. still southward, we meet with the influx of a riyolet thereunto, fetching his fountain from the heart of the Countrey, near the City of Bethulia, nigh unto which was acted the atchievments of Iudith against Holofernes. § 22. Form Bethulia the rivolet running full east, is swallowed up in the Galilean Sea, beholding the high seated City of Iotopata,The high sea∣ted city Iot∣pata. some two miles distant from the inlet thereof. The stout defending of this place against the Romans, with no less wisdome, then valour, was the master∣piece of Flavius Iosephus, in the behalfe of his Countrey-men. And now having made necessary mention of his name, pardon a digression in giving a free Character of his writings, whereof, next holy writ, we have made most use in this book. § 23. It must be confessed that he was guilty of some unexcusable faults:The character of Flavius Io∣sephus Iew and Priest, son of Matathias. namely of Boasting immoderately of his own birth, valour, learning, piety. Levity, inserting frivolous fables of the root Boras &c. And yet we will not confine natures power to our beliefe, concluding that impossible which we conceive improbable. Flattery of the Roman Emperours Vespasian and Titus, (a catching disease, wherewith the soundest Authours in that age were infected) and that so gross, that it seems not limn'd with a Pencill, but dawb'd with a Trowell. But all these may be winked at, with a charitable eye, were he not al∣so guilty of falsity: appearing first in his faults ofThough in his Proeme he promiseth, , without adding or di∣minishing any thing. omission, not mention∣ing the Jewish Idolatry, in making the Calfe, nor the disobedience of Moses
their Ministerial Legislator in smiting the Rock, which Moses himself, wri∣ting of himself, thought fitting to relate. Secondly, of Cōmission, stuffing his history with improbable tales of Moses loving the Lady Tarbith &c. and some mistakes contradictory to holy writ. When we meet with any such in him relating to this present work, we have made bold (the Sun is not to be set by dials, but dials by the Sun) to alter and rectifie his extravagancies according to Scripture. Notwithstanding all these faults, the main bulk of his book deserves commendation, if not admiration; no doubt at the first compiled, and since preserved by the speciall provi∣dence of God, to reflect much light and lustre upon the Scriptures. His last book De bello Iudaico is the best Comment on that part of the twenty fourth Chapter of Saint Matthew, which concerns the destruction of the City and Temple. As for the censure of Baronius, it is too harsh and un∣charitable, charging him withIn Apparatu, numero 84. absurda & portentosa mendacia, seeing that it cannot appear, that Iosephus willingly and wittingly made those mistakes. Wherefore such chance-medly amounts not to manslaughter, much less to wilfull murther; not to say, that the charitable Reader ought to be a City of refuge to such Authors, who rather unhappy, then unfaith∣full, fall into unvoluntary errours. In a word, historians, who have no fault are onely fit to write the actions of those Princes and people, who have no miscariages, and onely an Angels pen taken from his own wing is proper to describe the story of the Church triumphant. § 24. We still follow the Sea shore southward,Christs Ser∣mon on this sea. and light on the place where our Saviour standing in a ship taught the people on the land in hisMat. 13. 2. Sermon full of parables. A Sermon not unlike the pillar of cloud and fire, which gave light to the Israelites at the red sea,Exod. 14. 19, 20. but was a cloud of darkness to the Egyptians: because his preaching then obscure and parabolicall to the common people, was privately expounded, and made plain unto his disciples. § 25. At last we are come to the City of Tiberias,Tiberias, nigh to which Christ multi∣plied the loaves. so named by Herod the Tetrarch in honour of Tiberius the Roman Emperour. A populous City, and which gave the name to the neighbouring sea, thence termed Iohn 21. 1. the sea of Tiberias. Near to this placeIoh. 6. 22, 23. Christ fed five thousand men with five loaves and two fishes. Afterwards he went over the sea, but how and which way, grudge not Reader to peruse this following ac∣count given us b aM Biddulph in his Trav. p. 104. M. Biddulphs eye-comment on our Savi∣ours sea-voiage. learned man, an eye-witness of the place. § 26. It is said Iohn 6. 1. that Iesus went over the sea of Galilee: and in a∣nother place that he went beyond the lake: and Luke 9. 10. it is said that he went into a solitary place near unto a City called Bethsaida; which place of Iohn I lear∣ned to understand better by seeing it, then ever I could before by reading it. For seeing that Tiberias and Bethsaida, were both Cities on the same side of the sea, and Christ went from Tiberias to or near unto Bethsaida: I gather thereby that our Saviour Christ went not over the length or breadth of that sea, but over some arme, bosome, or reach thereof, viz. so far as Tiberias was distant from Bethsaida, which
is also confirmed in that it is said elsewhere,M. 6. 33. a great multitude followed him on foot thither; which they could not have done, if he had gone quite over the sea, to the o∣ther side among the Gergesens. So far our author, with whose judgement I am moved to concurre. § 27. More southward,The ancient ri∣ver of Kshon. the sea of Tiberias leaveth the Tribe of Ze∣bulun, and entereth into Issachar. Come we therefore now to describe the remaining places of note in this Tribe, most of them being seated on, or near the river of Kishon, whose course we will observe. It is called byJudg. 5. 21. Deborah, the ancient river the river Kishon. And why ancient? are not all rivers of equall antiquity, and the same seniority, seeing Gen. 1. (the Register book of the age of all creatures) they were made in the third day, when this lower globe was distinguished into earth and waterGen. 1. 9.? No surely, though this be true of originall and primitive rivers, many since have been of a second edition, occasioned by Noahs flood, earth∣quakes, eruptions of waters after long raine; not to speake of many others derived by art and industry. Thus we discourse with our selves whilestVid. eum in lo∣cum. Tremellius takes away the subject of the question rendering , or the Ancient river, torrens occursuum, or the river of meetings. Not that many tributary rivolets met therein (a probable sense on the first sound) but (as heAd quem utri∣que exccitus concurentes ma∣nu conseruer unt: Trm. ibid. The 2 streams of Kishon run∣ning into seve∣rall seas. expounds himself) because the armie of Israel there a∣gainst Sisera appeared in their generall Rendezvous. § 28. However, Kishon was a fair River, and surely the same which is termed by Ptolemy Choriaeus. Entering with a full and large streame (next to Iordan in breadth, depth, and swiftnesse) into the land of Zebulun, it divideth it self according to the observation of ourBeiden bachi∣us in ter. Sacr. Author (if not hypercriticall herein) into two channels, the one, and that the lesser, running east (commonly called Kadumim) and falleth into the sea of Galilee, the other rushing northwestward, and emptieth it self into the Mediterranean. Nigh the banks of the former stands the famous mountain of Tabor, generally conceived to have been the place of Christs transfiguration, whereMat. 17. 1. Mark 9. 2. Luke 9. 30. Moses and Elias were seen talking with him. Origen (according to his allegorising of the text) saith that thereby was signified, the harmony betwixt the Law, the Prophets, and the Gospell, all agreeing together. But here I cannot but smile at whatIn his decrip∣tion of Palestin which is neither divided into laves, pges, columns, nor chapters. Breidenbachius reports (who travelled up this mountain) Ibi etiam hodie ostenduntur ruinae trium tabernaculorum secundum desiderium Petri constru∣ctorum, there (saith he) even at this day, are shewed the ruines of those three ta∣bernacles built according to Peters desire. In very good time no doubt. I con∣fess one Scripture saith, Aske and yee shall haveMt. 7. 7., but another Text answer∣eth it, Yee aske andIam. 4. 3. because yee aske amiss; and improbable it is, that God would grant the desire (or rather distempter) of Peter; and that his wish should come to him, who was not come to himself, by reason of his great fear, amazement, and extasie of joy. Besides, Ta∣bernacles or Tents, being light, slight occasionall structures, make small
visible impressions in the earth, when set up; and leave no durable footsteps to be seen so many hundred years after. So that herein, Breiden∣ach seemeth to speak (as S. Peter did in the same place) notLuke 9. 33. knowing what he said. More likely it is, that there may at this day remain some ruines of Oratories erected many years since, seeing there was there a Monastery inhabited by Friers, untill they being molested by the Arabians (to use myBiddulphs Trav. p. 101. Authors expression) took their holinesse away with them, and left the mountain behind them. § 29. The greatest stream of Kishon runneth northward thorow the midst of this Tribe,The city Naim & Judge Elons sepulcher. not far from the City of Naim, where Christ meeting the widowes onely Child, carried forth to be buried, miraculously re∣stored him toLuke 7. 11. life. Hereabouts also was the City Aijalon, whereJudg. 12. 12. Elon Judge of Israel was buried, of whom nothing else is recorded save his name, time of his rule, ten years, and place of his interment. Slight him not because so little is reported of him, it tending much to the praise of his Policy in preventing forein invasions, and domestick commotions, so that the land enjoyed peace; as far better then victory, as health is to be preferred before a recovery from sickness. Yea times of much doing, are times of much suffering, and many martiall achievements are rather for the Princes honour, then the peoples ease. § 30. From Naim the river Kishon glides by the northern skirts of mount Carmel,The place where Baals prest were slain by Eliah. beholding the place where Eliah did execution on Baals Priests, on this occasion. All Israel met on mount Carmel, concluding him the true God, who answered by fire unto their sacrifices. Baals Priests being vainly clamorous in invoking their Idol, whose petitions finde no answer from heaven, except the echo in the aire descanting in derision on their importunate bawlings; discontented hereat they1 King. 18. 28. cut themselves with knives and lancers, the ready way to make bloud, but not fire to come. Then enters Eliah on his work, and to prevent all suspi∣cion of fraud, he three times caused four barrels of water to be powred on the Altar. If any here demand how they came by such plenty of water, a precious commodity after three years and six months drought, when springs, wells, and brooks were1 King. 17. 7. dried up: it is answered, it was fetched from the sea hard by, whose brackish water, though useless to quench the thirsts of men and beasts, was proper enough therewithall to trie the present experiment. Hereupon at Eliahs prayers, fire from heaven licked up the water, and consumed the Sacrifice. The Prophet taking advantage of this juncture of time, whilest the people of Israel were possessed with an high opinion of his power and person, King Ahab stood admiring at the miracle, Baals Priests stood dispirited with guilti∣ness and wonder, and Iazebel their active Patroness absent at great distance, being a single man, slew four hundred and fifty of them with∣out any resistance. Formerly their flattering hands rather acting and doing, did theatrically in superstitious formalities let out some drops of
wild bloud in the surface of their flesh, whereas now Eliah in true ear∣nest, with an unpartial arme, gave vent to their heart bloud by the brook Kishon, which presently carrieth both their gore, and its own water in∣to the Mediterranean Sea. § 31. However though Satan then was silent,The God Car∣melus. (when in credit most con∣cerned to speak in answer to Baals Priests) it seems he found his tongue afterwards, and here pretended to informe people of their fortune. Sue∣tonius tells usIn Vspsiano cap. 5. that Vespasian in Iudea took counsell from the oracle of the God CARMELUS, wch foretold his good success in whatsoever he should undertake, which God we conceive was some Spirit of delusion, (thogh then speaking truly) having his residence in or nigh this mountain of Carmel. § 32. As for Carmel in generall,The pleasure of Carmel. it was so delicious a place▪ that more pleasure was hardly to be fancied, then here to be found. It consisted of high hills, (where the wicked thought in vain byAmos 9. 3. hiding themselves in the height thereof, to be secured from divine justice) a fruitfull vale, plea∣sant river of Kishom, and a goodly forrest, so that the feet of Sennacherib did itch to2 King. 19 32. enter it, as his fingers did long to fell the fair Cedars in Lebanon. From this Carmel, the platform of pleasure, other delightfull places are so named (as copies and transcripts of this the originall) yea the name is sometimesIbid in the marginall note. rendered appellatively for any fruitfull field. § 33. From the top hereof we may easily discover two neighbour∣ing townes Cain andVde abulas Adrichomii. Caiaphas,Cain, Caiaphas, , &c. the one named from the murderer of Gen. 4. 8. Abel; the other from theJoh. 11. 49. active contriver of his death,Heb. 12. 2. whose bloud speaketh better things then that of Abel. But neither appearing in Scripture, it is enough to name them. More northerly we behold the valley of Iiphthah-el, or river thereof, the same word in Hebrew expressing both, as indeed it is hard to finde a vale, especially in winter, without a rivo∣let therein. And if I mistake not, the BOURNE in Wilt-shire, and the west, signifieth both the river and the dale down which it runneth. In the vale nigh the river of Iiphthah-el stood the city Zebulun, so beautifully built, saithDe bel. Id. li. 2, cap. 32. Iosephus, (let him forfeit his fingers when he measures any thing to loss which concerns his own countrey) that Cestius the Roman Governour who burnt it, admired the houses therein as corrivalls with those of Tyre, Zidon, and Berytus in magnificence. More southward is Cana called commonly the lesse, though greatened with Christs first mi∣racle wrought there at a mariage, turningIohn 2. 1. water into wine. How many matches have been made, to which Christ was never invited guest; yea the riot and revels thereat, would fright his gracious pre∣sence from the place. Hence the rivoletIosh. 19. 11. runneth to Iokneam, surnamed Iosh. 12. 22. of Carmel from the vicinity thereof; the King whereof was destroyed by Ioshua, and the City afterwards bestowed upon theIosh. 21. 34. Levites. § 34. Having mentioned the Levite-cities,A chrlish difficulty an importunate diffi∣culty (whilest I hoped silently to slip by it) plucketh me back in my passage: It resulteth from the ensuing parallel.
Joshua 21. 34, 35. And unto the families of the children of Mrri, the rest of the Levites, out of the Tribe of Zebulun, Jokneam with her suburbs, and Kartah with her suburbs, Dimnah with her suburbs, Nahalol with her suburbs: four cities.1 Chron. 6. 77. Vnto the rest of the children of Merari, was given out of the Tribe of Zebulun, Rimmon with her sub∣urbs, Tabor with her suburbs. The difficulty is double: first four Cities are mentioned in Ioshua, and but two in Chronicles. Secondly, those two fall out by their different names, nothing like the four formerly assigned them. § 35. In solution hereof,Rather waved then stisfied. some will say that the Levites might have six cities in Zebulun. But why should this tribe being not the biggest be most bountifull unto them? Was it because Zebuluns lot advantaged by the sea-situation thereof, was larger in worth then in view; and so the Merchant adventurers of this tribe, making gainfull voyages and pro∣fitable returnes, were obliged in conscience to be more liberall to the maintenance of Gods Ministers? Or are two of the Levites cities left out in Chronicles (omission in such cases for reasons to us unknown is no contradiction) and the otherTostatus, & Tremllius in locum Chroni∣oum, who maketh Dim∣nah the same with Rimmon, Tabo with Nahalol. two the same (though unlike in sound) with the two last mentioned in Ioshua. Indeed I deny not, but the towns at the same time may have two names nothing alike, (Medena, aliàs Newport, in the Isle of Wight may be an instance thereof.) But for all I can finde, still I languish in expectation of a better solution. Yet let not his good will be slighted, who though unable to cure the wound; (whilest Commentatours on the place suffer it to lie festering in silence) desires to wash it and keep it clean, till a more skilfull hand apply an effectuall plaister thereunto. § 36. In Solomons division of the land into twelve purveyour-ships,The armes of Zbulun. Zebulun had no distinct officer over him, but belonged to the territory of Baanah the Son of Ahilud; who, besides many places he had in Ma∣nasseh, extended his Jurisdiction1 King. 4. 12. even beyond Iokneam. The Armes of Zebulun, confirmed unto him by custome, and Rabbinicall tradition, were Argent, a ship with Maste and tackling sable. An honourable Bearing, the same with the Coate armour of Albertus free Baron of Alasco in Poland, ave that his ship is without sailes, (with this Motto, Deus dabit vela, God will send sailes) and Zebuluns accomplished with all the accoutrements thereof. Here the Map of Issachar is to be inserted.
THE TRIBE OF ISSACHAR. CHAP. 7. § 1. ISsachar,Issachars num∣bers and em∣nent persons. the fiftGen. 30. 17. Son which Iacob begat on Leah his wife, had his posterity so increa∣sed in Egypt, that from thence came forth of this Tribe fiftyNumb. 1. 29. four thousand and four hun∣dred. All which falling in the wilderness, for their frequent tempting of God, their Sons grew (Iudah and Dan excepted) more numerous then any other Tribe, inso∣much that sixty fourNum. 26. 25. thousand and three hundred, of twenty years old and upward, appeared at their second solemn muster in the plaines of Moab. Tolah the Judge was of this Tribe; Baasha and Elah Kings of Israel1 King. 15. 27 fair Abishag the Shunamite, wife (or1 King. 1. 4. rather bed-fellow) to aged David; with another Lady (if in beauty, not in goodness her inferiour) of the same city, who so kindly entertained the Prophet Elisha. § 2. Issachar had the seaDeut. 33. 18, 19. on the west, Iordan on theJosh. 19. 2. east;His bounds & fruitfulnesse. Zebulun on the north, Manasseh on the south. A fair fruitfull countrey; for, as all Canaan is called the pleasantPsal. 106. 24. land: so it is particularly observed of Issa∣chars portion, he saw the landGen. 49. 15. that it was pleasant, and bowed his shoulder to bear, and became a servant unto tribute. This Tribe better acquitted it self in the Subsidie, then in the Muster-book, they were the best Yeomantry of Israel, towards the advancing of raes and taxes. They loved rest, and a seden∣tary life. Blame them not, if sensible of the goodness of their soile, they were loath to leave home, because certain to remove to their loss, and are compared to anGen. 49. 14. Asse couching between two burthens. § 3. Yet were not the men of Issachar of such servile natures,Not defective in valour. but that they could be valiant, when just occasion was offered them. They were as willing, and resolute as any other, inJudg. 5. 15. helping Barak in the battell a∣gainst Sisera. Yet even then we may observe, they marched not far from their own habitations, the field being fought in the bowells of their
countrey. And well might his Asse, finde both heels and teeth, to kick and bite such, as offer to take his Hay from his rack and Provender a| way from his manger. § 4. Nor let the resembling of Issachar to an Asse;Excelling in Chronology. depress this Tribe too low in our estimation. The strength of his back, not stupidity of his head, gave the occasion thereunto  in one point of excellent skill, this Tribe surpassed all others, being men that had understanding of the times,1 Chr. 12. 32. to know what Israel ought to doe. Now seeing time Ianus-like hath two faces, one looking backward [Chronology] the other forward [Prog∣nostication] the question will be, in which of these lay the learning of the Issacharites? A learned manRivt Exer. in 49. Gensios. conceives them onely like husbandmen, weather-wise by their own rurall observations. Sure more is imported in that expression, and not onely Almanack, but Chronicle-skill contained therein; so that from deductions from former, they could make di∣rections for the future times. Oh for a little of Issachars art in our age, to make us understand these intricate and perplexed times, and to teach us to know what we ought to doe, to be safe with a good conscience. So much of the persons in this Tribe; come we now to survay the eminent places contained therein. § 5. In the south confines thereof stood the regal city ofJosh. 19. 18. Iezreel.Iezreel a regall City. For though the valley of Iezreel belonged toJosh. 17. 10. Manasseh, the city it self must pertain to Issachar, otherwise the sixteen cities assigned him Iosh. 19. will fall short of that number. In Iezreel Ahab had a Princely Palace (haply the joynter-house of Iezebel) besides a2 King. 9. 27. garden-house adjoining; and here in the city lived Naboth, as hard by lay his vineyard, which Ahab could not obtain from him, either by purchase or King. 21. 3. exchange. § 6. Some will finde more equity in Ahabs offers, then discretion in NabothsNaboths refusall defended. refusall. But, blame him not, if loth to offend his God, to accom∣modate his King. Being (no doubt) in his conscience perswaded that his earthly possession, was the earnest of his heavenly inheritance, and that his parting with the former, voided his title to the latter. Besides, his vineyard (six hundred years since the partition of the land by lot) had pertained to his ancestours (probably) moe ages, then Ahabs new erected palace had belonged years to his family. § 7. On the denyall Ahab falls sullen-sick. No meat will down with him for lack of a salad, because wanting NabothsIezebels murde∣ring of Naboth. vineyard for a garden of herbes, till Iezebel undertook the business. A letter is made up of her braines, her husbands hand and seal to the Elders of Iezreel, enjoining them to set up two1 King. 21. 10 men of Belial, to accuse Naboth of blasphemy a∣gainst God, and the King. She took it for granted, plenty of such per∣sons were to be found in so populous, and vicious a place. Oh the an∣cient order of Knight of the poste, for money to depose any falshood. Hereupon Naboth is stoned to death, and his2 King. 9. 26. Sons also, flatly contrary to Gods command, which in this case had provided, TheDeut. 24. 16. children shall not
be put to death for their fathers, but every man shall be put to death for his own sin. But this was don, to clear all claimes, and prevent all pretenders of ti∣les unto the inheritance. § 8. Thu Naboths vineyard was for Ahabs use turned into a garden of erbes.Divine justce. Surely the bitter wormwood of Divine revenge grew plenti∣lly theren. Fo in the same place his Son Ioram, and gran-child Aha∣zah had a martiall interview with Iehu, and were both worsted by him. Here Iehu with a shot out of a bow (archery fatall both to1 King. 22. 34. Ahab and his Son) wounded Iehoram to the2 King. 9. 24 heart, and by speciall order to Bidkar Captain, commanded that his corps should be cast into the field of Naboth the Iezrlite. Oh the exact Topography observed in divine justice! so accurate is God, not onely in the time, but place of his punishment. § 9. Greater is the difficulty about the death of King Ahaziah slain about the same time.Abaziahs double death reconci∣led. For, whereas it isHeb. 9. 27. appointed for all men once, he seem∣ed twice to die, and that in far distant places. 2 Kings 9. 27. But when Ahaziah the King of Iudah saw this, he fled by the way of the Garden∣house, and Iehu followed after him, and said, Smite him also in the charet [and they did so] at the going up to Gur, which is by I∣bleam: and he fled to Megiddo, and died there. 2 Chron. 22. 9. And Iehu sought Ahaziah, and they caught him (for hee was hid in Samaria) and brought him to Iehu, and when they had slain him, they buried him: because said they, he is the Sonne of Iehosaphat, who sought the Lord with all his heart. But all is reconciled, if we take Samaria, not for the city so named, but for the whole kingdome of Israel, in which notion Ahab is styled King of 1 King 21. 1. Samaria, that is, the ten Tribes, whereof Samaria was the Metropolis. In this acception, Megiddo, and all the passage thereunto was in Samaria, where Ahaziah hoped in vaine, by his flight to hide, and conceale himself. § 10. All thus agreed concerning the deah,And his doubl riall. I hope no difference will arise about the buriall of Ahaziah. Though in one tex his2 King. 9. 28. ow servants, in another Iehu2 Chr. 22. 9▪ his men are said to buy him. The one might doe it by the leave and licence of the other, and Iehu his souldiers did deliver Aha∣ziah's ded corps to his own servants, to interre it in Ierusalem. § 11. Iezebel survived not long after.The manner of lezebels death. As Iehu was entering Iezreel, she (newly painted) entertains him with a taunt out of the window, to try whether her tongue, or his sword were the sharper. We meet but with three principall speeches of her in Scripture; the first an Idola∣trous oath and curse, The1 King. 19. 2▪ Gods doe so to me, and more also: the next, a mor∣tall threat, and lowd lye, If I make not Elijah's, likeIbidem. one of their lives by to mor∣row this time: the last an impudent and unseasonable jeer, Had Zimri 2 King. 9. 31. peace that slew his Master? Presently she is thrown down headlong, and the dogs eat her up to the eversion of herIbid. vers. 35. skull, palmes of her hands, and feet. What, hd the poison of her painting,  deeply pierced into these the nakedFeet, in thos parts, naked i andal. parts of her body, that the dogs were afraid to feed o them?
However it came to pass, Iezebels skull may be worn as a deaths-head in the memories of all wicked persons, abusing their power, to minde them of their certain ruin, without serious repentance. The heads also of Ahabs children kill'd in Samaria, were laid in two heapes at the en∣trance of the gates of2 King. 10. 8. Iezreel. § 12. It may seem strange,The bloud of Iezebel why re∣qured of Iehu. that seeing Iehu was warranted by com∣mission from heaven, in the execution of Ahabs family, and friends, that God should afterwards threaten by his Prophet, I willHose. 1. 4. avenge the bloud of Iezreel upon the house of Iehu. But it seems, though herein Iehu his chariot went in the path of Gods command, yet he did drive it on furiously, the pace of his own cruelty, vainglory, and ambition. Thus, that officer is a murderer, though acting the sentence of the Judge, if withall he plea∣seth his private malice, in executing persons condemned to die. The matter of Iehu his act was rewarded, the manner revenged by God. § 13. The river Kishon runneth through the midst of this Tribe,The brave bat∣tell against . which entring in at Naboths vineyard, taketh his course north-ward with a winding channell, not far from Shamir in mount Ephraim, wherein Tola the Iudge, or rather, the Iustice of peace in Israel (nothing of war being achieved in his government) both dwelt,Iudg. 10. 1, 2. and was buried. Hence on his western bank, Kishon beholds the place, where Barak fought that famous battell against Sisera. It is recorded to the commendation of such Israelites,Iudg. 5. 19. as assisted him, that they took no gain of money. Indeed they of Zebulun were by their callingIudg. 5. 14. such as handled the pen, though now tur∣ned sword-men, in case of necessity. And when men of peaceable pro∣fessions, are, on a pinch of extremity for a short time, forced to fight, they ought not, like souldiers of fortune, to make a tradeto enrich themselves thereby, seeing defence of religion, life, and liberty, are the onely wages they seek for in their service. § 14. In this most eminent battell,Sars wacurs the Stars in their courses fought a∣gainst Sisera. What, are the numerous people of Israel meant thereby, whom GodGen. 15. 5. & 22. 17. promised to multiply as the Stars in heaven? or, are onely the principall officers in their Army intended therein? Sure, it is safest to embrace the literall sense, that those celestiall lights, frowning with their malignant aspects, caused frights and fears in the hearts of the Canaanites. Such, as utterly deny all influences of Stars on mens mindes, shew therein, that the moon hath made too much impression on their crazy judgements, and lunatick opinions. § 15. But, the river of KishonKishon Gods besome. was not onely a spectatour of this fight, but also an actour of a principall part therein: For, when the Canaanites routed in the battell, essayed to wade this river, so to recover their coun∣trey on the other side, the streame thereof, probably lately made more deep, and rapid with extraordinary raine (the largess of some wary Planet which fought for Israel)Iudg. 5. 21. swept them away. So that what fragments of these Canaanites, were left by the Israelites swords glutted with slaughter, Kishon was the voider to take them clean away.
§ 16. Hence KishonKishon and En∣gaim. runneth on by Kishion (the vicinity of the name is argument enough, to place it on the banks of this river) elsewhere 1 Chron. 6. called Kedesh, being one of the four cities in this Tribe, belonging to the LevitesJosh. 21 28. Gershonites. More east whereof lay another of the same nature, Engannim, called Ienine at this day, being now a very pleasantBiddulphs ravells. p. 113. place, having fine gardens, orchards, and waters about it, as it hath its Hebrew name from a fountain. And that we may know, that the countrey hereabouts, still retaineth more then the ruines of its former fertility, a judicious Idem ibidem. modern traveller tells us, that in his whole journey from Damascus to Ierusalem, he saw not more fruitfull ground, and so much together, then he did in two and twenty miles riding, betwixt mount Tabor and En∣gannim. § 17. Hence Kishon continuing his course northward,Shnem A∣bishags birth∣plach. leaveth the ci∣ty Iosh. 19. 18. Shunem at some distance from his western bank, the birth-place of Abishag, wife-nurse to King David, to procure1 King. 1. 3. heat to his decayed age. Time was, when he boasted, that his youth wasPsal. 103. 5. renewed as the eagles, but eagles (notwithstanding the often casting of their bills, and years there∣with) are at last seised on with age, and death, as it fared then with decrepit David. Adonijah, David's Son, afterwards lost his life, for petition∣ing to have this Abishag1 King. 2. 23. for his wife. What was his fault? Incest, or trea∣son? Surely, neither effected, no, nor attempted in any clandestine way, without leave from the King. Let it suffice, Solomon saw more, then we, in this matter; his eies also not wanting the magnifying-glass of State-jealou∣sie, to improve his discoveries herein. But, this accident was onely the hilt or handle, for Solomon to take hold on; Adonijah's former fault was the edge, to cut off his life. Thus, let those, who once have been desperately sick of a Princes displeasure, and recovered, know, that the least relapse will prove deadly unto them. § 18. In Shunem dwelt that worthy woman,Elisha his ho∣nourable landlady. who prevailed with her husband, to harbour Elisha in his passage this way. Gods Prophets are no lumber, but the most profitable stuffe wherewith an house can be furnished. Landlords prove no losers by such Tenants, (though sit∣ting rent-free) whose dwelling with them, pays for their dwelling with them. At Elisha's prayer God made this woman (barren before) the hap∣py mother of an hopefull2 King. 4. 17. Son. Somes years after, this child grown a stripling, and going into his Fathers field to see his reapers, was there smitten with a deadly sickness. So that the corn on the land might pass for the emblem of this childs condition, save that that being ripe, and ready wooed the cycles to cut it, whilst this green grain was mow'n down in the blade thereof. At noon2 King. 4. 20. the child dyed. Had one the same morning beheld the Sun arising out of the east, and this child coming forth of his fathers house in perfect health, he would not have suspected, that the noon of the one would prove the night to the other. But by the prayers of Elisha he was restored again unto her.
§ 19. This Shunamite was afterwards seven years absent,Restored to her lost possession. in the land of the Philistines, during which time, the profits of her estate, as appears by the text,x were seised on by the Kings officers.2 Kin. 8. 1. &c. Custome (it seems) intitled the Crown to their revenues, which resided not on their lands, especially (if living as she did) in the land of a forein foe. She addressed her self by petition to King Ioram, for restitution of her meanes. For∣merly she had no use of the Prophets profer, to2 King. 4. 13. speake for her to the King, or to the Captain of the host, who now was fain to prefer her suit in her own person. None know what hereafter may befall them. Such, whose young feet were onely taught to traverse their own ground, may in their old age be learnt a harder lesson, to trudge abroad in attendance to o∣thers. Gehazi happily there present, attests her the woman whose Son was restored to life, and by the Kings command, her lands and profits were restored to he. Let her, under God, thank Elisha for this favour; for, that place in her house, where his2 King. 4. 10. bed, table, stool, and candlestick stood, kept possession for her in her absence, of all the rest of her Demesnes, and procured the speedy restitution thereof. § 20. To return to Kishon,Tabor a city. which somewhat more northward lea∣veth this Tribe, and entereth into Zebulun, having first divided it self in∣to two streames, whereof the easternmost (being the north-boundary of Issachar) runneth byIosh. 19. 22. Tabor, a city so called, from the vicinity of the mountain we formerly described. Hereabouts ZebaIudg. 8. 18. and Zalmunna, made a massacre of many Princelike Israelites, for which fact Gideon or∣dered their execution. And here we take notice of two neighbouring mountains lovingly agreeing together. 1 Tabor on the north (whereof formerly in Zebulun) of so eminent note, that it passed for a proverbiall expression, of any unquesti∣oned certainty, AsIer. 46. 18. sure as▪ Tabor is among the mountains. This place was in after ages much profaned with Idolatry, as appears by the ProphetHos. 5. 1. complaining of the priests, that they had been a net spred upon Tabor. 2 Hermon, hard by on the south of this Tribe (the top-cliffe whereof is called HermoniumBrocardus in Descrip. Terrae Sanc. Itin. ab Acone versu Eurum. as a modern Traveller doth describe.Psal. 89. 12. David puts them both together, The north and the south thou hast reated them, Tabor and Hermon shall rejoyce in thy name. However others understand the Psalmist of another Hermon, that fa∣mous mountain formerly described in Manasseh beyond Iordan, being the east-border, as Tabor was in the heart of the land of Canaan; meaning thereby, that, middle, and marches; out-side, and in-side; center, and circumference; all the whole world must rejoyce in Gods power which made; and providence, which preserveth them. § 21. This east-stream of Kishon,Daarah and Tarichea. in modern Maps called Kedummim, runneth to Daberah in the confines ofIosh. 19. 12. Zebulun, but belongeth to this Tribe, out of whichIosh. 21. 28. it was assigned a city for the Levites. Then falleth it into the sea of Cinnereth, or Tiberias, somewhat south of Tarichea a fa∣mous city, whereof frequent mention in Iosephus, but none in Scripture, to which we chiefly confine our description. § 22. The east part of Issachar is wholly taken up with the mountains
of Gilboa, where the Armies of the Isralites, and the Philistines met, having formerly measured most part of this Tribe, with their mili∣tary motions. The Philistines marching first from1 Sm. 28. 4. Shunem to1 Sam. 29. 1. A∣phek; thence to1 Sam. 29. 11. Iezreel, (backward and forward to finde an ad∣vantageous place for fight) thence to mount Gilboa, where they encoun∣tred, and conquered the Israelites in battell. Saul being here grie∣vously wounded, desired his Armour-bearer to slay him, who re∣fused it, as bearing his Armes for the defence, not destruction of his Master. Hereupon Saul slew himself, and his Armour-bearer followed his example. Both which, having since cast up their▪ Au∣dit, can tell, what is gotten by the prodigall thrift of throwing away ones life, to prevent the losing thereof. Then a fourfold division was made of what remained of Saul. His1 Sam. 31. 9, 10. head sent into the land of the Philistines; body hung up upon the walls of Bethshean; Ar∣mour offered in the Temple of Ashtaroth;2 Sam. 1. 10. Crown, and bracelets brought by the Amalekite to King David. For though his tongue spake lies, his hands told truth, presenting the very regalia of King Saul. Wonder not, that Saul should weare these ornaments in battell, where an helmet had been more proper then a Crown; seeing we read in our EnglishSpeed in the life of Richard the third to∣wards the end. Chronicles, that in Bosworth-fight King Richards Crown-ornamentall was found among the spoiles in the field, and then, and there set by the Lord Stanley on the head of King Henry the seventh. § 23. David,Rain on mount Gilboa. on this dysaster of Sauls death, cursed Mount Gilboa,2 Sam. 1. 21. Let there be no dew or rain upon you. But,Descrip. Tr. Sanc. ab Acone versus Notum. Brochardus travel∣ling over them Anno Dom. 1283. found, and felt both, be∣ing well wetted in his journey. What! were Davids words guilty of infidelity, seeing it is easier to withhold rain from a mountain, then to remove it from its foundation, and cast it into the sea? and yet our SaviourMat. 17. 20. assures us this shall be done, if in faith desired. But, be it known, David intended not his curse should take effect, but meerly to manifest his great grief, and to shew, how far he was from delighting at the death of his greatest enemy. Better to fall under Davids Dirae, as he was a Poet, then as he was a Pro∣phet, the latter lighting heavily indeed, asAct. 1. 20. Iudas inPsal. 109. 7. Achitophel could witness the weight thereof. Nor remaineth any thing more observable in this Tribe, save in the east part thereof, on Ior∣dan they shew Pilgrims the place where1 King. 5. Naaman (patient at last by his servants perswasion) washed seven times, and was cleansed of his Leprosie. § 24. Thus all the remarkable places of Issachar,Manassh in Issachar. but not all those in Issachar, are already by us described. For, (as the text Iosh. 17. 11. expresly saith) the Tribe of Manasseh had in Issachar, and in Asher, even three Countries; that is, lying in Issachar, and Asher, but en∣vironed
round with those Tribes possessions, yet pertaining to the portion of Manasseh. Let none blame Divine Providence of ill Architecture, for not well contriving the rooms in the house of Israel; the division of the land by lot, not being well designed, wherein Issachars Chamber [his portion] was made a thorough-fare, Manasseh having three closets [three small countreys] within the same. So that neither Tribe could enjoy his own with privacy, and intireness; and Manasseh (if but stepping out of the high-way) must in a manner trespass on Issachar, or crave leave of him, to come, through his, to his own inheritance. But know, all was ordered by theEphes. 1. 11. counsell of Gods will, for reasons best known to himself; who would not have his children Churles, to ingross ha∣bitations by themselves; but, by such mixture of their portions, invi∣ted, yea, ingaged their persons to mutuall intercourse, seeing the very lots of their Tribes gave loving visits, and their Countreys (by Gods own appointment) came so curteously, and confident∣ly, one within another. § 25. But very hard it is to conceive,And how in Asher. how Manasseh could have any land within Asher, which Tribe lay many miles more northward, and beyond the Tribe of Zebulun interposed. The Jewish Rabbins being much perplext at the Pedegree of Azel, why it is twice reckoned up inViz. 1 Chr. 8. 38. & 1 Chr. 9. 44. Chronicles, use to say, that theyOpus est qua∣dringntis came∣lis onustis Com∣mentariis, rati∣onem reddere. Mar. Sutra cited by Buxdors. in Thesauro. sol. 202. need four hundred Camels loaden with Commentaries to give the true reason thereof. But their expression is more appliable to this pre∣sent difficulty, how Manasseh could have any ground in Asher, except (as we have presented it in our Map) some part of Asher lay southward at distance, dis-jointed from the main body of that Tribe, which we have formerly described. Who knows not that pieces of Parishes, parcells of Manors, portions of Coun∣ties, though far off dismembred, relate unto them, notwithstanding the intermediate distance betwixt them? § 26. But let not Issachar, or Asher repine, that Manasseh had so much land in their Countreys, seeing though the right was assigned unto them, the Canaanites for a long time (till about Davids reign) kept all the same in their possession, as will appear by the ensuing parallel. Joshua 17. 11. And Manasseh had in Issachar and Asher, Bethshean, and her towns, and Ibleam, and her towns, and the inhabitants of Dor, and her towns, and the inhabitants of Endor, and her towns, and the inhabitants of Taanch, and her towns, and the inhabitants, of Meggido and her towns, even three Countrys.Judges 1. 27. Neither did Manasseh drive out the inhabitants of Bethshean, and her towns, nor Taanach, and her towns, nor the inhabitants of Dor, and her towns, nor the inhabitants of Ible∣am, and her towns, nor the inhabi∣tants of Megiddo, and her towns: but the Canaanites would dwell in that land.
Of Bethshean more conveniently hereafter. By Ibleam,2 King. 9. 27. Ahaziah was wounded, as was formerly observed. Dor (mentioned for a sea-town in Ptolemy) had the King thereof conqueredIosh. 12. 23. by Ioshua. Endor, whither Sisera's souldiers defeated in fight, not far off atIudg. 5. 19. Taanach, (which alsowas a regall city in the days ofIos. 11. 21. Ioshua, and afterwards belonged to the Le∣vites) fled, were pursued,Psal. 83. 10. perished and became as the dung of the earth. Hi∣ther Saul repaired to a witch, to raise Samuel, and received cold comfort from the dead, or Devill rather, informing him of his future destruction: so that Saul, formerly sick with fear of the worst, lived to hear Satan toll his passing-bell in his sad predictions. § 27. ButIosh. 17. 11. MegiddoMegiddo an eminent city. was the most eminent City Manasseh had in Issachar. The King hereof was destroyed by Ioshua, and many years after Iosiah was slain in the vale of Megiddo, bidding Pharaoh Necho bat∣tell, in his march against Charchemish by Euphrates. Never Prince shew∣ed more devotion in his life, or less discretion in his death, court∣ing that danger which declined him, seeing Pharaoh desired2 Chr. 35. 21. peace∣ably to depart. But haply Iosiah conceived himself ingaged to fight him, in point of 1 Honour; because without leave he had made his land an high way to pass through it. 2 Policy; suspicious, though Pharaoh went forth as a friend, he would returne as a foe, especially if puffed up with success in his expedition. But what shall we say? it was the sin of his subjects would not suf∣fer Iosiah to keep quiet at home. Their impieties made him to march, thrust him into the field, forced him into the fight, yea, shot the fatall arrow, which wounded him at the heart. § 28. Now let none be troubled, because Iosiah (who rather deser∣ved two lives) seems to have two deaths,Iosiah his death recociled. one text making him to die 2 King. 23. 29. at Megiddo, another2 Chr. 35. 24. at Ierusalem. Understand it, death arrested him with a mortall wound at Megiddo, but did not imprison him till he came to Ierusalem, where he expired. Much less let any challenge God, as worse then his word with Iosiah, having promised him by his Prophet 2 King. 22. 20. to be gathered to his Fathers in peace; for besides that that promise princi∣pally related to the captivity of Babylon (from which Iosiah was exemp∣ted) even such may be said to die in peace, which swim to their graves in their own bloud, if withall imbarqued in a good conscience. § 29. All Israel,Generall grief thereat. and principally the Prophet Ieremy, dropped many a precious teare on his hearse, whoseSee the Sep∣ugints preface on the Lamen∣tations. Lamentations are an Elegy on Iosiah's death; yea, their grief was no land-flood of present passion, but a con∣stant channell of continued sorrow, streaming from an annuall foun∣tain, it being made an2 Chr. 35. 25. Ordinance in Israel. The Prophet speaking of a grand, and generall grieving for mens sins,Zech, 12. 11. compareth it to the mour∣ning of Hadadrimmon (conceived to be a place hard by) in the valley of Megiddon.
§ 30. Iehosaphat the son of Paruah was Solomons purvey our in1 King. 4. 17. Issachar,The Armes of Issachar. but the dis-jointed piece of Manasseh in this Tribe pertained partly to Baanah the son of Ahilud (to whom belongeth Taanach; Megiddo, and all Beth∣shan1 Kin. 4. 12.) and partly to Aminada husband to Taphath Solomons daughter, purveyour alone in the land of1 King. 4. 11. Dor. An argument of the great fertility of that little land, because the land of Dor alone, was a signe for a whole moneth in the Zodiack of Solomons yearly provisions. An Asse (formerly observed) argent, in a field vert, was Issachar's Arms, couhing between two Gen. 49. 14. burdens. Some by these understand Zebulun, and Manasseh, which boun∣ded Issachar on both sides. But, why was their neighbourhood more burdensome, then any other Tribes? Such perchance, are nearer the truth, who expound the two burdens, Tri∣bute and Tillage; betwixt which, Issachar, quie∣tly cocuhed, never medling with wars, but when forced thereun∣to in his own defence.
Here the Map of Manasseh on this side Jordan is to be inserted.
THE DESCRIPTION OF MANASSEH on this side IORDAN. CHAP. 8. § 1. MAnasseh his numbers and worthies have formerly been described on the east of Iordan,The remainder of Manasseh. as also such Cities as being environed with Issachar, yet belonged to this Tribe. It remaineth that we survey that portion of Manasseh west of Iordan, lying entire in it self, and having Issachar on the north, Ephraim on the south, the Mediterranean Sea on the west, and Iordan on the east thereof, a fruitfull Countrey divided betwixt Josh. 17. 2. six male-families of the Manassites, and the five daughters of Zelo∣phehad.Zelophhds daughters plea. § 2. These were those Virgins, who pleading beforeNumb. 27. 2. & 36. 12. Moses, got a right to, beforeJosh. 17. 4. Ioshua got possession of their inheritance. Silence was injoined their Sex in the1 Tim. 2. 1. Church, not Court, where they handled their own cause so well, it is pity any Counsell should be retained for them. Nor was it the worst part of their Rhetorick, the good Cha∣racter they gave their dead Father, which might serve for an Epitaph to be inscribed on his monument. Here lieth the man, whoNumb. 23. was not in the company of them who gathered them∣selves together against the Lord in the COMPANY OF KO∣RAH, but died in his OWN SIN. Meaning he died a naturall death for his personall offences, and was no sharer in the guilt of Rebellion against God in Moses. This instance of Zelophehad his coheirs, let Lawyers judge how justly it is alledged of some against their practise, who by entailes on the Heire male, dam up inheri∣tances from running in that generall channell into which God and nature hath derived them.
§ 3. In the west of this Tribe on the sea,Cesarea built by Herod. we meet with Cesarea Stra∣tonis, built and beautified (with a fair haven called Drusus) by Herod the great in the honour of Augustus Cesar. Amongst other edifices there∣in, Act. 23. 35. Herods judgement hall by him built was a most remarkable structure. Indeed all Cesarea might be termed Gods judgement hall, from an exem∣plary piece of justice here executed on Herod Antipas. Who coming hi∣ther from Ierusalem clad with gorgeous raiment, (and the guilt of Saint Act. 12. 2. Iames his bloud) made an eloquent oration, more gaudy then his ap∣parell, unto the people, who cryed out in approbation thereof, The voice of a God, and not of a man: here Herod in stead of rejoining The voice of lying flat∣terers, and not of sober men; in stead of reclaiming what they exclaimed, im∣braced and hug'd their praises as proper to himself, and thereupon anAct. 12. 23. Angell and worms, the best and basest of creatures, met in his punishment, the one smiting, the other eating him up: and no wonder if Worms quickly devoured him, whom those flesh-flies had blown up before. If any aske, seeing the people were equally guilty in that their sacrilegious expression, (yea they were the theeves, He∣rod but the receiver) why fell not the punshment also on the whole multitude? It is answered, First, because they were the whole multitude; and God in such cases mercifully singles out some singall offenders for punishment to save but fright the rest. Secondly, more discretion was expected from a Prince, then from a rabble of people. Lastly, what in them was but a blasphemous complement, was by Herods accep∣tance thereof made in him a reality, usurped by him as due to his deserts. § 4. But leaving profane Herod,Inhabited by pious people. many pious people lived in Cesarea, asAct. 10. 1. Cornelius the Centurion, the first fruits of the Gentiles; Act. 21. 10. Agabus the Prophet, foretelling Saint Pauls bonds and Martyr∣dome; and Philip the Evangelist, famous for his four daughtersAct. 21. 9. Virgins-prophetesses. This I firmely beleeve, whilest my faith de∣murres at what I read of Brechin a Lord inCamdens Brit. in Brecknock∣shire. Wales, who had four and twenty daughters all Saints begotten of his own body. § 5. Here Saint Paul eloquently defended his innocence,Saint Paul his behaviour in Cesarea. against the salable tongue of Tertullus, and afterwards reasoned of righteousness, temperanceAct. 24. 25. and judgement, before Felix the corrupt, vicious and debauched Deputy of Iudea, till Felix, (his foundred feet feeling the Pincers) began to winch and to prefer Saint Pauls room before his company. In the same place the Apostle pleaded for himself before Festus, Agrippa and Ber∣nice hisIoseph. lib. 20. incestuous wife-sister, entering into the place of hearing,Act. 25. 23. , with much fancifulness, or great pompe. Perchance this Bernice ware then about her, that eminent Gem, whereof the Heathen PoetIvenal Sa∣tyr. 6. took especiall notice. —deinde adamas notissimus, & Berenices In digito factus preciosior; hunc dedit olim Barbarus, incestae dedit hunc Agrippa sorori. AndTranslated by Sir Rob. Sta∣pilon. the fam'd diamond the richer show'd On Berenices fingers, this bestow'd The barbarous Agrippa, he to his Incestuous sister once presented this.
But be Bernice never so brave, theAct. 26. 29. bonds of Saint Paul, (worn by him then in Cesarea) were in the Judgement of God, and all good men the most glorious ornament. § 6. South of Cesarea stood Antipatris,The river Kanah. named in the honour of Anti∣pater father to Herod the great. Hiher Saint Paul came guarded in state by night with more thenAct. 23. 23. five hundred souldiers, and hence the foot∣men were sent back to Ierusalem whilest the seventy horse advanced forward with him to Cesarea. South of Antipatris the riverJosh. 17. 9. Kanah (which divideth this Tribe from Ephraim) runneth into the sea, so called from reeds KANAH in Hebrew, (whence our English Canes or walking-staves fetch in both the name and thing from the east Countreys) growing plentifully thereabouts, and many Maps pre∣sent us with a valley of Reeds in this place. Say not this debaseth the land, that so course a commodity should take up a whole valley there∣in, (for besides as London water-men will tell you, an acre of reeds on the bank side is as beneficiall as one of wheat) these Canes were to make arrowes and staves, yea some to make Sugars thereof: an M. Sands in his travels pag eye-witness affirming that plenty of sugar-canes grow in Palestine at this day. Surely formerly growing there, (though little known to▪ and less used by the ancients) seeing that Countrey hath gained no new plants, but rather lost much fertility it had before. § 7. Sugar (pardon a digression) was anciently less used,Sgar a mo∣deer invention. either because their masculine palats were not so liquorish as ours now adays; or because they preferred honey, plenty whereof was extract∣ed and refined to their hand. Yea our modern Sugar, as it is boiled and baked, is not above two hundred years old; and the art of refining it was found out long since by aPanciollus de rbus inent. lib. 2. it. 5. Venetian, getting above an hun∣dred thousand crowns thereby, leaving them to his son afterward made a Knight, who wasted all to nothing. § 8. In the north of this Tribe lies the vale of Iesreel and Well of Herod,Gedeon of a thresher made Judge. where Gedeon conquered the Midianites ncamping by the hill of Moreh. Indeed the achievements of Gedeon take up almost this whole half-tribe, and therefore we will attend on him from his call to be a Judge unto his summons to his Grave. § 9. Sad in his time was the condition of the Israelites,Israels sad con∣dtion. oppressed by the Midianites, who swarmedIudg. 6. . like Grass-hoppers, for number and noisomeness, over the land of Canaan: Grass-hoppers were formerly a Plague for Egypt, but now for Israel, theseIudg. 6. 3. Midianites devouring all which the other had sowen. Time was, when the Israelites reaped the fields they did not sow, whereas now they sowed what they did not reap. See what wofull inversions sin can make. In this dolefull estate the Angell found Israel, when he sat underIudg 6. 11. an oake in Ophrah in the east of this Tribe neare Iordan, and saluted Gedeon threshing by the wine∣press, The Lord is with thee, thou valiant man. Much concealed valour may
lurk under a plain & painful outside, whcih a just occasion may produce into publick view. Yet let none turn their flailes, aker-staves, sheep-hooks, shuttles, needles, into swords, till first with Gedeon they have a warrant from God for the same. Gedeon having thus a cal from God, and confirmed with many miracles, first by night cast down the Altar (erecting one to God in the same place) and cut down the grove of Baal, then gathered an army of thirty two thousand therewithall to fight the Midianites. § 10. But his army must be garbled,Gedeons army abridged. as too great for God to give victory thereby: all the fearfull return home byIudg. 7. 3. Proclamation, leaving the Perons, not the Men in the army, fewer for their departure. The good liquor was no less for the loss of such froath, though two and twenty thousand then went away. Yea the body of his men remain∣ing, was still too big, and must pass another decoction. Their valour, hardiness and industry must be tried by a Purgatory of water, and those onely were admitted to march on, (proving but three hundred) who bowed not down on their knees, in a lazy posture, (as if they meant to make a set meal in drinking) but loath to lose so much time, Iudg. 7. 5. doglike lapped water out of their hands, (their dishes, as their tongues, were their spoons,) manifesting thereby, (quick at meat, quick at work) the activity of their spirits, taking all refreshing, only in passage to their farther imployment. § 11. With these three hundred Gedeon advanceth against the Midi∣anites,Gods conde∣scension to Gedon. and (as formerly by the deeds of his friends) is now confir∣med afresh with the dreams of his foes, and their ownIudg. 7. 14. interpre∣tation thereof. Strange that God should condescend so much, and so often for Gedeons satisfaction, working miracles backward and forward for his sake: fleece only wet, and ground dry,Iudg. 6. 37. 39 fleece onely dry, and ground wet. Heavens reall miracles, will endure turning, being lining, and facing, inside and outside both alike. Yea after these and other confir∣mations, God the night before the battell gave Gedeon a new sign out of his enemies own mouth. He that spurneth at the presumptuous, how low will he stoop to take up a weake but true faith! Thus the wise mother beateth the sound and froward, but bemoaneth and cherish∣eth her sick and froward child. § 12. The Midianites lay secure in their tents when the word was given,The Midianites assaulted. The sword of God and Gedeon. Excellent mixture, both joined to∣gether; admirable method God put in the first place; Where divine blessing leads up the Van, and mans valour brings up the battell, must not victory needs follow in the rear? Gedeons men by order from him brake their lamp-lined pitchers, whereby night is turned into light, silence becomes a loud sound in an instant. We have this treasure in earthen vessels, and what miracles may the light of Gods word in the pitchers of poor preachers bring to pass? § 13. The sodain shining and sounding fills the eyes and eares of
the Midianites with amazement. Whence came these spirits walking in the dark, dropt from heaven, or raised from the earth? The text was terrible, but oh what disall descants did their affrighted fancies make thereon? Every mans fear, single in it selfe, was doubled by re∣flexion from his next neighbour. For, hearing so many Trumpets, to∣gether, if so many Trumpeters, then how many souldiers in proportion unto them? Hereupon the host ran,Judg. 7. 21. and cryed, and fled to Bethshittah in Zererah, and to the borders of Abel-meholah, unto Tabbath. Thus, great Ar∣mies, once struck with amazement, are like wounded whales, give them but line enough, and the fishes will be the fishermen to catch themselves, and beat themselves ame by their own violence. § 14. Hereafter let none term Gideon (as UlyssesSene. in Troad. is disgracefully cal∣led) Nocturne miles,Improves his victory. the night Knight, because he conversed with the Angel, cast down Baals Altar, conquered the Midianites, all by night; seeing now in open light he pursued his conquest, chasing Zebah and Zalmunna with the rest of their Army, home to their own Countrey, where he overtook and destroied them. Mean time the Ephraimites were active in stopping the passages on Iordan, and slew Oreb and Zeeb, the one at a rock, the other at aJudg. 7. 2. wine-press, first coloured with their bloud, then cal∣led after their names to all posterity. § 15. What remains of Gideon,Gideon occasi∣oneth Idola∣try. I would willingly conceal, that his Sun might not set in a cloud. But, man must not smother, what God will have seen, especially because tending to his honour, our instructi∣on, though Gideons disgrace. Who, refusing a Crown, accepted the ear∣rings of the people, and thereof made anJudg. 8. 27. Ephod: surely onely as a civill memoriall of his valour, and their thankfulness. But, what had Gideon a Manassite, to doe with an Ephod, a Leviticall vestment? Such a monument was neither of divine institution, or benediction, and therefore through mans corruption, easily subject to be abused to superstition. If Gideon walks but on the brink, the next generation will fall to the bot∣tome of Idolatry, as here it came to pass. Posterity went aIbidem. whoring after this Ephod, which caused the massacre in, and destruction of the fmily of Gideon, whom we leave buried in Ophrah in theIbid. v. 32. grave of his father Ioash, and so proceed. § 16. And now his history finished,Abel-meholah the place of Elisha. we shall soon dispatch the re∣mainder of this half Tribe. First we resume Abel-meholah (lately menti∣oned) which was the habitation in after ages of Elisha. Here he was plowing with twelve1 King. 19. 19. yoke of oxen before him, and he with the twelfth. What in severall teames, or all in the same, to draw one plough? The latter is most likely, whilest our English husbandmen will not wonder at such an herd of oxen, (twenty four) haling at one plough, when they shall read, that the Vale of Iordan (wherein lay Abel-meholah) is noted for1 King. 7. 46. clay ground, and therefore such stiffe land, (especially at the first tilth thereof) must needs require a great strength thereunto. But had his oxen been as
many more Elisha would willingly have left them, when Eliah his manle was once cast upon him. Mole, which could, stop rivers in the full speed of their King. 2. 8. course, and therefore might stay a man in the height of his calling. Hereby we perceive that the words of our Savi∣our, NoLuke 9. 62. an having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdome of God, are not literally, but spiritully, to be expounded, of such as having well begun, apostate from their religious Resoluti∣ons. § 17. In the aforesaid vale of IordanThe Vale of Iordan. lay Zarthan, betwixt which and Sccoth (on the other side of Iordan in the Tribe of Gad) the two brazen pillars, (Iachin, and Boaz) with all the vessels of the Temple, were made by Hiram, of bright brass, in the clay1 Kig. 7. 46. ground, which probable served him for moldes to run the melted metall therein. And somewhat more towards the north, lay Aenon near to Salim, where Iohn was baptizing, because there was muchIohn 3. 23. water there. Here his Disciples complained to Iohn, concern∣ing Jesus eclipsing him with his lustre. Iohn truly stated the controver∣sie, and modestly determined it against himself, how he must decrease, whilest Christ must increase. § 18. As these places lay on the east of this Tribe,Gath. Rimmon, and the land of Tappuah. in the vale of Iordan. so in the western part thereof in the vale of Iezreel, layIosh. 21. 25. Gath-Rimmon (in Chronicles called1 Chr. 6. 70. Bileam) the sole City which the Levites had in this entire part of the Tribe of Manasseh; seeing Taanach (called Anar in Chronicles) lay (as is aforesaid) in that part of Manasseh which was surrounded with Issachar. The land of Tappuah belonged also to this half Tribe, though Tappuah the City pertained to Ephraim. Thus the town, and late Castle of Belvoir stands in Lincolne-shire, though the vale thence denominated lies in three shires round about it. § 19. Amongst the mountains in Manasseh,The mountain of Oadiah. we take especiall notice of Gilead (so called from Gilead the grand son of Manasseh)Iudg. 7. 3. whence Gi∣deon's cowards departed; the hill Moreh,Iudg. 7. 1. nigh which the Midtanitish Army was incamped; and above all the mountain of Obadiah, so called because therein in two caves he hid an1 Kin. 1. 13. hundred Prophets, so close, that neither foes nor friends knew thereof, neither Iezebel nor Elijah get∣ting intelligence of their being there, the latter erroneously conceiving himself alone left of all the Prophets in the land. Their bill of fare was bread and water, pretious liquour when it had not rained in Israel for three years and an half; hereto our Saviour reflected, that none should lose his reward that gave his little ones a cup of cold water, yea, that such who received a Prophet, should receive a ProphetsMt. 10. 41. reward, as here it came to pass. For the sparkes of his guests spirit catched hold on Obadiah their host, so far inflaming his breast with inspiration that the short pro∣phecy bearing his name, is by learned men referred to him, as the Au∣thor thereof. SaintIn Epitaphio Paulae & Epist. ad arcellum. Hierome tells us, that the Lady Paula (as weak as she was) climbed up this mountain, to behold those monimental caves therein.
§ 20. In this land we also meet with the woody hils of the Perizzites,The Rephaims their iron cha∣riots. and of the Rephaims, or Giants, mingled amongst them, much affrightng the Manassites with their Iron chariots. Not as if all made of massie iron▪ (such would have been slugs in fight, and so heavy, that they needed horses of steel for strength to draw them) but that they were plated and armed with iron hooks, mischievous instruments of execution, especi∣ally in the pursuit of a broken army, men being as grass whereof whole swathes were mowed down with these crooked sithes in chasing a routed enemy. Enough almost to make one suspect our ancient Britones akin to these Canaanites, seeing such chariots were so fashionable in their Caesar de Bllo . fights; were it not that we finde the likeDiod Sc l. 17 Plutachus in Artaxxi & ali. , frequently used in all eastern Countries. However Ioshua gave the Ma∣nassites both a promise and prophecy, that (notwithstanding those Iron∣moving forts of the Canaanites) they should in process of time certainly overcome them. § 21. We must not forget BethsnBethsan where Bacchus hisn nure was bid. belonging to Mnasseh (butIosh. 17. 11. seated and invironed with Issachr) whence for a long time they could not ex∣pell the Canaanites, therefore called it Bethsan, that is, the house of an Enemy. Here the bodies of Saul and Ionathan were hung up by the1 Sam. 1. 12. Philistines Bethsan was afterwards called Nysa byPlin. Nat. hist. lib. 5. cap. 18. humane writers (and at last Scythopolis) from Nysa Bacchus his nurse, whom he is said there solemnly to have buried. A jolly dame no doubt, as appears by the well battling of the plump boy her nursery. But seeing wine was Bacchus his milk when a child, meat when a man, food when well, physick when sick, we may justly conceive the history mythologically true, the burying of Bacchus his nurse in this place plainly importing plenty of the best wines in the Countrey hereabouts. § 22. As for BezekBezek. I name it last of all▪ because ambiguously placed in the confines of Manasseh, and Ephraim, different from a City of the same name, nearerSee the de∣sription of the land of Moriah. Ierusalem, where the Tyrant Adonibezek lived. In this Be∣zek 1 Sam. 11. 8. saul numbred the Israelites (being three hundred and thirty thou∣sand) and thence marched to the relieving of Lbesh-Gilead from the Ammonites. The Armes of Manasseh have been formerly blazoned, and expounded in our Description of the half Tribe beyond Iordan, and in the Solomons Purveyourships this land, with some of Zebulun, fell under the care of Baanah the Son of Ahilud.
Here the Map of the Land of Ephraim is to be inserted.
THE TRIBE OF EPHRAIM. CHAP. 9. § 1. EPhraim the younger Son of Iosph was blest by his grandfather Iacob,Ephraim why accounted the eldest. layingGen. 8. 14. his right hand on his head (the print of whose fingers remained visible in the happiness of Ephraims posterity) that behinde Manasseh in age, he should prove before him in honour; which came to pass accordingly. Such was his increase in Egypt that they a∣mounted to fortyNumb. 1. 33. thousand five hundred men, all whose carkasses fell in the wilderness, and a new generation of thirty twoNum. 26. 37. thousand five hundred entred the land of Promise. §. 2. A Princely and puissant Tribe. Ephraim (saith David) is the strength ofPsal. 60. 7. my head,A princely and puissant Tribe. and is often put by a honorable Synecdoche for all the ten Tribes or wholeIsa. 7. 2. Kingdome of Israel. The people thereof were active, vali∣ant, ambitious of honour, but withall hasty, humorous, hard to be plea∣sed, forward enough to fight with their foes, and too forward to fall out with their friends, counting other mens honour to be their injury, except they might be admitted joint purchasers with them in all gallant underta∣kings. This caused their contest, first withJudg. 8. 2. Gideon, who pacified them with his compliance, & afterwards with Iephthah, where their Braul was hightned into a Battell, (how quickly doe hot spirits hatch words into blowes!) of which we haveIn Gad § 20. spoked before. § 3. This Tribe was subject to a naturall imperfection of lisping,The Ephra∣imites had a na∣turall lisping. the cause whereof we leave to others to dispute, whether got by imitation, or some heredity defect in their tongue, or proceeding from some secret quality in their soil, as it is observed in a village at Charleton inCamd. Brit. in Lecest. Leicester∣shire, that the people therein are troubled with wharling in their utter∣ance. The best is, men must answer to God for their vitious habits, not naturall impediments, and better it is to lispe the language of Canaan; then plainly to pronounce the speech of Ashdod. § 4. Sure I am,But were vali∣ant and for∣tunate. no Tribe, Iudah excepted, can vie eminent persons with Ephraim, as Deborah and Abdon, both Judges of Israel, the one by heJudg. 4 5. ha∣bitation whilest living, the other by hisJudg. 12. 15. sepulcher when dead, truly col∣lected
to be of this Tribe, as also1 Kin. 11. 26. Ieroboam and all the Kings of Israel § 5. The bounds of Ephraim. Dan on the south, But as for the parti∣cular and flexures  borders of this Tribe, they are so many, and so small, they will be scattered out of our memories, except bound together as, we finde them in the text. § 6. Condemn not this our diligence for needless curiosity,Exactness why necessary herein. but know, that every meer-stone that standeth for a land-mark, though in substance but a hard flint, or plain pibble, is a precious stone in virtue, and is cor∣diall against dangerous controversies between party and party, and therefore it is of great consequence to be well skilled in the out-limits and boundaries of this, or any other considerable . § 7. The particular bounds therefore of this Tribe  exactly as followeth.Ephraims par∣ticular bounds. South. West. North. East. 1 From Iordan by  to the 2 Thence to the wilderness that go∣eth up from , throughout moun . 3 Thence to , thence to be bor∣ds Hereof no doubt was Hushai the Archite.  Ataroth. 4 Thence westward to the coasts of Iapblei. 5 Thence to the coasts of Beth-horon . 6 Thene  Gezer, thence to the sea. The Medditer∣ranean Sea. North∣west. 1 From the sea to Kna. thence to ▪ North∣east. 2 Thence to Beth-horn the upper, thence to Michmha 3 Thence went about unto eastward. 4 And passed on the east to . 5 Thence to Atroth. 6 Thence to , and so to . The river . We reserve the satisfying of such difficulties as inumber these borders, to our fifth nd last book, intending it shall serve our four former in the same office wherein the Spleen attendeth on the Liver. For, as that is the drain or sewer of the feculent and melancholy bloud: so we design our last book of objections for the Repository of all hard doubts and diffi∣culties, that the rest of our work may be more cheerfull and pleasant in the reading thereof. § 8. Amongst these limitary towns,Gezer given to the . besides the Bth-horons, both of them with Uzzen-Sherah,1 Chr. 7. 24. founded by Sherah the daughter of Ephraim the younger (the greatest Buildress in the whole Bible) Gezer is most remar∣kable. The King  was  by Ioshu,Josh. 12. 1. and the City was gi∣ven to the Levites, but kept by the Canaanites in defiance of all the powers ofJudg. 1. 29. Ephraim, untill Pharaoh taking it, burning it, and killing the Cana∣anites therein gave it for a1 King. 9. 16. present to his daughter Solomons wife. Behold here two titles on foot at once, and the question is which should take effect. Whether the title of the Levites deriving it from GodsJosh. 21. 21. grant, though (a main matter) they never had the possession of Gezer given them, or that of Pharaohs daughter claiming it as a donative from her fa∣ther. The best is, the cause was to be tried before the wisdome and inte∣grity of Solomon, who no doubt, being so bountifull to the Temple, would
not be injurious to the Ministers thereof, but that as he gave the child to the true mother, he would adudge the City to the originall owners thereof, though making his Queen some reparation otherwise. Proceed we now to the description of this Tribe, and will begin with two emi∣nent Cities in the south part thereof. § 9. Rama,Ramathaim∣zophine otherwise1 Sam. 1. 1. Ramathaim-Zophim (because consisting of two towns, and seated in the land of1 Sam. 9. 5. Zuph) was the place, where Samuel was1 Sm. 1. 19. born wonderfully, of a long barren mother,1 Sam. 7. 17. lived unblamably, (as appears by the1 Sam. 12. 14. nationall testimony of his integrity) died peaceably, and was1 Sam. 25. 1. buried honorably. Naioth nere Rama was the name of his house, where David sometime conversed with Samuel, two eminent Prophets then living together under the same roof. § 10. Yea,Saul prophe∣ctes. the very aire of this place seems propheticall, seeing Saul coming hither to attach David, was by the great well that is in Schu (the Helicon of heavenly raptures) strangely inspired, and stripping himself, fell a1 Sam. 19. 21. prophecying a day and a night together. § 11. This Saul continued constantly a carnall man, though we meet with many spirits, which successively possessed, and deserted him, 1. The spirit of prophecy, which1 Sam. 10. 10. twice ravished, then finally forsook him. 2. The Spirit of the Lord, fitting him for government, which1 Sam. 16. 14. depar∣ted from him after David was anointed. 3. AnIbidem. evill spirit which trou∣bled him, partly allayed by Davids musick. 4. His vitall and animall Spi∣rits, which partially forsook him at the witches sad news, when he fell all along on the earth, and there was no1 Sam. 28. 20. strength in him. 5. His spirit, or soul, finally forced from him by his own sword on mount Gilboa. What need then have men to try the1 John 4. 1. Spirits before they trust them, seeing so many of them may be in one and the same person? § 12. In the new Testament this Rama is called Arimathe,Arimathea. whereof wasMat. 27. 57. Ioseph that honourable counseller, who so freely resigned his own sepulcher to the body of our Saviour, and with Nicodemus provided for the decent interring thereof. § 13. Shiloh succeeds (in a narrow southern spong of this Tribe) where after the conquering of Canaan,Shiloh why the frst place of the Arks si∣dence. the Tabernacle was solemnly set up, and remained there almost four hundred years. This place was for that purpose preferred before others, partly because almost the center of the land, and partly in honourable respect toJosh. 18. 1. Ioshua, extracted from, and living in this Tribe of Ephraim; and pity it was that God and the Prince should be parted. Perchance the allusion of Shiloh withIs. 8. 6. Shiloah, orJohn 9. 7. Si∣loam, (which is by interpretation sent, clearly pointing at our Saviour) might promote this place for the erection of the Tabernacle therein. § 14. At Shiloh there was an anniversary dancing of the daughters thereof (probably collected out of all Israel coming then to the Taberna∣cle) where the Benjamites as yet unprovided for wives,Here Benja∣mites  them wives. lying in ambush in the vineyards, violentlyJudg. 21. 23. seised some of those maides for their brides,
(happy man be his dole) making strange matches, if each interest concerned therein be seriously considered. § 15. First for the Fathers of these virgins.Equivocation. Did this equivocating ex∣pedient satisfie their consciences, who had formerlyIudg. 21. 1. sworn not to give their daughters to the Benjamites to wife, and yet now by laying the de∣sign Judg. 21. 20. themselves did in effect give these women in marriage to these men? § 16. Secondly,Match-lottery. for the young men. What assurance had they, they could love, not choosing the fittest whom they liked of, but catching the first they lighted on? Or that they could be beloved, storming their wives with violence, in stead of taking their affections by mutual composition? § 17. As for these Brides of fortune,Goldenchance. may we not presume that many of them which danced this day, wept on the morrow? Yet one thing might comfort them, they were all richly married to mighty matches of landed men, seeing the fair and fruitfull Tribe of Benjamin, with all the Cities therein was to be shared amongst their six hundred husbands alone, as the sole survivers and absolute heires of the whole Countrey. § 18. In Shiloh Eli lived Priest,Eli at Shiloh connives at his wicked sons. and Judge of Israel, whither Elkanah and Hannah, Samuels parents, repaired to Gods publick worship. This Hannah though silent1 Sam. 1. 7. when twited by Peninnah for barrenness, found her tongue when hereIbid. v. 15. taxed by Eli of drunkenness: because a meer sufferer in the former, but in the latter a sinner, had the accusation been true. Sa∣muel (here prayed for) afterward here served God in a linen Ephod, and though generally there was a1 Sam. 3. 1. dearth of visions in this age, here he had many revealed unto him. But Eli's dim eies connived here at his sons im∣pieties. Whose servant with his1 Sam. 2. 13. Trident (an Innovation, no doubt, and none of the utensils made by Moses according to the pattern of the mount) would have raw flesh for his Master; so that, what between the raw flesh here sa∣crilegiously stolne, and the strange flesh wherewith those PriestsIbid. v. 22. abused themselves at the door of the Tabernacle of the congregation, any pious eares would now1 Sam. 3. 11. tingle to hear their faults, as hereafter at their punishment. § 19. For soon after happned the destruction of Hophni and Phinehas,Afterwards sadly destroy∣ed. (slain in battell) the Arkes captivity, Eli's heart-breaking with the news, neck-breaking with his fall, the death of Phinehas his wife newly delive∣red, whose son got the sad name (not of Benoni, a name calculated for pri∣vate pangs, but) of1 Sam. 4. 21. Ichabod from this sorrowfull accident, because born in this grand eclipse when the glory was departed from Israel. § 20. Yea the very city of Shiloh it self,Shiloh sinkes in silence with the Tabernacle. may seem in some sort to expire on the same occasion, which, as it owed its life and lustre to the Taber∣nacles residence therein, so sinks down in silence at the captivity thereof. For we finde no after mention of any eminent act therein, onely that A∣hijah the Prophet long after lived1 King. 14. 2. there. He was the Jewish Tiresias, though blinde, a Seer, who discerning Ieroboams wife through her disguise, foretold the death of her sick son Abijah. So much of Shiloh; proceed we now to the more northern and mountainous part of this Tribe.
§ 21. Amongst the remarkable places in mount Ephraim,The possession given to Ioshua. we find Timnath Serah, or TimnathIudg. 2. 9. Heres (by inversion of the letters) on the northside of the hill Gaash, whereIosh. 19. 49, 50. when they had made an end of dividing the land, the children of Israel gave an inheritance to Ioshua. See here his publick spirit, not im∣proving his power, though Comānder in chief, to pickout the fattest pastures, fairest meadows, fertilest fields for himselfe, but (as if he counted it possession enough for him to have gained possessions for others) when the meanest man was first served, he was contented to stand to the peo∣ples courtesie, what they would bestow upon him. If it sound to the praise of a Generalls valour, to come last out of the field when it is won, no less is the commendation of his temperance to come last into it when it is divided. In Timnath Serah, asked and built by him, Ioshua afterwards wasIosh. 24. 30. buried; and as Saint Hierome reports that in his time the Sun was depicted on his monument. This I dare boldly say, that whereas modern Heralds blazon armes by the specious titles of Planets, their fancy is with most truth appliable to Ioshua's shield, bearing Sol and Luna indeed, having made both Sun and Moon stand still by his pryers. Also Eleazar the High priest wasIosh. 24. 33. buried in mount Ephraim, in an hill which pertained to Phinehas his son. § 22. Tirzah was another city near mount Ephaim,Tirzah once Metropolis of the kingdome of Israel. whose King was conquered byIosh. 12. 24. Ioshua. In the days of Solomon it was a place of great re∣pute, Thou art beautifull, ô my Love, asCant. 6. 4. Tirzah; comely as Ierusalem, terrible as an army with banners. Ieroboam chose it to be his1 Kin. 14. 17. Royall-seat (per∣chance because near1 King. 11. 26. Zereda his native place) where he and his succes∣sours lived for welnigh sixty years. Indeed Baasha had a project to make Ramah the place of his residence, as nearer to Ierusalem, and therefore more convenient to mark the motions of the Kings of Iudah; but fru∣strated of his designe he was fain to1 King. 15. 21. return to Tirzah,1 King. 16. 9. reigned and was buried here. Elah, Baasha's son, was here drinking in the house of Azzah his steward, when a dear reckoning was brought in, and no less then his life extorted from him by Zimri his successour. Afterwards, when Tirzah was taken, Zimri either out of envy that the royall Palace should survive him, or desire to prevent a more shamefull death, burnt himself, and the Kings house together. We read of King Asa, that after his death, his subjects made a very great2 Chr. 16. 14. burning for him; but Zimri exceeded, making a bone-fire for and of himself when alive; herein standing alone, except seconded byIustin. lib. 1. Sardanapalus, who in like manner destroyed him∣self on the same occasion. Thus dyed Zimri, a King onely for a week, whose Reign like a winters day was short and dirty; yet long enough to leave this taunt for Iezebels mouth,2 King. 9. 31. and Proverb to posterity, Had Zimri peace, that slew his Master? Hard by is2 King. 15. 16. Tiphsaph, where King Menahem barbarously ripped up the women with child, because the city opened not to receive him. § 23. Besides cities, many private dwellings were sprinkled on
mount Ephraim;Private houses on mount Ephraim. as the house of thatIudg. 19. 1. Levite, whose concubine the men of Gibeah abused to death: the house of Micah, well stored with Idols, where first the five spies, then the sixe hundred men of Dan, took up their lodgings, when marching to Laish: Ungratefull guests! who in stead of discharging their quarters, plundered theirIud. 18. 2. 24. Land-lord, taking his Images and priest away with them. Thirdly, the house of Deborah under a Iud. 4. 5. Palme-tree betwixt Ramah and Bethel, where she judged Israel. A tree then the Westminster Hall of the whole Land, made the seat of justice in an open place, partly that all people might have free access with their Petiti∣ons thereunto, without doors or porters to exclude any; partly that so publick a place might minde Judges, parties, and witnesses of fair and clear proceeding without secret or sinister reservations, having hea∣ven Gods Throne in view, and before their eyes. This Palme was pre∣ferred for this purpose before other trees, because far and fair spreading, it afforded much people a shady conveniency under the branches there∣of; not to insist on (a text rather for fancy to descant, then judgement to comment on) the resemblances betwixt the growth of Palmes and judiciall proceedings. Which, as that plant improves it self by pressures, ought in fine to flourish in defiance of all opposition. § 24. But the mostEsay 7. 9. observable place in the north of this Tribe is the City of Samaria,Samaria built by Omri. built by Omri, (because the royall Palace was burnt at Tirzah, as is aforesaid) on an hill bought by him for two talents of silver, and called by him Samaria, from1 King. 16. 24. Shemer the former owner of that place. Strange, it should take the denomination rather from him that sold it, then him that bought it: except this was part of the bargain, which ap∣pears not in Scripture. Sure we are, though the name of Omri was not pre∣served in the place, the Statutes of Omri were observed by the people, accord∣ing to theMic. 6. 16. Prophets complaint, and his impious injunctions obliged men to the practise thereof. Samaria proved afterwards a beautifull City, & was the principal place of the residence & burial of the Kings of Israel. § 25. Stately was the Kings Palace therein.The stately buildings in Samaria. Hence King Ahaziah Ahabs son had a mortall fall through a lattice in his upper2 King. 1. 2. chamber: possible this mischance had been prevented, had the house or chamber been built according to Gods direction,Det. 22. 8. with batlements, that men might not fall from thence. But likely it is, the Fabrick thereof was fashioned ac∣cording to the Mode of the Sidonian architecture. Hard by Ahab built an 1 King. 22. 39. Ivory-house. Conceive it chequered, inlaid, and adorned therewith; otherwise all the Elephants in India and Affrick would not afford mate∣rialls for such a structure: not to say, the crookedness and smalness of their teeth, made them useless for beames in that building. A frequent Synecdoche, to denominate the house from the principall materialls therein, like Leaden-hall in London; not because wholly built, but onely covered with that metall. But alass, what good would an Ivory-house do Ahab, whilest he had an Ebony soul in the midst thereof, blacked over with
impieties. Baals temple1 King 16. 32. built by Ahab, and turned by2 King. 10. 25. 27. Iehu into a Iakes, was a structure of great State, into which Baals Priests were trained by a device, and slain. The greatest place of receipt in Samaria (which might serve them for a market-stead, or rather for a seat of Justice) was that voide1 Kin. 22. 10. place at the entring of the gate; of such a latitude, that it was able to receive at once the Kings of Israel and Iudah, with their royall retinue. § 26. But amongst all the structures in Samaria,The King of Syria's streets in Samaria. none more eminent then the streets built therein by the King of Syria. A thing scarce to be paralleled, that a forein King should be permitted to erect streets in the Metropolitan City of another Kingdome. If any alledge that Peter Earl of Savoy built his palace in the Strand (known by the name of Savoy at this day) and that there is a street betwixt Aldersgate and Smithfield called Britons street, from the ancient lodgings of the Duke of Britain therein; neither of the instances amount to the matter in hand. The former pa∣lace being erected, as I take it, for the Earles abode here when in banish∣ment. And as for the latter, it appears not that the Dukes of Britain were at any cost in building it: whereas the Kings of Syria founded the Fa∣brickes of those streets in the city of Samaria, and never inhabited therein. It seems when Omri began the new building of Samaria, either he request∣ed the assistance of the King of Syria (as a neighbouring Prince in amity with him) to help him in the work; (no shame to beg the first clouts of friends, for an infant-city) or else the Syrian Kings civilly tendered their service, to give it as good handsell to so good a work, or as a Royall Largess amongst the inferiour builders thereof. For mine own part I conceive that the Kings of Damascus, got some conquest of Samaria not mentioned in Scripture, and then built these streets, as a monument of their victory and bridle to over-awe the city. The rather because Benhadad being af∣terwards overcome by Ahab profered the like favour and freedome unto him, if it pleased him to accept thereof,1 Kin. 20. 34. And thou shalt make streets for thee in Damascus, as my Father made in Samaria. § 27. We meet in Scripture with three famous sieges of Samaria.First siege of Samaria. Once when Benhadad not content with Ahabs submission, (profering to hold all he had by homage from him) would have all the wealth of the city in specie surrendered unto him, vainly vaunting that1 King. 20. 10. the dust of Samaria could not suffice for handfulls for all the people that followed him. Surely the Scavengers were very diligent in sweeping so populous a place, or else it was a most hyperbolicall expression. But grant Samaria could not yeeld dust enough to fill the hands, the mountains near unto it could afford dirt enough to stop the mouths of most of his army, who few days after were thereon miraculously1 King. 20. 21. defeated. § 28. A second siege was in the reign of King Ioram, when the famine was so great,The second siege of Samaria that an Asses head, and a cab of dung was sold at un∣conscionable rates: the former for food, the latter most probably for
fewell, and surely not to drain peter to make powder thence, an inven∣tion unknown in that age. Nor was the sudden plenty, occasioned by the Syrians flight, less admirable, all provision being brought down in an instant to a very unexpected low price. So that he that here knew beforehand what would be cheap or dear, needed but a few minutes to make him a rich Merchant. But this showre of plenty caused a floud of people to flock to the gates of Samaria, where that infidell Prince, who despaired of Gods power and Elisha's prophecy, was2 King. 7. 17. overwhelmed in the multitude; living so long to have his eyes confute his tongue, but not to have his taste confirme his eyes; beholding, but not partaking of the plenty. § 29. The third and last siege when the city was taken and destroyed by Salmaneser King of Assyria,The third and last siege of Samaria. in the reign of Hosea King of Israel, a King who was the best, or rather the least bad of all that sate on that throne. Of whom it is said, he was evill in the sight of the Lord, but2 King. 17. 2. not as the Kings of Israel, that were before him. It may therefore seem wonderfull that the ruin of the kingdome should happen in his reign: but what shall we say? When a vessell is already brimfull, the addition of the least drop more, will make it run over. § 30. Afterwards Samaria was peopled with Colonies of the Assyrians;A Christian Church in Sa∣maria. great back friends to the rebuilding of Ierusalem, as the books of Ezra and Nehemiah doe sufficiently declare. Our Saviour therefore gave in charge to the disciples, when sent to preach, IntoMat. 10. 5. any city of the Samaritans enter yee not. But this was but a temporary prohibition, for after Christs ascension and the persecution about Steven, Samaria quickly received the Gospell by the preaching ofAct. 8. 5. 14. 25. & 9. 31. Philip the Evangelist. Here afterwards hap∣pened the great contest betwixt the two Simons, Peter and Magus. The latterAct. 8. 19. profering money to buy the gift of bestowing the holy Ghost. But leaving them we may observe Gods gradation in giving his holy Spirit. First, to those that were purely Iews inAct. 2. 4. Ierusalem; Then to such as were partly Iews in Samaria; Lastly, to such as were purely GentilesAct. 10. 44. in Cesarea, where Cornelius was baptized. § 31. Near Samaria was a fountain to wash,Memorable places near Samaria. and house to sheare the sheep. Nigh to which in the rode to Iezreel, Iehu met two2 King. 10. 14. and fourty men comming on a visite of respect, to salute the late slain sons of the King of Israel. Wherefore because the persons they came to waite on were not in this world, Iehu took order to send them all to the grave, that they might be more perfectly informed how it fared with those, whom they came to salute. Hard by is the Lazar-house, wherein lived those2 King. 7. 3. 4. Levit. 3. 46. Lepers, who being bandied betwixt two deaths of the famine and the sword, preferred to put themselves on sudden and doubtfull, ra∣ther then on slow but certain destruction; and first brought to Sama∣ria the tydings of the Syrians tents left empty of men, and full of provision.
§ 32. We must not forget the people near Samaria,The pool of Samaria. wherein Ahabs chariot was washed, though some difference appears betwixt the pre∣diction and performance thereof. Prediction. 1 King. 21. 19. Thus saith the Lord, In the place where the dogs licked the bloud of Naboth, shall dogs lick thy bloud, even thine.Performance. 1 King. 22. 28.2 King. 6. 25. 26. And one washed the chariot in the pool of Samaria, and the dogs licked up his bloud, and they washed his ar∣mour according to the word of the Lord, which he spak. The difficulty is this; the dogs licked the bloud of Ahab at Samaria whereas Naboth was stoned at1 King. 21. 1. Iezreel, twenty miles and more north∣ward. To reconcile which difference, Rabbi Salomon conceives that though Ahabs chariot was washed at Samaria, his armour was washed at Iezreel, where (saith he) the royall armory was kept. Others fancy an out-let of the poole of Samaria in the river Kison, which many miles off glided by the vineyard of Naboth, so that his bloud might be carried thither down the stream. Lastly, it is generally answered, that those words, In the place, are not to be taken restrictively for the same numeri∣call spot of ground, but extensively for the same Land, countrey, and kingdome, which then was fulfilled according to the Prophets predicti∣on. Not to say, that some understand, In the place where the dogs licked, that is, pro eo quod, in stead, in lieu, or in requitall of thy cruelty, dogs shall lick thy bloud, &c. Nor have I ought else to observe of Samaria, save that Herod called the name thereof Sebaste from a fair Temple erected here, in the honour of Augustus Cesar. § 33. Hard by,Cursg and blessing on Ebal and Geri∣zim. are Ebal and Gerizim, twin-mountains of equall height, on which, in the days ofJosh. 8. 34. Ioshua, after the conquest of the land, the peo∣ple of Israel, according to GodsDeut. 11. 29. command, assembled themselves, with theirIosh. 8 35. women, little ones, and strangers, in manner and method following, On mount Gerizim to bless. 1Deut. 27. 12. Simeon. 2 Levi. 3 Iudah. 4 Issachar. 5 Ioseph. 6 Benjamin. On mount Ebal to curse. 1 Reuben. 2 Gad. 3 Asher. 4 Zebulun. 5 Dan. 6 Naphtali. See we here, both the Royall and Sacerdotall tribes (Iudah and Levi) on the blessing side; all cursings and imprecations (save when of abso∣lute necessity) ill becoming the mouths of Magistrates and Ministers. In this action, the Levites appeared in a double capacity; as publick officers, so they spake to the men of Israel with a loudDeut. 27. 14. voice; and as private persons, so they contributed their Amen, with the rest of the people. § 34. Here it will be demanded,How they might be heard form one moūt to another seeing the sides of this Quire were so far asunder, how could the Levites voices be distinctly heard from one mountain to another, especially if the whole city of Sechem (as theBeniamin in . pa. 38. Rabbin will have it) lay interposed betwixt them: and may not divine service as well be warranted in a language unknown, as unheard; both being equally understood? For answer whereunto, we must know, that the very make, and fashion of these mountains (pick'd out by Gods providence for that purpose) might advantage much the articulate
audibility of the Levites voices, especially if (as some fancy them) they bended tops, hanged over and leaned inwards, so, as it were with mutuall consent, more conveniently to reach the sound from the one to the other. We know whatGiraldus Cam∣brensis. See Camdens Britin Merionith-shire. some have written of the mountains in Merionith-shire, so even in height that the shepheards may talke together on the tops of them, yet so, that if haply they appoint to meet together, they can hardly doe it from morning to night. Besides, the people knew before hand, the very numericall words, both of the blessings, and cursings, which the Levites were to pronounce, and this rendred their voice intelligible at the greater distance. For, our eares and eyes quickly own those objects far off, with which formerly they have been familiarly acquainted. Lastly, the Levites uttered no long continued orations, but short speeches severally distinguished, with the full periods of the peoples Amen, which gave fair notice to their neigh∣bours on the next mountain, when to begin, and end their attention; and sentences so plainly pointed, are more easily understood at greater distance. § 35. On mount Ebal,A solmn Altar built on mount Ebal. where the curses were pronounced, a solemn Altar was, according toDeut. 27. 5. Gods command, set up by Ioshua; and burnt, andJosh. 8. 31. peace offerings, were sacrificed thereon. No more then needed, for otherwise, the maledictions had no sooner been uttered, but condem∣nation, and execution had instantly ensued, if these sacrifices, with the merits of Christ typified therein, had not seasonably interceded. This altar was made of whole stones, without Iron lift upon it, and was plaistered over, serving also for a table-book (the stones being the leaves, and in the plaistering were the letters thereof) wherein, by Gods com∣mand, all theDeut. 27. 8. 32 words of the law were written very plainly: not that all Deute∣ronomy, much less all the Pentateuch was registred thereon (where should they finde, and how should they fetch stones in folio for so vo∣luminous a work?) but, either the thirteen cursings (with their op∣posite blessings) mentioned there; or else the ten Commandements, the Breviate, and abstract of the whole law. § 36. But mount Gerizim was the Holy of holies to the Samaritans,Two sects of Samaritans the first Idolaters. in af∣ter ages commonly calling it the blessed mountain, and confining their pub∣lick service, and sacrifices, to that place. Here, to avoid confusion, we must take notice of two distinct sorts, or sects of Samaritans, differing much amongst themselves, in. 1 Antiquity. 2 Extraction. 3 Religion. 4 Place of their worship. One from Hezkiahs time. Heathens by descent. Heretcall. Any where in the province of Samaria. Another from  tie. Mongrel-Iews. Idolatrous. In mount Gerizim alone. We begin with the former, being colonies of Assyrians, planted by Salmaneser in the place of the ten Tribes, which he had carried away in∣to finall captivity. These at first were devoured with Lions, saith the 2 King. 17. 25. Scripture, thoughAntiq. lib. 9. cap. 14. Iosephus affirmeth, that the plague; the Samaritan Chronicle, that the famine destroyed them. Presumption in them to de∣viate from Gods word; for though both plague and famine may in
some sense be allowed to be Lions, that is, devourers; yet such as con∣found them, destroy Gods solemn Quadripartite of his punishments; making three members, of his four sore judgements mentioned in theEzek. 1. 21. Prophet, coincidere, to interfeer, yea run all into one. Afterward, a Jewish Priest was at their request sent out of Assyria, to teach these Samaritans the2 King. 17. 27 manner of the God of the land. He is called Ezdras byContr. Haeres. lib. 1. pag. 5.  Epiphanius, by others bn. Patrik. in . Arab. Lun, and by some Zacharias; but seeing God hath concealed his name, it is no whit materiall to know it, especially, except he had taught them better divinity. For he instructed them not to serve God as they ought, in his Temple then extant at Ierusalem, but in their own countrey, ac∣cording to the direction of Ieroboam; and then, no wonder, if the Samari∣tans were guilty of abominable impieties. For, as water neither will, nor can naturally ascend higher, then just levell to the spring, or foun∣tain, whence it is derived: so these people were capable of no purer service of God, then as they were principled by this superstitious Priest, who either did not know, or would not teach them the true Religion. Yea, their practise fell short of his precepts, not worshipping one God alone, but every city had also a severall2 King. 17. 29, 30, 31. Idoll to themselves, according to the nations, whence they were descended. These were the ancient Idolatrous Samaritans, which, as Chrysostome saith, did , min∣gle what was not to be conjoined, and which in process of time were well wasted, and few (if any of them) extant in the days of our Sa∣viour. § 37. These were succeeded with a second sort of hereticall Samari∣tans,The second Sect hereticall. beginning in the government of Nehemiah, whoNehe. 13. 28. reporteth, that one of the sons of Iojada, the son of Eliashib the high-priest, was son-in-law to Sanballat the Horonite, and therefore I chased him from me. This Priest is by IosephusAnti. Iud. li. 11. cap. 7. 8. called Manasse; who thus driven away from Ierusalem, went with other Iews, guilty of the like mongrell-matches, to the Samaritans their wives kind∣red, and there (as the JewishZemach. Da∣vid part. prim. pag. 26. . b. writers relate) built an Anti-temple on mount Gerizim, where a medly nation devised a miscellaneons worship of God, rejecting all the Scriptures, save the five books of Moses, and maintaining many abominable superstitions. And yet they were not so bad, as EpiphaniusHaeres. 9. makes them, charging them by a far-fetch'd conse∣quence, to worship heathen Gods, because placing sanctity in that mountain, wherein Iacob buried his Idols,Gen. 35. 4. whilst some tax them to a∣dore a Dove, the Armes of the Kings of Babylon, and others unjustly ac∣cuse them, utterly to deny the resurrection; we remit the Reader to our learnedHotting. Exer∣cit. Anti-mor. Authour, who cleareth them from these false aspersions; and, though we our selves will not take the pains to plead their cause, let us have the patience, to hear others speak for the worst of men, when un∣justly traduced. § 38. But the main difference in matter of Religion,Samaritans for their own ad∣vantage falsifie the text. betwixt the Sa∣maritans, and Iews, is no less briefly, then cleerly, and truly stated in those
words of the woman to our Saviour,Iohn 4. 20. Our Fathers [Samaritans] worship∣ped in this mountain [Gerizim,] and yee [Iews] say, that in Ierusalem is the place where men ought to worship. The contest grew high betwixt them, each zea∣lous to assert the transcendent holiness of their Temple; insomuch, that the Samaritans made the text false, to make their title true, wilfully de∣praving the originall. For, whereas we read in the Hebrew, both that Deut. 27. 12. Moses directed, and IoshuaIosh. 8. 30. erected an Altar on mount Ebal, theVid. Sam. Pent. Deut. 27. 4. Sama∣ritan Pentateuch make the same built on mount Gerizim, in the very place where afterwards their mock-Temple was set up, so to gain thereunto the greater reputation of holiness. This false foundation laid, they pro∣ceeded thereon, to vaunt of the excellency of their divine service, exceed∣ing the Iews in 1 Antiquity,1 King. 6. 1. it bearing date from this solemn Altar, four hun∣dred and odde years before the structure of the Temple by Solo∣mon. And, if the Iews once offered to plead the originall of their Temple from Abraham sacrificing his son Isaac on mount Moriah, then the Samaritans to outvy them, derived the seniority and sanctity of their mountain, from the first apparition God made toGen. 12. 6, 7. Abraham, and first Altar Abraham made to God in the land of Canaan, both in this, before Isaac was ever promised. 2 Constant continuance, pretending an uninterrupted succession of divine service in this place, whilest they objected the long in∣termission of Gods worship in Ierusalem, lying wast during the seventy years of the captivity in Babylon. But, oh how light and slight, how few and feeble are the Samaritan arguments for the place of their worship, if compared to the numerous, ponderous, pregnant proofes Iews can produce, for Gods presence fixed in Ierusalem! The Samaritans therefore were wise in their generation, to admit alone of the five books of Moses for canonicall (wherein all their supposed evidences, for the matter in controversie, are contained) seeing otherwise, had they accepted of the rest of the Prophets in the old Testa∣ment, their witness had utterly overthrown the fundamentals of their Reli∣gion, which so frequently make Ierusalem the proper center of all pious mens devotion. One instance for many;Psal. 78. 67, 68, 69. Moreover he refused the taber∣nacle of Ioseph, and chose not the Tribe of Ephraim; but chose the Tribe of Iudah, the mount Sion which he loved. And he built his sanctuary like-high palaces, like the earth which he hath established for ever. Here Ephraim is singled out by himself, as of all the Tribes, most probable in after-ages to justle with Iudah, for the place of Gods publick service (in whose portion was mount Geri∣zim, besidesIosh 18. 1. Iosh. 16. 6. Shiloh where the tabernacle so long resided) and yet he is cleerly cast, and the cause adjudged against him, by the immediate deter∣mination of God himself. § 39. We have no more to say of the Samaritan temple on mount Gerizim,The testimony of the son of Sirach. save onely that2 Macc. 6. 2. Antiochus afterward turned it for a time into
the temple of Iupiter that keepeth hospitality. Sure I am, the Samaritans practi∣sed small hospitality in the countrey hereabouts; denying to give our Saviour entertainment in their townsLuk. 9. 53. because he was going to Ierusa∣lem. The truth is, this temple was destroyed, somewhat before the time of our Saviour, by IohnZemach. Da∣vid parte 1. pag. 26. Hyrcanus, after it had flourished above two hun∣dred years: but, when the temple was taken away, the mountain re∣mained, in which the Samaritans continued their adoration. We con∣clude all with the words of the son ofEccles. 50 25. Sirach, There be two manner of nati∣ons which my heart abhorreth, and the third is no nation: They that sit upon the moun∣tains of Samaria, and they that dwell amongst the Philistines, and that foolish people that dwell in Sichem. Meaning by the first, the Idolatrous, by the last, the hereticall Samaritans, who indeed were no distinct nation (as Leopards, and mules, are properly no creatures) but a mixture of Iews, and heathen, blended together. § 41. Expect not here from me (as alien from our work in hand) any arguments,Impudency to prefer the Sa∣maritan, before the Hebrew Pentateuch. against their presumption, who have dared to compare, yea prefer the Samaritan Pentateuch, for authenticalness, before the He∣brew Originall. For three things (saithProv. 30. 21. 23. Solomon) the earth is disquieted, and the fourth it can not bear, namely, an handmaid that is heire to her mistress. How much more intolerable then is it, when a translation, which is, or ought to be, the dutifull servant to the originall, shall presume, (her mistress be∣ing extant, and in presence,) to take the place and precedency of her? As here, apographum doth of the autographum, when the Samaritan transcript is by someVide Exercit. Hottingei con∣tra Morium. advanced above the canonicall copy in the Hebrew. All I will adde is this, that to the Iews , wereRom. 3. 2. committed the oracles of God: and, to give them their due, they were carefull preservers thereof, being never reproved by our Saviour, (though often for false∣glosses thereon) of any forgery in corrupting, depraving, or altering the Letter of the text: whereas no such trust appears, delivered to the charge of the Samaitans. In a word, such as defend, that the Pentateuch coming from the hereticall (not to say apostate Samaritans) is purer then that in He∣brew, transmitted to us from the Iews, in that age the onelyAmos 3. 2. true Church of God in the world, may with as much truth maintain, that breath proceeding from putrefied and corrupted lungs, is more healthfull and wholesome, then what cometh from vitals sound and entire. § 42. Shechem,Dinah dflow∣red in Shechem. Gen. 34. 1. which we lately mentioned, lay betwixt the aforesaid mountains; a place stained with many treacherous practises, which were acted therein. Here Dinah went out to see the daughters of the land, so to please her fancy with gazing on forein fashions. O where was the tent, wherein her great-grand-motherGen 18. 9. Sarah lived, that now she had left it? Where was theGen. 24. 65 vaile, wherewith her grand-mother Rebekah covered her face, that now she had lost it? Her own mother LahsGen. 29. 17. eyes, which were weak and tender, (those worse) were better then Dinahs, which were wanton, and wandring. She sees, and is seen, and is lik'd,
nd lusted after, and (whether by force, or fraud) defiled, and still pas∣sionately affected; contrary to what commonly happens, that the snuffe of lust goes out in the stink2 Sam. 13. 15. of loathing. Yea Shechem was so honest in his dishonesty, that he desired to make Dinah the best amends he could give, or she receive, and on any rate went about to purchase the vine to himself, so to colour a title to those unripe grapes, which he had snatched from it. The agreement is made, on condition all the Sheche∣mites should be circumcised; which done, on theGen. 34. 25. third day (when commonly wounds are more painfull, then when first given) Simeon and Levi kill all the males of the city, and the rest of their brethren fall on the spoile thereof. § 42. Long after,Abimelech made King by the Shechemites Abimelech, the base-born and bloody-minded son of good Gedeon, was by the Shechemites (his towns-men by his mothers side) here at theIudg. 9. 6. stone in the plain, made King of Irael; whilest Iotham (which of his seventy brethren had onely escap'd his cruelty) from the top of mountIudg. 4. 7. Gerizim, uttered his parable of the Bramble, kinging it over the trees of the wood. Bramble; which he applied so home to the men of Shechem, that for the present, he left the pricks thereof in the ears of his auditours; the pain whereof they found and felt afterwards in their hearts, when God put a spirit of discord betwixt them, and Abimelech. § 43. We finde not the particular cause,Shechem sacked by Abimeleh. but the effects of the discord betwixt them. Insomuch that Abimelech sacked the city of Shechem, and Iudg. 9. 45. sowed it with salt. A formality usuall in that age in execration of peoples perfidiousness: but whence fetching its originall, it is hard to decide. I dare not say, in imitation of God himself, who when he destroyed the wicked cities of Sodome and Gomorrah, turned the fruitfull vales wherein they stood, into theGen. 14. 3. salt-sea, in token of their perpetuall desolation. Sure I am, the custome hath been imitated in these western parts. For Fre∣derick Barbarossa, for some affronts offered to his Empress by those of Millan, razed the city, and sowed it withMunsters Cosm. in descr. Italy. salt. § 44. The Shechemites retreated into the house of Baal-berith their God, hoping in vain to make it good for their defence.Abmelech slain at he tower of Thebez. For Abimelech fetching fuell from the neighbouring mountain of ZalmonIudg. 9. 48. (whence the Psal∣mist fetched his expression of spotless purity, white as snow inPsal. 68. 14. Zalmon, which commonly candied the top of this mountain, being the Jewish Albion) and firing the tower of the Temple, slew therein a thousand men and women. Then no doubt theIudg. 9. 20. 6. house of Millo was destroyed: which I take not for any building in the city of Shechem (though there was a fair street of that1 King. 11. 27 name in Ierusalem) but for a potent and puissant family therein, (as the house of the Fuggers in Auspurge) who first advanced Abimelech, and sought, when too late, to suppress. But the weaker sexe revenged on Abimelech his cruelty to them, when besieging the tower of Thebez, which we conceive hard by Shechem, (having no other indication,
but this single mention for the posture thereof) a woman broke his brain-pan with a piece of aIudg. 9. 53. milstone. § 45. Though not the salt which was sown,The people pe∣tition Rhoboam at Shechem. yet the city of Shechem, grew up again to its former greatness. Hither repaired Rehoboam for the people to make him King. One may haply sent Ieroboams policy & his hand in appointing the place, in his own Tribe of Ephraim, where his party was most puissant:1 King. 11. 31. 37. . who intending to run a race with Rehoboam for a Crown, chose out the ground most advantageous for himself. Here the people presented Rehoboam with a Petition for the mitigation of the intolerable burdens, whether personall, or pecuniary, which Solomon imposed upon them. How came he to be behind hand who was the most wealthy Prince in the world? Surely not the building of Gods, but his Idols temples impaired his treasure; and women impoverished both his wealth and his wisdome. Seven hundred1 King. 11. 3. Queens, and not unlikely so many Courts; and three hundred Concubines, which though lesser then the former in honour, might be greater in expence (as the Thiefe in the Candle wasteth more then the burning of the wiek) were able to bankrupt the land of Ophir, with Tarshish given in to boot▪ Rehoboam re∣quires three1 King. 12. 5. days respite for his answer: the onely act almost wherein he shewed himself wise Solomons son; seeing in matters of such conse∣quence, extemporary returns give men leasure afterwards to meditate their Repentance. § 46. The old men advise Rehoboam for remission and mitigation of taxes.Rehoboam fol∣loweth the young mens advice. What harm was it if He being now to be married to a Crown should waite on his Bride the wedding-day, that she might obey him all her life after? Especially they counselled him to2 King. 12. 7. speake good words to the peo∣ple, though his good deeds might follow at a distance. And truely fair speeches cost the giver nothing, and doe ease, though not cure the dis∣contented receiver. But Rehoboam followed the advice of the young men (hot heads, enough to set a kingdome on fire) not to satisfie, but sup∣press the peoples desires, threatning to make his little finger heavier then his Fathers loines; (more happy if he had made his head but half as wise) so that the people deserting the house of David, clave to Ieroboam for their King. § 47. During this distemper,Adoram stoned by the people. Rehoboam sent Adoram, who was over the Tribute, unto the people. No doubt in hope that they would reverence his gray-haires, not abating much of an hundred years in age, (having enjoyed that office above threescore years, from the midst of the reign of King2 Sam. 20. 24. David;) or else to give them some orall satisfaction, how all sums had formerly been expended for the publick good. But his sight was of∣fensive to the people, whose very looks seemed to demand a taxe, and his eyes to exact tribute of them: insomuch that the1 King. 12. 18. people stoned him to death. To lesson all money-officers from publick appearance in po∣pular tumults, being persons most obnoxious to the spight and spleen
of the Vulgar. Thus in Iack Stawes Rebellion, their fury fell first and fiercest on Sir Robert Hales Lord of Saint Iohns, and then Lord Treasurer, whom they drew out of the Chappell in the Tower; and without any reverence of his estate or degree, with fell noise and huge cryes struck off his head onHollir shead. pag. 431. Tower-hill. Nor did Sir ames Fines, Lord Saie, and Treasurer of England, fare better in he Rebellion of Iack Cade, whom without any judiciall proceed∣ings, before his confession was ended, theyIde  634. executed at the standard in Cheapside. And now it was high time for Rehoboam to call for his Chariot, and hast to Ierusalem. § 48.Iacobs purchase nd Iosphs portion. Near to Shechem was the parcell of ground which Iacob bought of the children of Hamor for an hundred pieces of money, whereon he spread his tent, and erected an Altar called God theGen. 33. 20. God of Israel. Afterwards Iacob gave it as a portion to his son Ioseph, whose bones brought out of Egypt wereIosh. 24. 32. buried therein. But how Iacob, when he bequeathed this land to Ioseph, could properly call it, A portion.Gen. 48. 22. which he took out of the hands of the Amorites with his sword and by his bow, is a difficulty much perplexing Divines in the solu∣tion thereof, meeting onely with Iacobs staffe (though Esau had a bow) in the Tenour of Scripture: We will present the Reader with their best answers, leaving him to chuse which he conceives most probable. Some conceive 1 That Iacob being a peaceable and plain dealing man, in reproof of such as delight in force and violence, called his money his sword and his bow. And indeed in all ages money is the sharpest sword, and bow that best hits the mark yeaEccles. 10. 19. answereth all things. 2 That thereby he meant his prayers (the Armes of the Patriarchs and Primitive Christians) whereby he obtained of God, that his posterity being now in his loins, in due time should by their martiall atchiev∣ments conquer the countrey; and speakes of the con∣quest as already made, because of the undoubted assu∣rance of it upon Gods promise. 3 That his sword and his bow import no more then his industry and endevours. Thus the Latine phrase, Fecit proprio marte, carrieth a warlike sound, but a peaceable sense, when one acquires a thing, though in a legall way with his own might, without the assistance of others, as Iacob purchased the foresaid heritage. 4 That his sword related not to his purchase, but to the city of in locum. Shechem, which Simeon and Levi won by their sword, and the sons conquest is reputed to their Father. Now let none be troubled because Iacob is said to purchase this land
of the Amorites, Hamor of whom he bought it being anGen. 34. 2. Hivite: Amorite being there taken in a genericall sense, as all the inhabitants of the eight united Provinces, are comonly called Hollanders. § 49. Near to this parcell of ground which Iacob gave to Ioseph, and Sha∣lem cties nigh Shehem. stood the city of Sychar; wherein was the well, at which that excellent dis∣course passed betwixt our Saviour and theIohn 4. 5. Samaritan woman, who came thither to draw water. Some also place hereabouts the city Shalem foun∣ding it on the words of the text, And Iacob came toGen. 33. 18. Shalem a city of Shechem. Which the Chaldee and other translations read, and Iacob came safe or sound and entire to a city of Shechem. Not that here he was healed of his halting (as some will have it) but rather that hitherto no notorious or emi∣nent dysaster befell his family, which afterwards fell thick and threefold upon it. As the defiling of Dinah; Simeon and Levi slaughtering the She∣chemites; Reubens incest; Rachels death; Er and Onan slain by God; Iudah's incest with Tamar; Ioseph sold by his brethren. § 50. And now to take our farewell of the countrey about Shechem,Two eminent oakes near Shechem. anciently called theGen. 12. 6. plain of Moreh: two eminent oakes grew therein. One, under which Iacob buried his heathen Gods, with the superstitious Gen. 35. 4. ear-rings of his family, wherein no doubt, Idols were ingraven. Ano∣ther, under which was a great stone solemnly set up by Ioshua with the words of the LawIo. 24. 27. written thereon, to be a witness against the Israelites, in case afterwards they should deny that God, whom then they gene∣rally resolved to serve But the question will be how this latter oake was termed to beIosh. 24. 26. by the Sanctuary of the Lord; seeing the Tabernacle, and the Sanctuary Lieger therein resided atIosh. 18.1. Shiloh in those days. If any say that every place where men seriously set their souls to serve God is his Sanctuary; they speake rather an Evangelicall truth, then a proper an∣swer to the present question. This inclines me to conceive, either that by Sanctuary is meant that place of the Altar, which Iacob long before thereabouts erected; or that the Tabernacle not far off, was brought hither for the instant occasion, and afterwards returned back unto Shiloh. § 51. Dothan lay east of Shechem,Doth where the Syrians were smitten with blindness. wherein the Prophet Elisha for some time made his abode. Here he was complained of to the King of Syria, for being the pick-lock of his Cabinet-councels: and therefore an ar∣my was ordered to apprehend him. But why so many to attach a single person and his servant? Indeed no more then needed. For Elisha alone was an army in himself2 Kin. 13. 14. being the horsemen of Israel and chariots thereof▪ His servant seeing themselves surrounded cryes out, till having his eyes opened, he discovereth themselves guarded with a fiery army on the tops of the mountains. Thus Angels are good mens Janizaries to pro∣tect them, and those Natives of heaven grudge not to guard those, who are onely free Denizens thereof. The Syrians are2 King. 6. 18. smitten with blind∣ness; and they that came for the destruction, are glad to follow the
direction of Elisha. Indeed to whom should blind men goe, but to the Prophet, the Seer, to guide them? He leads them, for the present, the wrong way to their intents and desires, but in fine the right way to Gods glory, and their safety; in stead of Dothan, bringing them to Samaria. How easily are those misled who lack the use of eyes? And (alass!) whither will implicire faith, and blind obedience steer the followers thereof? Yet here all came off in a peaceable close; so that their lives being saved, sight restored, bodies feasted, and mindes better informed, they re∣turned to Damascus. If I must be a captive, may I be a prisoner to a pious Prophet, so shall I be best used, and my ransome easiliest procured. § 52. This Dothan I take to be the very place,Dothan where Ioseph was sold by his brethren where Ioseph found his bre∣thren, and there was put into the pit, and sold to the Merchants. For being sent by his Father toGen. 37. 12. Shechem, he was by a man directed to Dothan, whither his brethren had removed their flocks, and which probably was not far off, but some few miles from the former place. Wherefore, when for∣merly in the description of Zebulun, we placed Dothan in the northern parts of that Tribe, threescore miles from Shechem, therein we were carri∣ed away with the common current of other mens judgements, and now have watched our advantage to swim back again, and shew our private opinion in the position thereof. And besides the aforesaid text, setling Dothan near Shechem in this Tribe of Ephraim, it is proportionable to di∣vine providence, that the place whereon Ioseph was betrayed, and pit wherein he was put, should in after ages fall to the possession of the sons of Ephraim descended from him. § 53. But here a materiall Question will be started,How this coun∣trey was called the land of the Hebrews. how Ioseph could properly say, that he was stolen away out of theGen. 40. 15. land of the Hebrews; when the Hebrews at that time, had none inheritance in it, no not soAct. 7. 5. much as to set their foot on? Say not that Ioseph being a child when taken away might be allowed to speak incongruously; for we behold his words as uttered by him when a man. And surely he, who then could expound dreames, could express himself in proper language. Some conceive it was termed the Land of the Hebrews, 1 From those few Hebrews, the family of Iacob, living there, though not as inhabitants, but onely as sojourners therein. 2 It was the Land of the Hebrews by promise, and in due time should be theirs by possession. 3 The Land of the Hebrews, though not in linage, in language; the Canaanites speaking the same tongue with Iacobs family. 4 Some conceive this land anciently belonged to Heber, (as all Asia to the sons of Shem,) and that the Canaanites had before Abrahams time encroached on that Countrey. To strengthen this last conjecture, we must remember that Melchise∣dech King of Salem, who generally is conceived to be Shem, the ancestour of the Hebrews, still retained hisGen. 14. 18. kingdome in the land of Canaan. And
it might be that the other Hebrews were ejected by the Canaanites. If so, the Israelites afterwards got the land under Ioshua by a double Right, of Conquest, and Recovery. § 54. In this Tribe no doubt was the city Ephraim,The City E∣phraim. in aIoh. 11. 54. Countrey near to the wilderness: where our Saviour that Sun of righteousness clouded himself for a time when the Iews took counsell to kill him. Wonder not, that we cannot find the exact situation of this place. For Christ chose it on purpose for the privacy and obscurity thereof. Thus though willingIoh. 10. 15. to lay down, he was not willing to cast away his life: unfit to be a Saviour of mankind, if a destroyer of himself. And though he knew well, that all the weights of mans craft and cruelty, could not make the clock of his time strike one minute before hisIoh. 12. 23. hour was come; yet he counted it his duty, by Prudentiall means to endevour self-preser∣vation. § 55. Two eminent places remain,The mount of Phinehas. which we have reserv'd for the last, because of the uncertainty of their particular situation, though both of them certainly in this Tribe. One, the hill of Phinehas, which was given him in mountIosh. 24. 33. Ephraim. Let no sacrilegious hands hasten hither with their Spades, and Mattocks, to pare and abate this hill as too large a possessi∣on for the high Priest, seeing a greater had been too small for his deserts, whoPsal. 106. 30. stood up, and executed judgement, and so the plague ceased. This Hill of Phinehas certainly was with in the circumference of some Leviticall city in this Tribe, and we conjecturally have placed it within the circuit of Beth-horon the upper. Here, religious Eleazar the son of Aaron wasIosh. 24. 33. buried, in this hill belonging to his son Phinehas. § 56. The other the Mount of AmaleckIudg. 12. 25. in the land of Ephraim.Mou Amalek But how came the Amalekites, to have any thing in the heart of Ephraim, whose own countrey lay two hundred miles more south-ward near the Red-sea? And yet it is no wonder to finde theeves, and robbers (such were theSee our De∣scription of Paran-parag. 20 Amalekites) in any place, who like the Devill their father,Iob. 2. 7. goe to and fro in the earth, walking up and down therein. But we are confident, this mountain was so called from some eminent thing, here done, or suf∣fered by the Amalekites. For we finde them joined with the Midianites in the days ofIudg. 6. 3. Gedeon, to destroy Israel, and finde afterwards this Tribe of Iudg. 7. 24, 25. Ephraim very succesfull in doing execution on the remains of the Midia∣nitish Army when defeated. Why then might not this mountain of A∣malek be so named from some Amalekites then slain in this place? As Danes∣end, in the west-side of Hartford-shire, took its name from aSee camd. Map▪ of Hart∣fordshire. battell there∣by, wherein the Danes were overthrown. In Pirathon, a town on mount Amalek, Abdon one of the peaceable Judges in Israel, was interred. § 57. I conceived all memorable places described in this Tribe,Baal-Hazor stained wih Absoloms cu∣elty. but on review do discover a guilty town lurking besides2 Sam. 13. 23. Ephraim as if con∣scious of the treachery committed therein, it endevoured to escape our observation, namely Baal-hazor, where Absolom sheared his sheep. If any
demand, how he came by any land in this Tribe to feed cattell therein; no doubt he held it by gift or grant from David his Father; and how David when King, became possessed of demesnes in all Tribes, hath In Descrip∣tion of Gad. pag. 84. formerly been largely resolved. Nor was it any disgrace to a Kings son to be master of sheep, seeing theEccles. 5. 9. King himself is maintained by husbandry. As commendable the thrift: so damnable the cruelty of Absolom in this place, causing the murder of his brother Amnon just2 Sam. 13. 28. when his heart was merry with wine, as if his wild revenge would imitate divine justice, to kill bothMat. 10. 28. body and soul together. This Amnon was he that2 Sam. 13. 6. feigned himself sick when he was well, and now dyed before he was sick. § 58. Let Archelais not be forgotten,Archelais and Iscariot. half ashamed to bear the name of wicked Archelaus the builderIosephus Antiq. l. 17. cap. 19. thereof, son and successour of Herod in Iudea, whose crueltyMat. 2. 22. frighted Ioseph from returning to Beth-lehem, and diverted him to Nazareth. As Archelais took its name from a wic∣ked man: so Iscariot (a village not far from it) gave name to a worse; that traitour of his Master being born in this place, as Adrichomius out of Saint Hierome will have it. But other reasons are rendered of Iudas his syrname, and the place of his exemplaryAct. 1. 18. death is more certainly known, then that of his obscure nativity. As for Apollonia by the sea side, 1 Macc. 13. 13. Addida over against the plain, with some other petite places in Ephraim, they are well known by their severall markes, not to be mentioned in Canonicall Scripture. § 59. The Son of Hur was Solomons monethly Purveyour in mount1 King. 4. 8. Ephraim.The Armes of Ephraim. The standard of Ephraim was pitched first on theNum. 2. 18. west side of the Tabernacle: Armes anciently depicted thereon, an Oxe sable passant, in a field argent, founded onDeut. 33. 17. Moses his words, His beauty shall be like the firstling of a bullock, to which we may ad the prophecy of Hosea,Hos. 10. 11. Ephraim is as an heifer that is taught, and loveth to tread out the Corn. Which perchance gave occasion to the postnate armes usually assigned to this Tribe, though later by twelve hundred years then their ancient standard erected in the wilder∣ness.
Here the Map of DAN is to be inserted.
THE TRIBE OF DAN. CHAP. 10. § 1. DAN was eldest Son of Iacob byGen. 35. 25. Bilhah Ra∣hels maide and his concubine. Of his body but one, [Hushim] went down into Egypt, yet of his Posterity came forth thence no fewer thenNumb. 1. 39. threescore and two thousand and seven hundred males of twenty years old and up∣wards: all which falling in the wilderness, for their faithlesness in Gods promises,Num. 26. 43. threescore and four thousand and four hundred entered the land of Canaan. § 2. There passeth a generall tradition taken up by some Fathers,Irenaeus lib. 5. Ambros. de be∣nedict. Patriar. cap. 7. August. quaest. 22. in Io∣shu. Prosper. de promis. Dei par. 4. Theodo∣ret. quaest. 109. in Gen. Gregor. lib. 31. morali∣um &c. continued by some middle, to modern Popish writers, that the Anti∣christ should descend of the Tribe of Dan. And why conceive (or con∣ceit they rather) so uncharitably of this Tribe? Confess we, that Dan hears ill, on severall occasions in the Scripture. 1 Dan, Father of this Tribe, had a foul mouth, which madeGen. 37. 2. Ioseph bring in a complaint thereof toSo had all the sons of Bilhah and Zilpah. Iacob. 2 The first personall blasphemy recorded amongst the Israelites was committed by a MongrellLvit. 24. 11. Danite, being the son of Shelo∣mith, for which he was stoned. 3 The first tribuall defection to idolatry Dan was guilty of, publick∣ly Iudg. 18. 0. setting upThis was Ieroboams not the Tbes act. and worshipping a graven Image. 4 A moity of the nationall apostasie of the Idolatrous Iews was solemnely acted on the theatre of this Tribe, one of1 Kin. 12. 29. Ieroboams golden calves being set up at Dan. 5 When twelve thousand of Gods sealed ones are reckoned up out of every TribeRev. 7., Dan is omitted, as consigned to malediction, say
some: as formerly in the first of Chronicles, no mention of Dan, So also is Zebulun, as Simeon is o∣mitted in Moses his blessings, Deut. 33. where the genealogies of all other Tribes are recounted. The reader may judge whether these roots be deep enough to bring and beare the branches of so far spread report, that therefore the Man of sin must derive his pedegree from this Tribe. Little probability of Anti∣christ coming from Dan literall (long since carried captive with the rest of his brethren into Africa) but as for Dan mysticall many have sought, and many conceive they have found him in another and nearer place. But leaving the uncertainties of Antichrist, most sure it is, that Samson, one of the liveliest types of Christ, was descended of Dan. And so wasExod. 31. 6. Aholiab that excellent artist: who was joint master of the fabrick of the Tabernacle: as Hiram also in the work of the Temple, was a Danite on the mothers side. § 3. The land allotted to Dan,Josh. 15. 1-- 13. seems, for the most part, first to fall to the share of Iudah at the partition of the Countrey. And because the bounds of Iudah were too great, the surplusage thereof by a new grant was made over to the Danites. Some will wonder, that God, who divi∣ded Manna so equally, a homer for every man, should part the land so un∣evenly, that one Tribe should leave and another lack: so that the thirst of Simeon and Dan was quenched with those few drops, which over∣flowed out of the cup of Iudah. May such remember, Iudah was the Princely Tribe, out of which Messiah was to arise, and his portion cut out in state; leaving the superfluous reversions thereof to others; may typifie Christ himself, who isPsal. 45. 7. anointed with oile of gladness above his fellows: of whose fulness (not onely of sufficiency and abundance, but even of re∣dundance) we have all received, grace for grace. Nor will the reader be moved when he finds some cities ensuing, sometimes mentioned as be∣longing to Iudah, other whiles to Dan: because to the former by ori∣ginall assignation, and to the latter by actuall possession. § 4. This Countrey was bounded with Ephraim on the north, Iudah on the east, Simeon on the south, and the Mid-land-sea on the west. From above Lydda to the brook Soreck, some thirty miles; and litle less east and west, from the sea to the edge of Iudah. A land at the best, but half Iu∣dah's leavings, and that not entirely possessed of the Danites. For herein the Amorites did both cut and chuse for themselves, reserving the fat and flesh thereof, (all the fruitfullIudg 1. 34. valley) for their own use, whilest the Danites were glad to pick the bones, crowded up into the moun∣tains. Besides, three of the Satrapies of the Philistines, are found in this Tribe; A puissant nation, and at deadly fewd with the people of Israel. This put the Danites on the necessity (men over-pent will some way vent themselves) of seeking new Quarters,Iosh. 19. 47. in that their memorable expe∣dition, whereof formerly in Nephthali. If any aske, why they did not en∣devour the enlargement of their bounds at home against the Amorites and Philistines, before a far adventure, an hundred miles off. Let such
know, the designe was conceived easier, suddenly to surprize the secure Leshemites, pursie with long peace, then to undertake those two warlike nations, well breathed daily in military Discipline: And Gen 49. 17. Deut. 33. 22. sudden surprisals were foretold in this Tribe. § 5. But grant the measure in this Tribe but short, the ware thereof was very fine, the Countrey being passing fruitfull in com∣modities. Herein grew that bunch of Grapes of prodigious greatness, in gathering whereof, by the hand of the spies sent to search the Land, the Israelites took Livery and Seisin of the fruits of the Countrey. Besides, this Tribe did drive some sea-trade (Deborah complains, Why did DanIud. 5. 17. remain in ships?) though the Iews gene∣rally were mean Mariners and Merchants. Partly because the fat∣ness of their soile so stuck by their sides, it unactived them for forein adventures: and natures bounty unto them gave their indu∣stry a Writ of ease to sit at home. And partly because, being divi∣ded (as an Island from the Continent of the World) in Religion from other Countries, it cut off their comfortable commerce with other nations: though since their wofull Posterity have proved the Capemerchants of the world. § 6. First to survey the west side on the sea,Io. 19. 46. therein we are accosted with Ioppa, a strong City, seated on an high rock, so that Strabo reports, that Ierusalem may thence be discovered: which a modernSand. his trav. pag. 152. Traveller concludes impossible. At the bottome there∣of a haven [formerly] most convenient. So ancient a place, that some make it first founded, and so named from Iapheth before the Adricho. in theat. Ter. Sanc. pag. 23. floud. But it is utterly improbable that Noah being himself bu∣sied about building an Arke, which threatned the worlds de∣struction, would suffer his son to erect a City, as promising a fixt habitation. Hither all the timber of the Temple, cut down and carved in mount Lebanon, was brought by the Tyrians in2 Chro. 2. 16. floates, and hence by Carts conveyed to Ierusalem. Hither Ionah fled, and took shipping for TarshishIon. 1. 3., conceived by some to be the Coun∣trey of Cilicia; by others the city Tarsus therein. But be it Sea or Land, Countrey or City, sure it was not Niniveh, whither God had sent him. Here charitableAct. 9. 36. Dorcas which made coates and gar∣ments for the poor widows whilest she was with them, (the lanthorn of mens good deeds cast the best light, when carried before them, and done in their life time) lived, dyed, and was revived by Saint Peter. Here he lodged in the house of Simon a Tanner by the sea∣side, Act. 3. 43. & 11. 5. 13. water we know is very necessary in that occupation (though salt water onely usefull to wash raw hides) and therein beheld that vision, wherein the Epitome of all creatures were in a sheet repre∣sented unto him. Of this great City, at this day onely two old towers doe survive, it being questionable, whether the place be
more ruinous, or the poor Moors more ragged, that dwell there∣in. A bad haven, much obstructed with sands, and exposed to the fury of the north wind. The best commendation of this har∣bour is, that Iury had no better, scarce another, as if God con∣demned the seacoasts thereof to danger, as the Continent to bar∣renness. § 7.Act. 9. 38. 32. 33, 34. Near unto Ioppa is Lydda (some six miles North-west) where Peter cured Enas (truly pious) of the palsie, which eight years had afflicted him. Here Saint George isGuilel. Tyrius. reported to have been beheaded, and his tombe is shewed in this place. All I will adde is (I hope without offence) this ensuing Parallel, In Ioppa. In Lydda. The valour ofPliny Nat. his. lib. cap. Perseus is celebra∣ted for freeing Andromeda daugh∣ter to King Cepheus,Et Pomp. Mela. Ovid. lib. 4. tyed with chaines to the rockes,Metam. from the fury of a sea monster to which she was exposed. The puissance of Saint George is remembred for delivering the name∣less andIoh. de Vorag. in the golden Legion. onely daughter of a cer∣tain King of Libya, from a fiery Dragon, to whom she was tendered by lot, to be devoured. It is pity these two stories should be parted asunder, which will both in full latitude be believed together. Hard to say, whether nearer, the two places, or two reports. He that considers the re∣semblance of their complexions, will conclude, Fancy the father, Credulity the mother of both; though we need not presently re∣ject all the story of Saint George for fictitious for some improbable circumstances appendent thereunto. Nor have I ought else to ob∣serve of Lydda, save that in Saint Hieroms time it was called Dios∣polis. § 8. To return to Ioppa, the port of Ierusalem. And let us a little way accompany the Pilgrims in the road thitherwards. Take the character of the Countrey on the credit of a lateMorisons trav. part 1. c. p. 215. eye-witness: A most pleasant plain yeelding Tyme and Hyssope, and other fragrant herbs without tillage or planting, growing so high, that they came to the knees of our Asses. Nor need any wonder at the stature of this ground Hys∣sope in Iury (different from wall-Hyssope or mosse rather, the last and lowest step of natures storehouse, and1 King. 4: 33. Solomons study) seeing goodHugo Groti. in Ioha. 19. 29. Authors have affirmed, that haec planta in Iudaeâ arborescit, hyssope doth tree it in Iudea. And what is called byMat. 27. 29. Mar. 15. 26. Matthew and Mark Calamus, a reed, cane, or speare, is rendred an Hyssope-stalke byIoh. 19. 29. Saint Iohn. Because as a learned man concludes, Hyssope here sprouted so high, that thereof an instrument might be made to lift up the sponge to our Saviours mouth hanging on the Cross. And thus we see that as always one of Iob's messengers escaped, to bring the sad tydings of their fellows destruction; so even at this day, some stragling vallies in Palestine, have made hard shift
by their own fruitfulness still continuing) to informe the world, how plentifull this Countrey was, before barrenness by Gods appoint∣ment, seised on the generality thereof. § 9. To proceed in the road to Ierusalem (as the best guide to di∣rect us in the survey of the north of this Tribe) It passeth not far from Shaalim a City ofIosh. 19. 42. Dan, but in the confines of Ephraim. Where though the Amorites dwelt in despight of the Danites, yet the Tribe of EphraimIudg. 1. 35. made them tributaries. A little further, this high∣way takes its farewell of the Tribe of Dan, but with full intent shortly to visite it again. For having passed over a corner of Ephraim, which baggeth into the south, it returns into Dan, and goes forward by Modin, the City of Mattathias and his sons, where the seven1 Macc. 13. 27, 28, 29. sepulchers of the Maccabees (each a high Pyra∣mid on a square basis, and all mounted on a steep hill) are a conspicuous sea-mark to the Mariners many miles distant. Chari∣table monuments, which being erected for the honour of the dead, are imployed for the safety of the living! Few miles hence this high-way finally leaves this Tribe. And therefore we leave it, onely wishing the passengers therein a prosperous journey to Ierusalem. That such as goe thither about business may dispatch the same to their own contentment; such as travell out of curiosity may have their expectation so satisfied, as to coun∣tervaile all their paines and charges: and such as goe thither out of superstitious opinion to merit, may have their erroneous judgements better rectified and informed. § 10. Nor doth ought else observable offer it self in this corner of the Tribe, saveIosh. 21. 24. Iosh. 10. 12. Aijalon, (where Ioshua'sIosh. 21. 24. Iosh. 10. 12. prayer arrested the Moon to stand still) assigned by God to the Levites. But the Amo∣rites took the boldness to keep possession thereof. Hear the words of theIud. 1. 34. Scripture, And the Amorites forced the children of Dan into the mountaines: for they would not suffer them to come down into the valley, but the Amorites would dwell in mount Herez, in Aijalon, and in Shaalbim. The genuine sense is, that though the Amorites generally pent the Danites up in the mountains; yet in these three places (though mountainous in their situation) they crossed their common custome; not out of necessity, but designe, as sensible of their own profit that these transcended the vallies in fertility, and therefore placed themselves therein. Let others dispute, how it came to pass, that the Priests, whom God intended men of peace, by their profession, had a controversiall City appointed them, incumbred with enemies so that they must win it before they could wear it. As also how the Levites could live, when the Land allotted them, was seque∣stred in the hand of a forein foe. It will be for enough us to observe, that in all ages the Church being imbarked in the same bottome with the
State ran an equall hazard therein, according to her proportion. And when the whole Tribe of Dan, like the Parish in generall, was strait∣ned in its processions, well might the Priests maintenance be abated accordingly. § 11. We goe back now to Ioppa, where standing on the rocks, an indifferent fight may easily discern those ships, into which the heathen people of Ioppa, with much courtesie, but more craft, invited the Iews with their wives and their children to goe aboard: for they made them pay their lives the fraight for their voyage, wil∣fully drowning two hundred of them. Whose bloud Maccabeus re∣venged with a contrary, but as cruell an2 Macc. 12. 3, 4, 5, 6. Element, burning all their ships in their harbour, with such as were found therein. Hard by is Iamnia, a little haven (which may be rendred Seaton in English) whose mischievous intention against the Iews, Maccabeus punished by2 Mac. 12. 8, 9. burning their towne by night. Which bone-fire was beheld, two hundred and fourty furlongs off, as far as Ierusalem. A thing not incredible, that fire it self should be seen so far, by the light whereof other things in darkness are discovered, especially when mounted high on its throne, with the advantage of pitch, cordage, and other navall and combustible matter.See Moors Mapof Palestine Some doe conceive that this Iamnia is the same with Iabneh, the wall whereof was broken down by2 Chr. 26. 6. Uzziah the puissant King of Iudah. § 12. Hence the sea running southward provides it self to enter∣tain a nameless brook: which Mercator cals Naphtoah, andAdricho. in theat. Ter. Sanc. pag. 24. num. 59 others (making signes, as unable to speak the true name thereof) the brook of the land of the Philistines, because otherwhiles the northern boun∣dary of their dominion. We had rather give it no name, then a nick-name. And because the course thereof affords us conveniency to visite the middle parts of this Tribe, we will accept of his cour∣tesie, and follow the guidance thereof. § 13. This brook hath its birth and infancy in the Tribe of Iudah, whence flowing into Dan, he runneth through the desert of Modin, which is full of rocks, and those of holes, and those [once] of men, flying out of the neighbouring Cities from the persecuti∣on of the Pagans. Herein a thousand of them were slain by the fury of their enemies, or rather by the fondness of their own su∣perstition, 1 Mc. 2. 38. refusing to make resistance on the Sabbath day. A sad accident. But the parent of a good event, because putting the sur∣viving Iews in a posture of defence, and teaching them more wise and valiant resolutions. Yea not long after, hereabouts they ob∣tained a victory over the numerous army of1 Macc. 16. 4. Cendebaeus. Nor will any slight this brook as inconsiderable, when they read how it ran in the midst betwixt the armies of the Iews and Pagans, and was so deep, that the hardiest of the former durst not adventure
to wade it, before first incouraged by the example of their1 Macc 16. 5, 6 Gene∣rall. Except any will say, they did not so much fear the depth of the river, as the height of the banks of the other side, to wit, the puissant army of their enemies. § 14. Going further on the river, we come into the Countrey of Makats, that is (as learnedVid. jus . in 1 King. 4. 9. Tremelius well observeth) the bor∣der or boundary (if you please, the Marches) betwixt this Tribe and their professed enemies the Philistines. It is impossible to define the limits thereof, seeing the Countrey was the constant Cock-pit of war: and the ground thereof, sometimes marched forward, some∣times retreated backward, according to the variety of martiall suc∣cess. Great is the difference betwixt the same sea, at high and low water mark: and so this Countrey must needs be much disproportioned to it self, when extended in a full tyde, and when contracted in a low ebbe of success. § 15. In this Countrey of Makats Bethshemesh was a principall City, belonging to the Levites, and reputed part of Iudah, but (except some Labell of land tacked to Iudah) surrounded about with the Tribe of Dan. A case obvious in the dividing of Countreys. Who knows not how Worcester-shire hath speckled all the adjacent Counties with snips and shreds belonging unto it, though environed with other shires, and that at considerable distance? Hither the kine drawing the Cart, and lowing as they went to their Calves at home, (nature in them was not rooted out, but overruled) brought the Arke, and rested it near a great stone in the field of1 Sam. 6. 18. Ioshua a Bethshemite. At what▪ time the Bethshemites were reaping their harvest in the valley. Instant∣ly at so good news, their Sicles lost their edges, and could cut no more corn that day. The Arke-home is to be preferred before Har∣vest-home. But oh! how hard is it to keep hungry eyes from feeding on forbidden objects! All the Bethshemites were Levites, but not Priests, much less high-Priests: to whom alone (and that onely anni∣versary) the survey of those mysteries did belong. Besides at this time Bethshemesh from a City, was enlarged to be a Countrey: (such the confluence of Israelites from all places) Otherwise no back of one City might seem broad enough for so great a rode,1 Sam. 6. 19. where∣by fifty thousand and threescore and ten men were destroyed by the Plague, for their Curiosity, in prying into the Arke. § 16. Gibbethon is another prime place in Makats: allotted by God to theIosh. 19. 44. & 21. 23. Levites of Kohath, and no doubt by them peaceably possessed for many years, seeing nothing to the contrary doth appear. But after the days of Ieroboam it is said to1 King. 15. 27 & 16. 15. belong to the Philistines. Probably, when the Levites loyall both to God and their King, upon the idola∣trous defection of Israel, willingly2 Chr. 11. 14. deserted their own Cities, the Philistines taking advantage thereof (when much good bloud is let out,
bad humours are nimble to supply the place) seised on this City. To recover the same, Nadab the son of Ieroboam besieged it: but was so far from taking the City, that before it he lost his own life, by the treche∣ry of Baasha conspiring against him. This siege continued more then twenty years, (no doubt with intervalls of cessation) for1 King. 16. 15, 16, 17, 18. here Omi a great Commander was in service, when by the souldiery voted King of Israel. After which election he had not so much minde to take the City, as a Crown, vigorously to prosecute his new title, and to suppress Tib his Corrivall. So much of the siege, but nothing of the taking of Gib∣bethon, so that it was still violently possessed by the Philistines. § 17. The south-east part of this Tribe is still to survey.Iud. 16. 4. Where the brook Zorek creeps faintly out of the Tribe of Iudah. Not far from whose banks we light on Zorah and Eshtaol: two twin-cities, the one seldome mentioned in Scripture without the other. Except one will call them man and wife: because Machaneh-Dan (betwixt Zorah and Eshta∣ol) was joint issue of them both. For when six hundred men out of these two cities marched towards the taking of Leshem, here theyIudg. 18. 2. 8. 11. 12. met (pro∣bably by mutuall agreement the most convenient place betwixt them) behind (that is, west) of Kiriath-jearim. These did call this the first place of their station Machaneh-Dan; and the last Dan (both from Dan their Ancestour) without naming any intermediate places. As in all undertaking, the first motion which founds and the last which fini∣sheth it, are most memorable. It seems that afterwards, a town was built in that place, where their tents were pitched, as a fortunate ground handselled with good success, whereIud. 13. 25. Samson seems to have had his education. § 18. But his birth at Zorah. Where he was the son of a long bar∣ren mother (a regiment in Scripture of such eminent Persons, Isaac, Iacob, Samuel, Samson, Iohn Baptist &c.) as if (besides higher causes) na∣ture had long thriftily reserved her utmost strength, to expend it at last with more credit. Here an Angel appearing to Manoahs wife, bothIud. 13. 4, 5. told her that she should be a mother, and taught her how she should be a nurse; with the ceremonious breeding of her son. No Wine must come in, no rasor on him. Hercules the Pagan-Samson in some sort may seem, by the luxury of Poets wits, to ape this Iewish Hercules. Neither of them otherwise mounted, then on their legs: otherwise defensively armed, then with their skin and clothes. A aw-bone a sword to the one, a Club, to the other. Both of them very like for their valour, and too like for their wantonness, women being the destruction of them both. § 19. But as Samsons lustre did rise, so it did set in this Tribe. Here∣abouts born andIud. 16. 31. buried in the grave of his Father Manoah, betwixt Zorah and Eshtaol. Reader, let me invite thee with me solemnly to be∣hold his sepulchre, that therein both of us may bury all our vain thoughts of eternity here. He that hereafter shall presume on his own might as
immortall, hath not stronge brains, but a weak back then Sam∣son. § 20. To goe back to ,Num. 13. 24, 25. & cap. 32. 9 Deut. 1. 24. which now grows confident and bold with the accession of the brook , so named (as the vine in Hamp∣shire) from bunches of grapes there growing, whereof one was the load for two men. Surely Bachus id not so drown Ceres in this Countrey, nor did God the wise master of the feast, entertain the Iews his daily guests, with suc liquid diet, but that we may justly presume the land afforded bread and meat in a plentifull proportion to their wine. But when the spies brought this home to the camp of the Israelites at Kadesh∣barnea, they like the wine, but not the reckoning which was to be paid for it▪ not so pleased with the bigness of the grapes, as frighted at the bulkes of the Giants. § 21. Nor is there any other considerable City remaining in this Tribe, save Timah, where Iudah sheared his sheep, and at Pethah-enaim (or the opening of the ways) committed incest with Thamar his unknown daughter-in-law, whom after wards he commanded to be brought forth andGen. 38. 24. burnt. Thus easier i s for one to cause another to be consumed to ashes, then to quench the least spark of lust in our own soul. After∣wards Samson going with his Parents to wooe his wife, killed a young Lion in the vineyards of Timnah, and theIud. 14. 5, 6. text saith, he told not his Father or other what he had done. Herein his silence no less commen∣dable then his valour. But indeed true prowess pleaseth it self more in doing then reporting its own atchievements.Verse 8. Not long after the Bees made a hive of the Lions body. And did not this land flow with honey, when it was powred into a carkass for want of other vessells to receive it? Honey which in fine proved gall to the Philistines. For though they read his riddle by plowing with his heifer,Verse 16. he payed his forfeit by killing their Countrey men. Hence afterwards Samson,Iud. 15. 4. to revenge the injuries offered unto him, sent forth his Foxes, which proved incendiaries of the corn and grain of the Philistines. § 22. So much for the places of this Tribe, of whose situation we have any certainty from Gods word, or good Authors. On the rest we hang out our conjecturall Flag. Which whilest some censure for the Ensignes of our ignorance; others I hope will approve as the colours of our modesty. Especially having done our best endevour in ranking them; and in default of demonstrations, the most probability hath ever been accounted the next heir apparent to Truth. The best is, such places are onely of name, not of note; but once mentioned inIosh. 19. 41, 42. &c. Ioshua, with∣out any memorable actions done in them, and so any mistake in the false posture will prove less dangerous. Mountains of eminency this Tribe affords none, saveIosh. 15. 10. mount Seir (puny hills far different from those in Edom) and mountIosh. 15. 11. Baalah. Both parcels of the south-west bounds of Iudah, as originally they were assigned. But seeing those limits were
afterward discomposed by a new division and re-assignment of them to this Tribe (the out-list of Iudah fell into the midst of Dans whole cloth) those antiquated borders are  the less remarkable. And as for other mountains, although this whole was mountainous, yet there was a parity in her hills, none exceeding high▪ one such advantages of ground swelling above the plain, seemed to be the full breasts and fair nipples of that land, which flowed with milke and honey. § 23. A fair reserve of land in, not of, the Tribe, is still behind, long expecting our company to come and describe it; namely; Philistia, or a part of the land of the Philistines. These were a warlike people; none of the seven nations of the Canaanites, which God drave out before Israel, but descended fromGen. 10. 14. Mizraim, the son of Cham. In the race of military at∣chievements, they started with the first, ran with the swiftest, and held out with the longest. Having a King in the days of Abraham, and con∣tinuing themselves in a considerable condition till after the captivity. Re∣turning almost as many forcible impressions, as they received from the Israelites. What thoughIud. 3. 31. Shgar smote, Samson , and1 Sam. 7. 14. Samuel humbled them? yet they grew so great in the reigne of Saul, that they left all the Israelites1 Sam. 13. 22. swordles: though afterwards there was one sword too many in Saul hand, wherewith he slew himself when over∣come by the Philistines. Indeed2 Sam. 5. 18. & 8. 1. & 21. 15. &c. David brought them, and Solomon kept them under. But in the days of Ioram they so recovered themselves, that they plundered Iudah, rifled the Kings palace,2 Chr. 21. 17. killed and carried captive the seed royall. Uzziah after ordered them into obedience2 Chr. 26. 6.. but under Ahaz they regnined their lost cities, and wan more unto them. In a word; of the heathen people left forIosh. 23. 13. thornes in the sides of the Iewes, none had sharper pricklesEzek. 25. 15. or pierced nearer to their hearts then the Philistines. Yea such their puissance, that from them the Greeks and Latinos called all this land Palestina because the Philistines lived on the sea-coast most obvious to the notice of foreiners. As in deed a small Port makes a greater report in the eares of strangers far off, then a land-locked place though far grea∣ter in proportion. § 24. The bounds of Philistia are not precisely to be set down. For whilest tame cattell are kept in pastures, beasts of prey (such this war∣like people) are onely bounded by their own ravenous appetite. The best way to measure the borders of the Philistines is to behold the sins of the Israelites. For when they were encreased, then the Countrey of the Philistines. was accordingly enlarged. Thus in the days of King Saul they roved, and1 Sam. 31. 10. ranged as far as Dor and Bethshean in the half Tribe of Manasseh, and had Garisons in the heart of most Tribes of Israel. But their constant habitation (their den, as I may terme it) was atract of ground from Gath in the north to Gaza in the south. Some fifty miles in length and about halfe as broad, in the lands allotted to Iudah, Dan, and Simeon. Their government was a mixture of Monarchy, and Aristo∣cracy.
For as their chiefe Cities had Kings over them, which seem abso∣lute in their own dominions; so these kingdomes were but Cantons in relation to the whole, as members making up one entire Common∣wealth. § 25. There need no other evidence be produced to prove the fruit∣fulness of their Countrey, then the vastness of their bodies, whereof the rankness of their ground must be allowed a partiall cause. Our Eng∣lish Proverb saith, shew me not the meate, but shew me the man. The well batling of the Giants bred in Philistia (chiefly in Gath their Seminary) being Heteroclites,2 Sam. 21. 20. 21 redundants from the rules of nature, sufficiently attests the fertility of their soil. Some of these Giants had their hands branching out into1 Chr. 20. 6. six fingers, though they who had one fewer had enough to kill them. Let Naturalists curiously inquire, whether or no this stock of Giants be wholly spent in our age. And if so, what the true causes thereof. Whether intemperance of diet, or over early marriage; seeing every one that is raw to work, count themselves ripe to wed. Let them con∣sult whether nature hath not some other way recompensed in our age that want of strength, by giving them quicker wits; wheras in volu∣minous men commonly there is much empty margent. However mens lesser strength and stature amounts not to a proof of an universall decay in nature,Dr. Hakwels apology for di∣vine provi∣dence. as a most learned pen hath unanswerably demon∣strated. § 26. One thing more we must observe of the Philistines, that they are also called Cherethims or Cherethites in1 Sam. 30. 14. & Ezek. 25. 26 & Zeph. 2. 5. Scripture. Know also that the 2 Sam. 8. 18. & 1 King. 1. 38. Cherethites were a kind of lifegard to King David. Now because it is improbable that so wise a Prince would intrust his Person in the pro∣tection of the Philistines his conquered enemies: therefore learned Vid. ejus an∣nota in locum pradicta. Tremellius by Cherethites understands such Israelites as afterwards posses∣sed the Countrey of the Philistines expulsed by David. Which seems to some but a forced interpretation. For what unlikelyhood was it, that David might entertain Proselyte Philistines, converts to the Iewish religion, if there were such, to be attendants about his body? Not to instance in the French Kings double gard of Scots, and Switzars, as improper to this purpose; (because though forein, yet free and friendly nations;) David out of policy might retain such to wait upon him, both for their pre∣sent encouragement, and future engagements of the fidelity of the Phi∣listines. Whose service might not onely be free from danger, but full of advantage, especially when they were under the conduct of so wise and valiant an Israelite as2 Sam. 20. 23. Benajah the son of Iehojada placed governour o∣ver them. To render this still more probable: Consider how Ittai the Gittite, with six hundred men of Gath, was no native of Israel, as ap∣pears by Davids words,2 Sam. 15. 18, 19. thou art a stranger and an exile; and yet was in∣trusted with the Command of a2 Sam. 18. 2. Terce of the army, in the battell a∣gainst Absolom. Wherein he excellently acquitted himself according to
his loyall resolution to attend the Kings fortunes whether in life or death. § 27. Come we now to describe the Countrey Philistia, where in the north part thereof, we finde Gath a regall City:1 Sam. 21. 10. before Achish the son of Maoch the King whereof, David to save his life counterfeited himself mad. But whether guilty or no in so doing, Divines have not yet de∣termined. It would incline me to the more charitable side, that he had good warrant for what he did, because at the same time (understand it immediately before or after) he composedPsal. 34. & 56 two Psalmes. Which shew his soul not out of tune solemnly to serve God. But David went to Achish a second time, with sixe hundred men; (it seems upon better assurance before-hand, then formerly) and was with great kindness entertained by him, dwelt with him in Gath, and after obtained Ziklag from him; and by Achish his minde should have been the1 Sam. 27. 2, 3 5, 6. & 2. 82. keeper of his head. Achish the son of Maachah (tributary no doubt to Solomon) was King of Gath. For Shimei confined to Hierusalem by Solomons command, and his own con∣sent, did fetch from1 King. 2. 39. him his fugitive servants. Time was when Shi∣mei's 2 Sam. 16. 7. tongue ran too fast in railing on David his Master, and now his feet moved too far in running after his servants, so that breaking the Tedder of his Commission, of the pieces thereof a Halter was justly made for his execution. This City of2 Chr. 11. 8. Gath was afterwards fortified by Reho∣boam, and many years after taken2 Kin. 12. 17. by Hazael King of Syria, and in the next age had the wall thereof broken down by Uzziah King of2 Chr. 26. 6. Israel. § 28. Betwixt Gath and Ekron (lying thence south west) we are as certain there were Cities as ignorant how to call them. For the present let them pass by the name of Samuels Cities: because by his devotion, the Cities, which the Philistines had taken from Israel, were restored to Israel from1 Sam. 7. 14. E∣kron even unto Gath. See the difference betwixt Priest and Priest, both in service and success. Vicious Hophni1 Sam. 4. 4. brings forth the Arke into the field, fights, falls, loseth his own life, and part of Israels Land to the Philistines. Pious Samuel stays and prays at home; the Arke is brought back to him: he both saves himself, and as a bountifull benefactor regaineth the for∣mer loss of his Countrey. § 29. Ekron was a stately City; and commendable was the discre∣tion of her Inhabitants, who learning wit from their neighbours woe, would not keep the1 Sam. 5. 10. Arke and Gods anger therein, but with the speedi∣est conveniency returned it home to Bethshemes. Of these Ekronites, Da∣vid afterward killed two hundred, and tendered their Foreskins a Dowry for Michal Sauls daughter. For, though by the condition of his Espousals he contracted but for an1 Sam. 18. 25. hundred Foreskins, yet such was the supere∣rogation of his valour (Love and Loyalty never give scant measure) that he1 Sam. 18. 27. doubled the number. And what injustice was it that he that paid her dowry double should enjoy her but halfe? seeing Saul after∣wards
took her away, and gave her to1 Sam. 25. 44. another. Beelzebub was the grand Idoll of2 King. 1. 2. Ekron, whose name importeth a Lord of flies. Scaliger con∣ceiving it to be a nick-name which the Iews gave it in derision, so that the terming it a God of flies, was in effect to say, a flie for your God. In the new Testament Beelzebub passeth for theMat. 12. 24. Prince of the Devills. It seems that Hell it self, that place of confusion, would wholly be confounded, if some superiority were not therein observed. § 30. More south we again come to the river Sorek, on whose banks grew Grapes of goodly greatness; yea the Hebrews report them to have been without anyHieron. in 5 tom. cap. Isa. kernels. But that hereabouts Lust did not grow without shame and sorrow to attend it, Samson will sadly wit∣ness. For in the house of Dalilah by the brook ofIudg. 16. 4. Sorek, he betrayed his strength to her, she his person to the Philistines. Thus those that sleep on a harlots lap for their Pillow, are overtaken with destructi∣on before they dream thereof. Hence they carried Samson toIudg. 16. 21. Gaza, which is welnigh fourty miles off. And why so far? Partly to ren∣der their triumph more glorious, baiting him with all eyes gazing on him, and partly the more safely to secure him, bringing him far from his friends, and beyond the reach of any rescue. § 31. But as here was the place where Samsons purity was pollu∣ted, so hard by was the the fountain or water wherein the Ethiopians pollution was purified. This was he, who being Treasurer to Can∣dace Queen of Ethiopia, rode in his chariot and read Isaias, when, (always some unexpected good surprizeth such as are studious in the Scripture)Act. 8. 29. Philip was sent to expound it unto him. Can aIer. 13. 23. Blacka∣more change his skin, saith the Prophet? But see here the virtue of baptismall water, washing away the black hue, and vicious habits of his naturall Corruption, and making him a true Christian con∣vert. § 32. But Philip was found at Azotus: and Azotus or Ashdd hardby is easily found, (for a City seated on a Hill cannot be hid.) This was the third Satrapie of the Philistines, in our definition, but first in honour, as famous for Dagon an Idol there adored: who yet had the manners in homage to the Arke to put off his head and hands, and fall flat on the ground; And hither first they brought the Arke of God1 Sam. 5. 1. & 6. 17.. This was allotted to the Tribe of Iu∣dahIosh. 15. 47.; but left unconquered by Ioshua. King Uzziah brake down the wall of it: and built Cities in the coast of itChap. 13. 3.  2 Chr. 26. 6.. And soon after Tartan sent by Sargon King of Assyria, took itIsa. 20. 1.. The Maccabees had divers battells near Azotus. Here Iudas overthrows Gorgias1 Macc. 4. 15., And spoiles AzotusChap. 5. 6.; And again pursues Bacchides. But himself is slainCha. 9. 15. 18.. Here Ionathan overcomes Demetrius the younger, and burns Azotus; and the Temple of Dagon1 Mac. 10. 78. 84.; And hereabouts Iudas and Iohn prevaile against 1 Mac. 16. 10. Cendebeus. As for Dagon here adored, some make him Patron of grain, (and he is translated  by Philo Biblius) others the President of the
sea; and we may safely beleeve his Power as much over the one as the other. His shape (save that it was masculine for sexe) resembled the Antick laughed at by the Poet. Desinit in piscem, mulier formosa supernè. Upwards man-like he ascended, Downwards like a fish he ended. And yet this Fish had alsoSee the Sp∣tuagint. feet under the taile thereof,. which feet of a fish seem not to stand with any proportion. But what shall we say? The uglier his shape, the handsomer for an Idol; and to keep a Decorum, it was fit that he should be as mishapen in his form, as monstrous in his worship. Far handsomer no doubt were the women of Ashdod, or else the Israelites would never have been so enamoured with them, as after their return from the ca∣ptivity, by marrying with them to beget a mongrell off-spring, whose tongues (as if divided Parte per Pale) spake halfNche. 13. 24. Ashdod and half Hebrew. But surely God was afterwards better pleased with the Iews solemn submission, and fair putting away of their wives, then with the cruelty of the Britons (if true whatNennius Elvo∣dug. reported) which marrying French women in Armorica (now called little Britain) out of a zeale to preserve their native Language, they cut out their wives tongues for fear they should infect their children with a mixture of French. As for2 Sam. 8. 1. Metheg-Ammah in Philistia, because the learned are not resolved whether thereby a place be designed; and if so, many take it for Gath; or else that thereby is signified, that David took the Bridle of Power, from the hand of the Phili∣stines; see it signed with an Asteriske, enough to tell the Reader, that we doe not shew, but seek a certainty therein. § 33. So much for the land in this Tribe.Ionah on the sea. If we look on the sea, bounding it on the west, see Ionah in his ship, flying as fast as he could,Ionah 1. 3. from the presence of the Lord, that is, from the per∣formance of his Propheticall function in Niniveh. Otherwise he was bet∣ter principled then to conceive it probable, in any place to avoid Gods presence; and (if so erroneously opinioned) made the worst of choices,Psal. 107. 23. to goe down into the sea, where Divine power most effe∣ctually appears. Many carnall reasons might cause his flight; as, fear to he murthered for delivering so unwelcome a message to thatNahum 3. 1. bloody City; suspicion, that his preaching little regarded in Israel, would be less in Niniveh; zeal to his Countrey, as perceiving the conversion of the Gentiles, would prove the rejection of the Iews; and a Iealousie (as himselfIonah 4. 2. confesseth) his Prophesie should be dis∣proved on the peoples repentance.
A terrible tempest persuing the ship, wonder working tem∣pest. works wonders in the ma∣riners: 1 Out of the bold came fear; They wereIonah 1. 5. afraid. 2 Out of the profane came piety; Cryed every man to his God. 3 Out of the covetous prodigality; Cast their ware into the sea. Mean time Ionah was fast asleep in the botome of the ship. It is hard to make sense of his actions, his flight spake fear, his sleeping shewed security; formidat & audet. How doth sin distract men, making them as contrary to themselves, as to Gods com∣mandements! § 34. At last, the Master of the ship (now vassall to the winds) awakes him; and Ionah detected by lot, and his guilty▪ conscience, is cast as a peace offering into the sea, where a Whale is provided, after three days to bring him safe to the shore; who amongst ma∣ny Land-types, was the onely Sea-type (as theIohn 3. 14. Serpent the Aire-type) of ourMat. 11. 39. Saviour. § 35. The son of Dekar was Solomons1 King. 4. 9. purveyour in Machats, and in Shaalbim, and Bethshemesh, and Elon-Bethanan, all places in or near this Tribe. The Armes vulgarly assigned to Dan, are Vert a Snake or adder argent nowed, bting, as some adde, (let Heralds translate it into the proper terms of Blazonry) the heels of an horse, whereby the Cavalier mounted on him falls down backwards. All grounded on theGen. 49. 17. Blessing of Iacob; intimating the slie and subtile disposition of the Danites, whose sleight was above their might, policy more then their power, verified in their sodain and unexpected surprisall of the City of Laish. Nor know I how here∣in to reconcile the particular fancy of Aben Ezra to this received opinion, who allots an Eagle for the armes of Dan: a creature of most contrary posture and practise to a Snake: (nothing creeps lower then the one, or soares higher then the other) except agreeing in the generall qualities of quick-sight and subtilty. Here if some say that the Eagle might have been the crest of Dan, they will quickly retract their opinion, considering crests a modern de∣vice, and could not be born in that age, which was scarce conceived three hundred years since. The standard of DanNumb. 2. 25. was erected formost of the three on the north side of the Tabernacle.
Here the Map of Simeon is to be inserted.
THE TRIBE OF SIMEON. CHAP. 11. § 1. SIMEON second son of Iacob by Leah his wife probably was active in the persecution of his brother Ioseph; (therefore singled out inGen. 42. 24. Egypt to be a prisoner) certainly imbrued his hands with Levi in the bloud of theGen. 34. 25. Sheche∣mites: Whereupon Iacob jointly cursed them,Gen. 49. 7. I will divide them in Iacob, and scatter them in Israel. Which prediction took a threefold effect in this Tribe, namely in their 1 Paucity. Scarce any Tribe cameNumb. 1. 23. & 26. 14. more out of Egypt, not any by much entred fewer into Canaan. So sensible was their diminu∣tion, that of fiftynine thousand, but twenty two thousand two hundred possessed their inheritance. It seemeth that the many mor∣talities in the wilderness did light heavy on the Simeonites. Yea after they were setled in their possessions, the Text saith, they had1 Chr. 4. 27. not many children, neither did all their family multiply, like to the children of Iudah. And although1 Chr. 4. 38. immediately after it is recorded, that the house of their Fathers increased greatly; yet the proportion is to be measured, not in relation of this to other Tribes, but in the reference of these families to others in the same Tribe of Simeon. 2 Obscurity. Neither Judge nor Prophet extracted from this Tribe: save that in this dearth of eminent persons (famine will make those crums to be taken up, which otherwise would be cast away) we must take inIudi. 9. 3. Iudith, with her Apocrypha atchieve∣ments. But most sure it is that one notoriously infamous, namelyNum. 25. 14. Zimri, the son of Salu, who defied justice, and boldly avouched his adultery with a woman of Midian, was son to a Prince of Simeon.
3 Dispersedness. Their Countrey was but a jagged Remnant ori∣ginally belonging to, and still surrounded withIosh. 19. 1. 9. Iudah on all sides, save on the sea, amongst whom their townes were scat∣tered. § 2. Yet in process of time, as the dispersion of the Levites was tur∣ned totally, so the scattering of the Simeonites was changed partially into a blessing. Their locall mixture with Iudah begate a politicall confede∣racy with them,Iudg. 1. 3. Come up with me into my lot, and likewise I will goe with thee into thy lot. Whence a double benefit accrued to the Simeonites. 1 Spirituall: they were hedged in by their habitation, in the right way of Gods worship: so that, when the ten Tribes made their idolatrous defection under Ieroboam, many of the Simeonites persevered in Gods true service: and they fell to King Asa in2 Chr. 15. 9. abun∣dance. 2 Temporall. When the rest of their brethren were finally car∣ried away captive under Hoshed in the sixth year of the reign of King Hezekiah,2 King. 17. 6. probable it is that a considerable number of the Simeonites remained, as hath been proved before, by their habita∣tion within the lot of Iudah. § 3. The Lot of Simeon was transcendently fruitfull▪ having a most temperate aire, insomuch that Saint Hierome , in his time it was termed Regio salutaris, the healthy Countrey. No marvell then if the Patri∣archs Abraham and Isaac having their choice of the whole Countrey, pre∣ferred to live so long in these parts. And the latter of them sowing grain near Gerar reapedGen. 26. 12. an hundred fold, which was the greatest increase which that Corn returned, which fell into good ground, in theMark. 13. 8. Gospell. § 4. In the north-east corner of this Tribe we find that mountain before Hebron, to theIudg. 16. 3. top whereof, full twenty miles from the City, Samson carried the gates of Azzah. There he laid them down, not in a plain but steep place, partly in the gallantry of his strength, that not faintness, but his free pleasure made him lay them down, and partly, that in so conspicuous a place the Gazites might easier finde their gates there, then fetch them thence. A little more westward, not far from the banks of the river Sorek, stood the City Ziglag, which1 Sam. 27. 6. Ahish King of Gath, bestowed on David during his abode there. If any demand why David, when King of Israel, did not restore Ziglag to Achish again; let such know, that (besides that Cities once passed into a potent hand, are too precious things to be parted with) David being crowned King of Israel had an undoubted right derived unto him by Gods grant, not onely to this City, but to the whole Kingdome of Gath, and land of the Philistines, which God had given to Iudah, though hitherto they were not able to re∣cover it. § 5. Afterwards, whilest David was marching (at least wise in pre∣sence) with Achish against Saul, the Amalekites in his absence burnt Ziglag,
carrying away all the people therein captive. Griefe hereat so prevailed in Davids men at their return, that in anguish of their hearts, they were ready to1 Sam. 30. 6. stone him. Could better be expected from them? Behold their originall, they were at first,1 Sam. 22. 2. men in debt and distress, whose severall discontents made them generally contented to join together; so that not David, but his necessities chose them to attend him, who now in ad∣versity discovered their impious dispositions. But David to avoid this showre of stones ready to rain upon him, run for shelter to God his Rock, in whom he comforted himself. Thus, as it is always darkest just before the Day dawneth, so God useth to visite his servants with greatest affli∣ctions, when he intendeth their speedy advancement. For immediate∣ly after, David not onely recovered his loss with advantage, but also was proclaimed King of Israel: though some war arose for a time between him and Ishbosheth. § 6. But the most memorable places of this Tribe are seated on or near the brook of Bezor, which arising in Iudah takes his course south∣west, not far fromIosh. 19. 7. Ethar or1 Chr. 4. 32. Etan in the north-east corner of this Tribe. In the rock ofIudg. 15. 11. Etan near the City of that name Samson reposed himself, whence the men of Iudah brought him down, bound with two cords, and delivered him to the Philistines: but he presently found his spirits, and in that place the jaw-bone of an Asse. Bad weapons are better then none; and it matters not what they be, so that they be weilded by Samsons arme, that, guided by Gods hand. This jaw-bone which used to feed on grass, here eat up aIudg. 15. 15. thousand men. Hereupon the place was called Rama-Lehi, the lifting up of a jawbone. § 7. Thus Samsons thirst of revenge was allayed with the bloud of the Philistines, but the quenching of one thirst was the kindling of another. How quickly can God tame fury into faintness with want of water! In this straight he hath his recourse by prayer to God, whoIudg. 15. 17. cleaves a hol∣low place in the jaw. Heaven can make dry bonesEzek. 37. 3. live, yea give life to others, as here to Samson, water presently flowing out thereof. Let poets fondly brag of Hippocrene, a fountain from a horses hoof; most true it is that a spring did flow from the jawbone of an Asse. Except any be pleased (which indeed is most probable) not to take Lehi in Hebrew for the ma∣teriall jaw-bone, but for the Countrey thereabouts, so newly named by Samson, out of a hollow place of the earth whereof, God produced this fountain. § 8. Hence Bezor runneth by Ain, the onely City belonging to theIosh. 21. 9. 16 & 19. 17. Levites, in this Tribe. Indeed bothGen. 49. 7. Simeon and Levi were cursed to be scattered in Israel, and this City of the Levites scattered in Simeon, may seem to be dispersed in a dispersion. One City it seems was pro∣portionable to this small and mangled Tribe. Thus even the poorest must have some Preachers to instruct them, and afford those Preachers maintenance for their instruction. At Gerar, the brook Bezor receives
from the south a Tributary rivolet, fetching its fountain out of the wil∣derness of Kadesh, a place full of strong and stately trees. But what saith thePsal. 29. 8. Psalmist? The voice of the Lord shaketh the wilderness, yea the Lord shaketh the wilderness of Kadesh. As if this of all other was most sturdy and stub∣born to withstand the summons of Gods voice: but all in vain, the least whisper of his mouth sending a palsey into the foundations thereof. § 9. In the confines of this wilderness stood three remarkable Cities, which (lest the Reader should mistake) we have marked with circles on the tops of them. Not that any evill spirits moved therein, seeing these were the places where David haunted, whilest Saul persecuted him, and to whose inhabitants he sent part of his spoile taken from the Ama∣lekites for a present. An act no less politick then just, with the same both discharging the shot of his former entertainment, and for the future ob∣liging them by his bounty to be really sensible of his right of succession to the Crown. The first of these1 Sam. 30. 30. Corashan (Iosh. 19. 7. elsewhere onely called Ashan.)1 Char. 4. 32. The secondIosh. 19. 8. 1 Sam. 30. 27. South-Ramoth, and1 Sam. 30. 30. Hormah the last and most ob∣servable, because of three eminent places of that name in or near the Land of Canaan, 1Num. 14. 45. Where the disobedient Israelites were destroyed by the Canaanites. 2 Where the Canaanites were destroyed by the penitentNumb. 21. 3. Israelites. 3 Where the Tribes ofIudg. 1. 17. Iudah and Simeon associating together de∣stroyed the Canaanites,1 Char. 4. 30. being properly in this Tribe. We see that destruction (so Hormah soundeth in Hebrew) gives the name to them all. And wonder not then, that in a Countrey the Seat of war, there were so many towns of this sad denomination, but pray ra∣ther that God would seasonably settle a peace in England, lest therein be found more Hormahs then were in Israel. § 10. As for Gerar the City above mentioned, it was anciently a kingdome of the Philistines, whose Kings seem all to be called Abimelech's. To one of these Abraham falsely affirmed that Sarah his wife was hisGen. 20. 2. sister: and afterwards Isaac (see the powerfull influence of Parents faults on their childrens practise!) to another of the same name offended in the like falshood. This latter Abimelech looking out of his window, beheld IsaacGen. 26. 8. sporting with Rebekah, (gestures not unlawfull as done, but as seen) and from this familiarity (greater his charity then Isaacs caution therein) interpreted her to be not his harlot, but his wife. § 11. Afterwards Isaac outed of the City dwelt in the neighbouring valley of Gerar, and whithersoever he removed, Gods blessing, and the Philistines envy followed him. He grew fat in estate, his enemies lean at the fight thereof, which made them spitefully stop theGen. 26. 15. wells which his Father had digged. Happy that they could neither dam up nor drain dry the dew of Divine blessing, from falling upon him, which, if possible to effect, their malice would have attempted. But Isaac after∣wards sunk these wells the second time, and heGen. 26. 18. called their names after the
names by which his Father had called them. See his humility herein, not vary∣ing from his Fathers will in an indifferent matter, whereas many now adays count it the greatest honour of this age, in all things to diffent from the former. Besides these renewed wells, Isaac had new ones of his own making, as namely 1Gen. 26. 20. Esech: that is strie, so called because his heardmen, and the Gera∣rites strove about it. 2Gen. 26. 21. Sitnah, that is hatred, so named on the like occassion. 3Gen. 26. 22. Rekoboth, that is enlargement, which he peaceably possessed; God making room for him. The two former pass for the emblems of our militant condition in this life, the last typyifieth our happy estate in a better, and more room∣thy place; In my Fathers house there be manyIoh. 14. 2. mansions. § 12. This vale of Gerar was the Granary of Canaan, whither the Patriarchs retired in time of famine; for plenty dwelt there, when penury was elsewhere. Nor will it be amiss to insert the testimony of aGeor. Sands. trav. 3. b. 150. p. Modern traveller, to shew how the Countrey hereabouts, even at this day, retains an indeleble character of its former fruitfulness. We passed this day through the most pregnant and pleasant valley, that ever eye beheld. On the right hand a ridge of high mountains (whereon stands Hebron) on the left hand the Mediterranean Sea bordered with continued hills, beset with variety of fruits. The Champion between about twenty miles over, full of flowry hills ascending leasure∣ly, and not much surmounting their ranker vallies, with groves of Olives and other fruits dispersedly adorned. Yet is this wealthy Bottome (as are all the rest) for the most part uninhabited. § 13. From the vale of Gerar the brook Berzor runneth by the grove near Beersheba,Gen. 21. 33. planted by Abraham for the more convenient perfor∣mance of his devotion. Collect we hence that Abraham resided some considerable time in these parts, seeing trees grow not up as Ionas his gourd in a night, but must have some competent season to come to ma∣turity. But what was piety in Abraham in planting this grove, was pro∣faneness in his posterity to imitate. For after that God had made choice of a fixed place (Tabernacle, or Temple) to put his name there, such as elsewhere sacrificed unto him were not onely guilty of Schisme (sepa∣rating themselves from the publick worship) but flat Idolatry, serving the true God in a false manner, namely, in a place prohibited. And now it is seasonably remembred, that many ages after, Beersheba was an eminent place of Idolatry. TheAmos 5. 5. & 8. 14. Prophet threatneth finall confusion to such that say, in nature of an oath, The manner of Beersheba liveth. It being probable that as the2 King. 18. 4. brazen serpent set up by Moses, was af∣terwards abused to Idolatry, so this grove of Abrahams planting near Beersheba was by his posterity perverted to some solemn superstition, the manner or way whereof, secundum usum Beershebae, was a precedent, or leading pattern for other places to imitate: as Act. 9. 2. & 18. 25. & 24. 14.
§ 14. But the City of Beersheba it self stood hard by on the brook Bezor. The name imports, The well of an oath. First so called fromGen. 21. 31. Abra∣hams, then fromGen. 26. 33. Isaac's ceremonious swearing and covenanting with Abimelech in that place. Now if Scarlet keep colour because twice died, and therefore called Dibaphon, well might Beersheba retain her name, twice on the same occasion imposed upon it.Gen. 46. 4. Here God com∣forted Iacob in his journey down into Egypt, promising him safety and sight of his son Ioseph. Many hundred years after, Samuel at1 Sam. 8. 2. Beersheba set up his Sons for Judges, who degenerated from their Fathers in∣tegrity. In the division of the land into two kingdomes, Beersheba belonged to Iudah, where2 Chr. 19. 4. Iehoshaphat set up Judges, and whither 1 King. 19. 3. Eliah persecuted by Iezebel fled for succour. Hence he fled into the wilderness, leaving his servant at Beersheba. Not that he carelesly cast him off, but as the case stood with Eliah, life was to be preferred be∣fore attendance, and one alone might shift with more secrecy then two together. Besides, by the avoidance of this servant (probably no person of extraordinary performance) divine providence made a way for Elisha (one of more desert) in this vacancy to be inducted into Eliah's service. § 15. Coming still west-ward on the bank of Bezor, we finde the place where two hundred of Davids foot being faint stayed with the1 Sam. 30. 10. baggage, whilest the rest of their brethren pursued and conquered the Amalekites. But these at their return denyed the two hundred stay∣ing by the brook, any part of their spoile, till David ordered it as a leading case, that these which attended the baggage should be equall sharers with such who fought in the battell. And very good reason: 1 It was not laziness, but weariness kept them behinde. A stout heart sometimes cannot help a fainting body. Wherefore to punish sickness in them for a sin, had been height of tyranny. 2 Grant their tired bodies could not keep pace with their souls, yet no doubt in desire they marched along with their brethren, and perchance by their prayers facilitated their victory. 3 During their staying behind, their imployment was as neces∣sary, though not so honourable. The stuffe could not secure it self, and the keeping of it in the others absence was a good piece of defensive service. Now from hence it appears, that in cases not provided for in the judi∣ciall Law, the Princes of Israel were intrusted with power to enact Statutes, in a prudentiall proportion to Gods word, binding all in their dominions to the observation of them. This ordinance of David may from the place be termed the Statute of Bezor. Nor is it any news for Laws to be made in open fields by rivers sides, our English Laws having had their birth in so plain a place in Ronny-mede near the river of Thames, where King Iohn and his Barons first drew them up together. Yea, no fitter place for such solmn acts then a rivers side, where the sight
thereof may be the remembrancer, thatAmos 5. 24. Iudgement may run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream. Hence Bezor glideth into the Land of the Philistines, whither in due time we will follow it. § 16. South of this brook lay the wilderness of Beersheba, often menti∣oned in Scripture. Herein Hagar andGen. 21. 14. Ishmael wandred when the bottle of water was spent, the last Legacy which Abraham bequeathed him. Oh how she weeps, as if intending to refill the same from her eyes! but a∣lass, that moisture so brackish would rather increase then allay any thirst. And now what should she do? It was death to her to see her son die, and yet that pity which would not suffer her to tarry by him, would not per∣mit her to depart from him. In this Dilemma of affection she resolves on the distance of a bow-shoot,Gen. 21. 16. as a competent mean betwixt presence and absence, and disposeth her self under one shrub, her son under another. Here Ishmael cryes and God heareth. The very worst in extreme want are the object of pity, and though Ishmael had mockes for Isaac, heaven had mercy for Ishmael. An Angel sent shews Haga a fountain, not now new∣ly created, but newly discovered to her sight. The object was there be∣fore, but the Organ not rightly disposed to behold it. How near may men be to their own happiness and miss it; touching it, yet not seeing it, till God open their eyes! More south in this wilderness was the Iuniper-tree under which1 King. 19. 4. Elisha sate so highly discontented. Coales of Juniper we know are extremely hot, but is there any secret quality in the shade of that tree, to put Eliah, sitting under, into such passions, as that nothing but death would please him for the present? Sorrow bought him asleep, and afterwards awaking, being refreshed with a cake of bread, cruse of water, and comfort of an Angel he undertook his journey to Horeb. § 17. Not far off betwixt Kadesh and Bered is Beer-laha-roi, that is, the well of him that liveth and seeth: soGen. 16. 14. named by Hagar, because there an An∣gel catechised, comforted, and counselled her to return and humble her∣self to Sarah her mistress. By this well Isaac was walking and meditating,Gen. 24. 62. when Rebekah brought from her Fathers house first met him, in her most modest behaviour. For at the sight of him, though at some di∣stance, sheGen. 24. 64. lighted from her Camel, counting it ill manners to ride, when her husband and master went a foot: as also to give an earnest of her fu∣ture good housewifery, that she would prefer industry before ease, honest pain before pleasure. The sheGen. 24. 65. vailed her self, partly to shew that the beams of her beauty were hereafter to be appropriated to Isaac alone, & partly in confession of subjection, being now under covert-baron, the command and protection of a husband. Well, I dare compare, yea prefer this vailed wives chastity, before the virginity of many vailed votaries. § 18. More south is the river of Egypt the utmost limit, not onely of this Tribe, but of all Israel. Indeed by the river of Egypt  (often menti∣oned in Exodus) onely Nilus is intended. But this stream (which some conceive is particularly called Shichos) is termed the River of Egypt,
not because it is in, but is in the high way to Egypt. Otherwise, the travel∣ler who sits down on the banks thereof, shall never come thither. In the Septuagint, Rhinocolura is put for this river of Egypt, being a long named city of short note, seated on the influxe thereof into the sea. Only this Rhi∣nocolura is famous in heathen History, because hither (as into an Hospi∣tall) all those malefactors were sent, whose noses were cut off for their offences: a punishment inflicted on the Egyptians by an Ethiopian King who conquered them Hence had it the name ofStrabo Geog. lib. 16. p. 759. Rhinocolura, or the place of nose-maimed people. But ô how great must that city be which in our age should contain all those, whose faces are nose-less, not by others cru∣elty, but their own luxury! § 19. As for other cities in this Tribe of Simeon they were many, but obscure. It is observable that most of them are written with an Aliàs first, as they are named Iosh. 19. secondly, as they are called 1 Chron. 2. None need to wonder at their different denominations. Here I interpose nothing of the severall writing of the same places 1 According to exact Criticks in spelling them. 2 According to vulgar tongues in pronouncing them. Onely we commend to the Readers notice, that the book of Chronicles was written after the return from1 Chr. 3. 19. Captivity; and about eighteen gene∣rations after the days of Ioshua. And therefore some difference of letters after so large a time is no strange thing. For seeing here we have no continu∣ingHeb. 13. 14. city, it cannot be expected that any city should have a continuing name. And yet great places longest retain their names unaltered, (as London from Taeitus to our times) whereas small cities like these in Si∣meon are as often alterable, as passed into the possession of severall ow∣ners. Yea seeing it was the custome of the Iews, toPsal. 19. 11. call their lands after their own names, this haply might changeIosh. 19. 6. Beth-lebaoth in this Tribe, into 1 Chr. 4. 31. Beth-birei, when it came into the possession of a new landlord. § 20. So much of this small Tribe, whose portion was too little for his people, and therefore they made two happy expeditions to en∣large their quarters: one in the reign of1 Chr. 4. 39. Hezekiah to the entrance of Gedor, e∣ven unto the east side of the valley, a place of good and fat pasture; for they of Ham (Canaanites) had dwelt there of old. Mice sometimes may be mens tasters, to teach them which is best for their palate: and those heathen were wise enough to settle themselves in the richest soile, whence now the Simeo∣nites expelled them. This Gedor was in the division of the land allotted to the Tribe ofIosh. 15. 58. Iudah. Now if any demand by what right the Simeonites might invade this which was assigned to Iudah, they may know that in case a strong hold could not be reduced into subjection by that Tribe to which it belonged, it was not an act of injustice, but valour, for the next Tribe toIud. 1. 34. 35. undertake the conquest thereof: As by their judiciall law if one dyed not having issue by his wife, the next of kin might , and was heire (as I may say) to marry hisMat. 22. 24. brothers wife; so when Iu∣dah
through some defect or debility was unable to improve his Patrimo∣ny in Gedor to profit, by casting out the heathen who violently detained it, Simeon (his next neighbour in situation) suecceding to the right of his brother, attempted and effected the conquest thereof: Herein onely it holds not proportion, because the seed so raised up was accounted to his dead brother, whereas here Simeon made bold himself quietly to possess what victoriously he had acquired. Wonder not that this petty Tribe in overcoming Gedor did more then puissant Iudah could performe; for al∣ways the battell is not to theEccles. 9. 11. strong, and weaker means watching advantages may perfect what more powerfull have left uneffected. This Gedor (grudge not reader to sally with thine eye a little out of this Tribe, being still in this map) lay on the north of the river Sorek, and was oneJosh. 12. 13. of the 31. regall cities of the Canaanites. As for the Simeonites second voiage a∣gainst the1 Chr. 4. 42. Amalekites in mount Seir, more proper thereof hereafter in the description of Edom. § 21. Now that which straightned the portion of Simeon, was the mul∣titude of Philistines inhabiting the sea coasts, allotted to, but never posses∣sed by this Tribe. Askelon was a prime city in those parts, once won by Judg. 1. 28. Iudah assisting Simeon, but after recovered by the Philistines. Samson, be∣ing cast to give his companions thirty change of raiment, went neither to the Merchant for the stuffe, nor Taylor for making of them, but (know∣ing the Philistines garments would best fit Philistines bodies) he marched directly toJudg. 14. 19. Askelon, where finding thirty Philistines, he bestowed their corps on the earth, and their cases on their fellow-countrey men. This caused that active antipathy betwixt Askelon and Israel, Tell it not in Gath, nor publish it in2 Sam. 1. 20. Askelon. Near to this city there was aDiod. Siculus. libro 13. lake, by which Se∣miramis is said to be born, there fed and relieved by Doves. Hence the Poet Tibullus. Alba Palaestino sancta columba Syro. The milke-white Dove esteem'd divine, By Syrians of Palestine. But because no mention of this in Scriptures, we forbear further prose∣cution thereof. § 22. Going along south by the sea side (here styled the sea of the Phili∣stines) we come at last to Azzah, Exod. 23. 31. or Gaza the fifth satrapy of the Philistines, onceJudg. 1. 18. Judg. 16. 3. 21. 25. conquered by Iudah, but soon after returning to the former owners Samson, who carried the gates thereof away, could not bring himself hi∣ther again, without the guidance of another. Pain here was added to his blindness, when set to grinde in a mill; scorn to his pain, when sent for, at a solemn feast to be the musician to make sport, or rather the In∣strument ready tuned for every wanton eye, tongue, and hand to play upon. But such as mock at other mens miseries, sometimes laugh so long till their own hearts ake. For Samson applied himself to the two pillars most fundamentall to the roof of Dagons Temple, and by the strength of his armes andJudg. 16. 30. prayers, pulling them down, killed and died together.
Strange that his enemies knowing his strength resided in his haire, pre∣vented not the second growth thereof. But God first stupefies whom he intends for destruction: Samson had lost his sight, the Philistines their fore∣sight at the same time. § 23. Many ages after Gaza was smote byIer. 47. 1. Pharaoh King of Egypt, and not warned thereby to repent, utter desolation was denounced against it. There needeth no clearer comment on the Prophets prediction,Zeph. 2. 4. Gaza shall be forsaken, then that passage in the Acts of the Apostles, the way unto Gaza which isAct. 8. 26. wast. This vastation was caused by Alexander the great, when he utterly razed the city, fulfilling whatIer. 47. 5. Ieremy had foretold, Baldness is come upon Gaza, whereby not onely the hair, but skin and flesh of this proud place fell away, scarce any signes of a city remaining. Out of the ruines hereof, some two miles westward (where Bezor falleth into the sea) Majuma or Sea-Gaza once a proper port-town took its rise and in∣crease, called afterward Constantia by Constantine the great, and Gatzra at this day, where simple roofs supported with carved columns, and broken pieces of ParianSand. trav. lib. 3. p. 149. Marble, serving for thresholds, jambes of doors, and sides of windows almost to every beggerly cottage, testifie its former better condition. So much for these Philistines, who are taxed for their soothsaying byIsa. 2. 6. Isaiah, accu∣sed of spightfulness and old hatred byEzek. 25. 15. Ezekiel, challenged for cruelty byAmos 1. 8. Amos, arraigned for pride byZach. 9. 6. Zachary, condemned by all to unavoidable de∣struction. Think not that these Philistines, fox-like, fared the better for be∣ing cursed, surely though slow, sure vengeance overtook them; and we undoubtedly beleeve the same, although it be hard in history to shew when, where, and how their particular extirpation was accomplished. § 24. Simeon hath usually assigned him for his armes, Gules, a sword in pale, with the point thereof erected argent; alluding to Iacobs words, In∣struments of cruelty are in his habitations, because of their perfidious massa∣cring of the Shechemites. None of Solomons Purveyours in the Tribe of Si∣meon, the reason whereof shall be rendered in our description of Iudah. If any demand, why Simeon alone is omitted in Moses his solemnDeut. 33. blessing of the other Tribes, let them remember how Iacob coupled SimeonGen. 49. 5, 6. and Levi in a curse; since which time the Levites had unstrained their credit by their exemplaryExod. 32. 26. zeale against the Idolaters, but the Simeonites had not recovered their reputation by any eminent act by them atchieved. Moses therefore having no commission to recall Ia∣cobs curse, and loth to repeat it, (lest the double-cursed Simeonites should be utterly disheartned) thought it in pious policy best to pass them over in silence. Of such persons, of whom we would willingly say no bad, and cannot truly say any good, it is the wiset way to say nothing. As for their tradition that the Simeonites were imployed to be Scribes and Notaries to the Tribe of Iudah, it is enough to mention it, knowing no sound autho∣rity, whereon the same is grounded.
Here the Map of Benjamin is to be inserted.
THE DESCRIPTION OF THE TRIBE OF BENIAMIN. CHAP. 12. § 1. BEnjamin youngest son of Iacob by Rachel,Ben-oni his name changed to Benjamin was by his mother dying of him in child-birth named Ben-oni, that is, the son of sorrow, but by his Father called Benjamin, that is, the sonGen. 35. 18. of the right hand. Say not Iacob did ill in altering the Will of his wife, and revoking the name, the last legacy she bequeathed to her child, seeing the alteration was perfective, and for the advantage of the Legatee; not to say that Rachels pangs imposed that name, and might be presumed scarce compos mentis in what she did. But the main reason of the alteration was, because Iacob could not call his son, but must recall his lost wife to his mind, so that his very name con∣stantly carried a coffin in the mention thereof. Highly he was beloved of his Father; and good reason; First, because begot in his old age. Se∣condly, because the youngest: and affection, which always descends, when it can goe no lower, settles it self. Thirdly, because he was mother∣less. Lastly, because brotherless, Ioseph being conceived dead, and so the portion of affection due to him, fell to Benjamin as the right heir there∣of.
§ 2. Of this Tribe came out of EgyptNumb. 1. 37. thirty five thousand four hun∣dred,The dysaster and recrut of Benjamin. all which dying in the wilderness, fourtyNumb. 26. 4. five thousand and six hundred of their children entred the land of Canaan. Afterwards an hea∣vy dysaster befell this Tribe (of the cause and manner whereof hereafter) insomuch that no.Iudg. 21. 16. women and onely six hundred men were left of Bemjamin. Yea none of Benjamin were left above ground, being destroy∣ed from being visible on the face of the earth, and the six hundred re∣maining allIudg. 20. 47. hid in the rock of Rimmon. Thus Benjamin was cut off from the body of Israel, and onely hung dangling by one small sinew, which by the carefull Chirurgery of their brethren, and Gods blessing upon it, in short time recovered it self to be very considerable in Israel. § 3. Herein the words of the Psalmist deserve to be observed,The words of the Psalmist well to be weighed▪ There is littlePsal. 68. 27. Benjamin with their ruler. Little Benjamin: It was therefore no court-complement, or modest excuse, but a downright truth. Saul said unto Samuel,1 Sam. 9. 21. Am I not a Benjami of the smallest of the Tribes of srael? It is added, with their Ruler: no Tribe (Iudah excepted) more trading in Comman∣ders then Benjamin did. Hereof were Saul and Ishbosheth both crowned Kings, Ionathan the eldest son;Esther 2. 5. Mordecai the Favorite, Esther the wife of a King;Iudg. 3. 15. Ehud the Judge, and Abner the Generall of Israel, with divers others. And among Ecclesiasticall Rulers, let not him be forgot, who had the care of all the2 Chr. 11. 28. Churches, evenPhil. 3. 5. Saint Paul the Apostle. But beside these Rulers, Benjamin bred some enemies to authority, Ziba that false cheater, Shimei that foul railer, Baanah and2 Sam. 4. 2. Rechab privy traitours, Sheba a professed Re∣bell; so impossible it is, all should be good herbs which grow in great gardens. § 4. The lot of Benjamin came forthIosh. 18. 11. betwixt the children of Iudah and the children of Ioseph.Benjamin pla∣ced between Ioseph & . IfMat. 10. 29. a sparrow falls not on the ground, surely ground falls not to any owner without Gods immediate providence. Benjamin joined with Ioseph to day the possession of Rachels children entire together; and joyned to Iudah, that vicinity of habitation might invite them to u∣nity of Religion. And indeed commendable was the constancy of the Benjamites both to God and their King, following the house of David at the disloyall defection of the rest of the Tribes. Say not that little Benja∣min was thus placed in the middle to be ground betwixt the mill stones of two potent Tribes; for it matters not who lies on our sides, so be it God dwells on our shoulders. Remember we the blessing Moses be∣queathed to this Tribe,Deut. 33. 12. The beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety by him, and the Lord shall cover him all the day long, and he shall dwell between his shoul∣ders; particularly pointing at his habitation in Ierusalem built in the borders of Benjamin. § 5. Now though Benjamins mess,The smal com∣pss of this Tribe recom∣pensed with the goodness of the ground. when he sate at Iosephs table, was Gen. 43. 34. five times as much as any of his brethren, yet here it happened his por∣tion was less then all the rest: except any will say, that onely Benjamins dish was less and meat more, because, though small the compass of
ground allotted to him, yet fair and fruitfull the soile, many and memo∣rable the cities contained therein, , The lot of this Tribe was straightned (saithAnti Id li. 5. cap. 1. fosephus) because of the virtue of the soile thereof. Yet as little as the land of Benjamin was, it was big enough to be divided betwixt two kingdomes, the south-west part thereof belonging to the kingdome of Iudah, the north-east to Israel, with the cities of Gilgal, Iericho, and Bethel, as shall be made plain in the respe∣ctive description of those places. § 6. Iordan is the eastern boundary of this TribeIosh. 18. 20.: David returning victoriously from Mahanaim,Eminent act∣ons on the banks of Ir∣dan. having2 Sam. 19. 8. ferried over this water, partly brought thither, partly met here, a miscellaneous multitude, Barzillai and Shimei, Mephibosheth and Ziba, that is, loyalty and treachery, faith and falshood mingled together in the same Countrey. Here (once railing) now begging Shimei obtained pardon from him; because bringing a∣long with him (the best argument in his excuse) a2 Sam. 19. 17. thousand men of Benjamin. Some will say, David shewed Shimei too much mercy, and did Mephibosheth too litle justice, not righting him against the false ac∣cusations of Ziba, who better deserved a whole halter, then half of the lands of Mephibosheth. Such doe not seriously consider the present condition of David; who, had his hand struck with the sword of justice, before his feet (in his renewed kingdome) were firmely fast∣ned on the throne of authority, it had been the ready way to have over∣turned him and his posterity. Here2 Sam. 20. 1. Sheba a Benjamite taking the advantage of the unseasonable contest betwixt Iudah and Israel, which should have most interest in David, with his trumpet blew rebellion into the eares and hearts of the people; had not the dangerous consequence thereof been seasonably prevented by the vigilancy and valour of David, and his servants. § 7. More south on the banks of the river the children of the Pro∣phets straightned for dwellings,Pitifull provi∣sions for a Colledge. went about to enlarge their habitati∣ons, but meanly provided for that purpose, if we consider the 1 Architect, a son of the Prophets, little skild (no doubt) in such employment. 2 Timber, green wood, and growing on the banks of Iordan. 3 Tools; a borrowed hatchet, the iron whereof fell into the river. Alass, how comes it to pass, that when houses of the Prophets are to be built, the iron forsakes the handle, which sticks too stedfastly thereunto, when they break them downPsal. 74. 6. with axes and hammers! But 2 King. 6. 6. Elisha made all things whole, the hatchet came unto the helve swim∣ming above the water. § The alter Ed succeeds next,Controversies concerning the position of the Altar Ed. more south-ward on the river. For∣merly we have placed it in the Tribe of Reuben on the east of Iordan, but others  it west of that river in this Tribe. Hear the arguments for both.
For Benjamin. 1 ItJosh. 22. 10. was set up in the bor∣ders of Iordan which are in the land of Canaan, which land strictly and properly taken was on the west of Iordan. 2 It was erected to shew the contesseration of their re∣ligions. And therefore most probable and proper on the west side of Iordan, in the main continent of the land, to claim right, or rather continue a title of those sepa∣ratist-Tribes, Reuben, Gad, and Manasseh in point of Gods worship with other Tribes. 3In lois Heb. lit. E. Saint Hirome, and since him learnedIn locum. Tostatus (to whose arguments in this controversie we refer the rea∣der) with many other Com∣mentators, are very positive in placing this Altar west of Iordan in the Tribe of Benja∣min. For Reuben. 1 It was set upIosh. 22. 11. over against the land of Canaan. Which in proper construction imports it to be on the other side opposite thereunto. 2 It had been a meer trespass, for the two Tribes and an halfe in aliena Republica, to build an altar on the ground of other Tribes: and therefore no doubt, they did it on their own ground east of Iordan. 3 IosephusAnti. Iud. l. 5. cap. 1. p. 143. saith . Therefore the Tribe of Reuben and Gad going over the river &c. 4 AnotherM. Ioseph Mde in his Sermon of the reverence of Gods house. Ioseph (though a modern, yet a learned writer) be∣leeveth, that in those elder times, that Countrey or territory was counted unhallowed, or unclean which had not a place set apart for Gods worship, and proveth from the words of Phinebas, that the altar was set up on their side, lest otherwise having no place consecrated, they might be con∣cluded to live in an unhallowed habitation. Thus as this altar caused a difference betwixt brethren, about the cause why it was erected: so hath occsioned a dissension amongst learned men, concerning the place, where the same was set up. The best is, the controversie is not of such moment, as to concern salvation. Let us take heed, we be not of that GenerationPsal. 78. 9. which set not their hearts a∣right, and then the danger is not great, though we set this altar on the wrong side of the river. However, as the devout Iews in the primitive times, when the Sabbath was newly changed into the Lords-day, kept both Saturday and Sunday holy, observing both ex nimia cautela, to be sure to keep the right day of Divine worship: so for more certainty we have erected two altars, one one each side of the river, leaving it to the dis∣cretion of the judicious Reader, to accept or refuse which of them he pleaseth. § 9.The Iewish Stone henge. Come we in the next place to theIosh. 4. 20. twelve great stones set up by Ioshua in memoriall that there they passed over the river Iordan on
foot Tremellius conceives probably, that these were the quarries in Gilgal mentioned Iudg. 3. 19. whence Ehud returned back, when he went to kill Eglon King of Moab. Others likewise conceive, that Iohn baptizing hereabouts, did particularly point at these stones, in that his expression to the Pharisees,Mat. 3. 9. God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham. They were set up in the Countrey Gilgal, the city so called lying some five miles west of the river. § 10. Gilgal (rolling in Hebrew) was so called by Ioshua,Remarkables happening at Gilgal in the days of Ioshua. because the reproach of Egypt was there rolled away from the Israelites, and circumcision suspended during their travell, beingJoh. 5. 9. here administred, and the Passeover solemnly observed; here also Manna ceased, the Countrey affording plentifull provisions. Miracles and meanes never shine together in the same Horizon, but the former setteth, when the later ariseth. It will perchance be demanded, why Manna rained so long, seeing the Israelites long a∣goe were come into the plentifull Countrey of Canaan, all the while they had remained in the land of Reuben, ever since they came over the river of Arnon. It is answered, God hitherto continued his largess of Manna, 1 Because formerly they were only come into the skirts of the coun∣trey, (unsufficient to maintain so numerous an Army) whereas now they were entred into the very heart and middle of the land. 2 The land of Reuben though very fruitfull,Numb. 32. 1. was a place for cattell, fit for grazing, and better for beasts, then men to feed upon. 3 God to manifest his liberality, would not onely have his provi∣sions to meet even, but to lap over, continuing Manna till his peo∣ple were otherwise plentifully provided for, both with new corn on the ground (coming hither inAs may be collected by the overflowing of Iordan, and by comparing Iosh. 3. 15. with 1 Chr. 12. 15. the beginning of harvest) andJosh. 5. 12. old in their Granary. Thus the Iews did not begin house-keeping on are walls, but were set up with full stock afore-hand: victualled in a manner, with two years pro∣vision, that with the good house-keeperMat. 13. 52. they might bring forth out of their trea∣sure things new and old. § 11. In the days of Samuel and Saul,Gilgall a Court or a Colledge. this was a place of principall credit, where Saul was solemnly invested with a crown, Come, let us goe up unto1 Sam. 6. 14. Gilgal, and renew the kingdome there. Yet here at the same time to shew Gods displeasure with the people for their tumultuous desiring of a King,1 Sam. 12. 18. Thunder in harvest (in Iudea Sommers thunder old mens wonder) exceedingly afrighted the hearers thereof. Afterwards Saul stained this place with a double deed of disobedience, 1 When in Samuels absence he presumed to offer1 Sam. 18. 9. sacrifice. Once the proverb was, Is Saul also amongst the Prophets? Now it may be, Is Saul also amongst the Priests, invading the Sacerdotall function? 2 When contrary to Gods command, he spared and brought hi∣ther the best of spoile of Amalek, so that Samuel was fain to sup∣ply what justice was wanting in Saul, who hewed Agag in pieces before the Lord in1 Sam. 15. 33. Gilgal.
In after ages here was an Academy or Seminary of the sons of the Pro∣phets,2 King. 4. 38. brought up here in learning preparatory to their profession. Ac∣quired, are so far from hindering infused abilities, that the stock prepa∣red by industry, is fittest to be graffed on by inspiration. Eliah and Elisha were successively the Presidents, or rather the Visitors of this Colledge, the latter being both food, and physick for the students therein: 1 Food, when with twenty small2 King. 4. 43. Barly loaves he fed an hundred of the children of the Prophets. 2 Physick, when his meal was2 King. 4. 41. Antidote against the malignity of the wild gourd in their pottage. It seems the sons of the Prophets were no expert Herbalists, whose learning moved in an higher and holier sphere, and they more skilfull to discern betwixt true doctrine and heresie, then betwixt pot-herbs and poison. § 12. Gilgal was afterwards a sinke of Idolatry,Gilgall a sink of Idolatry. and belonged to the Kings of Israel, as appears by the Prophets counsell, though thou Israel play the harlot, yet let not Iudah offend, and come yee not intoHos. 4. 15. & 9. 15. Gilgal &c. At Gilgal men multipliedAmos 4. 4. & 5. 5. transgression, whereupon destruction was denounced against this place, and Gilgal was afterwards rolled up in her own ruines. To return to the river Iordan, which a little south-ward falls in∣to theJosh. 18. 19. Salt-sea, the south boundary of this Tribe. The epithet Salt is not here superfluous, but emphaticall, partly to distinguish it from the sea of Cinneroth or Galilee, which was a fresh-water-sea; and partly be∣cause the water hereof was salt with a witness, fire-salt, as I may say. Let Philosophers demonstrate the cause of the brackishness of the Oce∣an, though it is to be feared, they wil be posed nearer home, how rivolets of teares which flow from their own eyes, come to be so salt. But a peculi∣ar reason may be certainly assigned, why the water in this sea was tran∣scendently salt above all others, whereof largely hereafter in the descripti∣on of Iudah. § 13. Having done with the channell of Iordan,The south-bound of Ben∣jamin. the certain and un∣moveable bound of Benjamin on the east, come we now in our peram∣bulation to surround the other three sides of this Tribe, and at first will onely take notice of the limitary places, and so proceed from the rine to the core, from the marches to the middle of this countrey. The south of Benjamin ranged from Kiriath-jearim by the wellSee Josh. 18. 15. &c. of the waters of Nephtoah, to the valley of Hinnon, and so on the south of Ierusalem descended to En∣rogell. All which places shall hereafter be presented in a peculiar map, and therefore no more for the present. § 14. Hence it went forth to Enshemesh, i. e.The fountain of the sun. the fountain of the Sun. Either so called from the clearness of the waters thereof, or because in Idolatrous days, when the hoste of heaven wasAct. 7. 42. worshipped (whereof the Sun the Generall) it was dedicated thereunto, or because the suns extraordina∣ry influence thereon endued it with soveraign virtue. And now it is well
remembred, that Bath in England is called byCamd. Brit. in Summerset∣shire p. 233. Antoninus Aque solis or the waters of the Sun. Hence the bounds of Benjamin stretched to Geliloth nearCompare Josh. 25. 7. with Josh. 18. 17. Gilgal (over against the going up to Adummim) and thence descen∣ded to the stone of Bohan the sonIosh. 18. 17. of Reuben, so called no doubt from some memorable act by him there atcheived, for otherwise the Reube∣nites had no part of possession on the west side of Iordan. Hence this Tribe extended through Arabah to Beth-hoglah, i. e. asIn locis Heb. lit. B. Saint Hierome in∣terprets it, Locus gyri, or the place of a circle, because (as he will have it) in this place Ioseph with his brethren set in a round (the forme of mourners) bewailed the corps of Iacob brought hither out of Egypt. § 15. But leaving this as a conjecture,The Egyptians passionate be∣wailng of Iacob. most sure it is, that herea∣bouts was the floor of Atad, where so solemn a lamentation was made for Iacobs death, that the place long after did weare mourning in the name thereof, therefore calledGen. 50. 11. Abel-mizraim, i. e. the sorrowing of the Egy∣ptians. Strange, that strangers, beingGen. 50. 7. the Elders of Pharaohs Court and kingdome, should so affectionately bemoan the death of a man no whit related unto them. Surely the Egyptians did not weep-Irish with faigned and mercenary teares, much less was their passion onely State-sympathy and politick compliance, sighing and smiling with the sighs and smi∣lings of Ioseph. Rather it was because the endearing disposition, and obliging goodness of old Iacob, living fifteen years with them in Egypt, had gained the generall love of the land. Besides, they lamented his loss as the death of their own grand-father, because he was Father to Ioseph, the Father, founder and preserver of them and theirs in the time of famin. If any demand why the Egyptians mourned for IacobGen. 50. 3. three∣score and ten days, whilst Ioseph made a mourning for him but forGen. 50. 10. seven days? I can tell the common answer, that the former ignorant of heavenly happiness lamented him totally lost, whilst Ioseph not1 Thes. 4. 13. mourn∣ing without hope was more moderate in his lamentation. But whether this solution be sound in it self, or the question exactly conformable to the text, we remit it to the examination of others. I would rather know the reason why this solemnity of sorrow, was performed in this place, rather then at the cave of Machpelah forty miles hence, where the corps were interred; surely the Master of the Ceremonies in those days could give an account thereof. § 16. But here it will be objected, that Ioseph coming out of Egypt, had a nearer way by many miles to carry Iacobs corps to Hebron, then by going over Iordan. It is confessed, but this fetching a compass was conceived more for the state of the funerall. Unfitting it was, that the body of that worthy Patriarch (to whom all the land belonged by promise) should steale into that Countrey in a clandestine way, and privately enter in at the postern door, rather let it solemnly surround the Countrey, and be brought in at the broad gates. Thus the corps of men of quality, though the Chancell-door be nearer, are borne
through the porch and middle-alley to the place of their interment. § 17. So much for the south-marches of Benjamin,The north bor∣ders of Benja∣min. we come now to visite the north-limits thereof. Those began from Iordan (saith our English translation.) In divertigio Iardenis quo magis adhuc ad orientem divertit (saith Tremellius in his note on the place) i. e. in the winding of Iordan as it turns still more to the east; and we could wish, that this eastern flexure of that river, had been made a little more visible in our Maps. Hence they went up to the sideJosh. 18. 13. of Iericho, understand thereby the confluence of the waters afterwards running to Iericho (as appears by paralleling Iosh. 16. 1. with Iosh. 18. 12.) and so through the mountains westward,Josh. 19. 12. the goings out thereof are at the wilderness of Beth-aven. Whence it turneth towards Luz which is Bethel, south-ward, which now I come to describe. § 18. Beth-el,Beth-el why so called. that is, Gods house, was so named by Iacob (for formerly it was called Luz) who here lying on a stone (it matters not how hard our bed, if so heavenly our dreams) saw aGen. 28. 12. Ladder with God on the top thereof, and Angels ascending and descending thereon. Going down to attend on Gods children according to their commission, and up to give an account of their attendance, and receive farther instructions. Here Iacob by vow indented with God solemnly to make this place his house, and to give to him at his safe returnGen. 28. 22. with bread and water, the tenth of all his substance. But though God over performed his counter∣part herein, Iacob neglected his promise, and when his staffe was swelled intoGen. 32. 10. two bands, set down his staffe at Shechem, and turned there a purcha∣ser of a parcell of ground, till God minded him of his former obligati∣on, AriseGen. 35. 1., goe up to Bethel, and dwell there &c. § 19. Most happy that man who runs the way of Gods commandements,Deborah buried near Beth-el. and next him he is the best, who answers the spur, and with Iacob goeth, when almost driven. Hither he comes (having first reformed his family ofGen. 35. 4. Idolatry) and here built an Altar called El-beth-el. During his abode here died Deborah Rebekahs nurse, venerable for her old age, having seen her nurse-childs childrens children, to the fourth generation. Surely she was well loved whilest living, because so much lamented when dead, buried underGen. 35. 8. Allon Bachuth, or the oake of mourning. As if Iacobs children desired, that their eyes should return that moisture to her in teares, which her breasts had bestowed in milke on their grand∣mother. Thus, though the Hebrews did not so doate on their nurses, as the wild-Irish (who love them better then their ownCamd. Brit. pag. 787. mothers) yet they had them in an high estimation. § 20. In the division of the land,eth-el jointly belonging to Ephraim and Benjamin. Beth-el fell to the lot ofJosh. 18. 22. Benjamin. Yet we finde that the house of Ioseph (understand the Tribe of Ephraim) wanJudg. 1. 25. and possessed it. It seems the City was divided into two parts, the northern pertaining to Ephraim, the southern to Benjamin. In the days of Samuel we finde, how1 Sam. 7. 16. he went from year to year in circuit to Beth-el, and Gilgal, and Mizpeh, and judged Israel in all these places; which were all three
in this Tribe, and in the heart of the Countrey, conveniently seated for Termers to resort hither from all parts thereof. § 21. Here Ieroboam set up one of his golden calves: and how busie was he about sacrificing unto it,Ieroboams calfe, set up in Beth-el. when a Prophet sent from God de∣nounced the destruction of his Altar, which presently clave asunder, according to his prediction? An Altar, which (were it of brass or stone) was softer then the miracle-proof heart of Ieroboam, which nei∣ther was broken, nor bruised thereat; as also he was no whit moved to repent, with the drying up, and1 King. 13. 6. restoring of his hand, which happened thereupon. Indeed he conceived, that his kingdome must have Idolatry for the pillars, which had Rebellion for the foundation thereof: and though Baalisme began and ended with the family of Ahab, Calfe-worship was rivetted into the Crown of Israel. As for the Prophet that foretold the future ruine of this place, a Lion1 Kin. 13. 24. slew him in his return, because he credited a pretended Revelation Parole unto another man, before a Com∣mission from God to the contrary, solemnly signed and delivered un∣to himself. See Gods finger in the Lions paw, how rationally did the brute-beast work his Masters will, being sent not to prey, but to punish? He killed the Prophet, filled not himself, but with the1 King. 13. 25. Asse; stood by the corps, if not as mourners for, as waiters about it. Behold his life spilled, whilest wickedNum. 22. 33. Balaams was spared in journey, so uncertain it is for any to conclude Gods loveEccles. 9. 1. or hatred from outward events. § 22. Eliah and ElishaChildren of Bethel why cur∣led and killed by Elisha. often visited this City of Beth-el; the latter go∣ing up hither was mockt by the children thereof, for lacking the comely excrement of haire on his head, whereupon came two beares out of the wood, and tare two and forty of them. Some will say, Elisha had better have called for two rods, then two Beares out of the wood, therewith to drive out that folly which was bound up in the heart of these children. But his severity will appeare needfull herein, if all circumstances be considered, 1 Probably (though termed children) they were striplings of some bigness, who durst adventure out of the city by the wood-side. 2 No doubt the chickens crowed as the cocks had learned them, and followed the precedents of their Idolatrous parents. 3 The gemination of their offence, Goe2 King. 2. 23▪ up thou bald-head, goe up thou bald-head. 4 They mocked him as he was going up the way, and it is said, the Prophet turned back, so they continued their taunts whilest he came to them, yea till he was at them, yea when he was past them. 5 He looked on them, so that had any ingenuity or remorse been legi∣ble in their countenances, no doubt he would have suspended his sentence. 6 He cursed in the name of the Lord, not out of spight, but with Gods Spirit, and the judgement followed accordingly.
Probably some of them escaped to the City, and there might instruct their mothers and nurses, never more to fright children with fond tales of Bug-bears, but seriously to informe them of the truth of this sorrow∣full accident. § 23. In this City Beth-el there was also a nursery of the Sons2 King. 2. 3. of the Prophets.A Colledge of Prophets at Beth-el. Alas, what heart had they to live here! Could the Stall of the golden calfe be a convenient place for them to study in? The frequent and abominable impieties here committed, they could neither behold with silence, nor reprove with safety. However, it seems, they were especially desirous of, and delighted in this place, where God had imme∣diately manifested his gracious presence to Iacob: and we may charitably beleeve, by the privateness of their lives secured themselves both from pollution and persecution. But for the main, Beth-el was changed into Beth-aven, Scala coeli into Gradus inferni, the Devills then dancing for joy, where once Angels (those holy Agitators) went up and down betwixt heaven and earth. Yea in after-ages it was penal for any pious Prophet to approach this place, such the strictness of the prohibition herein,Amos 7. 13. Pro∣phecy no more at Beth-el, for it is the Kings Chappell, and it is the Kings Court. As if it were against the Law of the Verge for one to draw a sword (though of Gods word) within the bounds and precincts of the Palace of the ido∣latrous Kings of Israel. § 24. The last memorable mention that we finde of Beth-el,Iosiah burns the dead bones at Beth-el. was when Iosiah burnt the bones of the idolatrous people on the2 King. 23. 16. Altar there. Some will say, he shewed little wisdome, and less valour therein, to en∣counter dead corps. Yea the living found more offence by the stinking, then the dead felt pain by the burning of these bones. Nor was the altera∣tion thereby produced of so great moment, seeing otherwise it would have been dust to dust, and now was ashes to ashes. But we must know that Iosiah herein was not acted with principles of cruelty, but moved in obedience to Gods command, to fulfill that prophecy some hundred years before foretold1 King. 13. 2. of him. Whilest here they were ransacking the se∣pulchers, behold one solemn grave (the house of the dead) with a stone thereupon, (the door of that house) with an Epitaph on that stone, (the Porter of that door) wherein, on enquiry appeared, that Prophet lay interred, who long since forespake these passages now come to pass. His corps were2 King. 23. 18 spared by special command, and with him quietly rested the old Prophet▪ so good is it, (as we haveHoly State cap. of Company. elsewhere observed) to keep good company both in life, and after death. So much of Beth-el, whence the border of BenjaminIosh. 18. 13. descended from Ataroth-Adar near the hill which lyeth on the south side of the nether Bethoron. § 25. In assigning the west border of this Tribe,Quere how Benjamin west∣ward could boder on th Sea. we meet with a churlish difficulty in the text, drawing the bounds thereof so, as to Iosh. 18. 14. compass the corner of the sea southward. Here the Quere ariseth, how any part of Benjamin could approach the sea, the Tribe of Dan being inter∣posed
betwixt it and the Mediterranean. Rabbi Solomon seeking to salve it, by Sea understands some great water in the west of this Tribe: and what he affirmeth, is proportionable enough to the Hebrew language, terming all watry confluences a Sea, as we have formerlyDescription of Gad num. 7. observed. And indeed what is our English word Mere used in the samesense more or less then Mare, or a Sea? I should be inclined to the opinion, that the2 Sam. 2. 13. pool of Gibeon so eminent in Scripture, and styled by Ieremiah, theIer. 41. 12. great waters which are in Gibeon, should be the Sea herein intended. Or if the words of the Text calling it the sea, without any other addition, must be understood of the best and biggest in that kinde, (and then can be no other then the Mediterranean sea) then I shall embrace the judgement of learned Vid. Macium in locum. Macius, interpreting  jam, not the Sea, but the west onely; which the propriety of the tongue will well endure. § 26. From this western compass (aliàs Sea in other translations) the limits of Benjamin range to Kiriath-jearim,Vzzah slain for his pre∣sumption. 1 Sam. 7. 2. in the confines of this Tribe, where the Arke was Leiger for twenty years, and whence David in a new cart intended to convey it to Ierusalem. This kinde of carriage was but1 Sam. 6. 7. Philistine divinity, and a Pagan precedent; not so ordered by Moses in the mount. When the Arke was removed from Shilo, it was1 Sam. 4. 3. set on the Levites shoulders; and I see no reason, why they now should be too good to beare it. Uzzah and Ahio drive the cart. The former with his hand held it from shaking, such his store of good intention, and sha∣ked it with his holding, such his want of due qualification. God stri∣keth him2 Sam. 6. 7. with death, and David is startled thereat. Is this the Arke placed so near the Mercy-seat? Oh how terrible then is the throne of di∣vine Justice! For a time therefore the Arke is set to sojourne in the house of Obed-Edom, where the Land-lord was blessed for go good a guest. Diuine ordinances, according as their subject receiveth them, are either cordials or poysons, and the Arke brought ither a curse or a blessing, whithersoever it came. § 27. The place where the former dysastr happened was called by David Perez-Uzzah,Iewish severall inventions to thresh out their grain. nigh2 Sam. 6. 6. Nachons threshing-floor. We meet with ma∣ny such places in the Bible, distant from Cities, where husbandmen housed, and beat out their grain, with severall inventions: namely, 1 With the feet ofDeut. 25. 4. Oxen treading out the corn. 2 By theProv. 20. 26. wheel running over them. Make them O Lord like &c. 3 With flailes, which having wooden handles, had their ends Amos 3. 4. armed with iron. But amongst all their devices, the lazy rick of theCamd. Brit. p. wild Irish, never entred into their braines, who to save pains, burn the straw, so to part the grain from it. § 28. So much for the borders of Benjamin.Ierich a plea∣sant place. Come we now into the middle thereof, and first we finde the waters of Iericho arising in the confines of Ephraim. The naughtiness of this water was mraculously
healed by Elisha putting salt into the2 King. 2. 21. fountain thereof. I say miraculous∣ly, otherwise that ingredient would rather have made it more brackish, then less bitter.2 King. 2. 19. Hence those waters run south-ward to the City of Ie∣richo; whose name (as Munster interprets) signifies having a good savour. Indeed so delicious the situation thereof (after the cure aforesaid wrought by Elisha) that, had Profit and Pleasure been disposed to solace themselves together, no fitter place could be found for that purpose. Fragrant the flowers, sweet the herbs hereabout; especially the garden of Balsame, which in the days of the Romans, occasioned a quarrell betwixt them and the Iews, who manfully defended it. Happy had the latter been, if as zealous for the substance, as for the shadow, losing their own lives to maintain the type, and taking away his life, who was the truth thereof. Then balsame intended by nature for the curing, was the causing of many wounds, such deadly blows passed be∣twixt them. § 29. Ioshua took this City with the sound of Rams horns,Miraculously taken. whereat the wall fell down to the ground. It troubleth me not to conceive, how the rest of the wall falling flat, Rahabs house built thereon should stand upright: seeing divine power, which miraculously gave the Rule, might accordingly make the Exception. A solemnIosh. 6. 16. curse was by Ioshua impo∣sed on those who should rebuild the walls of Iericho, so to obliterate the monument of divine power and justice. § 30. But Iericho thus dismantled, maintained the reputation of a City,Iericho termed a city of Palmes and though not walled with stone for defence, was shaded with trees for pleasure. It is called theDeut 34. 3. City of Palmes (whereJudg. 3. 13. Ehud killed Eglon the corpulent King of Moab) growing so plentifully round about it. These Palmes, or Date-trees had scaly barks, and the boughs were ge∣nerally used, in all combates of manhood, to crown the conquerour. For, asVid Adagi∣um, Palmam ferre. Erasmus observeth, though severall countries, on sundry occasi∣ons, had distinct garlands of victory, made of Laurell, Olive, Myrtle, Oake &c. yet the Palme-tree carried away the palme from them all, and was universally entertained as the Embleme of triumph. The worst I wish these trees is, that they may never want store of weight, seeing Naturalists observe, the more they are depressed, the more they flou∣rish. § 31. But to return to Iericho;The walls of Ierich unhap∣pily built again. it is ill hollowing in the eares of a sleeping Lion, and worse awaking that dust, which God would have dormant in eternall obscurity. See this in the walls of Iericho, which Hiel the Bethelite affronting heaven built again: and according to Ioshua's execration,1 Kin. 16. 34. laid the foundation thereof in Abiram his first borne, and set up the gates thereof in Segub his youngest son; that is, both the one and the other were then destroied by untimely deaths. Strange that seeing his first son drop away, he desisted not from that design; but such the pre∣cipice of bad projects, once step in, and seldome stop in the way of
wickedness. Nor can Hiels presumption herein be excused, whatsoever is pretended in his behalf, being led to this act of contempt, by one of these considerations: 1 H mistook Ioshua's curse rather for a patheticall expression, then propheticall prediction. 2 He conceived the virtue thereof worn out and antiquated, after five hundred years continuance. 3 He chose rather to bottome his memory on so famous a stru∣cture, then to build it on his posterity, as sooner likely to decay. However Hiel got a curse, and Iericho walls thereby, which afterwards grew to be a potent, and populous City. § 32. When the twelve Tribes were divided into two kingdomes,Iericho first be∣longing to Isra∣el, afterwards to Iudah. Iericho probably pertained to Israel, as may appar, 1 By the frequent conversing of Eliah and Elisha in this City, suffi∣ciently known to have been subjects of the crown of Israel. 2 Because Hiel the Bethelite (Beth-el belonging to Israel) built the walls thereof. 3 Because that building bears date in the1 in. 16. 34. days of Ahab, and is not accounted according to the reign of Iehoshaphat, the contempo∣rary King of Iudah. Afterwards it was in the possession of the Kings of Iudah, because in the reign of Ahaz, the captives of Iudah are said to be brought back to Iericho unto their2 Chr. 28. 15. brethren. When carried into Babylon, no more then threeEzra 2. 34. hun∣dred fourty five of this City returned home, whose zealeNehe. 3. 2. was very for∣ward in repairing the walls of Ierusalem. § 33. Here Christ cured blind Bartimeus; and Zacheus the Publican (one of more state then stature) dwelt in this City.Zaceus con∣verted at Iericho. Long had he wished for a sight of Christ: and curiosity in this kinde may sometimes open the door for devotion to enter in. But alass, he was so low, more likely in the crowd to loss himself, then finde his Saviour, till on a suddain he grows a proper man, by getting up into aLuke. 19. 4. Sycamore tree. Who dares say Sycamores are always barren? See one here loaden with good fruit. Christ seeing him invites himself to his house, and down he comes (with more speed no doubt then he gat up) to welcome his guest with good cheer, though the last-course he brought in, was the best; protest∣ing a fourfold restitution of what he had wrongfully gotten, and giving the half of his remaining estate unto the poor. § 34. Iericho was surrounded with plains on every side.Plaines of Ieric. Hither King2 King. 25. 5. Zedekiah fled, and here was taken by the forces of Babylon. The high-way betwixt Iericho and Ierusalem is infamous for theeving, be∣cause of the covert the neighbouring wilderness affords; and great roads are the best rivers for robbers to fish in. Wonder not, that so short a way betwixt two such eminent Cities, was no better secured, seeing some hundred years since, little safer was the road betwixt London and
Saint Albans: till an Abbot of that place, cut down the woods, that afforded them shelter. Reader, if thy occasion should call thee to goe from Iericho to Ierusalem, I wish thee well guarded; but if it be thy hard hap, with the man in the Gospell (be it history or parable) to be rob∣bed and wounded with theeves, mayst thou meet with some good Luke 10. 33. Samaritan, to convey thee to the Inne, and provide necessaries for thee. § 35. West of the waters of Iericho stood Ai,Ai at last taken by Ioshua. a small City, but great enough to give a check to the full speed of Israels victories. Their losse here was inconsiderableIosh. 7. 5. in it self (no more then thirty six men) but dangerous in the consequence thereof. Such a flaw in their orient suc∣cess, made them cheap in the worlds valuation; and the Canaanites (who hitherto had charactred them invincible in their apprehension) began hence to collect, and conclude a possibility of conquering them. Yet not valour too little, in such as fought, but sin too much in some who staid at home, caused this defeat. Achan was the man, who in fine proved no whit richer for the gold, or warmer for the garment he had stolen. Detected by lot, accused by his conscience, convicted by his own confession, condemned by Ioshua he (with hisIosh. 7. 24. children and cattle) is stoned by the Israelites. The place of his execution was called, the vale of Achor, or the vale of trouble, both because Achan actively had troubled Israel with his sin, and because here he was justly troubled by them in his punishment. As for the promise of the Prophet in after ages, that the Hosea 2. 15. vale of Achor should be a door of hope, understand it mystically, that the most deplorable, and seemingly desperate estate of the Church, is capa∣ble of comfort, and may in Gods due time be changed into a prospe∣rous condition. Achan thus punished, how active are the Armes of the Israelites, when freed from the fetters of Sacriledge! Ai is quickly conque∣red, the inhabitants thereof being trained by a dissembled flight of their foes, into their own destruction. Now although such ambushes are now adays unambushed, by the generall suspicion all have of them, yet in the infancy of the world, when battells were meerly managed by main might, and downright blowes▪ (men bringing all their forces a∣bove board) such lying in wait was an unusuall stratagem, and perchance may justly be referred to Ioshua, as the first inventor thereof. § 36. West of Ai,The melliu∣ous wood near Beth-aven. betwixt Bethel and Ai, was theGen. 12. 8. mountain, where Abraham and Lot long lived lovingly together, until the contest betwixt theirGen. 13. 9. heardsmen, when the land was grown too little for their sub∣stance. Poverty preserveth amity, when riches oft-times make rents a∣mong friends. Hard by was the City and wilderness of Beth-aven, which signifies the house of vanity. Strange, that any should impose on a place (except in derision) so ill, and unlucky a name. Yet, hath not Solomon in effect set the same on the whole world?Eccles. 1. 2. Vanity of vanities, all is vanity. But Beth-aven seems emphatically so called, for some eminent
Idolatry committed therein. Neer this place1 Sam. 14. 23. was the wood, wherein when it rained honey from heaven, the Israelites being in pursuit of the Philistines, wanted hands to receive it, having them bound up by Sauls adjuration, not to eat before night. I see neither piety, nor policy, but humour and headiness in Sauls resolution, the way to encrease their stomach, and not their valour. Might not a cursory meal been allowed them, in a running march, a snatch and away? Here Ionathans eyes were opened with tasting a little honey, and presently his eyes were opened again in a sadder sense, seeing himself liable to death for breaking his Fathers command. Nor was it his own innocence, and invincible ig∣norance of the law, but the peoples1 Sam. 14. 45. interposing, which preserved him alive. Yet will not this one good act of popular violence, make amends for those many mischiefs, which their impetuous exorbitances in other cases have produced. § 37. Still westward of Beth-aven stood Gibeon,Gibeoites o∣verreach the Isrlites. termed aJosh. 10. 2. royall City in Scripture, that is, a fair and princely place; otherwise, in all the tran∣sactions, betwixt this City and the Israelites, we meet with no King thereof, which may almost perswade us to believe it a popular State. The inhabitants thereof with clouted old shooes, mouldy bread, and a lie farther fetched then their journey, (pretending their dwellings at great distance) deceived the congregation of Israel, then camped at Gilgal. For the smoke of those ovens, wherein their bread was baked, might almost be perceived from Gibeon to Gilgal, which space Ioshua marched over with his foot-army in oneJosh. 10. 9. night. However, hereby they saved their lives, onely for their cheat were condemned to be Nethinims or Deo∣dands, that is, people given to God, to hew wood, draw water, and doe the drudgery of the Tabrnacle andIosh. 9. 27. Temple, a condition which they gladly accepted of; so sweet is life in it self, though sawced with servi∣tude. § 38. Afterwards Ioshua with a miraculous victory here conquered the five Kings of Canaan, which assembled themselves to besiege Gibeon, in re∣venge of their defection to the Israelites. Never had battell more of God therein; for, he himself brought up, or rather let down the train of Artillery, killing the Canaanites with hail-stones from heaven, as theyIosh. 10. 11. fled in the go∣ing down to Bethoron unto Azekah. Here Ioshua by his faithfull prayer stopt a Giant in his full career, as he was running his race, staying the Sun inIosh. 10. 12. Gibeon, to attend his execution on his enemies. This was (as I may say) the Barnady day of the whole world, the very longest, which that climate ever did, or shal behold, when time was delivered of twins, two days join∣ed together without any night interposed. How the heavens (this ex∣traordinary accident notwithstanding) were afterwards reconciled to their regular motions, and how the expence of so much delay, was re∣paired by future thrift, (I mean this staying of the Sun made up in the years account, by his swifter moving afterwards) I leave to be audited,
and cast up even by Astronomers. Mean time, the foresaid five Kings, were first hid, then stopt in the cave ofJosh. 10. 16. Makkdah, till Ioshua commanded them to be brought forth, and his souldiers to set their feet on their necks; and David in his expression many years after, reflecteth hereon, ThouPsal. 8. 40. hast given me the necks of mine enemies &c. Then were those five Kings hanged by Makkedah a regall City of the Canaanites, which at that time was taken, and theJosh. 10. 28. King thereof destroyed by Ioshua. § 39. To return to Gibeon▪Gibeon the Cock-pit of war though a city belonging to the Lvites. it was afterwards one of the four Cities in this Tribe, which were allotted to theJosh. 2. 17. Levites, and yet we finde it the Theater chiefly of martial atchievements; for, by the great pool in Gibeon, in Helkath-hazzurim, or, th field of strong men, was Abner with the host of Israel worsted by Ioab Generall for David; when Asahel like a wild Roe (wild for his rashness, Roe for his swiftness) would not be perswaded from pursuing of Abner, untill nigh the hill Amnah which2 Sam. 2. 24. lieth before Giah, he taught Asahel the great difference between a nimble leg, a and vigorous arme, smiting him with his spear under the fifth rib. § 40. Under the same rib,Amasa basely murdered by Iab. at the great stone2 Sam. 20. 8. which is in Gibeon, Ioab jea∣lous of Amasa his cousin-german (Ambition owns no alliance, and is onely of kin to it self) basly murdered him in this manner. Ioab had a sword hanging on his loines, and as he went it used to2 Sm. 20. 8. fall out, as if it sought for another sheath, bsides what it had already. Surely he had put his sword in this careless posture, thus to play at in and out, to cover his intended murder, under some pretence of casualty, as if in his em∣braces his weapon had hurt Amasa by unhappy accident. Vain excuse, for certainly his sword could not of its own accord have gone so quick∣ly, and so deeply to Amasa's fifth rib, had not Ioab's steddy aime, both dispatched it on that errand, and directed it to that place. Amasa thus slain, all the people passing by make an halt at his corps, and every2 Sam. 20. 12. one that came by him stood still, untill his body was removed. Where amongst so many gazing on his corps, it is hard, if the active thoughts of some did not light on this observation of divine justice, that he now was trea∣cherously slain, who2 Sam. 17. 25. so lately had been the Generall to a Traitor. § 41. In the beginning of the reign of KingGiben a place of publick wor∣ship. Solomon, Gibeon was a publick place of divine worship, where part of the Tabernacle resided. Here two things are carefully to be observed: 1 The Arke it self. This being taken out of the Tabernacle at Shi∣loh, by1 Sam. 4. 4. Hophni and Phinehas, never returned thither again. But from the land of the Philistines was brought back, first to1 Sam. 6. 18. Beth∣shemesh, thence to1 Sam. 7. 1. Kiriath-jearim, thence to the house of2 Sam. 6. 10. Obed-Edom, and at last fixed and setled by David in Zion under the co∣ver of a Tent2 Sam. 6. 17. which he had pitched for that purpose. 2 The Tabernacle of the Congregation, made by Moses in the wilderness, wherein the Priests attended about their publick sacrifices. This about Solomons time was translated from Shiloh to Gibeon2 Chr. 1. 3. as a
place of more eminency, and conveniency for divine service, be∣cause a City of the Levites. Herein on the high place in Gibeon, Solomon offered to God a thousand burnt offerings, and (which was most acceptable) a zealous prayer reque∣sting wisdome of God, who bestowed both it, and wealth, and honour upon him. Thus those who chiefly desire grace, receive it, the jewell, and at least a competency of outward provisions, for a cabinet to keep it in. Some hundred years after, by the great waters which are in Gi∣beon, Iohanan the son of Karcah, recovered the remnant of the poor Isra∣elites (left in the land after the captivity of Babylon) from Ismael a Prince of the bloud royall, who had a design to carry them away captive unto the Ammonites. § 42. Next Gibeon,Gihea distinct from Gibeon, a wicked city. we take the City of Gibeah into our serious consi∣deration, not as nearest in situation, but in sound of like name, inso∣much that some have unwarily confounded them, as the same place. Gi∣beah lay in the south-west part of this Tribe, whose inhabitants were bad men, but goodJudg. 20. 16. markes-men, right shooters (at an haires breadth and faile not) but unrighteous livers. A Levite coming with his concu∣bine, and servant from Bethlehem, declined to lie atJudg. 19. 12. Ierusalem, because then an heathen City, and (though late) recovered this Gibeah for his lodging place. Alas, what was this, but from the fire into the furnace? so excessive hot was the lust of the people of this City. But charity therein was as cold, none inviting this Levite to his house, untill an old man (and he also no inhabitant, but a stranger of mount Ephraim) coming from his workJudg. 19. 16. out of the field at even, (Industry is the fewel of hospitality) kindely entertained him in his house. In fine, the Levites concubine was by violence, and variety of lust of the men of this City abused to death. Oh the justice of divine proceedings! She had formerly beenJudg. 19. 2. false to her husband. Culpa libido fuit, poena libido fuit. By lust she sinned, and 'twas just She should be punished by lust. This villany being declared to all Israel, a consultation thereon, and first in a fair way the offenders are demanded to justice, which denied and all the Tribe of Benjamin engaging themselves to defend the damnable deed of those of Gibeah, all Israel resolves in a nationall war, to revenge so foul a murder. § 43. Here let us stand still and wonder,Israel twice worsted by Benjamin. that an army united a∣mongst themslves as one man, most in number, best in cause, wisest in counsell (as who had asked, and obtained the advice of God himself, to goe on in this war) should once, andJudg. 20. again be defeated, by those who were weaker, and wickeder then themselves. I cannot challenge the army of Israel, for any eminent sin at this time, yet it is very suspici∣ous, they were carnally confident of the conquest, as accounting the victory eleven to one on their side. However the next battel made amends for all, wherein all the ravenos wolves of Benjamin, with their dams
and whelps at home, were utterly destroyed, except sixJudg. 20. 47. hundred, and those cooped up in a grate, and hid in the rock of Rimmon. Thus, what once was sadly said of Ioseph, was now more true of Benjamin,Gen. 41. 13. One is not. And the whole Tribe had finally been extinguished, had not provision been made to supply them with wives, as formerly hath beenDescription of Ephraim. observed. § 44. Afterwards this GibeahGibeah why surnamed of Saul. got the surname of1 Sam. 11. 4. Saul, because he was born, lived, and buried here. In this Gibeah2 Sam. 21. 6. of Saul, five of his sons (amongst whom a Mephibosheth, but not the Mephibosheth) were in Davids reign hanged up on the hill before the Lord, to expiate Sauls murdering of the Gibeonites. How strangely was his zeale transposed, turning the back of his sword towards the1 Sam. 15. 9. Amalekites, whom God commanded him to destroy, and using the edge thereof against the Gi∣beonites, whom by oath he was bound to preserve? Here Rizpah Sauls concubine, covered the corps of such as were executed, with sackcloth, to keep birds and beasts, from feeding upon them. § 45. Her kindness to the dead is2 Sam. 21. 11. told to King David,Saul buried by David in Gibeah. who not one∣ly gave the hearing, but the practising of so good an example, and there∣by is put in minde, to shew mercy to the bones of Saul, and Ionathan, which he fetched from Iabesh-Gilead, and buried hard by in Zelah, in the sepulcher of Kish his Father. Shewing thereby, that his former severity to Sauls sons, proceeded from a publick desire of his subjects good, no private design of revenge upon Saul, whose corps he so solemnly inter∣red. Corpses, which were but wanderers, whilest hung up by the Phi∣listines in their City of1 Sam. 31. 10. Bethshan; were but sojourners, when buried by the Gileadites in the land of Gad; but now became house-keepers, when brought home to the proper place of the sepulcher of their Fathers. § 46. Hard by Gibeah was Migron,Migron and Ramah. a small City, where Saul for some time abode with his men under a1 Sam. 14. 2. Pomegranate-tree. Say not, that such a tree was a simple palace for a Prince, for in those hot Countreys, pleasant was the residence for some short time, under the shadow there∣of. Yea, our Countrey-manLib. 2. cap. 2. Bede can tell you, how in our cold cli∣mate Anno Domini 601. Augustine the Monke held a Synode under an Oake (called Augustines Ake in old English) which tree our learned Camd. Bit. fol. 436. Antiquary placeth in the confines of Worcester-shire. Nor far from Mi∣gron is Ramah a City, built by Baasha (jealous that Israel would revolt to Iudah,1 King. 15. 17 on Asa's reformation of Religion) to stop all intercourse betwixt the two kingdomes. Not that the armes of so small a City, could reach seventy miles from the sea to Iordan, but because Ramah was greater in command, then compass, as advantageously seated on some roade, or pass of importance. But Baasha diverted by the invasion of Benhadad King of Assyria, desisted from his building; for which he had made so large preparation, that Asa afterwards repaired the neighbouring ci∣ties of Geba and1 Kin. 15. 22. Mizpah, with the stones provided for the fortifying of Ramah.
§ 47. Mizpah now mentioned lay some eight miles hence, full north.Mizpah for a long time the seat of Juice. When in the days of Samuel, the seat of justice was annuall for the time, and tripartite for the place, Mizpah had a fair share thereof,1 Sam. 7. 16. Samuel went from year to year, in circuit to Bethel, and Gilgal, and Mizpah, lying in a kinde of triangle, and judged Israel in all those places, and his return was to Ramah, for there was his house. State-affairs made not the good man to forget his fa∣mily, spending three Terms abroad on the publick, and the Vacation at home, on his private occasions. At Mizpah was a generall reformation of the people, when conscious of their sins, and sensible of Gods anger, they drew1 Sam. 7. 6. water, that is, plentifully powred forth tears before the Lord. Say not, that their weeping was a labour in vain, and such drawing of water (like the bottomless buckets of the Belides never to be filled) ineffectuall for the expiation of sin, because no sorrow for the same is sufficient, see∣ing, not the intrinsecall worth of their tears, but Gods gracious appreti∣ation of the sincerity thereof, gave the value to their weeping. After∣wards at1 Sam. 10. 17. Mizpah, Saul out of modesty, or policy, was hid among the stuffe; when found there, fetched thence, and presented to the people for their king, appearing so proper a person, that nature might seem to de∣sign him for supremacy, and mark him out to be the2 Chr. 2. 18. Overseer of Israel, who was higher then any of the people, from the shoulders, andSam. 10. 23. upwards. § 48. In the days of King Baasa, AsaAsa his pit in Mizpa em∣ployed other∣wise then it was intended. King of Iudah frighted with fear, made aIer. 41. 9. pit in Mizpah for his retreating place. No doubt though the entrance, and orifice thereof, did promise no more then a plain pit, yet it wasSee our de∣scription of Asher. § 5. contrived into rooms, and fortified with substructions therein, fit for the receipt of a Prince. Wonder not, that he would prefer to trust his person here, rather then within the walls of his royall City Ierusalem; for surely this was not provided for a place of long residence, but for present priva∣cy, and sudden safety, if extremity required it. After the Babylonish capti∣vity, when Gedaliah was made governour of those poor Iews, which were left to till the land, he madeIer. 40. 6. Mizpah the seat of his short government. Thus have I often seen fishermen, when they have caught store of fish, cast the young fry (worth neither the keeping, nor killing) into the river again, to be breeders, in which consideration the King of Babylon preser∣ved these poor Iews from destruction. Slight not Gedaliahs place, as dis∣gracefull to be Prince of beggers, for they were in a thriving way, and pro∣bable to improve themselves to a considerable condition, had not Ismael (an unhappy name to persecute Gods children) a Prince of the bloud, kil∣led him, with his followers, casting them into the midstIer. 41. 9. of the pit that Asa made, now employed to bury the dead, but first intended to preserve the living. In the days of the Maccabees, whilest Ierusalem was possessed, and profaned by the heathens, they repaired to1 Macca. 3. 46 Mizpah, as a place formerly fortunate for that purpose, to fast, pray, and beg Gods blessing on their undertakings against their enemies. § 49. South of Mizpah lay the place called Eben-ezer,Different suc∣cess of the Isra∣eltes at Eben-Ezer. that is, the stone of
help, so named, by way of Prolepsis in Scripture, 1 Sam. 4. 1. for otherwise for the present, this place was no help, but an hindrance to the Israelites, who here were twice beaten in battell by the Philistines. At the second time they brought their Reserve, I mean the1 Sam. 4. 4. & cap. 5. ver. 1. Ark, into the field, & carnal∣ly conceited, that victory would fly along with them, on the wings of the Cherubims over the Mercyseat. But the sanctity of the Ark did not so much invite, as the profaneness of the managers (Hophni and Phinehas) did repell Gods gracious presence, from going along therewith; inso∣much as the Ark it self was taken captive, and carried into the land of the Philistines. Some years after the Philistines again charge the Israelites in the same place, presuming on their former victories, that in so fortunate a place they might prescribe for conquest, but God turned the tide of their success. At the importunate suit of Samuel (whose prayers were more potent, then formerly the presence of the Ark, to obtain victory) the Philistines were routed, and smitten untill they came under1 Sam. 7. 11. Bethcar. Whereupon Samuel set up a stone, between Mizpah and Shen, and called it Eben-ezer, the stone of help, to perpetuate so memorable a conquest. § 50. Hard by is Beeroth,Ionathns Scylla and Charybdis. once a City of theIosh. 9. 17. Gibeonites (with Chephirah not far off) afterwards the2 Sam. 4. 2. birth-place of Baanah and Rechab, the mur∣derers of Ishbosheth. Gittaim, whither those of Beeroth2 Sam. 4. 3. fled for fear of the Philistines (saith Tremellius when Saul was slain) and west thereof Bozer and1 Sam. 14. 4. Seneh two famous rocks; which Ionathan, and his armour-bearer clambred up upon their hands and1 Sam. 14. 13. feet. They found it more hard to come at, then to conquer their enemies, & yet whē on the top of the rock, they were but at the bottome, and beginning of their work. They lay a∣bout them, and kill many in a little space: so that they climbed not up the hill so slowly, but their enemies more swiftly ran down the same. Yet such as will justifie Ionathans act herein, for pious and prudent, must re∣trait to Divine inspiration, and plead, that his undertaking, as his success, was extraordinary; otherwise, his tempting of God, had been higher then the rock he climbed up, to adventure himself on such visible disadvantages. § 51. AnathothAnathoth the Country-house of the High-priests. remains, lying hence south-east; a city of the Levites, yea of the Priests, yea of the High-priests, as a country-house, or retiring place for them out of the populous city of Ierusalem. Abiathar being deprived of the priest-hood, for practising with Ioab, without the privity of David, to promote Adonijah to the Crown, was sent hither by Solomon, and confined to live1 King. 2. 26. privately on his own lands. Hence plainly appears the power of the Kings of Israel over the Priests; which on their misdemeanour in civill matters were subject to secular punishment. But Ieremy the Prophet was the honour of Anathoth, that man of mourning, famous for his book De Tristi∣bus, or most poeticall Lamentations, (though therein not bemoaning his own, but the publick calamities) bornIer. 1. 1. in this city. As here he drew his first; so he was likely to have drawn his last breath, by theIer. 11. 21. conspiracy of the people against him, had not God frustrated their wicked designe.
Herein the observation of our Saviour was verified,Mat. 13. 57. A Prophet is not with∣out honour, save in his own countrey, and his own house. Afterwards, Ieremy at A∣nathoth, bought the ground of his uncl Hanameel, with all the formalities of bargain and sale, mostJer. 32. 10. solmnly passed betwixt them. Is a Prophet a∣mongst the purchasers? commonly they are as clear from money, as the ApostlesAct. 3. 6 were: but this was rally, yet mystically done, to foreell the future felicity of Israel, after the captivity of Babylon, that men should have setled estates, with good title to, and tnure of their land therein. § 52. Michmash is still behinde, which we name last,The Philistines design to de∣stroy smiths in Israel. because not entire∣ly in this Tribe, but in the confines of Benjamin and Ephraim. It lay1 Sam. 13. 5. cast from Beth-aven, often mentioned in Scripture as the Rendesvouz, some∣times of the Israelites in the reign of Saul, and sometimes of the Philistines. The latter marched hence three severall ways, on design to extirpate all the smiths in Israel▪ Mark their motions, 1 One party went the1 Sa. 13. 17. way that leadeth to Ophrah, to the land of Shual, that is, north-east. 2 Another turned the way to Bethoron, that is, full west. 3 The third to the border that looketh to the valley of Zeboim, that is, south-east. Thus dividing themselves they compass their ends, and destroyed that necessary profession in all the land. For the musick of the harp may bet∣ter be spared in a common-wealth, then the noise of an hammer. Indeed, I have heard, that ther is an house on London-bridge, built entirely of wood, without any mixture of iron-nailes therein, therefore commonly called None-such, for the rarity of the structure thereof: but if any could shew a civilized State extant on earth, without the use of smiths therein, it deserveth the name of Nnesuch indeed. Yea, the very Philistines them∣selves, (though they suppressed the military use of smiths, for matter of Armes) permitted by way of lone their use to sharpen instruments of1 Sam. 13. 20. husbandry. This not their bounty, but policy suffered, as being confi∣dent, when the Israelites had ploughed, harrowed, & sown their ground, reaped, housed, and threshed their grain, then they at pleasure could come up, to take bake, and eate it themselves. § 53. So much for the cities in Benjamin,The massace of the Priests at Nob by Dg. of whose situation we have a∣ny certainty. A second sort succeeds, known by their conjecturall flags to be of doubtfull position. Amongst these Nob justly claimeth the prece∣dency (made by us within the compass of Anathoth) a city of the Priests, where Ahimelech victualled David, and his men, with1 Sam. 21. 4. shew-bread, and armed him with the sword of1 Sam. 21. 9. Goliah, there kept for a monument. Let others enquire, why Davids sling was not rather preserved for that pur∣pose, seeing it overcame the other. A false brother was present, by name, Doeg; nation, an Edomite; office, master of the Kings heardsmen; who told al, and more then all to Saul, adding of his own head, that Ahimelech1 Sam. 22. 10. enquired counsell of the Lord for him. Sure I am, Doeg enquired not of the Lord,
when he told so damnable an untruth. Hereupon, Saul condemned the Priest to death, and others declining so savage a service, Doeg undertook it, killing fourscore and five persons, which wore a linen Ephod, besides women, children, sucklings, and cattel: so voracious was the appetite of his sword, and so active his cruelty, when in commission, and armed with authority. § 54. The Readers eye may easily discover such places of uncertain position, as remain;Zemaraim, the vale of Crafts∣men, and Ze∣boim. and amongst them Zemaraim, so named in Hebrew, for plenty of wooll thereabouts, as Woollwich in Kent, and Woollton in Dor∣set-shire are so called, upon the same occasion. We set Zemaraim next Bethel because namedIosh. 18. 22. next unto it, where some place theGen. 10. 18. Zemarites ancient inhabitants of Canaan, as we have formerlyLib. 1. cap. observed. Nigh this city was an hil2 Chr. 13. 4. of the same name, whereon King Abijah stood, & made his excellent oration (wanting nothing but a better man to utter it) immediately before his miraculous victory, over the Army of Ieroboam. The Valley of Craftsmen, which though it sounds like a Countrey, yet, because going inNehe. 11. 35. equipage with other cities, may be concluded a city it self. And what are Valladolit, or Vallis Olitana in Spaine, and Vale-royall in Cheshire, but the former a fair city & the latter (lately an Abby) now a village? I am almost of opinion, that this Valley of craftsmen, took its denomination from Solomons work-men, of whom we1 King 7. 46. read, that in the plain of Iordan in the clay ground, they cast all the brasen vessels of the Temple, did not the position of that place, (whereof before) lie a little more north-ward. We conclude with Zeboim, not the same with that city, firstDe. 29. 23. burnt, then drowned in the Daed-sea, but another probably built not far thence, near the influx of Iordan into the dead-sea. § 55.1 King. 4. 18. Simei the son of Elah was Solomons Purveyor in Benjamin:A Wolfe Ben∣jamins Armes. The Armes of Benjamin were Gules, a Wolfe salient argent, in allusion to Iacobs words, He shallGen. 49. 27. ravin as a Wolfe, in the morning he shall devoure the prey, and at night he shall divide the spoil. Surely the conformity hereof was not found in the person of Benjamin, who appears rather lamb-like, then wolvish, in that little left of him in Scripture. Some conceive, they have found the re∣semblance in the two Sauls of this Tribe, the one persecuting David, the other the Son of David (Christ in his members) with raging cruelty. But to wave the various Rabbinicall conceits hereof, certainly, this (as al other similitudes of this nature) is not to be sought, in the disgraceful, but com∣mendable qualities of a Wolf. Thus, when God saith of himself,Revel. 16. 15. Behold I come as a thief, it is not meant, injuriously, fraudulently, mischievously; but secretly, suddenly, irresistibly. This premised, though wolves and foxes generally hear ill in Scripture, yet the former excell in sight, descrying things at great distance; in sleight, of excessive agility of body; & in might, very strong, in proportion to the bulk thereof. All which properties dis∣cover themselves in the Benjamites, quick sighted, steadyIudg. 10. 16. handed (witness their good mark-men) and stout-hearted; in a word , so that both their valour and success are foretold, in this blessing bestowed upon them.
Here the Map of Judah is to be inserted.
THE TRIBE OF IVDAH. CHAP. 13. § 1.IUDAH,Iudah and his good qualities. forth son of Iacob by Leab his wife, was generally a well-natured man,Gen. 37. 26. ende∣vouring preservation of his brother Ioseph, and an excellet speaker, being theGen. 44. 18. mouth for the rest of his brethren, in his eloquent oration to Iosh. Not that these his good qualities (which otherwhiles were allayed with lustGen. 38. 16. & 24. and cruelty) were the causes, bu rather the effects of Gods preferring him above the rest of his brethren. Of this Tribe, threescoreNumb. 2. 4. and fourteen thousand and six hundred canne out of Egypt; all which deservedly dying in the wilderness for their disobedience, the next ge∣neration descended from them, being threescore and sixteen thousand and five hundred, possessed the land of Canaan. § 2. Iudah (saith the1 Chron. 5. 2. Scripture) prevailed above his brethren,The Soveraign∣ty of this tribe. and of him came the chiefe rulers, so that he may be traced all along by the footsteps of his soveraignty. Whilest they were in th wilderness, God ordered, that the standard of Iudah should pitch first o theNumb. 2. 3. east side of the Taberna∣cle towards the rising of the Sun. Perchance, to denote that theMal. 4. 2. Sun of righte∣ousness arising with healing in his wings, should be extracted from that Tribe. When Ioshua was dead, and the childre of Israel asked of the Lord, Who shall goe up first for us to fight against the Candanites? It was answered,Judg. 1. 2. Iudah shall goe up. Othniel the first Judge was hence descended, and David, in whose royall line the Crown lasted for above four hundred years: and after the return from captiviy, Zorobabel of the Tribe of Iu∣dah is honoured with the style ofHagg. 1. 1. Governour, which office for some time continued in his family. In a word (besides Princes) so puissant was the Tribe in Generalls, Ioab, Abishdi, Amasa &c. Statesmen, Caleb, Ahitophel; and Prophets, Natan, Amos, Micah; that in dignity, as in strength and
number it surmounted all the rest. Yea, Napthali's fearfull Hinde durst not bellow; nor Issachars patient. Ass bray; nor Ephraims strong Oxe low; nor Benjamins cruell Wolfe howle; nor Dans cunning Serpent hiss, if Iudah's Princely Lion was pleased to roare, as Commander of all the beasts of the field and forest. § 3. However,How the scep∣ter departed not from Iudah. I dare not (with some) interpret Iacobs solemn pro∣phecy, the ScepterGen. 49. 10. shall not depart from Iudah, nor the Law-giver from between his feet, untill Shiloh come, of a constant Soveraignty immoveably fixed in this Tribe till the birth of our Saviour: a Tenet unteinable with truth, seeing of the many Judges in Israel, but two of this Tribe; Saul, the first King, of Benjamin, and the Maccabees of the Tribe of Levi, who after the captivity attained to Kingly honour amongst the Iews. Rather we understand Iacobs words of the whole nation, (whom he in the Spirit foresaw, should in process of time be called Iews, as the land Iudea, from Iudah) and expound them to be a prediction, that the Iews should never totally, and finally lose the visible being of a kingdome, or common∣wealth, with a form of government amongst themselves, (though of∣ten changed and altered in the manner, obscured and eclipsed in the lustre, confined and emparied in the power thereof) untill Messiah should be manifested in the flesh. Which came to pass accordingly, when the Iews at our Saviours birth (and more completely at, and after his death) had lost all shadows of a free State, totally inslaved to the Romane Em∣perour. To whom alone blonged, 1 The Militia with the Castle, giving martial-law to the Temple it self. 2 Coine, stamped with the image and superscription ofMat. 22. 2. Cesar. 3 Customes, collected, yea extorted by his Publicanes. 4 Power in causes capitall, by the Priests own confession,Iohn 18. 31. It is not lawfull for us to put any man to death. And the prophecy of Iacob thus expounded, is both clear in it self, and according to the interpretatio of theIustin Martyr in dialog cum Triphone Iudaeo. Ancients. § 4. This Tribe had Dan and Simeon on the west,The limits of the Land of Iudea. Benjamin on the north, the wilderness of Paran o the south, and the Dead-sea on the east. Extending east and west, welnigh fourty miles; but from Cadesh-Barnea to Ierusalem was about sixty six. Where in this countrey was conteined a mountainous land, but fruitfull with all commodities for pleasure and profit. We begin with the Dead-sea, Iudah's eastern boun∣dary, and so shall proceed to rround it in our description. § 5. This wasGen. 14. 3. once a fruitull countrey,The Dead-sea once a fruit∣full countrey. called the vale of Siddim, evenGen. 13. 10. as the garden of the Lord, Paradi se it self. Too like indeed thereto, both for the pleasure thereof, and Sepent therein, the spreading wickedness of the vicious Sodomites. Lot chose to live here, not because the people were well nurtured, but the place well vatered; though better watered (no doubt) during his living there, with his teares, from a soul2 Pet. 2. 8. vexed
with their filthy conversation. He lost by his dwelling among them, for whose sins he was carriedGen. 14. 12. captive by Chedorlaomer; They gained by their dwelling so near him, for whose sake they were rescued by his uncle Abra∣ham. Yea, afterwards Abraham endevoured to save the whole city of Sodome, beating down the price of Gods justice as low, as possibly it might consist with his honour, toGen. 18. 32. ten righteous men: and yet that too high a rate for the pie∣ty of Sodome to reach, so general was the wickedness therein. Hereupon, So∣dome, with three neighbouring Cities,Deut. 29. 23. Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboim, was destroyed with fire and brimstone from heaven, and thereby the whole Countrey turned into a standing stinking lake. § 6. Some will say,How fire let water behind it it was strange, that fire should beget water, a combustion produce an inundation. More proper it had been, that such an inflammation should have left and Aetna, Hecla or Vesuvius behinde it, fuming, if not burning always. The rather, because next morning this place presented it self to the eyes of Abraham, as the smoke of aGen. 19. 28. furnace. But such must know, that when the fire was once out: 1 The Countrey by nature was low and levell, being a depressed plain, and so more subject to drowning. 2 Iordan (running through this vale, and there sinking into the ground) had a quality in the first moneth toIosh. 3. 15. &c 1 Chr. 12. 15 & Eccles. 24. 30 overflow his banks, and so prone to occasion a deluge. 3 Probably, the river was formerly bridled with artificiall banks, which either were then broken down with that tempest, or af∣terwards decayed by degrees, when the people were destroyed. 4 Iordan, in the vacancy of the inhabitants, having got violent possession, fenced and fortified himself in the slime-pits, (as in so many castles) whereof greatGen. 14. 10. plenty in that place, and could not afterwards be ejected. Thus his title to this plain, though at first an unjust usurpation and incroachment, is made lawfull by the prescription of three thousand years possession. § 7. This sea is known by severall names. 1. The Dead-sea,Severall names of this sea. either because the Charnel-house of so many dead carcasses then destroyed there∣in; or, because it kills all creatures coming into it; or lastly, because dull and dead, not enlivened with a tide, or quickned with any visible motion, one main cause of the offensive savour thereof, laziness disposing men to lewdness, and waters to putrefaction. 2. TheGen. 14. 3. Salt-sea salt in∣deed, from the sulphurous combustions first occasioning it. 3. By Greek writers it is termed the Asphaltite-lake from , or Bitu∣men, growing plentifully thereabouts. This Bitumen (we are fain to re∣tain the Latine word, our land neither affording the thing, nor our language the name to signifie it) is a clammy, glutinous substance, use∣full in Physick to astringe, in Surgery to consolidate. Used by the rich as morter to build, (as in the tower ofGen. 11. 3. Babel) by the poor as oile to burn,
therfore called  in hebrew; quickly kindled, hardly quenched, flaming far and long, as partaking much of pitch, and more of brimstone in the nature thereof. And such as could not goe to the cost of richer spices, used it for imbalming their dead, being a great drier, and so preserver from corruption. § 8. This Salt-sea was sullen and churlish,Neithe ships nor fish in the Salt-sea. differing from all other in the conditions thereof. David speaking of other seas, saith, there goe the ships,Psal. 104. 26. and there is that Leviathan which thou hast made to play therein: so in∣stancing in the double use of the sea, for ships to saile, and fishes to swim in. But this is serviceable for neither of these intents, no vessels sailing thereon, the clammy water being a reall Remora to obstruct their passage; and the most sportfull fishes dare not jest with the edged-tools of this Dead-sea; which if unwillingly hurried thereinto by the force of the stream of Iordan, they presently expire. Yea, it would kill that Apocry∣pha-Dragon, which Daniel is said to have choaked with lumps ofHistor. of the Dragon ver. 27 pitch, fat, and hair, if he should be so adventurous to drink of the waters there∣of; so stifling and suffocating is the nature of it. In a word, this sea hath but one good quality, namely, that it entertains intercourse with no other seas; which may be imputed to the providence of nature, debar∣ring it from communion with the Ocean, lest otherwise it should in∣fect other waters with its malignity. Nor doeth any healthfull thing grow thereon, save onely this wholesome counsell, which may be collected from this pestiferous lake, for men to beware how they provoke divine justice, by their lustfull and unnaturall enormities. § 9. Heathen writers,Solinus his testimony of the Dead-sea. Tacitus and Pliny, take notice of this lake, with the qualities thereof, but especially Solinus, whose testimony (but with some variations from Scripture) we thought fit to insert, and translate, though the latter will scarcely be done, without some abatement of the native elegancy, and expressiveness thereof. LongoSolin. Poly∣bist. cap. 38. ab Hierosolymis re∣cessu tristis sinus panditur, quem de coelo tactum testatur humus nigra, & in cinerem soluta. Duo ibi oppida, Sodomum nominatum alterum, alterum Gomorrhum. Apud quae pomum gignitur, quod habeat speciem licèt maturitatis, mandi tamen non potest. Nam fuliginem intrinsecus favillaceam ambitio tantùm extimae cutis cohibet: quae vel levi tactu pressa fumum exhalat, & fatiscit in vagum pulverem. A good way side of Ierusalem lies ope a melancholy Bay, which the black soil being also turned in∣to ashes▪ witnesseth to have been blasted from heaven. In it are two towns, the one called Sodome, the other Gomorrah. Wherein grows an apple, which though it seem fair and ripe, yet cannot be eaten. For, the compass of the outward rinde onely, holds within it an ember-like soot: which being but lightly pressed, evaporates into smoke and be∣comes flittering dust. § 10. But Lot was preserved,Lots wie turn∣ed into a pillar of salt. and God is said therein to haveGen. 19. 29. remem∣bred Abraham, though he might have seemed to have forgotten him, in refusing to grant to spare Sodome at his request. Thus, though divine providence may denie good mens prayers in the full latitude of their
desires, he always grants them such a competent proportion thereof, as is most for his glory, and their good. Lot with his wife are en∣joined onely not to look back, wherein she disobeyed the commande∣ment, either out of 1 High contempt: Yet seeing for the main she had been a good woman, accompanying her husband many miles from his native to a strange Countrey, meerly depending on Gods providence, our charity believes her fact proceeding rather from 2 Carelesness, or incogitancy, having for that instant forgotten the command; or 3 Curiosity, to behold the manner of so strange, and suddain a de∣struction; or 4 Infidelity, not conceiving it possible, so great a City could be so soon overthrown; or 5 Covetousness, when she thought on the wealth she had left behinde her; or 6 Compassion, hearing the whining of swine, braying of Asses, bleating of sheep, lowing of kine, crying of children, shriek∣ing of women, roaring of men, and some of them of her own flesh and bloud. Were they any, or all of these, back she looked, and was turned in∣to aGen. 19. 26. pillar of salt, which, Saint Hierome saith, was extant in his age-Mean time, how sad a case was Lot in, bearing about him life and death? one halfe of him quick, lively, and active; the other halfe, (his wife, both making but one flesh) so strangely, and suddainly, sensless, dead, and immoveable. § 11. Not far off is the City of Zoar (Littleton in English) so named by Lot,Zoar spared at Lots request. whereas formerly it was called Belah. I say by Lot, who was the best benefactor to this place, which otherwise had been sent the same way of destruction, with the other four Cities, had not his importunityGen. 19. 21. prevailed with God, for the sparing thereof. Yet I finde not any monument of gratitude made by the men of Zoar, to the memory of Lot their preserver; yea, they would not afford him a quiet and comfortable being amongst them, insomuch that heGen. 19. 30. feared to dwell in Zoar. Either suspecting that they would offer violence to his person, or infect his soul with their bad example, or that he might be involved in their suddain destruction, as a wicked place spared, not pardoned by God, and allowed to himself for his present refuge, not constant habitation. Their ill usage of so good a man, mindes me of Solomons observation,Eccles. 9. 14. 15. There was a little City and few men within it, and there came a great King against it, and besieged it, and built great bulwarks against it. Now there was found in it a poor wise man, and e by his wisedome delivered the City, yet no man remembred the same poor man. No more
then Lot was remembred in Zoar, though the tutelar Saint thereof. But his clear conscience, in free doing this courtesie, rewarded it self in do∣ing it; whilest mercenary souls, working onely for the wages of thanks, often lose their labour, especially in this ungratefull age. § 12. From Zoar,Lots incest with his daugh∣ters. Lot removed to a neighbouringGen. 19. 30. mountain, and dwelt in a cave therein, which is shown to travellers at this day. Now, an hole in an hil could hold him, and all his family, whose substance for∣merly was so great, the whole Countrey could not afford room for his flocks and heard-men, withoutGen. 13. 7. striving with those of his uncle Abra∣ham. Here made drunken by his daughters practise upon him▪ with them he committed incest. It is grace, not the place, can secure mens souls from sin, seeing Lot fasting from lust in wanton and populous Sodome, urfeited thereof in a solitary cave; and whilest he carefully fenced the castle of chastity, even to make it impregnable against the battery of forein force, he never suspected to be surprised by the treachery of his own family. § 13. So much for Pentepolis,The utility of critcisme in boundaries. once a countrey of five cities, now all turned into one lake. Come we now to survey the particular limits of this Tribe. That Maxime, Qui bene distinguit, bene docet, holds most true herein: the well distinguishing of bounds, conduceth much to the true knowledge of this Countrey; especially, seeing the Holy Spirit hath been so exact in assigning them. Where God is pleased to point, for man not to vouchsafe a look, sheweth, that proud earth valueth his eyes, as more worth then the hand of heaven. § 14. The borders of Iudah with all their particular flexure are thusThe borders of Iudah. described inJosh. 15. 3. &c. Ioshua. East. South. North. West. The Salt-Sea. 1 From the south-side of the salt-sea, to the go∣ing up of Acrabbin. 2 Thence to the wilder∣ness of Zin. 3 Thence to the south-side unto Kadesh-Barnea. 4 Thence to Hezron. 5 Thence it went up to Adar. 6 Thence fetched a com∣pass to Karkaa. 7 Thence it passed to Azmon. 8 Thence unto the river of Egypt. 9 Thence went out at the Sea. Observe we, that these south bounds of Iu∣dah, are for the main the same with the south limits of the whole land, assigned Numbers 34. 1 From the end of Iordan at the salt-sea to Beth-hoglah 2 Thence by the north of Beth-araba. 3 Thence it went up to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben. 4 Thence towards Debir from the valley of Achor. 5 So northwards looking to Gilgal, before the going up to Adummin, on the south side of the river. 6 Thence towards the wa∣ter of Enshemesh. 7 Thence to Enrogel. Thence by the vally of Benhinnom unto the south of Ierusalē. 8 Thence to the top of the mountain at the end of the vally of Rephaim. 9 Thence to the fountain of Nephtoah. 10 Thence to the cities of mount Ephron. 11 Thence to Kiriath-jearim. 1 From Kiriath-jearim westward it compasseth unto mount Seir. 2 Thence it passeth along to the side of mount Iea∣rim, or Chesalon. 3 Thence went down to Bethshemesh. 4 Thence passed on to Tim∣nah. 5 Thence unto the side of Ekron northward. 6 Thence was drawn to Shichron. 7 Thence passed along to mount Baalah. 8 Thence went out unto Iabneel. 9 Thence the west border ended at the Great Sea. These west bounds of Iudah, were after∣wards altered, fal∣ling into the middest of the Tribe of Dan.
Now, as in the body of a man, if an inspection might be made into it whilest he is alive, every nerve, and artery therein (then flushed up with the spirits) is easily to be discerned, which after death shrink almost invisible, past discovering: so each small angle, and turning of Iudah's bounds in Ioshua's time, was then plainly to be perceived, which now adays (the land long since, being in a manner dead, and desolate) are not at all conspicuous, nor fall they under any accurate observation. § 15. Amongst all these limitary places,Kadesh-Barnea in the edge of Canaan. Kadesh-Barnea is onely of eminency, whither the children of IsraelNum. 32. 8. came, and where they stayed some time, after their coming out of Egypt, in the very edge and entrance of the land of Canaan. Thus that land was like a rich robe, whose ut∣most hem the Iews were permitted to touch (onely that their fingers might feel the fineness thereof) but were denied to wear it, and remanded to wander another way many years, for the punishment of their infideli∣ty. And thus many come to the Kadesh-Barnea of common illumina∣tion, who never attain to the true Canaan of holiness here, or happiness hereafter. § 16. In describing this spacious Tribe,Method pro∣pounded. we will begin with the eleven royall Cities therein, whose Kings were destroyed byIosh 10. 10, &c. Ioshua. These according to their dignities may thus be reckoned up: 1 Ierusalem, whereof largely hereafter. 2 Hebron. 3 Debir. 4 Libnah. 5 Lachish. 6 Adullam. 7 Geder. 8 Iarmuth. 9 Eglon. 10 Arad. 11 Hepher. These royall Cities, though scattered here and there in this Tribe, need no other Herauld in our map, to proclaime them to the Readers notice, being quickly found out by their coronets graven upon them. From these we shall proceed to other towns of eminency, reserving the rivo∣lets, and wildernesses, to close this our description. § 17. Hebron was the principall royall city belonging to Iudah,Hebron anci∣ently Kiriath-Arba. seven yearsNum. 13. 22. senior in its building to Zoan a City in Egypt; more anciently it was called Kiriath-Arba, that is (sayAdricho. in der. of Iudah. num. 145. some) the City of four men, be∣cause of four Patriarchs (as they reckon them up) Adam, Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob buried therein. But, I wonder any should delight in their own wild conjectures, when the text tendereth us a certainty herein, assuring us that this Arba (from whom Kiriath-Arba, or Hebron was named) wasIosh. 14. 15. a great man among the Anakims. This City stood in the vale of Mamre, so called fromGen. 4. 24. Mamre a person of quality in this place, who with Aner and Eshcol were Abrahams loving associates, and valiant assi∣stants, in conquering Cheder-laomer, and rescuing the captive Sodomites. Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob lived here successively, and from the vale of He∣bron, Ioseph wasGen. 37. 14. sent on a loving visit to his brethren, when for his good will they sold him to the Ishmaelites. § 18. Hereabouts was that great entertainment made,Entertainment of Angels. wherein the covert of aGen. 18. 8. tree was the dining-room, the ground (probably) the
board, Abraham the Caterer, Sarah the Cook, veal and welcome their cheer, Angels in the shape of men, Christ in the notion of an Angel, the guests, and the last promise ofGen. 18. 10. Isaac the free-offering they gave for their entertainment. Yea, in Hebron Isaac was born, suckled, weaned, perse∣cuted by Ishmael, till at last he mocked both himself, and his mother Hagar quite out of his Fathers family. § 19. Near Hebron was the cave of Machpelah,The cave of Machpelah. purchased by Abraham of Ephron the Hittite (with the field about it, and all the trees therein) at the price of fourGen. 23. 16, 17. hundred shekells of silver, for the burying of Sarah, himself, and his family. For, here, IsaacGen. 25. 9. Ishmael though formerly the one perscuted the other lovingly a∣greed to bury Abraham their Father. IacobGen. 35. 29. Esau though formerly the one designed the others death lovingly a∣greed to bury Isaac their Father. IosephGen. 50 13. and his brethren, though formerly they envied and sold him, lovingly a∣greed to bury Iacob their Father. And thus, though branglings, and brawlings may happen betwixt bre∣thren when young; all animosities ought to be buried in the grave of their Fathers. § 20. In the time of IoshuaJosh. 10. 37. Hebron had a King, whom he conque∣red,Royall turned into Sacerdo∣tall Cities. and subdued; and afterwards this place was made a CityJosh. 20. 7. of Refuge, and assigned (with twelve moe in this Tribe, and Benjamin) unto the Josh. 21. 13. Priests, the sons of Aaron, who were above common Levites, as em∣ployed in ordinary attendance about the Tabernacle. Herein God pro∣vided not onely for their conveniency, accommodating them with ha∣bitations near Ierusalem (as the place hereafter intended for his publick service) but chiefly for their conscience, placing them in these two Tribes, whom he foresaw would alone persevere in, when the others would apostate from the true Religion. Yea the Priests had the best and biggest places in Iudah, as Hebron, Debir, Libnah, formerly Royall, after∣wards Sacerdotall Cities: God allowing his Ministers large main∣tenance; and indeed a beggerly Clergy, is the forerunner of a bankrupt Religion. § 21. But although the City of Hebron pertained to the Priests,The suburbs of Hebron g∣ven to Caleb. the suburbs thereof by Gods appointment belonged toJosh. 14. 13. Caleb and his poste∣rity. This Caleb was that young-old man, whose strength contradicted his years, so able and active atJosh. 14. 11. fourscore and five, either for advice, or execution. But here he eate not the bread of idleness, being first to clear and conquer Hebron (before he could possess it) from the Giant-Amorite-Anakims dwelling therein. These Amorites,Amos. 2. 9. though (as the Prophet de∣scribes them) high as the Cedars, and strong as the Oakes, had notwith∣standing (to follow this Metaphor) much wastfull sap in their mighty big bodies: whilst Caleb (all heart, as his name imports) though less and lower, by Gods assistance easily overcame them. If any demand, How came Anakims hither, seeing Hebron so lately was smitten by Ioshua? A learnedBonrerius in locum Ioshu. author answers, that it is probable, whilest Ioshua after∣wards
was employed in the north in conquering theJosh. 11. 7. Canaanites, some remnant of the Anakims which escaped his hand, did in his absence re∣turn, possess Hebron, and put Caleb to a new task of a second subduing them. § 22. David afterwards made Hebron the Metropolis of this king∣dome (as being the most eminent City of his own Tribe of Iudah) and reigned almost seven years therein.Ioabs cruell killing of Ab∣ner. In the third year of his reign Abner repaired hither, with full intent to reduce all Israel to his obedience, had not Ioabs sudden murdering him frustrated his design. Probably some mixture of jealousie might put Ioab on this foul action, fearing to be outed of his office, that if Abner made David King, David would make Abner Generall over all Israel. Certainly, revenge of his brother Asahels bloud prompted him thereunto. Ioab sending messengers to fetch Abner back from the well of Siriah, slew him treacherously as he was entering the2 Sam. 3. 27. gates of Hebron. § 23. Forget we not that Hebron,Aggravation of Ioabs murder. in the gate whereof Ioab so basely and barbarously murdered him, was a City of Refuge,Josh. 30. 7. appointed by God for the saving of such, as had killed one unawares. Did not Ioab there∣fore, in such a place acting wilfull murder, in an high hand relie on his own greatness to beare him out in so bloudy a deed, as if he neither feared the justice of man, nor needed the mercy of God? No wonder then, if many years after he1 King. 2. 31. flying to the horns of the Altar, was denyed the protection of that place, who formerly so cruelly, despightfully, and presumptuously had defiled the City of Refuge with innocent bloud. § 24. Thus died Abner, very loyall to Saul,Abner and Ish∣bosheth buried to  ether. whilest Saul was living, and too loving to his2 Sam. 3. 7. concubine, when he was dead. Never man was killed more cowardly, or buried more honourably: David him∣self Ibid. v. 31. following the bere, weeping as chiefe mourner at his funerall. In the same sepulcher the2 Sam. 4. 12. head of Ishbosheth was afterwards interred. Though some jars were betwixt them whilest living, their dust well agreed in the same grave. Nor durst the ashes of Ishbosheth cross the others, who when alive (though checked, and chidden by him)2 Sam. 3. 11. could not answer Ab∣ner a word again, because he feared him. As for the bodies of Baanah and Re∣chab the murderers of Ishbosheth, they had, by order from David, their hands and feet cut off, and they hanged up over the2 Sam. 4. 12. pool in Hebron. § 25. After the death of Ishbosheth,Numbers re∣pairing to Da∣vid in Hebron. all Israel repaired to Hebron to make David their King, whose severall numbers deserve our observation. 1 Out of1 Chr. 12. 24. Iudah six thousand, and eight hundred. 2 Simeon, seven thou∣sand & one hundred. 3 Levi, eight thou∣sand & three hun∣dred twenty two. 4 Benjamin, three thousand. 5 Ephraim, twenty thousand and eight hundred. 6 Half Tribe of Ma∣nasseh on this side Iordan, eighteen thousand. 7 Issachar, two hun∣dred officers, and all their brethren at ther cōmandment. 8 Zebulun, fifty thousand. 9 Naphtali, thirty se∣ven housand, besides a thousand Captains. 10 Dan, twenty eight thousand and six hundred. 11 , fourty thousand. 12 Reuben, Gd, and Manassh beyond Iordan, an hundred and twenty thousand.
Behold here those Tribes which lived farthest from Hebron, appearing in the highest equipage; as if they endevouring to be revenged on the distance of their habitation, purposely advanced with the greatest num∣ber. Here it will be enquired, why Iudah largest in dominion, next in position, nearest in relation, (as Davids native Tribe) made here the slenderest appearance of all the rest, Benjamin alone excepted; the thin∣ness of whose numbers are excused in the text, becauseIbid. v. 29. hitherto the great∣est part of them kept the ward of the house of Saul. What! doth it fare with Princes, as with Prophets, that they are notMat. 13. 57. without honour save in their own Countrey, and in their own house, that David found fewest attendants from his own Tribe? Oh no, he was abundantly loved, and honoured therein. But, Tostatus answers 1 Davids daily attendance (both civill in his Court, and military in his camp, and garrison) hitherto chiefly consisted of the Tribe of Iudah. 2 The rest of Iudah remained at home, to makeSo saith the text (1 Chr. 12. 39.) For their brethren (mea∣ning Iudah) had prepared for them. pro∣vision, and give entertainment to this confluence of people from all parts. Adde hereunto 1 Six thousand eight hundred were a sufficient representa∣tion of Iudah, and moe not onely needless, but bur∣densome for the present, to pester Hebron too popu∣lous already. The rest keeping home, and living hard by, were ready (no doubt) on competent warning, to come quickly, if need required, or David commanded their attendance. 2 Iudahs main work was done two years before, when David was solemnly made their King. And they now, rather spectators, then actors at his se∣cond Coronation over all Israel. Now no less politick then thrifty were the other Tribes in bringing theirIbid. v. 40. victualls along with them, lest otherwise they should be held as occasioners of scarcity in Iudah, and enhauncers of the prices of provi∣sions. § 26. Afterwards Absalom,Absalom re∣paireth to He∣bron. when he intended a rebellion against his Father, chose Hebron as the fittest City, from whence he meant to mount into the Throne. Hither he came under pretence to doe sacrifice,2 Sam. 15. 1. with his chariots, and horses, and fifty men running before him: but, which was most to be pitied, he brought with him from IerusalemIbid. v. 11. two hun∣dred men, which were (as one may say) Loyall traitors, coming in the simplicity of their hearts, and meerly drawn-in to treasonable practises. But Hebron proved not a place so succesfull to Absalom the son, as former∣ly fortunate to David his father. This Traitours soveraignty soon ex∣pired, when forsaken of God, Man, and Beast (his own Mule going a∣way from him) he was slain of Ioab, asIn our descrip∣tion of Gad. Debir a Canaa∣nitish Univer∣sity. formerly related. § 27. Some ten miles south of Hebron lay Debir, anciently called
Kiriah-SepherJudg. 1. 11., the City of a book, conceived a Canaanitish University. And although the Giant Anakims dwelling hereabouts, may be presumed but little bookish, yet civilized Countreys, in all ages, have allowed such places for the education of youth, who are better unborn, then unbred. Caleb profferedNum. 1. 12. Acsah his daughter in marriage to any one that should con∣quer this City, which was accordingly performed by Othniel his youn∣ger brothers son, and first Judge of Israel. What, were not the glory of God, and good of his Countrey, enough to set an edge on his valour, but the promise of a wife needed also to whet his resolution? No doubt the scales of his resolution went down formerly on the right side, before this match was cast in as overweight. It is no unlawfull Bigamy of the soul, when wedded to Gods glory in the first place, to embrace also therewith theHeb. 11. 26. recompense of reward: and grand is the difference betwixt anJohn 10. 13. hireling whose minde is meerly mercenary, and him that works for his hire; with Othniel taking it (not as the main motive, much less as the end, but) onely as a welcome encouragement of his undertakings. § 28. Thus all parties were pleased;The south of Iudah called Caleb. Israel recovered Debir, Othniel got Acsah to wife, she gained a blessing from her Father, that blessing brought the possession of the upper, and nether springs along with it. Know also, in after ages the south part of Iudah was called Caleb, proba∣bly from the large inheritance, Caleb obtained in these parts, and puis∣sance of his posterity therein. Thus the Egyptian giving an account of the passages of the army of the Amalekites, confesseth they had been roving upon the coast that belonged to Iudah, and upon the south of1 Sam. 30. 14 Caleb. § 29. Libnah is the third in honour,Libnah a re∣bellious city. of the nine royall Cities in the days of Ioshua, assigned afterwards for the Priests habitation. Long it continued loyall to the Crown of Iudah, untill in the days of Iehoram (that ungodly, unmercifull, unsuccesfull, unbeloved, unlamented King) Edom revolted from under the hand of Iudah, unto this day, then Libnah2 King. 8. 22. revolted at the same time. Was it casualty, or confederacy (by mutuall intelligence) that both thir defections bare the same date? Surely, breach of faith is a catching disease, yea infectious from one to another. But, how could the inhabitants of Libnah, being Priests, (whose best livelyhood depended on their per∣sonall officiating in the Temple at Ierusalem) subsist, being cut off from their service, and the salary thereof? Yea, did they not thereby necessari∣ly apostate from their religion to God, desert his Temple and their own profession? Except any will say (easier spoken, then proved) that at this present, not the Priests, but some other persons were possessours of Libnah. We finde not this City afterwards reduced to the Kings of Iudah, whereupon someDr Heylyn Microc. in Palest. p. 571. Libnah how it might subsist a free State. conceive, that henceforward it stood on its own bottome, as an absolute Common-wealth. § 30. If any object it impossible, that Libnah so small a City, should subsist here as a free State against all the powers of the Kings of Iudah; let such look on little Lucca, in Italy, and less Geneva, in France, defended
by their foes from their foes; environed with enemies on all sides, yet so, that rather then any one shall subdue them, all the rest will assist them. Such probably, was the position, and politick State-poizing of Libnah, seated in the vicinity of the Kings of Iudah, Israel, and the Philistines, (not to say, Egypt, though far off, might come in as a protectour thereof) that it might make a Cordiall of a self-subsistance, from the Antidotes of its enemies. Afterwards we finde2 King. 19 8. Sennacherib fighting against Lib∣nah (whence he sent a railing message to Hezekiah) but read nothing of the taking thereof; yea, probably here the2 King. 19. 35. Angel by night did that me∣morable excution, slaying an hundred fourscore and five thousand of his numerous army. § 31. Lachish must not be forgotten,Lachish an I∣dolatrous one. whoseIosh. 12. 11. King was destroyed by Io∣shua. King Amaziah conspired against by his subjects in Ierusalem, fled hi∣ther in vain; for, They sent after him to Lachish, and slew him2 Kin. 14. 19. there. It was a leading City in Idolatry, infected from Israel, and infecting of Iudah.Micah 1. 1. Micah prophesied in particular against this City, warning it to prepare for spee∣dy captivity from its enemies.Mic.1. 13. O thou inhabitant of Lachish, binde the charet to the swift beast; she is the beginning of the sin to the daughter of Zion: for the trans∣gressions of Israel were found in thee. And although we finde not Lachish ta∣ken by Sennacherib whoIsa. 37. 8. warred against it, yet it escaped not the fury of Nebuchadnezzar, though one of theIer. 34. 7. last Cities by him subdued. § 32. But Adllam,Adullam Da∣vids retraing. another regall City in Iudah, was more ancient; whereGen. 38. 1. Hirah, Iudah's fast friend, dwelt, though employed by him but as a pandar post factum, to carry Tamar the hire of her whoredome. In a cave hereabouts repaired to1 Sam. 22. . David, every one that was in distress, and every one that was in debt, and every one that was discontented, and he became a Captain over them. Was this well done of him to be Protector Generall of Out-laws, thereby defying justice, defrauding creditours, defeating Gods com∣mand, which provided, that the deber, if not solveable, should beExod. sold for satisfaction? Alas, his need is all that can be alleadged in his excuse. Sure I am DavidPsal. 101. ad Sinem. promised (when in power to make his own choice) that his houshold, or Court, should consist of persons better qualified. However these men freely resorting to him, were better then those hired by Abimelech,Iudg. 9. 4. vain and light persons, and as far to be preferred before them as want is more excusable then wickedness. Yea, we may charitably believe Davids consorts impoverisht not by their own carelesness, but their creditors cruelty. § 33. As for Gedar it hath formerly been described in Simeon,Baal-Hanan inverted Han∣nibal. onely we will adde, that1 Chr. 27. 28. Baal-hanan the Gederite was of this place, Davids Overseer over the Olive trees, and Sycamore trees in the low plain. This name of Baal-hanan inverted is the same with Hannibal that great Generall of the Carthaginians. See here the affinity of the Hebrew, with the Phoenician, or Car∣thaginian tongue. Wonder not that Baal-hanan, or Hannibal was a fashi∣onable name for potent persons in these parts, (we finde also a King of
EdomGen. 36. 38. so called) seeing it signifieth a Lord in grace, or, favour; and our Saviour hath told us, such as exercise authority over others are calledLuk. 22. 25. Gracious Lords. As for Irmuth, Eglon, and Arad, we read nothing of them remark∣able, since their severall Kings were destroied by Ioshua. Of Hepher we shall speak more properly in the close of this Description. § And now,Carmel Na∣boths Manor. what a fall must our Description have, from the Cities of Kings, to the Manor of a clown; the fruitfull Carmell not far from the Dead-sea? Here folly, and wisdome dwelt under the same roof, sate at the same table, slept in the same bed, Nabal and Abigail. Are matches made in heaven, and was Abigail so ill beloved there, to be con∣demned to such a choice? Surely, God saw it most for his own glory and her good, for the emprovement of her patience. This Nabal pro∣ved himself a perfect Miser, both by his niggardliness to David, and pro∣digality of the1 Sam. 25. 36. King-like dinner he made to his shepheards. But both he and his family had been utterly destroyed by David, had not the dis∣creet mediation of Abigail been seasonably interposed. § 35. After his gluttonous supper Abigail next morning serves Nabal with a thrifty breakfast,The death of Nabal. telling him of the great danger he so narrowly had escaped. HereuponIbid. v. 37. his heart dyed within him. Thus some drunkards have been said to have swooned when sober, at the serious review of such perils they so neerly escaped in the fits of their distemper. Proba∣bly feare encreased his sadness, suspecting to fall into a relapse of Davids disfavour, and that his anger might revert to give him another visite hereafter. Thus the wrathProv. 19. 12. of a King (though but in reversion) is as the roaring of a Lion. Yea, Nabal became as a stone, and no wonder, being little better then a stock before, such his senseless stupidity. But, though he was a churl in his miserable living, he was bountifull in his season∣able dying, freeing Abigail from an unequall yoke, and fitting her with an husband better suiting with her deserts, even David himself. § 36. But,Giloh the po∣ession of Ahi∣thophel. Carmel had not such a fool, but that2 Sam. 15. 12. Giloh hard by had as wise a man for the owner thereof, even oraculous Ahithophel. This was he that gave the wholesomest, but Hushai the toothsomest counsell to Absalom, best pleasing the palate of a vainglorious traitour. Ahithophel ad∣vised as a cruel hunter, that David should presently be2 Sam. 17. 2. pursued, not giving him any breath, but either running him down outright, or killing him in the form, where they should finde him: HushaiIbid. v. 11. counselled to prolong the sport for their greater pleasure; and, seeing all the game was surely in their own hand, to give David the larger law, to shift away a while for himself, that so he might be put to death in the greater state, and with more ceremonious magnificence. Ahithophel seeing his coun∣sell neglected at Court, and foreseeing (in the causes) Absaloms ruin, and Davids return, to prevent farther shame, and save the executioner the paines, fairly went home, set his house in order, andIbid. v. 23. hanged himself. § 37. Tekoah is not far off,Tekoah the birth place of Amos. where a wise woman once lived (the subtilest
subtilest2 Sam. 14. 2. manager of Ioabs design to David, for the bringing back of Ab∣salom) and a wiser manAmos. . 1. Amos, called from an heardsman, and a gather∣er of wild figs to be a Prophet. Near Tekoah Iehosaphat obtained a me∣morable victory against the children of Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir, though at the first hearing of their coming, Iehosaphat is said to have been 2 Chr. 10. 2. affraid. Did he not discover much cowardice herein, considering what multitudes of men Iehosaphat at that time did command? Namely, 1 Under2 Chr. 17. 14. Adnah the chief of Iudah three hundred thousand mighty men of valour. 2 Next to himIbid. v. 15. Iehohanan captain over two hundred and fourscore thousand. 3 Next himIbid. v. 16. Amaziah with two hundred thousand mighty men of valour. 4 And of BenjaminIbid. v. 17. Eliada with two hundred thousand armed with bow and shield. 5 Next himIbid. v. 18. Iehoshabad with an hundred and fourscore thousand ready pre∣pared for the war. What need then Iehosaphat fear (except as in Gideons case suspecting he had tooIudg. 7. 2. many for God to give victory by) having an Army (if well disci∣plined with advantage of time and place) able to to encounter all man∣kind, especially on the defensive side, to make good their own Countrey against any invasion? § 38. It is answered,Why Iehosa∣phat might justly fear. the suddenness of the news might adde much to his fright, that an enemy was come into the bowels of his Countrey 2 Chr. 20. 2. [Behold they be in Hazeron-Tamar, which is Engedi] before the first intelli∣gence was brought thereof. Secondly, Iehosaphat feared not so much his foes, as his faults, guilty to himself of great offences, (good men the less sinfull; the more sensible thereof) and chiefly of his matching at home, and marching abroad with the Idolatrous family of Ahab. Last∣ly, those vast numbers of his souldiers lately specified, were not all at anySir Walter Rayleigh li. 2. par . pa. 440. one time, but severally, and successively, during the five and twenty years of Iehosaphat his reign. Wherefore those words in the list of Iehosaphat's Generalls thrice repeated, Next him, Next him, Next him, imply not a gradation in honour, as if all of them, though subordinate∣ly, were extant together, but import a succession of time, the latter en∣tering with his men on the office of a Generall, after the displacing, or death of the former. § 39. However,Iehosaphats admirable victory. Iehosaphat puts his people into a penitent posture, falling to fasting and prayer, and obtains a memorable conquest, which was purely heavens Donative, Sine cura, without mans care, cost, or charge to atchieve it. Prince and people stand still, look on, believe God, sing Psalmes, accounting their conquest gotten, because promised by the Prophet. Mean time, their enemies amazed with2 Chr. 20. 22. ambushments of Gods setting, fall foul one on another, till Moab, and Ammon had de∣stroyed, first the Edomites, then themselves. Three days are the men of Iudah employed in gathering the spoile, and so return to Ierusalem with
wealth in their hands, joy in their hearts, musick in their mouths, ha∣ving left behind them the name ofIbid. v. 26. Berachah, or blessing, imposed on the place, where this celestiall victory was bestowed upon them. § 40. But now it is high time that we enter on the severall Stages and removalls of David in or near this Tribe,Davids seve∣rall removals. after that he (having formerly suffered much from Saul as a private person) began to Prince it, and to stand on his guard. The text saith he and his men went1 Sam. 23. 13 wheresoever they could go. David herein being like the Son and Lord of David, whoLuk. 9. 58. had not where to lay his head. Indeed David confesseth that God made the stony rocks for the Psal. 104. 18. Conies, but yet he himself was glad to be their In-mate, and share with them in their1 Sam. 23. 25. habitations; and yet his soul was never so discomposed in any hole or cave, but that in the darkest of them he could see to make Psalmes, and praise his Maker. No place came amiss to his pious soul, above or under ground, all alike to him to serve his God therein. Now seeing it is Davids expression of himself, that he was hunted as a1 Sam. 26. 20. Par∣tridge on the mountains: Partridge, a bird innocent whose fine flesh is its grea∣test guilt, and importent, (not armed with beak or talons) whose chiefe might consisteth in the flight thereof: Now whilest Saul followed him, we will follow Davids Metaphore in our ensuing description. But be it premised, that Saul was no fair Faulconer, who more desiring the prey then the sport, came with his nets and setting dogs, with full intent to kill David wherever he might catch him. § 41. We begin at the cave of Adullam (which we may call his nest) wherein he composed the fifty seventh,From Adullam to Mizpah. and the hundreth fourty second Psalme. Hence he made wing, taking a long and strong flight to Mizpah in the land of Moab. Here the Partridge shewed much of the Stork in him, feeding his parents, and taking order with the King of Moab for the maintenance of his1 Sam. 22. 3. Father and mother. § 42. Hence (by the advice of the Prophet1 Sam. 22. 5. Gad,To Keilah. not to trust him∣self again in the cave of Adullam) by the forest ofIbid. Hareth to the City of Keilah. The Inhabitants whereof David had lately obliged to himself, by saving them from the Philistines, notwithstanding which favour, God assured him of their intentions to1 Sam. 23. 12. betray him to Saul. If a skilfull Gardiner can in the depth of winter, by beholding the bare root, and knowing the kind thereof, foretell when and what flowers the same will bring forth many moneths after, well may the God of heaven, the searcher of hearts, know mensPsal. 139. 2. thoughts afar off, and infallibly conclude what they will be, before they have any being. Base Keilites, who had rather pick thanks with Saul, then pay thanks to David to whom they were due! Thus deliver an ungratefull man from a danger, and he will be the first to bring you into the same condition. This sad occasion did spring the Partridge hence. § 43. To Hachilah hill in a wood in the wilderness of Ziph,To Hachilah hill. south of Iesimon.1 Sam. 23. 16. Here Ionathan came and renewed his amity with David. Behold how they
two is embracing one another, (Reader my phrase trespasseth on the rules of Grammar, no of friendship) and made a Covenant before the Lord Nor was it a small comfort to David, (though Saul, and Doeg, and Keilites, and Ziphites were against him) that, besides his own innocence, he had the Prince, the Priest, and the Prophet, Ionathan, Abiathar, and Gad, good mens prayers, and Gods providence on his side. Here the Ziphites, Sauls setters, having winded David; Saul; to catch him, comes with his net, but ei∣ther made too much noise, or too little speed, for before he came thither the Partridge was flown. § 44. To the wilderness of Maon.To the rock of Division. Here onely a mountain was betwixt David and Saul, and that not long likely to keep them asunder, seeing Sauls men, being many in number, began to compass David round a∣bout. But seasonable ill news was brought that the1 Sam. 23. 27 Philistines had in∣vaded the land, which made Saul turn his forces another way against a forein foe. Commendable his ingenuity, that he preferred rather to op∣pose an enemy of another Religion, then to dispatch a domestick ad∣versary, whom he now had at advantage. However judicious eyes behold not this as an act of Sauls pity, but Gods providence: hereupon David called the place Sela-hammahlekoth, or the rock of Division. § 45. Hence he fled to the holds at Engedi:To the cave in Engedi. Here he had Saul in a cave, and was seemingly courted by heaven, certainly urged by1 Sam. 24. 4. men to de∣stroy him, and yet he refused. O why is a golden opportunity put into a leaden hand, which wants activity to make use of it? What hard heart could have thrust away so fair an advantage? But oh, (though all things else were here) one thing was wanting, a Lawfull command. A Crown is over bought which costs a sin. David durst not kill him, one∣ly he cut off the skirt of his garment, and withall felt a greater gash in his1 Sam. 24. 5. conscience, then he made in Sauls clothes, for being too bold with Gods Anointed. This courtesie of David in sparing his life, made Saul half a convert, drawing1 Sam. 24. 16. tears from his eyes, fair words from his mouth, but what intentions from his heart, He onely knows, that knew the secrets thereof. It is suspicious that Sauls truth therein was not much, be∣cause Davids trust therein was none at all; who (notwithstanding the Court-holy-water of Sauls tears) gat him and his men again up into the1 Sam. 24. 22. hold. § 46. Hence David took a voluntary flight unto Carmel.To Carmel. Here the Partridge was like to turn Hauke, and become a Bird of prey, to kill all the the innocent family of1 Sam. 25. 22. Nabal, (as we have already observed) had not that God who formerly protected him from Sauls, here preserved him from his own sword, and from1 Sam. 25. 33. avenging himself with his own hand. § 47. Hence he fled back again to Hachilah hill,Again to Ha∣chilah-hill. which is before Iesi∣mon. Here the Ziphites bring Saul second tidings of his being there. So boundless was the stock of their malice, no danger of breaking, who though they failed at their first return, would adventure again. Onely
thei malice did this good, that it gave David the occasion to make the fifty fourth Psalme. Here he had Saul at a second advantage, finding him with Abner and his men round about him fast1 Sam. 26. 7. asleep, even as still as the Spear and Cruse of water that stood at his head. These David took away, but with intent truly to restore them after he had kept them a while monuments of his own integrity. Hereupon Saul▪ a second Convert, clears David, chargeth himself, prayeth for pardon, and promiseth a∣mendment, whilest David having had experience of his former fals∣hood, gives him the hearing, not the beleeving. For § 48. Hence he flew to Gath in the land of the Philistines,To Ziglag. and1 Sam. 27. 4. Saul sought no more again for him, leaving off his pursuit now the Partridge had took Covert in an enemies Countrey; whence he removed to Ziglag, and thence made many incursions against the1 Sam. 27. 8. Geshurites, Gezrites, and Ama∣lekites▪ but withall telling King Achish that he matched the clean contrary way against Iudah and the friends thereof. Here the Partridge had in him too much of the Lapwing, which by its hypocriticall fluttering pre∣tends its nest far distant from the true place thereof. Such dissimulation in David cannot be excused, must not be imitated. From Ziglag he mar∣ched along with Achish King of Gath to Aphek in the Tribe of Issachar, where he was dismissed and1 Sam. 29. 3. cashiered by the Philistines from any further service. Returning home he found Ziglag his nest spoiled, yea all his Covie therein (wives and children) catched in a snare, as hath for∣merly been described in the Tribe of Simeon. After the recovery of his losses, from Ziglag § 49. He flew to Hebron▪Lastly to He∣br. Here the Partridge turned Eagle, being solemnly made Soveraign first of Iudah, then of all Israel. And now be∣ing quietly setled in his Throne, he may joyfully sing, Many are the af∣flictions of thePsal. 34. 19. righteous, but the Lord delivereth him out of them all. § 50. But besides these eminent and noted Gests of David he had many more which were obscure and intermediate,Davids other haunting places. as appears by the list of the places1 Sam 30. 31. where he haunted, and to whom he sent part of his spoils taken from the Amalekites, viz. 1 Bethel in Benja∣min. 2 South Ramoth in Simeon. 3 Iattir in Iudah a Levites City. 4 Aroer in the tribe of Gad. 5Possibly the same with Si∣ma in the tribe of Reuben. Siphmoth. 6 Eshtemoa a Levites City in Iudah. 7 Rachal. 8 Cities of the Ierah∣meelites, (descended from Iarahmeel an1 Chr. 2. 26. eminent man in Iudah.) 9 Cities of the Kenites. 10 Hormah in Simeon. 11 Chorashan in Simeon. in Iudah. 12 Athach. 13 Hebron, e∣minent in Iudah. As for Siphmoth, Rachal, and Athach, because they appear not again in Scripture, their position is unknown, but may be presumed in or near
the Tribe of Iudah. The best is, though our tracing of Davids travels may be imperfect, and we fail in the reckoning thereof, yet Gods Arith∣metick is exact, and what is defective in our's, is supplied in his obser∣vations: Psal. 56. 8. Thou tellest my wanderings, put my tears in thy bottle, are they not written in thy book? § 51. Now besides the Cities mentioned in our description▪The totall sum of Iudah's Cities. many more remain which were obscure, without any memorable act atchie∣ved in them: and are thus reckoned up in Ioshua. 1 Towards the coast of Edom south-ward,Josh. 1. 21. twenty nine. 2 In the vale, Josh. 15. 36. Fourteen in the first▪ Ibid. v. 41. Sixteen in the second, Ibid. v. 44. Nine in the third, Cata∣logue. 3 On the Sea two,Ibid. 46. Ekron and Ashdod. 4 In the mountains, Ibid. 51. Eleven in the first, Ibid. 54. Nine in the second, Vers. 57. Ten in the third, Vers. 59. Six in the fourth, Cata∣logue. 5 Two by themselves, Kiriath-Baal and Rabbah. 6 In the wilderness, Six. In all an hundred and fourteen. So that the Tribe of Iudah alone had more Cities then all the Island of Crete, which had but just an hundred, and therefore called Hecatom∣polis. But many of these Cities were small, and a good share of them was given to the Tribes of Dan and Simeon, as formerly hath been ob∣served. But amongst such as remained to Iudah let notJosh. 15. 44. Maresha be for∣gotten, (in the north-west part of this Tribe) both because thereby, in the valley of Zephathah, Asa conquered2 Chr. 14. 9. Zerah the Ethiopian, whose army consisted of more then a million of men, and because the ProphetMicah 1. 1. Mi∣cah was born therein. § 52. In Saint Hieromes time somewhere in Iudah flourished a fair City called Eleutheropolis:Eleutheropolis uncertain in situation. from which thatIn his book de loci H∣braicis. Father measureth the di∣stance of most southern places in Palestine; as he computeth the northern from Legion a City in Galilee. But (the more the pity) that Father hath not acquainted us with the exact location of either of these two places. Whilest Adrichomius and others condemn Saint Hieromes carelesness herein, it better befits us to condole our own unhappiness, who can∣not read the accurate distance of places in his book of that subject, be∣cause though he have lent us his Characters, he hath not left us the true Key thereof. § 53. The Tribe of Iudah had no great river therein,Rivolets in Iudah. saving a little piece of gasping Iordan now ready to expire in the dead-sea; but with rivolets it was sufficiently stored, lending the brooks of Sorek and Bezr to Dan and Simeon; borrowing Kedron from Benjamin, whence it fetch∣eth its fountain▪ and keeping the brook before the wilderness of2 Chr. 20. 16. Ieruel wholly for its own use, as rising, running, and falling entirely in this Tribe. Nor must that brook be forgotten, which I may call the
brook of David, because being to encounter Goliah, he took thence1 Sam. 17. 4. five smooth stones (store is no sore, especially not being sure, but his first might faile) and furnished his scrip therewith. § 54. This was that Goliah whose strength was equall to his stature,Bitell be∣twixt David and Goliah. his armes sutable to his strength, but his Pride above all. Betwixt him and David first passed a tongue-combate. The one discharging ostentation, and presumption, which the other as quickly returned with faith and confidence in Gods promises. Come they then to encounter: see the lower man had the longer arme, who with his sling could reach death at distance to his adversary. The beaver of Goliahs helmet was open: not that he thought his brazen brow sufficiently armed with its own impudence, but either that he might see, breath, and boast the more freely, or because he disdained to buckle himself against so unequall a match: The stone from Davids sling flies directly to his forehead, whereby the Giant is mortally wounded, and notwithstanding his speare was as great as a1 Sam. 17. 7. weavers beame, his life was swifter then aJob. 7. 6. weavers shuttle; so soon passed it away and he was gone, David cutting off his head with his own sword. § 55. Many were the wildernesses in this Tribe,Many wilder∣nesses in Iudah. as those of Josh. 15. 1. Zin,1 Sam. 23. 14. Ziph,1 Sam. 23. 24. Maon,1 Sam. 24. 1. Engedi,2 Chr. 20. 16. Ieruel,Ibid. v. 20. Tekoa, andJudg. 1. 16. Iudah lying south of Arad. Now as once it was the question of the Disciples to our Saviour, FromMark. 8. 4. whence can a man satisfie these men with bread here in the wilderness? So here it may materially be demanded, Where did the men of Iudah finde food to sustain themselves, whose coun∣trey seems a heap of wildernesses cast together? Here we must know that the whole land of Palestine was drest and kept like a garden plot, and inclosed into Olive-yards, Vine-yards, and ara∣ble fields, save some extravagant places which lay common, where wild beasts did harbour in the woods, commonly called Wilder∣nesses. Such notwithstanding were full of fruitfullJoel 1. 19. pastures, and had fairIosh. 15. 61. towns, though more thinly inhabited then other parts of the Countrey; so that this Tribe was more frighted then hurt with the multitude of Wildernesses therein. § 56. Paramount over them all was The wilderness,Iohn Baptist preaching in the wilderness. having six Cities therein, and was part of theMark 3. 1. wilderness of Iudea, (extending also into Benjamin) wherein Iohn the Baptist preached: feeding here on Locusts (flying insects,Levit. 11. 22. whereof four kindes were clean, and permitted the Iews to eate) and wilde honey. Either such as fell down in1 Sam. 14. 26. dews from heaven, or was made by wild Bees, not civilized in hives, but nesting on the ground or in hollow trees. In a word, he was content with such course fare as the Countrey afforded, his rough clothes being suited to his homely diet, and both to his hard doctrine of Repentance. Hereupon scandalous tongues condemned him for having aMat. 11. 18. Devill, as afterwards they belyed our Saviour
(using a more liberal diet) to be a Winebibber, so impossible it is to please affected frowardness either full or fasting. § 57. Some make Iohn Baptist the first founder of Eremites.Nothing be∣friendeth the Eremites. But how little his precedent befriendeth their practise, who, not out of any impulsion, but meer election, delight to dwell in deserts, will appear by the ensuing Parallel. Hee, 1 By immediate com∣mand from God to fulfill the prophecy ofIsa. 40, 3. Isaiah. 2 Went into a wilder∣ness; a place more thinly peopled then the rest of the land. 3 Where he daily bu∣sied himself with preaching to multi∣tudes of people re∣pairing unto him. 4 And at last did end his life in a place of greater concourse, even theMark 6. 20. Court of King Herod himself. They, 1 By dictates of their own fancy, following the principles of will-wor∣ship. 2 Goe into a wilder∣ness indeed, conversing with solitariness, and shunning all socie∣ty. 3 Where they bury them∣selves alive in laziness with the talents God hath bestowed on them. 4 And binde themselves with a vow to live and dye in that solitary con∣dition. Behold here the large difference betwixt him and monking Eremites. Who, if men of parts, ought to help others with their society; if of no parts, need to be helped by the society of others. Yea whatsoever their endowments were, this running into the wilder∣ness was but a Bank-rupt trick, to defraud the Church and Com∣mon-wealth their Creditours, to both which they stood bound by specialty of Gods command to discharge all Civill and Christian relations to the utmost proportions of their abilities. In a word, though we stedfastly beleeve, that Iabal was the father of all such as dwell in tents, because the ScriptureGen. 4. 20. affirmeth the same, yet for the reasons aforesaid, we utterly deny Iohn Baptist the founder and Author of all those which live wilfully in hills and holes an eremiticall life. § 58. The Son of Hese was Solomons Purveyor in1 King. 4. 10. Aruboth, to him belonged Sochoth,Iudah for the man freed from Solomons Purveyours. and all the land of Hepher. A land which lay, as we gather by other proportions, in the north-west part of this Tribe. And indeed we finde a King of Hepher amongst those
which IoshuaJosh. 12. 17. destroyed, but dare not confidently averre him to have been of the Tribe ofSee more hereof in our objections a∣gainst the tribe of Iudah. Iudah. However, it appears that for the main, the whole body of the Tribe of Iudah (with Simeon lying therein) fell not under any of Solomons Purveyour-ships. The reason where∣of, if inquired into, may perchance be reduced into some of these con∣siderations. 1 It was referred to defray extraordinaries, on casuall enter∣tainments, and occasionall solemnities; or 2 It was kept for the expences of the thirteenth, or inter∣calary moneth (the product of the eleven supernumerary days) which commonly was every third year inserted into the HebrewVide Kalen∣darium Hebrai cum Munsteri. pag. 62. Kalendar. 3 Iudah might by speciall indulgence be exempted from such taxations; either because Ierusalem, the royall City, was principally seated therein; and therefore to prevent scarcity of victualls in so populous a place, the Court-purveyours went further off, that the City might be better provided; or, because Solomon did ease, and favour that Tribe, whence he himself was extracted. This very probably was some cause, why, when the other ten Tribes, grinded with grievous oppressions, deserted the house of David, Iudah alone, as having formerly tasted of his Fathers favour, entirely clave to Rehoboam. § 59. The armes of Iudah are Gules, a Lion couchant Or,The armes of Iudah. according to Iacobs prediction, Iudah he stooped down, he couched as aGen. 49. 9. Lion, and as an old Lion, who shall rouze him up? This is a posture which that princely beast is pleased to accept for his own ease: otherwise no chastisement shall impose it on him, no force but his own free plea∣sure can make him to crouch. The Analogy is obvious to every eye, the Lion being theProv. 30. 30. strongest amongst beasts, which turneth not away for any. As Iudah was the chief of Tribes for number, strength and largeness of possessions, and the Tribe of Chiefes, so many Kings, yea Christ himself according to the flesh deriving his extraction from the same.
Here the Map of the Land of Moriah is to be inserted.
THE LAND OF MORIAH. CHAP. 14. § 1. BEcause the Countrey about Ierusalem is very fruitfull of observable places,The adjacent parts to Ieru∣salem. it is therefore here presented in an intire Map. Nor do we meet with a fitter, and more adequate name to express the same, then to style it The land of Moriah, as it is named in Scri∣pture: Gen. 22. 2. Herein we shall onely insist on signall places of certain truth; otherwise the work would be almost infinite: for what is said of the people of Israel,Exod. 23 26. There shall not one be barren amongst them, is true of every petty place near Ierusalem, not a Hill, Hole, Stick, Stone, Cave, Grave, but is pregnant with some History, and vulgar be∣liefe is the Midwife to deliver it; we will therefore confine our selves to Scripture alone in our following description. § 2. We begin with the Brook of Kidron:The brook Kidron. which we may call the Brook of Reformation; for often the current thereof carried away the Reliques of Idolatry; once when the Idol of his grandmother Maachah was by King Asa1 King. 15. 13 2 Chr. 30. 14. burnt by the banks thereof; Again, when2 King. 23. 6. in Hezekiahs time the people (no doubt by his command) threw the Idolatrous Altars there∣in. Thirdly, when the dust of the Altars erected by King Manasses, was by Iosiah, cast into the channel of2 King. 23. 12 Kidron. I dare boldly say that the water of this brook, was no whit the less the sweet in taste, or clear in colour for washing away these monuments of superstition. However this Kidron may be ranked amongst those Rivolets whereofJob 6. 15. Iob speaks, My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook and as a stream of brooks which passeth a∣way; not that the water onely slideth away, other succeeding in the room thereof (which is common to the greatest channels) but this very Brook it self slides away in the Summer and is dryed up, as having no fountain to feed it, but the waters running down from Mount Olivet; Thus Kidron is the too lively emblem of our ouls, which having no naturall spring
of goodness in themselves, flow no longer then they are watered from above, with the infusion of celestiall Grace. § 3. This Brook runs through the Valley of Iehosaphat,The valley of Iehosaphat. being a hollow dale interposed betwixt Ierusalem and Mount Olivet, but why so named I finde no satisfactory reason alledged; for I cannot agree to what gene∣rally is reported, that in this place Iehosaphat got his miraculous victory over the2 Chr. 20. 20. Edomites, Moabites and Ammonites: because on serious perusall of the text, that battell appears fought far off in the wilderness of Tekoah. Many are of opinion, that as Mount Olivet shall be the Tribunall, erected for the Judge; so this Vale of Iehosaphat shall be the Gaol and Bar where all offenders at the last day shall be arraigned, founding their conceit partly on the words of the ProphetIoel 3. 2▪ Ioel, I will also gather all Nations, and bring them down into the valley of Iehosaphat, and will plead with them there for my people; partly on the expression of the Angels to the Disciples after Christs ascension,Act. 1. 11. that in the same manner he should return again. But these are too low, carnall, and restrictive conceits of Gods glorious judiciall pro∣ceedings▪ it being improbable he would appoint the certain particular place, who in his wisdome hath caused the time to be concealed; yea if one day be as a thousand years with God, why may not, according to the same proportion, the whole earth be meant by the Valley of Iehosaphat? Wherefore waving curious inquiries about the circumstances belong∣ing onely to the Judge to assigne, let us carefully provide our selves for those Assises, the proper work for us to performe▪ § 4. In this Vale of Iehosaphat, on the other side of Kidron stood the village of Gethsemane, so called in Hebrew for the plenty of Oile, that there was pressed out: But a far more precious liquor was once afforded in this place, which in the Garden hard by, fell from our Saviours face in his Agony,Luke 22. 44. Clods of sweat like bloud: Surely the hea of the weather had no influence on this his distemper: being the open aire, in so cold a night, that the stout servants of the high Priest, though housed in a Hall, found need of a fire to warm themselves thereat.Joh. 18. 18. It was not then with∣out cause that the paschall Lambe was commanded to be eaten, neither raw nor sodden with water, but rosted with fire, as Christ, the trth of this Type, was at this time bathed in his own sweat. Here Christ thrice con∣ditionally begged, that his up might pass away, preferring three severall short prayers, before one entire continued petition; partly that in a tripled suit his importunity might be more conspicuous: partly, to get breath, and gain strength in the intervalls: and partly, in the same time to visit his Disciples, being never so busie about himself, but he was still at lea∣sure to look how it fared with them. § 5. Hither into this GardenChist betrayed in this garden. repaired Iudas in the night timeIoh. 18. 3. with Lanthornes and Torches, (no more light then needed in such a deed of dark∣ness, otherwise it had been superfluous to seek the Sun it self with a Lanthorn) to betray our Saviour; bringing with him a band of souldiers
(too many to attach Christ as meer man, too few to encounter him as God) from the high Priest, gown-men, sword-men, young, old, Iew, Gentile, all contriving his death, as all sorts and conditions of people were afterward to reap benefit thereby: at the first allIoh. 18. 6. Luk. 22. 52. fell flat down at the sound of his voice, demanding of them, whom seek yee? If the report of a bare question gave such a blow, ô had his mouth been charged with a curse against them, what execution would it have done! Here Peters wild love almost had done our Saviour that harm, which the malice of his enemies might despaire to effect, by making him guilty not onely o the breach of peace, but of a plain Riot, by that dangerous wound he gave unto Malchus▪ whereby no doubt he had invited many swords about his own ears, had not the miracle of ChristsLuk. 22. 51. quick cure restrained them▪ This was that Peter now so forward to draw his weapon, from whom afterward a word could not be drawn in acknowledgement of his Ma∣ster; so unequally beas the pulse of blind zeal, either too fast, or not at all. § 6. From this Garden Kidron runs south-ward, and seems loth toThe Rock of offence. behold on his western bank the hill before Ierusalem whereon Solomon befooled in his old age with his wives, built high places for Chemosh and Molech, the Idols of Moab1 Kin. 11. 7. 5. and Ammon; Could not Idolatry be con∣tent to whisper in a hole, but she must hollow on a hill, and with a brazen brow out face the Temple, yea in a manner challenge, and defie it, to try which of them had the truest worship therein?Exod. 20. Thou shalt have no other Gods before me, or, in my sight, is the first commandment. Now, though all places are in the sight of an omniscient Deity, yet this Idola∣try was done in the presence, of the presence of God, who more imme∣diately and particularly is said to dwell in his Temple: Alass! what an eye-fore were these high places to all the Godly in Ierusalem? It spoiled the east and best prospect of all the windowes in the City, for none could see the rising of the Sun, but withall must behold the rising of I∣dolatry. Adrichomius tells us that the hill whereupon these Idols stood, was commonly called theRom. 9. 33▪ Rock of offence, which name the Scripture gives to our Saviour himself, but in different consideration: Christ was a Rock of Gods laying; this of mans making: He a Rock of offence unjustly taken at him by the wicked; this too justly given by it to the godly. § 7. Kidron continueth his course south-ward by the Vale of Saveh,Absaloms pillar in the Kings dale. or King Vale: haply so called from twoGen. 14. 17. Kings meeting of Abraham in this place, namely Melchisedec, and the King of Sodome; the former with a blessing, the latter with a request in his mouth: yea let Abraham at this royall enterview pass for the third King, seeing it is more honourable to make, then to be a King, who so freely here restored the subjects to the King of Sodome. Many hundred years after in this vale Absalom then issue∣less (as being before their birth, or rather after the untimely death of.
his children) erected a2 Sam. 18. 16. Pillar to perpetuate his memory. Pilgrims at this very day passing by the place use every man to cast a stone upon it: and my request to the Reader is, if he should ever goe thither, that when he hath first served himself, and satisfied his own revenge▪ he would then be pleased to cast one stone more upon that heap, in my name, to ex∣press my detestation of so damnable a Rebellion. § 8. Hence the River Kidron turneth his channell full east to finde out his way to the dead sea,The stone of Zoheleth. and leaveth at some distance on his northern side the stone1 King. 1. 9. Zoheleth, whereon Adonijah, who advanced himself to the kingdome, offered sacrifices, while the people cryed out, God save King Adonijah; but this echo was quickly checkt and countermanded with a lowder and greater, showed fourth from Mount Gihon, God save King Solomon. Wonder not that this latter noise was heard hither, at six miles distance, much befriended in the far and speedy conveyance thereof with a hollow Vale of Iehosaphat, reverberated with Mount Olivet, and im∣proved in the sound thereof by the advantage of the waters of Kidron; besides it was mainly lowd in it self, so that (though much of Hyper∣bole must be allowed in the expression) the earth1 King. 1. 40. rent with the sound of it; worse was Adonijahs heart rent at the hearing thereof, who now exchan∣geth his hopes of a Crown, for desire of Life, which he requested and obtained by his submission to Solomon. So ended the short government of Adonijah never sleeping in his reign, which began after the rising, and ended before the setting of the Sun. § 9. Thus taking our farewell of Kidron in this Map,Three tops on Mount Olivet. we pass over the current thereof to Mount Olivet, on the eastern side, so famous in Scri∣pture, consisting of three eminent Tops. 1 The most Northern, hereon the Cell of Saint Pelagia was built, leading there a solitary life some hundred years after Christ: no doubt a devout woman, especially if her heart was as holy as her house was high. 2 The middlemost, from which Christ made his ascension to hea∣ven, and after ages erected a fair Chappell in memoriall there∣of. 3 The most Southern, whereon the villages of Bethany and Beth∣phage, the house of Simon the Leper, the grave of beloved Lazarus, with the barren figtree which Christ cursed. All three over-spread with Olive trees, (whence it hath its name) and plenty of Palmes, of so quick growth, that those who cut down theirMat. 21. 8. branches, when our Saviour on an Asses Colt (which with her Colt was tyed hard by in the meeting of two ways) rode to Ierusalem, did no con∣siderable trespass to the owners of those trees, so speedily they sprouted again. § 10. Over the southern part of Mount Olivet David fled from Absalom,David flying from Absalom. for perceiving that his son by State-felony had stolne away his peoples
hearts, he politickly resolved not to be pent in Ierusalem (where the land∣flood of a popular mutiny, might presently drown him) but to retire to the uttermost bounds of his kingdome, mean time giving his subjects leasure and liberty to review what they had done, dislike what they re∣viewed, revoke what they disliked; that so on second debates they might seriously undoe, what on first thoughts they had furiously at∣tempted: knowing full well that Rebellion though running so at hand is quickly tyred, as having rotten lungs, whilest well breathed Loyalty is best at a long course. As David was flying this way, the Priests prof∣fered their service to carry the2 Sam. 15. 24. Arke along with them; Indeed how could it well stay behinde, and what should the Arke and Absalom, Re∣ligion and Rebellion do together? Was it not fit, that as once it was joifully brought into Ierusalem with Davids2 Sam. 6. 14 dancing: so now it should dolefully depart hence with Davids weeping? Howsoever he accepted their good will, and on better2 Sam. 15. 25. reason declined their attendance. Com∣ing 2 Sam. 15 30. & 16. . a little past the top of the hill, Ziba meets him with a couple of Asses, loaden with bread, Raisons, summer fruits and wine for the refection of David and his company. But, ô the Bran in that Bread, rottenness in those Raisons, dregs in that wine he brought, joining with them a false accu∣sation of his Master Mephibosheth to be a Traitour; whilest, alass! all the disloyalty that good man was guilty of, was onely his lame legs, his lying servant; and his over credulous Soveraign David did rashly believe this information. § 11. A little farther east-ward was Bahurim,Bahurim where Shimei rayled on David. where Shimei (Lord of that place) cursed David, casting stones and dust at him. What meant the mad man thus to raile being within the reach of Davids Armies, except he intended to vent out his venome, and life together? But causeless curses rebound on their Authors, and Ziba's gifts did David more harm then Shimei's curses; for those betrayed him to an2 Sam. 16. 45, act of injustice, whilest these improved his patience. Indeed his railing gave an Alarum to the martiall spirit of Abishai, who2 Sam. 16. 9. desired a Commission to take off the head of this dead dog (blood so let out in the neck vein is the soonest and speediest cure of such a traiterous Phrensie.) But David who desired not that Shimei should be killed for his words, but rather that his own heart should be mortified by them, by heavenly Logick à majore ad minus, argued his own soul into2 Sam. 16. 11. humility; that seeing his Son had conspired against him, the ill words of an open Enemy ought patiently to be in∣dured. Well! Let Shimei know though he pass unpaid for the present, yet either David himself, or his Executors, Administrators or Assignes, shall one day see this debt duly discharged. § 12. To this place of Bahurim Phaltiel the son of Laish followed Mi∣chal,Sples at Bahu∣rim concealed▪ his (or rather Davids) wife,2 Sam. 3. 16. weeping, when David demanded the restitution of her, as unjustly detained from him. Wherefore all Phaltie tears move no pity of mine; Caveat raptor, let him beware, who violently
takes another mans wife; seeing shame and sorrow are the issue of such ungodly marriages. Here in a mans2 Sam. 17. 18. Court at Bahurim, Ionathan and Ahimaaz Davids Intelligencers were concealed in this manner; an equi∣vocating covering was spread on the ground, pretending nothing but ground Corn laid upon it, but having under it the reservation of a dry wel, into which the messengers were put, and by it a woman to manage the fallacy with the less suspicion: she tells the pursuers after them2 Sam. 17. 20. that they were gone over the river, which nigh Enrogell falls into Kidron; ô that I could in the same instant commend her Loyalty, and condemn her Lying; which being impossible, we must be contented, successively first to praise her charity, and then to protest against her falshood. § 13. Come we now to survey the south parts of the Land of Moriah,Rachel bured nigh Bethle∣hem. where we meet some seven miles from Ierusalem with the famous City of Bethlehem-Ephrath: The first mention of this Place we finde, was when Iacob near to it buried his beloved wifeGen. 35. 14. & 48. 7. Rachel, dying in child-bed. This was that Rachel who said in herGen. 30. 1. fury, Give me children or else I dye (as if she would have had them begotten, conceived, bred, and born all in an instant) and now she had not onely her fill, but a surfet of her own wish, had children and dyed. It seems, dying in child-bed her corps required speedy interment: otherwise (no doubt) Iacob would have conveyed them to the Cave of Macpelah the solemn sepulcher of his family. She was buried by the high way, the ancient custome both of Iews, and Heathen, partly to minde passengers of their mortality, and partly to preserve the memory of the dead the longer, by so making their monument the more publick and visible. Heathen used in like manner to interre their dead in high-ways: yea their sepulchers served to measure the distances of places. Virgil. Eclo. 9. Hinc adeò media est nobis via: nam{que} sepulchrum Incipit apparere Bianoris.— Hence ev'n mid way it is for us: for near Bianors Tomb beginneth to appear. Nor is it amiss to observe that the self same place where Benjamin was born, and his mother buried, fell afterwards to the lot of the1 Sam. 10. 2. Benja∣mites, as if Rachels body all the while had but kept possession for her posterity. § 14. Bethlehem in Hebrew is the house of bread;Ruths glean∣ing in Bethle∣hem. principally so cal∣led in reference to Christ, the bread of life, who in fulness of time was here to be born: otherwise time was, when in this house of bread, little bread was to be had, namely when God brake the staffe thereof in Israel, by aRuth 1. 4. 6. ten years famine. This caused Elimelech with his wife Naomi and her sons to remove into Moab, whence after ten years stay she returned home to Bethlehem with Ruth her daughter-in-law, who here became an extraordinaryRuth 2. 8. Gleaner on the field of Boaz. Here harvest being ended, Ruth by the advice of Naomi, went afterwards to glean a husband for her self, and came in the night to theRuth. 3. 6. threshing floor of Boaz, to chal∣lenge
in him the right of the next kinsman; some herein will censure her carriage, to come at so unseasonable a time, to surprize a man for her hus∣band: so that, se defendendo, to vindicate his credit, he must be forced to marry her. But let these dainty dames, which condemn Ruth herein, first follow her faithfulness in attending, then imitate her industry in maintaining her mother-in-law, and this done, they will have less wan∣ton thoughts in themselves, and more charitable opinions of Ruth. Be∣sides, in the innocence and simplicity of those days, some passages might be harmelesly performed, which in our age (grown ripe in wit, and rie in wickedness) carry with them more then the appearances of evill. She brought forth here Obed, the father of Iesse, and grandfather of David. § 15. David afterwards was born,Davids birth and life in Bethlehem. and keept sheep in Bethlehem (therefore called the City of David) here he made an experimentall syllo∣gisme, and from most practicall propositions (Major a Lion, Minor a 1 Sam. 17. 54. Beare) inferred the direct Conclusion, that God would give him victory over Goliah. Hence he was fetched from following the Ewes big with young, to goe before the people of Israel; and God intending to raise David high in honourable old age, that the building might be the fir∣mer, laid the foundation thereof very low in his laborious and religious education. Being then better imployed, when thirsting after Gods ho∣nour, then afterwards, when not far from this place, he fondly longed for the2 Sam. 23. 15. water of the well of Bethlehem, which is by the gate, the Philistines Ar∣my then encamping about it. But it shall not be said, that David desired, what Davids subjects durst not perform; three of his Worthies boldly marched through the midst of their enemies, quickly draw, safely beare back, humbly present to their Soveraign this Aqua vitae, the procuring whereof cost them the hazard of their lives. But though Davids fancy was above his judgement in desiring, his conscience was above his fancy in refusing to drink of that water,2 Sam. 23. 16. but powred it out unto the Lord. § 16. But that that gave the greatest lustre to Bethlehm,Iesus born in Bethlehem. was that Iesus ChristEsay 9. 6. the Prince of peace, was born herein of the blessed virgin Mary in a time of peace, to procure and establish a peace betwixt God and Man, Man and Angels, Man and Man, Man and his own Con∣science, Man and other Creatures. Publick the place of his birth, an Luk. 2. 7. Inne, (every mans house for his money) and poor the manner thereof, so defeating the Iews towring fancies of a emporall King, who long looking to see their Messiah sitting on a throne, would rather stumble at him, then stoop to behold him lying in a manger. The first tydings of the Lambe of God, by intelligence of Angels, is told to poorLuk. 2. 8. shepheards watching their flocks by night, whilest the Priests the pretended shepheards of Israel, were snorting on their beds of security. The place of this apparition not being far from the tower of Eder (or, the tower of locks) whereGen. 35. 21, 22 Iacob sometime pitched his tent,
and kept cattell, and where Reuben defiled his Fathers Concubine. § 17. And now the wise men of the East make speed to their Saviour,The wisemen directed by a star to Bethle∣hem. directed unto him by a star, in its progressive motion probably point∣ing at Iudea, as if it had been but the bare reflexion of a brighter star which was there to be seen. These wise men, well read in the volume of heaven, perceiving this to be no hypocrite star, or blazing Comet, (usually portending not the Cradle but Coffin of some Prince) yea, no light con∣stantly Leiger in the skies, conclude it an extraordinary Embassadour sent upon some peculiar service, and advantaged with the Prophecy of Num. 24. 17. Baalam, current among the children of the East, haste to Ierusalem, and put it to the question,Mat. 2. 2. where the King of the Iews was to be born. Here Gentile and Iew confer their notes, and compare their intelligence toge∣ther concerning Christs birth; the former collecting the time from the star; the latter concluding Bethlehem the place from theMica. 5. 2. Ioh. 7. 42. Scripture. How much knowledge might men attain, if mutually they would lend their light one to another! To Bethlehem Herod sends the wise men to seek this new King, promising to come himself, and worship him, but secretly similing at their diligent devotion, whilest God in heaven laughed at his dissimulation. § 18. To Bethlehem they come to make enquiry after Christ,Return to their Countrey ano∣ther way. whom none never sincerely sought, but they found him. The star by moving (probably in the low region of the aire) shews them their way; by standing still, the end of their journey: coming into the house they finde the royall Babe, and present him with gifts; Then warned by God in a dream, they return into their own Countrey another way. Say not that they were more wise then honest, in not making good their promise to goe back to Herod, seeing 1 No such promise made by them appears in Scripture, who be∣ing certainly foreiners, and probably free Princes, owed no obe∣dience to Herods injunction. 2 Had such promise been made by them, yet being done in consi∣deration of another from Herod, to come and and worship Christ, they were now remitted to their former liberty, his fraudulent intent being revealed unto them by divine information. 3 Suppose their promise to return bound with an oath, yet herein the breach thereof made no forfeiture, because their Recognisance was taken in Gods name, who freely delivered up the band unto them again. Homewards they goe, whilest Herod wonders at their long delay, yet comforts himself, that the slowness of their searching, will at last be re∣compensed with their sureness of finding what he desired. § 19. Weary at last he is with waiting,The babes of Bethlehem massacred. seeing no King of the Iews was found, and they lost, which were sent to seek him: But this old Fox had two holes: fraud failing him, he betakes himself to force, and
sends executioners to kill all the children of two years old and underMat. 2. 16. in Beth∣lehem, and all the coasts thereof; Herods cruelty, being of greater com∣pass, then the City of Bethlehem, took in that circuit which the walls there of left out, so cunning he was to overdoe, rather then leave any thing undone. Here no pen can express the mothers sorrows for their chil∣dren, whilest one stood amazed, as if she had lost her son and senses together: another bleeds out sorrow in her eyes, to prevent festering in her heart: a third vents her passions in exclamations, and it gives her some ease, though she could not recall her dead child, to call him Ty∣rant that murdered it; All their mourning going severall ways, meet in one common misery, whilest the soules of these children are charita∣bly conceived by the Primitive Church all marched to heaven, as the Infantry of the noble Army of Martyrs. Herod, the while, huggs himself, that he had fitted their new King with a short reign, being confident, that burning the Hive, he had killed the Master-Bee, though Christ was all the while safe in Egypt, where his Policy could not finde, whence his power could not fetch him. § 20. Bethlehem is on all sides compassed with places of eminent note. On the North stood Ramah,Ramah nigh Bethlehem. nigh which was the execution of those in∣fants. In Ramah was a voice heard, lamentation, and weeping, and great mourning, Mat. 2. 18. Rachel weeping for her children &c. Some will say Leah had more cause of sorrow (to make her eyes watryGen. 29. 17. by nature, worse with her tears) Beth∣lehem belonging to the Tribe of Iudah▪ But let such know, that the cruel∣ty of Herod extended to all the coasts of Bethlehem, and so also reached to Benjamin, in whose confines Bethlehem was situated. Besides it is the opi∣nion of some learned men, that the land about Bethlehem was called Ra∣chel, from her sepulcher so eminent in these parts. Zelzah is hard by (in Hebrew a place shadowed, and therefore we have presumed to cover it with trees) where Saul1 Sam. 10. 2. according to Samuels prediction first heard ty∣dings, that his Father had found his Asses, and feared the loss of his Son, who had found a kingdome. § 21. South-ward we finde Asahels sepulcher2 Sam. 2. 32. buried in the grave of his Father:How so many Kings in Be∣zek. and south-west-ward in the way to Hebron, Geruth-Chimham, the Manor or Mansion of Chimham, son of Bailla, no doubt bestow∣ed on him by David according to his Princely promise,2 Sam. 19. 38. to give him whatsoever he should choose or require. Many years after, Iohanan the Son of Kareah with the remnant of the poor Iews, which had escaped the Babylonish captivity, dwelt at Geruth-ChimhamJer. 41. 17. untill contrary to Gods express command, hence they departed into Egypt. Almost full west lay Bezek, whose King Adonibezek was punished according to his own cruelty, who having cut off the Thumbs and Toes of threescoreIudg. 1. 7. and ten Kings, caused them to gather their meat underGen. 27. 20. his table. Now if Isaac's question to Iacob con∣cerning his kid, was of consequence, how he came so quickly by it? The Quere here is more considerable, how came Adonibezek by so many
Kings, to have them all at one time? With what Royall drag-net did he fish to catch so many together? Where got he these Kings? and where got they their kingdomes? Canaan being so small a Countrey. In an∣swer hereunto, in the acception of the word King, we must grind the honour thereof the smaller, to make the number thereof the greater, communicating it to the Sons and Nephews of Toparchicall Princes, as honours in Germany equally descended to all in the family, and so the number is quickly made up. § 22. North of Bethlehem lay the Vale of Ephraim,The vale of Rephaim. or Vale of Giants, men of vast proportions, which the ancient Ages plentifully afforded. Yea, our English AntiquaryCmd. Brit. in Northum∣berland. tells us, that Risingham a village in Nor∣thumberland in old Saxon, is nothing else then the dwelling place of Giants. In this vale of Rephaim, the Philistines (little less then Giants) were twice subdued; once at2 Sam. 5. 18. 20. Baal-perazim, where God by the hand of David brake forth upon them as the breach of waters: and again, where God not onely gave the success, but laid the design how the battell should be ma∣naged, namely as soon as he himself had sounded a charge out of the 2 Sam. 5. 22, 23, 24. Mulberry trees, David was to fetch a compass, and fiercely to fall on his enemies. Well is God styled a man of war, who here ordered the battell himself, and well did David confess Thou teachest my hands to war, and fingers to fight, who here received from God particular instructions, how to regulate his Army. § 23. Mulberry Trees (pardon a digression) were plentifull in Pa∣lestine;Mulberry trees and silke plen∣tifull in Palestine. A tree which may pass for the emblem of prudence, slow in consultation, swift in execution; for it putteth forth its leaves the last of all trees, but then (as it is said) all in one night, as if sensible of, and ashamed for its former neglect, she endevours to overtake other trees with her double diligence. Men feed on the fruit, Silkworms on the leaves thereof: Creatures contemptible in themselves, admirable in their qualities, appearing Proteus-like in sundry shapes in the same year, eggs, wormes, flies, finishing for the most part yearly their life and work together. But we leave these mysteries to be discussed by Naturalists, and will onely adde, that if the originall of silke were well considered, Gallants had small cause to be proud of gay clothes, for from wormes it came, and to wormes shall the wearers therof return. § 24. Store of the best silks were made and used in Palestine;Saul first made bravery fre∣quent in Israel. amongst other favours bestowed by God on the ungratefull Iews, this was one. I have girded thee about with fine linen, and covered thee withEzek. 1. 10. silk. King Saul was the first, who made bravery frequent, and fashionable in Israel (little state and gallantry being used under the Iudges) when the Court and costly clothes began together, according to our SavioursMat. 11. 18. saying, They that weare soft clothing are in Kings houses: I say in the reign of King Saul, rich rayment began generally to be worn by the Iews:2 Sam. 1. 24. Yee daughters of Israel weep over Saul, who clothed you in Scarlet and other delights: yea by the
confession of the heathen writers, best silks both for fineness and colour were in Palestine.In Esiacis. lib. 1. Pausanis writes . The silk (saith he) of Elis in Greece gives not place in point of fineness to silk of the Hebrews, but is not like it in yellowness: whereby it appears, that the Hebrew silk-wormes were as good spinsters, and better Dyers then those in Greece, setting a better gloss and lustre on their work. So much for the silk in Iudea called Shesh in Hebrew, whence haply, that fine linen or silk is called Shashes worn at this day about the heads of eastern people. § 25. But to return to our description,maus where Christ appear∣ed to the two Disciples. north-west from the vale of Giants lay the City of Emaus, afterwards called Nicopolis. Hither the two Disciples were a travelling, being about sixty furlongs from Ierusalem, whē Christ after his resurrection unknown joined himself to their cōpany. They tax him for not knowing the news in Iersalem, he reproves them for being ignorant of the sense of the Scriptures, which he began to declare unto them. O excellent expositor! Christ Commenting on his own prophecies, all which he first inspired, afterwards fulfilled, and now in∣terpreted. As he put light into their heads; so also heat into their hearts, whichLuk. 24. 13. burned all the while he communed with them: onely their eyes were held that they knew him not. Day, and their journey drew both to an end, when Christ makes as if he would goeLuk. 24. 28. farther; Truth cannot lye, but did simulate, onely to try how welcome his company was to them. They constrain him to stay, (such civill violences prevaile on hea∣ven it self) and in breakingVers. 30. of Bread, he brake himself unto them: their eyes being opened, he left them full of joy and amazement. Nor have I ought else to observe of Emaus but that many years before, Iudas Macca∣eus in that place got an eminent conquest, and defeated the voluminous Army1 Mac. 4. of Lysias. § 26. Hard by Emaus even at this day are showen the ruines of Za∣chariah his house,Zachariah his house. where Iohn the Baptist was born, being the voice of aMat. 3. cryer, begot of a dumb Father. This was that Zachariah who would not beleeve God without giving him a sign, and was punished that men could not understand him, without making of signes. To this place (then in a City in the Hill-country of Iudea) the blessed virgin Mary came with hast to congratulate the pregnancy of Elizabeth her Cousen; at the musick of whose salutation, the babe danced for oy, and leaped inLuk. 1. 41. the womb of Elizabeth. § 27. Hard by is the City Gebah belonging to theIosh. 21. 17. Priests;Gebah a City of the Levites. afterwards made a1 Sam. 13. 3. garrison of the Philistines, who therein were smote by Ionathan. King Asa afterwards built, that is, repaired and enlarged this City, as also Mizpah, with the remainder of those materials, which King Baasha had provided for the fortifying of Ramah: Cities so neer in situation, that after the captivity, their inhabitants are counted together in oneNehem. 7. 30. sum, the men of Ramah and Gebah six hundred twenty and one, which re∣turned from Babylon.
§ 28. We have hardly recovered into this map,David dancing before the Arke. the house of Obed-Edom, whence David in a most solemn procession brought the Ark to Ierusalem, dancing himself before it in a linen Ephod, which was not so white, but that Michal found spots therein, or rather cast dirt thereon, censuring David2 Sam. 6. 20. a fool for his indiscretion. But, when holy zeal is ar∣raigned at the bar of profaneness, and condemned either for folly, orAct. 26. 24. madness, it may appeal from that sentence, and challenge its right to be tried by its Peers; carnall eyes being incompetent judges of spirituall actions. Yea, God himself here took the matter in hand, so ordering it, that for the future, Michal's daughter should never mock her husband on the like occasion, punishing her with perpetuall barrenness. § 29. Look on the prospect of this map,Store of Storks in Palestin. especially the eastern parts thereof, and behold it overspread with trees of all sorts, Olive, Pine, Mul∣berry, Firre &c. Of the last saith the Psalmist,Psal. 104. 17. and the fir-trees are a refuge for the Storkes, breeding here in the greater abundance, because forbidden by theLevit. 11. 19. Leviticall law to be fed upon. A speckled bird (therefore in Greek from  niger, &  albus, black and white) and is remarkable for their love to their parents, feeding them in their old age. Hence called Chesida in Hebrew, that is, the mercifull bird; and in Dutch Oudevaer, that is, the carrier of the old one, because every Stork is an Aeneas bearing his Anchises on his back, carrying his Parent, when for age it cannot fly of it self. Some have confidently reported, that Storks will not live, save in a Republick; who may with as much truth af∣firm, that an Eagle, the Soveraign of birds, will not breed in a Common∣wealth. Not to say, that Storks were named in the Monarchy of Adam, preserved in the Arke in the Monarchy of Noah. Ieremy, who lived in the kingdome of Iudah, upbraided the ignorance of the people therein, Yea theIer. 8. 7. Stork in the heaven knoweth her appointed times. Which birds had they known their times, and the Iews not known the birds, as frequent, and fa∣miliar with them, both the Prophets illustration had beed obscure, and exprobration improper for his present purpose. Finis Libri secundi.
To the Right Honourable JOHN LORD ROSSE, Son to the Right Honourable JOHN EARL OF RVTLAND. MY LORD, IT hath been charged by Foreiners on our English Gentry, that many of them very knowing beyond the seas, have been strangers in their native Countrey; as able to give a better account of the Spaw, then our own Bath; the diving of the Spanish Anas under ground, then of our own Rivers (Diverill in Wiltshire, and Mole in Surrey) wherein the same wonders of Nature are set forth in a lesser Edition. How just this accusation is, for the present I have no lea∣sure
to enquire, but am afraid, that too many of our nation are guilty of a greater Ignorance; That being quic sighted in other kingdomes, and Countreys, they are altogether blinde as touching Judea, and the land of Palestine; the Home for their meditations, who are conversant in all the historicall passages of Scripture. Yet I would not have any wilfully to expose themselves (as Saint Paul was against his will) to2 Cor. 11. 26. perils of waters, perils of Robbers, perils by the Heathen, &c. personally to pace and trace the land of Canaan: who rather conceive that precept to Abraham▪Gen. 13. 17. Arise, walk through the land in the breadth thereof, and in the length thereof, may be performed by us, even whilest we also follow the counsell of Joash to Amaziah, Abide2 Chr. 25. 19. now at home. This may be done by daily and diligent perusing of the Scriptures; and comparing the same with it self; (Dia∣monds onely cut Diamonds) as also by consulting with such as have written the description of that Countrey. Amongst whom give me leave (though the unworthiest of thousands) to tender these my endevours, to your Honours seri∣ous perusall, and patronage, hoping my pains herein may con∣duce to the better understanding of the History of the Bible. I confess the doctrinall part of the Scripture is in it self most instructive to salvation. But as the rare relation of the wo∣man of Samaria,John 4. 39. first drew her neighbours to the sight of our Saviour, which afterwards believed on him, not for her words, but his own worth; so the delightfull stories in the Bible have allured many (youth especially) to the reading thereof, the light (the historicall part) first inviting their eyes, whose hearts were afterwards inflamed with the heat, the holy fire in the doctrine of Gods word.
Give me leave therefore my Lord, humbly to commend to your Honour, the constant reading of that, which eminently is termed The Scripture and the Bible or Book, all other be∣ing but scribling and Pamphlets in comparison thereof. They contain what will make you wise unto salvation; and the study thereof will render your Lordship more truely honoura∣ble then your outward extraction. Great indeed was the priviledge of Ruth, for whom purposely some handfuls wereRuth 2. 16. let fall, for her to gather up. But greater the honour done to your Ancestors by our English Kings, above an hundred years since, who scattered some flowers (and other ornaments) out of their own Armes, therewith to deck and adorn those of your family. Yet know my Lord that the Bereans areActs 17. 11. pronounced more noble then those of Thessalonica, in that they re∣ceived the word with all readiness of minde, searching the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so: And by the same proportion your exact skill industriously attained in Gods word, shall make your soul increase with the increaseColos. 2. 19. of God; far more honourable then that Aug∣mentation in Heraldry, which was conferred on your An∣cestours. Remember I pray what David writes, IPsal. 119. 96. have seen an end of all perfection, but thy commandement is exceed∣ing broad. Oh imperfect perfection which hath an end! And indeed David lived in an Age, wherein he saw Goliah1 Sam. 7. 51. the strongest overcome, Asahel the2 Sam. 2. 23. swiftest overtaken, Achi∣tophel2 Sam. 17. 23. the wisest befooled, and Absalom the2 Sam. 14. 25. fairest defor∣med with a violent death. Yet still the immortall word out∣lived all casualties, and triumphed in defiance of opposition.
Wherefore as the Jews were to provide a chest by the side of the Ark wherein the LawDeut. 31. 26. was to be placed and kept, so I wish your Honour a large heart to be a repository for this Broad commandement of God, that therein you may care∣fully lay up and treasure the same, which when all earthly per∣fections prove false and fading, will furnish your soul with ho∣liness here and happiness hereafter: which is the daily prayer of Your Honours most humble servant THO. FULLER. Here followeth the description of Jerusalem.
THE DESCRIPTION OF THE CITY OF IERVSALEM. The third Book. CHAP. I. Of the severall names and generall situation of Jerusalem. § 1 WHen a woman often altereth her surname, it is a signe she hath been many times married; deno∣minating of his wife from him, being parcell of theIsa. 4. 1. maritall priviledge. But when a City in diverse Ages hath different names, this speaks her succes∣sive subjection to severall Lords, new owners impo∣sing on her new appellations, as in our present subject plainly appears. For the City which we are to describe was called 1Gen. 14. 18. Salem, in the days of Abraham, when Melchisedec was King, and probably first founder thereof. Then it was but a small place, (the greatest Giant had once the cradle of his infancy) when mount Moriah (afterwards in the midst of the City, and a forest of houses) was as yet but a thicket ofGen. 22▪ 13. thornes, wherein the Ram, the exchange for Isaac, was caught by the hornes. 2 Iebus. A name either of the whole or principall part thereof; so we read of the LeviteJudg. 19. 10. that he came over against Iebus, which is Ie∣rusalem. 3 IerusalemIt is of the du∣al number in Hebrew, be∣cause first con∣sisting of two principal parts▪ Zion and the Lower City.; so called, as the Fathers generally affirme, as the pro∣duct of the union of Iebus and Salem, B, for sounds sake being
changed into R, which notwithstanding the propriety of the Hebrew tongue will not permit. For though chopping of letters be her cōmon practise, yet, the Iews (as they always married within their own Tribe, so they) exchanged letters of the same Linage, (same Instrument) Labials for Labials, Gutturals for Gutturals, whereas betwixt Beth, & Resh in Hebrew no such affinity. Besides the turn∣ing of a tender melting B. into a surly rigid R. is not to levigate or mollifie, but to make the name the harder in pronun∣ciation. This drives others to seek out the Etymology thereof, as signifying in Hebrew, The vision of peace. But seeing Abra∣hamGen. 22. 14. called an eminent place whereon it stood, Iehovah-Iireh, The Lord will be seen; perchance from the echo of the name Iireh added to Salem,(that is, peace shall be seen or provided) the City might be called Ierusalem, where having the essentiall Consonant, the most various point-vowels are not so considerable. Forget we not that even in Davids time, when the name of Ierusalem was in fashion, the City was sometimes still called Salem: For inPsal. 76. 2. Sa∣lem is his Tabernacle, and his dwelling in Sion. Thus it is usuall in England in common discourse to cut off the former part of long-named Cities, Weschester, Southhampton, Kingstone on Hull, whilest the remnant Chester, Hampton, Hull sufficiently express them to ordinary capacities. 4 Hierosolyma, which indeed is no new name, but the old name in a new language, translated into Greek. SomeEuseb. li. 9. prpar. evange. geippus. l. 5. ca. 9. & Niceph. calixt. l. 10. cap. 33. Fathers will have it compounded from the Greek word  a Temple and  So∣lomon, that is, Solomons Temple, as if the mixing of these Languages did promise, if not prophesie, in after ages a joint interest of Iew and Gentile in the mysteries of Religion. But SaintAbsurdum esse peregrinae linguae mixtura demonstrat. Hi∣eronymus Eva∣gr. Hierome is zealous against this Fancy, impatient that in the name of the prin∣cipall City of the Iews a Greek word should not onely be min∣gled with, but preferred before the Hebrew. It is safer therefore to say, that Hierosolyma is nothing else but Ierusalem grecized, or made Greek, and the conceit of the Temple of Solomon rather a witty allusion thereto, then a solid deduction thereof. 5 Solyma, being onely the half of the former. For whereas Hieroso∣lyma being a confluence of six short syllables was unmanagable in ordinary verse, Poets served this name (as the Ammonites the cloaths of Davids2 Sam. 10. 4. Ambassadours) cut it off in the middle. AnStatius sylvar. li. 5. in protr∣ptico ad Crispi∣num. Solymum cinerem Palmeta{que} capta subibis? Wilt thou go under Salems dust forsaken, Vnder the palme-trees lately captive taken? I conceive the name of Solyma not used by Authors till after our Saviours suffering, though Iosephus (and probably out of him Tacitus) writes that Homer makes mention thereof, as indeed we finde it. zta, & Odyss. Beta. twice in his Poems, never for this City in Iudea, but
for a place and people in Lycia. I will not say that the curtling of Ierusalem into Solyma after our Saviours time, was a sad pro∣gnostick that this spacious City should suddenly in the fire of ci∣vill war be boiled away to the half, yea afterwards shrink to so unconsiderable a smalness that a monosyllable, yea a bare letter were too long a name for it. 6 Aelia, so named from Aelius Hdrianus the Emperour, who built some part of it again, and made it a Garrison. 7 Ierusalem, recovering the ancient name again, whilest for some hundred of years it was in the possession of the Christians. 8Sands Trav. li. 3. pag. 155. Cuds, so called at this day by the Mahometans, who are the present owners thereof, which signifies Holy in their language. Here we omit those many appellations given Ierusalem in Scripture: The Isa. 1. 21. faithfull City, the City of the greatMat. 5. 35. King, theMat. 27. 53. holy City, because these are not proper names, but glorious Epithets thereof. § 2. Concerning the generall situation of Ierusalem, three things here∣in are remarkable: first it was placed, asDe bell Iud. lib. 3. cap. 4. Iosephus reports, in the very mid∣dle of Iudea. But herein criticall exactness is not to be observed, (the heart it self is not so unpartially in the midst of the body, but that if not in position, yet in motion it propends to the left side) for Ierusalem in∣clines more to the south of the Countrey. As Ierusalem was the navell of Iudea, so the Fathers make Iudea the middest of the world, whereunto they bring (not to say, bow) those places of Scripture, Thou hast wrought salvation in the midst of the earth. Indeed seeing the whole world is a round Table, and the Gospell the food for mens souls, it was fitting that this great dish should be set in the midst of the Board that all the guests round about might equally reach unto it; and Ierusalem was the Center whence the lines of salvation went out into all lands. Yea Ptolemy dividing the (then-known) world into seven Climats, placed Ierusalem as the Sun, in the fourth Climat, proportionably to what is said in theEzek. 5. 5. Prophe, I have set it in the midst of the Nations, and the Countreys that are round about her. § 3. Secondly, it had highEusebius saith that Ieru∣salem was cal∣led anciently, Algariza, that is, The  mountain. mountains under it, and lower about it, which as dutifull servants at distance seemed to attend it. Ierusalem had a mountain for her footstool, and her floor was higher then the roof of other Cities: no doubt the Emblem of the strength, stateliness, and stability of Gods Church in glory. High and hard climbing thither, but plain and pleasant dwelling there. § 4. Lastly, it was distanced from the sea welnigh forty miles, ha∣ving no navigable River near unto it. For God intended not Ierusalem for a staple of trade, but for a ROYALL EXCHANGE OF RE∣LIGION, chiefly holding correspondency with Heaven it self, daily re∣ceiving blessings thence, duly returning praises thither. Besides, God would not have his virgin people the Iews, wooed with, much less wedded to outlandish fashions. And ifIn perap. E∣vang lib. 12. cap. 27. Eusebius may be credited, for the self same
reason, Plato in imitation of Ierusalem, would have that City, wherein the modell of his imaginary Common-wealth should be set up, to be seated some miles from the sea, lest forein merchandize should by degrees bring in forein manners into it. CHAP. II. The particular Situation, Circuit; Populousness, Beauty and strength thereof. § 1 IT will be pain-worthy to enquire into the exact situation of Ie∣rusalem in what Tribe it was placed, the rather because severall testimonies of Scripture entitle both Iudah and Benjamin unto the posses∣sion thereof. For IUDAH. Josh. 15. 63. And for the Iebusites, the inhabitants of Ierusalem, the children of Iudah could not drive them out, but the Iebusites dwell with the children of Iudah at Ierusalem unto this day.Judg. 1. 8. Now the children of Iudah had fought against Ierusalem, and had ta∣ken it, and smitten it with the edge of the sword, and set the City on fire. For BENIAMIN. Josh. 18. 28. And Zelah, Eleph, and Iebus, (which is Ierusalem) Gibeah and Kiriath. This is the inheritance of the children of Benjamin according to their families.Judg. 1. 12. And the children of Benjamin did not drive out the Iebusites that inhabited Ierusalem, but the Iebusites dwell with the children of Benjamin in Ierusalem unto this day. FOR BOTH: Nehem. 11. 4. And at Ierusalem dwelt certain of the children of Iudah, and of the children of Benjamin. This fifth and last place is a good Comment on the four former, name∣ly, that this City (though the Iebusites long disturbed their quiet posses∣sion) jointly belonged to both Tribes, neither claiming it totally as his, both truly as theirs; NorNu▪ 36. 9. was this any confused mixture of their inhe∣tances (flatly forbidden in the law) but methodicall (if not mysticall) meeting thereof, so that Iudah and Benjamin (which alone persisted loyall to God and their King) had their possessions lovingly shaking hands in Ierusalem, the solemn place appointed for Gods publick service. § 2. Ierusalem was fiftyIosephus con∣tra Appin. lib▪ prim. furlongs in circuit, which reduced to our English account amounts to six miles and a quarter. In which compass multitudes of People did inhabit, and three different degrees of the po∣pulousness of this place are very remarkable. 1 Ordinary, even in vacation-time, when there was no spring-tyde,
or usuall confluence of people more then the proper Citizens thereof, and those no fewer then one hundred and fiftyIosep. ibid. thou∣sand. 2 Extraordinary, at the three annuall Termes, (as I may call them) I mean the three Feasts general of the Iews, Passeover, Pentecost, the feast of Tabernacles, when all the able malesExod. 34, 23. of Israel appeared with an offering before God. 3 Superextraordinary, when this City was sacked by the Romans, and when all sorts, and sexes (some drawn with devotion, more driven for protection) flocked thither, insomuch that by fire, famine, sword, civill discord, and forein force, eleven hundredIsep. Bl. Iuda. ca. gr. 45. lat. 17. thousand are said to be slain therein. Incredible it seems that so many should be pent in this place, except the people therein (as when they crouded about Christ, Luk. 8. 45. ) did throng and press one on another. But we must consider that flying thither for shelter, they had room enough, if they had but room enough, not aiming at any convenient, (much less delightfull ha∣bitations,) but onely a bare lodging in Ierusalem, where for the time being, every single chamber was made a severall family, and every story multi∣plyed into a street whilest the fiege continued. § 3. And therefore it is most justly recounted asone of the ten wonders (whereof the Rabbins take especiall notice amongst the Iews) that verAboth. R. Natn per. 34 any man did say to his fellow, I have not found a bed in Ierusalem to lye in; nor did evr any ma say to his fellow, My lodging is too strait for me in Ierusalem. As if he place were of a Cheverell nature, to extend to the proportion of the People therein. Indeed it was part of Gods goodness when he brought his Vine out of Egypt, then also to preparePsal. 80. 9. room for it, which he performed here accordingly, even to admiration. § 4. Now amongst the nativs of Ierusalem, many no doubt were the eminent Persons born therein, especially, if the Rabbinicall tradition be true, that wheresoever the particular place of any Prophets birth is not set down, there it is to be presumed that he was of Ierusalem. By this observation, Nathan, Gad, Isaiah, Daniel, Hosea, Ioel, Habakkuk, &c. should be town-born children of Ierusalem. But we leave it uncertain whether this place gave the cradles to these, being too sure that it gave the coffins to too many worthy messen∣gers of God, O Ierusalem,Mat. 23. 37. Ierusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee. § 5. The structure of this City was beautifull and high, of hewed free∣stone, very uniform, whether in respect of the houses, or streets, one toano∣ther:Psal. 122. 3. Ierusalem  builded as a City which is at unity in it self. Their roofs were flat nd fenced with battlements, by speciallDeut. 22. 8. command from God▪ to pre∣vnt casualties of people falling thence. These roofs were the Iews watch∣owers for prospect, galleries for pleasure and (which was the worst) their igh places for Idolatry. Which causeth the Prophets complaint
more thenIer. 19. 13. & Ier. 32. 29. once, That thereon they burnt incense unto all the host of Heaven. Surely the weight of this wickedness did break the strongest beams, and stiffest rafters in the Palaces of Ierusalem. For, though Idols be lighter then vanity it self, in point of power, and efficacy; they are heavier then lead to press the place down with divine vengeance. § 6. As for the strength of Ierusalem, we must in the first place listen to Iuah his song,Isa. 26. 1. We have a strong City, salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks. The Spaniards come off poorly with their brag, that they have Madrid a City in Castile walled withIoan. Mena Poeta Mercat. pag. 118. in Atlante. fire; which at last proves nothing else but that there be many quarries of flint found round about it. But, most true it is that God promised Ierusalem,Zech. 2. 5. he would be unto her a wall of fire round about: which promise he for his part, would most surely have kept, and performed, had not the sins of the Iews forced him to break it, in vindication of his own justice. § 7. As for the outward fortifications thereof, it was incompassed with aIoseph. lib. 6. Bll▪ Id. a. 6. treble wall, save where it was begirt with unpassable vallies, and there one wall did suffice. This wall was fenced with a ditch, cut out of a rock, saithCon. App. lib. 1. Iosephus, andGeogr. li. 16. pag. 762. Strabo, sixty foot deep, and two hun∣dred and fifty foot broad; the former not acquainting us with the au∣thour thereof, so prodigious a work may well be conceived, a perfor∣mance of many successive Princes therein. It seems, it was made the deeper because it was dry:Idem ibid. , well watered within, and dry without, is the character our author gives of the Ci∣ty. This I dare say, the breadth of this ditch exceeds the proportion of al modern regular fortifications, for in Breda it self (the platform where∣in, may be the platform for other places) the ditch is no broader then the rampire at the bottome thereof. And now, whatPsal. 48. 12. David principally intended mystically, comes to our place literally to endevour, Walke a∣bout Sion, and goe round about her: tell the towers thereof. Mark yee well her bul∣works, consider her palaces, that yee may tell it to the generation following. And to follow the motion of the Sun, we will begin at the East, and so for∣ward. CHAP. III. Of the Gates thereof. § 1. BE it premised,Four sort of Gates in Ieru∣salem. that many difficulties in this subject have been caused by mens unwary confounding of the severall natures of the gates in Ierusalem, which for the clearing of the truth, must carefully be distinguished into four sorts, in sundry places serving for different em∣ployments.
Gates 1 In the out-wall, giving ingess and egress to passengers, the sole subject of our present discourse. 2 In the in-walls, (like Temple-bar opening out of Fleet-street into the Strand) being partitions within Ierusalem. Such the Iron∣gate through whichAct. 12. 10. Saint Peter went out of prison, to the house of Mary the mother of Iohn Mark. 3 Leading to the Courts of the Temple: (as Saint Austins-gate into Saint Pauls Church-yard) such theAct. 3. 2. beautifull gate &c. 4 Of the Kings palace: (like Bulwark- gate, and Iron-gate leading to London tower) as the gate2 Chr. 23. 15. whereby the horses came into the Kings house. Now such as promiscuously make all these to be out-gates of Ierusalem ingage themselves in difficulties, and deceiv others thereby. For preven∣tion whereof we will onely insist on the gates of the first qualification. § 2. Begin we with the Sheep-gate on the east of Ierusalem,The Sheep∣gate. inNehem. 3. 1. Nehemi∣ahs time owing the reparation thereof to Elishib the high Priest, and his brethren. Through this gate the sheep were driven in, and all other cat∣tell designed for sacrifice, as the nearest way to the Temple. § 3. Next followeth the Golden-gate (not mentioned in Scripture,The Golden∣gate. but meely depending onBrc. it. 6. Sal. . 9. c. 4. Breid. 14. Iul▪ Pasch. d. 184. humane authority,) so called because gilt all over, vulgar beholders (who carry no touchstones in their eyes) ac∣counting all massie gold which is richly gilded. PopishSee Adricho. Theatrum Terr. sanct. p. 67. authours adde that when our Saviour in an humble but solemn equipage rode on an Asse colt to the Temple, this gate opened unto him of its own accord: a prety proportionable fiction. For, if theAct. 11. 9, 10. Iron-gate opened to Peter a Di∣sciple, no less then a Golden-gate could offer entrance to Christ his Master. Onely here's the difference, we receive the one as recorded in Scripture, and reue the other as not reported therein, especially our Saviour ha∣ving o fair an occasion to make mention thereof. For when the Pha∣risees questioned him for not silencing the Childrens Hosaas, and when he returned, tht if theyLuk. 19. 00. should hold their peace, the stones would immedi∣ately ry out, how easie had it been for him to adde, that the very walls of the City had already opened their mouthes (their gates) to receiv him? § 4. Thirdly,The Horse-gate. the Horse-gate by the Kings palace, through which the grooms brought the Kings hors, to water them in the brook of Kidron, yet some erroneously make this the same with the Water-gate. The Pro∣phet points at the exact position thereof towardsIer. 31. 40. the east, and we finde the mention, but not the reedifying of this gate inNhem. 3. 28. Nehemiah; a Presum∣pion, that it was not so ruinous as the rest, and not needing much repa∣ration. As for , who cryed Treason, Treason, (the fox the finder) when she was the greatest Traitour herself: on theCompare▪ 2 King. 11. 16. with  Chr. 23. 1. Comparing of Scripture it will appear that the Horse-gate whereat she was killed, was not this City gate, but another so named leading from the Temple to the the Kings Palace▪
§ 5. Fourthly,The Water∣gate. the Water-gate, In a fall, or declivity of ground,Neh. 12. 37. full east. So called, because thereat▪ all the ewers, channels, and water-courses of the City, flowed out, and ran into the brook Cedron▪ No mention in Nehemiah of the repairing hereof, for the reason aforesaid. Indeed, if in his time the Iews had de no vo, from the very ground begun the building of the walls, and gates thereof, it had been impossible, they could have finished that workNeh. 6. 15. in two and fifty days. Whereby it appears, they onely mended those places, which were most in dilapidation. This was the East∣gate, emphatically so calledJer. 19. 2. by the Prophet, and opened into the valley of the children of Hinnom. § 6. Thus far the gates on the east of Ierusalem. On the south thereof▪Why no gates on the south of Ierusalem. where Sion (or the City of David) lay, we meet with no gates at all, the precipice of the rock affording no passable ascent on that side, so that men must goe first through Ierusalem, and then into Sion. I dare not say that herein Ierusalem was a type of the Militant, as Sion (more mounted) of the Triumphant Church, although there be no access for those which are without into the happiness of the latter, but by taking the holiness of the former in their passage thereunto. § 7. Come we now to the west, in the southermost part whereof, we light on the Fountain-gate,The Fountain-gate. near the pool of Shiloah whence it took itsNehem 3. 15. name, nigh to which on the inside, were thoseNeh. 12. 37. stately staires, whereby men went up to the City of David. This gate was in Nehemiahs time repaired byNehem. 3. 15. Shallum the Son of Col-hozeh. § 8. Next to this the Dung-gate.The Dung-gate. A gate in greatness, though but a postern for the private use thereof, through which the offall, and excre∣ments of the City were conveyed. Appliable to this place, is that which the1 Cor. 12. 22. Apostle speaketh, of some parts of the body▪ Nay, much more thos members of the body, which seem to be feeble, are necessary. This gate, though of small honour, was of great use, and all Ierusalem had been a Dung-City▪ but for the Dung-gate. Yea, the noisomer soile carried out hereat, and conveyed hence into the gardens thereabouts, was by natures Chymistry converted into wholesome herbs, and fragrant flowers growing there. The Dung-gate in the days of Nehemiah, was set up, with the doors, locks, and bars thereof, byNehem. 3. 4. Malchiah the son of Rechab. § 9. Next follows the Valley-gate,The Valley-gate. commonly but wrongfully placed on the east side of the City; chiefly on this account, because the valley of Kidron lyeth on that side thereof. As if this valley alone was near Ierusa¦lem, which by the Psalmist is describedPal. 125. 2. with the mountains round about it, and so by necessary consequence must be surrounded with vallies inter∣posed betwixt it and those mountains▪ This gate stood in the north-west▪ opening into the valley of Carcases, lying betwixt it, and Mount Calvary. Here Nehemiah began,Neh. 2. 13. 15. and ended his surveying the ruins of the walls▪ going by night, because loth to be seen, and loth to see so sad a sight. This valley-gate was in his time repaired byNeh. 3. 13. Hanun and the inhabitants of Za∣noah.
§ 10. Having thus surveyed the east,The Corner∣gate. south and west, come we now to the northern part of the City. Where, first, we finde the Corner-gate, whose angular position speaks it to participate of two points, being seated in the very flexure of the wall from the east to the north. It was distanced from the gate of Ephraim just four hundred cubits, all which space of the wall was broken down by Ioash2 Chr. 25. 23. King of Israel when he conquered Amaziah, that his Army might march in triumphantly with the greater state. Pride we see hath not onely an high neck, but also a broad breast (especially when setting her armes by her side) so large a passage must be cleared for her entrance. Afterwards King Uzziah rebuided this gate, and adorned it with towers, yea fortified all the2 Chr. 26. 9. turning of the wall. For, as the elbows of garments ought to be made the strongest, as most sub∣ject to wearing out: so (walls being the cloaths of Cities, without which they are naked) wise Uzziah adjudged it necessary, that this Cor∣ner-gate, and wall bending thereabout, should have most cost and care ex∣pended in the fortification thereof, § 11. No mention of the repairing of this gate in Nehemiah,Why not re∣paired in Ne∣hemiahs time. which prompteth us with these conjectures: 1 Either that it was then dammed up. Ierusalem after the captivity being large in extent, and thin in people, (many uninhabited places being left therein) probably in policy they contracted the number of their gates, the multiplying whereof did require more money and men to guard them. OrFor this gate is mentioned Zech. 14. 10. rather, 2 Being so lately built by Uzziah, it might notneed much mending, as left standing, and undemolished by the Babylonians. For, in the sacking of a City it often fareth with the gates as with the men thereof, it is hard if some doe not escape, and survive the destructi∣on. Yea, sometimes conquerours are pleased to spare some parcell of walls, out of pity (not to the place but) to themselves, finding the structure thereof of so firme constitution, that it requires more pains then it will return profit in the levelling thereof. § 12. Next comes the gate of Ephraim.The gate of Ephraim. so called, not because standing in, but opening towards the Tribe of Ephraim. I deny not, but that some Ephraimites, after their return from captivity, dwelt in1 Chr. 9. 3. Ierusalem, from whose habitations hard by, this gate might, in probability, bor∣row his name; but prefer the former notation as most naturall. For usuall it is, both for streets and gates, to take their denomination from such places (though at great distance) to which they lead. Witness Ken∣tish-street inStows survey of London. pag. 448. South-wark, for that it is the way (saith my authour) leading into that County, the street it self otherwise being in Surrey: and witness Winchester-gate in Sarisbury, so named, because through it travellers pass to Winchester, a City twenty miles off: and (an instance best known to Scholars) Trumpington-street in Cambridge, so called from a village some two miles thence. This gate was probably destroyed, when Ioash King
of Israel entring Ierusalem, brake down four hundred cubits of the wall, from the gate of Ephraim, to the Coer-gate, where I conceive, the particle from is to be taken inclusively (so that both the gates were cast into that account) the rather, because Pride, and Cruelty, always, when they make measure, give in the advantage. § 13. Next the Old-gate:The Old-gate. so called (as Bonsrerius will have it) because extant here, ever since Melchisedec was the founder thereof. If so, it was an Old-old-gate indeed. But, as men having out lived all Registers, ac∣count themselves; so gates having outlasted all memories, are account∣ed by others, more ancient then truely they are. However, no wonder, if in Nehemiahs time the decays of so old a fabrick, called to the charity ofNehem. 3. 6. Iehoiada the son of Paseah, and Meshullam the son of Besodajah jointly to repair them. § 14. Next the Fish-gate.The Fish-gate. By mistake generally placed in the west wal, meerly because Ioppa on the Mediterranean sea, whence they fancy all fish (as if no moe ways to the water, then one) must come to Ierusalem, lay on the west thereof. Whereas in Scripture we finde no express of fish for mans eating (but one which eat a man, Ionab his Whale) mentioned from thatplace, whilst whole sholes were caught in the Sea of Galilee, or lake of Tiberias, lying north of Ierusalem▪ Indeed Tyre, lying almost full north from this City, was the staple place, which furnished it with fish (as appears inNehe. 13. 16. Nehemiah) which through this gate was brought to Ierusalem. Surely, the provisions of any populous place in long time will tire, if onely going on feet, or flying on wings, and not also swimming with fins, having fish as well as flesh and fowl for their repast, as here in Ierusalem. And although no sacrifices of fish were by God appointed to be offered unto him, yet hence the less wholesome∣ness, or cleanness of them cannot justly be inferred; because they were improper for offerings, living in an element wherein men had no con∣versation. This gate wasNehem. 3. 3. repaired by the sons of Hassenaah. § 15. The gate of Benjamin doth onely remain,The gate of Benjamin. he the least in his fathers family, this the last amongst the gates of Ierusalem, standing in the north. east part thereof. Indeed we finde two gates of Benjamin in Ierusalem (two of the same name, in one City, no wonder, the double New-gate in Lon∣don, the later new made postern into Moor-fields may be an instance there∣of) one called the high-gate of Benjamin, where Pashur put theJer. 20. 2. Prophet Ieremy in the stocks, which was by the house of the Lord, and therefore proba∣bly a gate of the Temple. The other was an out-gate of the City leading into the land of Benjamin, whither Ieremy was going to separate himself, when the Captain of theJer. 37. 13. guard in this gate, seised him in his passage, falsly accused him, and occasioned his imprisonment. § 16. Here I cannot but wonder at manyArias Monta∣nus, Adrichoi∣us, & M. Moor. learned men,A strange mis∣take in learned men. who make this Gate of Benjamin, to be the same with the Corner-gate. I deny not but that in many Cities it is usuall, for one and the same gate to have severall
names, as I have learnt from my industrious, and judiciousM. william Sommer in his Antiquitles of Canturbury pa. 16. & 17. friend in his description of Canterbury, how Burgate, and Saint Michaels-gate are the same▪ and so Newin-gate, and Saint Georges-gate in that ancient City▪ But the fancy of the foresaid authors, is directly oppossite to the words of theZech. 14. 10. Prophet, foretelling that Ierusalem should be inhabited from Benjamin gate, unto the place of the first gate, unto the corner-gate, &c. where we may behold these two gates, Benjamin, and the Corner-gate, set at terms at great distance, and a considerable space interposed. This gate was not repaired in Nehemiahs time for the reasons formerly alledged. § 17. These are all the gates of Ierusalem,The Needles∣eye. whereof express mention in Scripture. Some fancy another, called the Needles-eye, so low, and little onely men might enter thereat. These conceive our Saviours expression, Mat. 19. 24. It is easier for a Camel to goe through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man[Mark. 10. 24. tru∣sting in his riches] to enter into the kingdome of God, intended this small postern; where, the bunch on the Camels back, was the Porter to shut it against him, for entering in thereat. But, we listen hereunto, as to a fable, and account the threading ofCamden. in York-shire pag. 700. Saint Wilfrides needle, as a conceit (though much later and of a different nature) to have as much gravity, and truth therein. CHAP. IV. Of the Towers on or about Ierusalem. § 1. BEsides these gates,The Tower of M. Ierusalem was beautified▪ and fortified with many towers proportionably interplaced, though we finde but few of them recorded by name. Amongst these we meet with the tower ofNehem. 3. 1. & 12. 39. Meah, that is, the hundred tower, so called either because so many cubits high, or so many distanced from some other tower, or because a just Cen∣tury of towers was at it begun or finished. It was built after the capti∣vity by EliashibNehem. 3. 1. and his brethren the Priests. § 2. The Tower of furnaces,The tower of furnaces. standing in the West, north of the Valley gate, jointly repaired byNeh. 3. 11▪ Malchiah, and Hashub. So called (thinks Adrichomius) from fire kept there as a signall to seafaring men; But oh woefull those Mariners, who in a dark night had no better direction then what they received thence, above forty miles from the sea, and many mountains interposed! rather it might serve for some Beacon, or land-mark, or might take its name from some fire in the corpse du gard constantly preser∣ved therein. § 3. The tower of Hananeel in the east part.The tower of Hananeel. So called, no doubt, from the first builder thereof. It was in Nehemiahs time repaired by Eliashib theNehem. 3. 1. high Priest, and his brethren. § 4. The TowerNehem. 3. 25. that lyeth out from the Kings high house,The tower that lyeth out. nigh unto which Palal the son of Uzai, repaired in Nehemiahs time. Not that the promi∣nency of this extravagant Tower, hindred the uniformity of the walls,
but the fencing of the City, required such situation thereof. § 5. The GreatNehem. 3. 27. tower that lyeth out,The great tower that lyeth out. different from the former, else the builders of the wall in Nehemiahs time, made no progress in the work; in the east of the City, over against which the Tekoites did repair. § 6. The Tower ofNehem. 3. 19. David,The tower of David. furnished with an armory, at the south∣west turning of the wall, over against which Ezer the son of Ioshua re∣paired. Christ compareth the neck of hisCant. 4. 4. spouse to this Tower for the whiteness and proportionable length thereof. § 7. But among all these,The tower of Siloe. most remarkable was the Tower of Siloe (near unto the water of Siloe whence it fetcht its name) on the west side of the City, which killedLuk. 13 4. eighteen men with the fall thereof. Yet, the stones of this tower fell not more heavy on their bodies, then the censure of uncharitable Iews did on their memories, condemning them for the greatest sinners in all Ierusalem, as whose offences were mounted so high, that nothing less or lower then the fall of a tower, could depress their Persons, and impieties to the pit of perdition. False position to maintain, that those have wrought the most sin, who are brought to most shame, and confuted by our Saviour, assuring the Iews, if they did not repent, they should likewise perish: likewise; certitudine, non similitudine poenae. Yea, in a mysticall meaning, those incredulous Iews who rejected our Saviour, did not onely fall on a stone, and so were broken, but also the stone fell on them, by reason of their infidelity, andMat. 21. 44. ground them to powder. § 8. We will conclude with the Tower of Ophel,The tower of Ophel where the Nethinims dwelt. so named from dark∣ness, as some would have it, because always cloudy and misty at the high top thereof: But though the Etymology of Ophel be obscure, the situation and use thereof is clear in Scripture, over against theNehem. 3. 26. Water-gate, where the Nethinims had their habitation. Understand not all of them at once, but so many of their society, as for the time being, were in ordinary at∣tendance about the Temple, whilest the rest lived in otherEzra 2. 70. Cities assign∣ed unto them. § 9. These Nethinims were descended from those Gibeonites,Their service, and priviledges who for their fallacy put on Ioshua, and the people of Israel, were condemned to the drudgery of Gods service.Josh. 9 27. Thus the fathers lying tongues, cost their children many aking armes, and weary backs, with hewing of wood, and drawing of water. Saul was a great2 Sam. 21. 2. persecutour, David a grand preserver of them, who first made them a Corporation:Ezra 8. 20. He and his Princes appoin∣ting them for the service of the Levites, when first we finde them called Nethinims, (to bury the odious name of Gibeonites) that is, persons given to to pious uses. These for many generations approving their industry in Gods service, washed out the staines of their Fathers falshood, with the sweat of their fidelity: and in proces of time, (though Hivites by extra∣ction) attained to some honour above the natives of Israel. For whereas the sons of Barzillai were put by their places in theEzra 2. 62. Priesthood, because they could not clear their pedegree; the Nethinims continued in their
place whoseEzra 2. 43. genealogies were exactly, derived▪ Yea, whereas other Israelites were subject to heavy taxes, after their captivity, the Nethinims were exempted from all tribute (pity their purses and persons should both bear burdens) by the bounty of the Kings of Persia. Whose liberality, though a Pagan, to Gods worship (like the precious ointment onPsal▪ 133. 2. Arons head which ran down to his beard, even to the skirts of his garment) flowed from the Priests and Levites, by the singers, and porters, to the Netinims (the very verge, and utmost hem of Temple officers) by his especiall grace taking Ezra 7. 24. order, that it should not be lawfull to impose toll, tribute, or custome upon them. § 10. Many moe towers not mentioned in Scripture,The Tower of women. were about Ierusalem, as theIoseph. Bel. Iud. li. 6. c. 2. 5. Tower of women, remarkabl in Iosephus. But, why i was so called (what have women to doe with war?) I will give him a satisfactory answer, who first resolves me, why the Roman Fortification of twelve acres of groundCad. Brit. in Dorset. shire. And another so called in Yorkire. neer Dorchester, is called Maidens-castle. But, we refer all the towers of Iosephus his reporting (not appearing in Scri∣pture) to our particular Map of Ierusalem, as by him described. Come we now to make some observations on such as were the builders of the City walls, in the days of Nehemiah, because it was built on the same Area or floor with that in Solomons time, and we meet with many remar∣kables in the history thereof. CHAP. V. Observations on the repairers of the walls of Jerusalem, in the days of Nehemiah. § 1. MInisters ought to leade the Van,The high Priest begins the building. and be the first, and forwardest in all pious projects. Behold here Eliashib the high Priest, with the Priests his brethren, begin the work, and built the Sheep-gate. A gate ministeriall unto the Temple, (through which the sheep were brought intended for sacrifices) and therefore, as it was fit it should have the preheminence to be first repaired: so the Priests were the most proper persons to be imployed therein. Of this gate it is solely, and singularly said, that theyNehem. 3. 1. sanctified it, which dedication speaks it set apart to holy service as introductory of the offerings into the house of God. § 2. Great is the influence of the Pastours example,People of all sorts second them. on the peoples practise. Many hands make light work, behold a troop of buil∣ders cometh,
of all Professions, private persons, publick officers, whole families of all jointly, Levites, Merchants, Gold-smiths, Apothecaries &c. of all Places, from Iericho, Tekoa, Gibeon, Mizpah, Zanoah &c. Sexes, both men and women. Next repaired Shallion the son of Halloesh, the ruler of the half of Ierusalem, he,Nehem. 3. 12. and his daughters. What, had their tender hands any skill to carve stones, or weak shoulders any strength to carry morter? Or, was it sutable with the modesty of their sex, to clime ladders, clamber scaffolds, seeing there is no acting for any builders, but upon such stages? Surely they refused no pains pro∣portionable with decency to their power; and what was wanting in their persons, supplied with their purse, expending it (perchanc) out of their own portions. And, if orphans money put into the Chamber of London, be accounted so sure; God (no doubt) did repay, what they laid out on the walls of Ierusalem. § 3. Now whereas Shallum their Father is styled ruler of the half part of Ierusalem,Why after the captivity, two governours to one city. rather subtile then solid is the note of TremelliusVid ejus Annot. in Nehem. 3. 12. thereupon. For, saith he, Ierusalem being in two Tribes (Iudah and Benjamin) had therefore two rulers thereof. Not considering, how in the same Chapter, other smaller Cities, and those undoubtedly whole and entire in one Tribe, had notwithstanding two governours over them, and those be∣nefactours to the building of Ierusalem; As Malchiah the son of Rechab, the ruler ofIbid. ver. 14. part of Beth-haccarem. Shallum the son of Col-hozeh,Ibid. ver. 15. the ruler of part of Mizpah. Nehemiah the son of Azbuk, the ruler of theIbid. ver. 16. half part of Beth-zur. Hashabiah, the ruler of the halfIbid. ver. 17. part of Keilah. Banai the son of Henadad, the ruler of theIbid. ver. 18. half part of Keilah. Now the dividing of the command of the City betwixt two Gover∣nours, so usuall at this very time, and no notably extant in Scripture, be∣fore, or after the days of Nehmiah, leads us to this probable opinion, that immediately upon the Iews return from Babylon, the Persian Empe∣rour (from whom all Commissions were derived) would not entrust any Iew with the sole rule of a strong City, but for the better security, parted it betwixt two, who had joint, but distinct dominion therein: That whilst they with mutuall jealousie observed the actions each of other, both might preserve the interest of their Master. § 4. In building the Old gate two co-founders were joined together,The builders of one gate. namely, 1 Iehoiada the son ofNehem. 3. 6▪ Paseah. 2 Meshullam the son of Besodaiah. I will not say that as York Minster was built by PercyCamd. Bit. in the descrip. of York-shire. and Vavasour, the one giving stone, the other timber to that structure: so the building of this gate was in like manner advanced betwixt them; but hence observe, that it is no shame for one to admit a partner in that weighty work, which he caunot weild by himself. Blame worthy their pride, or peevishness,
who will not have that good design done at all, which can not all be done by themselves. § 5. Whereas Malchiah the son of Rechah is recorded builder of the Dung-gate (no needless port in that City,The founder of the Dung-gate conce∣ved by soe a Rchabite. seeing in populous places, Per∣fumers may be spared with less loss to the publick, then Scavangers) someVillalpandus in locum. conceive this Malchiah to have been a Rechabite by descent, and a ceremonious observer of their Ancestours instructions, not to drinkIer. 35. 6. wine, nor build house, but to live in tents, with other Canonicall obediences. Nor was this building of the wall of Ierusalem any breach of their vow; partly; because a publick, no private edifice; and partly, because those their ceremonious observances, probably terminated at the Babylonish captivity. This Malchiah they make heir of the family of the Rechbites, according to the Propheticall promise, that one of that houseIbid. ver. 19. should not fail to stand before God for ever. But, whether herein Interpreters doe not take more then the text tenders unto them, be it reported to others. § 6. It is signally observed,Younger be∣fore the elder in goodness. that Hanun theNeh. 3. 30. sixth son of Zalaph, re∣paired a piece of the wall. But, where were his five elder brethren? Were they dead, or absent, or idle, or impotent? The Scripture giveth no ac∣count of them, onely the sixth son is recorded for his forwardness here∣in. In matters of piety, there is no standing on useless (yea on dange∣rous) modesty. No breach of good manners, to goe before our betters in goodness, or for the younger brother in nature, to gain the birth-right in grace. § 7. It is said of Baruch the son of Zabbai verse 20.Baruch repai∣red earnestly. (and of him alone it is said) that he earnestlyNeh. 3. 20. repaired the other piece. What, did the others work but in jest, because this Accent earnestly, is onely put over the piece he re∣paired? Is not this mark of honour on him, a brand of infamy on the rest? No surely, though probably his zeal was paramount in the em∣ployment; and what if the word earnestly▪ (set there almost in the very midst, amongst all the builders) be to be taken , relating to all the rest, before, and behind it? § 8. It is observed,Persons repa∣ring against their own houses. that many men repaired onely against their own Ibid. ver. 28. 29. &c. houses. This, though at the first sight it may seem the fruit but of a nar∣row soul, and private spirit, yet effectually advanced the work. Yea, it is particularly recorded of Meshullam the son of Berechiah, who likely was but a lodger, and no house-keeper, that he repaired overIbid. ver. 30. against his Chamber. Oh, if order were observed for every one to mend his own heart, or house, how would personall amendment by degrees quickly produce family-city-countrey-kingdome-reformation? How soon are those streets made clean, where every one sweeps against his own door? § 9. Some doubled their files,Doublers with credit in the work. as Merimoth the son of Urijah the son of Coz, who having formerly been a repairer (verse 4.) comes again the second time to build (verse 21.) out of doubt the same person, as having the
same name, father, and grand-father. Let him have double praise, for his double pains; who not being weary of well doing, dealt with the wall of Ierusalem, as the Philippians with Saint Paul,Phil. 4. 16. once and again relieving the necessity thereof. § 10. The nobles of Tekoah are taxed for not putting their necks to the work Nehem. 3. 5. of their Lord.The degene∣rous nobles of Tekoah. Strange that now they should discover such unseasonable pride. Had they not lately returned from Babylon? Could not seventy years banishment from their own, and captivity in a forein land, hum∣ble them to purpose? Me thinks, so long suffering should have broken (though not their hearts) their stomacks. But, oh the difference be∣twixt being low, and being lowly! No affictions, except seasoned, and sanctified, are sufficient to bring down mens naturall corruption. This negligence of the Tekoite nobility in Gods cause was so much the more con∣spicuous, because of the double diligence of the Tekoite commoners there∣in; for, they had two shares in this adventure, building, Nehem. 3. v. 5. and again they had verse 27. another bout in the same service. Except any will say, that by the Tekoites in the second mention of them, their nobility are intended; who, sensible of their own dishonour, for their former backwardness, played an after-game, to repair their credit; which is af∣firmed without any proof, and with little probability. § 11. Some here will demand,Quaere concer∣ning Nehemiah. What did Nehemiah himselfe all the while? did he onely look on, work with his eyes, and command others to labour? Or was he like the ScribesMat. 23. 4. and Pharisees, who bind heavy bur∣thens, and grievous to be born, and lay them on mens shoulders, but they themselves will not move them with one of their fingers? § 12. It is answered,Answer, with his privative and potive bounty to this buil∣ding. his zeal was active, and exemplary in Gods work, and therein expressed it self, 1 Privatively, in forbearing the salary of the Governour, which his predecessours did, and he might justly receive. In this re∣spect, one may truly say, that each gate, tower, and piece of wall in Ierusalem, was in part repaired with Nehemiah's money, because the builders thereof were the better enabled for that work, by his remitting unto them, the taxe due to him as Governour. 2 Positively, not onely forbearing his own right, but also bearing a large proportion in the work. He kept a daily Ordinary (thanks being the onely shot his guests were to pay) for an hundred and fifty Iews, and Rulers, besides strangers of the Heathen. How many attendants then dined on the reversion, at the waiters ta∣ble? and how many poor feasted on the fragments, at the Por∣ters lodge? It may be presumed many laborers at the wall had gone supperless to bed, had they not repaired to Nehemiah's house for their refection. As for the opinion of Tremellius, that Nehemiah built the Kings palace at his own charge, grounding the same on his own translation of the text,
because I finde no other Authours to follow him therein, it is enough barely to mention his opinion. § 13. At the Sheep-gate they began to repaire,The conclusi∣on of the work. and thereat also they ended. The Gold-smiths and Merchants brought up the Rere of the work,Nehem. 3. 3. betwixt the going up of the corner unto the sheep-gate. § 14. Within the circumference of the walls, lay much ground un∣inhabited,Ierusalem em∣ptied of inha∣bitants, when rebuilded by Nehemiah. people being loth to live therein, exceptNeh. 11. 1. by lot compelled thereunto, and allIbid. ver. 2. blessed such as willingly offered themselves to dwell therein. Strange, that the chiefe City should run so low in generall reputation, the Gallants of our age being otherwise minded, all posting unto the principall place of the kingdome, as the fountain of fashions, and all delights. I read indeed of Histria a province under the Venetian Com∣mon-wealth, that they are fain toBterus. hire people to inhabit there. But the reason thereof is visible, because of the unwholsomeness of the aire, whereas no such pretence for any to decline the City of Ierusalem, whose elevated situation, conduced much to the purity, and wholsomeness thereof. § 15. But mens unwillingness to dwell therein,Why men loth to live in Ie∣rusalem. took the rise from other reasons▪ as namely, 1 The common enemy beheld it with most envious eyes, as the proper object of his malice. 2 The vast circuit of the City, put them to hard duty to guard it. 3 Trading was dead therein, and little wealth to be gotten at the new erection thereof. 4 All coveted the countrey, for the privacy, pleasure, and profit there∣of. However in after ages, Ierusalem grew exceeding populous, and had all the vacuities thereof filled, yea crowded with inhabitants. Thus, as it is most easie and thrifty, to make childrens garments too big for their bo∣dies, because they will quickly grow up to their clothes: so providence advised Nehemiah, to make the circumference of Infant-Ierusalem the larger, as which, in process of time, would soon spread it self, to the re∣plenishing thereof. CHAP. VI. Of the waters in and about the City. § 1. PAss we now from the walls, to the water of Ierusalem,Nogrea vers near Iruslem. a most necessary commodity for the well being of mankind. True it is, Ierusalem was so far from boasting of any navigable river, that it had no stream, near, or about it, to drive any water-mils. If it be demanded, how without such mils so populous a place could subsist, and not be famished for want of grinders? (as a chap-fallen man for lack of use of
his teeth) Know this was principally supplyed by hand-mils, here or∣dinarily used, where multitudes of slaves were in every family. As for other waters, both for necessity, and pleasure, Iesalem had, (though no supertuity) a self suffiincy thereof. § 2. The waters,Three sorts of waters. in and about Ierusalem, are reducible unto three se∣veral kinds. 1 Partly artificiall, as Pools and Conduits. 2 Partly naturall, as the brook Kidron (whereofIn the Land of Moriah. formerly) and the fountain of Siam. 3 Partly supernaturall, as the miracle-working Pool of Bethesda. Of the former sort were the Kings fishponds, Neh. 2. 14. on the south-west, not far from the fountain ga, and near thereunto the poolNehem. 3. 16. which was made, (no doubt with gre care and cost) betwixt the sepulchers of David and house of the mighty men. Also the conduit of the2 Kin. 18. 17. upper or old pool, in the path o the fullers field, and probably another of the lower pool, all referred by learned mnIosephus ex∣prsly called the first Sole∣s pool. to Solomon, as principall Author thereof. § 3. For in the Inventory of his vanities he confesseth of himself; I made me pools of water to ar threith the wood that bringeth forthEccl. 2. 6. trees. Thus he sought for felicity in the aire, climbing up with his lofty buildings; in the earth, diing low in his deep minigs; in the water, wading therein through costly aquaducts; but found at last that happiness ws super-elementall, and not to be found but in heaven. § 4. Some may conceive that King Uzziah had a hand in promoting the water-fabricks near Ierusalem,Vzziah a dea∣ler in water woks. finding him a very active Engineer, and of whom it is expresly recorded that he digged2 Chr. 26. 10. many well▪ But what fol∣loweth? for he had much cattell both in the low Countrey, and in the plain. The scene therefore of his watry discoveries, was laid at greater distance, where his cattell were kept, and where he was more commendably imployed in his husbandry, then afterwards in Gods house, any instrument better be∣fitting his hand, then a2 Chr. 26. 19. Censer. § 5. Not long after, probably in the reign of King Ahaz,The Iews bu∣sie about drains and trenches. (as may partly be collected from the time of Isaiah's Prophecy, and plaing of this passage therein) when the siege of Ierusalem was suspected from Rezin King of SyriaIsa. 7. 1. and Pekah King of Israel, the Iews fell to the fortifying of their City, both with wall and water-works. Hereupon theIsa. 2. 9. Prophet when the new line about Ierusalem was finished, complaineth thereof as followeth. Yee have seen also the breaches of the City of David, that they are ma∣ny, and yee have gathered together the waters of the lower pool: And yee have numbered the houses in Ierusalem, and the houses yee have broken down to fortifie the wall. Yee made also a ditch betwixt the two walls for the water of the old pool, but yee have not looked unto the maker thereof, nither had respect unto him that fashioned it long agoe. And in that day did the Lord God of hosts call to weeping and mour∣ning &c. § 6. Not that the Prophet herein reproved the people,Three faults taxed herein. for provident
preventing of danger, or politick endevouing of safety, or moderate delighting in pleasure, but justly taxed them, for 1 Too much confidence in the arme of flesh. 2 Unseasonable rejoycing in carnall comforts, when drains and for ditches down their own cheeks, had been more proper water-works for the present sad occasion. 3 Admiring their own handy-works, (without thankful relating for to God the principall) as if they had created those pools and springs of their own industry and ingenuity. Whereas all Grottoe, conduits, and Aquaducts, though allowed the lawfull issue of art, and off-spring of humane invention, are but stiborn babes at the best, except God quicken and enliven them, mediately or immedately, with moisture from above. He onely is the FatherIob 38. 28. of the rain, and is by consequnce the Grad-father of all pools and conduits whatsoever. Justly therefore were the Iews reproved, for having their stegatick Souls, dab∣ling too much in water, without once looking up to God, according to Davids divty, freely confessing,Psal. 87. 7. All my fresh springs are even in thee. § 7. But how well soever,Hezkiah stops out the water. the ponds, pools and conduits were per∣fected at this time, soon after all their curiosities were discomposed, when Seheri sent the railing message and letter, (though words whether spoken, or written, storme no Cities) to King Hzekiah in Ie∣rusalem. Who fearing a siege, by the assistance of his Princes and people in a short time stopt all the2 Chr. 32. 4. fountains and the brook which ran through the midst of the land, saying, Why should the Kings of Assyria come and finde much water? He∣zekiah knew that Snnacheribs blasphemous tongue would be sooner si∣lenced, and his roaring throat easier stopt, with Thirst then with any other answer. And although Sennacherib, out of the plentifull Magazeen of his malice, shot his arrows, even bitterPsal. 64. 3. ords, gainst Hezekiah, yet ac∣cording to Gods promise he came not into Iusalem, nor didIsa. 37. 33. he shot an arrow there, having all his Army soon after confounded from heaven, and he himself, (reprieved from the Angels) was executed by his own Sons sword, in his own Countrey. § 8. Here if any demand,Gihon brook meant hereby. what is meant by stopping the brook which ran through the midst of the Land; we understand not Cedron thereby, which to save them the pains in summer stops it self, (as onely the cistern to re∣ceive the land-flouds from mount Olivet) but rather, conceive the con∣stant waters of Gihon, or Siloam, therein intended, running through the midst of the Land ofGen. 22. 2. Moriah, wherein Ierusalem is seated. § 9. After Sennacheribs departure,Reopeneth and improveth it. Hezekiah fell a fresh on opening those springs hee had formerly obstructed, yea to make them reparation, he improved them to an higher perfection then at first he found in them: for, 1 He made a pool2 King. 0. 20. and a conduit. 2 He stopped up the upper2 Chr. 32. 30. water-course of Gihon, and brought it straight to the west side of the City of David.
3 He brought water IN TO THE CITY2 King. 20. 20. of Ierusalem. Hereby no doubt Hezekiah got many a blessing and hearty prayer from the poor servants in the City, whose weary shoulders had formerly fetched their water so far off for the use of their masters family. § 10. Here some will object,Such altering rivers not un∣lawfull. that such an altering of the course of this river, from the ancient channel thereof, and the enticing of it by Art into a new passage, was a violence, and a trespass offered to Nature. Yea did not man herein pretend to more wisdome then his maker, as if by such varia∣tion, he could direct the veines in the body of the earth, to a fitter posture, then that wherein God himself had disposed them▪ But let such know, that when God gave the earth [with the water therein, as making up one Globe] to the Sons of men, in the same charter he derived a right unto them, to mold it as might be most convenient and advantageous for their habi∣tation. And although it belongs to God alone, to put a sandy girdle about the loins of the Ocean, (because otherwise a giant too great for men to manage) Hither shalt thou come, and no farther, yet lesser brooks fall un∣der the jurisdiction of humane industry, to order them for mans most commodity. § 11. Others will admire,Hzki sup∣plies Soloons omission. that this new river was brought no sooner to Ierusalem, and that a project, so honourable, profitable, necessary, and feasable lay so long unperformed. How came this design to escape the searching eyes of Solomon, especially, seeing (as he confesseth himself) he dealt much in that moistEccles. 2. 6. Element? See we here, Solomon himself saw not all things, and Hezekiah coming many years after him, might supply his omissions. And to speak plainly, many of Solomons projects, were but voluptuous essays for his own personall (not to say carnall) contentment, whereas holy Hezekiah in his undertakings might have a more publick spirit for the generall good of his kingdome. § 12. The well or fountain of the DragonNehem. 2. 13. near the Valley gate might be made at the same time,The Dragon fotain. probably taking its denomination from some artificiall resemblance of a Dragon about it. A conduit in a Dragon-fa∣shion, (though such Anticks are more commonly presented spitting of fire then venting of water) is made here by Adrichomius. Tremellius con∣ceiveth it called Dragon, or Serpent well, because the waters thereof (which contrary to other Authors he maketh the same with Siloam) glide, snake-like, soft and gentle, yea crooked and winding with many intri∣cate flexures thereof. But it is impossible to assign the certain cause of such names as are meerly ad placitum, finding a Well and Gate in the Cose of the City ofDragon gate in Sarisbury. Sarisbury of the same name, yet hitherto could never hear any probable reason thereof. § 13. Amongst the waters meerly naturall,Pool of Siloah a Type of Christ. the fountain or pool ofNeh. 3. 15. Siloah, with the stream flowing thence into the brook of Kidron, justly claimeth the preheminence. Fountain which both in the name and nature there∣of, was the lively embleme, if not the reeall type of our Saviour. Name
which is by interpretation,Joh. 9. 7. SENT; and we know, WhenGal. 4. 4. the fulness of time was come, God SENT forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the law. Nature; for the waters thereof, as theIsa. 8. 6. Prophet observed, ran softly 1 To the eye▪ sine im∣petu, moving slow∣ly, and not rushing with a rapid stream like an impetuous torrent. 2 To the eare, sine strepitu, stil & quiet, not offensive to the neighbours with the noise threof. So Christ 1 Was leasurable and treatable in his going (on foot, but if mounted, onely on a slow paced Ass) and doing, not rash∣ly precipitate in his procee∣dings. 2 Not querulous or clamorous in his discourse; He shall not strive nor cryMat. 12. 19. neither shall any hear his voice in the streets; but meek and quiet. Now as God was eminently in the still1 Kin. 19. 12. voice, so also was he effectually once in this still water, when our Saviour sent the blind-born man hitherJohn 9. 7. to wash, and thereby he recovered his sight. § 14. This was he,The blind man cured there∣with. who afterwards proved so constant a confessor of Christ, avouching him a Prophet, and his cure by him really effected notwithstanding the Pharisees menacing to the contray; Hoping in vain, though Christ had opened his eyes, that they could stop his mouth, from the acknowledging thereof. His constancy herein cost him an ex∣communication and a castingJoh. 9. 22. & 34. out of the Synagogue. The best was, the power of the Keys when abused, doth not shut the door of Heaven, but in such cases onely shoot the bolt besides the lock, not debarring the innocent person entrance thereat. § 15. The supernaturall pool of Bethesda by theJoh. 5. 2. Sheep-market remains,The pool of Bethesda. whose waters, when at a certain season moved by an Angel, were medicinall to cure the first commer thereinto, whatsover disease he had. A learnedTremellius on Nchem. 3. 1. man conceiveth, that when Eliashib the high Priest, (after their return from Babylon) with his brethren, first began hereabouts to build the sheep-gate, and sanctifie it to divine service, (as leading to the Temple) God then and there in approbation of his Act, indued the Pool hard by, with this soveraign sanative quality: but this we leave with the Author. § 16. By this Pool an Infirmary was built,God and mans charity well met. for maimed folk to lodge in, and attend the troubling of the waters. How well was Gods bounty and mans charity here met together? Commendable it was that rich men did not engross this Spaw to themselves, but permitted poor people not able to use Physick and Surgery the benefit thereof. This Hospitall for building consisted of fiveJoh. 5. 2. Porches; not that the defective in the five senses, lame, blinde, deaf, &c. were here severally disposed of by them∣selves, but no doubt all promiscuously put together. In this Colledge of Cripples, he for his seniority might have been the Master thereof, who had been longer lame, then most men live, and now past the fift climactericall
of his disease, where with he had been afflicted full thirty eight years. In∣deed so impossible was the conditions of his recovery, that being lame, He must run, before he could goe, for seeing the first commer was only served, he must hast with speed into the pool after the moving thereof: whilst he, alas, wanted strength to help himself, wanted money to hire others, and others wanted mercy freely to give him their assistance. But because he could not goe to health, Health was graciously pleased to come to him, and he was cured miraculously by ourJoh. 5. 9. Saviour. § 17. And thus much of the Walls,Two ancient parts of Ieru∣salem. Gates, Towers, and Waters about Ierusalem: come we now into the City it self, which anciently consisted of two principall parts (therefore dual in the Hebrew) Sion on the south∣west, and Ierusalem (properly so called) on the north thereof, which we proceed in order to describe, with the places of principall note there∣in contained. CHAP. VII. Of Davids Palace, the High-priests houses, the Coenaculum, and other memorable places in mount Sion. § 1. WE begin with mount Sion, making that first which God most favoured,Psal. 87. 2. who loved the Gates of Sion, more then all the tabernacles of Iacob. Here first our eyes are entertained with the stately Palace of David,2 Sam. 5. 11. & 1 Chr. 1 4. 1. Hiram King of Tyre sending him timber and work∣men for the building thereof. Flat was the roof of this palace, whereon David sate, and from whence he beheld Bathsheba (hard by is her house) bathing her self. I cannot excuse her action herein. If policy be jealous, that hedges may have eares, modesty may suspect lest the motes in the aire have eyes. But see here divine justice. As this roof was the place whereon Davids lust did burn first; so thereon Absaloms incest did blaze farthest, lying here with his Fathers Concubines. This he easily did at the perswasion of Achitophel; those spurres needing no rowels, which are to prick forward graceless youth into wantonness. But that hellish Po∣litician did this to set such a distance betwixt Sire and Son, that the af∣fection of the one might never meet with the submission of the other, the breach hereafter being made so deep and wide, that no bridge of re∣conciliation might be built betwixt them. § 2. Under the Romans this Palace was turned into aAct. 21. 37. Castle, where a Garrison was kept to over-awe the City. Once the honour, now the terrour; once the beauty, now the bridle of Ierusalem. UponAct. 21. 40. the fair stairs leading thereto, stood Saint Paul when he made his speech to the people, hearing him with great silence, because he spake inAct. 22. 2. the Hebrew tongue; untill he came to that passage of preaching to the Gentiles (which though spoken in Hebrew was no good Hebrew to his auditours, but
false construction, & breach of Jewish priviledg) when they turned their attentive eares into railing tongues, away with such a fellow from off the earth. § 3. And now to shew the frailty of humane happiness, pass we from the palace of these Kings to their burying place, seeing Sion in a double respect may be called the Westminster of Ierusalem; because the Kings there∣of resided there while living, and rested when dead. The reader shall pay nothing but his pains in following me, whilest I shew him these royall remains. We may observe four gradations of honour in these interments. 1 Wicked2 Chr. 33. 24. Amon was buried in his own house, (not under the roof, but within the verge of the wall thereof) and so was2 Chr. 33. 20. Ma∣nasseh,In the Gar∣den of Vzzah. whose true but late repentance was effectuall to save his soul, but not his kingdome from destruction. 2 Cruell Ioram, who had no compassion whilest living, & therefore no2 Chr. 21. 1. bowels whē dying, was buried by himself in the2 Chr. 21. 16. city of David, & neither fire nor water, neither burning nor mourning made for him. 3 Godly, but leprous Uzziah, being ceremoniously unclean, was interred in the2 Chr. 26. 23. field of the buriall which belonged to the Kings; under∣stand it, within the suburbs, but without the walls of their so∣lemn sepultures. 4 All the rest were intombed in a stately place set apart for that purpose; namely, David the holy, the man after Gods own heart; Solomon the wise, when old, befooled by his wives: Rehoboam the sim∣ple, whose rigour rent ten Tribes from his kingdome: Abiah the wic∣ked, but2 Chr. 13. 15. valiant and fortunate in fight; Asa the upright, whose2 Chr. 15. 17. heart was perfect all his days: Iehosaphat the just, whose2 Chr. 17. 6. heart was lift up in the ways of the Lord: Ahaziah the Idolater, whose onely cōmendation was that he raigned but2 Chr. 22. 2. one year. Ioash the backslider, the lease of whose goodness determined with his2 Chr. 24. 2. uncles life: Amaziah the rash, worsted in a needless war against the King of2 Chr. 25. 21. Israel: Iotham the peaceable, who built the2 Kin. 15. 35. highest gate to the house of the Lord: Ahaz the profane,2 Chr. 27. 22. who in the time of his distress, yet trespassed more against the Lord: Hezekiah the pious, who destroied the high places: Iosiah the tender-hearted, who2 Chr. 34. 27. melted at Gods threatnings, denounced against the people of the Iews. § 4. Amongst these still I miss Iehojakim, and long seeking for his tombe light at last on the Prophets threatning,Ier. 22. 19. he shall be buried with the buriall of an Asse, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Ierusalem. § 5. Now as it were in exchange of Iehojakim excluded, we finde Ie∣ojada admitted among the royall interments. Count it not presumption for a Priests body to intrude amongst Princes bones, seeing not his pride but the peoples gratitude preferred him to the place, because2 Chr. 24. 16. he had done good in Israel towards God and his house. (Oh if monuments were mar∣shalled according to mens merits, what change would it cause in our Churches!) See we here the care the Iews had of decent burying thir dead. True it is, bodies flung in a bog, will not stick there at the day of judge∣ment;
cast into a wood, will finde out the way; thrown into a dungeon, will have free egress; left on the highway, are still in the ready road to the resurrection. Yet seeing they are the Tabernacles of the Soul, yea the Temples of the holy Ghost, the Iews justly began, and Christians com∣mendably continue the custome of their solemn interment. § 6. Farther off from the palace, we finde the house of the mighty; where Davids worthies lived in a Colledge under Ioab their President, next the KingsZach. 14. 10. wine-press and hisNeh. 7. 16. fish-ponds. Think not that the Kings of Iudah had onely Crowns, Thrones, and Scepters, the Ensignes of Soveraignty, for besides these to maintain their state, they had places of profit, so thrif∣ty as to make their own wine at the best hand. § 7. Next we take notice of the houses of Annas and Caiaphas both a∣live Joh. 8. 13. & 24. at once, and termed the high-Priests at the same time; one by courtesie, because lately he had been: the other by right, because at pre∣sent possessed of the high-Priesthood. Thus that function, which ought to have been during life by Gods institution, was made alternately annu∣all by mans innovation. Was not the shining of two Suns together in the Jewish Church sadly ominous? And was it not high time for God to take away the office, when men began wantonly to play at in and out, with that holy profession? But besides these two high-Priests, there was a third that had more right then either to the place, our Saviour himself, at the present brought a prisoner before them. In the house of Annas an officer wrongful∣ly Joh. 18. 22. struck him with the palme of his hand, and in the house of Caiaphas he was thrice denyed byJoh. 18. 25. Peter, adjured by the high-Priest, adjudged to death, spit upon, blinded, buffeted, with other insolencies offered unto him. The houses of the high-Priests were far asunder, all which distance Christ traced on foot; and it is observable, that being posted back∣wards, and forwards, from Annas to Caiaphas, from Caiaphas to Pilate, from Pilate to Herod, from Herod to Pilate, from Gabbatha to Golgotha, he traversed all the length and breadth, and most of the considerable places in the City: Partly to render his passion more publick, being made a spectacle to men and Angels, partly that his beautifull feet might bring the Gospell of peace into every principall street in Ierusalem. § 8. Next followeth the Coenaculum, orLuk. 22. 12. large upper-room where Christ en∣ded the Passover, began the Lords supper, and probably afterwards in the same place appeared to his disciples, where after his ascension, the holy SpiritAct. 2. 3. in fiery cloven tongues fell upon them, enabling them to speak all lan∣guages, for which some senslesly slandered them to beAct. 2. 13. full of new wine. For the excess thereof may give men more tongue, not moe tongues; and is so far from making them speak other, that it hinders the pronouncing of their own language. As for the house of the Virgin Mary, wch some make very fair in moūt Sion; I say a better was beneath her desert, but a worse was above her estate. Sure it is, that after hersons sufferings, she privately lived in the house of Iohn the Apostle, & Iohn formerly lay in the boom of Christ, &
Christ once lodged in the womb of Mary, and Mary was for ever hidCol. 3. 3. with Christ in God. O holy chain, ô happy complication! § 9. In the last place we come to the prisons (those necessary evills in a populous City) whereof we finde three severall degrees, 1 The dungeon ofIer. 38. 6. Malchiah, a most nasty place, the mud and mire whereof shall not be stirred by my pen, lest the ill savour offend the Reader. Yet good Ieremiah was forced to lie, andIer. 38. 9. like to die there∣in, had not Ebed-melech the blackmore procured his writ of re∣movall. 2 The house of Ionathan the Scribe, made a prison extraordinary of a privateIer. 38. 15. dwelling. This little better then the former, so that Ie∣remy counted it a favour at his importunateIer. 37. 20. request to be pre∣ferred thence, into— 3—The court of the prison, the best of all bads; which was part of the Kings palace, where Ieremy remained many days, fed with a piece of bread out of the bakers-streetIer. 37. 21. (a place hard by) till Ne∣buchadnezzar at last gave him aIer. 39. 11. Gaol-delivery. § 10. So much of Sion, forbearing to enlarge my self in the praises thereof frequent in holy writ. As for that expression,Psal. 76. 2. Gods dwelling is in Sion, it seems particularly to relate to that time, when the Arke resided there, brought in by2 Sam. 6. 16. David, and placed by him in the midst of a Taber∣nacle which he had2 Sam. 6. 17. pitched for it. Indeed he designed to make a better casket for that Jewell, had not God retrenched his resolution by speci∣all 2 Sam. 7. 12. order, intending Solomon for that purpose, who many years after re∣moved this Ark into the Temple he erected. CHAP. VIII. Of Millo. AS it is a great grace in a Rhetorician, not to have bald and flat but clear and fair Transitions; so it is no less beautifull in buildings to have spacious and handsome passages therein. For this cause the Kings of Israel counted no cost too much to be bestowed upon this Millo, as be∣ing the common pass between Sion and Ierusalem. It was called Millo, that is, a filling, as some would have it, because being naturally a gulfe or con∣cavity, it was by great expence levelled to be built upon.Greg. Greg. in Lex. sanc. nme∣ro 603. Others con∣ceive it so named, because filled with the confluxe and confluence of people, being indeed the largest street in the whole City.2 Sam. 5. 9. David began, 1 King. 9. 24. Solomon finished the building thereof. But as once Wickam Bishop of Winchester wrote in a wall of Windsor, This made Wickam; in the same sense it may be said of Millo, This made Ieroboam. For Solomon taking notice of his activity (merit commended men, and beauty women to his favour) made him surveyour of the works when he built1 Kin. 11. 27. Millo, which brought him
from a private person into publick notice (the first admission is half a degree to honour) and gave the occasion of his future greatness. In this 2 Kin. 12. 20. Millo, at the going down to Sillah, or to theVid. Tremel. annot. in locum. bulwark, King Ioash was cruelly killed by two of his servants. CHAP. IX. Of the Princely Palaces in this City. § 1. PRoceed we now to the Princely palaces in Ierusalem;The house of the forest of Lebanon. and first we light on the1 King. 7. 2▪ house of the forest of Lebanon, built by Solomon: So called, because an abridgement of that great forest, wherein (I mean in the groves and gardens about it) wild beasts of all kinds (if humane Authors may be beleeved) had their habitation. Here the bellowing Harts are said to harbour, the throating Bucks to lodge, the belling Roes to bed, the beating Hares to forme, the tapping Conies to sit, and the barking Foxes to kennell. Strange musick to be heard in the midst of a populous place; and very pleasant, that such a woody retiredness should be afforded in the heart of a City. Yet Solomons minde, when mounted on these seeming felicities, was as far from reaching true contentment, as the tired traveller, when on the top of the next hill, will be from touching the skies, which whilest he was in the valley seemed contiguous thereunto. § 2. The length of this house was an hundred,The dimensi∣ons of this house. breadth fifty, height thirty cubits, whereby it appears both longer and broader then the Temple it self. And no wonder, for who will deny that White-Hall stands on more ground then Westminster-Abby-Church? Besides, in measuring the Temple, onely the covered part thereof is reckoned on, without the Courts (wherein the greatest capacity thereof did consist:) whereas no doubt, Courts and all are taken in to make up the aforesaid dimensions in Solomons house. But grant the Kings Palace outspread the Temple in greatness, the Temple out-topped it in height; whose towred porches as∣cended 2 Chron. 3. 4. an hundred and twenty cubites. In this house Solomons golden shields and targets wer1 Kin. 10. 17. kept, till1 King. 14. 26. carried away by Shishak King of Egypt. § 3. Besides this SolomonSolomons wives house. had another house in Ierusalem which was 1 King. 7. 1. thirteen years in building; and a1 King. 7. 8. third which he made for his wife the daughter of Pharaoh. Say not, they needed two houses, which had two Religions, for we finde not that she ever seduced Solomon to idolatry: nor are the Egyptian Idols reckoned up among those severall1 Kin. 11. 5. 7. superstiti∣ons, which his second brood of wives brought into Ierusalem. Enough to perswade some that this match was made by dispensation, if not di∣rection of God himself, (typifying the calling of the Gentiles) and that Pharaohs daughter afterwards became a convert, following the Psalmists counsell, ForgetPsal. 45. 10. also thine own people, and thy fathers house. Hereabouts al∣so was the Golden throne of Solomon, to which those golden Lions gave
a stately ascent. It was the prayer of loyall1 King. 1. 37. Benaiah, make the throne of So∣lomon greater then the throne of my Lord King David, which accordingly came to pass, whether taken for this his materiall throne, or for the largeness and fulness of his royall authority. § 4. Pass we by the Castle of Antiochus,1 Mac. 1. built by him as a bridle to the City;The stately palace of Herod as also the Palace of the Maccabees, wherein for many yeas they made their residence, first built by1 Mac. 13. 52. Simon west of the Temple. In Christs time Herod the great had in Ierusalem a most magnificent house, wherein his grandchild Herod Antipas Tetrarch of Galilee kept his passeover, when Pilate sent Christ unto him to be examined by him. Right glad was He∣rod of this occasion, because though formerly much conversing with Iohn the Baptist, yet Iohn did noJoh. 10. 41. miracle, which he now in vain hoped to behold from our Saviour. For he that would not work a miracle at his mothersJoh. 2. 4. motion, would not doe it for his persecutors pleasure. Let Herod take this for a sign that Christ was the Son of God, because he would shew no sign for the will of man. However the silent shew of our Saviour wrought a reconciliation betwixt him and Pilate, which before were atLuke 23. 12. enmity betwixt themselves. But alass the innocent Lambe is not long liv'd, when thus both Wolfe and Fox are agreed against him. § 5. Appendant to this Palace was the prison wherein Peter was put,Peters prison. and being to dye the next day, was found in a deadAct. 12. 7. sleep the night be∣fore. I question whether Herod who condemned him, slept half so soundly. He must be smote before he could be waked, and his shackles fell off easier then his sleep. The Rhemish note tells us, that the chains wherewith he was bound are still preserved at Rome in the Church of Petri ad vincula. But if those there be the true chains, I dare boldly say, that others of richer metall, and finer making, more worth, and less weight, are daily worn by Peters pretended successour. § 6. Pilates Palace must not be forgotten,The palace of Pilate. wherein our Saviour was accused by the Iews: near whereunto was the Judgement-hall, called Joh. 19. 13. Gabbatha, or the Pavement. But how even, or smooth soever the stones were laid in the floor thereof; most rough, harsh, and unequall justice was administred in this place, when our Saviour therein was condem∣ned. This was the place, into which the high-Priests prepared for the Passeover would notJoh. 18. 28. enter for fear of pollution. O my soul enter not into their secrets, whose fe are swift to shed bloud, but legs lame to lift themselves over the threshold of a judgement-hall, for fear of defilement. Now all these Princely Palaces were not extant in this City at the same time, but successively: and therefore as Poets, when they present Persons, who lived in severall ages, on the same stage, lay their scene in the Elysian fields; so to put these Palaces together, the reader must suppose their dust and ruines did all meet on the floor of this City, though made in our map in a flourishing estate, the better to adorn our description of Ierusalem.
CHAP. X. Of the Colledges in Jerusalem. § 1. PAss we now from the Court,Ierusalem an Academy for education of youth. to the Innes-of-Court, namely such places, wherein youth had liberall education. TheVid. Grotii annot. in Act. Apost. cap. 6. vers. 9. Iews tell us of four hundred and fourscore Synagogues at Ierusalem for this purpose. We will insist onely on such as we finde named in Scripture, and begin with Huldah's2 Kin. 22. 14. colledge, wherein that Prophetess lived in the days of Iosiah. Perchance a female foundation of women alone, and she the Presidentress thereof; though surely not bound with any mo∣nasticall vow of virginity, because there also styled the wife of Shallum. § 2. Next, in the days of the Maccabees, we take notice of the Grecian Colledge or Gymnasium,The Grecian colledge. erected by Iason the high Priest, wherein the Jewish youth were taught to wrestle,1 Mac. 1. 15. & 2 Mac. 4. 12. ride horses, and other Grecian accom∣plishments. Indeed archery was an ancient Jewish exercise, (David taught the children of Israel the use of the2 Sam. 1. 18. how, as it is written in the book of Iasher) but these were pure heathenish imployments. Here also they were taught to wear a garment called , which some translate Hats, others buskins,See the Gen∣va note on 2 Mac. 4. 12. (though head and feet are far asunder) which whether it were the generall garbe of the Grecians, or onely an Academicall habit to distinguish the Students from common Citizens, let others enquire. But the worst of all was, here they were taught, not onely uncircumcision of omission, (neglecting the observing thereof on infants) but also the un∣circumcision of commission, practising to1 Mac. 1. 15. make themselves uncircumcised, studi∣ously deleting the character of that Sacrament out of their bodies. § 3. After Christs ascension we finde five Colledges or Synagogues mentioned in oneAct. 6. 9. verse,Five Synago∣gues against Saint Steven. all disputing against Saint Steven, Out of Asia those of Cilicia, and proper Asia. Out of Africa, those of the Cyreni∣ans and Alexandrians in Egypt. Out of Europe, those of the Libertines of Rome. Behold here an admirable Act hept, wherein Saint Steven was the An∣swerer, against whom Opponents were fetched from all the parts of the then known world; and all too few to resist the wisedome and Spirit by which he spake. What this Synagogue of Libertines was, is much controverted by learned men. Surely Libertines here are not taken in the modern notion of the word, for such as used their liberty for an occasionGal. 5. 13. to the flesh, or1 Pet. 2. 16. a cloak of maliciousness, though we confess in after ages such grew into a nume∣rous society, whereof Satans subtilty, and mans corruption the Founders, the negligence and conivence of Magistrates the daily Benefactours: A Colledge, whose gates (like those of hell) stand always open, having no other Statutes then the Students pleasure: where the diet is so dear, that their Commons cost the souls of such as feed on them, without their finall repentance. Most probable it is, that by Libertines were intended
such Romans as were manumised, or made free by their Masters; where∣of Tacitus counts no fewer then four thousand in the City of Rome, which professed the Jewish Religion; some whereof with most likelyhood had their Synagogues in Ierusalm, wherein they were more perfectly instructed in matters both of doctrine and discipline. The Gazith or Common-councell must not be omitted, coming near to the nature of a Col∣ledge, wherein the Sanhedrin or seventy Elders had their judicatory, before whom the Disciples were summoned, andAct. 4. 15. straitly threatned not to preach, and afterwards, for disobeying their Order, were put into theAct. 5. 18. common Prison. In the sameAct. 6. 15. place Saint Steven was accused and passed his purgation, in that excellent speech, that he was no enemy to the Law of Moses, if rightly understood. CHAP. XI. The remainder of private houses and streets in Jerusalem. § 1. AMongst the private,The house of Mary the mo∣ther of Iohn-Mark. dwelling in this City, we take speciall notice of the house of Mary, the mother of Iohn-Mark, wherein the Saints were assembled to pray for Peters enlargement. Hither he came and knocked at the door, when Rhoda portress thereof,Act. 12. 14. opened not the gate for gladness; whether because loth to lose so much time, as the opening thereof did necessarily require, (conceiving that Peter might better stand without the door, then the people stay without the news) or because her soul, surprized with suddain joy, was not at leasure to actuate her hands to open the door: yet it informed her feet, to run into the house, because that motion (was not, as the other, against the stream, but) went along with the tyde of her affection, so desirous to tell the news unto others. Sure I am, Peter got less harm by this maidens keeping him out for a time, out of this godly house, then he did by another DamoselsIoh. 18. 17. letting him into the high-Priests Palace. § 2. Adde to this the house of Ananias the high-Priest,The house of Ananias and Veronica. which stood not far off. If therein there was any rotten wallAct. 23. 3. well whitd over, it may pass for an embleme of him the hypocriticall owner thereof. As this was the house of a false man, so we take Veronica's to be a false house, yea meer fiction, shewn to pilgrimes at this day, in the corner of a street. Here she is said, that meeting our Saviour when carrying his Cross, she tndred unto him her vai therewith wiping off his sweat, which vail thereby presently received the lively impression and portraicture of his face and complexion: with more probability they might affirme, that the picture of his see remained in theIoh. 12. 3. haire of Mary Magdalen. § 3. So much for particular houses.The accurate ranging of streets in Ieru∣salem at the best but con∣jecturall. Now that Ierusalem was digest∣ed and methodized into severall streets is most certain, whereof such frequent mentionIer. 5. 1. & 7. 17. & 11. 6. &c. in Scripture: as sure it is also, that many fair market
places were found therein, where childrenMat. 11. 15. played with their mates, Merchants met with their Chapmen, LabourersMat. 20. 3. waited for Masters to hire them, and Pharisees bartered their outside sanctity for theMat. 23. 7. gree∣tings and salutations of the people. But the order and fashion of their severall streets are to us unknown, Scripture affording no certainty there∣in. And though Adrichomius seem so accurate in this point, that no Lon∣don-beadle can be better acquainted with the lanes, allies, courts, corners, of the Precinct belonging unto him, yet herein he proceeds on his own fancy, and meer conjecture. Onely we meet with the names of two streets, Water-gate-street, and Ephraim-gate-street, which may justly be con∣cluded more spacious, and roomthy then the rest, because preferred be∣fore all other places in the City to build booths therein at that solemn festivall, in the days ofNeh. 8. 16. Nehemiah. In the former of these, Ezra assem∣bled the people, and read the law before theNeh. 8. 1. Congregation. § 4. Give me leave to supply out of Iosephus three eminent places,The Amphi∣theatre, Castle Antony, nd Hippodrome. though not mentioned in Scripture. First, theIosep. ant. Iud. li. 15. c. 10. Amphitheatre, erected by Herod, so capable that it could contain fourscore thousand people, if the readers beliefe be so large as to give credit thereunto. Here Herod, after the fashion of the Romans, exposed condemned persons to encounter with Lions, Bears, Boars &c. But whether Saint Paul, when after the manner of men he fought with beasts at1 Cor. 15. 32. Ephesus, intended such combates with cattell, or onely his contesting with  evill beasts, such as the Cretians areTit. 1. 12. described to be, is not decided by Divines. Secondly, Castle Antony, built by the same Herod in the honour of Antonius, to be the keeper, yea the Gaoler of the Temple, (to which he had an underground passage, which would hold six hundred men) wherein he observed the motions of the Iews, lest they should hatch mutinies under the covert of Religion. Time was when God himself watched over the Temple to protect it, till for the sins of the people, he gave it over to be guarded by the jealous eyes of their inveterate enemies. Lastly, the Hippodrome, or place for horse-races, where the Chivalry of the City met on severall occasions. Sick Herod the great perceiving his end to approach, and knowing the same would bring a great joy to the Iews, (a Tyrants death-day is a solemn festivall in the Calendar of Nature it self) in this Hippodrome im∣prisoned a principall person of every City of Iudea, enjoining Salome his sister to kill them at the instant of his expiring, that so there might be a generall grief, though not for, yet at his death, whilest no place could laugh heartily being pinched with their particular loss. However after his death she discharged those prisoners, and we may easily be∣leeve that these Legatees were not offended with her (the Executrix of Herods Will) for not disposing the Legacies bequeathed to them, according to the minde of the Testator.
CHAP. XII. The mysteries of mount Calvary. § 1. SUburbs in Cities are like Suckers in trees,The dolorous way. which make them bigger, but not better; so that much of the strength of the City leaks out in such Excresences. Ierusalem therefore had no suburbs at all, but many pleasant mountains and gardens about it. We will begin with mount Calvary, and the passage thereunto, commonly called the dolorous way, (though thence came all our comfort) traced with the blessed feet of our Saviour, who suffered without the gate. This we are now to describe, and ô that our patience and practise might goe along with our pen! to observe our Saviours motion, according to the counsell of the Apostle,Heb. 13. 13. Let us goe forth therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his reproach. § 2. This dolorous way began at Gabbatha or the Pavement:The wild justice of Pilate. wherein we may take notice of a wild piece of justice in Pilate, first scourging, then crucifying Christ. If his offence was but criminall to deserve scourging, why was he crucified? If so capitall as to deserve crucifying, why scourged? Perhaps Pilate hoped by his scourging to satisfie the malice of the Iews, but in vain. For it was not the back-bloud, but the heart-bloud of Christ must satisfie their thirst. So that what might be pity in the intent of Pilate, proved cruelty in the event to Christ; whose bitter cup hereby was twice filled. Thus we commit double-folded, twisted, and complicated sins, which our Saviour expiated with dupli∣cated suffering, first scourged, then crucified. § 3. Hence being condemned heIoh. 19. 16. bare his own Cross part of the way,Reasons of Christs fain∣ting under the Cross. towards the place of execution, according to the custome of male∣factours (and we know what Furcifer inports in the naturall significa∣tion thereof) untill, it seems, at last he fainted under the burden thereof; whereof severall reasons are assigned. 1 Probably the Iews malice provided him a Cross of extraordina∣ry greatness, proportionable to the reputed offendour Para∣mount. 2 He was much debilitated with his long watching and sweating the night before. 3 The edges of the Cross grating his late whip-furrowed back, might occasion the new bleeding of his wounds, and his weak∣ning thereby. 4 He bare withall the invisible weight of the sins of mankind, and Gods anger for the same. Hereupon a substitute or surrogate was provided for him to bear his Cross, not out of any mercy, but the deeper malice of his enemies; part∣ly
thereby to reprieve him to a more publick death; not willing he should die under, to cover him from shame, but upon the Cross, to ex∣pose him to the greater ignominy: partly, because they were loath he should goe away so easily as in a fainting fit, and therefore their cruell kindness reserved him for a more painfull death. § 4. Simon of Cyrene is the person by them compelled to bear his Cross.Simon of Cyrene bearing Christs Cross. Had it been foretold that one Simon should have carried Christs Cross, and had one heard Simon Peter so lately, so solemnly promising,Mat. 26. 35. though I should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee, he would hence have certainly concluded him the party for that service. But it fell out far otherwise; whilest that Simon had forsaken his Master (and now was bewailing his fault) another of that name is found out, coming out of the field, to carry the Cross before him. Let Heraulds then boast of mens bearing, and their blazing of armes, (empty huskes where the kernell of vertue is wanting) behold here a rich bearing indeed; A Cross proper carried by Simon for our Saviour. We must buckle our selves in like manner for the same burden, patiently to undergoe afflictions. The best is, our Crosses are made hollow, being greater in bulk then in burden; seeing the Cross of our Crosses, eternall damnation, is taken off by the suffer∣ing of our Saviour. § 5. And now Christ comes to the place of execution,Mount Calvary why so called. called Golgotha or mount Calvary, that is, a place of a skull. Either from the fashion there∣of, because that hill was rounded up in the form of a mans head, or be∣cause mens bones were scattered thereabouts. Tremellius with great pro∣bability conceives this Calvary called the hillIer. 31. 39. Gareb in Ieremy, being de∣scribed to lie near the valley of the dead bodies. Here our blessed Saviour in a publick place, with infamous company, (who lived amongst Publicanes, and dyed betwixt theeves) after a cruell manner was despightfully cru∣cified. In whose sufferings we may observe § 6. The length thereof,The length of Christs passion. lasting six tedious houres, exposed all that time both to hunger and cold. Indeed the theeves were longer in suffering, both being stillJoh. 19. 32. alive when Christ expired: but they endured but per∣sonall pain, whilest he underwent miseries for all mankind; so that what his Passion lacked in the length, it had in § 7. The breadth thereof:The breadth thereof. extended over all the parts and powers of his soul and body. No part free from pain, save his tongue, left at liberty to pray for his enemies. His senses all suffered, namely 1 Seeing, tormented with the scornfull gestures, and reproach∣full postures of such as passed byMat. 23. 39. wagging the head, to expiate the lascivious, envious, covetous glances of our eyes. 2 Hearing, grieved with the taunts, jeers, and wilfullMat. 27. 49. mistakes of the Priests and people: so to satisfie for the pleasures our eares have taken in lustfull Sonnets, wanton jests, and other vain and wicked delights.
3 Smelling, offended with such savours as may well be presumed to be none of the best, in the place of a skull, to make amends for our luxurie in sents and perfumes. 4 Tasting. For when he cried out, I thirst, (and sorrowes we say are dry) they provided him a potion ofJoh. 19. 30. gall and vineger; so to repair Gods justice offended with our gluttony and drunken∣ness. 5 Touching, his hands and feet being pierced with the nailes, to ex∣piate the rapin and violence of our hands, the swiftness of our feet in the way of wickedness, with the manifold sins, which that sense in us committeth. What shall I speak of his head pierced with Thornes, so to make satis∣faction for the profane plots and projects, the wicked machinations of our brains? And it is worth our observing, that though the Scarlet Robe (put on him to act in that Princely Pageant) was taken from him, (as of some value, no pain, and too good to be spoiled) yet the Crown of Thornes, painfull to him, and profitable to no other, was, (for ought we finde) continued on his head, all the time of his passion. In a word, it is hard to say, whether his pain was more shamefull, or his shame more painfull unto him: the exquisiteness of his bodily temper, increasing the exquisiteness of his torment, and the ingenuity of his Soul, adding to his sensibleness of the indignities, and affronts offered unto him. § 8. Thirdly,The depth thereof. depth. His passion was as deep as Hell it self, induring tortures in his wounded Conscience to the apprehension of a desertion; witness his Exclamation, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me! not that really he was forsaken, or totally conceived so, shewing his faith in the deepest of his distress. For as when twins in the womb of Tamar strove which should come first into the world, theGen. 38. 28. mid-wise adjudged the Primogeniture unto him that first put forth his hand, as a champion challnging his birth-right: so in this expression of our Saviours, wherin Faith and Fear did contest for the priority, Faith must be esteem∣ed the heir and eldest, first putting forth his hand, My God; yea both his hands, My God, my God, claiming by that gemination a double interest in Gods fatherly affection. § 19. Lastly,The height thereof. the height: as high as heaven, because the person indu∣ring it was both innocent and infinite. Innocent; such he must be to effect our redemption,1 Pet. 1. 19. without blemish and without spot, otherwise had blurred fingers come to rub off, or wipe out the blot in mans nature, thereby it had been made the bigger: Infinite, being no less then the Son of God, which gave infinite worth and valuation to his sufferings. O then that we might be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is theEphes. 3. 18. breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and might know the Love of Christ that passeth knowledge, so infinite every way were the dimensions thereof.
§ 10. And now he had left all he had to be severally disposed of to persons most proper to receive them,The sevenfold division of Christs goods. as namely his 1 Purse (and his own price therein) to Iudas, who bare the Ioh. 13. 29. bag. 2 Peace unto his disciples, and the godly their successours: My Ioh. 14. 27. peace I leave unto you. 3 Prayers to his enemies for their pardon: Father forgiveLuk. 23. 34. them, they know not what they doe. 4 Wardrobe to the souldiers, who parted his raiment amongst them, and on his vesture did cast lots. 5 Mother to Iohn the beloved disciple:Ioh. 19. 26. Woman behold thy Son. 6 Body to Joseph of Arimathea, who afterwardsLuk. 23. 52. begged, and (with Nicodemus) embalmed and buried it. 7 Soul to God:Luk. 23. 46. Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit. These things thus disposed of, he bowed his head, partly in submission to Death the messenger, but more in homage to God the sender, and not by violent compulsion, but voluntary susception of death, gave up the ghost. So ended our Saviours satising sufferings, as redeemer of mankind; though his sympathizing sufferings, as mysticall head of the Church, are still behind,Col. 1. 24. and are daily filled up with the afflictions of his servants. I say his compassion daily remains and increaseth, though his passion was then, and there ended, according to his own expression,Io. 19 30. It is finished. § 11. Say not that the arrears thereof,Dead corps may be wron∣ged, but not hurt. and another reckoning re∣mained, because presently after, one pierced his side, out of which came water and bloud. For this added to their malice, not his misery: accor∣ding to that expression,Luk. 12. 4. Be not afraid of those that kill the body, and after that have no more that they can doe; all cruelties to breathless corps amount to just nothing, and injuries to the dead though figures on the account of the offerers, yet are but cyphers on the score of the sufferers. § 12. Near mount Calvary was a garden,Christ buried in Iosephs se∣pulchre. and in that garden a rock, and in that rock a grave, which Ioseph of Arimathea had provided for himself. This was fashionable in that age to make their monu∣ments in their gardens, so to retrench their wanton thoughts with me∣ditations of mortality. Thus pleasure, poison in it self, is made whol∣some, when well corrected with thoughts of our latter end; yea graves and green herbs make a good medly, seeing1 Pet. 1. 24. all flesh is grass, and the glory of man as the flower thereof, which withereth and falleth away. Here our Saviour was intombed, in aLuk. 23. 53. sepulchre bewen in stone, wherein never man be∣fore was laid; it being fit, that as he was born of a virgin-wombe, he should be buried in a virgin-tombe. It was also IosephsMat. 27. 60. own tombe, intended for his proper interment. Such our Saviours poverty, that as he lived in lended houses, so he was buried in a borrowed sepulchre, being rather a tenant, then owner thereof. To make sure work, the grave was shut with a great stone, the stone fastned with a solemn seal,
the seal guarded with a watch of souldiers; though all in vain. For all their solicitous care to suppress his resurrection, did but render it more conspicuous, and free it from all suspicion of forgery. § 13. Sure they did binde,Christs resur∣rection. but loose they did finde. For on the third day an Angell came down from heaven, causing a great earth-quake; as if the earth, like a guilty malefactor, trembled with feare, for its for∣mer boldness, that being made Gods footstool, it presumed to be his prison. This earth-quake begat a second in the heart of the souldiers▪ who frighted with fear ran all away, our Saviour being former∣ly risen out of his sepulchre. For the stone was notMt. 28. 2. rolled away by the Angell to give his body passage out, but to give the disciples eyes pas∣sage into the grave, to behold the reality of his resurrection: otherwise he, who came in when theIoh. 20. 26. door, could come out when the grave was shut. Atrwards he attested his rising from the dead, by his manifold appariions in sundry places to severall persons, as is largely recorded in the Gospell. § 14. However the Priests to palliate the matter,Endevoured in vain to be si∣lenced. possess the people, and prevent the propagation of the repot, endeavoured by thei money (their coin being better then their cause) whereby they had compassed the death, thereby also to hinder the beliefe of his resurrection. Though their seal on his grave was broken, they hoped to st a firmer on the lips of the souldiers, bribing them for the silence of the truth, and disper∣sing an improbable lye, that the Disciples came by night whilest they slept, and stole him away. It is admirable that such a falshood confuting it self (for if they were asleep, how could they discover them? if awake, why did they not resist them?) should by Gods permission make it passage so fast, so far, and so firme in the beliefe of the Iews. Here taking the devill (theIoh. 8. 44. father of all lies) to be father thereof, it is worth our observing in the very words of theMat. 28. 15. Evangelist 1 The mother of the lie, the brains of the Pharisees: they taught. 2 The nurse thereof, the tongues of the souldiers: they did as they were taught. 3 The wages of the nurse, ready paiment: so they took the money. 4 The well-batling of the babe, it grew very great: For it is common∣ly reported amongst the Iews. 5 The long life thereof, lasting longer then sixteen hundred years, unto this day. And it is to be feared it will live next day, next moneth, next year, many years, if God be not more mercifull in convincing their erroneous judge∣ments. Thus it is just in heavens proceedings to suffer the posterity to be poisoned, for the wilfull default of the parents.
CHAP. XIII. Of the Potters-field, Aceldama, Fullers-field &c. § 1. PAss we from the north-west,The Potters-field. to the south-east part of the City, where, without the walls, we light on the Potters-field, where men of that trade made brittle plate in abundance. For, although in Solomons time, such earthen ware was worthless in this City, when silver it self was King. 10. 21. nothing accounted of, and made to beIbld. ver. 27. as stones in Ierusalem; yet, poor people in after ages, found such cheap fur∣niture usefull for their estates. Here one might have seen those Potters absolutely lording it over their clay (purely passive to receive any im∣pression from them) and, according to their own power and pleasure, making of the same lump oneRom. 9. 21. vessell unto honour, and another unto dishonour. Others conceive, this Potters-field was onely an inconsiderable wast place, where sherds and pieces of broken pots were cast out in a by∣corner. § 2. Surely it was neither great in extent or value,Bought for a burying place. seeing thirty pieces of silver (the restored reward of Iudas his treason) could purchase the fee-simple thereof; except any will say, it came at a cheaper rate, be∣cause intended for a publick and pious use, the buriallMat. 27. 7. of strangers. Here their dead corps had an Hospitall, wherein their lodging and cloathing was freely bestowed upon them: and thus our Saviour, though himself a Stranger in a borrowedIbid. ver. 60. grave, by the price of his bloud conferred graves on many Strangers. As for the confi∣dent report, that the earth in this field will in fortySands his Tr. pag. 187. with legions of other Au∣thours. eight houres, con∣sume the flesh that is laid therein, yea retaining that quality though transported into forein Countreys, (the grave which every where hath a voracious appetite, having here as quick a digestion) my faith is neither all wax, nor all iron herein. To speak plainly, after long fighting against an Army of Authors affirming the same, my beliefe at last is taken captive by their gravity, and number, to give credit thereunto. § 3. It was afterwards called Aceldama,Called Acelda ma. or the fieldAct. 1. 19. of bloud, be∣cause purchased with the price of Christs bloud, and not (as some may erroneously conceive) because handselled with the bloud of Iudas therein, when his bowells gushed out. The place of whose self-execution is shewen to pilgrimes, some distance hence, on the south-west of the City, where he, who had lived aJoh. 12. 6. thiefe to his Master, dyed a felon of himself, hanged, say some, on an Elder; say others,Adricho. in Theatr. ∣sanc. on a Sycomore tree; a matter of no concernment.
§ 4. More are we troubled,The manner of Iudas his death. not for Iudas his sake (for whom two deaths were not too many) but in behalf of the Truth (which can be but one) to reconcile a seeming difference betwixt two places of Scripture about the manner of his death. MATTH. 27. 5. And he cast down the pieces of silver in the Temple, and departed, and went, and hanged himself.ACTS 1. 18. And falling headlong, he burst a∣sunder in the midst, and all his bowells gushed out. We understand it thus, not that the rope breaking, Iudas falling down thence some steep place, was paunched on some sharp pile; but, that the very weight of his body, and violence of his headlong motion (ha∣ving no hopes upward in heaven, and therefore hasting downward to the center of despair) brake his belly in so precipitate a fall. Thus as Trai∣tors, when hanged, are by our law to have their bowells drawn out by the executioner: so Iudas served himself so, o spare others the pains to punish him. § 5. Fullers-field must not be forgotten, where they stretched,Fullers-field. and dryed their clothes which they they had washed in the brook of Cedron. But all the sope used here by men of that trade, could not scoure the in∣delible stain of impiety out of the credit and conscience of King Ahaz, who in the high-way ofIsa. 7. 3. 12. the Fullers-field, peevishly refused a sign, which God graciously proffered unto him. And mens severall behaviours in matters of this nature deserved to be marked. For, it was 1 Commendable inJudg. 6. 7. Gideon andIsa. 38. 22. Hezekiah, humbly requesting a sign for farther strengthening of their weak Faith. 2 Pardonable inLuk. 1. 18. Zacharias, craving one out of a mixture of infi∣delity, therefore granted him in loving anger; his dumbeness ser∣ving as well to correct, as confirm him. 3 Damnable in the Iews, who out of pride and presumption, in a daring wayMat. 16. 1. demanded; and in Herod, who out of curiosity Luk. 23. 8. expected a signe from Christ, and therefore denyed them. But most of all in Ahaz, in whose nostrills the very perfumes of Heaven sented ill, because proffered unto him, refusing to accept a sign so freely tendered unto him. § 6. East of Aceldama,Tophet why so called. in the valley of the Sons of Hinnon, lay Tophet (that is, Breadth) as Saint HieromeIn his com∣ment on Ier. 7. expoundeth it, because there the Citi∣zens of Ierusalem, pent within the walls of their City, used to dilate, ex∣patiate, and recreate their spirits in the walks thereof. Pity it was that so pleasant a place should afterwards be poisoned with Idolatry, where children were offered to Moloch, searing them to death with his burning imbracements; of the manner whereof largely herefter. For the pre∣sent let it suffice us to observe, that Iosiah is said to2 King. 23. 13. defile this place: what! was it capable of more pollution then what it had before? Understand it, by burning of dead bones therein, he made it as offensive to the
nostrils of men, as formerly it had been odious in the eyes of God. Now as the stinking lake of Avernus in Italy, passeth in Pagan Poets for Hell it self: so this valley of Ben-hinnon (Gehenna in Greek) is used in the same sense by ourMa. 5. 29. Saviour: either because of the abominable impieties here committed by the parents; or exquisite torments here endured by the children. § 7. We conclude with the place wherein Saint Steven was stoned,Place of Saint Stevens Mar∣tyrdome. being on the east of the City, some distance from what at this day is termed Saint Stevens-gate: nigh which they shew the place where Saul sate, when he kept the clothes of those that stoned him. Now, seeing by Davids law,1 Sam. 30. 25. made by the brook Besor, he that tarrieth by the stuffe is to be equall sharer in the spoile with those that goe forth to the battell; the equity of this ordinance arraigneth Saul guilty alike of the bloud of Saint Steven, with those whose wardrobe he kept during the time of the execution. But, whatsoever Sauls share was in the murther, great was his part in the prayer of Saint Steven, whoseAct. 7. 60. petition (Lord lay it not to their charge) is justly accounted by Divines, a promoting means of his speedier conversion. Her the draught of Solomons Temple is to be inserted.
THE DESCRIPTION OF SOLOMONS TEMPLE. CHAP. I. Davids threefold preparation for the Temple. § 1. IT will not I hope be censured superstition,Preface to the ensuing dis∣course. if at the Threshold of this Temple, we fall flat in ve∣neration of the God thereof, to guide us in the en∣suing discourse. The subject whereon we enter is holy ground, may both writer and reader put off their shoos, and devesting themselves, as much as may be, of carnall corruption, come with simplicity, and sincerity to the matter now undertaken. § 2. As some previous dispositions,Preparaons made for the Temple. and antecedaneous acts are re∣quired of a Christian, before he be perfectly converted, and become the Temple of the holy Ghost; so some preparatory provisions were necessary to be made before the building of the Temple was taken in hand. Holy 1 Chr. 26. 28. Samuel was the first we finde, who stored up any wealth to this purpose; and Saul (probably invited with his example) dedicated things to the same intent. YeaIbidem. Abner and Ioab (though at deadly feud each against other) agreed both in consecrating spoiles won in battells t maintain the house of the Lord. But David exceeded all other, before-hand providing the materialls wherewith, prescribing the pattern whereby, and purchasing the ground whereon the Temple should be erected. § 3. First,Davids double oblation. for materialls. Lest he or his son should be recounted a∣mongst thoseLuk. 14. 30. foolish builders, which began and were not able to finish, vast were his preparations for this purpose, in those his two large showres
of his liberality, which we may call the former and latter raine of his bounty on the Temple. The former 1 Chr. 22. 14. An hundred thousand Talents of gold, and thousand thousand talents of silver, and of brass and iron without weight.The latter 1 Chr. 29 4. 7. Three thousand talents of gold of Ophir, and seven thou∣sand talents of refined silver, given by David of his own proper goods. Besides given by the Princes of the people, of gold fiv thousand talents, and ten thousand drams, and of silver ten thousand talents, and of brass eighteen thou∣sand talents, and an hundred thousand talents of iron. In the first oblation was given what they had suddainly gotten by their valour, in the latter, what they had leasurely advanced by their diligence. In the first their own, but taken from their enemies; in the latter their own, but saved from themselves: in both1 Chr. 29. 16. Gods own, as David confesseth, who first bestowed it on them, and they now restored it to his service. § 4. Come we now to examine how much a Talent,The value of a Jewish talent. in Hebrew Chichar, did contain. Whereof in Scripture we finde these generalls. 1 One man could not conveniently carry two Talents, and there∣fore 2 King. 5. 23. Naaman bound two Talents of silver in two bags, and laid them upon two of his servants. 2 One man might easily beare one Talent, not onely on his back, but on his head, and that not as a burden, but ponderous or∣nament. Thus the Crown of the King of Ammon, afterwards worn by David,2 Sam. 12. 30. weighed a Talent, besides precious stones. Ex∣cept any will say, that the heaviness thereof rested more on the subjects hands, then on the Soveraigns head, who by grand∣sergeantry ma be presumed to support the same. 3 Probably  ontained more then ten thousand Adarconim, (or drams, as r translations render it) because in the1 Chr. 29. 7. aforesaid text, after entire talents were reckoned up, these drams follow as a fraction or broken sum, not amounting to a whole talent. 4 The particular value thereof may be collected out ofExod. 38. 26. demonstrated by Brerewood d num. Iud. c. 4 Exodus, that every talent contained three thousand shekels, or fifteen hun∣dred ounces, which in gold according to three pound the ounce, amounteth to four thousand five hundred pound of English money. According to this standard the hundred thousand talents of gold given by David in the first oblation, make up four hundred and fifty millions, as an excellentIdem ca. 5. Critick hath accounted it. § 5. Here as that infidell Prince conceived,Talent some∣times taken for a smaller sum. if2 King. 7. 19. windows were made in heaven, such plenty of food could not follow in Samaria as the Prophet foretold; so more will be of the minde, that if Pluto should let open all his trap-doors, melt all his mines into money, so great a sum could not suddainly be advanced. This hath given the ground to their probable opinion, who conceive that Talent in the first oblation of David is there taken onely for a plain or flat plate of gold of small value,(as anciently
inIliad. lib. 23. Homer it passeth in the same acception) whilest in the second offeing Talent is used in the exact and strict notion, according to the full value aforesaid, whose judgement is strengthened by the following argu∣ments. 1 Surely Solomon was the1 Kin. 10. 23. richest of all the Kings of Israel before or after him, bu verily I say unto you, that Solomon in all his wealth and trienniall returns from Tarshish, was far inferiour to David, if the Talents there mentioned were full and entire according to the first computation. 2 What is said of our Saviours deeds by way of hyperbole, that if theyJoh. 21. 25. were all written, the world it self could not contain the books that should be written, may be literally affirmed of Davids treasure in the first oblation. For as the silver there mentioned was tenfold more then the gold; so if it be allowed (what in moderate pro∣porion cannot be denied) that the unweighed Brass was ten∣fold to the Silver, and the Iron to the Brass, the whole content of theSee Ludovi∣cus de Aleaser de mensuris sacris. Temple was not sufficient to comprehend so mighty a mass. 3 Though the second offering of David was far short of the first in number of Talents, yet it is beheld in Scripture as most solemn and of highest importance. At the presenting whereof greatest gratitude to God, and mutuall exultation amongst men was 1 Chr. 29. 9. expressed. This insinuates that at this rere-account, the Talents were Talents indeed, and though in number fewer, in worth more considerable then the former. Wherefore though we conceive not the long life of the Patriarchs a sufficient cause (as some doe) to expound their age of lunary years, yet the strength of these reasons carry our beliefe along with them to con∣tract the accepion of talents in the first account, as is above stated. § 6. But to close up all concerning Talents:A talent after∣wards a vast sum. It was so great a sum, that though now so many thousands of them abounded in Ierusalem, yet af∣ter wards in the reign of Iehojakim, one talent of gold and an hundred talents of silver, was found and felt an heavy annuall taxation for the whole City of Ierusalem and kingdome of Iudah to pay. Insomuch, that he2 King. 23. 35. exacted it of every one in the land, to make up that sum for the King of Egypt So great is the difference betwixt the same place, when flowing with wealth, and when exhausted with war. § 7. After all these preparations made,Davids holy complement. let not Davids expression be condemned of complement, Now behold, in my1 Chr. 22. 14. poverty I have provided for the house of the Lord &c. as if he were like those fond entetainers, who having forraged the elements of aire, earth and water for provision for their guests, still excuse their cheer for being no better. His words were indited from an humble heart, finding his deeds so far short of his de∣sires, of Gods deserts. Thus those who have given a little to God, think
they have given much, whilest such as have given much, know they have given but a little. § 8. Here it will be demanded,Why no re∣straint of po∣ples bounty in building the Temple. that seeing at the building of the Tabernacle, peoples bounty was refrained with a flatExod. 36. 6. prohibition to bring in no more, why no such restraint appears at the building of the Temple, where far greater masses of metall were presented for the erection thereof. But it is answered, that moderate or competent state best became the Tabernacle, resembling the kingdome of grace; whilest the Temple was not capable of excess in magnificence, representing the kingdome of glory. No hands could contribute too much to the Type, where no heart can conceive enough of the truth, the things which God hath prepared1 Cor. 2. 9. for them that love him, not entering into humane imagination. § 9. Besides these materialls,Modell of the Temple made Iure divino. David prescribed the modell, which he gave to Solomon his son, the pattern of the porch and of the houses thereof, and of the treasures thereof, and of the upper chambers thereof, and of the inner parlours thereof, and of the palace of the Mercy-seat, and the pattern of all that he had by the 1 Chron. 28. 11, 12. 19. Spirit. And it followeth not far after, All this (said David) the Lord made mee to understand in writing, by his hand upon me, even all the works of this pattern. Here David for the more certainty, had a double direction, one by the Spirit, the other by writing, to stand on record in per∣petuam rei memoriam. These two did not contradict, but confirm each other, because he, who hath learned his lesson most perfectly by heart, may notwithstanding sometimes have need to have recourse unto, and make use of his notes. § 10. However herein the note of the Geneva translation is very consi∣derable, Obsrve the notes in the Geneva tran∣sltion. thus glossing on the text. For all this was left in writing in the book of the Law, Exod. 15. 40. which book the King was bound to put in execution. Deut. 17. 19. Thus making David not by propheticall revelation, but prudentiall collection, to arrive at the knowledge of the Prototype of the Temple, by a writing, being (no new or immediate manuscript from hea∣ven, but) the ancient Scripture, delivering the modell, and dimensions of the Tabernacle to Moses. Yet so, that the dead letter in the word, was quickened and enlivened in Davids heart by Gods Spirit, teaching him to observe a generall conformity betwixt the Tabernacle and Temple, yet with those due and necessary alterations, as were requisite be∣twixt the one a small and moveable fabrick, and the other a large and standing structure. An interpretation easier cavilled at, then confuted, because such the Analogy betwixt these two edifices. —Facies non una duabus, Nec diversa tamen, qualis decet esse sororum. Their faces neither diverse, nor the same, But such as sisters very well became. The latter being none other, then the imitation of the former with pro∣portionable addition: as indeed what is the Tabernacle of Grace, but the Temple of Glory contracted; or the Temple of Glory, but the Ta∣bernacle of Grace dilated?
§ 11. This *Solomon was not so pattern-bound as Moses pattern was imparted to David, (who had the holier, though Solomon the larger heart) and no doubt his son exactly observed the same. Yet can I not beleeve that Solomon was altogether so pattern-bound, as Moses, who was so confined to hisExod. 25. 40. Act. 7. 44. Heb. 8. 5. instruction, that his hand might not write a letter, yea not make a flourish, more then was in his Copy: And a knop or flower in the Candlestick under or over, was a mortall transgression. More probable it is, that Hirams fancy, (Solomons Architect) was not pressed in all particulars, but was left a volunteire for some descants of Art, whilest for the main, he kept himself to the ground-work prescribed unto him. § 12. Besides materialls,The loor of the Temple purchased by David. and modell, David purchased the floor where∣on the Temple was erected; a floor paved with mysteries. Here on mount Moriah, an AngellGen. 22 2. & 12. stayed the stretched-out hand of Abraham from killing Isaac, and in the same place, God stayed the2 Sam. 24. 16. sword of the de∣stroying Angell, from slaying the Israelites with the pestilence. No place therefore more precious, more cordiall, or soveraign to build a Temple in, then this, which was twice confirmed with Probatum est, stamped with a double impression of Gods favour upon it. This floor David bought of Araunah the Iebusite, from whom he would not take it of gift, that hereafter it might not be said, that the Temple had no bet∣ter title to the ground whereon it was built, then the meer gratuity of such a man, whom most conceive to be but a Pagan. Indeed a main matter to make a structure stand firme, is to found it on ground lawful∣ly purchased, and honestly payed for, otherwise that floor, which for substance is a rock, will in point of right be found but a sandy foun∣dation. § 13. On this place David built an Altar,An Altar here first built by David. giving it this large cha∣racter, This1 Chr. 22. 1. is the house of the Lord God, and this is the Altar of the burnt-offering for Israel. Now as the heart is the Primum vivens in a creature; so this Altar was the first thing erected in the Temple, though for the present made of such mean matter as that hasty occasion would give leave. Here it stood many years after, even untill the brazen Altar of a firmer Fa∣brick was substituted in the room thereof. Either to this did Ioab fly, and caught hold in vain of the horns thereof, (three years before the Temple was built) or else to some other Altar near the Tabernacle in Sion For seeing those passages betwixt him and Solomon were transacted in the City of Ierusalem, certain it is, he fled not to the Altar as yet at1 Chr. 21. 29. Gi∣beon, distanced some miles from this place. § 14. If it be demanded why David thus diligent to provide for the Temple,Why David prohibited to build the Temple. was forbidden to build it; a double reason is rendered thereof. First, because he had been a1 Chr. 28. 3. & 1 Chr. 22. 8. man of war; and his martiall reign incum∣bred with constant battells, afforded not a peaceable conveniency su∣table to such a design. Secondly, because he had shed much bloud upon the earth in Gods sight, which principally related to his killing of Uriah. Say
not that Solomon also was a man of bloud, having ordered the executions of 1 King. 2. 29. Ioab, Shimei, and Adoniah, doing it in a judiciall way, not violent and murdering manner, as David had done. And although his serious re∣pentance had cured the wound in his conscience, yet God suffered the scare in his credit so far to remain, as to render him uncanonicall, or irregular for such an imployment. However, in some sense David may be said to have built the Temple: Namely, in Gods gracious2 Cor. 8. 12▪ accepti∣on of the readiness of his will for the performance thereof. CHAP. II. An army of workmen imployed by Solomon in the building of the Temple. § 1. NOw Solomon his son being a peaceable Prince,The Halcyon days of Solo∣mon. as his name imports, in his quiet reign began the building of the Tem∣ple. Thus as Cryers make an Oyes to silence all noise, that men may the better attend to the Judge when beginning his Charge; so by a generall peace, the rage of all people was stilled, before God in the Oracle did begin his familiar discourse with the Israelites, or the foundation of the Temple taken in hand. Then Solomon enters on the work, employ∣ing in mount Lebanon, a vast army of workmen, in their severall distan∣ces to advance this Fabrick. § 2. Namely,The multitude of workmen. for servile work, an1 Kin. 5. 15. & 2 Chr. 2. 18. hundred and fifty thousand bearers of burdens, and hewers of stone and wood. All these were strangers, Solomon reserving his native subjects for their purses to pay taxes, not persons to bear burdens. Secondly, for plain work; in which thirty thousand Israelites were imployed, yet with such1 King. 5. 14. alternation, that, divided in three parts, they stayed one moneth in mount Lebanon, and the other two at home. Thirdly, for carved-works; herein the Sidonians onely were used, whose exact number is not specified: But they must needs be numerous, if we may guess the men by their mouthes, and their mouthes by the2 Chr 2. 10. proportion of victualls allowed them. Lastly, above all for direction three thousand three hundred were appointed (surely so many officers would suffer no drones to be in the whole hive) to oversee the rest. § 3. Such,Two invincible gulfes to swal∣low mens la∣bours. who admire how so many could so long be busied in such a building, would haply have wondred more, how so few in so short a time could have finished the same, had they beheld the magni∣ficence thereof. Two great gulfes there were, which insensibly swal∣lowed up the labours of many thousands of men. First, the want of horses in Iudea (plenty whereof were brought out of Egypt towards the latter end of King Solomons reign) whereupon massie timber in those mountainous countreys, were managed by the main strength of men.
The second was a religious Criticisme peculiar to this structure, all things being beforehand so framed and fitted in mount Lebanon, that not so much as the sound of an Axe, or Hammer was heard in Ierusalem, when it came to be erected. Which exactness must needs occasion many charge∣able essayes and samples, before it could be attained. Nor wanted there a mystery therein, because as the moving Tabernacle typified the Church Militant; so the Temple resembled the Triumphant, where those who shall be thought worthy to be admitted into glory, shall have nothing to doe, but to be admitted into glory. § 4. Some will say withIoh. 3. 9. Nicodemus,Objection a∣bout the im∣possibility thereof. How could these things be, that no noise should be made at the erecting thereof? suppose but a bedstead having head, sides, feet, posts, tester, cords, and curtains fitted before, it cannot be set up without some necessary noise. Yea grant their ham∣mers or mallets cased with some soft matter, to bribe them to silence, yet they could not be made so mute, but that the very contusion and en∣forcement of the aire, would unavoidably advance some sound. Nor were the beams of the Temple so far in love with their mortises, as to run into them, or the mortises so fond of the beams, as to embrace them of their own accord. § 5. In answer hereto,Severall an∣swers thereun∣to. some plead miracle, others exquisite Art, and several kindes of cementing, souldering, rivetting, screwing, glewing, and other devices unknown to our age. As for the Rabbinicall fancy, that Solo∣mon with the bloud of the worme ThamyrRather Sha∣mir. vid. Text Eber. Lyran. Ezech. 3. 9. effected this matter, most will account it improbable in it self, and unproportionable to Scripture. Others distinguish on the degrees of the noise; small in comparison of so great a work, and not obstreperous to a publick disturbance. But the best interpret it, that no laborious sound was heard from the hewing or squaring of timber, or stone, but onely a more cheerfull, yea melodi∣ous harmony, from the happy conjunction, and compacting of parts to∣gether, now easily matched, which had been contracted before. This I am sure, that what tongue-tied tools soever, were used at the erecting of the Temple, too clamorous instruments were imployed at the destruction therof, when they brake down thePsal. 74. 6. curved work thereof at once with axes and hammers. § 6. Besides the two gulfes aforesaid,Solomon con∣sulteth not with thrit. (the quick-sands of many mens labours) it is also to be considered, that though so wise a King as Solomon▪ would not burden himself with superfluous numbers, yet in this Fabrick, wherein he did personate and represent the great God of hea∣ven, he consulted more with his magnificence, then his frugality, not minding so much how many the building in bare necessity did require, but how many the builders with full authority could command. § 7. Notwithstanding so many labourers entertained in the work,Seven years spent in buil∣ding the Tem∣ple. seven years was this Temple in building. Here some will behold the sanctity and perfection of the septenary number,1 King. 6. 38. so often occuring in Scripture, whilest we conceive this the best reason, why just seven years
were spent in the building thereof, because it could not be ended in six, nor accomplished within a shorter compass of time. Indeed almost twice as much time (thirteen years) did Solomon1 King. 7. 1. spend in building his own house: whereof this fair and ingenuous reason is rendered by Ant. Iud. li. 8. cap. 2. Iosephus; because he was not so intent and earnest therein, as in the structure of the Temple. It is in another case reported to the praise of Boaz,Ruth. 3. 18. the man will not be at rest, untill he have finished the thing; so Solomon, during those seven years of the Temples building, did not sleep in a cessation from, nor slumber in an interruption of that work, which was intended for the honour of God. Though in erecting his own Palace, as he made it for his pleasure, so he did it at his leasure; as conveniencies would permit. CHAP. III. Of the generall dimensions of the Temple. § 1. THe length of this Temple was1 King. 6. 2. sixty Cubites (besides ten Cubits for the Porch,The dimensi∣ons of the Temple. which compleat the whole length, se∣venty) the breadth thereof twenty, the height thirty. Here we may take notice of a manifest difference betwixt the Scripture and the writer of the Jewish antiquities; both for the time, wherein the Temple was built, and the dimensions thereof. Scripture. 1 KING. 6. 1. Four hundred and fourscore years af∣ter the children of Israel came out of the land of Egypt.1 KING. 6. 2. The height thereof thirty Cubits.Iosephus Ant. Iud. li. 8. c. 2. Five hundred ninety and two years af∣ter the departure of the Israelites out of Egypt.Ibidem. The whole height of the Temple was six score Cubits. A difference which will make no impression on his Faith, who hath read Saint Peters resolution,Act. 5. 29. We ought to obey God rather then man; Such passages not unusuall in Iosephus; witness when he saith of King Iehoja∣chin, c , being just and mercifull,Ant. Iud. li. 10. cap. 8. of whom the Scripture 2 King.  4. 9. once and2 Chr. 36. 9. again reporteth, and he did that which was evill in the sight of the Lord. § 2. A Cubit,Two sorts of Cubits. say some, is the length from the elbow to the wrist; say others, to the tip of the longest finger: some making it the fourth, others the sixth part of a man. Some allowing it a foot, others a foot and half, with whom we concurre. But it is mainly materiall, that the Cubits of the Temple were2 Chr. 3. 3. after the first measure; that is, according to those whereby the Ark was framed, before mens first strength and stature was abated. For as it is hard exactly to define how big men were
in former ages: so it plainly appears, both by Scripture and Pagan Testi∣monies, how much mens might is impaired, and falls short of the per∣formances of the ancients. Homer, Iliad. E▪ in the duell betwixt Diomedes and Aeneas.— .— Virgil, Aeneid. 12. in the fight betwixt, Aeneas and Turnus. Vix saxum lecti bi sex cervice subirent, Qualia nūc hominū producit corpora tellus. A stone he snatch'd and threw, a stone indeed So huge▪ so heavy, two men now had need To heave it up, such dwarfes our days doe breed. However we may safely with the most moderate, make the Cubit of the first measure double to the former, and equall to our English yard. § 3. Say not that this allowing of severall Cubits amongst the Iews was double dealing,This no breach of the law. and a flat breach of that Commandement,Deut. 25. 13. Thou shalt▪ not have in thy bag diverse weights, a great and a small. For that ordinance one∣ly forbad the abuse of one measure, a great to buy, and a small to sell with, both being conceived of the same standard. But to have severall weights or measures, where the chapman is acquainted with the diffe∣rence, and the prices rated accordingly, is neither fault nor fraud at all, no more then for a Merchant to sell by two severall pound weights, the one Troy, the other Averdupois, where the differences of the ounces is no∣toriously known. § 4. But thus allowing the Temple to be sixty great Cubits,Objection; Temple a zar or little one. or as many yards, or ninescore feet, long; twenty great Cubits, or yards, or sixty foot, broad; thirty great Cubits, or yards, or ninety foot, high; (all clearly within the house, besides the breadth of the wal without) yet some wil say it answered not expectation, and the stately character given therof in Scripture. Is this that Fabrick which filled the whole world with the fame thereof, which was so small in it self considered? Nothing can be magnificum, which is not magnum, and it must first be great, before it can be glorious. He may be pretty, but not a proper person, who hath not bulk proportionable to his beauty. Yea if Solomons Temple were com∣pared to some structures and Fanes of heathen Gods (as humane Au∣thors give in their dimensions) it would appear as Saint Gregories to Saint Pauls, (the babe by the mothers side) or rather this Davids modell would be like David himself standing by Goliah, so gigantick were some Pagan Fabrickes in comparison thereof. Indeed this Temple is termed exceeding magnificall 1 Chron. 22. 5. But Diana who is styled her magnifi∣cence, Act. 19. 27. seems better to deserve the title, whose Temple isPlin. Nat. hist. li. 36. ca. 14. said to be four hundred and twenty feet in the length, two hundred and twenty in the breadth,Answ. It was a vast edifce well considered with the appur∣tenances and sixty in the height thereof. § 5. To which we answer. 1t. The state of Solomons Temple did
principally consist not so much in the greatness, as exquisite symmetry thereof, and costly furniture therein. 2. It was abundantly big enough for the use for which it was intended, namely to contain the holy ves∣sells (with sufficient, yea with large space betwixt them) and to receive such Priests as did officiate therein. For the Holy of Holies was accessible to the high-Priest alone, and that but once a year, and into the Holy or in∣ward house came not all the many thousands of Levites, but onely such Priests (to light lampes, set shew-bread, offer incense) as by Lot and course were called thereunto, as appeareth by Zacharies sole staying there∣in, whilest the wholeLuk. 1. 10. multitude of the people were praying without. Indeed no∣thing of drudgery was done in the Temple, or what must require many men to manage it, it being neither handsome nor healthfull to croud much company into a covered room in that hot Countrey. Lastly, the great latitude and capacity of the Temple consisted in the outward Courts, unseparable parts thereof of such receipt, as to entertain multi∣tudes of men sub dio, in the open aire, as compleating a square of five hundred cubits, and in the amplitude, largeness and magnificence there∣of, equalling, yea exceeding the greatest buildings in the world, if report be but reduced to the standard of truth, and travellers not permitted to slip their thumb in their measuring of yards, overlashing in their relations. § 6. To return to what properly is termed Temple,Temple bigger then Taber∣nacle, and why. the Tectum, or covered part thereof. It was more then twice as great as the Tabernacle made by Moses, which (asDe templi fabrica. l. 1. c. 7. Ribera collects from the length of the cur∣tains Exod. 26.) was but thirty Cubits in length, ten in breadth, and as many in height. Yea, well might the Temple exceed the Tabernacle in dimensions, if we consider; First, the Tabernacle was erected by exiles wandering in a barren wilderness; the Temple by a potent Prince, and his populous subjects in their own peaceable countrey. Secondly, the Tabernacle was in a manner fitted for its foundation, to the backs and shoulders of the Levites, which were to carry it, and therefore might not exceed a portable proportion. Thirdly, the Temple mystically ty∣pified the Church Triumphant, and therefore in strength, state, grace, and greatness was to surpass the Tabernacle, the moveable Emblem of the Church Militant. § 7. Now how the structure of the Temple stood in relation to the four quarters of the world, is not plainly expressed in Scripture,The Temple stood East and West. but may partly be collected from the phrase used in the originall, where the porch is said to be set  before1 King 6. 3. the face of the house, where Before is Eastward in the propriety of the Hebrew tongue. Hence all expositors, Jewish and Christian, confidently place the ends or length of the Temple East and West, the sides or breadth thereof North and South, making the porch or entrance on the East end, the inward house in the middle, and the Holy of Holies in the West end of the Temple, which se∣verall parts we come now orderly to describe.
CHAP. IV. Of the fair Porch at the entrance of the Temple. § 1. THe Porch, in Latine porticus, & vestibulum,The dimensi∣ons of the porch. in Hebrew Ulam, (which name the Septuagint retain) gave a stately entertainment to such as entered into the Temple. In the book of1 King. 6. 3. Kings we meet with the length, and breadth thereof, but no height there menti∣oned: In2 Chr. 3. 4. Chronicles we finde the length and height of it, whilest there the breadth is omitted; by putting both together we may spell the perfect dimensions thereof. Thus, those who hope for exact intelligence from heaven, must peruse, and compare all expresses dispatched thence. Yea, in the new Testament, Gods message is whole, but not wholly by one mes∣senger, so that, what is wanting in one, is supplied in another Evange∣list. This Porch was twenty Cubits inThe flying oll. Zach. 5. 2. was just ad∣quate to this porch, in length and breadth twenty Cubits long and ten borad. length (according to the breadth of the house) ten in breadth, and an hundred2 Chron. 3. 4. & twenty in height, moun∣ting tower-like above the rest, being four times as high, as the body of the Temple. § 2. Some will say with covetous Iudas,Such a tower not useless. ToMa. 26. 8. & Ioh. 12. 4. what purpose was this wast? seeing the inside thereof was but an useless vacuity, not having any bells therein (trumpets being the onely bells of the Hebrews to summon their assemblies) and that otherwise it was for no service. But know, that is not empty, which is full of ornament; nor idle, which stands both for strength, and state. If an elegant exordium be so usefull in an oration, to gain the ears of the Auditors; no less gracefull a fair front in a building, to win the eyes of the beholders. Nor was Solomon minded like many in after-ages, who cut down all top-masts from the ship of Christs Church (politickly pretending a tempest, and that all is done for her safety) and make her close notted to the very keel; but, his large hart and hand, cared not what he expended on the magnificence of Gods House. § 3. Here I cannot but admire,The Temple not so high as the Porch. to see legionsReckoned up by Ribera de Templo. li 1. c. 2. with whom he seemethto con∣cur. of learned men, ex∣tend and cary on the aforesaid height, of an hundred and twenty Cubits (appropriated in the text to the porch alone) even to the whole fabrick of the Temple, making the entire body thereof of an uniform height, equall with the porch. Where, to excuse them from inconveniences, they make the lower Temple to reach to the first loft, roof, or seeling of Cedar, over which they fancy an upper house of equall propor∣tion, the roof whereof ranged even with the porch in height; so ma∣king a Duplicate, or all the rooms of the Temple to be double, one on the floor, the other in the upper story. Indeed we read in Solomons song of a sort of sheepCant. 4. 2. whereof every one bare twins, but that such gemination was here in the Temple, is altogether improbable, Scripture being silent
of that second, or upper story, nor mentioning any use, for which it was intended, and confining the height of the Temple to just thirty 1 King 6. 2. Cubits. Well therefore may we suspect some flaw, or crack in those spectacles, which represent the Temple thus double, against the simpli∣city of the text, to the unprejudiced readers thereof. § 4. To return to the porch;Bede his con∣ceit. fair (no doubt) was the door or gate leading thereinto, though very bold is the assertion of venerable Bede, In lib. qust. in lib. Regum quaest. 12. affirming that it was so great, that, standing full east, the equinoctiall Sun without any obstacle, did send his beams through the door of the Temple, and Oracle, into the very Ark which was within the Holy of Holies. But, grant the gate ve∣ry great in the porch, surely the sun-shine could not penetrate so far, be∣ing intercepted by the partition. It being improbable, that the door of the Oracle was ever left open, that mysterious place being unenterable, as well for the eyes, as feet of any, save the high-Priest alone. Otherwise, needless was the renting of the vail at our Saviours passion,Luk. 23. 45. if the passage into the Holy of Holies was pervious at all times, or if the gate thereof did usually stand open. § 5.The porch how overlaid with gold. This porch (as the words lay plain in the text) Solomon2 Chr. 3. 4. overlaid within with pure gold. However interpreters expound these words (though next in position to the porch) rather to reach over in their relation, to other more inward parts of the Temple, conceiving it too vast and needless an expence, to overlay a tower six score Cubits high within with gold. But, ill fare covetous Commentatours on a liberall text. Solomon will give them small thanks for their great thrift; to spare his cost, and at once to spoile both the letter of the text, and the lustre of his Temple. We conclude it overlaid with pure gold, that is, gilded all over, but being silver within; so reconciling it to another place, where Da∣vid is said to have provided1 Chr. 29. 4. seven thousand talents of refined silver, to overlay the walls of the houses withall. Thus it took the denomination of gold, from that metall which was most precious, and most visible on the surface thereof. § 6. Let none here condemn me, for grudging the Temple her glory, thus debasing the gold thereof into silver-gilt. For mine own part, as Moses wished all Gods peopleNum. 11. 29. Prophets; it would not offend me, if all Gods House were pearles, mine eyes are not so bleared with envy, as to smart at the shining of Solomons Temple. But a due decorum must be observed in this edifice, and one place of Scripture must not be advan∣ced, to depress another. And, seeing there were degrees in holiness, why not also gradations in gallantry, between the severall rooms of the Temple? So that all three might be overlaid with pure gold; the porch with leafe, the inward house with plate, the Holy of Holies with the most refined gold of Parvaim.
CHAP. V. Of the Holy, or outward Temple. § 1. WE advance now from the Porch into the next room,The names and dimensions thereof. called Hechal the Temple, (because the largest part thereof) as also  the greater2 Chr. 3. 5. house, by Tremellius templum anterius, by others interior domus, the inward-house, (namely in respect of the porch) which had forty1 King. 6. 17. Cubits in the length, while the breadth and height thereof, was adequate to the generall dimensions of the Temple. § 2. The foundation of this Temple (as of the whole structure) consisted of great costly hewed stones,The foundati∣on of the Temple. brought thither by the Kings1 King. 5. 17. com∣mand. Here if the vulgar Latine hath Lapides pretiosos, we must not un∣derstand gems and jewels thereby; for, the burying of such shining beauties under ground, what had it been else, but the putting of a candle under a bushell? Besides, such are by nature too small for that service, and it was the prerogative royall of the new Ierusalem, which came down from heaven, to have the foundation of that CityRevel. 21. 19. garnished with all manner of pretious stones. Conceive them here stones of price, on whose polishing much cost was expended to make them no less fair to ight, then firme for substance. For, Solomon, who built not for ostentation, but true mag∣nificence, did not worship God onely with eye-service; but was care∣full, that the under-ground work of the Temple should be as well spe∣cious, as strong; knowing, that the same God saw both the secret of his heart, and bottome of his house. To lesson us in our spirituall edi∣fices, 1 Tim. 6. 19. to lay up in store for our selves a good foundation against the time to come, that we may lay hold on eternall life. § 3. How thick the walls of the Temple were,The thickness of the walls. is not expressed in Scripture. Villalpandus out of Ezekiel colleteth the breadth of the wall to be six Cubits,In Ezek. cap. 41. ver. 5. but how truely, I will not determine; whilest Peter Co∣mestor, without giving any reason, makes the waen Cubits thick; more, I beleeve, then an Architect will allow proportionable; not to say, how many quarries of stone so much solid wall would superfluously devoue. We are well assured (though insisting on no et measure) it was built most substantiall of it self (had not the sins of the people infeebled it) with breadth suitable to such an height, to which it was to be raised, and such a burden, which it was to support. § 4. This wall had the out-side thereof made of stone,The threefold matter of the wall. for strength; the middle of Cedar, for beauty; the in-side of gold, for magnificence. The Cedar was so curiously carved with imagery of flowers,1 Kings 6. 18. & 29. Palmes, and Cherubims, that the walls of this house seemed at the same time, a Garden of flowers, a Grove of trees, yea and a Paradise of Angels. Nor was all this flowretry, and other celature on the Cedar, lost labour, because
concealed, when covered with gold. Indeed, had such graving been either in-laid, or flat-work, the superinduction of the gold had hid it, from any to behold it; but those figures being outwardly imbossed with visible prominencies, the plate of the purest and most flexible me∣tall, applyed it self so close to each lineament in the sculpture, that it set off, and expressed the carved work with advantage, abating nothing of the cunning, and adding much to the cost thereof. § 5.The severall shapes of Che∣rubims. But being here to enquire into the forms of these Cherubims, I am utterly disheatened with that passage in IosephusAnt. Iud. lib. 8. cap. 2. speaking of their shapes, , none can conceive or express what kind of creatures they were. Notwithstanding, many learned men are very peremptory in assigning their shapes, but no more agreeing in their severall opinions, then Men, Women, Children, Lions, Eagles, Oxen, are one like to another. In all which forms I finde Cherubims represented by se∣verall Authours, grounding them on the vision inEzek. 1. 5. Ezekiel. Haply they assumed severall shapes, not always fixt to one figure, but preferring that forme for the time being, which suited best with their present service. Appearing, when sent to treat, Men; when to terrifie, Lions; when to show strength, Oxen; when to use swiftness, Eagles. But for certainty herein, the surest way, to know the fashion of these celestiall creatures, is to live and dye in Gods fear and favour; and then, shall we not onely see, but in some sort be Cherubims our selves,  fellow-commoners with Angels (as ourLuk. 20. 36. Saviour saith) and sharers with them in glorious im∣mortality. § 6.The door lead∣ing into the Temple. Of the same curiosity for1 King. 6. 35. carving, were the two doors with folding leaves, but made of fir-tree, and overlaid with gold, which lead out of the porch into the Temple. The workmanship of these doors, and of the wall being in all particulars so like, that when they were shut, no breach or interruption appeared in the graving, but a fair continuati∣on thereof. Posts of olive-treeIbid. ver. 33. four-square were made for those doors to turn upon. § 7.The gorgeous floor thereof. The floor hereof was made of boards1 King. 6. 16. of fir (onely as stifning in the middle) and they were faced and lined with gold on both sides. So soundeth the text to the plain reader thereof,Ibid. ver. 30. and the floor of the house he overlaid with gold within and without. But TremelliusVid. ejus an∣not. in locum. expoundeth this within and without, not, above and beneath the boards (theseeming sense of the words) but, tam in adyto quàm in templo, both within the Oracle, as also without, in this Temple or great house. § 8. Some will say,Plain but of pure gold. this was not so proper, that the pavement of the house should be as rich as the roof thereof. But this must be imputed to the poverty of nature, not affording more precious metal, seeing worse the gold was too bad for the floor, and better could not be had for the roof. Yet the foresaid pavement though of gold must be presumed plain, without any carving, otherwise the inequality of the sculpture had ren∣dered
it uneasie to be walked upon. Here the Priests feet were taught to trample on worldly wealth; and surely, one meanes to move God to Rom. 16. 20. tread Satan under our feet, is to make a foot-stool of this temporall Mammon, being one of his principall baites, and most pernicious temptations. § 9. Windows were also made in the Temple, but how many,Windows in the Temple. is not exactly specified. The fewer would serve the turn, because of the abun∣dance of artificiall lamps constantly burning therein. Indeed, some competent darkness raiseth devotion; for, though that1 Tim. 6. 16. unapproachable light which no meer man hath or can see, doth heighten, and elevate the zeal of glorified Saints admitted thereunto, yet too much outward light draw∣eth out devotion too thin, and scatters it in the eyes, whilest a solemn darkness remands it to the heart with greater veneration. And a dark Oratory (being as it were a room hung with black against a funerall) doth minde such as enter therein of mortification. § 10. These windows come under a threefold enquiry.The fashion, matter, and position. 1. How fashioned. 2. Whereof made. 3. Where placed. For their fashion, the originall termeth them Secuphim athumin, words so variously rendered by Translatours, that the windows which should lighten the fabrick, are themselves the most dark and difficult to be understood. We stick to our last translation of narrow lights; a form found advantageous, as most thrifty to collect (tunnel-like) most light from without, so most liberall to dispense it within with greatest conveniency. For their mat∣ter, Rabbi Iehuda an ancient writer (whose judgement Tremellius pre∣ferreth Vid. annot. in 1 King 6. 4. above all others) conceiveth them of glass, plenty whereof we have observed nigh Sidon, in purity corrivall with Crystall it self. But On Ezek. 41. Saint Hierome will have them lattised, Lignis interrasilibus, & vermiculatis, with worming or winding splinters of shaved wood: in which notion the Sep∣tuagint renders them  windows of net work. If so, we will be bold to conceive such wooden lathes were overlaid with gold, other∣wise it was unsuitable, that when no wood appeared on the walls, it should presume to peep out in the windows. Sure I am, in the second Temple (inferiour to this in magnificence) IosephusDe bello Iud. lib. 7. cap. 10. reports, how a Roman soldier set fire on a golden window. However, if one will main∣tain, that these windows, made as much to let in aire, as light, and (per∣chance) more to let out smoak then either (caused by the constant lamps and perfumes) were open without any shutting at all, I see no coercive argument, to enforce his beliefe to the contrary, can be taken out of Scripture. Now because the Temple was compassed about with three stories of chambers, each of them, five, and all three, fifteen Cubits high, these windows in the Temple must be made above the roof of those chambers, where their high standing afforded a double benefit, both of clearer light, and greater privacy. § 11. The roof of the Temple,The roof and covering there∣of. finding no exception to the contrary, probably was flat, built like other houses in Iudea, where men might
walk upon them;Mat. 10. 27. Preach you (saith our Saviour) on the house tops. But, if any aske, with what metall it was covered? I am not ashamed to pro∣fess my ignorance. A quere, which, by his own confession,In Ezek. tom. 2. par. 2. cap. 40. posed Villalpandus, propounded unto him by Isabella Archduchess of Austria, even after he had studied the subject many years, and accounted himself question-proof in all particulars. Insomuch, that non-plussed hereat, he was fain afresh to betake himself to his book, and on second enquiries found out of Eupolemus, and other Authors (Scripture being silent there∣in) that it was covered with tiles of brass (no more contradiction, then 1 King. 22. 11. hornes of Iron mentioned in Scripture) which, squammato opere, in scale∣work, lay one over another. A thing not unlikely in it self, David having provided brass in such abundance, that it was1 Chr. 22. 14. without weight. No won∣der, when we read that in Meldorpe a small City of Dithmars in Denmark the ordinary inhabitants therein cover their houses withPet. Hcylyn. Micr. pa. 326. copper. This I dare negatively affirme, it was not covered with lead, being so drossie and impure a metall, that not one ounce thereof is mentioned to be used about all the Temple. CHAP. VI. Of the Holy of Holies. § 1. THis is called the Oracle,The dimension of the Holy of Holies. in Hebrew Debir, Gods Parliament-house, or, speaking place, also the Holy of Holies, or, the inner-house. It was in fashion four-square, the height, length, and breadth thereof equally extending to1 King. 6. 20. twenty Cubits. To shew the stability, and firmness of happiness: so that, place the roof where the floor was, exchange one side-wall for the other, Cube-like it still continued the same firme proportion.Homil. 14. in. Ezek. Nor is the allusion of Saint Gregory to be contemned, on the like occasion observing, that so much as the soul ascends in know∣ledge of God, so much it extends in love to his neighbour; both which meeting together make a square-well-grown, and proportionable Christian. Of the same form, but far less, was the Holy of Holiest in the Tabernacle, namely tenSee Ribera de Templo. li. 1. cap. 6. p. 28. Cubits square verifying our observation, that the Temple was the Tabernacle printed in a greater character. § 2. Some will demand of me,The vacuity a∣bove the Ora∣cle how im∣ployed. that seeing the Temple was thirty Cubits, and this Holy of Holies but twenty Cubits high, what then be∣came of the remaining ten Cubits, reaching up to the roof of the Temple? I answer in the words of Elisha in another case,2. King. 4. 27. The Lord hath hid it from me, and hath not told me. For the main we may be confident, that seeing Christ commanded the fragments of the multiplyed loaves to be bas∣ketted up, thatIohn 6. 12. nothing be lost, surely no rag of room, no snip, or shred of empty space cut off from the squareness of the Oracle, was cast away as needless, but was used for some sacred service, though the particular employment thereof appears not in Scripture.
§ 3. It is stifly can vassed by learned men,Whther any windows in the Oacle. whether any windows were in this Oracle; and topicall arguments are produced on both sides. For the Negative. 1 WindowsVillalp. in Ezek cap. 41. tom. 2 par. 2. cap. 4. were useless therein, which was entered into but once a year. 2 The Cherubims overshadowed the Mer∣cy-seat, shewing thereby these myste∣ries were intended not for sight, but secrecy. 3 This Oracle was designed for a little heaven, wherein They need noRevel. 22. 5. candle nor light of the Sun, for the Lord God gi∣veth them light. 4 It was exposed to the west, or setting Sun, whose declining beams were im∣proper for that place being the emblem of perfection. For the Airmative. 1 A totall darkness had made it rather the Truth of a dungon, then Type of heaven. 2 The1 King 6. 4. text placeth these windows not in the Hechal, but Ha-baith or House, which pro∣perly compriseth all the structure of the Temple. 3 Uniformity to the rest of the fabrick requi∣red, that the windows in the Oracle should be correspondent to those in the outward house. 4 S.In Ezek. cap. 41. Hierome is positive, that on three sides. South, North, and West, windows were made, only denieth any in the East, or Porch of the Temple, where the door supplied the want thereof. But leaving the Reader to the liberty of his own opinion, I conceive them too cruell, who serve the Oracle, as the Philistims didJudg. 16. 21. Samson, put∣ting out the eyes thereof, to which some necessary light in probability must be allowed, and that the high Priest therein did not annually officiate with blinde obedience. § 4. But grant the windows doubtfull, certain it is,The doors of the Holy of Holies. that a most mag∣nificent door of olive-tree was made out of the greater house into the Ora∣cle, carved with Cherubims, and overlaid with gold, the lintell and side∣posts thereof being five square, of the same matter and metall. As for the Cherubims of massie gold, with their severall dimensions, hereof more hereafter, in the description of the Utensils of the Temple. § 5. The floor was covered with boards of Cedar,Gold of Par∣vaim. overlaid with gold. But whether or no, the precious stones, wherewith this house was 2 Chr. 3. 6. garnished, were disposed in the pavement, or elsewhere in the walls, or roof, we are as uncertain, as we are confident those precious stones were exposed to view, and not covered (as the rest) under the gold ofIbidem. Par∣vaim; which some, from the affinity of the word, conceive Peru, or Peruana. But, we will not be over curious in seeking for the Countrey, which should we discover, all the misers of our modern age, would presently flock thither, to fraught themselves with wealth. Nor is it any absurdity, to conceive, Parvaim might be a Countrey now altogether unknown, where God broached a rich vein of gold for this paricular purpose; and, the structure of the Temple once ended, stopped it up a∣gain, that no other should tast thereof ever after. § 6.The nailes of the Holy of Holies. The weight of the nailes used in this room was fifty2 Chr. 3. 9. shekels of gold, which Ribera understands not collectively of them all (the most seeming sense of the text) but, that each of them severally weighed so much. I dare not say, that Solomon particularly reflected on them, in that his expression, The words of the wise are as goads, and asccles. 12. 11. nailes fastened by the Masters of the assemblies. But here the quere will be, how could they be of
pure gold, seeing nailes of such refined metall will not drive, but flat, be∣cause of the extraordinary softness, and pliableness thereof? It is answe∣red, either they were rivetted into holes fore-prepared of purpose, or else they were stifned with some mixture of silver, or copper, not for cheapness, but the greater usefulness thereof. Be it here once for all ob∣served, that, where the Utensils of the Temple, are termed of pure gold, understand it so pure, as the end, for which they were intended, would permit. Otherwise some necessary allay of baser metall made them not onely serviceable for, but more durable in that purpose, for which they were imployed. § 7. A stately Vaile was used as a traverse,The curious Vaile. cross the Holy of Holies, which Solomon made2 Chr. 3. 14. of blew, and purple, and crimson, and fine linnen, and wrought Cherubims thereon. If any demand why Solomon did not rather make use of that vaile of likeExod. 26. 31. workmanship, which Moses had made by Gods di∣rection, then put himself to the pain, and expence of a new one? Let them know, that the former vaile fitted for the Sanctum Sanctorum in the Tabernacle, was too short and narrow, yea, half in half too little for this purpose. Therefore, it not being princely to piece, patch, or eek the same, another was contrived, as indeed nothing at the second hand was suitable to so stately a fabrick, wherein (as the Apostle in another case) 2 Cor. 5. 17. Old things are passed away, behold all things are become new. But more hereof hereafter in the Utensils of the Temple. § 8. One difficulty remains,How the Holy of Holies was in the midst of the Temple. where this Holy of Holies was placed, be∣cause the text1 King. 6. 19. saith  he prepared it, in medio domus, in the midst of the house, which seems to import, that the house or Temple did inviron, or en∣compass it, and that the Oracle, like the center, was surrounded with the circumference of the Temple: But on stricter enquiry, it will be found onely a pure Hebraism, & that in the midst signifieth the same with within, as it is judiciously rendered in our translation. Thus saith David,Psal. 101. 7. He that worketh deceit shall not live in the midst of my house, that is, shall not dwell with∣in my family. O Lord,Hab. 3. 2. saith the Prophet, Revive thy work in the midst of the years, in the midst of the years make known. Not insisting therein on an exact middle, but desiring it might be done, onely within the time, and tearm appointed, and promised by the Prophet. So also was the Oracle prepa∣red in the midst of the house, that is, within the same, as the Chancell is said to be within the Church, through which the high and usuall way leadeth into it. CHAP. VII. Of the Chambers about the Temple. § 1. ALthough it be repeated thrice in one1 King. 6 5. verse,Chambers how round about. that chambers were built round about, yet because in the same place, mention onely is made of the Temple and Oracle, we conceive with learned Ribera, that
the east end where the Porch stood, was clear, and un-chambered, having no other buildings about it, to hinder the prospect thereof. Nor, let any be moved, because that the chambers are said to be built Ibidem. upon the wall, as if they were founded on the wall of the temple, supra being there taken for juxta, or contra, upon; or hard by, or over against, as our trans∣lation rendreth it. Thus it is in the originall,Psal. 137. 1. Upon the waters of Baby∣lon we sat down and wept, that is, by the waters; as these chambers were built hard by, or leaning to the wall of the Temple. § 2. Three rows there were of these chambers. In the lowest,Their dimen∣ions. each chamber1 King. 6. 6. was five; in the middle, six; in the third, and highest story, seven cubits broad; and each of them equallylbid. ver. 10. five cubits in height, go∣ing up from the first to the middle, thence to the highest story with win∣ding staires. The beams of these chambers did not lye in, but1 King. 6. 6. rest on the wall of the Temple, the reduction or abatement whereof, narrowing in, the higher it went, afforded fit stays for that purpose. It seems, the beams were not mortised into the walls of the Temple, because the in∣tireness of that building was not to be wounded with holes, and per∣forations, which in process of time might fret in, and indent into the structure it self. Speciall care therefore was taken, to preserve the whole∣ness and prevent all fractions in this fabrick, in some relation to the Temple of Christs body, whereof a bone was not to be broken. § 3. It is not expressed in Scripture,The vessels of the Tabernacle kept in these chambers. for what use these chambers were principally intended. Some conceive them designed for galleries, or walking-places; which to me seems too much presumption, for any to take their pleasure so near the holy place. Others will have them used for Dormitories, for such Priests to lodge in, who were in ordinary at∣tendance about the Temple. For my own part, I conceive them imploy∣ed for Repositories, wherein the holy vestments, and vessels were safely laid up, together with those of the Tabernacle, which (though not used) were here carefully preserved. For, first, the vessels of Moses his making were not aliened, or diverted to any profane service; such sacriledge be∣ing unsupposable in that age. Secondly, they were not altered, or melted by Solomon (of moe and lesser, so to make fewer, and greater Utensils for the Temple) because, the making, as well as the matter; the shape, as well as the substance of all the Tabernacle-vessels were of livine institution. Thirdly, they were not imployed in Gods service, because (some few excepted, whereof hereafter) being calculated for the Meridian of the Ta∣bernacle a less fabrick, thus fel out to be too short, and smal in proportion to the Temple, as in the Vail was formerly observed. Seeing therfore they were neither aliened, altered, nor used, it remaineth they were carefully kept in these chambers, intimated in the text,2 Chr. 5. 5. where after the finishing of the Temple, the Levites are said to bring up into it, all the vessels of the Ta∣bernacle. Thus graces acquired or infused into a Christian in this life, are not lost, forfeited, or cast away after death; but, preserved▪ perfected, and swallowed up in glory.
§ 4. As for the mysticall meaning of these chambers;Fancy runs riot when spurred with supersti∣tion. Bede,Lib. 7•. no doubt, thought he hit the very mark, when finding therein the three conditi∣ons of life all belonging to Gods Church. In the ground-chamber, such as live in mariage; in the middle-chamber, such as contain; but, in the excelsis or third-story, such as have attained to the sublimity of perpe∣tuall virginity. Rupertus, in the lowest chamber, lodgeth those of practi∣call lives with Noah; in the middle, those of mixt lives with Iob; and in the highest, such as spend their days with Daniel in holy speculations. But is not this rather lusus, then allusio, sporting with, then expounding of Scrip∣tures? Thus when the gates of the Oracle are made1 King. 6. 31 five-square, Ribera therein reads our conquest over the five senses; and when those of the door of the Temple are said to be four-square, therein saith he is denoted the quaternion of Evangelists. After this rate, Hiram (though, no doubt, dexterous in his art) could not so soon fit a pillar with a fashion, as a Frier can fit that fashion with a mystery. If made three-square, then the Trinity of Persons; four-square, the cardinall vertues; five-square, the Pentateuch of Moses; six-square, the Petitions in the Lords prayer; seven-square, their Sacraments; eight-square, the Beatitudes; nine-square, the orders of Angels; ten-square, the Commandements; eleven-square the morall vertues; twelve-square, the articles of the Creed are therein con∣tained. In a word, for matter of numbers, fancy is never at a loss, like a begger never out of his way, but hath some haunts where to repose it self. But, such as in expounding of Scripture reap more then God did sow there, never eat what they reap thence, because such grainless huskes, when seriously threshed out, vanish all into chaffe. § 5. For the rest, we refer the reader unto our Map, wherein he may observe a double Alphabet for his direction. One of Roman letters, presenting onely such things in the building of the Temple, as are infallibly foun∣ded on the words of the text. The other of Italian, relating to such addi∣tions, which, to compleat this fabrick, are taken out of Traditions, Rab∣bins, Fathers, and learned mens conjectures. We thought it unfit, to con∣found these together in the same character, being so distanced in their own natures. The Apostle Saint Paul varies his phrase, when delivering his prudentiall advises, from his style, when enjoyning, what he had from divine inspiration. In the former, To the rest1 Cor. 7. 12. speak I, not the Lord: In the latter,Ibid. ver. 10. I command, yet not I, but the Lord. It had therefore been impu∣dent presumption in us, not to have observed a difference in this our de∣scription, betwixt immediate divine dictates, and humane (probable, but fallible) collections. Here the Map of Solomons Courts is to be inserted.
THE COURTS and UTENSILS OF SOLOMONS TEMPLE. CHAP. I. Of the Court of the Priests. § 1. SO much for the Diamond it self,The difficulty of the present subject, with the causesthere∣of. the covered Tem∣ple, come we now to the Ring wherein it was set, the Courts which encompassed it. Herein we meet with much difficulty, arising partly from Gods silence, (speaking little in Scripture of the present subject) partly from mansloquacity, whose fancies without warrant from the word, are as copious as different in describing the Courts of this Temple. But, that which makes the matter in hand more intricate is, because learned men confound Temples and Times, ascribing those Courts to Solomons, which onely belonged to the second Temple, at, and after the time of our Saviour. Thus, as countrey painters make the nine Worthies (not ac∣cording to the garb of those ancient ages wherein they lived) with bands and cuffs according to our modern fashion; so some Jewish writers (Iosephus himself being not wholly free from this fault) shape the Courts of Solomons Temple, not after their true form in the old Testament; but as the second Temple adorned by Herod, stood modelled in their own days. § 2. We read of Iacob,Ill consequen∣ces of confoun∣ding the two Temples. that he set his own sheep three daysGen. 30. 36. journey from the flocks of Laban his father-in-law, so sufficiently to distinguish their severall stocks from making quarrels by meeting together. A greater distance divides the two Temples, there being no less then seven∣ty years, betwixt the destruction of the one, and erection of the other. Enough in probability to prevent all mistakes, which might arise from
udling them together. I wonder therefore the more at their marvellous agility, who so easily can leap over this great-gulfe of time, & who by con∣founding the two Temples, and making many things common to both, of two perfect models, compose one no better then a monster. That we run not on the same rocks, we will carefully observe their severall pro∣perties, insisting onely on such things for the present, as were peculiar to Solomons fabrick, confining our selves to Scripture instructions: as knowing that the judicious palat will prefer a drop of the sincere milk of the word, before vessels full of Traditionary pottage, resenting of the wild gourd of humane invention. § 3. A Court,The fashion of a Court. in Latine Atrium, Greek , Hebrew  Chatzer, ac∣cording to archi∣tecture consist∣eth of two prin∣cipall parts, 1 An open space in the middle (properly called ca∣vedium, quasi cavum edium) exposed to wind, and weather. 2 A covert on the sides thereof (termed porticus and ) whither in heat, or rain, men might retreat, for shade, or shelter, like the cloisters about the Royal-Exchange in London. This premised of the fashion of a Court in generall, Solomon made two of them on the east of the Temple, one called  chatzer happeni∣mith, or, the inner1 King. 6. 36. Court (in2 Chr. 4. 9. Chronicles, the Court of the Priests) built with three rowes of hewen stone, and a row of1 King. 6. 36. Cedar beams. Understand three rows, not collaterally in thickness, all abreast on the floor, and the Cedar for cei∣ling within, (as Richardus will have it) but three subordinately in height, one upon another, with Cedar beams (as lightest, and therefore upper∣most) for a tarras on the top thereof. This is all that Scripture acquaints us with, concerning the fabrick of the inner Court. For, that each row of stone therein, was of a different colour, as LyraVid. Lyram in locum. affirmes, is but a fan∣cy of his own. Such variation of colours I beleeve in IosephsGen. 37. 3. coat, and Thamars2 Sam. 13. 18. garment, because Scripture hath affirmed it: not here, where no warrant out of the word for such an assertion. § 4. Probably certain ascents led hither out of the outward Court, and hence into the Temple. For,Dgrees in this Court. besides the frequent phrase of going up into Gods house: it was proper that the Temple, as in holinesse, so in height should be distanced above her Courts (as they one above ano∣ther, and both above common ground) were it but to minde such as approached thither, with the mounting of their bodies to elevate their hearts in devotion. But, how many these stairs or steps were, is uncer∣tain, though some will have them fifteen, according to the number of the Psalmes of Degrees, sung, as they affirm, by the Priests in their ascent to the Temple. § 5. This inner Court,People  pressin into the  Court. or Court of the Priests, was proper onely for the Priests to enter into. Yet probably the common people made a tumul∣ous incursion into it, when stoning Zachariah at the command of
King Ioash in the Court of the house of the Lord, even2 Chr. 24. 21. betwixt the TempleMat. 23. 35. and the Altar. As if the Antiperistasis of two eminent holy places on both sides of them, had intended and emboldned their cruelty, and profaneness. Wherefore, his last words, the Lord look upon it,2 Chr. 24. 22. and require it, speake not not so much revenge of his own death, as zeal to Gods honour, that he would vindicate the profanation of so holy a place. This I conceive one cause why the Prophet pointeth the Priests to this particular place, tooel 2. 17. weep betwixt the porch and the Altar, so by their sorrow to avert Gods judgements from their nation, for this foul murder by their ancestours committed therein. CHAP. II. Of the great, or outward Court. § 1. WHereas Solomon is said to have made the Inner Court of the House of the Lord;The severall names of this Court. by the rule of relation, an outward Court is thence next inferred. But to clear it more, ex∣press mention is made thereof 2 Chron. 12. 9. where, besides the Court of Priests, he is said to have made the great Court, and doors for the Court, and overlaid the doors of them with brass. This Court in Hebrew is called Aza∣rah 2 Chr. 4. 9., rendered by Montanus atrium auxilii, from Azar to help, because God there answered his peoples prayer by his gracious assistance afforded unto them. § 2. Well might this be termed the great Court,Certainly large, how large un∣certain. seeing large (though uncertain) were the dimensions thereof, an hundred Cubits square at the least. But what was this to contain all Israel therein? Philip speaking of five thousand to be fed, TwoIohn 6. 7. hundred penny worth of bread (saith he) is not sufficient for them, that every one may take a little. But, grant this Court two hundred Cubits square (more then the place will allow) this would afford but few inches for a mans body to stand in, except the ground was here (as the loaves) miraculously multiplyed. We therefore con∣ceive, that the people of the land were successively admitted to this place, otherwise impossible to contain them. Ascents, or staires did also lead into this Court, but how many is not known; surely they were low and little, short and easie, to be climbed up, otherwise the cattell brought thither to be sacrificed, could not conveniently clamber over them. § 3. This Court was by successive Kings (especially Hezekiah,This Court bettered by suc∣ceeding Kings. who 2 King. 18. 16. cased the pillars thereof with silver) improved to more beauty, then it had in the days of Solomon. Some will say, this was a disparagement to the perfection of Solomons work, as if he had left any defects, or defaults therein, to be amended by others. Were not his structures, as his disco∣veries, compleat? for,Eccles. 2. 12. Who is he that will come after the King in things? It is answered, the outward Temple was, in the appendent Courts thereof,
capable of more cost and expence, to make them both bigger, and bra∣ver; though the covered Temple was semel & semper, at once and for ever perfected, afterwards admitting of no new addition, when Solomon had finished it. Surely God granted not such a Monopoly to Solomon alone to ingross all honour to himself, so that no reserve was left for posterity, no bottome for their bounty to build on, in after ages, to testifie their gratitude to Gods goodness. Some accessions therefore might be made (though not to the vitall parts, as I may say) to the out-lims of the Tem∣ple. It is the priviledge not of the house of God, but of God himself, to be so perfect, as that nothing can be added unto him. § 4. But others will object,Hezkiah en∣cused from in∣novation. that this was a presumptuous innovation in Hezekiah, seeing the Courts of the Temple, and all things therein were framed according to the divine1 Chr. 28. 11. 12. 19. pattern David left to Solomon, for him to overlay those pillars with silver, which Solomons wisdome, fol∣lowing Gods platform, was pleased to make plain. But, let such know, that he swerveth not at all from the proportion of the Copy, who onely gilds, or colours the letters therein. Hezekiah for the main kept himself to the former fabrick, not altering, but adorning the same. The worst was, that afterwards he2 King. 18. 16. cut off the silver again to purchase the favour of Sennacherib. Better had those pillars been left naked, then thus to be clothed, and then to be stript of their costly coats. For, though (as some scornfully may scoff) there was no danger of their catching cold when thus disrobed; yet the beauty of those pillars were thereby much im∣paired, looking ruggedly when again uncased, besides the inexcusable sacriledge therein committed, whereof hereafter. § 5. We must not forget the entry,Private passage from the Kings house into the Temple. leading from this Court to the Kings Palace, through which the Kings of Iudah had at pleasure a pri∣vate passage into the Temple. This continuation of the Kings to Gods house, shewed the mutuall intercourse which ought to be betwixt Poli∣cy, and Piety; as also that Princes (besides their set, solemn, and pub∣lick addresses to God by prayer) must have their secret recourses unto him, in their occasionall devotions. It was first made by King Solomon, and then so stately a structure, that amongst other things, the Queen of Sheba was ravished with admiration at the sight thereof, when she be∣held1 King. 10. 5. the ascent by which he went up into the house of the Lord. And yet after∣wards it was made more magnificent, when2 Chr. 9. 11. terrased on both sides with 1 King. 10. 1. Pillasters made of those Almuggin trees which she presented to Solomon; which, if oderiferous, (as some will have it) made that passage as sweet to the smell, as specious to the sight. Wicked Ahaz2. King. 16. 18. turned this entry from the house of the Lord, for the King of Assyria, that is, asVide ejus an∣not. in locum. Tremellius will have it, stopped up, or diverted that passage, fearing, lest through it the King of Assyria should out of the Temple suddenly surprise the Kings palace. I conceive this done not for fear, but in favour of the Assyrian King, Ahaz hereby cutting off all connexion, and dependence
of his Palace to the Temple, and utterly renouncing all relation to true Religion, so the more to confirme this friendship with that heathen King, begun on a new account, and grounded on pure principles of Idolatry. At the same time he turned out also the2 Kin. 16. 18. covert of the Sabbath which they had built in the house, by which our foresaid Authour un∣derstands, a place erected for the shelter of such Priests as officiated on the Sabbath. § 6. As for their tradition,A Rabbinicall Tradition. who report Solomon to have written on the walls of the Temple, soveraign Receipts against all diseases, which He∣zekiah afterwards is said to rase out, because people placed too much con∣fidence therein, to the prejudice of divine providence, I listen to both as Rabbinicall fables. Surely such medicines (if any there prescribed) proved uneffectuall to cure Asa's gout, Ioram's dysentery, Uzziahs lepro∣sie, as indeed no art can crave longer time, when death calls for the pre∣sent payment of the debt to nature. CHAP. III. Of the Gates and Porters of the Court. § 1. HEaven hath onely one,Four principall gates. and that aMat. 7. 14. narrow gate leading there∣into. But severall fair gates on all sides, gave entrance into the Courts of Solomons Temple. Some of them to us of cer∣tain, others but of conjecturall situation. Of the former were, 1 East-gate, where1 Chr. 26. 14. Shelemiah was Porter. This gate was set in the front, leading directly to the Temple, and therefore King Io∣tham 2 Kin. 15. 35. & 2 Chr. 27. 3. Vide Tremel. in locos. rebuilt it, mounting Monarch-like above the parity of other ports, that it became higher then all the rest, yet met with no zelot to humble it, for aspiring above its fellows. 2 North-gate, where1 Chr. 26. 14. Zacharias his son was Porter. 3 South-gate, attended on by the sons of1 Chr. 26. 15. Obed-Edom. The house of AsuppimIbidem. (rendred by Hierome and Pagnine a counsel-house, by Tre∣mellius Aerarium, the Treasury) was for conveniency united to their charge. A place, probably of entrance, certainly of conse∣quence, as needing a constant guard about it. 4 West-gate, where Shuppim1 Chr. 26. 16. and Hosah were Porters. To them al∣so belonged the gate Shallecheth, by the causway of the going up, un∣derstand thereby that stately ascent made by Solomon, out of his own Palace into the Temple. But besides these four, which respected the cardinall winds, we meet with other intermediate gates, whose accurate position is uncertain. Never did the blindedGen. 19. 11. Sodomites more groap for Lots door in the dark, then learned men are puzled to finde the gate of2 King. 11. 6. Sur, (elsewhere2 Chr. 23. 5. cal∣led
the foundation-gate) where at the coronation of King Ioash, a tierce of Levites were awarded to waite, by order from Iehojada. Tremellius not improbably conceives it the same with the East-gate. As for the New∣gate Ier. 26. 10. & 36. 10., wherein Baruch publickly read the book of Ieremy, I am confident it was one of the four principall gates, onely repaired, enlarged, or ad∣orned with new buildings.1 Chr. 26. 18. Parbar seated on the west must not be forgotten (whether Porters-lodge, Priests-vestry, or place wherein sa∣crificing instruments were laid up) having something of the nature of a gate therein, because two porters daily attended it. Say not, it was suspicious, that so small a Court would run out at so many gates, which surely were no more, then just proportion, and uniformity did re∣quire. § 2. The principall office of Porters was to secure the gates,The number and office of the Porters. provi∣ding for the peace and purity of the Temple and service therein. These in all were1 Chr. 23. 5. four thousand, thus daily disposed of; Eastward, six; North∣ward, four; Southward, four; at Asuppim-gate, two; and two, West∣ward; at the Causway, four; at Parbar-gate, two; four and twenty in all. An eminent number in Temple-service (so many the singers1 Chr. 25. 32., and the severall1 Chr. 24. 18. courses of the Priests) to which the four and twenty Elders in theRevel. 4. 4. Revelation have some allusion. Their service was, as well nocturnall, as by day:Psal. 134. 1. which by night stand in the house of the Lord. § 3. Here let others dispute,A treble quere concerning the Porters places. whether the Porters places were meerly ministeriall, (or servile rather) or also partly judiciall, with some ad∣missive, and exclusive power to take cognizance of the cleanness of such persons as did approach to the Temple. Otherwise, they were easily qualified for their office, rather bigness then brains commending men generally to such imployments. Secondly, if they were intrusted with any such authority, let others enquire, by what means they made discoveries of peoples uncleanness, finding no oath Ex officio they ten∣dred to any to betray themselves, though otherwise some secret polluti∣on might be concealed, the parties themselves being onely privy there∣unto. Lastly, let them discuss, whether these Porters were afterward advanced to higher places, or onely (as the doors whereon they atten∣ded turned round on their hinges) moved alternately in their own sphere, without possibility of any farther preferment. If the latter, it is strange that the worthy parts of Zachariah his son Porter Northward, com∣mended in Scripture to be a1 Chr. 26. 14. wise counsellour, should be imprisoned in so narrow a profession. And yet his employment (though the meanest about the Temple) was honourable in it self, if well executed: witness holy David his choice, I had rather bePsal. 84. 10. a door-keeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the tabernacles of wickedness. § 4. Now notwithstanding all the care of the Porters to the contrary; some (not going through the gates,Intruders into the Temple without the Porters leave. but over the walls) made bold to lodge and live with their whole families within the verge of the
Temple. Yea, the sparrowPsal. 84. 3. hath found an house, and the swallow a nest for her self, where she may lay her young, even thine Altars, O Lord of hosts, my King, and my God. By Altars understand the Courts and buildings about it, otherwise the Altar it self (fitter for Salamanders then Sparrows) was too hot a climate for their habitation. Birds, we see, may prescribe an ancient title to build in our steeples, having time out of minde taken the same priviledge in the Tabernacle, and Temple. Yea David in exile debarred access to Gods publick service, doth pity his own, and prefer the con∣dition of these fowls before him. And, although no devotion (whereof they were uncapable) but the bare delight in fair fabricks, brought them hither; yet, we may presume (according to their kind) they served God better then many men in that place, chirping forth Morning and Even-praises to the honour of their maker. To take our farewell of these Porters, wicked Ahaz gave them a Supersedeas. from their office, in that long Vacation wherein he2 Chr. 28. 24. shut up the doors of the house of the Lord, so obstructing Gods mercy against himself. CHAP. IV. Of the Chambers, and Treasuries about the Court. § 1. THe Porches,Chambers and Treasuries over the Porch. or Cloisters beneath were built with rooms a∣bove; if not round about the Court, certainly over the in∣tervalls of the gates. Such places were employed, partly for chambers for Priests to lodge in, partly for Treasuries, wherein conse∣crated things were deposited. § 2. Amongst the former,The Chamber of Gemariah wherein Iere∣miahs book was read. most remarkable was the chamber of Ge∣mariah the son of Shaphan the Secretary, whereinIer. 36. 10. Baruch read the book of Ieremy, which afterwards was burnt by Iehojakim King of Iudah. When though some (dissenters and disswaders) amongst all the Cour∣tiers no mourners appeared at the funeralls of this book, it being ex∣pected, they should have been as cruell to their clothes, toVers. 24. rend them for sorrow, at the sight of that double martyrdome of that innocent Volume, first cancelled with a pen-knife to pieces, then afterward burnt to ashes. But the flame, which did burn the book, did but bur∣nish the truths written therein; Yea another Phoenix arose out of the ashes thereof. Baruch transcribing another roulVers. 32. with the same and many like words added beside. Thus wanton children by breaking their parents old rod, give them onely the occasion to make a better, and big∣ger in the room thereof. § 3. Next we take notice of the chamber of Nathan2 King. 23. 11 Melech at the en∣tring of the house of the Lord,Chamber of Nathan Melech. by which stood those statues of horses dedi∣cated to the Sun by some Idolatrous Kings of Iudah, which Iosiah de∣stroyed.
What! was the Sun, whichPsal. 19. 5. rejoyceth as a Giant to run his course, ever so tyred, as to need hacknies to carry him to his journeys end? Oh no, but the Iews plundred this piece of Idolatry from the Persians, who Xenophon li. 8. . offered horses unto the Sun, andFastor. 1. Ovid renders some reason thereof, Placat quo Persis radiis Hyperiona cinctum, Ne detur celeri victima tarda Deo. Horse to the beamed Sun's the Persians gift, Slow sacrifice ill fits a God so swift. Now the Iews counting it too gross Idolatry to sacrifice naturall horses to the Sun, erected artificiall ones in honour thereof. § 4. Another eminent chamber,The chamber of the Sons of Hanan. was that of the Sons of Hanan,Ier. 35. 4. which was by the chamber of the Princes, probably on the one hand, which was by the chamber of Maaseiah the son of Shallum the keeper of the door, on the other hand thereof. Here Ieremy in vain solicited the Rechabites to drink wine, ob∣serving the instructions of their ancestours therein; as also in their con∣stant dwellingIer. 35. 10. in tents, so to entertain all turnings of the times, with less trouble to themselves. Provident birds, onely to perch on the boughs, not build their nests on that tree, which they suspected would suddenly be cut down, foreseeing perchance the captivity of Babylon. Indeed, in all fickle times (such as we live in) it is folly to fix on any durable de∣sign, as inconsistent with the uncertainty of our age, and safest to pitch up tent-projects, whose alteration may with less loss, and a clear con∣science comply with the change of the times. CHAP. V. That Solomon made no moe then two Courts on the east of the Temple. § 1. ALthough many learned authours make four,No moe then two outward Courts made by Solomon. and some moe Courts about Solomons Temple, yet the following reasons per∣swade me, that these two Courts formerly described by us, were all which were of Solomons originall foundation. Because, 1 Mention is made of no moe in Scripture, either in the book of Kings, or Chronicles, where his buildings are particularly described. 2 Manasseh is said to have built Altars for the host of Heaven in the two2 King. 21. 5. Courts of the house of the Lord. Probably, had there been any moe, his profaneness would have found them out, no place being priviledged from his Idolatry. 3 The narrowness of the place, as it was in Solomons time, admit∣ted of no moe Courts, such was the precipice thereof on all sides. This last is confessed byIoseph. de Bel. Iud. lib. 6. ca. 6. Edit. lat. sed graec. cap. 13. Iosephus, whose words deserve our heeding to clear the matter in hand; The Temple was built upon an. hard mountain, and at the first, the plain on the top thereof was scarce sufficient to contain the Temple, and the Altar, the. circumference thereof being steep and shelving. But, when King Solomon who built the Temple, had compassed the east part thereof with a wall, he
also placed a Porch upon the rampire, and so, many ages after it lay. unfenced on the other parts, untill the people every day bringing earth thither, at last made it plain and large enough. Insomuch that the Temple extant in the days of Iosephus▪ had a threefold wall about it, and other courts built on that forced ground, which industry had added thereunto. See here the small compass of the Temples floor at the first founding thereof. So that those who in Solo∣mons time make moe Courts about it, must build them in the aire, see∣ing the earth (such then the scantness and steepness thereof) afforded no bottome for the building of such imaginary fabricks. § 2. But shrewd objectionsObject. are brought to the contrary,David at least prescribed three Courts. by such who, in Solomons time, make moe then two Courts by us described. No doubt (say they) he observed Davids instructions, who by the Spirit gave him the pattern of1 Chr. 28. 12. all the Courts of the house of the Lord, which he meant to make. These therefore at the least must needs be three, seeing All (asLib. 1. de Caelo. cap. 1. Aristotle observes) can not in proper language, be predicated of a lower number. § 3. Answ. I confess the words so read in the vulgar Latine, & omnium quae cogitaverat atriorum, though no such thing appears in our translation founded on the originall, where David is said to deliver to Solomon the 1 Chr. 28. 12. pattern of all that he had by the Spirit, of the house of the Lord, of all the chambers round about &c. This third Court therefore in Solomons time, was but a groundless fancy. § 4. Object. Another Court must of necessity be allowed on the west of the Temple,Court on the west. or else (which is altogether improbable) the Holy of Holies lay open, unfenced, and common to the City. § 5. Answ. The same was sufficiently fenced, and severed from the City with the precipice of the place, barring all access, and the Temple on that side surrounded with ambient aire in the concavity of the vally. If besides this, any artificiall wall encompassed the Temple on the west, the distance between it and the Temple may be counted a passage, but a∣mounted not to the spaciousness of a Court. § 6. Object. Good authours,Some make a womans Court. Bede, Cassidore, Comestor, and Tostatus confidently adde, Atrium Foeminarum, or, the Womens Court, where their sex severally by themselves attended their devotions. Nor is it probable they were mingled with men, seeing the Prophet speaking of a solemn humiliation, They shall waile (saith he) the family of the house of David apart, and theirZec. 12. 13. wives apart, the family of the house of Nathan apart, and their wives apart. § 7. Answ. This place cited out of Zachary was spoken after Solomons Temple was demolished,The womans Court not grounded on Scripture. and Zerubbabels erected. Such separation of sexes in severall Courts in the first Temple hath no foundation in Scrip∣ture, but rather thence the contrary may be collected, that all sexes and ages promiscuously met together; for, Iehosaphat is said, to have stood in the2 Chr. 20. 5. Ibid. ver. 13. house of the Lord with their little ones, their l wives, and their children.
However it may be that there was anciently a partition of the outward Court per clathros & cancellos, with bar or lattise-work, into two parts, and so the women (though in the same Court) might be severally by them∣selves. § 8. Object. There were moe Courts,Ezekiels Tem∣ple had moe Courts. three at least, in Ezekiels Tem∣ple; which as Villalpandus will have it, in all particulars was the same with Solomons. § 9. Answ.But was not the same with So∣lomons. Confessing some generall conformities, we deny, not onely the identity, but exact similitude betwixt them. It is against the nature of a Prophecy to have a retrograde motion, to bring things back∣ward, and raise the ghosts of buildings departed, which rather looks forward, presenting things to come. Ezekiels Temple had not the same body with Solomons, but greater, and moe were the parts, and members thereof; as in due time, God willing, we shall make it to appear. § 10. Object.Ant. Iud. l. 8. cap. 2. Iosephus a learned Iew living in Ierusalem seems to adde another,Some collect another Court out of Iosephus. Atrium Gentium, the Court of Gentiles, or unclean persons. § 11. Answ. The place quoted out of him to this purpose, will scarce bear the collection of a new Court from it. However Iosephus was none of thoseEzra 3. 12. aged men, who remembring the magnificence of Solomons, wept when the foundation of the second Temple was laid before their eyes. I mean he was no eye-witness of the first and old Temple (being born five hundred years and more, after the dissolution thereof) and onely spake of it, either by tradition, or conjecture, and therefore his authority of no such strength, as to command our beliefe. Besides, he seems to have for∣gotten what formerly we cited out of him, for the narrowness of the place, not admitting moe Courts in Solomons time. However, his eyes were so dazeled with long looking on the second Temple extant in his age, that he conformeth thereto, and confoundeth therewith Solomons Temple, if making any moe Courts then two therein. § 12. However, I dare not deny,A third Court might after∣wards be added but even this first Temple, after the death of Solomon, might by succeeding Kings, have another Court added thereunto; namely, when by art, industry, and great expense they had raised up the valley, and gained more ground to the mountain of the house, which was so small at the first. Hereof we finde a double insinuation in Scripture: 1 One, when Iehosaphat is said to stand in the house of the Lord before the new2 Chr. 20. 5. Court, which probably about his reign, was added to the ancient fabrick. 2 Another, when at the coronation of Ioash Iehoiada gave order that the Priests2 Chr. 23. 6. alone should come into the house of the Lord (meaning the inner-court thereby) whilest the people should be in the CourtsIbid. ver. 5. of the house of the Lord, the plural number there impor∣ting two Courts at the least, at that time belonging to the Temple, into which the common people had free access. But herein no∣thing can be positively concluded.
Wherefore, as the sons of Barzillai, though Priests, yet because they found not their genealogy reckoned in theEzra 2. 62. Register, were therefore removed from the priesthood, till one with Urim and Thummim, should arise to decide the controversie: so we suspend this third and new Court, as doubtfull, in our descriptions, untill some infallible Judge, on better evi∣dence then we can produce, shall clear the title thereof. CHAP. VI. Of the Pillars in the Porch of the Temple. § 1. GOd at the first creation,The expressive utensils of the Temple. having finished the elements, and essentiall parts of the world, did afterwards furnish them with creatures suitable thereunto, no vacuity being left: so that rather then any thing should be empty, any thing will fill it. Solomon in like manner, having ended the main rooms of the Temple, in the nxt place made the furniture thereof, wherein every vessell was pregnant with heavenly mysteries; so that what the Apostle saith of the languages in the world1 Cor. 14. 10. none of them are without signification, was true of the smallest Utenill in the Temple, speaking much holy matter, had we eares to hear, and hearts to understand it. § 2. We begin with the Porch,The different dimensions of the Pillars re∣conclled. where the two great brazen pillars were set up, each of them1 King. 7. 15. twelve Cubits in compass, (bearing a little more then four Cubits in Diameter) fourIer. 52. 21. fingers thick of solid me∣tall, and the rest hollow within, some difference appearing in the mea∣sure of their height, variously presented unto us; 1 KING. 7. 15. And he cast two Pillars of brass of eigh∣teen Cubits high a piece.2 CHRON. 3. 15. Also he made before the house two Pillars of thirty and five Cubits high. 1 To reconcile these, some have recourse to severall Cubits, common, or great; of the first measure conceiving the former mentioned in Kings; the latter (which were twice as big) intended in Chro∣nicles. 2 Others understand the bare shaft of the Pillars to be eighteen Cubits high, besides the Chapiters above, and Basis beneath them: the former being1 King. 7. 16. five Cubits, and the latter so many as made the totall number thirty and five. 3 A thirdRibera de iis qua erant in Temp. l. 2. ca. 11. sort most probably conjecture, that in Chronicles the height of both Pillars are counted together. Where if any object, that eighteen and egihteen Cubits make thirty six, one more then the number in Chronicles; Ribera conceives that so much onely as appeared of these pillars are summed up, each of them having half a Cub it of their shaft lost in their height, as running in, and hid in his Chapiter grafted upon it.
§ 3. The chapiters of these pillars were curiously adorned with net∣work, Their chapiters how adorned. chain-work, and rowes of pomegranats. These were but apples of brass, whilest words spoken in due season are far more precious, being like those of gold in picturesProv. 25. 11. of silver. Lillies1 King. 1. 19. also were made on the top of these Cha∣piters, wherein though Hiram might imitate the fashion of those flowers, no art could counterfeit their colours, seeing he who set him on work, evenLuk. 12. 27. Solomon himself in all his glory was not arayed like one of these. These pillars set in the porch did not like those two in DagonsIudg. 16. 29. Temple support the main fabrick thereof, nor was any burden born by them, but were onely (like brazen Andirons in great mens chimnies) for ornament. Let none say unto them as the master to the men in the market place,Mat. 20. 6. Why stand yee here all the day idle? seeing they were usefull in their kind, and contributed much to the beauty of the Temple. § 4. Others will say, these pillars were ill placed, because obscured in the porch, where few did behold them. His kindred said to our Savi∣our Iohn 7. 4. There is no man that doth any thing in secret, and he himself seekth to be known openly. Had Solomon for his credit intended to make the Temple appear glo∣rious, he should not so privately have concealed these pillars in the Porch. —Occultae non gratia magna columnae. Better had they been set like the Colossus at Rhodes, or the two Columns before Saint Markes in Venice, sub dio, in the open aire. But here we must know, first, that Solomon intended his Temple, not so much to be seen, as to be glorious. Secondly, the door leading into the Porch, being ex∣ceeding broad, and high, these pillars were not wholly concealed, but a great part, if not all of them, was exposed to publick view through the door of the Porch. § 5. The PillarThe meaning of the Pillars names. standing on the right hand in the1 Kin. 7. 21. Porch was called Iachin, that is, he will stablish; and the other on the left side Boaz, that is, in him is strength. Pity without power will be but lame to help us; Power without pity will be but deaf to hear us; whilest both together make a comfortable composition. Both these pillars we finde in a manner erected in the expression of the leperMat. 8. z. to our Saviour: Iachin, but doubtfully and conditionally, Lord if thou wilt. Boaz, positively and absolutely, Thou canst make me clean. Both these pillars there set up, signified Gods protection of the place, and the gates of hell could not prevail against that Temple, which had these pillars in the Porch thereof. § 6. Besides this, in a secondary sense these two did resemble emi∣nent Saints,What they my∣ftically repr∣sented. Ministers especially (such as Iames, Cephas, and Iohn,Gal. 2. 9. who seemed to be, yea, whom God madeRevel. 3. 12. pillars in his Temple) who by the Word and Sacraments direct, conduct, and admit men into the true Church. Pillars, bottomed on the basis of a firm faith, mounting up with a clear shaft of a shining life, having their persevering tops garlanded about ac∣cording to GodsRevel. 2. 10. promise, Be thou faithfull unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of life.
CHAP. VII. Of the furniture of the Sanctuary, or Inner Tample. § 1. AMongst the Utensils of the Sanctuary, we first look on the Can∣dlestick,Ten Candl∣sticks in the Temple. and the light therein enables us, the better to behold all the rest. The Tabernacle had butExod. 37. 17. one, the Temple ten1 King. 7. 49. Candlesticks of pure gold, (this exceeding that ten to one in lustre) five on the right side, and five on the left, each of them no doubt fashioned like that which Moses made, seven fold with a great shaft for the body in the midst, and three stems on each side branching out thereof. In some resemblance of the seven Planets, amongst which the Sun, the stock of light, stands in the midst, and three other on each side, above, and beneath it. Here we can∣not but minde the reader of a foul mistake inAnti. lib. 8. c. 2. Iosephus, who beholding these Candlesticks through a multiplying glass, in stead of ten reads ten thousand that Solomon made in his Temple. Yet we deny not, that besides these ten standing Candlesticks of gold, there were many moe oveable ones, but all those made of1 Chr. 28. 15. silver, which the Priests in the night might carry about with them. By these Candlesticks also, having lights always in them, Gods Ministers in generall were represented. For, to say, that by these seven lamps in the ten Candlesticks (threescore and ten in all) the Luk. 10. 1. seventy Disciples were designed, would savour of too much curiosity. § 2. Next we take notice of the Table of1 King. 7. 48. shew-bread,The Table of Shew-bread. which Solomon made of that gold, which his Father David had peculiarly prepared for that1 Chr. 28. 16. purpose. The particular dimensions, and fashion thereof, is not mentioned in Scripture. Probably of the, like form with that which Moses made in the Tabernacle, though of a far greater pro∣portion. On this loaves were daily presented to God; Who, not out of any necessity (If I be hungry, I will not tell thee, for thePsal. 50. 12. world is mine, and the fulness thereof) but free will, was pleased to accept thereof: otherwise no more needing this bread to feed, then the light of the lampes to guide him. The bread on this Table was tendered to God, partly as a Quit-rent, in con∣fession that the Iews held all their food from his providence; and partly as a Type of Christ, TheIoh. 6. 41. bread which came down from heaven. And, as serving∣men feed on the reversions which their Masters leave, so the Priests (when new was substituted in the room of the formet) eate those loaves which were taken away. Not pretending withHist. Bel. v. 7. Bels Priests, that their God eat up, what they secretly devoured themselves; but by license from him, they openly avouched their lawfull repast thereupon. § 3. But the most eminent utensill in the Holy, was the Altar of incense,The Altar of incense. made by Moses in the Tabernacle, twoExod. 30. 2. cubits high, and four square: namely, with a cubit in the length, and another in the breadth thereof. Proportionable enough for that purpose, no sacrifices of bulk being to be offered thereon, but onely sweet odours (much whereof might lie in
little space) and spirituall spices (as I may term them) which took up but smal room therein. Davids express care provided1 Chr. 28. 18. refined gold for this Altar of incense. And no doubt, Solomon, the Executour of his Will, performed it accordingly. For, when it is said, that he1 King. 6. 20. covered the Altar with Cedar, and that heeIbid. ver. 22. overlaid the whole Altar (elsewhere1 King. 7. 48. made the Altar) which was by the Oracle with gold; it can refer to none other, but this Altar of incense; see∣ing, that for burnt sacrifices, was made2 Chr. 4. 1. of brass. It seems that, when Solomon made the Holy in the Temple, far larger then that in the Tabernacle, and when every implement therein (to make the furniture proporti∣onable to the room) commenced and took an higher degree of glory and great∣ness; then he cased the old Altar of incense with Cedar, and overlaid the same with gold, to be but the Basis and Pedestall of a greater Altar, which for the same purpose he advanced thereupon. § 4. As for the position of this Altar, that it was not set in the Oracle or most Holy place,Placed in the Holy but onely in the Holy, or inward Temple, may by the en∣suing arguments be demonstrated. 1 The text saith expresly, Moses put it in the tent of theExod. 40. 26. congregation before the vaile. 2 The incense thereon was to be perpetuall, renewed everyExod. 30. 7. morning, and therefore it could not be in Sancto Sanctorum, which was pe∣netrable but once a year for the high Priest. 3 Zacharias an inferiour Priest (as of the eight1 Chr. 24. 10. order, or course of Abiah) incapable to enter the Holy of Holies,Luk. 1. 5. officiated on this Altar of incense.Luk. 1. 9. & 11. Greater therefore is the difficulty, that, notwithstanding the premises so plain to the contrary, the Authour to the Hebrews, placeth it in the Holy of Holies,Heb. 9. 3. And after the second vaile, the Tabernacle, which is called the Holiest of all, which had the golden censer, and the Ark of the Covenant &c. § 5. All that our best endevours can perform herein,Scripture to the contrary an∣swered. is onely to pre∣sent the severall solutions, learned men produce to the present difficulty. 1 IuniusSee and en∣devour to un∣derstand him, Parall. lib. 3. pa 275. placeth this Altar within the vail, and without the San∣ctuary, in so strange a posture, that scarcely either Jewish or Chri∣stian Tacticks of Temple-implements, will admit thereof. 2 OthersDidati in. locam. by the golden censer [] understand not this Altar of Incense, but that eminentNum. 16. 18. & 46. censer of Aaron used by him in his contest with Korah, which they conceive (though omitted by Moses) preserved with his Budding rod, as a memoriall in the Holy of Holies. 3 Others understand thatLevit. 16. 12. Censer which the high Priest once a year carried thereinto full of incense, and which for the time be∣ing was in the Holy of Holies, namely during the high Priest his remaining therein. 4 Ribera,De iis quae e∣rant in Templo. lib. 2. cap. 8. expounding it properly of the Altar of incense, avoucheth, that the Holy of Holies had the golden censer, not, quoad situm, but,
quoad usum; not within the compass, but command thereof, as more immediately subservient thereunto. Indeed this Altar of incense peculiarly belonged to the anniversary solem∣nity of the Holy of Holies, upon the hornes whereofExod. 30. 10. once a year, the high Priest with the bloud of the sin offering (sacrificed no doubt on the bra∣zen Altar without, but) sprinkled here, made an atonement for the people. § 6. So much for the Utensils of the Holy,No staves on the Altar in the Temple. onely we will adde, that whereas the Table of shew-bread, and Altar of incense were made by Moses withExod. 25. 27. & 0. ver. 5. staves and rings, to make them more portable on the Priests shoul∣ders; probably Solomon omitted the same as superfluous, when now setled in a fixed residence. Except any will say, that as the Israelites (when peaceably possessed of their countrey) were still enjoined to eat the Pass∣over withExod. 12. 11. staves in their hands, to preserve the memory of theirYet disusedin Christs time. journey at the first institution thereof: so these Utensils, even in the Temple, con∣tinued their staves about them, in memoriall of their long pilgrimage, and late coming home to their constant habitation. CHAP. VIII. Of the vessels in the Holy of Holies. § 1. PAss we now into the Holy of Holies,Why Solomon made no alte∣ration in the Utensils of the Holy of Holies. into which the high Priest onely entered once a year; finding three gradations in their re∣ligious service, which waited on the Temple; 1 Hourely attendance in the outward Courts: where many (Porters especially) watched all houres of day, and night. 2 Daily in the Holy: where lighting lampes, and burning incense were quotidian duties. 3 Weekly in the same place, where new shew-bread was substituted everyLevit. 24. 8. Sabbath day. 4 Yearly in the Holy of Holies; open onely to the anniversary entring of the high Priest. This was a little, house well filled with mysterious vessels. And for the main, we may observe, that, although Solomon altered, and enlarged the Uten∣sils in the Holy and outward Courts, yet in the Holy of Holies, he made use of those numericall vessels of Moses his making, without any addition, or alteration: as at the first formed so exactly, and fitted so suitably to the privacy of the place, that it had been presumption to new modell them, whose perfection was uncapeable of any higher improvement. § 2. Yet Solomon for the more magnificence,Solomons addi∣tionall Cheru∣bims. added two Cherubims, for the matter, dimensions, position, and use thereof, distinguished from those of Moses his making. 1 Moses made his of pure goldExod. 37. 6, 7. of beaten work, whilest Solomon, were of1 Kin. 6. 23. 30 Olive-tree within, but overlaid with gold. 2 Both the former had but two cubits and an half in length (as onely
adequate to theEoxd. 39. 6. length of the Mercy-seat) whereas each of Solomons Cherubims was ten1 King. 6. 25▪ cubits in height, the greatest gallantry of the whole Temple. 3 Moses his Cherubims lay on the Mercy-seat, both whose wings turned inward, met together, whilest Solomons were set on the floor, whose four wings stretched outwards to the full length, extended to the whole breadth of the Holy of Holies. 4 Moses his Cherubims with their wings shadowed the Mercy-seat; Solomons, like a golden arch, overshadowed those Cherubims; so that in the Holy of Holies there was a little Hierarchy, Angels above Angels therein. Wonder not that whilest Moses his Cherubims were of Massie gold (bearing best proportion to the purity, and incorporeity of the Angelicall Nature) that Solomons should be but overlaid with gold, having Olive-tree within them. For so vast were their dimensions [ten cubits or thirty foot high] that if of solid gold, a little land of Ophir might have lain within that com∣pass. And being to be made hollow, perchance it was necessary that some wood for stiffenting should be put within them. These Cherubims were the most gorgeous and costly ornaments in all the Temple, and proba∣bly were embezeled by the covetous Babylonians at the captivity, and ne∣ver brought back again, because onely essentiallEra 1. 9. vessels, and not all the ornaments of State, were restored, and placed in the second Temple. To re∣turn to the Mercy-seat, under it: the Ark of the Covenant was placed, and the Tables written with Gods own finger, were put therein. § 3. But here appeareth some contradiction,Aseeming con∣tradiction star∣ted. betwixt the furniture of the Ark of the Covenant, as described in the Old and New Testament. 1 King. 8. 9. & 2 Chron: 5. 10. There was nothing in the Ark save the two tables of stone, which Moses put there at Horeb.Hebrews 9. 4. And the Ark of the Covenant overlaid round about wth gold, wherein was the golden pot that had manna & Aarons rod that budded, & the tables of the Covenāt. Behold here the Ark filled (not to say crowded) by the Apostle with other implements; which the Old Testament onely a Repositary for the Tables of the Covenant. § 4. Amongst the many answers tendered by learned men, in soluti∣on to this difficulty, none in my opinion so satisfactory,And the same satisfied. as whatDe iis quae e∣rant in Templo. lib. 2. cap. 2. Ribera first bringeth, andIn his paral∣lels on Heb. 9. Iunius (otherwise in judgement much different from him) approveth, and enlargeth. Namely, that those words of Saint Paul, Wherein was the golden pot &c. , relates not to the Ark (though last named) but to  the Tabernacle, called, The holiest of all in the precedent verse: it being confessed of all hands, that the fore∣said pot of Manna, and Aarons rod (though not within the concavity of the Ark) were within the compass of the Oracle, or, Most holy place. Now, that the propriety of the tongue will bear it out, that the Relative some∣time refers not to the next immediatly, but more remote Antecedent, ma∣ny instances are alledged for the proof thereof.
CHAP. IX. Of the vessels in the Priests Court. § 1. SO much for the Utensils in the covered Temple.One onely Altar. Proceed we now into the Priests Court, and there first finde the brazen Altar, having twenty2 Chr. 4. 1. cubits in length, as much in breadth, and ten in the height thereof. Now, although Solomon made ten candlesticks, ten lavers, ten &c. yet he confined himself to one Altar of incense, one Altar of sacrifice, (multiplying of Altars hearing ill in Scripture, as suspicious of Idolatry) but whether therein pointing at Christ our onely Mediatour, or at the unity of the Church, let others dispute. § 2. Now seriously considering this Altar, we meet with many wonders therein. First, that being set sub dio, in the open aire, it is strange that rain (presumed sometimes to fall in great plenty, with great violence) did not extinguish the fire thereof. Secondly, seeing continuall fire was kept there, it is wonder, that the whole Court (as the Chimney-generall thereof) was not turned Tawny-More, if not Black-More with the constant soot, smuttiness, and smoking thereof. Third∣ly, it is strange, that in so short time, so many sacrifices could be consumed, within the compass of so small a place; especially at the dedication of the Temple, when,1 King. 8. 5. sacrificing Sheep and Oxen that could not be told, nor numbred for multitude. Lastly, it is admirable, that in a Climate so hot, and place so populous, no putrefaction did arise from the bloud, fat, offall, and ordure of so many beasts slain there, to the infecting of the Priests, and people thereabouts. We know how noisome, and offensive slaughter-houses in Sommer, are in great Cities; insomuch that Tertio Richardi secundi a motion was made, Stws Survey of London. p. 340. that no Butcher should kill any flesh within London, but at Knights∣bridge, or some such distant place from the walls of the City. § 3. But under favour I conceive,Unwondred if the nature of the fire be con∣sidered. the true satisfying of these dif∣ficulties depends on the right understanding of the nature, or rather the supernaturall qualities of the fire on the Altar. It was not com∣mon, or culinary fire, but such as2 Chr. 7. 1. came down from heaven: which (amongst other peculiar properties where with it was endowed) was so far from being quenched by rain, or water, that it would quickly lick it up, though1 King 18. 38. a trench, containing twelve barrels, were filled there∣with: as in the sacrifice of Elijah (fetching fire from the same originall) it came to pass. Secondly, such celestiall flame, being of a more clarified, and refined substance▪ left not any suffocating smoke, or sooty feculency behind it. Thirdly, being sent from heaven not to dally, but dispatch the work (God employs no slugs on his errands) it made speedy riddance of the matter in hand, and consumed the sacrifice of a sudden. We know how quickly lightning (though not the ame, much of kin to the fi on
the Altar) will turn any thing that resists it, into ashes. Hereupon, some conceive, that by Ariel, that is, Gods Lion, in theIsa. 29. 1. Prophet, the Altar in the Temple is meant. A voracious Lion indeed, which with Pharaoh's lean kine, devoured many thousands of cattell, and was no whit the fatter for the same. Lastly, such heavenly fire was a great preservative against infection, and the purgative nature thereof, swept away much putrefaction, which otherwise would have proved very noisome. § 4. Pass we now from the fire, to the Water: from the Altar, to the Molten sea.The brazen Sea. A worthy vessell this was, of solid brass; five cubits high, and ten over from side to side, being1 King. 7. 23. round all about, and thirty cubits in compass, containing two thousand Baths:1 King. 7. 26. namely, as they filled it, but two parts of three for ordinary use, leaving a third part for empty Margin in the top. Otherwise were it filled brimfull, it would in all receive three2 Chr. 4. 5. thousand Baths, where the totall capacity thereof is computed. Therefore called a Sea from the large containt thereof (and not much unlike the Caspian sea, for the circular form, and entireness thereof) having its brim wrought about with lily-work, and it stood upon twelve oxen, which by four seve∣rall Threes respected the quarters of the world. § 5. But now the question will be, How this vast vessell was furni∣shed with water?How supplyed with water. Solomon, speaking of the Ocean,Eccles. 1. 7. All the rivers (saith he) run into the sea; but, how this artificiall sea, was supplied with any water by peoples industry, is a considerable question; the Temple of Ierusalem being so highly situated on a mountain. Here the Rabbins tell us of a WellMaimony in Biat Mikdash. per 5. & Talm. Irus. in Ioura per. 3. sol. 41. Etam, some distance hence▪ whence the water was conveyed in pipes, so that the Temple had it always in great abundance. We con∣fess, there was a1 Chr. 4. 32. city, andIudg. 15. 11. & 19. rock of Etam in the Tribe of Simeon: near to which a miraculous fountain issued in the days of Samson, to quench his thirst, out of the jawbone of an Ass. And it seems, the Ghost of this foun∣tain did walk in the brains of the Rabbins, when first they invented this tradition. But, this Etam, being full forty miles from Ierusalem, was likely to afford them little water, for the replenishing of this Molten sea. Rather we beleeve, that the Gibeonites, or Nethinims, whose office it was to beIcsh. 9. 27. drawers of water for the Congregation, out of the fountain of Siloam, or Pool of Bethesda hard by, filled this Sea, and furnished all other Lavatories, and Offices about the Temple, with that necessary element. Yea, probably there were some wells within the verge of the Temple, seeing Ierusalem is charactred by Strabo, an Heathen writer, to be , well watered within it self, though without the walls it wanted the conveniency thereof. And, which is the main, in Ezekiels description of the Temple, which one may term A visionarie varnish on an historicall ground-work, being a literall truth mystically much improved, we finde, the watersEzek. 47. 1. issued out from under the threshold of the house eastward, which swelled to a miraculous proportion. Now, though the increase, and
overflowing of such streams, was extraordinary, and propheticall; yet surely the fountain thereof was reall, and naturall, importing some springs in the Temple, whence the Nethinims did fill this Molten sea, and all other vessels with water, designed for the Priests to2 Chr. 4. 6. wash themselves therein. § 6. Having thus dispatched the Molten sea, the tenIbidem. LaversThe ten Lavers. (being as it were but so many little lakes) will quickly be described. In the Tabernacle none of these were extant, as appointed for the washing of sacrifices: (for, that single Laver made by Moses for the Priests service, answered one∣ly to the Molten sea) whereby it appears, that Solomon, not onely made in his Temple, vessels moe in number, and bigger in degree, but also other in kind, then were in the Tabernacle, to fill and furnish the magnificence there∣of. These Lavers of brass contained forty Baths apiece, each set on his ba∣sis with wheels, for their more convenient removall, though generally their station was five on the one side, and five on the other in the Court of the Priests, and east of the covered Temple. § 7. In the outward Court,Utensils of the outward court. or Court of Israel many (no doubt) were the Utensils thereof. As that brazen2 Chr. 6. 13. scaffold made by Solomon for the King to stand, and pray upon, the same (as Tremellius conceives) with the Kings2 Chr. 23. 13. Pillar: with the Pulpits and deskes, wherein the Priests expoun∣ded the law to the people. But as for the remainder of the vessels of the Temple, with the manyfold traditions concerning them, the Reader is referred to the learned paines of my industrious friend Mr. Iohn Lightfoot: who, as I understand, intends an entire Treatise thereof. Far be it from me, that our pens should fall out, like the heardsmenGen. 13. 6. of Lot, and Abra∣ham, the land being not able to bear them both, that they might dwell together. No such want of room in this subject, being of such latitude, and receipt, that both we, and hundreds moe, busied together therein, may severally lose our selves in a subject of such capacity. The rather because we em∣brace severall courses in this our Description, it being my desire, and de∣light, to stick onely to the written word of God, whilest my worthy friend takes in the choicest Rabbinicall, and Talmudicall relations, being so well seen in those studies, that it is questionable, whether his skill, or my ignorance, be the greater therein.
CHAP. X. Of things deposited in the Chambers, and outward Courts of the Temple. § 1. PRoceed we now to the outward Courts of the Temple,Rooms for the keeping of Salt. whose Chambers were severally imployed for sundry uses: as for the laying up of Tithes, First-fruits, Wood, Salt, and other Requisites for the sacrifices. Of this last a mass was spent in the Temple, seeing no offering wasMark 9. 49. acceptable without it. The best was, Iudea could well afford to spare plenty thereof for Gods service, who had bestowed such store thereof upon it, that there was a place called theIosh. 15. 62. City of Salt in the Tribe of Iudah. § 2. Other rooms were employed, to contain the many instrumentsAnd for seve∣rall musicall instruments. used in the Temple. Some of whose names we finde mentioned in the titles of severall Psalmes, solemnly set to be sung upon them, though so many authours so many mindes in expounding their names and qualities, we will onely insist on what we conceive most pro∣bable. 1Psal. 22. AijelethOthers apply it to Christ. Shahar: or, The hinde of the morning. Probably some early instrument (as the going about of the Waites in some places) bringing tydings of the morning, and giving men notice to rise. 2Psal. 46. Alamoth; which literally may be renderedAinsworth Annot. ibidem. Virginales, or Maiden-instruments, with high and shrill notes; acuta sym∣phonia, saith Tromellius. 3Psal. 8. 81. 84. Gittith; A personall instrument, appropriated to the poste∣rity of2 Sam. 6. 10. Obed-Edom the Gittite, an excellent1 Chr. 15. 21. Master of mu∣sick, thence taking its denomination. 4Psal. 56. Ionath Elem, Rechokim. By some rendered appellatively, The dumbe Dove in far places. By others conceived an instrument of sad, and dolefull musick; I did mourn as a Dove▪ saith dyingIsa. 38. 14. Hezekiah. 5Psal. 53. Mahalath; which Ainsworth interpreteth, sickness, or infir∣mity, and conceiveth it a kind of wind-instrument. 6Psal. 98. Mahalah-leannoth. The same with the former, but with this addition, toAinsworth in locum. sing by turnes, which is, when alternately one part answereth another in singing. 7Psal. 9. Mutb-labben. The Chaldee interpreteth it, for The death of the Son (as if it were some cheerfull instrument made by David to comfort himself after the death of his2 Sam. 12. 19. child) whilest others con∣ceive it a kind of tune, like to that which we call the Counter∣tenour.
8Psal. 61. Neginah. A manuall instrument,1 Sam. 19 9. Nagan being properly to play with the hand. 9Psal. 4. Neginoth, a consort of the former. 10Psal. 5. Nehiloth: being wind-instruments, (Chalil being used for aIsa. 5. 12. pipe) as Flutes, Cornets, and Trumpets. 11Psal. 12. Sheminitb; an Harp, or instrument of eight strings: con∣ceived (no doubt) very complete in its kind, untill (as there is daily accession and improvement in artificiall inven∣tions) an instrument of tenIsal. 30. 2. 144. 9. strings got the credit from it, as of more absolute perfection. 12Psal. 45. Shoshannim. Which amongst flowers is the Lily with six leaves, but amongst instruments, an Harp with so many strings. 13Psal. 60. Shushan-Eduth. The same with the former, with the addition of the Testimony, as used at the witnessing of some great solemnity. Expect not here from me a Panegyrick in praise of Musick (either in it self, or reference to Gods service) though in Scripture appea∣ring instrumentall to qualifie1 Sam. 16. 23. evill, and invite1 King. 3. 15. good spirits; heighten devotion both in Men and Angels: seeing Charity, and Melody, Loving, and Singing is almost all we finde expressed of Celestiall happiness. Nor can any truly taxe Musick, as the chil∣dren their mates in the market place,Mat. 11. 17. We have piped, and yee have not danced; we have mourned, and yee have not lamented: seeing such the sociableness of Musick, it conformes it selfe to all companies, both in mirth, and mourning, complying to improve that passion, with which it findes the Auditours most affected. In a word, it is an invention which might have beseemed a Son of Seth, to have been the father thereof: Though better it was, thatGen. 4. 21. Cains great-grand∣child should have the credit first to finde it, then the world the unhap∣piness longer to have wanted it. § 3. In other Chambers the standards of all measures were care∣fully kept. Thus we finde the inferiour Levites, whose office was to waite on the sons of Aaron, in severall services; and amongst other of their employments, they had a superintendency over1 Chr. 23. 29. all manner of measures and sizes. Let none conceive this beneath the cal∣ling of the Levites, to be so meanly busied; seeing in all ages something of sacredness hath been conceived in weights, God him∣self (who hath ordered all things inWisd. 11. 20. measure, and number, and weight) being justly reputed the supreme Clarke of the Market; for, All the Prov. 16. 11. weights of the bag are his work. And, as God is accounted the first founder, the Levites were esteemed the fitrest keepers of measures, presumed men of much integrity, which willingly would not falsifie, and deprave the same. Besides, an essentiall part of the sacrifices consisted in the pars quota, in the exact quantity of the
meale, oyle &c. in their offerings, and therefore the Levites were highly concerned to be skilfull in measures, as constantly converstant in the criticalness thereof. § 4. Their measures were of a double nature, either of Application,Measures of Application or of Capacity. Of the former these the principall. 1 : A fingersIer. 52. 21. breadth, which in round reckoning. (though not exactly) passed for an inch. 2 , Palmus, AExod. 28. 16. span. Whereof the lesser contained three inches; the bigger was the distane betwixt the thumbe, and little finger extended▪ 3  A Cubit; of the severall kindes whereof largely be∣fore. 4 Ezek. 40. 5. A Reed; used to measure buildings, containing six Cubits, and an hand-breadth in the length thereof. Here of purpose (because ignorant of the exact proportion thereof) we pass by the  Chebel (whence our English Cable) being a Rope, or line to measure ground therewith: so that by a Metony∣mie, sometimes it is taken for the inheritance it self, ThePsal. 16. 6. lines are fallen to me in pleasant places. § 5. Measures of capacity follow,Of Capacity for dry things. being either to mete things dry, liquid, or both. Dry things were measured by 1 The Kab2 King. 6. 25., answering unto (in default of accurate cor∣respondencies, we must pitch on the English measure next thereunto) our Quart, the fourth part whereof [our double Gill] of Doves dung, was at the siege of Samaria sold for fiveIbid. pieces of silver. 2 , Omer. It was the dailyExod. 16. 16. Ordinary of Manna for a man, and contained well-nigh a pottle, or two quarts. 3 Ephah. The just quantity that RuthRuth 2. 17. gleaned in a day Concerning this measure let these following Scriptures be observed, lest similitude of sound betray us to a great mistake: 1. An Omer is the tenth part of an Ephah. Exod. 16. 36. 2 The Ephah is the tenth part of an Homer. Ezek. 45. 11. It was in fashion shallow, and broad, (so that aZech. 5. 7. woman might sit in the compass thereof) and contained halfe a bushell, and a pottle; wherefore BoazRuth 2. 16. his bounty con∣curred with Ruth her diligence in making so good a days∣work. 4 , Homer; that is, The lading of Asse, being five bushels, and five gallons. God threatneth in his Prophet, that, The seed of anIsa. 5. 10. Homer should yeeld but an Ephah, that is, their grain should so decrease, they should onely reap the tithe of what they had sown. The half of an Homer was called aHosea 3. 2. Lethec.
Here we wittingly omit the  Seah, because unsatisfied in the content thereof; though surely it must be much more, then what a learnedGodwin in Moses & Aaron. lib. 6. ca. 9. man makes it, stinting it to a gallon, and an half: for, by that proportion no incredible plenty, or cheapness was pro∣phecied in Samaria, when2 King. 7. 1. a Seah of fine flour should be sold for a shekel (or an English half-crown) which is according to the rate of a Mark the bushell; dear enough of all conscience for poor people to purchase. § 6. As for Measures for Liquids,For liquids. we first pitch on an Hin, whereof frequent mention in Scripture (as also of theNumb. 15. 9. half, Ibid. ver. 6. third,Numb. 28. 5. fourth, andEzek. 9. 11. sixt part thereof) and contained three Eng∣lish Quarts. Next it we take notice of the Bath, being just of the same capacity with the Ephah, and the tenth part of an Homer, as the ProphetEzk. 45. 14. himself hath computed it, that is, four gallons and an half. By which account the Molten sea, which held three2. Chr. 4. 5. thousand Baths, contained thirteen thousand five hundred gallons. § 7. Amongst mixt measures the Cor deserveth especiall notice; used both for 1 Liquid.Ezk. 45. 14. The Cor of Oyle. 2 Arid. ,Luk. 16. 7. Cors of wheat. The Cor was (as may be collected from theEzk. 45. 14. Prophet) just the same quantity with the Homer (as in the best English, Bushell, and Strike are severall names for the same measure) save that the Cor was common to both, the Homer appropriated to liquid com∣modities. § 8. To measures might be added the gage of1 Kin. 18. 33. Barrels,Barrels and Coins. and Iohn 2. 6. Firkins; as also all Weights and Coines, as Gerahs, Half Shekels, Shekels of theExod. 38. 24. Sanctuary, (so called, as some will have it, because the Standart thereof was kept in the Sanctuary, whilest others make it double to the common Shekel) Drams, Pounds, Talents, whereof largelyIn Descrip. of Solomons Temple. heretofore. All which we leave in the Levites safe custo∣dy, being confident, that they will very carefully keep them, from ever coming into the fingers of such covetous wretches, who would willingly make The Ephah small, and theAmos 8. 5. Shekel great, and falsifie the ballances by deceit; especially, if the Originals of both were but once in their absolute disposall thereof. § 9. There were also Books kept in the Temple,Book of the Law where kept. of which the Auto∣graph of the law was most remarkable, by command from Moses to be pla∣ced in theDeut. 31. 26. side of the Ark of the Covenant, that is,Ainsworth in locum. by the side (as some expound it) in a coffer by it self made for that purpose. But others conceive the performance hereof neglected after Moses his decease (before which time it could not conveniently be done, Deuteronomy not being fully finished till after his death) and this book deposited, not in the Holy of Holies but in some outward place amongst the treasures of the Temple: Alledging in confirmation hereof, how Hilkiah the high Priest, sent to seek out and sum1 King. 22. 4. up the silver for repairing of Gods house, found (what in Davids
and all good mens valuation is dearer thenPsal. 119. 72 gold and silver) the1 King. 22. 8. book of the Law, hid in some treasury within the verge of the Temple. But proba∣bly this book was originally placed in the Holy of Holies, which after∣wards, when the Temple-service in the Idolatrous days of Aaz, and Manasseh was turned upside down, might fall out of the proper position thereof, into another place. § 10. Other books (no doubt) were kept by the Priests (Scribes, wher∣of many amongst them,Other books in the Temple. and books being relatives) though their Libraries could not be so numerous in volumes, the Art of printing not being then invented. Wherefore, when we read in Iob, a most ancient authour,Iob. 19. 23. Oh that they were printed in a book! the mystery of the Press is not meant thereby, but letters written in deep and large characters. And amongst all other books most likely it is, that, that book of theIosh. 18. 9. description of the land into se∣ven parts by lot, as of publick concernment, daily use, and divine instituti∣on, was preferred in the Temple; like our Domes-day book in England, which some Criticks will have so called (not because all lands are arraig∣ned to appear therein as at a General Iudgment, but) quasi domus Dei, or Gods∣house book, where the originall thereof, was anciently intrusted. § 11. The Refectories must not be forgotten,Refectories for the Priests. being roomes, wherein the Priests had their repast on hallowed food. Amongst all whose fare, we most admire at the Shew-bread; that, being shifted butLevit. 24. 8. once a week by Gods command, it did not contract corruption, grow hard, and dry, good onely for the Gibeonites to cheat the Israelites, with theIosh. 9. 12. mouldiness thereof. This the Rabbins ascribe to miracle, the same command, which enjoined it to be set there, preserving it from putrefaction; that nothing might lose ought of its goodness, which is exactly ordered according to Gods direction. Thus, as Man liveth not by bread alone: so bread lasteth not onely by naturall causes, butMat. 4. 4. by every word which proceedeth out of the mouth of God. § 12. And now (to conclude all fast and firme) there was al∣so an Armory in the Temple,An Armory in the Temple. well provided with weapons, to guard the Treasure therein. For, seeing it is the priviledge of hea∣ven alone, that thereMat. 6. 20. Theeves cannot break through, and steal; the provident Princes of the Iewes thought not fit to entrust so much wealth without Ammunition to defend it, seeing no place so sa∣cred as to secure it self from saciledge. David providedChr. 23. 9. Speares, and bucklers, and shields for that purpose, as if foreseeing in his Prophe∣ticall spirit, that in after ages, a distressed Prince [Ioash] extracted from his loines, should, by Gods blessing, and the assistance of thoseIbidem. weapons, recover his rightfull throne from the unjust usur∣pation of [Athaliah] an Idolatrous intrudress thereinto.
CHAP. XI. The additionall Utensils of the Temple after the days of Solomon. § 1. MAny other instruments were added to the Temple,The Chest which Ihoiada the Priestade. after Solomons death, by succeeding Kings, as occasion did require. Amongst which, we must take especiall notice of that Chest, which in the reign of King Iehoash, was made by Iehoiada the high-Priest, to receive the peoples free-offerings for the repair of the Temple. § 2. It may seem strange,How the Tem∣ple so much ruined in so short a time. that the Temple built so substantially at the first, of the most solid materialls, should in so short a time of an hundred and fifty years, run so far to ruine, as to need so costly repara∣tion. But, we must know, it stood without shelter, high on a mount, exposed to tempests, and in the last seven years of wicked Athaliahs reign (gray hairs are multiplyed on men, more by afflictions, then old age) besides neglect of reparation, did2 Chr. 24. 7. meet with despightfull defacing thereof. Iehoash therefore resolves to amend the decays therein, as in∣deed he stood obliged, both in credit, and conscience; for, seeing the Temple had formely been the nursing-mother to Iehoash, well might Iehoash be the nursing-father to the Temple; who now did onely , pay for his feeding and breeding, who six years 2 Chr. 22. 12. had his preservation, and his education therein. § 3. The care of the work,Levites why backward in repairing the Temple. was at first committed to the charge of the Le∣vites in generall, though it thrived not under their managing therof, so that in the twenty third year of the reign of King Iehoash, they had not repaired the 2 King. 12. 7. breaches of the house. We can not be so uncharitable, as to conceive, they embez'led the monies appointed for that purpose, but rather impute their slow proceedings herein, either to 1 The unhappiness usually attending great undertakings, few effectually advancing that work, wherein all are equally in∣trusted. Or else, 2 Being every one to receive money of their own2 King. 12. 5. acquaintance, some car∣nall indulgence might be used therein to retard the business. 3 Receiving small sums of severall persons, they were insensible in the taking, and inconsiderable in their laying out. 4 Repairing was out of the Levites element, having no dexterity therein; and we know, that Ministers, and Church-wardens are two distinct employments. Hereupon the Levites by King Iehoash are called, checked, commanded to forbear farther collection of money, and some other particular persons deputed for that purpose, who had more care, skill, and success to order the matter.
§ 4. To this end a chest was devised,The fashion and placing of Crban. with an hole2 King. 12. 9. bored in the lid thereof, and appointed to receive the free-gifts of those who would contribute to so pious a work. It was placed very handy, and conve∣nient for such as went up to sacrifice, to cast in their bnevolence, being setIbidem. beside the Altar on the right side in the outward-court as one came into the House of the Lord. Perchance our Saviour reflected on the position of this chest so fit for dexterous Benefactours, when advising in giving of almes, LetMat. 6. 3. not thy left hand know what thy right doth. In this chest were mens charities cast, and kept till amounting to a great sum, (and then the breaches of the Temple were perfectly repaired therewith) and in after-ages, it was called Corban, which name sometimes signi∣fieth theMar. 7. 11. gift it self, sometimes the vessell receiving it, which was the pattern (not to say parent) of the poor-mens-boxes in our modern Parish-Churches. § 5. Here we must not forget that Diall of AhazAhaz his Dial. (in those days, no doubt, a master-piece of art) whereon the Sun miraculously went back ten2 King. 20. 9. degrees, in token that Hezekiahs life should goe forward fifteen degrees. Some conceive this Dial, not drawn on the outside of any wall, or house, but contrived within a winding stair-case, so that every step thereof bare proportion to the distance of an houre: but whether this fancy may be reconciled to art, be it referred to the judicious in dialling. However it was made, we shall scarce meet with a Dial more ancient in any authour, which many years after retained the name of Ahaz the erectour thereof. But for all this Dial, Ahaz was one of those who could not dis∣cern Mat. 16. 3. the signes of the times, nor perceive the day of his visitation; how his kingdome, being past the flourishing Meridian thereof, did draw near to the night of finall ruin, and destruction. § 6. Adrichomius placeth this Dial on the House of the Lord,Adrichomius his conceit concerning this Dial. and therefore we mention it here amongst the ornaments of the Tem∣ple. Though, to speak my opinion, on perusall of the text, it ap∣pears rather set up in some open place in the Kings Palace, so that sick Hezekiah, for the farther confirmation of his faith, lying on his bed, might look on the retrograde motion of the Sun thereon: though I deny not, but he might receive information thereof from relation of others. But wouldIn quara parte Templi. Adrichomius had acquainted us, whence he received his intelligence, for what he reports, that Ahaz made this Dial of the brazenFecit ex altari Holocastiaeno Altar of whole-burnt sacrifices. Indeed 2 King. 16. 17. Scripture tells us, that he took down the twelve brazen oxen from under the great sea, and it was poor reparation for his sacriledge, if in lieu thereof he set up a Dial, with figures for twelve houres, or perchance the twelve signes of the Zodiack there∣upon. But carnall men conceive, they may safely steale Gods dove, and stick down a feather in the room thereof.
§ 7. Now besides the originall Utensils of the Temple,Two eminent supplies of ho∣ly instruments. of the same foundation with the Temple it self, there were severall re∣cruits (not of different, but the same fashion with the former) which succeeding Kings made in stead of those instruments, which constant use and age had empaired. For, we must not think, that the Ash-pans, Fire-pans, Snuffers, Caldrons, and Flesh-hooks of the Temple, were like the bush appearing toExod. 3. 3. Moses, always burning, yet never consumed: or, that the knives used about the sacrifices, were like theDeut. 29. 5. clothes of the children of Israel in the wilderness, never a whit the worse for wearing, but they did daily decay, and were duly repaired, especially in the reign of King 2 Chr. 24. 14. Iehoash. Thus when the soul of a Christian is by faith made the Temple of the holy Ghost, and fitted with severall graces, the furni∣ture thereof; the same notwithstanding, because of continuall sin∣ning, must be constantly repaired by renuing repentance. § 8. So much of the right and lawfull issue of holy vessels in the Temple.Idolatrous u∣tensils justly omitted. As for that spurious, and bastard brood of Idolatrous Altars, and other Utensils principally introduced by King2 King. 16. 3. Ahaz and 2 Chr. 33. 7. Manasseh, contrary to Gods express command, and placed in the house of God, we will not doe them so much honour as once to mention them in this discourse. CHAP. XII. The Temple often spoiled of her Treasure and Ornaments. § 1. THe first Temple of God at Ierusalem,The Temple pillaged by Shishak King of Egypt, & Iosh King of Israel. often had the same hard hap with him that journied thence to Iericho, even to fallLuk. 10. 30. amongst theeves, or rather for theeves to fall into it. Twice was it pillaged by forein foes, and four times by her own friends before the finall destruction thereof. First, when Shishak King of Egypt in the reign of Rehoboam, took1 Kin. 14. 26. away the treasures of the house of the Lord, This wound, whence so much precious wealth did bleed forth, first shewed, the Temple with the riches therein to be mortall. Shishak did then but brush the house of God, whilest he swept the house of the King, whence he even took awayIbidem. all. Afterwards Ioash King of Israel in the reign of King Amaziah, having stormed Ierusalem, took2 Chr. 25. 24. All the gold and silver, and the vessels that were found in the house of God with Obed-Edom, and returned to Samaria. That were found, for, such no doubt was the providence of the Priests to conceal some wealth from his sight. A thing not impossible for them to doe, having formerly hid a young King, and his nurse six2 Chr. 22. 12. years invisible, from the jealous eyes of Atha∣liah.
And now, seeing idolatrous Ioash carried away this holy treasure to Samaria, let none hereafter conclude the best cause from the best success, finding the Cherubims of Solomons setting up, worsted by the golden Calves of Ieroboams erection. § 2. By the way, it is very remarkable, that the Tabernacle,The Taberna∣cle never plu∣dred, and why? which lasted four hundred and thirty years before the Temple was begun, was never plundered, or robbed, or spoiled of its goods. Yet the Iews in that age were as sinfull, and their enemies as spightfull, Moabites, Mi∣dianites, Ammonites, &c. who in the interim betwixt the Judges, oppres∣sed the people of Israel, though we finde none of them offering any af∣front, or violence to the Utensils of the Tabernacle. As for the Philistims, though they took the Ark by conquest in the field, we know they were forced with a witness to bring it back again. Whereas the Temple within less space was by forein Princes often pilled and polled of the ornaments belonging thereunto. Enquiring into the reason hereof, we meet with none more probable, then because Divine providence delighteth in pro∣tecting what is weakest in it self. And seeing the Tabernacle was altoge∣ther undefensible, and able to make no resistance, consisting onely of thin boards, slight skins, & slender curtains, God more immediately walled it about with an awefull respect, which the very enemies thereof bare unto it. Whereas the Temple, being a strong structure of stone, in a stronger City, with walls, gates, and bars, visibly intitled it self to fortification, and therefore God left it to the arme of flesh to defend it, which fre∣quently failed therein, as nothing can be safe, which hath onely infull men to secure it. § 3. But the Temple suffered oftner from her friends,The Temple spoyled by her own Kings. then her foes, frequently spoiling the wealth thereof, insomuch, that in all desperate consumptions of the State, no gold was found so cordiall to cure it, as what was taken out of the treasury of the Temple. 1 Asa brought out silver and2 Chr. 16. 2. gold, out of the treasuries of the house of the Lord, and bestowed them on Benhadad King of Syria, to purchase his assistance against Baasha King of Israel. 2 Iehoash to appease the anger of Hazael King of Syria, marching furiously against him, took2 King. 12. 18. all the hallowed things, which his Fathers, and himself had dedicated, and sent them as a gift to Hazael, to stop his coming up against Ierusalem. 3 Ahaz took the silver and gold2 King. 16. 8. which was found in the house of the Lord, and conferred it on Tiglath-Pileser, to hire his help against the Kings of Syria and Israel. 4 Hezekiah cut off2 Kin. 18. 16. the gold wherewith he himself had overlaid the doors, and pillars of the Temple, and gave it to pacifie Sennacherib coming a∣gainst him. Not to mention the waste, and havock, wicked2 Chr. 24. 7. Athaliah, and Manasseh made, in their idolatrous reigns, of the vessels of the Temple.
§ 4. There want not those,Reasons for the law fulness of such sacriledge who dare to defend the foresaid spoiling of Gods house to be lawfull, chiefly alleadging absolute necessity (that bawd generall of all illegitimate actions) that, otherwise, in such extremi∣ties, the kingdome of Iudah could not be preserved, from forein invasi∣on. In vain doth what may be dispute, when what must be sits Doctour of the Chaire. It is not onely lawfull, but needfull, to shave the haire, thereby to save the head. The parting with the fruit, kept the tree alive; otherwise, if not pacified with such a present, the idolatrous enemies would undoubtedly have demolished the Temple, and totally rooted out Gods service therein. § 5. But what ever politick palliations may be pleaded for the con∣trary,Such argumēts answered. such sacriledge was unavouchable in it self, and those pretended extremities to justifie it, were onely created; either by mens infidelity, not beleeving Gods power; or their impatience, not atten∣ding Gods pleasure, to defend his own glory, in his own due time, by his own means. Yea, Heaven by the finall success protested against such proceedings, and the treasure taken out of the Temple, and given to Pagans, rather presently declined, then finally diverted the imminent danger. Thus Ahaz2 Chr. 28. 21. took away a portion out of the house of the Lord, and gave it to the King of Assyria, but he helped him not. Likewise when2 King. 18. 15, 16. Hezekiah pre∣sented Sennacherib with the wealth of the Temple to buy his favour, his bribes proved ineffectull, who having received the present, was not pleased to understand the language thereof, but nevertheless in the next Ibid. ver. 17. verse invaded Iudah. As for the instance of Asa, God directly by the mouth of his Prophet reproved him for his fact, in relying rather on the King of Syria, then divine assistance. In a word, though some were good men that did it, they were no whit the better for the doing it. For, though it be Christian policy, and ChristsLuk. 16. 9. precept, that men make to themselves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness; yet, goods rightly conse∣crated to the righteous God, come not under that appellation: and such holy things are unjustly degraded, which having once been advanced to the dignity of a free-will-offering to God, are afterward set back, to be∣come a peace-offering to man. § 6. Indeed some hold,No sacriledge, say some, under the Gospell. that under the Gospell the sin of sacriledge cannot be committed. If so, it is either because nothing under the Gospell hath been given to Gods service; or, because God hath solemn∣ly disclaimed the acceptance of any such donations; which, when and where it was done, will be hardly produced. If this their position be true, we have cause, first, to rejoyce in regard that God and his members are now adays growen so rich, that they need not addition of humane gra∣tuities to be bestowed upon them. Secondly, we may congratulate the felicity of ours above former ages, being not in a capacity of committing the sin of sacriledge, to which those were subject, who lived before the time of our Saviour. Lastly, we may silently smile, to see how Satan is
defeated, having quite lost one of his anient baites, and old temptati∣ons; men now adays being secured from this sin, and put past a possi∣bility to be guilty thereof. But, before we goe thus far, let us first be sure, we goe on a good ground, otherwise it is the highest sacriledge, to steal away sacriledge it self, and to deny that (which formerly was a grie∣vous) in our days to be any transgression. § 7. To come now to the finall, and fatall dissolution of this Temple, with the dissipation, at least wise transportation of all the Utensils thereof. Three gradations herein may be observed. Nebu∣chad∣nezzar 1 In the 11 year of Iehojakim 2 In the 4 month of Iehojackin 3 In the 11 year of Zedekiah caried Of the2 Chr. 36. 7. vessels of the house of the Lord The goodlyIbid. ver. 10. vessels of the house of the Lord All the vesselsIbid. ver. 18. of the house of the Lord great and small. to Ba∣bylon. Here we will not observe the eleventh year of wicked kings, climacte∣ricall to their kingdomes, seeing any year is equally fatall to a nation, when the measure of their sins is made up. Rather we will take notice, how God, twice as it were in mercy, clipt the treasures of the Temple with the cisers, and (neither working repentance) the third time in justice shaved all away, with the hiredIsa. 7. 20. razor of Babylon. And it is my opinion, that though the outward Courts, and chambers of the Tem∣ple had formerly been frequently plundred, yet the Holy, and Holy of Holies remained entire, and untouched, till all was destroyed at the ca∣ptivity of Babylon. Here the Map of Zorobabels Temple is to be inserted.
THE TEMPLE as it was in CHRISTE time. Iohn Goddard sculpsit.
ZOROBABELS TEMPLE, REBUILT BY HEROD. CHAP. I. The mean preparations for building this Temple. § 1. THe seventy years of the Babylonish captivity expi∣red, God moved the spirit of CyrusCyrus his pro∣clamation. (whose name the ProphetIsa. 44. 28. mentioneth two hundred years be∣fore his birth) not onely by hisEzra 1. 1. proclamation to permit Gods people, to return to their native Countrey, and thereby to encourage others to contribute necessaries unto them; but also restored the vessels of Solomons making, and furnished them with provisions out of his own Exchequer, for the erection of a second Temple, which came after the former, not moe years in time, then degrees in magnificence. A thing no whit strange, if the disparity betwixt the builders be seriously considered. § 2. First,Difference in power. Solomon was an absolute Prince, full of wealth and power, in his peaceable Countrey, where no dog durst bark against him (save two 1 King. 11. 14. 23. or three whapping curs toward the end of his reign) whilest the buil∣ders of this second Temple were but raw captives, newly returned to their native land, where they met with much disturbance, and con∣stant opposition from their enemies. Wherefore, no such (almost mi∣raculous) silence observed at the second Temple, like that in the first, wherein1 King 6.7. no tool of iron was heard, it being probable, here was knocking of hammers, and (certain) here was clashing of malicious foes agains the faithfull Israelites. § 3. Secondly,In number. Solomon (though alternately) employed seven score1 King 5. 15. and ten thousand hewers and burden-bearers, besides three thousand three hundred over∣seers at the building of his Temple; whereas the totall sum, and whole company of this Remnant, or rather, Reversion of the Iews, with their
servantsEzra 2. 64. 65. and maids, exceeded not fifty thousand, not amounting to a full third of the former number. As few the men: so were they ill furni∣shed with all kinde of cattell. And whereas Camels had been necessary creatures to be used by them, for bearing of burdens at this structure, so meanly were they provided therewith, thatCompare Iob 1. 3. with Ezra 2. 67. Iob a private man, had six times (and after his restoration twelve times) more Camels, then all the whole nation of the Iews had in their possession, when returning from captivity. § 4. Thirdly,In wealth. Solomon had (besides other vast in-comes, and a bank provided by David his Father) the gold of Ophir swimming unto him in the ships1 King. 9. 28. & 10. 22. of Tarshish, making their trienniall returns. Whereas no such golden fleet arrived to the building of this second Temple. As for silver, in Solomons time it was1 King. 10. 27. in Ierusalem as stones in abundance; but, in Zorobabels time, silver was as silver in scarcity, and esteem, and the exchange of all coin ran very high in valuation. And, whereas the cost expended by Solomon on his Temple amounted to many thousands of1 Chr. 2. 14. & 1 Chr. 29. 4. Talents, unto which are added ten1 Chr. 29. 7. thousand drams of gold (onely as a supernumerary fraction, or odde sum above the entire Talents) the free-will-offering to the second Temple is not at all computed by Talents, which would have disgraced their poor provisions, but (to stick to our new translation) is onely summed up byEzra 2. 69. drams (as the silver not by Talents, but pounds) for the greater grace and credit of their contribution, so small in it self, but large (no doubt) in proportion unto their poor estates. § 5. Lastly,No eminent arizan. here was not (as in the making of the Tabernacle) any Bezaleel, or Aholiab, filled with theExod. 31▪ 3. Spirit of God in all manner of workmanship; no Hiram (as at the building of the Temple)1 King. 7. 14. filled with wisedome, and un∣derstanding, and cunning to work all works in brass; no extraordinary artificer specified by name, employed therein. Yet, probably, they entertained the best workmen that age did afford, their purses or credit could pro∣cure, to polish, and adorn the building. And therefore the ingenuous Ribera de Temp. sabr. li.. cap. 27. Romanists acknowledge a gross errour in their vulgar Latine, where they readEzra 6. 4. ordines de lapidibus impolitis tres, three rows of unpolished stone, which should be polished stone. For,  Eben Gelal in the originall, is a stone turned, rolled, and tossed about, to smooth, and levigate every side there∣of, and byAnti. Iul. lib. cap. Iosephus is rendred ,n. some copies  as Ri∣bera cies it. of sha∣ved, hewed or carved stone. However, our last translation (following Tre∣mellius therein) reades it GREAT STONES, as if the state consisted, rather in their bigness, then beauty; amplitude, then art bestowed up∣on them. § 6. Timber they fetched fromEzra. 3. 7. mount Libanus (the magazeen of Cedars) brought thence in ships to Ioppa,Cedars fetched from . and thence conveyed by land∣carriages to Ierusalem. But, we may be assured, that Solomon long agoe had flitted the cream of the choicest trees in that mountain, this second generation being lesser, lower, and fewer, then those before them. Yea,
in process of time, Cedars were so rarified in Libanus, thatBddulphs Travel. pag 40. modern travellers saw but four and twenty in their passage over this mountain, and heard but of a few moe (and they all in one place) extant there at this day. § 7. Some will object,Great promises ill performed. all these defects were eminently supplyed by the favour of Cyrus, who in his Charta Magna for the building of the Temple, had privided, that the expences beEzra 6. 4. given out of the Kings house; and water may sooner be wanting at the well-head, then they lack accom∣modations, who commanded the coffers of so mighty a Monarch. But, such must take notice of the great space of ground, betwixt Ierusalem and Babylon; and the bounty of Kings (especially at so great a distance) maketh more noise in the mouths of the reporters, then it brings profit into the hands of the receivers. So that all things considered, whilest So∣lomons Temple, like the eldest son, and heir, went away with the solid inheritance of a world of wealth; this latter, like the younger brother, was contented with a poor pension of the peoples bounty allotted unto it, especially at the inconsiderable beginning thereof. § 8. Wherefore at the foundation of this Temple,The old men weep. the old menEzra 3. 12. wept at the laying thereof, who could call to minde the greatness, and gallan∣try of the former. How great was the griefe of our first parents after their expulsion ou of paradise, when comparing their present with their primitive condition, and what was lost, with what was left unto them? Enough to drown them in despair, if not supported with certain expectation of the promised Seed. § 9. But the youngsters,The youngmen shout for joy. being moe in number, and greater in strength, shouted for joy, conceiving the foundations newly laid a matchless fabrick for magnificence, having never seen better, nor other in that place. Thus, such as have been bred in the dark, when first brought into the twilight, admire at the incomparable lustre thereof. But, what saith our proverbe? Better children weep, then old folk: and it had been happy, if here (by a transposition of their passions) whilest the young folk sorrowed, the old men had rejoyced: the former thinking themselves to have just occasion of mirth, the latter knowing they had too much reason for mourning. § 10. But, what saith the Prophet,God delight∣eth in minims. in reference to this mean fabrick? Who hath despised the day of small things?Zech 4 10. God, who is all in all, delights to improve such things, as are next to nothing. He that loved the Iews best, who wereDut. 7. 7. the fewest of all people; who made Gedeon a Judge, who was theIudg. 6. 15. least in his Fathers house; Saul a King, whose family was the1 Sam. 9. 21. least of all in his Tribe▪ Paul a preacher, the1 Cor. 15. 9. least of the Apostles; who delighted in Psal. 68. 27. little Benjamin their ruler, the little hill of Hermon, theLuk. 1. 48. lowliness of his hand∣maiden; who multiplyeth mustard-seed theMat. 13. 32. least of all grains into a tree, did cherish and hatch this weak building under the wings of his protection, bringing it from feeble beginnings; by faint proceedings, to full per∣fection.
CHAP. II. The dimensions of the Temple, and the foundations thereof laid. § 1. BE it premised for an undeniable truth,This far less then Solomons Temple. that this Temple fell short of Solomons in the dimensions thereof. Which plainly appears, first, by the question the Prophet propoundeth;Hagg. 2. 3. Who is let among you, that saw this house in her first glory? and how doe you see it now? Is it not in your eies, in comparison of it, as nothing? Secondly, by the tears the old menEzra 3. 12. shed, when theIbidem. foundation thereof was laid, whilest they beheld the meanness of the one with their eyes, and recollected the magnificence of the other in their memories. § 2. But here we meet with (almost) an inextricable difficulty.Objection to the contrary. For, notwithstanding the premises so plain to the contrary, the dimen∣sions of Cyrus his Temple appear larger then those of Solomons, if the en∣suing parable be seriously perused. 1 King. 6. 2. And the house which King Solomon built for the Lord, the length thereof was threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof twenty cubits, and the height thereof thirty cubits.Ezra 6. 3. Let the foundations thereof be strongly laid, the height thereof threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof three∣score cubits. Behold here, how Cyrus his Temple was thirty Cubits higher (just as high again) and forty cubits broader (thrice as broad) as Solomons. And, although the length of this second Temple is not expressed, yet an ordi∣nary judgement will infer by the symmetrie of building, that the length thereof must needs be much greater, to manage such a breadth in any due proportion of Architecture. This so strong an evidence to the con∣trary, would almost have perswaded one to beleeve, that their old men were either deceived with their dim eyes, or mistaken in their fraile memories, and that this Temple was greater then the former, did not the infallible testimonies of thegga. 2. 3. Zech▪ 4. 10. Prophets so peremptorily avouch the comparative smalness thereof, in respect of Solomons. § 3. Many are the solutions,A Salv re∣jected. which the learned produce in satis∣faction of this difficulty. But, first, as for their conjecture, that Zorobabel, at the building of this Temple, purposely abated of those dimensions assigned by Cyrus (as too great for him to compass) contenting him∣self with a less scantling, but more proportionable to the weak power of his people: I can in no wise concur with them therein. For, in such dealcation of measures by Cyrus allotted, he shewed little courtship to his master the Emperour, (in distrusting the performance of his pro∣mises) and less religion to the Lord his God, in not beleeving, that he, who miraculously had stirred up the spirit of Cyrus to appoint, would also vigorously inable him (or his successours) to effect the aforesaid assignment, in building of his Temple.
§ 4. Some suspect a mistake of numbers in Cyrus his Grant,Othersendd. which notwithstanding will very hardly be admitted. For, seeing the laws of the Medes and Persians couldDan. 6. 8. never be altered, they were highly concerned to be accurate, and exact, in their entering, and inrolling all Deeds on Record. Ohers justly make a difference in the measures, and whilest Solomons were sufficiently known to have been of the2 Chr. 3. . first measure,Tremellius in locum Ezrae. they conceive Cyrus his cubits to be common ones, but half as large as the former. And thus this second Temple, though sixty cubits high, was for the main body thereof, but just even with Solomons Temple. Mean time it came far short of Solomons in this respect, because Solomons had amost beautifull Porch, in nature of a Tower-steeple,2 Chr. 3. 4. one hundred and twenty cubits high (that was double the body of the Temple) whilest no such aspiring building graced the second Temple, being all of one uniforme height. § 5. This difficulty in the height thus satisfied,Breadth how aken in Scri∣pture. by the difference of cubits, let none be troubled at the breadth of this second Temple, tripling that of Solomons, seeing here breadth is taken (as elsewhere in Scripture) for the full extent of a thing on every side. Thus in theRevel. 20. 9. Revelation, Saint Iohn speaking of the numberless army of Gog and Magog, describes them to goe upon the breadth of the earth, that is, on the whole space of the surface thereof. Nor is the Hebrew  Rekbo (which properly signifieth his breadth, and is used. 1 King. 6. 2.) used in Ezra, but the Chaldee  which (asDe Templi abrica. lib. 1. cap. 27. Ribera observeth) importeth the expansion, or spreading of a thing, quaquaversum, on every side. On which consideration, it is judi∣ciously rendered by Tremellius, not latitudine, but amplitudine ejus, not the breadth, but the largeness thereof. So that Cyrus gave order, that the bigness of this Temple (length and breadth put together) should not exceed threescore cubits (perchance forty in length, and twenty in breadth) and so, both when first founded, and when fully finished, it came far short of the dimensions of Solomons. CHAP. III. After many obstructions, finished at last. § 1. NOw went the building hopefully on,Samaritanes ther false friendship. probable in some com∣petent time to come to perfection; when the Samaritans (the envious enemies of Israel) first by fraud, then force, endevour to obstruct their proceedings. First, they tenderEzra. 4. 15. their service to be fellow-builders with the Iews, (claiming a joynt-interest in their Tem∣ple, as serving the same God) which by Zorobabel, and the Elders of Israel was wisely refused, as knowing, such seeming helpers would prove reall hinderers. Thus, when2 Chr. 11. 14. Satan transformes himself into an Angel of light,
as pretending to sing Gloria in excelsis, with the rest of those heavenly Spirits, it is onely out of design to disturbe their harmony, and (if pos∣sible) to put that celestiall Quire out of une. § 2. Their first project failing,Their open enmity. the Samaritanes accuse the City of Ie∣rusalem in the Court of Artaxerxes King of Persia, to have been formerly aEzra. 4. 15. rebellious city, referring themselves to the Court-rolls for the proof there∣of. See what it is to be a Rebell on record, their posterity may fare the worse for it, many years after. Indeed, it cannot be denied, but that Zedekiah King in Ierusalem, though sworn by God to the contrary,2 Chr. 36. 13. rebelled against King Nebuchadnezzar, so that this suggestion of the Samaritans, had too much of truth, though more of malice therein. For, hence they in∣ferred, were the place rebuilt, the people would return to their former stubbornness, whereby, in process of time, the Persian Monarchy would be deprived of all command, andEzra 4. 13. 16. revenue on this side the river of Iordan. § 3. Power,The Iws for∣bidden to build the Temple. and Profit are the two apples of Princes eyes, woundable with the least touch thereof. No wonder therefore if upon the premises, a Prohibition was presently from Artaxerxes sent, and served upon the Iews, commanding them to desist from building till farther order should beEzra 4. 21. given them. Thus the work ceased till the second of Darius. Mean time private palaces in Ierusalem were finished, and garnished withHaggai 1. 4. ceiled work, whilest Gods Temple lay waste. Did not those privae houses blush at their own bravery, as serving-men may be justly asha∣med, to see themselves finer then their Masters? § 4. Then arose Haggai,Fall a building it again encou∣raged by the Prophets. and Zachary, andEzra 5. 1. encouraged the people to build again. What, must the Pulpit be obeyed before the Throne? Eccles. 8. 4. In the word of a King there is power, but is there more in the mouth of a Prophet? Oh! a greater then Artaxerxes was here, these Prophets being warranted by divine inspiration. On goes the Temple afresh, whilest the enemies of Israel seek in vain to hinder it the second time. For, upon search, the originall grant of Cyrus is produced from amongst the Re∣cords of theEzra 6. 2. Medes, in pursuance whereof, Darius did not onely give leave, and liberty to the Iews to build their Temple, with a penalty on such as refused it, but also enjoyned Tatnai,Ibid. ver. 8. Shethar-Boznai, and others beyond the river (which sided with the Samaritans) to contribute all necessaries towards the finishing, and furnishing thereof. No doubt the Iews (formerly refusing their persons) accepted their purses to build with, as knowing, though the men were false, their money might be made faithfull towards the farthering of the work. § 5. As for the many chronologicall differences,Chronologi∣call difficulties justly declined. wherewith the building of this Temple is encumbred, we utterly decline them as alien from our subject. He that medleth (saithProv. 26. 17. Solomon) with strife belonging not to him, is like one that taketh a dog by the eares. Chronology (all know) is a surly, churlish Cur, and hath bit many a mans fingers, who have cause∣lesly medled therewith. Blame me not therefore, if willing to keep
mine own hands whole. Onely I will adde, that such are much trou∣bled, who apply to this Temple those words of the Iews to our Savi∣our,Iohn 2. 20. Forty and six years was this Temple in building, and wilt thou rear it up in three days? So that all their endevours can not conform those numbers to Zorobabels Temple, which had not so many years spent in the erection thereof. Wherefore for the main they plead, that malice hath a wide mouth, and loves to outlash in her relations. So that the Iews stood not exact∣ly on the particulars of years, whilest the totall sum of their intent was to cast a greater odium on Christ, by widening the disproportion between so many years, and so few days. Yea, seeing at the same time they wilfully mistook the meaning of our Saviours words, no wonder if withall they corrupted the computation of the building of the Temple, adding moe years thereunto, then were in the true account thereof. § 6. But be the years moe or less,Sacrifice at the Dedication. at last after many stops, stays; demurs, delays; suspensions, relaxations; desertions, resumptions thereof, the building was compleated, and a solemn sacrifice at the dedication there∣of, but far inferiour to Solomons, on the same occasion. 1 King. 8. 63. And Solomon offered a sacrifice of peace-offerings, which he offered unto the Lord, two and twenty thousand oxen, and an hundred and twenty thousand sheep.Ezra 6. 17. And they offered at the dedication of this house of God, an hundred bullocks, two hundred rams, four hundred lambes; and for a sin-offering for all Israel twelve hee-goats, according to the number of the Tribes of Israel. See here a great fall, but the second sacrifice was suitable to their small substance: of a little they gave a little to that God, who, where there is 2 Cor. 8. 12. first a willing minde, accepteth it according to that a man hath, and not according to that a man hath not. However, we must congratulate the hopefull men∣tion of the twelve Tribes of Israel. Welcome happy name, and number, well met in holy writ, seeing so long since last we parted from you, some hundred years agoe, when Elias offered his sacrifice on mount 1 King. 18. 31. Carmell. A strong presumption, that some of each Tribe were now pre∣sent, at the finishing of this Temple, whereof largely before. § 7. This Temple was afterwards miserably defaced,Repaired by Maccabeus. and profaned by wicked Antiochus, untill some years after, Iudas Maccabeus cleansed the Sanctuary, repaired the breaches of the Temple, renewed the gates and chambers about it, and deckt the1 Mac. 4. 57. forefront thereof with crowns of gold. He ordained also in the moneth Casleu anIbid. ver. 59. annuall festivall by the space of eight days to be kept with mirth and gladness. Some will say, this was but a ceremonious supererogation of Maccabeus, in making such an or∣dinance; seeing, neither Hezekiah, when purging the Temple from the profanation of Ahaz; nor Iosiah, cleansing it from the idolatrous pol∣lutions of Manasses and Ammon, instituted any such yearly solemnity in memoriall thereof. But, let such know, that under Antiochus there was not onely a suspension, and interdiction of the Temple from pious uses, but a totall alienation thereof from piety, and diversion to profaneness:
and by Maccabeus the old Altar was not (as by Hezekiah, and Iosiah) re∣conciled to Gods service, but aIbid. ver. 47. new one erected (hence perchance the feast was called Encaenia, or the Renewing) in the place thereof▪ And what, if in this particular point Maccabeus was more pious then either Hezeki∣ah, or Iosiah, let not his memory fare the worse, for endevouring the better to preserve Gods favours in the memories of others. § 8. Just (no doubt) were the considerations moving Maccabeus to make this annuall festivall,Christ at this Feast of Dedi∣cation. seeing our Saviour in the GospellIoh. 10. 22. graced this feast of the dedication with his presence. Although it appears not in Scripture, that Christ went up purposely to Ierusalem for the observation thereof (as he did to the Passeover, which was of divine appointment) but there might be a casuall coincidence of this feast, and his presence at Ierusaem. However, seeing Christ with his company adorned aIoh. 2. 2. marriage∣feast at Cana in Galilee, being a meeting of meer civil concernment, founded on no divine command, but onely the commendable custome of the Countrey, no wonder if he honoured the feast of Dedication with his person, wherein the Temple was at first in some sort remarried to the proper use thereof, from which by the profaneness of persecutours it had formerly been divorced. § 9. Here I must not omit the Rhemists note,The Rhemists their wilde note.Pag. 29. on Iohn 10. 22. Christ (say they) vouch∣safed to honour, and keep that feast instituted by Iudas Maccabeus, Lib. 1 cap. 4. and now Hereticks vouchsafe not to pray, and sacrifice for the dead,2 Mac. 12. used and appro∣ved by him. But, Christ his presence at this feast of Maccabeus his institu∣tion, doth no more oblige us to an universall observation of all the actions of Maccabeus, without farther examination of them, how well they agree with Gods word; then his eating of bread in the house, and at the invitation of Simon theLuk. 7. 36. Pharisee, engageth us to avouch all the opi∣nions, or practise all the traditions, which the said Simon might erroni∣ously maintain. CHAP. IV. Of the Utensils in Solomons, wanting in this Temple. § 1. AS for bulk of fabrick,Most of the ensils resto∣red. and beauty of frame: so also for varie∣ty, and richness of furniture, this Temple fell short of Solo∣mons. Indeed, great was divine providence in preserving the Utensils of the Temple, during the captivity in Babylon. Though Bel∣shazzar Dan. 5. 3. drank in the holy vessels, yet his sacrilegious swallow was not so wide, as to devoure the metall thereof. These remained in the treasury, and were afterwards restored to the Iews at their return, even vessels of gold and silver, to the full number ofEzra 1. 11. five thousand and four hundred. And yet notwithstanding the restitution of them, this widow-Temple, as I may
erm it, fell in beauty short of the Virgin-Temple, wanting many eminent ornaments which were found in Solomons. § 2. First, it is probable,But many wan∣ting. that the stately2 Chr. 6, 13. scaffold of brass, with the Kings2 Chr. 28. 13. pillar (which some conceive set thereupon) in nature of a roy∣all throne, was not in the second Temple; so glorious a Sphere being needless, when there was no Sun to shine therein. Certainly this wan∣ted 1 The two fair pillars of Iachin and Boaz▪2 King. 25. 13. broken in pieces by Ne∣buchadnezzar, to make them the more portable to Babylon, other∣wise such mountains of massie brass, were unmanageable, till parelled into many fragments, past possibility of being rejointed together, whilest all the lesser vessels were preserved whole and entire. Thus, greatness oft-times exposeth eminent persons to their own destruction, whilest poverty carrieth its own protecti∣on, and inferiour people are preserved by their meanness. 2 The greatIbidem. Molten Sea, which being guilty of the same crime (its own overgreatness) suffered the same execution with the brasen pillars. 3 The fire from heaven, which, as in theLevi. 9. 4. Tabernacle, so in Solomons Temple2 Chr. 7. 1. came down from heaven, and consumed the burnt-offerings, and the sacrifices, and the glory of the Lord filled the house. No spark of this fire appeared in the second Temple. 4 The Pot ofExod. 16. 33. Manna, spilt, broken, or lost by some accident un∣expressed in Scripture. 5 TheNum. 17. 10▪ Rod of Aaron which budded, but now was withered away (by some casualty unrecorded) during the capivity of Babylon. 6 The Are of the Covenant. Not, that we give any heed to Ieremy his Apocryphall2 Ma. 2. 5. hiding thereof in mount No; but, wheresover it was, it was not in the second Temple. 7 The to tables of theExod. 34. 1. Law written by Gods own finger, and put formerly into the Arke of the Covenant. Here for the main we may observe, that the Holy of olies in this second Temple, was left altogether empty, and unfurnished. Such avoidance of the Utensils thereof being purposely made to make room for the coming of our Saviour the true High-priest, who with his gracious pre∣senceEphes. 1. 23. filleth all in all. § 3. As for the Oracle,The Oracle speechess. if it were present in this Temple in substance, it was absent in effect, because dumbe, and speechless, asAnti. Iud. li. 3. ca. 10. pag. 90. Iosephus both ingenuously , and conscienciously rendereth a reason thereof; affirming that the stones therein ceased to send forth their wonted splen∣dour (by which formerly answers were returned) two hundred years befoe he wrote his book, God being angry ith his people for their preariati∣on from his law. And thus this second Temple was, s in her strucure, so in her ornaments much  to that first of Solomo .
§ 4. All these defects notwithstanding,Wherein it ex∣celled Solomons. in one eminent respect this Temple equalled, yea excelled Solomons; according to theHagg. 2. 9. Prophets pre∣diction, The glory of this latter house shall be greater then of the former, saith the Lord of hosts: and in this place will I give peace, aith the Lord of hosts; so that in a mysticall respect, the pavement of this, was higher then the roof of the other. For, hereon our Saviour, when a child, was presented to the Priests; when a youth, disputed with the Doctours; when a man, wrought many miracles, preached many Sermons; teaching with∣in, and tempted without the Temple, on a pinnacle thereof. In a word, Solomons Temple, like Mans originall creation in purity, and perfection, was most glorious in it self: this latter, like our state of regeneration, which, though full of faults, failings, wants, weak∣nesses, in comparison of the former, yet outstrips it in Gods graious ac∣ceptance thereof, crowning it with perseverance here, and happiness hereafter. § 5. So much for the Temple it self,The Courts of the Temple. which also was guarded with Courts attending the same. Witness Nehemiah reporting, how, at the feast of Tabernacles, the people, to testifie their joy, made themselves booths, or arbours, in theNhem. 8. 16. Courts of the house of God. But, whereas Eza mentioneth the Ezra 10. 9. street of the house of God, (whither all the people repaired, being about to reforme their strange marriages) I take this to be no part, or parcell of the structure of the Temple, but some fair street in Ierusalem, leading thereunto: as Temple-gate, and street in Bristol, so termed, because in passage to the fair Church called the Temple therein. § 6. Let not the Reader here expect from me, a draught of Zorobabels Temple.Why no draught of Zorobabels Temple. For, besides that already I have dipped my fingers deep enough in holy mortar, (when describing Solomons Temple) we have nothing out of Scripture, for the particular fashion thereof. To frame it therefore ac∣cording to conjecturall fancies, would be as much offensive to any con∣sciencious writer, as little satisfactory to the judicious Reader thereof. Onely in lieu of Zorobabels we present here the Herodian Temple, and all the Courts thereof (the same in all essentials with Zorobabels) as Herod rebuilt it, although the story thereof be incumbred with many impro∣babilities, which we come now to relate. CHAP. V. Herod (saith Josephus) plucked down, and  built Zorobabels Temple. § 1. IT is strange,Wicked men sometimes do good. how the worst of Tyrants sometimes stumble on eminent actions, doing such works as might beseem beter men to be the authours thereof. Either, out of the love of variety, that being
long wearied with a constant course of wickedness, they adventure on some commendable deeds, meerly for recreation. Or else, onely se de∣fendendo, for their own security, to fence themselves against the too just as∣sault of peoples tongues, hoping in vain, by one good, to make amends for many evill deeds they have committed. Some such consideration put Herod the King upon the building of the Temple, who (asAnti. Iud. lib. 15 cap. 14.  of which all our ensing history is taken. Some deny Herods rebuil∣ding of the Temple. Iosephus reports) plucked down Zorobabels Temple to the ground, and erected a new one in the room thereof, of greater art, and larger dimensions. § 2. But someEkius first, and after him Villalpandus in zech tom. 2 part 2. lib 5. dp. 4. cap. 68. & sequentibus. Authors of very good account, are very loth to give credence hereunto, utterly denying Herod to have built, and lanched a new vessell of a Temple, although allowing him, to have carined, new rigged, and repaired the old, and especially the south-porch thereof. They conceive this third Temple meerly modelled, and made by the fancy of Iosephus, as which never had other then paper-wals, inke-mortar, and quil-timber in his book-description thereof. Yea are bold to call it commentum, figmentum; fabulam, and in downright terms mendacium, the flat lie of Iosephus. § 3. For mine own part,Iosephus to be believed herein. after very much reluctancy, I am at last con∣tented to credit Iosephus herein, though willingly I could have wished, that some other ancient Authour of his own age had avouched the same, that so in the mouth of two witnesses thisDeut. 17. 6. truth might have been established. For, this is that same Iosephus whom the greatIn Proleg in librum de E∣mend. it. Tempo∣rum. Scaliger charactereth Diligentissimum omnium Scriptorum, cujus fides & eruditio in omnibus elucet. And, although we come not just up to this so high a commendation of him, yet we will not suspect him of falshood in such passages, wherein he dissenteth not from Scripture. § 4. For,Could not be deceived, would not deceive. first herein he himself could not be deceived in a matter no∣toriously known, some being alive who could remember Herods buil∣ding thereof. And Iosephus himself had often personally officiated in this Temple, in his Priestly function. Nor, would he deceive others by such a report; for, cui bono, what could he gain thereby? Nothing could be gotten by flattering the dust, or ghost of Herod; especially none of his linage (when Iosephus wrote) being in power, or place to reward him. How can we then in charity conceive, that he did transgress without a cause? Seeing there were so many of his own countreymen, living in all lands, ready to confute so lowd a lie, if avouched by him. § 5. Secondly,Answers bst to the Disciples▪ admiration. the words of the Disciples to our Saviour,Mk 13. 1. Master, see what stones, and what buildings are here, must in probability relate to some new, spcious, eye-pleasing fabrick. And, if any should say, that the Disciples, being poor fisher-men, and untravelled into forein parts, might be priviledged to wonder at a fabrick, not so admirable in it self; let such know, we collect the magnificence of this Temple, not so much from their admiration, as from Christ his concession; who (though reproving the Apostles carnall affections) alloweth the stateli∣ness thereof in that sharp return,Ibid. ver. . Seest thou
these great buildings? Now, this could not well agree with Zorobabels Temple, being little curious when new, & almost contemptible when old (if standing in Christs time, weather-beaten after four hundred years continuance) and therefore undoubtedly relates to the Herodian Tem∣ple, as then in the prime, and perfection thereof. § 6. Adde hereunto,Beleeved by many good au∣thours. that Herod his wholly taking down, and re∣building this Temple, is embraced, and beleeved, by most ancient, and learned writers,Lib. de. Hegesippus,In cap. 11.  fere ini∣tio. Saint Hierome,In cap. 2. Haggai. Rupertus, and many other Christian Authours.Constantine l. Empe. in praesatione in Middoth. And that some Talmudists acknowledge Herods Temple, a learned Critick hath sufficiently cleared the same. Yea, which is much materiall (even by the confession of suchVillalpandus ut prius. as lately have opposed it) mille quingentis annis nemo vocavit in dubium, nemo non credidit; for fifteen hundred years (since Iosephus wrote it) none ever doubted, or questioned the truth thereof. CHAP. VI. Objections to the contrary answered. § 1. HAving thus brought our beliefe (not over forward in it self) to answer the spur,Much may be alledged against Herods buil∣ding. in what Iosephus reports, we confess not∣withstanding, many shrewd objections may be alleadged to the contrary, which we shall endevour to satisfie in order, as fol∣loweth. § 2. Ob. It is utterly improbable,1. Objection. that God who refused Davids tender to build him a Temple, meerly because he was a man2 Chr. 28. 3. of bloud, would ac∣cept of such a Tyrant as Herod was, for the same purpose. Who had murthered Hircanus his patron, Ioseph his own uncle, Aristobulus his bro∣ther-in-law, Mariamme his wife, Aristobulus the younger, Alexander, and Antipater his sons. In a word, unlikely it is, his service should be employ∣ed in building the Temple of God, who endevoured to destroy theMar. 2. 20. God of that Temple. § 3. Ans.Answer. Gods ways are in the deep, past mans finding, or fathoming out: who, to shew the fulness of his power, and freedome of his pleasure, useth variety in his own working. That shall be sometimes a bar to one, which otherwhiles shall be no hinderance to another. Who knowes not, but Cyrus was a cruell man, the manager of mighty wars, who came to a wofull and violent death? Witness, whenInstine lib. 1. Tomyris the Scythian Queen, having cut off his head, and put it into a vessell of bloud, Satia te (saith she) sanguine quem semper sitisti, Cloy thy self with bloud which thou hast always thirsted after. And yet God accepted of the service of Cyrus, not onely to be a benefactour unto, but founder of his Temple, theEzra 6. 4. expences thereof being given out of his own house. Why then might not the same God make use of Herod, for the rebuilding of his Temple, when in continuance of time, much run into dilapidations?
§ 4. Ob.Objection. The Temple extant in our Saviours time, was forty six years in building, as theIoh. 2. 20. Iews did avouch; now, this cannot be applied to He∣rods Temple, who reigned in all but thirty seven years; it must there∣fore belong to Zorobabels, the building whereof was so long suspended, through the frequent opposition of their enemies. § 5. Ans.Answer. It cannot well be applyed to Zorobabels, but exactly fits Herods Temple; for Zorobabels it falls out too large, which makes expositours take refuge at severall shifts, as we have formerlyAbove cap. 3. § 5. observed. It is ade∣quate unto Herods Temple, the Greek being , the first Aorist passive, that is, it hath been in building. For, from the time that the first foundation was laid by Herod, untill the present instant of the Iews their speech, the sum of forty six years was exactly compleated, all which time (though the main of the fabrick was finished in the first eight years, and an half) workmen were constantly employed in trimming, polishing, and perfecting the out-buildings thereof. § 6. Ob.3 Objection. The ProphetHaggai 29. Haggai foretold, that the glory of the second Temple should be greater then the first, which was accordingly accom∣plished in the coming of our Saviour, gracing it with hisMat. 3. 1. presence, and preaching therein. Now, if the Temple extant in our Saviours time, were not the same numericall, individuall Temple, which Zoro∣babel built, but another new one of Herod his erection, the Prophesie of Haggai took no effect, and missed of the due performance thereof. § 7. Ans.Answer. Haggai his prophesie found the full accomplishment thereof, in our Saviours preaching in Herods Temple, which was no distinct, but in all essentialls the self same with Zorobabels. The holy riddle in the Revelation is very hard to be understood, how the beastRevel. 17. 11. was the eight, and yet one of the seven. But here it is obvious to any apprehension, that this was the third, and yet the second Temple, set up in the same place of the for∣mer. § 8. Ob. Zorobabels,The same ob∣jection rein∣orced. or the second Temple may as properly be termed the first, and avouched the same with Solomons, as this third of Herods building may be called the second Temple, and maintained the same with Zoroba∣bels. For, it was erected on the same Area, or floor, and had, though less limbs (smaller dimensions) the self same vitals, all the essentiall Utensils of the first Temple, restored unto it. § 9. Ans.And answered. Not so, for, not a foot of stone, or inch of timber used in Solo∣mons, was found in Zorobabels, which being all utterly destroyed, new materials were fetched from mountEzra 3. 7. Lebanon. Whereas no doubt He∣rod made use of whatsoever was firm, sound, and undecayed in Zoro∣babels Temple. Besides, there was an interstitium, or distance of seven∣ty years, between the destruction of Solomons, and erection of Zorobabels Temple; whereas here no vacancy at all, the service, and sacrifices to God being continued without any interruption. As therefore that man, who, out of a desperate consumption, by Gods blessing, physick, and
good diet, recovers new flesh, remains still the same man: so Zoroba∣bels Temple, acquiring by Herods bounty more beauty, and bigness, continued the same Temple, Gods unintermitted service (the life and soul thereof) preserving the individuity, or oneness of this Temple with the former. § 10. Iosephus himself elsewhere confesseth (as learnedVid. ejus annot. in Mat. 24. 1. & Iohn 2. 20. Grotius doth observe) that the Temple was never but twice demolished,4 Objection. first by Ne∣buchadnezzar, and finally by the Romans. § 11. Understand him (to reconcile him to himself) never but twice demolished in anger from enemies,Answered. whereas Herod destruebat animo re∣struendi, destroyed it with intent to rebuild it. As the Chirurgion, who, not out of cruelty, but pity, breaks an ill set bone, with full intent to set it better. Hence it was, that this third Temple, in some sense, is always accounted, reputed, and esteemed by the Jewish Rabbins, the same with the second. CHAP. VII. Generall observables in Herods building. § 1. THus satisfied for the main,Full credit not required to Io∣sephus. that Herod rebuilt Zorobabels Temple, come we to some memorable observables therein, gathered out of Iosephus, whose single band if the Reader shall refuse to accept, we can tender him no better, yea, no other securi∣rity. It is not therefore expected, that all which Iosephus relates, should be credited in the full latitude thereof, it is enough if the judicious Rea∣der (with1 Cor. 11. 18. Saint Paul in another case concerning the reports of the Corinthians) doth partly beleeve it. § 2. First, to satisfie, and content the Iews (half suspecting his power, or pleasure to rebuild the Temple) he plucked not down the old Temple, till all necessaries for the new one were perfectly provided, and brought in place, ready to be set up, lest otherwise be∣tween two Temples, none at all should be left. Such as take down one Church, before fully furnished for the setting up of a new, make a dan∣gerous breach for profaneness, and Atheisme to enter in thereat. No such regnum for Satan, as in the interregnum between two religions. § 3. As for the dimensions of Herods Temple in relation to Solomons, the ensuing parallel thus presents them unto us, 1 King. 6. 2. And the house which King Solomon built for the Lord, the length thereof was threescore cu∣bits, and the breadth thereof twenty cubits, and the height thereof thirty cubits—[after the first 2 Chr. 3. 2. measure] the porch therein was anIbid. ver. 4. hundred and twenty cubits high.Iosephus Anti. Iud. lib. 15. cap. 14. Herd removed the old foundations, and laying new ones, built the Temple an hundred cubits long, so many and twenty more, in height; as for the breadth (omitted by Flavi Iosphus) Ben-Gorin addeth, it was an hundred cu∣bits. Not that the whole body of Herods Temple was an hundred and twety
cubits high, but onely the middle thereof, as Iosephus confesseh, the sides round about being lower. Thus whilest Solomons Temple was builded long ways, with the porch, or to wer at the east end, Herods ap∣pears more round, with a tower in the middle thereof. § 4. Now,Common cu∣bits meant by Iosephus, ap∣pearing by the bigness of the tones. though the length, and breadth of Herods Temple exceeds Solomons, (as they make it) yet certainly, no cubits of the first measure, but common ones are meant by Iosephus, as may appear by the vast pro∣portion of firme stones employed in this building, being twenty five cubits long, eight high, and twelve broad. Oh! with what art, or engines were they brought hither? If the stones on Sarisbury plain, in a levell and flat Coun∣trey, and not above twenty miles from the sea, are recounted amongst the wonders of England, for their conveyance thither (though the biggest of them called Corse stones are farAs but 24 foot high, 7 broad, and 16 in compass, Camdens Brit. in . less) I say, if they be beheld with such admiration, that judicious men resolve them not reall, but factitious stones, of grit cemented with some unctuous matter, how can we con∣ceive that these solid stones (four of them being the ful length of the Tem∣ple) were managed hither, farther off from the sea, over a mountainous Countrey? However, that great, and goodly stones were here, the Mark. 13. 1.  and  in the Disciples observation,Luk, 21. 5. doth sufficient∣ly prove. § 5. The Holy of Holies had the inside thereof made onely by the Priests (others not presuming to come on the ground) whereof a thou∣sand were found very cunning in building.Priests builders Now, although Saint Paul was a Pharisee, and aAct 18. 3. tent-maker (the principles of that sect annexing some trade to their profession) it is strange, so many Priests, though skilfull in the Mathematicall, should be so dexterous in the manual part thereof. The pinnacles of the Temple (saith Iosephus) were made so sharp, that a bird could not sit on them, to prevent the defiling thereof. Wherefore when the Devill set our Saviour onMat. 4. 5. a pinnacle of the Temple, (where no doubt his feet stood fast without any miracle, which the Devill could not, and Christ would not causlesly work, as presumption against the will of his Father) we understand thereby, not such a sharp pinnacle, but some bartlement, wing, or brink, of building, higher then the rest of the fabrick. § 6. It was finished (of all the days of the year) on Herods birth-day,Finished on Herods birth∣day. and therefore (saith Iosephus) the joy was the greater, two such eminent causes thereof meeting together. In very good time no doubt. Indeed the memories of Philip and Iacob; or, of Simon & Iude, have been anciently celebrated on the same day, being paires of pious persons well agreeing a∣mongst themselves. But,2 Cor. 6. 14. What communion hath light with darkness? Hea∣ven, with hell; God with Herod, that they should be coupled together, in the same solemnity? However, the finishing of the Temple on He∣rods birth-day, was a better deed then what his grand-child Herod did many years after, on hisMat. 14. 6. birth-day, beheading Iohn the Bptist. The
same authour reports they had it by tradition, that it never rained on the day-time, but onely by night, during the building of the Temple, that so the labour of the workmen might not be interrupted. § 7. But a more improbable passage falls from the pen of Iosephus, An incredible report. when he reports, that the Temple when finished, sunk down twenty cubits in the foundation, which the skilfull in Architecture will hiss at as an untruth. For, 1 Strange that all parts thereof (as if by mutuall consent) should at once equally sink directly down, such an even, and eminent proportion; the same weight above meeting with just the same weakness beneath, and no more in one place, then another. And grant, the walls all agreed to sink together, it is much, the beams were not broken with the sudden subsidency of the building. 2 Such a sinking fabrick would have frighted the Priests from offi∣ciating therein, and death hanging over their heads disturbed their devotion. 3 The same authour reports, that the Holy of Holies in Herods Tem∣ple was just twenty cubits high. If so, then by the sinking of this fabrick, it was wholly swallowed in the earth, turned into a cel∣lar, so that the High-Priest, in Scripture phrase, must not go up, but go down unto it. 4 The Disciples, when gazing on theMark 13. 1. greatness of the stones, might better have bestowed their wonder, that so firm a fabrick should stand on so fleeting a foundation. Wherefore with the sinking of his Temple, Iosephus his cred it sinkes twenty cubits in my estimation, enough almost to make one un-believe whatsoever he hath formerly reported therein. § 8. But admit it done,What se may be made there∣of, if true. not suddenly, but leasurely, and by insensi∣ble degrees, sinking some cubits more or less, was not the hand of God more immediately therein? Partly to punish Herods pride; shewing, he rather permitted, then approved, such a wretched Tyrant should build his Temple. Partly, to prognosticate the future ruine of this fa∣brick, not standing full fourscore years, before it was destroyed. How∣ever, in a spirituall sense, the true Zion, and Church of God hath the Psal. 87.1. foundations thereof in the holy mountains—The highest himself shall establish her, God is in thePsal. 46. 5. midst of her, she shall not be moved. CHAP. VIII. Herods Temple many degrees short of Solomons. § 1. BUt here we must have an abominable falshood of Ioseph Ben∣Gorion, An impudent lie of Ben-G∣rions. posted, and pillored, impudently affirming, that the HerodianIn his book of the Herodi∣ans pag. 103. Temple was a more gorgeous structure, then that of Solomons;
flatly against the Scripture it self, which presenteth Solomons as a None∣such, or peerless structure, (admitting no equall, much less a superiour) exceeding1 Chr. 22. 5. magnificall, of fame, and of glory throughout all countreys. But let us put the builders, and their buildings into the ballance, whilest the Rea∣der is requested to hold the beam with an unpartiall hand. 1 Solomon was a mighty Monarch, subordi∣nate to God alone, having many tributa∣ry Kings homagers1 King. 4. 24. unto him. 2 He had wealth at will, God promising there should not1 King.3.13. be any amongst the Kings like unto him all his days; and had his ships from Tarshish, and Ophir, bringing him abundance of treasure. 3 He employed1 King. 5. 15, 16. an hundred forty three thousand three hundred for seven years in the building of the Temple. 1 Herod was a King by the Courtesie of Rome, and accountable unto Augustus the Emperour. 2 Herod (whilest Solomon was a Mer∣chant royall) was so poor a Pedler, that he turned the basest of theeves, and (as Iosephus reporteth) robbed the sepulchre of David fr treasure hid therein. 3 Herod used eleven thousand men, and a thousand carts, eight years and an half, in the erection of his building. Whosoever seriously considers the premisses, and remembers the words ofIudge. 8. 21. Zalmunna to Gideon, for as the man is, so is his strength, (actions bear pro∣portion to the power of their actours) will conclude; Herod, though urnamed the great, was too little to match, and far less to surpass Solomon in such undertakings. § 2. As for Ioseph Ben-Gorion extolling the Herodian,Ben-Gorion an incompetent Iudge. above Solomons Temple for sumptuousness, his judgement is lighter then vanity it self. In al controver∣sies Gods law provided, that theExod. 22. . cause of both parties should come before the Iudges. But, Ioseph Ben-Gorion (no news for them who know least to censure most) never saw either Temple, and yet is bold to pass censure on both. Indeed the aged Fathers thatEzra 3.12. wept, saw two Temples, Solomons before the destruction, and Zorobabels at the foundation thereof. Flavius Iosephus the Iew saw one (Zorobabels rebuilt by Herod) in his time rased by the Romans; Ben-Gorion beheld no pinnacle of either being a late authour, living some hundreds of years since our Saviour. Yea (what the maid said to Saint Peter)Mark 14.67. his speech agreeth thereunto, discovering himself a more modern writer, by mentioning the name, and nation of theLib. 6. cap. 1. sol. 53. Editio∣nis Cracovinsis. Franks, a word not appearing in the world till some hundreds of years after our Saviour. Besides, the book of Ben-Gorion like Geryon (the famous mon∣ster amongst the Poets) consisteth of three bodies confounded into one; pieces of Hegisippus, parcels of Russinus, and patches of his own fancying, so jumbled together, that little truth, and less certainty can be extracted from it. § 3. Here we must know,A dangerous Iewish design. that such as advance Herods above Solomons Temple, for the beauty thereof, drive on a dangerous Iewish design. Late anguis in herba, there is a pad in the straw, and invisible mischief lurking therein. Hoping hereby literally to verifie the Prophesie of Haggai, of the glory of the second Temple, in that carnall, materiall bravery, which Heroa bestowed upon it, so to frustrate, and defeat the spirituall sense of those predictions, mystically accomplished in the coming of Christ. Where∣fore,
all Christians are highly concerned to be zealous, to detect and de∣test an opinion, so destructive to the truth of Scripture, and derogatory to the glory of God. § 4. However,The golden Vine in the H∣rodian Temple. we deny not, but that this Herodian Temple in it self considered, without relation to Solomons, was a magnificent structure, (asHistoriaru. lib. 5. Tacitus, an heathen, and no friend to the Jewish nation, doth confess;) and I beleeve that the Courts on all sides thereof took up a greater com∣pass and circuit of gronnd, then those of Solomons, the Mount of the house (narrow in his days) being afterwards much enlarged. Therein we take principall notice of two eminent braveries. First, the Golden Vine ornamentall thereunto, which had clusters thereon as big as the stature of a man, as if corrivals in greatness to those bunches ofNumb. 18. 23. grapes, the spies anciently brought as a sample of the fruitfulness of the land of Canaan: This Vine Ben-Gorion makes of massie gold, whilest a learnedVillalpandus. authour, out of Flavius Iosephus, proves it to have been onely woven of gold threed, which much abateth the price thereof. But, whilest Iews gaze with admiration on the cost, and curiosity of this Golden Vine, Christian eyes may better behold another, of more grace, and glory, often to be seen in the same Temple, even Him that said,Iohn 15.1. I am the true Vine, and my Father is the husbandman. § 5. The other was that GoldenIosepus An∣ti. Iud. lib. 17. cap. 8. Eagle,The golden bloudy Eagle. set over the entrance of the Temple, which afterwards proved a Bird of prey to the poor Iews, occasi∣oning a grievous slaughter amongst them. Who conceiving their Tem∣ple profaned by this Image, brake forth into a mutiny thereupon, where∣in they were slain in great numbers. Threefold was the offence, the Iews took at the making thereof, because 1 Scandalous, to set up any image in the Temple, as introductory to Idolatry. 2 Unbeseeming the state of Gods house, like an Inne to have a sign hung out of it. 3 The Eagle being the Roman Armes minded them of their sub∣jection. An ungratefull spectacle to the Jewish nation (so constant a pretender to freedome) to be daily upbraided with their loss of liberty. § 6. To conclude, and give Herod his due, this third-second Temple (as I may term it) though far short of Solomons, may be believed more ma∣gnificent then Zorobabels. So that, what Hezekiah ingenuously confessed of the Kings of Assyria, may as justly be affirmed of Herod, Of a truth he hath done great matters. Though, who had not rather have one line of Iosiahs Epitaph, written truly on his tombe,2 Chr. 5. 26. The rest of his acts, and his goodness, then all the popular applause Herod received, for erecting this magni∣ficent structure.
CHAP. IX. The Actions of Christ in the Temple. § 1. WE have tendered to the view of the reader,The Map taken out of Capellus. in our lastmap, the draught of Zorobabels Temple as repaired & enlarged by Herod, so as the learned, and pious LudovicusIn his Com∣pendiu Hi∣storia Iudaic, lent m by that learned and in∣dustrious Gen∣tleman M. Ed∣ward Ligb Esq. Capellus hath presented it, who exactly took his instructions therein, from the pen of Iosephus, an eye-witness hereof. Wherefore I justly disingage my self from all objections against this Map, which are properly chargeable upon Capellus his account. I confess, herein I proceed not with that , and , with that boldness and assurance, which I could desire; because the divisions and dimensions of the Courts, and cham∣bers, as exhibited in this Temple, rely not (as Solomons) on Gods word, but onely on humane fallible testimony. Oh it is excellent, when, with Theophilus, we may know theLuk. 1. 4. certainty of those things wherein we are instructed out of Scripture it self. § 2. Come we now to the actions of our Saviour in the Temple;The difference betwixt  and . having first premised this usefull, yea necessary distinction. What our English tongue, for want of another proper word, promiscuously cal∣leth the Temple, the originall carefully expresseth by two names, ade∣quate to two severall parts thereof, .This properly was the covered part of the Temple (from  to inhabite, God peculi∣arly dwelling there) consisting of the Prch, Holy, and Holy of Holies, with the chambers about them. Into this Christ never came, (though Zachariah in his course did, to ffer Luke 1. 9. incense) nor by the law (under which he was made, as not coming to destroy, butMat. 5. 17. fulfill it) might he enter thereinto; proper onely for the Priests to officiate therein. Yet though not his person whilest living, his power when dying, penetrated this Temple, namely, when he rent theMat. 27. 51. vaile, thereby mystically opening an entrance into heaven by the merit of his passion. .Containing all the verge and com∣pass of the Courts about the Tem∣ple, and within the outward Sept thereof. Christ constantly came hi∣ther, I ever taught (saith he) inIoh. 18. 2c. the Temple: understand him, that he ne∣ver wilfully affected Conventicles, as ashamed of his doctrine, or willingly declined the Temple, when affor∣ded convenient entrance therein∣to. Otherwise, he taught also on theMat. 5. 1. Mount, in theMat. 13. 2. Ship, in Syna∣ggues, in private houses; but never so properly in his center, as when in the Temple. This distinction of  and  holds current, clean through the new Testament; save that once  is taken for the whole circumference of the Temple, when Iudas cast down the pieces of silverMat. 27. 25. therein: though he stayed not long there, as out of his own element, but desperately made haste, that he mightAct. 1. 25. goe unto his own place. § 3. This distinction premised,Beautifull gate full of begge. we will waite on the Reader into the Temple. First requesting him to carry competent money, and a
charitable minde along with him. For as we shall enter in at the eastern gate, (commonly called Beautifull) we shall be sure there to meet with many creeples, and beggers of all sorts, as proper objects of his liberality. Here daily lay thatAct. 3. 2. lame man, on whom Saint Peter, though moneyless, bestowed the bestalmes he could give, or the other receive, even the use of his limbs. § 4. But now we come to the memorable passages concerning our Saviour in the Temple. These were either done on him,Christ presen∣ted in the Temple. when an infant; or by him, when arrived to mans estate. Of the former was his presentation by his parents to the Priest, and when anLuk. 2. 24. oblation for his mother was made, a paire of Turtle-doves, and two young Pigeons. § 5. Hereat in-springs old Sieon into the Temple.Simos testi∣mony of Christ God always per∣formes his promises with advantage. He had a revelation that he should not die before he saw Christ, who here both saw and felt him. Oh how he hugges him (though faster by his Faith, then) with his weake armes, which seem the stronger for the Burden, as his dim eyes the clearer for this sight! Yea, he petitions heaven for a Gaole-delivery,Luk. 2. 29. Lord let thy ser∣vant depart in peace. Longer life would be but longer loss, and therefore fain would he flye from Christ in his armes, to the armes of Christ, before his refined joy were allayed with any worldly woe. Then he addresseth himself, with bitter-sweets, to Christs parents, neither frighting nor flat∣tering, but plainly foretelling them, their child should be for the fall and rise of many in Israel. Particularly, he tells Mary, that aLuk. 2. 35. sword should pierce through her, and Christ (though borne) should not die without the pain of his mother. As if the throws, suffered by other women at the birth, were reserved for her to endure at the death of her Son. § 6. Simeon is seconded by Anna,And is secon∣ded by Anna. a prophetess of an hundred years old, (temperance is the best prolonger of the candle of life) and herein she exceeded Simeon. He came butLuk. 2. 27. into the Temple, sheLuk. 2. 37. departed not from the Temple, but served God therein with fasting and prayer. She also spake of Christ to all that looked for redemption. And thus Christ was proclaimed in the Temple by two Heralds of different sexes, whilest his Parents carefully kept the copies of their severall Proclamations, as trusting them in no other Cabinet then their own hearts. § 7. Now seeing it is said of Anna (pardon a short digression) that she departed not from the Temple,How Anna de∣parted not out of the Temple. it will be enquired whether any women were constantly Leigers to live therein. Were any of the weaker sex (be∣ing prohibited to speak in the Church) permitted to live in the Temple? For, as for the nurse of King Ioash, hid with him in the2 King. 11. 3. house of God, the case was extraordinary, and her clandestine condition nothing per∣tinent to the present question. In answer whereunto: By never departing thence, we understand her daily repairing thither. It was Davids wish, that he mightPsal. 27. 4. dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of his life, i. e. that he might have free access thither upon any occasion. Thus the sacrifice, though onely morning, and
ing, is called a continuall Burnt-offeing. And thus Anna daily frequenting the Temple, was continually there, as formerly those persons, who every day might be found in saint. Pauls Church at walking-houres▪ might in some sort be said never to depart thence. § 8. To return to our Saiour,Christs first act in the Temple. who hitherto appeared onely passive in the Temple, but afterwards acted miraculously therein First, when found sitting in the middest of the Doctours, bothLuk. 2. 46. bearing them, and asking them questions. He, who himself was theIohn 1. 1. Word, would notwith∣standing hear, before he did speak and attentively listned to the po∣sitions of those Doctours, before he began his opposition against them. § 9. Arrived at mans estate,He pugeth it. we first fix our eyes on hisIohn 2. 14. purging of the Temple, from Dove-mongers, Mony-changers, and such as old sheep and oxen therein▪ Had such Merchants, kept themselves in the or▪Iohn 5. 2. sheep-market, Christ had never distubed them, who now, with a scourge of small cords, drave them out of the Temple. Say not it was as lawfull to sell as sacrifice cattell therein: the one being the main use thereof, according to Gods command, the othr a notorious abu of the Temple, turning it by fraudulent bargains into a den of the § 10. Saint Hierome reports,Sant Hieromes conceit. that certain fieryIgneum enim quiddm & sdc∣eum adiabat rayes, or beams, darting from Christ eyes, drove out these Merchants from this place. A cncei, which we dare not presently avouch for fear those  of Christs scourge flie also in our faces thereupon. For if he whipped out those Merchants, for setting up their ware-houses in the Temple, surely he will lend a lash to such as adde traditions to the Text. This sure we are (because recorded in Scripture) that Christ so earnestly pursued this reformation, that the Ioh. 2. 17. zeal of his Fathers house did eate him up. Understand it, that our Saviour being truly Carneus though not Carnalis, of a fleshy, though no fleshly constitution, had his body wearied out with faintness, not able in its performances, to keep pace with the desires of his mind. § 11. After this time,Christs Sermon in Solomons porch. many were those heaenly Sermons; Christ made in the Temple: which here we forbear to relate Onely we take notice of that he preached in Solomons PorchIoh. 10. 23. (which afterwards deser∣ved rather the name of Christs-porch, seeing a greater then Solomon  here) when the people (mysteries are blasphemies to ) took up Ioh. 10. 31. stones to stone him. Some will ake, whence had they those stones? It be∣ing unlikely that any were let to lie loose in so holy a place. But we may be confident, if there were any to be had above ground▪ their ma∣lice would finde them out▪ And probably they plcked them off from the pavement: their furious zeal counting it a meritorious act, rathe to end the out of the ground, then suffer a supposed blasphemer to escape▪ Surely such stones would rather haveLuk. 19. 40. spoken in his praise, then done any thing to his prejudice, especially before his oure was come. § 12. And as he spake woll,Lame & b'ind cured in the Temple. so he did as well therein.Mat. 21. 14. The blind and the lame came to him in the Temple, and he healed them. See here, those with
might come to him in the Temple, not those with Insections: the lame, but not the leprous might enter therein. Thus whilest sufferings and afflictions do not hinder us, sinfull pollutions do debar our access to Gods gracious presence. § 13. We must not forget,Christs second purging of the Temple. that a little before his passion, Christ the second time purged the Temple ThreeIoh. 2. 15. years since he cast all Merchants and their appurtenances out of Gods house, which now notwithstanding that ejection, had again gotten unlawful possession therein. Devils he cast out of men so finally, that they entred no more into them; but wicked men, once thrown out of the Temple, recovered their stations therein again. Abu∣ses in the Church depart not till they are driven, and then go away un∣willingly, animo revertendi, with full intent to embrace the next op∣portunity to return. What need hath Reformation it self to be frequently reformed, seeing corruptions will so quickly creep thereinto? Christ, the second time, cast those vermine out of the Temple. § 14. Now,His farewell to the Temple. just before he took his farewell of his Fathers house, he beheld the Pharisees casting their money into the treasury. So that the Mark 12. 42. & Luk. 21. 2. Widowes mites, was the last object (no small credit unto her) which in the Temple entertained our Saviours eyes on earth, and no doubt long since hath been rewarded by him in heaven. For presently he departed to mount Olivet, and there foretold, yea thence denounced the destructi∣on of the Temple, which followed not many years after. CHAP. X. The acts of the Apostles in the Temple. § 1. CHrist,Saint Peters remarkable Sermon. after his ascension, resigned the Temple to his Apostles, to supply his absence by their preaching to the people. Here on the day of Pentecost Saint Peter made that memorable Ser∣mon, wherein he vindicated both himself and company from the asper∣sion of drunkenness, avouched the truth of Christs resurrection, & charged the Iews so  home, for shedding his innocent bloud, that by the sharpness of his reproof (Eccles. 12. 11. the words of the wise are as goads, and as nails fastned by the masters of the assemblies) such as heard him were pricked in theirAct. 2. 37. heart; cry∣ing out to Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles; Men and brethren, what shall we doe? § 2. Here,The Apostles joint-commis∣sioners. by the peoples equall applications, and addresses to the rest of the Apostles, it appeareth, that they were all fellow helpers, and joint Commissioners with Saint Peter, (all in the Iury besides the Foreman are not cyphers) though he for order sake, and regularity, to avoid con∣fusion, was made the mouth for the rest. Yea, such their sobriety and
discretion, though at that instant inabled with the gift of tongues, that they onely made use of seasonable silence (such as best know how to speake, know best when to hold their peace) with their tacite suffrages concurring to the truth of what Saint Peter delivered: who further gave his Auditory counsellAct. 2. 38. TO REPENT. § 3. But was this well done of him to adde grief to grief?Evangelicall rpentance pre∣scribed to the people. What, more re∣pentance still? Why further pain, to such as were pricked to their hearts? Was this any valour, to beat them with more blows, who already cryed out for fair quarter, WHAT SHALL WE DOE? But know, Peter herein ad∣vised them to join to their former legall sorrow, an evangelicall repen∣tance; such as is attended with desire, hope, & some assurance of Pardon. He prescribes them the same receipt, he lately took himself; having found the good fruit thereof, when, on his heartyMat. 26. 75. sorrow, he obtained pardon for denying his Master. No Sermons so soveraign, as those which proceed from the Ministers2 Cor. 1. 4. comfortable experience. Nor did he barely advise them to repent, but also toAct. 2. 38. be baptized every one of thē, in the name of Iesus Christ &c. § 4. See the success of his counsell,Act. 2. 41. about three thousand were added to the Church that same day. O high holy-day in heaven! This Many-Saints∣day was a festivall of great solemnity therein, where there isLuk. 15. 7. joy over one sinner that repenteth, singing on their golden viols, Peter and the Apostles have saved their three thousand. His Sermon (as set down) contained not so many words, as it converted souls. Though surely, what we read in Saint Luke was onely the breviate, sum, and abridgement of his Sermon, see∣ing, with manyAct. 2. 40. other words did he tesifie and exhort. § 5. Many advantages concurred to render his Sermon the more effectuall. First,Four advanta∣ges of Peters Sermon. the suffering of our Saviour was so near in place, and late in time, that his wounds were (as I may say) still fresh bleeding in the guilty memories of the people assembled. Secondly, the present mi∣racle of tongues bestowed on Peter and his mpanions, did wonderfully make way for the Word he delivered. Thirdly, such to whom he spake, wereAct. 2. 5. devout men, blindly pious (like Saint Paul before his conversion) but desirous of information; zeal not being to be wrought, but regulated, not to be new gotten, but right guided in them. Last∣ly, and chiefly, the Spirit of God invisibly wrought on their souls. Thus when the1 Cor. 16. 9. & Colos. 4. 3. door of utterance, or the2 Cor. 6. 11. opened mouth of the Minister meets with the Act. 14. 27. door of Faith or entrance, in theAct. 16. 14. opened hearts of the people, the Word makes miraculous improvement. § 6. And now our Saviour had plentifully performed his promise: He that beleeveth on me,Christs promise plentifully per∣formed. the works that I doe, shall he doe also, and greaterIoh. 14. 12. works then these shall be doe, for I goe to my Father; as then put into a capacity more effectually to assist them, (as formerly but with his prayers) then au∣thoritatively with his power. The Disciple, (by his Masters permission, yea procurement) proved above his Master in success. Christ, all his life long, was angling for a few fishes, but aAct. 1. 15. hundred and twenty, whilest
Peter comes with his Drag-net, and catcheth about three thousand in one day. Amongst the reasons whereof, consider 1 Christ was properly, not to be the builder, but the Foundation it self: and therefore others were more happy in edification. 2 He was to be humbled (as with hunger, thirst, weariness, shame, and pain, so) with the heavy afflictions of long unprofitable preaching, because of peoplesMat. 23. 58. unbeliefe. 3 During his life, the kingdome of heaven was butMat. 4. 17. at hand, which after his death, and Ascension was in hand. The broad gates of grace being then opened for multitudes to enter, where few by especiall favour got in before by the Wicket. We have insisted the longer on Saint Peters Sermon, because it is the be∣ginning of Ecclesiasticall History after Christs ascension, which, in Gods due time, we are in some hope to finish by his assistance. And that the foresaid Sermon was made in the Temple, appears by the passage of theirAct. 2. 46. continuing daily with one accord in the Temple. Intimating that they were formerly assembled in the same place. § 7. Pass we by the other acts of the Apostles in the Temple,What properly was Solomons porch. onely we must not omitAct. 3. 11. & 5. 12. Solomons porch where they made their aboad. And it is worth our inquiry where the same was placed. § 8. First,Not Solomons porch properly so called. negatively, it was not that porch of Solomons (nor any other afterwards built of the same dimensions on the same floor) mentioned in the1 King. 6. 3. & 2 Chr. 3. 4. Old Testament; because 1 That was a part (being the entrance) of the , or Covered Temple: Into which, the disciples (being no Priests) might not enter. 2 That porch had butIbidem. twenty cubits in length, and ten in breadth, being so small, that it could not contain the disciples, and their company, being above three thousand persons. 3 That by the Septuagint, is called UIam (retaining always the He∣brew word) not , as this Porch is called in the Greek tongue. Rather therefore, by this Porch, we understand, one side, square, or cloister of the great Court about the Temple. § 9. Now seeing the same was surrounded with Courts on all sides, the question is,Seated on the east side. on which side thereof Solomons Porch was placed. Here we had been utterly at a loss, but for the seasonable help ofLib. Anti. 20. cap. 8. Iosephus; The people (saith he) perswaded the King [Agrippa the younger] to repair the east Porch or Cloister: Now this Cloister was of the outward Temple, standing over an exceeding deep valley, raised upon a wall of four hundred cubits, which was made of square white stones of twenty cubits long, and six cubits high a piece, the work of King Solomon, who first built the Temple. Whereby it appears, that this Porch respected the east, and was on each side of the entrance into the Temple.
§ 10. But the greatest difficulty remains.Quest. Why called Solomons porch? How came it to be called Solomons Porch? did not he equally build all the first Temple? Why there∣fore did this Porch (as his darling) beare his name above all the rest? And (which increaseth the difficulty) seeing all that Temple was razed by the Babylonians (following no doubt the cruell counsell of the Edo∣mites, Psal. 137. 7. Down with it, down with it, even to the ground) how came this cloister, of the second Temple in Christs time, to retain the name of Solomons? § 11. Some conceive this part stood undemolished by the Babylonians: seeing that curse,Answer there∣unto. there shall not be left here one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down, was denounced against the second Temple, not against Solomons, some parcell whereof might be left standing. But un∣der favour, I conceive, it was particularly called Solomons-Porch,. because the very bottome, or floor thereof (being forced ground) was by much expence made by Solomon, and gained with great art and industry, from theCompare o∣sephus as afore¦cited, with himself, de Bel. Iud. li. 5. c. 14. valley beneath; so that (even when the superstructure thereon was by the Babylonians levelled to the earth) the admirable foundation, that master-piece of art, still remained, preserved the memory, and imparted the name of Solomon, the founder thereof, to that Cloister, which in the second Temple, was erected upon the same. § 12. If any demand why the disciples made choice of this Porch,Why Solomons porch chosen by the disciples. above any other, to make their residence therein; severall considerations might move them thereunto: 1 Because formerly handselled with our Saviours heavenly Sermon therein. 2 Because of great capacity, conveniently to receive them, without prejudice to other peoples passage into the Temple. 3 Because it was the first place that offered it self unto them, at their entrance into the Temple. Herein they observed some Analogy of Christs counsell, InMar. 6. 10. what place so∣ever yee enter into a house, there abide untill yee depart from that place. Thus Solo∣mons-porch, being (as I may say) the first house in the house of God, into which the disciples entered; there they fixed themselves, as no starters and fugitives, but such as would stand to the doctrine they delivered. § 13. So much of Solomons-porch;Wherein we decline Capellus his judgement. onely let me adde; that Capellus (herein contrary to otherConstantine learned men) placeth Solomons-porch on the south side of the Temple;l. Empereur in Middoth. p. 53. & Ludovic. de Dicu in Act. Apost p. 39.  mistaking it, as we believe, with or the Cloister Royall: which out of Iosephus indeed appears, to have been largely built and beautified on the south-side of the Temple. However we would not innovate or alter any thing in our map from the minde of Capellus, though here, in our description, we presume to nter our dis∣senting from his opinion. § 14. Pass we by many other intermediate acts of the Apostles and Disciples in the Temple.The last pas∣sage of Saint Paul in the Temple. Amongst all which none might lawfully avouch his entrance so far therein, as arnabas, being a Levite by his extraction,
andAct. 4. 36. therefore legally priviledged in his approaches to the Altar it self. Come we now to the last passage of Saint Paul in the Temple. Last in∣deed it was likely to prove unto him, and he lose his life therein, on this occasion. § 15. At the instance of some godly people,Who almost lost his life therein. he was perswaded to pu∣rifie himself: thereby, partly to gain on the affections of the beleeving Iews, as yet zealous for the Law; partly to confute their falshood, who traduced him for an Antinomian, against all ceremonious observances. Here∣upon he came intoAct, 21. 26. the Temple to signifie the accomplishment of the days of purifi∣cation, untill that an offering should be offered for him and his companions. If any grudge that after the coming of the Gospel, so much cost should be bestow∣ed on the Law, and sullenly say, with Iudas Iscariot, To what purpose is this Mat. 26. 8. wast? Might not the Law truly answer with our Saviour, in the same case, Mat. 26. 12. He did it for my buriall, and for the more solemn interment thereof. § 16. But Saint Pauls devotion in performing these Obsequies was in∣terrupted by the people,A popular mu∣tiny. who accused him for defiling the Temple, ha∣ving Act. 21. 29. seen Trophimus, and Ephesian, with him in the City, whom they supposed he had brought into the Temple. Malicious jealousie never makes good Logician, so strange are the inferences thereof. In vain might Saint Paul deny the consequence of their syllogisme, whilest they were ready to prove it by an inartificiall argument, from the Authority, or prevalency rather of a popular uproare,Act. 21. 34. Some cryed one thing, some another, and those, no doubt, that knew least railed loudest, and no certainty could be known for the tumult, the many-headed multitude speaking a Language, whereof none can be an in∣terpreter, to understand them, which understand not themselves. § 17. Suppositive was the offence of Saint Paul,Saint Paul rescued. (onely on their bare surmise) but positive must be his punishment, drawing him out of the Temple, whom certainly they had killed, had not the seasonable inter∣posing of the Captain, rescued him from them. Who hence conveyed him safe into theAct. 21. 37. Castle, no doubt, of Antonia hard by, and not the Castle on Mount Sion, built out of the ruines of the Palace of David, though formerly (following the authority of others) we made that place the Theater of Saint Pauls future actions on this occasion. CHAP. XI. Of the vast wealth of the second Temple. § 1. WE have cause to conceive, that the Corban or Treasury of the second Temple was about our Saviours time,The wealth of the Corbar ar∣sing from pure Pagans. welnigh as well lined with wealth, as in the reign of Solomon, flowing from three principall springs, 1 Meer Gentiles. 2 Proselytes. 3 Native Iews. The first of these were very bountifull to the Temple, and constantly
§ 4. Native Iews were the last,Native Iews their liberality. and best benefactours to the Temple, especially if all contributed thereunto in proportion to the poor widow who cast in twoMark 12. 44. mites being all her substance. Now, had one been present when the Scribes and Pharisees cast in their offerings into the treasury, it had been pleasant to behold the conflict, betwixt their covetousness, and vainglory, and how the latter prevailed in them. For, though they were Luk. 16. 14. covetous, yet when people beheld them, they were content to part with their money, or rather to let it out for the interest of popular applause▪ But, besides free-will-offerings at any time, that Gods service might not be lest arbitrary, the Iews were injoyned thrice a yearExod. 14. 23. at the solemn festi∣valls with their men children (when able, saith the Rabbih, led in their Fathers hands, to climbe up the mountain whereon the Temple was built) to appear before God; where none, who hoped to return with their hearts ful of joy, came with their hands empty of money For seeing the Iews held their estates of no mean Lord, but all by tenure in capie from the God of Heaven, these were the three solemn payments of their head rent to their high Land lord. Besides these in the days of our Saviour, vast were the sums which were advanced to the treasury, by that gainfull Di∣vinity current amongst the people, though stamped onely with Pharisai∣call traditions, of which, this one that followeth, was the most re∣markable. § 5. It plainly appears,The gainfull doctrine of Corban. that all children, if of ability, should maintain their parents, if by age or accident grown weak and impotent to subsist 1 Tim. 5. 16. of themselves, according to Gods command, HonourExod. 20. 12. thy father and mother Qamp;c. Notwithstanding which obligation, the Scribes and Pharisees did preach, & teach, that in case any children were pleased to compound with Mar. 15. 5. & Muk 7. 11. Corban, &c to pay a round sum proportionable to their estates, unto pious uses, thereby they were disingaged in consciede, from making any far∣ther provision for their poor parents▪ Going on this ground, that one debt was to be but once satisfied, and if they paid it in to the service of God the grand-father to all mankinde, thereby they were discharged from duty to their immediate, and subordinate parents. § 6. This commutation-money (as I may term it) amounted to a Nem∣scit of revenue,The ill inlu∣ence of this doctrine. but withall made a dearth of dutifull children in the land, who counted it the more frugall way, once for all to fine to the Temple, then to pay the constant rent of daily relief to their parents. But can an Acquittance of humane, adition, be valid, against a debt of Specialty▪ by Gods command? Oh! had the hole in the cover of Corban been a mouth to speak, as well as to take in, how zealously would it have protested a∣gainst such proceedings? And we may conceive this one cause of hasten∣ing the wofull ruine of the Temples wealth, such ill gotten money poi∣soning the Corban, making it suddenly swell, and then break in pieces, when swept away by the Romans, which we come now to relate.
CHAP. XII. The finall abolition of the Utensils of the second Temple. § 1. GReat houses commonly crack before they fall,Pompey his moderation in sparing the treasure of the Temple. to give the dwel∣lers therein notice to depart. Thus before the Temple was fi∣nally ruined, and her vessels taken away, two grand warnings were gi∣ven the Iews, seasonably to amend, and prevent farther mischief. The first in that famous year wherein Tully and Mark Antony were Consuls, some sixty years before our Saviours birth, whenIosephus Ant. Iud. . 14. 6. 8. Pompey the great, ha∣ving taken the City and Temple, entred the Holy of Holies with some of his souldiers, the floor whereof had formerly felt no other feet, but those of the high Priests, and those but once a year. Here he saw mysterious ornaments, understanding (not the meaning but) the matter thereof to be pure gold; a shroud bait to tempt his hungry souldiers to sacriledge, besides two thousand talents of silver in the treasury of the Temple. On all which he onely feasted his, and his officers eies, whilest their hands did fast, not diminishing the least mite thereof, in veneration of that deity to whom they did belong; Onely he took on him to restore Hircanus to be high Priest, a presage that the Jewish Priesthood would shortly fall down, which already did so shake, that the high Priest needed to take a Presentation, ad corroborandum, from the hands of Pompey a Pagan Patron. § 2. Secondly,Crassus his sa∣criledge. when Crassus that rich churl, and Roman Generall mar∣ching with his Army into Syria, and through Ierusalem, flayed, what Pompey did not fleece, spoiling the Temple to the value of eight thousand talents. Indeed,Iosphus Ant. Iud. li. 4. c. 12. Eleazar keeper of the holy treasures, gave, or rather pay∣ed to Crassus a wedge of gold weighing three hundred pounds, to ran∣some the rest from his rapine. But the golden wedge did but widen the covet ousness of Crassus, and like a break-fast did inable him to encoun∣ter a dinner with a greater appetite; so that, notwithstanding his oath to the contrary, he added sacriledge to his perjury. But seeing theeves give whatever they take not away, we have rather cause to comend his boun∣ty, that the golden table, candlesticks, and other ornaments escaped his fingers; except, they were either hid from him by the carefull providence of others, or left by him out of his own politick covetousnes, like nest-egs to encourage others again to lay up more wealth in the same place. And no doubt he hoped, though now he had mowed down the Temples trea∣sure to the bare roots, shortly, when grown up again, to return to the after-share thereof; but all in vain, for, marching with his Army into Parthia, there his money perished with him, losing the principle of his stoln wealth, and paying his own life for interest. Thus, those who on a sudden grow rather foggy, then fat, by feeding on sacrilegious morsels, do pin away by degrees, and die at last of incurable consumptions. § 3. Here we cannot but take notice,The fond Cri∣ticisme of the Scribes. how profoundly shallow
the Scribes and Pharisees were, in that their superstitious Criticisme, and leaden distinction, how he that swore by the Temple, was left at liberty, whilest he that swore by theMat. 23. 16. gold of the Temple, was bound up and concluded in conscience to the performance of his oath. Whereas our Sa∣viour demonstrateth, that the Temple was greater then the gold, as the sanctifier thereof. Besides, in common sense, he should seem faster tyed, whose faith by oath was staked down to the Temple, as to a fixt, firme, stable structure, then he whose truth was tyed onely to the gold thereof, a more fading, flitting, moveable matter, as appears by Crassus and others carying so much of it away with him into forein countreys. But indeed (as our Saviour teacheth) the main obliging power of those oaths, con∣sisted in the presence of God, before whom they were made, who alone is immoveable and immutable, whereas in process of time, the Temple it self, as well as the gold thereof, came to destruction. § 4. For,The finall abo∣liton of the utensils of the Temple. Vespasian and Titus his son, Roman Emperours, Anno Dom. 72. razed the Temple, and utterly confounded all the Utensils thereof. In∣deed they were first carried in triumph to Rome, but what afterward be∣came of them is altogether unknown. It is no sin to conceive that their property was altered; and they either converted to coin, or turned to plate for the use of the Emperour, or his favorites. Sure none are known to re∣main in specie at this day: and one may wonder, that no impudent Relick∣monger hath produced a golden feather of a Cherubims wing, or a knop, flower, bowle, or almond of the seven-branched candle-stick, having pretended since Christs time, to improbabilities of as high a nature. Strange that no Pope hath gotten a piece of Aarons Mitre, or breast-plate, to grace his wardrobe, or a parcell of the manuscript-commandements written by Gods finger, to adorn his Vatican. But divine providence hath utterly ra∣zed all foundation for superstition to build upon, in the totall abolition of these holy ornaments. And if those reasonable Witnesses of Gods truth, were by his permission overcome, and killed by the Beast, when they had finished theirRevel. 11. 7. testimony, no wonder if these sensless and inanimate types, having served their generation, the truth being come, were finally extinguished▪ Nor have I ought else to observe of those holy Utensils, save that all were made of pure gold, and yet the Apostle is bold to tearm them, and all other legall ceremoniesGal. 4. 9. beggerly elements, so debasing them in compari∣son of Christ, the authour of grace, and giver of eternall life. Finis Libri Tertii.
To the Right Honourable FRANCIS LORD RVSSELL, Son to the Right Honourable WILLIAM EARL OF BEDFORD. MY LORD, PErusing this passage in the beginning of Saint Lukes Gospell,—ToLuke 1. 3. 4. write unto thee in order, most excellent Theophilus, that thou mightest know the certainty of those things, , wherein thou hast been catechised, or, instructed: it furnished me with some observables, very conducible to my present purpose; 1 Though GodLuk. 18. 19. alone be good, yet man in some sense may be most excellent. 2 Even in that age, wherein they hadAct. 4. 32. all things common, Nobility remained severall, as appro∣priated to some principall persons.
3 No diminution to the dignity of a Noble man, to be catchised, , in the Principles of Re∣ligion. 4 Dedicating of Books of Noble persons is an anci∣ent practise,  Scripture precedents. 5  not patronage for his book (the Word of God being theEphes. 6. 7. sword of the  to defend it) but intended the instruction of Theophilus therein. The  the tex, encourgd me, ing to put forth a Treatise to publick view, to make choice of an ho∣nourable Patron, and hope I have found a Theophilus in your Lordship, whom I see to be young, know to be Noble, and beleeve to e religous. The composure therefore of this ensuing bo (the issue by Gods blessing of  own in∣dustry) this alone I humbly  to  Honour to pro∣tect the same. As for the matter thereof, being wholly Scri∣pture, I heartily dedicate your Honour thereto, to be in∣structed therewith. And now, my Lord, may I request you to tke a serious survey of your own extraction, to be unto you a forcible motive unto vertue. To instance onely in your deceased Ancestors (as cut of the reach of flattery) John your Atavus by his wise∣dome, and valour (the fortunate Generall against the Rebels in the West) founded under God the Nobility of your fami∣ly. Francis your Abavus (whose Hall seemed a Court, Clo∣set, a Chappell, and Gate-house, an Hospitall) shined as a light with his piety in those darker days. William your Pro∣avus, to whom agreed the character of Sergius Paulus,Act. 13. 7. A prudent man, and Deputy of the Countrey, and that an
Island too (though not Cyprus, yet) Ireland; of whose abi∣lities Queen Elizabeth was well assured, when choosing him Pilot of that leaking Land; then toffed with the violent tem∣pest of Rebellion. Francis your , whose death I would epithete Untimely (not onely for the behoof of his own fa∣mily, but benefit of the whole nation) did not the same autho∣rity, which reproved Saint Peter for calling that commonAct. 10.15., which he had cleansed, forbid me to term any thing untimely which his Providence hath appointed. Now, my Lord, upon a review of this your pedegree, I will not be so Pedantick to minde you of a Grammar-instance, to make it true construction in your Honours practise, Mag∣norum haudquaquam indignus avorum; but in Scripture-phrase I request you toIsa. 51. 1. Look to the rock whence you are hewn, and the hole of the pit whence you are digged; and doe nothing unworthy of that honourable parentage, whence you are derived. Far be it from your Honour to be listed among those noble men, of whom it may be said in a sad sense, that they are very highly descended, as being come down many degrees from the worth, and virtues of their noble Progenitors. To conclude then with Theophilus, with whom I began. It is observable of him, that though styled most excellent by Saint Luke in his Gospell, yet in the Book of the Acts (which was written many years after) he calls him onelyActs 1. 1. Theophi∣lus, without any honourable addition. What? Had Saint Luke in process of time less civility, or Theophilus (with more age) less Nobility? Surely neither, but Saint Luke may be presumed, purposely to wave his titles, out of compli∣ance to the temper of Theophilus, who in his reduced age
grew weary of worldly pompe, more pleased to have the truth of honour fixed within him, then hear the titles thereof fast∣ned upon him: according to the Analogie of the Apostles preept, Let him that hath honour, be as if he had it not. Thus, the longer your Lordship shall live, the less you will delight in outward state, and daily discover the vanity there∣of; especially in your old age, your soul will grow sensible, that nothing can satisfie it, which is less then Grace, or Glory, or God himself. To whose protection you are committed, by the daily prayer of him, who is Your Honours most humble servant THO. FULLER. Waltham Abbey, Iuly 16. 1650. Here followeth the Map of Mount Libanus.
THE DESCRIPTION OF MOVNT LIBANVS and the adjacent Countreys. The fourth Book. CHAP. I. § 1. SO much for the Iewel, Palestine it self. Now for the Case thereof, namely the neighbour∣ing Countreys which surrounded it. One∣ly herein the Simile holds not, because Cases serve, as to compass, so to preserve and de∣fend the Jewell; whereas these bordering nations were sworn enemies to oppose and destroy the land and people of Palestine. The most quiet neighbour Iudea had, was the Midland sea on the west side thereof, which though sometimes (as the Psalmist observes) it would rage horribly, yet generally it was more peaceable and serviceable then the Pagans, which bounded them on all other quarters: as namely, 1 In Syria, on the north, Giblites, Arvadites, Aramites, &c. 2 In Arabia, on the east, and south-east Ammonites, Moabites, Ismaelites, Midianites. 3 In Egypt, and the wilderness of the south, Edomites, Amalekites, Egyptians, &c. So that the Iews, to finde faithfull friends must not look about them, but above them, even to heaven whence all their safety was derived.
§ 2. For the present we are to describe mount Libanus or Lebanon with the parts of Syria confining thereunto. A mountain which some will have so named from Frankincense, ( in Greek) whereof great plenty groweth there. Yet seeing it is usuall for Parents to give names to their children, not children to their Parents, more probable it is that Frankincense is called  from this mountain, breeding store thereof, then that the mountain should be named Libanus from Frankincense growing therein. § 3. But whilst humane writers are best pleased with this Greek extraction of Libanus, more conformable to Scripture is the Hebrew Etymology thereof from Whiteness:In Hebrew White. because the faithfull snow forsakes not the top of this mountain (no not when persecuted by the Sun in the dog-days) but remains there all the year long. A pleasant sight, at the same time to have Winter on the top, and Sommer at the bottome of one and the same mountain. Excellent the use of this snow in these hot climats the ProphetIer. 18. 14. mentioning it, as most welcome and precious, Will a man leave the snow in Lebanon, wherewith the Tyrians and neighbour∣ing nations used to allay and mixe their wines: so making the Torrid and Frozen Zone to meet in the Temperate, more healthfull for their Constitutions. § 4. Lebanon was a place so pleasant, that an Epicure therein might feed all his senses to a surfeit. 1 Sight. The pouse saith ofCant. 5. 15. Christ, His countenance is as Lebanon, where most delightfull is the prospect, with high hills, humble dales, sweet rivers, shady groves. No wonder then if Ptolemy placeth Paradise a City hereabouts, where what Poets can fan∣cy, Nature hath performed. 2 Smell. Such the fragrancy of flowers, Gummes, and Spices thereon, perfuming the aire round about.Cant. 4. 11. Hos. 14. 9. His smell is as the smell of Lebanon. 3 Hearing. For besides the melody wrabled forth by the sweet Choristers of the wood, pleasant it was to listen to the com∣plaints which the Rivers murmuring made against the Rocks, for wronging them in obstructing their channels: whose com∣plaints therein, were so far from finding pity in mens hearts, that they onely lulled their heads the sooner and faster aseep. 4 Taste, & Touch. Such the most delicious fruits and liquors this mountain affords. Vinum C.O.S. The sent thereof shall be as theHose. 14. 7. wine of Lebanon. Galen also reporteth that yearly in mount Libanus husbandmen used to sing, God raineth hony, at which time they spread hides on the ground,De alimentis facult. lib. 3. cap. 38. and from the boughs of trees shook into them the hony dropt from heaven (called there∣fore mel roscidum & aereum) filling pots and pitchers with the same.
No wonder then that Moses made it his earnest request to take this place in his way, to heaven: IDeut. 3. 25. pray thee let me goe over and see the good land, which is beyond Iordan, that goodly mountain and Lebanon. As if his soul more conveniently might take his rise from the top thereof to eternall blisse, and be the better provided to entertain endless happiness, when first he had sipt some drops of the same in delightfull Lebanon, the temporall type thereof. § 5. It will perchance be objected against the fertility of this place, that the ProphetIsa. 29. 17. foretelleth, Is it not yet a very little while, and Lebanon shall be turned into a fruitfull field? Where its future conversion into fruitfulness seemingly implies the present barrenness thereof. But here we must distinguish betwixt field and forest fruitfulness. The former is compo∣sed of the concurrence of art and industry with nature; the latter onely takes what nature tenders, without any toile to improve the same, wherein Libanus already did exceed. But now the Prophet foretells (be∣sides this wild and native) an elaborate and artificiall fertility likely to befall this mountain, namely in the speedy and universall alteration of things in Israel, when champian fields for fear should be forsaken, and husbandmen for their security retire with their tillage to mount Le∣banon. Thus much for this fair and fruitfull place full of goodly trees, wild and tame beasts in abundance; and yet when measured by an infinite majesty,Isa. 40. 16. Lebanon is not sufficient for him to burn, nor all the beasts there∣of of sufficient for a burnt offering. § 6. Having largely praised this place (enough to set all the neigh∣bouring Princes at variance about the propriety thereof) it is now high time to inquire to whom the right thereof did belong. Here we finde an undoubted evidence, that the same by a double title per∣teined to the land and people of Israel. 1 As a fence to the vineyard. 2 As a Common to a City. As a fence to a vineyard. So the Prophet in his ParableIs. 5. . And be fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof. Now although this fen∣cing principally refers to Gods protection over the Iews, yet is it not un∣appliable to the naturall posture of their countrey, hem'd in with mount Libanus on the north. Secondly, if we conceive all Iudea under the no∣tion of a great city, Lebanon was a CommonIosh. 13. 5. assigned thereunto, and ALL LEBANON towards the Sunrising. And though probably the neighbouring Tribes Asher, Naphtali, and Dan did reap the most benefit thereby, yet all the rest are presumed to have a right both in the herbage for their pro∣fit, and wild beasts for their pleasure. However, either with or without the leave of Israel, theIudg. 3.3. Hivites (andGen. 10.17. Archites, whose city Archa is by Ptole∣my placed hereabouts) made bold to share with them in the commodities of this mountain. Here grew the goodly Cedars, of whose severall kindes, (some bearing fruit without flowers, others bringing flowers without fruit) manner of growing, having streight and clean
bodies to the top, and there a tuft of boughs and leaves, (where should the haire be but on the head?) naturall qualities or supernaturall rather, (because said to be free from corruption, and therefore used to make the statues of the Gods) the Philosopherlin. nat. history. will give the best account, to whose reports we remit the Reader. § 7. Forget we not that humane writers make a division of the mountain, calling the northern ledge thereof Libanus, the southern Anti∣Libanus whereas the Scriptures taking no notice of this distinction, ex∣press both under the generall name of Libanus. § 8. And now to climbe this mountain, behold it every where scat∣tered with Solomons workmen, some bearing of burdens, (Better to car∣ry the meanest materiall to the Temple of God, then carve the most cu∣rious pieces for the tower of Babel) some hewing of stones, all busied, either with their hands as labourers, or eyes as overseers. No hole left for idleness to peep in at, but presently she was perceived and punished. I hope without offence, one may wish them God speed, the rather be∣cause Psal. 74. 6, 7. he that hewed timber afore out of the thick trees, was known to bring it to an excellent work, but now they break down all the work thereof with axes and hammers. § 9. It is now high time that leaving the generall description of Li∣banus we come to survay the severall places on, or near thereunto. In the southwest side thereof near Zidon, and the sea, lay the land of Cabul, which Solomon gave to Hiram King of Tyre for the cost and charge he was at in building the Temple. Hereby it appears that this territory (though lying in1 King. 9. 11. Galilee was no part of the Land of Canaan, it being above the power of the Kings of Israel, to alienate any parcell thereof. But though it was unlawfull to take the childrens bread, and cast it unto dogs, yet the crust and parings thereof might be given them: to which this Land of Cabul may well be compared, being so course and base a Countrey, that it little contented King Hiram, who therefore called it1 King. 9. 13. Cabul, that is dirty, or displea∣sing. It may seem strange that Solomon, who in other things consulted with his honour and magnificence and to whom God gave a large heart, should herein have so narrow a hand, as not to give Hiram a friend and forein Prince full consideration, who so freely had furnished him with all necessaries for his building. But 1 Haply Solomon beheld Hiram as a Homager unto him, holding the kingdome of Tyre from the Crown of Israel. And if so, then all he did was but his duty, and fully rewarded in Solomons favou∣rable acceptance thereof. 2 Solomon might conceive Hirams expences sufficiently satisfied in allowing his men such a vast1 King. 5. 11. 2 Chron. 2. 10. proportion of yearly provision: so these cities were given him not in compensation of the charge, but as an overplus and meer gratuity. For which Hiram ought to be thankfull because so good, not displeased because no better.
3 Most probable it is, that absolute need, and no other reason, made Solomon fall short, in satisfying Hirams expectation. His treasure being much exhausted (excess will begger wealth it self) by his sumptuous structures. The same necessitous principles, which caused his intolerable taxes on his own people, might also make him (against his own will, and generous disposition) faile in rewarding the full deserts of Hiram. It is some contentment unto us, that though we know not the seve∣rall names, yet the1 King. 9. 11. Scripture acquaints us with the exact number of the cities in Cabul-land: being twenty in all, as in our Map, we have recko∣ned them accordingly. § 10. But here some will be very much startled, that this land of Cabul should so lately receive this denomination from Hirams displea∣sure, whereas we finde it so called four hundred years before in the book of Ioshua, where the borders of the Tribe of Asher, are thus assigned: they goe out toIosh. 19. 27. Cabul on the left hand. To satisfie which seeming difficul∣ty, we must know, that though the book of Ioshua contains matter of far more ancient date,Josh. 10. 13. yet it was written by holy-men of God after the days of David, and probably in the reign of Solomon. This appears because in Ioshua mention is made of the book of Iasher, wherein the standing still of the Sun and Moon was recorded, and that book of Iasher was pen∣ned after Davids reign, because therein Davids2 Sam. 1. 18. acts were also Chro∣nicled. § 11. Mount Libanus is overspread with the1 King. 9. 19. & 2 Chr. 8. 6. buildings of Solomon, whereof some may be conceived the fragments made out of the Rem∣nants and Reversions of the stone and timber left of what was provi∣ded for the Temple. Yea probably some were platformes and modells to heighten and improve the skill and knowledge of his builders. True it is, in the making of the Tabernacle, every Tenon, board, hook and socket were Iure Divino, both by precept and precedent, according to theHeb. 8. 5. pat∣tern in the Mount: but it was not so in the building of the Temple. There∣in, God gave Solomon a large heart, and furnished him with Hiram a skilfull workman: but as for all particular proportions, they were left at large for their wisdomes to contrive. It may therefore with much likelyhood be conceived, that to better their knowledge in Architecture for the Temple some slight buildings in Libanon were erected, which afterwards might serve Solomon for privacy, and pleasure, retirement, and recreation. And seeing Solomon took his naturall history from the Cedar that growes in Lebanon, to the Moss on the wall, haply he might study in some of these buildings, where Cedars, and other simples were presented unto him, being best able to comment on Natures works when he saw the text before his eyes. Of these buildings in Libanus that tower whichCant. 7. 4. looks towards Damascus was the principal, to which the Nose of the Spouse in the Canticles is compared, for the whiteness, uniformity, and pro∣portionable
largeness thereof, whereby the generousness and animosity of the Church is intimated. TheArist. in libro physiognomico. Philosopher telleth us that a tower-fashi∣oned Nose (round and blunt at the top) is a signe of magnanimity. § 12. From this tower we may take the Prospect of all the adjacent countrey: wherein we take no notice of the division of Syria according to humane writers, but confine our selves to Scripture expressions. 1 Rehob. 2 Aram or Maachah. 3 Syria of Damascus. 4 Zobah. 5 The land of Hamah. 6 Syrophoenicia. 7 Coelosyria. 8 Phoenicia. Aram2 Sam. 10. 6. Rehob, or Beth-Rehoh, so called from a principall City therein, lay south east of mount Libanus. Herein wasGen. 14. 14. Dan the place where A∣braham overtook the four Kings, who after many victories had took Lot and his wife captives. By Dan we understand not the city of Dan (formerly Laish) which some hundreds of years after was so named (thoughHeb. 7. 9. Levi is said [vertually] to pay tithes in the loines of Abraham, Dan cannot be conceived [formally] to name cities, being as yet in the body of his great Grandfather) but the eastermost fountain of Iordan, anciently called Dan. And surely springs the issue of nature, are seni∣ours to all cities the result of Art. Here Abraham overtook them, and with three hnndred and odde men conqueredand pursued them (being nu∣merous and flushed with former victorys) toGen. 14. 16. Hobah which is on the left side of Damascus. Thus that army which is but a handfull of men, managed by Gods hand, will work wonders. Hereby Lot recovered his liberty, the King of Sodome his subjects, they their goods; the Auxiliaries ofGen. 14. 24. Aner,Gen. 14. 20. Eshcol and Mamre, received their pay out of the spoile, Melchisedec had the tithes, Abraham the honour, and God the glory of the victory. § 13. Aram-Maachah, lay southeast of Aram-beth-Rehoh, the1 Chr. 18. 6, 7. King thereof appeared very active (though bringing into the field but a thousand2 Sam. 10. 6. men) in the battell against King David. It seems Ioab the politick Generall reputed these Syrians valiant, who took the2 Sam. 10. 9. choicest men of Israel under his own conduct to oppose them, consigning the refuse under Abishai against the2 Sam. 10. 9. Ammnoites, presuming they would fly of course, if the other were worsted: as indeed it came to pass. Appen∣dants to this Aram-Maachah were 1 Geshur:2 Sam▪ 3. 3. 1 Chr▪ 3. 2. hereof Talmai the King; and Maachah his daughter was maried to David, and mother to Absalom. No wonder then if the child proved a cross to his Father, begotten on a heathen woman contrary to Gods command. And here Absalom (changing his climate, not conditions) staid2 Sam. 3. 38. three years, clouded with his Fathers displeasure for murdering his brother Amnon. 2 Ishtoh, which contributed twelve2 Sam. 10. 6. thousand men in the generall engagement of the Syrians against King David. 3 The land of Tob: that is, the good-land (orSo Minister expounds the name thereof. Goth-land if you please)
so called from the goodness thereof. Though all the good we know of it is this, that it afforded a safe refuge toIudg. 11. 3. Iephthah, when persecuted by his brethren, who hence was solemnely fetched to be Judge of Israel. Adrichomius, and other Authours here make the Land ofIob. 1. 1. Uz where Iob dwelt. I cannot blame any place to be desirous of so pious a man to be an inhabitant therein. But both Iobs friends and foes forbid the situ∣ation of the land of Uz here abouts. His foes the Sabeans, his friends Eli∣phaz the Temanite &c. who are known to live far south of this place, of whom properly in the description of Edom. 14. Aram of Damascus succeeds lying northeast of Aram-Maachah,2 Sam. 8. 5. watered with the rivers of Abanah and Pharphar. This Abanah in humane writers is called Chrysoroas or golden-streame from the yellowness of his banks and water. Otherwise, as little gold is to be found in his chanell, as at the golden grove in Caermarthen-shire, or at the golden-vale in Hereford∣shire. However Abanah and Pharphar were highly beholden to2 King. 5. 12. Naaman, who preferred them before all the waters of Israel; as possibly they might equall, yea exceed them in some outward respects. But what if the water in the Cistern chance to be clearer then that in the Font? Know it is divine institution, which puts the difference betwixt them, leaving the one a plain Element, and making the other a soveraigne Sa∣crament. This river Chrysoroas running northward is afterwards swal∣lowed up in the sandy ground, and there is the visible end thereof. So that Solomons rule, All rivers run into theEccles. 1. 5. Sea, must admit of an exception or exposition, namely either openly or secretly, as no doubt this river hath an underground recourse to the Ocean. § 15. Coming near to Damascus we finde the place where Saint Paul was cast down to the ground, as he went with a Commission from the high Priest to persecute the Saints of Damascus. Now seeing Damascus was not in Iudea, if any demand why Paul should straggle so far from his own Countrey, hear his own answer, Being exceedinglyAct. 26. 11. mad against them, I persecuted them even unto strange cities: and it is reason enough for the actions of blind zeale, that they are the actions of blind zeale. Besides, it seems the high Priests at Ierusalem had a kind of Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction over the Iews in all places. Some seeming contradiction, but on serious thoughts easily reconciled, appears in the history of Saint Pauls travells. Acts 9.7. The men also which journeyed with him stood amazed, hearing a voice, but seeing no man.Acts 22.9. Moreover they that were with me saw indeed a light, and were afraid, but heard not the voice of him that spak unto me. For, two things considerable in this viion. 1 The generals thereof communicated to his fellow-travellers, that they might attest the truth of this miraculous accident. No seem∣ing fancy but really acted. Hereupon they heard confusedly that
there was a sound, but heard not distinctly what that sound was, and were admitted to see a light, but did not discover the person of Iesus appearing. 2 The particulars thereof imparted to Paul alone (as calculated onely for his conversion) whose eares and eyes plainly heard and saw the voice and apparition. Hence Saint Paul was conducted to the city of Damascus, whither we follow after him. § 16. Damascus is by some conceived to have been founded by Eliezer Abrahams Steward, onely because he is styledGen. 15. 2. Eliezer of Damascus: But if so, then signall was the piety of Eliezer who preferred rather to live a servant in Abrahams good family, then to rule as a Lord in a great city of his own building. Various was the success and fortune of Damascus un∣der severall Lords, and we will onely instance in such as are mentioned in Scripture. 1 It was inhabited by the Syrians, and accounted the Metropolis of the Countrey. 2 It was probably conquered by David, when he put2 Sam. 8. 5, 6. & 1 Chr. 18. 6. garisons into Aram of Damascus. 3 In the days of Solomon it was possessed by Rezin a fugitive Syrian, who being made a King thereof,a 1 Kin. 1. 23, 24. was a professed enemy to Israel. 4 It was won by Ieroboam the second, King of Israel, who is said to have restored2 King. 14. 28. Damascus. 5 It was recovered again by the Syrians, and Rezin in the days of Ahaz was2 King. 16. 6. King thereof. 6 It was taken by Tiglath-Peleser King of Assyria,2 King. 16. 9. who carried all the inhabitants thereof away captive. In the new Testament we finde it in subjection to the Roman Empe∣rour, under whom2 Cor. 11. 32. Aretas was King, a persecuter of Saint Paul. § 17. Wonder not that the Roman Emperours ruling over the world, should suffer some Kings to reign under them: which was their con∣stant practise, and whereby they received no small benefit. For first, hereby they kept their people in more willing obedience, when they saw their former government not wholly altered, but some shadow thereof still remaining in their Kings continued amongst them. Se∣condly, when any distastfull project was set on foot, the Emperours used these Kings to promote it: so casting the odium upon them, which themselves declined, while suchVetus ac jam pridem recept a populi Romani consuetudo, ut habcret instru∣enta servittis & reges. Tacit. in vita Agricolae. Kings (usually by their immediate de∣pendence) durst not displease, but doe whatsoever the Emperours en∣joined them. Thirdly, it conduced to the state of their Empire to have Kings homagers thereunto. It is but a Farme (though of never so great revenues) and not reputed a Manor, which hath not some free-holders holding of it, and owing suit and service unto it. Semblably it was part of the Imperiall glory amongst the Romans to have even Kings to hold
their Scepters and Crowns, by deputation under it, as Herod in Iudea, Deiotarus in Galatia, our Lucius in Britain, and this Aretas King of Da∣mascus. § 18. Under him Saint Paul had a miraculous deliverance, though both Prince and people plotted his destruction, andAct. 9. 24. & 2 Cor. 11. 32. watched the gates day and night that they might kill him. But what saith the Psalmist? ExceptPsal. 127. 1. the Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain, either to keep out those whom he will have in, or to keep in those whom he will have out. All the wall shall be one open gate to those, whom divine providence will have to escape, as here to Saint Paul, being let down over the wall by a rope in a basket. § 19. Amongst the publick buildings of Damascus, the house of Rimmon was most remarkable; It troubled the tender Conscience of converted Naaman,2 King. 5. 18. when his Master went up to worship there, that he had so often bowed to that Idoll: so an excellentNic. Fuller Miscel. Sacra. pag. Critick proves the words to be read, relating not to his future but former actions. Wherefore the Prophets answer, Goe in peace, is not a toleration of his Idolatry for the time to come, but an absolution from his former faults, upon Naamans free confession and serious sorrow for the same. They shew also in this city the house or rather hole whereinAct. 9. 12. Ananias (Saint Pauls ghost∣ly- father) dwelt or lurked, being a Cellar under ground, to which pil∣grimes descend by many staires, who have so filled the walls thereof by Biddulph in his travels. pa. writing their names therein, that Reader there is no room left to re∣gister thy name if going thither. § 20. Modern Damascus is a beautifull city. The first, Damask-rose had its root here, and name hence. So all Damask silk, Linen, poul∣der and plumbes called Damascens.Nullae ibi sunt ob fortunae bona lites, & nulli proinde advocati, procu∣ratores, aucausa∣rum sollicitors, quia debitores non sunt ulli, aut credires. Omnia piompta & paeata tran∣siguntur pccu∣nia. Medicis omnino nibil ni∣i restituta prius aegro sanitate of∣sertur. Gorg. Bra in civit: orbis terrarum. in des. Damasc. Two things at this day are most re∣markeable amongst the inhabitants: There are no Lawyers amongst them, no Advocates or Sollicitors of causes, no compacts being made for future performance, but Weigh and Pay, all bargains being driven with ready money. Secondly, Physicians here are paid no fee, except the patient recover his health. And now I perceive that Mahomet was a politick man, who entered but once into Damascus, and perceiving the pleasures thereof, would never return again, for fear (forsooth) lest he should be bewitched with the delightfulness thereof, and hindred from the great work he had in hand. I indeed perceive that so pleasant a sub∣ject hath too long retarded my pen, almost forgetfull to goe forward in our description, we therefore leave it and proceed. § 21. Aram-Zobah lay north-east of Aram-Damascus. Hadadezar or Hadarezar was King thereof, so glorious a Prince, that his servants wore shields of gold in war, as if they intended to dazle their enemies eyes with the splendor of their armes; but all in vain. For the best swords of steel will command the bravest shield of gold: and David at Elam, got an absolute conquest of him, killing2 Sam. 10. 16. Shobach his Captain, as for∣merly
he had2 Sam. 8. 4. defeated him and stript him of much rich spoile. As for those golden shields, they fell not to the shares of any private persons, but were treasured up by David for the building of the Temple, where this glorious Plate shined in its proper sphear; and where Riot, and Luxury abused by man, was converted into well grounded bounty, as bestowed on Gods service. Here David houghed the horses of Hada∣dezar, and onely reserved an hundred2 Sam. 8. 4. chariots of them as a Trophee of triumph to be used for state at publick solemnities. § 22. Some will censure this as an improvident and unpolitick act, and character David as more happy to get, then able to use a victory; not casually letting slip, but wilfully casting such a power of horse out of his hand, which managed with a proportionable infantry, might have given Law to all the east Countrey. Surely it was not done out of a cowardly suspicion, lest the Syrians should recover those horses again; much less out of consciousness of want of horsemanship in the to set riders upon them: Rather it was, that David being privy to the deceitfulness of mans heart (how hard it was to have much humane strength, and not to have confidence in it) did it to wean his subjects from the arme of flesh, that they might more rely on divine protection. And he did it, to encourage in them, what properly is called Manhood: that they might not expect victories of equivocall generation begotten betwixt men and horses, but such atchieved onely by mans prowess, instrumentall to get, and Gods providence, the principall to give them. Yea David might seem to have houghed all the horses in the world, with that his short, but sharp sentence, APsal. 33. 17. horse is but a vaine thing to save a man. § 23. It will further be objected, that grant these horses not to be used in the wars of Israel, yet what needs this wast to spoile Gods good creatures? Might they not have been sold for many talents and given to the poor? It is answered, that David did it in an holy Brave, to shew that the Pagans pride, was Israels scorn, and that he as much disdained to gain wealth by the sale, as to get strength by the service of those horses. Besides, David herein did follow the precept given to, and pressed and practised byIosh. 11. 6. Ioshua in the like case. And indeed multiplying of horses wasDeut. 17. 19. forbidden the Kings of Israel. But after Davids days the Militia was much altered and managed by horse; by the way, Absalom was the first Israelite, whom we finde riding in a chariot, and how he was blest is not unknown: Afterwards Solomon brought many horses out of Egypt, and an Egyptian wife on the back of them, who certainly hin∣dred more, then the other helped him; and generally the Israelites were more prosperous before their use of horses, then ever after; Their suc∣cess was mounted when they fought on foot, but scarce went on foot when their armies were mounted on horseback. § 24. But to return to Aram-Zobath: Two prime cities thereof with
four names are mentioned in Scripture,2 Sam. 8. 8. Beta, and Berothat,1 Chr. 18. 8. elsewhere called Tibhah and Chun. Here (not to say that Beta and Tibhah by Meta∣thesis are the same) it is no newes for cities standing in the confines of severall kingdomes, and the juncture of severall languages to have dou∣ble names. What the English-man calls Glocester and Worcester, the Welsh-men tearmHumrey Lhuyd in de∣scrip. Walliae. Caer Loyw and Caer-Frangon. And probably one of the names of these cities was Hebrew and the other Aramite. Both of them afforded much brass2 Sam. 8. 8. to King David (Gods receiver generall for that purpose) for the building of the Temple. But Zobah which gave the name to this Countrey is generally conceived at this day to be called Aleppo, (though some Iews inhabiting therein count it anciently the city of Sepharvaim) from Alep which signifiesBiddulphs travels pa. 45. milke in the Turkish language; whereof such plenty here, that if via lactea be to be found on earth, it is in this place. It is so seated on a navigable stream which runs into Euphrates, that here the commodities of the East and West doe meet. The former from Babylon by water, the latter by Land-caravans from Scanderoon, and this city is the golden clasp to couple both sides of the world together, and we remit the Reader to modern Merchants for further information thereof. § 25. And here standing on the utmost verge of our map we could wish it of such extent as might represent to the Reader Aram-Naharam or Mesopotamia (otherwise Padan-Aram) where Bethuel and Laban dwelt; Charran, whither Abraham first removed; Caldea and Ur, a city where he formerly dwelt; Babylon and Nineveh, the two Emperesses of the world, with the rivers which watered and bounded Paradise it self. But alass, as Prodigalls who have spent their possessions take little delight to see a survey of the lands they have sold, (the sad remembrancer of their for∣mer riot and present wretchedness) so small comfort can accrew un∣to us by the curious enquiry into the ancient place of Paradise, having long since in our first Parents forfeited all our right and title thereunto. But the main matter forbidding our Pens progress any further, is be∣cause, as Shimei confined by Solomon to Ierusalem suffered justly as an offen∣der for gadding to1 King. 2. 44. Gath: so Palestine with the neighbouring countreys being the proper subject of our discourse, we shall be taken trespassers, if found wandering beyond the bounds thereof. However I hope without offence my hand may point further then my feet may follow, and tell the Reader that the fore-named places lie northeast of the city of Aleppo. § 26. The land of Hamah lay west of Aram-Zobah, anciently inha∣bited by the Hamathites, descended from the eleventh and youngest Son of CanaanGen. 10. 18. the Son of Cham, of whom largely before. In the days of David Toi was King of this Countrey, who being at war with Hadadezar, and hearing how the Israelites had defeated him, sent2 Sm. 8. 10. Ioram his Son to King David with presents in his hand and complements in his mouth,
to congratulate his victory. Long after Salmaneser subdued this coun∣trey and extinguished the royall race; witness that brag: Where is the King of HamathEsa. 37. 13. and of Arpad? Though that proud question admits of an answer; namely, they were even there, where their sins set them: seeing it was not so much the Assyrian valour, as the Syrian wickedness which cast these Kings out of their countrey. Riblah was a prime city in this land, where Nebuchadnezzar caused the eyes of2 Kin. 25. 6, 7. Zedekiah to be bored out. Some conceive this done in the land of Nephtali, others with more like∣lihood in this place, and we (see Reader our carefulness to please all if possible in this captious age) mention it in both. Yet because this Riblah was many miles nearer to Babylon, and further from Ierusalem, it is more probable to be the place, as more for Nebuchadnezzars ease and Zedekiahs anguish: it adding to the conquerours state to fetch the cap∣tive furthest from his own countrey. § 27. Hamah the city which gave the name to this countrey, was af∣terwards called Antiochia. Seven and twenty cities are said to be of the same name. For severall Antiochuses being successively Kings of Syria, stocked their dominions with many cities after their names, as being either built, beautified, strengthened or enlarged by them, or their Fa∣vorites. But it matters not how many younger brethren there be of the same family, as long as our Antioch is the heire, and though not in age, in honour to be preferred before all the rest. Here the professor of the Go∣spell formerly termed Beleevers for their faith, sometimes Brethren for their love, Saints for their holinesse, Disciples for their knowledg, were for all these first calledAct. 11. 26. Christians. Probably when many of all nations be∣leeved, the name Christian was given them, to bury the difference be∣twixt Iews and Gentiles (thus England and Scotland happily joined in great Britain) which two names though remaining afterwards, were used as terms of civill difference, not odious distinction. Had this happened at Rome, how would the Tide of Tiber have swoln above all his bounds and banks at the conceit that in her city Religion it self was christened? But this Antioch hath still more to brag of: The Chair of Saint Peter, where∣in he sate Patriarch many years before his removeall to Rome: and there∣fore no wonder if Antioch grudge to give Rome the superiority. Why should not that place be the prime, which was the first? Besides, Saint Peter was honoured at Antioch, murdered at Rome. And why should that City receive most credit by him, which used most cruelty unto him? But let Ecclesiasticall Heralds deduce the pedegree, and martiall the pre∣cedency of these Churches, we will onely adde, that this Pharisaicall taking of the upper-hand, hath in all ages hindered the giving of the right hand of Christian fellowship. § 28. Now surely no malignant quality in this place, but a principle of perversness in mens hearts was the cause, that so many famous con∣tentions happened in this city of Antioch. Here it was, that some com∣ming
down from Iudea, maintained the necessity ofAct. 15. 1. circumcision, and the legall ceremonies, endevouring to set up a religion (like those monsters in Africa, begotten betwixt severall kindes, partaking of both, perfect in neither, but defective in their very redundancy) a edley mongrel betwixt Judaisme and Christianity. This occasioned the calling of the first great Councell in Ierusalem, which in fine concluded that this legall Yoke was not to be laid on the neck of Christians. Here Peter being guilty (it is the expression ofIn his Epistle to the Cardi∣nall of Loraine prefixed before his translation of Chrysostome on the Galati∣ans. Erasmus) of superstitious dissimulation, with his ex∣ample (oh the impulsive power of great mens Precedents!) brought Gal. 2. 18. Barnabas into the same fault: for which Saint Paul presently and pub∣lickly reproved him. But we will not widen the wounds in good mens memories, rather commending to posterity, the holy zeale of Saint Paul in seasonable giving, the humble piety of Saint Peter in pati∣ent taking so sharp a reproof. § 29. But the greatest contention happening here, was that Paroxysme betwixt Paul and Barnabas, the one as earnestly refusing, as the other desiring the company of Iohn Mark to goe along with them. In which contest, Paul is generally conceived to have most reason, Banabas most passion on his side, because 1 He saw clearly without carnall relation, whilest Barnabas beheld Mark hisColos. 4. 10. sisters son through the spectacles of naturall affection. 2 A reason is rendred by Paul why Markes company should be declined, namely, because heAct. 15. 58. departed from them at Pamphilia and deserted the work, none alledged by Barnabas why the same should be accepted. 3 Paul immediately departing after this contention is said toAct. 15. 46. be re∣commended by the brethren to the grace of God, which seems to amount to a generall approbation of his carriage herein. No such pas∣sage appears of Barnabas. 4 After this time Saint Paul and his acts are celebrated in every Chapter, whereas Barnabas sinks here in silence, and his name mentioned no more in the history of the Scripture. But we must admire Gods wisdome in mans weakness, sanctifying this discord to his glory. For whilest Paul and Barnabas were newly converted, and their company needfull for mutuall assistance each to o∣ther, their persons and affections were united together: but now grown strong in grace, and able singly to subsist, God suffered this un∣happy difference to sever them. Whereby the Gospell encreased, the one sailing to Cyprus, the other staying in Syria. So whereas formerly one place at the same time did jointly enjoy them; now there became two Flockes, two shepheards, two vines, two vinedressers, and the division of Preachers proved the multiplication of preaching. § 30. We must not forget how one Nicolas a Proselyte of this city of Act. 6. 5. Antioch, was the last of the seven Deacons, and the first founder of an
heresie (which God professeth himself toRev. 2. 6. hate) from him called the Nicolaitans. For thisBarnius An. Eccles. Anno. 68. Num. 10. Nicolas is reported to have had a beautifull woman to his wife, and being taxed for being causlesly jealous of her, to vindi∣cate his innocence, he prostituted her to the embraces of any that would lie with her; with some other strange opinions he maintained. Those therefore who so undiscreetly express their detestation of one sin, that they fall foul on the committing of the contrary, may by a spirituall proportion be accounted mysticall Nicolaitans. § 31. There was also belonging to Antioch (pardon a little digressi∣on) a delicious suburb called Daphne, where Apollo Daphneus was adored. Now (some three hundred sixty years after Christ) Iulian the Apostate, the professed enemy to piety, sacrificed hereto this Devill-God, who used to be very talkative in giving of Oracles, but lately was grown very mute. And being demanded the reason of his suddain silence answered (forsooth) it was because the body of Babylas (martyred under Decius the Empe∣rour) was buried near his Temple, the vertue whereof stopped his wind-pipe. Hereupon a conceit was taken that other Martyrs bones might be found upon triall as terrible to the devill, which gave theSee M. Meade in his Aposta∣sieof the latter times. pag. 122. first occasion to the enshrining, worshipping, and circumgestation of the Reliques of Saints. See how Satan (much delighted in his apish Parallels of divine service) was ambitious, that a dominative point of Antichristianisme should have its originall in the same place where the name of Christianity first began. But long since Antioch hath smarted for this superstition and her other sins; reduced at this day to a petty village, (standing in the rode betwixt Scanderoon and Aleppo) and Orontes the river thereof once navigable, (Saint Paul is said to haveAct. 14. 26. sailed to Antioch) much obstructed with sand, and more profitable for good Eeles there taken, then any other commodity, and the few buildings remain∣ing miserably ruinous. But seeing silkes, though ragged, may be worn with the less discredit; the torn and tattered edifices in Antioch seem no disgrace, because most of them are made of rich stuffe, even costly mar∣ble curiously polished. § 32. Leaving Antioch we come to Seleucia seated on the sea side, a Port once graced with SaintAct. 13 4. Pauls presence: whence they sailed into Cyprus lying over against it. This Island is so called from Cypress trees growing there in abundance, which a greatNic. Fuller, Miscell. lib. 4. ca 5. pa. 493. Critick conceives to be that GopherGen. 6. 14. wood, whereof the Arke of Noah was made, and boldly af∣firmes that setting aside the adventitious termination, CUPAR and GOPHER are effectually the same in Hebrew. Frequent the use of Cypress-boughs in Funeralls, whereof theCuprssus incisa non renascitur, sicut ex mort nihil jam est sperandum. Scal. casti. infe∣stum. reason is rendred, because that tree cut down sprouts no more, as no naturall hope of a dead corps reviving.  pag. 5. Coffins also were generally made of Cypress even amongst the heathen, in memoriall, asNic: Fuller ut prius. one will have it, of the deluge, and man∣kinde buried quick many moneths in the Cypress ark. The distance
of Cyprus from the continent cannot be great, if it be true whatNat. hist. li. 8. cap. 32. Pliny reports, that whole heards of Deer used to swim over thither (senting, though not seeing land) the formost like an adventurous Captain valiantly con∣ducting them; and then in order one so lying on another, that the leaders hanch was the followers pillow to rest his head upon. Most fruit∣full was this Island, affording all things both for pleasure and luxury, and therefore Venus worshipped for chief Deity therein. The women of this countrey anciently were very wanton, or as they counted it, very religious, for having a whore for their Goddess, no wonder if adultery was their devotion. § 33. Amongst the eminent persons bred in Cyprus, whilest States∣men take speciall notice of Solon the lawgiver, Philosophers of Zeno the Stoick, Poets of Astepiades first authour of those verses from him so called, it will be fittest for us to observeAct. 21. 16. Mnason an old Disciple; hoste to Saint Paul, SergiusAct. 13. 7. Paulus deputy of this Island, a prudent man, Saint Pauls Convert; and Barnabas here born a Iew-Levit-Cypriot (the first by nation, the next by family, the last by place of his nativity) and had therein possessions of considerable value. If any say it was covetous∣ness, and distrust of divine providence in Barnabas to be a landedAct. 4. 36. Levite, because that Tribe had no inheritance given them; The Lord of Israel was theirIosh. 13. 33. inheritance: Let such know, that constitution was onely tempora∣ry and locall, to last no longer, then whilest the Iews continued at home in a settled Commonwealth, after whose banishment abroad, happy that Leite, who (when charity of others waxed cold) could warm himself with his own well gotten goods. But afterwards Barnabas that Son of consolation (comforting the bowels of the Saints as well by his works as words, deeds as doctrine) soldAct 4. 37. his possessions; and tendered the price thereof at the feet of the Apostles. Such practises were sincere∣ly performed in the primitivetimes, superstitiously imitated with opi∣nion of merit in after ages, and scornfully derided by too many in our days, so far from parting with the propriety, that they will not appro∣priate a part of their goods to good uses. We finde Saint Paul, preaching in two cities in Cyprus;Act. 13. 5, 6. Salamis, where there was a Synagogue of the Iews, and Paphos (where Venus was worshipped, thence surnamed Paphia, and) where Elymas, the sorcerer was struck blind, for opposing Saint Paul.verse 11. We cannot recover Paphos proportionably into this Map, behold it therefore peeping in, but excommuned the lines thereof. § 34. But to return to the Continent, where we fall on Syrophoenicia, whose mixt name speakes its middle situation betwixt Syria and Phenice, so that if those two countrys should fall out, no fitter umpire to arbitrate their difference then Syrophoeniia, participating of, and therefore presu∣med impartiall to both. Of thisMark 7. 26. Countrey was that bold begger, who would have no saying nay, but importunate in the behalf of her daughter, no whit discouraged with the disadvantage of her person, disaffection
of the disciples, (miserable mediatours interceding for her repulse) deep silence and afterwards disdainful denial of Christ himself, would not de∣sist (as if her zeal was heated with the Antiperistasis of the cold comfort she received) till the violence of her faith had wrested a grant from our Saviour. The bounds of Syrophoenicia are variously assigned, the princi∣pall cities whereof are Laodicea, different from that, to which Saint Iohn wrote, and whoseRev. 3. 16. lukewarm temper made health it self sick thereof. § 35. Next we finde on the sea the city of Gebal (in Ptolemy and Strabo Gabala) and the Inhabitants therein and thereabouts, termed Giblites in Josh. 13. 5. Scripture. These led the Van in the grand conspiracy against Israel, Psal. 8 3. 7. Gebal and Ammon and Amalek, the Philistims with the inhabitants of Tyre, Asher also &c. But Solomon taught their hands another lesson, not to fight against Gods people, but to help to finish his1 Kin. 5. 15. 18 See the mar∣gin in our Bibles. Temple. At the Coronation of Tyre the Queen-Mart of the world, (so largely de∣scribed by Ezekiel, where all neighbouring Cities as in Grand-Sergeantry, held their places, by some speciall attendance about her) the Ancients of Gebal, and the wisemen thereof were herEzek. 27. 9. calkers, to stop the leakes and chinks in her ships, so cunning were the Giblites in that imployment. Yet all their curiosity in this kind, could not keep out the deluge of divine anger, from entring their own City, which at this day hath drowned Gebal in utter destruction. § 36. More south the river Eleutherus arising out of Libanus, shaped his course to the sea, so being the northern boundary of Phoenicia. In this river, saith reverendVide Bczae Annot at. inl∣cum. Act. 8. 36. Beza, was the Eunuch baptized by Philip, therein making an unexcusable mistake. For except the Eunuch in his travell went (like the Sun on2 King. 20. 11. Abaz his dial) backwards, it was impossible for him going to Gaza, and so into Aethiopia his own countrey, once to come near this river, lying far north quite the contrary way. Had Beza (in stead of the Eunuch baptized) placed the Emperour Barbarossa drowned here, it had born better proportion to truth. However from this learned mans mistake, I collect comfortable confidence of pardon for my faults committed in this our description. For seeing so strong legs are prone to stumble, surely the falls of my feeble feet will be freely forgiven me by the charitable Reader. § 37. Near the running of Eleutherus into the midland sea stood An∣taradus, so called because opposite to Aradus (Arvad in Scripture) a city of remarkable antiquity, situation, and subsistence. Well doth Strabo call this an ancient place, seeing it retained its name, more then two thousand years, fromGen. 10. 18. 1 Chr. 1. 16. Arvad the ninth son of Canaan, even till after the time of our Saviour. The city is seated in an Island seven furlongs in compass, and twenty distant from the Continent, being all a mainStrabo li. 16. pag. 753. rock (industry and ingenuity will make wealth grow on a bare stone) wa∣tered in peace from the main land, in war with an engine (consult with ourStrabo ut prius Author for the forme thereof) which limbeck-like extracted
sweet water out of the brackish Ocean. The citizens of this place served Tyre in a double office; by land as souldiers, The men ofEzek. 27. 11. & Ezek. . 8. Arvad with thine army were upon the walls round about; by water, as failers▪ The in∣habitants of Arvad were thy mariners: which sufficiently speaks their dexteri∣ty in either Element. § 38. Next the men of Arvad the Prophet mentioneth theEzek. 27. 11. Gamma∣dims (the joint naming them probably insinuates the vicinity of their habitation) which were in the Tower of Tyre as a garison to defend them. By Gammadims some understand Pygmies of a Cubit-high (equall to the standard of EhudsIudg. 8. 16. dagger) because, Gamad signifies a cubit in the He∣brew tongue. But how ill doth this measure agree with martiall men? except any will say, that as the Iebusites, in a proud confidence of the na∣turall strength of mount Sion, placed the2 Sam. 5 8. lame and blind to man the same: so the Tyrians presumed that dwarfes were tall enough to make good their giant fortifications. More likely is the conjecture ofVide Trml. annot. in locum. Tremellius, that the Gammadims were a people in Phoenicia inhabiting a part thereof, which ran out bowed and bended into the sea. And we know that Ancona in Italy, andSee Sows survey of London. Elbow-lane in London receive names from the same fashion. And seeing Cornish-men are so called from the forme of their Countrey, dwelling in a land which by degrees is contracted or nar∣rowed into the likeness of an horn; why not Gammadims Cubit-men from the similitude of their countrey in the situation thereof? Here to fortifie his conjecture Tremellius produceth a place inNat bist. li. 2. cap. 91. Pliny of Gamala a city in Phoenicia, since swallowed up, where he conceiveth the L. to be changed into the D. that the Gammadims were inhabitants thereof. How∣ever for quietness sake, may the Reader be contented, to suffer them to remain there in our Map, if not as dwellers, onely as sojourners, untill such time as learned men shall provide a more proper place for them. § 39. And now on a suddain we are fallen unawares against our pro∣pounded order, on Phoenicia, of the name and nature of which countrey formerly in the Tribe of Asher. The chief havens therein were Tripolis; so called, sayP. Hylyn Mi∣crosme. pa. 556. some, because it hath been thrice build; by others, because Strabo Geog. lib. 16. p. 754. three Cities (Tyre, Sidon, and Aradus) concurred to the building thereof. Next is the promontory called  or Gods face, which no whit afrighted the Pirates, and sea-robbers (who had a Castle hard by, calledIdem. p. 755. Castellum praedonum) from their mischievous cruelty. Botrus succeeds, whose name signifieth a bunch of grapes, either from plenty of wine grow∣ing there, or because the houses in this compacted city were built in a cluster, though now become so thin scarce any two of them stand toge∣ther. Byblus the birth-place of Philo commonly surnamed Byblius, Barutis, anciently a good haven, now decayed. Adonius, so called from the mini∣on of Venus worshipped hereabouts, and Licus are the chief rivers in this countrey: (having many other smaller brooks) and Climax the moun∣tain of most note, whose figure like that figure in Rhetorick ascends like a staire-case by degrees.
§40. Coelosyria is onely behind, or hollow Syria, so called because lying in a concavity betwixt the mountains of Libanus and Antilibanus. Though Ptolemy and others stretch the name thereof in a large acception, even as far as Arabia. Full it was of fair cities, but none we meet with named in Scripture, and therefore forbear the further prosecution thereof. One∣ly to cover the nakedness of our map, we mention four modern villages under the command of the Turkes, where, and whereBiddulphs travels. p. 1. alone the Syriack tongue is spoken at this day, namely, Hatcheeth, Sharri, Blouza, and Eden. The last the seat of a Bishop of the Maronites (who have a poor Patriarch residing at Tripoli) and the people here against all sense conceive this Eden to be the place of Paradise. Worse errours they maintain in point of doctrine, concurring with the Greek Church; but in discipline late reconciled to Rome, where the Pope on his own cost gives some of their children education. Honest harmeless people these Maronites are, happy in the ignorance of luxury, and so hospitable that in stead of receiving, they return thanks to any western Christians which will accept of their entertainment. § 41▪ There remains nothing more in the Map for me to acquaint the Reader with, save onely that we have set the modern stages or Innes (we must have all wares in our pack, not knowing what kind of chapmen we shall light on) betwixt Aleppo and Damascus, and so for∣wards to Ierusalem. Amongst these Canes or Turkish Innes, Marra and Cote∣fey are most beautifull; the latter, little inferiour to the old Exchange in London; built by a Bashaw (ô let not Christians confound, whilest Turkes found places, for publick use) for the benefit of travellers, being both a Castell for their protection, and a Colledge for their provision: Where on the founders cost sufficient food is afforded both them and their cat∣tell. As for some Christian travellers whoBiddulphs travels. pag. scorned to feed there∣on, it seems that either they were not soundly hungry, or were not of the solid judgment of Eliah, who surely would have taken meate from the hands of Turkes, who refused not flesh from the beakes of1 King. 17. 6. Ravens. Here the Map of Midian, Moab, Ammon, Edom, is to be inserted.
THE DESCRIPTION OF MIDIAN, MOAB, AMMON, EDOM. CHAP. 2. § 1. BEfore we come to the particular description of the Countreys, something for satisfaction; why Midian first, and why Midian and Moab together. In giving Midian the Precedency, we observe se∣niority, he being extracted from Abraham the uncle, by Keturah his wife, whilest Moab came from Lot the nephew, by his own daughter. As for putting them toge∣ther, we are loath to confess our poverty, that lack of larger instructions to furnish forth severall Maps, was any cause of our conjoining them together. The main motive is not onely the vicinity of their habitation, but also correspondency of severall atchievements betwixt them, which makes them often coupled together in Scripture. ThusGen. 35. 36. Hadad King of Edom smote Midian in the field of Moab. The Elders of Moab andNumb. 22. 7. the El∣ders of Midian were jointly imployed to fetch Balaam. TheCompare Numb. 25. 2. with Num. 25. 18. daughters of Moab and the daughters of Midian enticed the Israelites to whoredome and Idolatry. § 2. Midian consisted of two families: one seated southward near the Red-sea, serving the true God, (not so purely but with the mixture of su∣perstitions) where Iethro Moses his father-inlaw lived, of whom (God willing) hereafter. The other Idolaters, planted more eastward; the subject of our present discourse. This distance of place and difference of Religions gave probability to their opinions, who fancy them two distinct nations, which is seemingly confirmed, because the former is called Madian in theAct. 7. 29. new Testament. But though in some cases we con∣fess that the difference of a letter, may make more then a literall diffe∣rence, yet here it is not enough to make a reall distinction: seeing He∣brew words made Greek often suffer greatermutations then of a vowell, Midian into Madian. Others are startled, because the Midianites areGen. 37. 25. 27, 28. 39. Iudg. 8. 22. 24. 26. some∣times termed Ishmaelites, whereas the latter come from Hagar, the former
from Keturah. But it is probable (surely such as reject our conjecture will substitute a better in the room thereof) that because Ishmael was the eldest son of Abraham, chief of the house, all those eastern people de∣scended from Abraham were denominated by the genericall name of Ishmaelites. § 3. It is as difficult precisely to define the bounds, as impossible compleatly to describe the Countrey of Midian. For besides the mixture and conjunction (not to say confusion) of these eastern people, interfe∣ring amongst themselves in their habitations, the Midianites especially led erraticall lives, and therefore had uncertain limits. They dwelt most in tents, which we may call moving towns, and extempore cities, set up in a few houres, and in fewer taken down and dissolved. Next morning oft times found them many miles off, from the place where last night left them. And if we wonder at the wildness of their wandring, and rudeness of their roving abroad, they will admire as much at the stilness of our station, and dulness of our constant dwelling in one place. And no doubt they observed a method in their removalls, as there is a regu∣larity as well in the motion of the Planets, as of the fixed Stars. § 4. For the generall we dare avouch they had Reuben and Gad on the west, Moab on the south, Ammon on the north, the Ishmaelites or Hagarens on the east.Adrichom. de Te. Sanct. in tab. Reub. Some place them more south, hard by the Dead-sea, but therein surely mistake. For whenIug. 7. Gideon had the Midianites in chace out of the land of Canaan, they betook not themselves southward (and surely such Foxes when hunted would hast home to their own kennels) but ran through the Tribe of Gad full east, to their proper habitations. But now what a slender account shall we make of the towns and places in Midian? But I conceive it better to present the Reader with a map without cities, or those cities without names, then those names without truth, or at least wise that truth without certainty, and a fair blank is to be preferred before a full paper blurred over with falshoods. § 5. But first we doe behold those castles; and cities of Midian all on a bright fire,Num. 31. 10. burnt by Eleazer and the twelve thousand Israelites (where∣of noNum. 31. 49. one man slain in the action) wherein they killed all the males of that countrey and females which had known man. What time also they did execution on five Kings of Midian, and Balaam the false Prophet their chaplain, who fell by the sword ofNum. 31. 8. man, though he had escaped that of theNum. 22. 31. Angell. Some may think strange, that the Israelites having conquered this countrey possessed not themselves and their heirs thereof. Let such know, first, that this sandy land was barren it self, whose best fruitfulness consisted onely in the largeness thereof: Secondly, God in∣tended an entire territory to his own people, whereas this stragling Countrey was hardly kept, though easily conquered: Thirdly, the Midianites were of the halfe bloud with the Israelites, descended from A∣braham, and therefore God would not have them disinherit their kinsmen of their possessions.
§6. If we goe out of their cities to take free aire in their countrey, see how thick their tents are spread over the face of the earth. Whereof, though their coverings might seem course, their courtains (mentioned by the ProphetHabak. 3. 7.) being both the side walls, and roof of their inward rooms, were most costly and curious. As the Midianites were called the children of the east, so none more orient in their apparell, and gorgeous ac∣coutrements. For if their Camels woreIudg. 8. 26. Collers of gold about their necks, how rich may their riders be presumed to be in pearles, and pre∣cious stone? § 7. Another great part of their wealth consisted in their cattell, a∣mongst which we must take speciall notice of theirEsa. 60. 6. Dromedaries, seeing the most or best of this kind were bredhereabouts. A Dromedary is a dwarf∣camell, nature recompensing his smalness in his swiftness, so that he will travellan hundred miles a day, and continue at that rate with sparing diet a week together. He hath but one bunch on his back (the Camell having more) the naturall saddle for his Rider to mount upon, generally more used for travell then bearing of burdens, and of as much more refined service above Camells, as Hacknies are above Packhorses. In a word, as in one respect this beast is the commendable character of perseve∣rance, not fleet by fits, at the first; but holding out a constant and equall tenour in travelling: so in another regard, it may pass for the emblem of hypocrisie, pretending to both symptomes of a clean beast, really chew∣ing the cud, and seemingly cleaving the hoof, but onely on the out side, whereasGesne. de qua∣drup. in Dro∣medar. within it is wholly fleshly, and entirely round like a platter. § 8. Yet all their speed could not save their Masters from the pursuit of Gideon, when such a fatall blow was given to the Midianites, that the TextIudg 8. 28. saith, They lift up their heads no more. Yea, which is memorable scarce, any part of their body appears afterwards in Scripture, or any mention of Midian men∣tioned 1 King. 18. relates not to these, but to the southern Midianites, whereof here∣after. Midianites (save with relation to the former defeate) which leads us to this conjecture, that the remains of that nation, which escaped that dismall overthrow, shrowded themselves under the names of some neighbouring people, probably of the Ishmaelites, of whom but a word or two, and so to Moab. § 9. Nor need the Reader be afraid to adventure amongst them, suspecting the Ishmaelites, like Ishmael their Father, to beGen. 16. 12. wild men, Whose hands were against every man, and every mans hand against them; seeing their fierceness and fury had been well tamed by the Reubenites, Gadites, and half Tribe of Manasseh in that memorable victory, wherein no fewer then an1 Chr. 5. 2. hundred thousand of them were taken captives, and those Tribes dwelt in their tents even unto the river1 Chr. 5. 9. Euphrates. Conceive it in a cursory condition, onely grazing their cattell during the season, which amounted not to a constant and settled habitation. § 10. The Ishmaelites were descended from Ishmael, otherwhiles cal∣led Hagarens, wherein the difference not great; their former name be∣ing
fetched from their Father, the latter (but one degree further) from Hagar, their grandmother. Of this Ishmael it was foretold, first that he should dwellGen. 16. 12. (as also he didGen. 25. 18. die) in the presence of all his brethren, that is, he should not hide his head in holes, or creep into corners, as afraid of the force of his neighbours, but should justifie and avouch his Right in o∣pen habitations, daring and defying all pretenders to his possessions. Secondly, it is said he should beGen. 21. 12. Onager homo or a wild-ass-man; in which similitude (the holy Spirit not using casuall but choice comparisons) surely very much is folded up of the Physiognomy both of him and his posterity. Wild asses are said to carry a bow in their heels, and to finde arrows in the sandy ground where they goe, wherein if hunted they doe bestirre themselves with flinging the gravell behind them, that therewith they pierce the breasts, yea sometimesAmmian. Marcellinus. split the heads of such as pursue them: as the Ishmaelites excellent archers laid about them with their ar∣rows to kill and slay such as opposed them. § 11. Large were the bounds alotted to Ishmael, and divine provi∣dence which staked them down within certain limits, allowed them a very long teddar, TheyGen.25.18. dwelt from Havilah unto Shur, that is from before Egypt till as thou goest towards Assyria: a spong of ground somewhat nigh a thou∣sand miles, (perchance not so entire but interrupted with other nations) and not bearing a proportionable breadth, consisting generally of the Sandy and stony Arabia, so that a span of Isaacs was worth a stride of Ishmaels possession. However, in relation to Ishmaels posterity that Prophecy, he shall dwell in the presence of his brethren, admits also of this interpretation, that the land alotted him ranged out so far, that the bounds and borders thereof abutted on all his kindred, Edomites and Israelites his nephews or brothers sons, Moabites and Ammonites his cousins once removed, Midia∣nites descended of his half brother by Keturah, and Egyptians his near kins∣men both by his wife and mother. § 12. In this large countrey did dwell the twelveGen. 25. 13, 14, 15, 16. 1 Chron. 1. 29, 30, 31. sons of Ishmael, which I may call the twelve tribes of the Ishmaelites. 1 Nebaioth. 2 Kedar. 3 Adbeel. 4 Mibsam. 5 Mishma. 6 Duma. 7 Massa. 8 Hadar. 9 Temah. 10 Ietur. 11 Naphish. 12 Kedemah. A learnedVid. Tremel. in locum. man from the allusion of letters and similtude of sounds hath found out in stony, desert, and happy Arabia some places symbolizing with these names; and I commend his industry, not daring altogether to concur with his judgment; conceiving the subject in hand to want a bottome for any to build with certainty thereupon. Sooner shall Chy∣mists fixe quick-silver, then Geographers place these people in a setled habi∣tation. Indeed mention is made of someGen. 25. 16. Townes and Castles (no cities) they had, (perchance some strength to retire to) but generallyComment in Isaiam li. 5. cap. 21. Saint Hierome tells us, they had neither doors nor bolts, but lived in tents in desert places. Wherefore, as foreiners, for matter of clothes, paint an
Englishman with a pair of sheares in his hand, taxing therein his levity in following fashions, continuing constant to no kind of apparell; so we may present the Ishmaelites (besides a bow at their backs) with a staffe in their hands, to intimate their ambulatory and ever-moving condition. Here we may remember how Hagar being with child with Ishmael, wasGen. 16. 7. found by the Angell wandering in the wilderness, and as if the pregnant mothers condition had made an impression on her child and his posterity, we find their home to be in a constant roving and wandering in a desert Countrey. Leave we these Ishmaelites, and come to men of a milder temper, and more fixed habitations, I mean the Moabites. § 13. MOab Son and Gran-child of Lot, was incestuously begotten on his edest daughter, in hisGen. 19. 37. drunkenness; after which act, no more mention of Lot or what befel him in the history of the Bible: (drunkenness makes men to forget and to be forgotten, drown∣ing their memories in neglect and obscurity): onely after this, the new Testament epithets him2 Pet. 2. 7. Righteous Lot. That Spirit of meekness na∣ming good men, not from the obliquity of some acts, but habituall inte∣grity of their hearts. Yea, for love to Lot God granted many great fa∣vours to the Moabites, assisting them to conquer the GiantsDeut. 2. 10. Emims, and peaceably possessing them of their Countrey, with speciallDeut. 2. 9. Jud. 11. 15. 17, 18. command to the Israelites not to disturb or molest them in this enjoiment thereof. § 14. Yet the Moabites ill requited Israels kindness unto them. That falling out which was first begun betwixt the servants, andGen. 13. 7. heardsmen, was afterwards continued and increased betwixt the Sons and posterity of Lot and Abraham. Yea upon all occasions the Moabites were backfriends to Israel; witness Balak, who barked at, and Eglon who bit them, whom Israel servedIudg. 3. 14. eighteen years. Note by the way, that under the Judges all the heathen which bordered on Israel (Edom almost onely excepted, the cause whereof hereafter)Iudg. 3. 8. Aramites,Iudg. 10. 7. Ammonites,Iudg. 6. 1. Midianites,Iud. 13. 1. &c. Philistines &c. did all successively yrannize over Israel. No shrub growing about on the banks of Canaan was so little, but it was big enough for God thence to gather a Rod to whip his wanton children. Now if it be any ease to the sickman, to have his bed, not disease often altered, Israel had the favour of exchange of tyrants and variety of oppressors; amongst whom I dare say the Moabites were none of the mildest. More might be said of their malice to the Iews, but I spare them for good Ruth, their Countreywomans sake; who, when all her sister Orpha's complemen∣tall Religion came off with a kiss,Ruth. 1. 14. persevered to wait on Marah her mo∣ther-in-law (forRuth. 1. 20. so she desired to be called) into the land of Canaan. § 15. But because the Moabites could not be perswaded to love, David was the first who forced them to fear the Kings of Israel;Psal. . 8. Moab is my washpot, that is, one condemned to servile imployments: yea such was
Davids absolute command over this countrey, that he2 Sam. 8. 2. 1 Chron. 18. 2. measured the Mo∣abites with a line, casting them down to the ground, even with two lines measured he to put to death, and with one full line to keep alive. At the first sight he may seem to have killed two, and saved one: A merciless proportion. But on better consideration it may possibly be, that the preservative might equal both the destructivelines, though not in number, in measure; as one overflowing cup may contain as much as two sparingly filled. What caused this severity in David against the Moabites the Scripture is silent, and I had rather be so too then affirm with the presumptuous Rabbins without warrant, that it was because the King of Moab had slain Davids Father and Mother,1 Sam. 22. 3. whom he had left there for protection whilst Saul persecuted him. § 16. If any object, this Act of David was a breach of GodsDeut. 2. 9. com∣mand, Distresse not the Moabites, neither contend with them in battell, it is an∣swered, 1 This prohibition was temporary to Moses conducting the Isra∣elites, that they should not molest Moab in their passage by his countrey out of Egypt. 2 Israel might not begin with offensive war to provoke them; but being stricken might strike again, and follow their blow as David did. 3 Moab might be distressed to subjection, not to ejection; might be brought into obedience, not dispossessed of their coun∣trey. After the defection of the ten Tribes from the house of David, Moab re∣mained tributary to the Kings of Israel till the death of wicked but vali∣ant Ahab. After which time, Moab2 King. 1. 17. rebelled, and though2 King. 3. 6. attempted was never reduced into obedience by the Kings of Israel. § 17. Moab had the river Arnon on the north, the Dead-sea on the west, Edom on the south, and Arabia on the east. It contained about a square of an hundred miles, fit for grazing; and the peoples industry following Natures guidance to their own profit, principally imployed it to that use. Yea Mesha their King is tearmed a2 King. 3. 4. sheep-master. Husbandry doth no more eclipse the resplendent beams of Majesty, then the oile in the Lamp hindreth the bright shining thereof. Guess the greatness of the Grist by the Toll, the multitude of Moabs flocks from the Tribute he rendered to the Kings of Israel, a2 King. 3. 4. hundred thousand Lambs, and a hundred thousand Rams with the wooll. § 18. To come now to the particulardescription of Moab, let it not be censured for a needless Tautology in this Map, that therein all the cities of Reuben are again represented, being done deliberately on a double consideration. 1 Formerly that land belonged to Moab before Sihon King of the Amorites had forcibly wrested it away from them.
2 After the Reubenites were carried away captive by Tiglath-Pileser, the Moabites reassumed their ancient possessions, as appears by theEsay 15. ler. 48. Prophets. As for the particular description of those cities, we remit the Reader to what formerly hath been written in the Tribe of Reuben. § 19. In the north-east bound of Moab towards Midian in the border of Arnon,Num. 22. 36. which is in the utmost coasts, stood a nameless city, where Balak met Balaam, standing as it were on his tiptoes on the very last labell of his land, to reach forth welcome to that false Prophet, who hither rode in state with hisNum. 22. 22. two men to attend him, whilst many Ministers of the Truth are forced to be slaves to others, and servants to themselves. But that these two men of Balaam were Iannes and Iambres the gyptian en∣chanters, the Chaldee Paraphrase shall never perswade me, whilst the distance of time and place; protest against the possibility thereof. Not to say that it is likely that the sorcerers, so frequent in the presence of Pharaoh, had long before waited on their Master through the red sea to another world. Hence Balak conducted Balaam toNum. 22. 39. Kiriath-huzoth or the city of streets, which at that time seems to be the Metropolis of Moab. § 20. Mizpah of Moab followeth, where the Father and Mother of David reposed themselves whilst their Son was persecuted by Saul. Ar of Moab, and Rabbah of Moab were also places of great note in this land, and besides these, many other cities of inferiour note. But as many mean men living obscurely, so that the world takes no notice of them, if surprized by some unusuall and strange mortality, become remarka∣ble for their deaths, who were never memorable for their lives: so some cities of Moab, whereof no mention in Scripture for any action done in, or by them, are onely famous in holy writ, for their strange ruine and destruction, by the Prophet sadly foretold, and therefore cer∣tainly accomplished. Such areRead Isa. 16. & Ier. 48. Misgab, Horonaim, Luhith, Baith, Eglaim, Ber-elim, Holon, Kirioth, Kirherez andIer. 48. 2. Madmen. The last as I conceive is note-worthy, not for its own merit, but others mistake. For in the Bi∣bles, and those numerous, printed Anno Dom. 1625. the verse in Ieremy is thus rendered, O Maiden the sword shall pursue thee; where the Corrector of the Press conceiving it incongruous to join Thee a singular pronoune, with Madmen (which he mistook for an appellative, no proper name) ran himself upon that dangerous errour. § 21. But Kirharasheth seems the Metropolis of Moab. Near to this three Kings, Iehoram of Iudah, Iehosaphat of Israel, and the nameless King∣deputy of Edom, marched on a designe to chastise Mesha the rebellious King of Moab into subjection. But wandring in the wilderness of Edom they encountred a worse enemy, Thirst it self, wherewith all of them were ready to saint. But happily it happened that Elisha,2 King. 3. 11. who powred water on the hands of Eliah, by the same Element seasonably refreshed the
hearts of the distressed armies, respecting Iehosaphat for his own good∣ness, the other two Kings for his company. How many generall bene∣fits doe the very Tares enjoy, because inseparably mingled with the Wheat in the field of this world? Yea, Elisha was an instrument to give them, not onely water, but victory (heavens favours goe commonly by couples) after this miraculous manner. § 22. The Moabites beholding water miraculously brought in that place, where never any was seen or known before, and the same at di∣stance appearing2 King. 3. 22. red unto them, (guilded with the beames of the Sun) concluded it to be bloud, and that that Paroyall of Armies had smitten one another. Wonder not that their conjecture was so wide and wild, for well might the Comment be out of the way of Truth, when the Text was out of the Rode of nature, and the Moabites on the suddain not capable to suspect a miracle. Hereupon the word is given,2 King. 3. 23. Moab to the spole, which in some sense was true, that is, not to take but become the spoile of others. For the tents they assaulted, being lined with armed men, quickly overcame them. And it is worth our observing, that this victo∣ry was bestowed on Iehosaphat (my eyes are onely on him, on whom alone the2 King. 3. 14. looks of Elisha reflected) just in the morning when the2 King. 3. 20. Meat∣offering was offered, as procured by the Propitiatory virtue thereof; all fa∣vours being conferred in and for the merits of Christ the truth of all sacrifices. § 23. God gave, man used this conquest. Improving their success, they2 King. 3. 25. beat down the cities, and on every good piece of land, cast every man his stone, and filled it, and stopped all the wells of water, and felled all the good trees. This was contrary to Gods expressDeut. 22. 19. command; but none could better dispense with the Law, then the lawgiver, who in detestation of the rebellion of Moab against Israel2 King. 3. 19. enjoined this severity. Onely the City of Kirharash∣eth was left, and that they besieged, untill the King of Moab therein took and sacrificed his eldest Son,Some con∣ceive him (be∣ing ambiguous in the text) son to the King of dm, groun∣ding it on Amos 2. 1. who was to succeed him: either out of a bad imitation of Iephthah; (and their Idols we know were adored with sacrifices of men) or to give assurance to the besiegers, that they were men resolved to endure all extremities, so that they might presume he that would sacrifice his Son would not spare to spend his souldiers on any desperate adventure. Hereupon the foresaid three Kings surcea∣sed their siege: either out of policy, perceiving the same desperate, and unlikely to prevaile; or out of a royall sympathy, that it was revenge e∣nough to distress, though not destroy a King or (which is most proba∣ble) out of a religious horrour (the trembling whereat made their swords fall out of their hands) as unwilling to provoke the besieged any further to such impious, and unhumane performances; lest heaven should arraign them as accessary thereunto, by giving the occasion there∣of: whatsoever was the cause, home they returned, content with the spoiling, without the finall conquering of the Countrey.
§ 24. Many are the invectives of the Prophets against Moab for their sins. The people thereof are charged to have been at ease from their youth, and setled on theirIer. 48. 11. less, because not emptied from vessell to vessell, neither carried in∣to captivity (whilest poor Israel was posted from Canaan to Egypt, from Egypt to Canaan, from Canaan to Babylon, from Babylon to Canaan, back∣ward, and forward) God therefore threatneth, because they had not been emptied from their vessell, toIer. 48. 38. break them in their vessell, and foretelleth that Moab should be madeIer. 48. 26. drunk (haply alluding to his geniture seeing he was begotten in a fit of drunkenness) and wallow in his vomit; and come to utter destruction. Thus never to be acquainted with any affli∣ction in youth, is a certain prognostick of finall confusion in old age. So much for Moab, leaving it to learned men to dispute, what is intended by theIer, 48. 47. restauration of Moab foretold in the latter days; as also let them enquire whether that passage inDan. 11. 41. Daniel, that after a generall overthrow, Edom, Moab &c. should escape, must not mystically be meant of the enemies of the Church, in which sense we may be sure, the devill will have a Moab, as long as God hath any Israel in the world. § 25. AMmon another base Son of Lot, had Midian on the east, Moab on the south, Gad on the west, and Syria on the north: a cir∣cular countrey extending about sixty miles every way. The ancient inhabitants hereof were the GiantsDeut. 2. 20. Zamzmmims. These were conquered and cast out by the Ammonites, who afterwards dwelt in their countrey, being a fruitfull land, and too good for these Ammonites that bare an inveterate malice to the people of Israel, manifested in many particulars. 1 In their oppressing themIudg. 10. 8. eighteen years till Iephthah gave them deliverance. 2 In their cruell conditions (such Ravens and birds of prey first peck out the eyes) tendered to the men of1 Sam. 11. 8. Iabesh-Gilead. 3 In their barbarous abusing Davids2 Sam. 10. 4. ambassadours. 4 In rippingAmo. 1. 3. up the bellies of the women with child in Gilead. 5 In their ClappingEzk. 25. 6. their hands, stamping with their feet, and rejoycing in their heart at the sacking of Ierusalem by the King of Babylon. 6 In their contriving the destruction ofIer. 40. 14. Gedaliah, and the poor remnant of the Iews left behind in the land by the Babylonians. 7 InNhe. 4. 7, 8. retarding the building of the Temple after the Iews return from captivity. And although David and some other Kings, amongst whom Uzziah most remarkeable, forced the Ammonites to give them2 Chr. 16. 8. gifts; yet we may justly beleeve the same were presented rather with their hands then their hearts, bearing a cordiall grudge against Israel. § 26. Rabbah was the Metropolis of Ammon, called in Scripture the tity of waters,2 Sam. 12. 27. because low and plashy in its situation, conducing much
to the strength thereof, rendering all undermining of it uneffectuall. But perchance it is so termed from the extraordinary populousness thereof, Waters being often used for People in Scripture phrase, both being at all times unstable and unconstant, and when they get a head implacable, neither speaking nor hearing reason; both usefull servants, but intolera∣ble Masters. Here the Iron-bed of Og was preserved for a Relick, being Deut. 3. 11. nine cubits high and four broad. Now though Alexanders souldiers are said to have left shields in India, far greater then those which they did or could weare in war, onely to possess posterity with a false opini∣on that his men were mightier then they were, yet we may presume this bed of Og was not unproportionably greater then he necessarily used for his ordinary repose. No doubt Og confident of his own strength certainly concluded, that as he did often lie in health upon that bed, so he should quietly die on the same, whereas contrary to his expectation he was slain in the field, and now his bed served him for a Cenotaph or empty monument. § 27. This Rabbah was besieged by Ioab, to revenge Hanun King of the Ammonites his despitefull usage of Davids Ambassadours. Here Uriah engaged in battell was killed, though not conquered, by the treacherous retreat of2 Sam. 11. 15. his own countreymen. What a deal of doe was here to bring one innocent man to his grave? Davids wicked designe, Ioabs unwor∣thy compliance, Ammons open force, Israels secret fraud, and yet all too little, had not Uriah's own credulous simplicity, unspotted loyalty, un∣daunted courage rather to die then to fly, concurred to hasten his own destruction. Afterwards Ioab having brought the city to terms of yeeld∣ing, politickly sends for David solemnly to take his place, to decline all envy from himself, and invest all honour on his Soveraign. Here the glorious Crown of this kingdome was taken, and set on Davids2 Sam. 12. 1. head: and I dare boldly say it became David better, then him from whom it was taken. But (oh!) what a Bridewell or house of correction was provided for the people of this place! They were2 Sam. 12. 31. put under saws, and under har∣rows of Iron, and under axes of Iron, and made to passe through the brick kilne. See here Davids patience provoked into fury. And was it not just that they who would not civilly, like men, use Davids2 Sam. 10. 4. Ambassadours, should by Davids men be barbarously used, like beasts, in slavish imployments? § 28. The most populous part of the Kingdome of Ammon lay be∣twixt Aroer and Minnith, containing no fewer then twenty Cities, (so ma∣ny represented in our Map) and had I found their names in Scripture, I had imparted them to the Reader. All theseIudg. 11. 33. cities were smote by Iephthah that most valiant Judge of Israel. For he passed over to the enemy to fight with them, other Judges onely expelling them out of Israel, and pursuing them to their own countrey. An action of very much prowess in Iephthah to rowze those wild beasts in their own den, and no less po∣licy, preventing the spoiling of his native soil, and translating the Seat
of the war into the land of a forein so. Here if any demand how the wheat of Minnith comes to be reckoned by theEzk. 27. 17. Prophet, amongst the staple commodities of the land of Iudah, wherewith she bartered with Tyre, when Minnith wasIudg. 11. 33. undoubtedly a city of the Ammonites; it is answered. 1 This fine wheat might first be denominated from Minnith as origi∣nally growing there, though afterwards as good and more of that kind grew generally in Iudea. Thus some flowers, and fruits, Province-Roses, Burgamo peares &c. are as full and fair in other countreys as in that place whence they take their name. 2 By Minnith-wheat may be meant, wheat winnowed, cleansed, and dressed after the fine and curious fashion of Minnith. Thus they are called Hungar-dollars, which are re∣fined to the standard of Hungarian gold, in what place or by what Prince soever in Germany they be coined. § 29. We must not forget that after the Tribe of Gad was carried a∣way captive by Tiglath-pileser, the Ammonites seised on and dwelt in the cities of that Tribe. For which reason so many of them are set down in this our Map. This caused the complaint of theIr. 49. 1. Prophet; Hath Israel no sons? Hath he no heire? Why then doth their King inherit Gad, and his people dwell in his cities? Sure I am that Ammon double barred with bastardy and incest, though somewhat allied, could never legally succeed to the possessions of Israel. But in such cases, the keenest sword is next to the kin. Not to say that Ammon had a title to that kingdome, before that Sihon King of the Amorites took that land away from them, whereof largely before in the description of Gad. If any aske me what became of the Ammonites in after ages; I answer with David, hePsal. 37. 6. passed away, and loe he was not, yea INo menti∣on of Edom, Moa or Am∣mon, in the new Testament sought him, but he could not be found. Yea the less there ap∣pears of Ammon, the more there appears of Gods justice, and di∣vine truth, foretold by the mouth ofEzk 25. 7. Ezekiel, I will cut thee off from the people, and will cause thee to perish out of the countreys. § 30. Esau eldest Son of Isaac was red and hairy at his birth; the one shewing his irefull nature, the other his hardy constitution. He was highly beloved of his Father (whilest Iacob was Gods and his Mothers darling) chiefly for providing himGen. 25. 28. Venison: a consideration beneath so good a man, and for which Isaac smarted afterwards, sawcing each morsell of his Sons venison in his own teares, caused by Esaus unhap∣pyGen. 26. 5. matches, and undutifull demeanour. This Esau is as generally known in Scripture, by the name of Edom given him on this occasion. Coming one day hungry from hunting he sold his birthright to his bro∣ther Iacob forGen. 25. 30. red pottage, red being Edom in Hebrew. I confess many flaws may be found in this bargain and sale, as namely, 1 It was no faire but fraudulent dealing for Iacob to surprize his brother, taking advantage of his hunger. 2 The contract was not made on a valuable compensation; not to say it was Simoniacall to sell or buy such heavenly priviledges.
3 The heires of Esau, (as yet in his loines) concerned therein, but not consenting thereto, might justly question their Fathers grant in passing away what by nature was intailed upon them. Wherefore it is safest to turn all our excusing of Iacob into our admi∣ring of Gods wisdome, who makes mens crooked actions to tend in a streight line to his own glory. And yet we must not forget, that even after Esau had satisfied himself with food, the text saith, ThusGen. 25. 34. Esau despised his birthright. It seems thereby, that what his hast and hunger had conveyed his profaneness did deliberately confirme, and by that his neglect and contempt, he acknowledged a Fine, cutting off his heires from any recovery thereof. Indeed afterwards Esau made it a main matter ofGen. 27. 36. quarrell with his brother, but never a matter of conscience in himself. But enough hereof: onely I will adde the crossing of the common rule, Caveat ven∣ditor, let here the seller beware, for God took Esau at his word, and accor∣dingly deprived him of his birthright. § 31. But Esau set a greater valuation on his Blessing, wherein be∣ing prevented by Iacob, he sought it with teares, though they were not a kindely showre of repentance, but onely some heate drops of anger and in∣dignation, not so much grieved that he had lost, as vexed that Iacob had gotten the Blessing. At last his importunity got from his Father a Blessing though not the blessing, the severall clauses whereof we are seriously to consider, because thereon dependeth the right understanding of the con∣ditions of the people and countrey of Edom, which we are now to de∣scribe. BeholdGen. 27. 39. thy dwelling shall be the fatnesse of the earth, and of the dew of heaven from above. Earth is by Isaac first mentioned because by Esau most minded. But oh the difference betwixt the dew of heaven inGen. 27. 28. Iacobs and Esau's blessing! In the former it signified Gods favour with an undoubted right unto, and sanctified use of divine promises, service and Sacraments: whereas in this blessing of Esau, heavenly dew, was in effect, but earthly dew, tempo∣rall terrestriall fertility allowed to this mountainous land of Edom, whose lean hils were larded with many fruitfull vallies interposed. Heathen Authors confesse no less; Dulce nemus florentisStatius sylv. lib. 3no. Idumes. The fair grove of flourishing Idumea. Quicquid nobile Ponticis nucetis Foecundis cadit aut jugisIdem lib. 1. in Satu Kal. Decemb. cele∣brante. Idumes. What ever noble worth destils On Pontus nut-trees, or what fils The fruitfull Idumean Hils. However, divine providence seems to have suited the Countreys to the conditions of Isaacs children, giving plain-dealing Iacob a more low and levell Land, and fitting the haughty minde of aspiring Esau with high-swelling and ambitious mountains, though he who was nearest to heaven, was farthest from God.
And by thy sword shalt thou live, and shalt be thy Brothers Servant. It is observable, that though God in the time of the Judges, made use of almost all other heathen nations, bordering on the Iewes, succes∣sively to oppress that his own people (Midianites, Ammonites, Moabites, Philistines &c.) Yet he never permitted the Edomites at any time to Lord it over Israel, because (according to Isaacs Blessing) subjection to Iacob, not soveraignty over him belonged to Esau, and his posterity. This prophecy of Esau's serving Iacob was fully accomplished in the days of David,1 King. 11. 14. 18. when he put a2 Sa 8. 14. Garison in Edom, throughout all Edom put he souldiers, and all they of Edom became Davids servants; and so remained tributaries to the Kings of Iudah and governed by their deputies for one hundred and fifty years and upwards. But it shall come to passe, when thou shalt get the mastery, that thou shalt breake his yoke from thy neck. This was fulfilled when the Edomites rebelling against King2 King. 8. 22. 2 Chr. 21. 8. Iehoram, finally recovered their liberty, whilest he (more cruell to kill his bre∣thren at home, then valiant to conquer his enemies abroad) could ne∣ver after reduce them into subjection, nor his successors after him. § 32. The Horims first inhabited this Countrey of Mount Seir; whose Dukes are reckoned up byGen. 30. 28. Moses, of whom Duke Anah is most remar∣kable for his first finding out of Mules,Gen. 36. 24. as he fed his Father Zibions Asses: A creature (or rather a living beast) which may be called a reall fallacy in nature, whose extraction is a conclusion unduely inferred from the premises of an Hee-asse and a Mare joined together. Yet this is com∣mendable in Mules; they imitate rather the virtues then vices of their Sire, and Dam, having in them, the dulness of the Asse, quickened with the metall of the Mare, and the Mares stubbornness corrected with the Asses patience. Barren they are (as to whom God never granted the Charter of increase) and yetNat. hist. li. 8. cap. 44. Pliny reports (but it is Pliny who reports it) that in Rome Mules are often recorded to beare young ones, but then al∣ways accounted ominous. Let others dispute whether Anah was the Inventour, or onely the Repertour of Mules, the industrious Founder, or the casuall Finder of them: Let them also discuss whether such copula∣tions be lawfull, for men of set purpose to joine together severall kinds, which God hath parted asunder; yea they may seem to amount to a tacite upbraiding of Gods want of wisdome or goodness, in not pro∣viding sufficient Creatures for mans service, without such monstrous ad∣ditionals in nature. If they be concluded unlawfull, let them argue whe∣ther the constant use of Mules,1 King. 1. 33. Ezra 2. 66. be not continuing in a known sin; and yet some good men in Scripture, rather then they would goe on foot, used to ride on them, though our SaviourMath. 21. 5. himself accepted of a plaine Asse for his own Saddle. § 33. TheseDeut. 2. 2. Horims were at last conquered and exirpated by the Edomites, who succeeded them, and dwelt in their stead. The civill government
of the land of Edom was sometimes Ducall, sometimes Regall. Moses reckoning upGen. 36. 40. eleven Edomite Dukes, leaveth it doubtfull, whether they were successively one after another, or went all a brest, as living at the same time, (which is most probable) and so the land divided into Ele∣ven Dukedomes. This is most certain that eight severall Kings reigned in Edom one after another, and allGen. 36. 31. before there reigned any King over the chil∣dren of Israel. Thus the wicked as they have their portion in this world; so they quickly come to full age to possess the same, whilest Gods children are long children, long kept in nonage, and brought up in the School of affliction. Now it is recorded inGen. 36. 31. 1 Chr. 1. 43. Scripture that every Edomite King had successively a severall city of his royall residence, namely Kings Parentage Royall-city. Bela The son of eor Dimhabah. Iobab The son of Zerah Bozrah. Husham of the land of Temani Teman. Hadad The son of Bedad Avith. Samla   Masrkah. Shaut   Rhoboth by the river. Baal-banan The son of Achbor   Hada   Pan. It is plain those Kings were not by succession, and probably they were not by election, but onely by strength and power as they could make their parties, according to Isaacs prediction,Gen. 26. 40. By thy sword shalt thou live. Now this their frequent removall of their royal City was politickly done. 1 To declare the fulnes and freedome of their power and pleasure, that they were not confined to follow the footsteps of their pre∣decessours. 2 To disperse and communicate civility and courtship into all the parts of their kingdome. 3 To honour and adorne the place of their birth, for probably their native, was their royall city. 4 To cut off from one place the occasion of suspicious greatness; Politicians having found in their theory, and Princes perchance felt in their practise the danger thereof. § 34. And now we come to the particular description of the Land of Edom called also Mount-Seir, Dumah, and Idumea in the Scripture. Mount Seir is as much as Mons hispidus, or hirsutus, a rough and rug∣ged mountain. So called some conceive from Esau, who Satyr-like had a quickset of hair on his body, though it seems the place was soGen. 14. 6. & 36. 20, 21. named long before he came to possesse it as brisling with bushes and overgrown with wood, in the famous wilderness thereof, name∣ly of 1 Teman. The inhabitants hereof were, or were accounted (of themselves or others) very wise. IsIer. 49. 7. wisdome no more in Teman? Yet all their carnall policy could not preserve them from utter destruction there threatned unto them. Eliphaz one ofIob 2. 11. Iobs friends was of this Countrey.
2 Dedan. Such as dwelt therein were merchants,Ier. 49. 8. & Ezk. 25. 13. and did drive a land trade with Tyrus, bringing thither precious clothes, for chariots; or, in chariots. 3 Edom,2 King. 3. 8. . Herein the three Kings wandered and were distressed for want of water, till Elisha relieved them. As for the other two names of this Countrey Dumah and Idmea, for∣merly largely thereof. § 35. Edom had the Dead-sea and Moab on the north-east, Arabia deserta on the east, the wilderness of Paran on the north-west, and the Red-sea on the south-west. A sea not so called from the redness of the water thereof, (yet I know not how it may appear, when beheld with bloud∣shot eyes) nor from a King Eruthraeus, (for what makes a Greek name so long since in these eastern parts?) but fromNic. Full Misel. Edom, or Rufus the red son of Iacob, commanding in this countrey, so that Red sea is all one with the Edomite or Idumean Sea. In Hebrew it is termed Iam Suph or the flaggy sea, because of the plenty of flags, reeds and weeds found therein, though of the last never so many, as when the wicked Egyptians were drowned therein. Ezion-gaber is a fair haven of great commerce on this sea. Here Solomon1 King 9. 26. 2 Chr. 8. 17. had his navy royall, which jointly with the ships of Hiram, brought four hundred and twenty talents of gold from Ophir. This it seems was the sum paid de claro into the Kings Exchequer, otherwise thirty talents more are mentioned,2 Chr. 8 18. probably expended in defraying the cost of the voyage. Long after Iehosaphat joining with Ahaziah, hence set forth ships for the same purpose, to the same place, but they1 King. 22. 48. went not, for they were broken. Why the seas which smiled on Solomon, should frown on godly Iehosaphat, I durst not conjecture (lest my adventuring in guessing, prove as unsuccessefull as his in sailing) had not2 Chr. 20. 37. Scripture plainly told me, that the winds and the waves forbad the Banes of matching Gods children with Idolaters in the same designe. Yea the breath of Eliezer the Prophet, may be said to have sunk those ships, threa∣tening their destruction. Thus those shall never reap good harvest, who plow with an Oxe and an Asse, contrary to Gods flatDeut. 22. 10. command. Afterwards, wicked King Ahaziah requested again of Iehosaphat,1 King. 22. 49. Let my servants goe with thy servants in the ships, but the other refused, having foundas bad success with the son at sea, as lately he had had on land with Ahab his Father. Besides, Iehosaphat being sensible how his infant-designe was strangled in the wombe, and his ships broken at Ezion gaber in the very haven, would not renew his voyage, it being a bold defying of divine power, to water that project from earth, which one plainly sees blasted from heaven. § 36. Other remarkable places in Edom were, first Mount Hor (hap∣ly so called from the Horims ancient inhabitants thereof) where Aaron put off his clothes the covering of his body, and hisNum. 20. 28. body the clothes of his soul, and Eleazar his son both buried and succeeded him. Thus
though for his disobedience forbidden the entrance of the land of Canaan, yet he came to the selvedge or out-skirt thereof, for hard by, the Tribe of Iudah with a narrow spong confined on the king∣dome of Edom. 2ly The valley of salt, at the south end of the Dead Sea, where God twice seasoned the Edomites, with two sharp and smart overthrows, when Abishai1 Chr. 18. 12. killed eighteen thousand, and afterwards when2 King. 14. 7. Amaziah killed ten thousand of them in the same place. 3ly2 King. 8. 21, 22. 2 Chr. 21. 8 Zair is not far off; where King Ioram of Iudah gave the Edomites a great blow, though he could not bring them again into a full subjection. 4ly More south, Bozrah the metropolis of Edom. The name thereof signifieth a muniment or fortification, (hence so many of them in these parts) and it was a place of great strength and renown. The Prophet speaking of Christ returning in triumph from overcoming his enemies: Who is this (saithIsa. 63. 1. he) that cometh from Edom, with red garments from Bozrah? But oh the difference (though the colour be the same) betwixt the manner of the die, when Christ came red a sufferer, and red a conquerour, the latter from Boz∣rah, but the former from Ierusalem! § 37. Yet Bozrah carrieth it not so clear to be chiefe in this Coun∣trey, but that Sclah is a stiffe corrivall with it for the same honour. This Hebrew name signifies a Rock, in which sense it is called Petra in Greek and Latine, (I say not that Arabia is thence denominated Petraea) standing on a steep hill, from the precipice whereof, Ama∣ziah threw ten thousand Edomites, and they2 Chr. 25. 12. all burst to pieces; where∣of before; a cruell act, yet admitting of a better excuse, then ano∣ther he committed in this kingdome in adoring the captive Idols2 Chr. 25. 15. of Edom, and setting them up to be worshipped in Iudah: Did he think that as some trees gain more strength by being transplanted; so these Gods would get new vigour by being removed into another coun∣trey?2 King. 14. 7. Petra was by Amaziah named Ioktheel, and is called Crach at this day, having lately been used for a place, therein to secure the trea∣sure of the Sultan. § 38. So much of Edom: whose ancient antipathy against Israel continued and increased to the last. Witness, their standing in the cross ways toObad. 14. cut off them of Iudah which should escape, and shut up the remnant in the day of affliction. God in conclusion was even with them: for as they had castObad 11. lots upon Ierusalem, so at last they drew such a blank for themselves, that notwithstanding theirObad. 4. Eagles-nests and starry-dwellings (wherein they placed their confidence) they were brought to destruction, their high habitations being so far from saving them, that they onely contributed to make their fall more visible to others, and dangerous to themselves. § 39. East of Edom lay the Land of Uz, where Iob dwelt, so renow∣ned for his patience, when the devill heaped afflictions upon him, al∣lowing
him no lucid intervalls. Onely the more deliberately to tor∣ment him, measured unto him, so much space betwixt his severall stripes, that Iob might be distinctly sensible of the smart thereof. Yea this fa∣ther of confusion observed a methodicall gradation in doing mischief, that still the hindmost was the heaviest affliction. 1 TheIob 1. 15. Sabeans, a people of Arabia the happy, took away his Oxen when plowing, and Asses when feeding besides them. 2 Fire of hell falling from heaven (of Satans sending, and Gods suffering)Iob 1. 16. consumed his sheep and servants. 3 The Chaldeans coming in three bands fell on his Camels, and carriedIob 1. 17. them away. If any object that Chaldea was many miles hence; it is answered that roving crafty theeves have long strides, and commonly fox-like, prey farthest from their den. Besides, probably the Chaldeans driving a land-trade from Arabia to Baby∣lon with Spices, being Merchant-pirates, did light on this prize in their passage. 4 A winde smote the fourIob 1. 19. corners of the house wherein his seven sons were feasting with their three sisters: Nor will any won∣der at this wild Hericano blowing at once from all points of the Compass, when he remembers that Satan is styled the1 pho. 2. 2. Prince of the power of the aire. 5 His body became an Hospitall of diseases, equally painfull, shamefull, loathsome. How quickly is Dives turned into La∣zarus? as if his heards of cattell were turned intoIob 2. 7. boiles, and flocks of sheep into so many Scabs on his body. 6 His wife persecuted him with her badIob 2. 9. counsell. When the physick which should help, traiterously sides with the disease; Oh the dolefull condition of the Patient! 7 Lastly, his friends proved his greatest enemies. Others onely despoiled him of his goods, they sought to deprive him of his goodness. And whereas Iob was onely passive in his other losses, (plundered of all his wealth against his will) they ende∣voured to perswade him voluntarily to resigne and surrender his innocence and integrity, and to confess himself an hypocrite; For to this purpose tended their large discourses containing true Doctrines, but false Uses, as applied in relation to Iob. All these crosses Iob bare with invincible patience. Insomuch that some Moderns accounting such patience impossible, have turned it all into a Parable, denying the historicall, and onely making an Allegori∣call truth of all his sufferings; dealing worse with Iob, then the devili∣did, whose commission extended not to take away hisIob 2. 6. life; whereas these men utterly destroy his beeing, denying such an one ever to have been in Rerum natura. See the baseness of our degenerate days, being so far from following the worthy example of former
Heroes, that mens laziness takes a more compendious way, in stead of imitating their virtues, practise to abolish their persons. And yet what clearer demonstration can there be of the historicall truth of Iob, then that his own name, the name of the place of his dwelling are set down, with the names of his foes, friends, and daughters; and the whole History as largely recorded in the old, as briefly repeated in the newIam. 5. 11. Testament? On the other side we listen as little to those who lessen Iobs sufferings, because he lost nothing with in doors, his Coin, Jewels, Plate, and houshold-stuffe (presumed in a conside∣rable equipage to the rest of his substance) remained entire for any thing we finde to the contrary. But the wealth of that age chiefly consisted in their stock, so that one may call their cattell their coin, (Grammarians derive Pecunia à pecudibus) bargains in those days not being driven with money in specie, but by bartering of commodities. § 40. But Comicall was the end of Iob, and all things restored double to him:Iob 42. 10. so that it had been better for him to have lost more; for then he should have had twice as much restored: onely the same number of children were given him, seven sons and three daughters, because his former children, non amissi, sed praemissi, were not foregone, but gone before. Parents may account on their pious children depar∣ted, and reckon, not that once they had, but still have them; though not here, in heaven. Yea in some sort Iobs children were doubled also, be∣cause he lived to see his sons sons to the fourthIob 42. 16. generation. As for the friends of Iob: Eliphaz the Temanite (of whom formerly) lived in Edom: Bildad the Shubite dwelt hereabouts, as descended fromGen. 25. 2. Shuah one of Abrahams sons by Keturah: Zophar the Naamathite from Naamah a City after allotted to Iudah, on the south of Iudea bordering in EdomIosh, 15. 41.. § 41. Here I omit the Countrey of Temah with some other petty ter∣ritories, all parcels of Arabia deserta. Yea the Reader may stand on the edge of this Map, and there smell the fragrancies of Arabia the happy, so called on good reason. Misers measure Paradise by their profit, Epicures by their pleasure: both met here. And it is hard to say whether the spices or the gold of the countrey are more renowned. But if heaven should commence an action against Arabia the happy for usurping his priviledge, Arabia would non-sute it self, and confess her unhappiness in the midst of all her felicity. For in default of other fuell they are fain to burn and dress their meat with Aromaticall wood, which so stupefi∣eth the senses of the people, that they are forced withPlim. lib. 12. cap. 17. Bitumen and the sent of Goates (where perfumes are too frequent, a stink is a perfume) to qualifie their suffocating sweetness. Thus no heaven out of heaven, and no earthly felicity will fall out even measure to content us, but either too much or too little. § 42. It remaineth now that we observe the severall stations of the children of Israel coming out of Egypt, which cross this map in fashion
of a Belt. We begin at mount Hor their thirty fourth stage in the edge of the land of Edom. Hence Moses sent messengers to request a peaceable passage through the kingdome of Edom, but could not obtain it. No doubt they were jealous of Israels greatness, and being carnally suspici∣ous of them (because Power generally performeth promises, no further then it complies with its profit) conceived it easier to keep, then cast them out of their countrey. IfGen. 32. 6. Iacob was frighted with Esau's coming to meet him with four hundred men, Esau was now no less afraid of Iacob accosting him with six hundred thousand men. § 43. However, God commanded his people not to force this, but finde another passage. It was well more ways then one led to Canaan, else Israel had been at a losse. But wicked men may for a time retard, not finally obstruct our access to happiness. It is but fetching a compass, making two steps for one; a little more pains and patience will doe the deed. Israel surrounds the land of Edom, and next sets down at Zal∣mona. § 44. Here they want water, and fall a muttering, and God sends them more fire in lieu thereof,Numb. 21. 6. Fiery Serpents to destroy them. Humble praying is the onely means to remove; peevish muttering, the ready way to double our distress. Yet afterwards by the setting up of the bra∣zen Serpent, their malady was remedied. Suddain wound, to be hurt with a touch; and as quick a cure, to be healed with a look! Oh lively type of our Saviours death! Here is both Christ and his Cross; both his Person, and the manner of his Passion, he must be lifted up. Zalmona in Hebrew signifieth the shadowing of a portraicture; probably so named from the Effigies of the Serpent set up in this place. As for the five fol∣lowing, Num. 33. 42. Phunon, Oboth, Iie-abarim, Dibon-gad, and Almon-diblathaim, we finde no memorable accident happening at them. § 45. These solemn Gests were, as I may say, the full points, which distinguished the severall sentences of the Jewish Peregrination. But besides these there were certain Comma's or Colons, I mean intermediate subordinate Stages, where they did baite, not lodge; or perchance lodge for a night, not live any time. Thus after Iie-abarim, their 88th. Stage, they pitched successively in 1 The valley ofNum. 21. 13. Zared. 2 By the stream of Arnon. 3 At Beer. 4 Mattanah. 5 Nahaleel. 6 Bamoth. Betwixt Kadesh-barnea and the valley of Zared the space of time wasDeut. 2. 13, 14. thirty and eight years, and at Beer was that famous well, which the Princes digged with their staves (Ensignes of authority are not degraded,Num. 21. 18. if sometimes used as instruments of industry) except any
will say, that with their staves they onely pointed out the place, and gave direction to others. As for the reasons why the Israelites were a long time in going so little way, insomuch that that beast in Brasile, which in fourteenPet. Heyl. Microcos. days goes no further then a man may throw a stone (therefore called by the Spaniards Pigritia) might o∣vertake them; the reasons hereof in the following Map shall be pre∣sented us. Here the Map of the wilderness of Paran is to be inserted.
THE WILDERNESS OF PARAN. CHAP. 3. § 1. THe wilderness ofGen. 21. 21. Paran (wherein a principal place called Phara in the days ofGeog. l. 5. c. 17. Ptolemy) is part ofGal. 4. 25. Arabia the stony,The bounds and barren∣nesse of this wildernsse. hath Iudea and the Mediterra∣nean-sea, on the north; Egypt, on the west; the Red-sea, on the south-west and full south; Ara∣bia the desert, and therein the kingdome of Edom, on the east. An ocean as (I may say) of sand, whereof it hath incon∣stant tides, removed in drifts, by the violence of the winds, to the great danger of travellers; without water, or wood, save a few Anchorite∣palme-trees scattered here and there, whereof a whole convent seventy in number, was found at Elim, therefore signally noted inEzod. 15. 27. Scripture, as a remarkable rarity; other wood hath it none, saith theStrabo. lib. 16. Geogra∣pher, save Thorn and Tamerisk, and of the former sort (I conceive) thatExod. 3. 2. bush was, nigh Horeb, which burnt, and never consumed. § 2. Here was Strabo lib. 17. ,Flying Ser∣pents. plenty of Serpents hidden in the sands, whereof the Israelites had sad experience, whenNumb. 21. 6. stung of them in their passage. Solinus calls them pennatos Serpentes, winged Serpents, affir∣ming their poison so active, ut morsum antè mors quàm dolor insequatur, that death ensues their biting, before any pain felt thereby. Say not, that a flying-ser∣pent is a contradiction, scarce reconcileable with Gods curse on that creature,Gen. 3. 14. upon the belly shalt thou goe, seeing in the Leviticall law we finde the Iews forbidden to eateLevit. 11. 23. all flying-creeping things. And though such Serpents might for a spurt, in a frisk or frolick, make use of their wings, yet creeping was their certain aud constant travelling, which they trusted unto. § 3. One may admire, to what purpose,Natures intent in this desert. nature making nothing in vaine, intended this wild desert, the ground whereof for the generality, is like salt when it hath lost its savour,Matth. 5. 13. which thenceforth is good for nothing. Except any will say, it was meerly made to be a foile to the transcen∣dent
fruitfulness of Iudea, and Egypt on both sides thereof. But, we must know, that though barren for the main, and distempered with sterility, yet it had some fertile intervalls, especially in the skirts, and purlews thereof, as about Mount Horeb, where some tolerable herbage, where∣on Exod. 3. 1. Moses pastured his flock. Yea, some nations, Amalekites, Midianites, Gessurites (whose hardy bodies, and fierce souls were fitted for so hun∣gry and course a countrey) had their habitation in the confines of this wilderness. But, the main end for which this desert may seem ordain∣ed, was, that therein God and the Israelites might for forty years mutually prove one another. And upon triall, they appeared a peevish, froward, stubborn people; He, for a long time, patient, long-suffering, slow to wrath; but at last, sure, and severe in punishing such, as had provoked his patience, into unquenchable anger. § 4. Here some will demand,Object. How could they wander forty years in Paran. How was it possible, that the Israelites should busie themselves fourty years in passing this wilderness? Had the Patriarchs, when twice sent to fetch food out of Egypt into Canaan, staid a quarter so long, in crossing this desert, certainly (without other help) their Father Iacob, and his family had been famished. An English Gen∣tleman, some forty years since, departed from Cairo in the heart of EgyptSnds Trav. pag. 136. March the fourth, mounted on a Camell in the company of the Carvan, refreshed himself withPag. 138. two days rest in his journey, and came safely to Gaza on the entrance of the land of Canaan, byPag. 140. seven a clock on the se∣venteenth day of the same moneth. § 5. It is answered;Answ. Severall reasons thereof. first, the Israelites went not theExod. 13. 17. nearest way through the land of the Philistines, over the narrow neck of the desert, but more southward, over the belly or gulfe thereof, where it was of grea∣test extent. Secondly, their removealls and stations were not arbitrary, at their own disposall, when, how far, and whither they pleased; but were ordered by Gods appointment, and the pillar ushering them; pro∣bably, staying many moneths (not to say years) in the same place. Thirdly, they removed not foreright, but with many flexures and in∣dentings, that their tedious travell, in the indirect motions thereof, might minde them of their sins, which caused their sufferings. § 6. They were a crookedDeut. 32. 5. generation, lost in the laborious labyrinths of their own fancies, who made not their paths straight in Gods service, but bent toHos. 11. 7. backsliding they didPsl.  5. 10. erre in their hearts, contrary to God, all1 Thes. 2. 15. men, and themselves. They would, and would not, and would again; now sick to stay, now wild to goe on, now mad to return. God there∣fore fitted their perverse wills with winding ways, so that no Hare, when hardly put to it by the hounds, and running foile, makes moe doub∣lings and redoublings, then they fetcht compass, circuits, turns, and re∣turns in this their intricate peregrination. § 7. The Turkes (who themselves use to sit still on the ground) wondred at our English men,Chiefly to spend out that generation. to see them walk up and down, some
few turns in a Cloister. If your way (said they)Biddulphs Trav. pag. 98. lieth to the upper end, why come yee downwards? if at the nether end, why goe yee back again? But with how, much admiration would they have beheld the Israelites, passing from Egypt to Canaan? now going full forward, then moving retrograde; now advancing in a streight line, then retraiting in the same. Yea surely, any man would have concluded them not well in their wits, untill satisfied in the true cause thereof; namely, that God in this their fourty years wandring, meant to weare out the whole stock of that faithless generation, Caleb and Ioshua onely excepted. § 8. See what fourty years can doe,No old men came into Canaan. lay six hundredExod. 12. 37. thousand men in their graves, and substitute a new generation in their room. It is ob∣served of Lightning, that sometimes it melteth the sword, and yet brui∣seth not the scabbard: and the reason commonly rendered, is, because the steel maketh opposition against it. Thus God miraculously pre∣served their clothes, and consumed their flesh; their shooesDeut. 29. 5. waxed not old, but their feet did; their cases were spared, and persons spilled, because God therein met with so much resistance against his com∣mands. Thus the stock of that generation being wholly wasted, no de∣crepit, or decaied; no impotent, or infirme person entered the promi∣sed land, but all able and active, in the prime of their strength, fit to fight, to the greater terrour of their enemies. And in a mysticall sense this was to shew, that not the old man born in the house of bondage, but onely the new regenerate creature shall enter the heavenly Canaan. § 9. Come we now to describe the Israelites through this wilder∣ness;The Israelites extremity at the Red-sa. and first of their passage over the Red-sea, when pursued by the Egyptians. Then were they reduced to great extremity. Fight they durst not, being a multitude of undisciplin'd people, of all ages and sexes, a∣gainst a regulated army of their enemies; fly they could not, having the sea before, the Egyptians behinde, steep. and unpassable hills on either side of them. It was well there was nothing above, betwixt them and heaven, to hinder the access of Moses his prayers to God in their behalf. However, for the present, God so ordered it, that the Egyptians overtook not the camp of Israel, being parted with the pillar of the cloud, the first and perfect pattern of a dark-lantern; darkExod. 14. 20. indeed to the Egyptians, but a lan∣tern to the Israelites. Then Moses, by order from heaven, gave the signall with his rod, a strongExod. 14. 21. east-winde blew, and the sea miraculously re∣traited, standing on heaps on each side of the Israelites, whilest they passed through it. Thus, out of danger came safety, the sea flanking the Israelites on both sides, whose rere was secured by the pillar, and front advanced far off out of danger. § 10. Here the importunate cavill of Borphyrius presseth for admissi∣on,Porphyrius his cavill. alledging, that Moses taking advantage of a low water, unknown to the Egyptians, passed the people over thereat. Utterly unlikely, that he, being a stranger, should be better acquainted with the secret ebbings of
the Red-sea, then the Egyptian-natives, whose countrey bordered on the shores thereof, beside many otherSee Sir Walter Raleigh part 1. lib. 2. c. 3. sect. 9. improbabilities. But, malice must carp at the clearest truth, and had rather lose her small credit in saying non-sense, then great revenge in bringing nothing against it. § 11. True it is,Passed over at the nartowest place. they went over at the wrist of the sleeve of the sea, and crossed it in the shortest place, God making use, not out of any need, but his own meer pleasure, of the narrowest cut of the sea, for their more compendious passage. Thus Christ went into heaven from Acts 1. 12. Mount Olivet, taking the advantage of the rising ground for his ascent, not out of necessity, but state, the Lord of nature therein graciously ac∣cepting of that service, which she dutifully tendred unto him. And though small and short the Red-sea in this place, it was big and broad enough to doe the deed, and drown the Egyptians. Oh! if the least joint of the little finger of the sea, be so heavy, how weighty are the loines of the Ocean if let loose! Able in an instant to press all mankind to the pit of destruction. § 12. The Egyptians follow the chace of the Israelites. Strange,The Egyptians drowned. that they left not off their pursuit, at so miraculous an accident! Such a road in the sea, out of the road of nature, seemed not to be gone in, but gazed at with amazement. But they thought; good for one, good for a∣nother; and all objections to the contrary, are answered in three words, Exod. 14. 4. 8. 17. God hardened them. Yea, such, whom he designeth for destruction, shall mistake their funeralls for their nuptialls, and dance as merrily to their graves as if they went to their wedding. God first sent distraction a∣mongst them, their cripple chariots turned into carts (when their fore∣wheels were taken away) halt on very heavily. In vain did the wiser Egyptians perswade a retrait, whilest the returning waters swallow all up in a moment. Mean time the Israelites march fair on, and recover the other side, and then in a double Quire of menExod. 15. 1. and women, sing praises unto God for their miraculous deliverance. § 13. But this musick was too good to hold long.Their murmu∣ing at Marah. We meet with a new ditty, and worse notes soon after. Three days they wander with∣out water; probably sustained for food, with that unleavened bread, and other provision they brought with them out of Egypt. See here sudden vicissitudes: 1 Water they want. Oh great grief! 2 Water appears plenty at Marah. Oh great joy! 3 This water proves no water, so bitter it could not be drunk. Grief again, and murmuring. 3 The water is cured. Great joy again. This cure Moses effected, casting, by Gods direction, aExod. 15. 25. tree into it. Thus the infusion of the least piece of Christs cross (I mean a true in∣terest in his passion) will turn our bitterest afflictions in this world, to become sweet, and pleasant unto us. From this Marah, they remove to
their next station at Elim, famous forExod. 15. 27. twelve wells of water, and seven∣ty Palme-trees: as if nature had purposely produced, a Well for every Tribe to drink of, a Palme-tree for every eminent Elder in Israel to lodge under. § 14. From Elim they removed,Their return to the Red-sea. and incamped by theNum. 4. 10. Red-sea. What meant their going back again? Was it because in theirAct. 7. 39. hearts they turned back again into Egypt. And therefore God in his justice, would vex their wearied bodies, to fetch a flexure thitherwards? Or rather, was it be∣cause God would have them take a second view of that sea, that so their deliverance thereat, might take the firmer, and deeper impression in their memories? Thus scholars who have once con'd their lesson by heart, are set again at the weeks end to get it for their part. Whatsoever was the cause, sure I am, they were now no nearer to the end of their race, then at the first starting, and these their last three removealls were but ci∣phers towards the account of their journey. Wonder I no longer at Saint Paul, and his companions in their sea-voyage, when they had sailed Act. 27. 7. slowly many days, the winde not suffering them, finding these Israelites in their land-travell after so long time, moved, not promoted, yea, going back∣ward; and the slowest snaile makes more speed forth-right, then the swiftest retrograde Cancer. § 15. From the Red-sea they advanced to the wildernessExod. 16. 1. of Sin. For although the wilderness of Paran passeth for the genericall name of this whole desert,They come in∣to the wilder∣ness of Sin. yet it was subdivided into many petite wildernesses, name∣ly those of Shur, Eham, Sin, Kadesh, &c. § 16. In the wilderness of Sin,Quailes, and Manna. the Israelites fell a murmuring for food. Here over night God gave themExod. 16. 13. Quailes, (light supper-meat, and easie of digestion) being onely exceedings, or a feast for a meale; and next morning, their ordinary, or constant fare was delivered out unto them, Manna rained from heaven. Some conceive it so called from  in Chaldee What? (or rather,Vide M. Mede Diatri. 3. part pag. 557. who?) from the question made by them at the first sight thereof. But, how came the Israelites, newly come out of Egypt, to speake the Chaldee language? Egypt and Babylon (the one the house of bondage, the other the land of captivity) though meeting in mischief against the children of God, being in time and place far asunder? Rather in Hebrew it signifieth a portion, being their daily allowance, or elseIdm ibidem. food made ready, prepared for them without their labour or industry. It was no fragments of frankincense, called Manna by Dioscorides and Galen, no , or honey-dew, nor any such mimicall drug (being not food, but physick) called Manna at this day by the Apothecaries; but a substance so solid, that it would endure grinding, and pounding, in Mill and Mortar; yet so friable, that it melted at the rising of the Sun. It fell six days, and not on theExod. 16. 23. seventh; observed, and inforced by some, for the antiquity, and morality of the Sabbath, this happening before the giving of the fourth Commandement on mount Sinai.
§ 17. Dim are their eyes who see not Christ typified therein.Christ typified in Manna. Given freely of Gods goodness, without any work or merit of man; in a mi∣raculous manner, at first unknown what it was, orExod. 16. 15. whence it came, for, whoIsa. 53. 8. shall declare his generation? Equally belonging to all, rich and poor, sufficient for all:Exod. 18. 31. white in colour, so clear his innocence: plea∣sant like honey, so sweet are his benefits,Psal. 34. 8. O taste and see that the Lord is good: beaten, and broken, before eaten; [Christ on the Cross:] given onely in the wilderness, ceasing as soon as they came into the land of promise; as Sacraments shall expire when we enjoy the substance in heaven. § 18. Hence they removed toAs for Doph∣kah and Alsh two Intermedi∣ate stations, (mentioned Numb. 33. 13.) they are omit∣ted in Exod. because no∣thing memo∣rable was per∣formed in them. Rephidim, and there fall a murmur∣ing for water. Moses at Gods commandement smites the rock, and wa∣ter Exod. 17. 6. gushed forth. Saint Paul addeth, and the1 Cor. 10. 4. Rock followed them; that is, by a Metonymie, the water issuing thence trailed after them, in all their removealls. In what state did the Israelites march, having a pillar of fire before to usher, and a stream of water their train-bearer, behind them? Both bad masters, but then their good servants. This latter (though little observed) was one cause of the long lingering of the Israelites in the wilderness: the pillar conducting them such by-ways, in levels or declivity of vales in that mountainous countrey, where the water had a conve∣niency to be derived after them. How many miles doth the artificiall new river make, betwixt Ware and London, finding out flats to expedite the passage thereof? Indeed, God could as easily have made this rock∣water climbe, and clamber mountains, as lacquey at the heels of the Israelites; (though the one was but beside, the other quite against nature) but he would not causelesly multiply miracle on miracle. How the water of this rock was afterwards suspended, and another at Cadesh made suc∣cessour in the room thereof, shall in due time, God willing, be observed. Rephidim by this ill accident of the peoples murmuring, got (no good, but) two new names, Massah and Meribah, temptation and chiding. § 19. Here the children of Israel were in war incountred by the A∣malekites,Amalik op∣poseth Israel. whose countrey lay hereabouts. A base barren land, yet too good for the owners thereof, living not so much on their own, as on incursions into their neighbouring countries. Descended fromGen. 36. 12. Timnah, concubine to Eliphaz, Esau's eldest son: the dregs of whose malice against Iacob, and his posterity, were setled in this nation. Whilest Ioshua in the valley undertook them in a pitched field, Moses in the mount of Horeb assaulted, and battered the gates of heaven with his importunate prayers. With the rising or falling of whose hands, rose or fell the courage, and success of theExod. 17. 11. Israelites; till at last supported by Aaron and Hur they procure a finall conquest. This AmalekNum. 24. 20. was the first of the nations that opposed Israel, and therefore just it was, that on him (first opening the matrix of malice) as on the eldest son of Satan, a curse should be entailed, and his heires for ever; God enjoining his people a truceless war, to the utterExod. 17. 14. & 16. extirpation of the Amalekites.
§ 20. Hence forward we never meet an Amalekite in Scripture,Amalkites mis∣chievous in conjunction with others. but ever doing mischief. Either stealing; (as when they plundered1 Sam. 30. 1. Ziglag, carrying away the women and children thereof captive) or lying, as the 2 Sam. 1. 8. 10. messenger that told the tidings of the manner of Saul's death; or craftily plotting murder, asEsther 3. 1. Haman designing the destruction of the Jewish nation; or cruelly performing it, as1 Sam. 15. 33. Agag, the barbarous, and bloudy King of the Amalekites. Now these Amalekites, after this their first defeat by Ioshua, were never after able alone to wage war with Israel, but listed themselves as Auxiliaries, with others. Thus under KingIudg. 3. 13. Eglon, they joined with Moab, and Ammon; united themselves toIudg. 5. 14. Sisera against Barak; confederated withIudg. 6. 3. Midian, against Gideon; and after the death of Tola, combined with the Sidonians against Israel: These Adjectives one∣ly appearing in conjunction, and composition with the enemies of Gods people. Yea, it is observable, that the Israelites never ingaged a∣gainst Amalek in set-fight, but constantly came off conquerours, as if the vigour and virtue of Moses his upheld hands, and the rod therein, had continued to all posterity. Thus, besides the victories gotten by Ehud, Barak, and Gideon; Saul smote Amalek, (when contrary to Gods com∣mand, he1 Sam. 15. 9. spared the King, and choicest spoile thereof;) David1 Sam. 30. 18. sur∣prised them and regained his captives; and the Tribe of Simeon1 Chr. 4. 13. made a succesfull expedition against them, to mount Seir, in the days of He∣zekiah. § 21. We must not forget hat mount Horeb,Mount Horeb Gomountain whereon Moses did pray, was the place, nigh which formerly, he fed the flocks of Iethro his father-in-law. It is called in Scripture, theExod. 3. 1. & 1 King. 19. 8. mountain of God, either because exceeding high, and by an Hebraisme, all things eminent in their kind, are given to God, (as the Cedars of God, that is, very tall and lofty Cedars) or, because God there miraculously manifested himself in the Exod. 3. 2. bush that burned, and consumed not. Some hundred years after, Elijah living in a cave of this mountain, heard the Lord passing by, neither in fire, earth-quake, or wind, but in a1 King. 19. 12. still small voice. § 22. Whilest the Israelites abode about Rephidim, Iethro Moses his fa∣ther-in-law,Iethro gives Moses a visit. Prince of Midian, a countrey lying south-ward from hence towards the Red-sea, repaired hither to give his son a visit, and congratu∣late his good success. During his abode there, he observed how Moses wearied himself with working, and the people with waiting, whilest all causes arising betwixtExod. 12. 37. six hundred thousand men, besides women, (too frequently fruitfull in contentions) were brought before him to be decided. He that measureth these peoples litigiousness amongst them∣selves, by their frowardness to God, will less admire, that Samsons back was, then that Moses his brains were not broken, with so great a burden. Surely his prudence was not so much tryed with the difficulty, as his patience with the easiness of many triviall matters brought before him. Iethro fairly chideth him for over-burdening himself. Send us such cor∣diall
woundings of a faithfull friend, and keep us from the wounding cordials of flattering foes. § 23. His chiding is seconded with counselling him.Chides and counsells him. Thunder doth more harm then good, if not bringing some soft rain along with it. He adviseth Moses to substitute under-governers (reserving an appeale in grand causes to himself) charactered with these cardinall vertues, Exod. 18. 21. Men of courage, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousnesse. Moses followed his advice, new modelling the people, appointing officers over thousands, and hundreds, and fifties, and tens. Parallel to the last was the originall institution of our EnglishSee Lambert of Constables. Tything-men (a word still in use in the west-countrey) being a superiour appointed to oversee ten men, with their families belonging unto them. § 24. From Rephidim (alias Massah,Terrible appa∣ritions at the giving of the Law on Mount Sinai. or Meribah) Israel advanced to mount Sinai; where, after much preparatory state (on purpose to make terrible impressions on the people) of thunder, smoke, and lightning, the law at last was delivered. Small hope, that this Law would give life, which at the giving thereof, almost proved mortall to the beholders. If the Judge be thus terrible, when he but beginneth his charge, what will he be, when proceeding to pronounce the sentence of condemnation on ma∣lefactors? The mountain was railed about with a Noli me tangere, the people being commanded to observe a reverentiall distance. § 25. Hard it is to understand, who of the people, when, and how far, were permitted, or prohibited their approach to this mountain. I conceive the following modell clearest in it self,The equipage of the people on Mount Sinai and most consonant to the text; 1 Moses, by divine command,Exod. 19. 12. set bounds round about the borders of Mount Sinai; either drawing a line, or casting up a bank of sand, or cancelling, and railing it with posts: though the last least probable, trees being so scarce, nothing but hunger and horrour growing hereabouts. 2 When God came down on mount Sinai, it was death for man or beast to approach those bounds (as made on the skirt of the Mount, which they might not touch) untill solemn leave was given unto them. 3 When theIbid. v. 13. Trumpet sounded long (as a signall, or watch-word for that purpose) the people might come up to the mount (namely up the skirts, and lowest verge thereof, so far as the foresaid bounds gave them leave) andIbid. v. 17. hither they advanced under the conduct of Moses. 4 Here the people kept their station, during the promulgation of the law: attentive eares being permitted, but prying eyes forbid∣den them. Yea, on pain of death they were to proceedIbid. v. 21. no farther. 5 Aaron by a Call of grace (as high Priest in reversion) came up
higher haply to the midst of the mountain. 6 Whilest thus the people stood at the bottome of the mount, in the Chamber of presence; Aaron in the midst thereof, as in the Privy Chamber; Moses on the mount-top (as in the Bed Chamber, where∣in Gods glory rested) conversed with the Divine Majesty. Forget we not, how Ioshua was disposed, in some unknown distance in this Mount, where he remained with MosesExod. 32. 17. fourty days. As for∣merly Barons eldest sons were admitted into the House of Lords, not to vote, but view the passages therein: so Ioshua Moses his heire apparant, and successour designed in Divine intention, had a peculiar favour, more neerly to behold the transactions on Mount Sinai. § 26. No doubt the Israelites,The Iews Ido∣latty. at the giving of the Law, made large promises to observe it, but very ill performed by them. For, during Moses his absence fourty days in the Mount, they solicited Aaron to make them Gods. He to decline the imployment, requires theExod. 32. 2. ear-rings (not out of the cabinets, but) from the eares of their wives, sons, and daughters. Hoping, this his motion would make such a generall mutiny in all their families, it would finally dash the designe. Especially, seeing golden ornaments were accounted essentiall in those Eastern parts, and their heads, and hands being without ear-rings, and bracelets, were e∣steemed more naked, then ours without hats, and gloves. But Aaron herein missed his marke, finding the Iews superstition above their pride, or covetousness, who violently brakeIbid. v. 3. off their ear-rings, even such as were riveted in their skin with long wearing, so that rather they would fetch away some flesh, then leave any gold behinde them. Of these Jewells delivered unto him, Aaron made a moltenIbid. v. 4. calfe for them to worship. § 27. And why a Calfe?Why a Calf. could they finde no fitter resemblance of God, amongst all the creatures? Why not rather the Lordly Lion, to shew the soveraignty; vast Elephant; the immensity; subtile Serpent, the wisdome; long-lived Hart, the eternity; swift Eagle, the ubiquity of God, rather then the silly senseless calfe, that eateth Hay? But, the shape mattered not much, for if God be made like any thing he may be made like any thing. It being as unlawfull to fashion him an Angel, as a worm, seeing the CommandementExod. 20. 4. forbids as well the likeness of things in heaven above, as in earth beneath. But, probably a Calfe was preferred be∣fore other formes, because they had learned it from the Egyptians wor∣shipping their oxe Apis. Thus the IsraelitesExod 12. 35. borrowed, not all gold, and silver, but some dross from the Egyptians, whence they fetcht the idola∣trous formes of their worship. § 28. Moses descends in haste from the mount,The abolishing thereof. and beholding their impiety, in holy zeale brake the two Tables, wherein the Com∣mandements were written. Then, boldly he seiseth on their Idol, be∣ing but one against many thousands. Oh! what an army, innocence
and authority carrieth, in a sole person! None durst rescue their calfe, and it could not rescue it self; yea, could not so much as low, being now led to be slaughtered. He stamps it to powder, and being now pulverized, and strawed on the water, heExod. 32. 20. made the Israelites to drink thereof. Say not, this was uncivill, to force men to drink against their will, and the Persians in their feasts had more goodness, whereEsther 1. 8. none did compell. For, as a Physitian, he made the people his Patients, take this potion for their own good. Aurum potabile (they say) is cordiall, and this draught would be soveraign for the Israelites, to teach them, how hereafter they worshipped that, which went into the draught. For, now, their Gods made to goe before, are gone behinde them; and, if so minded, they might meet them next morning in their excrements. § 29. The Idol thus abolished,xecution made by the Levites. the idolatry was not thereby instant∣ly expiated. The Levites, at Gods summons, and command, with drawnExod. 31. 27. swords, went in and out from gate to gate, through the camp, and un∣partially slay every one they meet. Wherein observe, they had no com∣mission to kill 1 Children, whose judgment was not out of nonage to discern Idolatry. Besides, God was very tender in preserving the next generation. 2 Nor women: seeing men alone are mentioned to be slain. And although Levi is commended for saying to his mother,Deut. 33. 9. I have not seen her; this relates not to their killing of women, but that they were inexorable, to spare any at their intreaties. 3 Nor men in their tents; How good is it (especially in sad times) to keep home, and not to be gadding abroad, without great oc∣casion! 4 But onely such, as they met stragling, and strutting in the streets, whilest the rest within doors, may charitably be conceived, sor∣rowing for the sin they had committed. Say not with David,2 Sam. 11. 25. the sword-devoureth one as well as another. For, sure∣ly Divine providence brought herein the most active offenders to exe∣cution. And God was so well pleased with this sacrifice of Levi's offer∣ing, that hereafter none other Tribe should offer sacrifice unto him. § 30. The number of the slain were aboutExods. 32. 28. three thousand men.Mercy in Gods justice. A great sum in it self, yet divided amongst six hundredExod. 12. 37. thousand, it a∣mounteth but just to the twentieth part of decimation, taking but one out of two hundred, and five out of a thousand. And this was the first mor∣tall judgement inflicted on the Israelites, since their coming out of Egypt; for, although formerly they had many times muttered, yet God onely chid, not kil'd any of them. But, ever after this time, they never mur∣mured, but it cost some their lives for the same. Thus Divine Justice is long plucking his arme out of his bosome; but, having once found the use thereof, never striketh in vain. Yea, ever after God improved
himself to greater numbers, observing generally a gradation in his judgments, and the price of the Market rose higher to the latter end thereof. But three thousand slain at this time; afterwards fourteenNum. 16. 19. thousand and seven hundred upon the rebellion of Korah; andNum. 25. 9. twenty four thousand destroy∣ed by the plague, about the business of Baal-Peor. § 31. The modern Iews are of opinion,The error of the modern Iews. that all the afflictions which ever since have, do, or shal befal their nation, are still the just punishments on them, for this their first act of Idolatry. And the Rabbins haveMoses Ger∣densis. a saying, that God never inflicts any judgment upon them, but therein is an ounce of his anger on them for their ancestors making the goldenVide P. Fa∣gium in Cal∣daic. Exod. Paraphras. Calfe. A reverend friend of mine, conversing at Amsterdam with a Iewish youth (very capable and ingenious for one of that nation) endevoured to make him sensible of Gods anger upon them, for rejecting and crucifying of Christ; for which foul fact, he shewed, how the Iews have lived many hundred years in miserable banishment. But, the youth would in no wise ac∣knowledge their sufferings, any effect, or punishment of their murdering of Christ, but taking his Bible, turned to Gods threatning immediately after their making of the Calfe, Exod. 32. 34. Nevertheless in the day when I visit, I will visit their sin upon them; so interpreting, and applying all the numerous calamities, which since have befallen them, to relate to no other cause, then that their first idolatry. Whereas indeed, the arrears of their idolatry long agoe were satisfied, and this is a new debt of later date, contracted on themselves by their infidelity. § 32. Many moe matters of moment happened during the Israelites abode at mount Sinai;Many remar∣kable at Mount Sinai. as instructions delivered to Moses, for the build∣ing of the Ark, by him performed accordingly, (wherof in the next chap∣ter) the first numbring of the people since their coming out of Egypt, with the giving of the Ceremoniall, and Judiciall law. From mount Sinai they marched byNum. 11. 3. Taberah, that is, a burning, (because there, the fire of God, till quenched by Moses his prayer, consumed the hindmost in the camp, for their murmuring) on to Kibroth-Hattaavah. § 33. Here the people fell a longingfor meat,Mama loathed by the Israelites. and loathingNum. 11. 4. of Manna, though man could eat no cheaper, Angels no better food. But, oh! thought they, no Manna to variety. Always the same in substance, though disguised in dressing, proved offensive unto them. This makes me suspect the truth, of what Saint Augustine out of the Rabbins reports, that Manna relished in every mans mouth, as their fancy affected, so that all flesh, fish, and fowle were virtually epitomized therein. If so, the Iews had noVide Augusti∣num. tom. 2. pag. 558. & Retract. lib. 2. cap. 20. pretence to distaste, what tasted as themselves did desire. Except any will say, they desired to feast their eye, as well as their palat, and severall meats, not diversified in sight, were nauseous unto them. Had not the fever of their lust put their mouths quite out of taste, to prefer an EgyptianNum. 1. 5. Cucumber before such heavenly repast? § 34. Here God gave them flesh with a vengeance,Quailes sent them the se∣cond time. sending
Quailes now the second time unto them, after a different manner, then what formerly he had given them at the wilderness of Sin. Then, 1 TheyExod. 16. 3. murmured out of hun∣ger and necessity, having no∣thing to eat. 2 Those Quales lasted but oneExod. 16. 13. meal. 3. They were safely eaten, and well digested. Now, 1 They murmured out of humour, and curiosity, because they had nothing but Manna. 2 These Quailes continued a whole Num. 11. 20. moneth. 3 Many Israelites were slain, whilest the meat was in their mouths. The Psalmist addeth, that God slew thePsal. 78. 31. wealthiest, or fattest of them: the judgement fell heaviest on men of the primest quality. Which mindeth me (though barring all uncharitable application) of a strange mortali∣ty in England Anno 1558. at the death of Queen Mary, when a dainty mouthed disease did rage, which (passing by poor people) fed general∣ly onCommunis quaedam lues ex∣ardore febrium per universes Angliae ordines permeabat, & in ill is maximè divites & hono∣ratas personas depopulabatur. Haddon cont. Osrium. fo. 25. principall persons, of greatest wealth, and estate. The place where this execution was done, was called Kibroth-Hat-taavah, or, the grave of lusters. § 35.Miriam and Aaron brawle with Moses. Hence they removed toNum. 11. 35. Hazeroth, where happned the contest ofNum. 12. 1. Miriam and Aaron against Moses, because of the Ethiopian [or Cushite woman] whom he had married. Understand we Zipporah hereby (Moses having wife enough of her alone, as appears by her shrewish Exod. 4. 25. returns) being an Ethiopian at large, Midian being part of the Asitick Cush, as learned men have cleared beyond opposition. Wherefore we look on the Lady Tarbith, as no Bride of Moses, but Brat of Iosephus, begotten of his luxurious fancy. True it is, many years since Moses was married to Zipporah, and yet no wonder, that now they made it new matter for fresh falling out. For, Anger can keep an accusation long dormant in the deck, and awaken it at last, when conceiving it most for its advantage. § 36. That Miriam was most active in this brawle,Miriam most active. is not onely pro∣bable from the female subject thereof, but may certainly be collected from the first naming of her, [Num. 12. 1. And Miriam and Aaron spake against Moses] and the punishment lighting heaviest upon her. For, God making himself umpire, ended the brawle, cleared Moses, checked Aaron, and punished Miriam with seven days leprosie. During which time the Congregation of IsraelNum. 12. 15. not removing out of regard to her (leprous Miriam is Miriam still, a good woman for the main; and such, when smarting for their faults, are not to be cast away, but comforted) respectfully attended her recovery. § 37. Hence they removed to the Wilderness of Paran,Murmurings occasioned by the false report of Spies. whence spies were sent to search the land, and whither after forty days they returned, with medly tydings in their mouths, feeding such as sent them with a bit and a knock; greatNum. 13. 23. grapes, figs, and pomegranates, but withall telling them, that the rest (whereof these were a sample) must cost bloudy blows,
before they could quietly be gathered. Here we will not defend their falshoods by a figure pleading a Miosis, when they in respect of the Anakims,Num 13. 33. were in their own sight as Grashoppers, whilest the Cities of the Ca∣nanites (liers relations like the sea, what they lose in one place, gain in another) were (by an Hyperbole bringing both stone and mortar)Deut. 1 2. walled up to heaven; seeing, in down right terms, they with their carnall fear, flatly belyed both the place, and people therein. Yea, what if their wals had reached up to heaven? Did not Israels help come down from thence? so that the bottome of their comfort, was higher then the battlements of their enemies buildings. Hereat the people fall a muttering and whilest Caleb and Ioshua, the onely two Tell-troths, endevoured to undeceive, and incourage the people, instead of stilling them, they had been stoned themselves, if the glorious appearance of God out of the Tabernacle had not seasonablyNum. 1. 10. interposed betwixt their innocence, and the fury of the multitude. § 38. God (as justly he might) took this their affront in high in∣dignity,This the tenth tempaion. especially seeing since their coming out of Egypt, they had tempted him now theseNum. 14 22. ten times, and this decumana tentatio as yet the last and greatest. Ten Commandements he gave them to observe, and ten temptati∣ons they already returned him in lieu thereof. Surely God is a just Ac∣countant, not charging moe faults on their score, then they were guilty of, but let us reckon up as many murmurings of them as appear in Scri∣pture. Not to speake of the personall faults of Nadab and Abihu offering withLevit. 10 1. strange fire, (conceived drunk at the same time, because immediate∣ly after, wine and strong drink are forbidden the Priests when they officiate) one thatLevit. 34. 11. blasphemed, another gatheringNum. 15. 32. sticks on the Sabbath; we insist on more generall and solemn Rebellions, out of the stock of the publick infidelity. 1 Before their coming over the Red-sea. Exod. 14. 11. 2 At Marah for want of water. Exod. 15. 24. 3 In Sin Wilderness for lack of food. Exod. 16. 2. 4 At the same place, some keeping Manna till it stnk. ver. 20. contrary to Gods comand. 5 Others going out to gather it on the Sabbath. ver. 27. contrary to Gods comand. 6 At Rephidim, for want of water. Exod. 17. 2. 7 For the absence of Moses, when they made the calfe Exod. 32. 1. 8 At Taberah, when fire consumed them. Numb. 11. 1. 9 At Kibroth-Hattaavah longing for food. Numb. 11. 4. 10 At this time after the return of the Spies. Yet not to stand strictly on ten, perchance, a certain is put for an uncertain number (Thou hast changed my wagesGen. 31. 41. ten times, that is, very often.) Not that the Iews tempted God under, but rather over that number, their seve∣rall impieties not being all expressed, as appears by the charge of the Pro∣phet Amos, In theAmos 5. 26. wilderness forty years, ô house of Israel, you have born the Taber∣nacle of Moloch, and Chiun your images &c. being guilty of more Idolatry, then is particularly mentioned by Moses. § 39. The place whence the Spies were sent,Three names to one place. and whither they
returned is called in Scripture by three severall names; 1Num. 33. 18. Rithmah, as may be collected from the order of their severall stations. This we conceive the center of the camp, and punctu∣all place (otherwise but obscure in it self) where the Tabernacle was pitched. 2Deut. 1. 19. Kadesh-barnea, whither the out skirts of that numerous Camp, distant some space, might extend. 3 The Wilderness ofNum. 12. 16. & 13. 3. Paran, which though the genericall name to the whole Desert, is here appropriated to a particular part therof. Thus in Asia a fourth part of the world, there is the lesser Asia (now Na∣tolia) a large Countrey, and therein1 Pet. 1. 1. proper Asia a little Province (which I may call the Asia of ASIA in ASIA) as here, this proper Paran in the midst of the great Wilderness of the same name. § 40. God on their disobedience condemned this whole generation (Caleb and Ioshua excepted) to death in the Wilderness, forbidding them farther approach to the land of Canaan, and enjoining their tedious return toward the Red-sea. Notwithstanding whose prohibition, some outlaw'd of his protection, armed onely with their own stubborness (as if with their gold and silver, they had borrowed also part of Pharaohs hardened heart) without Pillar to guide, or Arke to accompany them, ad∣vanced forward, and became aNum. 14. 45. prey to the Canaanites, and Amalekites. And no wonder, if such who in their march set their faces against Gods com∣mand, be found in their retrait (or flight rather) turning their backs to∣wards their enemies. The rest were remanded by Gods order towards the south, who from Rithmah their fifteenth, to Kadesh their thirty third station, spent well-nigh thirty eight years, and were spent by the same, wherein all that generation was consumed. § 41. Which term of time we may fitly call the Gulfe of silence,The gulfe of silence. nothing remarkable being stored thereof in Scripture, save onely the rebellion of Num. 16. 1. Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, and that also without any notation of the particular place whereon it was acted. YetAinsworth on Numb. 33. learned men with some probability conceive, thatNum. 33. 25. Makheloth the two and twentieth stage of the Israelites, was the Theater of so sad a Tragedy, because interpreted Assem∣blies in the Hebrew tongue, the same word which in the Originall is used, when those mutineers are said toNum. 16. 3. gather themselves together against Moses. § 42. Come we now to Kadesh in the wilderness of Zin their thirty third resting place,They come to Kadsh. where one may rationally hope to finde much refor∣mation amongst the people, if all things be seriously considered. For, such as survived of the old generation, seeing their equalls in age extinguish∣ed before their eyes, and this the last year (in their lease of forty) begun, should probably prove older and wiser, learning wit from others woe not to provoke God. And the succeeding generation were concerned to carry themselves accordingly, being Probationers upon their good beha∣viour, to be admitted into Canaan, coming now to the confines thereof.
§ 45. It is observable,Moses punished for the people. that since the Israelites making of the Calfe, all their mutterings were mortall, and cost many their lives: yet onely here at Kadesh none were slain for their disobedience, save Moses and Aaron (emi∣nently worth thousands of others) who here had the sentence of death pronounced against them (though reprieved for a time) and rende∣red uncapable of their entering into Canaan, as if the rest had fared the better for their punishment, God not willing that the chief Magistrate, chief Minister and all the people should smart at the same time, for the same offence. § 46. Here we take our farewell of the Israelites,A farewell to the Israelites. much admiring at their constant disobedience, notwithstanding their manifold delive∣rances, so that miracles grown customary with them, were (like Manna) contemned for their commonness, and the Pillar ofNum. 14. 14. fire going before them (What is ever seen, is never seen) made no more impression on theirs, then the rising and setting of the glorious Sun, doth on our thankfulness. Yea, still they persisted to rebell against God, and (which is remarkable) lust was their last tempting of him, committing carnall and spirituallNum. 25.  whore∣dome
with the daughters of Moa, whereof formerly in the Desiption Pag. 63. §. 19. of Reuben. Now the old generation began to run drogs, (very few of them being left alive, and therefore strange it is, that any of them should be wanton in their old age (How ill doth green thoughts sui with gray heads?) though probably some of them having one foot in the grave, had an Arme in those amorous embraces. § 47. But whilest we condemn the Iews,Admonition to the English. we see not the stubborn∣ness in our own hearts. A brain-sick opinion hath possessed many English now adays, that they are descended from Iewish extraction, and some pretend to derive their pedegree (but out of what Herals office I know not) from Iewish parentage. Here a mysticall truth may be wrapped up in a literall lye: (Old-Iury is a street of large extent) and too much of Iewish bloud, spirits, marrow; fill, move, fraught; our veins, nerves, bones;Amos 2. 13. pressing God under the weight of our sins, who daily Psal. 68. 19. loadeth us with his benefits; who, besides other favours, in the day-time of posperity is a pillar of a cloud to cool, check, and counsell; in the night of adversity a pillar of fire to cheer, comfort, and conduct us, and yet neither effectually works our serious amendment. Thus leaving the tedious travels of the Iews, we come to the ready road betwixt Egypt and Canan, which may be gone over in far fewer days, then they spent years in their passage. § 48. Some will say,Ioseph defended for want of affection. if so short a cut betwixt Egypt and Canaan, how can Ioseph be excused for lack of filiall affection, in not sending so long time to his Father, to rectifie his mistake, and to untorture him from the apprehension of his sons supposed death? Especially, seeing his Fathers numerous family on small enquiry might easily be found out, even by the signe of his different religion from the rest of the Countrey. All that can be answered is, Ioseph had some immediate security, and assurance from God, that his dreams in due time should take full effect, and there∣fore attended whilst providence seasonably ripened the same by his own means: his obedience to God (whose ways he waited on) stopping his expression of his love to his parent, which flowed forth at last the more plentifully, for being so long dammed up before. § 49. This compendious passage betwixt Egypt and Canaan,Syon lake and Casian Moun∣tain. leaveth the Mediterranean sea on the left hand, as also the Syrbon-lake, formerly much larger, now daily decreasing, since the inlet thereof into the sea, hath been choaked up with the sand. More eastward it passeth by the Mount Casius, famous for the buriall of the unfortunate Pompey the great therein, by a poor souldier, untill Adrian the Emperour afterwards be∣stowed a fair Monument upon him. But neither this Mountain, nor any other place on this road is mentioned in Scripture, save two Innes thereon of eminent note. § 50. Of these that the ancientest wherein the ten sons of their Father Iacob lodged in their going down to Egypt.The most anc∣ent Inne. I say the ten sons of one Father.
And therefore the same is pertinently alledged by them in their purgation that they were no spies,Gen. 42. 11. because all one mans children, (which some resem∣blance in their countenances [probably] might partly evidence) it be∣ing utterly unlikely, that persons sent on so dangerous discoveries should all be taken out of one family, (to the finall extirpation thereof, if mis∣carrying in the designe) whereas generally Spies, (like a Party commanded out of severall troops, when sent on desperate service) are chosen out of di∣vers housholds, (with those which Moses sent to search the land, one out ofNum. 13. 2. every Tribe) that if cut off in the Action, the loss may be the lighter when divided amongst many families. Here those brethren were, in their return, troubled with too much money, (wealth hath her distracti∣ons as well as want) the silver in theirGen. 52. 28. Sacks, which they beheld as a bait laid there to ensare them, though all came off joyfully at the last. § 51. The other Inne (on or near this road) was that wherein Moses (coming out of Midian and compassing the Red-sea) lodged with his wife and children.Moses his Inne. An Inne which was likely to have proved hisEccles. 12. 5. long-home, and Moses his Embassie to Pharaoh, was almost turned there into an errand unto his own grave, yea the messenger welnigh dispatched before the message, God seeking toExod. 4. 24. kill him, for neglecting the circumcising of his sons. Whether because his forty years living in Midian, had made him more remiss in his Religion, or out of a peaceable compliance to purchase the quiet of his wise, whose aversness herein appears by her words and gesture, at the same time here casting her sons foreskin at his feet, yet hitting him in the teethExod. 4. 25. there with, Surely a bloudy husband art thou to me. § 52. Now to take our farewell of this Wilderness,People living in this Wilder∣ness. as barren as it was, some people, (besides the Amalekites formerly spoken of) made a shift to live therein. (No place so dry with sand, or hard with rockes, but, if well cooked with industry, it will make mans-meat, especially for hungry-stomachs.) As the Madianites, where Iethro was Prince in the South-west, on the Red-sea, the1 Sam. 24. 8. Geshurites, and Gezrites in the North-east, betwixt Egypt and Shur, and above all, the Kenites, who at first lived mixed with the Amalekites. § 53. By Kenites we understand not that antiquated nation,The Kenites. whose lands God promised toGen. 15. 19. See our firt book pag. 19. Abraham, but a people descended from Hobab Judg 4 11. or Iethro the father-in-law to Moses, some whereof removed out of this Wilderness, and planted themselves near the TribeIbidem. of Napthali, others continued here, and both Colonies of them alwaies kept good corresponcie with the Israelites. Saul, when sent against the Amalekites, was very civill to these southern Kenites, both warning and wishing them seasonably to 1 Sam. 15. 6. depart at which time I conceive they hitched their Habitations; a little more Northward, and nearer to Iuduh. These Kenites, (though Gentiles and strangers) were kinder to David, then the Keilites, (Iews, of his own Tribe) who though engaged to David for delivering them from their enemies, yet ungratefully1 Sam. 2. 12. intended to betray him to Saul. Whereas the Kenites,
though bound to Saul for a late favour received from him, yet protected Davids innocence from Sauls persecution, their Cities being one of Da∣vids Topicks,1 Sam. 30. 29. or place where he haunted, and whither he sent part of the spoile he had taken from the Amalekites. § 54. Here let Balaams prophecy be well heeded,Balaam his prophcy of the Kenites. when looking on the Kenites, Strong (saith he) is thy dwelling place,Num. 24. 21. and thou puttest thy nest in A ROCK, nevertheless the Kenites shall be wasted, untill [or ratherSee Ainsworth in locum. whilst] Ashur shall carry thee away captive. By Rock, (besides the locall position of their dwelling) we understand, their confederacy and association with the Iews in the true Religion, (being accounted Proselytes) and sharing with them in the same success, as carried away by the Assyrian to Babylon, and returning again when the rest of the Iews were restored, seeing we finde some Kenites1 Chr. 12. 55. mentioned after the captivity, and are (as the text intimates) conceived to be the same with abstemious Familie of the Rechabites. Here the draught of the Tabernacle is to be inserted.
Icon TABERNACVLI ex Aria Montano desumpta
GENERALL OBSERVATIONS ON THE TABERNACLE. CHAP. IV. § 1. IN all peaceable times,Always some publick places for Gods ser∣vice. even from the infancy of man∣kinde, certain places were set apart for Gods pub∣lick service. Thus the ancientGen. 12. 7, 8. & Gen. 13. 3. &c. Patriarchs, no sooner pitched down their tents, but they reared up an Altar for divine worship. Indeed this laudable custome had been intermitted, discontinued and suspended during the Israelites af∣fliction in Egypt, making hard shift to serve God with safety, and secrecy in their own houses, when publick places of adoration were prohibited: as always in time of persecution, any place which hath the properties of Capacity and Privacy, (to hold and hide the people assembled therein) may serve for that purpose. But no sooner were the Israelites restored to their liberty (though as yet but in a barren wilderness) but that God issued out order for the erection of his Tabernacle to place his Name, and fix his peoples devotion therein. § 2. The materials of this Tabernacle were taken from the Egyptians,Egyptians justly spoiled. when the Israelites, at their departure,Exod. 12. 35. borrowed of them jewels of silver, and jewels of gold. The text saith (according to the old Translation) that they Exod. 12. 36. robbed the Egyptians: as indeed to borrow, with an intent never to pay, is no better then flat felony. But, although this act of the Israelites was robbery, quoad effectum, leaving the Egyptians spoiled and naked; yet it was none, quoad reatum, having not onely a Commission, butExod. 12. 12. Command from God for the same. And albeit the Egyptians are in some sense, then said, toExod. 12. 36. lend to the Israelites, yet in very deed they did but pay back their due unto them. § 3. See what it is to detain the wages of the hireling.Wages long de∣tained paid with a witness. Many a year had these Israelites, and their Fathers toiled, and moiled in Egypt, and had no∣thing for their pains but their labour. But now, both the Principall, and Consideration for their forbearance thereof, was laid them down in a lump all together▪ Indeed they are said to have builded TreasureExod. 1. 11. Cities for Pharaoh; whereas in fine Pharaoh proved but the Treasurer and Storer for them, carefully keeping their money for them, till it amounted to a mass, for their greater benefit; which, if formerly payed them by in∣considerable parcels, might possibly have been spent, as fast as received. § 4. Amongst the materials offered for the building of the Tahernacle,All persons promote Gods Tabernacle. all Persons presented things proportionable to their own professions and conditions. The Princes broughtExod. 35. 27. Precious stones, rich people Gold
and Silver, the middle sort fine Linneu and Brass (not an ounce of iron be∣ing used in all the Fabrick) and the meanest Goates haire and Badgers skins. And as men sent their purses, so the women lent their pains, the wise hearted amongst them,Exod. 35. 25. spinning with their hands, blue, soarlet, and fine linnen for the Tabernacle. § 5. Behold here,But still keep their callings. how all advanced Gods work, yet every one con∣tinued in his own vocation. Blame worthy their Pride, who will be no∣thing, if they may not all be Bezaleels at the building of the Tabernacle. Rom. 10. 15. How shall they preach except they be sent? De jure: How can they preach lawfully and comfortably? though de facto, they presume to doe it al∣though but to the small profit of others, and great danger of themselves. § 6. But that which most commended the offering of the Isrelites in the sight of God, was their readiness and willingness therein. None were rated, or taxed to this work, but all flowed freely from them. This purified poor peoples Brass into refined gold, and changed their Goats-hair into silk, in Gods acceptance thereof. Otherwise, many may be the Item's in mens Account, and yet all of them amount to just nothing in divine acceptation, onely for the want of a good Imprimis. For if there be FIRST a2 Cor. 8. 12. willing minde, it is accepted according to that a man hath, and not that he hath not. § 7. One main motive which made them more bountifull,A main mo∣tive of their bounty. was to expiate the late guilt that they had contracted by making the Calfe; when off went theExod. 32. 3. ear-rings of the women and their children, to that Idola∣trous use. They were therefore engaged to drown that stain with a more plentifull stream of gifts to Gods service. Thus, the consideration how prodigall we have formerly been to sin and Satan, ought to make us hereafter more liberall in the performance of divine duties:Rom. 6. 19. For as yee have yeelded your members servants to uncleanness, and to iniquity, unto iniquity: even so now yeeld your members servants to righteousness, unto holiness. § 8. Yea,Their bounty restrained by Proclamaion. such was the spring-tyde of the Israelites bounty herein, that to prevent the danger of a deluge, bounds were set thereunto, Hither shalt thou come and no further: They broughtExod. 36. 5. much more then enough, for the srvice of the work which the Lord had commanded to make. Insomuch that Moses issued out aIbid. ver. 6. Proclamation of restraint, that no more should be brought to that purpose. Oh the shame! that peoples liberality under the Law should need a bridle, which needs a spur under the Gospell! § 9. Here we may take notice of the ,Moses his con∣tented minde. and contented minde of Moses. Had he been possesed with the humour of theProv. 30. 15. Horse-leach, Give, give; yea, had he been but pleased to have been the Cistern whilest the children of Israel were glad to be the fountain, what a mass of money might he have advanced for himselfe, and yet have unsuspectedly char∣ged all on the account of the Tabernacle? How might he have feasted his family and friends with the full baskets of the fragments left of their liberality? But Moses was of the same minde, with his great-great-grand∣father
Abraham, who would not take even from aGen. 14. 23. thred to a shoe-latchet, of what was not his own, that none but God might make him rich. And thus honest hearts will rather cut off their hands, then licke their own fingers, for their private profit, when intrusted onely as Stewards for the publick good. § 10. It may seem strange,Why so boun∣tifull to this building, and afterwards backward in goodness. that these Iews, who now were so for∣ward to serve God, should soon after prove so backward in his worship, and provoke him so often by their manifold infidelities and rebellions against God. Many of these bountifull contributors to the Tabernacle, being devoid of true grace, and some of this people slain afterwards for their disobedience. But herein we may consider: 1 That this building was but a worldly Sanctuary, as theHeb. 9. 1. Apostle calleth it. And therefore no wonder, if men, otherwise given toTius 2. 12. worldly lusts, were liberall thereunto. 2 Carnall men may take a natural delight in outward visible works, whilest a confluence of vain-glory and hypocrisie may make the torrent of their bounty the greater. 3 Such outward performances are easie in comparison of that diffi∣cult and spirituall master-piece, the mortifying of mens inward corruptions. Hence came it to pass, that many that brought gold to the Tabernacle, pro∣ved themselves but dross afterwards, and fell in the conspiracy ofNum. 16. Korah and his company, and other their mutinies made against Moses. § 11. The Platform of this Tabernacle was by God delivered to Moses in the Mount;Moses receives the pattern. With a strict charge, to make all things conformable there∣unto. And he herein so exactly observed his instructions, without the least deviation from them, that in the two last chapters of Exodus, where the erecting of the Tabernacle, with the Utensils thereof, is described, these words are twelve severall times solemnly repeated, As the Lord commanded Moses. So dangerous it is to introduce any thing as essen∣tiall to Gods worship, which is not of divine institution. § 12. Bazaleel is appointed Master-workman,Bzaleel and Aholiab, Arti∣zans. one of a prosperous name, whose parents may be presumed pious, comfortably calling their child (though born in Egypt under the parching heat of persecution) in the shadow of the Lord, as his name seems to import. This Bazaleel was one of all crafts, skilfull toExod. 31. 4, 5. work in gold, silver, brass, precious stones, and timber (whereas amongst us, Gravers in gold are utterly at a loss to work in wood) Gold-smith, Lapidary, Carver, Carpenter, never Apprentice to any, yet Master in all Handy-crafts to work, and Head-crafts to contrive by divine inspira∣tion. And there wasExod. 31. 6. given with him Aholiab of the Tribe of Dan (as a Se∣condary, inferiour to the former in skill, not to clash with, but submit to his judgement) so that, as all the fine linnen used in the Tabernacle, was for the more strength thereofFine twined linnen menti∣oned about six∣teen times in making the Tabernacle. twined by divine command: so God also twisted two curious Artizans together (besides many other wise hearted
men) that the building might be the more substantially effected. § 13. The Tabernacle taken in generall consisted of two principall parts:Two principall parts of the Ta∣bernacle. 1 The Court of the Tabernacle, being anExod. 27. 9. hundred Cubits long, andIbid. ver. 13. fifty broad, made with hangings and pillars for side-walls, and without roof, open at top, parallel to the outward Courts of Solomons Temple. 2 The covered Tabernacle (consisting of the Holy, and Holy of Holies) answering to the , or roofed Temple, whose length may be col∣lected to be thirty yards (accounting a Cubit a yard) because composed of twentyExod. 26. 18. boards, standingIbid. ver. 15. upwards, each aIbid. ver. 16. Cubit and an halfe in breadth (so that the breadth of the boards joined together made the length of the Tabernacle) the height thereof being the length of the boards, that is ten Cubits, and the breadth thereof of the same proportion. This latter alone is presented in our Map, as the proper subject of our description. It was without windows, admitting no naturall light, (save what entred in on the east at the door when opened) the defect whereof was supplied with the constant light from the sevenfold Golden Candlestick. § 14. To resume the boards of the Tabernacle;The breadth, gilding, sockets and bars of the boards. we have (as formerly) their length, and breadth, but not thickness expressed in Scripture. Arias Montanus conceives them almost a Cubit thick, but if so, they had rather been trabes quàm asseres, beams then boards; whilest Iosephus more proba∣bly conjectures them four fingers thick, and we may conclude them so substantiall, as was consistent with their portableness. They wereExod. 26. 29. over∣laid with gold, understand it, they were gilt over, both because, if covered with gold-plate, the same was more subject to discomposure at the dis∣jointing and removing thereof, and because it is impossible such a mass of the purest metall should be found with exiles in the wilderness. Each board had twoExod 26. 29. tenons fastned in their silver sockets, which sockets some conceive made fitchy, or picked, to be put into the earth; which we rather beleeve flat and firm, standing fast on the surface of the ground, otherwise no need of silver sockets if their bravery was all buried in the earth. These boards had bars also (overlaid with gold) in the midst of them,Ibid. ver. 29. (understand it not perforating their thickness, but) running along their breadth in an even proportion through golden rings (as in our draught is described) to make them the more portable. § 15. The inside of the Tabernacle was covered with curious cour∣tains embroidered with Cherubims,The inside and roof thereof. and a threefold roof (shewing the Exod. 26. 14. plentifulness of divine protection over the Church against all dangers) covered the same. One of Goats-hair, (spun into cloth) another of Rams skins died red, and a third of Badgers-skins; the latter no doubt had the fur upon them, the lubricity of the haire thereof being excellent gutters and spouts to shoot down the rain thereby.
§ 16. But amongst all the materialls in the Tabernacle none more fre∣quently mentioned then Shittim-wood,Three proper∣ties of Shittim-wood. though learned men agree not, what it was, or where it grew. But, leaving them to abound in their own sense, we will content our selves with three principall properties of this wood. First, it was very durable, therefore usually translated in the Greek , wood which never rotteth. Secondly, it was portable, very light for carriage, else the Israelites coming out of Egypt, would never have cumbered themselves, to have brought heavy lumber along, seeing such shittim wood was not felled by them in the way, butExod. 35. 24. found with them, as the text doth observe. Lastly, it was precious, used in the middest of the most Utensils of the Tabernacle: Arke, and both the Altars, typifying there in the humanity of Christ; in the brazen Altar of burnt offering, resembling his satisfaction when Redeemer; and in the golden Altar of Incense, representing his intercession as Mediator; retaining still his [glorified] body about him inAct. 3. 21. heaven. § 17. Many will wonder,Shittim-wood within the Altar, why ne∣ver fied. that thisExod. 27. 1. Shittim-wood in the middest of the Altar for sacrifices (though plated over with brass on each side) was never fired with the continuall flames thereupon. Some know to their sorrow how soon such rafters or joices are set on fire, which by the ill contrivance of the Carpenter run under those hearths where constant fires are kept. But we must know, that on the Altar the fire came down from heaven, and onely minded the dispatch of that message on which it was sent; and as gun-powder (though ill comparing fire of heaven, andIgnis tartareus. fire of hell together) burnes onely upwards: so this celestiall fire, as in mo∣tion, so in operation, had its activity upwards towards heaven, whence it derived the descent thereof. § 18. Expect not here an enumeration (much less an exposition) of all the Utensils of the Tabernacle,The Laver made of wo∣mens Looking∣glasses. most of them being formerly touched in Solo∣mons Temple. Onely here a word of the Laver, and Aarons solemn Ponti∣ficalls, because of their rare composition. The former was made of the Exod. 38. 8. looking-glasses of the women, many being much troubled herein, how so brickle matter when broken could be made usefull, and solidated for this service. Indeed we have a tradition of one at Venice, who made glass malleable, but was for his invention rewarded with death by the State (who knew full well that they must break, if glasses were not broken) though this is listned unto as a fable. But, to the difficulty in hand, it is meerly grounded on a mistake, that all Specula must needs be vitrea, that what renders the reflexion of a face cannot be but of glasse. Whereas many other resplendent, though not transparent bodies, doe the same, as polished touch, jet, steel, and brass, the purest of the last most probably being here intended. Surely such looking-glasses, which severally were so clear, lost not their lustre by being many of them melted into the Laver, but (when polished again) retained their returning of resemblances. But, whether the Priests (as some will have it) made use thereof to disco∣ver
all soiliness in them before they washed, as also after washing, whe∣ther the same were sufficiently cleansed, we dare not define. § 19. However,Female de∣votion. commendable was the devotion of these women in bringing their glasses (dear ornaments in their account) to Gods service. Oh that men would but part with their superfluous, yea noxious glasses (such as might be spared, not onely without any hurt, but with much health to their souls, bodies, and estates) to bestow them on pious uses! What monuments to Gods glory, and the good of others, might there∣with be erected? § 20. We must not forget theLargely rec∣koned up Exod. 28. and metho∣dically ranked Levir. 8. 7, 8, 9. eight ornaments of Aaron thus rec∣koned up.Aavons ight ornaments. 1. Linnen breeches next his flesh. 2. A Coat of fine linnen over them. 3. Girded with an embroidered girdle. 4. Over which coat and girdle a robe all of blew, with bells and Pomegranates. 5. Upon it the Ephod, on the shoulders whereof two goodly Berill stones graven with the names of the Tribes of Israel. 6. In the Ephod the Breast-plate, and therein the Urim and Thummim. 7. On his head a Mitre. 8. In the forefront whereof a plate of pure gold two fingers broad, wherein was graven Holiness to the Lord. Say not, that the High-priest was sweltred, being built so many stories high in his garments; seeing, if pride be never a cold, when pleasing its own fancy; piety can never be too hot, with what it weareth in obedience to Gods commandement. The Priests hands and feet, when entring into the Holy of Holies, were washed and bare, to show the purity, simplicity, and sin∣cerity of his actions, and conversation, especially in the service of God. § 21. In the making of these vestments we frequently meet with four essentiall ingredients,Four principall ingredients of Sacerdotall vestments.Exod. 28. 5. 8. 15. blew, purple, scarlet, and fine twined linnen. HereDevest. Sacr. lib. 3. . 5. Ri∣bera findes the four elements (though hardly put to it to make them all out) fire in the colour of scarlet; aire of blew; earth in fine linnen, because it coming thence; water in the colour of purple, because died with the li∣quour of a fish from the sea: as if the High-priest was thus presented as upreme Chaplain to the Lord of the Universe. Thus though taking in the whole world, in my minde he leaves out the most materiall mystery in∣tended therein; for, we may behold the High-priest, when entering the Holy of Holies, representing Christ himself under such coloured clothes in a double capacity; First, as he stood charged with the guilt of man∣kinde, when The LordIsa. 53. 6. laid on him the iniquity of us all, having ourIsa. 1. 18. scarlet and crimson sins imputed unto him. Secondly, as he made satisfaction for the same with his bloud, scarlet, blew, and purple being severall sanguine colours, differing onely in degrees, and the severall setlings thereof. § 22. What Urim and ThummimVrim and Thummim. were ( in the Se∣ptuagint, in Aquila, doctrina & veritas in the Vulgar, light and perfection, according to the interpretation of the Hebrew) neither Iew nor Christian can tell; though the former (the blinder the bolder) are as various, as confident in their conjectures. Some conceive it those very two words, others the name Iehovah graven in the breast-plate, others nothing
else but the twelve stones, resplendent with light and compleated to per∣fection with the Tribes names therein, and other some mysterious mat∣ter, not of mans making but Gods giving to Moses. In a word, we shall never certainly know what Urim, and Thummim were, untill (as in the case ofEzra 2. 63. Brazlla's children) there stand up a Priest with Urim and Thummim to inform us thereof. § 23. Nor less is the variance amongst authours, how answers there∣by were returned to the Priests that consulted it, in behalfe of others, whe∣ther such designes should be undertaken, or not. Some conceive, that at such times, the fair, fresh, and orient lustre of the stones therein amoun∣ed to the airmative, whilest their dim, dull, and dead colour was inter∣preted negative. Others conceive, that seeing the Tribes names therein contained all the Hebrew letters and vowels, such characters discovered themselves by their sparkling, which concurred to the spelling of a grant or deniall, as here (imitating the Hebrew in our English tongue) is descri∣bed. Conceive such letters as we here make Capita appearing extraordi∣narily radiant on the Priests enquiry. And also to avoid confusion, that sparkling first in time, which was to be read first in place. Sardius. Reuben. Dun. ReUben. DaN. Ligre. Topaz. Sincon. Nphtali. Sinne On. NaPh Tli. Agate. Carbuncle. Levi. Gad. LEvi. Gd. Amethyst. On a           On a Emraud. IUdah. Ash Er. Iudah. Asher. Beryl. Saphir. Issachar. IsePh. Issachar. Oseph. Oyx. Diamond. ZebulOn. Benjamin. Zebulon. Benjamin. Iasper. GOE UP, GOE NOT UP. But leaving these difficult trifles (beneath the state of the high-priest, good onely for Acrostick-mongers, and Anagrammatists to pore upon) I conceive rather, that (because sometimes the answer returned was prolix and en∣cumbered with numerous and important1 Chr. 14. 14, 15. circumstances, troublesome to be represented in such literal curiosities) it was neither audible to the ear, nor legible to the eye, but byRivet in Exod. ca. 28. v. 13. illuminating the understanding of the High-priest, inabling him to give a satisfactory answer in all particulars, to the question propounded, whilest consulting the Urim and Thummim as of divine institution, to invite the Spirit of God upon him. § 24. There needs no other argument to be alledged for the freeness,The speedy fi∣nishing of the Tabernacle. and forwardness of the Israelites in building the Tabernacle, then that the same was fully finished in few moneths. For they came to the desert of Sinai in the thirdExod. 19. 1. moneth after their coming out of Egypt, and all was ended before theNum. 10. 11. twentieth day of the second moneth of the second year, when they removed from Sinai to the Wilderness of Paran. So that not above eleven moneths were expended on the whole fabrick, whereas Solomon in buil∣ding the Temple (though confessed a far more stable, and stately structure) spend full1 King. 6. 38. seven years therein. § 25. The Tabernacle thus finished, most methodicall was the march∣ing and pitching of the Tribes about it; and surely, that God who in his
service enjoined order under the Law, will not allow confusion under the Gospell. See we here the Le∣vites of Kohath, and the Reubenites, near neigh∣bours on the south of the Tabernacle.See Psa. 80. 2. Here∣upon it came to pass, that Korah the grand∣child of Kohath the Le∣vite, conspired against Moses with Dathan and Abiram the sons of Num. 16. 1. Reuben, the vicinity of their habitation affording them the conveniency of intercourse, and pri∣vacy together. And thus was the Tabernacle first put in its posture, sur∣rounded with the people on every side. Happy method, when in mat∣ters of religion the Church guides the State by her counsell, whilest the State guards the Church with her company. § 26. This Tabernacle when first brought into the land of Canaan,The Taberna∣cle Templi∣zing. was set up at Gilgat, (the Ark being often parted from it on severall occasions) thence removed to Shiloh where it staid a long time, thence to1 Sam. 22. Nob, thence to ibon, and thence brought into Ierusalem, and laid up with the vessels thereof in the2 Chr. 5. 5. Temple. The Rabbins conceive that during the abode there∣of at Shiloh, the Tabernacle began to Templize, getting wals (though with∣out a roof) round about it, chiefly because about that time it isNamely, 1 Sam. 1. 9. & 2 Sam. 22. 7. & Psal. 19. 3. thrice termed a Temple. But I rather conceive, that Temple in those places is taken in a large acception, in which notionAnti. Iud, lib. 3. cap. 4. Iosephus termeth it , an ambulatory, or portable Temple. Or else it is so styled by way of Prolepsis, and well might David (twice in the forementioned places) call the Tabernacle a Temple, who endevored to make it so, both in his intention, and vast preparation for the same. But enough of this subject, for as Moses by hisExod. 36. 6. prohibition stopped the bounty of the people bringing too much to the making of the Tabernacle: so must we here stint our dis∣course as swelling too large in the description thereof. Onely I adde, that though at the first free will-offerings alone were used, at the making of the Tabernacle, (none being necessitated to contribute thereunto) yet after∣wards for the maintenance thereof, and the service therein, men were bound to a certain sum to be paidDeut. 16. 16. thrice a year. God foreseeing that their first forwardness would not always continue, but cool by degrees, and need to be quickned by commands, as men now adays must be legally rated to repair those Churches which at first so franckly were erected, and endowed by the liberality and devotion of our Ancestors. Here the Map of Egypt is to be inserted.
THE DESCRIPTION OF EGYPT. CHAP. V. § 1.EGYPT was by the Hebrews called Mizraim (and by the Arabians,The names and bounds of Egypt. Mesre, at this day) fromGen. 10. 6. Miz∣raim the second son of Cham, first inhabitant thereof. It was anciently called , by the most skilfull of the Egyptian Priests, as Plutarch Lib. de Iide & Osyride. observes, no doubt from Cham the second son of Noah: as also it was termed Hammois (a name also generall to Libya, yea to all Africk) being in the same sound and sense styled the LandPsal. 105. 23. of Ham by the Psalmist. It had the Mediter∣ranean sea on the north, Cyrene on the west, Ethiopia (the countrey of Queen Act. 8. 27. Candace) on the south, the Red-sea on the east, with a smal Isthmus of land (not past seventy miles over) betwixt it and the Mediterranean. Many Princes with as great expence as small success, have oft attempted with their Pioneers to pierce through this slender neck of ground, so to join the two seas together, for the greater conveniency of traffick. It seems hea∣ven blasted their designes, as an incroachment on the divine Preroga∣tive, it being onely placed in Gods power to give the Word of Command to the Ocean, Hither shalt thouIob 38. 11. come, but no farther. And if it be dishonesty to Pro. 22. 28. remove Land-markes of mens fixing, how high presumption is it to alter so ancient and solemn water-bounds of Gods own appointing? § 2. The Egyptians are low in stature,The complexi∣ons and condi∣tions of the Egyptians. of firme and well compacted bodies, swarthy and tawny complexions. Hereupon Abraham coming into Egypt said to Sarah his wife, Behold NOW, I know that thou artGen. 12. 11. a fair woman to look upon. Not that being so many years married, he had hither∣to lived in ignorance of her beauty, and now took first notice thereof, but (as Stars shine brightest in the night) so her fairness was now more
conspicuous amongst the black faces of the Egyptians. Their wits anci∣ently were very subtile and searching, esteemed the first inventers of Arithmetick, Musick, and by reason of the perpetuall serenity of the aire, they found out the course of the Sun and Stars, first dividing Time into Moneths, and Years. The wisdome of the1 King. 4. 20. & Act. 7. 22. Egyptians, is eminent in Scripture, much given to Magick, and Divination, yea2 Tim. 3. 8. Iannes and Iam∣bres the Inchanters have even to this day some in Egypt, heires to their mysterious impieties. As for the wandering Gypsies, which now a days pretend to the telling of Fortunes, their best cunning generally is the credulity of others, oft-times not seeing how near their own feet are to the stocks, and backs to the whipping-post. Yea commonly they are counterfeites, coming no more from Egypt, then the dissembling Gibeo∣nites did from a farIosh. 9. 6. Countrey, and perchance are next neighbours un∣to us. § 3. A most pleasant Countrey Egypt was,The pleasure and profit of Egypt. and is. For when the holy Spirit intended to commend the sweet situation of the plain of Iordan (be∣fore it was turned for the sins of the people into a stinking lake) he de∣scribeth it to be well watered every where, even as the Garden of the Lord, like theGen. 13. 10. land of Egypt. Nor was the profit less then the pleasure thereof, affor∣ding plenty of the best Wheat, Barly, Rice, and all other grain; insomuch that this Land was generally horreum Romani imperii, the Barn or Granary of the Roman Empire. Indeed I finde the same title given also to the Island of Sicily. And no wonder; for the Roman Empire being so vast and expensive an housekeeper, might wel make use of two Barnes for her provision. However I dare boldly say, that though Sicily was the nearer, Egypt was the bigger and better Barn, and yeelded greatest store of corn in time of scarcity. § 4. Flax also was a stable commodity of Egypt,Egyptian Flaxe. much whereof at this day is imported and used in England. Of this the finest linen in the world was woven. The Harlot could tell the silly young man, she sought to inveigle, I have decked my bed with coverings of tapestry, with carved works, and fineProv. 7. 10. linen of Egypt, as commonly the worst of women, get the best of wares, to please their luxury. As for the making of this linen cloth, it will hardly be beleeved, what Pomponius Mela hath reported, that the ancient Egyptians used to have their men keep home and spin, while their women managed their greater businesses abroad. But surely where the man puts his hand to the spindle, and the woman to the plough, there the whole family will be ill clad, and worse fed. § 5. Horses of the best kind were very plentifull in Egypt.Egyptian horses excellent. Those were a prohibited commodity, forbidden by Gods law to be brought by great numbers into Israel, whose King was charged,Deut. 17. 16. Not to multiply horses to himself, nor to cause the people to return into Egypt; partly, lest whilest they went thither to course horses, they should change religions, and fall into love with Egyptian Idolatry; partly, lest they should place too
much confidence in the legs of horses; or arme of flesh, whom God would have immediately to depend on his own protection. § 6. Paper most usefull for intercourse, anciently grew in Egypt alone,Paper first grew in Egypt. being a sedgy weed on the rivers side, which they divided into thin flakes, whereinto it naturally parteth, then laying them on a table and moisten∣ing them with the glutinous water of the River, they pressed them toge∣ther, and so dried them in the Sun. God foretelling his punishments onIsa. 197. Egypt, threatneth that The paper reeds of the brooks, by the mouth of the brooks, and every thing sown by the brooks, shall wither, be driven away, and be no more. § 7. Mummy must not be forgotten,Mummy how made. being mans flesh, at the first em∣balmed forGen. 50. 3. forty days together, and afterward for many years buried, in that hot and sandy Countrey. Yet all art cannot finally avoid the curse pronounced on mankind,Gen. 3. 19. Dust thou art, and to dust thou must return, so that if left alone, these corpses of themselves moulder to ashes. Oher∣wise such cost and curiosity used for their longer preservation, acciden∣tally occasioneth their speedier destruction; such bodies being taken up out of their graves, bought and brought into forein Countreys for me∣dicinall uses. What, is there such a dearth of drugs? such a famine of Physick in nature, that (as in the2 King▪ 6. 28. siege of Samaria) one man must feed on another? However, whilest some squeamish stomacks make faces to feed on the dead, perhaps their hard hearts at the same time,Psal. 14. 4. Eate up the living as if they were dead, either by fraudulent contracts or forcible oppressions. § 8. But these grand commodities of Egypt,The inconve∣niences of Egypt. were also allaied with some great inconveniencies, many noxious and venimous creatures swarm∣ing therein. The ProphetIsa. 0. 6. called it, the land from whence come the young and old Lion, the Viper and the Viper and the fiery-flying Serpent. This, though mystically meant of the Kings of Egypt, their Lion-like antipathy and cruelty to Israel (styled also Serpents for their craft; flying, for the swift marching of their Armies, winged on horse-backs; fiery, for the fierceness and heat of their fury) yet was it also literally true, of plenty of such beasts in Egypt, where that moist and hot Countrey was both the pregnant mother to breed, and tender nurse to feed them in great abundance. Especially in the western deserts, towards Cyrene, an hideous, and dismall place: and therefore theTobit. 8. 3. Author of the book of Tobit, fitted it with a meet inhabitant, banishing thither, and binding there, Asmodeus the evill spirit, in the ut∣most parts of Egypt. § 9. Rain is very rare in this landRain rare in Egypt. (and that onely in winter) the windows of heaven here having no casements, and the Egyptians sup∣plying the want of rain, by making gutters out of the river of Nilus into all their grounds and gardens. God therefore in this respect preferreth the land of Canaan before this Countrey,Deut. 11. 10. For the land (saith he) whither thou goest to possess it, is not as the land of Egypt, from whence ye came, where
thou sowedst thy seed, and watered it with thy feet; as a garden of Herbs. But the land whither thou goest to possess it, is a land of mountains and valleys, and drinketh water of the rain of heaven. Surely as it is more honour to receive a boon immediately from the hand of a Prince, then in an indirect line, from him, by his servants; so more peculiar was the favour of God to the Iews, and the familiarity of the Iews with God, having their land watered from heaven, whilest the Egyptians looked not upward as men, but downwards as beasts, on that moisture which constantly procured the fruitfulness of their Countrey. But this pleased them best: as carnall souls had rather be at a certainty of plenty from Nature, then at an un∣certainty thereof, even from the God of Nature himself. However they are much mistaken, who have confidently reported that it never raineth in Egypt; seeing I have been informed the contrary, by a right worship∣full Sir william Paston of Oxbint in Nrfolk. Person, and well accomplished traveller, a great Patron and bountifull promoter of my present studies; an eye-witness of much and violent rain at Grand-Cairo in Egypt, but such as presaged a great mor∣tality, which ensued not long after. § 10. The River of Nile is the happy Genius of the Egyptian soil, called in Scripture Nachal Mitzraim, or the river of Egypt, as a most learned Authour hathVssius de Idololatria. lib 2. cap. 74. observed. Yea from this Nachal he clearly derived the name of Nilus with excellent proportion. For as from Bahal Bââl Beel Bel is deduced. so   Nachal Nââl Neel Neil   And to make the matter more plain, PomponiusLib. 5. c. 10. Mela reporteth, that the fountain of Nilus is called Nachul by the Ethiopians. A river wherein na∣ture hath observed an even tenour of admirableness, so that the birth, the life, and the death thereof, I mean the fountain, flowing, and fall of the river, are equally composed of a concatenation of wonders. 1 Fountain. The particular place thereof being never as yet known certainly. So that (as theMat. 13. 26. Tares in the Gospell, were beheld, not when sown, but when grown) Nilus appears even at the first in a full stream and fair chanell. 2 Flowing: which constantly beginneth with the rising Sun on the seventeenth of Iune, swelling by degrees untill it mount sometimes twenty four Cubits, and that the uttermost (for an∣ciently sixteen was the highest it attained unto:) and answerable to the increase of this river is the plenty of scarcity of the follow∣ing year. Nor doth this overflowing of Nile, give onely wealth, but also health to Egypt. For if five hundred chance to dye in a day in Cairo of the plague (aG. Sandys Trav. p. 97. mortality not rare in so populous a place, where the sound keep company with the sick, holding death fatall, and to avoid it irreligion) not one doth die the day following. 3 Fall. For at the influx thereof into the sea, the fresh water keeps
together, and contrary to other rivers, changeth the colour of the salt▪ farIdem. p. 94. farther into the sea then the shore from thence can be discerned. Nor less wonderfull are the creatures in and about this river, the bird Trochilus, the Ichneumon, or Rat of Nilus; the Crocodiles and River-horses, (though as big as a cow, and proportioned as aIdem. pa. 99. swine) for all which we send the Reader for his better information to that modern learned Philosopher,Windeline de adira. Nili. who hath made a just tract thereof. Onely we will adde, that not moe cures are prescribed for the tooth-ach, then causes by seve∣rall Authors assigned for the flowing of Nilus, nor are the one farther from giving the body ease, then the other the minde satisfaction. § 11. With the flowing of the River,The Egyptians proud of Nilus rose also the Pride of the Egypti∣ans, exceeding all bounds and banks of modesty and moderation, defy∣ing Nature it self, because (as Isocrates saith) they had both drought and moisture in their own dispositions. And such their land is described by theLuan. l. 8. Poet: Terra suis contenta bonis; non indiga mercis, Aut Iovis, in solo tanta est fiducia Nilo. A land content with home-bred ware, For forein wealth she doth not care, Or whether heavens do frown or smile, Her confidence is all in Nile. Yea so impudent is the Egyptian arrogance herein, that whereas Nilus makes Egypt and God made both, they falsly boastEzek. 29. 3. once andEzek. 29. 9. again in the Prophet, My river is mine own, and I have made it for my self; whereupon God to clear his own property and right to the creature, threatneth to shew his judgements on that river,Ezek. 29. 10. from the tower of Syen even unto the bor∣der of Ethiopia. § 12. Nilus venteth it self into the Mediterranean sea, with seven mouths, nothing being more famous in humane poetry and prose then this septemfluous river. The holy spirit takes notice of the same num∣ber, threatning utterly to destroy the tongue of the Ethiopian Sea, when with his mighty wind he shall shake his hands over the river, and shall smite it in the seven streams, and make men go over dry-shod:Isa. 11. 5. which words admit of severall in∣terpretations. 1 The strength of Egypt is hereby mystically meant, whose king∣dome was afterwards destroyed, and the Countrey thereof con∣quered and subdued to the Persian Monarchy. 2 It probably was literally performed, when Nilus by ominous ac∣cident failed to overflow (as in the tenth and eleventh year of Cleopatra) and his streams became low, and shallow thereupon. 3. The ancient and originall chanels thereof are now in time ob∣structed, new conveyances succeeding in their place. An alteration elsewhere obvious. In the Isle of Elie (Englands Egypt for the flatness, moistness, and fruitfulness thereof) how are the old, and once plentifull streams ofVide Camdens Brit. in Cambr. shre. Nyne and Welland impoverished, by artificiall derivations thereof, into the Leam, the old and new Podick, and other by∣ditches;
made, to drive mills, to drain meadows; fence fields, bear boats, and other private conveniences? Rivers having as little certainty to possess their proper chanels, as men their houses, ancient families being daily outed by other of later extraction. § 13. However,Various num∣bring of the streams of Nilus. though the seven streams of Nilus pass current in most mouths, yet they are reckoned up, both over and under that num∣ber, by authours of excellent credit. Ortelius and Maginus, in their Maps of Egypt, make them eleven. Hondius in his Map of Europe (where Nilus is brought in by the by) ten. Ptolemy this Countreyman, in his description thereof, nine. The foresaid Hondius, in his Map of Africa, eight. HerodotusIn Euterpe. (with whom theIsa. 1. 15. Scripture agreeth) seven. Gulielmus Tyrius, and Bellonius, four. Mr.Trav. pa. 94. Sandys, but two navigable branches extant in our age. This various reckoning, exceeding seven, ariseth, because anciently, some onely counted the grand and solemn ostiaries of Nilus (and these, which they be at this day, let such enquire which are of the Commission of Sewers amongst the Egyptians) whiles others cast all his chanelets (rather cuts then courses) into the number. Since, they fall short, either choaked up, or commixed, yet still maintain in mens talk the reputation of seven. For, when a naturall, or noted number is once up in the market, small occasionall variations thereof, more or less, can never beat it down in common discourse. Thus, Thomas is termed one of theIohn 20. 24▪ twelve, when there were but eleven, after the self-execution of Iudas, and before the election of Matthias. In a word, the chanels of Nilus, daily decreased in number, because (as pinked or slashed clothes have the fewer holes the longer they are worn) so his streams fret one into another; especially, the ground being so soft and tender which lyeth betwixt them. § 14. To come now to the particular description of Egypt;The Isle of Dogs. Nilus flowing out of Ethiopia, compassed an Island called the Isle ofSee Ortelius and Mercators old Maps. Dogs; but, why so named, I know as little, as why those rich meadows lying be∣twixt London and Black-wall, are called after the same name, though bet∣ter deserving to be termed the Isle of Oxen, from the fat cattell feeding therein. But, seeing no mention of this, or the next Island (which Nilus makes) in Scripture, we pass them by, confining our ensuing discourse to Gods Word alone; save onely, that we will take leave to survey the Pyramides, becauseAnti. Iud. li. 2 K. . Iosephus (though erroneously) conceiveth them built by the Israelites, when here living in bondage. § 15. They stand not far from the western bank of the river,Vanity in buil∣ding the Pyramids. and are the younger brethren of the Tower of Babel, built (but with better suc∣cess, because finished) on the same consideration, by the Egyptian Kings, toGen. 11. 4. make them a name. Yet, who erected them, Greeks agree ill with them∣selves, and worse with the Arabian authours, so that PlinyNat. hist. li. 36. cap. 12. gravely ob∣serves
it a just punishment on the vanity of these ounders, that they are forgotten. Indeed, in the Criticisme of credit, the Artisans cunning might cry halfes in honour, with the Kings cost in this structure; but, both the one and the other, are equally buried in silence, so that the most skilfull Egyptian Antiquary cannot out of these Hieroglyphicks of pompe and pride, read the name of either. Whilest the poor midwives, who contrary to Pharaohs command preserved the Hebrews children, are to this day remembred by their names, ShiphrahExod. 1. 15. and Puah. Thus memories founded on the rock of vertue, stand firme, and fast; when they quickly fall, built on the foundered bottome of affected magnifi∣cence. Indeed, these Pyramides are of stupendious vastness, and may be termed Arts mountains, though mole-hills, yea, but warts, if compa∣red to those which Nature hath produced. So ridiculous is the unequall contest in point of bulk, betwixt their severall workmanships, that Natures pismires may be said to exceed Arts elephants. § 16. Some to excuse the pride of these builders,Intended for Sepulchers. resolve their design on a point of policy, onely to busie their people, to prevent in them laziness and luxury, (the mother of mutinies) knowing, so rich a soile would invite them to riot, if out of employment. But (whatever was their principall project) their secundary end intended such structures for sepulchers, where the builders bodies lay, not interred, but immured, with all imaginable cost bestowed upon them. For, the Egyptians fond∣ly conceived (Reader, pity them, and praise God that thou are better in∣formed) that the soul even after death, like a gratefull guest, dwelt in the body so long, as the same was kept swept and garnished, but finally for∣sook it, and sought out a new body, if once the corpse were either care∣lesly neglected, or dispightfully abused; and therefore to wooe the soul to constant residence in their bodies (at least wise to give it no wilfull distaste, or cause of alienation) they were so prodigiously expensive, both in imbalming their dead, and erecting stately places for their monu∣ments. § 17. The long lasting of these Pyramids,Their long lasting. is not the least of admira∣tion belonging unto them. They were born the first, and doe live the last, of all the seven wonders in the world. Strange, that in three thousand years and upwards, no avaritious Prince was found to destroy them, to make profit of their Marble, and rich materials; no humorous, or spightfull Prince offered to overthrow them, meerly to get a greater name for his peevishness in confounding, then their pride in first founding them; No Zelote-reformer (whilest Egypt was Christian) demolished them under the notion of Pagan monuments. But, survi∣ving such casualties, strange, that after so long continuance, they have not fallen like Copy-holds, into the hand of the Grand Signeur (as Lord of the Manor) for want of repairing. Yea, at the present, they are rather ancient, then ruinous; and, though weather-beaten in their tops,
have lively looks under a gray head, likely to abide these many years in the same condition, as being too great for any throat to swallow whole, and too hard for any teeth to bite asunder. § 18. We have been the longer hereon, because Iosephus,Not built by the Israelites. as is afore∣said, makes the Israelites, when enslaved in Egypt, against their wills, the builders of their Pyramids; others conceive them Pharaohs maga∣zines; so called, not,  from fire, ascending in a narrowing shape, but  from wheat, as used for granaries, or store-houses, where corn was deposited: both alike improbable, for 1 They afford no concavity of considerable receit for such pur∣pose. 2 Their form (of all least capable) is useless for such intents, all the spire being to loss. 3 The Israelites built withExod. 5. 8. bicks, whereas these are made of Marble. But for farther satisfaction of the Reader herein, I refer him to that learnedM. Iohn Greaves in his Pyramidogra∣phia. Traveller, who hath made an excellent tract of his own obser∣vations herein. § 19. However,The miserable slavery of the Hebrews in Egypt. here we may take occasion, to mention the miserable condition of the Israelites in Egypt, during which time, woefull their slavery, if we consider, the 1 Long continuance thereof, twoFour hundred and thirty years if accouted from Isaac's birth Exod. 12. 41. hundred and odde years in the latitude, and fourscore (from the birth of Moses) in the Paroxysme of their bondage. 2 Deep misery, insomuch that their livesExod. 1. 14. were made bitter unto them. 3 Broad extent, none exempted, no, not Moses and Aaron; Get you unto yourExod. 5. 4. burthens. Say not, that the officers of Israel, who onely oversaw the rest, had an easie place of it; for, theyExod. 5. 14. were beaten, because others under them did not their impossible taske: as if what was wanting in the tale of the peoples bricks, must be made up in blows on their backs, who were set to oversee them. Onely, to give the Egyptians their due, they gave the Israelites their belly full, (as of work, so) ofExod. 16. 3. food: which proceeded, not so much from their pity, as their policy; (Cariers are so mercifull to their horses, meat them well, to prevent their trying) and the plenty of the land, affording at cheap prices abundance of provisions. § 20. Somewhat north of the aforesaid Pyramids,Memphis the ancient Metro∣polis of Egypt. on the same side of Nilus, stood the great City of Memphis, anciently the Metropolis of Egypt, where their Kings kept their Courts, and therefore it is probable here Ioseph was bought, and beloved by Potiphar, here afterwards accused and imprisoned unjustly, favoured by the jailer, advanced by Pharaoh, whose dreams he expounded: in a word, likely it is, that all those emi∣nent passages, betwixt him, and his brethren, were transacted in this City. Some hundred years after, the frequent addresses of Moses and Aaron to another Pharaoh, in the behalf of the Israelites, were performed
in the same place; and here, or hereabouts the ten Egyptian plagues were first inflicted, in manner and order ensuing. 1 All the water (formerly the merciless executioner of the Jewish infants) was for seven days turned into bloud,The ten plagues of Egypt. whereby the fish dyed, and the river stank, so that theExod. 7. 21. Egyptians could not drink of the water thereof. Water, which otherwise in it self, was most sweet and delicious, witness the answer of Pescentius Niger unto his mur∣muring souldiers, What? crave you wine, and have Nilus to drink of? The transubstantiation of this element into bloud, extended over all the streams, rivers, ponds, and pooles in Egypt, and the sea onely was excepted, from whence (or from pits newlyExod. 7. 2▪ digged in the ground) the Magicians might fetch their water, which in imitati∣tion of Moses, quoad similitudinem, if not veritatem, they also turned into bloud. 2 Frogs, so plentifull that they covered the land, and so presumptu∣ous they came into PharaohsExod. 8. 3. Bed-chamber, (though never sworn his Grooms in ordinary attendance) yea, they crept into the very ovens (as if Salamanders rather then frogs) and no private place was priviledged from their unwelcome company. But the Magi∣cians made the like in show, if not in substance, the Devill much delighting in their monstrous shape, for we finde inRevel. 16. 13. Scripture, Three unclean spirits like frogs coming out of the mouth of the Dragon. 3 Lice, Insects, with so many lineaments in a little compass, that the eyes of the Magicians could not see, much less imitate them, so that they were forced to confess itExod. 8. 19. the finger of God. But, whether thus beaten out of distance, they here left off their race of emulation with Moses, or still continued it, it is hard to determine. 4 Flies,Exod. 8. 21. properly waspes, or hornets, armed with stings, wherewith they tormented the people. Surely, they were more then ordinary flies, because they brought Pharaoh to proffer to Moses, a partiall and conditionall departure of the people. 5 A generall Murrain, insomuch thatExod. 9. 6. all the cattell of Egypt dyed. Some will object, If this was a totall destruction of all the beasts in the land, how came it to pass, that some afterward were killed byExod. 9. 25. the hail, and after that, in the tenth plague, the first-bornExod. 13. 15. of beasts were destroyed by the Angell? But it is answered, All, here is taken com∣muniter, non universaliter, for the greater, and most considerable num∣ber. Or else, the Egyptians in the interim (some distance of time being betwixt the severall plagues, and a year from the first to the last) furnished themselves afresh with new supply of cattell from forein Countreys, which second stock was also afterwards de∣stroyed. So vain is it, for men to outvie Gods routings, with their recruitings; his desolations, with their replantations; and no new store, without a new heart, can hold out against his punish∣ments.
6 Boils, and Blains, so generall that they were on theExod. 9. 11. Magicians themselves (Hell hath no guard against Heavens blows) who therefore could not stand before Moses. Let them now not try to make, but unmake such boils, if they can. But here it is remarka∣ble, that as the wifeGen. 39. 14. of Potiphar, when she had tempted Ioseph to uncleanness, cunningly changed her note, and complained on him for offering violence unto her: so in after-ages, the Egyptian Au∣thors slanderously retorted these loathsome diseases on the Israelites. From whose false reports, humane writers both Greek and Latine (asSee the books of Iosephus a∣gainst him. Appion, Diodorus Siculus, TrogusInstin. Hist. lib. Pompeius and Tacitus) have fetcht their relations, how the Iews being shamefully afflicted with scabs and ulcers, were therefore driven out of Egypt (for fear of infecting others) by the inhabitants thereof. 7 Thunder, fire and hail, consuming all men and beasts abiding in the field, together with the flax which was bolled, and barly then in Exod. 9. 32. are, whilest the wheat was yet under ground: a thing preposte∣rous in our English, but methodicall in the Egyptian harvest. 8 Grashoppers, or locusts, which devoured the reversion of grass and green herbes, till the verdant earth was sabled, and the surface of the land wasExod. 10. 15. darkened with their multitudes. 9 Positive and palpable darkness for three days, not so much from the suspension of the sun-beams, or detention of the Egyptians eyes, as condensation of the aire with thick clouds, probably also extinguishing all fire, and artificiall lights, as candles goe out in a damp. The Authour of the bookWisd. 17. 4. of Wisdome addeth, that the Egyptians during that time, were frighted with terrible sounds, with sad shapes and apparitions, which is more then the Scripture affirmeth, though we deny not, but that darkness is the pliable wax, whereof a guilty fancy may mould to it self any frightfull impressions. Thus all the land of Egypt was before-hand hung with mourning, against the death of her people, and all the Egyptians were for three days imprisoned in their places, not moving thence, so great was the darkness. Whilest the Israelites, though in the same Climate with them, were in effect their Antipodes, it being day and summer with the one, when night and winter with the other. 10 The first-bornExod. 12. 29. of man and beast were slain by the destroying Angell all over Egypt. Here if any object, that the plague could not be generall, because probably in so large a Countrey some child∣less family could not afford a first-born: Saint Augustine answers, that God in his providence so ordered, that every house yeelded a fit object for his justice. And seeing Pharaoh their Soveraign was raised on set purpose for God to ruine, no absurdity to conceive, that his subjects were made fruitfull on design, that they might be deprived of their first-born. However, grant it onely in most
families, never were more heires killed and made in one night. Yet the younger brethren could not brag of the lands they got by this accident, fearing for the present, lest their own turn was next, and many of them (no doubt) found their deaths few days after in the Red-sea. Observe in all these the variety of Gods judgements, no one twice used, al∣ways inflicting fresh punishments. God is said to be cloathedPsal. 93 . with strength, and here like a Prince of such power, he appeared ten severall times in new suits, so plentifull is his wardrobe, and such the diversity of his judgements. Indeed, he could have made any one of these miracles, effectual for his peoples deliverance, but was pleased to make use of them all, so to prove his peoples patience, manifest his own power, render Pharaoh the more inexcusable. § 21. A gradation also appears in his proceedings,The gradation in Gos judge∣ments. so that his heaviest judgements were reserved to the last, shewing first harmeless miracles (onely to raise wonder and seal his servants Commission) when Moses his rod was turned into a Serpent, and vice versa; and afterwards sending Punish∣ments, Noisome, Frogs about Lice upon men. Painfull, Flies Bols within their skins flesh. Deadly, Murrain, Hail, Grashoppers &c. to Plants, destroying mans Meat, in grain. Drink, inPsal. 78. 47. Vines. Clothing, in flax and emp. Beasts, for Burden, Camels, Asses. Food, Oxen, Sheep. Men SomeExod. 9. 19. & 25. refractary folk in the field. All the -born. In the eight first plagues, God by the mouth of Moses, gave solemn notice to Pharaoh, how, and when he would send them, but in the last two sur∣prised him on a sudden. After warning often given, and neglected, ex∣pect no farther caution, but present confusion. § 22. To return to the City of Memphis,Memphis, or Noph threaten∣ed in Scripture▪ by which name it is but once called in Scripture, namely Hosea 9. 6. being otherwise usually termed Noph in Holy writ. Divers Prophets have reproofs of, and comminati∣ons against this proud and profane City. Isaiah 19. 13. The Princes of Noph are deceived. Ieremy 46. 19. Noph shall be wast, and desolate without an inhabitant. Ezekiel 30. 13. Noph shall have distresses daily. Can the walls of that City stand long safe, against which so great bullets are discharged? These threatnings took slow but sure effect, and at this day it is justly become a desolation. For, seeing all Egypt bare an im∣placable antipathy to the people of Israel, it may well be presumed, that Memphis the metropolis of the kingdome, as in wealth, so in wicked∣ness exceeded other Cities. § 23. Somewhat north of Memphis Nilus divideth it self into two main streams (besides some smaller betwixt them) thereby shaping a triangular Countrey,No, or Alexan∣dria. not unlike a Δ Delta in the forme thereof. Of these the more western falleth into the Mediterranean, at the ancient city of No, afterwards called Alexandria. A place, which principally prided it self in its populousness (theIer. 46. 29. & Ezek. 30. 15. multitude of No, often mentioned in Scripture) and
in the advantageous situation thereof, both to get, and keep wealth, be∣ing invironed with water. But the greatness of this City onely made it the fairer mark for divine justice, which (notwithstanding the watery stati∣on thereof) needed neither bridge, ford, nor erry, at pleasure to waft it self over into it. How afterwards this City was humbled, take it from the pen of the ProphetNahum 3. 8., who speaking to Niniveh (though an exceeding great CityIonah 3. 3. of three days journey) seems to equalize, if not prefer No for bigness above it; Art thou better then populous No, that was situate among the rivers, that had the waters round about it, whose rampart was the sea, and her wall was from the sea, Ethiopia and Egypt was her strength, and it was Infinite, Put and Lubim were thy helpers. Yet was she carried away, she went into captivity, her young men also were dashed in pieces at the top of all the streets: and they cast lots for hono∣rable men, and all her great men were bound in chains. It will hardly appear else∣where in Scripture, that Infiniteness is attributed to any created greatness, and here we see what became of it, so that the ruines of No may have this Epitaph written upon them, Hîc jacet finis infiniti. § 24.Beth-shemsh where Christ is said to have lived. The estern stream of Nilus from the east receiveth the river Trajanus, on the south side whereof stood the City On (Onii in Ptolemaeus) whereof Potipherah was Prince or Priest, whose daughter AsenathGen. 41. 50. Ioseph took to wife. Aven is hard by, a City, against whichEzek. 30. 17. Ezekiel prophesied, and by some is made the same with Heliopolis. This Heliopolis, or Beth∣shemesh, is generally conceived the place (though not named in Scripture) where our Saviour (before he could go, forced to flyMat. 2. 13. from the fury of He∣rod) being a babe abode with his parents. What he did here (besides sucking of his mothers breast) is not recorded in the Gospell; though Athanasius lib. de Incarn. Verbi. one presumes to tell us, how the Egyptian Idols, at his entring into the land, felt a shaking ague, and fell down in homage to him, as once Dagon to the Ark.Sozom. Histo∣ria. lib. 5. ca. 21. Another relates, how this infant sate under a great tree, which out of dutifulness bowed down to him, because his short armes could not reach the branches thereof.Burchar. in de∣scrip. Ter. snc. par. 2. cap. 4. A third reports of a fountain betwixt Heliopolis and Babylon, purified to a medicinall virtue, from the foulness of the Babes clothes washed by his mother therein. All which Non credi∣mus, quia non legimus. Thus Authors conceiving it not to stand with the state of Christ to live obscurely in Egypt, furnish him with faigned mi∣racles to make him more illustrious, and therein mark not the main in∣tent of Divine Providence. For, in this clandestine flight of his Son, God intended not to present him in a glorious appearance, but to lessen, hum∣ble, & empty him, so that his poverty in it self considered was a rich mi∣racle, especially seeing we are stayed by his flight, and brought home by his banishment. Besides, theIoh. 2. 11. Scripture expresly termeth his turning of water into wine at Cana in Galilee, the beginning of his miracles. § 25. The precise time of Christs residence in Egypt is not set down, The time of Christs abode in Egypt. but surely his stay here was not so long, as to tanne the Virgin Mary, and dye her complexion into a Black-more, as she is presented in her Chapell
of Lauretta. I deny not, but the purest beauties are soonest subject to sun∣burning, but such a face better became Christs Spouse, then his mother, Cnt. 1. 5. I am black, but comely, ô yee daughters of Ierusalem. Nor should I much won∣der at the colour in her face, if onely the fancy of a libertine Painter, had not so many learned men made her picture the object of their adoration. Yet the darkness of her face here, is as avouchable, as the brightness of her clothes elsewhere, glistering with gold, and rich stuffe (some preten∣ded reliques whereof at Paris, the finer they are, the falser they are) better beseeming her ancient royall extraction, then her husbands present poor and painfull condition. Yet such gorgeous apparell was not so much above her means, as such garish attire (wherewith some Painters doe dress her) was against the modesty of that ever blessed Virgin. But, par∣don our digression, and we return to or matter. § 26. Just at the confluence of Trajanus and Nilus,Babylon a City in Egypt. stood the once fa∣mous City of Babylon, though in antiquity, greatness, and strength, far inferiour to a City of the same name in Chaldea. It is not yet decided, which of these two Saint Peter intended; when writing, The1 Pet. 5. 13. Church which is at Babylon elected together with you saluteth you, and so doth Marcus my Son. Pro∣testant Divines generally interpret this of the great Chaldean Babylon, where moe Iews dwelt, then in any one place which was without the land of Palestine, and therefore probable that Saint Peter, being the ApostleGal. 2. 7. of the Circumcision, might sometimes reside there, yet seeing Marcus is mentioned in the same verse, who is notoriously known to have lived in this land (and once to have been Patriarch of Alexandria) why might not this our Egyptian Babylon, be here meant by the Apostle? But Popish writers are so fond to have Saint Peter at Rome, that here they will have Rome mystically to be termed Babylon. Good luck have she with her honour; always provided, that if Rome will be Babylon in this Epistle, to gain Peters presence; she shall be Babylon in the Revelation, on whom those plagues and punish∣ments are denounced. But, such as plead her heir-apparent to the former, endevour to cut off the entail, that the latter may not descend upon her. § 27. To return to the eastern stream of Nilus,Ieremy forced into Egypt. which runneth through the land of Pathros. Into which the remnant of the Isralites, left by the King of Babylon, returned under the conduct of Iohanan the son of Kareah, contra∣ry to Gods flatJer. 42. 14. command by the mouth of Ieremiah. They took also him, andJer. 43. 6. Baruch the scribe (pity to part them, but that the mouth and and should go together) no doubt against their consents, and brought them down hither into the land of Egypt, partly out of policy (though they would cast away their counsell) to weare their [forced] company to counte∣nance their design; and part out of despight, that if (according to their prediction) any evill betided them, they also might be joint-sufferers therein. Both of them, (nothing appearing to the contrary) dyed here, not finding their corpes, likeExod. 13. 19. Iosephs, carried back in a Coffin into their own countrey. It matters not though our bodies be bestowed in the
earthly Egypt, so our souls be translated to the heavenly Canaan. § 28. Many were the prophecies of Ieremy during his abode in this land.Prophecyeth Pharaohs d∣struction. Amongst others, that, when he solemnly denounced the ruine of Egypt. For he was commandedJer. 43. 9. to take stones, and hide them in the clay in the brick-kill, which is at the entry of Pharaohs ouse in Tahpanhes, (understand it some competent distance thence, otherwise such a shop of smoak was but a bad Preface to a Kings Palace) and did foretell that Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, should in process of time, set his throne, and spread his roy∣all pavillion on those very stones when he should conquer Egypt, which no doubt came to pass accordingly. A little more northernly this western stream of Nile parts it self into two chanels. One falling into the Mediter∣ranean at Zoan, a City builtNum. 13. 32. seven years after Hebron in the land of Cana∣an. Anciently a chief City in Egypt, the whole land, by Synecdoche, being termedPsal. 78. 12. The field of Zoan, where many of Moses his miracles were wrought. The Princes of Zoan, though pretending to much wisedome, areIsa. 19. 11. & 13 twice pronounced fools by the Prophet. The other stream of Nile falleth into the sea atEzek. 30. 15, 16. Sin, (where hard-by anciently lived theGen. 10. 17. Bochart. in Ge∣ogr. Sac. Sinites, one of the ele∣ven nations of the Canaanites) called also Raamses, being one of theExod. 1. 11. cities which the Israelites built for Pharaoh, (as Pithom was another) afterwards called Pelusium from the muddy situation thereof, and Damiata at this day. § 29. But we hasten to the land of Goshen,The land of Goshen. as the best ground in all Egypt, lying in the east part thereof. The bounty of an ancient Pharaoh gave this Countrey to the Israelites for the goodness thereof, and the poli∣cy of succeeding Pharaohs continued it unto them for the situation thereof being surrounded with Egypt on all sides save the sea on the east, so that the Israelites were wedged in fast, not to depart without leave. Herein they multiplyed miraculously, though the Egyptians endevoured their de∣struction. § 30. Shiphrah and Puah are tampered with,The midwives honesty. of Midwives to become Murderers, that all the male children of Israel might be still-born. The pri∣vacy of their place might have performed this with the less suspicion, by but lending a Pinch to such tender plants, and then putting it on the ac∣count of casualty, or some sinister accident. But they the Ministers of life, refused to be the Messengers, yea the Procurers of death: and God, in re∣ward of their kindness to his people,Exod. 1. 21. made them houses. Not materiall houses (as little comfortable in a land where they, and theirs were not long to live) but understand it, God made their posterity (the Midwives) themselves being presumed ancient before entring on that profession) to multiply and increase. Some will say, such houses could not stand firme, being built on the foundered foundation of theirExod. 1. 19. lying. For this act of these Midwives was with child with twins,St. August. Fides mentis, and Fallacia mentientis, the faith of their love, and falseness of their lying, and the former onely was rewarded by God, without any approbation of the other. § 31. This taking no effect,Moses born. came out that cruel edict, that all the males
should be drowned, whilest the females were kept alive to be drudges. In which timeAct. 7. 20. Moses was born; one of the best of men, in the worst of ages. He was a beautifull childe,Exod. 2. 2. not onely in the eyes of his partiall parents (every bird counting its own young-ones the fairest) but really the marks of extraordinary comliness appeared in his face. Yea, such was his per∣severing beauty, (fair in the Cradle and Saddle too) that it lasted unto his old-age; His vigorous and sparkling eyes not beingDeut. 34. 7. dimmed after an hundred any twenty years. His parents hid him three moneths, and then not daring longer to keep him, for fear of the Kings searchers for for∣bidden goods [male-children] expose him in aExod. 2. 3. bulrush Ark unto the water. § 32.Taken up by Pharaohs daugh∣ter. Pharaos daughter with her feminine train-guard comes down to wash her self, spies the Ark, and commands one of her maidens to fetch it. At the opening thereof, to see with what wares it was fraught, they finde a child therein, andExod. 2. 6. behold the babe wept. It is common for children to cry (few born without it) whilest this infant did not cry out of curstness, nor sob out of sullenness, but wept out of sorrow, as silently sensible of more sadness then he durst express, lest he should give his enemies war∣ning thereby to destroy him. How early did Moses begin his meekness, and learned the lesson of patience betime? The Lady beholding him, had compassion on him, accounted it pity to drown him, who had almost drowned himself with his tears. She saves him alive, sends him to his mother-nurse, pays her wages for suckling him, takes him home when weaned, counts him herExod. 2. 10. son, and gives him breeding accordingly, they being but half-parents that bestow Nutrition, not education, on their children. § 33. Moses well becomes his breeding,Refuseth royall relation. and isAct. 7. 22. learned in all the wisdome of the Egyptians. Yet we finde not that the Court made that impression on him as on Ioseph, never swearing by theGen 42. 16. life of Pharaoh. However, when he was come to years, heHeb. 11. 24. refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter. Probably in his minority he owned that royall relation.1 Cor. 13. 11 When he was a child he did as a child. Now come to the full use of his reason, he renounced all such false extraction. He was so far from writing or styling himself so, that he would not be called the son of Pharaohs daughter. It is not enough for us not to tell lies, but we must not suffer them to be told, if it lie in our power to forbid it. Moses is not ashamed ofExod. 6. 20. Amram and Iochebed his poor but pious parents, and will not exchange them, to be supposed the son to Pha∣raohs daughter: Though that was not a bare title, but had both theHeb. 11. 25. pleasures andHeb. 11. 26. treasures of Egypt attending it. An Israelite in the kilne is better then an Egyptian in the Court. § 34. He chose rather the afflictions of his brethren,Killeth an Egyptian. and goes out to see how it fared with them. Finding an Egyptian wronging an Israelite he kils him: shewing therein some signes of that Saviour-ship, which God intended him for, and he hoped his Countreymen would haveAct. 7. 25. under∣stood. But alass, they were capable onely of burning brick, whose eyes
had pored so long on the earth, at last they had almost lost looking up to heaven with any hope of deliverance. The Egyptians bodyExod. 2. 12. is hid in the sand, but his killing was publick in the mouths and discourse of all the Israelites. § 35. This his first essay succeeding so well,Is upbraided with k. Moses would adventure on a second design, to at one two Israelites at variance. But he found it more facile to subdue a foe, then reconcile friends fallen out, and easier to be a Conquerour, then Peace-maker. He that did the wrong demands of him, who made him a Judge, and whether heExod. 2. 14. intended to kill him, as he did the Egyptian. I see it is no sufficient proof, because the party is Plaintiffe that his cause is the best, seeing sometimes they that are most injurious, are the most querulous. Herein God gave Moses an handsell, or taste, of the froward nature of the Iews, (offended with such, as advised them for the best) that he might know the better, how hereafter to demean himself towards such waiward dispositions. Hereupon Moses, by seasonable flight, provides for his own safety. § 36. Shall such a man as Moses fly?Flyeth into the land of Madian. Had he not better have stood to it, and avouched his act? Sure the Princess royall, his Lady-mother could bear him out for innocent; at the worst, by her Court-interest could procure his pardon. But he knew it was ill trusting of doubtfull friends in dange∣rous cases; especially that Ladies affection no doubt abating unto him, since his refusall of her son-ship. Into the land of Madian he flies, conti∣nueth there forty years; that term expired, returns into Egypt, and wrought those great wonders in the Court of Pharaoh, whereof largely before. § 37. But of all the Physick he gave Pharaoh,Returns and brings out the Israelites. none wrought so effectu∣ally upon him for the mollifying of his heart, as that last Purge, when the eldest son was slain in all families; whereupon the Israelites are urged to depart: first borrowing all theExod. 12. 35. wealth from their neighbours, who would make their flying enemies a bridge of gold. Nothing bounded the Egyptians giving, but the Israelites asking: had more been demanded, more had been delivered unto them. Skin for skin, yea all that a man hath, Iob 2▪ 4. will he give for his life. Yet I cannot properly call these, Gifts; but rather Le∣gacies of the Egyptians, because bequeathed by them, when all conceived themselves in a dying condition. § 38. Out marched six hundred thousand Israelites,The march for∣ward and back∣ward in Egypt. besides a mixt multitude; full of wealth, wanting nothing, butExod. 12. 39. leaven in their bread, for lack of time; from Rameses in the land of Goshen where they dwelled, toExod. 12. 27. Succoth: thence forward toExod. 13. 20. Ethaim in the edge of the wilderness; and then faces-about, by Gods command they were to turn and encamp before Pihahiroth between Migdoll and the sea, over againstExod. 14. 2. Baalzephon, where we leave them in a sad condition, Pharaoh behind them, the sea before them, having their choice to be drowned or slain; till God sent them a miraculous deliverance. Here followes the Map of Jewish habits.
OF THE CLOTHES and ORNAMENTS OF THE IEWS. CHAP. VI. SECT. 1. Of Iewish Garments in generall, their matter, colours, and fashions. § 1. I Conceived my taske finished in describing the land of Palestine,The occasion of this discourse. when casually casting mine eye on Speeds Maps of England, and other Countreys, I found their borders, or margins, garnished with the pictures of their inhabitants, garmented, and habited respectively according to their several fashi∣ons. Wherefore, not to be defective in any necessary ornament, we have added this discourse of Iewish Vestments, confining our selves herein onely to Scripture instructions, and the last Translation, to avoid endless difficulties, arising from the various render∣ing of the names of Iewish apparell. § 2. Iewish garments were made of severall matters. First,Severall matter of Jewish gar∣ments. of pelts, or raw hides, all the wardrobe of those pious persecuted people (Exiles are living Martyrs) whoHeb. 11. 37. wandred about in sheep-skins, and goat-skins. Secondly, Leather, as the girdle2 King. 1. 8. of Elijah. Thirdly, Hair-cloth, as the raiment of IohnMat. 3. 4. Baptist. Fourthly, course hemp, whereof sackcloth, the generall weeds of extraordinary2 King. 6. 30. mourners. Fiftly, Fine linen very fashionable in those parts, silk, cloth, scarlet,Psal. 45. 13. wrought gold, whereof severally in due place. In a word, according to the condition of the wearer, their clothes might be made of any thing, but not of two things together [woollen and linen] as flatly forbidden by the LeviticallDeut. 22. 11. Law. Because God would have his people sincere, without any mixture of hypocrisie;1 Thes. 5. 23. & James 1. 4. , all of one sort, linsie-woolsie being to the touch, whatRevel. 3. 16. lukewarmnss to the taste, offensive to him, who being simple and single in himself, loves integrity in others.
§ 3. Of all colours they most delighted in white.White their principall co∣lour. Let thy garments be alwaysEccles. 9. 8. white; signifying the jollity and mirth of the wearer. A colour highly valued in Scripture, He that overcometh, the same shall be clothed in Revel. 3. 5. white raiment, as the Embleme of victory, purity, cheerfulness, know∣ledge, and (in a mysticall sense) grace, and glory. Which whiteness of their apparell, the Iews daily preserved, with constant washing thereof. § 4. Black is conceived by Arias Montanus to be the generall wearing of mourners,Black used by mourners. chiefly grounding it on Davids words,Psal. 35. 14. I bowed down heavily as one that mourneth for his mother; the Hebrew is  Incurvabam atra∣tus, I bowed down in black. However, I conceive this blackness no superin∣duction of a dark die on Davids clothes, but rather a dirty hue, or soil contracted on his white garments, from neglect of washing them (Vestes potiùs sordidae quàm; nigrae, as we say mourning shirts) it being custo∣mary for men in sadness, to spare the pains of their laundresses, with Mephibosheth, who, when David was driven from Ierusalem, during his absence, washed not his2 Sam. 19. 24. clothes from the day the King departed, untill he came again in peace. § 5. Other mention of black among the Iews,Chemarims clad in black. I finde none at all, save one∣ly, that there was a company called Chemarims, or, Black men, from  to black or burn, (and black we generally complain is a burnt die) accounted by some conjurers, as trading in the black Art, & clothed accordingly whose name GodZeph. 1 4. threatneth to cut off from Ieruslem. They were the idola∣trous Priests of Baal, prophesied against byHosea 10. 5. Hoea; or some appendants to his service, who were2 King. 23. 5. destroyed by King Iosiah, and got their name of Chemarim from black clothes, a peculiar habit (no doubt) to themselves, and which in opposition to them (I conceive) few other would wear. § 6. Blew succeeds,lew more va∣lued then worn by the Iews. a celestiall, or skie colour; Color caeruleus quasi coe∣luleus, highly priced by the Iews, who anciently had (as their Rabbins report) the exact skill of dying it to the height, which since they have lost. Yet I finde no Iewish apparell wholly made of this colour; where∣of I conceive this reason, that they abstained from it, as a colour sacred and mysterious, then which none more used about the Tabernacle, and Temple, in the curtains, vailes, and vestments thereof. Onely we read, that ordinary Iews, by Gods command, were to make that lace, or rib∣band Num. 15. 38. of blew, wherewith their fringes were bound to their clothes. In∣timating, that heavenly meditations were the best ligament, to continue, and fasten Gods commandements unto their souls. The Babylonians much delighted in, yea, doted on this magisteriallEzek. 23. 12. colour: and so also did the Persians, as may appear by Mordecai, who when advanced, was clothed inEsther 13. 5. blew, amongst many other royall accoutrements. § 7. A gradation in honour of three colours remain,Scarlet, Crim∣son and Purple. usuall amongst the Iews in robes of State for persons of highest qualities, on great solemnities. First, Scarlet wherein2 Sam. 1. 24. Saul first clothed the daughters of Israel, not dyed (as our modern) with Madder, or with Cochenil, or with the powder in
grain [otherwise Alchermis] all inventions of later date; but with , a shrub, whose red berries, or grains, gave an orient tincture to cloth. Second, Crimson (to which Scarlet is brought by a mixture of Alume) which was used in Solomons2 Chr. 2. 7. 14. & 3. & 14. Temple, and in the garments of the prin∣cipall Jer. 4. 30. Iews. Third, Purple, the richest of all earthly colours, having the gaudiness of red (whereof it retains a cast) abated with the gravity of blew, chiefly dyed at Tyre, and taking the tincture thereof from the liquor of a shel-fish, formerly found plentifully in the sea thereabouts, but ut∣terly lost and unknown at this day. And, although I no whit envy the good huswife described by Bathsheba, clothed with soProv. 31. 22. rich a die, because earned with her industry (and good reason, Win purple and wear purple) yet, I confess, I grudge at the rich glutton in the Gospell, that he should be clothed withLuke 16. 19. purple and fine linen, and fare sumptuously every day. § 8. And now I have dipt my fingers so far in the die-fat,Scarlet and Purple how the same. a word more to reconcile a seeming difference in the Gospell. For, when our Saviour had rich robes in derision put on him by the souldiers, what Saint Matthew calls a ScarletMat. 27. 28. robe, is termed byMark 15. 17. Saint Mark, andJohn 19. 5. Saint Iohn a purple robe, and that without the least prejudice to the truth; for 1 Possibly two severall garments were put on him, as our English Iudges have distinct suits of robes, one of Scarlet, the other of Purple. 2 The ancient Roman robes of Magistracy whatsoever, were called by the genericall name ofIf I rightly understand La∣zarus Bayùs de Re Vestiaria. pag. 173. Purple. 3 The ground work was Scarlet, which with a mixture of blew makes the richest purple (as the most skilfull in that mystery have informed me) so, being Scarlet purpurized, it might be termed by either, and both appellations. So much for the colours of the Iews clothes mentioned in the Bible; other colours, yellow,Yet found in the Rabbins. green &c. not appearing therein; though I dare not say, that▪ because these colours not being dyed in grain, lose much of their lustre, and gloss in washing (so frequently bestowed on their ap∣parell) they therefore abstained from the use thereof. § 9. As for the shape and making of the Iewish garments,Iews no fashi∣on mongers. they were no affecters (Englishmen-like) of various fashions; but, according to the commendable gravity of the ancient Germanes, kept the same form for many ages. Indeed their clothes, being for the most part loose vestments, not exactly fitted to their bodies, but onely cast over, wrapped about, or girded unto them, the less curiosity was required in their making. Hence it is, that we finde the Philistines theirJudg. 14. 19. clothes fitting Samsons friends, and IonathansSam. 18. 4. robe given to David, serving him without any considerable difference. And, because we meet not with the trade of a Tailor, clean through the Scripture (though frequent mention of Weavers, and Fullrs therein) it seems anciently no distinct occupation among the Iews, being probable, the men, or their wives made their own clothes;
with Dorcas, whoAct. 9. 39. made coats and garments for the widows, whilest she was with them. Thus the state, and gallantry of the Iews, consisted not in their changeable fashions, but in their various changes, orient colours, costly matter, curious embroderies of their garments. However so much of the fashionablenesse of their clothes as is colligible from Scripture, we come now to describe. SECT. II. The particular fashion of their apparell. § 1. NExt to their skins they ware linen cloth (as most cleanly,Linen next their bre bodies. soft, and wholesome for that use) and at night lay in the same: Thus the young man, late at night allarum'd out of his bed, with the noise made by Iudas, and his rout, when Christ was apprehended, is said, to haveMark 15. 5. a linen cloth cast about his naked body (as his bed-livery left on him) which he was fain to forsake, and so to make his escape. § 2. Next this they put on their coat,Next a coat coming down to their feet. which came down to their very feet, accounted modest, grave, yea, honourable amongst them. Great therefore the indignity, offered by the King of Ammon, to Davids Embassa∣dors, 2 Sam. 10. 4. cutting off their garments in the middle, even to their buttocks; it being a disgrace to the Iews, which was all the fashion in the cloaks of the anci∣ent Gaules. Dimidiásque nates GallicaMaialis. palla tegit. And to prevent the dangling down, and dagling of so long garments, the Iews used, when sent on2 King. 4. 29. an errand, when taking a journey, when doing anyLuk. 17. 8. office in the house, and whenExod. 12. 9. eating the Passeover, to gird up their clothes about them. Hence a girdle is taken in Scripture for strength, readiness, and activity, whilest the want thereof denoteth weak∣ness, looseness, and laziness. Those girdles used generally to be but about their loins, Stand therefore having your loinsEphe. 6. 14. girt. And therefore extraordinary was that golden girdle of Christ in the vision, and singularly placed about Revel. 3. 13. his paps, shewing it rather of ornament then use, not to get strength, but show the state of the wearer thereof. § 3. Now,Slaves tucked up their clothes above the thighs. although free-born people, when about their business, girt up their coats not above their mid-leg; slaves, for their greater shame, when carried captive, were forced to tuck their clothes up above their thighes. Thus the Prophet, foretelling the captivity of Babylon, calls to the virgin of Sion, make bare the leg,Isa. 47. 2. uncover the thigh, pass over the rivers, as being to wade the nearest way over waters in their passage, whilest their conquerors would not be at the cost to ferry them over. § 4. To return to the Iewish coats;Jewish coats girdled, collar'd and fringed. As they were tyed up with girdles in the midst: (girdles serving the Iews for purses wherein they carried their moneys—,Mat. 10. 9. nor brass in your girdles) so
they were collared about the neck; witness Iob his expression, that his diseaseIob 30. 18. bound him about as the collar of his coat. Either, that his malady in∣separably clinged unto him, (in which sense we say, n ague sticks to ones back as close as his clothes) or rather, because he was visited with a noisome disease and aggulatinatus sanie, was grown stiffe and hard with the purulent matter of his ulcers. As the Iews coates were collared above; so they were skirted, and fringed below, by Gods especiall command.Num. 15. 38. 39. Speak unto the sons of Israel, and say unto them, that they make unto them a fringe on the skirts of their clothes throughout their generations, and that they put upon the fringe of the skirt a ribband of blew. And it shall be unto you for a fringe, that yee may see it, and remember all the commandements of Iehovah, and doe them. AndDeu. 22. 12. elsewhere they are enjoined to make fringes upon the four skirts of their garment. § 5. A fringe in Hebrew Zizith,The manner and mystery of their ringes. or Tsitsith, sometimes also Gedilim, in GreekMat. 23. 5. & Mark 9. 20. , represented the complication, or conjunction of Gods commandements among themselves, with their inseparable connexion, as the threads in those thrummed fringes were woven together. The blew lace tying them to the four skirts, typified how closely Gods law ought to be applied, and fastned to our hearts. By the rules of the Rabbins, every free-born male-child amongst the Iews, when knowing to cloth himself, was bound to wear these fringes. But women, servants, and infants were not bound (sayMaimoni. Tom. 1. in Zi∣zith cap. 3. Sect. 9. they) to weare them, though they might without committing any sin, provided that they used no ceremoni∣ous blessing (like men) at their putting them on. The same say, that blindeIdem ibidem. men were also bound to wear fringes, for, though they saw them not themselves, others did behold them. Gedilim (they say) was the thrums woven in the cloth, and Zizith was an addition of threads tyed with knots thereunto, but the particular and numerous Criticismes thereof we refer to such as delight in Rabbinicall disquisitions. Onely adding, that the modern Iews have wholly left off the formall wearing of fringes, alledging this reason thereof, because they have utterly lost the mystery of making the blew ribband (even by their ownSee Ainsworth on Num 15. 39. confessi∣on) an essentiall implement of the fringes, which should be dyed of a firmament, and unfading colour, in lieu whereof, some make shift with a white onely, whilest others (it seems) unable to compleat their fringes according to Gods command, prefer the totall omission, before the imperfect observance thereof. § 6. Hitherto of the lower coat of the Iews,Their cloak, or mantle. which they ware next their linen shirts. Over this they had another called a mantle, or cloak cast over them, when they went abroad, separable from their garment be∣neath it. This cloakGen. 38. 25. Iudah left with Thamar, andGen. 39. 12. Ioseph with his mistress, when the one lost and the other preserved his chastity thereby. Such an upper garment was laidIohn 13. 4. aside by Christ, when about to wash his Disciples feet: and putAct. 7. 58. off by the Iews, when intending to stone Saint Steven; and was2 Tim. 4. 13. left by Saint Paul at Troas. Yea, generally they
ware it not when busie at their work in the field, and were counselled by Christ at the invasion of Iudea by the Romans, forthwith to make their escape, and not to return back to take such clothes with them, as left at home behinde them. § 7. Of these coats beneath,What meant by double clothing. and cloaks above, we understand that ex∣pression in the description of a goodProv. 31. 21. wife, She is not afraid of the snow for her houshold, for all her houshould are clothed with scarlet, or rather (seeing no good huswifery to aray servants in so rich suits) as the Hebrew word importeth  with double garments, that is, with coats and cloaks to make them winter-proof, and perchance with duplicates, or two of both kindes, though successively worne at severall times. So much of both their garments, not forgetting the counsell Christ gave the Iews concerning them (but when and how far to be followed, let others dispute)Mat. 5. 40. If any will sue thee at law, and take away thy coat, let him take thy cloak also. § 8. At night they used to strip themselves of bothPut off both at night. when going to bed:ant. 5. 3. I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? Except in some case of ex∣tremity, requiring their readiness every instant: Nor the men of the guard which followed me, none of them put off theirNehem. 4. 23. clothes, saving that every one put them off for washing. § 9. The poorer sort were fain in the night,Cloaks poor mens coverlets. to make use of their cloak, or upper garment, for their blanket, or coverlet. And therefore God by speciall order provided, that though men might pawn their upper clothes (as not absolute necessary for their wearing) all the day time, yet at night such a pledge was not longer to be detained, but should be restored to him,Exod. 22. 26. At the Suns going down, for that is his covering onely, it is the raiment for his skin, wherein shall heIbid. ver. 27. sleep? Say not, he was as much subject to catch cold in the day, as at night for want thereof; for then being warmed with his work, and in constant motion during his day-labour, no danger of taking cold, though the same might surprize him lying still at night, when, how sharp the season happened sometimes, the high Priests servants will testifie, needing in the spring timeJohn 18. 18. a fire of coales to be made for them. SECT. III. Vestments how varied, according to the age of the wearers. § 1. HOwever,Infants swad∣ling clothes. all Iewish garments admitted of variations, according to the ages, professions, conditions, occasions, and sexes of the wearers. First for the ages, briefly to habit a Iew, from the Cradle to the Coffin, we begin with the infant, who with Iob, comingJob. 1. 21. naked out of his mothers wombe, findes some clouts provided by the care of his parents, or providence of his friends, to cover him. Amongst these, most remark∣able are hisLam. 2. 22. & Ezk. 16. 4. swadling clothes, wherewith the Iewish mothersLuke 2. 7. swathed
their children. No doubt doing it with more discretion then many English mothers, and nurses, who (as SpigeliusIn his Ana∣tom lib.  c. 9. Anglia regio pervesam anc fasciandi ratio∣nem ut plurim  sequitur, quo it ut maxima pars hominum abe & distil∣lationibus ibi coniciatur. Afterwards yearly coated. observeth) generally hurt their babes by binding them too hard about their breast, thereby causing consumptions, of which disease, he affirmeth, moe die in Eng∣land, then in any other Countrey. And so we leave this Iewish infant sucking, or sleeping on the lap of his mother. § 2. Afterward in due time he is coated, with little Samuel, for whom his mother made a little1 Sam. 2. 19. coat year by year. Nor know I which more to commend, Hanna's huswifery in annuall providing, or Samuel's thrift in making his coat to serve him a whole year. We conceive childrens clothes differed from mens, not in fashion, but in degrees, which encreased with the stature of the wearer. Leave we this childe in his calling, name∣ly playing with his mates in the MarketMat. 1. 16. place, loth to spoil his sport (it being as pleasant to see children play, as men to work:) Provided, they be seasonably set to school, for,Prov. 22. 6. Train up a child in the way he should goe, and when he is old he will not depart from it. § 3. From a child he starts up a youth,Then grown a Stripling. and becomes a stripling, then beginning to delight in brave clothes. If his fathers darling, then per∣chance he is clothed with a coat, rain-bow like, striped, and streaked, as Iosephs garment, with diversGen. 37. 3. colours; the sight whereof bred worse co∣lours in the face of his brethren (pale envie, red wrath, blew malice, black hatred) finding him so far out strip them in their fathers affection. Leave we this stripling, hunting, shooting, and offering at manlike exercises. § 4. Few moe years shoot him up to be marriageable,Becomes a gay Bride-groom. and his parents provide a wife for him, as Abraham for Isaac, (Abraham, who followed GodsGen. 24. 7. Angel sent before him, whilest too many covetous fathers are onely gided by other Angels in their choice) and soon after he is prepared for marriage. On his wedding day, how glorious doth he appear coming out of his chamber as the. 19. 5. rising Sun, when as aIsa. 61. 10. Bridegrom he decketh him∣self with ornaments? We wait on him to his Bride-chamber, wish him joy, and depart. § 5. Within a year after his marriageAfter a year is a Souldier. (for till that time he was pri∣viledged by the law,Deut. 24. 5. not to goe out to war, but to be free at home, and to cheer up his wife) he goes forth to fight, souldiery not being so distinct a profession amongst the Iews, but that every able man, upon just summons, was bound to bear armes. Behold we him now in complete armour, accor∣ding to his quality, made either of steel,King. 14. 27. brass, or1 King. 10. 10. gold (I man for shields and targets; for, otherwise all the art of man cannotmake an edged tool of gold, or silver) Defensive; as habergeon, brigandine, coats of male, (which we wish better put on, then Ahabs was, that no chinkes may be left betwixt the1 Kin. 22. 34. joints thereof) Offensive, & those either to use cominùs, at hand∣push; or stroke, as sword, dagger, spear; or eminùs, at distance, as bow, sling, dart, and other artificiall engines, (whereof King2 Chr. 26. 15. Uzziah was the ingenious inventour) or of a mixed nature, as a Iavelin, which was a spear-dart,
sometimes cast out of their hands, as Saul at1 Sam. 18. 11. David; sometimes kept in, and thrust through their enemies, in which mannerNum. 25. 6. Phinehas did execution on Zimri and Cozbi. It is enough barely to name these wea∣pons, as having no peculiar Iudaisme in them, but common with other Countreys. For, though God enjoyned the Iews some ceremonious ob∣servances in their wearing-apparell, distinguishing them from other nations; yet in the fashion of their armes, he suffered them to conform with the heathen, as might be most for their own safety, and advantage. § 6. But amongst all martiall accoutrements,Te Souldiers blt or girdle. we must not forget the souldiers girdle, the inseparable companion of military men. Thus when Ionathan stript himself, he gave David his garments even to his sword, and to his bow, and to his1 Sm. 18 4. girdle: understand his gift exclusively, these three things not comprehended therein, as being unsouldier-like to part with them. Ioab promised to give him that could kill Absalom ten shekels of silver, and a2 Sam. 18. 11. girdle, as a proper military Donative. And perchance, such a Girdle, Balteus militaris, bestowed by a Generall in a field after the fight, amounted to the honour of our modern Knighthood, not to say, Banneret∣ship. Conquerors used to besmear their girdle with the bloud of those they overcame (a Bend or Fess gules, we know, is an honorable Bearing) in avowance, and justification of what they had done. And therefore David taxeth Ioab, that having killed Abner, and Amasa, not valiantly in the field, but treacherously by fraud, he shed the bloud of war in peace, and put the bloud of war upon his1 King. 2. 5. girdle, that was about his loines, and in his shooes that were upon his feet. Not that it casually spirted upon them, but that of set purpose he put it there, misapplying an hostile ceremony of lawfull con∣quest, to his act of perfidious, and cowardly murder. Leave we now our souldier thus completely armed in all respects, going forth to fight, wishing him to be valiant for his people, and for the Cities of his God, and [for success] the Lord doe what seemeth2 Sam. 10. 12. good in his eies. § 7. But if in stead of victory,Turnes mour∣ner at ill success he meeteth with overthrow, and de∣struction, so that, with IobsIob 1. 15. messenger, he himself hardly escapes to bring the dolefull tidings of their defeat; behold him in the following sorrowfull equipage of a Mourner. WithIsa. 1. 2. baldness on his head (not na∣turall, but) occasioned by the shaving thereof, to make room for a sad Peruke of1 Kin. 20. 38. Ashes, or1 S m. 4 12. earth thereupon; beardlsa 15. 2. shaved, or else, his upper lipMiah 3. 7. covered, clothes rent, yea, flesh it self cut (not wounded by the enemies sword, but) as a penance imposed uponler. 41. 5. himself, feet2 Sm. 15. 30. bare, and whole body next the skin clothed1 King 21. 27. in sackcloth, wherein he used to lie, and accor∣ding to the occasion, more or less was his humiliation. May he meet with seasonable comfort, and good counsell, whilest we proceed. § 8. Some few years after, 'tis strange to see, how insensibly age hath surprised him, so that he beginneth now to become an Elder.Quickly be∣coes an der If you finde him not at home in his house, you shall certainly meet him amongst those of his own rank in the gate of the City (where a Con∣sistory
Court was daily kept, and he a Judge therein) wrap'd with Samuel warme in his1 Sam. 28. 14. mantle, and having in his hand a staffe; 1 Not of any infectious infirmity, being an heavy curse: Let there not fail from the house of Ioab, one that leaneth on a2 Sam. 3. 29. staffe. 2 Much less of Idolatry, an hainous sin: My people aske counsell at their stocks, and theirHosa 4. 12. staff declareth unto them. 3. But a staffe of Antiquity, accounted a great blessing: Every man with aZech. 8. 4. staffe in his hand for very age. To which we wish him another staffe for his better support, even duty∣full children, and so leave him. § 9. At next return we finde him beddred,Beddred with∣out heat. reduced to aged Davids condition, though they cover him with clothes he getteth no1 King. 1. 1. heat. We wish him (in stead of a young Abishag) good kitchin-Physick, carefull atten∣dance, and serious meditation on his latter end. SECT. IV. Their habits how differenced, by their severall professions, and conditions. § 1. PRobable it is,Fishermens coates. that all vocations of people (besides the Priests and Levites) as Husbandmen, Tradesmen, Citizens, Mer∣chants, Doctors, Judges &c. were distinguished by their severall ap∣parell, though we can onely insist upon some few we finde in Scri∣pture. First, Fishermen had their coates made with the best advantage, not to hinder the wearers swimming therein. Thus, Peter hearing that the Lord stood on the land,John 21. 7. girt his fishers-coate about him (for he was naked) and did cast himself into the sea. Oh that men would but use the wealth of this world, as Saint Peter his coate, onely for civility, as a covering in their passage through the waves of this life, without danger of being drowned in the Deep, with the weight thereof! § 2. Shepheards succeed,Shepheards garments. sufficiently known by their bag,1 Sam. 17. 4. and staffe, orPsal. 23. 4. hook; except any will adde thereunto theJob 30. 1. dog of their flock, as so ne∣cessary an attendant, they seem naked without him. Their clothes were made large and loose, easie to be put on, without any adoe, so that they might run, and ray themselves. Hereupon it is prophesied of Nebuchad∣nezzar, that he should array himselfe with the land of Egypt, as a shepheardJer. 43. 12. putteth on his garment, that is, quietly, quickly, in an instant, the conquest thereof should cost him no trouble, as meeting with no considerable opposition. § 3. But my pen is soon weary of the worthless wardrobe of such poor, and painfull people, longing to come to Court,Court the Ele∣ment of Gal∣lants. the center of brave∣ry, where those Men of clothes, to whom gallantry is essentiall, have their continuall residence. Such (saith our Saviour) as weareMat. 11. 8. soft clothing, are in Kings houses. Insomuch that there was a law in the Court of Persia,
that, None might enter into the Kings gate clothed withEsther 4. 2. sackcloth, as a disparage∣ment to the place. Though the Porters which shut out sackcloth, could not stop out sorrow from entering into the Palace of the mightiest Mo∣narch. § 4. Courtiers were apparelled often in fineGen. 41. 42. linen,Courtiers clo∣thed in white linen. which the chiefest of them need not blush to weare, finding Angels themselves (waiters on an higher King) clothed in pure andRevel. 15. 6. white linen. Now, although Iudea had store of home-growingJosh. 2. 6. flax, yet she fetched far finer from Egypt, whence in Solomons time the Kings Merchants received linen1 King. 10. 28. yarn at a price. Kings Merchants, being a Guild or company of men with a badge Royall upon them, probably priviledged with a preemption of all wares, and sole trade in some commodities, so that Solomon (like the great Duke of Tu∣scany) counted traffick no abatement to his Majesty. They brought it in linen-yarn, not linen-cloth, Solomon so setting up Napery, and the manufacture of weaving, to the much enriching of the land, and employing of the poor people thereof. Thus, after his time the finest linen cloth, formerly a purely forein, became partly a native commodity of Iudea; as linen, Egyptian; as cloth, Iewish; spun abroad by the wheels of strangers, woven at home on the looms of his own subjects. I say not, that Solo∣mon took the first hint of this good husbandry, from the mouth of his mother Bathsheba, charactering a good wife,Prov. 31. 24. She maketh fine linen, and selleth it: though a family being a little kingdome (as a kingdome a great family) what is found beneficiall for the one, may by proportion be extended advantageous for the other. § 5. Pass we by fine cloth to come the sooner to silk,And in silk. the appaell also of our Courtier. By silk we understand not Sericum, coming from the East Indies, where it groweth on trees: nor Byssus, a soft silk grass; but Bombyina, made of silk-wormes, (whereof largelyIn the land of Moriah. before) and of it plenty in Palestine. Indeed we finde, thatLampridius in eus vita. Heliogabalus first wore such silk clothes in Rome; and that in Iustinians time (some five hundred years after Christ) silke-wormes by someProcopius. Monkes were first brought into Europe; as also thatMatth. Parker in his life. Cardinall Woolsie was the first Clergy-man that wore silk in England: but, when silk began first to be worn by the Iews, we cannot exactly define. Onely we finde amongst the many favours God bestowed on their Countrey, this especially recounted,Ezck. 16. 10. I covered thee with silk. And thus we leave our Courtier so gaily apparelled, that his clothes (according to the ApostlesJames 2. 3. complaint) are not onely his Usher to make room; but also his Herauld, to appoint a principall place for him to sit down, when coming into any assembly; whilest others, of less gallantry, (but perchance more goodness) must either stand, or sit at his foot-stoole. § 6. Come we from the Stars to the Sun;Robes royall of Kings. from the Courtirs to the King himself. Such were conspicuous, and distinguished from their subjects, by their Crown, Scepter, Throne, and royall Robes, which Iehosaphat
wore in war to his1 King. 22. 30. cost, had not Gods goodness ordered, that he was more scar'd then hurt thereby. White garments were worn even by the Kings themselves. Hereupon when our Saviour as a Mock-king was made a derision both to Gentile and Iew▪ as the Souldiers arraied him in John 19. 2. Purple, Robes of Magistracy amongst the Romans; so Herod, a Iew (conforming his scoffes to custome of his own Countrey)Luke 23. 11. , clothed him with a white garment. Sometimes, Kings did, out of speciall grace, communicate their robes to be worn by their Favorites, as isEsther 6. 8. eminent in the case of Mordecai. Many and rich (no doubt) were the habilliments of the Iewish Kings, but when all was done, Solomon, in all his glory, was not arrayed as aMat. 6. 29. Lily in the field, more fine to the touch, fair to the eye, and, which is the main, the Lilies beauty is his own, and in him; Solomons bravery but borrowed, and upon him. § 7. We had almost forgotten the Pharisee,Pharisees their habit. who will be offended (as loving theMat. 23. 6. uppermost rooms at feasts, and chief seats in the Synagogues) if not having an high, and honourable mention in our discourse. These, gene∣rally, delighted inMat. 23. 5. Phylacteries (and fringes of the broadest size) being schedules, or scrouls of parchment, tyed to their foreheads, or left hands (by popular error accounted nearest the heart) wherein the Decalogue, and, some adde, four other sections of the Law were written; so carrying a Library of Gods word on their clothes, scarce a letter in their hearts. They wore course clothing, pretending much mortification, and , when they exercised, (that is, when these Mountebanks theatrically acted their humiliation) piyanius adversus Hare∣ses li. 1. p. 20. , they had thornes for their bed to lay upon, and some of them wore a Mortar on their heads, so ponderous, that they could look neither upward, nor on either side, but onely down∣ward, and forthright. But, because the Pharisees affected such clothes meerly to be seen of men; out of set purpose, to cross their vainglorious humour, we will look no longer on their strange apparell, lest we in∣crease their pride, by our studious gazing on their phantasticall habits. SECT. V. A Iewish man ornamented cap-a-pe. § 1. ALthough it be probable,Hats on their heads. that the ancient Iews generally went bare-headed (making use with Elijah of their Mantles, or upper garments, in tempestuous weather, wrapping their heads, as he his1 King. 19. 13. face therein) yet we finde them in after ages wearing Hats on their heads, with which the three childrenDan. 3. 21. were cast into the fiery furnace. Not, that they were like those we wear now adays, (a meer modern inven∣tion since round flat caps were disused) but, are termed Hats by analogy, though not of the same form, for the same service, the coverture of the head.
§ 2. But,Antiochus his hats of a diffe∣rent fashion. some will say, if Hats were formerly fashionable among the Iews, how came that Order of Antiochus (many years after) to be be∣held as an Innovation, of so dangerous consequence in it selfe, and so distastfull to the Iews, when he enjoyned them to wear an2 Mac. 4. 12. Hat? It is answered; such Hats were offensive to the Iews, not so much for them∣selves, but because, 1 A forein Power imposed them. 2 An odious instrument (Iason the Pseudo-Priest) pressed the wearing of them. 3 They came in company with other heathenishIbid. ver. 13. customes, for whose sake they fared the worse in the Iews acceptance. 4 Such Hats (in Greek ) were (as I may say) of another block from those, which the Iews, most tenacious of their native habits, formerly had used. But, how the ancient Hats of the Iews were made, is impossible to de∣fine, though probably they were of the same matter with their upper garment. Sure I am, the Babylonians were more top-gallant then the Iews, and quite put them down with bravery in that part, as, exceeding in died Ezk. 23. 13. attire upon their heads. All that we will adde of Jewish head-attire, is this, that mourners amongst them used (in expression of their shame, and sorrow) to be bound about close, The plowmen were ashamed, theyJer. 14. 4. covered their heads. Wherefore, when the Prophet foretold,Ezek. 24. 23. And your tires shall be upon your heads, and your shooes upon your feet: yee shall not mourn nor weep, but yee shall pine away for your iniquities, and mourn one towards another; he pro∣nouceth their sorrow so transcendent, as uncapable to be ordered by the usuall method of mourning, and onely to be managed with amazement. § 3. Ear-rings were generally worn by Jewish women,Ear-rings doubtfull whe∣ther worn by Jewish men. as also by their male children whilest as yet young, and under their mothers com∣mand; Exod. 32. 2. Break off the golden ear-rings which are in the ears of your wives, your sons, and your daughters. Where, by sons, we understand little boys (there∣fore hemmed in the text with women on both sides) having their sex as yet scarcely discriminated by their habits. But, whether men amongst them ware ear-rings, is doubtfull, and the negative most probable; see∣ing the Scripture, speaking of the eastern Army conquered by Gideon, For they had goldenJudg. 8. 24. ear-rings, because they were Ishmaelites; intimates thereby, that such were no masculine ornaments usuall amongst the people of the Iews. Except any make [for] there to relate, not to the ear-rings them∣selves, but to the extraordinary multitude, and massiness thereof. Wherefore, if any be earnest on the contrary, I oppose not; being con∣tented the Iews should have rings in their ears, so be it they had not Idols in those rings, aGen. 35. 4. superstition of their ancestours, when first coming out of Padan-Aram. § 4. Nothing saveCant. 1. 10. chaines was worn about their necks;Onely chaines about their necks. no linen in lieu of our modern bands, which otherwise would have intercepted, and
hindered the beautifull prospect of the Spouse her neck, when compared to a tower of Ivory. As forGen. 24. 22. bracelets about their wrists,Luk. 15. 22. rings on their fingers, (for gloves we finde none)Jer. 22. 24. signets in those rings, herein the Iews nothing differed from other nations. § 5. Their legs were generally bare:Their legs bare. wherefore, when we finde the Three children cast into the fiery furnace, in their coats, theirDan. 3. 21. hosen and their Hats; by [hosen] we understand not stockins, but breeches; which (as the Ieish PriestsExod. 28. 42. must wear of linen for modesty) other persons might for their own conveniency, or warmth; as probably these children did, as then living in Babylon, being somewhat a more northern climate, and colder countrey then Iudea. § 6. On their feet, when at home,Sandales and shooes. and in summer time, they used to weareMark. 6. 9. & Act. 12. 8. Sandales; which had soles, but no upper-leathers, save the liga∣ments wherewith they were fastned over the instep and cross of the foot. Hence came the frequent washing of their feet in the eastern parts; not onely to cool them, but chiefly to clear them from the gravell, and cleanse them from the dirt, which those casements of their Sandales had let in. In the winter time, and when they travelled abroad, they wore shooes (which they used to put off when coming onExod. 3. 5. holy ground.) And it seems that in fair weather, whilest the Master, for more ease, might walke in his Sandales, the servant used to carry his shooes after him (as our Ser∣ving-men their Masters hoods on the same occasion) in case that rain, or foul weather should happen in their journy. Hence that humble ex∣pression, Mat. 3. 11. Whose shooes I am not worthy to bear, that is, unworthy to per∣form the meanest servile office unto him. Their shooes were tyed with a small, and slender latchet, yet big and strong enough, to fasten two eminent Proverbes on posterity. 1 From a thread to aGen. 14. 23. shooe-latchet, that is, nothing at all. 2 TheMark 1. 7. latchet of whose shooes I am not worthy to stoop down and unloose, that is (as aforesaid) unworthy to have the meanest employment about him. Nothing else occurs of the Iewish shooes, save that they were often made ofExk. 16. 10. Badgers skins, which (otherwise seeming fitter for gloves then shooes) served for the upper-leathers, which skins (no doubt) were of finer grain and dressing in those parts (perchance worn with their fur) then in our land where the leather thereof is of no considerable value. It is suspicious, that afterwards some extraordinary cost was luxuriously be∣stowed on their shooes, when the poor was sold for a Amos 2. 6. & Amos 8. 6. pair of them. Or else their Exchange ran at a strange rate, when a piece of a dead beasts skin was accounted a valuable compensation for the flesh, whole body, and life of a man.
SECT. VI. The habits of Girles, Virgins, Brides, Wives, and Widows amongst the Iews. § 1. SO much of the Iewish male-apparell,Sexes distin∣guished by their clothes. come we now to their Fe∣minine-attire; sexes amongst them being solemnly distingui∣shed by their clothes, according to Gods express command therein, Deut. 22. 5. The woman shall not weare that which pertaineth to the man, neither shall the man put on a womans garment, for all that doe so are abomination unto the Lord thy God: as in all ages, Epicoene Apparell hath been the Baud to much baseness. Onely herein we are sorry we cannot satisfie our selves, much less the Rea∣der; so little appears of their apparell in Scripture, though we will dili∣gently take whatsoever it tenders unto us. § 2. We begin with the Girles;Girles soon starting Vir∣gins. when, first we findeZech. 8. 5. the City full of boys and girles playing in the streets thereof. Let none condemn them for Rigs, because thus hoiting with boys, seeing the simplicity of their age was a Patent to priviledge any innocent pastime, and few moe years will make them blush themselves into better manners. § 3. For,Maidens kept secret; their attire. being grown virgins of pretty stature, they were closely kept under covert-parent. Whereupon a virgin in Hebrew hath her name from  to hide, or keep secret, maidens not being permitted to gad abroad alone, but onely in companies on great solemnities, then exer∣cising themselves with their own sex, inJudg. 21. 21. dancing, singing, and playing onJudg. 11. 34. Timbrels, accounted maiden melody. Hereupon it was, that Amnon lusting after his sister Thamar, thought it2 Sam. 13. 2. hard for him to doe any thing to her. Not, that he made it any difficulty, or scruple in conscience to commit folly with her; but all the hardness was in compassing her company, that was kept so close; and therefore, he was fain, with a fetch, to be∣tray her into his Chamber. We finde nothing particularly of the attire of ordinary virgins in Scripture, but onely that the Virgin-royall, or Kings daughters, were apparelled with garments of diversIbid. ver. 18. colours upon them: of the severall kindes and makings whereof, we shall treatParag. 7. by and by. § 4. Now,Iews marry young. before the Virgin we speake of, prove 1 Cor. 7. 36. past the prime of her youth, her parents have provided an husband for her. Indeed generally the Iews married very young, as studiously advancing speedy propagation of posterity, especially before Christs time, accounting virginity (after ripe years) a petty purgatory, and barrenness after marriage a little hell, so ambitious all were of children. § 5. On her wedding-day,The bravery of Brides. how gallantly doth she come forth as a BrideRevel. 21. 2. adorned for her husband? She needs not any Art of memory to minde her to put on her ornaments, for, can a BrideJer. 2. 32. forget her attire? Hers, to use, if not to own: it being a fashion amongst the Iews (even at this very day observed by them) that, at a marriage, a Bride (though
never so mean a person, or silly servant) is decked and dressed in all gay∣itry lent unto her by her neighbours, so that, that day she appears a mo∣ving mine of gold, and precious stones. Nor matters it, though the Brides bravery be borrowed on her wedding-day, if so be that the com∣fort, and contentment in her match, remain her own all her life after▪ And no wonder, if Bride and Bridgroom were both very gallant, when all their invited guests are highly concerned to be comely; otherwise, if wanting aMat. 22. 12. wedding garment, they are accounted to ffont all the compa∣ny, and the welcome occasion of their meeting together. § 6. Next day we behold our Bride a formall wife,Wives wore vailes. and amongst all her clothes we take especiall notice of theGen. 24. 65. vaile on her head, in token of the subjection she gave to, and protection she took from her husband. Vaile in Hebrew called  radid, derived from radad, to bear rule and au∣thority, shewing now she had power2 Cor. 11. 10. on her head, being under the com∣mand of an husband. Her vaile was partable from the rest of her clothes▪ witness the complaint of the Spouse, that, TheCant. 5. 7. watchmen (shame on them for their pains) and the keepers of the walls took away her vaile from her. This vaile (as all the other garments of the wife) were provided her all her life time, on her husbands charge, God taking peculiar order, that in case her husband should take another wife, yet (amongst other provisions) his first wivesExod. 21. 10. raiment should not be diminished, though formerly she had been but a servant unto him. But wofull the condition of those seven women, who (as the Prophet foretells) in a dearth of men, desiring nothing with an husband but an husband, would be contented, yea willing, and desi∣rous to weaie their ownIsa. 4. 1. apparell, (that is, to clothe themselves at their own charges) so be it they might have but one man for their husband, to per∣form conjugall duties unto them. § 7. Now,Ladies wore broidered clothes of two sorts. as the ordinary Iewish wives wore clothes proportionable to their husbands estates: so the honourable women amongst them, Queens especially, wore broidered garments, which were of two sorts, 1 Wrought withPsal. 45. 14. needle work, brought from Babylon, of which kinde (for the Art, though not the sex thereof) I oneive was thatJosh. 7. 21. Babylonish garment which tempted he hands of Achan to sa∣criledge. 2 Woven exactly in imitation of the former, and this properly called , Plurimis liciis texta, composed of various coloured threads, like branched work; first found out at Alexandria in Egypt, whereof theMartialis. Poet, Haec tibi Memphitis tellus dat munera: victa est Pectine Niliaco, jam Babylonis acus. Affirming that in his age the Egyptian shuttle had got the victory of the Babylonish needle. Understand him, for the quickness, speciousness, cheapness, and novelty of the work; not the state, riches, and curiosity thereof, seeing the wrought garments from Babylon were like costly
Manuscripts, the woven stuffes from Egypt like Printed books, done with less charge, and greater expedition. § 8. But besides embroidered clothes,And Queens beaten or wrought gold. we finde the Queen of Iudea once arraied inPsal. 45. 9. gold of Ophir (as if her garment were cut out of the same piece with her Scepter and Crown) and made of massie plate. If so, such bravery was rather to be pitied, then envied, (as all outward great∣ness is a penance rather then an ornament) except the hands of her Train∣bearers did lighten the burden thereof. However, it rather appeareth (as afterward it followeth) ofIbid. . 13. wrought gold; either onely studded or bossed therewith, or consisting of golden threads wrought thereinto. Thus such gallantry was fashionable amongst the Iews, long before any there∣of was used in the western parts, or Rome it self. Where Tarquinius Priscus is by Pliny affirmed the first who triumphed aureâ tunicâ, In a golden coat. And many hundred years after, the same Author reports for a matter of greater rarity, that he with his own eyes beheld Agrippina the wife of Claudius wearing Paludamentum auro textili (or Chlamydem auratam, as Tacitus phraseth it) a Mantle of cloth of gold, as the first which began that fashion in Rome, though customary with the Iewish Queens a thousand years before. § 9. But,The sad gar∣ments of Widows. if our foresaid wife, though a Queen, chanceth to bury her husband, and so become a widow, presently on she puts herGen. 38. 14. widows-garments, and2 Sam. 14. 2. anoints not her self with oyle, but weares mourning apparell (or else, it would be accounted a great breach of modesty in her) some competent time, though the exact limitation thereof be not specified in Scripture. These Widows-garments, of what mean and homely matter so∣ever they were made, had this peculiar priviledge, that they might not be taken to pawn, orDeut. 24. 17. pledge; God the Father of the fatherless, and the Iudge of thePsal. 68. 5. widows, being so carefull, that no injury should be offered unto them. SECT. VII. Of the riot and luxury of the Iewish women before the Captivity. § 1. SO much for the attire of sober,Riot the fore∣runner of ruine and civill Maidens; the garments of grave and modest Matrons. Another genera∣tion succeeds, whose husbands might be the Sons of Abraham by their extraction, but these their wives were none of the daughters of Sarah by their conditions. Indeed a little before the captivity of Baby∣lon (luxury is the forerunner of misery) the Iewish women were arrived
at the greatest height of pride; like those of whom Moses foretold, Dut. 28. 26. The tender and delicate woman among you, who would not adventure to set the sole of her foot upon the ground, for delicateness and tenderness. Oh pride! the earth, which isMat. 5. 35. Gods footstool, is not good enough to be hers. Though the same one day will be bold to tread on her face, who thought her foot too good to tread on it. § 2. The Prophetsa. 3. 18. &c. Isaiah taketh especiall notice of a world of trinkets,Mundus, or a world of wo∣mens trinkets. which in his days concurred to dress them: 1 Tinkling ornaments. 2 Caules. 3 Round tires like the moon. 4 Chaines. 5 Bracelets. 6 Mufflers. 7 Bonnets. 8 Ornaments about the leg. 9 Head-bands. 10 Tablets. 11 Ear-rings. 12 Rings. 13 Nose-jewels. 14 Changeable suites. 15 Mantles. 16 Wimples. 17 Crisping-pins. 18 Glasses. 19 Fine-linen. 20 Hoods. 21 Vailes. But now, as once the Eunuch said concerning a more mysterious passage in this Prophet,Act. 8. 31. How can I understand without an interpreter? So here without the same help, who can attain to the meaning thereof? § 3. In the first place we may conceive many of these ornaments were onely temporary,Many of these ornaments temporary for that age. as used by the Fashionists of that age, which afterwards disused, both name and thing came to be abolished. Which frequently comes to pass in all kinde of apparell, whose very names by degrees grow old, wax thread-bare, turne to rents, to rags, to nothing. For instance, it would pose a good Antiquary, to describe the exact fashion ofCamd. Remains pag. 196. Herlots, Paltocks, Gits, Haketons, Tabards, Court-pies, Chevesailes, and Gipsers: barbarous names, which may seem to carry a Spell or Conjuration in the mention of them. Yet all these were kindes of gar∣ments, commonly used in England some four hundred years agoe. Yea, pride playing in all ages upon conceited opinions of decency, hath in∣finitely varied the fashion of all apparell, customes of our Ancestours appearing as antick to us, as our fashions (perchance) will seem in∣credible to posterity. Who would beleeve, that ever our English, some four hundred years since, wore shooes souted and piked more then a finger long, crooking upwards (calledMentloned in the History cal∣led Eulogium. Crackowes) resembling the Devils claws, which were fastened to the knees with chains of gold, and silver? Or, that about the reign of King Henry the fifth, men grew so excessive in that kind, that it was fain to be ordered by Proclamation, that none shouldCamd. Re∣mains. pa. 197. Pride the grea∣test offence in these orna∣ments. weare their shooes broader at the toes then six inches? § 4. Secondly, of these ornaments, some were necessary, as fine-linen; others modest, as Vailes; moe (though costly) comely, as ear-rings, and bracelets; (whichGen. 24. 30. Rebekah her self, and the best of women did weare)
most of them (some few excepted) though magnificent, lawfull, if not exceeding the wearers estate. Some therefore will demand why the Prophet reproved them, and why God was offended therewith? But, we must know, the things were not so faulty in their own nature, as for the superfluous variety, fantasticall fashion, and over costly mat∣ter thereof. But, which is the main, the mindes of the wearers did the mischiefe, whose fingers (as I may say) infected their Rings; and mouthes marred their Mufflers, being used with pride, and abused to wantonnefs. The text saith, The daughters of Sion were haughty and walked withIsa. 3. 16. stretched out necks (and  to boast is byVide Stepha∣num. Criticks deduced from the neck; pride being most visible in the erected posture thereof) and wanton eies, walking and mincing as they goe, and making a tinkling with their feet, carrying (it seems) bells at their heels, whose musick did jar with modesty, and gave the watchword to wantons, at what Signe mer∣cenary embraces were to be sold unto them. § 5. Thirdly,Nose-jewels how fastened. of such as were meer superfluities, none appear more ridiculous and strange then the nose-jewels in Hebrew  leaving us at a loss how they were fastned. Surely, the Iewish women were not ringed swine-like, nor had they, like the Salvages in America, their noses bored through to hang jewels therein. For, although some may plead, Pride never feels pain; as also, that the absurdest fashions, when made common, seem comely; yet such holes in their noses (moe nostrils then ever nature made) must of necessity hinder, both their speech, and plainer pronunciation: except, (as some conceive) they were fastned with gold, or silver-hoops about thier noses. For mine own part, I suppose these nose-jewels the same with frontlets, frequent among the Iews, or else some pendants fastened thereunto: 1 First, because frontlets (otherwise ordinary ornaments) are omitted in this catalogue. 2 Secondly, because frontlets were worn betwixt theirExod. 13. 16. & Deut. 9. 8. eies (between which and the nose no great distance) hanging down on a peak from their foreheads. However, 'tis probable these nose-jewels were frontlets of a larger size, more prominent then ordinary, as pride in process of time improveth it self to a greater proportion. And most certain it is, God was highly dis∣pleased with this their luxury; witness his heavyIsa. 3. 24. commination, And it shall come to pass, that in stead of sweet smell there shall be stinke; and in stead of a girdle, a rent; and in stead of well-set haire, baldness; and in stead of a stomacher, a girding of sackcloth; and burning, in stead of beauty. Which last curse is omit∣ted by the Septuagint. § 6. Now,Women why subject to baldness. whereas baldness is threatned to the Iewish women, i prompts unto me a passage in Hippocrates, who (asFoeminis nec capillos desuere dixit, nec labo∣rare. Epist. 95. Seneca cites him) affirmes, that women in his time were neither bald, nor subject to the gout: and yetIbidem. Seneca confesseth, that the weaker sex in his days, were
subject to both these infirmities; Non qua mutata foeminarum natura, sed vita: nam cum virorum licentiam aequaverint, corporum quoque virilium vitia aequa verunt. Though a supernaturall cause must be allowed, immediately to inflict the same on the Iewish women, about the time of the Prophets prediction. § 7. Whereas it is said,What meant by burning. in stead of beauty burning, I question whether it relateth to the Babylonians sacking of the City, when2 Chr. 36. 19. they burnt the house of God, and brake down the wall of Ierusalem, and burnt all the palaces thereof with fire, and destroyed all the goodly vessels thereof. Rather I beleeve it referred to some personall, and corporall malady, which afterwards God in∣flicted on the bodies of these lascivious women: As Fevers, or the disease Erysipelas, A swelling full of heat, and redness with pain about it, (called by us Saint Anthonies fire) or some other pestilent inflammation. Except any will understand burning in the1 Cor. 7. 9. Apostles sense, for inward lust; that these women, when ugly and deformed, should still ardently affect their lovers, by whom they were entertained with neglect, and con∣tempt. § 8. The mention of turning a sweet smell into a stink,Iews generally ill sented. mindes me of a common tradition, that an offensive savour attends the bodies of modern Iews, who (notwithstanding their frequent washing) may be sented in their company, from those which are Christians. Indeed the flout of a fleering PaganMartialis. li. 4. Epigr. 4. Poet herein, workes nothing on my beliefe, Quod jejunia Sabbatariorum, Malles, quàm quod oles, olere, Bassa. More am I moved with the testimony of many credible Merchants in our age, adding hereunto, that the Iewish mothers use to buy the bloud of Christians, from Barber-surgeons, (who preserve it on purpose) there∣in to bath the bodies of their new born babes, so to mitigate the rank smell of their children. However, we leave this asIt is learned∣ly confuted by D. Brown in Vulgar Errors. doubtfull, having formerly found their report false, who (literally interpreting that com∣mination, Psal. 69. 24.& Rom. 11. 10. And ever bow down their backs) affirme all Iews to be crooked, or bunch-backed; experience presenting many of that nation (for their stature) as proper persons, and as streight as any other people. § 9. I shall deceive their expectations,Harlots their bashfull impu∣dency. who conceive I will soile my book with presenting the exact habits of common Harlots therein. One∣ly in generall we learn from Scripture, that with Thamar the daughter-in-law of Iudah, they used to sitGen. 38. 14. covered and wrapt in a vaile, in an open place, by the way. Impudent modesty! shameless shamefacedness What a contradiction was there betwixt her gesture, and posture? WhyIbid. . 15. face covered, if intending to be dishonest? Why in the high-way, if disposed to be otherwise? Hereby she professed a private-publickness (theProv. 7. 9. twilight is the Harlots season) As free to commit sin: so carefull not to be openly
known her self, and (by consequence) not to reveal him who com∣mitted it with her. § 10.Harlots painted themselves. Adde hereunto that painting was practised by2 King. 9. 22. & 30. Harlots, adulte∣rated complexions well agreeing with adulterous conditions. Especi∣ally, they used toEzek. 23. 40. to paint their eyes, understand their eye-browes and eye-lids with Stibium, to make them look black, conceited by them an extraordi∣nary comeliness. Hereupon was Solomons caution, Neither let her take thee with herProv. 6. 25. eye-lids, as one of her principall nets to catch wantons therewith. When aged, they used in vain to make themselves fair by Jer. 4. 30. renting their faces with painting, though more cause to rent them with their nailes out of penitent indignation. Thus painting, used to recon∣cile, in time widens the breaches in their faces; and their flesh, tainted at last with the poison thereof, like rotten vessels, spring the moe leakes, the more they are repaired. § 11. As for the other garments of whores, it is probable,Harlots had habits to them∣selves. that the publick, and mercenary, were distinguished from honest women, by some habit peculiar to themselves; Solomon observing, that one came forthProv. 7. 10. with the attire of an Harlot. Sure I am, the same custome long since was observed in England, finding that Adam Francis Mercer, and Lord Maior of London Anno 1352. procured an Act of Parliament, that no known whore should wear any hood, or attire on her head, except raied, Stows Survey pag. 553. or striped cloth of diverse colours. But, enough, if not too much, of so bad a subject;Eccles. 7. 26. Who so pleaseth God, shall escape from her, but the inner shall be taken by her. SECT. VIII. Of Iewish Grave-clothes, and burying Ornaments. § 1. AFter some few years,The dead how ordered among the Iews. all the persons formerly described, high and low, rich and poor, one with another, meet at the house of death, whither we will afford them our attendance, to behold their funerall wardrobe. Indeed, by Iobs confession,Job 1. 28. Naked shall I return thi∣ther again, all are resolved naked into the wombe-generall of their Mother Earth; andPsal. 49. 17. When he dieth he shall carry nothing away with him, (that is, actively, which he himself can put on, or is sensible of) though passively the dead may beLuk. 7. 12. carried out with such clothing upon them, as decency, and modesty requires. § 2. First therefore,Eyes closed, washed and embalmed. his eyes being closed by one nearest, or dearest unto him,Gen. 46. 4. Ioseph shall put his hands upon thine eyes; the body wasAct. 9. 37. washed, and then prepared for embalming. This embalming was twofold; either by incor∣poration,
substituting spices in the rooms of their brains and bowells taken out, so to preserve their corpses from corruption; an Egyptian custome, and so probablyGen. 50. 2. & 26. Iacob and Ioseph were embalmed: or else onely by apposition, or putting of sweet odours to the dead body, (called by the IewsJohn 19. 40. ) after which sort our Saviour was embalmed. Of whom as a bone was not broken: so no part of his body was taken away, to hinder the entireness of his resurrection. § 3. The next work was,Winded in li∣nen.Act. 5. 6. Act. 8. 2. , that is, to con∣trive the body, and winde it into a modest method. For, though the pale cheeks of the dead will take no other dye, yet the corpse may blush by proxy in the surviving kindred, if not put into a decent posture. After∣wards, they were wrapped up in a Sindon,John 11. 44. bound hand and foot with grave-clothes (generally calledJohn 20 7. , and more particularly ) having a napkin about their heads, single by it self, and not fastned to the rest of the grave-clothes, as appears by that napkin in about our Saviours head, not lying with the clothes after his resurrection, butIbid. wrapped toge∣ther in a place by it self. This done, the body was put into aGen 50. 26. Coffin; laid, and carried out on [] aLuke 7. 14. biere, and then either, 1 Buried, the mostGen. 23. 19. ancient and generall custome of the Hebrews; or, 2 BurntJer. 34 5. with fragrant spices, to qualifie all noisome smels; or, 3 Both, as the bodies of1 Sam. 31. 12, 13. Saul and his sons, whose flesh was burnt, and bones buried. As for Asa his buriall, it was peculiar for the solemnity thereof, they2 Chr. 16. 14. laid him in a bed which was filled with sweet odours, and diverse kindes of spices prepared by the Apothecaries art; and they made a very great burning for him. And the reason, that more state was used at his buriall, then others, was because he was a pious King, and so well deserved it; as also (which was the main) because he had a godly son and successour Iehoshaphat, not grudg∣ing what cost he bestowed on his Fathers funerall. A feast called the breadEzek. 24. 17. of men, and elsewhere aJer. 16. 7. cup of consolation, was made at these burials, probably at the cost of the friends of the party deceased, to comfort them at their grief, with moderate refection. § 4. We presume,Mercenary weepers. the children and friends, of this person deceased, bemoaned him veirs & spirantibus lachrymis, with true and lively sorrow; otherwise it was common amongst the Iews, as amongst our modern Irish, to send for Mourning women, soJer. 9. 17, 18. cunning in wailing, that they could make their eyes run down with tears, and their eye-lids gush out with waters, so to furnish forth the Funerall. Such mock-tears were in all ages: CredidimusOvid. Epist. lacrymis: an & hae simulare docentur? Hae quoque habent artes, quáque jubentur eunt. Thy tears were trusted: do they falshood know? Yea, they have tricks, at will they come and go. But, as parents, when their children cry for nothing, use to beat them, that they may cry for something: so God threatned that he miseries of Ierusalem shouldJer. 9. 19▪ afterwards turn their faigned, and strained wailings, into sound and sincere sorrow; when those teares (formerly but the adopted chil∣dren)
should become the naturall issue of their heavy hearts. § 5. Nothing more remains of the Iewish burying clothes;Sepulchers Me∣taphoricall clothes. except any will adde, as part of their Metaphoricall garments, the graves where∣in they were interred. These were proportioned to the deserts of the party deceased, and love which the living bare unto him. In which re∣spect Hezekiah was buried in the chiefest (or2 Chr. 32. 33. highest) of the sepulchers of the sons of David; but whether highest in posture as nearest to David, or in structure, as built most eminent above ground, let others dispute. They used to white over their sepulchers to appear beautifull without, to which the hypocriticall Pharisees are resembled by ourMat. 23. 27. Saviour. Yea, the friends of the dead used to raise, repair, and rebuild such sepulchers many years after the party was deceased (probably renewing the Epitaphs upon them:)Mat. 23. 29. witness the contradiction in the Iews actions, with one hand out of pretended courtesie, building and garnishing the tombes of the dead, whilest at the same time with the other hand, out of reall cruelty, they killed the living Prophets among them. Here the Map of Jewish Gods is to be inserted.
THE IDOLS OF THE IEWS. CHAP. VII. § 1. IT is hard,Idolatry very ancient. exactly to define, when Idolatry first began. It is generally thought about the days of Enos, Adams grandchild; grounded upon Gen. 4. 26. though little certainty can be col∣lected from those words, so variously transla∣ted. We may safely conceive, it began very early, in the infancy of mankinde: it being true of the great World, what is said of Man the Microcosme,Psal. 58. 3. The wicked are estranged from the wombe, they goe astray speaking lies, as soon as they be born. § 2. If we enquire into the causes of the variety of Idols,First reason of many Gods, multiformity of Errour. and far spreading of superstition, these principally present themselves. First, the multiformity of error in its own nature. If truth be once casually lost, but especially if wilfully left, numberless are the by-paths of falshood. Nothing under an Infinite, can expleat, and satiate the immortall minde of man. Who having once forsaken God, infinite in power, thought to fill it self with Idols, infinite in number; leaving still a blank, and reser∣ving their souls forAct. 17. 23. unknown Gods, when they should be added there∣unto. § 3. Secondly,Second misun∣derstanding of Gods Prov∣dence. the mistaking the attribute, of divine Providence. Men did conceive the whole world, and all therein, too large a compass for one God to actuate and inform. And therefore as PlinyNat. hist. observeth, that the old Eagles determinant spatia, assign severall and certain circuits to their young ones to flye and feed in, without interfering each on others dominions; so the heathen confined topicall Gods to particular places. Their Gods (say1 King. 0. 23. the Syrians of the Israelites) are Gods of the hills; (perchance collecting the same from the Iews usuall sacrificing in high places) we will fight against them in the plain, and surely we shall be stronger then they.
This mindes me of the speech of aI doe not say his name was Coya Shawsware of whom in Stows Survey. pag. 780. Persian in England, attendant on the Embassador Anno 1626. who perceiving wealthy people in London in the time of the Plague tumultuously posting to their Countrey houses; What (saith he) have the Englishmen two Gods, the one for the City, and the other for the Countrey? A mistake in the heathen, which gave the occasion of multi∣plying of Deities: some shadow of whose superstition, still remains in Popish Saint-worship. For whereas Christ gave his Disciples power toMat. 10. 1. heale all manner of sicknesses, and all manner of diseases (not consigning the Ague to Peter, Palsie to Andrew &c.) they appoint the severall maladies to the cure of severall Saints, Tooth-ach to Apollonia, Sore-eyes to Saint Blaze &c. § 4. Thirdly,Third, impre∣ving Heroicall into Divine worship. the improving of Heroicall into Divine worship. Anci∣ently every nation had men of renown, famous in their generations, meri∣ting much of their Countrey. Whose memories after their death was honoured with monuments, statues, Anniversaries of mourning, some foosteps whereof are seen in the daughters of Israel yearly lamenting the daugh∣ter Judg. 11. 40. of Iephthah. In process of time, popular indiscretion, hightened this civill, into divine honour, translating such famous Heroes from the front of the mightiest men, into the rear of the meanest Gods: as appears by the propensity of the people of Israel to adore Moses when dead, had not GodDeut. 34. 6. prevented it. § 5. Fourthly,Fourth, assign∣ing severall sexes to their Gods. the assigning severall sexes to their Gods, as1 King. 11. 5. & 33. Ashtaroth the Goddess of the Zidonians. Hereupon the fancy of the Poets were the spokesmen to make love betwixt them, the Priests to marry, or rather the Pandars to couple; and upon the present impregnation of the female Deities, the same luxurious fancies were the midwives to deliver them, the nurses to suckle their children. These, when brought up to maturity, were also disposed in matches, thus filling the world with families of full grown, and nurseries of infant Deities. § 6. Lastly,Last, suggestion of Satan. the suggestion of Satan, who was the Master of the ceremo∣nies in all these superstitions: who as he is a generall gainer by all sins of men, so he did drive a secret trade, and particularly received unknown profit by Idolatry; seeing, as the1 Cor. 10. 20. Apostle observeth, what they saerifi∣ced, they sacrifittced to Devills. § 7. In the progress of Idolatry we may observe,Fur steps of Idolaty. first, they began to worship glorious creatures, The Sun, with all the host of heaven, mentioned by holyJob. 31. 26. Iob, an ancient writer. But all the stars in heaven were too few for them to adore. Hence they proceed to worship usefull creatures, sheep, oxen &c. stepping thence to the adoration of things hurtfull, Dragons, Serpents, Crocodiles; probably in fear, for a Ne noceant, that they should doe them no harm. Lastly, they gave divine honour to all creatures in generall, Rom. 1. 23. Changing the glory of the incorruptible God, into an Image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and fourfooted beasts, and creeping things: their children not making more babies, then their parents did Idols. But of all, the Egyp∣tian superstition, rather then it would sit out, plaid at the smallest game;
they worshipping besides Oxen, and Sheep, Onions and Leeks, in their gar∣dens: So that one may justly admire that their superstition did not starve them. For this being granted, that they would not eat what they did adore, (which is laid to the charge of the Papists, how truly I have now no leasure to examine) it is hard to conceive where they found food to satisfie their hunger, besides the objects of their Idolatry. § 8. If now in the next place we descend to enquire, what should make men so much to dote on the visible representations of their Dei∣ties, contrary to the nature of a spirit; we shall finde it proceed from thier infidelity,Infidelity the main cause of worshippng God in a visible shape. not able to apprehend God under the notion of an incor∣poreal Being. And therefore to contract the species of their devotion, they fixed it in a materiall object, lest otherwise with them their God should be out of sight, out of minde. Saint Lewes of France loved much to hear Sermons, whilest our King Henry the third his contemporary, was more for be∣ing at Mass, saying he had rather see his God then hear another speake eloquently of him. This humour of seeing a Deity (though venting it self other∣ways) possessed the hearts of people in all ages, who being unable to raise up their minds to conceive God every where, loved to look on him bodily represented in some materiall Image. § 9. Infidelity thus premised as the main cause, two other occasions,Two occasions thereof. no ways given by God, but ignorantly taken by men, much advanced such visible representations: First, Gods frequent appearing to the Pa∣triarchs in a bodily shape. Which being but then assumed, voluntary, occasionall, and for the present purpose, was misinterpreted by men for naturall, necessary, constant, and an essentiall part of his Being: and thence they concluded him a corporeall substance. § 10. Secondly,Second occasi∣on of making images. Image-making was much advantaged by some ex∣pressions in Scripture, that God used after the manner of men, allaying the purity of his nature, with humane Phrases, so to work himself the bet∣ter down to our capacities. Should God speake of himself as he is, his expressions would be as incomprehensible as his Essence. Hereupon, men, in stead of thinking higher of Gods Goodness, thought lower of his Greatness, and not able to conceive his Providence by his Eye, cleare de∣monstration of his Power by his Arme, clearer by his Hand, clearest by his Finger, attention by his Eares, gracious presence by his Face &c. fell first in their brains to fancy, and then with their hands to form him a bodi∣ly Image, or Idol. Idols, which though (as the PsalmistPsal. 105. 5. observeth) they have mouths and speake not, yet are termed by the Prophet,Habak. 2. 18. teachers of lies, misinforming men with most false apprehensions. § 11. But their impieties stopped not here, but proceeded from a corporall, to a vicious assimilation,A second assi∣mlation in badness. and soon after inferred their Gods conformity to man, as well in lewdness, as in limbes, badness, as bodi∣ly proportion. This they falsely collected from the impunity of many profane persons, interpreting Gods silence, consent; as approving,
because not presently punishing their wicked practises. These things ast thou done, and I keptPsal. 50. 21. silence, and thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy self. Thus because many Theeves have thrived by their felonious cour∣ses, Drunkards in their distempers have strangely escaped dangers, and Harlots have grown wealthy by their mercenary embraces; the hea∣thens have fancied Mercury the God and Patron of theft, Bacchus of drun∣kenness, Venus and (as some will have it) Flora of whoredom, con∣ceiving such Gods guilty themselves of the same sins, and friends, fa∣vourers, yea protectors thereof in others. § 12. But to return to their worshipping of Idols. True it is,Difference be∣twixt the lear∣ned and simple heathens Ido∣latry. the most knowing and rationall amongst the heathens, adored not the very materiall Image, but in, under, through, and beyond the same worship∣ped the true God of heaven and earth. And in all ages some were found who flouted at such superstitions: amongst these the Poet brings in an Idol thus speaking. Olim truncus eram ficulnus, inutile lignum, Cum faber incertus scamnum facerétne, Deúmve; Maluit esse Deum. Time out of minde a fig-tree stock I grew, An useless block, before the workman knew, Benches, or Gods to make me, (smal the ods) Resolv'd at last of me to make his Gods. Semblable whereunto is the story of a Countrey-man in Spain, who coming to an Image enshrined, the extraction and first making whereof he could well remember, and not finding from the same that respectfull usage which he expected, (haply because he had not feed the Friers to their contentment, who accordingly do sell such frowns and smiles) You need not (quoth he) be so proud, for I have known you from a Plum∣tree. But although the wiser sort both of Pagans and Papists worship∣ped God under the Image, so onely faulty in symbolicall Idolatry, and breach of the second Commandement, serving the true Deity in a false and forbidden manner, yet the ignorant people amongst them both, were directly guilty of dull downright Idolatry, breaking both first and second Commandement, adoring a false God with a false service. And as Iacob, though bound by his own vow to goe on toGen. 28. 22. Bethel, yet either out of faintness or forgetfulness, set up his staffe short thereof at the City ofGen. 33. 19. Shechem, where he bought a dwelling; so the devotion of igno∣rant people, though projecting perchance a longer journey to themselves to worship God in the Image, tired in their travell, and taking up a nearer lodging, terminated their worship in that visible object presented unto them. Thus Gods Spirit, though allowing liberty to the Potter of the same clay to make one vessell to honour and another to dishonour, sharply reproveth theIsa. 44. 16, 16. Carpenter, who makes a fire for his warming, and a God for his worshipping of the self same wood. § 13. But grant Idols originally frequent amongst the Heathen,How heathen Idols were first brought in a∣mongst the Iews. a Colony of them began to be planted amongst the Israelites, much by their mixture with the men, more by their matches with the women of those nations of Canaan; notwithstanding God flat prohibition to
the contrary: HisDeut. 7. 3, 4. daughter shalt thou not take unto thy son, for they will turn away thy son from following me, that they may serve other Gods. Some will say, it was more probable the Iewish husband should turn his heathen wife to true Religion. For suppose her no fool (such unconvertible in aProv. 27. 22. Mortar) but one of a tolerable capacity, bearing unfeigned affection to her hus∣band (obliged thereunto in gratitude for his marrying her, he might de∣stroy) he having the double advantage of Authority and Verity on his side, it seems more likely that he should make impression on he beliefe, then receive infection from her. But here we must know, that he hus∣band by breaking Gods command in his unlawfull match, forfeited the vigour and vertue of his arguments, intreaties, perswasions, and threat∣nings to work upon her. And as his sword justly wanted the edge of power, so his shield deservedly lost all strength of protection, being left liable and exposed to his wives solicitation, without any fence against her infection. Yea, grant at first his constancy in the truth as hard as stone, yet in continuance of time it might be hollowed with that, which Solomon calleth a continuallPro. 19. 13. dropping; and restless importunity advantaged with bosome-opportunity, may atchieve a seeming impossibility. § 14. So much for the occasion of Polytheisme,How it is law∣full to describe heathen Idols. the originall of hea∣then Idols, and naturalizing such strange Gods amongst the Israelites. Come we now to the particular description of their Idols. Conceive we this no breach of GodsExod. 2. 13. command, Make no mention of the name of other Gods, neither let them be heard out of thy mouth, understanding it, by way of praying to them, praising of them, pleading for them, swearing by them, but otherwise it is lawfull to mention them occasionally by way of discourse; yea commendable to name them as detesting their impie∣ty, deploring mens ignorance, desiring mens information, the right knowledge of many Scripture-passages, depending on some insight into such superstitions. Where, before we begin, be it observed, that though very many the Idols mentioned in Scripture, yet our mistake may make them more then they were; if erroneously conceiving Quot nomina, tot numina, that every severall Idols name we meet with, was a different and distinct Deity by them adored. O no! As our one and onely God is known to us by severall names, Iah, Iehovah, El, Elohim, Adonai &c. so in apish imitation thereof, some one heathen God took a principall pride, to have severall names imposd upon him, and pleased himself much in , in multitude of titles. § 15. In setting forth these heathen Gods,Alphabeticall method in ranking them. it matters not what me∣thod we use, and perchance none at all is most naturall for our subject. Molten Images areIsa. 41. 29. confusion, saith the Prophet; and therefore, a rude heap fitter, hen an orderly pile, for their description. However, not for their honour but one ease, we will rank such Idols as we finde in Scripture worshipped by Iews, or Judaizing people, Alphabetically; as fol∣loweth.
Adramelech. § 16. That is, a Magnificent King. Surely, seeing such men as made, named also these Idols, they had been highly to balme, if not fitting them with illustrious titles. This was not adored by the Iews, but such Samaritans as from Sephervaim, came to people the Countrey whence the ten Tribes were carried captive. His image may probably be conceived, a Crowned King sitting on a Throne, and the manner of his worship is expressed in Holy2 Kin. 17. 31. writ, that they burnt their children in fire unto him. Not that they burnt them to ashes, as they did to Moloch, (whose service was Hell, whilest this of Adramelech was Purgatory) but, by way of lustra∣tion, expiation, consecration, and Mock-baptisme by fire, their Chemerim, or Priests led the unwilling children, and passed them through the fire on both sides, where their painfull scorching was rewarded, with the peo∣ples acclamation, and their parents opinion of merit therein. Anamalech. § 17. As someGer Voss. de Orig. Idolat. lib. 2. cap. 5. deduce it from the Arabian word  Ani, Rich, in effect a rich King, or (if you will) Prince Mammon. If so, he hath ma∣ny adorers this day, byCol. 3. 5. covetousness which is Idolatry. Others deriving it from an Hebrew root  an answering God, which shows him more civill, friendly, and familiar then others of his rank, taking more state upon them in their sullen silene No doubt, the Devils answers here were no plainer, then his riddling Oracles elsewhere, which like change∣able Taffata (wherein the woofe and warpe are of different colours) seems of severall hues, as the looker on takes his station: so his doubling an∣swers appeared such to every ones apprehension, as they stood affected in their desires. Anamalech had the same superstitious worship2 King. 17. 31. with the former, and was worshipped by the Sephervaite Samaritans. Apis, or Serapis. § 18. Was a true living black bull, with a white list, or streak along the back, a white mark in fashion of an half Moon on his right shoul∣der; onely two hairs growing on his tail (why just so many, and no moe, the Devill knows with a fair square blaze in his forehead, and a great bunch called Cantharus under his tongue. What art their Priests did use, to keep up the breed, and preserve succession of cattell with such , or privy marks, I list not to enquire. It was adored by the Egyptians, (though not mentioned by name in Scripture) and hence it was, that they fed by themselves, counting it anGen. 43. 32. abomination to eate with the Hebrews. For, oh! how would their hunger have been tur∣ned into fury, if tasting of an Israelitish dish, they should chance to meet therein with parcell of that God whom they worshipped? This also was the cause, why Moses requested three days journy into the wilder∣ness to sacrifice, refusing to doe it in the land of Egypt, alledging fear to be stoned, if before their eyes they should offer the abominationExod. 8. 26. of the Egyptians, namely, if he should offer a bull or cow, how mad would the other
have been, at such an indignity, and affront to their Deity. § 19. Beides this naturall and living Bull, kept in one place, they also worshipped  a golden, or gilded oxe, the Image or portrai∣ture of the former. Some conceive this Apis to have been the symbol, and emblem of Ioseph the Patriarch, so called from  Ab, a father, seeing he is said to be made by GodGen. 45. 8. a Father to Pharaoh, that is, preserver of him and his Countrey. And therefore the Egyptians in after ages, gratified his memory with statues of an Oxe, a creature so usefull in plowing, sowing, bringing home, and treading out of corn, to perpetuate that gift of grain he had conferred upon them. They strengthen their conjecture, be∣cause Serapis (whichG. Voss. de Idol. li. 1. c. 29. one will have to be nothing else but Apis with ad∣dition of  Sar, that is, a Prince, whence perchance our English Sir) was pictured withRuffinus Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. ca. 22 & Suidas in . a bushell over his head, and Ioseph (we know) was corn-meater generall in Egypt. Though others on good ground conceive, Oxe-worship in Egypt of far greater antiquity. § 20. However, henceExod. 32. 4. Aaron, and hence afterwards Ieroboam (who flying from Solomon, lived some years with Shishak King of1 Kin. 11. 40. Egypt) had the pattern of their Calves, which they made for the children of Israel to worship. If any object, the Egyptians Idols were Bulls, or Oxen, the Israelites but Calves; the difference is not considerable. For (besides the objectour never lookt into the mouths of the latter to know their age) gradus non variat speciem, a less character is not another letter. Yea Herodotus calls Apis himself  a Calfe, and Vitulus is of as large acception among the Latines. Such an old calfe theVirgl.log. 3. Poet describes, —Ego hanc vitulam (ne fortè recuses, Bis venit ad mulctram, binos alit ubere foetus) Depno— My Calfe I lay (left you mislike't, both tides She comes to th'pale, and suckles twain besides.) But to put all out of doubt, what in Exodus is termed a Calfe, the Psal. 106. 20. Psalmist calleth an Oxe. Some will have Aaron to have branded on his Calfe the privy tokens of Apis, because it is said, after he had made it a molten calfe that heExod. 32. 4. fashioned it with a graving toole, this is, say some, imprinted it with the foresaid characters in the face, back, and shoulder thereof; but this we leave as uncertain. Ashima. § 21. All that we know of him, is, that he was the God of the men of Hamath2 King. 17. 30., which were brought into Samaria. The Rabbins say, he was presented as an Hee-goate. Like enough, Satan much delighted in that shape, where his staring, frizeled, shaggy hair was fit to affright folk. Indeed, both Devils and Goats are said to goe out in a stinke, and so fare they well. Ashtoreth, in the Septuagint Astarte. § 22. Her Hebrew name signifieth flocks, either because worshipped in the form of a Sheep, as the Iews will have it, or because (as Scaliger) whole flocks were sacrificed to her. What if because supposed protector and preserver of flocks in those eastern Countreys, as in the west,
—Pan curat oves, oviúmque magistros. Pan he doth keep, both Shepheard and Sheep. Ashtaroth, saith the Scripture, was the Goddess of the Sidonians1 Kin. 11. 13.. Tully saith the same,De na. Deo.  lib. 3. Venus Syria Tyróque concepta quae Astarte vocatur. But, though the Sidonians did originally invent, they did not totally ingross her to themselves, the Philistines having a share in her service, who hung up Sauls Armor in the1 Sam. 31. 10. House of Ashtaroth, as acknowledging their victory atchieved by her assistance. In the vacancyJudg. 2. 13. & 10. 6. of the Judges, the worship∣ping of Ashtaroth was first brought into Israel; which afterwards, by the advise of1 Sam. 7. 3, 4. Samuel, was solemnly banished out of the land, untilll Solomon in his old age, befooled by his wives,1 King. 11. 5. 33. introduced it again. Her image was the statute of a woman, having on her own head the HeadM. Selden de Diis Syris ex Philone Byblio. of a Bull, where the hornes erected resembled the Crescent Moon, and his curled hair (falling down on her forehead) betokened (forsooth) the fiery beams therof. This Goddess was very tender of her self, and carefull not to catch cold; for, besides the Grove over her image, she had also Curtains over her Grove,2 King. 23. 7. which the women weaved for that purpose, till Iosiah took order to destroy them. Baal. § 23. That is, a Lord, being the name generall for most Idols. Here∣at haply the Apostle1 Cor. 8. 5. reflected, when acknowledging (according to common language) there be Gods many, and Lords many. But, we take this wherof we treat, to be Chiefe of the Baals, the most ancient, and emi∣nent of his name. A great Lord no doubt, who could qualifie four1 King. 18. 19. hun∣dred and fifty Prophets for his Chaplains. He was served with1 Kin. 19. 18. bowing of the knee, and his Priests, in a religious frenzie,1 Kin. 18. 28. used to cut themselves with knives and lancers, till the bloud gushed out upon them. Oh how doe some go down hill with difficulty, and take pains to the place of eternal Pain? In the interim betwixt theJudg. 2. 13. Judges, Baalisme was first brought into Israel, which in the days of Samuel was1 Sam. 7 4. publickly abandoned by the people. Af∣terwards the worship of Baal ebbed and flowed variously, as followeth: In Israel. 11 Kin. 16. 31. Iezebel daughter to Eth-baal King of the Zidonians wife to Ahab, brought in Baal (as part of her portion) into Samaria. 2 Eliah gave his worship a mortall wound, when killing four hundred and fifty of his Prophets at mount Carmel. 3. Iezebel before Ahabs death, recruited the number of Baals Prophets, to about1 King. 22. 6. four hundred, and set up his service again. 4 Ichoram her son (best of all the bad Kings) put away the image2 King. 3. 2. of Baal, which Ahab had made. 5 Iehu so totally and finally routed Baal, and his Priests, that they never after rallied up their forces in Israeal. In Iudah. 1 Athaliath Iezebels daughter, publickly plan∣ted the service of Baal in Ierusalem, and be∣stowed 2 Chi. 24. 7. on him, all the dedicate things of the House of the Lord. 2 Iehoiada rooted it out, when he slew Mattan 2 Kin. 11. 18. Baals Priest, before the Alter. 3 Ahaz set up bank-rupt Baal, with a new stock, and made molten2 Chr. 28. 2. images for his service. 4 Hezekiah is presumed to have destroyed Baal, amongst the rest of the images, which he brake in pieces. 5 Manasseh reared up2 King. 21. 3. Altars for Baal, and made a grove for him in imitation of Ahab. 6 Iosiah made an2 King. 23. 5. utter abolition of Baal out of the land. Then was fully acomplished, what God by hisHosea 2. 17. Prophet had foretold,
I will take away the names of Baalim out of her mouth, and they shall no more be re∣membred by their name. § 24. Some will aske, that seeing Baal is made a Man by Eliah, He is a God 1 King. 18. 27. pursuing his enemies (which is no womans work) how comes Saint Paul to make him female Rom. 11. 4. , where the feminine article speaks him, or her rather, of the weaker sex? It is answered,  the Image, or something equivalent, is understood. If this satisfie not, even, Let, Baal plead for himself, and make his own vindi∣cation for the monstrosity of an Hermaphrodite. Baal-Berith, and Baal-meon. § 25. I take these to be the same with Baal, onely distinguished by the place wherein they were worshipped. Thus the Lady of Lauretta Hall, and Walsingham, are not severall persons, but the same adored in sundry Shrines. Baal-Berith (perchance because first worshipped in Berithus a City in Phoenicia) had a Temple in, or near Shechem, whence Abimelech took seventy pieces of silver to raise hisJudg. 9. 4. Army. Baal-meon was placed in the Tribe of Reuben. Baal-peor. § 26. Taking his name from  to lay open, Deus apertionis, an Idol which shewed all that Adam covered with fig-leaves. TheHieron. lib. 2. in Hose. ca. 9 & lib. 1. contra Iovinianum Isidorus de Ori∣gin. lib. 8. c. 11. Fathers make him to be the beastly God Priapus. No wonder then if grave Cato went off from the stage, at the Plays presented to the honour of the God Bacchus, accounting such scurrility inconsistent with his severity, seeing none could contentedly behold the image of Baal-peor (the Idol of Moab and Midian) but first must sacrifice all his modesty unto it. And we may be well assured, where the Idol was naked, the Idolaters were not covered, so that both sexes assumed much licentiousness in their feasts, and merry meetings, as appears by the impudencyNumb. 25. 6. of Cozbi and Zimri. § 27. One thing I much admire at, in the worship of Baal-peor, that such as adored him (as the Psalmist observeth) did eat the sacrificesPsal. 106. 28. of the dead. Me thinkes, each morsell they put into their mouths, should mar their mirth, and the very mention of the Dead, make them all amort. Their warm and wanton embraces of living bodies, ill agreed with their offerings Diis manibius, to gashly Ghosts. This inclines me to that learnedVollu de Idolat. mans opinion that by sacrifices to the dead are intended no Inferiae, or obsequies to the departed, but onely meer offerings to the Idol, a liveless, dull, dead, and inanimate thing; in opposition whereunto, God so Above thirty times. See the Concordance. often in Scripture is styled the living Lord. Bel. § 28. The same (say some) with Baal, onely he was a Phenician, this aIsa. 46. 1. Babylonish Deity. This Bel was the grand confounder of so many barnes, flocks, and vineyards, spending daily twelveHist. Bel. v. 3. measures of fine flowre, forty sheep, and six great pots of wine. Surely he deserved to forfeit his large fare, by the Apostles2 Thes. 3. 10. rule, He that will not work, let him not
eat, finding no activity in this Idol, proportionable to his voracious ap∣petite. Indeed his Priests, and their famiy are said to make riddance of all those victuals; and although the whole story may be challenged to be Apocrypha, yet so much thereof as relateth to Bels devouring belly (so be∣leeved by a vulgar errour) seems framed in some analogy to Canonicall truth; witness the threatning of God in theIer. 51. 44. Prophet. And I will punish Bel in Bablyon, and I will bring forth out of his mouth, that which he hath swallowed up. Baal-Zebub. § 29. That is, the Lord of flies; but, whether so called, from bringing or banishing of flies; from causing, or chasing them away, is not de∣cided. Indeed the Iews account it one of their constant miracles in their Temple,Mat. 24. 28. that whereas naturally (as where the carcase is, thither will the Eagles resort: so) flies swarme where sacrifices are slain, yet not any of such troublesome insects infected their Altar, whilest plenty thereof about the sacrifices of Baal-zebub. Of this Idol formerly in§ 29. Dan, here I onely enter my dissent from their opinion, who conceive Baal-zebub a nick∣name given in derision to the God of Ekron. Surely sick men speake seriously, and Ahaziah his fall had not so far crazed his intellectuals (cal∣ling him Baal-zebub in his Commission to his messengers) as to send a mock by their mouth to that God from whom he begged a boon,2 King. 1. 2. and hoped to have a favorable answer. At which time those messengers were remanded by Elijah, and soon after the two Captains with their fifties sent to attach him burnt with fire from heaven, whilest the third saved himself with2 King. 1. 13. submissive language; a Petition working more then a Mandamus on the spirit of the Prophet. Bel-zebub, or God of flies, passeth in the Testament for theMat. 12. 24. Prince of Devils. Indeed, as flies have their felicity in inflaming of raw sores: so the Devill delights in height∣ning each pimple into a scab; scab, into a boyle, boyle, into an ulcer; ulcer, into a fistula; endevouring to improve our smallest sins by his temptations in∣to unpardonableness, if Gods mercy prevent not his malice. Chemosh. § 30. Notoriously known to be the abomination of1 King. 11. 33 & 2 Kin. 23. 13. & Ir. 48. 13. Moab; yet so that this Idol was held in Coparcenary betwixt them, and the Ammonites; witness Iephthah his question to the King of Ammon, demanding restitu∣tion of the land of Gilead from the Israelites,Iudg. 11. 24. Wilt not thou possess that which Chemosh thy God giveth thee to possess? Thus as Moab and Ammon once parted the incestuous extraction from the sameGen. 19. 37, 38 Grandfather: so now they met again at the Idolatrous adoration of the same God. We finde nothing in Scripture of the fashion, or worship of Chemosh, onely we read in In . Benjamin an ancient learned Iew, that at Gebal in a Temple was found the Idol of the children of Ammon (certainly either Chemosh, or Moloch) being an image of stone gilded over, sitting on a throne, betwixt two female images also sitting, having an Altar before him whereon incense was offered, as we in our draught have designed it accordingly.
Dagon. § 31. Neither good flesh nor fish, but a mixture of both, bearing fish in his name, and flesh in his head, and1 Sam. 5. 4. hands. Indeed the heathens observe the Syrians generally to have adored fish: Piscen Syri venerantu,De Natura Dorum. 3. saith Tully. Yet dare I not impute Gods not apointing any fish to be sacrificed unto him, to his detestation thereof on the foresaid account; but rather, either because being ferae naturae they could not be constantly gotten for the continuall sacrifice; or because it was hard to bring fish alive to Ierusa∣lem many miles by land, it being essentiall to the sacrifice to be presented quick at the Altar when offered thereupon. But of Dagon formerly in § 32. Dan. The Ephod▪ § 32. This by the primitive institution thereof, is sufficiently known for a PriestsExo. 28. 6. &c. vestment. Indeed, once we finde David, when dancing be∣fore the Arke, wearing2 Sam. 6. 14. an Ephod, but in what capacity let others dispute: surely not with any crilegious invading of the Priest-like office. Per∣chance, (as formerly our English Kings at their Coronation wore a Dalma∣tica with sleeves, a Sacerdotall garment: so) David, as custos utriusque tabu∣lae, and being by his place to provide that the Priests should perform their office, habited himself (especially on that occasion) in some gene∣rall conformity to their function. But leaving this to others, as God by Arons chiefe1 Sam. 13. 7. Ephod informed such as inquired of him, so Satan (Gods Ape in his Temples, Priests, Prophets, Altars, Sacrifices, Oracles, and Ephods) counterfeited in his mock-Ephods, to resolve such as asked counsell there∣at. Thus the Danites before their expedition against Laish, consulted the Judg. 18. 5. 14 Ephod which Micah had in his house, concerning their success. Gideon also made an Ephod of the spoiles of the Midianites, which we charitably beleeve might be (when first made) a Virgin (as innocently intended by him, onely for a civill memoriall) but in fine proved an Harlot, when all Israel went aJudg. 8. 27. whoring after it. So that such an Ephold may pass under the no∣tion of a Iewish Idol. Milcom. § 33. That is, their King. If any object, that the points therein answer not exactly to that sense; know their Gods were too great to be ranked under Grammar Rules: (Iupiter we know irregularly declined both in Latine and Greek) and some grammaticall Anomaly is conceived to con∣duce the more to their magnificence. It was the God of the1 King. 11. 33. & 2 Kin. 23. 13. Ammonites, and was the same with Moloch, as may appear, because whatAmos 5. 26. Amos cal∣leth , Saint LukeAct. 7. 43. rendereth Moloch▪ according to the judicious ob∣servation of the most learnedS Hieroe li. 2. in Amos. Father, concerning Apostles, and Apostolicall me, citing places out of the old Testament, Illos non verba considerare, sed sen∣sum, nec eadem sermonum calcae vestigia, dummodo à sententis non recedant. Moloch. § 34. A monstrous Idol. Nothing came amiss to him, having Stow∣age
enough to receive whatever was offered unto him. It was an hollow image of brass, having seven repositories therein; one for Meal, a second for Turtles, a third for a Sheep, a fourth for a Ram, the fifth for a Calfe, (like to which was the head thereof) the sixth for an Oxe, thePaulus Fgi∣us in Chaldaeam paraphrasi Le∣viici. seventh for a Child, which it first embraced in its armes, and then (Hags hugs kill with kindness) seared to death, having fire made under the conca∣vity thereof. This murder of children was acted near Ierusalem, in a place remarkable for its double name, 1 The valley of the sons of2 Chr. 28. 3. Hinnom. So called from the skreeking of children ( Nahem is to roar out) when sacrificed there. 22 King. 23. 10. Tophet. From  Toph aSee suprà, in the Descripti∣on of Ierusalem pag. 349. § 6. drum, loud musick being used to inter∣cept the childrens crying from their parents hearing it. But, had not such parents ears as well is their hearts, as on their heads, to sympathize with the suffering of their own flesh and bloud? And see∣ing these Tragedies were acted in their presence, why had not such pa∣rents, (as musick to keep the sound from their eares, so) maskes to hide the same from their sight? But, what shall we say? They may be ranked amongst those of whom the Apostle speaks, Whom2 Cor.44. the God of this world hath blinded. Superstition depriving men both of Grace and Nature to∣gether. Nergal. § 35. He was adored by the2 Kin. 17. 30. Cuthites, by whom we understand such who (before their transplanting into Samaria) dwelled at or nigh Cuth, a river in Persia. His name may be deduced from Properly a Candle in He∣brew. Ner, light or fire, and gal, rolled or wreathed: the raies of the one, and flakes of the other appearing waved or curled to the beholder. Hence we conceive this Nergal of the Cuthites to be a constant fire which they adored as the sym∣bole of the Sun, notoriously known to be the grand Deity of the Persians. As indeed fire is the the terrestriall Sun, Whence the Stars of our torches and tapers borrow their light. Yea, such the purity, clarity, and activity thereof, that though it be not to be called a God, God is pleased to call himself aHeb. 12. 29. consuming fire. Nisroch. § 36. A God of the Assyrians, in whose Temple Sennacherib was a worshipping, when2 King. 19. 37. slain therein by Adramelech, and Sharezer his sons. This was he who so lately boasted, Where is the King of Hamath, of Arphad, of Sepharvaim,Ibid. ver. 13. of Henah and Ivah? Let now one more be added to that Ca∣talogue, And where is Sennacherib the proud King of Assyria? Many were gainers by his death; God got the honour of the action, Isaiah the per∣formance of his prophecy, Hezekiah riddance from his worst enemy, Esarhaddon his son and successour got the kingdome of Assyria, and his two sons who slew him,Ibid. ver. 37. got exile into the land of Armenia, too fair a reward for so foul a Patricide. Now though we finde not this Nisroch
by name to be worshipped by the Iews, yet because theEzk. 23. 5. Prophets com∣plaint is generall, that they doted on the Assyrians their neighbours, we may conclude them guilty of spirituall whoredome with Nisroch as a princi∣pall Idol of that Countrey. Nibhaz. § 37. This and Tarkah were the Idols of the2 Kin. 17. 21. Avites, of whom no∣thing save their names extant in Scripture, (though the Rabbies fancy the one like a Dog, the other an Asse) and it is a good hearing that we hear no more of them. Some heathen accounted those men happiest that were never born, and those next that died the soonest: so we esteem those Idols least bad which never appeared, and next them such as are most obscure, the manner of whose mischievous worship have left the least impressions to posterity. Queen of Heaven. § 38. God himself most justly is styled The King of heaven byDan. 4. 37. Nebuc∣chadnezza; but by Queen of heaven in theJer. 7. 18. & 44 . Prophet, (superstitiously wor∣shipped by the Iews) we understand the Moon made to rule the night. Let her be deposed from her Regency, if willingly accepting of this usur∣ped title, and their unlawfull offerings: but seeing mans importunity forced them upon her against consent, the Moon is as free from idolatry, as the Virgin Mary from superstition, on whom Regina Coeli is obtruded by the Roman Missals. The Cakes offered unto her must needs be most compleate, seeing each one in the family had a finger in the making thereof. TheIbidm. Children gather the wood, and the Fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead the dough to make cakes for the Queen of heaven. Their servants be∣ing conceived too mean to be used in so high an employment. Remphan, or Rephan. § 39. Onely mentioned by Saint Steven in his purgation of himself, and that with such difference from the text in the old Testament, that learned men have much adoe to reconcile it. AMO 5. 26. But yee have born the Tabernacle of your Moloch, and Chiun, your Images, the Stars of your God which yee made to your selves. ACTS 7. 43.Yea, yee took up the Tabernacle of Moloch, and the Star of your God Remphan, figures which yee made, to worship them. The main difficulty is this: how comes Chiun in the Hebrew to be ren∣dered Remphan in the Greek? not the same letter (save the last) being found in the one as in the other. The best solution we meet with is as followeth: 1 By Chium (as Aben-ezra will have it) the Planet Saturn is meant. Plautus in his Penulus calls the same Cun, as a learnedSam. Ptit. Miscel. i. 2. c. 2. Critick hath observed, and the Egyptian Anubis called Cyon in Greek,Plutar. in  ide Plu∣tarch conceives to be the same with Saturne. 2 Rephan in the Coptick language, a tongue extant at this day (partly
consisting of Greek, and partly of old Egyptian) is used for Saturn, as anKircher. Prod. pag. 147. c. 5. Author well skilled in that tongue hath informed us. 3. The Septuagint we know was written in the land of Egypt, at the instance of Polemaeus Philadelphus, where the Translatours using Rephan the noted name for Saturn in stead of Chiun, altered the word and retained the sense, a liberty lawfully assumed by the most faithfull interpreters. 4. Probably Saint Steven spake to the Iews in their own language, but Saint Lke writing in Greek, alledgeth his words according to the Septuagint translation. This I conceive to be most satisfactory amongst multiplicity of answers by severall Authors applyed to the place. Rimmon. § 40. An Idol of Syria whose principall Temple was in2 King. 5. 18. Damascus. The name signifieth a Pomegranate,Ni. . as one will have it; who there∣upon concludes it to be Venus, because Apples were dedicated unto her, and her image commonly made with such fruit, as a frolick, in hr hand. More probable it is, that this God got his name from  Rum, that is, high, or exalted, used so frequently in Scripture of the true God, and of them abused to their Idol. Sccoth-Benoth. § 41. This was made by the2 Kin. 17. 30. men of Babylon. The Rabbines (ac∣cording to their assumed liberty, to fancy any thing without reason ren∣dered thereof) conceive this Idol, A Hen and her Chickens. We stick to the originall notation of the word, The tents of the daughters, conceiving there∣by meant some Temple-like Tents, by them made and erected in the honour of Mylitta or Venus UraniaHerode. li. 1. & Strabe. li. 16., known for an eminent Deity in Babylon: unto which tents their daughters were sent, there to doe their devotions. How honest they went in we know not, it is suspicious they came out none of the chastest, the bargain of their uncleanness being driven, though not performed in that place. ThatSuidas .  Binos, Venos Venus, is deduced from Benoth in Succoth-Benoth, is learnedly observed for probable bySyntag. 2. 6. 7. pag. 313. Mr. Selden in his excellent book de Diis Syris. From whom I have, with thea King. 6. 5. children of the Prophets, not onely borrowed an Axe, but most of the tools and timber, wherewith the structure of this our Iewish Pantheon is erected. Teraphim. § 42. A word plurall in the sound and termination (like Penates in the Latine) yet single in the sense thereof. Three sorts of Teraphims ap∣pear in Scripture, in the originall; 1 Common, onely an ordinary carved image, such as1 Sam, 19. 13. Micol is said to have laid in her bed, making a mock-David, or counterfeiting her sick husband therewith. 2 Religious, in which sense the Prophet threatneth, that Israel
shouldHose. 3. 4. remain many days without King, Prince, Sacrifice, Image, Ephod and Teraph, that is, a Prophet to instruct them in future oc∣currence. 3 Superstitious; such asJudg. 17. 5. & 18. 17. Micah made, which foretold the Dantes of their future good success. This we conceive some Image acted and informed by the Devill, ac∣cording to his serpentine knowledge shrewdly guessing at all contin∣gences. Thamuz. § 43. That is, Adonis, as Saint Hierom conceives, whom most Latines doe follow. Adonis is known by all for a Phenicia Deity, so called from , Adone, A Lord in Hebrew. And the Poets are almost hoarse with singin the sad Elgies, how Venus bemoaned Adonis killed by a Boar. In mythologie this is true, when wanon women bemoan their beautifull youth, slaughtered with old age, leaving the print and mark of his teeth and tuskes in the wrinkles furrowed in their faces. But seeing Adonis is generally conceived to be the Sun, Venus her mourning at his death, rather represents the generall griefe of northern men, when the Sun in Iune (called Thamz by the Iews and their neighbours) takes his leave of them in the tropick of Cancer, and retreateth southward, making shorter days by dgres. This Phenician superstition infected the Iews;zek. 8. 14. Then he brought me to the doo of the gate of the Lords house, which was towards the north, and behold there sat women weeping for Tammuz: And why the gate towards the north? Because the body of the Sun never appearing in that quarter of the heaven, it was the fittest place to bemoan the absence thereof. Had not those womens tears been better expended on the death of Iosiah, ac∣cording to that2 Chr. 35. 25. ordinance in Israel? But we may be well assured, such eyes as wept for Tammuz, were dry for Iosiah. Conclusion. § 44. Many other obscure Deities were adored by the Iews, which we purposely omit. For never was Rebecca moreGen. 27. 46. weary of conversing with the daughters of Heth, then we of describing these heathen Gods. Enough therefore of Cor. 8. 4. nothing, for so all Idols are termed by the Apostle. The rather because that as the Psalmist observeth,Psal. 104. 20. In the night all the beasts of the forest creep forth, the Sun ariseth, they gather themselves together, and lay them∣selves down in their dens: so when the Sun of the Gospell displayed his light, all these herds of heathen Gods hasted to their homes, their lurking in eternall obscurity. Then was theIsa. 2. 20. Prophets prediction accomplished, that all Idols should be cast to the Moles and to the Bats. Excellent compa∣ny, it is pity to part them: let the blind converse with the blind, it being true of these that they have eyes and see not. § 45. Yet to give the Iews their due, in the days of our Saviour they were so free from Idolatry, that the very name thereof, or the word Idol, is not to be found in the four Evangelists. For having smarted seven∣ty
years in Babylon, and sensible that their Idolatry principally caused their captivity, after their return that sin was deested by them, and shunning open profaneness, they reeled into spirituall pride, hypocrisie, superstitious observing the Sabbath, equalling Traditions with Scripture &c. sins chiefly reproved in the Sermons of our Saviour. § 46. As for Christians, their principles presrv them from formall worshipping of Idols, though too often guilty of what may be termed, tralatitious Idolatry, when any thing (good and lawfull in its own nature) is loved, or honoured above, or even with God himself. Thus money may and must be loved and used, as the Centurion did hisMat. 8. 9. servant, Doe this, and he doth it, fetch me meat from the shambles, and money fetcheth it, bring me clothes from the shop, and money bringeth them: But, when the man shall turn master, and money command him, Commit such a sin for my sake, and he obeyeth, such baeColos. 3. 5 Covetousness is by the Apostle termed Idolatry. § 47. Indeed Idolatry is a subtill sin; and seeing by nature we retain in our hearts the principles of all old Errors, it is to be feared that this sin finding its usuall way obstructed, will watch its own advantage, to vent it self by some other conveyances: Yea as Pride may grow out of humility; so Idolatry may sprout out of the detestation thereof; when men (like Iehu rooting out Baal▪ and erecting his own opinion ofKin. 10. 16. merit therein) shall detest, damn, and destroy all images, and wor∣ship their own imaginations. Finish Libri quarti.
To the Right Honourable JOHN LORD BVRGHLEY Son to the Right Honourable JOHN EARL OF EXETER. MY LORD, IT is confidently reported of the Stork, (plenty of which build in the Low-Countreys, being Inmates in most chim∣neys) that she usually throeth down one of her young ones out of the nest, as a Rent to the Land-lord of the house, for permitting thre her quiet and unmolested habitation. Now as our Saviour sends us to such Masters, [Behold the fowles of theMat. 6. 2. aire &c.] of them all to learn the generall lesson of a contented dependence on divine providence, (and particularly Innocence from theMat. 10. 16. Doves) so may this practise of the Stork instruct us to be gratefull to such as have bestowed courtesies upon us.
Now the first light which I saw in this world was in a BeneficeOldwinle (old shop Sax∣on) Saint Pe∣ters in North∣hampton-shire conferred on my Father by your most honourable great Grand-father, and therefore I stand obliged in all thankfulness to your family. Yea this my right hand which grasped the first free aire in a Manor to which your Lordship is Heir apparent, hath since often been catching at a Pen, to write something in expression of my thankfulness, and now at last dedicates this Book to your Infant honour. Thus as my Obligation bears date from my Birth, my thankfulness makes speed to tender it self to your Cradle. I know it will be objected, that your Lordship is infraannu∣ated to be the Patron of a Book in the strist acception thereof: For a Patron properly is appealed to as Judge of the Me∣rits of a Treatise. Yea Authors anciently-craved their Patrons consent (as dutifull children their Parents leave) whether that he thought it fit their work should be matched to the Publick view, or rather remain in the single estate of privacy. This censure some will cavill at me that your tender Age is unable to pass, and therefore incapable of being a Patron. In answer hereunto, first I am assured, none of those who please to call themselves Roman Catholicks, will lay this to my charge. If they doe, I return them with the story confessed by their Champian, of a child not fully five years old consecrated Archbishop ofBonius An. Er. ann. 925. Rhemes, by Pope John the tenth, sinc which time some children of small age, (but great birth) have been made Cardinalls, though long since their Church of Rome had been off the hooks, had it had no stronger Hinges. But generally I plead in my own defence, that Custome
Custome hath much mitigated the rigor of the word Patron, which is not currant in common discourse, at so high a rate whereat first it was coined, insomuch that a Negative voce is denied to many Patrons now adays, and they generally used not for Censurers, but Countenancers of books dedicated unto them, in which notion I humbly request your Lordships patronage of our present endevour. Our London Gardiners doe not sow or set all their seeds (though of the same kinde) at the same time, but so that they may ripen successively, to last the longer in season. Such is my design, planting a Nursery of Patrons, all Noble, but of different years, a Babe, a Child, two youths of severall date, and a Man, (having as a Scale of miles in my Maps, a Scale of Ages in my Honourable Patrons) hoping so always to have one or more in full power to protect my endevours. Thus in process of time your Lordship (as yet but a Patron in reversion) will be possessed with power effectually to dis∣charge that place. As for the present, let not your tender age be slighted by any, seeing such an one (Ma. 18. 2.  a little child) was chosen by our Saviour to be Doctor of the Chair to determine the controversie between the Disciples; which he truly decided, not by his speech, but humble silence. Till such time as your Honour shall be able to learn by my writing, may I learn from your Honours living the necessary vertues of Meekness, Hu∣mility, Quietness, Contentedness. For the continuance of which in your Honour, with the daily addition and increase of other Graces proportionable to your growth, the hearty prayers shall never be wanting of Your Honours most bounden servant THO. FULLER.
OBJECTIONS ANSWERED Concerning this DESCRIPTION. The fifth Book. CHAP. 1. The intention of the Author in this Treatise. PLATO being sick said to the Physician being about to prescribe Physick unto him, Cure me not as a Countrey-oxe-driver, but , as one well versed in Philosophy; and demanded of him the reason of his receipts, how the medicine was proper for his malady, why this, why thus, why now, why thus much, why no more was prescribed unto him. In like manner it seemeth unreasonable for Map-makers, here to plant a wood, there mount a hill, here to sink a valley, there to run a river in their draughts; and then magisterially obtrude all these on the beliefe of an ingenuous Reader, without giving a particular account how the same are conformable to Nature and true Geography: especially seeing it is vehemently suspected, that many maps are full of affected extravagancies. And must their fancies draw up the forms for other mens judgments to subscribe? But on the other side it seems not onely an ungentile harshness, but an unconscionable injustice, strictly to exact a reason for every Puntillo in a Map. Gally-slaves would be in a more freer condition then Geo∣graphers, if thus dealt with. As the Poets feign Atlas was wearied by bearing the weight of heaven, Mercator would be more tired by bearing the burden of his own Atlas, if questioned for the crookedness or straight∣ness of every line in so vast a volume. A lawfull latitude herein hath
been ever allowed. For instance, it is generally agreed that Meander, a River in Phrygia, runs wonderfully winding; but it breaks not the head of Truth in a Map, if a curle of that River be made more or less, or be put out of its proper place. Let the Stewards of Lords Courts, or rather Bailifes of Gentlemens Manors know each nook of a wood, corner of a field, reach of a River within so small a compass; such as describe a Countrey in generall, if truly presenting the most materiall things there∣in without visible disproportion, doe what their diligence can exactly perform, and what the Readers discretion can rationally expect. Desiring therefore to acquit my self in the best manner to all ingeni∣ous capacities, I have here exposed my self to the strongest objection which without favour or flattery, I could make against the former de∣scription. And left scattering of them before in the respective Tribes should have interrupted the entireness of our discourse (what thred can run smooth if full of so many knots? we have reserved them all for a small Treatise by themselves in the conclusion of the work. Solemnly promising that if any shall enfavour me so far as to convince me of any error therein, I shall in the second Edition (God lending me life to set it out) return him both my thanks and amendment, or else let him con∣clude my face of the same metall with the Plates of these Maps. Whatsoever can be objected against the Generall description of Iudea re∣turns in the particular Tribes, and therefore to avoid repetition we shall there more properly meet with it. This premised, without further de∣lay (by Gods blessing) we fall on the matter in hand. And can we be∣gin higher then at Adam it self? CHAP. II. Objections concerning Reuben answered. Philogus. Alethaeus. Philol. I First take exceptions at your placing the City Adam so near unto Iordan. For where it is said, That the waters which came down from above, stood and rose up upon an heape, veryJosh. 3. 16. far from the City Adam, which is besides Zartan, you make Adam not above three miles from that stoppage of waters, which is not very far. Aleth. Very far, is a relative terme, and accordingly admits of much alteration. Three miles is little in respect of so many leagues, but very far in respect of so many furlongs. Attend I pray you the main scope of the holy Spirit, which was to notifie the place where these upper waters failed in view of the Israelites. Which must be acknowledged within the discovery of their sight; otherwise the land-mark more obscure, then the staying of the waters that were dated from it. Where therefore the
distance is measured in a plain Countrey by the eye, three miles may well pass for very far. Philol. Why make you so great a flexure in Iordan just at his influx into the Dead-sea, contrary to the nature and custome of great Rivers? In∣deed small brooks like little children goe wadling on one side, their streams are winding and crooked, because they must run where they may run, and finde soft ground to receive them. But great Rivers which doe not finde but make their way, flow generally in a straight channell, and so it seems should Iordan, sliding through a flat, low, and levell Countrey, and not meeting with any effectuall opposition. Aleth. I have sufficient warrant for this my description. Pliny saith of Iordan, Invitus Asphaltitn lacum, naturd dirum petit; unwillingly he goes into that slimy Lake, terrible by nature. You perchance will say, Iordan needs not to follow the motion of Plinies pen, as if because he makes a flourish with his phrase, the River must fetch a compass with his channell. But consider, I pray, how in the mixture of all liquours of contrary kinds, the best liquour (which may be said to lose by the bargain) incorpo∣rates always with a reluctancy, and the same Antipathy causeth here this crookedness of Iordan. This is precisely taken notice of by learnedIn Plinianis exercit. in Ca Iul Solini Po∣lyhist. p. 577. Sl∣masius, and is agreeable to the observations of modern Travellers. Philol. You place three severall stations of Balak and Balaam with seven altars a piece upon them in this Tribe of Reuben, whereas more probably all those passages were transacted south of Arnon in the King∣dome of Moab. It is utterly unlikely that King Balak would adventure his person out of his own dominions, into a strangers (not to say an enemies) Countrey. Aleth. In so short a journey the pains was little, the danger none at all. For (although on Balaks side there might be private▪ heart-burnings) there was no open hostility betwixt Israel and Moab. Yea we know that then the Israelites had familiarity, much with the men, tooNumb. 25. 1. much with the women of that Countrey. I confess the places as described in Scrip∣ture stand (as I may say) equivocally betwixt Israel and Moab. But here∣in I have followed the example ofIn Theat. Ter. sanc. in Ruben. Adrichomius, and other good authors, not to say, that if Balak had taken his view in the kingdome of Moab of the people encamping then at Abelshittim, he could not at that distance have taken a discovery of them. Philol. Mr. More in his Maps bringeth down the waters of Nimim (with a stream in breadth corrivall, if not bigger then Arnon it self) running through the very midst of this Tribe into the Dead-sea, whereof no appearance at all in your description. It was a very envious part of the Philistines toGen. 26. 18. stop up the wells of Isaac, (so needfull a commodity in that Countrey) but how great a fault in you to deprive Reuben of this river, except it was not your envy that stopped, but ignorance that omitted it?
Aleth. I am sensible full well of such waters, but cannot be convin∣ced that they took their course through this Tribe into the Dead-sea, but rather conceive they ran onely through the Tribe of Gad, and emptied themselves in Aroer, whereof in due time we shall give our best account. Philol. I wonder you make Nophah so near to Medeba contrary to See M. Mores Map. others descriptions, which set it thence twenty miles at least. Aleth. I wonder they place it so far from Medeba contrary to the words of theNm. 21. 30. Scripture, and we have laid them wast unto N O P H A H which reacheth unto M E DE B A: where the verb, though supplyed by the Translatours, is implyed in the Text. Philol. Why make you three fishponds in Heshbon, to which the eyes of theCant. 7. 4. Spouse are compared, which is in effect to make her a mon∣ster if the resemblance be applyed? Aleth. I set a certain for an uncertain number: in the originall it is  plurall, and therefore indefinite. In all these comparisons, the strength of the similitude lies in the nature, not the number of the things. They deserve not the name of a flock of sheep which are under an hundred, to which the teeth of the Spouse areCant. 3. 2. compared, and nature commoly allowes not above thirty two. Philol. The City of Misor belonging to the Levites, and recorded by Adrichomius in this Tribe, is omitted by your oversight. Aleth. Commendable is his charity to the Levites. For whereas Moses allotted them but four Cities in Reuben, namelyJosh. 21. 36. Kedemoth, Iahazah, Me∣phaah, and Bezar: his bounty bestoweth a fifth, this Misor, upon them. But the poor Priests might well be full lean, had they nothing to feed them, but this imaginary City, groundless in the Hebrew, and onely founded on the erroneous Vulgar. Yea generally the descriptions of Adrichomius are guilty herein, that (more made ad splendorem, then ad veri∣tatem) to render them specious to the beholder (because a lean bald Map is not so amiable as one filled full) he poulders them thick with places, rather scraped then gathered, thereby offending the judgments of the learned to please the eyes of the ignorant. But it is my business to excuse my self, not accuse him, and consciousness to my own many faults, commands me to be tender to the errors of others. CHAP. III. Objections concerning Gad answered. Philol. VVHy make you the City of Iazer so in-land into this tribe, which Adrichomius placeth on the River of Arnon? Aleth. I can demonstrate, it could not stand on that River, and by consequence must be more within the Tribe of Gad. For, Arnon, is noto∣riously known to be the eastern bound of Canaan▪ Now attend what
Moses saith, And the suburbs of the Cities, which yee shall give unto the Levites, shall reach from the wall of the City, and outwards a thousand Cubits round about: And yee shall measure from without the City on the east side, two thousand Cubits, and on the south side two thousand Cubits, and on the west side two thousand Cubits, and on the north side two thousand Cubits, and the City shall be in the middest, this shall be to them the suburbs of their Cities. Iazer therefore being a City of theJosh. 21. 39. Levites, could not stand upon Arnon, because they could not measure three thousand Cubits eastward, for then they should take so much out of an enemies Countrey, which belonged not to Israel. Where we may also observe, that no sea-town was allotted the Levites, because, for the reason aforesaid, it would have proved less unto them, hindering the circular dimensions of their possessions. Philol. You are much mistaken in the placing of the City of Aroer. The Josh. 13. 25. Scripture saith, that it is before Rabba, or as Tremellious rendreth it, ante conspectum Rabbae, within the view, or sight of Rabba. Whereas your Map presents it six and twenty miles off from that place. Lynceus his eyes need a prospective-glass to discover Rabba from Aroer, at the distance in your description. Aleth. Judicious SirHistory of the World . part 2. book 10. chap.  5. Walter Raleigh answers in my behalf; that Rabba, near to which Aroer was seated, was not (as you erroneously conceive) Rabba of Ammon, to which it was neither near, nor in sight, (as he wor∣thily observes) but Rabba a chief City of Moab. Which Rabba bordered on Aroer, as in our Map of Moab doth appear; though, here straitned fro room, no mention is made thereof. Philol. You ill observe Scripture-instructions, in fixing the first tent of Ioab, when sent to number the people. For the2 Sam. 24. 5. text saith that the he pitched in Aroer (that is, in the Countrey not City of Aroer, wherein I con∣cur with you) on the right side of the City that lyeth in the midst of the River of Gad, and toward Iazer. Be your own judge, whether or no, the tent be set on the right side of the City. Aleth. The chief directory in placing this tent is the word right hand, and that relative term is varied, according as the face is setled. If Ioabs face in his journy respected the north, then the east is the right hand of the City, and then the posture of the tent is rightly placed. However the best is, a tent is but a tent, no solid or substantiall structure, it will be no great work, or weight, on better grounds, to take it down and re∣move it. Philol. IN Iaobs travells you place Soccoth fifteen miles from Peniel, yet was it the very nextGen. 33. 17. station, to which he removed. Now I appeal to Nurses and Drovers (the most competent judges in this controversie) whether it be not too long a journy, for little Children and Es big with young; except you conceive, miles are as easily gone on the grounds, as measu∣red in a Map with the Compass. Aleth. Though in Iacobs Gests, Succoth succeeds the next place to Peniel,
yet it follows not, that Iacob with his train went so far in one day. Pro∣bably, he might bait, yea lodge severall days betwixt them; the Scri∣pture not mentioning every stage of his staying, but onely marking sig∣nall places, whereat some memorable accidents did happen, or wherein for some considerable time he made his abode. Philol. Sir Walter Raleigh (whose judgment you deservedly honour) makes the River of Iabbok the northern bound on the matter of the Tribe of Gad, therein following the example of Adrichomius. Whereas you ex∣tend this Tribe many miles beyond that river, even to the sea of Cinneroth or Galilee; a great tract of ground, which you injuriously take from Ma∣nasseh, and bestow on this Tribe. Aleth. I exactly follow Scripture directions, in dividing this land be∣twixt them.Josh. 13. 27. The text saith expresly, that the border of the inheritance of the Gadites reached even to the edge of the sea of Cinneroth, and therefore the land betwixt Iabbok, and the edge of the sea, undoubtedly belongs to this Tribe, which justly may have an action of trespass against the foresaid Author, for depriving it of so considerable a part of its true possession. And yet (under favour) I conceive, Mr. More in his Maps doth much overdoe, stretching the inheritance of this Tribe to the utmost, and most northern part of the sea of Galilee. Philol. I admire much at your inconstancy. In your Map of Palestine, some seven years since prefixed to your Holy War, you set Iabesh-Gilead north of the river Iabbok in the Tribe of Manasseh, which now you have translated many miles southward into this Tribe. It seems, you need no other to confute you but your self. Aleth. I have seen mineI request this mine answer may be applyed to those many differences be∣twixt my for∣mer Map, and this present de∣scription. error, and you see my retractation thereof. One day teacheth another. To live, and not to learn, is to loiter, and not to live. Confessions of our former mistakes, are the honourable Trophies of our conquest over our own ignorance. The main reason, why Iabesh-Gilead could not be so far north, is this, because Saul marched from Bezek in the Tribe of Ephraim, with an army of foot, in an afternoon and a night, over Iordan, unto this City, and came hither in the1 Sam. 1. 11. morning-watch. Now though we allow, that zeal to their brethren in danger, spurred on the souldiers, and did horse those foot in point of speed, yet they almost needed wings, in so short a time to goe so long a journey (fifty miles at least besides the crossing of two great rivers, Iordan, and Iabbok) and to come thither so early. Wherefore with master More we have placed Iabesh-Gilead south of Iabbok, some thirty miles from Bezek, having the concurrence of other Authors for the position thereof. hilol. You have found a nest of Cities in the1 Mac. 5. 26. Apocrypha, and place them all in this Tribe. Whereas two of them, namely, Bozra and Betzer, are by learnedVid. Tm i locum praed. Tremellius found to be, the one in Edom, the other in Reuben, many miles from the Tribe of Gad.
Aleth. I deny not, but two Cities of the foresaid names are presented in those Countreys, but could not be the same, with these Cities which Maccabeus relieved. It is expresly recorded (once1 Mac. 5. 25. 27. and again for the more certainty thereof) that these places were in the land of Gilead. And that any part of Edom, or Reuben, was ever reputed to belong to the land of Gilead, is as I conceive an opinion unpresidented in any good author, and unavouchable by any strong argmnts. CHAP. IV. Objections concerning Manasseh beyond Jordan answered. Philol. YOu have made the countrey of Manasseh beyond Iordan, too large in the dimensions thereof. for, it being the porti∣on but of half a Tribe, is, according to your scale of miles, little less in proportion, then the Countrey which other entire Tribes did possess. Aleth. I confess the truth of what you alledge, which is no whit strange in it self. What more common then to call a Twin, half a man? Yet I doubt not, but you have seen such half-men, as proper persons, as any single-born. And the moiety of this Tribe, possessed as much ground, as most other whole Tribes in Israel. This may appear by the number of Cities, no fewer thenJosh. 13. 0. threescore contained therein. Yet under fa∣vour, I conceive, that the land east of Iordan was not altogether so civi∣lized, but more wilde, and warlike, then the countrey west thereof. Especially this of Manasseh, subject to hostile incursions from the north and east; and therefore their portion was cut out in the largest size, that what they wanted in the quietness, they might have in the quanity of their possessions. Philol. You make Chorazin within two miles of Capernaum, whereas Mr. More in his Maps, placeth it on the west side of the sea of Galilee, hard by Bethsaida; in my minde with more probability of truth. For, our Saviour saith,Mat. 11. 21. Woe be to thee Chorazin, woe be unto thee Bethsaida, coupl∣ing them together in his commination, who probably would have joined Capernaum and Chorazin together, for the vicinity both of their profaneness, and place, had they been seated so near together, as they are presented in your description. Aleth. Your argument concludes nothing at all. Have you not often seen malefactours manacled together, whose places of birth and breed∣ing were farthest asunder? So might it be with Chorazin, and Bethsaida; whilest Capernaum is singled out, and set solely by it self, in our Saviours threatning, as a signall offender, most eminent for its ingratitude. As for our placing of Chorazin, we have therein observed the instructions of SaintHieon, in locis Hebr. lit. C. & Brchardus iti∣nre 3. &. 5. Hierome, and other good Authours.
Philol. You make the brook Cherith in this Tribe, without rendering any reason, why you place it here; which Adrichomius (no doubt on good ground) appointeth to be on the west side of Iordan, in the Tribe of Ephraim. Aleth. The brook is but once mentioned in Scripture, and therefore we want exact instructions for the position thereof. Yea generally the Maps of Palestine take no notice of this brook. As if it had been so dried up, with the long drought in the days of Eliah, that the channell thereof did not afterwards appear. But to the point; Two things are obser∣vable in Scripture, concerning the postre of this Cherith; First, that Eliah after his message done to Ahab in Samaria, was commanded to turn himself1 King. 17. 8. Eastward: Secondly, that the brook Cherith, whither he was sent, is said to be before Iordan; the Hebrew hath it  and Tremellius ren∣dereth it è regione Iordanis; All which put together, clearly speaketh it, to have been ast of Samaria, and on the other side of Iordan, where judi∣cious Mr. More in his Map hath placed it, whom I conceive my self to fol∣low on good reason. CHAP. V. Objections concerning Naphtali answered. Philol. YOu make all the Tribe of Naphtali west, and on this side the River of Iordan; whereas that passage foretold by the Isa. 9. 1. Prophet, and applied by theMat. 4. 15. Evangelist, describes it on the other side; The land of Zebulun, and the land of Naphtali by the way of the sea beyond Iordan, Galilee of the Gentiles. The particle beyond is  in the Greek, which makes it plain, that Naphtali lay on the east side of Iordan. Aleth. The strength of your objection consists in the words beyond Iordan, which are variously rendered by learned men. By Tremellius in Isaiah secundum Iordanem, by the same Author in Matthew, transitus Iordan; by Beza, secus Iordanem. The dicision of the difficulty depends on the proper sense of the preposition  nebher, in Hebrew; which barely imports no more, then over; but which way, whether Cis, or Trans; whether on this side, or beyond, is to be expounded by the context. This flexible nature, and promiscuous sense of  Gnebher, is observed byOn mat. 4. 15. instancing on Jr. 22. 20. Tremellius, and others; so that the text alledged by you, renders no more, then the land of Naphtali over Iordan, without specifying any side of the river. Secondly, we answer, that those words beyond Iordan, are so indifferently placed in the Prophet, that they may equally be referred, to what followeth, Galilee of the Gentiles; part of which Galilee, we have Lib. 1. ca. 11. parag 6. formerly described, to lie east of Iordan, and therein the City Chorazin, wherein our Saviour so frequently conversed. Philol. You make two fountains, the one Ior, the other Dan, as the
father and mother of the River Iordan: a fancy (I fear) rather pretty, them solid; bearing too much affinity with the derivation of the River Dourdan in France, from the confluence of the two streams, Dour, and Dan; whilest such a composition hath more of Latine, then Hebrew therein. Not to say, that Iosephus is wholly silent hereof, I suspect it for a modern conceit, unavouchable by ancient Authors; and prefer his opi∣nion Greg. Grg. Lex. Sacnum. 209. as most probable, who deduceth Iordan from the Hebrew  Iarad, to descend, because it comes down with a powder, and at set timesJosh. 3. 15. overflowes, all his bankes. Aleth. The negative argument from Iosephus, is of small validity; but to attest the antiquity of Iordans descent, according to our description, grudge not to read the following testimony of Philostorgius, both because he is an ancient Author (living in the fifth Century after Christ) and his book at this day not extant, save that some parcells of his are recited by Ioannes Antiochenus, out of whoseIn part set down by Sal∣sius in his notes on Soli∣nus cap. 35. Manuscript, not yet printed, the following words are transcribed, . In this Countrey of Paneas one of the fountains of Iordan is be∣gotten, there being two of them; Dan so called even to this day from the ancient name thereof. As for the other, which is named for, a certain hill of the sameMeaning Li∣banus. mountain sendeth it forth, distant from the former about an hundred and sixty furlongs; from either of which flows a rivolet, the one termed Ioates, the other, Danites, which flow∣ing by the mountains to the foot of the plain, thence forthwith compleate one great Ri∣ver Iordan, in the same mingling both their names and streams. See here an ex∣cellent evidence of the extraction of Iordan, which cannot be condem∣ned for a modern invention. However if any will deduce Iordans name from a third fountain, (that Hebrew word aforesaid) let him herein con∣tentedly embrace his own opinion. Philol. If you stick so stedfastly to the authority of Philostogius, why dissent you from him in the distance between those two fountains, which e makes an hundred and sixty furlongs, that is, twenty miles, (if eight furlongs make a mile) and the interstitium in your Map amounts not fully to half so much? Aleth. Some mistake may justly be suspected in Philostorgius his num∣ber, because for exceeding the proportion in other Authours. IBook. 1. ca.. former∣ly acquainted you with that arbitrating power I have assumed (I hope not unjustly) to reconcile such differences in Authors by pitching on a middle number betwixt their extremities, and here have made use of the same power accordingly. Philol. What mean you by these eight nameless buildings sur∣rounding
the City of Cesarea Philippi? Aleth. They are set there to signifie the townes of Cesarea Philippi menti∣oned by theMark. 8. 27. Evangelist, whereabouts Saint Peter gave that eminent testimony of the Deity of our Saviour. Philol. At Dan in this Tribe (aliàs Leshem, and Cesarea Philippi) you erect one of Ieroboam his Calves; whereasIn descrip. Ter. sanc. pag. 237. Brocard, who exactly survey∣ed Palestine, in his Iournall gives us to understand, that half a league from Bethel, where one of the Calves were set up, stood a mountain called Dan op∣posite thereunto, where the other Calfe was erected. Aleth. His authority cannot countervaile Saint Hieromes, Benjamin in Itinerario, and others, yea Truth it self, which are on our side, and against his opinion. For, Ieroboam was too good an husband to lavish both his Calves in one place, which he rather would scatter in distant Cities, the better to spread Idolatry in his kingdome. Besides, consider the end pretended at their erection, namely to spare the peoples pains, It is too 1 Kin. 12. 28. much for you to goe up to Ierusalem, that these Calves should be (as it were) Chappels of ease, to save his subjects a tedious journey. Now, if both his Calves were penn'd up in a stall near Bethel (as Brocard would have it) little ease thereby was given to the northern Tribes, and their journey not considerably shortned. Therefore the other Calfe was set up at Dan in Naphtali, as we have described it. Philol. All that you have said, doth not satisfie me, that this Dan was the place where the Calfe was worshipped. For, soon after Ieroboams death, in the reign of Baasha, this Dan you speak of was1 Kin. 15. 20. smitten by Ben∣hadad King of Syria. This, probably, would have extinguished Calfe∣worship, if set up in that place, which notwithstanding1 Kin. 10. 29. continued many hundred years after in the kingdome of Israel. Aleth. You might argue on the same grounds, that the other Calfe was not erected in Bethel, seeing even in the life of Ieroboam, Abijah King of Iudah took from him2 Chr. 13. 19. Bethel with the towns thereof. Observable herein is di∣vine Justice, punishing both those idolatrous places by the sword of their enemies, so soon after the Calves were set up in them. But, we may be confident, the Kings of Israel recovered both Dan and Bethel again, and restored them to their former impious uses. Philol. In the Worthies of Naphtali you account on Hiram Solomons Architect in building the Temple,Description of Naph. §. 1. as a Naphtalite by the mothers side: And yet in theDescrip. of Dan. §. 9. description of Dan you make him a Danite by his female extraction. Now, what saith Nicodemus?Jo. 3. 4. Can a man enter the second time into his mothers wombe? Yea, can he be born (as you would have it) twice, though not of the same, of severall women? Aleth. This your objection is not brought against my description, but against the very letter of the Scripture that affirmeth the same.
1 KING. 7. 14.He was a widows son of the Tribe of Naphtali, and his Father was a man of Tyre.2 CHRON. 2. 14.The son of a woman of the daugh∣ters of Dan, and his father was a man of Tyre. Now although I am not ingaged to meddle with the solution of this difficulty; yet, under favour, I conceive the same properly to depend on an observation in Chorography. May you be pleased to remember, that Dan had a parcell of his portion acquired by conquest, near the fountains of Iordan, where Leshem, Laish, or Dan was placed, which small territory lay above an hundred miles from the main body of that Tribe, surrounded about with the Tribe of Naphtali, as appeareth in ourSee our Map of Dan, and de∣scription. §. 9. description thereof. Now I suppose Hiram (whose paternall ex∣traction from Tyre is confessed on all hands) was descended a Danite by his mother, and called a Naphtalite also by his mothers side, because of her habitation (though in Dans small Countrey aforesaid) lying in the land allotted to Naphtali. Philol. You term itIn descrip. Naph. §. 5. a most erroneous opinion in such, who conceive the Galileans more drossie Iews then the rest, herein contradicting your self, ha∣ving formerlyBook. 1. cap. 11. §. 7. affirmed, that they were courser, and less refined Iews. Aleth. Give me leave to distinguish, between Iews courser in Religion, and courser in Extraction. The former we confess, that the Galileans were less pure in Gods service, as probably descended from the remnant of the ten Tribes: Yet were they most truly the lost sheep of Israel, not deba∣sed by mixture of Gentilisme in their bloud, like the Samaritans, whom Christ declined, whilest he constantly conversed with these Galileans. Philol. You say, that the City Naasson depends meerly upon the credit of the vulgar translation Tobit 1. Whereas looking on the Hebrew Map, graven at Amsterdam by Abraham Goos, but designed, and made by another Abraham a great Rabbin, skilled in the land, and language of his own nation, this Naasson appears there in Hebrew characters, the Author (no doubt) having good assurance for the same. Whose Map (I can tell you) is much valued by many Antiquaries, as appears by their difficult procuring, dear purchasing, and carefull preserving thereof. And you may finde it solemnly set up, at the upper end of Sion Colledge Library. Aleth. It ill becomes me to detract from the pains of any, being also my self, a man under authority of the pens, and tongues of others, and Can∣didate for the Readers good will in this my description. Yet, give me leave, plainly to profess, that the Map by you alleadged, answereth not the great price, and generall praise thereof, being nothing else but Adri∣chomius his Map translated into Hebrew. What once Sir Iohn Old Castle, Lord Cobham, spoke jeastingly, that the Priests made Christ to be boots, and spurs, and all in the Sacrament, may I serously say that Adrichomius, with his faults, and failings, dross, dirt, and all together, without any cor∣rection, is cast into this Abrahams overvalued description, so that the
Map you alledge is not gold, but mean metall gilded over, containing surreptitious names out of the Vulgar Latine therein Hebraized, and pre∣senting many spurious places utterly disclaimed in the Originall. CHAP. VI. Objections against Asher answered. Philol. I Admire you have altogether omitted the River Eleutherus in this Tribe (much mentioned inMac. 11. 7. & 12. 30. Maccabees, and which Adrichomi∣us makes to fall into the Mediterranean in the mid-way betwixt Zidon and Tyre. Yea,Lib. 3. p. 213. M. George Sandys in his travels, going from Sarepta to Tyre, crossed a little valley divided by the River Eleutherus, called Casmire at this day by the inhabitants thereabouts. Aleth. By what name, or title soever, the water, he there went over, is known at this day, sure I am, it cannot be the ancient Eleutherus, which by Ptolemy, Strabo, and generall consent of all Authors, falls above sixty miles more northward, into the Mediterranean. And therefore the error of Adrichomius and others herein, is briefly taxed by judicious Sir Hist. lib. 2. part. 1. pag. 289 Walter Ralegh. Philol. You make Asher to border on Zidon, contrary to the descrip∣tion ofSee Masius on the 19. of Joshua. Wolsegangus Wiseburgius, and learnedIn his Com∣ment on Gen. 9. Tostatus, who set Zebulun in the same place, as the most north-west of all the Tribes, and alleadge Gen. 49. 13. Iacobs words to avouch the same, prophecying, that Zebuluns borders shall be unto Zidon. Aleth. GodsJosh. 19. 2. Word, the coast of the Countrey, and all good authors justifie our description, those two onely excepted which you alleadge, being both deceived, by taking Zidon restrictively in Iacobs prophecy, for the City so called, whereas the whole Countrey thereby is intended (as Sarepta is called a CityLuke. 4. 26. of Zidon) and the name of Zidonians adequate to Phenicians, in which sense Zebulun confined on the Countrey, though Asher onely on the City of Zidon. Philol. You peremptorily place the defeat of Benadad, and fall of Apheks wall on his flying Army, in this Tribe, not remembring the while, that there is anotherMenioned 1 Sam. 29. 1. Aphek in Issachar, (nearer to Samaria) which puts in with more probability to be the theater, whereon that tragical accident was acted. Aleth. I confess Aphek a place in Issachar, but finde it not charactered to be a City, such an one as ourJosh. 19. 30. Aphek in Asher is described, and whose walls are therefore more probable to doe the foresaid execution. How∣ever, be it known unto you, whensoever two places are with equall likelihood corrivals for actions therein atchieved, we adjudge it to that place, that falls first under our description. Thus, the start of half an
hour, bestows on the elder twin, the whole inheritance. To avoid con∣fusion, and prevent repetition, first come, first serv'd; the place first occur∣ring, carries away all history in our describing thereof. CHAP. VII. Objections, against Zebulun, answered. Philol. YOu, very confidently, make Iordan continue his unixit stream, clean through the Galilean-sea (a course somewhat ir∣regular in nature) without alleadging any authority for the proof of so improbable a passage. Aleth. Excellent Authors avouch the same.Hist. lib. 5. pag. 618. Tacitus, amongst others, tells us of this River, Unum, atque alterum lacum integer perfluit, tertio etinetur; One, and another lake (viz. the waters of Merom, and Galilean-sea) it runneth through entire, but is stopped in the third; namely, in Asphaltite-lake, or Dead-sea. More full is the testimony of Philostorgius, and deserveth our serious perusall thereof. Who speaking of this River, , Which (saith he) passeth through the lake of Tiberias, cutting it in the middle, and flowing clean through it in its own proper channell. Which cutting of the lake, implies the entire continuance of Iordans water; otherwise, that knife doth not cut the loaf, but is cut by the loaf, which is broken in the dividing thereof. Philol. I wonder you pass over Shimron-Meron in such silence, which appears a place of great note, yea, a Royall City in the days of Ioshua, as the Coronet thereupon doth inform us. Aleth. I confess it signed with a Coronet, and with something more, a flag of uncertainty, having nothing sure of the location thereof, the chiefest cause that I willingly declined the mention of it. However, we will scrue our selves into as much certainty of this place, as may be extracted out of Scripture: and observe, the four first wreaths of my scrue are un∣doubtedly, the fifth and last more then probably true, as followeth. 1 Shimron-Meron was one of theJosh. 12. 20. Royall Cities, whose King Ioshua destroyed. 2 The same City is elsewhere called plainlyJosh. 11. 1. Shimron, without any addition. 3 It lay on the northern part of the land, because the King thereof associated in the northern, and secondSee book. 1. cap. 8. §. 3. combination of the Canaanites against Ioshua. 4 A City named Shimron, was alloted to the Tribe ofJosh. 19. 15. Zebulun. 5 Most probably this is the same Shimron, whose King was destroy∣ed by Ioshua. This is all, which my best industry could collect out of Scripture, or good Authors, concerning the situation of this place.
Philol. What mean you by that third smooty circle, which (as the Meteor Halo about the Sun) surroundeth the Levites City of Iockneam? Aleth. It signifieth nothing, being a meer aberration of the Graver, which (now but obscure) will in process of Printing, wholly disap∣pear. And I could hartily wish, no other faults in our Maps, would be of longer continuance. Philol. You make the Galilean-sea all along the east boundary of this Tribe. Whereas I am altogether of the minde of Masius, that no part of Zebulun touched on that sea; with him principally grounding my opinion on the Scriptures silence, which mentioneth not any contermi∣nating of this Tribe thereupon. Which might soon have been spoken, yea surely would not have been omitted, had Zebulun been so situated. Aleth. That Zebulun bordered on this sea, may cleerly be demonstra∣ted; first from Iacobs prophecy, that he should dwell Gen 49. 13. At the haven of the Seas. Seas in the plurall, pointing at his position betwixt the Mediterranean, and Galilean seas, the west and east bounds of his possessi∣on. Now lest any should seek to wave these words by an Enallage in Number (a figure, we confess, frequent in Hebrew) Zebuluns bounding on the Galilean-sea, is unfallibly collected out of theMat. 4. 13. Gospell, where Christ is said to dwell in Capernaum which is upon the sea coast, in the borders of Zbulun, and Naphtali. Philol. Christ his feeding of five thousand, with five loaves, and two fishes, is misplaced in your Map, as which ought to be set on the east side of the Sea of Galilce. Aleth. Learned men are much perplexed about the position of this miracle. A miracle, so remarkable in it self, that of all the passages be∣twixt Christs conception, and the introduction to his passion, this onely, and the descent of the Dove at his baptisme are recorded in all four Evangelists. Yet some difficulty appears in the particular place thereof.Lk. 9. 10. Luke term∣eth it the desert of Bethaida; but Saint IohnJohn 6. 23. who wrote the last, (there∣fore supplying the omissions, and explaining the doubts in other Go∣spells) assigneth the particular place to be near Tiberias, both being Cities on the west side of the sea, so that north of Tiberias, betwixt itThe Reader is intreated with his eye to emove the p∣cture of the peoples feeding, a little north of Tiberia. and Beth∣saida, (in a desert named from the latter, because leading to it) this mi∣racle is properly placed. Philol. But immediately at the ending thereof, the Disciples are said to sail ,M k. 6. 46. unto the other side unto Bethsaida, or as Saint Iohn says, towardsJoh. 6. 17. Capernaum (both these being Cities not far asunder.) Wherefore, if they crossed over the Sea to go to Bethsaida, they were not already on the same side thereof when the miracle was wrought, and by consequence were then on the other [the eastern] side of the Sea. Aleth. By , is meant the opposite shoar, on the same side of the Sea, but so that it was over a reach, or bay which they crossed therein, sailing (not athwart the breadth of the Sea from west to east, but) almost foreright
the length of the lake, from a place near Tiberias to the land ofMat. 14. 34. Gennesa∣ret, on the north end of the lake, betwixt Bethsaida and Capernium. Thus, such who on the Severn Sea sail from Bristoll to Barstable, may be said in some sense to cross the water, as well as those that saile from Barstable to Cardife. And thus, in placing this miracle we have not onely followed the judgment ofIn his Har∣mony on the Text. worthy Calvin, but also the eyes ofSee our Zebu∣lun § 26. Biddulph a modern traveller, who beheld the place. CHAP. VIII. Objections against Issachar answered. Philol. WHat vast mountains have you made those of Gilboa to be? the highest of them four miles perpendicular: Sure∣ly the battell betwixt Saul, and the Philistines could scarce be fought on such ascents. Yea, David might well have spared his wish,2 Sam. 1. 21. Let there be no dew, neither let there be rain upon you, whose tops, (as you have exalted them) may be presumed higher then the clouds themselves. Aleth. I confess them to be of the largest size, store of room and want of other matter to fill it, gave the occasion to their greater growth. Which fault is amended in the following Map of Manasseh, where be∣hold them reduced to a more moderate proportion, less then many of the mountains in Wales. Philol. How comes a parcell of mount Ephraim to straggle into the Map of Issachar? It being proper for those mountains to be confined to their own Tribe of Ephraim, whence they fetcht their denomination. Aleth. I may say the Tribe of Ephraim had the Preemption, but not the Monopoly of them. I mean his turn was first served, and he had the best and most of those mountains in his possession, whence they deser∣vedly took their name. Yet so, that some part of mount Ephraim ranged south ward into the Tribe of Benjamin, (as mountCompare Josh. 18. 22. wth 2 Chr. 13. 4 Zemaraim) and some branched northward into Issachar, as Shamir in mountJud. 10. 1. Ephraim; certainly in this Tribe,Judg. 10. 1. 2 because Tola a man of Issachar was buried therein. Philol. It followeth not, because he was extracted from this Tribe, that therefore the place of his buriall was in the same, finding many mens interments in Scripture, casuall, out of the Tribes of their nativity. Thus Saul and Ionathan being Benjamites, were notwithstanding buried in the Tribe of Gad, at1 Sam. 3. . 12. Iabesh Gilead: as also Ishbosheth and Abner their Countreymen got graves at2 Sam. 4. 12. Hebron in the Tribe of Iudah: so infirme is your inference, that Shamir in mount Ephraim was in Issachar, because Tola an Issacharite was intombed therein. Aleth. You instance onely in persons, some forcibly, others treache∣rously slain, which occasioned their hasty, tumultuary, and extravagant
interment. Remember also that Saul and Ionathan, (though interme∣diately at Iabesh Gilead) were finally intombed in the2 Sm. 21. 14. sepulchres of their Father, in the land of Benjamin, as we may presume that Tola his corps a peaceable Judge (no violent detention, or disturbance appearing to the contrary) did rest in the possessions of that Tribe; the Iews gene∣rally being as ceremonious to be buried in their own land, as to be mar∣ried in their own linage. CHAP. IX. Objections against Manasseh on this ide Jordan answered. Philol. ANd why so much of the Map of Issachar presented again in Manasseh? What need this waste, and repetition of the same again? Aleth. The squaring of the Map necessarily commanded the repetiti∣on thereof; nor is it lost labour, because two scattered pieces in Issachar belonged to Manasseh. Philol. But ô what a medley motley pieced Map have you made of this half Tribe of Manasseth! Surely Iosephs coate consisted not of more Gen. 37. 3. colours then Manasseh (Iosephs sons) portion is made up of shreds and par∣cels as you have presented it, marring the inireness of this halfe Tribe with your manifold divisions. Aleth. And yet no more then what are warranted by Gods word. Let none part what he hath put together, nor put together what he hath parted. I delight not out of wantonness, to make smp of Manasseh's por∣tion, but the Tex puts the Shears into my hand, commanding me to cut it so: because Manasseh hadJosh. 17.11. three Countreys in Issachar and Asher: That is, surrounded with them, which necessitates the cantoning of this halfe Tribe into such dis-jointed parcels. Philol. You make a piece of Asher, parted from the main body thereof, to confine on Manasseh, whilest Bonfrerius finds a fitter expedient by cut∣ting off the west ends of Zebulun and Issachar from the Mediterranean, and continuing Asher along the sea side to Manasseh, so preserving Asher intire thereby. Aleth. His Expedient raiseth more difficulties then it allaieth; as di∣rectly opposite to Scripture, Reason, and the generall consent of Writers, as formerly hath been largely proved in our Objections against Zebulun. Better it is therefore to admit a parcell of Asher separated from the main of the Tribe (Instances in English Counties being frequent in this case) then by Bonfrerius his shift, to allow Truth parted from IacobsGen. 49. 23. pro∣phecy, which inevitably followes, if Zebulun be made Landlocked, and cut off from bounding on the sea.
Philol. Indeed you put Manasseh's separate Countreys within Issachar, but not within Asher, not invironed there with, but onely joining thereto, whereas the Text saith equally,Josh. 17. 11. And Manasseh had in Issachar and Asher &c. Aleth. The main body of Issachar confining on Manasseh afforded us conveniency to insert such Countreys therein. But Asher his part being in it self but a small dis-jointed portion, is not so capable of surrounding a Countrey within it, seeing such a parcell within a parcell would ap∣pear so diminutive a subdivision as almost inconsiderable. Besides, the preposition  rendred In in the Text, may sometimes be satisfied with sig∣nifying ad, or juxta, nigh, or by, that is, a bare proximity, apposition, and contiguousnes of a thing. In which sense Manasseh had land border∣ing on this dis-jointed piece of Asher. Philol. InParag. 32. Ephraim you say that Iezreel was more then twenty miles from Samaria, which measured by the scale in your Map are not above twelve miles asunder. Aleth. Let not the Typographicall mistake of the Printer be accounted the Topographicall errour of the Author; That twelve should be twenty, and in the Errata is mended accordingly. Philol. You might almost as well inscribe this Map the Tribe of Levi, as the Half Tribe of Manasseh. It was the complaint in time of Popery, that the Church did eate up the Commonwealth; every third foot in the king∣dome being Church-land, before the dissolution of Abbies. You ende∣vour to reduce Palestine to the same proportion. It was a pious wish of Moses,Num. 11. 29. Would God, that all the Lords people were Prophets: But a covetous de∣sire in you to convert so much of the land into the Levites portion, by ex∣tending the circular suburbs of their Cities to six miles Diameter; whereas Authours contract them, within less then halfe that compass, yet observing the true dimension of the Cubit therein. Aleth. For number such Cities are no moe then the Scripture assigneth, though here haply falling thicker then in other Maps. As for the three thousand Cubits of their extent on all sides, we have in the manner of the measuring thereof followed the direction of judiciousVid. on Num. 35. 4, 5. Mr. Ainsworth, (as he the learned Rabbi Maimony) preferring it amongst various exposi∣tions, as most naturall to the Text. Now let none wonder that we make a thousand Cubits adequate to a thousand paces, or on English mile. For, although lesser Cubits were used by the Iews, about their vessels, and buildings; yet their Geometricall Cubit (generally employed for their better expedition, because largest, in their surveying of land) contained sixM. Godwin his Moses and Aaron lib. 6. pag. 248. common Cubits; and RabbiIn Ezkielis ca. 48. 2. cited by Arias Mon∣tanus de Men∣suris sacris. Kimhi expresly saith that a thousand Emoth, or Cubits make a mile. Besides, consider I pray, these three thousand Cubits were to be measured from the wall of the City, the flexures and bendings whereof, produced the parallel bendings in the bounds of the Levites suburbes. But because we cannot be instructed in what from the line of their walls ranged about, we begin our mea∣sure
from the midst of the City, and therefore  bound to make their lands amends with the largeness of the Cibts, because beginning our mensuration to their disadvantage, from the ner of the City, in sead of the [unknown] circumfce thereof. Philol. I am not satisfied in the situation of , that it was seated in this half Tribe of Manassh. Aleth. It is seated according to Adrichomis, and the judgment of most otherMercaor, Gil. Tyrius & generally in most Maps. Authors. But if I might interpose mine own opinion, I conceive it many miles nearer unto Ierusalem in the Tribe of Ephraim, rather nigh then on the sea, in the road betwixt Ierusalem, and Cesarea, some thirty miles from the former; whither I shall remove the same, when my opinion herein shall be countenanced with the approbation of others. My reason that Antipatris could not be so far northward, (full sixty miles as they make it from Ierusalem) is, because theAct. 23. 31, 32. ootmen sent to attend Saint Paul marched thither from Ierusalem in one night. Now, although their suspicion of the Iews pursuing them to rescue Saint Paul, might quicken their pace, yetIbid. v. 23. 32. foot-souldiers could not be foot-posts, it being im∣possible for spearmen to go so far, in so short a time, betwixt the third hour [nine a clock at night] and the next morning. CHAP. X. Objections against Ephraim answered. Philol. YOu make a strange desultory Description of the bounds of this Tribe, valting over from length to breadth in such a fashion as is hard to be understood, and worse to be applied to the letter of the Josh. 17. Text. Alth. Wise Agur confessed he knew not thePrev. 30. 19 way of an Eagle in the aire, whose flight therein  not to be traced, leaving no visible perforation behinde it, partly through the swiftness of his motion, partly through the subtileness of the aire presently closing up the passage. So short and concise is the Holy Spirit in bounding the children of Ioseph, and so long since hath time taken all impression of many limitary obscure places there mentioned, that exactness herein, by the confession of theMasins in Josh. 17. best Authors, is not to be attained. But herein we have followed the directi∣on of the learned Bonfrerius, save that we have not contracted the east of Ephrain to wards Iordan into so narrow a point, but bounded it broader, to make it a degree the better with the descriptions of other Authors. Philol. You make Sechem in this Tribe, full seventy miles from He∣bron in the Tribe of Iudah. Me thinks they should be much nearer seeing Iacob sent Ioseph fromGen. 37.14. Hebrn to Sechem to give a visite to his brethren. Now how could his tender love adventure his darling child alone so tedious and dangerous a journey? Surely the distance was far less then you make it.
. Philol. Rama in this Tribe, doubtlesly was a City of the Levites as doth appear by Elkanah and Samuel their constant habitation there, both of then Levites. Why therefore is it not surrounded in your Map with a double circle, like other Cities of the saine qualification? Aleth. I acknowledge Raa for the reasons by you alledged, proba∣bly pertaining to the Levites, but have omitted the double incircling thereof, because I finde it not amongst the four Cities given the Levites in Epraim, nor the fortySee Josh. 21. eight assigned to them in the whole kingdome. Philol. Was it not then usurpation in the Levites to inhabite a City which by God was never granted unto them? Aleth. Under favour I conceive, though the Levites must have four, they might have moe Cities in Ephrain, or elsewhere, if the charity of well disposed people was pleased to bestow them. Thus, beside the three Cities for Refuge west of Iordan the Israelites were bound, if God did inlarge theirDut. 19. 8, 9. coasts, to adde three more for the same service. By which analogy it may be collected, that the Ephraimites in gratitude to God, who gave them more intire possession of their portion then any other Tribe in Ioshua's division (nothing out ezer, a Levites City being de∣tained from them by the Cananites) might give this Raa as a gratuity to the Levites. Besides, the suburbs and lands of the Levites reached from th walls of the Cities three thousand Cubits round about, with in which space they might erect what buildings they please, being therein (without incroaching on any other Tribe) resident on their proper in∣heritance. Rama therefore might be built within that circumference, and by the proportion of miles we collect it to stand within the circuit of Gezer, so that though they could not get Gezer it self, they might gain and build Rama within the compass thereof for their habitaion. However, we define nothing positively, much less impose it on the beliefe of others. Clipt money is worth as much as it weighs, though it will not pass for what it was coined; and conjectures, though they will not goe for certain truths, deserve to finde as much acceptance, as they bring probability with them. Philol. Have you nothing more to observe concerning the blessings, and  pronounced on mount Ebal and Gerizim Aleth. I conceive on second thoughts, that the Priets with the Ake stood in the valley betwixt the two hils (whilest the whole body of the ordinaryDeut. 30. 2. Levites were on the mount of Gerizi) whose station in the
half way betwixt both, when they pronounced the blessings and the cursings, facilitated the conveyance of the sound on both sides, as appear∣eth on the seriousCompare Deut. 11. and cap. 27. with Josh. cap. 8. comparing of the Scripture. Philol. Tiphsah is made by you a City in this Tribe. But, if it were si∣tuate herein, very short were the dominions of Solomon even in the very height of his greatness, who then reigned on this side of the river from 1 King. 4. 24. Tphsah even to Azza, or Gaza, in the Tribe of Simeon, not fully an hun∣dred miles, as appears by your Scale in the generall Description of the land. Aleth. Tiphsah there mentioned being the eastern boundary of Solomons Empire (from our2 Kin. 15. 16. Tiphsah where cruell Menahem began his reign) was near a thousand miles north-east on the river Euphrates, probably the same with the City Tharsacus, whereof Ptoley, Strabo, and Stephanus take spe∣ciall notice. Philol. Have you any miraculous faith, who so easily have removed the mountain of Phinehas (wherein Eleazar was buried) from the north of this Map, within the suburbs of Bethhoron a Levites City, to the south thereof near Shiloh, where in your Map generall the same is presented? Aleth. On better consideration I see no necessity, that his mountain should be brought within the bounds of any Leviticall City. Phinehas was an extraordinary person, and therefore his land might be extraordinary in the location thereof. This his portion was no part of the Levites pa∣trimony in their forty eight Cities given them by God, but seems rather the sperpondium of the peoplesJosh. 24. 33. bounty cast into the balance, as an ho∣nourable augmentation in reward of hisNum. 25. . eminent desert. I conceive therefore it lay in Mount Ephraim, near Shilob, where the Tabernacle was set up, bestowed upon him thereabouts, for his more convenient at∣tending of Gods service therein. CHAP. XI. Objections against Dan answered. Philol. YOu positively affirme that the land of Dan belonged primi∣tively to Iudah, yet produce no Scripture for the proof there∣of. We beleeve the same of Simeon, theJosh. 19. 1. Text affirming that their inheri∣tance was within the inheritance of Iudah, but no evidence appears of such de∣rivation of Dans possession originally from Iudah. Aleth. The same is infallibly collected from Scripture, because the Cities of Eshtaol,Josh. 15. 33. Zoreah,Josh. 19. 57. Timnah,Josh. 19. 45. Ekron were first bestowed on Iudah, andJosh. 19. 41. 43. afterwards we finde the same places, (with the Countrey there∣abouts by necessary consequence) conferred upon Dan's posterity for their portion. Philol. Such an alteration seems utterly inconsistent with divine im∣mutablity,
with whom is no , nor shadow ofJames 1. 17. changing. To give a thing and take a thing is unproportionable with his proceedings, whose Gifts are pronounced by the Apostle to be ,Rom. 11. 29. without Repen∣tance. Aleth. Indeed such gifts as amount to the notion of  are unca∣pable of alteration, to which his other grants are subject. Besides, God never so passed away that land but he still reserved it as his own Demesnes. For the land (saith he) is mine; not was, but is, even after the Israelite, had long possessed the same. Is it not lawfull for him to doe as he will with his own,Mat. 20. 15. and to change at pleasure what tenants to rent, or rather what Bailifes to occupy his own ground? Philol. The faces of the Men which bear the great bunch of grapes, are set the wrong way. For being to goe south-east to Kadesh-arnea, they look full west to the Mediterranean sea. Aleth. You put me in minde of a man, who being sent for to pass his verdict on a Picture, (how like it was to the person whom it was to resemble) fell a finding fault with the frame thereof (not the Limners but the Ioiners work) that the same was not handsomely fashioned. In stead of giving your judgment on the Map, (how truely it is drawn to re∣present the Tribe) you cavill at the Historyproperties therein, the act of the raver, not Geographer. Yet know Sir when I checkt theRo. Vaughan. Graver for the same, he answered me that it was proper for Spies, (like Water-men and Rope-makers) for surety sake to look one way and work another. CHAP. XII. Objections against Simeon answered. Philol. VVHy both an Asteriske and flag of uncertainty over Sheba? For, though unassured of the exact position thereof, the Text ascertaineth us, that it was a reall City in Simeon,Josh. 19. 2. Beer-sheba, and Sheba, and Moladah &c. Aleth. I am not satisfied that Sheba was a distinct City by it self, but rather conceive it the same with Beer-sheba. Because, 1 They are both accounted the sameGen. 26. 33. when originally denomi∣nated. 2 Sheba is omitted in1 Chr. 4. 28. Chronicles where other Simeonite Cities are summ'd up) as the same with Beer sheba. 3 Simeon had butJosh. 19. 6. thirteen Cities, which make fourteen if Sheba be ac∣counted a distinct City by it self. The premisses considered, Sheba appears the same with Beer-sheba (as Psal. 76. 2. Salem with Ierusalem) commonly so called for brevity sake. Philol. But then how doe you answer the Text, which expresly maketh Sheba a distinct City, Beer-sheba, and Sheba, and Moladah &c?
Aleth. Proteus appeared not in more shapes, then the Particle (here rendred and) hath severall significations, for though chiefly it is copulative, other whiles it is causall, collective, adversative, exegeticall, redditive, and dis∣junctive, asIn locum Iosh. Bonfrerius readeth it here, Beer-sheba, or Sheba, and Moladah &c. Philol. You say that Simeon wasIn the desr. of Iudah §.1. surrounded on all sides with Iudah, where∣as in your Map, the northern side thereof, is all along fairly flanked with the Tribe of Don. Aleth. You may remember (what we so lately proved) that Dan's portion primitively pertained to Iudah, and was a canton cut out thereof. In which sense according to Scripture, Simeons inheritance wasJosh 19. 1. within the children of Iudah's, and originally encompassed therewith. Philol. Why call you this TribeIn descript. of Simeon § 1. a jagged remnant, being as whole a cloth as the rest, and (though not so great) as entire as the other Tribes? I am not sensible by this your Map of any notorious dispersedness of the Simeonites habitations. Aleth. Undoubtedly Iudah his portion made many incisures, and lar∣cinations into the Tribe of Simeon hindering the entireness thereof. Par∣ticularly Askelon andJosh. 15. 47. Gaza first given to, onceJudg. 1. 18. possessed by Iudah, (though regained by the Philistines) were continued and tyed by some narrow labell of land to the main of Iudah, at leastwise had a Church-path (as I may terme it) a passage to the Temple, without going through any part of Simeon. But, wanting certain instructions, how to contrive, and carry on such indented conveyances, and not willing to confine the Rea∣der to our conjecturall fancies, we have left him to his liberty, presen∣ting SimeonAdrichomius hath done the same. entire, wherein he may frame such incursions of Iudah as comply best with his own opinion. Philol. You make this Tribe to range some miles south of Beer-sheba, whereas that place passeth currant for the utmost border of the Coun∣trey. What more common in Scripture, thenJudg. 20. 1. & 1 Sam. 3. 20 & 2 Sam. 3. 10. &c. from. Dan to Beer-sheba, that is, from the north to the south of the land of Canaan? Aleth. It was the utmost eminent City, but not absolutely the farthest place in Palestine, as neither mentioned amongst the southern boundaries of the land in generall, Numb. 34. nor with the utmost limits of the Tribe of Iudah, Iosh. 15. In ordinary discourse we measure England east and west from Dover to the Mount, as the farthest western place of note, though Cornwall stretches sevenConsult cam∣dens and Speeds Maps. miles beyond it unto the lands end. So Beer-sheba was the remotest remarkable City of Canaan, where the cloth, as I may say, ended, though the list thereof reached beyond it to the River of Egypt.
CHAP. XIII. Objections against Benjamin answered. Philol. VVHy make you Nob a Levite City in Benjamin, within the suburbs of Anathoth? Seeing Nob is neither named amongst the four Cities bestowed on the Levites in this Tribe, Iosh. 21. 17. nor is it any of the eight and forty belonging unto them throughout the whole Countrey of Canaan. Aleth. That Nob was in this Tribe, appears by that caalogue of Cities presented us inNeh. 11. 31. Nehemiah, which the Benjamites repossessed after their return from Babylon. That it was a Levites, yea a Priests City, appears (too plainly) by the1 Sam. 22. 19. Massacre therein on them committed. We confess it none of the eight and forty originally assigned to the Levites. Yet how they in after-ages, were capable of supernumerary Cities more then in their first Charter, and how the Mortmain of the Levites (as I may term it) was enlarged with new foundations, we have lately answered in the objections of EphraimConcerning ., whither we refer you for further satisfaction. Philol. You make the sons of Saul executed on an hill nigh Gibeah of Saul, which your judiciousM. ight soot in th Tmpl▪ pag. 264. friend will have hung up before the Taber∣nacle in Gibeon, observing therein an exemplary piece of divine justice, that, whereas Saul had ruined the Tabernacle at Nob, his sons were hung up before the same in Gibeon. Aleth. Not to be a Plaintise against him, but a Defendant of my self▪ I conceive him mistaken in confounding Gibeah of Saul with Gibeon, distinct Cities, as may appear by their severall owners, and actions therein performed. GIBEON. GIBEAH. An ancient City of the Hi∣vites, whoseJosh. 9. 3. &c. inhabitants de∣ceived the Israelites,Josh. 21. 17. given to the Levites, in the Tribe of Benjamin, where the Taber∣nacle was set up in the time of Solomon. A City in Benjamin, hard by Irusalem, distinct from theCompare Josh. 18. v. 25. with . 28. former, whose inhabitants were meer Benjamites, and by their lust abused the Judg 29. 16. Levites Concubine to death, for which their Tribe was almost extirpated: it was afterwards called Gibeah of Saul from his birth and frequent residence therein. Now the text expresly saith, that the Gibeonites did hang them up unto the Lord in Gibeah2 Sam. 21. 6. of Saul, that is, in Sauls native place, and Court, where he had issued out his cruell edicts for the slaughter of the Gibeonites. Philol. But that expression they hanged them in the hillIbid. . 9. before the Lord, im∣ports the same performed in some religious place, probably in the pro∣spect or view of the Tabernacle. Aleth. Before the Lord implies no more, then what in the foregoing verse was termedIbid. v. 6. unto the Lord, that is, in a sacred manner, not out of private revenge, but in an holy zeal, tendering the parties executed an ob∣lation to divine justice, and so is interpreted by the Expositors there∣on.
Philol. In your particular Map of Benjamin, Iordan runs almost di∣rectly south, the whole course of whose channell visibly bendeth east∣ward in your Map generall of Palestine. Aleth. That generall Map, (though first placed) was last perfected, wherein we have amended three mistakes, as escaped in our particular descriptions. One that wherein you instance, another  Reen (for∣merly forgottn to be confessed) making that Tribe a little longer from north to south, then it is represented in our particular description thereof. My care shall be, God willing, in the second edition, to conforme those particular Maps, according to these rectisiations in the generall description. CHAP. XIV. Objections against Judah answered. Philol. WOuld not it affright one to see a dead man walk? And will not he in like manner be amazed to see the Dead-sea moving? Why have you made the surface of the waters thereof wa∣ving, as if like other seas it were acted with any tye, which all Authors avouch, and your self confessethIn description of Iudah §. 5. to be a standing stinking lake? Think not to plead, that such waving is the impression of the winde there∣upon, seeing Tacitus affirmes of this sea, Nequeis. li. 5. p. 618 vento impellitur, it is such a drone, it will neither goe of it self, nor yet be driven of the winde. Aleth. I will not score it on the account of the Graver, that it is onely lascivia, or ludicrum coeli, the over-activity of his hand: And in such cases the flourishings of the Scrivener are no essentiall part of the Bond: but behold Mercators, and other Authors Maps, and you shall finde more motion therein, then is here by us expressed. The most melancholy body of moisture, (especially of so great extent) is necessarily subject to such simpe∣ring in windy weather, as inseparable from the liquidity thereof. Philol. Why set you Zeboim most northernly of all the five Cities in the Dead-sea, in the place where Sodome is situated in all other descriptions? Aleth. The placing of them is not much materiall, whether longwise all in a File as Mr. More sets them, or in two Rankes, (two and two) as they are ordered bySo set in our Map of old Canaan. Mercator. Skuls in a charnel-house never justle for the upper place; and as sensless is the contention betwixt these dead Cities, which shall stand first, whose foundations long since were doubly destroyed with fire and water. But the sole motive of my placing Zeboim most northern of these four Cities, is because I finde1 Sam. 13. 18. the valley of Zeboim in the TribeNe. 11. 34. of Benjamin, which probably lay near the influx of Iordan into the Dead-sea, denominated from the vicinity of Zeboim there∣abouts. Philol. The Hebrew Orthography confutes your conceit. For Zeboim by
you last alledged is spelled with different letters from the City which was burnt with fire from heaven. Aleth. I confess a threefold variation in the writing of this name, though all the same in effect, 1 Gen. 14. 2. and so also Deut. 29. 23. 2 1 Sam.So also Ne∣hem. 11. 34. 13. 18 3 Hoseah 11. 8. . I shall set thee at Zeboim &c. Here to mollifie the word, the Gutturall is either altered, or wholly omit∣ted; neither amounting to make it a new word: How variously are the names of the same English towns spoken and spelled; as Lester, Leicester, Legeocester, Legecester, yet the same word dressed in severall spel∣lings and pronunciations? Philol. Why make you Hebon being a noted City of the Priests, and City of Refuge, different from all the rest, onely with a single circle about it? Aleth. Because the fields and villages thereof were none of the Priests,Iosh. 21. 12. but were given to Caleb the son of Iephunneh for his possession. Philol. If so, then Hebron ought not to have had any circle at all about it, being a bare City of the Priests without any suburbs belonging there∣unto. Aleth. The Priests in Hebron had, and had not, suburbs pertaining thereunto, according to the severall acception of suburbs. If by them you onely understand aedificia suburbana, buildings (though without the City walls) contiguous thereunto, these (no doubt) belonged to the Priests, who hadIbid. v. 13. Hebron with her suburbs: otherwise if you extend them to ager suburbanus, the fields surrounding the City, these related to Caleb as the proper owner thereof. Philol. You might well have afforded conjecturall flags to most of the Cities in Iudah, going generally by guess in your placing of them, and differing from all other authors therein. Aleth. The Learned in Anatomy have informed me, that veins are alike in their trunks, but not in their branches; so that although the great Channels of bloud run alike in all bodies, yet the smaller veines (as is most visible in their divaication on the back of the hand) disperse them∣selves diversly, in divers persons: The like is confessed in all Maps of Iudah, wherein the grand Cities, Hebron, Debir, Bethlehem &c. have their certain position agreed on by most Authors, whilest their inferiour places (and no Tribe afforded more obscure Cities but once named in Scripture) are subject to much variety, according to the fancies of Au∣thors. Wherein we hope we have observed, as much as might be, these short, and small directions we finde in Scripture. Philol. But you are not constant to your self in the location of those lesser places, as appears by some diversity of their distances (both amongst themselves and from Ierusalem) in the particular description of Iudah, and in the generall Map of Palestine.
Aleth. I confess the same; who having discovered some errors in the particular Map, reformed the same in the Map-generall. Which may be beheld in this point, as a new Edition of the former, corrected and amen∣ded. Request I therefore the Reader in such small differences, to rely ra∣ther on the credit of the Map-generall. Philol. YouLib. 1. p. 22. § 2. once placed Hepher a royall City in Manasseh on this side Iordan, which since you have removed into Iudah, without giving any account of the alteration. Aleth. Some probability perswaded us to our former opinion. Cheif∣ly because Hepher is mentioned in Ioshua'sJosh. 12. 17 list, next to Tapuah; which is known to be in Manasseh. But since finding also a TapuahJosh. 15. 34. in Iudah, and a land of1 King. 4. 10. Hepher near Sochoh, a place also inJosh. 15. 35. Iudah, it hath staggered our judgment, and caused us to remove Hepher into Iudah with a flag of uncer∣taintie thereon; all Authors finding an Ignoramus for the exact position thereof. Philol. The land of Goshen is sufficiently known to be inGen. 46. 28. Egypt: And how stragleth ofJosh. 10. 41. and 15. 15. Countrey of Goshen into this Tribe? Aleth. You know that besides this England wherein we live, there is an Anglia in Denmark, whence our Ancestors are said to have come; and there is England beyond Wales, whither some of our nation removed. Some such occasion (to us unknown) might give the name of Goshen to a petty tract of ground in Iudah: Or else it might be so called from some assimilation in the fruitfulness thereof. Wonder not at a Goshen in Egypt, and another in Iudah; when we finde twoJosh. 15. 24. and 55. Ziphs, twoJosh. 15. 34. and 56. Zenoahs, two Josh. 35. & 48. Socohs &c. (As two Kirbies market-townes in Westmorland) within the compass of this Tribe. Philol. Conceive you that any wildernesses wherewith Iudah aboun∣ded, were places of any pleasant habitation? Aleth. I am confident thereof. For instance, Engedi though a1 Sam. 24. 1. Wil∣derness, was so delicious a place,Cant. 9. 14 that the Spouse is compared to a cluster of Camphire in the Vineyards of Engedi. Besides, it had the conveniency of Palmtrees, therefore2 Chr. 20. 2. in Scripture called Hazazon-Tamar, which is Engedi Tamar, being in Hebrew a Palme. Nor can I omit the testimony of Inra os En∣gadda oppidum est, scundum ab Hiersoymis silitate, Pal∣metorumque nemoribus, nunc alterum busum. Pliny as the best comment herein in Gods word; who speaking of people living on the west of the Dead-sea; amongst these (saith he) is the town ENGADDA; Second to Ierusalem in fruitfulness, and WOODS OF PALME-TREES; but now become another heap of Ashes. Philol. I finde indeed a City, and wilderness of Maon in this Tribe, but were the dwellers therein, those same Maonites, which are said Iudg. 10. 12. with the Zidonians and Amalekites to have oppressed Israel? Aleth. O no. I take these tyrant Maonites to have been a fierce and forein Nation. Saint Hierom, de locis Hebraicis, conceives Maon to be the Countrey of Moab. The vulgar Latine translates it Canaanites, because Maonites signifieth inhabitants, and the Canaanites we know were the an∣cient
and originall dwellers in the land) whose Relicks left in the land contrary to Gods command, were constant thornes in the sides of the Israelites. But I conceive rather with learned Cajetan on this place, these Mao∣nites were a distinct neighbouring nation, whose certain habitation is to us unknown. Philol. Saul, when marching against the Amalekites, is said to have numbred the people (being two hundred and ten thousand, in1 Sam. 15. 4. Telaim: which by the coast of the Countrey seems south in or near Iudah. Yet no such place appears in your Map thereof. Aleth. The Hebrew word  is variously interpreted, the Rab∣bins render it appellatively in Lambes; affirming the Saul did not count them in specie, but for more safety or expedition, computed the people by their Paschall Lambes, proportioning such a number of men to a Lambe. Others read it, He numbred them as Lambes, that is, now grown meek and quiet, (whereas at the first there were some1 Sam. 10. 27. & 1 Sam. 11. 12 animosities of the people against him: Shall Saul reign over us?) contentedly submitting themselves to his command. But I take Telaim for a true City, and the same with Telem Iosh. 15. 24. which you may finde in our description. CHAP. XV. Objections against the Land of Moriah answered. Philol. I Perceive the imperfection of your description by the omitting of a memorable valley therein, namely the vale of Ba∣ca, mentioned by the Psalmist pronouncing him blessed who passing through the vale of BacaPsal. 84. 6. maketh it a Well. You in stead of passing through, pass by this vale unmentioned. Aleth. I reserved my observations on this vale for this place. Some render it appellatively, The vale of weeping: meaning thereby the militant condition of a Christian in this life, incumbred with constant afflictions. If so, this vale of Baca is too big to come under my description; all the moun∣tains in the world being but part of this valley, the extent whereof is ade∣quate to the whole earth. But if you be pleased to take this vale for a proper place, I embrace the opinion of learned Ainsworth on the text, that this vale of Baca, or Mulberry trees, (for so also it signifieth) was near to Ierusalem; out of the tops of which2 Sam. 5. 23. trees, God sounded the Alarum to David when he conquered the Philistines.
CHAP. XVI. Objections against the City of Jerusalem answered. Philol. VVHat is charged unjustly on Saint Paul and his compa∣nions, that they hadAct. 17. 6. turned the world upside down, may truly be laid to your charge, you have in your description of Ierusalem tumbled all things topsie turvy, in the position of the gates thereof; yea the foundations of the City, as presented by you, are out of course, and con∣trary to the rules of other writers. Aleth. Let God be true, and every man a liar. In this particular I profess my self a pure Leveller, desiring that all humane conceits (though built on most specious bottomes) may be laid flat and prostrated, if opposing the written Word. In conformity whereunto, we are bound to dissent from such Authors (otherwise honouring them for their severall deserts) to ac∣commodate the Description of the Gates and Towers of Ierusalem, accor∣ding to a threefold eminent Directory, which we finde in Nehemiah. Philol. Give us I pray you an account of them in order. Aleth. The first main Scripture direction we are to observe is, the night survey which Nehemiah took of the walls, (or rather ruines) of Ieru∣salem, described in this manner:NEHEM. 2. 13, 14, 15.And I went out by night by the gate of the valley, even before the Dragon Well, to the Dung port, and viewed the walls of Ierusalem, which were broken down, and the gates thereof were consumed with fire. Then went I out to the gate of the fountain and to the Kings pool, but there was no place for the beast that was under me to pass. Then went I up in the night by the brook, and viewed the wall, and turned back and entred by the gate of the valley, and so returned. The second is the severall reparations (where the same were required) done on the Gates and walls of the City by severall persons, in a circular form, from the Sheep-gateNe. 3. 1. & 32. surrounding the whole City till they returned to the same place where they began▪ Whose names we have carefully inscribed on those portions of buildings, upon which their cost and pains were expended. The third, but most materiall, (because most declaratory of the me∣thod of the Gates) is the solemn Processions, which the people divided into two Quires, made round about the walls: each of them measuring a Semi-circle; both of them incompassing the whole circumference of Ierusalem, and at last joining together in the (best meeting place) the Temple of God.
First Quire, Nehem. 12. 31.One great company went on the right hand, upon the wall towards the Dung-gate, consisting of half the Princes of Iudah: and Ezra the Scribe before them. And at the fountain-gate which is over against them, they went up by the staires of the City of David, at the going up of the wall above the house of David, even unto the water-gate eastward.Second Quire, Nehem. 12. 38, 39.And the other company of them that gave thanks went over against them,Not behind them in place, but somewhat later in time. and I after them, and the half of the people upon the wall, from beyond the Tower of the furnaces even unto the broad wall. And from above the gate of Ephraim, and above the old-gate and above the fish-gate, and the tower of Hananeel, and the tower of Meah, even unto the sheep-gate; and they stood still in thePorta custodiae or the Watch-gate being (as Villlpds excellently proveth) the East-gate of the Temple. prison-gate. So stood the two companies of them that gave thanks in the house of God. Now I request the Reader with his eye to examine, whether the walls of Ierusalem, as designed in our draught, agree not with these directions of Scripture. To purchase the favour whereof, I pass not for the frowns of any Authors. Omne excelsum cadet, down with whatever dare oppose our embracing of the Text. This we hope for the main▪ will satisfie any indifferent Reader; otherwise if being as impossible for me in this short discourse, to meet with the severall exceptions of private fancies; as for a Geographer in the Map-generall of a Countrey, to set down the house of every particular person. Philol. You set Sion south of Ierusalem, clean contrary to the description of the PsalmistPsal. 43. 2., Beautifull for situation, the joy of the whole earth is mount Sion, on the Sides of the North the City of the great King. Aleth. The place by you alleadged is difficult, much canvassed by Comments, who fasten upon it two principall interpretations. 1 Sense. Some make this verse a description of Sion a∣lone, the latter clause by Apposition so referring unto it, that Sion it self is solely charactered to be the City on the side of the North. 2 Sense. Others make this verse the full description of all Ierusalem, consisting of two principall parts, by the figure of Asyndeton coupled together. 1. Sion. Beautiful for situation the oy of the whole earth is Mount Sion. 2. Properly Jerusalem. On the sides of the North the City of the great King. That the latter is the truer interpretation we send the Reader to the vo∣luminous labours ofApparat. Vr∣bis part 1. lib. 1. cap. 11. pa. 40. col. 2. & lib. 2. cap. 18. Villalpandus proving the same out of Scripture, Io∣sephus, and other Authors. Besides (though time and casualty hath made many alterations on Ierusalem, yet) what Peter in his time said of Davids sepulcher, even in our age true of mount Sion,Act. 2. 29. it is with us unto this day, standing still full south of Ierusalem, as Travellers doe affirme, no doubt in the ancient place and posture thereof. For, although Ioseph could re∣move the Egyptians fromGen. 47. 21. one end of the borders of the land, unto the other end thereof; yet mountains are too firmly fastned to be transplanted from their naturall location. Philol. You doe commit what you condemn in Adrichomius, taxing Lib. 3. pa 342. par. 3. him for fashioning the streets of Ierusalem after his own fancy; assu∣ming the same liberty to your self in conjecturall ranging them with∣out warrant from Gods word. Aleth. Reason dictates what we have done herein. For Gates being made for entrance, probably the streets from them stretched forth-right,
as we have deigned them. Those Insulae, or Quadrants of buildings, are no∣thing else but the necessary product of the decussation and thwarting of such direct streets where they cross one another. It is impossible that in describing Ierusalem we should doe what Saul in another case desired of the Ziphites,1 Sam. 23. 23. See therefore and take notice of all the lurking places, and come yee again with the certainty; onely such generalls in likelyhood may be presu∣med, and the rest is left to every mans free conception. Philol. You have forgotten the Porta fictilis or Potters-gate, which Apparat. Vrbis pal. 1. lib. 3. cp. 25. Villalpandus solemnly sets up on the east of the City, building on a place alleadged out of the Prophet Ieremy. Aleth. His Porta fictilis, is rather fictitia and so brittle a gate that it is broken with perusing the text by him cited, for the proof thereof.Ier. 19. 1, 2. Thus saith the Lord, goe and get a potters earthen bottle, and take of the ancients of the people and of the ancients of the Priests, and goe forth unto the valley of the son of Hinnom, which is by the entry of the east gate, and proclaim there the words that I shall tell thee. See here (whatever may be in the vulgar Latine) no sherd of a Potters-gate, though we confess a PottersMat. 27. 7. field nigh the City; but, thence it cannot be collected that there was also a gate of that name, no more then if followes, because of Smithfield, there must be Smith-gate in London. Philol. You affirmLib. 3. pa. 320. par. 6. that we meet with no gate at all in Sion, flatly contra∣ry to the words of David,Psal. 87. 2. The Lord loveth the gates of Sion more then all the dwellings of Icoab. Aleth. I say again, that because of the precipice of the place, Sion had no out-gates, but had those which led into Ierusalem which might be meant by the Psalmist. But to speake plainly, Gates of Sion are not there to be taken literally, being put for the assemblies of the people at Gods publick worship; especially, whilest the Ark was in Davids time fixed in Zion. CHAP. XVIII. Objections against the Courts of Solomons Temple answered. Objections a∣gainst Solomons Temple are whollyomitted, because the draught thereof is intirely taken out of Arias Montanus, and chargeable on his account. Philol. IN your description of the Courts of Solomons Temple, I finde one∣ly four gates to the cardinall windes, but neither Parbar nor Asuppim Gate, though both of them eminently mentioned1 Chr. 26. 17. in the Bible. Aleth. I must confess my self utterly unsatisfied in the position of these places, whether or no they were in the first two Courts, as built by So∣lomon, or added in after ages, when the new2 Chr. 20. 5. or third Court was added to Solomons foundation: which latter I am most inclined to beleeve. For perusing the date of the first book of Chronicles, I finde it written long after the Iews return from the captivity of Babylon, as appears by reckoning up the grand-children of1 Chr. 4. 21. Zorobabel, and therefore I suspend the describing of them till further information.
Philol. At the entrance of the House of the Lord, youPag. 385. §. 3. make horses, but omit the Chariots of the Sun, both equally mentioned in2 King. 23. 11. Scripture, and destroyed by Iosiah. Besides, you make them artificiall statues, which (no doubt) were naturall horses, sent out with riders every morning in a superstitious frolick, to give a welcome, or visit to the dawning-day, and to salute the Sun in the first arising thereof. Aleth. Chariots must be supposed there, though not expressed for lack of room. Sure they were no reall horses, which the [idolatrous] Kings of Israel had given to theIbidem. Sun. For (except thereby be meant a successive breed, or race) such horses must be extremely old at this refor∣mation, after theCompare the foresaid place with 2 King. 22. 3. eighteenth year of Iosia, probably set up by Ahaz sixty years since. Besides, it is improbable, that living horses were kept so close to the Temple, and that noisome stables should be so near Gods house, generally set at some distance from mens dwellings. However, I had rather subscribe, then ingage in a controversie not worth the conten∣ding for. Philol. YouPag. 391. §. 2. mention onely one Table of shew-bread, whereas David made preparation for the1 Chr. 28. 16. Tables thereof. And lest so plain a place of Scripture should be avoided, by the frequent figure of Enallage, Solomon is expresly said to have made2 Chr. 5. 8. ten Tables and placed them in the Temple, and it is added not long after, whereon theIbid. ver. 19. shew-bread was set. Aleth. I am confident, there was but one principall Table for the presen∣tation of shew-bread, whereon, by Gods appointment, the twelveLevit. 24. 5, 6. Cakes were set in two rowes, according to the number of the twelve Tribes of Israel. Now, if there were ten Tables provided for that purpose, the twelve Cakes could not be equally set upon them without a fraction. I conceive therefore the other nine, onely as side-cupboards, or Livery tables ministeriall to that principall one, as whereupon the shew-bread elect was set before the consecration thereof, and whereon the old shew-bread removed for some time, might be placed, when new was substituted in the room thereof. Philol. To proceed to the Altar. I approve yourPag. 394. §. 3. answer taken from the Celestiall fire thereupon, as satisfactory in relation to the Tabernacle, and Solomons Temple, that so many sacrifices were so suddenly consumed without any noisomeness. But, the difficulty still remains as touching the second Temple: where, by generall confession (in default of hea∣venly) the Priests were fain to make use of common, and ordinary fire. Aleth. Although I beleeve not in full latitude, what the Iewish Rabbins doe affirme; That the Pillar of smoak which ascended from the sacrifice, curled onely upwards in direct wreaths to heaven, without any scatter∣ing, or shedding if self abroad; yet for the main, we may be confident, it was no whit offensive to the Priests, or people thereabouts. This we impute to the providence of God, passing an Act of indemnity, that none should be impaired, either in health or wealth, by the performance of
any service according to his appointment. And, as the land of the Iews was secured from forein invasionExod. 34. 24. during the appearing of all the males thrice a year at Ierusalem: so the same goodness of God ordered, that his people should sustain no damage or detriment, either in their purses, or per∣sons, whilest busied in his worship: the main reason that no infection did arise, no smoak, nor ill savor sented from the fat, offall, and excre∣ments of so many sacrifices offered in so short a time, and small a compass. Philol. You say something for the avoiding of noisomeness, but no∣thing in answer, that that common fire should so quickly devour so many sacrifices, though, I confess the offerings in the second Temple, nothing so numerous as those in Solomons. Aleth. We must totally ascribe this to the work of the Lord, who though not granting this second Temple the honour and use of Celestiall fire (al∣lowed to the former) yet, in approbation of his own ordinance, indu∣ed common fire with more then common activity. As, often in extre∣mities, when miracles are denied, ordinary means are blessed with extra∣ordinary efficacy in their operation. CHAP. XIX. Objections against Zorobabels Temple rebuilt by Herod. Philol. I Forbear from objecting any thing against this Map of the Temple, seeing, by your confession, it is none of your own designing, but borrowed from Ludovicus Capellus. Onely let me tell you, that I have seen a draught of the same Temple, as in fashion much un∣like it, so in exactness far above it. I mean the same which Constantine L' Empereur hath set forth out of Middoth, or the Rabbinicall book of Solomons building. Aleth. I confess my self to give little credit to Rabbinicall relations therein, and think the worse of the writings of all Rabbins, for their own thinking so well thereof, comparing them with, yea preferring them be∣fore Scripture it self. SuchAs translated by Buxtorse in his Rcensio opc∣ris Talmudici. passages (which for me shall goe unenglished) being found frequent therein.In Codice juris Bava Mtria sol. 33. 1. In illis qui operam dant lectioni Biblicae, virtus aliqua est, aut potiùs nulla; at qui traditioni, virtus est, propter quam accipitur praemi∣um. EgredientiIn Codice juris Chagiga. so. 10. 1. è studio Talmudico ad studium Biblicum, non erit pax.Iacob in Libro Caphtor. o. 121. Scito verba Scribarum amabiliora esse verbis Prophetarum. Justly therefore did Christ com∣plain of thē,Mark 7. 13. Making the word of God of none effect through your traditiōs which ye have delivered. And, although I am not of the mind ofTom. 2. par. 2. pag. 576. Villalpandus, who ad∣viseth such as would read the Rabbins without danger, first to fense them∣selves with the signe of the Cross, and then whilest reading their books, often to repeat our Saviours word, You are of your father theJohn 8. 44. Devill; yet
I conceive Epicharmus his counsell very usefull herein, , Re∣member thou not to beleeve, their books (I mean in many passages therein) being the Leaven of the Scribes and Pharisees, whereof Christ forewarneth us to beware. Philol. Grant them unsound in points of faith, they may be true in mat∣ters of fact. And though we must zealously reject their doctrinall positi∣ons, we may safely embrace their historicall relations; especially con∣cerning the contrivance of the second Temple extant in their age. Aleth. As touching this second Temple, the works of the Rabbins now extant can give us no true intelligence thereof. The Iews once said to our SaviourJohn 8. 57., Thou art not yet fifty years old, and hast thou seen Abraham? taxing him for pretending to more antiquity, then his age could extend unto. Though this was but a cavill at Christ, the same may justly be charged on the Rabbins, that the oldest of them extant at this day, (all of them wri∣ting since Ann. Dom. 100. in Trajans time) are too late and modern to give us any infallible information of the second Temple, as which their eyes did never behold. Whilest Iosephus (out of whose instructions Capellus his description was lately taken) was an eye-witness thereof. Philol. Allow their personall experience too short to reach the Temple, their reports proceed on ancient records, declaring, as what was done in their days, so in the old time before them. Aleth. So many and prodigious are theSee Sixtus Senensis on this subject. monstrosities by them deli∣vered, that it is hard to discern their Lampreys from their Snakes; and the very truths among them are rendered suspicious, because mixed with so many falshoods: Who, because they received not the truth [Christ him∣self] for this cause God hath sent them strong2 Thes. 2. 11. delusions that they should beleeve a lye. Philol. Grant the Rabbins generally guilty hereof, yet Rabbi Iudah may be credited, living about Trajans time, not much above thirty years after the destruction of the Temple. One commonly styled the Prince, and the Holy, conceived by his Countreymen next to Moses in knowledge and piety. Wherefore that new description of the Temple I so lately commended, deserves beleefe, coming from the pen of this Rabbi Iudah, as far exceeding other Rabbins, as the Patriarch Iudah excelled other Tribes. Aleth. Your so much admired Rabbi Iudah was swolne with Pharisai∣call hypocrisie, as high as any other. Witness his dying words, breathing out his soul with an expression to this effect,Constantine L' Emperur in Mddob. cap. . Sect. . Lord of the world, it is mani∣fest and known unto thee, that I have laboured in thy law with my ten fingers, and have not received any gain, no not with so much as the least finger. Justly therefore may we be jealous of this water coming from such a fountain. Philol. Well, to wave the description of this Rabbin, and to give you onely an occasion to enlarge your self, I desire farther information both in this draught of Capellus, and also in your own written description of Zorobabel-Herods Temple. For the first, I wonder you have omitted the Bridge from mount Olivet to the Temple, mentioned in Middoth.
Aleth. We finde indeed such a Bridge (others call it a Caus-way) in Mid∣doth built on purpose from mount Olivet to the mountain of the house,A bridge from mount Olivet to the Temple. whereon the Temple was built. But oh! how long must that Bridge be? Above a mile in the direct extent thereof. How many, but especially how high must the arches therein be, to stride over so vast a concavity? What need of so expensive a structure, seeing an ordinary plank would serve for a bridge over Kedron? which in sommer time was all bridge it selfe. How came Iosephus (one neither blinde to see, nor dumb to tell of beautifull buildings for the honour of his nation) to take no notice hereof? In∣deed the high Priests amongst the Romans, anciently had an inspection over the making and mending of bridges, thence called Pontifices: but he deserved to be Pontifex Maximus amongst the Iews, who erected this sum∣ptuous bridge, on which may beliefe dare not walk with confidence, for fear of falling, and therefore I conclude it well omitted by Capellus. Philol. I am not satisfied in the reasons you give why Solomons Porch was so called. Aleth. Concerning the name whereof,Solomons porch. let me adde this (to what formerly we haveIn descripti∣on of Zoroba∣bels Temple. written on this subject) that some conceive it so called, not because Solomon ever built it, but because in after ages erected by Herod, it did approximate, or come the nearest in state and magnifi∣cence to that of Solomons first founding. Thus Manna is termedPsal. 78. 25. Angels food, not because they ever eat thereof, but had they any intention to feed thereon, better dainties could not be desired by them, or afforded to them: as this Solomons porch (at leastwise in the apprehension of the builders thereof, well conceited of their own workmanship) was so called, be∣cause as brave, and beautifull, as if Solomon himself with all his wealth, and glory, had been the erectour thereof? Philol. I conceive some carnall reason for the buyers and sellers of Sheep and Oxen in the Temple, (driven out by our Saviour) because men, to save the tedious driving of them up in kinde, brought flocks and heards up in their purses to Ierusalem, (money wherewith there they bought them) but what use was there of money-changers in the Temple? Aleth. Money-chan∣gers their im∣ployment. Besides their changing of strangers gold into silver, for less pay∣ments at their coming hither; silver into gold for the lighter portage, at their departure hence; under favour I conceive, they fitted people coming hither with Shekels, for their religious service. True it is, the Roman coins were onely currant in common and civill paiments (as appears by Christs question and the Iews answer, Whose image and superscription is this? and they said, Cesars) but probably Shekels were used in sacred paiments, the Romans permitting the Iews the free enjoyment of their Religion, in things not destructive to their civill government. Now, seeing the Iews were enjoined by Gods Law, to tender unto him Shekels of the Sanctuary, not onely in valuation, but in Specie (especially in the case ofLevit. 7. 3. vowes, paying moe or few according to the age, or sex of the person) it is likely
that the money-changers here furnished the aforesaid Votaries with Shekels, and other pieces thereof, in exchange for their Roman moneys. But here∣in such Brokers so improved themselves on the present necessities of some, and ignorance of others, that they much defrauded people with their contracts, therefore termed by our Saviour aMat. 21. 13. Den of theeves. Philol. Why was the outward Court in the Temple called the Court of women? Aleth. Why called Court of wo∣men. Not, that they alone were permitted to be there; but because they were not suffered, unless on speciall occasions, to goe any farther. Thus De Bello Iud. lib. 5. cap. 14. Iosephus calls it , the proper place for wo∣men to worship in; but elsewhere expounds himself,Anti. . 15. c. 14 , farther then this the Temple was unaccessible to women; so that this Court was proper for, but not peculiar unto the weaker sexe for their staying therein. Philol. Seeing that Court was signally so called from Women, doe you conceive as many women as men repaired to Gods publick service in Ierusalem? Aleth. O no! All males were enjoined to appearDeut. 16. 16. thrice a year (and that not empty handed) before the Lord in the Temple; whilest the same was not required of women. Whose exemption proceeded partly from the infirmity of their sexe, not able to endure so long a journey; partly to protect their chastity in such a concourse of people; and part∣ly that they might attend their young Children, and family-affaires. For though God gave themExod. 34. 24. assurance, that during their husbands absence, no enemy should invade the land; yet their tender1 Sam. 1. 22. children were not exempted from inconveniencies which might arise if their mothers were away from them. Philol. Me thinkes the place in the Temple, where the Sacrifices were slain and fleaed, seems too small for such a purpose, if all the Paschall Lambes (computed by Iosephus to be thousands) were as the Rabbins will have it) all killed by the Priests in the Temple, and that betwixt the two Evenings, (i. e. between three and six a clock in the afternoon) no longer time being allotted thereunto? I say, if so, a far greater square then what is presented in your Map was requisite for that service. Aleth. I am not bound to finde room for all their Lambes. Sufficeth it that I have exactly followed my pattern in the dimensions of the place. But to the point, may I be so bold as to whisper my opinion in your eare; I conceive that, after the  (or Priests appointed to view the blemishes of Lambes)For they were not confined to so few hours n their scru∣tiny. had at more leasure approved those Lambes legally perfect, a private person might sacrifice them in his own house; and then the less room was required in the Temple for such performances. And here I alledge the authority of Philo,Libro tertio de vita Mosis, and again in his book de deca∣loge. affirming that (as undoubtedly at the first institution of the Passeover and before the erection of the Tabernacle) every one was a Priest in his own family,
even in his days, and sufficiently qualified for the offering of such sacrifices. Philol. You make staires ascending to the Altar, flatly against Gods command;Exod. 20. 26. Neither shalt thou goe up with steps unto my Altar; and the rea∣son is rendered, that thy nakedness be not discovered thereon. Aleth. To salve the matter, (and to reconcile our, with the Rabbins, description) I conceive under the favour of Capellus, that the going up to the Altar was not divided into steps (as he presenteth it) but that it heightened it self by insensible degrees, being (though a Rise of many Cubites) an even ascent (as I may term it) equally elevated, so that the Priests, not striding, but pacing up thereon, were not necessitated to any See Constantine L' Empereur in Middoth. p. 111. divarication of their feet, which might occasion the discovery of any uncomeliness. Philol. You make the Holy immediately continued to the Holy of Holies, whereas there was a Cubit distance betwixt them, and that covered with two vailes, which interstitium was called , by the Rabbins. Aleth. I have read as much in their writings, and that they were un∣resolved whether to refer this space to the Holy or Holy of Holies; (like the condition of dying men in transitu, dubious whether to be accounted in this or another world) and thence they say it was called , i. e. See M Light∣oo in his Temple. Perturbation or disturbance, because the Priests were much disquieted thereat to which part of the Temple to relate it. But what aith the Psalmist? manPsal. 39. 7. disquieteth himself in vain, as here the Rabbins do, causelesly troubling themselves about that which appears not in Scripture. This we know, the Temple (besides the Porch) had two fair rooms, the Holy and Holiest; but as for this partition-Closet betwixt them, no foundation there∣of in Gods word. Philol. You confidently deny that the Ark was in the second Temple, whereas, upon inspection of the Triumphant Marble of the Vespasians in Rome, the same appeareth pourtraicted thereupon. Aleth. Their eyes are much mistaken which finde the Ark on that Monment, though something Ark-like, (but in very deed nothing else but the Table of shew-bread) be presented therein: as for further satisfacti∣on we have causedSee the last draught or frag∣mnt Sacra. here to be exemplified. Philol. You avouch an utter abolition of all Temple-Utensils, and no surviving Reliques thereof at this day. I conceive the contrary may be made good out of History and daily experience. Aleth. I confess the fingers of superstition have itched to be tampering with them. But finding the same not to fadge, at last she was fain Hands-off to desist from such improbable designes. OneVilllpands. tells us of a chea∣ter in France which many hundred years agoe pretended to Moses his wonder-working Rod (though that of Aaron, not Moses, was preserved in the Tabernacle) and essayed to work miracles therewith, till at last he was beaten with his own Rod, detected and punished for an impostor. I con∣fess
also thatIn lib. hist. Exod. 1. ca. 6. Comestor, and out of himDe iis quaee fu∣runt in cap. 1. Ribera in altari Lateranensi infra quod dicitur esse Arca, In the Lateran Altar, say they [in Rome] beneath [within] which IT IS SAID the Ark is; but both of them speak so uncertainly, and put it on publick fame, that they teach us to deny the Truth thereof. Philol. You are very briefe in the destruction of the City and Temple by the Romans, whereas so memorable a subject deserved a fuller de∣scription. Aleth. It is largely related by Iosephus to whom the Reader is referred; onely I will adde a word of the remarkable time thereof. God graci∣ously promised his people, Neither shallExod. 34. 24. any man desire thy land, when thou shalt goe up to appear before the Lord thy God thrice a year. Obedience is better then an Army to secure ones estate. As the Meniall-servants of great Persons are protected in some cases, from Arrests, whilest they waite on their Masters in publick imployment; so Gods people were priviledged from damage during their attendance on him thrice a year in his Temple; no invasion being found to befall them on that occasion clean through the Scripture. But at last, in token that they, by their wic∣kedness, had out-lawed themselves of his protection, and he withdrawn his defending of them, the Romans besieged them in Ierusalem, coming up thither on the solemn feast of theIosep. Bell. Iud. li. 6. c. 4. Passeover; and soon after both Temple and City was destroyed, by Vespasian and Titus his son, seventy two years after our Saviours birth. Not one stone of the Temple left upon ano∣ther; though three towers of the City (Maiamne, Phaselus, and Hippicus) were left standing; not out of pity, but pride; their devouring sword leaving this mannerly bit on purpose, that posterity might tast how strong the place was, to the greater credit of the conquerours. Philol. To adde to the solemnity of the State, Titus with his Father Vespasian made a solemn Triumph in Rome, wherein the golden Table and Candlestick, with otherIosep. de Bel. Iud. li. 7. cap. 21. sacred Utensils of the Temple, formerly reve∣renced, now derided, made once for Gods service, now served to adorn the Trophees of Pagans. We read what befellDan. 5. 5. Belshazzar when he quaffed in the vessels of the Temple. Some perchance might here expect that God, to punish the profanaion of these holy instrument, should then have shewed some signall judgment on the profaners. But the case was altered, because the date of Ceremonies was then expired, the use of Types ended, Christ the Truth being come: and the Moon may set ob∣scurely without any mans taking notice of her, when the Sun is risen. Aleth. The Law car∣ried captive. The last and greatest Trophee then carried in triumph was the Iosep. ut prius. LAW OF THE IEWS: probably that very numericall book, the Authentik or Originall of the Law, which by Gods command was constantly to be kept in theDeut. 17. 18. & 2 Chr. 24. 14. Temple. And this perchance was permitted by divine providence, not without a peculiar mystery therein, to shew, that the Law, which formerly bound men over to damnation, was now bound it self in captivity, outed of its former dominion, deposed
from its condemning power, having now the Gospell of Grace succeeding in the place thereof. Lastly, orders were issued out to the Governour of Syria to set the whole land of Iudea to sale; which was done accordingly. Time was, when by the Leviticall Law, Iewish land though old, yet at the year of Iubile was to revert to the ancientLevit. 25. 28. owners; but now the King of heaven granted such a license of Alienation, that it was fully and finally passed away from its ancient possessors. Philol. Coins made in memoriall of the Romn con∣quest. To perpetuate th memory of this Roman conquest, besides many other monuments, Coins were stamped both in gold andBaronius An¦nal. Eccles. anno. 73. ex numis Llii Pasquali∣ni Romani. silver, with the Image of Vespasian and Titus, on the one side, and on the reverse a woman placed in a pensive posture under a Palme-tree, which tree was the Hieroglyphick of Iudea, onely differing herein, that the Palme-tree the more depressed, the more it flourisheth, whereas Iudea sunke under the weight of her woes, and never again outgrew her miseries. And lest men should miss the fancy of the Impress, they are guided thereunto by the Motto subscribed, Iudaea capta, Iudea taken. Aleth. Conclusion of the description. What an on sight hereof would not call to minde the com∣plaint of the Prophet,Lamen. 1. 1. How doth the City sit solitary that was full of people? how is she become as a widow? she that was great among the nations, and Princess among the Provinces, how is she become tributary? Great, no doubt, was the grief of the Iews hereat. But few drops seasonably showred, would preserve the green blade from withering, when much rain cannot revive the roots once withered. Eyes dry for their sins, are vainly wet after their sufferings: and a drought in the Spring is not to be repaired by a deluge in the Autumn. CHAP. XX. Objections, concerning the Description of Mount Libanus, answered. Philol. YOu make Libanus to be the north-ridge of these hills, and Anti-Libanus to be the south part thereof, clean contrary unto lear∣ned Cosmog. lib. 5. pag. 1001. Munster in his description of it. Aleth. Munster is singular therein, unseconded by any other Authors. However, the controversie is not important as touching Scripture, wherein this distinction appears not at all, both the north and south chains of those mountains being promiscuously called Libanus in Holy Writ. Some humane Authors lay this distinction in point of east and west, so great is the difference among them. If I may freely profess my opinion herein, I conceive that the inhabitants of this mountain, termed the place of their own habitation, wheresoever they dwelt, Libanus, and named the mountains of their overthwart neighbours Anti-Libanus: as commonly men account their own Religion onely to be Christianity,
and all such opinions as are opposite to their own, Antichristian Phill. In your Map generall of old Canaan, the Island of Arvad (or Aradus) is not above forty miles from Zidon, which in this Map of mount Libanus are fourscore miles asunder. Indeed I have read of a floating Isle in Scotland, moving from place to place with the winde and waves. But is this Isle of Aradus fixed to no firmer foundations, so that it hath swom forty miles more northward in this, then in your former draught thereof? Aleth. May you be pleased to remember, that in our instructionsLib. . cap. 14. § 8. pre∣mised to the Reader, we gave notice that places standing on the Um-stroke▪ or utmost line of any Map, denote not their accurate position, but situ∣ation thereabouts, to clear the continuation of the Countrey. Such the location of Arvad in our former Map, which in this of mount Libanus is placed according to the true distance thereof. Philol. You make the River Aban (in heathen Authors Chrysorrhos) to sink into the ground, without communicating it self to the sea. This is out of the common road of nature, that this River should be free from paying tribute to the Ocean, to which all smaller waters are in∣debted. Yea andIn his descip∣tion of Manas. beyond Iordan. Lit. A. Adrichomius (no doubt on good authority) maketh it, when passing from Damscus, to run through a plain called Arch abod, and so into the Syrian, or Mediteranean-sea. Aleth. His error therein is confuted, both by ancient, and modern writers. Strabo speaking thereof, . Which Chrysorrhos beginning from the City, and Countrey of Damascus, in a manner is wholly spent in drains thence derived; for it watereth much ground, and that very deep. Some thing more may be collected from Ptolemies ex∣pression, not terming the fall of Chrysorrhoas  (his ordinary word) the Out-lets, or Ejections thereof into the sea, but onely , the End, or determination thereof. Where, by the degrees by him assigned, Betius in his Maps presenteth this River swallowed up wholly in the sands: and the same is confessed by Bellonius an eye-witness thereof, and other modernVd Ferrarii Lx con Geogra∣phicum. Geographers, that it never cometh unto any sea. Philol. You have omitted the Vale of Salt in your Map (near Aram Zo∣ba) neither mentioning in your description that most memorable de∣feat, which David gave the Syrians therein. Your modern Merchants of Aleppo will inform you thereof, who have been on the very place where the battell was fought, as tradition reporteth. Aleth. I have heard so much from the mouths of my judicious M. Roger Vi∣vion and M. Hump. Brown. friends, which have lived in those parts: and have formerly read the same in effect; How, within halfe a days-journeyRiddulhs Travels pa. 45. of Aleppo, there is a very great plain, without grass growing on it, the sand whereof is naturally good salt, and after rain being dried again with the Sun, the people gather it. However, I cannot be perswaded, that this Salt Vale was the place, whereon David gave his
enemies that notable overthrow, as on the perusall of the following Scriptures will appear. 2 Sam. 8. 13And David gat him a name when he returned from smiting the Syrians in the valley of Salt being eighteen thousand men. And he put garrisons in Edom, throughout all Edom put he gar∣risons.1 Chr. 18. 12.Moreover Abishai the sonne of Zerviah slew of the Edomites in the valley of Salt, eighteen thousand.Inscription of Psal. 60.To the chief Musician upon Sushan-Eduth; Michtam of Da∣vid, to teach. When he strove with Aram Maharaim, and with Aram Zobah, when Ioab returned and smote of Edom in the valley of Salt, twelve thousand. Here under favour, I conceive, these severall Scriptures intend one, and the same victory, because fought in the same place, the Valley of Salt, whilest the seeming contradictions, in the names of the Conquerors, dif∣ferent numbers, and nations of the persons conquered, are easiely reconciled: 1. Ioab (as Generall) might give the Command, and Abishai (Lieutenant Generall) do the execution, whilest David (as Soveraign) received the honour of the Action. 2. Twelve thousand might be slain on the place, and six more kild in the pursuit, so making up eighteen thousand in the totall number. 3. This slaughter fell on the Edomites, who are called Syrians, not by their Countrey (though Syria taken in a large sense is compre∣hensive of many nations) but cause, and confederacy, as ingaging themselves (to their cost) auxiliaries in the same quarrell of the Syrians against King David. This battell thus stated (with most probability in my opinion) it seems fought rather in the land of Edom, where there is another Valley of Salt emi∣nent in2 King. 14. 7. & 2 Chr. 25. 11 Scripture, and not near Aleppo, or Aram Zobah. However, because Tradition is a Tyrant on the contrary, I dare resolve nothing positively, but suspend my own, and attend the judgments of others herein. Philol. You make Marra the next modern stage south of Aleppo: where∣as there be many moe miles, and intermediate lodging-places (namely Cane-Toman, andSee Biddulph Travels pa. 88. Saracoop) betwixt them. Aleth. I confess no less, but am sorry your memory is so short, that I must so often incultate the same rule unto you: That places situate on the Um-stroke (such the location of Aleppo in our Map) are not in their exact position, whilest we onely make a long arme to reach them con∣fusedly into our description, though otherwise they be at greater distance, then the scale of miles will admit. Philol. I wonder you make the Mediterranean from Tripoli to Antioch, to run with such a crooked flexure, in form of an Hook, which certainly will not catch the beleefe of any judicious beholder thereof. The rather because no Geographers take cognizance of it, and such a bending is disavowed by all modern Maps. Aleth. Consult Ptolemies Maps (as drawn by learned Bertius) and they present the fashion thereof accordingly: though such an Elbow ap∣pears
not in the late Cardes of this Countrey. No news now adays for Sea to gain, Land to lose, or (reciprocally) both to alter their ancient, and accept new forms: seeing our Cornish-men will tell us, that a good piece of their horn is blunted, and broken off by the sea: whose land formerly stretched out more westward, and wasCamdens Brit. in Cornwall. called (as they say) Lioness, before the waters devoured both the paws, and whole body thereof. CHAP. XXI. Objections answered against the eastern confines of Palestine. Philol. YOu have left the eastern part of this Map altogether empty, which you ought to have furnished with moe towns, and Cities therein. Aleth. Whose image and superscription doth this Map bear? Is it not of Arabia the desert, a wild barren Countrey? To make a desert full, is as ab∣surd, as to paint a Black-more faire. Besides, whence should the Geogra∣pher fetch the names of these Cities, except from his own groundless fancy? And then, as King Edgar is said to have founded in England as many Monasteries as there be weeks in the year, a Map-maker might build moe Cities then there be hours therein, whilest the Reader must have as much simplicity, as the Author dishonesty, that gives credit there∣unto. Philol. You have false pointed (to use your ownPag. 7. §. 45. expression) the Iewish peregrinations, seeing those four intermediate stages (Comma's, as you term them) be Ar, Mattanah, Nahaliel, and Bamoth, being named after the stream of Arnon, seem on the other side of the River, and there∣fore rather to be placed in the Tribe of Reuben. Aleth. I have consulted the text, and best Comments upon it, and cannot yet be convinced, but that the same is rightly situate. Arnon I conceive divided into many streams, therefore plurally termed the brooks ofNum. 21. 14. Arnon, probably tributary brooks running into that main River: and though the places aforesaid lay north of these rivolets, they were south of the main Arnon, and in the land of Moab. However, because of their so ambiguous posture, being more willing to learn then to teach, I am ready to alter them on any better information. Philol. You make Iobs sons tent in your Map blown down on his children therein, whereasJob. 1. 13. Scripture calleth it expresly an house, and other∣wise it is unlikely they should be slain, with such slight curtains falling upon them. Aleth. I will not plead that a tent is also termed an house in Scripture Compare Gen. 26. 25. with Gen. 27. 25. phrase, that tent-dwelling was most fashionable in the eastern Coun∣tries,
especially in that ancient age, that statory, or long standing tents were quilted with timber, for their stronger support; that Iob children might be (though not killed with weight) stifled with the closeness of the very linnen in the tent, when Satan with such violence in a vengeance, drave it in upon them; but fairly charge it on the account of the Graver following his own fancy therein. Philol. You have made the Red-sea too near to the Dead-sea, presenting not above sixty miles distance betwixt them, when there is much more in all authentick descriptions of them. See now what covetousness doeth, it makes men guilty of much falshood, as here your over-gree∣diness to recover Ezion Gaber within this Map, hath tempted you to trespass on due proportion. Aleth. I confess the main channell of the Red-sea runs many miles more south-west; but this Bay called Sinus Elaniticu; from  (Eath in Scripture, a fair City built by2 King. 14. 22. Uzziah, and restored to Iah,Deut. 2. 8. hard by Ezion Gaber) buncheth out more to the north, and in Mr. Mores Maps, and others of good credit, is advanced as near to the Dead-sea, as in this our description. Besides, I have good reason to conceive, that this Reach of the Red-sea, anciently stretched more north-ward, then now adays; even to the City of Elana, or Elath, whence it takes its name; because in Ptolemies Map, Elana is set in the land, some miles distance from the Sea; whither, no doubt, it reached formerly, and made an haven for Ezion Gaber thereabouts. Philol. But, how can Ezion Gaber stand on the Red-sea, when we read of Huram King of Tyre (an haven sufficiently known to be seated on the Mediterranean) that he sent2 Chr. 8. 17, 18. ships to Solomon to Ezion Gaber? Surely, they sailed not round about Africa, much less can you conceive them to goe over land, (ships having fins, and not feet) and a shole of fish may with as much probability be driven over the Continent. Aleth. Here Sir, I will not tell you of the Prince of Orange his constant∣ly carrying boats to make bridges of (though of no great burden) in his wagons: much less will I instance in those seventy lesser ships, and Galliots, brought by Zoganes Bassa Anno 1453. up aKnowls Tk. Hist. pag. 343. great hill, and so by dry land with all their sails abroad▪ out of the Bosphorus, the space of eight miles, into the haven of Constantinople, by an ingenious device, and a great strength of men to manage it, whereby the said City was soon after unexpectedly taken by the Turke. An invention formerly found out, and practised by the Venetians at the lake of Bennacus. But, waving these things, take notice, I pray, of two memorable passages concerning the matter in hand. 1 King. 9. 26.And King Solomon made a navy of Ships in Ezion Gaber.2 Chron. 8. 18.And Huram sent him [to Ezion Gaber] by the of his servants, Ships, and servants that had know∣ledge of the sea. The result of both is this, Solomons ships were built in the place at Ezion
Gaber, where all their lumber, and masie timber was provided, at the Dock wherein they were made: whilest their tackling, and other essenti∣all implements thereof (easily portable when taken in pieces) might be sent from Tyre by land-carriages. Such far carting being part of the bur∣dens Solomon imposed on the people, whereof they afterwards so grie∣vously 1 King. 12. 4. complained: or else by Hurams sending ships, by a Metonymie of the cause understand ship-rights, such as found materials there, and brought art and industry (virtually with the former a whole navy) thither with them. Philol. Seeing Edom bounded north-ward on the Dead, south-ward on the Redsea (whereon stood Ezion Gaber in the land ofKing. 9. 26. Edom) how can the children of Israel be conceived (when denyed passage through it) toNum. 21. 4. compass the land of Edom without coming into any part thereof, ex∣cept they went into the water? Aleth. Understand it, they went not the nearest way to Canaan through the heart, and fruitfull middle of Edom, but surrounded the same, going through the borders thereof (leaving the Red-sea on the right hand) where their passage was no whit prejudiciall to the Edomites, as being through a base Countrey secured against the long stay of any passengers therein, by its own barrenness. Besides,. some conceive the land of Edom extended not anciently so far as the Red sea, so that in Moses his time Ezion Gaber belonged not thereunto, though in the days of Solomon ac∣counted parcell thereof. CHAP. XXII. Objections against the Wilderness of Paran answered. Philol. IN your Map of Simeon and Iudah, you make that the River of Egypt, which runs nigh Rinocolura into the Mediterranean sea. And here you call both that brook that runs into the Syrbon Lake, as also the easternmost stream of Nilus by the name of the River of Egypt. How comes this triplication? Where the Scripture presents but one, you multiply three Rivers of Egypt. Aleth. You put me in minde of a passage Bishop Latimer confesseth of himself, whilest as yet a young Priest, and zealous Papist. He, being en∣joined by the Rubrick to mingle water with the wine in the Chlice at Mass, was soSee the pre∣face of M. Ma∣son de Ministeri Aglic. scrupulous to doe it effectually, that he powred in water so much, and so often, that he almost diluted all into water. Such is the  of my caution herein, who have Egypt-rivered this Map to pur∣pose, willing to please all without displeasing of the truth. You know who saith,Rom. 12. 18. If it be possible, as much as in you lyeth have peace with all men, as herein I have endevoured. For,
1 The Rivolet south of Simeon, by generall consent 2 That running into the Syrbon-lake, by Mr. More 3 The easternmost stream of Nile, by Bochartus is made the Ri∣ver of Egypt. Thus each opinion having learned men to patronize it, we equally ten∣der them all to the Readers discretion, to reject, or accept which of them he shall conclude most probable. Philol. You make Sinai (where the Law was given) a different, and distinct mountain from mount Horeb. Whereas in Scripture it plainly appears, that Horeb was the same with Sinai, two names for one and the same mount. For, that the Law was given in Sinai, all agree, and the same is attributed to Horeb also. The Lord our God made a covenant with us inDeut. 5. 2. & 4. Horeb.—The Lord talked with you face to face in the mount, out of the midst the fire. Aleth. SomeSir Walter Ra∣leigh conceive this mountain (as Moses is erroneously fanci∣ed with hornes) to rise up Parnassus-like, with a double top; whereof the one is called Horeb, the other Sinai. Or else the former, like the Alpes, is a genericall name to many, whilest Sinai, like mount Senis amongst the Alpes, is more eminent and conspicuous then the rest, for the height thereof. Philol. Seeing the Spies were sent fromNum. 32. 8. & Deut. 1. 19. Kadesh-Barnea to discover the Land, a City afterwards assigned toJosh. 15. 6. Iudah, how come you to make the Israelites to incamp so many miles south of the same place? Aleth. None can be so wild as to conceive that the Israelites during their journeying in the wilderness, ever came within the walls of any City, but always pitched in the open desert. This premised, when they are said to beJosh. 14. 6. in Kadesh-Barnea, we understand thereby a Countrey, not City, so named, which began southwardly about Rithmah (the fifteenth station of the Israelities, whence they sent their spies) and extended north∣wardly to Kadesh-Barnea properly so called, (probably a City) certainly a limitary place belonging afterwards to the Tribe of Iudah. Philol. You term their provocation of God in this placeDescription of Paran §38. as yet the last and greatest temptation, which seems to me not of so hainous a nature. Aleth. So many and great were their Rebellions, it is hard to define which was their highest offence. Their carriage for forty years is styled by God aPsal. 95. 8. day of temptation, whose transgressions were so frequent and came so fast, that they all compleated but one intire, constant, and con∣tinued temptation. But to the point, that this their despising of thePsal. 106. 24. pleasant land was a paramount impietie, appears not onely by the exclusion of that whole generation from entering the same, but by the confession of modern Iews: Manasseh Ben Israel (the Hebrew Divine at this day in Amsterdam) observes the ninth day of the moneth Ab, whereon saith he In his book called Spes Is∣ralis, Sect. 28. pa. 86. Exploratores flebant sinecaua, The spies sent to discover the land [and all the congregation occasioned by their false reports]Num. 14. 1. wept without cause, hath ever since been unfortunate to their nation, their first, and second Temple
being burnt on the same day, and many dysasters have since befallen them thereon. Thus the Iews travell far off in their inquiries, fetching the cause of their misfortunes from their forefathers in the wilderness more then three thousand years agoe, which with more ease might take up their lodging nearer hand, and finde the same in their crucifying of Christ, as their highest sin, and the cause of their deepest suffering. Philol. Think you that Rithmah (the fifteenth stage of the Israelites) was the particular place, whither the spies returned bringing the report of Canaan? Aleth. Though many conceive so, under favour I take it more pro∣bable, that the next mansion, Rimmon-parez by name, was the proper scene of that action. For, it signifieth in Hebrew the Division of Pomegra∣nates, so called (as I conceive) not from any growing there (too bar∣ren a place for such beautifull fruit) but brought thither by the Spies (Num. 13. 23. Pomegranates being specified amongst the fruits of the land) which here were divided, and shared among the people of Israel, to show them a sample of the fruitfullness of Canaan. Philol. What a blank and vacuity have you left betwixt Ezion-Gaber the thirty second, and Kadesh-Zin the thirty third station of the Israelites (sixty miles at least) without any stage interposed? It is not probable that they travelled so far, without resting themselves betwixt them. Aleth. Surely they had intermediate Mansions where they took their nightly repose, though not named by Moses, because not making any con∣siderable abode therein. I conceive, that after their departure from Ezion-Gaber, God quickned the Israelites (who truanted before in their slow, and snail-like proceedings) making them mend their pace, probably tra∣velling every day will they came to Kadesh, which their young men might the better endure, the old generation being almost worn out. Philol. How comes Aaron to be buried in mountNum. 20. 27, 28. Hor, whom else∣where the Scripture affirmeth to be interred inDeut. 10. 6. Mosera? Aleth. It is no news to have severall names for the same place. The forest of Black-more, and the forest ofCmd. Brit. in. Dorset-shire. White-Hart (though black and white be contrary colours) signifie the self same tract of ground in Dorset-shire. Hor wasSir Walter Ra∣eigh book 2. part 1. pa. 254. the east part, and Mosera the west part of this mountain. This Mosera had formerly been theNum. 33. 31. twenty seventh Mansion of the Israelites in their passage to Ezion-Gaber, near which afterwards they made their thirty fourth station (when Aaron was buried there) which sufficiently argues the crookedness of their journying, crossing those parts again where they had been before. Philol. I commend your cunning that hath slipt over in silence, four of the hardest names contained all in one verse Deut. 1. 1. These be the words which Moses spake unto all Israel, on this side Iordan in the wilderness, in the plain over against the Red-sea, between Paran, and Tophel, and Luban, and Hazerth, and Dizahab, Direct us to the position of these places. Aleth. SomeVide Tremel. in locum. conceive theSee our de∣scription of Reuben.§23. plains of Moab (wherein Moses wrote the
book of Deuteronomy) described thereby with the eminent bounds (though at some distance) round about it, in manner following. Others refuse this interpretati∣on, as an obscure, and far fetch'd bounding of those plains, preferring our English translati∣on (reading it Red-sea, in stead of Zuph, or Sedgie-land) and so making these severall places the signall stages of the children of Israel in their passage out of Egypt. Whereof the Red-sea, and Paran are sufficiently known, Laban the same with Libna theirNum. 33. 20. See Ainsworth thereon. seventeenth station;Num. 11. 35. & 12. 1. Hazeroth the place where Miriam was punished with leprosie; Dizahab, which the Greek renders golden mines, and the Chaldee refers to the place where the goldenExod. 32. 20. Calfe was made, and stamped to powder, whilest Tophel (not mentioned again in Scripture) is conceived some station in Paran. Thus Deuteronomy is a repetition of the law, and of the memorable actions which occurred at these severall places. Philol. I object nothing against the draught of the Tabernacle, because the authority of Arias Montanus (whence you confess it taken) will pass it without exception. But I question the exactness of severall places in your Map of Egypt. Aleth. You minde me of a Gentlemans finding a Picture in the shop of a Country-Painter, whom he mistook for the maker thereof, and there∣upon fell a finding many faults therein. But being informed that the same was drawn by one of the rarest Masters in Italy, he instantly turned his cavilling at, into commending thereof. Such a convent your judg∣ment will quickly be when I shall tell you that the Map of Egypt is of Ortelius his making, save onely that the southern part thereof (uselesse for our history) is cut off, and such places onely inserted herein as appears in Scripture. The same I plead for the Habits, and Idols of the Iews; the former taken all out of Scripture, the latter out of such Authors as are se∣verally cited in our description. Onely I could wish, that in the Picture of Moloch out of Benjamins Itinerarie the three statues had been presented it∣ting according to ourSee our de∣scription of Chemosh. directions. And by the Altar to the unknown God we mean not that erected in Athens (to a Grecian, no Iewish Deity) but onely we intend the same for a reserve for those many Iewish Idols, whose names, and severall worships are unknown unto us. But, it is time to break off, lest one grand objection be made against all our Objections and Answers, that they swell the volume into tediousness.
EZEKIEL his VISIONARY LAND OF CANAAN. CHAP. I. Ezekiels visionary Land, City, and Temple uncapable of a literall meaning. § 1. PErusing the nine last Chapters of Ezekiels prophesie (invited thereunto with the mention of many places in Palestine) whilest I hoped to find,No literall sense in Ezki∣els land and feel a Solid body, I onely grasped the flitting aire, or rather a meer spirit; I mean in stead of a literall sense I found the Canaan by him described no Geography, but Ouranography, no earthly truth, but mysticall prediction. Now, his Description will appear irreconcileable with a literall interpretation (no Topicall, but a bare Typicall relation) if the particular location of the Tribes therein be seriously considered. § 2. For, so transposed, and inverted is the method of their severall portions, as neither reducible to an agreement with the order of their birth, nor blessing by Iacob,Reader this draught I bor∣rowed from the reverend and learned Iohn Richardson D. D of Ardaugh, to whose exel∣lent notes on Ezkiel (short∣ly to come forth) I refer thee for farther satisfaction. nor division of the land by lot in Ioshua's, nor parting it into Purveyorships in the days of Solomon. Behold here in this rud draught how the seven northern Tribes, as it were, march before in the Van; whilest the five southern Tribes bring up the Rere. See the Temple in the midst, supported with the Priests portion on both sides, and that of the Le∣vites coming behind, and holding up the train thereof (parting the Temple from the City) whilest the Princes portion flanketh it on both
sides. Quavs dictio, contradictio; Each word flatly opposeth the literall position of those Tribes and places, and therefore the interpretation thereof Is risen it is, not here, not buried beneath in the words, but is mounted above in the mystery. § 3. Adde hereunto the miraculous fruit (unfading and new every moneth) which this land produced,Miraculous fruit. one leafe whereof was more worth then all the greatNum. 13. 23. Grapes, Pomegranates, and Figs, the Spies brought from Canaan, as being unfading andEzk. 47. 15. soveraign for medicines. Now surely such as under∣stand this literally have need of some of those Leaves to cure their distem∣pers therein. § 4. It will be objected,Objection. that this Propheticall Palestine makes frequent mention of Seas,Ezek. 47. 15. Great Sea, andIbid. . 18. East Sea; River, Iodan, Mountain, Gilead; besides the land is bounded, North, South, and East with severall places of name, and note, asEzek. ibid. Hethlon, Zedad, Hmath &c. Now, what saith our Saviour?Luke 24. 39. A spirit hath not flesh and bones, meer visions are of a more rarified, and attenuated nature, not consisting of such gross, and drossie parts, and therefore the Prophet seems rather to be taken at his word, and his literall relation to be embraced, without farther search for a mysticall meaning therein. § 5. It is answered,Answer. Omnis visio fundatur in historia; the most refined vision hath some mixture of, and analogie with an historicall truth. As in a Web, the stamen, or Warp, it fast fixed, through which the Woofe is cast, or woven; o there re certain standards in all visions, being the materiall and corporall ground-work, for a spirituall flourish, or des∣cant to improve it self thereupon. More particularly, because so many places of Palestine are named in this vision; yea, seeing the body there∣of is confomed to an unlike likeliness (as I may terme it) of the earthly Canaan, it intimaes, that the Iewish nation shall have more then a single share in the accomplishment of this Prophesie, and have their happi∣ness highly concerned in the performace thereof. § 6. As the Land,The City not literally meant. so the City described by the Prophet, is not appliable to the earthly Ierusalem. It is said of Christ, Thou artPsal. 45. 2. fairer then the children of men; sure I am, this City as presented by the Prophet, was fairer, finer, slicker smoother, more exact, more uniforme then any fabrick the earth afforded. This Triumphant Ierusalem (as I may term it) was a compleate square of fourEzek. 48. 16. thousand five hundred reeds, with a just Iury ofIbid. ver. 31. gates, three of each side, according to the names of the twelve Tribes) with most re∣gular suburbs, reaching two hundred and fifty reeds every way, so terse, so trim, that not an house started out of its due proportion. Whereas the literall Ierusalem, built by parcels at severall times, on abrupt precipices, ranged about with the wals rather for strength, then beauty, being on the East and South suburbless, and without such correspondency, either in the number, or position of the gates thereof. In a word, that so exact structure in the Prophet, never sprang by art out of earth, but was let
down by a miracle from heaven▪ to which Saint Iohn alludes in his ce∣lestiallRevel. 21. 10. Ierusalem. § 7. Lastly, the Temple, as framed by the Prophet, is not suitable with Solomons, and the very waters rising from under the threshold there∣of, encreasing by degrees unto an unpassableEzek. 47. 5. river, doe drown all possi∣bility of a literall sense therein. Expect not here, I should intermeddle with a particular description of the foresaid Land, City, and Temple; both because they being meerly mysticall are alien from our subject, and because I am deterred from so difficult an undertaking by the ensuing computation. 1 Moses saith, the days of ourPsal. 90. 10. years are threescore years, and ten. 2 The Iews made an ordinance, that none should read this vision, till thirty years old. 3 Villalpandus confesseth, he studied this Prophesie twenty three years, yet understood not the difficulties thereof. If life be so short, and we must begin so late, and study so long on this Prophesie alone (without attaining the full understanding thereof) high time at the end of those studying years, to leave the measuring of this vision, and survey the dimensions of our own Graves. § 8. To conclude,The mysticall meaning. as once our Saviour told Pilate,John 18. 36. My kingdome is not of this world: so the sense of Ezekiels Land, City, and Temple, is not car∣nall, and corporall, but mysticall, and spirituall. Yea, God may seem of set purpose to have troubled, and perplexed the text, imbittering the Nibbles thereof with inextricable difficulties, meerly to wean us from the milke of the letter, and make us with more appetite seek for stronger meat there∣in. For the main therefore, it is generally conceived, this vision imports the great inlargement, and dilatation of the Church under the Gospell, when the Gentiles shall be called to the knowledge of Christ, and the Iews also (as mainly concerned, though not solely intended in this visi∣on) brought home to their true Messiah, not excluding even those of the ten Tribes, from having each one his Childs-portion in the per∣formance of this Prophesie. A word or two of whose condition, since their captivity. CHAP. II. What became of the ten Tribes since their captivity, and where probably extant at this day. § 1. POlitick was the practice of the Kings of Assyria,Policy in trans∣planting con∣quered people. when conquer∣ing a Countrey, neither to kill the natives thereof, nor to con∣tinue them any longer in their own land, but to transport them into a far distant Countrey, and in exchange planting other colonies in their room. For, first to kill them (besides the cruelty thereof in cold bloud)
had been an improvident act, men amongst them being precious to people their vast dominions, which otherwise, if empty, had been more exposed to the invasion of enemies. To continue them in their own land had not been safe; who, best knowing the advantages thereof, would on all occasions practice the recovery of their lost liberty; and therefore to prevent farther disputes, the subject of the question was taken away, and they advisedly disposed of in far distant places. Lastly, the re∣moving them into other parts, and substituting others in their land, taught both these plantations an immediate dependence on their Prince, (having no other plea but his bare pleasure for their present possessions) which made them, (like the Turkish Timarios) more dutifull at home, and daring abroad in their undertakings. § 2. These reasons moved the Kings of Assyria to transport the Isra∣elites from their native soil. Indeed they, if any people, might term the land their own, having a threefold tie thereunto; by Donation from God, the supreme Proprietary; by conquest of the Canaanites, the ancient owners; by prescription of more then seven hundred years peaceable possession thereof. But this threefold cable was broken with the weight of their sins, and so was Israel carried away from their2 Kin. 17. 23. own land to Assyria unto this day. Even Lands as well as Goods are moveables, though not from their Center, from their Owners, at leastwise the owners are moveable from their lands. § 3. Yet God did not all at once begin,Their three∣fold captivity. and end the captivity of the ten Tribes, but , at sundry times, and in diverse manners. For, 11 Chr. 5. 16. Pl King of Assyria in the reign of2 King. 15. 19. Menahem carried the Reube∣nites, Gadites, and half Tribe of Manasseh away to the Cities of the Medes. 2 Tiglath-Pieser in the days of Pekah, transported (besides Gilead, and the remains of the aforesaid Tribes)2 King. 15. 29 Galilee; namely, so much thereof as was in the land of Naphtali, unto Assyria. 3 Shalmaneser cleared all the rest in the ninth year of Hoshea, carrying them away to2 King. 27. 6. Halath, and Habor, by the River Gozan in the Cities of the Medes. Probably the second, or middle captivity of the Naphtalites, afterwards removed themselves into Tartary, where Ortelius findes their very name, and a City called Tabor (Josh. 19. 34. Asnoth-Tabor we know was a place in the bor∣der of Naphtali) imposed (no doubt) to perpetuate the memory of their native Countrey. § 4. Scripture gives us no account what afterwards became of these ten Tribes.Since seeming∣ly utterly lost. Onely in2 Ed. 13. 40. Esdras ( book accounted by some as the Aprypha of the Apocrypha, because never owned for Canonicall, either by the Iews, RomishSee Bllr∣mins Argur∣mēts against it. Church in generall, or Protestant writers) we finde them tra∣velling over Euphrates (miraculously dried up in their passage) towards Arsareth [or Tartary] a great way; namely, a journey of a2 Esdr. 13. 45. year and an half. A
long stride indeed, and yet might be but little, if mending their pace no more then their ancestors did in their passage between Egypt, and Canaan. But waving Esdras his single testimony, these ten Tribes appeare not since in any authenticall relation; strange! that the posterity of the two Tribes (Iudah and Benjamin) should be found [almost] every where, whilest the off-spring of the ten Tribes are found no where! Thu God hath on them  that curse which he formerly threatned, To scatter them into corners, and make theDeut. 32. 26. remembrance of them to cease. Not, that he hath utterly extinguished the being (an opinion as unreasonable, as unchari∣table) but hath hitherto concealed the known bing of so numerous a na∣tion, whom we may call the lost-lot sheep of Israel; both in respect of their spirituall condition, and corporall habitation. § 5.Supposed by some in Ameri∣ca. SomeSee the book of my worthy fiend M▪ Tho. Thowgood on Iews in Ame∣rica. conceive the modern Amricans of the Jewish race, col∣lecting the same from some resemblances in rites, community of customes, conformity of clothes, fragments of letters, foot-steps of knowledge, ruines of language, (though by a casuall coincidence some straggling words of the Athenians may meet in the mouths of the veriest Barbarians) and many other Iudaismes amongst the Indians. And lately, aManasseh Ben Israel in his book called Spes Israelis. Jewish Rabbin of Amsterdam tels us, that beyond the Cordiller hills, and river Maragnon, a fair people are found with long beards, and rich in clothes, living by themselves, different in religion from the rest of the Indians, whom he will have to be the ten Tribes there remaining in a bo∣dy together. His arguments so prevaile on some, formerly contrarily minded, as to turn the tyde of their judgment to concur with his, with others they make it dead water, not to oppose his opinion, whilest a third sort listen to his relation, as onely priviledged from confutation by the remoteness thereof. § 6. For mine own part,Our private opinion. I behold his report as the Twilight, but whe∣ther it will prove the morning twilight, which will improve it self into full light; or that of the evening, darkening by degrees into silence, and ut∣ter obscurity, time will discover. When the eleven Tribes (so virtually may I term them) brought news that one lost Tribe [Ioseph] was found, Iacobs heartGen. 45. 26. fainted, for he beleeved them not, till afterwards he was convinced on clearer evidence. How much more then may I be permitted to suspend my judgment, when one man brings tydings of ten lost Tribes, all found in an instant, untill farther proof be made thereof? Surely we, who now secretly smile at some probable insinuations in his report, shall on better assurance have our mouthes filled withPsal. 126. 2. laughter (notGen. 18. 12. Sarahs laughter of distrust, butGen. 17. 17. Abrahams, of desire, delight, and beliefe) when his relation shall be confirmed to us from other hands. And indeed, the messenger deserves to be well paid for his pains, who brings clear proof thereof, the discovery of the posterity of these ten Tribes being an happy Forerunner, and Furtherer of their future conversion.
CHAP. III. Of the Jews their repossessing their native Countrey. § 1. IT is a conceit of the modern Iews, that one day they shall return under the conduct of their Messias to the Countrey of Canaan,The Iews fan∣cy of a tempo∣rall kingdome. and City of Ierusalem, and be re-estated in the full possession thereof. If any ob∣ject, that their land, now base, and barren, is not worth the regaining: They answer, when they shall recover their Countrey, the Countrey shall recover its former fruitfulness; as if God would effect miracles, as fast as man can fancy them. With them concur some Protestant Divines, maintaining, that the Iews shall be restored to a flourishing Common∣wealth, with the affluence of all outward pomp, and pleasure, so that they shall fight and conquer Gog and Magog [the Turke] with many other miraculous achievements. OneM. Finc in his Book of the calling of the Iews (pub∣lished by Will. Gouge D. D. Anno 1621.) for which he was impriso∣ned. Scripture pro∣duced for the opinion. Author so enlargeth the future amplitude of the Jewish State, that thereby he occasioned a confining to himself. His expressions (indiscreetly uttered, or uncharitably constru∣ed) importing, that all Christian Princes should surrender their power as homagers to the temporall supreme Empire of the Jewish nation. § 2. For the proof of this their position, never did the servants of Benhadad more diligently observe, or more hastily catch any1 King. 20 33. thing [of com∣fort] coming from the mouth of Ahab, then the Iews search out, and snatch at every gracious promise made to them in the old Testament. Such prin∣cipally as Deut. 30. 3. Then [on their repentance] the Lord thy God will turn thy captivity, and have compassion upon thee, and will return, and gather thee from all nations, whiter the Lord thy God hath scattered thee. Isaiah 11. 12. And he shall set up an Ensigne for the nations, and shall assemble the out-casts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Iudah from the four corners of the earth. Levit. 26. 44. And yet for all that, when they be in the land of their enemies, I will not cast them away, neither will I abhor them, to destroy them utterly, and to break my covenant with them, for I am the Lord their God. § 3. This last place the Iews highly price,The Iews their Golden Ap. and such of them as live in Germany, call itSee  his common places, de Extr∣mo Iudicio. pag. 258. Simiam auream, or the Golden Ape. And why so? Because (forsooth) in the Hebrew it begineth with , ve Ape, And yet. A frivo∣lous conceit on the similitude of sound of two words, of different sense, in the Hebrew, and Dutch tongues. Indeed, all the loud threatnings in Scripture, may more fitly be termed Lions, all the meek promises therein, Lambes; amongst which, this cited out of Leviticus is of especiall note, whilest it is to be feared, such Iews (as found hence their temporall kingdome) will prove themselves Apish in their ridiculous comment thereupon. § 4. But,Arguments to the contrary. most learned Divines are of a contrary opinion, because totall and finall desolation is in Scripture, so frequently denounced against their Countrey, and Cities therein. The Virgin of Israel is fallen, she
shallAmos . 2. NO MORE rise; I willZch. 11. 6. NO MORE pity the inhabitants of the land, and out of their enemies hand I will NOT deliver them: I will love them Hosea. 9. 15. NO MORE: The land shall fall, and 4. 20. NOT rise again: I will break this people and this City as a Potters vessell, which canJer. 19. 1. NOT be made whole again. § 5. As for the Scriptures alleadged by the Iews for their temporall restauration to an illustrious condition in their own countrey, they have found their full accomplishment,Jewish reasons confuted. in the return of that nation, to their own land, from the Captivity in Babylon; and therefore farther per∣formance of such promises, is not to be expected: and accordingly it is resolved in their ownSeder Olam & Talmud. best Authors, Possessionem primam, & secundam habi∣turi erant, possessio autem tertia non erit illis. And if any more fulfilling of those promises remaineth behinde, it must be made up, in the sprirituall conversion of the Iews, in Gods due time, to the knowledge of Christ, and embracing of the Gospell. Some of their ownIn Kli Iachan cited by Geard de Extremo Iu∣dicio pag. 259. writers affirming, that all things which relate to the office of their Messiah (whom they expect) are heavenly, and not corporall. § 6. The farther prosecution hereof,An eminent in∣stance. we leave to those Authors, who have written large discourses of this subject. Onely we will observe a remarkable difference betwixt a place of Scriputre, written in the Old, alleadged, and applyed in the New Testament. Amos 9. 11, & 12.In that day will I raise up the Taber∣nacle of David that is fallen, and close up the breaches thereof, and I will raise up his ruines, and I will build it as in the days of old: That they may possess the remnant of Edom, and of all the heathen, which are called by my name, saith the Lord that doth this.Act. 15. 16, & 17.After this I will return, and I will build again the Tabernacle of David, which is fallen down: and I will build again the ruines thereof, and I will set it up: That the re∣sidue of men might seek after the Lord, and all the Gentiles upon whom my name is called, saith the Lord who doth all these things. Here the Apostle Iames, more following the sense, then the words of the Prophet, as an Expositor, rather then Translatour, renders the possessing of the remnant of Edom, to be, by seeking after the Lord; by which Analogy we collect, that those Topicall promises to the Iews, of their conquering and possessing such, and such places, in, and near their own Countrey, import onely a spirituall propriety, and shall mystically, not carnally be accomplished, in their sincere conversion to Christ. § 7. More probable therefore it is,The Iews their land will come to them. that the Iews shall not come back to their land, but their land shall come back to them; I mean, those se∣verall places, in Europe, Asia, and Africa, wherein they reside, shall on their conversion, become as comfortable unto them, as ever the Land of Canaan was to their Ancestors. Forti quaevis terra patria; and a contented minde in them, shall make any mountain, their Olivet; river, their Ior∣dan; field, their Carmel; forest, their Libanus; fort, their Zion; and city, their Ierusalem. But, as for their temporall regaining of their old Countrey, in all outward pompe, and magnificence, even such as are no foes to the Iews welfare, but so fa friends to their own judgments, as not
to believe, even what they desire, till convinced with Scripture, or reason, account this fancy of the Iews, one of the dreams proceeding from the Rom. 11. 8. Spirit of slumber, wherewith the Apostle affirmeth them to be possessed. CHAP. IIII. Of the generall calling of the Jews. § 1. BY Iews,The question stated. we understand, some left of every Tribe (asLib. 1. formerly hath been proved) being banished their own Countrey, since the death of our Saviour; not extending it also (as some doe with small probability) to the ten Tribes, carried captive by Shalmaneer, and never since certainly known, where existent. By calling, we intend, their reall converting by the word, to the knowledge and love of God in Christ. By generall, we mean not every individuall Iew, whereof some refractary Recusants will ever remain (were it but to be foiles to Gods favour in saving the rest) but a considerable, yea conspicuous number of them. And it is a charitable opinion, ancient, and conformable to Scriptures, that in this sense, the Iews in Gods due time, shall be gene∣rally called. § 2.Severall Scri∣ptures to prove it. Come we now to the places of Scripture alleadged for the proof of this opinion. Now as Mesha King of Moab, when his Countrey was invaded, stood not the choosing of select souldiers for fight, but2 King. 3. 21. gather∣ed all that were able to put on armour, and upwards: so authors muster up all places of Scripture, which put on any probability to this purpose, and can carry any countenance thereunto, amongst many others, these en∣suing▪ Num. 24. 17. Isa. 33. 17. Ezek. 16. 61. Mat. 23. 38. Deut. 32. 43. Isa 41. 15. Ezek. 20. 34. Mat. 24. 23. Psal. 68. 22. Isa. 43. 1. &c. Ioel 2. 28. Luk. 21. 24. Psal. 69. 32. 33. Isa. 49. 16, 17. Amos 9. 8. Rom. 11. 25. Psal. 110. 2, 3. Isa. 51. 1, 2. Obad. ver. 15. 2 Cor. 3. 16. Cant. 8. 10. Ier. 3. 12. Micah 7. 7. 2 Thes. 2. 8. Isa. 14. 2. Ier. 30. 3. Zeph. 3. 8. Revel. 16. 12. Isa. 30. 21, 22. Ier. 33. 6. Zech. 2. 9. &c. Revel. 19. 5. Should these quotations be severally examined, many would be found rather to perswade, then prove; rather to intimate, then perswade the matter in hand: and that, onely to such free, and forward apprehensi∣ons, as are prepossessed with the truth thereof. But, amongst these, and many more numerous Scriptures cited, that one place Rom. 11. 25. principally deserveth our serious perusall thereof. § 3. The words of the Apostle run thus,The staple place for the calling of the Iews. For I would not brethren that yee
should be ignorant of this mystery (let yee should be wise in your own conceits) that blindness in part is hapned to Israel, untill the fulness of the Gentiles be come in, and so all Israel shall be saved &c. This is conceived the strongest, and clearest Charter for the Iews generall conversion▪ § 4.Objection to the conrary. It will be objected, that by all Israel the believing Gentiles are meant (for Gods Church, being a collective body, of some Iews, and moe Gentiles) which in Scripture are styledGl. 3. 7. the children of Abraham,Gl. 6. 16. the Israel of God;Rom. 2. 29. Iews inwardly, with circumcision of the heart, in the spirit, not the letter. Yea, in the same verse, Saint Paul [a Iew] called the Romans being Gentiles, brethren, the kindred coming in by their regeneration: and in the same sense, all converted Gentiles may be called Israel, whose praise is of God, and not of man. § 5.Answered. It is answered, allowing elsewhere in Scripture believing Gen∣tiles to pass under the name of Israelites, here literally the naturall Iews by extraction must be intended, 1 Because clean through the Chapter, the Apostle opposeth the Gentiles and Israel, as contradistinct termes. 2 He acquainteth the Romans with a mystery, which was none in effect (but stale news, and generally known) if onely the saving of the Gentiles were therein intended. 3 It was his design, to comfort the Iews, and curbe the Gentiles, from over-insulting on their sad condition. And lest any should say slightingly to this opinion, as David once civilly to Ittai,2 Sam. 15. 20. Thou camest but yesterday; know, it descendeth unto us recom∣mended from the Primitive times. § 6. Origen was the first that mentioned it,The opinion avoured by Fathers, School men, and mo∣dern Divines. and h (otherwise the Allegorizer Generall) interprets the Apostle literally, in his exposition thereof. Say not that being the first of the Fathers who wrote a Com∣ment, no wonder if he wandred in his Glosses (he who first went from place to place, never found out the nearest way) seeing better judgments afterwards built on the same bottome, Hierom, Ambrose,In their se∣verall Com∣ments on Rom. 11. 25. Chrysostome, and Lib. 2. Quaest. Evangel. Quaest 13. Saint Augustine. In the School-men the opinion of the Iews their con∣version, is not dead, but sleepeth: Parables, and Prophesies, are no dishes for their diet. Their heavy studies delighted not to tread the water (at best the marishes) of future contingencies, but on the terra firma of certainties, where arguments might be grounded. Yet the most peaceable amongst them, (more medling with Comments, then Controversies) such is Dionysius Carthusianus, concur in their judgments therein. But, the silence of the Schools is recompensed with the loudness of the Pulpits in our later age ofSee Gerardi Loc. Com. p. 262. Romanists, Lutherans, and Calvinists, generally maintaining the cer∣tain expectation of the Iews conversion. § 7. Adde hereunto, that the Iews ever since their exile from their own land,Countennced by their long continuing an unmixt tlon. when the Romans sold their Countrey, (and a learnedM. Mede. man observes, they set no land to sale save Iudea alone) have continued many
hundred years a distinct nation. As if had learned from their River of Iordan, running through the Galilean Sea, and not mingling there∣with, daily to pass through an Ocean of other nations, and remain an unmixt, and un-confounded people by themselves. A comfortable pre∣sumption (when in company with other arguments) that they, once GodsDut. 14. 2. peculiar, are still preserved a peculiar people, for some token for good, in due time to be shewed upon them; and that these materials are thus care∣fully kept entire by themselves, because intended by Divine Providence, for some beautifull building to be made of them hereafter. § 8. Let it also be seriously considered,And some Iews conver∣ted in all ages. that in all ages God hath dropt some considerable convert-Iews into the treasury of the Christian Church, as good-handsell, and earnest of a greater payment to ensue. A∣mongst whom we meet with a Mess of most eminent men. Nicolaus Lyra, that grand Commentator on the Bible; Hieronymus de Sancta Fide turned Chistian about Anno 1412. (Physitian (as I take it) to Benedick the thirteenth Pope) who wrote a book unto his Countrey-men the Iews, wherewithIn the preface of his book in Biblioth. . five thousand of them were converted; Ludovicus Carettus livingHis Epistle is at the end of Btors Syn. Iud. in Paris Anno 1553. and the never sufficiently to be praised Emma∣nuel Tremellius. And besides the visible converts, falling uner the notice of man, we may charitably presume many concealed ones, especially on their death-beds known to God alone. Yea, I conceive that learned Rabbi Sm. Marochianus de adentu Messi. cap. 6. Rabbin, more then AgrippaAct. 2▪ 28., almost a Christian, who hath this amongst other pious expressions, I dread, and fear, O Lord, that that Iesus whom the Christians worship, may be that righteous sold for silver, according to the Prophet Amos 2 6. Amos. § 9.Time of their conversion. As for the time of the Iews conversion, let us content our selves for the generall, it shall be after the fulness ofRom. 11. 25. the Gentiles shall come in. But, for the particular year, by some so peremptorily, and positively assigned, I cannot but admire at the confidence of men therein. Especially, seeing some, which pretend such familiarity to future events, are not the best acquainted with passages in former ages; and those, which seem to know all which is to come, know but little of what is past; as if they were the better Prophets, for being the worse Historians. § 10.Cruelty con∣joyned with confidence. But well it were, if their confidence were confined to themselves alone, being onely content to abound in their own sense, without imposing it on others. But, besides their confidence, such is their cruel∣ty, to exact, yea, extort the uttermost farthing of our beliefe, to be paid in (even at the first sight) to their conceits, or else we must into the Prison, yea, deepest dungeon, and be condemned for being weak, or wilfull; ig∣norant, or obstinate. Whereas, in such peremptory particularizing of the very year, such as pretend to plough with the heifers of Gods Spirit, may be suspected to be drawn away with the wild buls of their own imagina∣tions. § 11.Different Dates thereof. The rather, because so great the difference betwixt the severall
Dates assigned by them. Some making it 1652; others, 1660▪ Some sooner, and before; some later, and after the destruction of the Romish Antichrist. It is therefore the most safe, and sober way, in so much variety to leave a blanke in our judgments, for God to write the true time therein, when we, or after-ages shall behold the same brought to pass. One day teachethPsal. 19. 2. another; and, to-day (yesterdays school-master) is scholar to to-morrow, at whose feet (as Paul at Gamaliels) it will at night it duti∣fully down for farther informaton. Yea, by an inverted method, the daughter doth instruct the mother; and, the day which in time cometh after, goeth before in knowledge. CHAP. V. Of the present obstructions of the calling of the Jews. § 1.Civill di∣stance in socie∣ty. MAny are the obstacles both externall, and internall, which for the present obstruct the conversion of the Iews. First, our want of civill society with their nation. There must be first conversing with them, before there can be converting of them. The Gospell doth not work (as the weapon-salve) at distance, but requires some competent familiarity with the persons of Probationer-converts. Whereas the Iews, be∣ing banished out of England, France, and Spaine, are out of the call of the Gospell, and ken of the Sacraments in those Countreys. § 2.Cruell usage in point of state. Secondly, the cruel ussage of them in the Papall, and Imperiall do∣minions, where they swarm most, and where publick authority doth not endevour to drop, and distill piety into them; but to squeese, and press profit out of them. Especially, whilest that merciless law stands in force, that on their conversion, they mustD. Heylin in Micro. in Palest. pag. 570. I think out of St. Edwin Sandys. renounce all their goods as ill gotten. If the resolutions of the promise-forward Disciple quickly re∣coyled, at our Saviours tentative command, to sell all, and give to the poor; I say, if heMat. 19. 22. went away sorrowfull, for he had great possessions; no wonder if the rich and covetous Iews distast our Religion, when before they can em∣brace it, they must take a finall farewell of their large estates. Rather should those Princes imitate the pious example of our Henry the third, who, between the new, and old Temple, erected anComd. Brit. in Middlesex pag. 428. house of Converts (after∣wards appointed by Edward the third for Records to be kept therein, now called the Rowles) endowing it for the maintenance of poor Iews con∣verted to Christianity, and baptized, allowing two penceStowes Sur∣vay. pag. 435. a day unto each of them during their lives. § 3.Offence at Image-worship Thirdly, the constant offence given them by the Papists their wor∣shipping of images, the present Iews hating Idolatry with a perfect hatred, whose knees may sooner be broken, then bended to such superstitious postures. And, to speak out the plain truth, the Romanists are but back∣friends to the Iews conversion, chiefly on this account, because the Rabbins generally interpretEspecially, on the Burden of Dum Isa. 21. 11. Dumah, or Edom, to be Rome, and Edomites, Romans, in
their expositions on the old Testament. And therefore, all those passages have (by order no doubt from Superiours) been lately purged our, and expunged the VenetinSet forth by Daniel Bomb∣gius. edition of the Rabbins. Yea, there is a constant tradition, currant time out of minde, amongst the modern Iews, that af∣ter the destruction of the City of Rome, their nation shall be put into a glorious condition. No wonder then, if cold, and dull the endevours of the Romanists, for the conversion of the Iews, who leave that taske of be performed by Moses, and Elias, whom the Papists fondly fancy, shall to∣wards the end of the world personally appear, and by their powerfull preaching, perswade the Jewish nation unto the Christian Religion. § 4.Discords a∣mongst Christi∣ans. Lastly, the difference in judgments, distance in affections, disso∣luteness in lives among the Christians themselves. In vain do we hollow to the Iews to come over to us, whilest our voyces are hoarse with railing one at another; and becken with our hands to them, to be on our side, whilest our hands are imbrued in the bloud of those of our own religion. § 5.Internall ob∣stacle, blindnes. But far greater then all these, is that internall obstacle, that , that blindness which is happened unto them, inflicted on their ancestours, continued, and increasing on their posterity. How Bedlam-like was their behaviour at Saint Pauls but mentioning of preaching to the Gen∣tiles, Act. 22. 23. They cryed out, and cast off their clothes, and threw dust into the aire, as en∣devouring to thicken, and condensate the same, that no audible sound might penetrate unto them. And, as then they threw the dust into the aire: God hath since thrown their land after it; so that no Iew can take up one crum of dust, from any intire Countrey, upon the face of the earth, that he can call his own. Great is Gods providence in ordering it, that a fog, and a tempest never can be together at sea, the fog vanishing so soon as the tempest ariseth, otherwise smaller vessels would be cast away, which want the direction of the Compass to guide them: but woefull is the present condition of the Iews, having a fog of ignorance, and a tempest of vio∣lence, both together in them in the highest degree, most bold, when most blind; stumbling at what should stay them; slighting the Chirurgeon, when sorest; scorning the Physician, when sickest; miserable, if they knew their condition; and more miserable, because ignorant thereof. § 6.Obstacles easi∣ly banished by an Infinite power. But though these obstacles, and obstructions were moe, and mightier then they are, should God but give the word, they are instantly removed. Long was the service of the true God disused in Iudah (during the idolatrous reign of Ahaz) so that great was the difficulty, to bring the whole nation to the solemn observation thereof. Yet, Hezekiah quickly effected it, because (as the text observes)2 Chr. 29. 36. God had prepared the people, and the thing was done suddenly. So, when He shall be pleased to set his hand to the Iews conversion, all impediments notwithstanding, in the twinckling of an eye, their eies shall be opened; and their hearts turned, in the turning of an hand.
Chap. VI. How Christians ought to behave themselves, in order to the Jews conversion. § 1.Motives for our prayer for the Iews con∣version. MEan time it is the bounden duty of Christians, to their utmost to endevour, both by their pious examples, and faithfull prayers, the conversion of the Iews, having many motives to invite them thereunto. First, because the more knowing, and pious in the Iewsh Church, did anciently desire the vocation of the Gentiles, witness the soli∣citous care she took, and the great cost she would expend for the welae thereof.Cant. 8. 8, 9. We have a little sister, and she hath no breasts, what shall we do for our sister, in the day when she shall be spoken for? If she be a wall, we will build upon her a palace of silver &c. For, although the common Is accounted the cal∣ling of the Gentiles, blasphemy against their own nation, (having some carnall reason thereof, as not without cause suspicious, that the Gentiles admission would prove their expulsion, as indeed it came to pass) yet the intelligent Prophets (no doubt) were earnest petitioners for the same. § 2.Motive from the Iews joy for us. Secondly, because such was the transcendent joy of the godly Iews, managed with silence (their hearts thereat being too big for their mouths) at the conversion of Cornelius, and his family;Act. 11. 18. When they heard these things, they held their peace, and glorified God, saying, Then hath God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life. § 3.Clearing of the Sciptures. Lastly, because so great glory shall, by the conversion of the Iews, redound to God, and clearing to the Scriptures. Many places in the old Testamen (the meaning whereof, the Iews hitherto were too envious to teach us, or we too proud to learn of them) will then most plainly be expounded. Oh! what a feast of knowledge will it make, when both Iew and Gentile shall jointly bring in their dises thereunto! The former furnishing forth the first course with many Hebrew Criticismes, and Rabbinicall Traditions (some of them gold amongst more dross) on the old Testament: the latter supplying the second course on the whole Scripture, with solid▪ interpretations, out of Fathers, Schoolmen, and Modern Divines. Oh happy day for such as shall behold it, and we all ought to pray for the speedy dawning thereof! § 4.Objection a∣gainst praying for the Iews conversion. It will be objected, many men cannot heartily pray for the fu∣ture conversion of the Iews; being unsatisfied in their judgments, of the certainty thereof▪Rom. 14 23. For whatsoever is not of faith is sin; and because they can∣not aske according to the Apostles preceptJames 1. 6.  prayers are better omitted, as which may prove prejudiciall to themselves, and nothing effectuall for others. § 5.Answer. It is safest for such to insert conditionall clauses in their prayers, If it may stand with Gods good will and pleasure, used by the best men (not to say the bestMat. 26. 39. in bests) in their petitions:Mar. 8. 2. Lord if thou wilt▪ thou canst make
me clean. Such wary reservations will not be interpreted in the Court of Heaven, want of faith, but store of humility, in such particulars where such persons have no plenary assurance of Gods pleasure. Yea, grant the worst, that God never intended the future conversion of the Iews, yet whilst he hath not revealed the contrary (as in the case of Samuels1 Sam. 16. 1. mour∣ning for Saul) all mens charitable desires herein, cannot but be acceptable to the God of heaven. O Lord who artPsal. 145. 17. righteous in all thy ways,A Prayer. and holy in all thy works, we acknowledge, and admire the justice of thy proceedings, in blinding, and hardening the Jews; as for their manifold impieties; so especially for stoning thy Prophets, despising thy Word, and crucifying the Lord of life. For which thou hast caused them, according to the prediction of thyHosea 3. 4. Prophet, to abide many days without a King, and without a Prince, and without a Sacrifice, and without an Image, and without an Ephod, and without Teraphim. But thou ô Lord howPsl. 6. 6. 3. long? HowRevel. 6. 10. ô Lord holy and true? HowPsal. 79. 5. long Lord, with thou be angry for ever? Thine anger is said to endure but aPsal. 30. 5. Moment, but Lord how many Millions of Millions of Moments, are contained in sixteen hundred years, since thou hast first cast off thy first and ancient people the Jews? Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, not for any merit in their persons, which was none, but for the mercy in thy promises, which is infinite, so frequently made, and so solemnly confirmed unto them. But oh! remember the Oratour on thy right hand, Christ Jesus our Lord,Rom. 1. 3. which was made of the seed of David according to the flesh, and the Oratour in thine own bosome, thine essenti∣all and innate Clemency, and let these prevaile, if it may stand with thy good will, and pleasure, that thy people the Jews may be received into the armes of thy mercy. As once by a wilfull, and wofull imprecation they drew the guilt of his bloud onMat. 27. 25. them and on their children: so by thy free imputation drop the merit of his bloud on them, and on their children. For the speedying of whose conversion, be pleased to compose the many different judgments of Christians into one truth, to unite their disagreeing affections in one love, that our examples may no longer discourage, but in∣vite them to the embracing of the true Religion. Oh mollifie the hearts, rectifie the wills, unvaile the eyes, unstop the ears of those thy people whom hitherto thou hast justly hardened. Reveale to their understanding thoseRom. 3. 2. Oracles which thou hast committed to their keeping. That so our Saviour, who long since hath been a light to lighten the Gentiles,Luk. 2. 32. may in thy time be the glory of thy people Israel, that so there may be oneJohn 10. 16. shepheard and one sheepfold. Grant this ô Lord for Christ Jesus his sake, to whom, with Thee, and the Holy Spirit, be all honour and glory, now, and forever, Amen. FINIS. Here followes the draught of Fragmenta Sacra.
Necessary directions for the use of the INDEX. AN Index is the bag and baggage of a book, of more use then honour, even such who seemingly slight it, secretly using it, if not for need, or speed of what they desire to finde. Our Table, for the better expedition, is contrived into severall Columnes; The first presenting the names of Scripture places within the land of Palestine. If any literall difference appear (not onely such as betwixt Zidon, Kidron, in the Old; Siden, and Cedron, in the New Testament, but) concer∣ning the same place diversly written, the discretion of the Reader wil easily re∣concile it. Immediately after the name the addition of C. donoteth City, F. Field, L. Land, M. Mountain, Pl. Plain, Ri. River, Ro. Rock, S. Stone, St. Station of the Iews in the Wilderness, T. Town, V. Vaile, We. Well, Wi. Wilderness. The second Column interprets the Hebrew names into English, though great the variety of Authors in rendring their signification. This party proceeds from the laxity of Hebrew words admitting sundry senses, partly from the vicinity of Primi∣tives, so that the same derivative may seem to spring from two roots, and be son (as directly to his Father, so) collaterally to his Vncle, I mean to words akin, and alluding, whence the same in probability may be deduced; and this subjecteth it to much variety of interpretation. In this diversity we have wholly followed Gregorius Gre∣gorii in his Lexicon Sacrum (as a work meerly expository of proper nams) though some perchance will say, that what is the credit of the good wifeProv. 31. 14. she bringeth her food from far, is sometimes his discredit in his over strained, and far fet derivations. Expect not here from me, after the meaning of the name, a reason of the meaning, how conformable to the nature of the place. Many Townes were called so, be∣cause they were called so, ad placitum of the first imposer. Other places, when first denominated, had just reason of the same, but this kernell long since hath been eaten up by all-devouring time, leaving nothing thereof but the huske of the empty name to posterity. Now to fix the Hebrew names the better in our memory, we have here, and there (as the propriety of our language, and commodities of our Countrey will admit) inserted some English Townes, as Synonyma's, and parallel to the Hebrew in signification. The fourth Column is reserved for those texts of Scripture, wherein is made, either the first, or most important mention of those plces. As the fifth exhibits the Map wherein the same are to be found. The sixth tenders to the Reader the Longitudes of most places, and the rest may be supplied by proportion. But oh, the difference of best Authors herein! As in populous Cities an houre is lost in measuring of time, the lag clock about noon striking the most, when the forwardest strikes the fewest: so a whole degree of Lon∣gitude is swallowed up betwixt the difference of Geographers. Yea, so great is the uncertainty therein, that in most Maps lines of Longitudes (as onely for generall di¦rection, ne toto coelo errent) serve to lace their Maps that they grow not without forme, or fashion; but are not reducible to an exact agreement. More is the certainty of Latitudes the work of the next Column, as greater their concernment in our Description, because effectuall in the length of the days, and heat of the climate in Palestine. It is situated for the main betwixt thirty one and thirty four, the longest day being fourteen houres, and a quarter; though the Iews (as if it were always Equinoctiall with them) divided both day and night evenly into twelve
houres, so that the two overplus houres and the quarter, fell under the nocturnall computation. As for the climate of Palestine, in summer time it must needs be hot, lying not above seven degrees from the Tropick, especially when theLuke 12. 55. south winde blew▪ But sometimes God cooled them, by drawing betwixt the Sun and them a Canopy, or Isa. 18. 4. Cloud of Dew in the heat of harvest. Their winter, though short, was sharp;Psal. 147. 1. Who is able to abide his frosts? Now although such their vicinity to the Sun (lying at the same distance with some parts of Barbary, where the people are tawny) yet the1 Sam. 17. 42. & 2 Sam. 13. 1. & 2 Sam. 14. 27. & 1 King. 1. 4. (their women especially) were of fair complexion. Indeed, though the setting of the Fa be the same, all stuffes take not die alike. Besides, that the able faces of Black-mores come not from the Sun, but some other secret cause, plainly appears, because Ebony and Ivory, I mean, black and fair faces are found in parallel Climates. The last Column containes the Book, Page, and Paragraph (save that the fifth book is divided onely into Chapters) where any memorable mention is made of such places in our Description. Places out of the Apocrypha, and humane writers we have omitted, which by their ownSee our first Book. chap. 15. markes will soon insinuate themselves into the Readers acquaintance, without any farther indication.
AN INDEX.English re∣semblances▪ A Name. Meaning. Mentioned. Map. Longit. Lat. Lib Pag. Par ABana. Ri. Stony.Stony Stratford Bucking∣ham Shre. 2 King. 5. 12 Libanu 70. 20 34. 10 4 7 14 Abarim. M Passengers. Num. 27. 12 Reuben 70. 10 32. 10 2 63 20 Abdon. C. Servitude. Iosh. 21. 30 Asher 69. 10 33. 50       Abel S. Grief, or a Pla. 1 Sam. 6. 18 Dan   2 213 15   Abel-maim. C. Plain of the waters. 2 Chr. 16. 14 Naphtali.           Abel-Mehlah C. Plain of the Quire. Iudg. 7. 22 Manass Jo. 69. 34 32. 30 2 175 16 Abel-Mizraim. Grief of Egyptians. Gen. 50. 11 Benjamin 69. 50 31.0 2 247 15 Pl.                 Abel-Shittim. T. Plain of Thornes.Thorny-Aby Cam∣bdg sh. Num. 33. 49 Reuben           Abel of the Vines. Pl. Plain of the Vines. Iudg. 11. 33 Ammon           Abez. C. Muddy or dirty. Iosh. 19. 20 Issachar           Abilene. L. from Abilene the chief City. Luke 3. 1 Libanus. wholly out of Palest.     1 38 3 Acho. C.   Iudg. 1. 31 Asher 69. 00 33. 30 2 133 27 Aceldama. F. Field of bloud. Acts 1. 19 By Jerusalē.     3 348 2, 3 Achor. V. Trou le.Trouble∣field or  in Noman∣dy. Iosh. 7. 24 Benjamin     2 254 35 Achshaph. C. Witchcraft or In∣chantment. Iosh. 11. 1 Asher 69. 00 33. 40 2 14 7 Achzib C.   Iosh. 15. 44 Asher 69. 00 33. 40 2 134 27 Adadah C.   Iosh. 15. 22 Judah           Adam C. Red.From such colour Rut∣land, Red born in  in Surry, &c. Iosh. 3. 16 Reuben     2 62 16 Adami T. Iosh. 19. 33 Naphtali 69. 50 34. 10       Admah C. Gen. 10. 19 Judah 0. 10 30. 50       Adar T.   Iosh. 15. 3 Judah 69. 10 30. 50       Adithaim C.   Iosh. 15. 36 Judah           Adullam C. Testimony to them Iosh. 12. 15 Judah 69. 10 31. 30 2 278 32 Adummim T. RedRedman Hash. men, or Earthly Iosh. 15. 7 Benjamin 69. 30 31. 50       Aenon T. A little fountain. Ioh. 3. 23 Manas. cis Jo. 69. 40 32. 30 2 176 17 Ahlab C. Milky.. Iudg. 1. 31 Asher 69. 20 33. 50       Ai C. A confused heape. Iosh. 7. 1 Benjamin 69. 20 32. 00 2▪ 254 35 Aath C. I conjecture it the self same with Ai. Isa 10. 2 Benjamin           Aija. C.   Nh. 11. 31. Benjamin           Aijalon. C. An Oake'sOkcham in Rutland Okeley Northamp. Iudg. 12. 12. Zebul 8. 50. 33.0 2 150 29 Aijalon. C. Iosh. 19. 42 Dan 69. 10 31. 50 2 211 10 Ain. C. An Eye or a Fountain. Num. 34. 11 Nephtali 69. 50 33. 50       Ain. C. Iosh. 15. 32. Simeon 69. 0 31 20 2 229 8 Akrabhim. M. See Maaleh-akrahim. Num. 34. 4 Judah 69. 40 30. 50       Alamelech. T.   Iosh. 19. 26. Asher compare Ios. 21. 18. with         Alemeth. C. The same with Almō. 1 Chr. 6. 60. Benjamin 1 Chro. 6. 60.         Alexandria. C.   Acts 6. 9 Egypt 60. 31. 4 87 23 Allon. C. An Oake. Iosh. 19. 33 Naphtali 69. 40 34. 10 2 105 6 Allon-Bachuth. Oake of weeping. Gen. 35. 8 Benjamin     2 248 19 Almon. C. Hiding. Iosh. 21. 18 Benjamin 69. 30 32. 00       Almon-Diblatha∣im. St. Hiding of clusters of Figs. Num. 33. 46 Moab           Alush. St. Meale mingling with water. Num. 33. 13. Paran           Amad. T. A people of witness. Iosh. 19. 26. Asher     2 124 7 Amam. C. Mother of them. Iosh. 15. 26. Judah 69. 20 30. 50       Amana. M.   Cant. 4. 8. Manas. tr.     2 93 5 Ammah. M. A Cubit. 2 Sam. 2. 24 Benjamin     2 56 39 Anab. C. A Grape. Iosh. 11. 21. Judah 69. 10 31. 10      
Anaharath. C. Grumbling, or mur∣muring. Iosh. 19. 19 Judah 69. 20 33. 00       Anathoth. C. An answer. Iosh. 21. 18 Benjamin 69. 30 31 40 2 260 51 Anem C. The same with Engan∣nim; compare Ios. 21. 29. with 1 Chr. 6. 73. 1 Chr. 6. 73 ssachar           Anim C.   Iosh. 15. 50 Judah 69. 30 31. 10       Antioch C.   Acts 6. 5 Libanus     3 21 27 Antipatris C.   Acts 23. 31 Mana. cis Jor. 68. 50 32. 30 2 172 3 Aphek C. Strength, or Vigour. Iosh. 12. 18 Asher 69. 10 33 40       Aphek C.   1 Sam. 29. 1 Issachar     5 c. 6. p. 154. Apheka C.   Iosh. 15. 53 Judah 69. 00 32. 50       Ar C. Watchfull. Num: 21. 15 Maob           Arab C. Lying in waite. Iosh. 15. 52 Judah 69. 30 31. 10       Arabah T. See Beth-arabah. Iosh. 18. 18 Judah           Arad C. A wilde Asse. Iosh. 12. 14 Judah 69. 40 30. 50       Arba C. The same with Hebron Iosh. 14. 15             Archi T.   Iosh. 16. 2 Ephraim           Argob L. & C. A clod of clay. Deut. 3. 4 Mana. tr. Jor. 70. 10 33 40       Arimathea C. HighHigh∣worth, Wil. sh. Higham Northamp∣tonshire. Mat. 27. 57 Ephraim 69. 00 31. 50 2 185 12 Arki L. & People My sinewes Gen. 10. 17 Libanus     1 20 13 Arnon Ri. & C.   Num. 21. 13 Gad 70. 20 32. 30 2 75 5 Aroer C. & L.   Num. 32. 34 Reuben 70. 20 32. 40 2 56 4 Arvad C. Commanding or do∣mineering. Ezek. 27. 8 Libanus     4 16 37 Aruboth L. Lying in waite or Treacheries. 1 King. 4. 10 Judah     2 286 58 Arumah C. Lofty or exalted.Vpping∣ham Rut∣land sh. Iudg. 9. 41 Ephraim 69. 00 32. 00       Ashan C. See Corashan. Iosh. 15. 42 Simeon           Ashdod C.   Iosh. 11. 22 Dan 68. 40 31. 30 2 219 32 Ashdoth-Pisgah T. The sheddings out of Pisgah. Deut. 3. 17 Reuben           Ashnath C.   Iosh. 15. 33 Judah           Ashtaroth C. Flockes Deut. 1. 4 Manas. tr. Jor. 70. 00 33. 30       Ashtemoth C. See Eshtemoa. Iosh. 15. 50 Judah 69. 20 31. 00       Askelon   Iudg. 1. 18 Simeon 68. 40 31. 20       Ataroth Crowns. Num. 32. 3 Gad 69. 40 32. 40       Ataroth-Adder Crowns of the mighty Iosh. 16. 5 Ephraim 69. 40 32. 20       Ataroth T.   Iosh. 18. 13   69. 10 32. 00       Athach T.   1 Sam. 30. 30 Judah           Aven C. Iniquity, or Vanity Ezek. 30. 17 Egypt 63. 30.       Avim C. Unjust, or pervers men Iosh. 18. 23 Benjamin           Avith C. Froward or perverse. Gen. 36. 35 Edom           Azekah T. A fenced City. Iosh. 10. 10 Benjamin           Azem   Iosh. 19. 3 Simeon 68. 50 31. 20       Azmon T. Strength, or Bone. Num. 34. 4 Judah 69. 0 30. 50       Aznoth-Tabor   Iosh. 19. 34 Naphtali 62. 20 33. 30       B BAalah   Iosh. 15. 9   68. 50 31. 40       Baalath   1 King. 9. 18             Baalath-Beer   Iosh. 19. 8             Baal-gad   Iosh. 11. 17   70. 20 33. 50       Baal-hamon   Cant. 8. 11             Baal-hazor   2 Sam. 13. 23   69. 30 32. 10       Baal-hermon   Iudg. 3. 3   70. 20 33. 50       Baal-meon   Num. 32. 38             Baal-perazim Pl. The plai of breaches 2 Sam. 5. 20 Moriah     2 302 22 Baal-shalisha. C. Lord of Shalisha. 2 King. 4. 42 Ephraim           Baal-tamar. T. Lord of a Palm. Iudg. 20. 33 Benjamin           Baal-zephon. St. The Idol of Zephon. Exod. 14. 2 Egypt 63. 29. 4 92 38 Baca. V. Mulberries or weeping Psal. 84. 6 Moriah     5     Bachuth. Tree. Weeping. Gen. 35. 8 Benjamin     2 248 19 Bahurim. C. Choice or young men. 2 Sam. 3. 16 Benjamin 69. 30 31. 40 2 297 11 Baiith. T.   Is. 15. 2 Moab           Balah. C.   Iosh 19. 3 Simeon 69. 00 31. 20       Bamoth. St. High places or Altars. Num. 21. 19 Moab           Bamoth-Baal. C.   Iosh. 13. 17 Reuben 70. 10 32. 10       Bealoth. C.   Iosh. 15. 24 Judah           Beer-elim. C. Fountain of Rams.Ramsy, Huntington shire. Isa. 15. 8 Moab           Beer-la-hai-roi. W The well of the living and seeing. Gen. 16. 14 Simeon     2 233 17 Beeroth. C. Wells.Wells in Sommerset shire. Iosh. 9. 17 Benjamin           Beersheba. C. Well of an Oath. Gen. 21. 14 Simeon 68. 50 31. 10 2 232 14 Beeshterah. C.   Iosh. 21. 27 Manas. tr. Jor.           Bene-berak. C.   Iosh. 19. 45 Dan 69. 00 31. 50       Beon. T. In affliction. Num. 32. 3 Reuben           Berachah. V. Blessing. 2 Chr. 20. 26 Judah     2     Berothath. C.   Ezek. 47. 16 Libanus     4 11 24 Besor. Ri. Merry message. 1 Sam. 30. 9 Simeon           Betah. C. Confidence or security 2 Sam. 8. 8 Libanus     4 11 24 Beten. T. A Pelly. Iosh. 19. 25 Asher 69. 00 33. 40       Bethabara. T. House of passage.Aust-pas∣age Glost. shire. Ioh. 1. 28 Reuben           Bethanah.   Iosh. 19. 38 Naphtali 69. 40 33. 40       Bethanoth. C. House of affliction. Iosh. 15. 59 Judah.           Bethany. T. House of the afflicted. Mat. 21. 17 Moriah           Betharabah. T. A Crows nest.Pic-nest Waltham Abbey Essex Iosh. 15. 6 Judah 69. 5 31. 40       Betharam. C.   Iosh. 13. 27 Gad           Bethaven. C. House of vanity or ini∣quity, Iosh. 7. 2 Benjamin 69. 20 32. 00 2 254 36 Bethazmaveth.   Nehem. 7. 28             Bethbirei C.   1 Chr. 4. 31 Simeon           Bethcar. T. House of the Lambe.Lambeth Surry. 1 Sam. 7. 11 Benjamin           Beth-Dagon. C. House of Fish.Fish house in the Isle of Weight. Iosh. 15. 41 Judah           Beth-Dagon. C. Iosh. 19. 27 Asher 69. 10 33. 40       Bethdiblathaim. C House of Figs.Figce Court in the Temple Ier. 48. 22 Moab           Bethel. C. House of God.Godstow in Oxford∣shire. Gen. 12. 8 Benjamin 69. 20 32. 00 2 248 18 Bethemek. C. House of deepness.Deeping, Linc. sh. Iosh. 19. 27 Zebulun 69. 10 33. 40       Bether. M. Division Cant. 2. 17 Manas. tr. Jor.           Beth-gamul. C. House of retributi∣on. Ier. 48. 23 Moab           Beth-haran. T.   Num. 32. 36 Gad 70. 10 32. 40       Beth-hoglah. T. House of a circle. Iosh. 15. 6 Benjamin 69. 50 31. 40 2 247 14 Beth-Iesimoth. C. House of desolations. Num. 33. 49 Reuben           Beth-lebaoth. C. House of Lionesses. Iosh. 19. 6 Simeon 68. 50 31. 20       Bethlehem. C. House of bread.Bread∣street. Lond. Gen. 35. 19 Judah 69. 20 31. 30 2 298 13 Bethlehem. C. Iosh. 19. 15 Zebulun 69. 00 33. 30       Beth-maachah. C. House of contrition. 1 Sam. 20. 14 Naphtali 69. 40 33. 50 2 113 26 Beth-marcaboth. C House of Chariots. Iosh. 19. 5 Simeon 69. 00 31. 30       Beth-meon. C. House of habitation. Ier. 48. 23 Moab           Bethnimrah. C. See Nimrim. Num. 32. 36 Gad 70. 00 32. 40       Bethoron. C. House of liberty. Iosh. 10. 10 Ephraim 69. 20 32. 30       Beth-palet. C. House of freeing. Iosh. 15. 27 Judah           Bethpazzez. C. House of breaking. Iosh. 19. 21 Issachar 69. 00 33. 00       Beth-Peor. C. House of opening. Deut. 3. 29 Reuben           Bethphage. T. House in the mouth of the Valley. Mat. 21. 1 Moriah           Bethphelet. T.   Neh. 11. 26 Judah           Bethrehob. C. A large or spacious house. Iudg. 18. 28 Libanus     4 6 12 Bethsaida. C. House of fishing or hunting. Wilt. sh. Mat. 11. 21 Naphtali 69. 30 33. 30       Bethshn. C. House of enemy. 1 Sam. 31. 10 Manas. cis Jor. 69. 30 32. 40 2 177 21 Bethsmesh. C. House of the sun.Sunning in Ba ksh. and Sunbury Middlesex. osh. 15. 10 Judah 69. 00 31.0 2 213 15 Iudg. 1. 33 Naphtali 69. 20 33. 40 2 115 31 Ier. 43. 13 Egypt 62. 30. 4 88 24 Bethshittah. T. House of wandring. udg. 7. 22 Manas. cis Jor. 69. 20 32. 30       Beth-Tappuah. C. House of an Apple.Applc shaw Hamp. sh. Iosh. 15. 53 Judah           Bethul. C Marriageable Maid.Maidwe Northamp. Iosh. 19. 4 Simeon 69. 10 31. 10      
Bethzur. C. House of a Rock.Ro. kley in Yoksh. Iosh. 15. 58 Judah           Betonim. C. Bellyes. Iosh. 13. 26 Gad           Bezek. C. Lightning or shining.Shine in Surrey. Iudg. 1. 4 Judah     2 301 21 Bezer. C. A fortification or mu∣niment.Castleton in Yorksh. Deut. 4. 43 Reuben     2 58 8 Bileam.   1. Chr. 6. 20             Bithron. L. Partition. 2 Sam. 2. 29 Gad           Bizjothjah. C. In the olive of the Lord Ioshua 15. 28 Judah           Bochim. T. WeepingWepham Sussex. Iudg. 2. 1 Benjamin           Bozer. Ro.   1 Sam. 14. 4 Benjamin.           Bozkath. C.   Iosh. 15. 39 Judah           Bozrah. C. A muniment or forti∣fication. Gen. 36. 33 Edom     4 34 36 Bozrah. C. The same with Besh∣terah. Iosh. 21. 27 Manas. tr. Jor.           C CAbbon. C. Quenching. Iosh. 15. 40 Judah           Cabul. L. Durty or barren. Iosh. 19. 27 Libanus 69. 20 33. 40 4 4 9 Cain. C. A possession. Iosh. 15. 57 Judah           Caleb. L. All-heart. 1 Sam. 30. 14 Judah           Caleb-Ephrata. C.   1 Chr. 2. 24 Judah           Comon. C.   Iudg. 10. 5 Manas. tr. Jor. 70. 10 33. 30       Cana. C.   Ioh. 2. 1 Zebulun 69. 10 34. 00       Capernaum. C. Village of consolation Mat. 4. 13 Naphtali 69. 50 33. 30 2 109 14 Carmel. Val. A full, green, tender eare. Iosh. 12. 22 Zebulun           Iosh. 15. 55 Judah. 69. 40 31. 10       Casiphia.   Ezra 8. 17             Cesarea. C. Philippi. Mat. 16. 13 Naphtali 69. 40 34. 0 2 107 11 Stratonis. Acts 8. 40 Mana. cis Jor. 68. 50 32. 40 2 172 3 Charasim. V. Craftsmen. 1 Chr. 4. 14 Judah           Chephar-Haam∣monai. C.   Iosh. 18. 24 Benjamin 69. 20 31. 50       Chephirah. C.   Iosh. 9. 17 Benjamin           Cherith. Ri.   1 King. 17. 3 Manas. tr. Jor.     2 97 17 Chesalon. M.   Iosh. 15. 10 Dan           Chesil. C.   Iosh. 15. 30 Judah           Chinnereth. Sea. An Harpe.Harpham & Harpley. Norfolk. Num. 34. 11 Zebulun     2 141 4 Chisloth-Tabor. T. Rashnesses of choice. Iosh. 19. 12 Zebulun 69. 20 33. 10       Chorazin. C.   Mat. 11. 21 Manas. tr. Jor. 69. 50 33. 30 2 97 16 Chozeba. T.   1 Chr. 4. 22 Judah.           Chun. C.   1 Chr. 18. 8 Libanus     4 11 24 Cinnereth. C. See Chinnereth. Iosh. 19. 35 Naphtali 69. 40 33. 30       Chorashan. C. A furnace of smoake. 1 Sam. 30. 30 Simeon           Cyprus. Isle.   Acts 4. 36 Libanus     4 14 32 D DAbareh. C. Word or work. Iosh. 21. 28 Issachar 69. 30 33. 10 2 162 21 Dabbasheth C. Flowing with hony.Honiton Devonsh. Iosh. 19. 11 Zebulun 68. 50 33. 00       Dalmanutha. L. The poors inheritance. Mark 8. 10 Zebulun     2 147 20 Damascus, or Da∣masek. C. A sack of bloud. Gen. 14. 15 Libanus     4 8 16 Dan, Fountain.   Gen. 14. 14 Libanus 69. 40 34. 10 4 6 12 Dan-Iaan.   2 Sam. 24. 6             Dannab. C. Judgment. Iosh. 15. 49 Judh 69. 10 31. 20       Debir. An Oratory. Iosh. 10. 48 Judah 69. 40 32. 40 2 277 27 Decapolis. L. Ten Cities. Mat. 4. 25 Naphtali     1 39 6 Diblath. T. A cluster of Figs.Fighildō Wiltsh. Ezek. 6. 14 Moab           Dibon. C. An abounding Son. Num. 21. 30 Gad 70. 10 32. 40 2 76 8     Neh. 11. 20. Judah           Dibon-Gad. St. The abundance of an happy Son. Num. 33. 45 Moab           Dibzahab. St. Sufficiency of gold. Deut. 1. 1 Paran     4     Dileam. C. Poor mans answer. Iosh. 15. 38 Judah           Dimnah. C. A Dunghill. Iosh. 21. 35. Judah           Dimon. Ri. Bloudy. Isa. 15. 9 Moab           Dinhabah. C.   Gen. 36. 32 Eom     4 32 33 Dizahab. St. By the gold mines.Golden∣grove in carmar sh Deut. 1. 1 Paran     5 c.22   Dophkah. St. Compulsion. Num. 33. 12 Paran           Dor. C. A generation. Iosh. 11. 2 Manas. cis Jor. 68. 40 32. 50 2 165 26 Dothan. C. Statute or Decree Gen. 37. 17 Ephraim 69. 20 32. 20 2 199 51 Dumah. C. Likeness of silence. Iosh. 15. 52 Judah 69. 30 31. 10       L.   Isa. 21. 11 Edom     4 99 30 E EBal. Mount. Heap of Atiquity. Deut. 27. 4 Ephraim 69. 20 32. 10 2 191 33 Eben-ezer. S. The stone of help.Helpston Northamp. shire. 1. Sam. 4. 1 Benjamin     2 260 49 Ebronah. St. Passing by. Num. 33. 34 Paran           Ed. Altar. A witness. Iosh. 22. 34 Reuben     2 60 13 Edar. C. Hocks. Gen. 35. 21 Moriah       244 8 Eder. Iosh. 15. 21 Judah           Edrei. C. Heape of strength. Num. 21. 33 Manas. tr. Jor. 69. 50 33. 40 2 97 15 Eglaim. T. Calves, or Heifers.Kineton Warwic. sh. Isa. 15. 8 Moab           Eglon. C. A Calf.The Calf in the Isle of Man. Iosh. 10. 34 Judah           Ekron. C. Rooting up, or barren∣ness. Iosh. 13. 3 Dan. 68. 50 31. 40 2 218 29 Elh. V.   1 Sam. 17. 2 Judah           Elath. St. An Oake.Oake∣hampton Devon. Oakching∣ham, Bark∣shire. Deut. 2. 8 Paran     5 184   Elealah. C. The ascent of God. Num. 32. 3 Reuben           Eleph. C.   Iosh. 18. 28 Benjamin 69. 40 31. 50       Elim. St. Rams or Harts.Ramton Camb. sh. Exod. 15. 27 Paran     4 47 13 Elon. C.   Iosh. 19. 43 Dan 68. 50 31. 40       Elon-Bethanan. T.   1 King. 4. 9 Dan           Elteketh. C.   Iosh. 19. 44 Dan 69. 00 31. 30       Eltolad. C. The generation of God. Iosh. 15. 30 Simeon 69. 00 31. 20       Emmaus. T. Mother of strength. Luke. 24. 13 Moriah 69. 10 31. 40 2 303 25 Enam. C.   Iosh. 15. 34 Judah           Endor. C. Fountain of the gene∣ration. Iosh. 17. 11 Manas. cis Jor. 69. 00 32. 50 2 165 26 Eneglaim. T. Fountain of Heifers. Ezek. 47. 10             Engannim. C. Fountain of Gardens. Iosh. 19. 21 Issachar 69. 30 32. 50       Engannim. C. Iosh. 15. 34 Judah           Engedi. Fountain of felicity. Iosh. 15. 62 Judah 69. 50 31. 30       En-hakkore. Fountain of him that cryed. Iudg. 15. 19 Simeon           Enhaddah. Fountain of eye of Mirth. Iosh. 19. 21 Issachar 69. 20 32. 40       Enhazor. C. Fountain of the Court Iosh. 19. 37 Naphtali 6.30 33. 50       En-rimnon. T. Fountain of the Pome∣granates. Neh. 11. 29             En-rogel. Fountain of a Spie. Iosh. 15. 7 Moriah           En-shemesh.   Iosh. 15. 7   69. 40 31. 40       Entappuah. Fountain of the Sun. Iosh. 17. 7 Manas. cis Jor. 69. 10 32. 40       Ephes-Damim. T.   1 Sam. 17. 1 Judah           Esek. We. Contention Gen. 26. 20 Simeon     2 231 11 Ephraim.   2 Sam. 13. 23   69. 30 32. 10       Ephratah.   Gen. 35. 16             Eshcol. V. & Ri. A cluster of Grapes. Num. 13. 24 Dan     2 215 20 Eshean.   Iosh. 15. 52 udah           Eshtao. C. Asking or requesting. Iosh. 19. 41 Dan     2 214 17
Eshtemoa. C. Womans wombe. Iosh. 21. 14 Judah 69. 20 31. 0       Etam. Ro.   Iudg. 15. 8 Simeon     2 229 6 Etam. C.   1 Chr. 4. 32 Simeon           Etham. St. Strength or vehemen∣cy. Exd. 13. 20 Egypt 63. 30.       Ezel. S.   1 Sam. 20. 19 Benjamin.           Ezem. T.   1 Chr. 4. 29 Simeon.           Ezion-Gaber   Num. 33. 35 Edom     4 33 35 G GAash. M. A tempest or commo∣tion. Iosh. 24. 30 Ephraim 69. 32.       Gaash. R. 2 Sam. 23. 30 Ephraim           Gaba. C. An Hill.Hilton Castle. B. of Durham. Iosh. 18. 24 Benjamin           Gad. R. A Troop or good for∣tune 2 Sam. 24. 5 Gad     1     Galilee. L.   Iosh. 20. 7       1 35 6 Gadarens. Compassed with a sence. Mark 5. 1 Gad 69. 50 33. 10 2 79 17 Gallim.   1 Sam. 25. 44   69. 20 31. 40       Gath. C. A Presse.   Dan 68. 50 31. 40       Gathrimmon C. A Presse of Pome∣granates. Iosh. 19. 45 Dan           Gathrimmon C. Iosh. 21. 25 Man. cis Jor.           Gaza. C. Sec Azza. Gen. 10. 19 Simeon 68. 50 31. 10 2 235 22 Geba. See Gaba. Iosh. 21. 17 Benjamin 69. 20 31. 40       Gebal. A bound, or limit.Merch County in Scotland. Psal. 83. 7 Libanus     4 16 35 Gebim.   Isa. 10. 31             Geder. C. A wall.Walden Essex. Iosh. 12. 13 Simeon           Gederah. C. A wall Iosh. 15. 36 Judah           Gederoth. C. Walls. Iosh. 15. 41 Judah           Gederothaim. C. Two walls. Iosh. 15. 36 Judah           Gedor. C.   Iosh. 15. 58 Judah           Geliloth. T. Revolutions. Iosh. 18. 17 Benjamin 69. 40 31. 50       Gennesaret. L.   Mat. 14. 34 Zebulun           Gerar. C.   Gen. 10. 19 Simeon 69. 00 31. 10 2 230 10 Gergesens.   Mat. 8. 28 Gad           Gerizim. M. Sythes or Mowers. Deut. 11. 29 Ephraim 69. 20 32. 10       Geshuri. L. and C. The vale of an oxe.Oxney Kent Deut. 3. 14 Libanus     2 6 13 Gethsemane. T. A Presse of oile. Mat. 26. 26 Moriah           Gzer. C. Cutting off, ordivision Iosh. 10. 33 Ephraim 69. 00 31. 50 2 184 8 Giah. C.   2 Sam. 2. 24 Benjamin 69. 30 31. 50       Gibbethon. C. High-backed or rid∣gedTotter∣ridge Midle sex. Iosh. 19. 44 Dan 69. 10 31. 40 2 213 16 Gibbeah. C.   Iosh. 15. 57 Judah           Gibbeath. C. An Hill, or Hilly. Iosh. 18. 28 Benjamin 69. 20 31. 40 2 257 42 Gibbeon. C. Iosh. 9. 3 Benjamin 69. 20 31. 50 2 255 37 Gidom. T.   Iudg. 20. 45 Benjamin           Gihon. M. and Ri. A Belly. 1 King. 1. 33 Moriah     3 331 8 Gilboa. M. Joy of searching out. 1 Sam. 28. 4 Issachar 69. 20 32. 50 2 163 22 Gilead. L. The heap of witness. Gen. 31. 21 Gad     2 82 25 Gilgal. C. Rolling.Rolle∣wright Ox∣ford. sh. Deut. 11. 30 Benjamin 69. 40 31. 50 2 245 10 Giloh. C.   Ioshua 15. 51 Judah 69. 40 31. 10 2 279 36 Gimzo. C.   2 Chr. 28. 18 Judah           Gittah-hepher. C. A digging Winepress. Iosh. 19. 13 Zebulun 69. 20 33. 30 2 147 20 Gittaim. C. Wine-Presses. 2 Sam. 4. 3 Benjamin     2 260 0 Goath.   Ier. 31. 39             Gob. A Locust or a ditch. 2 Sam. 21. 18             Golan. C. Change or revolution Deut. 4. 43 Manas. tr. Jor. 70. 20 33. 40 2 97 16 Golgotha. M. A place of a scull. Mat. 27. 33 Moriah           Goshen. L.   Gen. 45. 10 Egypt     4 90 29 Goshen. L.   Iosh. 15. 51 Judah 69. 30 31. 10       Gudgodah. St. The same with Hor∣hagidgad. Deut. 10. 7 Paran           Gur. T. A whelp.Dogdik∣sey Licol∣shire. 2 King. 9. 27 Issachar           Gur-Baal. A whelp of the Lord.Whelpston Yorkshire. 2 Chr. 26. 7 Arabia           H Name. Meaning. Mentioned. Map. Longit. Latit. Lib Pag. Par HAch . M. Hope or hook in her. 1 Sam. 23. 19 Judah 69. 40 31. 20       Hadadrim∣mon.   Zech. 12. 11 Issachar 69. 00 32. 40       Hadashah. C. New, or a moneth. Iosh. 15. 37 Judah           Hadattah. C. Rejoicingor delighted. Iosh. 15. 25 Judah           Hadid. C.   Neh. 11. 33 Benjamin 69. 40 32. 00       Halac. M.   Iosh. 11. 17 Edom           Halhul. C. The beginning of grief Iosh. 15. 58 Judah           Hali. C.   Iosh. 19. 25 Asher. 69. 00 33. 40       Hamath. C. Burning Anger. 2 Chr. 8. 3 Libanus     4 11 26 Hammath. C.   Iosh. 19. 35 Naphtali 69. 30 34. 10 2 112 23 Hammon. C.   Iosh. 19. 28 Asher 69. 20 34. 10       Hamoth-dor Heat of the generation Iosh. 21. 32 Naphtali 69. 30 33. 50       Hanes. C.   Isa. 30. 4 Egypt 63. 30.       Hannathon. T. Graces or Mercies.Grace-Dieu Lecest. shire. Iosh. 19. 14 Zebulun 69. 10 33. 30       Hapharaim. C.   Iosh. 19. 19 Issachar 69. 20 33. 00       Haradah. St. Trembling. Num. 34. 24 Paran           Hareth. Forest.   1 Sam. 22. 5 Judah           Harod. We. Fearfulness. Iudg. 7. 1 Manas. cis Jor.     2 173 8 Harosheth. C. Plowing, Silence, or deafness. Iudg. 4. 2 Naphtali 69. 50 33. 50       Hashmonah. St.   Num. 33. 29 Paran           Havoth-Iair. L. The livings or hamlets of Iair. Num. 32. 41 Manas. tr. Jor 70. 0 33. 30 2 96 14 Hazar-addar. T.   Num. 34. 4 Judah           Hazar-enan. T. Court of their fountain Num. 34. 9             Hazar-gaddah. Court of a Kid.Goatham Nott sh. Iosh. 15. 27 Judah 69. 10 31. 10       Hazar-hatticon.   Ezek. 47. 16             Hazaroth. St. Courts. Deut. 1. 1 Paran     4 54 35 Haza-shual. C. Fox-court.Foxton in Camb sh. Iosh. 15. 28 Simeon 69. 00 31. 20       Hazar-susah. C. Court of the horse∣menHorsley Daby sh. Iosh. 19. 5 Simeon 68. 50 31. 20       Hazerim. T.   Deut. 2. 23             Hazeroth. St.   Num. 11. 35 Paran           Hazezon-tamar.   Gen. 14. 7             Hazor. C. A court. Iosh. 11. 10 Naphtali 69. 30 33. 50       Hebron. C. Company or Com∣munion. Gen. 13. 18 Judah 69. 20 31. 20 2 273 17 Hebron. C.   Iosh. 19. 28 Asher 69. 20 33. 50       Helam. C. Their army or strength 2 Sam. 10. 16 Libanus     4 9 21 Helbath. C. Fatness. Iudg. 1. 31 Asher 69. 10 33. 50       Helbon. C. Milke.Milkstreet London. Ezek. 27. 18 Syria     2 132 16 Heleph. T. Changing or boring through Iosh. 19. 33 Naphtali 69. 30 34. 10       Helkah. A field. Iosh. 21. 31 Asher 69. 00 33. 40 2 256 39 Helkath. Iosh. 19. 25 Asher           Hlkath-Hazzu∣rim. F. Field of strong-men. 2 Sam. 2. 16 Benjamin           Hemath, or Ha∣math.   1 Chr. 13. 5             Hena.   2 King. 18. 34             Hepher. C.   Iosh. 12. 17 Judah           Heres. M. The Sun.Sunburn Hamsh Iudg. 1. 35 Dan           Hermon. M. Destruction. Deut. 3. 8 Manas. tr. Jor.     2 32 4 Heshbon. C. Thought, or Reaso∣ning. Num. 21. 25 Ruben 70. 00 32. 40 2 66 26 Heshmon. C.   Iosh. 15. 27 Judah           Hethlon. T.   Ezek. 47. 15   69. 20 34. 10       Hezron. T.   Ioshua. 15. 3 Judah           Hilen.   1 Chr. 6. 58       3 349 6 Hinnom. V. Roaring of shreiking. Iosh. 15. 8 Judah     4 134 34 Hoba. T.   Gen. 14. 15 Libanus           Holon. C.   Iosh. 15. 51 Judah          
Hor. M. A Mountain. Num. 34. 8 Asher 69. 20 34. 10 4     Hor. M. Num. 20. 22 Edom           Horeb. M. Drinesse.Driield in Yokshire. Exod. 3. 1 Paran           Horem. C.   Iosh. 19. 38 Naphtali 69. 40 33. 40       Horhagidgad. St. The hill of Gidgad. Num. 33. 32 Paran           Hormah. C. Destruction. Num. 14. 45 Simeon 69. 10 31. 10 2 230 9 Horonaim. C. Angers, or furies. Isa. 15. 5 Moab           Hosah. T.   Iosh. 19. 29 Asher           Hokkk. T.   Iosh. 19. 34 Naphtali 69. 10 33. 30       Hukok. C. the same with Helkah   1 Chr. 6. 75 Asher           Humtah. C. A SnailSnailwell Camb. sh. Lizads∣point in Cornwall. & a Lizard. Iosh. 15. 54 Judah           I JAbbok. Ri. Striving. Gen. 32. 22 Gad     2 76 9 Iabesh-gileid. C Drinesse or blushing.Drisoke Rutland. 1 Sam. 11. 1 Gad 69. 50 32. 50 2 81 22 Iabez.   1 Chr. 2. 55             Iabneel. C. Building of the Lord. Iosh. 15. 11 Judah 68. 50 31. 50       Iabneel. C. Iosh. 19. 33 Naphtali 70. 00 33. 50       Iahneh. C. Building. 2 Chr. 26. 6 Dan           Iagur. C. A guest or strangr. Iosh. 15. 21 Judah           Iahaz. C. Chiding or brawling.Wrangle . Num. 21. 23 Reuben           Iahazah.   Iosh. 13. 18             Ianoah. C.   2 King. 15. 29 Naphtali 69. 40 33. 40       Ianohah. T. Resting.Reston Lin∣colshire. Iosh. 16. 6 Ephraim 69. 30 32. 20       Ianum. C.   Iosh. 15. 53 Judah           Iaphleti. C.   Iosh. 16. 3 Ephraim 69. 10 32. 00       Iapho. C. Faireness or beauty. Worcestersh Iosh. 19. 46. Dan 68. 50 31. 50 2 209 6 Iarmuth. C. Projection of death. Iosh. 15. 35 Judah. 69. 10 31. 20       Iarmath.   Iosh. 21. 29 Issachar 69. 10 32. 50       Iashubi-lehem.   1 Chr. 4. 22             Iattir. C. Excelling. Iosh. 15. 48 Judah           Iazar. C. An helper or coadju∣tor. 2 Sam. 24. 5 Gad 70. 20 32. 50 5     Iazer. L. Num. 22. 1             Ibleam. C.   Iosh. 17. 11 Manas. cis Jor.           Idalah. C.   Iosh. 19. 15 Zebulun 69. 00 33. 10       Iearim. M. Woods.Wootton Northāpsh. Woodbor∣rough Not∣tinghamsh. Iosh. 15. 10 Judah           Iebus. C.   Iudg. 19. 10 Jerusalem.           Iehud. C. Praising or confessing. Iosh. 19. 45 Dan. 68. 50 31. 50       Iekabzeel. C. See Kabzeel. Nh. 11. 25             Iericho. C. Having a good savor. Num. 22. 1 Benjamin 69. 30 31. 50 2 252 28 Ieruel. Wi. Fearing the Lord. 2 Chr. 20. 16 Judah     2 285 55 Ierusalem. C. Vision of Peace. Iosh. 15. 8 Benjamin                 Judah 69. 20 31. 40 3 313   Ieshimon. C.   1. Sam 26. 1 Judah 69. 30 31. 20       Ieshana.   2 Chr 13. 9             Iethlah. Suspension. Iosh. 16. 42   69. 00 31. 50       Iezreel. C. Seed of the Lord. Iosh. 19. 18 Issachar 69. 10 32. 40 2 158 5 Iezreel.   Iosh. 15. 56 Judah 69. 40 31. 10       Ije-abarim. St. Heaps of passengers. Num. 21. 21 Moab           Ijon. C.   1 King. 15. 20 Naphtali 69. 50 33. 50.       Iiphta. C.   Iosh. 15. 43 Judah           Iiphtahel C.   Iosh. 19. 14 Zebulun 69. 10 33. 40       Iegbohah. C. A sad wilderness. Num. 32. 35. Gad 70. 20 33. 00       Iokdeam.   Iosh. 15. 56 Judah 69. 50 31. 10       Iokmeam.   1 Chr. 6. 68             Iokneam. C. Possessing the people. Iosh. 19. 11 Zebulun 69. 00 33. 30 2 151 33 Ioktheel. C.   Iosh. 15. 38 Judah           Ioppa. C. See Iapho. 2 Chr. 2. 16 Dan 68. 50. 31. 50       Iordan. Ri. Descending with a powder. Gen. 13. 10 Naphtali     2 106 7 Iotbathah. St. His goodness. Num. 33. 33 Paran           Irpeel. C.   Iosh. 18. 27 Benjamin 69. 30 32. 10       Ir-shmesh. C. A City of the Sun.Sundon Iosh. 19. 41 Dan 68. 50 31. 50       Ithnan. C. Giving, or an Hire. Iosh. 15. 23 Judah 69. 50 31. 0       Itta-kazin. C. Now a Prince. Iosh. 19. 13 Zebulun 69. 30 33. 30       Iuttah. C.   Iosh. 15. 55 Judah. 69 40 31. 0       K KAbzel. C. Congregatiō of GodGodston Sey. Iosh. 15. 21 Judah 69. 40 30. 50       Kadesh. W. Holiness.Holy Istād in Nothū∣berland. Gen. 14. 7 Simeon, Paran     2 230 8 Kadesh-Barnea. C Holiness of an unstable Son. Num. 32. 8 Judah 69. 20 30. 50 2 273 15 Kanah. Ri. A cane or reed. Iosh. 16. 8 Ephraim     2 173 6 Kanah. C.   Iosh. 10. 28 Asher 69. 10 34. 00 2 125 7 Karkaa. T. The pavement, or foundation.The Pave∣ment in York. Iosh. 15. 3 Judah 69. 00 30. 50       Karkor. T.   Iudg. 8. 10 Gad 70. 20 33. 00       Karnaim. C. Hornes.Horn∣church Essex. Gen. 14. 5 Manas. tr. Jor. 70. 10 33. 20 2 96 15 Kartah. C. Calling or meeting. Iosh. 21. 34 Zebulun 68. 50 33. 30 2 151 34 Kartan. C.   Iosh. 21. 32 Naphtali 70. 00 33. 40       Kattah. C. The same wth Kartah. Iosh. 19. 15 Zebulun           Kedar. L. Blackness or sadness.Blackwal Middlesex. Saddington Lecestosh. Ier. 2. 10 Edom     4 22 12 Kedemoth. W. C. Easternly.Eason Northampt. shire. Deut. 2. 26 Reuben 70. 20 32. 10 2 56 5 Kedesh. C. Holiness.Holy head in Anglsey. Iosh. 12. 22 Nephtali 69. 40 33. 40 2 115 30 Kehelathah. St. Church or congregation Num. 33. 22 Paran           Keilah. C.   Iosh. 15. 44. Judah     2 281 42 Kenah. C. A Possession Num. 32. 42 Manas. tr. Jor. 70. 20 33. 20       Kerioth. C. Cities. Iosh. 15. 25 Judah           Keziz. C.   Iosh. 18. 21 Benjamin. 69. 40 31. 40       Kibroth-hattaa∣vah. St. Graves of the lusters. Num. 11. 34 Paran     4 54 34 Kibzaim. C. Congregations. Iosh. 21. 22 Ephraim 69. 00 32. 20       Kidron. Ri. Black.Blackwa∣ter Hamsh. 2 Sam. 15. 23 Moriah     2 293 2 Kinah. C. A Possession. Iosh. 15. 22 Judah           Kir. C. A City. 2 King. 16. 9 Moab           Kirharaseth.   2 King. 3. 25 Moab     4 26 23 Kirheresh.   Isa. 16. 11 Moab           Kiriath.   Iosh. 18. 28 Benjamin           Kiriath-arba. C. The City of Arba or four, the same with Hebron. Gen. 23. 2                 Iosh. 15. 54 Judah 69. 20 31. 20 2 273 17 Kiriath-arim.   Ezra 2. 25             Kiriath-baal. C.   Iosh. 15. 60 Judah           Kirloth-huzoth. City of Streets., Stretley Num. 12. 39             Keriath-jearim. The City of woods. Iosh. 9. 17 Judah           Kiriath-sannah. C The same with Debir. Iosh. 15. 49 Judah           Kiriath-sepher. C. A City of a book. Iosh. 15. 15 Judah     2 277 27 Kiriathaim. C. Doubleton, or two Cities. Gen. 1. 5. Reuben     2 64 22 Kirioth.   Ier. 48. 24             Kishion. C. Hardness.Hard∣wick,  shire. Iosh. 19. 20 Issachar     2 161 16 Kishon. Ri.   Iosh. 21. 28 Zebulun 69. 20 32. 40       Kithlish. C. A Wall.Wallington Surry. Iosh. 15. 40 Judah 69. 30 31. 20       Kitron. C. Spring or perfuming. Iudg . 30 Zebulun           L LAban. St. White.Whiteby Yorkshire. Deut. 1. 1 Paran     5     Lachish C. Is walking.Walkha∣stead, Surry. Walkhamp∣ton Devon. Iosh. 10. 31 Judah 69. 20 31 30 2 278 31 Lahai-ri. Well. That liveth and seeth me. Gen. 24. 62 Simeon     2 233 17 Lahman C. Rapin or their bread. Iosh. 15. 40 Judah 69. 30 31. 30       Laish. C. An old Lion.Lion-key London. Iudg. 18. 7 Naphta li 69. 40 34. 00 2 106 9 Lakum. T. Rising again or con∣firming Iosh. 19. 3 Naphtali 70. 00 33. 40      
Lasha. T. Fair to be seen.Fairfield Glocstersh. Gen. 10. 19 Reuben 70. 00 31. 40 2 52 9 Lasharon. C. A plain or field. Iosh. 12. 18 Ephraim 68. 50 32. 00       Lebanon. M. Frankincense. Deut. 1. 7 Libanus     4 1 1 Lebaoth. C. Lionesses. Iosh. 15. 32 Simeon     2 234 19 Lebnah. C. The Moon. Iosh. 15. 42 Judah 69. 40 31. 30 2 277 29 Lehem. T.   1 Chr. 4. 22             Lehi. L. Jawbone. Iudg. 15. 9 Simeon     2 229 6 Leshem. C. The same with Lais, or Dan. Iosh. 19. 47 Naphtali     2 106 9 Libnah. St.   Num. 33. 20 Paran     5 188   Lod. C.   1 Chr. 8. 12 Benjamin 69. 40 32. 00       Lodebar. C. Word to him. 2 Sam. 9. 4 Manas. tr. Jor. 70. 20 33. 30 2 94 10 Luhith. C.   Isa. 15. 5 Moab           Luz. C. An Hasel-nut.Nutwell Devon. Nuthall Notting. sh. Gen. 28. 19 Ephraim 69. 10 32. 00       Lydda. C.   Act. 9. 32 Dan 68. 50 32. 00 2 210 7 M MAacathi. C. & L. The contrition of the belly. Deut. 3. 14 Libanus     4 13 Maaleh-acrab∣bim. T. The climing up of Scorpions. Iosh. 15. 3 Judah 69. 40 30. 50       Maarah. C.   Iosh. 15. 59 Judah           Machpelah. Cave.   Gen. 23. 9 Judah     2 274 19 Madmnnah. The measure of re∣ward. Iosh. 15. 31 Judah           Madmenah. Isa 10. 31 Moab     4 25 20 Madon. C. Brawling or strife. Iosh. 11. 1 Naphtali 69. 40 34. 10 2 114 29 Magdala. C. Turretted. Mat. 15. 39 Zebulun 69. 20 33. 30 2 147 20 Mahanaim. C. Two Armies. Gen. 32. 2 Gad 70. 20 33. 10 2 76 9 Mahaneth-dan. T The tents of Dan. Iudg. 18. 12 Dan     2 214 17 Makheloth. St. Assemblies. Num. 33. 25 Para     4 56 41 Makkedah. C. Adoration. Iosh. 10. 10 Benjamin     2 256 38 Maktesh. C.   Zeph. 1. 11             Mamre. Pl.   Gen. 13. 18 Judah     2 273 17 Maon. C. An habitation. Iosh. 15. 55 Judah 69. 40 31. 10 2 282 44 Marah. St. Bitter.Bitteing Norolk. Exod. 15. 23 Paran     4 46 13 Maralah. C.   Iosh. 19. 11 Zebulun 69. 00 33. 00       Mareshah. C. From the head or the Prince. Iosh. 15. 44 Judah     2 284 51 Maroth. T.   Micah 1. 12             Massah. St. Temptation. Exod. 17. 7 Paran     4 48 18 Mattanah. St. A gift. Num. 21. 18 Moab           Mearah. T. A Cave.Stanford in the Cave. Northāpsh. Iosh. 13. 4   69. 10 34. 10       Madeba. C. Waters of grief. Num. 21. 30 Reuben           Megiddo. C.   Iosh. 17. 11 Manas. cis Jor. 69. 00 32. 40 2 165 27 Mejarkon. C.   Iosh. 19. 46 Dan 68. 50 31. 50       Mkonah. T.   Neh. 11. 28 Judah           Meonenim. Pl.   Iudg. 9. 37 Ephraim           Mephaath. C. The force or appear∣ing of waters.Watecrton Walsham. Yorkshie. Iosh. 13. 18 Reuben 69. 50 32. 20       Merathaim. T.   Ier. 50. 21             Meribah. St. Chiding. Exod. 17. 7 Paran     4 48 18 Merom. Ri. Heights or depths. Iosh. 11. 5 Naphtali     2 107 12 Meroz. C. L. or T. Secret. Iudg. 5. 23 Naphtali 69. 50 33. 50 2 114 28 Metheg-mah. T. Bridle of the People.Bridling∣ton Yorksh. 2 Sam. 8. 1 Dan 68. 50 31. 30 2 220 32 Michmash. C. Bringing up the poor. 1 Sam. 13. 2 Benjamin 69. 20 31. 50 2 261 52 Michmethah. T.   Iosh. 16. 6. Ephraim 69. 20 32. 30       Middin. C.   Iosh. 15. 61 Judah 69. 40 31. 40       Migdal-el. C. Tower of God. Iosh. 19. 38   69. 50 33. 40       Migdal-gad. Tower of good succes. Iosh. 15. 37             Migdol. T. A tower. Exod. 14. 2 Egypt 63. 29.       Migron. T.   1 Sam. 14. 2 Benjamin           Minnith. C. Making ready. Indg. 11. 33 Ammon     4 29 28 Misgab. T.   Ier. 48. 1 Moab           Mishal. C. Asking or requesting.Askeham Yorkshire. Iosh. 21. 30             Misheal. C. Iosh. 19. 26   69. 00 33. 30       Misrephothma∣im. T. Th boiling of waters Iosh. 11. 8 Asher 69. 10 34. 10       Mithcah. St. Sweet. Num. 33. 28 Paran           Mizpah. C. A watch-towr.a Watching∣wy, Isle of Weight. Gen. 31. 49 Manas. tr. Jor. 70. 20 33. 30 2 94 11 Mizpeh. C. Iosh. 18. 26 Benjamin 70. 20 33. 30 2 259 47 Mizpah. C. 1 Sam. 22. 3 Moab     4 25 20 Moladah. C.   Iosh. 15. 26 Judah 69. 00 31. 10       Moreh. Pl.   Gen. 12. 6 Ephraim           Moriah. L. Vision of the Lord. Gen. 22. 2 Moriah     2 293 1 Mosera. St. Band or Bands. Deut. 10. 6             Moseroth. St. Num. 33. 30 Paran           Mozah. C.   Iosh. 18. 26 Benjamin 69. 20 31. 50       N NAamah. C. Fair or pleasant.Belvoire Lincolnsh. Iosh. 15. 41 Judah           Naaran. T. See Naarath. 1 Chr. 7. 28 Ephraim           Naarath. T. A young Maiden.Maidston Kent. Iosh. 16. 7 Ephraim 69. 40 32. 20       Naballal. C. Praised or bright.Bright∣sow Somersetsh. Iosh. 19. 15 Zebulun 69. 10 33. 10       Naim. Fair or beautifull.Beauli Hamsh. Luke 7. 11 Zebulun 69. 00 33. 20       Naioth. T. An habitation. 1 Sam. 19. 18 Ephraim 69. 10 32. 00       Napthali. C.   Tobit 1. 2 Naphtali 69. 30 33. 40       Nazareth. C.   Mat. 2. 23 Zebulun 69. 10 33. 20       Neah. T.   Iosh. 19. 13 Zebulun 69. 30 33. 30       Nebo. M. & C. Speech or Prophecy. Num. 32. 3 Reuben           Niel. C. The moving of God. Iosh. 19. 27 Asher 69. 10 33. 40       Nekeb. T. A ditch.Ditton Camb. sh. Iosh. 19. 33 Naphtali 69. 50 34. 00       Neptoah. We. Open or opening. Iosh. 15. 9 Judah           Netophathi.   Nehem. 12. 28             Nezib. C. A standing or erection Iosh. 15. 43 Judah           Nibshan. C.   Iosh. 15. 62 Judah 69. 40 31. 30       Nimrah. C.   Num. 32. 3 Gad           Nimrim. Ri. Leopards or Panthers. Isa. 15. 6 Gad 70. 10 32. 40       Nob. C. Speech of Prophecy. 1 Sam. 21. 1 Benjamin 69. 30 31. 40       Nabah. Barking. Iudg. 8. 11   70. 30 33. 00       Nodab.   1 Chr. 5. 19             Noph. C.   Isa. 19. 13 Egypt 62. 30 4 89 22 Nopah. C.   Num. 21. 30 Reuben           O OBoth. St. Witches or Botles.Botlesham Cambr. sh. Num. 21. 10 Moab           Olivet. M.   2 Sam. 15. 30 Moriah           On. V. & C. His grief. 1 Chr. 8. 12 Benjamin           Ophel. T. Clowdy and obscure. 2 Chr. 27. 3 Jerusalem.           Ophin. C.   Iosh. 18. 24 Benjamin           Ophrah. C. Dusty or leaden. Iosh. 18. 23 Manas. cis Jor. 69. 40 32. 00 2 173 9 P PArah. C.   Iosh. 18. 23 Benjamin           Paran. W.   Gen. 21. 21             Pas-dammim. T.   1 Chr. 11. 13             Pau. C. Hissing. Gen. 36. 39 Edom           Penuel. C. The face of God. Gen. 32. 31 Gad 70. 10 33. 00 2 77 10 Peor. T. Opening. Num. 23. 28 Reuben           Perazim. M. Breaches.Great∣breach, Kent Isa 28. 21 Moriah.     2 203 22 Perez-Vzza. T. The breach of Vzza. 2 Sam. 6. 8 Benjamin     2 251 26 Pi-hahiroth. St. The mouth of Hiroth. Exod. 14. 2 Egypt 63. 28.       Pirathon. T.   Iudg. 12. 15 Ephraim 69. 30 32. 10 2 201 56 Pisgah. M. An hill. Num. 21. 20 Reuben 70. 0 32. 10 2 63 20 Panon. St.   Num. 33. 42 Moab          
R RAbbah. C. Great or spacious.Greatton Nothampshire.   Moab           Rabbah. C. Deut. 3.11 Ammon           Rabbith. C. Multitude. Iosh. 19. 20 Issachar 69. 00 33. 00       Rachal. T.   1 Sam. 30. 29 Judah           Rakkath. C.   Iosh. 19. 35 Judah 69. 30 33. 50       Rakkon. C.   Iosh. 19. 46 Dau 68. 50 31. 50       Ramah. High or exalted.Vpton, Vpham Hamsh. Vpburn Busking sh. Vphall Harts Hie-gate Midlesex. Iosh. 18. 25 Benjamin 69. 20 31. 40       Iosh. 19. 29 Asher           Iosh. 19. 36 Naphtali           Mat. 2. 18 Moriah 69. 30 33. 50       Ramath. C.   Iosh. 19. 8 Simeon 69. 10 33. 50       Ramathaim. C.   1 Sam. 1. 1 Ephraim           Ramath-lehi. T. The lifting up of a Jawbone. Iudg. 15. 17 Simeon           Ramath-mizpeh. C The same with Ramoth Gilead. Iosh. 13. 26 Gad           Ramases. C.   Gen. 47. 11 Egypt 63. 31.       Ramoth-gilead. C.   Deut. 4. 43 Gad 70. 10 32. 50 2 82 26 Rehob. C. Large or broad.Broad∣lands Ham∣shire. Num. 13. 21 Asher 69. 20 33. 50       Rehoboth. We. Room or enlargemētBroadway Somerset sh. Gen. 10. 11 Simeon           Remeth. C. High.Highley Devonsh. Iosh. 19. 21 Judah           Remmon. C. A Pomegranate. Iosh. 19. 7 Simeon           Remmon-metho∣ar. T.   Iosh. 19. 13 Zebulun           Rephaim. V. Giants. 2 Sam. 5. 18 Moriah     2 302 22 Repidim. St.   Exod. 17. 1 Paran           Riblah. C.   Num. 34. 11 Naphtali 69. 50 33. 50       Rimmon. C.   Iosh. 15. 32 Judah 68. 50 32. 30       Rimmon-gath.   Iosh. 19. 45   68. 50 31. 40       Rimmon-parez. St. The division of Pome∣granates. Num. 33. 19 Paran           Rissah. St.   Num. 33. 21 Paran.           Rithmah. St. Juniper. Num. 33. 18 Paran           Rogelim. C.   2 Sam. 17. 27 Manas. tr. Jor. 70. 20 33. 20 2 94 10 Rumah. T.   2 King. 23. 36             S SAlcah.   Iosh. 12. 5 Manas. tr. Jor.           Salchah.   Deut. 3. 10             Salem. C. Peace. Gen. 14. 18 Moriah 69. 30 32. 20       Salim. T.   Iohn 3. 23 Manas. cis Jor.     2 176 17 Samaria. C.   1 King. 13. 32 Ephraim 69. 10 32. 30       Sansannah. C. Thorn on thorn. Iosh. 15. 31 Judah           Saphir.   Micah 1. 11             Sarepta. C.   Luke 4. 26 Asher 69. 10 34. 10       Sarid. T.   Iosh. 19. 10 Zebulun 69. 10 33. 10       Saran. C.   Acts 9. 35 Ephraim 69. 00 32. 00       Secacah. C.   Iosh. 15. 61 Judah 69. 40 31. 30       Sechu. We.   1 Sam. 19. 22 Ephraim     2 185 10 Seirah. T.   Iudg. 3. 26 Benjamin.           Sela. C. A rock.Rocking∣ham Nor∣thamp. sh. Isa. 16. 1 Edom     4 34 37 Sela-hammah∣lekoth. The rock of division. 1 Sam. 23. 28 Judah           Seleucia. C.   Acts 13. 4 Libanus           Sench. Ro. A Thorn.Thorn∣augh Nor∣thamp. sh. 1 Sam. 14. 4 Benjamin           Senir.   1 Chr. 5. 23             Sephar.   Gen. 10. 30             Sepharad.   Obad. 20             Sepharvaim. C. Books scribes or num∣bers. 2 King. 17. 24 Libanus           Shaalbim. C. The understanding of a Fox. Iudg. 1. 35 Dan           Shaaraim. T.   1 Sam. 17. 52 Dan           Shahazimath. T. Humbled with fast∣ing.Hungcr∣ord Barksh. Iosh. 19. 22 Issachar           Shalem. T. Safe or intire. Gen. 33. 18 Ephraim           Shalim L. Foxes.Foxholes Darbysh Foxton B. of Durham. 1 Sam. 9. 4 Ephraim           Shalisha. L.   1 Sam. 9. 4 Ephraim           Shamir. C. Briers or a Thome.Brierley Hefordsh. Iosh. 15. 48 Judah 69. 10 31. 10       Shapher.   Num. 33. 23 Paran           Sharaim C. Two gates.Gately Norfolk. Yatton so∣merstsh. Iosh. 15. 36 Judah           Sharon.   1 Chr. 5. 16             Sharuhen. C. A Prince or song of grace. Iosh. 19. 6 Simeon 69. 00 31. 20       Shaveh. Pl. A plain. Gen. 14. 5 Reuben           Shebam.   Num. 32. 3             Shechem. C. A shoulder. Gen. 33. 18 Ephraim 69. 20 32. 10       Shema. C. Hearing or obeying. Iosh. 15. 26 Judah 69. 10 30. 50       Shen. T.   1 Sam. 7. 12 Benjamin           Shenir.   Deut. 3. 9             Shepham. T.   Num. 34. 10 Naphtali 69. 50 34. 10       Shibmah. C.   Num. 32. 38 Reuben     2 66 25 Shicron. T. Hire or reward. Iosh. 15. 11 Dan 68. 50 31. 40       Shihor. Ri.   1 Chr. 13. 5 Simeon     2 233 18 Shihor-libnah. Ri.   Iosh. 19. 26 Asher     2 142 7 Shilhim. C.   Iosh. 15. 32 Judah           Shiloh. C. Peaceable and happy. Iosh. 18. 1 Ephraim 69. 20 31. 50 2 185 13 Shiloah. Ri.   Nehem. 3. 15 Jerusalem     3 322 13 Shimron. C. The same with Shim∣ron-Meron. Iosh. 11. 1 Zebulun           Shimron-meron. C   Iosh. 12. 20 Zebulun 69. 00 33. 10 5 155   Shinar.   Gen. 10. 10             Shion. C. Noise or tumult. Iosh. 19. 19 Issachar 69. 20 33. 00       Shocho. C.   2 Chr. 11. 7 Judah           Shochoh.   1 Sam. 17. 1             Shophan. C. A Rabbet.Coiston in Lancast sh. Num. 32. 35 Gad 69. 50 32. 40       Shual. L.   1 Sam. 13. 17 Ephraim           Shunem. C.   Iosh. 19. 18 Issachar 69. 10 33. 00 2 161 17 Shur. W.   Gen. 16. 7 Simeon           Sibmah. C. Gray or Hoary-hairs.Grays Oxford sh. Iosh. 13. 19 Reuben           Sibraim.   Ezek. 47. 16             Sichem. C.   Gen. 12. 6 Ephraim     2 195 42 Siddim. V.   Gen. 14. 3 Judah     2 268 5 Sihor. R.   Iosh. 13. 3             Silla. T. The Bulwark. 2 King. 12. 20 Jerusalem     3 337 8 Siloa. We.   Neh. 3. 15             Siloe. T.   Luke 13. 4 Jerusalem     3 324 7 Sinai. M.   Exod. 16. 1 Paran     4 50 25 Sinim.   Isa. 49. 12             Siphmoth. The same with Sib∣mah. 1 Sam. 30. 28 Reuben           Siriah. We.   2 Sam. 3. 26 Judah     2 275 22 Sitnah. We. Hatred. Gen. 26. 21 Simeon     2 231 11 Sochols.   1 King. 4. 10 Judah           Socoh. C. A thick bough.Boughton Northāpsh. Iosh. 15. 35 Judah 69. 20 31. 10       Sodom. C. Chalke or ement.Broad∣chalk Wilsh. Gen. 13. 10 Judah     2 270 5 Sorek. Ri. A vineyard or vine.The Vine Hamsh. Iudg. 16. 4 Dan     2 214 17 South-rumoth.   1 Sam. 30. 27 Simeon           Succoth. C. Boothes.Boothby in Lincolsh. Gen. 33. 17 Gad 69. 50 32. 50 2 77 12 Succoth. St. Num. 33. 5 Egypt           Sychar. C. Mercenary. Iohn 4. 5. Ephraim 69. 30 32. 20 2 199 49 Syrion. M.   Deut. 3. 9. Manas. tr. Jor.          
T TAanach. Humbling thy self. Iosh. 17. 11 Manas. cis Jor. 68. 50 32. 50 2 164 26 Taanath-shi∣loh. T. Barking or baring a figtree. Iosh. 16. 6 Ephraim           Tabbath. T. Good or goodness. Iudg. 7. 22 Manas. cis Jor. 69. 40 32. 30       Taberah. St. Burning. Num. 11. 3 Paran     4 53 32 Tabor. C. and M. Election or purity. Iosh. 19. 1 Zebulun     2 149 28 Tahat. St. Underneath. Num. 33. 26 Paran           Tahtim-hodshi. L. Newly inhabited.Newland Essex. 2 Sam. 24. 6 Gad     2 78 13 Tappuah. L. & C. An Apple.Appleford Barksh. Iosh. 12. 17 Ephraim     2 176 18 Tarah. St.   Num. 33. 27 Paran           Taralah. C.   Iosh. 18. 27 Benjamin 69. 40 32. 00       Tehaphnehes. C.   Ezek. 30. 18. Egypt 63. 30.       Tekoah. C. Sounding with a Trumpet. 2 Sam. 14. 2 Judah     2 279 37 Telaim. C. Probably both the same. Lambs.Laborn Baksh. 1 Sam. 15. 4 Judah           Telem. C. Iosh. 15. 24             Thebez. T.   Iudg. 9. 50 Ephraim 69. 30 32. 10       Thimnathath. C.   Iosh. 19. 43 Dan           Tiberias. C.   Ioh. 6. 1 Zebulun 69. 30 33. 20 2 148 25 Timnah. C. An Image or figure. Iosh. 15. 10 Judah, or           Timnath. C. Gen. 38. 12 Dan           Timnath-serah.   Iosh. 19. 50   69. 10 32. 10       Timnathah.   Iosh. 19. 43             Tiphsah. C.   2 King. 15. 16 Ephraim 69. 00 32. 10 2 187 22 Tirzah. C. Sweet or delightfull.Beaufield Kent. Iosh. 12. 24 Ephraim 69. 00 32. 10 2 187 22 Toh. L. Good. Iudg. 11. 3 Libanus           Tochen. C. The midle.Midlton Oxfordsh. 1 Chr. 4. 32 Simeon           Tolad. C. See Eltolad. 1 Chr. 4. 29 Simeon 69. 0 31. 20       Tophel. T.   Deut. 1. 1 Paran           Trachonitis. L. Sharp-land. Luke 3. 1 Manas. tr. Jor.           Tyre. C. A Rock.Rochel in France. Iosh. 19. 29 Asher. 69. 00 33. 50       U Ummah. C.   Iosh. 19. 30 Asher 69. 10 33. 40       Vzzn-she∣rah. C. An ear remaining. 1 Chr. 7. 24 Ephraim 69. 10 32. 20       Vz. L. Counsell. Iob 1. 1 Edom     4 34 39 Z ZAanannim. P The Bed of the slee∣per.Bedod. Iosh. 19. 33 Nephtali 69. 40 34. 10 2 114 27 Zaanan. T.   Micah 1. 11             Zair. T.   2 King. 8. 21 Edom     4 34 36 Zalmon. M.   Iudg. 9. 48 Ephraim     2 196 44 Zalmon. St. The shadowing. Num. 33. 41 Edom     4 37 44 Zanoah. C. Abomination or ob∣livion. Iosh. 15. 34 Judah 69. 50 31. 10       Zaphon. T.   Iosh. 13. 27 Gad 70. 00 33. 00       Zared. Ri.   Num. 21. 12 Moab           Zarephath. C. A melting place.Melton Lcstersh. 1 King. 17. 9 Asher     2 133 26 Zaretan. T.   Iosh. 3. 16 Reuben 69. 30 32. 30 2 62 16 Zareth-shahar. C.   Iosh. 13. 19 Reuben           Zartanah. C.   1 King. 4. 12             Zarthan. C.   1 King. 7. 46 Mans. cis Jor.     2 176 17 Zeboim. C. Pleasant or a Roe. Gen. 10. 19 Judah 69. 50 31. 40       Zedad. T.   Num. 34. 8   69. 20 34. 10       Zelah. C.   Iosh. 18. 28 Benjamin 69. 30 32. 00       Zelzah. T. Shadowed.Sl adwell nigh Lon∣don. 1 Sam. 10. 2 Moriah     2 301 20 C. Wools.Woolto Dosesh. Iosh. 18. 22 Benjamin 69. 20 32. 00 2 262 54 Zenam. C.   Iosh. 15. 37 Judah           Zephath. C.   Iudg. 1. 17. Simeon           Zephathah. V.   2 Char. 14. 10 Judah           Zer. C.   Iosh. 19. 35 Naphtali 69. 30 33. 50       Zered. Ri. Dispersed dominion. Deut. 2. 13 Moab           Zereda. T.   1 King. 11. 26 Ephraim 69. 00 32. 10       Zeredathah.   2 Chr. 4. 17             Zererath T.   Iudg. 7. 22 Manas. cis Jor. 69. 30 32. 30       Ziddim. C. Huntings.Hunting∣ton. Iosh. 19. 32 Naphtali 69. 30 34. 10       Zidon. C.   Gen. 49. 13 Asher 69. 10 34. 10 2 132 22 Ziglag. C. The streightning of a measure. Iosh. 15. 31 Simeon 69. 00 31. 30 2 228 4 Zin. W.   Num. 13. 21 Paran           Zion. C.   2 Sam. 5. 7 Jerusalem     3 334 1 Zior. C.   Iosh. 15. 54 Judah           Ziph. C. That mouth. Iosh. 15. 24 Judah           Ziphron. T.   Num. 34. 9             Ziz. Ro. A flower or a bud.Budleigh castle, De∣von. Budwoth Chshire. 2 Chr. 20. 16 Judah           Zoan. C.   Num. 13. 22 Egypt 63. 31.       Zoar. C. Small or little.Littleton Staffordsh. Little port Camb sh. Gen. 13. 10 Judah 69. 40 31. 30       Zobah. L.   1 Sam. 14. 47 Libanus           Zoheleth. S.   1 Kings 1. 9 Moriah           Zophim. F.   Num. 23. 14 Reuben           Zoreah. C. Leprosie.Burton Lazers Lecestersh. Iosh. 15. 33 Dan     2 214 17 Zuph. L. Swimming or fluctua∣ting. 1 Sam. 9. 5 Ephraim     2 185 9 REader, be pleased to take notice, that limitary places, and all other mentioned in Scripture, which we could not confidently refer to another Letter, are by us (though no Townes) consigned to T. which as an Hospitall, of no less charity, then capacity, gives them all entertainment. And thus by Gods assistance we have finished our Table. Mi∣raculous almost was the execution done by David on the Amalekites, who saved neither man1 Sam. 27. 9. nor woman alive to bring tidings to Gath. I cannot promise such exactness in our Index, that no one Name hath escaped our enquiry: some few, perchance, hardly slip∣ping by, may tell tales against us. This I profess I have not (in the language of some modern Quarter-Masters) wilfully burnt any Towns, and purposely omitted them; and hope, that such as have escaped our discovery, will upon examination appear; either, not generally agreed on by Authors for Proper Names, or else, by proportion falling without the bounds of Palestine. Soli Deo gloria. Errata sic corrigas. LIb. 2. page 76. line 37. for Naanaim, read Maanaim. p. 108. l. 20. & 21, & 30, & 41. for Cave read Cane. pa. 109. l. 15. dele though born in Bethlhem. pag. 191. l. 1. for people read pool. Ibid. l. 9. for twenty miles, read twelve miles. pag. 236. l. 33. for unstrained, read unstained. pag. 302. l. 9. for Vale of Ephraim, read Vale of Rephaim. pag. 303, l. 20. for They read Day. pag. 304. l. 30. for beed, read been. Lib. 3. pag. 321. l. 4. for from East to the North, read form West to the North. pag. 330. l. 8. for partly naturall read purely naturall. pag. 332. l. 37. for Cose. read Close. pag. 397. l. 20. for liquid, read dry. 79. l. 23. for dead, read bread. pag. 188. l. 19. for  read pag. 132. l. 14. for infeed, read infesed. Lib. 5. pag. 147. l. 11. for less, read lss. pag. 159. l. 17. for that twelve should be twenty, read that twenty should be twelve. pag. 164. l. 17. for larcinations, read lancinations. pag. 179. l. 27. dle Philol. Ibid. l. 38. dele Alth. pag. 180. l. 9. dele Philol. Ibid. l. 18. dele Alth. pag, 196. l. 8. not extending it, dele not. Ibid. dele as some doe with small probability. FINIS.
