G1018 09538375 43548
THE GOLDEN ISLAND OR the DARIAN SONG In Commendation of All Concerned in that Noble En∣terprize Of the VALIANT SCOTS. By a Lady of Honour. EDINBURGH Printed by John Reid, and are to be sold at his Printing-House in Bells-Wynd, 1699.
THE GOLDEN ISLAND Or the Darian Song in Commenda∣tion of All Concerned in that Noble Interprize of the Valiant SCOTS. SOME Slumbring thoughts possess'd my brain, was Prophesied of Old, That ALBANIE should Thrissels spread, o're all the Indian Gold. Me thought I heard the Valiant SCOTS beneath the Northern Poll, Rejoycing of their Prosperous Voyage, which England did Control. The Heavens did Favour them so Fair, they were into Deaths Jaws, And Neptune bowed the loftie Seas, and humbled all her Waves, Untill the Ransomed should pass that ventured on the Main. The English Great, then ventur'd twice, and were beat back again.
Sol, Luna, Mars and Jupiter, Heavens Canopie did keep. Be sure some Angel stier'd our Helm, when some were faln a sleep: To guide us to that Noble place, was promis'd us before, That will Enrich brave ALBANIE, which Fame does still adore: It is ordain'd in Holy Write, Death pay'd our Sacrifice; The Thristle and the Reed Lyon, will Crush our Enemies. We're Antipods to England now, win by a pleasant Toil. We've saild the Gulf against the Tyde, come to a Fruitful Soil. Who can express what we expect, since we are favoured so, The Lord has thought upon our slight, some thought to make us low: All Men that has put in some Stock, To us where we are gone; They may expect our Saviours words a Hundered reap for One; For to Encourage every One that ventures on the Main.
Come cast thy Bread on Waters great, thou'lt get it back again. The World durst never Scotland Brag, for Valour and Renown: Go pass the Line surrownd the Glob, not such an Ancient Crown. What One has slighted us before, not want of Honour sure: Brave Noble Spirits, in Ancient Land, onlie is called Poor. Our Enemies has the Sun shine, so well we know our Foes? But the Thrissel in the Lyons hand, 'gainst Leopards and Rose; The Lord will mend the Broken Reed, and will not quench the spark: Our Enemies shall all fall down, as Dagon before the Ark. Fortune put on her Gilded Sails, went to the Antipods: Heathens receiv'd us with a Grace, as if we had been Gods. The Gales blew sweet, we Bless the LORD, for all our sails were full, King WILLIAM did Encourage us, against the English will. His Words is like a Statly Oak, will neither Bow nor Break; We'll venture Life and Fortune both, for Scotland and his sake,
For he has done such valiant Acts, what Pen can him express? Lay down your Crowns and Battons all, that came by Adams Race. What will be said in future times when Vertue yields her Flowers, The Babes unborn will then cry out, no Parent's like to Ours. This great Attempt is carried on, by Mortals that has breath, It seems the Lord does mind to send Christs Gospel through the Earth: To writ the parts of these brave Men, that has sent us away: The Vialactia smiles to see, Scotlands new Nuptial day. The Harp play'd us a pleasant spring, and Neptune took a dance, Made Monsiur Flower-de luce to fall, into a deadly Trance. When we were on the Darian Main, and viewed that Noble Land, The Trees joyn'd hands and bowed low, for Honour of Scotland. Young Native Babes that never spake, Dame Nature bad them cry, And utter forth some joyfull Notes, to welcome ALBANIE! Refreshing springs and Rivolats when we were Landed there,
Came glidding with her Jumbling Notes, invits us to take share; The chearming birds, that haunts the Woods, Meavis, Peacock and Dove, Brought Presents in their mouths, and sang we pay Tribute to you. We went in Boats▪ and come to Land, which banisht all our fears. The Seas did mourn for want of us, each Oat was droping Tears. The Woulf, the Lyon, and the Boar, the Wyld Tigger and Fox, Did fill their Claws with Golden Dust, salutes us from the Rocks. The Tottels in the Indian Seas, left Eggs upon the Land, And came to see that Noble Fleet, was come from Old Scotland. The Hurtchon came out of the Woods, her prickels Load with Fruit, She mumbled, but she could not speak, ye're welcome all come eat. The Balmie Grass, and blooming Flowers, were all covered with dew; Then Phoebus bid them give a smell, and that would pay their due. The Seas began to roar for joy when we were all past through, And Neptune with's great Harry Rains, to us was like a Loach;
And still we bless the LORD of Hoasts, and all our Benefactors, And drank a health to ALBANIE, for all our Brave Directors. Nilus Banks did Overflow only but Egypts land: But your Fame will the World Ov'rspread, and Banks of Heathen sand. We have another Fleet to sail, the Lord will Reik them fast; It will be wonderfull to see, the Sun rise in the West! If I should name each One concerned, according to their station, Ten Quair of paper would not do, its known by true Relation: For some are Noble, All are Great; Lord bless your Companie, And let your Fame in Scotlands Name O'respread both Land and Sea. FINIS.
