G1810 12068547 53441
The high and Mighty Monarch CHARLES the grace of GOD King of Great Brittaine France and Ireland▪ P. Stent excud▪
THE ROYALL GAME OF CHESSE-PLAY. SOMETIMES The Recreation of the late KING, with many of the NOBILITY. Illustrated VVith almost an hundred GAMBETTS. BEING The study of BIOCHIMO the famous Italian. LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign of the Anchor, in the lower walk of the New Exchange, 1656.
To the Industrious Chesse player. I Shall not trouble thee with the insipid relation of the profit and plea∣sure which may be reaped by this game of Chesse, nor as little as I can with the Analogy it re∣ally hath with the drawing up, and incounter of two Armies, the mysteries which every man may and doe, ut suo abundat sensu, find out in almost every
Art and Science, as we see not onely in common, but even in the most grave and serious Profes∣sions, being innumerable, my in∣tention being to set forth the ea∣siest and shortest way for one who is desirous to play at this game, to atchieve his desires, and for him who is but an easie proficient, to arise almost to the highest degree of well playing, which he shall attain to, if he di∣ligently peruse this Book, and not onely learn, but examine the reason of the following Gam∣betts (practised by the best of our Nation) wherein he may
observe such deep and intricate▪ designes, with such admirable and answerable events, as may instruct him to lay such like plots of his own, as also to foresee and prevent the endeavours of his adversary, with unexpected counterplots, to the gaining of such pieces from him, as will give him so much advantage, that he may easily destroy all the rest, and then (if not before) give him Check mate. I forgot to tell you one thing, that a Gambett signifies here a game, so contrived, that he which lo∣seth shall have a palpable reason
for every remove he maketh, whereas the reasons of the re∣moves of the winner are so hard to be found out, that they seem rather preposterous, and unfitting, which sheweth the excellent con∣trivance and invention of the Authors of them.
SIr, now unravell'd is the Golden Fleece, Men that could onely fool at Fox and Geese Are new-made Politians by the Book, And can both judge and conquer with a look. The hidden fates of Princes you unfold, Court, Clergy, Commons, by your laws controll'd. Strange serious wantoning! All that they Bluster'd & clutter'd wisely for, you play.
On the incomparable Game of CHESSE-PLAY. WE read of Greekes could ten yeares warres define, And draw its whole designe in drops of wine: Could shew where Rhesus, where Ulysses lay. Who stole the Horse, ne're toucht the fatall Hay. This was weak demonstration, Sir, but you Bring us the very Siege and Soldiers too. E. Revet.
Upon Chesse-play. To Dr. Budden. TO thee Lawes Oracle, who hadst the power To wage my pens imployment for an hour, I send no Frogs, nor Mice, Pigmees nor Cranes, Giants nor Gods, which trouble so the braines Of feighning Poets; nor my leasure sings The Counterbuffs of the foure painted Kings: Those worthy Combatants have had their times, And Battells sung in thousand curious rimes. I sing the fierce Alarme, and drefull stroke Of passing timbred men, all heart of Oake; Men that scorne Armes defensive, nor, in beat Of bloudy broiles, complaine of dust or sweat. Men that doe thinke, no victory is fit That's not compacted by the reach of wit. Men that an Ambuscado know to lay, T'entrap the Foe in his retiring way; Plot Stratagems, and teach their braines t'indite What place is fittest to employ their might. Dull down-right blowes, are fit for rustick wits, Within the compasse of whose scalp there sits A home-bred sense, weak apprehension, That strike the first they cast their eye upon▪ Those are the chaff of Soldiers, but this Corne Of choicest men, at highest rate is born.
Here life is precious, where the meanest man Is guarded by the noblest, who doe scan, (Not what a poor man is, but) what may prove, If bravely to the Armies head he move; Such may his valour be, he may of right Be an executor to Rook or Knight, Whose Lands fall to the King (their Master dead) With which this Pawn lives to be honoured, And do his Prince good service. Tell me then, Thou that dost distribute Justice to men, Must Honours ever follow blood? or should Vertue be grac'd, though in the meanest Mould? Tell me, thou man of Peace, are not these Warres Lawfull and commendable, Where the scarres Are for command, where either Enemy Seeks to himself a fifth great Monarchy? Where neither knowes his confines, but each foot Is his, where he or his, can take firm root? Pity with me, the fortunes of those Kings, Whose battell such an untaught Poet sings. Know, that the great Alexander could not have An Homer; and remember, in wars brave, Each deed▪s a Poem, and he writes it best Who doth engrave it on a conquered Crest. If I offend, part of the blame is thine, Thou gav'st the Theam, I did but frame the Line. Two angry Kings weary of lingring peace, Challenge the field, all Concord now must cease: So do their stomacks with fir'd anger burn, (turn. Nothing but wounds, blood, death must serve the
They pitch'd their field in a fair chequer'd square Each form two Squadrons, in the former are The common Soldiers, Whose conrageous scope Is venturing their lives, like Fortune, Hope. These still march on, & dare not break their rank, But for to kill a Foe, then 'tis their prank To make the ground good 'gainst the enemy▪ Till by a greater force subdu'd, they dye. The Kings for safety in mid-batel stand And marshall all their Nobles on each hand. Next either King, an Amazonian Queen, Like our sixt Henry's Margaret is seen, Ready to scour the field, corner, or square, She succours, where the Troops distressed are. Next stand two Mytred Bishops, which in war Forget their Calling, ventring many a scar In Princes cause, yet must no Bishop stray, But leave the broad, & keep the narrow way. Next are two vertuous Knights, whose nimble feet Leap o're mens heads, scorning to think it meet They should stand Centinels, while the poor Pawns, With danger of their lives do scour the Lawnes. The Battels out spread wings, two Rookes doe guard, These flank the fields so well, that there is barr'd All side assaults: these, for their valours grace, (The King in danger) with him change their place. But Majesty must keep a setled pace, Rides not in post, moves to the nearest place,
That's to his standart: If there be report Of the Kings danger, all troops may resort. But now they sound Alarm, each heart doth swell With wrath, strikes in the name of Christabell; Strike, strike, be not agast, soldiers are bound To feare no death, much lesse to dread a wound. Now with mercy dies the common Troop, A Rook a Bishop, and a Knight doth droop; Yet neither boasts of Conquest, though each hope To win the field, Which now is half laid ope By soldiers death; now dares a martial Queen Check her Foe King, when strait there steps be∣tween A ventrous Soldier, or a Noble-man Who cares not for his life, so be he can From danger keep his King; he feares not death, In Princes cause, that gives each Subject breath. But this Virago dyes, being left alone, When straight a nimble Soldier steppeth on, And through the thickest Troops hews out his way, And till he come to th' head doth never stay. This brave attempt deserves the honouring; The Queens colours are his, given by the King▪ Who knowes that valour should not want reward, And ventrous spirits, best keep Princes guard. Now is the War in heat, bloody the Field, Mercy is banishd, none hath thought to yeild, Basely to beg his breath; the fame now ran, That they must fight it out to the last man. All Soldiers die, but one, who to his King, Griev'd with his great losse, doth this comfort bring,
That their great Foe, whose Troops are all now dead, Must to their swords, yeild up his conquer'd head. Then with their Check, and check on either hand, The poore disheartned King doth mated stand. Though thus to dye it be the Princes fate, Who dares pronounce he had a whisking mate; Who, rather than mumping forego the Field, Joyes in the place he stands, his breath to yeild? But now the conquering couple want their breath Their festered wounds doe rankle, and grim death Creeps through the gashes, down the Victors fall, And then one generall Herse entombs them all.
To the Right Honourable, MONTAGƲE, Earle of Lindsey, &c. THe Consideration, that to finde out a certaine Rule for this Princely Game of Chesse, is generally, (and I think, justly) estee∣med to be impossible, was the first cause that invited me to publish these Gambetts, which doe, in a very great measure, supply the defect of
such an advantage, which in respect they were in the De∣lights of his late Majesty, and many of the Nobility of these Kingdomes, I presumed to dedicate unto your Ho∣nour, whom I have under∣stood not onely to take plea∣sure, but to be very judici∣ous in this Incomparable Re∣creation, beside the particular relation of the Duty I have to submit my self, on all oc∣casions, unto your Honours Censure and Commands, and the necessity I have of
desiring your Lordships Pro∣tection for that I have at∣tempted to publish, that which some Gentlemen have alrea∣dy in Manuscript, and perad∣venture to their displeasure; Instructions also for Learners being already in Print, and very plaine, might have de∣terr'd me from medling, as it were, wth another mans work; but for these, I have excuse, that these Gambetts being so beneficiall, cannot but be very acceptable, and also give in∣vitation to those who are but
small Proficients, to take a greater delight, than formerly, in this Pastime; and alterati∣on of the Instructions being made more brief, are conse∣quently more usefull. I am onely therefore to crave your Honours Pardon, for distur∣bing your Honours more se∣rious Contemplations with these trifles; which if I have, I shall rest secure from Ca∣lumny, that can be throwne upon Your Honours most humble Servant, Fr: Beale.
THE GAME OF CHESSE-PLAY. CHAP. I. Of the Antiquities and Inventors of this Game. DIverse are the opinions of the antiquity of this game of Chess. Some thinke that it was inven∣ted by Palamedes one of the chief Commanders of the Grae∣cian forces at the siege of Troy. Others that Xerxes the great King of Persia devised it: but the most received opinion is, that at that siege or some other place blocked up by their adversaries, by some of the most learned and experienced besiegers, meeting and clubbing their inventions together, this in∣imitable game was found out: and the rather, because who ever playes at it shall not be able to carry on any designe with any successe, or understand the plots of his adversary without his whole intention is fixed upon it, and he be ab∣stracted from all other contemplation.
CHAP. II. Of the shapes, names, and places of the Chesse-men. ALthough in all Countries the shapes of the Chesse-men are not the same, yet are the figures framed so distinctly from one ano∣ther, that they never breed any confusion: The Chesse-board therefore (which is divided into sixty foure square houses) standing (as usually) with the white corner to the right hand, the first and highest generally called the King, stan∣deth in the fourth house from the corner of the board in the lower rank, with this observation, that the white King must stand in black, and the black King in the white: where note that every piece standeth right over his adversaries piece of the same sort. The next in height is the Queen or Amazon, who is placed in the fourth house from the cor∣ner of the field by the side of her King, and al∣wayes in her owne colour; whence Rex albus in atro, Rex ater in albo, servat Regina colores. Next to the Kings other side place a Bishop o Archer, who is commonly figured with his hea cloven, next to him the Knight, and in the cor¦ner of the field: the Rooke, Rock, or Duke who is sometimes fashioned with a round head sometimes like a Castle, &c. So also on the Queen
side, place her Bishop Knight & Rook, who always stand in different colours to those of the King. Lastly, before each Great man standeth their particular pawne or Serving-man, so that the King and Queen have three great men and four pawnes a piece. CHAP. III. Of the draught, guard, worth, and Prerogative of each plece, and first of a Pawne. THe draught of a Pawne is only one house at a time streight forward in his owne file never retiring; but he differs from all other pieces, in that it doth not take the adverse pie∣ces as it goeth, but that which standeth aslope in the next house forward of the next file on either hand, and then goeth forward upon occasion as at first; now as all other pieces doe, he guar∣deth any piece of his owne side just as he taketh, that is, if a piece of his side standeth in that place where if it were an adverse piece he might take it, he then doth guard it, so also doth he check, that is, (give notice to) the adverse King that he can take him, which check if the King cannot avoid either by taking him up himselfe if he be unguarded (for a King can at no time remove into checke) or by causing him to be taken up by some other of his pieces, it is checke Mate, and
the Game lost. This is the draught of the Pawne who though it be of least value, yet hath it thre, great priviledges. The first is, that whereas his remove is but one house forward at a time, yet every pawne for his first draught, may remove two houses forward. The second is, that if any pawne commeth up to the fourth ranke of the adverse party, if any of his pawnes of the next file on either side doe remove two houses at one time, that is beyond his guard, he may take him as if he had removed but one. The third and greatest is, that if any Pawne can arrive unto any house of the uppermost ranke of the adversary, you may immediately make him a Queen, or what piece you have al∣ready lost, (yea in forraigne Countries, and a∣mongst the best players, here you may have two or three Queens at a time) who shall be able at that very instant, to check the adverse King, and use all power the Piece you make him hath.
CHAP. IV. Of the Bishops, and Knights. NEXt in value above a Pawne are Bishops and Knights. The Bishops walke is, al∣wayes in the same colour he is first placed in, forward and backward aslope as far as you please, and the way is cleare betwixt him and the place you intend to remove him to, so doth he guard any piece of his own side; take any of the contrary, and check the adverse King, which unavoided by either taking or causing him to be taken up, or interposing some piece between him and the King, it is Check mate. The Knights draught is forward and backward on either hand aslope from the place he stand∣eth in, to the next save one of another colour, skipping over any piece that standeth in his way; and in the same manner doth he guard, take, and check; which check, because (as the Pawnes check) it cannot be covered, the King must either remove out of check, or cause him to be taken, for he cannot take him himselfe, it is Check mate. Now the difference of worth be∣tweene the Bishops and Knights is uncertaine, some preferring one, some the other, as they play best with either of them themselves, or ob∣serve it in their adversary: but generally the
Knights are more esteemed, because their walks have more variety, that is, into all the sixty foure houses, but a Bishops walke is, but through thirty two of them: A Knight likewise guardeth three houses before he doth remove, and eight when he is from the side of the file, whereas the Bishop guardeth but two houses in his first place, and but foure afterward; Thirdly, the Knights can guard one another, which the Bi∣shops cannot doe, because they move into one anothers colour: Fourthly, a Knights check cannot be covered, but a Bishops may, and I cannot see, but that the two Knights and a King may give a mate though not so well as the Bi∣shops, but it is hard for either of them to doe it.
CHAP. V. Of the Rookes, Queene, and King. THe Rocks, Rookes or Dukes walk forward, backward, and side-wayes in any rank and file (but not aslope as the Bishops do) unto any place; so also doe they guard, take, and check, which check, if not avoided the game is lost: Now a Rookes worth is as great as both a Bi∣shops and a Knights, because he goeth over all the board which the Bishop cannot, and though the Knight may, yet his remove is confined to a certaine distance, when the Rookes is unlimited where there is no interposition, and although he guards no more places then the Bishop doth, yet he can give mate with the King alone, which no piece else beside the Queen can doe; his Pri∣viledge is to change with the King as you shall see in the Kings Prerogative. But the Queen is in value equall to any two pieces: Her remove being forward, backward, side-waye, and aslope, but not as the Knight doth as far as she will if she meet no opposition, she in like manner doth guard the pieces of her owne side, take the enemy and check his King which unavoided is Mate: She guardeth five houses in her first place, and eight when she is from the side of the file.
The King removeth but one house at a time forward, backward, side-wayes, and aslope to any place not possessed by his owne men, or guarded by the enemy where he may take any piece of the enemies; but there must be alwayes the distance of one house between the two Kings, for they can neither check nor take one another, he guardeth as many places as the Queen doth. His Prerogative is First, that no piece can take him, but must only salute him with the word check. Secondly, whereas his draught is but one house at a time, yet for his greater safety, if nei∣ther he nor either of the Rookes have as yet stirred out of their places, and there is no piece standing between them, he may change (or Ca∣stle) with this Rooke, that is, he may goe two draughts at once towards this Rooke on which hand soever he standeth, causing the Rooke to stand next to him on either side; this may he doe at any time before check, or after check, In France the Rook when the King changeth, goeth into the Kings house.
CHAP. VI. Observations in playing the game. HAving now discovered the places, removes, guards, worth and Prerogative of each piece, I will now shew you some observations in the removall of them: but whereas there is 64 houses in the Chesse-board, there may be con∣sequently as many varieties of games as 64 can be altered which are more then there have been minutes since the Creation, therefore there is no such rule found out at this game, as who shall play according to it, must necessarily win the game: however there may be such precepts and directions given, that whosoever shall carefully observe and remember upon occasion to put them in use, shall have great advantage against him that hath them not, so that the following advises and Gambetts well studied will be in∣stead of a rule to direct you how to advance and retire, how to take opportunities, as also how to designe upon your adversary to foresee and prevent his stratagemes, with a returne upon himselfe: For certainly he that hath before his eyes & in his memorie many games well played shall be able to make such observations upon them, as may stand him in great stead when ever the enemy shall fall into such a posture of game
as he hath formerly seen, and remembreth the disadvantage he is liable to. The first thing therefore you are to indeavour is, to get the first remove, for it is of great ad∣vantage: for which gamesters strive severall wayes according to their agreement between themselves, but when a game is ended he is to have it, who winneth it, unlesse you make it o∣therwise. Now for the first draught it is gene∣rally esteemed best to remove the Kings pawne two houses, because if not prevented (by the like play) you may still move that pawne for∣ward with good guard, which will be very pre∣judiciall to the adversary. The second thing observable is to play your men in good guard of one another, that if any man you advance be taken, the adverse piece may be taken againe by the piece which guar∣deth yours: and to this purpose be (of all things) sure to have as many guards upon one of your pieces, as thou seest the enemy doth ad∣vance of his upon it. Thirdly, that thy guardes be of lesse value then the pieces he assaileth withall, for then if either he or you begin to take you shall gaine something, if you finde you cannot well guard your piece, see whether you can advance some piece, of yours in guard to take a better piece for so you may many times save your endan∣ger'd piece.
Fourthly, never change piece for piece untill you get the advantage either by taking a Pawne or Noble-man of his for nothing, or disordering a pawne or two of his which is of very materiall consequence. Fiftly, take great heed that you doe not choak up your owne passage from advancing your men, and retiring on all occasions, but indea∣vour by all meanes to take that liberty from your adversary. Sixtly, never play any man untill you have examined whether you your selfe are free from danger, and to that end upon every remove of your adversary, consider of what consequence the advancing and retreating of your adversary may prove, and indeavour (if it may be hurt∣full) to prevent it before it be too late. Seventhly, consider the maine designe of the game, which is as suddenly as can be to give check mate, that is as I said before, so to check the adversary King, as that he can neither take the piece checking because it is guarded, nor cause it to be taken, nor cover the check, nor remove out of check, which may be done seve∣rall wayes, so that sometimes by the losse of one or two of your great men, yea, sometimes of your Queen you may give an unexpected mate, as you may often observe in the following Gam∣betts: I shall therefore omit to discover unto you the manner of the surprizing the Rookes,
or a Queen, or the making a new Queen, of which you shall have plentifull examples in the Gambetts. Lastly, never let your Queen stand so before your King, as that your adversary may bring a Rooke or Bishop to check your King if she were not there, for then you will hardly be able to save your Queen, nor let his Knight come so safely, that he cannot be taken up to check your Queen and King or your Rooke, and King at one time, for then you will loose your Queen or Rooke, since the King must be forced to remove out of check. CHAP. VII. Of some particular things to be observed, with the lawes of Chesse-play. BEfore I come to the Gambetts, I will tell you what a Forke, a stale, a blind Mate and a dead Game is. A Forke is, that when you see two of the ene∣mies Noble-men standing in the same ranke, and but one house betwixt them, advance a pawne, guarded with an other, unto the middle house before them both, and you may commonly take one of them.
A stale is given when one King hath lost all his men, and hath but one place left to fly into, if then the adversary bar him of that place with∣out checking him, so that he being now out of check cannot remove but into check, it is then a stale, and he that giveth it to the distressed King loseth the Game. A blind Mate is, when one giveth check mate but seeth it not, yet it is neverthelesse a Mate, though a disgracefull one. A dead Game is when only the two Kings are left: yea most Gamesters will draw the stakes, when they have but a Knight or Bishop left with their King, and the enemy only his King: For it is not possible then to give a Mate by force.
depiction of chess board His Queens Rookes house. Queens Knights house. Queens Bishops house. Queens house. Kings house. Kings Bishops house. Kings Knights house. Kings Rooks house. 4. House. 3. House. 2. House. 1. House. Your Kings Rooks house. Kings Knights house. Kings Bishops house. Kings house. Queens house. Queens Bishops house. Queens Knights house. Queens Rooks house. 4. House. 3. House. 2. House. 1. House.
The Lawes of Chesse are, 1. If you touch your man you must play it, and if you set it downe any where you must let it stand. 2. If your adversary play a false draught, and you spy it not before you play the next draught, tis then too late to challenge him. 3. If by mistake you play a false draught, and your adversary let it alone for his advantage till he hath played his next draught, you nor he can∣not then recall it. 4. If at first you misplace your men, and play two or three draughts, it lieth in your adversa∣ries choice whether you shall play out the game or begin it againe. 5. The King in changing may not goe into check, nor at any time remove into check. 6. If your adversary playeth or discovereth a check to your King, and giveth you no notice of it, you may let him stand so for that draught if you please. 7. If your King standeth in check and you remove a draught or two, the adversary may not give check when he pleaseth, unlesse he re∣moveth the piece checking, or some other.
Having now finisht all those rules and instru∣ctions that are necessary for a Learner, I shall for the increase of his farther benefit refer him to these Gambets which follow, by which not onely he that is a beginner, but also an experi∣enced Gamester may receive such satisfaction, as that he will find it worth his labour and study to be perfect in them, and cause him by seeing the mysterious passages therein, to take far more delight then hitherto he hath done in this most excellent and delightfull game of Chesse-play.
The Fooles Mate. BBlack Kings Bishops pawne one house. White Kings pawne one house. Black kings knights pawne two houses White Queen gives Mate at the contrary kings Rookes fourth house. The Schollers Mate. WHite kings pawne one house. Black kings pawne the same. White Queen to the contrary kings Rookes fourth house. Black Queens knight to her Bishops third house White kings Bishop to the queens Bishops fourth house Black kings knight to the kings Bishops third house White queen takes the contrary kings Bishops pawne gives mate.
Gambett. I. WHite kings pawne two houses Black kings pawne the same White kings Bishop to the queens Bishops fourth house Black kings Bishop the same. White queen to the kings second house. Black queen to the same White kings bishops pawn two houses Black kings bishop takes the contrary kings knight White rook takes the contrary kings bishop Black kings pawn takes the contrary bishops pawn White queens pawn two houses Black queen checks at the contrary rookes fourth house White kings knights pawn one house and co∣vers Black kings pawn takes contrary pawn White rooks takes the contrary pawn Black kings knight to the kings bishops third house White queenes knight to her bishops third house Black kings knight to the kings rookes fourth house
VVhite kings bishop takes the contrary kings bishops pawn and checks Black king takes the contrary kings bishop VVhite queenes bishop to the contrary kings knights fourth house Black kings knight takes the contrary kings rook VVhite queen checks at the kings bishops third house Black king to his knights third house VVhite bishop takes the contrary queen Black knight to his kings rooks fourth house VVhite queen checks at the kings bishops fourth house. Black king to his kings third house VVhite queen or Bishop gives mate.
Gambett. II. WHite kings pawn two houses Black the same White kings bishop to the queens bishops fourth house Black the same White queen to the kings second house Black the same White kings bishops pawn two houses Black pawn takes the contrary pawn White kings knight to his bishops third house o Black kings knight pawn two houses Wl VVhite kings rooks pawn two houses Black kings bishops pawn one house White queens knight to her bishops third house Black queens bishops pawn first house White kings rooks pawn takes the contrary pawn Black pawn takes the contrary pawn White queens pawn two houses Black kings knight pawn one house White kings knight to the kings rooks fourth house Black kings bishop takes the contrary pawn White knight to the contrary kings bishops fourth house
Black bishop takes the contrary knight and checks White pawn takes the contrary kings bishop Black queen to her kings bishops third house White bishop takes the contrary pawn Black queen takes the contrary pawn and checks White king to his bishops second house Black queens knights pawn two houses White kings bishops to the queens knights third house Black queens rooks pawn two houses White knight checks at the contrary queenes third house Black king to his bishops house White queen takes the contrary pawn Black queens bishop to her rooks third house White queen checks at the contrary kings bi∣shops fouth house Black queen covers at her kings bishops third house White queens bishops checks at the contrary kings rooks third house Black king to his second house White queens bishops to the contrary kings Knights fourth house Black king takes the contrary knight White bishop takes the contrary queen and shall win the game.
Gambett. III. Play the second to this mark, o and then as followeth. BLack kings knight to his bishops third house White queens pawn two houses Black kings bishop checks at the contrary queens knights fourth house White queens bishops pawn one house & covers Black kings bishops to the queens rooks fourth house White kings pawn one house Black kings knight to his rookes fourth house White king changes Black king changes White kings knight to the kings house Black queen to the contrary kings rooks 4th house White kings knight to the queens third house Black kings knight pawn two houses White queenes knight to the queenes second house Black queens bishops pawn one house White queenes knight to the kings fourth house
Black kings knight to his second house White knight takes the contrary kings pawn Black kings knights pawn takes the contrary knight White rook takes the contrary pawn Black queen to the kings second house White knight checks at the contrary kings bi∣shops third house Black king to his rooks house White queen to her Kings fourth house, &c.
Gambet IV. Play the second to this marke. Wl WHite queen pawn two houses Black kings bishop checks White queens bishop pawn one house covers Black bishop to his queens rooks fourth house White Kings rooks pawn two houses Wl Black Kings bishops pawn one house White Kings rooks pawn, takes the contrary pawn Black pawn takes the contrary pawn White Kings Knight pawn one house Black Kings Knight pawn one house White Kings Knight to the contrary Kings fourth house Black pawn one house, to the contrary Kings bishops third house White queen to her Kings third house Black Kings Knight to his bishops third house White Kings Knight to the contrary Kings Knights third house Black queen to her Kings Knights second house White Knight takes the contrary Rook Black queen takes the contrary Knight White Kings pawn one house
Black Kings Knight to his house White queen to the contrary Kings Knights fourth house Black Kings Knight to the Kings second house White queen checks at the contrary rooks fourth house Black King to the queens house White queen takes the contrary Kings Rooks pawn Black queen takes the contrary queen White rook takes the contrary queen Black queens pawn one house White Kings pawn one house Black queens bishops pawn one house White queens bishop to the contrary Kings Knights fourth house Black queens pawn one house White bishop takes the contrary Knight, and checks Black King to his house White Kings Bishop to the quens third house Black bishops takes the contrary pawn White Kings bishop checks at the contrary Kings Knights third house Black King to the queens second house White queens bishop to the queens Knights fourth house, and checks with the Kings Rook Black King to his queens bishops house White bishop takes the contrary bishop &c.
Gambett. V. Play the last to this mark W BLack kings knights pawn one house White kings knight to the contrary kings knights fourth house Black kings knight to his rooks third house White queens bishop takes the contrary pawn Black kings bishops pawn one house White king changes Black pawn takes the contrary knight White bishop takes the contrary pawn Black queen to the kings knights second house White queen to the kings third house Black kings knight to his house White rook to the contrary kings bishops se∣cond house Black queen to the kings knights third house White queen to the kings bishops fourth house Black queens pawn one house White rook checks at the contrary kings bishops house Black king to the queens second house White kings bishop to the contrary kings bi∣shops second house Black queen to the kings knights second house White kings bishop checks at the contrary kings house
Black king to his third house White queens pawn gives mate. Gambett. VI. WHite king pawns two houses Black the same White kings knight to his bishops third house Black queens knight to her bishops third house White kings bishop to the queens bishops fourth house Black the same White queens bishops pawn one house Black kings knight to his bishops third house White queens pawn two house W Black pawn takes the contrary pawn White pawn takes the contrary pawn Black kings bishop checks at the contrary queens knights fourth house White queens knight covers at her bishops third house Black kings knight take the contrary pawn White king changes Black kings knight takes the contrary queens knight White pawn takes the contrary knight
Black Kings bishop takes the contrary pawn White queen to her Knights third house Black bishop takes the contrary queens rook White Kings bishop takes the contrary Kings bishops pawn and checks Black King to his Bishops house White queens bishop to the contrary Kings Knights fourth house Black Knight to his Kings second house White Kings Knight to the contrary Kings fourth house Wl Black Kings bishop takes the contrary queens pawn White Kings Bishop to the contrary Kings Knights third house Black queen pawn two houses White queen checks at her Kings bishops third house Black queens bishop covers White Kings bishop takes the contrary queens bishop Black Kings bishop takes the contrary Knight White Kings bishop to the contrary Kings third house, and checks by discovery with the queen Black Kings bishop covers White queens bishop takes the contrary Kings bishop Black Kings Knights pawn, takes the contrary bishop
White queen takes the contrary pawn & checks Black King to his house White queen gives mate. Gambet VII. Play the sixt to this marke. Wl BLack Kings bishop to the queens Knights third house White queens pawn takes the contrary Kings pawn Black Kings Knight takes the contrary Kings pawn White queen to the contrary queen fourth house. Gambet VIII. Play the sixth to this marke. Wl BLack queen pawn two houses White queen to the Kings bishops 3d. house Black queens bishop to the Kings bishops fourth house White Kings bishop to the contrary Kings third house Black Kings Knight pawn one house White queens bishop checks at the contrary Kings Rooks third house Black King to his house White Kings bishop gives mate.
Gambett. IX. WHite King pawns two houses Black the same White Kings bishop pawn two houses Black Kings bishop to the queens bishops fourth house White Kings Knight to his bishops third house Black queen pawns one house White queens bishop pawn one house Black queen to the Kings second house White queens pawn two houses Black Kings pawn takes the contrary queens pawn White pawn takes the contrary pawn Black queen takes the contrary pawn, and checks White King to his bishops second house Black Kings bishop to the queens Knights third house White Kings bishop checks at the contrary queens Knights fourth house Black King to his queen or bishops house White rook to the Kings house Black queen to the Kings bishops fourth house White rook gives mate.
Gambett. X. WHite Kings pawn two houses Black the same White Kings Knight to his bishops third house Black queens Knight to her bishops third house White Kings bishop to the queens bishops fourth house Black the same White queens bishops pawn one house Black queen to the Kings second house White King changes Black queens pawn one house White queens pawn two houses Black Kings bishop to his queens Knights third house White queens bishop to the contrary Kings Knights fourth house Black Kings bishop pawn one house White queens bishop to the Kings rooks fourth house Black Kings Knight pawn two houses White Kings Knight takes the contrary Kings Knights pawn Black Kings bishops pawn takes the contrary Knight
White queen checks at the contrary Kings rooks fourth house Wl Black King to his queens second house White queens bishop takes the contrary pawn Wl Black queen to the Kings Knights second house White Kings bishop checks at the contrary Kings third house Black King takes the contrary bishop White queen checks at the contrary Kings house Black Kings Knight covers at the Kings se∣cond house White Queens pawn gives mate.
Gambett. XI. Play the last to this mark Wl BLack king to his queens house White queens▪ bishop takes the contrary pawn Black kings knight to his bishops third house White queen to the contrary kings rooks third house Black kings rooks to his bishops house WHite kings bishops pawn two houses Black kings pawne takes the contrary queens pawn White kings pawn one house Black kings pawn takes the contrary queens bishops pawn and checks by discovery with the bishop White king to his rooks house Black pawn takes the contrary queens knights pawn White kings pawn takes the contrary queenes knight Black rook takes the contrary pawn White queen takes the contrary rook Black pawn takes the contrary rook White queen takes the contrary pawn at her rooks house
Black kings bishop to the contrary queenes fourth house White bishop takes the queen and checks Black king takes the bishop White queenes Knight to her bishops third house Black queenes bishop to the kings bishops fourth house White knight checks at the contrary queenes fourth house Black king to his bishops house White queen to the Kings house Black rook to the Kings house VVhite queen to the Kings rooks fourth house, &c.
Gambett. XII. Play the tenth to this mark Wl BLack King to his bishops house White queenes bishop takes the contrary pawn Black queen to her kings house White queen checks at the Kings bishops third house Black king to his knights second house White kings bishop takes the Kings Knight Black King takes the bishop White queenes pawn one house Black queenes knight to the Kings second house White queenes bishop to the contrar Kings bishops third house Black queene to the Kings bishops second house White queens knight to the queenes second house Black Kings rooks pawn one house White bishop takes the rook Black queen takes the queen White knight takes the queen Black King takes the bishop White Kings rookes pawn one house
Black queenes bishop to the queens second house White queenes bishops pawn one house Black Kings bishop to the contrary queenes fourth house White Knight takes the contrary Kings bi∣shop Black pawn takes the Kings Knight White kings rook to the queens house Black queens bishops pawn two house White queens bishops pawn two houses Black rook to the Kings bishops house White Kings pawn one house Black pawn takes the pawn White pawn takes the pawn Black rook takes the rooke and checks White rook takes the rook Black King to his Knights house White pawne to the contrary Kings third house Black bishop to his house White queens pawn one house Black Knight to the Queenes Bishops third house White queens pawn one house Black Bishop takes the pawn VVhite pawn takes the queens Bishop Black Queens pawn one house VVhite rook to the Kings house
Black queens pawne to the contrary queens second house White rook checks at the contrary Kings house Black King to his Knights second house VVhite pawn is made a queen Black Knight takes the Queen VVhite Rooke takes the Knight Black King to his bishops second house White Rooke takes the pawn, &c.
Gambett. XIII. Play the tenth to this mark Wl BLack queen to her Kings bishops house White Kings bishop to the contrary kings bishops second house Black queenes Knight to the Kings second house White Queens pawn takes the Kings pawn Black pawn takes the pawn Wl White rook checks at the queens house Black King to the queens bishops third house White Kings bishop checks at the contrary kings house Black king to his queens bishops fourth house White queens bishop checks at the Kings third house Black king to the contrary queens bishops fourth house White queens Knights pawn gives mates.
Gambett. XIV. Play the last to this mark Wl BLack Kings rooks pawn one house White Kings bishop to the kings rookes fourth house Black kings rook to his second house White pawn to the contrary Kings third house and checks Black King to the queens house White Kings pawn one house Black queens pawn one house White queen to the Kings bishops third house Black queens bishops pawne one house White queens bishops pawne one house Black King to the queens bishops second house White queen to her rooks third house Black queens bishops pawn one house White pawn takes the queens pawn Black queens Knight to the Kings bishops fourth house White queens bishop to the Kings knihts third house Black Knight takes the bishop White queen takes the Knight Black rook to the Kings Knights second house
White queen to her Knights third house Black Kings rooks pawn one house White pawn to the contrary Kings second house Black queen takes the bishop VVhite pawn checks at the contrary queenes third house Black King to the queens second house White pawn checks at the contrary Kings third house Black queen takes the pawn White queen takes the queen and checks Black King takes the queene White pawn is made a queen and checks, &c.
Gambett. XV. WHite Kings pawn two houses Black the same White kings knight to his bishops third house Black queens knight to her bishops third house White kings bishop to his queens bishops fourth house Black the same White queens bishops pawn one house Black queens pawn one house White queenes pawn two houses Black kings pawn takes the pawn White pawn takes the pawn Black bishop checks at the contrary queens knights fourth house White queenes knight covers at her bishops third house Black kings knight to his bishops third house White king changeth Black kings bishop takes the queens knight White pawn takes the kings bishop Black kings knight takes the kings pawn White rook to his kings house Black queens pawn one house White rook takes the contrary knght Black pawn takes the contrary rook White knight to the contrary kings knights fourth house
Black king changeth White queen to the contrary kings rooks fourth house Black kings rooks pawn one house White kings knight takes the kings bishops pawn Wl Black queen to the kings second house White knight takes the kings rookes pawn and checks double Black king to his rooks house VVhite knight checks double at the contrary kings bishops second house Black king to his knights house VVhite queen gives mate.
Gambett. XVI. Play the last to this mark W BLack rook takes the contrary knight VVhite bishop takes the rook and checks Black king to his bishops house VVhite queenes bishop checks at the queenes rooks third house Black queenes knight covers at the kings se∣cond house VVhite kings bishop to the queens knights third house Black queen to the kings house VVhite queen to the contrary queens fourth house Black queens bishops pawn two houses VVhite queens Bishops takes the pawn Black queens rooks pawn one house VVhite queen gives mate.
Gambett. XVII. Play the 15th. to this mark Wl BLack rook takes the contrary Kings Knight White bishop takes the rook and checks Black king to his rooks second house White queenes bishop takes the Kings rooks pawn Black pawn takes the bishop White queen checks at the contrary Kings Knights third house Black King to his rooks house White queen gives mate.
Gambett. XVIII. Play the 15th. to this mark Wl BLack rook takes the Kings knight White bishop takes the rook and checks Black King to his rooks house White queens bishop takes the kings rookes pawn Black queens bishop to the contrary kings knights fourth house White bishop takes the kings knights pawn and checks Black king takes the queens bishop VVhite queen checks at the contrary Kings Knights third house Black King to his bishops house White Kings bishop to his queens Knights third house Black queen to the Kings house VVhite queen checks at the contrary Kings Knights house Black Kings to his second house VVhite queen takes the bishop. Black King to the queenes house White rook to the Kings house Black queenes rooks pawn one house VVhite queen takes the pawn, &c.
Gambett. XIX. WHite Kings pawn two houses Black the same White Kings Knight to his bishops third house Black the same White knight takes the contrary pawn Black knight takes the contrary pawn White queen to the kings second house Black the same White queen takes the Kings Knight Black queens pawn one house White queens pawn two houses Black kings bishops pawn one house White kings bishops pawn two houses Black queens knight to her second house Whtie queenes kinght to her bishops third house Black queens pawn takes the knight White Kings bishops pawne takes the pawn Black bishops pawn taks the pawn White queenes knight to the contrary queens fourth house Black queen to her third house
White queens pawn takes the pawn Black queen to her bishops third house White kings bishop to the contrary queenes knights fourth house Black queen to her bishops fourth house White queenes bishop to the kings third house Black queen takes the kings bishop VVhite queens knight takes the queens bishops pawn and checks Black king to his queens house VVhite knight takes the queen, &c.
Gambett. XX. WHite kings pawn two houses Black the same White Kings knight to his bishops third house Black queens pawn one house White kings bishop to the queens bishops fourth house Black queens bishop to the contrary kings knights fourth house White kings rooks pawn one house Black queens bishop to the kings rooks fourth house White queens bishops pawn one house Black kings knight to his bishops third house White queens pawn one house Black kings bishop to his kings second house White queens bishop to his kings third house Black king changes White kings knights pawn two houses Black queens bishop to the kings knights third house White kings knight to his kings rooks fourth house Black queens bishops pawn one house White knight takes the queens bishop
Black kings rooks pawn takes the kings knight White kings rook pawns one house Black queens knight pawns two houses White kings bishop to the queens kn. 3d. h. Black queens rook pawns two houses White queenes rook pawns one house Black queens rook pawns one house White kings bishop to the queens rooks 2d. h. Black queens kn to her rooks third house White kings rook paws one house Black pawn takes the pawn White Kings knight pawns one house Black kings knight to the contrary kings kn: fourth house. White kings rooke takes the pawn Black kings knight takes the queens bishop White rooke checks Black king takes the rook White queen checks at the contrary kings rooks fourth house Black king to his Knights house White kings knight pawns one house Black kings knight checks at the contrary queens bishops second house White king to his queens hous Black knight takes the queens rook White queene gives mate.
Gambett. XXI. WHite kings pawn two houses Black the same White kings knight to his bishops third house Black queens pawn one house White Kings bishop to the queens bishop fourth house Black queens bishop to the contrary king knights fourth house White kings rooks pawn one house Black queens bishop takes the kings knight White queen takes the queens bishop Wl Black kings knight to his bishops third house White queen to her knights third house Wl Black kings knight takes the kings pawn White kings bishop takes the kings Bishops pawn and checks Black kings to his queens second house White queen checks at the contrary kings third house Black king to his queens bishop third house White queen checks at the contrary queen fourth house Black king to his queens knights third house White queen takes the kings knight &c.
Gambett. XXII. Play the last to this mark Wl BLack queen to her kings bishops third house White queen to her knights third house Black queens knights pawn one house White queens knight to her bishops third house Wl Black queens bishops pawn one house White queens knight to the contrary queens fourth house Black queen to her house White queens knight takes the queens knights pawn Black Queen takes the queens knight Whitekings bishop takes the kings bishops pawn and checks Black king to his queens second house White kings bishop takes the kings Knight Black Queens pawn one house White kings pawn takes the queens pawn Black queen takes the queen White kings pawn takes the queens bishop pawn and checks Black queens knight takes the pawn White Kings bishop takes the queen &c.
Gambett. XXIII. Play the last to this mark Wl BLack kings knight to the Kings second house White queens knight to the contrary queens Knights fourth house Black queens Knight to the queens Rooks third house White queen to her rooks fourth house Black queens Knight to the queens bishops fourth house White queens knight takes the queens pawn and gives double checks Black King to his queens house White queen gives mate. Gambett. XXIV. Play the 21 to this mark Wl BLack queen to her second house White queen take the queens knights pawn Black queen to her bishops third house White Kings bishop to the contrary queens
Knights fourth house Black queen takes the queens bishop White queen takes the Queens &c. Gambett. XXV. WHite Kings pawn two houses Black the same White kings knight to his bishops third house Black queens Knight to her bishops third house White kings bishop to the queens bishops fourth house Black Kings Knight to his Bishops third house White Kings Knight to the contrary Kings Knights fourth house Black queens pawn two houses White kings pawn takes the pawn Black Knight takes the Kings pawn White Kings knight takes the contrary kings Bishop pawn Black King takes the Kings knight White queens checks at the Kings bishops third house Black King to his third house White queens knight to her bishops third house Black queens Knight to her kings second house White King changes Black queens bishops pawn one house White rook to his kings house
Black queens bishop to the queens second house White queens pawn two houses Black King to his queens third house White rook takes the pawn Black queens knight to the Kings Knights third house White queens Knight takes the Knight Black knight takes the rook White pawn takes the knight and checks Wl Black king to the queens bishops fourth house White queen checks at her kings third house Black king takes the kings bishop White queen checks at her third house Black King to his queens bishops fourth house White queens knights pawn gives mate. Gambett. XXVI. Play the last to this mark Wl BLack king takes the pawn White queen checks at the kings bishops fourth house Black King to his third house White Knight checks double at the contrary queens bishop second house
Black King to his second house White queen checks at the contrary Kings Knight fourth house Black King to his queens third house White queens bishop gives mate. Gambett. XXVII. Play the 25 to this marke Wl BLack king to his third house White knight checks double at the con∣trary queens bishop second house Black king takes the pawn White queen gives mate. Gambett. XXVIII. Play the 25th to this marke Wl BLack king to his third house White knight checks double at the contra∣ry queens bishops second house Black King to his second house White queen gives mate.
Gambett. XXIX. WHite Kings pawn two houses Black the same White Kings bishop pawns two houses Black Kings Knight to his bishops third house White queens knight to her bishops third house Black kings pawn takes the Kings bishops pawn White queens pawn two houses Black Kings bishop to the contrary queens knights fourth house White kings bishop to the queens third house Black queen to the kings second house White queen to the kings second house Black queens knight to her bishops third house White Kings pawn one house. Wl Black queens knight takes the queens pawn White Kings pawn takes the Kings knight Black Knight takes the queen White pawn takes the queen Black Knight takes the queens Knight White queens rooks pawn one house Black Kings bishop to the queens rooks fourth house White queens bishop to the queens second house Black King takes the pawn White bishop take the Knight &c.
Gambett. XXX. Play the last to this marke. Wl BLack Kings Knight to the queens fourth house White queens bishop to the queens second house Black queens Knight takes the queens pawn White queens Knight takes the Kings Knight Black queen checks at the contrary Kings rooks fourth house White kings Knight pawns one house Covers Black pawn takes the pawn White queen to the Kings knights second house Black pawn takes the pawn and gives check with the queen White King to his bishops house Black Kings bishop takes the queens bishop White rook takes the pawn Black queen to her house White queen takes the Kings Knight pawn Black Kings rook to the Kings bishop house White rook takes the Kings bishop Black Knight to the Knigs third house White Knight checks at the contrary Kings bi∣shops third house Black King to his second house White queen takes Kings rooks pawn
Black Kings rook to his house White knight checks at the contrary queens fourth house Black king to his house White queen takes the rook and checks &c. Gambett. XXXI. WHite Kings pawn two houses Black the same White Kings knight to his bishops third house Black Kings bishop pawn one house White Kings knight takes the Kings pawn Black Kings bishops pawn takes the Knight White queen checks at the contrary Kings rooks fourth house Black King to his second house White queen takes the Kings bishops pawn and checks Black King to his bishops second house White Kings bishop checks at the queens fourth house Wl Black queens pawn two houses covers White Kings bishop takes the pawn and checks Black King to his knights third house White kings rook pawn two houses VVl Black kings took pawn one house
White bishop takes the Queens Knights pawn Black queens bishop takes the kings bishop White queen gives mate. Gambett. XXXII. Play the last to this marke. Wl BLack King to his knights third house White queen checks at the contrary Kings bishops fourth house Black King to his rooks third house White queen pawns two houses and checks with the queens bishop Black kings Knight pawn two house covers White Kings rook pawn two houses Black King to to his Knights second house White queen checks at the contrary Kings bi∣shops second house Black king to his rooks third house White Kings rooks pawn takes the pawn and gives mate.
Gambett. XXXIII. Play the 31 to this mark VVl BLack queen to her Kings bishops third house White queen checks at the contrary Kings house Black King to his rooks third house White queens pawn two houses and checks with her bishop Black Kings Knight pawn two houses covers White Kings rooks pawn takes the pawn and checks Black King to his Knights second house White pawn takes the queen and checks Black Kings Knight takes the pawn White queen gives mate. Gambett. XXXIV. Play the 31, to this make vvl BLack Kings bishop to the queens third house White King rooks pawn checks Black King to his rook third house White queens pawn two houses and checks with her bishop Black Kings Knight pawns two houses covers
VVhite queen takes the Kings rook Black queens bishops pawn one house White Kings bishop takes the Kings Knight Black queen to the Kings second house VVhite Kings bishop takes the Kings rooks pawn Black queen takes the Kings bishop VVhite queen checks at the contrary Kings Bishops third house Black queen covers at the Kings Knights third house VVhite queen or pawn takes the queen and gives mate. Gambett. XXXV. Play the 31. to this mark Wl BLack Kings rooke pawns two houses White Kings bishop takes the queenes Knights pawn Black queens Bishop takes the bishop White queen checks at the contrary Kings bi∣shops fourth house Black King to his rooks third house White queens pawn two houses and checks with the bishop Black Kings Knights pawn two houses co∣vers
White queens bishop takes the contrary Kings Knights pawn and checks Black King to his Knights second house White queenes bishop takes the queene, &c. Gambett. XXXVI. BLack Kings pawn two houses White the same Black Kings Knight to his bishops third house VVhite queenes knight to her bishops third house Black Kings bishop to his queens bishops fourth house VVhite the same Black King changes VVhite Kings Knight to his bishops third house Black Kings rook to the Kings house White king changes Black queens bishops pawn one house White rook to his kings house Black queens pawns two houses White kings pawn takes the queens pawn Black kings pawn one house White kings knight to the contrary kings knights fourth house Black pawn takes the kings pawn
VVhite queens knight takes the pawn Black kings knight takes the queens knight VVhite queen to the contrary kings rooks fourth house VV Black kings knight to his bishops third house VVhite queen takes the kings bishops pawn and checks Black king to his rookes house VVhite queen checks at the contrary Kings Knights house Black knight or rook takes the queen VVhite queens Knight gives mate. Gambett. XXXVIJ. Play the last to this mark VVl BLack Kings rooks pawn one house VVhite queen takes the Kings bishops pawn and check: Black King to his rook's house White queen to the contrary Kings Knights third house Black pawn takes the Kings Knight VVhite queen checks at the contrary kings rooks fourth house Black King to his Knights house
VVhite Kings bishop takes the knight and checks Black queens bishop covers at the Kings third house VVhite rook takes the pawn at the Kings fourth house Black queen to her second house VVhite queen to the contrary Kings Knights third house Black queens Bishop to the Kings bishops second house White bishop takes the bishop and checks Black queen takes the bishop White rook takes the rook and checks Black Kings bishop covers at his house VVhite queen takes the queen and checks Black King takes the queen White rook to the Kings fourth house, &c.
Gambett. XXXVIII. Play the 36. to this mark. vv Black queens Bishop to the kings third house White queene takes the Kings rooks pawn and checks Black King to his bishops house VVhite queen checks at the contrary kings rooks house Black King to his second house White queen takes the Kings Knights pawn Black rook to the Kings Knights house VVhite Knight takes the queens bishop Black King takes the Knight VVhite rook takes the pawn and checks Black King to his queens third house White queen takes the Kings bishops pawn Black King to his queens bishops third house White bishop takes the Knight and checks Black queen takes the bishop White rook checks at the contrary Kings third house Black Kings bishops cover VVhite queen takes the Rook, &c.
Gambett. xxxix. BLack Kings pawn two houses White the same Black Kings Knight to his Bishops third house White Kings bishops pawn two houses Black Kings Knight takes the Kings pawn VVhite queen to the Kings second house Black queen checks at the contrary Kings rooks fourth house White Kings Knights pawn one house and co∣vers White Kings Knight takes the Kings Knights pawn White queen takes the Kings pawn and checks vv Black Kings bishop covers at the Kings se∣cond house White Kings Knight to his bishops third house Black queen to her Kings rooks fourth house White queen takes the Kings Knights pawn vvv Black Knight takes the Kings rook VVhite queen takes the Kings rook and checks Black Kings bishop covers VVhite queen checks at the contrary Kings 4th. house
Black queen takes the queen White pawn takes the queen Black Kings bishop to the queens bishops 4th. house White queens pawn two houses Black Kings bishop to the queens Knights 3d. house White Kings bishop to the Kings Knights se∣cond house, &c. Gambett. XL. Play the last to 39. marke. vv BLack King to his queens house White King Knight to his bishops third house Black queen to the Kings rooks fourth house White Kings rookes pawne takes the Kings Knight Black queen takes the Kings rook White Kings Knight to the contrary Kings Knights fourth house Black queen to the Kings rooks fourth house White Knight checks at the contrary Kings 3d. house Black queens pawn takes the Kings Knight White queene takes the queen &c.
Gambett. XLI. Play the 39. to this marke. vvv WHite Kings rooks pawn takes the Kings Knight Black queen takes the Kings rook White queen takes the Kings Knights pawn Black rook to his Kings bishops house White King to his bishops second house Black Kings bishop to the queens bishops 4th house and checks White queens pawn two houses covers Black Kings bishop to the Kings second h. White queens Knight to her third house Black queens bishops pawn one house White queens bishop to the queens second h. Black queens pawn two houses White queens Knight takes the queens pawn Black pawn takes the queens Knight White Kings bishop checks at the contrary queens Knights fourth house Black queens bishop covers at the queens 2d. house White bishop takes the queens bishops & checks Black queens Knight takes the bishop VVhite rook takes the queen, &c.
Gambett. XLII. BKack Kings pawn two houses White the same Black Kings Knight to his bishops third house White Kings bishops pawn two houses Black Kings pawn takes the pawn White Kings pawn one house Black Kings Knight to the contrary Kings fourth house White Kings Knight to his bishops third house Black Kings Knights pawn two houses White queens pawn one house Black Kings Knight to his queens bishops 4th. house White queens Knights pawn two houses Black Kings Knight to his queenes rooks 3d. h VVhite queens rooks pawn one house Black Kings bishop to the Kings Knights 2d. house White queens pawn one house Black queens pawn one house White queenes Bishop to her Knights second house Black pawn takes the pawn White Knight takes the pawn
Black Kings rooks pawn one house White queens pawn one house Black queens Knight to her second house White Kings bishop to the contrary queenes Knights fourth house Black queens bishops pawn one house White pawn takes the pawn Black Knight takes the Kings Knight White pawn takes the queens Knights pawn and checks Black bishop covers White bishop takes the bishop and checks Black Knight takes the bishop White bishop takes the Kings bishop Black rook to his Kings Knights house White pawn takes the rook Black queen takes the pawn White Kings changes Black rook takes the queens bishop White queen checks at the Kings second house Black King to his Bishops house White queen takes the Knight Black Kings Knights pawn one house White queen checks at the contrary queens 3d. house Black King to his house White rook checks at his Kings house Black King to his queenes house White rook to his queens house Black Kings bishops pawn two houses
White queen checks at the contrary Kings bi∣shops third house Black King to his house White queen takes the Kings rook, &c. Gambett. XLIII. BLack Kings pawn two houses White the same Black Kings Knight to his bishops third house White queens Knight to her bishops third house Black Kings bishop to the queenes bishops fourth house White the same Black King changes White Kings Knight to his bishops 3d. house Black Kings rook to his Kings house White King changes Black queens bishps pawn one house White Kings rook to the Kings house Black queens pawn two houses White Kings pawn takes the queens pawn Black Kings pawn one house White Kings Knight to the contrary Kings Knights fourth house Black queens bishop to the contrary Knights fourth house White Knight takes the Kings bishops pawne
vv Black queen to her Knights third house White pawn takes the queens bishops pawn vv Black bishop takes the queen White pawn takes the queens Knights pawn vvv Black queen takes the pawn White Knight to the contrary queens 3d. house and checks with the Kings bishop Black King to his bishops house White Knight takes his queen Black queens bishop takes the queens bishops pawn White Knight takes the queens bishop, &c. Gambett. XLIV. Play the last to this mark vv BLack King takes the Knight White pawn takes the queens bishops pawn checks with the Kings bishop Black King to his bishops house White pawn takes the queens Knigts pawn Black bishop takes the queen White pawn takes the rook and is made a qu. Black queen to her bishops seccond house White queens Knight to the contrary queenes fourth house
Black Kings Knight takes the queens Knight VVhite queen takes the Knight Black queenes Knight to her bishops third house VVhite queene checks at the contrary Kings Knights house Black King to his second house VVhite queen takes the Kings Knights pawn & checks Black King to his queens house VVhite queen takes the queen and checks Black King takes the queen VVhite queens bishops pawn one house, &c. Gambett. XLV. Play the 43. to this mark vv BLack queens Knight takes the pawn VVhite Knight giues double check at the contrary Kings rookes third house Black king to his bishops house VVhite knight takes the queens bishop Black Knight takes the Kings Knight VVhite queen takes the Kings Knight Black Kings bishop takes the Kings bishops pawn and checks VVhite King to his bishops house
Black bishop takes the Kings rook VVhite queen checks at the contary Kings bi∣shops fourth house Black King to his second house VVhite Knight checks Black King to his queens third house VVhite Knight takes the queen Black Kings rook to the Kings bishops house VVhite Kings bishop to the contrary Kings bi∣shops second house Black pawn takes the contrary Knight NVhite King takes the bishop Black Knight to his queens house VVhite queen checks at the contrary queens 4th. house Black King to the ueenes bishops second house VVhite Kings bishop to the contrary Kings rooks 4th. house, &c. Gambett. xlvj. Play the 43. to this mark vvv BLack Kings bishop takes the Kings bishops pawn & checks VVhite King to his rooks house Black queen Knight to her bishops third h. VVhite Knight to the contrary queens house and checks with the bishop
Black King to his bishops house VVhite pawn takes the queens rook and is made a queen Black rook takes the Kings Knight White queen takes the rook and checks Black Knight takes the queen White rook takes the queens bishop, &c. Gambett. xlvij. WHite Kings pawn two houses Black Kings pawn one house White queens pawn two houses Black Kings Knight to the Bishops third h. VVhite Kings bishop to the queens 3d. house Black queens Knight to the bishops 3d. house VVhite Kings Knight to the bishops third house Black Kings bishop checks at the contrary queens Knights fourth house VVhite queens bishops pawn covers Black Kings bishop to the Kings second house VVhite Kings rooks pawn two houses Black King changes White Kings pawn one house Black Kings Knight to the queene 4th. house White Kings bishop takes the Kings rookes pawn and checks Black King takes the bishop
VVhite Kings Knight checks at the contrary Kings Knights fourth house vv Black King to his Knights house VVhite qu. to the cont. Kings rooks 4th. house Black Kings bishop takes the Kings Knight VVhite Kings rooks pawn takes the bishop Black Kings bishops pawn two houses VVhite Kings rooks pawn one house Black rook to the Kings house VVhite queen gives mate, Gambett. XLviij. Play the last to this mark vv BLack Kings bishop takes the Kings Knight VVhite Kings rooks pawn takes the bishop and checks with the Kings rook Black King to the Knights third house White queen checks at the contrary Kings rooke fourth house Black King to his bishops fourth house White queen checks at the contrary Kings rooks second house Black Kings Knight pawn one house covers White queen checks at the Kings rooks 3d. house Black King to the contrary Kings fourth house White queen gives mate.
Gambett. XLIX. Play the 47. to this marke vv BLack King to his Knights third house White Kings rooks pawn one house and checks Black King to his rooks third house White Kings Knight takes the Kings bishops pawn and checks double Black King to his rooks second house White Knight takes the queen &c. Or thus Black King to his Knights third house White Kings rooks pawn one house and checks Black King to his bishops fourth house White Kings Knights pawn gives mate Gambett. L. WHite Kings pawn two houses Black the same White Kings Knight to his bishops third house Black queen pawn one house White Kings rooks pawn one house
Black Kings knight to his bishops third house White queens bishops pawn one house vvl Black kings knight takes the kings pawn White queen checks at her rooks fourth house Black queens bishop pawn one house White queen takes the kings knights &c. Gambett. LI. Play the last to this marke vv BLack queens knight to her bishops third house White queen pawn two houses Black kings knight takes the kings pawn White queen pawn one house Black queens knight to the kings second house White queen checks at her rooks fourth house Black queens bishop covers White queen takes the kings knight &c.
Gambetts composed by Giochim, Graeco∣talian, Calabresse in the King∣dome of Naples. Gambett. lij. WHite Kings pawn two houses Black the same White Kings bishops pawn two houses Black kings pawn takes the kings bishops pawn White kings knight to his bishops third house Black kings knight pawn two houses White Kings bishop to his queens bishop fourth house vv Black kings knight pawn one house White kings knight to the contrary kings fourth house Black queen checks at the contrary Kings rooks fourth house White King to his bishops house Black kings Knight to his rooks third house White queens pawn two houses Black queen pawn one house White kings knight to his queens third houses Black king pawn one house to contrary kings bishops third house
White kings knight pawn one house Black queen checks at the contrary kings rooks third house vv White king to his house vvv Black queen to the contrary kings knights second house White kings knight to his bishops second house Black queens knight to her bishops third house White kings bishop to his house Black queen takes the Kings rook White knight takes the queen &c. Gambett. LIII. Play the last to this mark vv BLack kings rook pawn one house White kings rook pawn two houses Black kings bishops pawn one house White Kings knight to the contrary kings fourth house vv Black pawn takes the kings knight White queen checks at the contrary kings rooks fourth house Black king to his second house
White queen checks at the contrary kings bishops second house Black king to his queens third house White queen checks at the contrary queens fourth house Black king to his second house White queen takes the contrary pawn and gives mate. Gambett. LIV. Play the last to this mark Wl BLack queen to her Kings second house White queen checks at the contrary kings rooks fourth house Black king to his queens house White knight checks at the contrary kings Bishops second house Black king to his house White knight takes the contrary rooks and checks with the queen Black king to his queen house White knight checks Black king to his house White knight takes the contrary kings knights pawn and checks with the queen Black king to his queens house
White knight checkes Black king to his house White knight takes the contrary kings rooks pawn and checks with the queen Black King to his queen house White knight takes the contrary Kings Knight &c. Gambett. LV. Play the 52d to this mark Wl BLack Kings bishop to the Kings knights second house VVl White queens pawn two houses Black queens pawn one house White queens Knight to her bishops third house Black queens bishops pawn one house White Kings rooks pawn two houses Black Kings rooks pawn one house White Kings rooks pawn takes the Kings Knight pawn Black pawn takes the pawn White rook takes the rook Black bishop takes the rook White Kings Knight to the contrary Kings 4th house
Black queens pawn takes the Knight White queen to the contrary Kings rooks fourth house Black queen to her Kings bishops third h. White queens pawn takes the pawn Black queen to her Kings Knights second house White pawn to the contrary Kings third house Black Kings Knight to his bishops third house White pawn takes the contray pawn & checks vvv Black King to his bishops house White queens bishop takes the pawn at the Kings bishops fourth house Black Kings Knight takes the queen White queens bishop gives mate. Gambett. LVj. Play the last to this mark vv WHite Kings rooks pawn two houses Black Kings Knights pawn one house White Kings Knight to the contrary Kings Knights fourth house Black Kings Knight to his rooks third house White queens pawn two houses Black Kings bishops pawn one house
White queenes bishop takes the pawne at the Kings bishops fourth house Black Kings bishops pawn takes the Kings Knight White queens bishop takes the pawn Black Kings bishop to his third house White queens bishop takes the Kings Knight Black queens bishop takes the Kings rooks pawn and checks VVhite King to his second house Black queen to her Kings bishops third house White queens bishop to the Kings third house Black queens Knight to her bishops third house White queens Knight to her bishops third house Black Kings bishop to the contrary King Knights third house White queens Knight to the contrary queenes fourth house Black queen to the Kings Knights third house White Kings pawn one house Black King to his queens house White Kings bishop to his queens third house Black queen to the Kings bishops second h. White queenes bishop checks at the contrary Kings Knights fourth house Black King to his house VVhite Knights takes the queens bishops pawne and checks Black King to his bishops house
White Kings rook to the Kings bishops house Black queens Knight takes the queens pawn and checks White King to his third house Black Knight to the contrary Kings bishops third house White pawn takes the Knight Black queen to the Kings Knights house VVhite pawn takes the pawn and checks Black King to his Knights second house White queens bishop checks at the contrary King bishops third house Black King to his rooks third house White Rook gives Mate. Gambett. lvij. Play the 55. to this marke. vvv BLack King to his second house White queen to her Kings second house Black queens Bishops to the Kings third h. White Kings bishop takes the queens bishop Black King takes the Kings bishop White queen checks at her bishops fourth h. Black King to his second house White queen checks at her Knights fourth house
Black King takes the pawn White queen takes the queens Knights pawn and checks Black queens Knight covers at the queens se∣cond house White queen takes the queens rook, &c. Gambett. lviij. Play the 52d. to this mark vv WHite King to his bishops second house Black queen checks at the contrary Kings Knights second house White King to his third house Black Kings Knight to his house White Kings Knight to the Kings bishops 4th. house Black Kings bishop to the Kings rooks third house White Kings bishop to his house Black queen takes the Kings rook White Kings bishop checks at the contrary queens Knights fourth house Black queens bishops pawn covers White Kings bishop takes the pawn and checks Black Knight takes the Kings bishop White rook takes the queen, &c.
Gambett. lix. Play the 52d. to this mark vvv BLack queen to her Kings rooks fourth house White Kings Knight to the Kings bishops fourth house Black queen checks at her rooks fourth house VVhite queens bishops covers at her second house vv Black queen to the contrary queens rooks 4th. house VVhite queens Knight to her rooks third house vvv Black queen to her second house VVhite Kings Knight to the contrary queens fourth house Black Kings bishop to the Kings Knights se∣cond house VVhite queens bishop takes the Kings Knight Black Kings bishop takes the queens bishop VVhite Kings Knight checks at the contrary Kings bishops third house Black King to his queen VVhite kings knight takes the queen, &c.
Gambett. LX. Play the last to this mark vv BLack queen to her Knights third house VVhite Kings Knight to the contrary queens fourth house Black queen takes the queens pawn VVhite Kings bishop to her queens third house Black queen to her bishops fourth house VVhite queenes bishop to her Kings third house Black queen to her bishops third house VVhite Kings bishop to the contrary queenes Knights fourth house Black queen takes the Kings bishop VVhite Knight takes the queens bishops pawn and checks Black King to his queens house VVhite Knight takes the queen, &c.
Gambett. LXI. Play the 59. to this mark vvv BLack queens bishops pawn one house White Kings Knight to the contrary queens fourth house Black queens Knight pawn two houses White queens Knights pawn one house Black queen takes the queens Knight White queens bishop to her Knights fourth h. Black queen to the contrary queens Knights second house White queens rook to the queens Knights h. Black queen takes the queens rooks pawn White queens rook to his house Black queen to the contrary queens Knights second house White queens bishop to her third house Black queen takes the queens rook White queen takes the queen Black pawn takes the Kings Knight White Kings bishop takes the pawn Black queens Knight to her second house White Kings bishop takes the queens rook, &c.
Gambett. LXij. Play the 52. to this mark vv BLack Kings Knights pawn one house White Kings bishop takes the Kings bi∣shops pawn and checks Black King takes the bishop White Kings knight checks at the contrary kings fourth house vv Black king to his house White queen takes the kings knights pawn vvv Black queens pawn one house White queen checks at the contrary kings rooks fourth house Black King to his second house White queen gives mate. Gambett. LXIII. Play the last to this marke vv BLack king to his third house White qu. takes the contrary p. & checks Black king takes the kings knight
White queen checks at the contrary kings bi∣shops fourth house Black king to his queens third house White queens pawn two houses Black kings bish. to the kings knight 2d. h. White queens bish. takes the pawn and checks Black king to his second house White queenes bishop checks at the contrary king Knights fourth house Black kings bishop covers at his third house White kings pawn one house Black Kings bishop takes the queens bishop White queen takes the bishop and checks Black king to his house White queen checks at the contrary kings rooks fourth house Black king to his second house White king changes Black queen to her kings house White queen checks at the contrary kings knights fourth house Black king to his third house White rook checks at the contrary kings bi∣shops third house Black knight takes the contrary kings rook White queen takes the knight and checks Black king to his queens fourth house White queens knight checks at the bishops 3d. h Black king to the contrary queens bishops fourth house
White queen checks at her kings bishops house Black king takes the pawn White queen checks at the bishops fourth house Black king to his queens bishops fourth h. White queens knights pawn checks Black king to his queens knights third house White queen checks at her fourth house Black king to the queens bishops third house White queen gives Mate. Gambett. lxiv. Play the 62. to this mark vvv BLack queen to her kings second house White queen checks at the contrary kings rooks fourth house Black king to his queens house White knight checks at the contrary kings bishops second house Black king to his house VVhite knight takes the kings rook and checks with the queen Black king to his queens house White knight checks Black king to his house White knight to the contrary kings rooks third house, and checks with the queen Black king to his queens house
White knight takes the kings knight Black queen takes the kings pawn & checks White king to his bishops house Black queen takes the queens bishops pawn White queen checks at the contrary kings knights fourth house Black king to his house White knights checks Black King to his bishops second house White queens Knight to her bishops 3d. house Black queen checks White King to his Black pawn to the contrary Kings bishops third house VVhite pawn takes the pawn Black queen takes the pawn White rook to his Kings bishops house, &c. Gambett. lXV. Play the 62. to this mark vvv BLack Kings Knight to his bishops third h. White queen takes the pawn at the Kings bishops fourth house Black queen to the Kings second house White queens pawn one house, &c.
Gambett. LXVj. WHite Kings pawn two houses Black the same White Kings bishops pawn two houses Black Kings pawn takes the pawn White Kings Knight to his bishops third house Black Kings Knight to his Kings second house White Kings rooks pawn two houses Black Kings rooks pawn two houses White Kings bishop to the queens bishops 4th. house Black Kings Knight to his third house White Kings Knight to the contrary Kings Knights fourth house Black Kings Knight to the fourth house of his King White Kings bishop to the queens Knights third house Black Kings bishops pawn one house White Kings Knight to the Rooks third house vv Black Kings Knights pawn two houses. VVhite Kings rooks pawn takes the pawn Black pawn takes the pawn White queens pawn two houses
vv Black Kings Knight to his bishops second house White Kings Knights pawn one house Black pawn takes the Kings Knights pawn VVhite Kings bishop takes the Kings Knight and checks Black King takes the Kings bishop White Knight takes the pawn and checks at the contrary Kings Knights fourth house Black King to his Knights second house White queen to her Kings bishops third house Black queen to her Kings bishop third house White queen takes the pawn at the kings knights third house Black queens pawn one house White Kings Knight checks at the contrary Kings third house double check Black King to his bishops second house White rook to the Kings bishops house Black queen takes the rook and checks White King takes the queen Black queens bishop takes the Knight White queens bishop to the contrary Kings Knights fourth house, &c.
Gambett. lxvij. Play the last to this marke. vv BLack Kings Knight to his third house White queens pawn two houses Black Kings Knight takes the Kings rookes pawn White Kings Knight takes the pawn at the kings bishops fourth house Black Kings Knights pawn two houses White rook takes the Kings Knight Black pawn takes the rook White Kings Knight to the contrary Kings Knights third house Black rook to his second house VVhite Kings bishop to the contrary Kings Knights house Black Kings rook to the Kings Knight 2d. house White queen takes the pawn at the contrary Kings rooks fourth house Black rook takes the Kings bishop White Kings Knight to the contrary Kings 4th. house and checks with the queen Black King to his second house White queen checks at contrary Kings second house
Black Kings to his queens third house White Kings Knight checks at the queens bi∣bishhps fourth house Black King to the queens bishops third house White queen gives mate: Gambett. lxviij. Play the 66. to this marke vvv BLack Kings Knight to his third house VVhite Kings Knights pawn one house Black pawn takes the pawn White Knight takes the pawn at the contrary Kings Knights fourth house Black Kings Knights pawn one house White Kings bishop checks at the contrary Kings bishops second house Black King to his second hous White rook to the Knights house Black Knight to the contrary Kings rooks fourth house White kings bishop takes the Kings rooks pawn Black Kings bishop to his Knights second h. White queen to the Kings knights fourth house Black bishop take the queens pawn White queen takes the knight Black rook takes the bishop
White queen takes the Kings rook Black bishop takes the Kings rook White queen checks at the contrary Kings bi∣shops second house Black King to his queens third house White queen checks at the contrary queenes fourth house Black King to his second house White queen checks at the contrary Kings 4th house Black Kings to his bishops house White queen checks at the contrary Kings rooks house Black King to his second house White queen checks at the contrary King Knights second house Black King to his queens third house White Knight checks at the contrary Kings bi∣shops second house Black King to his second house White Knight takes the queen and checks with the queen Black King takes the Knight White queen gives mate.
Gambett. lxix. WHite kings pawn two houses Black the same White kings bishops pawn two houses Black queens pawn two houses White kings pawn take the queens pawn Black queen takes the pawn White queens knight to her bishops third house Black queen to her kings third house White kings knight to his bishops 3d. house Black kings pawn takes the pawn and checks with the queen White kings to his bishops second house Black kings bishop checks at the fourth house of the queens bishop White queens pawn two houses Black Kings bishop to the queens 3d. house White kings bishop checks at the contrary kings knights fourth house Black kings to his queen or bishops house White kings rook to his kings house Black queen to her kings bishops 4th. house White rook gives mate.
Gambett. lxx. BLack Kings pawn two houses White the same Black Kings bishops pawn two houses White Kings pawn takes the pawn Black Kings Knight to his bishops third h. White Kings Knights pawn two houses Black Kings bishop to the queenes bishops 4th. house White Kings Knights pawn two houses Black Knight to the contrary kings▪ fourth house White queen checks at the contrary kings rooks fourth house Black king to his bishops house White Kings Knight to his bishops 3d house vv Black Kings Knight takes the contrary Kings bishops pawn White queens pawn two houses Black bishops takes the pawn White Knight takes the bishop Black Kings Knight takes the Kings rook VVhite Kings Knight to the Kings bishops third Black Kings pawn one house White Kings Knight to the Kings rooks fourth house Black queen to her Kings house
White queen takes the queen and checks Black King takes the queen White Kings bishop to the Kings Knights se∣cond house, &c. Gambett. lxxj Play the last to this mark vv BLack Kings bishop takes the Kings bishops pawn and checks White king to his queens house Black Kings Bishop to his queens knights 3d. house White kings knight to his rooks fourth house Black knight checks at the contrary kings bi∣shops second house White King to his house Black knight takes the Kings rook VVhite knight checks at the contrary Kings Knights third house vv Black Kings rooks pawn takes the Knight White queen takes the rook and checks Black King to his second house White pawn one house and checks at the con∣trary Kings bishops third house Black pawn takes the pawn White pawn takes the pawn and checks Black King to his bishops second house White queen takes the queen, &c.
Gambett. lxxij. Play the last to this mark Wl BLack to his Knights house White Kings bishop checks at the queens bishops fourth house Black queen pawn two houses covers White kings bishop takes the pawn and checks Black queen takes the bishop White knight checks at the contrary kings se∣cond house Black king to his bishops house VVhite knight takes queen, &c. Gambett. lxxiij. BLack Kings pawn two houses White the same Black kings bishops pawn two houses White Kings pawn takes the pawn Black kings knight to his bishops third house White kings knights pawn two houses Black kings bishop to the queens bishops fourth house VVhite kings knights pawn one house Black kings knight to the contrary Kings fourth house
White Kings knight to his rooks third house Black Kings Knight takes the Kings knights pawn vv White queen checks at the contrary Kings rooks fourth house Black Kings Knight covers White queens pawn two houses vvv Black Kings bishop takes the queens pawn White queens bishop to the contrary Kings Knights fourth house Black Kings Knights pawn one house White pawn takes the pawn Black Knight takes the bishop White pawn one house and checks with the queen Black King to his second house White queen taks the Knight and checks Black King to his bishops second house White pawn takes the Kings rook Black queen takes the pawn at the rookes h. VVhite queens bishops pawn one house Black Kings bishop to the queenes Knights third house VLhite queens Knight to her second house Black queens pawn one house VVhite king changes with the queens rook Black queens bishop takes the knight VVhite bishop takes the queens bishop, &c.
Gambett. lxxiv. Play the last to this marke. vv WHite Knight takes the Kings Knight Black queen takes the Kings Knight VVhite queens pawn two houses Black qu. takes the p at the Kings bish. 4th. h. VVhite pawn takes the Kings bishop Black queene checks at the contrary Kings fourth house White queens bishop coves at the Kings third h. Black queen takes the Kings rook White queen checks at the contrary Kings rooks fourth house Black King to his bishops house White queen checks at the contrary Kings bi∣shops fourth house Black King to his Knights house White queen takes the Kings pawn Black Kings rooks pawn one house White queens bishop to the queens fourth house Black queen to the contrary Kings Knights h▪ White Kings bshop pawn two houses Black queen to the Kings Knights third house White Kings bishop to the queens third house Black queen to the Kings bishops second h. White Kings bishop to the queens bishops 4th. h. Black queen takes the bishop White queen gives mate:
Gambett. lxxv. Play the 73 to this mark vvv BLack Kings pawn takes the queens pawn VVhite Kings pawn to the contrary Kings Bishops third house Black Kings bishop checks at the contrary queens bishops fourth house White queens bishops pawn one house covers Black Kings pawn takes the queens bishops p. White queen checks at her Kings second house Black King to his bishops house VVhite pawn takes the Kings Knights pawn and checks Black King takes the pawn White queen checks at the Kings Knights fourth house Black King to his bishops house White queen takes the Kings bishop and checks Black queens pawn covers White queens Knight takes the pawn, &c. Gambett. LXXVI. WHite Kings pawn two houses Black the same White Kings bishops pawn two houses
Black pawn takes the pawn White Kings bishop to the queens bishops 4th. h. Black queen checks at the contrary Kings rooks fourth house White King to his bishops house Black Kings bishop to the queens bishops 4th. h. White queens pawn two houses Black Kings bish. to the queens Knights 3d. h. White Kings Knight to the bishops third house vv Black queen to the contrary Kings Knights fourth house White Kings bishop takes the Kings bishops pawn and checks vvv Black King takes the bishop White Kings Knight checks at the contrary Kings fourth house Black King to his bishops house White Knight takes the queen, &c. Gambett. LXXVII. Play the last to this mark vv BLack queen to the Kings rooks third house White Kings Knight to the contrary Kings fourth house Black queens pawn two houses White bishop takes the pawn
Black queens bishop to the Kings third house White Kings bishop takes the contrary queenes Knights pawn, &c. Gambett. lxxviij. Play the 76. to this mark vv BLack queen to the Kings bishops third house White Kings pawn one house Black queen to the Kings bishops fourth h. White Kings bishop to the queens third house Black queen to the contrary Kings Knights fourth house White Kings rooks pawn one house Black queen to the contrary Kings Knights third house White queens bishop to the queens second house Black queens Knight to her bishops third h. White queens bishops to the Kings house, &c. Gambett. lxxix. Play the 72. to this marke vv BLack queen to the Kings second house White queens bishop takes the pawn Black queen takes the Kings pawn White Kings bishop takes the Kings bishops pawn and checks
Blac King to his bishops house White queens bishop to the Kings Knights 3 d. h. Black Kings Kt. to the Kings rooks third house White queens Knight to her bishops third house Black queen to her Kings second house White Kings bish, to the queens Knights 3 d. h. Black queens bishops pawn one house White queen to her third house Black queens pawn two houses White rook to his Kings house vv Black queen to the Kings bishops third house White queens bish▪ the Kings rooks fourth house Black queen to the Kings Knights third house White queenes bishop checks at the contrary Kings second house Black King to his Knights house White queen takes the queen Black Kings rooks pawn takes the queen White queens Knight takes the queens pawn Black pawn takes the queens Knight White Kings bishop takes the pawn and checks Black King to his rooks second house White Kings Knight gives mate. Gambett. lxxx. Play the last to this marke. vv BLack queen to the Kings bishops second h. White queens bishops checks at the contrary queens third house
Black King to his Knights house Whte queens rook to the contrary Kings 2d. h. Black queen to the Kings bishops third house White queens Knight takes the queens pawn vv Black queen takes the queens bishop White queens Knight checks double at the con∣trary Kings bishops third house Black King to his bishops house White Rook gives mate. Gambett. lxxxj. Play the last to this mark vv BLack queens bishops pawn takes the qu. Kt. White Kings bish, takes the pawn & checks vv Black Kings Knight covers at the Kings bi∣shop second house White Rook gives mate. Gambett. lxxxij. Play the last to this mark vv BLack King to his bishops house White rook to the contrary Kings bishops second house and checks with the bishop Black King to his house White rook takes the queen
Black Kings Knights pawn takes the rook VVhite queen checks at the Kings fourth house Black King to the queens second house VVhite queen gives mate. Gambett. lxxxiij. Play the 76. to this mark vvv BLack King to his bishops house VVhite Kings rooks pawn one house Black queen to the contrary Kings Knights third house VVhite queens Knight to her bishops third h. Black King takes the Kings bishop White queens Knight to the Kings second house Black queen to the Kings Knights third h. VVhite Kings Knight checks at the contrary Kings fourth house Black King to his bishops house VVhite Knight takes the queen and checks Black pawn takes the Knight VVhite Knight takes the pawn at Kings bishops fourth house, &c. Gambett. lxxxiv. WHite Kings pawn two houses Black the same
White Kings bishops pawn two houses Black Kings pawn takes the pawn VVhite queens bish. to the queens bishops 4th. h. Black queen checks at the contrary Kings rooks fourth house VVhite King to his bishops house Black queens pawn one house VVhite Kings Knight to his bishops third house Black queen bishops to the contrary Kings Knights fourth house VVhite queens pawn two houses Black queen to the Kings rooks third house VVhite Kings Knights pawn one house vv Black queen checks at the contrary Kings rooks third house VVhite King to his bishops second house Black pawn takes the pawn and checks VVhite pawn takes the pawn Black queens bishop takes the Kings Knight VVhite kings bish▪ takes the kings bishops pawn and checks Black King to his queens house VVhite queen takes the queens bishop Black queen to her second house VVhite rook takes the cont. Kings rooks pawn Black rook takes the contrarary rook VVhite Kings bishop takes the Kings Knight Black rook checks at the contry Kings rooks second house VVhite King to his Knights house
vvv Black rook the queens bishops pawn White queen takes the Kings bishop and checks Black queen covers at the Kings house White queens bishop checks at the contrary K Knights fourth house Black King to his queens second house White Kings bishops checks at the contrary kings third house Black queen takes the Kings bishop VVhite quee checks at the contrary queens house Black King to the queens bishop third house VVhite queen pawn one house and checks Black queen takes the pawn VVhite pawn takes the queen and checks Black King takes the pawn VVhite queens knight checks at her bishop third house Black King to the queens bishops third house White queen checks at the Kings house Black King to the queens bishops fourth house VVhite queen checks at the contrary queens knights fourth house Black king to the contrary queens fourth house White queen gives mate. Gambett. lxxxv. Play the last▪ to this mark vv BLack queen to the Kings bishops third house White kings pawn one h.
Black queens pawn takes the Kings pawn White queens pawn takes the queens pawn vv Black bishop takes the Kings Knight VVhite queen takes the bshop Black qu. takes the p. at the Kings fourth h. White qu. takes the queens Knights pawn, &c. Gambett. lxxxvj. Play the last to this mark vv BLack qu. takes the pawn at the Kings fourth house White Kings Knight takes the queen Black queens bishop takes the queen White Kings Knight takes the Kings bishops p. Black queens bish. takes the queens bishops p. White Kings Knight taks the Kings rook Black Kings Knight to the rooks third house White queens bishop takes the pawn Black Kings Knights pawn one house White bishop takes the Knight Black bishop takes the bishop White queens Knight to her bishops third house Black Kings bishop to his Knights second h. White rook checks at the Kings house Black King to his bishops house White Kings Knight to the contrary Kings bi∣shops second house, &c.
Gambett. lxxxvij. Play the 84. to this mark vv BLack Kings Knights pawn two houses White Kings Rooks pawn two houses Black Kings bishops pawn one house White Kings pawn one house Black queens pawn takes the pawn White queens pawn takes the pawn Black bishops pawn takes the pawn White qu. to the contrary queens fourth house Black bishop takes the Kings Knight White queen takes the bishop Black queens bishops pawn one house VVhite Kings rooks pawn takes the pawn Black queen takes the pawn White Kings Knights pawn takes the pawn Black pawn takes the pawn White queens bishop takes the pawn Black queen to the Kings bishops third house White queens Knight to her bishops third house vv Black Kings bishop to his rooks third house White queens rook checks at the Kings house Black King to his bishops house White qu. bish. checks at the contr. queens 3d. h. Black King to his Knights second house White Kings rook checks at the Kings Knights h. Black Kings bish. covers at the Kings Kts 4th. h White rook takes the bishop and checks Black qu. takes the rook
White qu. checks at the cont. Kings bishops 2d. h. Black King to his rooks third house vvv White queen checks at the contrary Kings bi∣shops house, &c. Gambett. lxxxviij. Play the last to this mark vv BLack Kings bishop to the queens third h. White queens rook checks at the Kings h. Black Kings Knight covers at his Kings second h. White queens Knight to the Kings fourth house Black queen takes the queens bishop White queens Knight takes the queens bi. & checks Black queen takes the Knight White Kings R. to the cont. Kings rooks third h. Black queen takes the rook White qu. checks at the cont. Kings bishops 2d. h. Black King to his queens house White queen takes the Knight and checks Black King to his queens bishops house White Kings B. checks at the cont. Kings third h. Black queens Kt. covers at the queens 2d. h. White queen takes the Kings Knight and checks Black King to the queens Knights house White queen gives mate.
Gambett. lxxxix. Play the last to this marks. vvv WHite Rook to the contrary Kings 4th. h. Black qu. to the cont. kings rooks 4th. h. White rook checks at the contrary Kings rooks fourth house Black queen takes the rook White qu. checks at the contr. Kings bishops h. Black King to his Knight, third house White Kings Bish. checks at the queens third h. Black King to his Knights fourth house White queen gives mate. Gambett. xc. Play the 84. to this mark vvv BLack rook to his house White qu. takes the Kings bishop & checks Black queen covers at the Kings house White qu. B. checks at the cont. kings Kts. 4th. h. Black King to the queens second house White qu. takes the Kings Knights pawn & checks Black King to his queens bishops third house White queen takes the Kings rook Black queens Knight to her rooks third house White Kings B. checks at the cont. queens 4th. h. Black King to the queens Knights third huse White queen takes the queen Black rook takes the queen White queens Knight to the queens 2d. h. &c.
Gambett. xcj. Play the 84. to this mark vvv BLack queen to the contrary Kings rooks 3d. h. White queen takes the Kings bish. & checks Black King to the queens second house White qu. checks at the cont. Kings bishops 3d. h Black King to the queens bishops third house White queen checks at her bishops fourth house Black King to the queens second house White queens B. checks at the cont. Kings 2d. h. Black queen takes the Kings bishop White queen takes the queen and checks Black King takes the queen. White King takes the rook &c. Gambett. xcij. WHite Kings pawn two houses Black the same White Kings bishops pawn two houses Black Kings pawn takes the pawn White kings bish. to the queens bishops fourth h. Black Kings bishop to the Kings second house White queens pawn two houses Black Kings bishop check▪ at the contrary Kings rooks fourth house White King to his bishops house Black Kings Knights pawn two houses White Kings Knights pawn one house
Black pawn takes the pawn White pawn takes the pawn Black Kings bishop takes the pawn White queen to the cont. kings rook. fourth h. Black queen checks at the Kings bishops 3d. h. White Kings Knight covers at the Kings bishops third house Black queens pawn one house White queens bishop takes the Kings Knights p. Black queen to the Kings Knights third h. VVhite queen takes the queen Black Kings bishops pawn takes the queene VVhite King to his Knights second house, &c. Gambett. xciij. BLack Kngs pawn two houses VVhite the same Black Kings bishops pawn two houses VVhite Kings bishops pawn two houses Black Kings pawn takes the pawn VVhite queen checks at the contrary Kings rooks fourth house Black Kings Knights pawn one house covers VVhite queen to the Kings second house Black queen checks at the contrary Kings rooks fourth house VVhite King to the queens house Black Kings bishops pawn takes the Kings p. VVhite queen takes the pawn and checks
Black Kings bishop covers at the Kings 2d. h. VVhite Kings Knight to his bishops third h. Black queen to the Kings bishops third house VVhite queens pawn two houses Black Kings Knights pawn one house VVhite Kings rooks pawn two houses Black Kings rooks pawn one house VVhite Kings rooks pawn takes the pawn Black Kings rooks pawn takes the pawn White rook takes the rook Black queen takes the rook VVhite queen checks at the contrary Kings Knights third house Black King to the queens house VVhite Kings Knight takes the Kings Knights pawn Black queen takes the queens pawn and checks VVhite queens bishop covers at her second h. Black Kings Knight to his bishops third house VVhite Kings Knight checks at the contrary Kings bishops second house Black King to his house VVhite Kings Knight to the contrary queenes third house, and checks double Black King to the queens house White queen checks at the contrary Kings house Black Knight takes the queen White queen gives mate.
Gambett. xciv. White Kings bishops pawn two houses Black Kings pawn two houses White pawn takes the pawn Black queen checks at the contrary Kings rooks fourth house White Kings Knights pawn one house covers Black queen to the contrary Kings fourth h. White Kings Knight to the bishops third house Black queens Knight to her bishops third house White queens Knight to her bishops third house Black queen to the Kings bishops fourth house White Kings pawn two houses Black qveen to the Kings third house White queens pawn two houses Black queen to the Kings second house White queens bishop to the contrary Kings Knights fourth house Black queen to the contrary queens Knights fourth house White queens rooks pawn one house Black queen takes the queens Knights pawn White queens Knight to her Rooks fourth house FINIS.
The Stationer to the Ingeni∣ous Chesse-player. Gentlemen, FOr few else will buy this Book, I intreat you to correct these Errors, which the Printer hath let passe, by reason of the un∣usuall manner of the writing of the Gambets; the Litterall faults are of no consequence, and therefore omitted, and these being cor∣rected, will render the book as usefull as is desired by Your Servant, H: Herringman.
ERRATA. IN the first verses line the last, blot out wisely, p. 5. 1. 22. before it read else. p. 6. l. 6. p. 7. l. the last, for file r. board, p. 8. l. 9. for her r.  p. 13. l. the last, blot out by force. p 19. l. 13. r. contrary. ib. l. 15. r. rooks for kings. p. 23. l. 17. for first r. one p. 36. l. 9. for kings r. queens, ib. l. 11. for queenes r. kings, p. 42. l. 7. for second r. bishops third, p. 36. l. 1. r. contrary queens bishops paw t, p. 67. l. 11. for 39 read this, p. 68. l. 13. r. her bishops, p. 86. 1. the last, read White knight, p. 93. l. 12. r. his house, p. 100 l. 10. r. one house p. 107. l. 19. r. 76, p. 111. l. 3. r. White kings, p. 112, l. 2. r. takes, p. 28. l. 12. p. 32. l. 6. p. 50. l. 16. p. 58. l. 26. p. 72. l. 4, and at the beginning of Gambett. viiij, xxiv, xxxiij, xxxiv. xxxv, lviij. make this mark vvv p. 72. l. 7. and Gam∣bett. xlvj. lix make this mark vvvv.
