G655 R39570 18432014 107652
THE SCHEME OR DIAGRAMME Adjusted for Future use, in a larger Prodromus ere long to be published; and whereof this is then to be a Part. At present Printed for private Hands. A CONCATENATION of the Series of the Heads of the Grounds of the Scripture repre∣sented in this second Systeme by Scheme or Diagramme. ANd first of that great and prime Hyperphysical (that is) supernaturall and spiritual Ground GOD, demonstrating Himself to us by His first Outgoings and after Condescensions, necessarily to be thus in Concatenation con∣sidered. 1. God in Unitie of Essence, One GOD; The Abysse Unfathomable. 2. That Essence subsistentiated, (i.) specificated in Subsistencies, in order to Creation Emanant.
CREATOR, WORD, SPIRIT. Three Subsistencies For Nature, Grace, Glory. 3. Those Subsistencies (so specificated) in their Actual Out∣goings exerting (i.) putting themselves forth by their singular Energies, the Energie of each respectively. 4. Those Energies become in the Subject (the Creature) Operations: This in the Creation simply considered, the first Crea∣tion, the Creation of the First and Second Race of Intel∣lectuals. 5. Those Energies for their Operations on the Creature in the second Creation (that is, the Restauration of the second Race in their Nature laps't) concentred in the Person of a Medi∣ator: The prime specificate Subject of that Work, Our Lord Jesus Christ; the Beginning of the Creation of God, The new Crea∣tion. And then the Essence in the Subsistencies worketh by their Energies concentred in that Person of the Mediator, through Him and by Him transmitted unto Individuals in lapse, The second specificate Subject of that second Work; that, Per∣sons pertakers of that decayed Nature from the old Adam, might by those operations for Restauration, through and from Him be made and become New Creatures. Whence, The Essence is not the Subsistency: The Subsistency is not the Energie: The Energie is not the Operation: And yet, The Essence is virtually the Subsistency; The Subsistency is virtually the Energie; The Energie is virtually the Operation: Because, The Essence is the Abysse from whence the Subsistencies Emane; The Subsistencies are the Fountains from which the Energies flow; The Energies are the Causes (in the Subject) of all Operations.
In like manner, The Operation is not the Energie; The Energie is not the Subsistency; The Subsistency is not the Essence: And yet, The Operation is relatively the Energie; The Energie is relatively the Subsistency; The Subsistency is relatively the Essence. Because, The Operations (in the subject) are the Energies termina∣ted; The Energies are the Subsistencies limited; The Subsistencies are the Essence specificated. In result and summe (the work of the Creation simply con∣sidered pretermitted) The Operation Prime, for the new Creation or Restauration, is the Influence of the Essence, from the Subsistencies, by their Energies, concentred in the Mediator, from him, by a second operation upon lapsed nature, terminated in Particulars. And thus the Lowest hath (from that which is nearest to it self) of the Highest and Soveraign Being; what could not otherwise, either be derived from It, or, in that state of Lapse, be received by the Creature. Because, as Essence, in its Infinity Essential, (i.) as Essence, did not work ad extra (i.) outwardly to the Being of the Creature, but in the Subsistencies; Nor did the Subsistencies worke to the constitution or making up that Being in the Creature, in the state of Integrity, but by their Energies: So, neither could the Subsi∣stencies condescend to nature in the state of Lapse for Restaura∣tion; nor the Creature in that state, receive their Influence by their Energies immediately; had They not by those their respective Working Powers, sanctifying (in a Person prepared) the First Fruits of humane nature; as well Treasured up those their efficacies from Themselves, as Fitted them (treasured up) for the creatures Re∣ceiving them: The Principles, as thus in Him predisposedly uni∣ted, so their Glory for the creature (as it were) rebated in the Person of a Mediator.
Secondly, The Concatenation of the Heads of the Grounds of the Scripture, as they are a Narrative of the methods of that GOD in those his great Designes, the Creating, and Restoring of mankinde; and give us the Physicall and Morall Theologicall Grounds conteined in them (i.) the Naturall Heads and Result of and from them; which we represent in the severall Heads and Notes of the Inward Circle and Outward Epicycle. And first, as an Inlet to the whole, A Look before the Crea∣tion of the visible and Ani∣mate World; and so of the Creation of (the First Race of Intellectuals) Spirits, simple Essences; of which Some Adhered and stood These Confirmed, and their number to be made up by a second Race. A Look before the Crea∣tion of the visible and Ani∣mate World; and so of the Creation of (the First Race of Intellectuals) Spirits, simple Essences; of which Some kept not their first state. These Reprobated, for whom Tophet; whence the Devil and evil Angels. II. The Creation of the visible Animate-world; and of the Second Race of Intellectuals, Man, in the Protoplast, the First Adam; A Spiritual Essence Imbodied (i.) consisting of Inner and Out∣ward Man, to be made One with the simple Essences (Spirits unbodied) those of the First Race that stood: Their Innate Law, Covenant of Nature by Impresse upon Adhesion of the Inward Man; And the Appendixes preparatory (Sacrament, the Tree of Life; Sab∣bath, the Rest; Symboles of Grace and Glory) for consummation of the Person and Nature both in the Inner and Outward Man, up∣on the condition of that Covenant performed. III. The Inhibition, Probational of his Inward Adhesion (in that Covenant of Nature) by his Outward Obedience unto this Ne∣gative Law, for the fixing of that State of Nature in his Person, by the Annexing those Appendixes preparatory upon the con∣dition performed (i.) Adhering and Obeying: And the Threat annext, if otherwise, being an Antedated Sentence. IV. The Breach and Violation of that Covenant by Disadhesion, and of the Probational Inhibition likewise by Disobedience, com∣monly call'd the Fall: whereupon the Appendixes (because only preparatory) become suspended; The Threat before, now an Actual sentence, the Curse incurred; importing, upon Nature forfeited, Aversion or turning away the Face of his Creator from him; and
the Word withdrawing his Principle of Grace: Both these as the Paena damni or Privative Evil; And in demerit eternall Dereliction of his Intellectual Nature in that state; and casting it off into the state of Tophet (prepared for those of the First Race that kept not their first state) as the Paena sensus or Positive Evil of Punish∣ment; These relatively from the Covenant distinctly terminated in that his Inward Man; And from the Inhibition, Support with∣drawn, as the Privative Evil; and Mortality seizing on him, as the Positive, terminated in the Body or Outward Man; and from all these Glory in designe from the Spirit of necessary consequence come short of. V. The Interpellation, a Rescuing from the Execution of the Sen∣tence and Curse upon that Breach; And the State of Nature (as so rescued from the Paenasensus or Positive Evil) to be consider∣ed under the Paenadamni or Privative onely: Yea farther (upon the Creator's admitting that Interpellation) A Reprieve from the Sentence, and so the Curse for the present sublevated both to the Inward and Outward Man, by which a possibility for a follow∣ing Covenant for Restoring of Both. VI. The Restauration of Nature in the Inward and Outward Man (under the forfeiture to Justice suspended upon that Rescue and Reprieve) in Decree by the Covenant of Grace Primitive in the first Transaction, as the New Creation in the Second Adam by this the New Covenant (for Restauration and Revelation) betwixt the Creator Ordaining, and the Eternal Word undertaking to be In∣carnate by his Eternal Spirit immediately united to the Intellectu∣all Nature, and by it to be united to the Body. Whereby (the prin∣ciple of Grace withdrawn Restored to our Nature in that the second Adam) He became a fit Mediator Sponsor (in the Apostles phrase a Pledge) to perform the Condition of the first Adam by Ad∣hesion Inward, Obedience Outward. This not only Active to van∣quishing, but Passive also (for the satisfying the guilt of the first Adams non-performance) even to the suffering of Death; whence Raised & Glorified (as Reward upon the work done, taking posses∣sion in our nature of the Glory come short of) He was thereby made a fit Mediater Regenerator to restore the principle of Grace to particulars, and so gave them title to the Glory in Him prepared for them. For the efficacious Revealing and applying of which Grace to the Inward by the Outward Man, Outward Means and Ordinances are hereunto Codecreed in him, as Apostle by Unction
from the Father to Reveale, as the work given him to do: And so here, Nature sanctified, the Inner Man delivered from the Positive Evil, the Execution of the Sentence, and the state of Tophet, by translating of the Guilt and Curse upon the Satisfaction under∣taken: From the Privative Evil, the Creator now lifting up the light of his Countenance in his Decreed Ordinances for the resto∣ring of the Principle of Grace withdrawn, and Glory consecutive thereupon: And though the Outward Man still continued under its incurr'd Curse, Gen. 3.19. To dust thou shalt return, yet that also here sanctified upon Capitulation, that the Creator (to make it redeem∣able in us) would by a second work prepare it for the Eternal Word to assume, and so to become voluntarily and of himself Mediator to Redeem; and in it Annoynted, Apostle to Reveale. All from this (the beginning of time) by His cooperating Grace in Shadowes and Types in the severall Administrations (and from this Compact) having efficacie as Ordinances; though as to the Actuating them in the fullnesse of time Personally in and from Himself (as in the Flesh) they were onely in Decree. VII. The Actual Restauration of Nature compleat in the Covenant of Grace Primitive in the second Transaction, mutually made good in the Person of the Mediator, by the Creator's preparing, and so san∣ctifying the Humane nature or Body as to the Outward Man: And the Word by the Intellectual nature, the Inner Man (unto which from the first Transaction it was united) assuming it pre∣pared into union with his Divine Nature; so restoring the Principle of Grace in his Person to Humane nature compleat, both to the Inward and Outward Man: On whom thus constitu∣ted (His Duty, Obedience Active and Passive, performed) the Reward, Glory, is actually conferred: All according to that Re∣stauration in Decree. VIII. The Restauration of Particulars in the Covenant Derivative, as the Revelation and efficacious Application of the Covenant Primitive from Him, by complication of Ordinances and My∣sterie, into which coming as into the Kingdom of God, their Persons are by the Ordinances sanctified, and they renewed in Knowledge from Him, as Apostle by unction of the Holy Ghost, Jo. 14.26. teaching them all things: And then (upon the appropriate condition of Faith in its Advances) they receive from Him, as Mediator, by Influx of that his Renewing Nature, the Mystery, the Righteousnesse of the Kingdom, unto their Regeneration in their
Inward Man, upon and according unto that actuall Restauration in the Person of the Mediator. IX. That Restauration of Particulars by Influx, upon the ap∣propriate Condition of Adhering and Vanquishing (in the Cove∣nant Derivative Finish't) consummate as to the Inward Man in the Earnest from the Spirit sealing, The third Subsistency; and the Cutward man by that his work on it, (the Inward,) sealed to the Day of Redemption. X. The State of Nature by dissolution separate in and after Death, relative both to the Inward and Outward Man; the In∣ward (because by immediate impresse Sealed) immediately in actuall Blisse, a Blisse proportioned to this Separate state: And the Outward Man (because once united to the Inward, and by that Seal on it, sealed to its Redemption) resting in Hope. XI. The state of Nature, both Inward and Outward; (accor∣ding to that Seal and Rest in Hope) by the Resurrection reunited and perfectly restored; Sealed unto Translation. XII. The State of Nature thus, as before, perfectly restored in the Persons fully redeemed. Now declaredly Acquitted at the last Judgement, according unto the different Administrations un∣der which they were; whether Generall of the Creature, or spe∣ciall in their severall diversifications (that is) Patriarchall, Mo∣saicall, Propheticall, Interlegall, Evangelicall: Prime, under Christ and the Apostles; or Continued, in their Successors unto the End of the World. XIII. The Persons, thus by the Resurrection redeemed, after the Resurrection sealed unto Translation, and according unto their Administrations at the Last Judgement acquitted, Now finally Translated, as their consummate Glorification, and made One Hi∣erarchy with those of the first Race that Adhered and stood. This the Accomplishing of that first Designe, the End of the first Creation in the state and Covenant of Nature violate and frustrated by the first Adam's Dis-adhesion (explicated in his Dis-obedience) Now, and Thus repaired according to This counsell of the will of God in a second Designe, the end of their second and New Creation in the state and Covenant of Grace, made good and finisht by the Second Adam, Christ Jesus, (God blessed for ever) upon his Adhesion, Vanquishing, and Suffering (explicated by his Obedienc Active and Passive) according unto the Inter∣pellation and Covenant Primitive for the Redemption and Restauration of Mankinde.
Thirdly, The Consequentiall Heads of the Grounds of the Scripture, as they are involved in the Primitive Fundamentals, and unto which they are relatively consequentiall; which we have for distinction Chequered. THus the Trinity Supreame, Creator and Word; operating by Creation unto the constitution of the creature Intellectu∣all, as Fountains Prime; and Spirit, the Third Subsisten∣cy, distinct from either, which was (in Designe) the consum∣mating Principle to the second Race upon perseverance: in∣cluded in and evidenced by that Head, the Creation of the visible world: And yet farther, their distinct Personalities more ful∣ly appearing by the Interpellation and Covenant of Grace Pri∣mitive in the first Transaction, we consequently state it not till in this place, the close of the first Fundamentals, from which it hath its evidence, as included in them. The Consideration of those of the first Race that stood is chequered also, though but an Appendix to the sixth Head: And that it is properly unto it an Appendix, is confirmed by the Holy Ghost, in that he saith, Heb. 1.14. Are they not all ministring Spirits, sent forth for them who shall be Heirs of Salvation? that is, of those who are Claimers by this Covenant, which was properly A Co∣venant of Salvation, the Covenant of Grace Primitive in the first Transaction, which is the sixth Head. The Consequentials involved in the Heads of Mediatorship. THe Trinity of Condescensions for Redemption, The Creator, now compleat and actually Father by Generation, in over∣shadowing the Virgin and preparing a Body: The Word, now Sonne, by Incarnation of his Eternall Spirit (personally united to the Intellectuall nature, and by it to that Body prepared) the New Creature: The Spirit, now Consummator of Glory in full, actuated in the Person of the Mediator, and by Him merited for particulars, as the Seal of Grace and Earnest of Glory. All inclu∣ded in and resulting from the Covenant Primitive in the second Transaction, and the Covenant Derivative Finisht.
The Church Regenerate, the Ultimate End of this whole work of Condescentions for Redemption, as the New Creation of God: This Consequentiall upon the Covenant Derivative, and Covenant Derivative Finisht. The Consequentials involved in the Heads of Apostleship. SCripture comprehended in the Emergent Revelations unto the Patriarchs, Moses, the Prophets, Jesus Christ, and the Apo∣stles; The subject matter of Those Records; That Revela∣tion by them to us, onely Divine; And the Tradition of it from them to us, onely Authenticke. The Trinity of Condescensions for Administrations in the Aposto∣late of Jesus Christ: The Father, now Anoynting, as Lord: The Sonne Anoynted, as Servant: The Holy Ghost, the Energie of the Father by Procession from Him in fullnesse on the Sonne, and by and from Him in the severall dispensations, the Principle of speciall Administrations, for Revelation; included in the Cove∣nant Derivative, as the subject matter of his Apostleship, and implied in the principle of this House of Administrations. The Subadministrators, by whom that Apostleship of Jesus Christ was executed in all Ages, to whom the word of Recon∣ciliation was committed, and with whom it was to remaine and be continued unto the end of the world; both as to the prime Or∣dinances, The Power of sending and Government; and secondary Ordinances, the Administration of the Word and Sacrament, by those that are so sent. The Church Congregate, the Ultimate End of this whole work of Condescensions for Administrations, and so the Last in these con∣sequentials; that He might sanctifie and cleanse it with washing of water by the Word (the Initiating Sacrament to this Church) that He might (as Apostle) present it unto himself (as Mediator) a Church, not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing; Eph. 5.26, 27.
The Influence of the Spirituall Theologicall Grounds (represented in the inner Lines) their Juncture and Union with the Naturall and Morall Theologicall Heads, on which they terminate themselves. HAving thus given in summe, the , or Narrative of the Things as they are, as well Hyperphysicall, as Physicall and Morall, with their relative Consequentials, separate and apart: we farther desire, for the farther comprobating of the Scheme, to suggest the , or manner how in Juncture with themselves and each other, they so become one entire Body, as we have represented them in It. And first, in all humble confidence presuming upon that De∣monstration (which, by his Outgoings) the Infinite, Immortall, Incomprehensible Godhead hath given of it self; we do in confor∣mity thereto suppose, and (by those Lines issuing from the Essence, and terminated on the Subsistencies) expresse Their Co∣essentiall Inbeings, their Coeternall and Coequall Emanations (i.) Flowings forth from It. The termination of those Lines upon the Figures 1, 2, 3. speak∣eth not their Priority or Posteriority in order of Nature (they be∣ing so Coequall and Coeternall) but onely sheweth their Order of Working, demonstratively evident from their after-works in their subsistentiall Actings and energeticall Operations, according to their distinct respective specifications, for Nature, Grace, Glory: Be∣cause there must be Nature (i.) Being from the Creator, before there can be Impresse upon that Being (i.) Grace from the Word: And there must be Nature and Grace from both, before They can be anneal'd or fix'd by the Third, the Spirit, to make that Grace become Nature (i.) Glory Inchoate, in the Earnest con∣summate here, or Glory in full (i.) absolutely consummate upon Translation. And secondly, with the same confidence (because upon the same grounds, of the Subsistencies in Their Outgoings demon∣strating themselves) we do determine of their respective Ener∣gies (i.) their Working Powers or Spirits, One with themselves, and therefore distinct from each other, as Themselves are. And though One with themselves and distinct from each
other; yet the same Energie (from One and the same Subsistency diversifying it self for operations towards and upon the Creature) becometh varied in Each and all those Operations, according to the capacity of the Subject in its respective states of Constitution and Restauration in its severall Advances. Nor is it without reason that we call them Energeticall Opera∣tions (not simply Energies and Operations) because, as in and from the Subsistencies, they are properly Energies; so in and up∣on the Creature, properly Energeticall Operations: as we shall shew you in their union with their Heads, with which they must be read, as in the Order and manner of Reading we have di∣rected. All which Subsistentiall Actings, and Energeticall Operations, we represent by the Lines drawn from the Subsistencies, termina∣ting on their severall Heads; which we are now cursorily to run over. Of which, the first Three, give us the Constitution of the first Race of Intellectuals Consummate; that is, every of the Subsisten∣cies having their Energeticall Operations in the Creation of that Race by Constitution fixt: In constitution we say, as deriving their Nature (which we in them call simply Essence) from the Crea∣tor; their Grace (which in them we call Specification) from the Word; their Glory (which we in them call Consummation in constitution) from the Spirit: As giving us the reall ground laid by the wisedom of God in their forming, for his indispensible and Absolute Reprobation of them, if they should Apostatize; in that All their Operations being, as we have said, fixt; All must be equally incensed, and so there could be no Interpellator to stop the Ju∣stice, much lesse Mediator to undertake for them: Heb. 2.16. He in no wise lald hold on the Angels (i.) to deliver them, but took the seed of Abraham. The next Three speak the Constitution of the Secohd Race, not consummate: Their Nature, complex'd of Inner and outward Man (from the Creator) onely constituted, (i) fixt; Their Grace (from the Word) in Principle not fix't (because to its fixing it prerequired a Condition on Man's part to be performed) And Their Glory (from the Spirit) which should have fixed Grace and consummated Nature, in Designe onely; which we have made the Line to say, in that it comes not home, because the Energie it self could not be attained, but upon perseverance: And
this gives us the like reall ground of the possibility of restoring this Race, if they should Fall, because their Constitution was not in their creation consummate. The Inhibition hath no Energeticall line terminating on it, be∣cause not convoying any thing to his nature, but onely as of Positive Precept, a Negative Law, laying hold on him, as from the Lord and Soveraigne of his Person. Nor hath the Fall any, It being his Defection from the God of Nature, by his breach of the Covenant of Nature, and his Rebellion against the Soveraigne of his Person, by his transgression of the Law: yet the Consequens thereof, being proportioned to his con∣stitution by the Energies (to wit, his Nature forfeited into the hands of the Creator, from whom it derived its constitu∣tion; his Grace in Principle, the Energie, from the Word, withdrawn; because (the condition unperformed) not fix't; And his Glory in designe, from the Spirit, come short of, because He persevered not) minister unto us the reall ground, why the Justice of the Creator onely remaineth to be satisfied, and mankinde, in the Protoplast, delinquent to him alone. But that the Justice of the Creator might be satisfied, order of of nature requireth, that It first be suspended: And that Suspension must as necessarily precede the Restauration in Decree; as satisfa∣ction made good must precede the Actuall Restauration. And here we are cast upon disquisition, How Mankinde in the first Adam shall for the present be rescued from the Threat, now a sentence? And how the Justice may be superseded, for the making way unto Redemption and Restauration to ensue? And this we are necessitated unto, that we may make up the Chasme or Hiatus in the Primitive and first Truths, betwixt the State of Nature, under the Guilt upon breach of Covenant, and Transgression by the Fall, with the Sentence thereupon; And the Redemption from that Justice of the Creator, and Restauration of the Race by another Covenant, A Covenant of Grace. For though, from the consticution of this second Race, we have discovered and evidenced, that by the wisedom of God it was provided, that their Lapse, if it should become actuall, should not put them beyond the possibility of Restoring, yet must that in∣curred Sentence, be revers'd as to the delinquent, and that Justice stopt; which we cannot referre either to the Soveraigne Love of the Creator, with some; or to His soveraigne Beneplacit, or
sovereigne Mercy with others; because (Man being in reall Guilt and under an actuall sentence,) it would crosse those his other Attributes of Soveraigne Holinesse, Justice and Truth, already fixt in the Covenant and Threat. To salve therefore that crossing of Attributes, we have by dis∣quisition found, and do give another expedient, which we call The interpellation of the Eternall Word (so the Line speaks it,) God of God (that is) God the Word (the second Subsistencie) of God in Essence (not Christ, the Word Incarnate, which was the Per∣son of the Mediator) Interposing himself; And this putting himself in the Gap, was His the Word's work solitarily; A Rescue upon his self worth. And this, besides the salving of that Crossing of the Attri∣butes, gives us in consequence First, A Plumbe-Line, by which we sound and fathome in the after Capitulation, the depth of the wisedom of the Creator, in transmitting (not disanulling) the Curse, in delivering (not absol∣ving) the delinquent; and by that mortality (introduced upon the Temptation and Fall) destroying the Enemy himself: and discover the Bottom upon which the submission of God the Word, is also grounded, for making satisfaction unto that Justice, because from It he rescued mankinde. Secondly, It reacheth unto us a Jacob's-staff, whereby we may take the true height of the Divine Nature of Jesus Christ the Mediator, and demonstratively conclude (from his satisfaction made) Him to be the same Eternall Word then Incarnate, which now Interpellated and Capitulated. This Head, thus discover'd, will be Fruitfull for the eviden∣cing of many other particulars, which have their first Root in it, which we do at present pretermit, not willing to anticipate our selves in our larger compleat Prodromus, nor in our after larger work. Upon the Covenant Primitive in the first Transaction, two Lines terminate from the Creator and Word; These two Subsi∣stencies being the onely Parties interessed in that Covenant, (whose respective works, the words on the Lines speak) which doth import, that the Third Subsistency, as to capitulation, is not concerned; because his work was but in Designe in the Constitu∣tion of the first Adam, by the Covenant of Nature; and therefore but consecutive (upon the work undertaken) in Decree, and not till
executed, to be actually the consummating Principle in and to the second Adam by this Covenant of Grace. And this with the Interpellation, we are bold to affirm, the Be∣ginning of the Gospel, The New Creation, and to be intended by the Foundation of the VVorld, and by all the like Gospel expres∣sions: This being the Foundation of the World of Regeneration simply and properly so called, as in Gospel sense: Yea and the Foundation of the very visible world, by the same Figure that the Holy Ghost using hath sanctified to my hand, when he affirmeth, Heb. 11.19. that Abraham received his sonne Isaac from the  after a Figure. For if the rescuing of Isaac from the sacrificing sword, and the providing a Ramme to be sacrificed in his stead, made that his Deliverance to be a Resurrection: How much more shall this Interpellationall Rescue, and Compact for preparing a Ransome un∣to Man, the Heir and Lord of the Creation, with the whole Fabrick (provided for him) forfeited by the Fall, be accounted both to him and it, a New Creation? Trinity Supream, as a Consequentiall from the Primitive Fun∣damentals, we have stated in the Systeme of Consequentials. Note first, that, that Line to the Interpellation, and Those two to the Covenant Primitive, are not Energeticall, but Personall Acts: For, as Personall Consultation was necessary before they did exert their Energies to Constitution; so, man having here destroyed himself, there is a like reason for This their second Consultation, be∣fore they could exert their Energies to Restauration. Secondly, Nor is that which we draw from those of the first Race, which adhered and stood; but only doth denote by the words upon it, when they became Ministring spirits, as a farther justification of our calling of them Intellectuals there, and not An∣gels, till here. Those Three, that fall upon the Covenant Primitive in the se∣cond Transaction, are purely Energeticall; the Two first qualifying him for Duty of Mediator Sponsor undertaken, which we there∣fore reade downwards: The Third crowning him with the Re∣ward appropriate to the work of Mediator Regenerator upon the Duty performed, which we therefore reade upward. Of the other Three, which fall upon the Covenant Derivative (the subject Matter of his Apostleship) the Two first are to qualifie Him for that his Office Apostolicall, and are therefore to be read
downwards; the Third crowning him with Reward, upon the same ground with the former, to be read likewise upward. The words Restauration executed, and Revelation executed, (which head the points of each) refer you back to the second Note in the Epicycle, of their being coactuated in their respective Prin∣ciples (by which He was fitted for each work) as That doth to the Covenant in the first Transaction, when they were codecreed. That single Line, which from the Spirit, the Third Subsistency, fal∣leth on the Covenant of Grace Derivative Finish't, sheweth, that the Mediator having meritoriously attained it in his Person, for our Nature, we in conformity performing our respective Conditions, have in consequence at last from that subsistency, an Impresse seal∣ing us to Redemption, proportioned to this state, which that Re∣verse Line speaketh, pointing to the Redemption it self in the Resurrection, The Redemption of our Bodies, Rom. 8.23. The next from the second Subsistency, the Word, terminated on the Church Regenerate, doth give us, by the Scripture on it, the true and reall ground of Communication of Properties, to be between the Eternall Word, and the Person of the Mediator. For though the Body was prepared by the Father, by the over∣shadowing of the Holy Ghost, his Energie, Luk. 1.35. yet it was still as from That, but the Blood of man (though of the Sonne of God, Sonne of God and sonne of Man being coincident) the seed of Da∣vid according to the flesh, Rom. 1.3. But when assumed into union Hypostaticall, or Plastick, with the Word; His Blood (viz.) the Mediator's, becometh so the Blood of God (viz. of God the Word) and this People purchased by his own Blood, Acts 20.28. The next Three give the varied Operations of the respective Energies, as the Subject (under and by their foregoing operations respectively) is prepared for This work, the Resurrection; and by these their present Operations, predisposed for the Next, their fu∣ture Glorification. Thus: 1. Nature in the Primitive state, constituted by the Energie of the Creator; becomes forfeited, by the Fall; reprieved, by the Interpellation; sanctified in Decree, by the Compact in its first Transaction; then actually sanctified in the Person of the Mediator, (as to the Outward man or Body) by the overshaddowing of the Holy Ghost in the Covenant in its second Transaction; and, from that alteration thus wrought in Him, Beleevers in Particular san∣ctified;
as they come under the Covenant Derivative then sealed to its Redemption in and by the Covenant Derivative Finisht; And so Nature Consummate in the Earnest. 2. Grace in the Primitive state, the Energie of the Word in Principle, but not fixt; by the Fall, withdrawn; the Interpellation maketh way for its restoring in Decree, by the Compact; as That in the Decree maketh way for the Actuall restoring of it in the Person of the Mediator (by the Divine nature from the Word assuming our nature into Plastick union in the second Trans∣action) by and through whom it becometh actually conveyed, by Influx, unto particulars, as they receive the mystery, in the Co∣venant Derivative; in the strength of which they performing the conditions in conformity required (i.) adhering and vanqui∣shing, the Covenant Derivative is finish't (i.) fixt in and on them; And so Grace perfected in the Inward man. 3. Glory, the Energie of the Spirit, in the Primitive state in Designe onely; by the Fall come short of; yet, by the Interpellation, in order to an Advance; and consecutively restored in Decree, by the Compact in its first transaction, as actually consequent (upon the work done) in the Mediator's assumption into Glory in the se∣cond Transaction; And in consequent merited for us, and applied unto us in the Covenant Derivative Finisht, the Seal in the Ear∣nest from the Spirit; And so Glory Inchoate. Note first, That the Fall (as the frustrating of the first De∣signe) was the Decay of all these in the Person of the first Adam; The Interpellation, as the Occasionall ground, and the following Covenant, as the Fundamentall of the Restauration of them; were Subsistentiall Acts betwixt themselves, and so forensick to Our Natures: The actuall restoring them (in the second Transaction) in the Person of the Mediator, was by Energies and Energeticall Operations, and so intrinsick to our nature, but terminated in his Person: The subsequent Operations in their severall Advan∣ces (as being Energeticall likewise) are intrinsick to our natures in our own persons, as we encreasing with the encreasings of God, are made conformable to the Image of his Sonne. Note Secondly, That in all these severall Personall Acts and Ener∣geticall Operations (on this side the Fall) in their prequalifying Advances; The Succeeding are not attainable (ordinarily) untill the Acts and Operations immediately foregoing, have had their Designed Works on or in relation to our na∣ture
and Persons; because the foregoing onely do predispose and render the subject (in and on whom They are wrought) capable of the exalted operations immediately following. Thus the severall foregoing Operations, gradually heightning and advancing our Nature and Persons, untill Nature and Grace be consummate in the Earnest, we do by that Sealing rest in Hope; then raised, according to that Hope, in this The First Resurre∣ction; we have from the Creator by his Energie (in a varied Operation) Nature, in the state of Integrity constituted, now Restored; Grace from the Word in like manner, then in Principle, but not fixt; now in Principle, and fixt; Glory from the Spirit, then likewise in Designe onely, now secured: This being the seal∣ing to the Day of Translation, intercepted by the Fall. Thirdly, In concurrence with this latter Note, this we must also farther suggest and add; that as the Prequalifying Operation is of the Nature of Disposition unto the after Advance; so by the after exalted Operation, the former Prequalification becometh to be of the Nature of Habit. And being thus brought to the Point where we first set forth, and from whence we departed (the proper sense of the Apo∣stles word , which hath hitherto been rendred, the Restitution of all things, Acts 3.21.) with this farther advantage, that we are sealed to Translation; we have in our actuall Transla∣tion (in consequence of that Seale) Nature, by the Creator, then onely restored; now by a varied operation, Exalted: That Grace from the Word, then onely in principle and fixt, now Glo∣rified: That Glory, from the Spirit, then onely secured, now con∣summate. Then come in those Notes, Of which the first, (The Subsistencies themselves now Comprehensible, because Face to Face, &c.) occasioneth us upon review of that Attribute of Incomprehensibility (the Boundary of created natures) to give you in scale, when and upon what grounds in predication of God (thus di∣versly considered) in Essence, Subsistencies, Energies and Ope∣rations, the Person of the Mediator with his Energies and Ope∣rations,) it becometh moveable, when fixt (i.) when He is In∣comprehensible, when and how Comprehensible unto us, viz. GOD in Essence, absolute simply and in Himself, Incomprehen∣sible; The manner of the Inbeing and Emanation of the Subsi∣stencies so also.
But then, because the Essence, by the Emanation (as a nearer approach to the creature) manifesteth it self subsistentiated; And the Subsistencies render themselves comprehensible, medi∣ately by their Energies, in their Operations immediate; there∣fore when we shall have past all the Advances of the varied Operations, and so become made fit by Glorification for the re∣ceiving of their Energies immediately: Nature (which Adam forfeited) fully redeemed and exalted; the Principle of Grace (from which He fell) by Restauration fixt and Glorified; the Principle of Glory (of which He came short of) as of Auction, secured and Attained; and so we Consummate: The Subsistencies themselves must necessarily then become Comprehensible. And from this ground, we have the sense of the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 13.12. Face to Face, and Know as Known: which we have therefore made the close of this Note. And that the Apostle's words (having found their proper ground) do na∣turally speak their sense to be as we have given it, is most evident; because Comprehensibility being formally an Attribute upon Com∣munion betwixt God and the Creature, Consequentiall upon his Being; and not (as the other Attributes from God unto the Creature) Constitutive of his Being: It must therefore necessa∣rily follow, that (his Being once restored, and God taking us into Immediate Communion of the Subsistencies, the End of the whole work) He then turn his Face unto us, and we have Immediate vision (i.) Face to Face: The Communication under Moses his Administrations, being but his back Parts of Types to Ours; And Ours, The Gospel administrations, but mediate in the Face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor 4.6. (i.) by his Energies, as Mediator and Apo∣stle; not Face to Face of the Subsistencies by their Energies. Though when we come thus Face to Face, and that the Sub∣sistencies become thus comprehensible; Incomprehensibility is even then and afterwards fixt to the Essence, as that Abysse unfa∣thomable, that state of Godhead Incomprehensible; accor∣ding to the second Note; Essence, as They in it (in the Inbeing) It in them (Subsistentiated and Emaned) now and for ever incom∣prehensible.
The Consideration of Our Lord Jesus Christ, as represented in this Scheme, relative to his distinct Offices and Works of Mediatorship and Apostleship. FRom these Inward Lines, and their junctures with them∣selves and the rest of the Body, as the Spirit and Informing part of the whole; That which next occurres, is the con∣sideration of our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom onely we can blesse God, because through Him onely God hath been thus good unto us; in whom all these Advances being first wrought, they through Him are (as we have said) transmitted unto us. Him therefore we represent, I. Standing upon that direct Energeticall Line from the Word, the Divine constitutive Principle, by which He assu∣med our Nature; so the words on the Line speak, The Eter∣nall Spirit by which He offered up Himself (i. His Humane Nature) without spot, Heb. 9.14. for by the same, by which He offered up Himself, He must assume it. II. Plac't betwixt the severall Energeticall Lines, relatively qualifying Him for each Office and Work, and conferring the respective appropriate Rewards on Him as Mediator for Man to God, in the Covenant of Grace Primitive in the second Trans∣action; and as Apostle from God to Man for promulgating the Covenant Derivative. III. Standing also upon his Administrations Patriarchall, Mo∣saicall, Propheticall (in which Revelation in Shadow, Redemption in Type) Interlegall as in John Baptist's Ministry, preparing his way beforehis Face: And Evangelicall, in which Revelation, be∣fore in shadow, is now in Substance; Redemption, before in Type, is now in Truth. The Consideration of the Crosse Lines, or Lines of Commensuration. THe Crosse Lines (of which in the third Note in the order and manner of Reading) are Commensurations of the se∣verall states under those Heads, where they terminate: we have only this to advert, that, as the words at either end of
them, separately considered, are the Gages of that state; so relatively considered, they are the Graines of difference which bal∣lance them. Thus first, though onely Confirmation, was the state of the first Race, which adhered and stood, yet Confirmation of the second Race could not have ballanc't them without Translation. Secondly, The Gage of the state of Nature in Integrity, be∣ing (as on the Commensuration Line) Ingenerate and unto Glo∣ry but determinable, presupposing, the first Designe of God, and That frustrated by the Lapse; neverthelesse then (though sup∣posing the Interpellation and Covenant for restoring of it) can∣not That State of Nature be commensurate, but by the state of Nature in and after the Resurrection; and yet This state hath its graines of difference, Regenerate for Ingenerate, for Determinable Determinate. Thirdly, The State of Nature in the Fall (because Death in the Root) commensurate with the state of Nature in Death; with which it cannot be ballanc't, untill what Here was in Root by the Fall, hath passed over all There by Death; the Merit here, the wages there. Fourthly and lastly, That the Gentiles (under the Generall Ordinances, and their Instructing Paedagogie of the creature-Ad∣ministrations, with the work of the Law written in their hearts) if working Righteousnesse (according to the purport of the words on the Commensurating Line) are (as to the Common Interest of Eternall salvation) in equall ballance with the Jew and Christian, saving that these latter had their Prerogatives (as the Graines of difference) the speciall Adminisirations; The One, the Adoption, the Glory, the Covenants; Rom. 9.4, 5. The Other, 3. the Kingdom of God and the Righteousnesse thereof, Matth. 6. as speciall assistances, and more conducible meanes (though varied unto Each respectively) unto that one Common End of All, Sal. vation.
The Import of those Words, THE INTELLECTUAL WORLD. LAstly, that you see in Capitals these Words, THE INTEL∣LECTUAL WORLD, taking place between GOD in Essence, the Subsistencies and their Energies in their first Operations (for constitution of the First and Second Race) as situate above them; And separating Those Above (as the First part of the Scale) from the Subsistentiall Actings, and the same Energies and their Operations varied, for the Constitution of Jesus Christ Mediator and Apostle, upon and after consultation to restore (the second Part of the Scale) together with those Divine Principles in Jesus Christ constituted, and for execution of that second Consultation to us ward by Him exerted; in whose Person, as the Restauration was first wrought, so by Him was it to be per∣fected in us (the third Part of the Scale) Both these latter gradu∣ally in situation, as in order of nature, beneath Them. We do assign unto Our Spirit, The Intellectuall Nature, its pe∣culiar Object (purely spirituall, abstract from matter, and with∣out the mediation of sense) the Knowledge and Acknowledgement of God, as represented in this Scheme: For want of which, we do but groape after God, not knowingly contemplate or adore Him. For how can we ascend unto Him, but by the same scale He descendeth unto us? And hence it followeth, that That great Work and last End, Our Regeneration, is lesse evidently quickning, and the Means thereto, the Ordinances, are lesse effi∣cacious. And we must farther say congruous with this Analogy, that the not understanding the first Part of the Scale, GOD in Essence, Subsistencies, Energies, Operations to the constitution of the crea∣ture, hath been the Prime cause of the not understanding of the Second, viz. The Subsistentiall Actings in the Interpellation and Covenant of the first Transaction, the Energies and Operations in the Lines terminating on the Covenant in the second transaction, as to his Mediatorship, and the Covenant Derivative as to his Apo∣stolate: These being but their Operations upon Condescension, which cannot have their Light but from a consideration had of these their first Actings. And the confused or Indistinct understanding of this Second, hath been a like cause of not understanding the
Third, the Operations from the Mediator and Apostolate, by his re∣spective Energeticall Operations to us ward and on us, the subject matter exhibited in the Covenant Derivative, and Covenant Deri∣vative Finisht; This being but the Deriving unto us, what was Treasured up in Him. And in as much as This Scale of the Intellectuall in its Juncture with the rest, is indeed the Spirit quickning the whole, we may af∣firm, that all Our Errors, as well in Judgement and Faith, as in Pra∣ctise and Manners, in the other natur all Theologicall Heads and mo∣rall Theologicall Grounds (in the Circle and Epicycle modelled) have arisen principally from the not aright discerning of these. And it would be no hard matter to evidence in particulars, where and how from some Misprision or other (here in Root) of the Intellectuall; each and every of our misguided Actings in Mo∣rals, Oeconomicks, Politicks, as well of sacred as civill cognisance, have burgeoned and put forth. The Review of the whole. ANd now let the whole be viewed, From the Abysse of Essence to the Operations, and the Person of Jesus Christ, with his Energies and Operations on us: From the Look before the Creation, to the state of Glorification: From the Judge∣ment of the first Race, to the Judgement of the second Race; From the state of nature in its Primitive constitution, to the state of na∣ture in the first Resurrection: From the state of nature in the Fall of the first Man, to the state of nature in Death, the condition of all men: From the Covenant of Restauration in Decree, to the same Covenant derived unto us, and Finisht in us: From the Tri∣nity Supream, to the Trinity of Condescensions: From the Gentile in the Gener all Ordinances, to the Jew and Christian in all the speciall Administrations. What should I mention particulars? Look on the Generals, as the Circle in the Epicycle; and let the whole be considered in its Symmetry and proportion, as it hath wrought it self in the Scheme, A Systeme of Truths purely naturall, and ac∣cording to the order of nature; without any Artifice at all in the framing; we having only followed (not forced) Them, whilest they in their naturall Method (as things) formed and brought them∣selves into Diagramme Mathematicall; that the Inward subject matters might more efficaciously (by demonstrating the Seri∣ptures
Designe) inform the Reason, when (fixt according to the order of nature in the outward Form and Figure) they shall be transmitted unto it by the convinced Sence; that so, Sence, Rea∣son, and Revelation, may all conspire to the stating of each and every particular Truth. Thus see and consider, Essence in the Subsistencies Emanant by their Energies consti∣tuting a First Race; and upon the Apostacy of some of that Race creating a Second in a Condition Inconsummate; Upon their Lapse, (the Lapse of the second Race, in the Protoplast) the first and second Subsistencies (because They onely had their Prin∣ciples actually in the constitution of the first Adam) in and by their Subsistentiall Actings, laying their Designe for the Restauration of this second Race: This Decreed, Executed in the second Adam, re∣vealed by Him, and accomplished in the earnest, then in the Full in the creature: This creature, thus restored by the Regeneration, and consummately Glorified (All by the varied Operations of the Subsistencies by their Energies) shew in Figure, the Designes, the Degrees and Steps of this creatures Constitution, Restoration, Advance, and Exaltation. Next see and consider, Tophet in its situation, A Work not decreed, but emergent up∣on Their Apostacy, and extraneous to the Designe of God in the Creation of that first Race; as The Sentence from him, was aliene. They first become Devils and Evil Angels in consequent of their Fall; Reserved in chains of darknesse in consequent of their Sentence, unto the Judgement of the great Day for the full of their punishment, And then become Tempters in that state to the first man, and ever afterwards in Enmity with the seed: Thus in that Head and Labels. And the Last Judgement in proportioned situation opposite, because an Abdication of that first Race, and at once a Sentence and Abdication of those of the second Race, workers of Iniquity, then finally Reprobated, imported by the Labell, Go ye Cursed into Ever∣lasting Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Concerning which Last Judgement, I shall at present onely suggest this one thing; that It hath and must keep the seaventh place in the close of the Heads of the Ordinances, as the First Re∣surrection is the seaventh to those of the Mediatorship; because It dependeth on those Ordinances which the whole Body of the
Head importeth; Giving us farther also in the close, a Distinction of the Kingdom of Apostolate, which he is to resigne after this, and to lead us into that merited Kingdom of the Father, prepared for us before the Foundation of the World simply considered, exprest by that part of the Labell, Come ye blessed of my Father, &c. Matth. 25.34. when those who claime It by Covenant, acquitted at the Last Judgement, are gathered into One with those of the first Race confirmed. Then see and consider, The Head of the Fall, upon the same ground not decreed of God, and so the Root of Death not made by God, He made not Death, saith the Wise man, Wisd. 1.13. but man; Adam giving him∣self by sinne into the power of Satan; Death came in by Sinne, Rom. 5.12. And hence we see how Satan came to have the Power of Death, Heb. 1.14. (to wit) by Adam's admitting of the tempta∣tion, which was Death in the Root: It was indeed a Breach, by which man was going forth to the state of those in the Labell re∣served in Chaines, but by the Interpellation made up, that all might be saved by the Covenant, as to the Inward man, if they perform the Condition, though committed to Satan (by the Sen∣tence, to Death thou shalt return,) for the destruction of the Flesh, the Outwardman. And the Head of the state of Nature in Death, the Execution of that Sentence (in opposite situation and like proportioned Fi∣gure) is a Going out of the Land of the Living; but made up also by the first Resurrection; as That of the Fall by the Interpellation. And the state of Nature in the Fall, with this state of Nature in Death (being the terminating puncts of the Epicycle) speak∣eth, that the matter contained in that Epicycle, viz. The Ordinan∣ces principled by the unction, (relating unto the Reparation of that Darknesse contracted in the Fall) are (though in their severall diversifications) to continue untill now the State of Nature in Death, as the Day of Grace vouchsafed by God to mortals in and by the Ordinances, the lifting up the Light of his countenance up∣on us. In like manner, as the Interpellation and Covenant in the Circle, did primarily relate unto that Death into which we were sunk, but to be delivered from (in the first Resurrection) by Him that by the Union of Natures brought Immortality to light (which he published in the Gospel) and in whom, whilst
Our Life is hid, and we by the Spirit sealed, our flesh may in this, even the state of Death, rest in Hope. The Notes under the Diagram. THe two Notes, the One concerning Decrees Eternall (as they speake) of Election and Reprobation, the Other of Attri∣butes, are next to be considered; which because we fore∣see may raise some prejudice, being here as Notes in barre, and in the foot of our Diagramme; which in other Systemes and Bodies of Divinity have been presupposed for Truths, and laid as Praecognita and Primo-creaita to be foreknown and first assented unto. We are for the justifying of our method in these and other particulars coincident with them (viz. God in unity, Trinity, by Generation and Procession, Decrees, Attributes and Scripture) by all others laid together as Prolegomena and certain Premissa (as we have said) to be first believed, necessitated to desire the Ingenu∣ous and unprejudiced Reader to consider, that this having been a work purely of disquisition, we could not without violence to the nature of Primitive Truths (which we hold sacred) or distort∣ing their Order (which were piacular) represent them otherwise or in other order, than they gave themselves. Wherefore we first consider God in Unity, not as a Postulatum to be premised, but as the first Truth: Trinity hath its place as a Consequentiall inferred as to us from their works ad extra, The Creation and Restauration, Generation referred to the Per∣son of the Mediator; Procession to the Apostolicall Principle and Work. And for Decrees of Election and Reprobation (our first Note) in their notion (of Eternall) waved; we give in supplement, the Compact betwixt the Creator and Word, and the Decree there∣upon in the Covenant of Grace Primitive in the first Trans∣action; And because there limited to his Person, when He should be Incarnate, and become a Mediator, and to our nature, but as He assumed it, we referre the more explicit consideration of this De∣cree of Election and Reprobation as it may concern, and lay hold on us in particulars, unto the Covenant (with us) of Grace Derivative, and Covenant of Grace Derivative Finisht, on which They must necessarily depend.
For the Attributes (the second Note) that they should be treated of onely, where they emerge, is so congruous both with the Word and Thing, that we suppose the speaking it onely, is suffi∣cient to evince it. Yet our Diagramme therefore representeth in view onely and overtly, the Attributes Essentiall, as the onely and all that are appropriate to the Essence, viz. Infinite (the genus to Eternity, Immensity, with such like,) Immortall (i.) self-living; and (with reference to the Creature) All Incomprehensible. Then the Attributes Subsistentiall from their Inbeing, Coessen∣tiall; and from their Emanation (as Subsistencies Emanant and Emaned) Coequall and Coeternall: which implyed, that all the other Attributes (viz. Goodnesse, Omnipotency, Omnipresency, Wisedom, Justice, which we (according to the nature of the thing) call Operating Attributes, that is in their Personall or Ener∣geticall Actings exerted, either in the Creation or Administration of the creature, must be delitescent and covert unto us, untill they disclose themselves in the respective Heads, where they are ex∣erted. Nor could we be satisfied in our selves with the imposing of Scripture with the rest of their Prolegomena; seeing we could not state it demonstratively, untill we had summed up the Emergent Revelations, of which it is a Sacred Record; those Revelations from God making good by parts these Principles; and that Body of Scripture from Men, divinely inspired and assisted, making good unto us those Revelations. But it will be sufficient at present to say, that these thus distri∣buted (according unto that order which they have in nature) is a sufficient warrant for our thus disposing of them in Dia∣gramme; which we shall more fully assert, when (by the Conti∣nuance of that grace that is given us of God) we shall, on these Foundations, raise the superstructure, and finish the Building in our larger work. The Use of all is, First, As the generall of the Designe, by this Series of things (which are the first Truths) to give in Diagramme, an Entire Summe or Body of Divinity Reall, that is, a Series of all Primitive Truths Theologicall, neither Defective, nor Redundant, evidenced by their Concatenations. And then this Diagramme by its exact Concatenations justifying it self, as before;
We do secondly propose it (as the Fundamentals in Modell) to be the ground of demonstration unto all Dogmaticall and Pra∣cticall Truths (according to the Title) of which we shall shew you a clearer use in our Essay Mathematicall, which is to be part of the Prodromus. Nor can it be just cause of offence, either as restreining the li∣berty of some, or as giving check to the magisteriall determi∣nations of others; seeing it is of universall consent, that All dedu∣ced Theoremes and consequentiall inferences cannot otherwise be evidenced for truths in what science soever, but by their propor∣tion with their respective Fundamentals. When we say Fundamentals in the Plurall, we comprehend the first Angular or corner-stone, Truth, the knowledge of God, and ac∣knowledgement of Him, as He hath manifested himself, and of all the rest in a connected dependance with and on it; Each and e∣very one constituted in it self, and having its respective Contigna∣tion with the precedent and consequent from the Look before the Creation, unto the State of Glorification, neither in a Heape of Confusion, a discretive Independencie of each other, or the An∣gular, nor in a dislocation of Disorder. And then we say and affirm, That these, thus considered and disposed, are so the genuine and naturall Fundamentals unto all Dogmaticall and Practicall Truths in matters Sacred and Divine, that what can be demonstrated by these (and that onely) ought to be believed and practised; that is, our Grounds sound, our De∣ductions certain, we may then, and then onely securely rest in them. Nor let it seem strange, if we also say, that all our Confessions of Faith (as by the Analogie) must necessarily be formed according to It: and all Our Liturgies of Worship must in congruity be con∣formed unto It: of which we shall (with submission) give you our Practicall Essay, ere we close our larger work.
The Explanation of the Termes. HAving now given by the order and manner of Reading (thus enlightned) the Concatenation of the Heads or Primitive Truths Supernaturall and Naturall; and the grounds immediate in their Contignations, which give in Systeme their Juncture with each other; justified the Figure of the Dia∣gramme; and shewed the use of the whole; we have brought the matters and things themselves so near to the senses both Inward and Outward in all their severall aspects, that the words in which we represent them, will have the lesse difficulty. And forasmuch as the method is wholly new, we presume that the Intelligent Reader will not be offended at the liberty we have taken in Wording such Principles, as have discovered themselves (not heretofore taken notice of) in such termes (though new also) as may most properly expresse them; nor be too severe towards us for varying the words, when we have been constreined thereto, that we might bring them to the due proportion of Analogie, to rectifie the things themselves, from what they have been current in these latter Ages. Yet for those, whose weaker apprehensions may require an Interpreter (because in this also we desire to descend to the ca∣pacity of the meanest) we have thought it our duty to give an explication of them, as familiar, as the matters will possibly bear. By GOD in Essence, we intend that state (The Abysse unfa∣thomable) the Infinite, Incomprehensible Godhead; wherein before his Outgoings manifested, we can onely say, that GOD is, or that there is a GOD, One GOD. Subsistencies, The Outgoings of that Essence, by their Emana∣tion discovering themselves Three, This the true interpretation of the Greek word Hypostasis, which the Latines endeavour to expresse by Persons, and which we also use (though seldom) as be∣ing more familiar and better known to signifie the same thing. Inbeing, The state of the Subsistencies in the Essence. Emanation, The Outflowings from it. Incomprehensible, Is of which we can frame no Idaea in our mindes. Ineffable, In consequence must be unwordable, for which there can be no expression.
Emergeth, (i.) Putteth up the head, appeareth or sheweth it self. Energies, Are their Efficacies, or Working-Powers, called in Scripture, spirit. Energeticall Operations, are the Effects of those Energies in the subject. By the First Race of Intellectuals, we intend Spirits bodied (i. simple Created Essences) which we from their Office and Ministrie not till afterward call Angels. By the Second Race of Intellectuals, we intend Mankinde (i) Spirits Imbodied. By Animate world, we intend a created Dead matter, quick∣ned by a Forme from without it self, which in this was the Ener∣gie of the Creator, the Spirit of God moving upon the waters, Gen. 1.2. Innate Law of Impulse: By Innate we intend, that which was in their constitution or making up; And because in that their constitu∣tion, the Superior, the Intellectual nature, did qualifie the inferior, the Animal, with Rationality a Forme besides its own; I do there∣fore call that from the Superior to it a Law of Impulse, and the same in the Inferior, a Law of Instinct. The Covenant of Nature properly so called (i.) of Impresse upon Ad∣hesion, whereby is intended, that whilst he should adhere and keep himself close unto God, the Subsistencies would then continue their Impresse upon him, and Concurse with him. Appendixes Preparatory, Sacrament, Sabbath (i.) these were pre∣pared, and but prepared; untill he Adhering and Vanquishing, not to be actually Appended or exhibited. Inhibition (i.) by that Negative Precept, enjoyned not to eat. Probationall (i.) by which God his Lord would know and make Proof whether he would Adhere and Obey. Threat, an Antedated Sentence (i.) that which was in Threat, was as certainly, upon his Disobedience, to be his Sentence; as it was now a Threat. Interpellation, Is expounded by the words following, Putting himself in the Gappe, in English it is nearest to a Rescue, but here Legitimate from a Ground; because the Interpellator the Word, was in a degree concerned in the constitution of the Delinquent, and Himself coequall with the Incensed, the Creator. Superseding (i.) Dispensing with the present Execution of his
own Justice; A Law terme in use amongst us. So also is Reprieve, known unto most in criminal causes. The Covenant of Grace Primitive in the First Transaction (i.) the Mutuall Agreement and Capitulation transacted betwixt the Creator Ordaining, and Word undertaking, in reference to Re∣demption and Restauration. The Trinity Supream, is a consideration of the Subsistencies, as They emaned and acted before their Condescentions, either in order unto or for the actuall Restauration. The Covenant of Grace Primitive in the Second Transaction, their mutuall Performance (of what was mutually undertaken in the First Transaction) in the Person of Jesus. The Covenant of Grace Derivative; the Publication of that Grace wrought for us in his Person, and the offer of termes of Reconciliation thereupon, Influx (i.) A Spirituall Inflowing into us by operation from Him the Mediator, opposed unto That which was by union of Natures, as Energie radically in Himself. Trinity of Condesceutions for Administrations and Redemption, are the respective Energies of the Trinity Supream, in their condes∣centions exerted or put forth for the accomplishing of the se∣cond Designe, both as to Redemption and to Revelation. The Explication of the Greek Words. ΠΕΡΙΠΟΙΗΣΙΣ, (i.) A Making by Gyre, Compasse, or circumfe∣rence; first in Christ the new Creature; and then Particulars in the state of Lapse from Him as Mediator by union of Na∣tures, the Principle of this House. ΠΒΡΙΟΥΣΙΟΣ, A People pecullar, (i.) those whom God hath dignified with speciall Administrations; and so a People appro∣priated by sanctification of the Holy Ghost, the Principle of this House. ΑΠΟΚΑΤΑΣΤΑΣΙΣ, An Astronomicall terme, The Bringing of Nature about (by Grace) to the same Point, whence it first set forth, and from whence it declined, and fell. ΑΝΑΚΕΦΛΑΙΩΣΙΣ, The Gathering together again under One Head, the Word; Now (by Incarnation) Mediator of this se∣cond Work, for compassing of the first Designe FINIS.
My Desires to the Reader are, FIrst, That those who desire the understanding of this De∣signe, would as the Alphabet or first Elements, get by Heart the Capitall Heads; as, THE LOOK Before the Creation, THE CREATION, THE INHIBITION, &c. pun∣ctually according to the Direction in the order and manner of Reading. Secondly, That, That being done, they would in like man∣ner inform themselves of the Subject Matters under every Head, and take notice of their concatenate dependenctes. Thirdly, That These things being done, they would then (and not before) having the Scheme before them and in their eye, peruse these Sheets as the Key unto It. Whereto if they bring their Heads as intent, and their Hearts as sincere, as I have been (I take God to witnesse) in composing the whole. I shall not doubt of that Union (so much talkt of) in Truth and Peace; which, as it is the Prayer, so it is the endeavour of him that is An obedient Sonne of the Church truly Christian, Protesting against all Popish Errors, or what∣soever is contrary to sound Doctrine: Nicholas Gibbon. Errata. Pag. 14. line 10. for Resurrection, read Dead. pag. 24. line 24. for Figurea, read Figure wih a Parenthesis. pag. 25. line 14. reade Scripture as in a Parenthesis; pag. 26. line 5. for Yet read That. Which is desired the Reader would correct with his Pen before he peruse them.
