H2088 12709959 66085
His Most Sacred MAJESTIES, And His Most Honourable Privy Councils LETTERS, Relating to the College of Physicians. As likewise, A SHORT ACCOUNT Of the Institution, Use and Privileges of that Royal Foundation. By His Majesties Special Command. LONDON, Printed for Randal Taylor near Stationers-Hall. 1688.
JAMES R. TRusty and Well-beloved, We Greet you well. We ha∣ving lately Graciously given to you, the President and Commonalty of Our College of Physicians in London, Our Letters Patents, confirming all former Grants of Our Royal Progenitors, together with other Privileges, and more ample Authority, for suppressing all Illiterate and Illegal Practisers of the Art of Phy∣sick, in Our City of London, and seven Miles distance; We have thought fit, for the prevention of the great Damages and Inconveniences which our loving Subjects may be exposed to in their Healths, and otherwise, by the Ʋnskilfulness of the said Practisers, to Will and Require You, the President and Censors of Our said College, and your Successors, in Pursuance of Our said Letters Patents, as also of the Laws and Statutes of Our Realm, forthwith to do your utmost Diligence to Prosecute and Suppress all such Ʋnlearned and Ʋn∣lawful Practisers of Physick, as shall presume to act contrary to Our said Letters Patents, and to the Laws of the Realm in that Case provided; And, for your Encouragement therein, We do require all our Judges, Justices of the Peace, and others whom it may concern,
to Countenance and Assist you, the President and Censors, in your Prosecution of such Offenders according to Law: And, for the more effectual doing thereof, you are, as occasion shall offer, to demand the Aid and Assistance of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of Our City of London, whom by Our Letters We have re∣quired to give you all Countenance and Assistance in the Execution of this Our Royal Will and Command; Not doubting, but that you will be careful to Suppress such Offenders, and Answer the Trust in this Case com∣mitted to you: And so We bid you farewell. Given at Our Court at Windsor, the Third day of July, 1687. in the Third Year of Our Reign. By His Majesties Command, Sunderland P. To our Trusty and Well-beloved, the President and Censors of Our College of Physicians in London.
JAMES R. TRusty and Well-beloved, We Greet you well. Whereas, in the Reigns of Our Royal Progeni∣tors of famous Memory, sufficient Provision and Power hath been given and granted by several Charters and Acts of Parliament of Our College of Physicians in London, for the Reforming and Suppressing all Ʋnlaw∣ful and Ʋnlearned Practisers of the Art of Physick in London, and within seven Miles distance thereof; And, We having of late in Our Princely Wisdom, thought fit to confirm and enlarge the said Charters by Our Royal Patent granted to the said College; and, resolving to see the said Charters and Acts of Parliament duly put in Execution, have thought fit by these Presents to charge you, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Justices of the Peace, within Our said City and the Precincts thereof, that with all readiness you do Aid and Assist the President and Censors for the Time being, of Our said College, or such Officers as the President of the said College shall appoint, in the doing of all such things, as by the said Acts of Parliament or Charters ought to be done, for the Suppressing of all and every such Person or Persons, as contrary to the said Royal
Charters and Acts of Parliament shall dare to adven∣ture in the Practice of Physick, upon any of Our Sub∣jects in the City of London, or the Suburbs and Precincts of the same: And, to the Intent, that this Our Purpose, tending to the Safety of Our Subjects, and the Suppression of Ʋnlawful and Ignorant Practicioners, may with more Diligence and Authority be effected, VVe do Will and Command you, the Lord Mayor of Our City of London, that at your next Sessions, these Our Letters may be so read and published, that all Justices of the Peace, as well within Our said City, as also the Suburbs and Pre∣cincts of the same, may take knowlege of this Our Plea∣sure and Command: And so We bid you farewel. Given at Our Court of Windsor, the Third day of July, 1687. and in the Third Year of Our Reign. By His Majesties Command, Sunderland P. To the Lord Mayor of Our City of London.
WHEREAS, by the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, Power is given to the President and Commonalty of the Faculty of Physick in Lon∣don, or to such, as they the said President and College for the Time being, shall according to the Statutes in that behalf made, Authorize to have the Fine, Search, Cor∣rection and Government of all Persons using the Faculty of Physick in London, and the Suburbs thereof, and seven Miles distance, and to punish all such as shall Ʋnlawfully Ʋse or Practise the said Faculty within the said Precincts, contrary to the true Intent and Meaning of the Statute in that Case made; with this further Authority, That all Justices, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, and other Ministers and Officers within the City of London and Precincts aforesaid, upon Request to them made, should Help, Aid and Assist the President of the said College, and all Persons by the said President and Commonalty from time to time Authorized for the Execution of the Acts and Statutes in that behalf made, upon Pain, for not giving such Aid, Help and Assistance, to run in Contempt of the King's Majesty, His Heirs and Successors; And, whereas there are sundry Ʋunskilful Persons within the Precincts and Limits aforesaid, who do use and practise the said Faculty, con∣trary to the Statutes of this Realm in that Case provided,
and to the great Peril and Danger of the Lives of many of His Majesties Subjects; These are to Will and Require you, and in his Majesties Name straitly to Charge and Command you, that henceforth at all time and times, you, according to the Tenor of the said Act, be Aiding and Assisting unto the said Pre∣sident, and to those that shall be Authorized by the said President and College, for the Apprehending of all such persons, as shall Ʋnlawfully Ʋse and Practise the said Faculty within the Limits aforesaid, contrary to the In∣tent and Meaning of the Statutes aforesaid, when they or any of them shall given you Notice of, and require it; and thereupon to bring them before the said President, or those Authorized, as aforesaid, to their College, there to be Examined and Proceeded against, as to the Law in that Case shall appertain. Whereof fail you not, as you, or every of you, will answer the Contempt in that behalft made. Dated at the Court at Hampton Court, the Sixteenth day of July, 1687. Jefferys C. Sunderland P. Arundell C. P. S. Albemarle Peterborow Bath Middleton Craven Dartmouth Ormond Powis Mulgrave Phil. Musgrave. To all Justices, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailifs, Constables, Head boroughs, and all other His Majesties Offi∣cers and Ministers, to whom this shall or may appertain, within the City of London, Suburbs and Liberties thereof, and the Limits within mentioned, and to every and either of them.
A short Account of the Institution and Nature of the College of Physicians, London. THE College of Physicians in London (first Founded and Constituted by the Charter of King Henry VIII. in the Tenth Year of his Reign, and afterward confirmed and inlarged in its Privileges and Jurisdictions by several Acts of Parliament, and Charters granted by Himself and Royal Successors,) consists of a President, Fellows, Candidates, Honorary Fellows, and Licentiates. 1. The FELLOWS Are Doctors of Physick, chosen out of the Candidates, who have been always limited to a certain Number, and are now confined to the Number of Fourscore, by His present Majesties Gracious Charter: Out of these are chosen the President, Elects, Censors, and other Officers of the College, who, with the rest of the Fellows, are solely concerned in the Governing Part of the College, and have a Voice in the making and rescinding any Statutes, Orders, or by-Laws, relating to Physick and the Practice thereof. 2. CANDIDATES Must be Doctors in Physick, admitted to that Degree in one of our Own Universities, must not be Foreigners, and ought to
have practised Physick Four Years before they are admitted into that Order; out of these, as the Seminary, the Fellowships are filled up, as they become vacant, in a perpetual Succession. 3. HONORARY FELLOWS Are such Doctors in Physick, as by reason of their being Fo∣reigners, or having taken their Degrees in some University be∣yond the Seas, are not incorporated into either of Ours; or, for some other reason (having not been Candidates) are not of the Number of those who have Votes in the Affairs of the College. 4. LICENTITATES Are such other Persons Skilled in Physick, who by reason of their being Foreigners, or their not being admitted Doctors in one of Our Universities, or for their not being Eminently Learn∣ed, or by reason of their too great Youth, or such like Causes, are not capable to be Elected into the Number of the Candidates; yet may, notwithstanding, be serviceable to the Publick in ta∣king Care of the Health of the King's Subjects, at least in some particular Disease. NOW, of all these several Ranks and Degrees of Practisers in Physick, none of them is confined to any certain Number but the Fellows and Candidates; so that the Rest being wholly un∣limited, no Person can be excluded out of the College, or de∣barred from Practice, but such as are so wholly illiterate and unskilful, that they dare not adventure to submit themselves to the Examination and Judgment of the President and Censors of the College, either as to the Goodness of their Medicines, or their own Skill in all, or any Part of Physick; though the President and Censors be Men strictly sworn to do justice to
all Persons, who shall present themselves, or their Medicines, to their Scrutiny and Examination. From hence it manifestly follows, That the College of Phy∣sicians is very far from being a Monopoly, since it cannot re∣ject any of the King's Subjects who are duly qualified for the Exercise of all, or any Part of Physick; and therefore, all Preten∣ders to Secret Medicines, or to the Practice of Physick, without Licence first had from the College, are justly prosecuted and punished as Publick Cheats and Impostors (conscious to them∣selves of Fraud in their Medicines, and Insufficiency in their pretended Skill in Physick) according to the just and wholsome Laws in that Case provided; For which purpose, and for the Incouragement of Legal and Learned Practicers in Physick, the College of Physicians is invested with several Powers and Privileges, partly by the express Laws of the Land, and seve∣ral Royal Charters; and partly by such Statutes and Orders of the College, as have been made in Pursuance thereof. An Ac∣count of some of which are here Printed, for the more Publick Information of all the King's Subjects, so that none may here∣after pretend Ignorance in these Matters. 1. The Censors of the College are intrusted with the Go∣vernment, Scrutiny, Correction and Supervision of all Persons practising Physick within the City of London, and Seven Miles Compass, together with all their Medicines, Bills and Prescriptions whatsoever; so as that they may punish Offenders by Fines, Amerciaments, Imprisonments, and other reasonable Methods. 2. No Person in the Country (except Graduates in Physick in either of Our Universities) can have a License to practise Physick from the Lord Bishop of the Diocess, till he be first ex∣amined approved by the President and Three Elects of
the College, and receive their Letters Testimonial for that Purpose. 3. All Persons practising Physick in the City of London, and Seven Miles Compass, without Licence first had of the College of Physicians, after due Examination, whether meer Empiricks and Unlearned Persons, or any other whatsoever, are to be pro∣secuted at Law, and upon Conviction to pay Five Pounds for every Months Practice proved against them; and, if they happen to be Apothecaries, may also (according to the ancient Practice, and laudable Custom of the College, inforced by a former, as likewise by a late Statute) be discommun'd; so that no Member of that Society ought, upon Notice thereof, to suffer any of his Bills or Prescriptions to be sent to any such Apothecary. 4. Any Person practising Physick Illegally, that is, with∣out Licence first had from the College of Physicians, if his Patient shall happen to dye under his Hands, is indictable at Common Law for the Loss of one of the King's Subjects. 5. Upon Complaint made by any Person to the President and Censors against any Practiser of Physick, within the City of London, and Seven Miles Compass, whether he be a Li∣censed Physician or not, for having prescribed any Unfitting or Unwholsome Medicine to his Patient; the said President and Censors have full Power and Authority to receive any such Com∣plaint, to summon the Person offending to appear before them at their Board; to summon, and examine Witnesses, and to hear and determine the Matter; and, if the Person accused be found guilty of Ill Practice, they have Power to set a Fine upone him to any Summ not exceeding Twenty Pounds, and by the Warrant of the Censors to commit him to any Prison of the City (except the Tower of London) till he shall have paid the
aforesaid Fine, and made due Submission to the College; so that all Persons who are injured in their Bodies and Healths by Unskilful Practisers, may there have certain and speedy Redress. 6. By the King's late Gracious Charter, the sole Power of Licensing all Books, Papers, &c. relating to Physick and Chi∣rurgery, and the Practice thereof, is, after the Expiration of the Act of Printing, granted to the President and Censors of the College of Physicians; And, in the mean Time, is by them exer∣cised by Favour of his Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury, who has been pleased to give them his Deputation for that Purpose; by which Means, frivolous and useless Books in Physick and Chirurgery, will for the future be in great measure Prevented, and the Scandalous Bills of Empiricks and Impostors in that Faculty stifled and suppressed. 7. Any Physician Licensed by the College, may exercise the Science of Physick in all and every of its Parts, any Act, Statute or Provision made to the contrary notwithstanding; so that he may, as often as he pleaseth, practise Chirurgery and Pharmacy, or the making and compounding Medicines for the Use of any of his Patients. THESE are some of those Privileges and Powers, which the Royal Wisdom of our Princes, by their Charters and in their Parliaments, have thought fit to grant unto the College of Physicians, for the better Reformation of diverse Abuses and Enormities happening to the Common-wealth, by the evil using and undue Administration of Physick: And therefore, since the College was first Founded for that very Purpose, and af∣terwards (almost in every Princes Reign) strengthned and armed with fresh Powers and Authority to the same Intent; since all
the Members of the College have given their Faith, or solemn∣ly sworn that they will do their utmost Endeavours to sup∣press all Illiterate and Illegal Practicioners; since not only by former Acts of Parliament, and Royal Charters, but also by that of His present Majesty, and by his Particular Letters Manda∣tory we are strictly commanded so to do: We should be eminently guilty, not only of the greatest Remissness, and most supine Neg∣ligence, but also of open Breach of our solemn Oaths and Faith, and manifest Disobedience to our Prince, if we should not exert the Authority committed to us, for the vindicating of the Practice of Physick out of the Hands of Ignorant Me∣chanicks, and other Illegal Invaders of that Liberal Faculty. And whereas, in all Trades and Corporations of this City, con∣stituted for Private Benefit, not for Publick Use, and that by Charter only, not by the Statute-Laws of the Land, do with∣out Blame or Envy inform against any Intruders, so as not to suffer any neighbouring Trade to break in upon them, but that by severe Mulcts and Fines constantly imposed upon Offenders, they vigorously maintain their respective Bounds and Limits; I cannot be thought hard and unreasonable in the College of Physicians alone (being constituted of men of ge∣nerous and liberal Education, and instituted for Publick Benefit, confirmed not only by repeated Charters, but several Acts of Parliament, out of which no Person of sufficient Capacity and Learning can be excluded) to assert its Own Constitution and Privileges, by legally punishing such Persons as shall boldly invade the Liberties of that Society; especially, when so precious a thing as the Healths and Lives of the King's most eminent Subjects, residing in and about this City, are herein concerned. For the Discharge therefore of that Duty incumbent upon them, viz. to preserve the Healthful State of the King's Súbjects, &c.) the present College have taken all imaginable Care so to regulate the Practice of Physick, as that no Person may be neglected or
aggrieved: The known Poor and Meaner Families are abun∣dantly and prudently provided for, by a late Order for that Purpose. It is well known, that in Families of Middle Rank, the Physicians are moderate in their Expectations and Demands; and for those that are Rich and Noble, Liberality is inseparable from their Quality and Breeding. We are also fully resolved, for the Publick Good, to incourage and protect those two ne∣cessary Instruments of Physick, the Chirurgeons and the Apo∣thecaries (the latter of which owe their Charter and Knowlege of Medicines to the Favour of the College) so long as they shall contain themselves withing the Limits of their own Professi∣ons; and, in short, to do all other things necessary for the vindi∣cating and perpetuating of the Faculty of Physick, that so the Young Students in our Universities, may not be discouraged from applying themselves to the Study of a Science, so useful to the Common-wealth; nor that Profession be invaded by the Vulgar, which hath been the usual Support of the Younger Sons of the Gentry of this Kingdom. FINIS.
