h2551 18112662 106842
THE ILIADS AND ODYSSES OF Homer. Translated out of Greek into English, BY THO: HOBBES Of Malmsbury. With a large PREFACE concerning the Vertues of an Heroick Poem; written by the Translator. The Second EDITION. LONDON: Printed for Will. Crook, at the green Dragon without Temple-Barre. 1677.
bust of Homer THE WORKES of Homer Engl: by T: Hobbes portrait of Hobbes London Printed for W: Crooke at the green Dragon, without Temple Barr. 1677.
TO THE READER. CONCERNING The VERTUES of an HEROIQUE POEM. THe Vertues required in an Heroick Poem (and indeed in all Writings published) are compre∣hended all in this one word Discretion. And Discretion consisteth in this, That every part of the Poem be con∣ducing, and in good order placed to the end and designe of the Poet. And the Designe is not only to profit, but also to delight the Reader. By Profit, I intend not here any ac∣cession of Wealth either to the Poet, or to the Reader; but accession of Prudence, Justice, and Fortitude, by the Example of such Great and Noble
Persons as he introduceth speaking, or describeth acting. For all men love to behold, though not to practise Ver∣tue. So that at last the work of an Heroique Poet is no more but to fur∣nish an ingenuous Reader (when his leisure abounds) with the diversion of an honest and delightful Story, whe∣ther true or feigned. But because there be many men cal∣led Critiques, and Wits, and Vertuosi, that are accustomed to censure the Poets, and most of them of divers Judgements: How is it possible (you'll say) to please them all? Yes, very well; if the Poem be as it should be. For men can judge what's good, that know not what is best. For he that can judge what is best, must have con∣sidered all those things (though they be almost innumerable) that concur to make the reading of an Heroique Poem pleasant. Whereof I'll name as many as shall come into my mind. And they are contained, first, in the choice of Words. Secondly, in
the Construction. Thirdly, in the Contrivance of the Story or Fiction. Fourthly, in the Elevation of the Fancie. Fifthly, in the Justice and Impartiality of the Poet. Sixthly, in th clearness of Descriptions. Se∣venthly, in the Amplitude of the Subject. And (to begin with words) the first Indiscretion is, The use of such words as to the Readers of Poesie (which are commonly Persons of the best Quality) are not sufficiently known. For the work of an Heroick Poem is to raise admiration (princi∣pally) for three Vertues, Valour, Beau∣ty, and Love; to the reading whereof Women no less than Men have a just pretence, though their skill in Lan∣guage be not so universal. And there∣fore forein words till by long use they become vulgar, are unintelligible to them. Also the names of Instruments and Tools of Artificers, and words of Art, though of use in the Schools, are far from being fit to be spoken by a
Heroe. He may delight in the Arts themselves, and have skill in some of them; but his Glory lies not in that, but in Courage, Nobility, and other Vertues of Nature, or in the Com∣mand he has over other men. Nor does Homer in any part of his Poem attribute any praise to Achilles, or any blame to Alexander, for that they had both learnt to play upon the hittarre. The Character of words that become a Heroe are Property, and Significan∣cy, but without both the malice and lasciviousness of a Satyr. Another Vertue of an Heroique Poem is the Perspicuity and the Faci∣lity of Construction, and consisteth in a natural contexture of the words, so as not to discover the labour but the natural ability of the Poet; and this is usually called a good Style. For the order of words when placed as they ought to be, carries a light before it, whereby a man may foresee the length of his period; as a torch in the night shews a man the stops and uneveness in
his way. But when plac'd unnaturally, the Reader will often find unexpected checks, and be forced to go back and hunt for the sense, and suffer such un∣ease, as in a Coach a man unexpectedly finds in passing over a furrow. And though the Laws of Verse (which have bound the Greeks and Latines to number of Feet, and quantity of Syl∣lables, and the English and other Na∣tions to number of Syllables and Rime) put great constraint upon the natural course of Language; yet the Poet, ha∣ving the liberty to depart from what is obstinate, and to chuse somewhat else that is more obedient to such Laws, and no less fit for his purpose, shall not be (neither by the measure, nor by the necessity of Rime) excused; though a Translation often may. A third Vertue lies in the Contri∣vance. For there is difference be∣tween a Poem and a History in Prose. For a History is wholly related by the Writer; but in a Heroique Poem the Narration is, a great part of it, put
upon some of the persons introduced by the Poet. So Homer begins not his Iliad with the injury done by Pa∣ris, but makes it related by Menelaus, and very briefly as a thing notorious; nor begins he his Odysses with the de∣parture of Ʋlysses from Troy, but makes Ʋlysses himself relate the same to Alcinous, in the midst of his Poem; which I think much more pleasant and ingenious, than a too precise and close following of the time. A fourth is in the Elevation of Fan∣cy, which is generally taken for the greatest praise of Heroick Poetry; and is so, when governed by discretion. For men more generally affect and ad∣mire Fancy than they do either Judg∣ment, or Reason, or Memory, or any o∣ther intellectual Vertue, and for the pleasantness of it, give to it alone the name of Wit, accounting Reason and Judgment but for a dull entertainment. For in Fancy consisteth the Sublimity of a Poet, which is that Poetical Fury which the Readers for the most part
call for. It flies abroad swiftly to fetch in both Matter and Words; but if there be not Discretion at home to distinguish which are fit to be used and which not, which decent, and which undecent for Persons, Times, and Places, their delight and grace is lost. But if they be discreetly used, they are greater ornaments of a Poem by much than any other. A Metaphor also (which is a Comparison contracted into a word) is not unpleasant; but when they are sharp, and extraordi∣nary, they are not fit for an Heroick Poet, nor for a publick consultation, but only for an Accusation or Defence at the Bar. A fifth lies in the Justice and Im∣partiality of the Poet, and belongeth as well to History as to Poetry. For both the Poet and the Historian wri∣teth only (or should do) matter of Fact. And as far as the truth of Fact can defame a man, so far they are al∣lowed to blemish the reputation of persons. But to do the same upon Re∣port,
or by inference, is below the dignity not onely of a Heroe but of a Man. For neither a Poet nor an Hi∣storian ought to make himself an ab∣solute Master of any mans good name. None of the Emperors of Rome whom Tacitus or any other Writer hath con∣demned, was ever subject to the Judg∣ment of any of them, nor were they ever heard to plead for themselves, which are things that ought to be an∣tecedent to condemnation. Nor was (I think) Epicurus the Philosopher (who is transmitted to us by the Sto∣icks for a man of evil and voluptuous life) ever called, convented, and law∣fully convicted, as all men ought to be before they be defamed. There∣fore 'tis a very great fault in a Poet to speak evil of any man in their Wri∣tings Historical. A sixth Vertue consists in the per∣fection and curiosity of Descriptions, which the ancient Writers of Elo∣quence call Icones, that is Images. And an Image is always a part, or ra∣ther
the ground of a Poetical compa∣rison. As (for example) when Virgil would set before our eyes the fall of Troy, he describes perhaps the whole Labour of many men together in the felling of some great Tree, and with how much ado it fell. This is the Image. To which if you but add these words, So fell Troy, you have the Comparison en∣tire; the grace whereof lieth in the lightsomness, and is but the description of all (even of the minutest) parts of the thing described; that not onely they that stand far off, but also they that stand neer, and look upon it with the oldest spectacles of a Critick, may approve it. For a Poet is a Painter, and should paint Actions to the under∣standing with the most decent words, as Painters do Persons and Bodies with the choicest colours, to the eye; which if not done nicely, will not be worthy to be plac'd in a Cabinet. The seventh Vertue which lying in the amplitude of the Subject, is nothing but variety, and a thing without which
a whole Poem would be no pleasanter than an Epigram, or one good Verse; nor a Picture of a hundred figures better than any one of them asunder, if drawn with equal art. And these are the Vertues which ought especially to be looked upon by the Criticks, in the comparing of the Poets, Homer with Virgil, or Virgil with Lucan. For these only, for their excellency, I have read or heard compared. If the comparison be grounded up∣on the first and second Vertues, which consist in known words and Style un∣forc'd, they are all excellent in their own Language, though perhaps the Latine than the Greek is apter to dis∣pose it self into an Hexameter Verse, as having both fewer Monosyllables and fewer Polysyllables. And this may make the Latin Verse appear more grave and equal, which is taken for a kinde of Majesty; though in truth there be no Majesty in words, but then when they seem to proceed from an high and weighty employment of the
minde. But neither Homer, nor Vir∣gil, nor Lucan, nor any Poet writing commendably (though not excellent∣ly) was ever charged much with un∣known words, or great constraint of Style, as being a fault proper to Tran∣slators, when they hold themselves too superstitiously to their Authors words. In the third Vertue, which is Con∣trivance, there is no doubt but Homer excels them all. For their Poems (ex∣cept the Introduction of their Gods) are but so many Histories in Verse; where Homer has woven so many Hi∣stories together as contain the whole Learning of his time (which the Greeks call Cyclopaedia) and furnished both the Greek and Latin Stages with all the Plots and Arguments of their Tragedies. The fourth Vertue, which is the height of Fancy, is almost proper to Lucan, and so admirable in him, that no Heroique Poem raises such admiration of the Poet, as his hath done, though
not so great admiration of the persons he introduceth. And though it be a mark of a great Wit; yet it is fitter for a Rhetorician than a Poet, and re∣belleth often against Discretion; as when he says Victrix causa Diis placuit, sed victa Catoni. that is, The Side that Won the Gods approved most, But Cato better lik'd the Side that lost. Than which nothing could be spo∣ken more gloriously to the Exaltation of a man, nor more disgracefully to the Depression of the Gods. Homer in∣deed maketh some Gods for the Greeks, and some for the Trojans; but always makes Jupiter impartial. And never prefers the judgement of a Man before that of Jupiter; much less be∣fore the judgement of all the Gods together. The fifth Vertue, which is the Ju∣stice and Impartiality of a Poet, is
very eminent in Homer and Virgil, but the contrary in Lucan. Lucan shews himself openly in the Pompeyan Faction, inveighing against Caesar throughout his Poem, like Cicero against Cataline or Marc Antony; and is therefore just∣ly reckon'd by Quintilian as a Rhe∣torician rather than a Poet. And a great part of the delight of his Readers pro∣ceedeth from the pleasure which too many men take to hear Great persons censured. But Homer and Virgil (e∣specially Homer) do every where what they can to preserve the Reputation of their Heroes. If we compare Homer and Virgil by the sixth Vertue, which is the clear∣ness of Images (or Descriptions) it is manifest that Homer ought to be pre∣ferr'd, though Virgil himself were to be the Judge. For there are very few Images in Virgil besides those which he hath translated out of Homer; so that Virgil's Images are Homer's Praises. But what if he have added something to it of his own? Though he have, yet
it is no addition of praise, because 'tis easie. But he hath some Images which are not in Homer, and better than his. It may be so, and so may other Poets have which never durst compare them∣selves with Homer. Two or three fine sayings are not enough to make a Wit. But where is that Image of his better done by him than Homer, of those that have been done by them both? Yes, Eustathius (as Mr. Ogilby hath observ'd) where they both de∣scribe the falling of a Tree, prefers Vir∣gil's description. But Eustathius is in that, I think, mistaken. The place of Homer is in the fourth of the Iliads, the sense whereof is this: As when a man hath fell'd a Poplar Tree Tall, streight, and smooth, with all the fair boughs on; Of which he means a Coach-wheel made shall be, And leaves it on the Bank to dry i'th' Sun: So lay the comely Simoisius, Slain by great Ajax, Son of Telamon. It is mauifest that in this place Ho∣mer
intended no more than to shew how comely the body of Simoisius ap∣peared as he lay dead upon the Bank of Scamander, streight, and tall, with a fair head of hair, and like a streight and high Poplar with the boughs still on; and not at all to describe the manner of his falling, which (when a man is wounded through the breast, as he was with a Spear) is always sudden. The description of how a great Tree falleth, when many men together hew it down, is in the second of Virgil's Aeneads. The sense of it, with the comparison, is in English this: And Troy, methought, then sunk in fire and smoke, And overturned was in every part: As when upon the mountain an old Oak Is heen about with keen steel to the heart, And pli'd by Swains with many heavy blows, It nods and every way it threatens round, Till overcome with many wounds it bows, And leisurely at last comes to the ground. And here again it is evident that Virgil meant to compare the manner
how Troy after many Battles, and af∣ter the losses of many Cities, con∣quer'd by the many Nations under Agememnon in a long War, and thereby weak'ned, and at last overthrown, with a great Tree hewn round about, and then falling by little and little leisurely. So that neither these two Descrip∣tions, nor the two Comparisons can be compared together. The Image of a man lying on the ground is one thing; the Image of falling (especially of a Kingdom) is another. This therefore gives no advantage to Virgil over Ho∣mer. 'Tis true, that this Description of the Felling and Falling of a Tree is exceeding graceful. But is it there∣fore more than Homer could have done if need had been? Or is there no De∣scription in Homer of somewhat else as good as this? Yes, and in many of our English Poets now alive. If it then be lawful for Julius Scaliger to say, that if Jupiter would have descri∣bed the fall of a Tree, he could not
have mended this of Virgil; it will be lawful for me to repeat an old Epigram of Antipater, to the like purpose, in favour of Homer. The Writer of the famous Trojan War, And of Ulysses Life, O Jove make known, Who whence he was; for thine the Verses are, And he would have us think they are his own. The seventh and last commendati∣on of an Heroick Poem consisteth in Amplitude and Variety; and in this Homer exceedeth Virgil very much, and that not by superfluity of words, but by plenty of Heroick matter, and multitude of Descriptions and Com∣parisons (whereof Virgil hath transla∣ted but a small part into his Aeneads) such as are the Images of Shipwracks, Battles, Single Combats, Beauty, Pas∣sions of the mind, Sacrifices, Entertain∣ments, and other things, whereof Vir∣gil (abating what he borrows of Ho∣mer) has scarce the twentieth part. It is no wonder therefore if all the an∣cient Learned men both of Greece and
Rome having given the first place in Poetry to Homer. It is rather strange that two or three, and of late time, and but Learners of the Greek tongue, should dare to contradict so many com∣petent Judges, both of Language and Discretion. But howsoever I defend Homer, I aim not thereby at any re∣flection upon the following Transla∣tion. Why then did I write it? Be∣cause I had nothing else to do. Why publish it? Because I thought it might take off my Adversaries from shewing their folly upon my more serious Wri∣tings, and set them upon my Verses to shew their wisdom. But why without Annotations? Because I had no hope to do it better than it is already done by Mr. Ogilby. T. HOBBES.
BOOKS Newly Printed For William Crook. SCarron's Comical Romance: Or a Facetious History, of a Company of strowling Stage-players, Interwoven with divers Choice Novels, rare Ad∣ventures, Amorous Intrigues; Written Originally in French, by the famous and Wittty Poet Monsieur Scarron, and now turned into English. Fol. price 6 s. A Letter about Liberty and Necessi∣ty: Written to the Duke of Newca∣stle by Thomas Hobbes of Malmsbury, with Observations upon it by Dr. La∣ney, late Bishop of Ely, 12o. price 8 d.
A true Narrative of the Circumcision of the Great Turk. Parthenissa, that most Fam'd Ro∣mance, in six Volumes compleat, Composed by the Right Honourable the Earl of Orrery. Fol. The Wrangling Lovers, or the In∣visible Mistriss: a Comedy, written by Mr. Ravenscroft; and acted at the Duke's Theatre. Printed 1677.
Homer's ILIADS IN ENGLISH. By THO. HOBBES of Malmsbury. To which may be added Homer's ODYSSES Englished by the same Author. LONDON: Printed by J. C. for William Crook, at the Green Dragon without Tem∣ple-bar. 1676.
THE CONTENTS. LIB. I. THe discontent and secession of A∣chilles. LIB. II. The Dream of Agamemnon. The tem∣pting of the Army, and the Cata∣logue of Ships and Commanders. LIB. III. The Duel of Menelaus and Paris, for the ending of the War. LIB. IV. The Articles broken by the Trojans. And the first Battle. LIB. V. The first Battle continued, wherein Pallas strengtheneth Diomedes to supply the absence of Achilles.
LIB. VI. The first Battle yet continued. The o∣ther Gods forbidden by Jove to assist. LIB. VII. The Greeks enclose their Ships with a Wall and Ditch. The Duel betwixt Hector and Ajax. LIB. VIII. The second Battle; and the Trojans stay all night in the Field. LIB. IX. The Greeks deliberate of going home, but are staid by Diomed and Nestor. And Embassadors sent with Gifts to reconcile Achilles, in vain. LIB. X. Encounter of the Scouts by night. And the surprize of Rhesus. LIB. XI. The third Fight. Agamemnon wounded. The Greeks beaten to their Camp. Diomed, Machaon, Ulysses, and Eu∣rypylus wounded. Patroclus is per∣swaded by Nestor to obtain of Achil∣les to be sent to the aid of the Greeks in Achilles his Armour.
LIB. XII. The fourth Fight (Hector having enter'd the Argive Camp) at the Ships. LIB. XIII.Neptune encourageth the Greeks. LIB. XIV.Juno by the help of Venus layeth Jove asleep, whilst Neptune assisteth the Greeks. LIB. XV.Jupiter awakes, and sends away Nep∣tune. Hector chaseth the Greeks a∣gain to their Ships, and fireth one of them. The Acts of Ajax. Which is the fifth Battle. LIB. XVI. The sixth Battle. The Acts of Patroclus, and his Death. LIB. XVII. The seventh Battle, about Patroclus his body. LIB. XVIII. The grief of Achilles. And new Ar∣mour made him by Vulcan.
LIB. XIX.Achilles reconciled to Agamemnon goes forth to Battle. LIB. XX. The eighth Battle, and the Gods permit∣ted to assist. LIB. XXI.Achilles with great slaughter pursues the Trojans to Scamander, and takes twelve alive to kill at Patroclus his Tomb. LIB. XXII. The death of Hector, and lamentation in Troy. LIB. XXIII. The Funeral-Games for Patroclus. LIB. XXIV. The Redemption of Hector, and his Fu∣neral.
BOOKS Printed for William Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple-bar. I. THe Compleat Vineyard, or an excellent way for planting of Vines in England; and how to make Wine of their Grapes. By W. Hughs, price 2 s. II. The Compleat Measurer, or a new exact Way of Mensuration. By Tho. Hammond, price 1 s. III. Jesuites Morals. Folio, price 10 s. IV. Bacon's Natural History. Folio, price 8 s. V. Boccalins Parnassus. Folio, price 8 s. VI. Clarks Praxis Curiae Admiralitatis. Octavo, price 2 s. VII. A Description of Candia, with an account of the Siege and Surrender of it. Octavo, price 1 s. VIII. The Deaf and Dumb Mans Discourse; A Treatise of those born Deaf and Dumb: to which is added the Rationality of Beasts, particularly of the Elephant, shewing the wonderful understanding of that Creature. Octavo, price 1 s. IX. The life of Des Cartes, Octavo, price 1 s.
X. Fleckno's Epigrams of all sorts. Octavo, price 1 s. XI. Thomas à Kempis Christian Patern, En∣glish, Twenty fours, price 1 s. XII. Knowles Answer to Ferguson of Justifi∣cation, price 1 s. 6 d. XIII. Blount's Academy of Eloquence. Twelves, price 1 s. 6 d. XIV. Hobbes Three Papers to the Royal Society. Quarto. XV. Sir H. Blount's Voyage into the Levant. Twelves, price 1 s. XVI. Hobbes Rosetum Geometricum. Quarto, price 3 s. XVII. Sinners Tears, by Fettyplace. Twelves, price 1 s. XVIII. Drexelius of Eternity. Twelves, price 2 s. XIX. Greek Testament. Octavo, price 3 s. 6 d. XX. Articles of Visitation for Norwich, price 2 d. XXI. The Flower-Garden, shewing how all sorts of Flowers are to be ordered; the time of Flowering, the taking them up, and Plan∣ting them again, &c. Being all necessary observations relating to a Flower-Garden, by the diligence and experience of W. Hughes. Twelves, price 1 s. XXII. Bishop Corbets Elegant Poems. Twelves, price 1 s. XXIII. The Court of Curiosity; being the
most Witty and Facetious Fortune-Book that was ever published in English; with a most judicious Interpretation of all Dreams drawn from the Wisdom and Doctrine of the An∣tients; also a Treatise of Physognomy. All written in French, since Translated (for the excellencie of it, into Spanish, Italian, High Dutch, Low Dutch, &c. now out of French) into English. The second Edition, much improved and explained. In Twelves, price 2 s. XXIV. The White Devil, or, Vittoria Corom∣bona, A Tragedy, Acted at the Theatre Roy∣al. Quarto, price 1 s. XXV. The old Troop, or, Monsieur Raggou, A Comedy, Acted at the Theatre Royal. Quarto, price 1 s. XXVI. Catalines Conspiracy, A Tragedy, Acted at the Theatre Royal. Written by Ben. Johnson. Quarto, price 1 s. XXVII. Lux Mathematica. Quarto, price 5 s. XXVIII. Hobbs his Travels. Twelves. price 1 s. XXXIX. Principia & Problemata aliquot Ge∣ometrica ante desperata, uunc breviter explica∣ta & demonstrata. Autho. Th. Hobbs. Quarto, price 2 s. XXX. The American Physitian, shewing all the Vertues and Uses of all Roots, Herbs, Trees, Fruits, &c. in the English Plantations in Ame∣rica. By W. Hughes. Twelves, price 1 s. XXXI. Shafto's Great Law of Nature, of Self-preservation.
Examined and Vindicated a∣gainst the abuses in Mr. Hobbes his Leviathan. Twelves, price 1 s. XXXII. Calliopes Cabinet opened and reviewed. Wherein all Gentlewomen, of what quality soever, may know how to adorn themselves for Feasting, Funerals, &c. With a Dictiona∣ry to explain all the Terms in Heraldry. By J. Salter, price 8 d. XXXIII. A new Collection of new Songs and Poems. Written by the present Wits of this Age. Octavo, price 1 s. 6 d. XXXIV. A Discourse of the Dukedom of Mo∣dena, the Native Country of her Royal High∣ness the Dutchess of York. Quarto, price 6 d. XXXV. Brevis Demonstratio. The truth and ex∣cellency of the Christian Religion demon∣strated by Reason. The Second Edition, Twelves, price 10 s. XXXVI. The Memoires and rare Adventures of Henrietta Silvia Moliere, Translated out of French. Twelves, price 2 s. XXXVII. Waltons Lives. Of Dr. Donn, Sir Hen∣ry Wotton, Mr. Hooker, and Mr. Herbert. Octa∣vo, price 3 s. XXXVIII. The Primitive Institution, shewing the use and antiquity of Catechising. By L. Addison, D. D. Twelves, price 1 s. 6 d.Author of the Present State of the Jews.
These new Books Printed for William Crook in the year 1675. 1. HOmers Odysses, Translated into English by Tho. Hobbes of Malmsbury. With a large Preface, concerning the Vertues of He∣roick Poetry, price 4 s. 2. The Jurisdiction of Court-Leets, and Court-Barons, Marshalsey, Pypowder, &c. and all other Courts; to which is added Choice Writs. By R. A. and T. J. price 6 s. 3. The Third Volume of Mr. Hobbs his Works, in Quarto, price 10 s. 4. The Golden Rule of Arithmetick made easie. By C. H. Octavo, price 3 d. 5. De Mirabilibus Pecci Carmen. Tho. Hobbes, price 6 d. 6. Euterpe Revived; being Epigrams on the most eminent persons now living, price 1 s. 7. Amorous Gallant, or Love in Fashion. A Co∣medy in Heroick Verse. By J. B. Gent. price 1 s. 8. The Mock-Duellist, or the French Vallet. A Comedy Acted at the Theatre Royal. Quarto, price 1 s. 9. The Grounds of Soveraignty and Greatness. In Quarto, price 6 d. 10. Gees Steps of Ascention unto God, or, A Lad∣der to Heaven. Twenty fours.
Books Printed for William Crook for this year 1676. 1. HOmers Iliads, Translated out of Greek in∣to English, by Tho. Hobbes of Malmsbury. 2. The present state of the Jews, relating all their Customs and Practices now in use. The se∣cond Edition. By L. Addison, D. D. Twelves. 3. Camera Regis, A short view of London, con∣taining the Antiquity, Fame, Wall, River, Gates, Tower, Cathedral, Officers, Courts, Cu∣stoms, Franchises, of that City. Octavo. 4. A Sermon Preached at the Bishop of Chiche∣ster's first Visitation. By W. Howel, Minister at Fittleworth in Sussex. Quarto. 5. The Potable Balsam of Life, described by Dr. P. Belon. 6. The Historians Guide, in two parts, First, the Recovery of lost time, being a Chronology from the Creation to this time, Translated out of Italian. Second, Englands remembrancer, being an Account of the Actions, Exploits, Battles, Sieges, &c. happened in any of his Majesties Dominions, from 1600 to 1675. Octavo.
ILIAD. LIB. I. O Goddess, sing what woe the discontent Of Thetis Son brought to the Greeks; what Souls Of Heroes down to Erebus it sent, Leaving their bodies unto Dogs and Fowls; Whilst the two Princes of the Army strove, King Agamemnon and Achilles stout. That so it should be was the will of Jove, But who was he that made them first fall out? Apollo; who incensed by the wrong To his Priest Chryses by Atrides done, ent a great Pestilence the Greeks among; Apace they di'd, and remedy was none. or Chryses came unto the Argive Fleet, With Treasure great his Daughter to redeem; And having in his hand the Ensignes meet, That did the Priestly Dignity beseem, A Golden Scepter and a Crown of Bays, Unto the Princes all made his request; But to the two Atrides chiefly prays, Who of the Argive Army were the best. O Sons of Atreus may the Gods grant you A safe return from Troy with Victory; And you on me compassion may shew, Receive these Gifts, and set my Daughter free; And have respect to Jove's and Leto's Son. To this the Princes all gave their consent, Except King Agamemnon. He alone, And with sharp language from the Fleet him sent; Old man (said he) let me not see you here Now staying, or returning back again, For fear the Golden Scepter which you bear And Chaplet hanging on it prove but vain.
Your Daughter shall to Argos go far hence, And make my Bed, and labour at the Loom, And take heed you no farther me incense, Lest you return not safely to your home. Frighted with this, away the Old man went; And often as he walked on the sand, His Prayers to Apollo up he sent. Hear me Apollo with thy Bow in hand, That honour'd art in Tenedos and Chryse, And unto whom Cylla great honour bears, If thou accepted hast my Sacrifice, Pay th' Argives with thy Arrows for my tears. His Prayer was granted by the Deity; Who with his Silver Bow and Arrows keen, Descended from Olympus silently In likeness of the sable night unseen. His Bow and Quiver both behinde him hang, The Arrows chink as often as he jogs, And as he shot the Bow was heard to twang, And first his Arrows flew at Mules and Dogs. But when the Plague into the Army came, Perpetual was the fire of Funerals; And so nine days continued the same, Achilles on the tenth for counsel calls; And Juno 'twas that put it in his head, Who for the Argive Army was afraid: The Lords to Counsel being gathered, Up stood Achilles and thus to them said, We must I think (Atrides) run from hence, Since War and Plague consume us both at once, Let's think on how to stay the Pestilence, Or else at Troy resolve to leave our bones. Let's with some Priest or Prophet here advise That knows the pleasure of the Gods above, Or some that at expounding Dreams are wise, For also Dreams descend on men from Jove: That we may from him know Apollo's minde, If we for Sacrifice be in arrear, Or if he will for Lambs and Goats be kinde, And to destroy us from henceforth forbear.
Achill's then sat down, and Chalchas rose, That was of great renown for Augury, And any thing was able to disclose That had been, is, or should hereafter be; And guided had the Greeks to Ilium; Achilles (said he) since you me command To tell you why this Plague is on us come, Swear you will save me both with word and hand. Of all the Greeks it will offend the best; Who though his anger for a while he smother, Will not, I fear, long time contented rest, But will revenged be some time or other. Chalchas (reply'd Achilles) do not fear, But what the God has told you bring to light: By Phoebus not a man shall hurt you here, As long as I enjoy my life and sight; Though Agamemnon be the man you dread, Who is of all the Army most obey'd. The Prophet by these words encouraged, Said what before to say he was affraid. 'Tis not neglect of Vow or Sacrifice That doth the God Apollo thus displease; But that we do his Priest so much despise, As not his Child for ansome to release. And more, till she be to her Father sent, And with a Hecatombe, and Ransomless, The anger of the God will not relent, Nor will the Sickness 'mongst the people cease. This said, he sat. The King look'd furiously, And anger flaming stood upon his eyes, While many black thoughts on his heart did lye; And to the Prophet Chalchas thus replies. Unlucky Prophet, that didst never yet Good fortune prophecy to me, but ill, And ever with a mind against me set Inventest Prophecies to cross my Will; And now again you fain would have it thought, Because I would not let Chryseis go, The Gifts refusing which her Father brought, Therefore this Plague was sent amongst us now.
With Clytemnestra she may well contend For Person, or for Beauty, or for Art. Yet so, to send her home I do intend. For of our loss I bear the greatest part. But you must then some prize for me provide. Shall no man unrewarded go but I? This said, Achilles to the King reply'd, Atrides, that on booty have your eye, You know divided is, or sold the prey Which never can resumed be again. But send her home. When we shall have sack'd Troy Your loss shall be repaid with triple gain. No, said Atrides, that I never meant; D'ye think 'tis fit that you your shares retain? And only mine unto the God be sent, That unrewarded none but I remain? I thought it reason th' Argives should collect Amongst themselves the value (how they list) And give it me before they did expect This Prize of mine should be by me dismist. If they'l do that, 'tis well. If not, I'le go To your, or Ajar, or Ulysses tent, And take his prize, and right my self will so, wherewith I think he will not be content. But since there's time enough to speak of this, Let's ready make a Ship with able Row'rs, And th' Hecatombe, to go with fair Chryseis, And (to direct) one of the Counsellors; Ajax, Idomeneus, Ulysses, or Your self may go, Achilles, if you please, And do the bus'ness you are pleading for, And if you can th' offended God appease. O impudence (Achilles then reply'd) What other of th' Achaeans willingly Will when you only for your self provide, Go where you bid, or fight with th' enemy? Against the Trojans I no quarrel have. In Pthia plundring they were never seen, Nor ever thence my Kine or Horses drave, Nor could; the Sea and great Hills are between.
Only for yours and Menelaus sake, To honour gain for you we came to Troy, Whereof no notice (Dogshead) now you take, But threaten me my prize to take away; Which by my labour I have dearly bought, And by th' Achaeans given me has been. And when the City Troy we shall have got, Your share will great, mine little be therein. For though my part be greatest in the pain, Yet when unto division we come, You will expect the greatest part o' th' gain, And that with little I go weary home. Then farewel Troy. To Sea I'le go again, And back to Pthia. Then it will be seen When you without me shall at Troy remain, What Honour and what Riches you shall win. Go when you will, (said Agamemnon) fly, Ile not entreat you for my sake to stay. When you are gone more honour'd shall be I, Nor Jove (I hope) will with you go away. In you I shall but loose an enemy That only loves to quarrel and to fight. The Gods have giv'n you strength I not deny. Go 'mongst your Myrmidons and use your might. I care not for you, nor your anger fear, For after I have sent away Chryseis, And satisfi'd the God, I'le not forbear To fetch away from you the fair Briseis, And that by force. For I would have you see How much to mine inferior is your might, And others fear t' oppose themselves to me. This swell'd Achilles choler to the height. And made him study what to do were best, To draw his Sword and Agamemnon kill, Or take some time his anger to digest. His Sword was drawn, yet doubtful was his Will. But Juno, that of both of them took care, Sent Pallas down, who coming stood behind Achilles, and laid hold upon his Hair. Whereat Achilles wondring in his minde,
Turn'd back, and by the terror of her eyes Knew her; but by none else perceiv'd was she. Come you (said he) to see the injuries That are by Agamemnon done to me? So great (O Goddess Pallas) is his pride, As I believe it cost him will his life. I hither came (Athena then reply'd) To put an end to this unlucky strife. From Heaven I hither was by Juno sent, (That loves you both, and of you both takes care) Drawing of Swords and Blood-shed to prevent. But as for evil words you need not spare. For the wrong done you he shall trebly pay Another time. Hold then. Your Sword forbear. I must (then said Achilles) you obey, Though wrong'd. Who hears not Gods, the Gods not hear. This said, his mighty Sword again he sheath'd, And Pallas up unto Olympus flew. Achilles still nothing but Choler breath'd, And Agamemnon thus revil'd anew. Dogs-face, and Drunkard, Coward that thou art, That hat'st to lead the people out to fight. Nor yet to lye in ambush hast the heart, And painfully watch in the field all night. But thou to take from other men their due (Safe lying in the Camp) more pleasure hast. But fools they are that ruled are by you, Or else this injury had been your last. But this I'le say, and with an Oath make good. (Now by this Scepter, which hath left behind The stock whereon it once grew in the wood, And never more shall have nor leaf nor rind, And by Achaean Princes now is born By whom Jove's Laws to th' People carried be.) You hear now what a great Oath I have sworn: If ere the Achaeans shall have need of me, And Agamemnon cannot them relieve. When Hector fills the field with bodies slain, And Agamemnon only for them grieve, They my assistance wish for shall in vain.
This said, Achilles threw the Scepter down That stuck all over was with Nails of Gold; And Nestor rose, of Pyle that wore the Crown, Wise and sweet Orator and Captain old. His words like Honey dropped from his tongue. Two ages he in battle honour gain'd. For all that while he youthful was and strong, And with the third age now in Pyle he reign'd. What grief t' Achaea coming is, said he, O Gods, what joy to Priam and his Seed, How glad will all the Trojans be to see You two that all the rest in pow'r exceed, With your own hands shed one anothers blood! I elder am, do then as I advise. For I conversed have with men as good, That yet my counsel never did despise. Perithous and Dryas were great men, And Polyphemus and Exadius, Such as for strength I ne'er shall see agen; And so were Caeneus, and Theseus. The strongest of mankind were these, and slew The strongest of wild beasts that haunt the Wood. These strong men I convers'd withal and knew; And with them also I did what I cou'd. With these no other could contend in fight. Yet they from Pyle thought fit to call me forth Far off; nor ever did my counsel slight. Think not therefore my counsel nothing worth. Atrides take not from him, though you can, The Damsel which the Greeks have given him. Forbear the King (Pelides.) For the man Whom Jove hath crown'd is made of Jove a limb. Though you be strong, and on a Goddess got, Atrides is before you in command. Atrides, be but you to peace once brought, T' appease Achilles I will take in hand, Who is (while we are lying here) our Wall. To this Atrides answered again, I nothing can deny of this at all. But he amongst us thinks he ought to raign,
And give the Law to all as he thinks fit. But I am certain that shall never be. He well can fight; the Gods have granted it, But they nere taught him words of infamy. Then interrupting him Achilles said, I were a Wretch and nothing worth indeed, If I what ever you command obey'd. I will no more to what you say take heed. But this I tell you, if you take away The Damsel which is mine by your own gift, I do not mean for that to make a Fray Amongst the Greeks, or once my hand to lift. Fetch her your self Atrides, but take heed Against my will you nothing else take there. Try; that th'Achaeans may see how you speed, And how your black blood shall run down my Spear. Thus in disorder the Assembly ends. Achilles to his own Ships took his way, Patroclus with him and his other friends. And Agamemnon then without delay Lanched a Bark, and in go Row'rs twice ten. Aboard the Maid and th'Hecatombe they lay. Ulysses went Commander of the men. And swiftly then the Ship cuts out her way. And then Atrides th'Army purify'd, And threw into the Sea the Purgament. Then sacrific'd o'th'sands by the Sea side A Hecatombe. To Heaven went up the sent. And busie were the people. But the King Still on his quarrel with Achilles thought, And how Briseis from his Tent to bring. For what he threatn'd he had not forgot. But sent Talthybius and Eurybates T'Achilles Tent to fetch Briseis thence. (Two publick servants of the King were these Ordain'd to carry his commandements.) If he refuse (said he) to let her go, I'le thither go my self with greater force And take her thence, whether he will or no. Which, angry as he is, will vex him worse.
The Messengers, though not well pleased, went Unto the Fleet o'th' Myrmidons, and there They found Achilles sitting by his Tent. Well pleas'd he was not. And they silent were, And stood still, struck with fear and reverence. Achilles seeing that, spake first, and said, Come near. To me you have done no offence. Go you Patroclus and lead forth the Maid, And give her to these men, that they may be To Gods and Men, and to th'unbridled man My Witnesses, when they have need of me To save th'Achaeans, which he never can. For what can he devise of any worth? Or how can he the Greeks in battle save? This said, Patroclus led Briseis forth, And to Atrides Messengers her gave. She with them went, though much against her heart. Achilles from his friends went off and pray'd. And sitting with his face to th' Sea apart Weeping, unto his Mother Thetis said, Mother, though Jove have given me so small A time of life, I could contented be, Had I not been dishonoured withal, And forc'd to bear such open injury. Thetis in th'inmost closets of the Deep, Sat with the old God Nereus, and heard. And not enduring long to hear him weep, Above the Sea like to a Mist appear'd, And by him sat, and stroak'd his head, and said, Why weep you Child? What is't that grieves you so? Tell me, speak out. Of what are you afraid? Come, whatsoever 'tis let me it know. Mother (said he) 'tis not to you unknown, When we took Thebe, and had brought away The Captives and the Riches of the Town, Chryseis fell t'Atrides for his prey. And how her father Chryses came to th'Fleet With Ransome great his Daughter to redeem, And having in his hands the Ensigns meet Which did his Priestly dignity beseem,
A Golden Scepter and a Crown of Bays, Unto the Princes all made his request. But to the two Atrides chiefly prays, Who of the Argive Army were the best. O Sons of Atreus, may the Gods grant you A safe return from Troy with Victory; And you on me compassion may shew, Receive these Gifts, and set my Daughter free; And have respect to Jove's and Leto's son. To this the Princes all gave their consent, Except King Agamemnon. He alone, And with sharp language from the Fleet him sent. Away the Old-man goes, and as he went, Against the Greeks he to Apello pray'd; Who heard him, and the Plague amongst them sent, Which dayly multitudes of men destroy'd. Of which the Prophet, being ask'd the cause, Said, 'was for th'injury to Chryses done. I mov'd to send her back. Then angry was Atrides, though beside Atrides, none. And though he too has sent her now away, Yet what he threat'ned he has brought to pass. His Officers from me have forc'd my prey, And Agamemnon now Briseis has. And now, if ever, let me have your aid, If you have holpen Jove with word or deed; (For in my Fathers house you oft have said, That heretofore you stood him in great steed, When other Gods to bind him had decreed, Juno and Neptune, Pallas and the rest, You to him came and from his bonds him freed. For up you setch'd Briareus the best Of Titans all, whom men Aegaeon call, The Gods Briareus, with a hundred hands, And set him next to Jove. No God at all Then durst to Jupiter approach with bonds) Put Jove in mind of this, and him intreat The Trojan hands to fortifie in fight, And to repel the Greeks with slaughter great, That in their goodly King they may delight,
And Agamemnon count what he hath won By doing such dishonour to the best Of th'Argives, and that has such service done. Ay me, (said Thetis) would you could here rest Unhurt, ungriev'd. For I have born you to Short life. And not far from you is your Fate. And grievous 'tis to be dishonour'd too. But I to Jove will all you say relate When I go to Olympus. Till then stay, And angry though you are, from war forbear. To Blackmoor-land the Gods went yesterday, And twelve daies hence agen they will be there. This said, the Goddess went away, and left Her Son Achilles with his Anger striving, For that he had been of his prize bereft. And then Ulysses at the Port arriving Of Chryse, first his Sails he furl'd, and stow'd Them on the Deck together with the Mast; And with their Oars their Ship ashore they row'd, And out their Anchors threw; and ty'd her fast. And on the Peach the men descending laid The Victims in good order on the Sand. When this was done, they disimbark'd the Maid. And then Ulysses took her by the hand, And brought her to the Altar, where the Priest Her Father stood, and to him spake, and said, O Chryses see, Atrides hath dismist Your Daughter, and this Hecatombe hath paid. By Agamemnon we are hither sent The same to offer, and t'Apollo pray, That he accept it will, and be content The Sickness from the Greeks to take away. This said, he put Chryseis to his hand, And he with great contentment her receiv'd. Then all with Salt and Barley ready stand, And Chryses pray'd with hands to Heaven upheav'd. Hear me Apollo with the Silver Bow, That dost in Tenedos and Cylla reign, And heardst my Pray'r against the Greeks, hear now, And from them send the Pestilence again.
When Chryses had thus to Apollo pray'd, Then pray'd they all; and Salt and Barley threw Upon the Victims; which they kill'd and flay'd. But from the Altar first they them withdrew. And then the Thighs cut off they slit in twain, And round about they cover them with fat, And one part on the other laid again. The Priest himself came when they had done that, And burnt them on a fire of cloven wood; And as they burning were pour'd on black Wine. Young men with Spits five-branched by them stood. When burnt the Thighs were for the Pow'r divine, And Entrails eaten, the rest cut in joynts Before the fire they roasted skillfully, Pierc'd thorow with the Spits that had five points; And took it up when roasted thorowly. When ended was their work, began the Feast; Where nothing wanting was of what was good. And having thirst and hunger dispossest, And filled with sweet Wine the Temp'rers stood. Then round the Cups were born; and all day long Sitting they celebrated Phoebus might, And magnifi'd his goodness in sweet Song, And he in his own praises took delight. But when the Sun had born away his light, Upon the Sands they laid them down to sleep And when again Aurora came in sight, Again they lanch their Ship into the deep. A good fore-wind Apollo with them sent. Then with her breast the Ship the water tore (Which by her down on both sides roaring went) And soon arrived at the Trojan shore. And there they drew her up again to Land, And ev'ry man went which way he thought best. Achilles yet not able to command The anger that still boyled in his breast, No longer would the Greeks at Councel meet, Nor with them any more to battle come; But sullen sat before his Tent and Fleet, Wishing to see the Argives beaten home.
Twelve times the Sun had risen now and set, The Gods t' Olympus all returned were; Thetis her Sons complaints did not forget, But up she carried them to Jupiter. Upon the highest top alone sat he Of the great many-headed Hill, and laid One hand on's breast, th'other on his knee. And in that posture thus unto him said, O Father Jove, if for you I have done Service at any time by word or deed, Repay it now I pray you to my Son Whom Agamemnon hath dishonoured. Short time the Fates have given him to live. Atrides taken from him hath his prey. Now Victory unto the Trojans give Till Agamemnon for his fault shall pay. Thus prayed she. But Jove made no reply. Nor took she off her hands; but pray'd anew; O Jove my Prayer grant me, or deny, That I may know what power I have in you. Then Jove much grieved, spake to her, and said, 'Twixt me and Juno 'twill a quarrel make. For she before the Gods will me upbraid, When she shall know the Trojans part I take. But go, lest she observe what you do here. I'le give a Nod to all that you have spoken, That you may safely trust to and not fear. A Nod from me is an unfailing token. This said, with his black Brows he to her nodded, Wherewith displayed were his Locks divine; Olympus shook at stirring of his God-head; And Thetis from it jump'd into the Brine, And Jupiter unto his house went down. The Gods arose and waited on him thither: But unto Juno it was not unknown That he and Thetis had confer'd together, Who presently to Jove her husband went, And angry him rebukt with language keen. You that still in my absence tricks invent, What God hath with you now in counsel been?
Though unto me you hate to tell your mind. Juno (said Jove) you must not hope to hear All whatsoere it be, I have design'd. But what I mean shall come unto the ear Of all the Gods, you first of all shall know. But what from all together I shall hide Ask me no more, I will not tell you, though My Wife you be. Juno then thus reply'd. Harsh Chronides, what words of yours are these! To ask you questions I'le henceforth forbear, And quietly let you do what you please. But one thing I must tell you that I fear. Thetis I fear has gotten your consent, For her Sons sake the Argives to oppress. Suspect you can (said Jove) but not prevent, Which doth but give me cause to love you less. Though it be true, 'twas I would have it so. Therefore sit still and do as I would have you, Lest when my mighty hands about you go, Not all the other Gods in Heav'n shall save you. Then Juno silent sat with grief and fear; And all the Gods i'th' House of Jove did grieve. But Vulcan the renown'd Artificer Stood up his Mother Juno to relieve. O what will this come to at last, said he, If you for mortals thus shall be at odds The tumult than the chear will greater be. What pleasure can be this unto the Gods? And though my Mother wiser be than I, Yet thus much I'll not doubt her to advise, That with my Fathers Will she would comply, That no such quarrel may hereafter rise. For by the roots he can the World pluck up. Therefore I pray you Mother speak him fair; He'll soon be pleas'd. Then filled he a Cup Of Nectar sweet, and bore it to her Chair; And to her said, Mother, I pray you hold, And do no more my Fathers choler move. If you be beaten I shall but behold, And grieve I am not strong enough for Jove.
I would have helpt you once, when by the foot He threw me down to Lemnos from the skie. All the day long I was a falling to't, Where more than half dead taken up was I. And there by th'Sincians I was taken up. When Vulcan had his History told out, His Mother on him smil'd, and took the Cup, And to the Gods he Nectar bore about. And then the Gods laught all at once outright To see the lame and sooty Vulcan skink. And all the day from morning unto night Ambrosia they eat, and Nectar drink. Apollo played, and alternately The Muses to him sung. When night was come, Then gently Sleep sollicited each eye, And to his house each God departed home. And Jupiter went up unto the bed Where he at other times was wont to lye When sleep came on him, and laid down his head To take repose; and Juno lay him by.
ILIAD. LIB. II. THe Gods, and Princes of the Argive Hoast Slept all night long. Jove only waking lay, And many projects in his mind he tost, To grace Achilles, and the Greeks annoy. At last a Dream he call'd. False Dream, said he, Go, hye to Agamemnons Tent, and say, Distinctly as you bidden are by me. Bid him bring up his Army now to Troy; For now the time is come he shall it take. The Gods no more thereon deliberate, But all consented have for Juno's sake, No longer to delay the Trojan Fate. Then with his errand went the Dream away, And quickly was at Agamemnons Tent. And finding him as fast asleep he lay, Up presently unto his head he went. And in the shape of Nestor to him spake. Sleep you, said he, Atrides? 'Tis not fit For him from whom the people counsel take, That sleep all night upon his eyes should sit. But Jove looks to you. Listen then to me. For 'tis from Jove that I am to you come. He bids you lead the Army presently Up every man to th' Walls of Ilium. For now the time is come you shall it take. The Gods no more thereon deliberate. But all consented have for Juno's sake, No longer to delay the Trojan Fate. And therefore when you wake forget it not. This said, the Dream departed. And the King Believ'd it as an Oracle, and thought To take Troy now as sure as any thing;
Vain man presuming from a Dream Jove's will, Who meant to th' Greeks and Trojans yet much wo, And with their carcasses the field to fill Before the Greeks should back to Argos go. The King awak't, and sat upon his Bed, Puts on his Coat and a great Cloak upon, Handsome and new; his Dream still in his head; And then his Silver-studded Sword puts on. And then he took his Scepter in his hand Which formerly his Ancestors had born, And went to th' Ships whereof he had command. And to the Gods with light then came the Morn. Then Agamemnon bids to Counsel call. The Cryers call'd, the Greeks together went. But first he had with the old Captains all Consulted what to do at Nestors Tent, And said he dream'd that one like Nestor spake To him and said, Atrides 'tis not fit For one of whom the People Counsel take That sleep upon his eyes all night should sit. But Jove secures you. Listen then to me, For 'tis from him that I unto you come. He bids you lead the Army presently Up every man to th' Walls of Ilium. For now the time is come you shall it take. The Gods thereon no more deliberate, But all consented have for Juno's sake, No longer to delay the Trojan Fate. And therefore when you wake forget it not. This said, the Dream went off again, and I How to th'assáult the Army may be brought As far as we can safely fain would try. I'le first give them advice to go away, As if there were no hope to gain the Town. But you must then be sure to make them stay. This said, King Agamemnon sate him down, And Nestor, rose. Captains of th'Hoast, said he, This Dream had it been told b' another man, Feigred and foolish would have seem'd to me. But since the King is th'Author (if we can)
Let us perswade the people to take Arms. And having said, began to lead away. And now the People coming were in swarms. For as the Bees in a fair Summers day Come out in clusters from the hollow rock, And light upon the flow'rs that honey yield; So to th'Assembly did the People flock, And bristling stood with expectation fill'd. When they sat down, it made the ground to sigh, The Lords nine Cryers then amongst them sent To make them silent, or to drown their cry, And from the press their chairs to defend. With much ado at last they silent were. Then Agamemnon took into his hand His Scepter (which was made by Mulciber For. Jove to carry when he did command. Jove gave it afterward to Mercury; And Mercury to Pelops gave the same. From Pelops it went down successively To Atreus, and to Thyestes came. From him it came to Agamemnons hand, Who many Islands and all Argos sway'do.) And leaning now upon it with his hand, Unto the Princes of the Army said. Servants of Mars, Commanders of the Greeks, O what great trouble Jove involves me in! Disgracefully to send me home he seeks, Although he told me I the Town should win, And now (when I have lost so many men) It seems to play with men he takes delight. What Towns has he destroy'd, and will agen Destroy still more to exercise his might? For both to us and our posterity 'Twill be a great disgrace to go to Troy. With so great multitudes, and baffled be, And nothing done again to come away. If we and they should on a Truce agree, And one by one they muster up their men; And we should count how many tens we be, And make one Trojan fill out wine for ten,
Many a Ten would want a man to skink. So much in number we the Town exceed. But when upon their many Aids I think, I wonder less that we no better speed. Nine Years are gone; our Cordage spoil'd with rain; Our Ships are rotted, and our wives at home, And Children dear expect us back again. Nor know we of the War what will become. Come then and all agree on what I say, Let's put to Sea, and back t'Achaea flie. We shall not win the Town although we slay. This said, the Army with applauses high Consented all (save those that had been by In Counsel of the Princes of Achaea) And moved were like to the billows high That rolled are by some great Wind at Sea. Or as, when in a field of well-grown Wheat The Ears encline by a sharp wnd opprest; So bow'd the heads in this Assembly great When their consent they to the King exprest. Then going to the Ships cry'd Ha la la. Great dust they raised, and encouraged Each other to the Sea his Ship to draw, And cleans'd the way to th' water from each bed; And streight unpropt their Ships; and to the skie Went up the noise. Then Juno sent away Pallas. Pallas (quoth she) the Greeks will flie, And Helen leave behind, for whom at Troy So many of the Greeks their lives have lost, And stay'd so long in vain before the Town. And then will Priam and the Trojans boast, Unless you quickly to the Ships go down. Go quickly then, try if you can prevail, With hopeful words to slay them yet ashore, And take away their sudden list to sail, And let the Ships lye as they did before. This said, the Goddess leapt down to the ground, From high Olympus, and stood on the sand Where lay the Greeks. Ulysses there she found Angry to see the people go from Land.
Ulysses, said she, do you mean to fly, And here leave Helen after so much cost Of time and blood, and shew your vanity; And leave the Trojans of their Rape to boast? Speak to each one, try if you can prevail With hopeful words to stay them on the shore, And take away this sudden list to sail, And let the Ships lye where they lay before. Ulysses then ran t' Agamemnons Tent, And took his staff (the mark of chief command) And laying by his Cloak to th' Ships he went Amongst th' Acheans with that staff in's hand. And when he met with any Prince or Peer, He gently said, Fear does not you become. You should not only you your self stay here, But also others keep from flying home. Atrides now did but the Argives try, And those he sees most forward to be gone Shall find perhaps least favour in his eye. For of the Secret Counsel you were none. Deep rooted is the Anger of a King, To whom high Jove committed has the Law, And Justice left to his distributing. But when a common man he bawling saw, He bang'd him with his staff, and roughly spake. Be silent, and hear what your betters say. For who of you doth any notice take In Counsel or in Martial Array? Let one be King (we cannot all be Kings) To whom Jove gave the Scepter and the Laws To rule for him. Thus he the people brings Off from their purpose, and to counsel draws. Then to th' Assembly back again they pass'd, With noise like that the Sea makes when it breaks Against the Shore, and quiet were at last. Thersites only standeth up and speaks. One that to little purpose could say much, And what he thought would make men laugh, would say. And for an ugly fellow none was such 'Mongst all the Argives that besieged Troy.
Lame of one leg he was; and lookt asquint; His shoulders at his breast together came; His head went tapering up into a point, With stragling and short hair upon the same. Ulysses and Achilles most him haed, For these two Princes he us'd most to chide; And Agamemnon now aloud he rated, And thereby anger'd all the Greeks beside. What is't Atrides (said he) stays you here? Your Tent is full of Brass; Women you have The best of all that by us taken were, For alwaies unto you the choice we gave. Or look you for more Gold that yet may come For ransome of some prisoner whom I Or other Greek shall take at Ilium, Or for some young maid to keep privately? But Kings ought not their private ease to buy With publick danger and a common woe. Come women of Achaia, let us fly, And let him spend his gettings on the Foe. For then how much we help him he will know, That has a better than himself disgrac'd. But that Achilles is to anger slow, That injury of his had been his last. This said, Ulysses straightway to him went, And with sour look, and bitter language said, Prater, that to thy self seems eloquent, How darest thou alone the King t'upbraid? A greater Coward than thou art there's none 'Mongst all the Greeks that came with us to Troy. Else 'gainst the King thy tongue would not so run. Thou seek'st-but an excuse to run away. Because we know not how we shall come off As yet from Troy, must you the King upbraid, And at the Princes of the Army scoff, As if they too much honour to him paid? But I will tell you one thing, and will do't. If here again I find you fooling thus, Then from my Shoulders let my Head be cut, Or let me loose my Son Telemachus,
If I not strip you naked to the skin, And send you soundly beaten to the Ships With many stripes and ugly to be seen. This said, he basted him both back and hips. Thersites shrug'd, and wept, sat down, and ad His shoulders black and blew, dy'd by the staff. Look'd scurvily. The people that were sad But just before, now could not chuse but laugh. And, Oh said one t'another standing near Ulysses many handsome thing has done, When we in Councel or in Battle were, A better deed than this is he did none, That has so silenced this railing knave, And of his peevish humour stay'd the flood, As he no more will dare the King to brave. And then to speak Ulysses ready stood. Where Pallas like a Crier did appear, And standing by him silence did command, That also they that sat far off might hear. Then spake he, with the Scepter in his hand. The people, O Atrides, go about To put you on an act will be your shame, Forgetting what they promis'd setting out, Not to return till Troy they overcame. But now like Widow-women they complain, Or little Children longing to go home. To be from home a month, it is a pain To them that to their loving Wives would come. To Sea they'ld go though certain to be tost By many a sturdy wind upon the same. But they have now lyen here Nine Years almost; I cannot therefore say they are to blame. But certainly after so long a stay 'Tis very shameful empty back to go. Let us at least abide till know we may Whether what Chalchas said be true or no. For this we all know and are witnesses (Excepting only those that since are dead) When we from Aulis went to pass the Seas, And by contrary winds were hindered,
That there we to the Gods did sacrifice Upon an Altar close unto a Spring, That of a Plane-tree at the root did rise; And how we saw there a prodigious thing. mighty Serpent with a back blood-red From out the Spring glided up to the Tree, The boughs whereof were ev'ry way far spread. On th'utmost chanc'd a Sparrows nest to be. Young ones were in it eight, with th'old one nine; The old one near the Nest stay'd fluttering, And grievously the while did cry and whine. At last the Serpent catcht her by the wing. And when the Serpent had devour'd all nine, He presently was turn'd into a stone; That we might see from Jove it was a Signe Of what should afterward at Troy be done. We were amaz'd so strange a thing to see, Till Chalchas rose and did the same explain. This is a certain Sign from Jove, said he, That he intends to do the like again. For as the Snake devour'd nine birds in all; So nine years long we shall make war at Troy, And after nine years Ilium shall fall. But in the tenth year we shall come away. This then said Chalchas; and all hitherto Is come to pass. Therefore Achaeans stay, Since nothing here remaineth now to do, But overcoming the old Town of Troy. This said, the people made a mighty noise (Which bounding from the Ships was twice as great) Sounding of nothing but Ulysses praise. And up then rose old Nestor from his Seat. Fie, Fie, (said he) why sit we talking here? VVhere are your Promises, and whither gone' Our Oaths and Vows? To what end did we swear? VVhere be the hands that we rely'd upon? VVhat good will't do to sit upon the Shore, How long soever be our time to stay? Hold fast, Atrides, as you did before The power you have; and lead us up to Troy.
A man or two you safely may neglect, Though they dissent and secret counsel ake. For they'l be able nothing to effect, Before to Argos our retreat we make, And know if Jove have spoken true or no. For when we went aboard to go for Troy, Jove light'ned to the right hand, which all know A sign of granting is for what we pray. Let none of you long therefore to be gone, Till of some Trojans wife he hath his will, And ta'ne a not unfit revenge upon The Trojans that have Helen us'd as ill. But he that for all this is fiercely bent On going home, and thinks that counsel best, And laies hand on his Ship, let him be sent Down into Erebus before the rest. But you, O King, think well, and take advce First into Tribes the Army to divide, And Tribes again into Fraternities, That Tribe may Tribe, and Fellow Fellow aid. The Leaders and the Souldiers then you'll know Which of them merits praise, and which is naught. And if the Town you do not overthrow, VVhether on us or Jove to lay the fault. To this Atrides answer made and said, O Nestor, Father, you exceed all men In giving Counsel. VVould the Gods me ad VVith Counsellors such as you are but ten, The Town of Priam we should quickly win. Nor had we now so long about it staid, If Jupiter had not engag'd me in A quarrel with Achilles for a Maid. But if we come but once more to agree, The evil day from Troy will not be far. Now take your food that we may ready be, And able to endure the toil of war. Let ev'ry man now sharpen well his Spear, His Buckler mend, and give his Horses meat, And look well to his Chariot every where, That we may fight all day without retreat.
For we shall fight I doubt not all day long, And never cease as long as we can see. Of many a Shield sweaty will be the Thong, And Spear upon the hand lye heavily; And many Horses at the Charret sweat. But he that willingly to avoid the fight Shall stay behind, or to the Ships retreat, His body shall be food for Dog and Kite. This said, the People pleas'd with what was spoken, Approv'd the same with Shouts, as loud as when Betwixt great waves and rocks the Sea is broken. Then from the Assembly they return agen. nd at their Ships they sacrifice and pray Each one to th' God in whom he trusted most, That he might by his favour come away Alive, with whole Limbs from the Trojan Hoast. ut Agamemnon sacrific'd a Steer To Jove, of five years old, and to the Feast all'd such as in the Army Princes were, Or held to be for Chivalry the best, estor, Idomeneus, two Ajaces, And the Son of Tydeus Diomed, The sixth Ulysses Laertiads, And Menelaus thither came unbid. or well he knew his brother would be sad. About the Victim then the Assembly stands, nd in heir hands they Salt and Barley had. Then pray'd Atrides holding up his hands; reat, glorious Jove, that dwellest in the Sky, O let not Phoebus carry hence the day ill Priam's Palace proud in ashes lye, And Hector sprawling in the dust of Troy, nd many Trojans with him. So pray'd he. And Jove was with his Sacrifice content. ut unto all his Pray'r did not agree, Intending still his labour to augment. When all had pray'd, they Salt and Barley threw Upon the Victim which they kill'd and flay'd. ut from the Altar they it first withdrew. The Thighs they slit, and far upon them laid.
And burnt them in a fire of cloven wood; The Entrails ore the fire they broyled eat, The rest they rost on Spits that by them stood; And when they rosted were, sell to their meat. When the desire of meat and drink was gone, Nestor stood up, and to Atrides said, Let us no longer leave the work undone, Which Jupiter himself has on us laid. Let's call the Greeks together out of hand, That we may make them ready for the War. Atrides then to th' Cryers gave command T'assemble them. They soon assembled are. And then the Princes went into the field, And them in Tribes and in Fraternities Distinguished. And Pallas with her Shield, (An undecaying Shield and of great price, Rais'd at the brim with orbs of beaten Gold An hundred, worth an hundred Cows at least.) With this the Goddess went, to make them bold, Courage inspiring into ev'ry breast. And now their hearts are all on fire to fight, And vanisht is the thought of their returning. And such as of a Mountain is the sight Upon whose top a large thick Wood stands burning; Such (as they marching were) the splendor was, And seemed to reach up unto the Sky, Reflected from so many Arms of Brass Bright and new polished unto the eye. As when of many sorts the long-neckt Fowls Unto the large and flow'ry Plain repair Through which Caysters water gently rolls In multitudes high flying in the Air, Then here and there fly priding in their wing, And by and by at once light on the ground, And with great clamour make the Air to ring, And th'Earth whereon they settle to refound; So when th'Acheans went up from the Fleet, And on their march were to the Town of Troy, The Earth resounded loud with hoofs and sect. But at Scamander's flow'ry bank they stay,
n number like the flowers of the field, Or leaves in Spring, or multitude of Flies n some great Dairy 'bout the vessels fill'd, Delighted with the milk, dance, fall and rise. The Leaders then amongst them went, and brought Them quickly into Tribes and Companies, s ev'ry Goat herd quickly knows his Goat Whether it be another mans or his. And Agamemnon there amongst the rest Was eminent. Like Jove in head and face; elted like Mars; like Neptune's was his breast. Such beauty Jove upon the man did place. Now, Muses, ye that in Olympus dwell, (For Goddesses you are, and present were, And all that pass'd at Troy can truely tell, And we can nothing know but what we hear.) Who of the Greeks at Troy commanded men? The common Souldiers you need not name. For I should never say them ore agen, Although I had as many tongues as Fame. Boetia, wherein contained be Eteonus, and Schoenus, and Scolus, Aulis, Thespeia, Graea, Hyrie, Harma, Eilestus, and Mycalessus, Erythrae, Elion, Ocaliae, Hylae, Eutress, Thisbe, Peleon, Plataea, Aliareus, and Copae, Coronia, Glisse, Thebe, Medeon, Onchestus Neptune's Town, Nissa divine, And Midias, and utmost Anthedon, And Arne that great plenty has of Wine. The which in all made fifty Ships. And those Commanded were by Archesilaus, And Prothoenor and Peneleos, And Leitus, and with them Clonius. The Seamen in each one to sixscore rose.
Aspledon and Orchomenus besides Did set forth twenty good black Ships to Sea. Ascalaphus and Ialmenus were guides, Begot by Mars upon Astyoche. The Towns of Phocis, Crissa, Panopea, And Cyparissus, Python, and Daulis, And on the brook of Cephisus Lilaea, And Anemoria, and Hyampolis, And other Towns o'th' bank of Cephisus, Made ready forty good Ships for the Seas, Ruled by Schedius and Epistraphus The Sons of Iphitus Naubolides. The Locrians the lesser Ajax led, Of King Oileus the valiant Son. (For he was lower more than by the head Than th'other Ajax Son of Telamon) A linnen Armour he wore on his Breast. But understood as well to use a Spear, Or better, than could any of the rest That in the Army of th' Achaeans were. There went with him from Cynus and Opus, From Bessa, Scarphe, Thronius, Aygiae, Taphe, Calliarus, Boagrius, Forty good Ships well fitted for the Sea. Th' Euboeans were by Elephenor led, That dwell in Chalcis and Eretriae, Cerinthus, Dion (that holds high her head) Carystus, Styra, and in Istiaea. And by the name Abantes they all go, Goodmen, and that in battle use the Spear, And love to pierce the Armour of a foe. And these on forty Ships embarqued were. From Athens (who Erectheus people were) Aurora's Son, by Pallas nourished In her own Temple, in which ev'ry year Many good Bulls and Lambs are offered, Under Menesteus fifty Ships did pass, Who for the ord'ring of a battle well Of Horse or Foot the best of all men was, Save Nestor, who in age did him excel.
From Salamis came to the Trojan Shore, And by the greater Ajax govern'd were, The Son of Telamon, twelve good ships more, And lay at anchor to th' Athenians near. Argos, Tyrinthe, Troezen, Asine, And Epdaurus, and Hermione, Mases and Aegina, and Eione, Amongst them all put fourscore Ships to Sea. Of which there were three Captains, Diomed, Euryalus, and Sthenelus. But they By Diomed were chiefly governed. For him they all commanded were t'obey. And from Mycenae, Corinth, Cleonoe, And Orthe, and Hyperesiae, From Sicyon, and Araethuree, And Gonoessa, and from Helice, Pellenae, Aegium, and all that Shore, An hundred Ships were laid upon the Seas; And with King Agamemnon passed ore, And his peculiar command were these. Amongst them he puts on his Armour then, Proud that he was of all the Hero's best. For of his own he thither brought most men, And chief Commander was of all the rest. From Sparta, Pharae, Messa, Brysiae, From about Otylus, with those from Laus, Helos, Amyclae, and from Aygiae, Went thirty good black Ships with Monelaus. Which from his Brothers forces stood apart, And he amongst them heart'ning them to fight, And breathing courage into every heart. For to the Trojans he bare greatest spight. Pylus, Arene, Cyparisseis, Amphigenia, Aepy, and Thryus, (Whereat a Ford i'th' stream Alpheus is) Elos, and Pteleus, and Dorius. (Here 'twas the Muses met with Thamyris The Thracian Fidler which their Art did slight, And said their Skill was not so good as his, And they depriv'd him both of Art and Sight.)
The number of the Ships those Towns set forth, In all amounted to fourscore and ten; And led were by a Captain of great worth. 'Twas Nestor the command had of these men. From Phene, Ripe, and Orchomenus, And from Enispe, and from Stratiae, Tegea, Mantinea, Stymphalus, And those that dwelled in Parrhasia, (Arcadians all, and in sharp War well skill'd) Came sixty Ships by Agapenor led, And ev'ry Ship sufficiently fill'd. But then the Ships Atrides furnished. The men of Helis, and Buprasium, And all the ground enclos'd by Hyrmine, Myrsinus, Olene, Alisium, Amongst them all put forty Ships to Sea, Led by Amphimachus and Thalpius, Diores, and Polyxenus the Son Of martial Agasthenes, and then Ten good Ships were commanded by each one. Dulichium, and th'Isles Ethinades, Sent forty Ships. Meses Commander went The Son of Phyleus, who for his ease Liv'd from his Father there in discontent. Ulysses also brought out twelve good Ships From Ithaca, Neritus, Ceph'lonia, From Same, and from Zant, and Aegylips, And from Epirus, and Croaeylia. Th' Aetolians with Thoas Andraemon's Son Sent from Pylene, and from Chalcis, and From Olenus, Pleuron, and Calydon Sent forty Ships, whereof the sole command. In Thoas was. For Oeneus was dead, And Meleager; all the Royal race. Andraemon's Son their men to Troy to lead By suffrage of the Cities chosen was. From Coss, Gortys (in the Isle of Creet) Lictus, Miletus, Phaestus, Rycius, Lycastus, and some others went a Fleet Of eighty Ships with King Idomenus.
And valiant as Mars Mriones. And nine good Ships went with Tlepolemus (That was the Son of mighty Hercules) From Lindus, Camirus, Ialissus. For Hercules Tlepolemus begat On Astyochia whom in war he won, And for her many Cities had laid flat. But after Hercules was dead and gone, Tlepolemus now grown a man, and bold, Licymnius (his Fathers Uncle) slew By th'Mothers fide, a branch of Mars, but old. Then cuts down Trees, and rigs a Navy new, And many men together gathered, And wandred till to Rhodes he came at last, And there dwelt in three Tribes distributed. Fear of his Kindred made him go in haste. And mightily in little time they throve, And ev'ry day in wealth and power grew, And favour'd were continually by Jove. For dayly he unto them riches threw. From Syme went with Nireus Ships three, Nireus that was the fairest man of all (Achilles alwaies must excepted be) But weak was Nireus, and his number small. From Casus, Carpathus, and Nisyrus, Calydnae Islands, and the Isle of Cous Went thirty Ships. Two Sons of Thessalus The Son of Hercules commanded those. And the Pelasgique Argives sent to Sea From Trechis, and from Hella, and Halus, From Pthia, and the Port of Alope, Commanded by the Son of Pleus, Fifty good Ships of Myrmidons, which some Acheans, others Hellens use to call. But these would not to any Battle come. For sullen sat ashore their General, Because Briseis they had forc'd away, Which when he won Lyrnessus, was his prize, And did Epistrophus and Mynes slay. There sa he then, but shall again arise.
From Inon, Phylace, and Pyrasus, From Pteleus, and Antron on the Sea Went forty Ships with Proteslaus, Which he commanded while alive was he. But he was dead. For as he leapt to land From out his Ship, he was the first man slain Of all th' Acheans by a Trojan hand, And left his wife to tear her hair in vain, His house at Phylace half finished. His Souldiers chose Podarces in his place, His younger Brother, who at Troy them led. A Captain good; but th'Elder better was. And they that dwelt about Bobeis Lake Iaolcus, Boebe, Pherae, Glaphyrae, Put all together Ships eleven make. Under Eumelus there were put to Sea. From rugged Olizon and Meliboea, The towns Methone and Thomacia sent Seven Ships of fifty Oars apiece to Sea, And Philoctetes their Commander went. But him the Achaeans left in Lemnos Isle, In cruel torment bitten by a Snake. And of his Ships Medon took charge the while. But better care of him the Greeks will take. From Tricca then, and from Methone steep, And from Oechalia (Seat of Eritus,) Thirty good Ships to Troy went ore the Sea, By Machaon led and Podalirius, Two skilful Sons of Aesculapius. From chalky Titanus Hyperia, and Astirius, and from Ormenius, Eurypilus did forty Ships command. And from the Towns Argissa and Gyrtone, From Oloosson, Orthe on the Hill, With those that sent were from the Town Elone, So many went as forty Ships did fill. And had two Leaders. Polypoetes one, Son of Perithous the son of Jove, And gotten by him was the day whereon He and the Lapiths' gainst the Centaurs strove,
And drave them from the Mountain Pelion. The other Leader was Leontius, Whose Father was Capaneus, who the Son Was of the valiant Lapith Coeneus. The Aenians and Perrhiboeans bold Did two and twenty good black Ships set out, From hollow Cyphus, and Dodona cold, And other habitations about, The pleasant River Titaretius, That into Peneus runs, but doth not mix, But glides like Oyl at top of Peneus. For Titaretius is a branch of Styx. These Gouneus led. Then the Magnesians sent From Towns upon the banks of Peneus, And sides of Pelion mountain eminent, Forty good Ships under swift Prothous. These were the Leaders of th' Achean forces. O Goddess tell me now who was the best In Battle of the Leaders, and whose Horses In swiftness and in force excell'd the rest. Eumelus his two Horses did surpass (Though they were females) all the rest for speed. Their colour, age, and stature equal was, Sprung in Pieria from Apollo's Breed. That terrour drew about as swift as wind.) 'Mongst Greks the greater Ajax had no Peer, (For now Achilles had the War declin'd, Whom none in Prowess equall'd or came near, Nor other Horses could with his compare.) But at his Ships he discontented staid, And full of spight which he t' Atrides bare, Whilst on the Beach idle his Soldiers plaid At who can furthest throw a Dart or Stone. The Horses loosly wandred here and there Amongst the people, and had Riders none, Or upon Lote and Cinquesoil feeding were. But the Achaeans to Scamander march'd Swiftly as when a fire runs ore a Plain Which Phoebus had with a long Summer parch'd, And going made the ground to groan again,
As when Jove angry lasheth Arimy, Which men say of Typhaeus is the bed, The earth therewith is made to groan and sigh, So groan'd the ground when they to Troy were led. Then Jove unto the Trojans Iris sent, Who old and young were then at Priams gate Assembled with the King in Parliament. Over their heads stood Iris as they sate. Her voice was like to that of Priams Son Polytes, that was watching at the Tomb Of old Aesuites, there to wait upon The coming of the Greeks to Ilium. Old man (said he) you love to hear men preach As in a time of Peace. But now 'tis War. The Greeks no more lye idle on the Beach, But at your Gates, and numberless they are, As sands by the Sea-side, or leaves in Spring. And to the City now they bring the War. Hector to you this counsel now I bring. Within the City many people are To aid you come of divers Languages. Let them that hither led them lead them here, Arm, and command them each one as he please. When she had done, dismist the people were. Hector to open all the Gates commands, And with great clamour Horse and Foot come out. Before the City a high Pillar stands, To which the field lyes open round about. And Battiea called was by men; Which 'mongst the Gods another name did bear, Myrinna's Sepulcher. And there agen The Trojans and their Succours muster'd were. The Trojans were by Hector led. The best In battle, and in number most were these, With Spear in hand, and Brass on Back and Breast. The Dardans were commanded by Aeneas, (Anchises Son; but Venus was his Mother; Amongst the Hills of Ida got he was) And joint Commanders with him were two other, Brave men, Archilochus and Acamas.
And of Zeleia the Inhabitants, Which of Mount Ida lyeth at the foot, And on the River of Aesopus stands, Under command of Pandarus were put, Son of Lycaon, and that well knew how To make an Arrow in the Air fly true. Phoebus himself had given him a Bow, And how to use the same none better knew. Th' Adrasteians and the men of Apaesus, Of Pityeia and Tereia Hill. were by Adrastus led and Amphius, Two Sons of Merops, that had mighty skill In Prophecy, and both of them forbad Themselves to venture in the War at Troy. But Fate a greater power with them had, And made them go, but brought them not away. The People of Percosia, and they That dwell upon the Banks of Practius, Arisbe, Sestus, Abydus, obey The orders of their Leader Asius The Son of Hyrtacus, whose Chariot By Horses great and black as any coal, And on it he to Ilium was brought. And of Selleis race each one a foal. Larissa was Pelasgique by descent. Under Pylaeus and Hyppothous, Two stour Pelasgique Leaders these were sent, Who both the Grandsons were of Teutomus. The Thracians on this side Hellespont, Were led by Piros and by Achamas. O'th' Cycons who do these oppose in front Troezenus Son Euphemus Leader was. From Amydon that standeth on the side Of Axius the fairest Stream that flows, The Poeons came. Pyrechmus them did guide, And arm'd they were with Arrows and with Bows. The Enneti in Paphlagonia, From whence proceedeth of wild Mules the race, Parthenius Brook and the Town Coronia, Cytorus, Sesamus, and the high place
Of th' Erithins, and of Aegyalus The charge was given to Pylomenus, And of the Halizons t' Epistrophus, But not alone; joyn'd with him was Dius Of Alybe, where is a Silver Mine. The Leaders of the Mysians were Chromis, And Enomus. Both of them could divine By flight of Birds, though they soresaw not this That in Scamander Stream they both should dye, Slain by Achilles who there massacred Many a Trojan, many a good Ally, Which to the Sea the River carried. The Phrygians from Ascania, far off, Were led by Phorcys and Ascanius; And Battle lov'd. But the Commanders of The Maeones, Mesthles and Antiphus The two Sons were of old Pylomenes, Both of them born upon Gygaea Lake, (At th' foot of Tmolus dwell the Maeones.) Amphimachus and Nastes charge did take Of those of Caria, people of rude tongue; And of Miletus, and the Hill Phtheiron, And of the Towns that seated are among The windings of Maeander, and upon Mount Mycale. And Nastes carry'd Gold Unto the Battle, like a Child or Sot; Wherewith his Life he did not buy but sold. For slain he was; his Gold Achilles got, And left him lying at the River dead. The Succours by the Lycians sent to Troy, By Glaucus were and King Sarpedon led. Far off they dwelt, and a long march had they.
ILIAD. LIB. III. WHen both the Armies were prepar'd for fight, The Trojans marched on with noise and cry. As in the air of cackling fowl a flight, Or like the Cranes when from the North they fly, The Army of Pygmaean men to charge, And shun the Winter, with a mighty cry Fly through the Air over the Ocean large; So swiftly march'd the Greeks, but silently Resolved one another to assist. And such a dust between both Hoasts did rise, As when upon the Mountains lies a Mist, Which to a stones cast limiteth the eyes. (Which good for Thieves is, but for Shepherds not) So great a dust the middle space possest. When they were near to one another got, Came Alexander forth before the rest. A Leopards skin he wore upon his Shoulders, Two Spears in hand, his Sword girt at his side, Bow at his back, and brave to the beholders; And any of th' Achean hoast defi'd. And glad was Menelaus to see this. As when a Lion finds a lusty prey, A wild Goat or a Stag, well pleased is, And hungry seizes him without delay, Although by Hunters and by Hounds pursu'd; So glad was Menelaus him to see. And soon as he his person had well view'd, Arm'd from his Charrer to the ground leapt he. Aslured (as he thought) revenge to take But soon as Alexander once saw that, He fled into the throng, as from a Snake Seen unawares, trembling and pale thereat.
Then Hector him with words of great disgrace Reprov'd and said, Fine man and Lover keen, Cajoler, that confidest in thy face, I would to God thou born hadst never been, Or never hadst been married. For that A great deal better had been of the twain, Than to be scorn'd of men, and pointed at For one that durst not his own word maintain. O how the Greeks are laughing now to see That so absurdly they themselves mistook, Supposing you some mighty man to be That are worth nothing, judging by your look. Was't you to Lacedemon pass'd the deep, And setch'd fair Helen thence (the bane of Troy) And now when it concerns you her to keep, You dare not in her husbands presence stay? For you would quickly know what kind of man You have bereav'd unjustly of his wise. Neither your Cittern, nor your Beauty can, Nor other gifts of Venus save your life. Were not the Trojans fearful more than needs, You had a Coat of stones by this time had, A fit reward for all your evil deeds. This answer then to Hector, Paris made. Hector, since your reproof is just (said he) And your hard language (as when helpt by Art A Shipwrights Axstrikes deep into a tree) Like riggid Steel has cut me to the heart. If with Atrides you would have me fight, Object not Venus favours ('tis unfit The Gifts of the immortal Gods to slight) But make the Greeks and Trojans both to sit. And in the midst set me and Menelaus, And which of us shall have the Victory, Helen be his, and all the Wealth she has, And 'twixt the Greeks and Trojans Amity. Let this be sworn to, that we may reman At Troy in quiet, and the Greek repass To Arges and Achaea back again. At this brave profer Hector joyful was;
And stepping forth the Trojan Ranks kept in With both his hands o'th' middle of his Spear. And to shoot at him then the Greeks begin, And many took up stones and hurling were. But Agamemnon with a voice as high As he could raise it, to the Greeks cry'd, Hold. Throw no more Stones, let no more Arrows fly. Hector to us has somewhat to unfold. This said, they held their hands, and silent were; And Hector both to Greeks and Trojans spake. May you be pleased on both sides to hear The motion I from Alexander make. Let Arms (said he) on both sides be laid by, And in the midst set him and Menelaus. And which of them shall have the Victory, Be Helen his, with all the wealth she has. And let the rest an Oath on both sides take The Pacts agreed on not to violate. When this was said, then Menelaus spake. And both the Armies with great silence sate. Hear me too then, said Menelaus, who By Alexander have been most offended. If you'll do that which I advise you to, The quarrel he began will soon be ended. Which of us two shall fall in single fight, Let him dye only, and the rest agree. Bring forth two Lambs, one black, another white, To th'Earth and Sun a Sacrifice to be. Another we will sacrifice to Jove. And let the old King Priam present be, (His proud Sons think themselves all Oaths above) That what is sworn he may performed see. No hold is to be taken of an Oath Which Young-men make, whose likings change like wind. But Old-men can foresee what's good for both. 'Tis good for both that makes a Contract bind. These words did to both Armies sweetly sound; They thought the worst was past; and up they ty'd Their Horses; and their Spears stuck in the ground, With spaces left between them, but not wide.
Then Hector to the King two Heralds sent, To fetch the Lambs, and Priam to implore To take the Oath. From Agamemnon went Talthybius to the Fleet to fetch two more. Mean while to the fair Helen Iris came, So like t' Antenor's wise Laodice, King Priam's daughter, that she seem'd the same. Quickly she found her; for at work was she Upon a double splendid Web, wherein Many a cruel Battle she had wrought The Trojans and th' incensed Greeks between, That for her own sake only had been fought. Come Nymph, said Iris, see one Battle more Between the gallant men of Greece and Troy. They fight not altogether as before, But silent sit, and from their Arms away. Shields are their Cushions, planted are their Spears; Paris and Menelaus only fight. Save these two no man any Armour wears; And you his Wife are, that has greatest might. Thus Iris said, and her inspir'd anew With love to Menelaus as before. Then ore her Head a mlk-white Scarf she threw, And out went weeping at the Chamber-door, But not alone; two Maidens follow'd her, Fair Aethre Pittheus child, and Clymene. And quickly at the Scaean Gate they were, Where Priam sate; and in his company Were the old Lords Lampus and Clytius, And Icetaon, and Ucalegon, Antenor, Thymet's, and Panthous, Whence both the Armies they might look upon. Old men they were, but had brave Captains been, And now for consultation prised were. Assoon as Helen came into their sight, They whisper'd one another in the ear, I cannot blame the man that for her strives. Like an Immortal God she is. Yet so, Rather than we should hazard all our lives, I should advise the King to let her go.
Thus said they one t'another. But the King Call'd her and said, Daughter, sit down by me, (Not you, but the Immortal Powers bring Upon the Trojans this calamity.) And tell me who that great Achaean is. I see some higher by the head than he, But comelier man I never saw than this, Nor liker to a King in Majestie. O King (then answered Helen) to whom I. Of all men owe most reverence and fear, Would I had rather chosen there to dye, Than to your Sons ill counsel given ear, Leaving my House, my Child, and Brothers two, And all my sweet companions for his sake. But since I cannot what is done undo, Unto your question I'll now answer make. The man you point to Agamemnon is, A good King, and a valiant Man in fight, And Brother to the Husband is of this Unworthy woman me that did him slight. And Priam then the man admiring said, Happy Atrides, great is thy command, Whose Soldiers though now very much decay'd, In such great multitude before us stand. At a great fight I was in Phrygia, And brought to Otreus and Mygdon aid Against the Amazons. I never saw Till then, so many for a Fight array'd, As were the Amazons, upon the Banks Of Sangareus, and yet they sewer were, Than are contained in the brissled Ranks Of th'armed Greeks that stand before us here. Again Ulysses coming in his sight, Tell me (said he) sweet Daughter, who is this?? He wants the head of Agamemnons height, But at the Breast and Shoulders broader is. His Arms lye still upon the ground; but he. In no one certain place himself can keep, But through the Ranks and Files runs busily, Just as  runs in a Fold of Shee
To this Jove's Daughter Helen thus replies. Ulysses 'tis, the old Laertes Son Of Ithaca; to counsel and devise, In all the Army like him there is none. O Helen (said Antenor) you say right; On your affair he once came into Troy With Menelaus. I did them both invite To sup with me; and in my house they lay. I them compar'd. When at their Audience They both stood up, Atrides taller seem'd; Sitting Ulysses won most reverence, And was amongst the people most esteem'd: And when they were Orations to make, Atrides words went easily and close. For little he, but to the purpose spake, Though th'younger man. But when Ulysses rose, Upon the ground a while he fix'd his eyes, Nor ever mov'd the Scepter in his hand; You would have thought him sullen or unwise, That did not yet his bus'ness understand. But when his voice was raised to the height, And like a Snow upon a Winters day His gentle words fell from him, no man might With him compare; so much his words did weigh. Then Priam seeing Ajax, askt agen, What Greek is that, that taller by the Head And Shoulders is than all the other men? And Helen to the King thus answered, Great Ajax. Who of th' Argives is the Sconce, And he o'th'other side Idomeneus, Who was the guest of Menelaus once, And lodg'd at Lacedemon in his house. And now I see the rest, and could them name. But Castor I and Pollux cannot see. Two Princes are they, and well known by Fame, And by one Mother Brothers are to me. Did they not pass the Sea? Yes sure they did Come with the rest; but are asham'd of me. And in the Argive Fleet lye somewhere hid, And will not of my shame partakers be.
Thus Helen said, because she could not tell Whether her Brothers were alive or dead. But dead they were; and (where they both did dwell) In Lacedemon they were buried. The Heralds now the two Lambs had brought in, That for their Sacrifice appointed were, And full of noble Wine a great Goars skin. Idaeus with the Golden Cups stood near, And pray'd the King to go down to the Plain. There stay for you the Greeks and Trojans both; A Peace agreed on is; but all in vain Unless you also go and take the Oath. For Paris must with Menelaus fight, And he must Helen and her wealth enjoy Upon whose side the Victory shall light; The Greeks return; and Peace remain at Troy. These words to th'Old mans heart came cold as Ice. But streight he bad his Coach made ready be. The Servants made it ready in a trice, And up into 't Antenor went and he; And past the Scaean Gate into the Plain. And when they came near to Scamander Banks, From out the Coach alighted they again, And stood between the adverse Armies Ranks. Then Agamemnon and Ulysses came, And to the Contract for the Greeks did swear. And Priam and Antenor swore the same. The Heralds mix the Wine with Water clear; And poured water on the Princes hands. Atrides at his Sword a Knife did wear, And as he near unto the Victims stands, Cuts with it from their foreheads locks of Hair, Which by the Heralds were distributed, Till ev'ry Leader part had of the hair. The Ceremonies being finished, Atrides to the gods then made this Prayer. O mighty Jove, the Monarch of the Gods, O glorious Sun with thy all-seeing Eye, O Streams, O Earth, O you that hold the Rods Beneath the Earth, scourges of Perjury,
Hear me, and be you witnesses of this. If Menelaus be by Paris slain, Let Helen and the wealth she has be his, And to Achaea we return again. If slain by Menelaus Paris be, Let Helen with her wealth to Greece be sent With some amends made for the injury, To be of th' wrong done an acknowledgment. If such amends the Trojans will not make, I will pursue the War, and here abide, Till I the Town of Ilium shall take, Or till the Gods the quarrel shall decide. This said, the Victims with his Knife he slew. And sprawling there upon the place they lay. Then into Golden Cups the Wine they drew, And pour'd it on the Lambs. Then prayed they Both Greeks and Trojans; Jove, and Pow'rs divine, Who first to break this peace shall go about, As poured on the Victims is this Wine, So they, and their Sons Brains be poured out. Thus prayed they. But Jove that Pray'r did flight. Then Priam said, To Troy return will I. It cannot please me to behold the Fight. For none but Gods know which of them shall dye. And then into the Charret went again He and Antenor, and drave t'Ilium, And with them carried their Victims slain. Then in Ulysses and great Hector come, And having measur'd out the Lists, wherein They were to fight, then the two Lots they drew For who to throw his Spear should first begin. And then the Greeks and Trojans pray'd anew. O glorious Jove, whom all the Gods obey, Let him that of the War the Author was Be slain, and all the rest firm peace enjoy. Then mighty Hector shook the skull of brass. The Lot that was the first drawn out, was that Which gave to Paris the right to begin. Then down upon the ground the people sate In order as their Armours plac'd had been.
And Paris arm'd himself, and first puts on His Leg-pieces of Brass, and closely tyes, That silver'd over were at th' Ancle-bone. And then his Breast-plate to his Breast applyes. Lycaons Breast-plate 'twas, but ev'ry whit As just upon him sat, as it had done Upon Lycaon when he used it. And next to this his good Sword he puts on. And then his broad Shield and his Helmet good. And last of all a Spear takes in his hand. And in like Armour Menelaus stood. Then come they forth, and in the Lists they stand. And one did on another fiercely look. (The people stupid sat 'twixt hope and fear.) And when they come were nigh, their Spears they shook. But Paris was the first to throw his Spear, And threw, and smote the Shield of Menelaus, But through the Mettle tough it passed not, But turn'd, and bended at the point it was. Then Menelaus was to throw by Lot. But first he prayed. Grant me, O Jove, (said he) That this my Spear may Alexander slay, Who was the first that did the injury. That they who shall be born hereafter may Not dare to violate the Sacred Laws Of Hospitality. Having thus said, He threw his Spear, which Paris Shield did pass, And through his Breast-plate quite, and there it staid; But tore his Coat. And there he had been dead, But that his Belly somewhat he drew back. Then with his Sword Atrides smote his head Which arm'd was, and the Sword in pieces broke. Then Menelaus grieved at the heart, Looking to Heaven did on Jove complain. O Jove that of the Gods most cruel art, Broken my Sword, my Spear is thrown in vain. Then suddenly laid hold on Paris Crest, And to the Greeks to drag him did begin, And Paris then was mightily distrest, Choakt by the Latchet underneath his Chin.
And to the Greeks had drag'd been by the Head, If Venus to his aid had not come in, Who broke the string and him delivered. Atrides conquest else had famous been. Then to the Greeks the empty Cask-he threw. But Venus snatcht him from him in a Mist. And whither she convey'd him none there knew. A God she is, and can do what she list. When Paris to his Chamber was convey'd, His Chamber which of Perfumes sweetly smelt, Then puts she on the form of an old Maid That Helen serv'd when she at Sparta dwelt. And in that shape went to call Helen home, That stood with other Ladies of the Town Upon a Tow'r. When she was to her come, She gently with her finger stir'd her Gown. Helen (said she) Paris has for you sent, And on his glorious bed doth for you stay, Not as a man that came from Fight, but went To Dance, or from it were new come away. Helen at this was mov'd, and mark'd her Eyes, And of her lovely Neck did notice take, And knew 'twas Venus though in this disguise; And troubled as she was, thus to her spake. Venus, why seek you to deceive me still, Since Menelaus has the Victory? Though I have wrong'd him, he receive me will, And you come hither now to hinder me. Whither d'ye mean to send me further yet? To Phrygia or to Moeonia, That there I may another Husband get? You shall not me to Alexander draw. Go to him you, and Heaven for ever quit; Grieve with him; have a care the man to save, And by his side continually to sit, Till he his Bride have made you, or his Slave. I will not to him go (for 'twere a shame) Nor any longer meddle with his Bed, Nor longer bear the scorns, nor mocks, nor blame Which from the wives of Troy I suffered.
Then Venus vext, Hussie (said she) no more Provoke my anger. If I angry be, And hate you as I loved you before, The Armies both will to your death agree. This said, the beauteous Helen frighted was, And with the Goddess went, who led the way, And by the Trojan Wives did quiet pass Unto the house where Alexander lay. I'th' Roomes below at work her women were. But up went Helen with the Goddess fair. And when to Alexander they were near, The Goddess unto Helen fetcht a Chair. Then sat she down, and look'd at him again. You come from Battle. I would you had there, And by my former Husbands hand, been slain. You brag'd you were his better at a Spear. Go challenge him again, and fight anew. But do not though, for fear you should be kill'd. But rather when you see him, him eschew, Lest he should leave you dead upon the field. To Helen Alexander then reply'd. Forbear; though he have now the Victory By Pallas help; there are Gods on our side, And they another time may favour me. Let's go to Bed, and in sweet Love agree. Your Beauty never did me so much move, At Lacedemon, nor in Cranae; Where the first blessing I had of your Love. This said, to bed they went, first he, then she. Atrides then sought Paris in the throng O'th' Trojans and their Aids; but could not see Nor hear of him the company among. They would not have conceal'd him though they might; But had to Menelaus him betray'd. So hateful to the Trojans was his sight. Then stood King Agamemnon up and said, Hear me you Trojans and your Aids. 'Tis plain That Menelaus has the Victory. Let Helen therefore rendred be again, And pay your Fine, 'Tis Right, the Greeks all cry.
ILIAD. LIB. IV. MEan while the Gods at Counsel drinking sat. Hebe the Nectar carry'd up and down. And Jove amongst them present was thereat, And sitting had his eyes upon Troy Town. Then Jupiter puts out a word, to see What Juno would unto the same reply. Two Goddesses assistants are (said he) To Menelaus, but sit idly by, Pallas and Juno; but on th'other side Venus gives Paris aid, and really Has helpt him when he thought he should have dy'd. Though Menelaus have the Victory. But let us now think which the best will be, To suffer war to make an end of Troy, Or let Troy stand and make them to agree, And Helen with Atrides go her way. Juno and Pallas that together sat, Grumble and plot; Pallas her spite kept in. But such of Juno was the choler, that Had she not spoke, her heart had broken been. Harsh Jove (said she) what do you mean by this? Shall I with so much sweat, and labour spent, And Horses tyr'd, now of my purpose miss? Do. But he other Gods will not consent. Devil, said Jove, what hurt is done to you By Priam and his Sons, that you should so Fiercely the ruine of the Town pursue? I think if you int' lium should go, And eat up Priam and his Children all, And every Trojan in the Town beside, Man, Woman, Child alive within the wall, Your anger will at last be satisfi'd.
Do as you please. It shall breed no contention 'Twixt you and me. But then remember this, When I to raze a City have intention That yours, and greatly in your favour is, To let me do't without Plea or Request; Since to give you your will I loose my own. For Ilium I love above the rest, Though under Heav'n be many a goodly Town. For I by Priam and his people still Have honour'd been, my Altars richly serv'd With Wine and Sacrifices to my will, Which is the honour to the Gods reserv'd. To this the Goddess Juno then reply'd, Three Cities I preser before the rest, Argos and Sparta, and Mycena wide. Destroy you may which of them you think best, If you see cause; I'll not stand in your way. Or if I do, what mends can I have so? For since your Pow'r does mine so much outweigh, It will be done whether I will or no. But you ought not t'undo what I have done. For I a Goddess am, and have the same Parents, of whom you boast to be the Son. And further of your Wife I bear the name, Whom Mortals and Immortals all obey. Then let us not in such things disagree. But I to you, and you to me give way. For of our two minds all the Gods will be. Let Pallas to the Army streight be sent To make the Trojans first the Peace to break. And Jupiter to do so was content, And did (as he was bid) to Pallas speak. Pallas, said he, down to the Armies go, Let not this Peace be by the Trojans kept. When Pallas heard her Father Jove say so, Glad of the Errand, from the Sky she leapt. Just like a falling Star, which Satura sends To Armies or unto Seafaring men; Which change of Fortune, commonly prtends. The Goddess through the Air deing th,
Splendid and sparkling on the ground did light The Armies that were in the field array'd, Both Greeks and Trojans wondred at the sight; And one unto another next him said, This bloody War will sure return again, Or else the Peace be surer made than 'tis. But which o'th' two Jove has not yet made plain, Who both of Peace and War disposer is. Pallas the form took of Laodocus Antenor's Son, and went into the throng O'th' Trojans to inquire for Pandarus. At last she found him his own Troops among, That were of Lycaonia the Bands, And from Zeleia led by Pandarus To Ilium. There Pallas by him stands Like to Antenor's Son; and to him thus: Lycaon's Son, saies she, dare you let fly A Shast at Menelaus? For I know The Trojans all would thank you, specially Paris the Son of Priam, and bestow Great Presents on you if you should him kill. Shoot at him then, and to Apollo pray The God of Archers that he help you will. And vow a Hecatombe of Lambs to pay, When to Zeleia safely you come home. For there your people to Apollo vow. When this was said, the vain man overcome, From off his Shoulders taketh down his Bow (Which did a lusty Goats-head once adorn, Which with a Shaft he killed had among The Rocks, and taken from his head the Horn, Which was no less than sixteen handfuls long. And to a Fletcher gave it to be wrought, Shaven, and Polisht, and Guilt at the hand.) This Bow he bent; and lest the Foe should know', He crouched down, and laid it on the sand. But lest the Greeks should rush on him, before He ready were to shoot, they that stood near, Before him with their Bucklers stood good store. And being now delivered of that fear,
From out the Quiver takes an Arrow keen, And new, well wing'd to carry mischief true, Which shot before that time had never been. But yet his Vow before his Arrow flew. Phoebus (said he) if I Atrides slay; Assoon as I shall to Zeleia come, I vow unto your Deity to pay Of my first yeaned Lambs an Hecatombe. Then to his breast he drew the leather string, And to the Bow return'd the Arrow head. Out leapt the Shaft, and as it went did sing Amongst the throng, as pleas'd mans blood to shed. And (Menelaus) now the Gods you blest, And chiefly Pallas that before you stood; And turn'd the deadly Arrow from your breast, About as much as a kind Mother cou'd From her Childs face divert a busie fly; And made it on the Golden Buckle fall, Where of his Breast plate double was the ply. And though it past through Buckle, Plate and al And Girdle which his Coat unto him bound, The Shaft into his Body penetrated, And made (though not a great one) yet a wound, The force it went with being much abated. Yet out the blood ran. As when Ivory Is stain'd with Crimson, to adorn the Cheeks Of the proud Steeds, and please the Drivers eye, Many a Cavalier to have it seeks. The Dame that stain'd it then holds up the price, And keeps it by her as a precious thing; So lovely seems the Colour to her eyes, As to be sold to none but to a King. So look'd his body when the streams of Blood His Iv'ry Legs and Insteps did defile. But Agamemnon stiff with horror stood; And so did Menelaus for a while. But when he saw the Arrow Barbs appear Above the Nerve, his courage came again. But Agamemnon not yet out of fear, Did on the Trojans Perjury complain.
Brother (said he) and took him by the hand, Dear Brother, 'tis the Oath that has you slain, Making you thus before the Trojans stand. But sure I am the Oath cannot be vain, Confirmed with so great solemnity. They shall (though late) pay for it with their lives (For Jove nere fails to punish Perjury) Both they themselves, their children and their wie For I well know the fatal day will come To Priam and to Priam's people all. Jove will his black Shield shake ore Ilium, And for this ugly action make it fall. This (Menelaus) is a thing to come. But what if of your wound you chance to dye? The Argives streight will think of going home. How by the Greeks then scorned shall be I! How proud will Priam and the Trojans be, When Argive Helen shall be left behind, And your bones rotting in the ground they see, Without effecting what they had design'd? Some trampling on you Grave perhaps will say, Would Agamemnon thus would alwaies vent His Choler, as he now has done at Troy, Now gone with empty Ships back to repent, Leaving his Brother Menelaus here. Then should I wish the earth would swallow me, But Menelaus to displace that fear, Fright not the Army Brother, thus said he. Not mortal is the wound. 'Twixt me and deat My Armour and the Clasps stood, all of Brass; Besides a good tough Girdle underneath. Pray God't be true (said he to Menelaus.) But we must send for a Chyrurgeon To mitigate with Lenitives the pain. Talthybius (said he) call Machaon, And having found him quickly come again. Tell him he must to Menelaus come, Who by a Foe is with an Arrow shot, Troan or Lycian, I know not whom, That with great grief to us has honour got.
This said, the Herald went, and look'd about Amongst the Troops of Tricca which he led. Nor was it long before he found him out With many Targetiers environed. You must (said he) to Menelaus come, Who by some Foe is with an Arrow shot, Trojan or Lycian, I know not whom, That (with great grief to us) has honour got. 'Tis Agamemnon calls you. Then they pass Together through the Hoast, and hastened Till they were come where Menelaus was With many other Lords encompassed. There Machaon the Arrow first pulls our. (The Barbs were broken as they came away) Then took he off his Armour and his Coat. Then sucked he the wound the blood to stay; And laid on Unguents to allay the pain. Mean while the Trojans arm'd were coming in. And then the Greeks were forc'd to arm again. And Agamemnon's vertue now was seen. He did not at their coming sleep nor start, But speedily prepared for the fight, And of a Chief Commander did the part, His own Commanders first to disaffright. His Horses and his Chariot he sent off. T'Eurymedon the Son of Ptolemy The Son of Pirus he gave charge thereof, And bad him with it alwaies to be nigh, To use when labour tired had his Knees. Through the great Army then on foot he went, And where them hasting to the Fight he sees, He gives them in few words encouragement. On Argives, and be sure Jove never fights Against good men for such perfidious knaves, But leave them will for food to Dogs and Kites, And to their Foes their wives and children Slaves. But where he saw the Soldiers negligent, His admonition was then severe. Fie Argives, what d'you sear? To what intent Stand you thus staring like a herd of Deer?
Just like so many Deer that had been chased Ore some great Plain looking about they stay, So stand you here like frighted Deer amazed, Till to our Ships come down the Troops of Troy, To try if Jove will help you there or no. Thus he commanding went the Hoast throughout. And when the martial Cretans he came to, Where armed stood Idomeneus stout. (Meriones the Rear led, he the Van) And Agamemnon lock'd on them with joy; And to Idomeneus thus began. Of all the Greeks that me assist at Troy I value you the most, both in the War And otherwise. And when at Feast we drink, Other mens Cups by measure stinted are, But yours, as mine, stands alwaies full to th'brink The King of Creete reply'd, I shall, said he, Continue still your good Confederate, As heretofore I promis'd you to be. But go, and th'other Leaders animate, That we may with the Trojans quickly fight. Then wo be to them, sure they are to die Who of the Gods and Sacred Oaths make light. Then on went Agamemnon joyfully; And came to th' Quarters of the Ajaxes, There armed both compleat, and followed With a huge multitude of Greeks he sees, And ready to the Battle to be led. As when a Shepherd from a Hill espies A full-charg'd Cloud march tow'rds him in the Dee It seems as black as Pitch unto his eyes, And makes him seek a shelter for his Sheep; So black the Squadrons of the Ajaxes, And horrible with thick and upright Spears T' Atrides seem, and well it, did him please, And both of them he thus commends and chears O Ajaxes expect nor I should bid You hearten up your Army for the fight; 'Tis done so well already there's no need. O Jove, Apollo, Pallas, that I might
Find all the other Leaders such as you, We should not need from Argos long to stay Ere we the Town of Priam should subdue And rifle. And this said, he went away, And came to Nestor, who was ordering His Troops and Bands of Horse and Foot, each one Against the Enemy encouraging. And with him stood Alastor, Pelagon, Haemon, and Chromius, skilful men in War. I'th' Front the Charrets and the Horsmen were. The most and best Infantry placed are (A Hedg unto the Battle in the Rear.) The middle Ranks were filled up with those, Upon whose courage he did least rely. For these would fight because they could not chuse; Since they could neither back nor forward fly. And Nestor to the Horsmen spake. Let none, Said he, before another go, to shew His Manhood or his Skill. But all go on At once. To single is to weaken you. Further, If any of you should have need To mount into anothers Chariot, There let him use his Spear; but still take heed That with the Horses Reins he meddle not. Our Fathers have before us us'd these Laws, And thereby many Cities level laid. Thus Nestor taught them. Glad Atrides was, And with great approbation to him said, O Nestor, that your Arms were but as strong As is your Mind! But they're decay'd by age. Or could you give your age to some man young, And with the youngest of the Foes engage. Atrides (then said Nestor) so wish I. Would I were as when Erenthalyon I flew. But Gods gifts come successively. I then was young; and age is now come on But as I am I'le ride amongst my horse, And as becomes an Old-man, give advice, While they that may presume upon their force, With Spear in hand charge on their Enemies.
Atrides pass'd on to th' Athenians That by Menestheus commanded were. And by these stood the Cephalonians Ulysses Bands. Neither of these did hear The clamour of the Battle new begun, But stood unmov'd, because they did expect Some greater Troop of Greeks should first fall on. For this Atrides grievously them check't. Menestheus (said he) Son of a King, And you the crafty man Ulysses, why When you your men should to the Battle bring, Stand you here shrinking from the Enemy? You hear the first when there will be a Feast, And stay for no man. For your Messes are Greater than other mens; your Wine the best, And without stint. And therefore in the War You should strive who should be the first to fight. But now though ten Troops were before you th You would not be displeased with the sight. These words came harshly to Ulysses ear, And with a frowning look, What's this (said he) Are we not making all the haste we can? Telemachus his Father you shall see By and by fighting in the Trojan Van, And that this reprehension needless was. But Agamemnon smiling then reply'd, (Seeing his Censure did not kindly pass) Noble Ulysses, I meant not to chide, Nor to direct you, that so skilful are. For we are both of us of the same mind. What's said amiss I shall again repair. But let it now away go with the wind. Then on he went and came to Diomed, Whom mounted on his Chariot he found With Capaneus Son accompanied, And other Lords that him encompass'd round. Ay me, Tydides, wherefore stand you thus, As if you for some Bridge did look about. You do not as your Father Tydeus, Who still before his fellows leaped out.
So said they that had seen him at the War, Which I did not, but take it upon fame, Which him above the rest preferred far. But certain 'tis he to Mycena came With Polynices to desire their aid Against the Thebans. And they willingly Had granted it, but that they were afraid. For Jove forbad them by a Prodigy. Then to the Brook Asopus back they went, Which doth the Theban Territory bound. To Tydeus the Greeks a letter sent To enter Thebes, and terms of Peace propound. To Thebes he went, and with Eteocles He found the chief o'th' Thebans at a Feast. And at all manly Games the Prize with ease, By Pallas help, he carry'd from the best. And when for spight they sent out Fifty men With Maeon Haemon's Son, and Lycophon To murder him as he went back agen, Slain by Tydeus they were all but one. For he sav'd Maeon (warned by the Gods) Such Tydeus was, but left a Son behind That less could do, but for words had the odds. But valiant Diomed Reply declin'd, Who gave t' Atrides what respect was due. The other answer'd him with language rude. You say, said he, what you know is not true. We than our Fathers there more manhood shew'd For we with fewer men proud Thebes did gain, By Jove's help, and Observances divine, Whilst the Cadmeans for their pride were slain. How from our Fathers then do we decline? But streight reprov'd he was by Diomed. My friend (said he) are you more griev'd than I? VVould you not have the Army ordered? Atrides both i'th' loss and victory Is most concern'd, Let us of Battle think, And down he leapt, assoon as that was said, In compleat Arms, with such a sudden chink, As might a constant man have made afraid.
As when the Billows of the Sea rais'd high By some great wind go rolling to the Shore, And follow one another to the Dry, There stop'd and broken are, and foam and roar: So then the Greeks up to the Trojans come, Obeying each his Leader silently. (You would have thought them, though so many) du In glittering Arms, and glorious to the eye. On th'other side the Trojans made a noise, Like Ews a milking kept off from their Lambs When in the field abroad they hear their cries, And they again bleat back unto their Dams But did not one another understand; For few there were whose Language was the same, Some were of one, some of another Land, And most of them from far off thither came. Pallas the Greeks, Mars Trojans favoured. Then Fright came in, with (Mars his sister) Strife Little when born, but grew until her Head Was in the Clouds; for she grows all her life. But when the Armies were together near, Then Man to Man came close, and Shield to Shield, And mingled in the Front was Spear with Spear, And horrible the noise was in the field; Whilst some insult, and others groaning dye. And th'earth they stood on cover'd was with bloo As when great Torrents from the Mountains high Pour down into the Valley a great flood; The Streams through thousand Channels falling roar The trembling Shepherds hear it to the Hills. So much the noise o'th' Battle the Air tore, And all the Region with terror fills. A Trojan was the first man that was slain, Echepolus Son of Thalysias. He smote was with a Spear into the Brain; Antilochus the man that smote him was. His Armour ratled on him as he fell, As if some Tow'r had fall'n. But then Elphenor (To strip him of his Arms that hoped well) Dragging him off was killed by Agenor.
For whilst in stooping he his Flank unhides. Agenor quickly his advantage spyes, And perc'd him with his Spear through both his Sides. Then down he fell, and darkness seiz'd his eyes. And then about his body rose great strife, And one upon another falling on, Anthemn's Son, a fair youth lost his life, Slain by great Ajax Son of Telamon, And Simoisius called was by name, 'Cause born upon the Bank of Simois, Whither from Ida both his Parents came To view their Flocks, lest ought should be amiss. But had no joy of him. He was unblest To be the first that came in Ajax way, Who smote him with his Spear quite through the breast. There dead he fell, and by the River lay. As when a man has fell'd a Poplar-Tree Tall, streight and smooth, with many fair boughs on, Of which he meant a Cart-wheel made shall be, And leaves it on the Bank to dry i'th' Sun; So lay the comely Simoisius Slain by great Ajax Son of Telamon. At Ajax then a Spear threw Antiphus, Bright-armed Antiphus, King Priam's Son. Death the Spear carries, but of Ajax misses, And deadly wounds the Groin of Leucus bold, And well beloved Soldier of Ulysses, Who dragg'd the dead, but now lets go his hold. Ulysses angry that his friend was slain, Went out before the rest, and coming close To th' Trojan front, some fit revenge to gain. Democoon, King Priam's Son he chose, (A lawful Son where Nature is the Law) The Trojans when they saw him look about, Into the shelter of the Ranks withdraw. Then soon his Spear Democon pickt out. And through both Temples forward went the head. Then heavily he falls, his Armour chinks, His Eyes with endless night are covered, And Hecter with his Trojans from him shrinks.
The Greeks then shouted, and drew off their slain, And on the Trojans pressing further were. But then Apollo cryed out amain From Pergam Tow'r, O Trojans, what d'ye fear Go on upon the Greeks; no more give way. Their Bodies neither are of Stone nor Steel, Nor able are the force of Brass to stay. No less than you the wounds it makes they feel. Nor fights Achilles here, but angry lyes, And wishes that the Greeks were overthrown. So Phoebus.  'Mongst the Argives Pallas flies, Through Ranks and Files encouraging each one. And then Diores slain was with a stone, By Pyros whom the Thracians obey'd. Crusht of his Right Leg was the Ankle-bone, And in the dust upon his Back was lay'd Unto his fellows holding up his hands. Ready to dye he for assistance cries. Piros comes quickly in, and ore him stands, And wounds him in the Belly. Then he dies But Thoas then slew Pyros with his Spear, That pass'd his Breast till in his Lungs it stopt. Then coming in he drew his Sword, and there His Belly ript till out his Bowels dropt, But to disarm him could not stay, because So many Thracians about him stood. Then back retir'd he, and well pelted was, Leaving two Leaders wrapt in dust and blood One an Epeian, th'other Thracian, And many others lying by them dead. This Battle was well sought. Although a man Through both the Armies safely had been led By Pallas, and protected by her Shield, He had no want of courage seen that day, So many Greeks and Trojans in the field Depriv'd of Life by one another lay.
ILIAD. LIB. V. ANd Pallas now t'ennoble Diomed Amongst the Greeks, with force did him inspire, Whereby his heart and hands were strengthened; And on his Shield and Helmet stood a Fire Bright as th' Autumnal Star above his Head And Shoulders flaming. And straightway he runs (Set on by Pallas and encouraged) Into the throng, where were the two good Sons Of Dares, who was Vulcan's Priest. Well skill'd They both were in the War. Ideus one, The other Phegus. These seeing him i'th' field On foot, and not far from them, and alone, Met him; and Phegus threw, but hit him not. For ore his shoulder flew the Spear in vain. Then Diomedes threw, and Phegus smote, Clean through the Breast. When Phegus thus was slain Down leapt Idaeus from the Chariot; But durst not by his Brothers body stay. For if he had, the like Fate he had got. But Vulcan in a smoak took him away, Not willing that his Priest should childless dye. Tydides to the Ships the Horses sent. To see these two, one slain, the other fly, To the proud Trojans very hearts it went. But Pallas then took Mars by th'hand, and said, Mars, bloody Mars, to what end stay we here? Let's Neuters be. For I am much afraid We both shall too much anger Jupiter. This said, she led him out, and set hi on Scamander bank. And then the Trojans fled Before the Greeks. Each Leader killed one, Pressing em at their backs vered.
Then Dalius first his Charret turn'd about, And open lay to Agamemnon's Spear, Which in at's Back, and at his Breast went out. Down fell the Alizonian Charioteer. Idomeneus slew Phaesus with a thrust, As up into his Charriot he went. The Spear at the right shoulder passed just, And back again unto the earth him sent. And Menelaus slew Scamandrius, That well the Art of Hunting understood. I'th' Hills and Woods none was more dexterous. Bur Dian', and his skill did him no good. For Menelaus pierc'd him back and Breast Between the Shoulders with a deadly Spear, And down he tumbled of life dispossest, His eyes with endless darkness covered were. Meriones slew Phriclus the Son Of Harmonides the great Architect That (but by Pallas) taught had been by none. But of his Art unhappy was th'effect. 'Twas he that built those Ships for Alexander, That brought with him so much ill luck to Troy, And to himself, and to his chief Commander; Not knowing what the Oracles did say. But he, as from the Fight he fled, was here Oretaken by Meriones, and slain. At his right Buttock entered the Spear; And at his Groin the point came out again. Meges Pedaeus slew, Antenor's Son, Though not his Wives, yet was his Wife so kind T' Atenor, that she bred him as her own, And lookt upon him with a Mothers mind. Him Meges overtaking as he fled Slew with his strong sharp-pointed Spear, which lighting Behind upon the noddle of his Head, Forward he fell the senseless weapon biting. And then Eurypylus Enaemon's Son Hypsenor slew, new made Scamander's Priest, That from him, but not fast enough, did run. Eurypylus shav'd off his Hand at th' Wrist.
For at his Shoulder though he aim'd the stroak, The quick Sword finding there the brass resist, Slipt down unto his hand with force unbroke, And there in streams of blood his Soul dismist. Mean while dides like a man enraged Ran up and down the field. One could not know With whom and where he was in sight engaged, Whether amongst the Greeks, or with the Foe. As when a Torrent falling from the Hills Distends it self with fury on the Plain, And suddenly the River overfills, Supply'd by Jove with mighty showers of Rain, And beareth down the Bridges as it goes, No sence of Vineyard can against it stand; But all the husbandry of men orethrows, And uncontrolled passes ore their land: Tydides so brake through each Trojan band, And made them fly before him as he went. And Pandarus then took his Bow in hand, And a sharp Arrow from it to him sent. Which pass'd through the right shoulder of his Coat Of Mail, and fetcht the blood, and with great joy Trojans (cry'd he) no more stand so remote. For wounded is the stoutest foe of Troy, And long he cannot the sore pain endure, Unless my faith in Phoebus be in vain. Thus said he boasting. For he thought 'twas sure The wound was mortal, and Tydides slain. Tydides to his Charre did then retreat, And Sthenlus alighting on the ground (For sitting he was on the Charret-seat) Drew out the cruel Arrow from the wound. And out the blood gusht. Then Tydides pray'd, O Pallas, Jove's all-conquering Child, said he, If ere you did me or my Father ayd, Within my Spears reach let me this man see, That with his Arrow me prevented has, And boasting says, I have not long to live. Athena to his wish indulgent was, And to him did more strength and courage give.
Fear not (said she) to go into the throng, And charge i'th' thickest of the Enemies. For I have made thee as thy Father strong, And taken have the mist off from thy eyes, That thou mayst see who Gods are, who are me. If any God oppose thee, give him way, Except if Venus thou encounter, then Spare her no more than Mortals in the Fray. This said, away the goddess Pallas went, And Diomed went to the fight again, And though before he were upon it bent, His courage now was trebled by his pain. As when a Shepherd sees a Lion come, And wounds him slightly as he leaps the Pen; Then leaves his Sheep, and frighted runneth hoe, And dares not in the field appear agen; The Lion now made fiercer than before, Laies all his Sheep one by another dead, And back again the Pen once more leaps ore: So rag'd amongst the Trojans Diomed. Aynos there, and Hypenor dy'd; One through the Breast he pierced with his Spear; And th'others Head did from his Neck divide With his broad Sword. And slan he lest them there. And overtook Abas and Polyeide Sons of Earydamas, who could tell what Upon a Dream should to a man betide, And slew them both. No Dream had told him th Thoon and Xanthus then he followed Phps two Sons, gotten when he was old, And of them both the vital Blood did shed. Th'Estate to strangers came to have and hold. Then Chromius and Echemon he slew, Two Sons of Priam in one Chariot, Whom from the seat unto the ground he threw, And till he had dsarm'd them left them not. But to the Ships he sent away the Horses. Aeneas seeing how he disarray'd Before him as he went the Trojan forces, Sought Pandarus, and having sound him, said,
Lycaons Son, where are thy Shafts and Bow, And Skill, wherein the Lycians yield to thee? See you the man that rages yonder now? Am a Shaft at him whosoere he be. For many valiant Trojans he has slain. (Unless he be one of the Gods above Neglected by us) 'twill not be in vain. Shoot boldly then; but first invoking Jove. Then Pandarus replying, to him said; 'Tis Diomed as far as can be guess'd. His Horses, and his Shield I have survay'd. And pleated Horse hair hanging at his Crest. Though it be he, as I believe it is, Yet sure some God does on his Shoulders fi. For else of killing him how could I miss, When I his Shoulder with my Arrow hit? For I one Arrow shot at him before, And verily believ'd I had him slain. His Armour all besmeared was with gore, But slew him not. Now here he is again. I did not on a Charret hither come, Although Lycaon have eleven new, With handsome Curtains to each one, at home, And Horses fit to draw them not a few. The old Knight too advis'd me earnestly That when to Battle I the Trojans led, I from a Charre should charge the Enemy; But to his counsel I not hearkened. (Which I repent.) It came into my head That when within Troy Walls we should be pent, My Horses, which were us'd to be well fed Would there be useless wanting nourishment. This made me come without a Chariot, And march (as far as 'twas) to Toy on foot. And trust unto my Bow which helps me not, But faileth me as often as I shoot. For two of them I have already shot, Tydides and Aides, and good store Of blood have drawn from both, though killed not, But made them fiercer than they were before,
In an ill hour sure I took down my Bow To fight for Hector and the Trojan men; But if I safely to my Country go, And to my House and Wife get back agen, Let any man that will cut off my Head, If presently my Bow I do not burn, That never yet my hopes has answered. For why not, when it doth not serve my turn? To Pandarus Aeneas then reply'd, No, say not so, but first let's to him go. For by th'encounter soon it will be try'd Whether he be indeed a God, or no. Get up into the Seat, and you shall see. The vertue of my horses on the plain, And if some God with Diomedes be, How nimbly they will fetch us off again. Come take the Whip and Reins in hand, and I Descend will from the Chariot and fight. Or if you please, when to him we are nigh I'll hold the Whip and Reins, and you alight. No, no (said he) keep you the Reins in hand, The Horses us'd thereto will you obey. To me, it may be, they will restive stand, And to the Foe themselves and us betray. Let me alight and meet him with my Spear. This said, they mounted both; and coming on Towards Tydides both observed were By Sthenelus Capaneus his Son, Who warning to Tydides gave. I see Two mighty men to fight us coming on, Of which I know th'one Pandarus to be, The other Venus and Anchises Son. Come up into your Charret and retire. But frowning he reply'd, I'll ne'r do that It not becomes the Children of my Sire, When they should fight to Double nor to Squat. I loath to sit upon a Chariot, And as I am I will attend them here. For of my strength deprived I am not, And Pallas has forbidden me to fear.
I doubt not but to kill them both, or one. If both, your Reins unto the two Wheels tie, And to Aeneas Horses quickly run, And seize their Reins, lest frighted they should fle. Then send them to the Ships, brave Steeds, well bred; Of heavenly race they are, and got by those, Which Jove to make amends for Ganymed, Was pleas'd to give unto his Father Tos. Anchises privily convey'd to these, Six Mares, and had a Colt by ev'ry one; Whereof he gave two to his Son Aeneas. To take these Horses now were bravely done. While they were talking th'other two came nigh, And then said Pandarus, O Diomed, Since my swift Arrow could not make you die, I come to try now how my Spear will speed. And as he spake the Spear flew from his hand And pass'd his Shield, but in his Armour staid. Y'are hit, said he, and long you cannot stand. But Diomed, nothing at all dismaid, No no cry'd out, your Spear is thrown in vain. But I believe before we have done here, That one of you, if not both, will be slain. And as he spake he at him threw his Spear. Which at his Nose close by his Eye went in, And struck his Teeth out, and ut off his Tongue. And out again it pass'd beneath his Chin. For Pallas from above it downward flung. There dead he lay. Aeneas to defend His body to him came with Spear and Shield, And 'bout him went, resolv'd the man to send To Hell, that should oppose him in the field. Tydides then took up a mighty Stone Which two men scarce could bear such as are now. But Diomedes swinging it alone, The same with ease did at Aeneas throw, And hit him on the Huckle bone, wherein Into the Hip inserted is the Thigh. And torn was by the rugged stone the skin, And Tendons broken which the Joint did tie.
Then down upon his knees and hands he fel, And taken from him was his sight with pain. That Venus saw him lying thus 'twas well; Else by Tydides he had there been slain. For then came Veus down, and with the lap Of her Celestial Robe him covered, Lest any of the Greeks should have the hap To kill or wound him as from Earth he fld. But Sthenelus remembring well his Order, Ty'd his own Steeds up to his Charret-wheels, And led them out o'th' tumult and disorde; And to Derphilus that was at's Heels, (His Friend) he gave the Horses of Aeneas To carry them unto the Argive Fleet. But took Tydides Horses, and with these To try went if Tydides he could meet. But he in chase of Venus now was gone (Knowing that she a tender Goddess was, And for the War Commission had none, Nor had as Pallas any Shield of brass.) And had when he came to her wounded her. For through her Robe, though by the Graces made, Without resistance quickly pass'd the Spea; And at her Wrist did her fair Hand invade. And from the Wound out sprang the Blood Divine. (Not such as men have in their Veins, but Ichor. For Gods that neither eat Bread nor drink Wine Have in their Veins another kind of Liquo, And therefore bloodless and immorral be) And Venus screaming then lets fall her Sor. But by Apollo's hand preserv'd was he, Convey'd thence in a Mist perceiv'd by none, For fear he should be by some Argive slain. To Venus then Tydides whoop'd, and said, Away Jove's Daughter, from the War abstain. Go practise how to consen VVife or Maid, For I believe if here you longer stay, (So many such as these mshaps there are That you therein will have but little joy, And troubled be when men but talk of VVar.
This said, away she went, not knowing where She was; and great the pain was of her hand. But Iris from the Fight conducted her, And set her hard by Mars upon the sand. For there by Pallas placed he had been. His Horses and his Charret by him staid Hid in a Mist by man not to be seen. And Venus there before him kneeling said, Dear Brother, let me your good horses have, To bear me to Olympus from the Fray; This cruel wound mad Diomed me gave, And would wound Jove if he came in his way. Mars presently his Horses to her lent. Venus and Iris mount into the Seat. Iris the Reins held, and away they went. The time they spent in going was not great. When they were there, Iris the Steeds unty'd, And set them up; and gave unto them meat, Ambrosian meat, till they were satisfy'd, Such as immortal Horses use to eat. But Venus sell into Diones lap, Her Mother, who imbrac'd her lovingly, Stroakt her, and said, How came this sad mishap? Who us'd you thus? What a rash God was he? What more could he have done, if he had found You doing somthing openly amiss? It was a man, said she, gave me this wound, Tydides; and for nothing else but this; I sav'd my Son Aeneas from his hand, My dearest Son, whom he was going to slay. And now the War is all (I understand) 'Twixt Greeks and Heaven, not 'twixt Grecks and Troy. Daughter (reply'd Dione then) 'tis hard. For we the Gods that in Olympus dwell Many from men as ill as you have far'd, And many no less wrongs have put up well. Otus and Ephialtes Neptune's Sons In a brass Dungeon once imprison'd Mars, And kept him in the dark there thirteen Moons. There like he was t'have staid till now, for scarce
Could Hermes set him free with all his Art And Juno's help. And when to liberty He was restor'd, he took it in good part, Though with his chains he gall'd was cruelly. When Hercules shot Juno in the Breast, Though wounded sore, yet she reveng' it not. And Pluto by the same man shot did rest Contented, and no reparation got. But to the house of Jupiter he went, And got the Arrow pluck'd out from the wound By Paeon; who with gentle Plaisters sent The pain away, and made his Shoulder sound. But though no God of any wound can di, Yet of Amphitryon the peevish Son (Who little cares at whom his Arrows flie) Great mischief oft unto the Gods has done. But Pallas 'tis that thus has wounded you, Though with Tydides Spear. Fool as he was What 'tis to wound a God he never knew. Not long such wicked deeds unpunish'd pass Such men when they return from painful War Shall seldom set their Children on their Knee Pleas'd with their half-form'd words. Let him be Lest he provoke some stronger Deity. And then Aegilia Diomedes wife Awake the houshold with her Lamentaon, And cry, Tydides thou hast lost thy life, O my dear Husband, best of all the Nation. This said, she wip'd the Ichor from her hand, And streight her hand was well, the paln was go Then Juno by, and Pallas jeering stand. And Pallas thus to Jupiter begun. Shall I say what I think? O Father Jove, Venus some Argive Dame has courting been To take the Trojans part whom she doth love, And stroaking her, her hand scratcht with a pin. Jove smil'd at this, and then to Venus said, Daughter, I gave you no command in War. That charge on Mars and Pallas I have lad. Of Nuptials and Love take you the care.
While they were thus discoursing, Diomed Did with great speed and rage Aeneas follow, To gain his Armour and his Blood to shed, Knowing he was in th'hands now of Apollo. Undaunted then, with Shield before his Breast, And Sword n Hand, struck at Aeneas thrice, And thrice again Phoebus his rage represt. But at the fourth time gave him good advice. Retire (said he) Tydides, and beware You not your self think equal to the Gods. They sway the Heavens, on Earth men creeping are. 'Twixt Mortals and Immortals there's great odds. Tydides then retir'd a little way, Not knowing what harm might from Phoebus come. And Phoebus thence Aeneas did convay T'a Temple of his own in Pergamum. There Leto and Diana cur'd his wound. And then an Image Phoebus like him made, And in like Arms, and set it on the ground, For which the Foes each other then invade. And there they one anothers Bucklers hew. To Mars Apollo speaking, VVhy, said he, Mars, bloody, murdering Mars, why suffer you Tydides at the Battle still to be? Mad as he is now, he with Jove would fight. From Venus hand he made the blood run down, And then at me he flew like any Sprite. This said, he sat o'th' top of Pergam Town, And Mars the Trojan Bands encouraged, Taking the shape of valiant Acamas. VVho to the VVar at Troy the Thracians led. And as he through the armed Ranks did pass, Children of Priam what d'ye mean, said he; Shall the Greeks follow killing us to Troy? Fall'n is Aeneas the great man whom we Like Hector honor'd. Come, let's if we may This good Commander rescue. Thus said he. Sarpedon likewise Hector sharpned. VVhere Are now your Kin you said enough would be Troy to defend? I see none of them here.
Like Hounds about a Lion off they stand. VVe your Confederates the Fight maintain. The labour lyeth all upon our hand; And I my self amongst the rest would fan Make tryal of this mighty man in fight. At least I shall, as doth a friend become, My peoples courage all I can excite, Since they are here, and very far from home; And though from me the Greeks can nothing get, Neither to carry nor to drive away. But you to th' Trojans have not spoken yet So much as to defend their Wives in Troy From being taken in the Argives net, And plund'red be the stately Town of Troy. When chiefly you on this your heart should set, And your Confederates perswade to stay, And not the fault on one another lay. So said Sarpedon. Hector therewith slung, Upon his Charret could no longer stay, But armed down unto the ground he sprung. And 'mongst the Trojan Ranks and Files he goes, Into their hearts new courage to inspire And then they turn'd their Faces to their Foes. Nor did the Argives from their place retire. And then, as when on Ceres sacred floor The winnowed Chaff lyes heapt together white, So white the Troops of Argives were all ore With dust their Horses rais'd had in the Fight. And then the Trojans boldly marched on, And Mars to aid them dark'ned had the Field, As he was bidden by Latona's Son, When Pallas from the Greeks remov'd her Shield. And from the Temple fetcht Aeneas out Alive and whole, and bold, and made him stand Amongst the Troops, that joyful stood about. But other work now lying on their hand, (Made them by Mars and Strife) no time had they To ask him questions. But encouraged The Argives were by th' Ajaxes to stay, And by Ulysses and by Diomed.
For of the Trojans they were not afraid. But as a Cloud that resteth on a Hill, Which in calm weather there by Jove is laid, Till boisterous winds arise it resteth still. Then up and down went Agamemnon there, My friends, said he, be bold, and fight like men. Of one anothers censure stand in fear. Of them that do so fewer perish then Of those that fly and never think upon The loss of fame. This said, he threw his Spear And smote Aeneas friend Democoon, Who was unto the Trojans no less dear Than if he one of Priams Sons had been. For with the foremost he was still in fight. And at his Buckler went the Weapon in, And through both that and Belt it passed quite. And mortal in his Belly was the wound, And with his Armour ratling down he sell. Aeneas then two Greeks laid on the ground. The Sons of Diocles, descended well. For of th'immortal and fair stream Alpheus, Orsilochus a great King was the Son. And he the Father was of Diocles, And he Orsilochus got and Crethon; Brave men, who when they came to mans estate With Atreus Son, his honour to regain, To Ilium sayl'd, and there they met their Fate, And never to their Country came again. As when two Lions in the Mountains bred And Woods obscure, come down into the Plain, And Sheep and Cattle in the field leave dead, Until at last by Hunters they are slain; So fell these two men by Aeneas kill'd, And like two Fir-trees straight lay on the Sand. And Menelaus then with fury fill'd, With Helmet on his Head, and Spear in Hand, Advanced boldly to Anchiss Son, In hope to have deprived him of breath. And Mars himself it was that set him on To bring him by Aeneas hand to death.
Antilochus then Nestor's valiant Son Fearing lest Menelaus should be slain, Resolv'd he should not fight with him alone, And all their toil at Ilium make vain, Went after him, and overtook him as They ready were to fight, but nothing done. Aeneas then as valiant as he was Retir'd, eschewing th' odds of two to ore And when they had brought off the Bodies slain, And lest them in their fellow soldiers hands, Unto the skirmish they return'd again, And-slew the Prince of Paphlagonians ylmnes. Atrides threw the Spear Which near the Shoulder pass'd into his Neck. By Nestor's Son slain was his Chariotier, Mydon by name that did his Horses check, As he his Charret turning was to fly, Antilochus him wounded with a Stone On th'Elbow, and benum'd his Hand, whereby The sense he had to hold the Reins was gone. The Reins fell down, and then with Sword in hand Antilochus divides his Head in twain, And headlong fell he where it chanc'd the Sand Was very deep, and there he did remain With Head and Shoulders sticking in the sands. But upright in the Air were both his Hips. The Horses laid him flat. Which by the ands Of Nestor's Son convey'd were to the Ships. Hector saw this, and in came with great cry, Whom Bands of lusty Trojans followed. Mars and Bellona marching furiously Against the Argives to the Fight them led. Bellona brought in Tumult and Affright. And Mars a mighty Spear had in his hand, And sometimes after Hector went 'th' fight, Sometimes before, and oft did by him stand. Tydides when he saw him was affraid, As when a man in haste has lost his way, And running on is at some River staid, That's deep and swift, he runs as fast away:
So he retir'd. And to his Argives said, No wonder 'tis if Hector valiant be; One God or other alwaies gives him aid, And near him stands from death to set him free. Now Mars comes with him like a mortal wight. Retire. But turn your Faces to the Foe, Forbearing still against the Gods to fight. This said he, but the Trojans near were now. And Hector there had slain two men that sat Together, Mnestheus and Anchialus, Both Warriors good. But Ajax griev'd thereat (The greater Ajax, Telamonius) Darted his heavy Spear at Amphius. Rich was he both in Lands and Goods, and dwelt At Paesus. And fought here for Priamus. But by the Spear which pass'd quite through his Belt Upon his Belly took a mortal wound. And as he fell, Ajax ran fiercely in To strip him of his Armour on the ground, And stript him had, had he not hindred been. For from the Trojans came a shower of Spears, Whereof his Shield received not a few. Then to be hemm'd in by the Foe he fears. His own Spear he recover'd and withdrew. Whilst they in stubborn war thus toyling were, Unlucky fate Tlepolemus brought on To charge Sarpedon; and when they were near Toether come, Jove's Grandson and his Son, Tlepolemus said then, What need had you Unskilful in the War to tremble here? Jove's Son men say you are, but 'tis not true. No such weak men by Jove begotten were; But such as Hercules is said t'have been Couragious as a Lion; with few men In but six Ships this strong Town he did win, And rifled it, and safe went off agen. But you are weak, your men a great part dead, And can but little help afford to Troy. And though from Lycia you were strengthened, I mean to send you now another way.
To this Sarpedon answered, 'Tis true That Hercules sackt Troy, because the Steeds Laomedon kept back that were his due, And gave him evil language for good deeds. But you from me shall present death receive, For which I shall have honour truly paid, And you your Soul shall now to Pluto leave. And this Sarpedon had no sooner said, Than from their hands their Spears together started. Tlepolemus clean through the Neck was struck, And from him presently his life departed. But from Sarpedon Jove kept such ill luck; Yet on his left Thigh he receiv'd a wound. For through it went the Spear close by the bone. Sarpedon by his friends born off the ground Was plac'd apart where Battle there was none, Tormented with the Spear still in his Thigh. To pull it out they all had quite forgot. In so great haste they were, the Foe so nigh, The time so little, and the Fight so hot. Mean while Tlpolemus his body dead The Greeks fetch'd off. The wise Ulisses then Within himself a while considered, Whether to charge Sarpedon or his men. But since by Fate Sarpedon was to die By other, and not by Ulysses hands, Athena made him lay that purpose by, And turn his anger on the Lycians. Alastor then he flew, and Coeramus, Alcander, Prytanis and Noemon. And Halius he slew, and Chromius, And many Lycians more had overthrown. But mighty Hector now approached near In glittering Arms, and brought with him Affright. But glad Sarpedon was to see him there; And when he was come up unto him quite, Himself lamenting thus to Hector said, Leave me not Hector to the Greeks a prey, But let my Body in your ground be laid, Since I my Country must no more enjoy,
Nor my beloved Wife and tender Son. So said Sarpedon. Hector not replies, But to the Enemy he passeth on; And as he goes the ground with blood he dye. Under a Beech sacred to Jupiter Sarpedon placed was upon the ground, And gently Pelagon pull'd out the Spear; The pain hereof put him into a swound. Lost was his sight; but by a gentle wind. And cool, that from the North upon him blew, He soon recover'd both his Sight and Mind, And all the company about him knew. To Mars and Hector still the Greeks gave way, And still their Faces to the Trojans were, But for to charge none durst advance or stay. For Diomed had told them Mars was there. Now tell me Muse, who slain by Hector was? Trechus, Orestes, Tenthras, Helenus, (Whose Father Oenops was) and Oenonaus. And last of all wealthy Oresbius. In Hyla on Cephissis Lake he dwelt, The richest pasture of Boeotia, And known was by the gayness of his Belt. This slaughter of the Greeks when Juno saw, She then to Pallas spake. Pallas (said she) If we let Mars still play the madman here, Our word to Menelaus false will be, That he from Troy return should Conqueror. Let's courage take, and try what we can do. Pallas contented, 'twas agreed upon. And Juno ready made her self to go, And quickly the Coach-wheels Hebe sets on. Eight spokes each wheel had, and were all of Brass, And fixed round about at th' Axle-tree. The Axle-tree it self of Iron was. The Circle Gold, and wonderful to see. But arm'd-it was above with Plates of Brass. The Naves on both sides were of Silver white, With Gold and Silver Wire extended was The Seat, which had two Silver rings and bright.
In which the Beam of Silver fastned staid. At th' other end the Golden Yoke she ti'd, And on the Yoke the Golden Reins she laid. And Juno then no longer could abide, But to the Coach her self the Horses brought, From quarrels so impatiently she staid. Pallas threw off her Robe, and took Joves Coat, And with the same she there her self arraid. And then her Breast with Armour covered, And on her Shoulder hung her frightful Shield, Wherein Strife, Force, Flight, Chase were figured, With all the Horrour of a soughten field. And in the middle stood out Gorgoes head. Then put she on her Golden Helmet, that Ten thousand mens heads might have covered, And to the Charret up she went, and sat, And her great heavy Spear takes in her hands The Spear wherewith, when she displeased is, She scatters of proud Kings the armed bands, Then Juno with the whip was not remis. And of it self flew open Heaven-gate, Though to the Seasons Jove the power gave Alone to judge of Early and of Late. And out the Goddesses their Horses drave. Jove on the highest of Olympus tops' Sitting alone they found, and none him righ. The Goddess Juno there her Horses stops, And spake unto him thus, his mind to try. Pray tell me Jove if you contented be, That Mars thus raging in the Field remain: For what unseemly work he makes you see, And of brave Greeks how many he has slain, While Venus at my grief stands laughing by, And pleased is Apollo with the sight, And set him on. But I could make him fly (But that I fear your anger) from the Fight. Do't then, said Jove; not you, but Pallas; she Accustom'd is to vex him more than you. Juo took this Commission willingly. Feeling the whp away her Horses flew,
'Twixt Heav'n and Earth, and went at every strain As far as coming one can see a Ship That from a Hill looketh upon the Main, So far the Horses of the Gods 'can skip. Arriv'd at Troy, on ground they set their feet, And Juno there her heavenly Steeds unty'd Where Simois doth with Scamander meet. And with Ambrosia Simois them supply'd. Then swift as Doves, to give the Argives aid They went to where they saw the greatest throng. There was Tydides, and about him staid Many as Lions valiant and strong. And Juno there in shape of Stentor stood, And spake as loud as any fifty men. Argives, said she, Cowards, for nothing good, Although you make a goodly show. For when Achilles went before you to the Fight, Out at their Gates the Trojans durst not peep, So much they of his Spear abhor'd the sight. But from your Ships you scarce now can them keep. When Juno thus the Greeks encouraged, To Diomed went Pallas; whom she found Hard by his Horses sitting, wearied, And cooling in the open air the wound Given by Pandarus; which with the sweat Under his Belt afflicted him the more. And lifting up his Belt, some ease to get, He from the wound was wiping off the gore. As at the yoke Athena leaning stood, Like him (said she) your Eather left no Son. A little man was he, but Warriour good. Though I not bad him, he went boldly on. And when to Thebes alone I bad him go Ambassador, and with the Theba Lords To sit at Feast, and not provoke the Foe, And at their Table to forbear harsh words, Yet he his native Courage still retained, And them defy'd at manly Exercises, And from them all the Victory he gained, And won, by my assistance, all the Prizes.
But when I you, as I did him, defend, And bid you boldly with the Trojans fight, You are affraid, or weariness pretend. Of Tydeus sure the Son you are not right. Tydides to her then replying said, Daughter of Jove, (Pallas I know you are) 'Tis not that I am weary or affraid, That I stand here abstaining from the War, But in obedience to your own command, Who gave me leave if Venus in the Wars I met, to wound her; but not lift my hand 'Gainst other Gods. Now in the field is Mars, And domineering fights on Hectors side. And that's the cause why I from fight abstain, And others by my Counsel here abide. To this the Goddess then reply'd again, Nor Mars nor any of th'Immortals spare That shall advance against you in the field. And for your safety trust unto my care, And know you are protected by my Shield. But first to Mars drive up your Horses close, And strike the Blockhead with your Spear in hand, That fights sometimes for these, sometimes for those, And with the Trojans now you see him stand, And yet to help the Greeks he promis'd me And Juno, but a little while before, And now amongst the Trojans fighteth he, And thinks upon his promises no more. This said, they mount into the Chariot, And Sthenelus descending left his Seat. The Axtree groaned under them. Why not A great man he, she was a Goddess great. And then to Mars directly they drive on, Who had but newly slain great Periphas, Of old Ochesius the valiant Son, And far the best of all th' Aetolians was. Athena then puts Pluto's Helmet on, Lest she by Mars should be discovered. When Mars there saw Tydides all alone, He Priphas forsook who there lay dead;
And turn'd to meet Tydides on the way; And when to one another they were near, Mars making full account the man to slay, Over the Yoke thrusts at him with his Spear. But Pallas with her hand the point supprest, And made it light beneath the Seat in vain. Tydides then to Mars a Spear addrest, Which had he been a Mortal had him slain. For Pallas in his Belly stuck the Spear, And presently the same pluckt out again. Mars roar'd as loud as if in battle there Fighting had been nine or ten thousand men, And frighted-both the Armies with the noise. Then like a black Cloud which some Wind makes rise, He left th'unlucky field and went his ways, And in a little time was in the Skies. And sitting down hard by his Fathers Throne, Shew'd him the blood that from the wound did flow, And grievously lamenting made his mone. Father, said he, do you such work allow? That we the Gods such harm from Mortals take, While some for Trojans, some for Argives fight, And partial be for one anothers sake, The fault is to be laid on you by right. For you brought forth this mad pernicious Maid, Whose study is her malice to effect, When by us other Gods you are obey'd. And this you saw, but never would correct. 'Twas she that on the Gods set Diomed, Who wounded Venus first, then flew at me. And there in pain I lien had 'mongst the dead, Or crippled been, had not my feet been free. Uncertain Mars (then Jupiter reply'd) Of all the Gods most hateful to my sight, That quarrel lov'st to make, but not decide. Thou hast thy Mother Juno's nature right, That oft provokes me with her peevish tongue, And by her order, I think, this was done. But in this pain I'le not detain you long, Seeing you are as well mine as her Son.
But had another got you, you had sure To Pluto and th'Infernal Gods be sent. This said, to Paeon he commits his cure: And Paeon presenly about it went. As quickly as the Milk is turn'd to Curd, When with a proper Rennet it is mixt, And with a Housewises hand together stir'd; So quickly was the wide wound clos'd and fixt, Then bath'd he was by Hebe, and new clad; And that he so came off was well content. Juno and Pallas when they driven had Mars from the Battle, up t'Olympus went:
ILIAD. LIB. VI. THe Gods to neither side assistance yield, But on his own hand each mans fortune lies. Now here now there they skirmish in the field Betwixt the Streams Xanthus and Simoeis. And first great Aax killed Acmas, And for his fellows opened a door For slaughter 'mongst the Files and Ranks to pass, And caus'd thereby the loss of many more. And by Tydides Axylus was slain, That at Arisb dwelt near the High way, Rich, and the Greeks did often entertain. But none of them would save him in the Fray. For slain he was by Diomedes there. Together with his Squire Caleus, That by him sat and was his Charioteer. Euryalus then slew Opheltius And Dresus. After Pedasus he runs And Aesepus sons of Bucalion, Who by Abarbara had two Sons, But he for Father had Laomedon. And th'eldest was, but not in Wedlock got. And Twins the Sons were of Bucalion. But from Euryalus they scaped not, Nor long they lay there with their Armour on. Then Polypoetes by Astyalus, Pidytes by Ulysses, and by Teuc. Er Arcton, and by Antilochus Ablerus, by Atrides Elateus Was slain, that the Pedasians led From the delightful Bank of Satnius. And Leitus Philacus slew as he fled. Eurypylus then slew Melanthius.
And then Adrestus taken was alive By Meuelaus. For his Horses frighted, Whilst to the Town they labour'd to arrive, Upon two Branches of a Tree they lighted, And brake the Charret pole off at the head. The Horses loose away ran tow'rd the Town, As did the rest that from the Battle fled. Adrestus headlong from the Seat fell down, And by him with a Spear Atrides stood. Adrestus then laies hold upon his Knee. Save me, said he, my Ransome will be good. At any rate I shall redeemed be. My Father wants nor Iron, nor Brass, nor Gold, And any thing to set me free will give, When he of my condition shall be told, And that I am your prisoner and live. This said, Atrides was thereto enclin'd, And ready for to send him to the Ships. But Agamemnon came and chang'd his mind Before he had confirm'd it with his lips. Brother, said he, what makes you be so kind To any of these men? Is it because You did at home the Trojans faithful find, And that they had well served Menelaus? No, no, we must no quarter give at Troy, Nor spare the Child yet in his Mothers womb, But utterly the Nation destroy, And pluck up by the root proud Ilium. Then Menelaus pity'd him no more, But violently push'd him from his Knee, Wherewith he backward tumbled ore and ore, And soon by Agamemnon slain was he. Then Nestor to the Greeks with voice as high As be could raise it, cried out, Let none Yet on the Spoil and Booty set his eye, But follow killing now, plunder anon. The dead will stay till back again we come. The Greeks by Nestor thus encouraged, Had chas'd the Trojans unto Ilium. But that by Helenus was hindered.
For standing near to Hector and Aeneas, Since all the work, said he, lyes on your hand, And you in Fight and Counsel chiefly please Both Lycians and Trojans, make them stand. About them go, and put your selves between The Gates and them, lest followed by the Foe They should be by their loving Wives there seen, And th' Argives stand triumphing in our woe. And when you once have them encouraged, Aenaeas and my self will with them stay, And fight against the Greeks, though wearied. But Hector to the Town go you away, And bid your and my Mother take with her The eldest Trojan Matrons, and make haste To Pallas Temple, and present her there With the best Robe she has; and having plac't It on her Knee, vow to her Deity (If she protect our Wives and Children will And City from this raging Enemy, And take off Diomed) that you will kill Twelve Heisers at her Altar. For in fight He has the great Achilles much outdone, Who never did the Trojans thus affright, Although they say he is a Goddess Son. Then Hector armed leapt down to the ground, And with two Spears about the Army goes, Courage inspiring to the Trojans round, And streight they turn'd their Faces to the Foes. The Greeks retiring then no longer fought. Some God from Heav'n descended was they thought, And t' Hector and the Trojans aid had brought. Then Hector to the Trojans cried out, Trojans and Aids, said he, be sure to stay And play the men, whilst I to Ilium Return, and cause them to the Gods to pray, And to them sacrifice an Hecatomb. And as he walkt the edges of his Shield By turns his Ankle and his Neck did smite, Tydides then and Glaucus on the field Met one another, and prepar'd to fight.
Tydides speaking first, Brave man, said he, Who are you? Let me know your Name and Race, That dares so boldly thus advance on me. I never yet in Battle saw your Face. Men mortal to provoke me thus none dare, But they whose Parents are condemn'd t wo. But if some God come down from Heaven you are, Do what you will I'll not return a blow. Licurgus Son of Dryas chas'd the Train Of Bacchus with a Goad at Nyssa, where The Maenades threw from them on the plain Their Ivy twined staves, and fled for fear; Bacchus himself leapt into Thetis lap, Trembling and frighted, and the Goddess kind Receiv'd him and defended from mishap. But for this act Jove struck Licurgus blind, Who dy'd soon after. For the Gods above All hated him. And that's the cause that I Dare not the anger of the Gods to move. But if thou mortal art, come near and die. O brave Tydides (Glaucus answer'd then) To what end serves it you to know my race? As with green leaves, so fareth it with men; Some fall with wind, others grow in their place. But since you ask me (though it be well known) My pedegree at large I shall you tell. Within a Creek of Argos stands a Town Call'd Ephyre. There Sisyphus did dwell. The subtile Sisyphus who Glaucus got. Glaucus the Father of Bellerophon, Than whom a fairer person there was not, Nor valianter in all the Land, not one. But Praetus sought to take away his Life. For so enamour'd of him was the Queen Anteia, who of Praetus was the Wife, That she a Suiter to him oft had been. But still in vain. For he would not consent. The fury of her Love then turn'd to Hate. And spitefully, she to her Husband went, And weeping bitterly down by him sate,
And to him said, O King, resolve to dy Your self, or else Bellerophon to kill, For he attempted has my Chastity, And would have ly'n with me against my will. The King incens'd, to kill him did intend, But loath to do it there, he thought it better Unto the King of Lycia him to send (Who was Anteia's Father) with a Letter, Wherein he had declar'd his cruel mind, And many waies to bring it to effect. He ignorant of what was then design'd, The Kings commandement did not neglect. To Lycia he went, and coming thither, In favour with the Gods, was honoured And treated like a God nine days together. O'th' tenth his Letter he delivered. The Letter read, the King him first imploy'd The terrible Chimaera to assail, That by the Monster he might be destroy'd. A Lions Head it had and Dragons Tail, And in the midst the Body of a Goat; A flame of burning fire was its Breath. Bellerophon with this foul Monster fought, And put it (by the aid o'th' Gods) to death. The next Adventure that he set him on Was th'Expedition 'gainst the Solymi. The third when from the Amazons he won (Those Martial Females) a great Victory. And as he came from thence the King had laid An Ambush for him on the way in vain, Of choicest Lycians whom he destroy'd, That not a man of them return'd again. The King receiv'd him then, believing now That he descended was of Heavenly Race, And gave him half his Pow'r and Land enough, And with his Daughters Marriage did him grace. Bellerophon by her had Children three, Two Sons, Isandrus and Hippolochus, And one fair Daughter call'd Laodamie, On whom by Jove Sarpedon gotten was.
Her Father by the Gods forsaken then Liv'd up and down in the Alean Plain, And shun'd the conversation of men. At Solym Battle was Isander slain. But of Hippolochus the Son am I, And he of Noble Ancestors descended. To Troy he sent me, and especially Unto me th'Honour of my Race commended, Than which in Ephyre none Nobler is, Nor in the Land of Lycia more renown'd. And Diomedes joyful to hear this Turn'd his Spears point and stuck it in the ground, And to him kindly spake. There is, said he, Between your Ancestors and mine of old A mutual bond of Hospitality. Belleriphon, as I have oft been told, Was by my Grandsire Oeneus freely treated, And stayed with him twenty days and nights, And when again he from his house retreated, They Tokens gave of Hospitable Rites; Oeneus to him a Belt most glorious, Bellerophon to him a Golden Cup. Which I not with me brought, but in my house When I came thence I safely left lockt up. My Father I remember not. For he Left ue too young when last he went from home. Henc forth my Guest in Argos you must be, I yours in Lycia, when I thither come. Mean time let's one anothers Spear decline; For many Trojans more I have to kill, Unless I crost be by some Pow'r divine. And of the Achaeans kill you whom you will. And that our Friendship may the more appear, I will present you with these Arms of mine; And you to me present the Arms you wear. This said, they lighted and their hands did joyn. But Glaucus surely here bewitched was, Or cursed by the Gods, that had forgot His Arms were Gold, and Diomed's but Brass. An hundred his, nine Beeves the other bought.
Hector was now come to the Scaean Gates. To him the Trojan Wives and Daughters run To ask their Husbands and their Brothers Fates, But to those questions he answer'd none. But to the Temples bad them go and pray, Inquire no more for what you will lament. Then to the Royal Palace went his way. For great the danger was and imminent. On every side within were Galleries Magnificent, of square well-plained Stones, With Fifty Lodgings for the Families (One by another) of King Priam's. Sons. And for his Daughters twelve Appartments were (In the same Court, but on the other side) To lodge his Sons in Law when they were there, Of the same Stone in like form beautifid. Here Hecuba, as she conducted home Laodice her beautifullest Daughter, Met her Son Hector that was newly come In dusty bloody Armour from the Slaughter. And took him by the hand, and to him said, Why come you from the fight? Have we the worst, And you come to sollicite Jove for aid, And after that is done to quench your thirst? A little Wine will much the strength sustain Of one that labour'd has as you have done. No, no, from Wine (said he) I must abstain, Lest I forget and leave my work undone. Besides, to Jove I dare not offer Wine With bloody hands, lest I should him incense. But, Mother, go you to Minerva's shrine With other Ladies, and with Frankincense; And of the Robes in your perfumed Chest Take with you that which in your judgment is Amongst them all the largest and the best, And lay it down upon the Goddess knees. And vow that at her Altar you will kill Twelve yearling Heifers of the best you have, I at your Prayer condescend she will Your Children with your selves and Troy to save,
And from the Fight this Diomed remove. To th' Temple presently go you away. But I to Paris now must go, and prove If he th'advice I give him will obey. Then Hecuba into the Chamber came Where many divers-colour'd Vestures lay, The work of many a Sidonian Dame, Which then from Sidon Paris brought to Troy, When thither he from Sparta Helen brought. Of these, to give the Goddess, she took one The largest and most curiously wrought, And that like to a Star in Heaven shone. And when unto the Temple come they were, Theano opened the door; for she (Antenor's Wife) was Pallas Priest. And there She took the Robe, and laid it on her Knee. Then prayed she (whilst with a mighty cry They to the Goddess lifted up their hands.) Pallas (said she) Daughter of Jove most high, In whose protection ev'ry City stands, Great Pallas, break the Spear of Diomed, And overthrow him at the Scean gate, That at thy Altar may be offered Twelve yearling Heifers; and commiserate The Wives and Children and the state of Troy. Thus prayed they; But Pallas would not hear. To th'House of Paris Hector went away That was unto his own and Priaras near, Built by himself the Citadel within, With all the Art the Trojans understood. There Hector with hs Spear in hand went in, That was in longth eleven Cubits good, And pointed at the Head with polisht Brass, Fastned into the staff with a Gold Ring. Busy about his Armour Paris was, And Helen work to th' Mads distributing. Here Hector Paris chid. Is this, said he, The fittest time to manifest your spite Against the Trojans, when the Enemy Under our Walls is killing them in fight?
When none but you the cause is of the War. And Tumult, which surrounds the Town of Troy. I think it would become you better far To rate those men that from the Battle stay. Brother, said Paris, What you say is right. But hear me too. I stayed not behind Because I to the Trojans bear a spite, But from their Slanders to avert my mind. And now my Wife too has persuaded me, Who of my self was ready to be gone. Not sure to any side is Victory. Stay only while I put my Armour on. Or go. I'll follow you and find you out. Thus he. But Hector to it nothing said. And to be gone his Face he turn'd about. But Helen saw about to speak, and staid. Brother (said she) though I unworthy am To call you so, I would I had been thrown Into the Sea the same day that I came Into the world, so many shames to own. Or that this Husband sensible had been, As men of Honour should be of ill fame; But that's not now, nor ever will be seen, He one day will (I fear) repent the same. But Brother (pra'ye) sit down and rest a while, That with the toil of Battle weary are; The cause whereof am I the Woman vile, That with me brought to Troy. this cruel War. Unlucky day that brought me first acquainted With Alexander to our Infamy, Which through the world hereafter will be chanted, And make uslcathsom to posterity. Helen (said Hector) now I cannot stay, The Trojans of my presence stand in need. But bid you Alexander come away While I am in the Town, and that with speed. For hence unto my house I must go home To see my Wife, my Child and Family, An't may be never back again shall come, But by the hands of the Achaeans dye.
This said, home Hector went, and there was told His Wife Andromache at home was not. For with the Nurse the Battle to behold, Into the Tow'r on Scaea Gate was got. Then Hector of the women askt again, Is she gone to some Sister or some Brother? Or to the Goddess Temple in the Train Of those that thither waited on my Mother? To this one of the Women said again, She neither went to Sister nor to Brother, Nor to the Goddess Temple, in the Train Of those that thither waited on your Mother. But when I know not who inform'd her had That th' Argives did the Trojans overpower, With her young Son and Nurse as one that's mad Ran to the Gate, and up into the Tower. Then back went Hector passing the same Streets Through which he went when he came from the fight, Where in the way Andromache he meets That now was running home in great affright. The Daughter she was of Eetion, Who of Cilicia the Scepter carried, And dwelt at Thebe in Hypplacion. But unto noble Hector she was married. Now Hector, met her with their little Boy. That in the Nurses arms was carried, And like a Star upon her bosome lay His beautiful and shining golden Head. Scamandrius he called was by Hector, Astyanax he named was in Troy. Because his Father was their sole Protector, The people from his Honour nam'd the Boy. Then Hector smiling look'd upon his Son. And to him weeping said Andromache, My Dear, You'll by your courage be undone, And this your Son a wretched Orphan be The Greeks at once on you alone will fall, And then a woful Widow shall be I, And have no comfort in the world at all, But live in misery and wish to die.
Father or Mother they have lest me none, For by the great Achilles he was slain When he the goodly Town of Thebe won. But from disarming him he did refrain. Together with his Arms he did him hurn, And with such Rites as did a Prince become. And having put his Ashes in an Urn Bury'd the same, and ore it rais'd a Tomb. The Mountain-Nymphs Daughters of Jupiter Planted about it many Elmen-trees. My seven Brothers all were killed there. In one day by Achilles slain were these, As they defending were their Kine and Sheep. My Mother with the Booty he brought hither, And her he at the Ships did pris'ner keep Until her friends her Ransome had sent thither. Then to her Country back they sent my Mother, Who shortly after there fell sick and di'd. Now Hector you my Father are and Brother, Husband and Mother. In you I confide. For pities sake then on this Turret stay, Lest Fatherless your Son, I Widow be. And set your armed people in array, And those that aid you at the Sycamore-tree, Where to the City easiest is th' access. For there it was the Argives thrice fell on Led by Idomeneus, and th' Ajaxes, The two Atrides, and Tydeus Son. Whether they had some God for their Director, Or had observ'd some weakness in the place I know not. And to this replyed Hector, Dear Wife, this might be done. But what disgrace Shall I be in? How will the Trojans scoff Both Men and Women, and deride my fear, If on the Tow' they saw me standing off When others fighting with the Argives were? Besides by Nature I am framed so, I am not able to abstain from fight, But must be 'mongst the foremost, when the Foe Invades my Fathers Honour in my sight.
And yet I know the evil day will come, That Priam and his people perish must, And utterly destroy'd be Ilium, And all her stately Buildings lye in dust. Yet am not griev'd so much to think upon The fate of Troy, of Priam, of my Mother, Or all my Brothers, as for you alone When by a proud Achaean one or other You drag'd are weeping into Slavery, And when t' Achaea he has brought you home, To fetch in water you imploy'd shall be, And made to labour at anothers Loom. And one that sees you weeping, there will say, This Woman was the Noble Hectors Bride, The bravest man of all that fought for Troy, And of your tears bring back again the Tide. But dead may I be first and buried Before I see you drag'd or hear you cry. And when he thus had said, his arms he spread The Child to take, who terrifi'd thereby, And unacquainted with a glittering Crest And Horses Mayn that nodding at it hung, Turn'd his face crying to the Nurses breast, And with his little arms close to her clung. Which made his Father and his Mother smile. Then Hector on the ground his Helmet laid, And took the Child and dandled him a while, And then to Jove and all the Gods he pray'd. O Jove and gods, Grant that this Son of mine No less in Troy may honour'd be than I, Nor from his Fathers vertue ere decline, But hold the reins of Ilium steadily. That men may say when he hath slain his Foe, And bringeth with him home his Spoil to Troy, In Battle he his Father doth outdo, And fill his loving Mothers heart with joy, This said, he gave the Child t' Andromache, Which she receiving hug'd, and laugh'd and cry'd. Which Hector with compassion did see, And thus with gentle words his Wife did chide.
Dear Wife, do not afflict your self for me. No man can die before his hour is come; And when 'tis come, put off it cannot be By weak nor strong. Therefore I pra'ye go home, And tend your work, and give your Women theirs, And sit still at your Spindle and your Loom, And leave to men these Martial affairs, And me that have the charge of Ilium. Then up he takes his Helmet and departs, And homewards she; but often turn'd her head. At home with grief she fill'd her womens hearts, And made them mourn for Hector not yet dead. Nor Paris at his house did longer stay Than he must needs his Armour to put on, And up and down the streets went every way, To see if he could Hector light upon. As when a Horse i'th' Stable pampered, And used to be washed in the River His Headstal breaks, or be delivered From that which held him by what means soever; Then proudly he sets up his Tail and Head, And beats the Plain, and with the wind he makes His Mane play in the air dishevelled, Then to the Pasture known the way he takes: So from his house went Paris through the Streets With shining Arms, and Courage at his heart; And quickly with his valiant brother meets, Turning from where he and his wife did part. And first to Hector Paris thus began. Brother I fear I've made you stay too long. No (he reply'd) your courage no man can Accuse, but such as mean to do you wrong. But when you, out of humour, will not fight, The Trojans that much suffer for your sake Speak all the ill they can of you in spight. Which when I hear, it makes my heart to ake. But now let's go. If ere the Pow'rs Divine Displace th' Achaean Host, and give us Peace, That freely to them we may offer Wine, Your quarrel with the Trojans soon will cease.
ILIAD. LIB. VII. THis said, they went together to the Fight, For Paris now no more the War declin'd, And welcome to the Trojans was the sight, As to a weary Rower a good wind. There Paris slew Menesthius, the Son Of the great Clubman Areithous Of Arne. And by Hector overthrown And struck clean through the Neck was ionus. Iphinous the Son of Dexias As to his Charre he mounted to have fled, By Glaucus through the Shoulder wounded was, And to the ground again fell backward dead. When Pallas saw the Argives fall so fast, She from Olympus leapt to Ilium: Apollo then to meet her made great haste, That saw her from his Tow'r in Pergamum. And when they were together at the Beech, He for the Trojans, for the Argives she, Apollo to her thus addrest his Speech: Daughter of Jove, what great necessity Brought you to Troy? Was it to please your mind, Or give unto the Greeks the Victory? For well I know to Troy you are not kind. But for the present be advis'd by me. Let th'Armies both give over fight to day, And fight it out hereafter till they know What end the Fates assigned have to Troy, Since you and Juno needs will have it so. Your Counsel's good (said Pallas) and the same I thought upon. But tell me how to do it. For to that end I from Olympus came. Tell me but how, and I'll consent unto it.
Why then, said Phoebus, Hector I'll excite In Duel all the Argives to defie; And they some one will choose with him to fight, And both the Armies quietly stand by. This counsel was by both agreed upon; And known to Helenus by Augury, To Helenus that was King Priam's Son. And he to Hector did himself apply. Hector, said he, will you do that which I That am your Brother shall advise you to? Go to th' Achaean Army and defie The best of all the Argives; Boldly go; For in this Combat you are not to die: The Gods have told me so; Then never fear. Then to the Front came Hector joyfully, With both his hands o'th' middle of his Spear To keep the Trojans back and make them stand; And streight King Agamemnon seeing it, Unto the Argives gave the like comand. Then on the ground both Greeks and Trojans sit. Phoebus and Pallas flew up to the Tree, The high Beech-tree that sacred was to Jove, I'th' likeness of two Vulturs, thence to see How the two Armies looked from above. As when a West-wind ruffled has the Main, It black and horrid to the eye appears; So lookt the Greeks and Trojans on the Plain, Grisly and dark with Helmets, Shields and Spears. Into the midst between them Hector stept. You Trojans and well-armed Greeks, said he, Since 'twas Jove's will our Oath should not be kept, But that the War continued shall be Till either you shall win the Town of Troy, Or we your Army and your Ships confound, Fighting till one another we destroy; I to you Argives somewhat will propound. The best of all the Greeks are present here. Let one of them come forth and fight with me, On these conditions (witness Jupiter) If by his hand I slain in Combat be,
Let him do with my Armor what he will, But send my Body into Ilium. But if Apollo grant me him to kill, His Armour I will have and carry home, And in Apollo's Temple dedicate. His Body to the Ships shall rendred be, That on his Urn the Greeks may elevate A Mount of Earth for Passengers to see Upon the Shore of Hellespont, and say, Here lies a valiant Greek by Hector slain Long since, when th' Argives were besieging Troy. My honour thus for ever will remain. So Hector said. The Greeks all silent were. For shame the Challenge they could not refuse; And to accept it ev'ry one did fear. But Menelaus then his Valour shews, And rising up in anger thus he said, Women of Argos what a shame is this That you should all of Hector be affraid! What now become of all your threatning is? There, (dust and water, heartless, nameless) sit. My self I'll arm (for I perceive no odds) And will this sturdy Champion Hector meet. For Victory comes only from the Gods. This said, he rose and arm'd himself; and there Depriv'd of life had Menelaus been (So much too weak he was) by Hector's Spear, But that the Princes starting up came in. And Aganemnon seizing on his hand, Why Menelaus are you mad, said he, In fight you cannot against Hector stand, How much soever you concerned be. Avoid him in the Field as others do. Achilles who than you much stronger is, Strong as he is, considers Hector too, And cooler grows as oft as he him sees. Therefore, good Brother, sit still at your Troop. Some other we'll oppose to Hector's migh, That, haughty as he is, shall make him stoop, And thank the Gods if safe he come from fight.
To this good counsel yielded Menelaus. Whereat his Servants not a little joy'd, Came in, and soon by them unarm'd he was, And to the Greeks then Nestor rose, and said, O how unwelcome will this Story be To Greece, and Peleus King o'th' Myrmidons, Who at his house the names enquir'd of me Both of your selves, your Fathers, and your Sons. If he should know how much you Hector dread, How oft would he hold up his hands, and pray The Gods to send him down amongst the dead, And from his body take all sense away! O that I were as young as I was then When war was 'twixt Arcadia and Pyle, And at the Walls of Pheia stood the men Ready for bloody fight in Rank and File! Amongst them stood one Ereuthalion, And of the great man Areîthous Upon his Shoulders had the Armour on, Who Clubman commonly surnamed was, Because he used neither Bow nor Spear, But with an Iron Club the Battles brake. Lycurgus slew him though he weaker were, (When at advantage great he did him take) By craft, not strength. For in a narrow way He watch'd him at a turning with his Spear, And on a sudden took his life away, So that the Club had nothing to do there. Then took he off his Arms, and wore the same In Battle when there was occasion, But gave them when old age upon him came To this his Squier Ereuthalion. Who wearing them our Army did defie, At which when others trembling stood and shook Although the youngest of them all was I, Great as he was, the man I undertook, And slew him by the Goddess Pallas aid, The strong'st and tallest that I ever slew, As when upon the ground he stretcht was laid, The place he covered did plainly shew.
If I were now as young and strong as then, The Greeks for Hector soon a match should find, Though none of you that are their bravest men To try your fortune with him have a mind. Thus Nestor th' Argive Lords did reprehend, And nine of them in number (all that durst In single fight with Hector to contend) Armed, and Agamemnon was the first. And next the strong and valiant Diomed, And then the greater Ajax, then the less, Then King Idomeneus, of Creet the head, And with him his good Squire Meriones, Who as the God of Battle valiant was, Besides Eurypylus Euaemon's Son, And of Andremon the stour Son Thoas, And wise Ulysses last of all made one. So many Greeks durst Hector undertake. Bring in your Lots, said Nestor then, and we Will in a Helmet them together shake. And who by Lot our Champion shall be Sall please us all, but please himself much more When back again he cometh from the ight. Then brought they in their Lots; which ore and one He shook in Agamemnon's Helmet bright. Mean while the people lift their hands, and pray, O Jove, let now the Lot to Ajax fall, Or that on Diomedes light it may, Or on Atrides our great General. The Helmet shaken threw out Ajax Lot, Which th'Herald took and carried about To th' Argive Princes, but they own'd it not, Till to the hand of Ajax it was brought, Who sign'd it had, and into th'Helmet thrown. He took it, and a while consider'd it; And when he was assured 'twas his own, Rose up, and lets it fall before his feet And to the Princes said, This Lot is mine, And glad I am, and hope for Victory. But send your Pray'rs up to the Pow'rs divine, While I put on my Arms; and silently,
So that (at least) the Trojans may not hear. Or (now I think on't) plain and openly. For I see nothing that I need to fear. I am not forc'd to fight unwillingly, Nor rashly undertook the enterprize. For I was born and bred in Salamis, And hope I am not so weak or unwise. Assoon as mighty Ajax had said this, The people looking up to Heav'n pray'd. O Jove, said one, grant Ajax Victory; Or if you be inclin'd Hector to aid, Then let their strength and glory equal be. When Ajax had his Arms put on compleat, He walkt away with a Majestique pace, As Mars goes to the War. His strides were great, And scornful smiles with terror in his face. And as he went he shook his mighty Spear, Which joyfully the Argives did behold; But by the Trojans lookt on was with fear; And Hector at the heart himself was cold. But was ashamed back again to fly, Since he provok'd him had into the field. And Ajax now was come unto him nigh, As from a Tower looking ore his Shield. By Tychius of Hyla made it was, And cover'd with sev'n fat Bulls hides well tan'd, And over them an eighth of shining Brass, And at his Breast he held it with his hand, And threatning said, Hector I'll make you see, That in the Army many yet remain, Though from us angry gone Achilles be, And discontent from Battle now abstain, That fear not Hector. Do the worst you can. Ajax (said Hector) I am not a Child Nor Woman to be threatned, but a Man That understands the bus'ness of the Field, And can my Buckler bear from Left to Right, And have whereon in Battle to rely, And how to guide my Horses in a fight, And move my feet to Mars his Melody,
But no such cunning will I use with you. My Spear I'll send unto you openly. And at that word the long Spear from him flew, And pierc'd his Target to the seventh ply. But there it staid. Then Ajax threw his Spear, Which Hector's Shield, Armour & Coat we at through But Hector shrunk his Belly in for fear. For else it pierced had his Belly too. Then from their Shields the Spears they plucked out, And them no more at one another threw, But came unto each other close and fought. And like two Lions on each other flew. And Hector made a thrust at Ajax Shield Which entred not, resisted by the brass: But Hector's Shield to Ajax Spear did yield, Which pierc'd it through; and so far in did pass, That grazing on his Neck it fetch'd the blood. But Hector not dismaid took up a Stone. Ajax took't on his Shield and firmly stood, And with his hand took up a greater one And rougher, which did Hector's Buckler tear, And with the weight unto the ground him threw, But up again Apollo did him rear. Then both of them (the Combat to renew) Their Swords were drawing. But the Heralds then Idaeus and Talthibius came in, The sacred Messengers of Gods and men, And put themselves the Combatants between. Troy's Herald then Idaeus to them spake. Good Sons, belov'd of Jove, give over fight. For all men of your Valour notice take. And now 'tis late; we must submit to Night. Idaeus (then said Ajax) let these words From Hector come, from whom came the Defie. 'Twas he that Challeng'd all the Argive Lords. Let him give over first, and then will I. Then Hector spake. Ajax since you, said he, The Gods indued have with Strength and Wit, Let for to day the quarrel ended be. Hereafter let the Gods determine it,
And give which side they please the Victory. For now 'tis late. To Night we must submit. That you the Greeks may cheer, and specially Your own friends, and companions at your Fleet: And I the Trojans from their fear relieve, And Wives, that for my safe return do pray. But come, let's t'one another Tokens give, That Greeks and Trojans seeing them may say, These two men fought and fought each others death, Yet parted friends. This said, he to him gave His Belt with his good Sword and Iv'ry Sheath; Ajax to him his shining Girdle brave. Thus parted, Ajax to the Argives went; And Hector back into the Troops of Troy; Who mightily rejoyc'd at the event That past all hope they saw him come away. The Lords conducted him to Ilium, The Greeks to Agamemnon Ajax led. And when they all unto his Tent were come, He for them sacrific'd a Bull well fed. Which flay'd, divided, roasted, taken up The Carvers into Messes cut. This done King Agamemnon and the Princes sup. The Chine at Ajax Table was set on. And when their thirst and hunger was subdu'd, Nestor whose counsel still had been the best, What further was to be consider'd shew'd, And to the Princes all his Speech addrest. Atrides, and you other Princes know How Mars with Argives strowed hath the Plain, And sent their Souls down to the Powr's below, Whose bloody Bodies in the Field remain. To morrow therefore let us cease from War, And early in the Morning fetch the dead, And burn them somewhere from the Ships not far, That t' Argos back they may be carried, When we depart from hence; that their Bones may By their own Friends and Children buried be. Let's raise a Mount upon the Shore of Troy, One for them all, for Passengers to see,
And fortifie our good Ships with a Wall, And Turrets in it, and a Ditch without, Lest unawares the Trojans on us fall, And Gates for Charrets to go in and out Mean while the Trojan Lords at Counsel were Loud and discordant. Then Antenor said, Trojans and Aids I pray to me give ear, For of the worst I greatly am affraid. Let Menelaus have his Wife again, And all the goods she brought with her. Take heed▪ Against our Oath we shall but fight in vain. Then let her go, or never look to speed. Antenor (then said Paris) this is not The best advice you could have given, or (If what you say dissent not from your thought) You are not now so wise as heretofore▪ Thus much to you. But to the Trojans this. Her wealth Ile render, with more of mine own. But my Wife Helen I will not dismiss. And when he that had said again sat down. Then Priam rose: Trojans and Aids, said he, Now take your Supper as you us'd to do, And Sentinels set such as careful be; To morrow I will send Idaeus to The Greeks with Paris answer, and to try If they from Battle for so long will cease, That we may burn our slain men quietly, And sight again hereafter when they please. This said, the Trojans to their Suppers went. Next Morn Idaeus found the Argive Lords Together met at Agamemnon's Tent, And coming in, unto them said these words. Atrides, and you Argives all, I come With Terms from Paris, and by Priam sent, On which you may depart from Ilium, And end the War, if thereto you consent. The wealth which he with Helen brought ashore (I would before he brought it he had dy'd) To Menelaus he will give and more. But his wife Helen shall with him abide.
Besides, the People have commanded me To ask you if you will the War suspend, Until our dead fetcht off and burned be, And after fight till Jove the War shall end. So said Idaeus. The Greeks silent were A while▪ At last Tydides rose and spake. Let not the Greeks so much the Trojans fear As Helens goods, or her herself to take At Alexander's hands. The hour is come (As any Child may manifestly see) That must orethrow the State of Ilium, So said Tydides, and much prays'd was he. Then Agamemnon answer'd to Idaeus, You hear what th' Argives say. I say the same. As for the dead men burn them if you please; They're good for nothing, I contented am. And of this Truce let Jove a witness be. This said, to Jove his Scepter up he heav'd. Idaeus back to Troy went speedily The Answer to relate he had receiv'd. Mean while the States of Troy in Councel sat, And there their Heralds coming back expected. Idaeus then went in, and told them that The offer made by Paris was rejected. But that a Truce was granted for a day. Next Morn the Trojans early as they cou'd Went some to th' field to fetch their dead away, And others to the Hill to fetch down wood. So did the Argives some to Ida go For wood, and others to the bloody field. But could not then distinguish friend from foe. But by and by the Sun began to guild Scamander Plain; then washt they off the gore And dust, and laid their dead men upon Carts, But Priam had forbidden them to roar, Or cry outright, though grieved at their hearts. When they had burnt them, back they went again. The Greeks too, when they had counsum'd with fire And done their lamentation for the slain, Unto their Ships did back again retire.
But this th' Achaeans did at break of day, And rais'd one mighty Monument for all. And the incursion of the Foe to stay, Their Navy they inclosed with a Wall. With Turrets high and a great Ditch without, (Upon the sides whereof sharp Pales they fix) And Gates for Charrets to go in and out. And all the day thus toyling were the Greeks. Mean while the Gods together sat above, And wondring lookt upon this work of men; And Neptune then addrest his Speech to Jove. What mortals will the Gods consult agen? See you not what a Wall the Greeks have rear'd, And what a ditch about it made, said he, The fame whereof 'mongst people will be heard As far as the Sun-beams extended be? Yet to the Gods they Hecatomb gave none. Whereas the Walls that I and Phoebus rais'd About the City for Laomedon Obscur'd by this no longer will be prais'd. Then answer'd Jove. Neptune, I never thought That such a word would e're have come from you That have the pow'r to bring their work to nought. A lesser God might have complain'd, 'tis true; But of your pow'r Aurora fees no bound. Stay only till the Greeks be gone away; Then break their Wall, and throw it to the ground, And hide the place with Sand. Thus taked they. The Sun now set, and finisht was the Wall. The Greeks went back then each man to his Tent, And many good fat Beeves they made to fall; And Wine they had great store from Lemnos sent. For Ships abundance laden were come in, Which by Euneus (th'Hero Jason's Son Got on Hypsiphile) thither sent had been, For which the Army barter'd. Hides gave one, Another th'Ox it self, another Brass, One Iron, and another gave a Slave, Beside what by Eunëus given was To th' two Atrides of free gift to have.
When Supper ready was they all sat down, And all night long the Feast continued, Greeks in their Tents, and Trojans in the Town. And all night long aloud Jove thundered, Meaning no good to th' Greeks. Then pour'd they on The ground the offer'd wine, Jove to content. And no man durst to drink till that was done. And when they had well drunk to sleep they went.
ILIAD. LIB. VIII. THe Morning now was quite display'd, and Jove Upon Olympus highest top was set: And all the Gods and Goddesses above By his command were there together met. And Jupiter unto them speaking said, You Gods all and you Goddesses d'ye hear, Let none of you the Greeks or Trojans aid; I cannot do my work for you. Forbear. For whomsoever I assisting see The Argives or the Trojans, be it known He wounded shall return and laught at be, Or headlong into Tartarus be thrown, Into the deepest pit of Tartarus, Shut in with Gates of Brass, as much below The common Hell, as 'tis from Hell to us. But if you will my pow'r by trial know, Put now into my hand a Chain of Gold, And let one end thereof lye on the plain, And all you Gods and Goddesses take hold; You shall not move me howsoere you strain. At th'other end, if I my strength put to't, I'll pull you Gods and Goddesses to me Do what you can, and Earth and Sea to boot, And let you hang there till my pow'r you see. The Gods were out of countenance at this, And to such mighty words durst not reply, Till Pallas said, Well known, O Father, is Your mighty Pow'r. But do not us deny, When we so many Argives falling see, To show we have compassion, and grieve. And though in fight we no Assistants be, Yet let us somtimes counsel to them give,
Lest in your anger they be all destroy'd. Dear Child (said Jove) it goes against my mind. I would not have my Orders disobey'd. 'Tis granted though. For I'll to you be kind. This said, he set his Horses to his Charre, Hard hoof'd, swift-footed Horses two. Like Gold Their Mains profound well-combed shined farre. Then arm'd himself, and on the whip laid hold. No sooner had the Horses felt the Whip, But up they start, and 'twixt the Earth and Sky The winds themselves with swiftness they outstrip, And came unto the top of Ida high To Gargarus, and there Jove took them out, And hiding them with air on th'Hill sate down, And as he sat he cast his eyes about With great content upon the Fleet and Town. The Argives at their Tents short Break-fast make, And arm'd themselves assoon as they had done. The Trojans, for their Wives and Childrens sake, (Though fewer) arm'd and made haste to be gone. Then open'd were the Gates, and to the Field Out came they Horse and Man; and being met, They Man to Man came up with Shield to Shield, And Spear to Spear; and on each other set. Some groan'd, some vaunted, mighty was the din Of those that kill, and those that falling cry. And this condition they continued in Until the Sun had mounted half the Sky. Then Jove took up a pair of Scales of Gold, And weigh'd the fates of both the Nations, And equally suspended them did hold; But not so equal were their inclinations. For th' Argive Scale sat still upon the ground, While th'other lifted was up to the skies. Heaven and Earth did then with Thunder sound, And Jove threw Lightning in the Argives eyes. Then all the Greeks amazed ran away. Idomeneus and Agamemnon ran; Nor either of the Ajaxes durst stay: Except old Nestor they fled ev'ry man.
And Nestor too had fled, had he known how: For of his Horses Paris one had shot, And pierc'd his Forehead just above the Brow Into the Brain, so that his Chariot Now useless was, and the Horse troublesome. Then cuts he th'Harness; but so long did stay, That Hector now was almost to him come, And th'Old man surely had been cast away, But that Tydides saw him in this pain, And terribly t'Ulysses cryed out, Whither d'ye fly Ulysses? Come again, Help to defend old Nestor; face about. While he said this, Ulysses still ranon, Not minding what he said. And Diomed, To succour Nestor, to him went alone, And with him stood before his Chariots head, And said, O Nestor, youthful is the Foe That cometh on, and you now very old, Your Charioteer not strong, your Horses flow, Come up into my Charret, and behold My Trojan Horses how well they can run When there is cause t'approach or shun the fight. From Venus Son Aeneas I them won, A man of much experience in flight: Send back your Horses, and with mine we'll go And fight the Trojans. 'Twill not be amiss To let the mighty Champion Hector know, A Spear as mad is in my hand as his. This said, both Sthen'lus and Eurymedon With Nestor's Horses went to Nestor's Tent: Nestor and Diomed, both mounted on Tydides Charret, up to Hector went. And when they were to one another near, At Hector Diomedes threw in haste, And miss'd of him, and kill'd his Charioteer; Clean through his Breast the Spear well driven p Down dead he fell, but Hector lets him lye, And turns aside to seek a Charioteer The place of Heniopeus to supply. And Archeptolemus then being near,
(Call'd up by Hector) on the Reins laid hold. Then mighty work and slaughter there had been, And Trojans shut like Lambs within a Fold In Troy, but that it was by Jove foreseen. For in a Clap of Thunder Jove down threw His Bolt at Diomedes Horses feet. And th'Earth with Sulphur flaming looked blew. Nestor himself astonish'd was to see't; Lets go the Reins, and down the Horses fell. And Nestor then to Diomedes said, 'Tis Jove (you see) that doth our force repel, And Hector (for this day) intends to aid. Another day to us he will be kind, If he see cause; for no man can him tie, Nor able is to make him change his mind. And therefore now our best course is to flie. 'Tis true, O Nestor (said Tydides then) But what a pain then at my heart will lie, When Hector speaking to the Trojan men, Shall brag he made Tydides from him flie? Then should I wish the Earth would swallow me. Though Hector saies so (Nestor then reply'd) Believed by the Trojans 'twill not be, So many of them by your hand have dy'd. And at this word his Steeds he turn'd about. A show'r of Spears then from the Trojans flies, Who them pursued with a mighty shout. Then Hector loud unto Tydides cries, Ho! Diomed, by th'Argives honoured Above the most, serv'd with a greater Mess, And higher Seat, and Wine unlimited, You will hereafter be esteemed less. Unmanly Diomed. Fly, Baggage, fly. You ne'er shall come within the Walls of Troy To fraight your Ship with Women here; for I Intend to send you first another way. This said, Tydides was a while in doubt Whether to turn or no and Hector meet, And thrice to turn his Horses was about, And Jove thrice thund'ring turn'd them tow'rd the Fleet,
Shewing that he the honour of that day Had granted to the Trojans. Hector then Pursu'd them close, and roaring all the way, Trojans, said he, and Aids now play the men. For sure I am that Jove is on our side, And give us will the Victory this day. And fools they are that in their Wall confide; For through their Trench our Horse shall find a way. When we are at the Ships let one or other Have fire to burn them ready, and then fall Upon the Men confounded in the smother. This said, he did upon his Horses call. Xanthus, Podargus, Aethon, Lampus, see You pay now what you owe me for your meat Laid in your Mangers by Andromache, Who alwaies served you with pleasant wheat, And steep'd sometimes (when she thought fi:) in Wine; And very oft (though I her Husband be) Your dinner was made ready before mine Now, now pursue the Argives lustily, That Nestor's Shield of Gold I may obtain, Nor of Tydids Armour must we fail By Vulcan wrought. If we but these can gain, The Argives will this vey night hoise Sail. At Hectors speech Juno upon her Throne Unquiet sitting made Olympus shake. For mov'd she was with his presumption, And looking upon Neptune to him spake. Neptune, said she, are you not stir'd at this? You know at Aege, and at Helice Their liberality abundant is. And sure I am you wish them victory. What! Cannot we who with the Argives side, If we our pow'rs together join in one, Drive back the Trojans and abate their pride, And leave Jove here to sit and chafe alone? Juno (said Neptune griev'd) these words are bold. I'll not rebel. For we shall have the worst; And so we have by Jupiter been told. Thus Neptune and the Wife of Jove discourst.
And now between the Walls and Ships, the place With Horses and with armed Men was fill'd, And crammed were within a narrow space By Hector that was Master of the Field. And had not Agamemnon been inspir'd By Juno to put courage in his men, The Argive Ships had certainly been fir'd, And never had the Greeks gone back again. Then 'mongst the Ships he went, and stayed at Ulysses Ship, which was the middle most Of all the Navy, and the tallest; that He might be heard to both ends of the Host, Both to Achilles and to Ajax Tent, Clad in th'Imperial Robe that all might see't. For these two being the most confident, Had plac'd themselves at th'utmost of the Fleet. And with a mighty voice to th' Argives cry'd, Disgrace of Greece, meer outsides, where are now Your Brags, that any of you durst abide An hundred Trojans, and yet dare not show A Face to Hector who our Ships would fire? But this was said at Lemnos in your Wine, Which rais'd your language than your nature higher; But cooled now the Battle you decline. Was ever King afflicted as I am, O Jove, or lost a Victory so near? And yet at all your Altars as I came, My Sacrifices duly payed were, In hope that I the Town of Troy should sack. But grant at least, O Jove, that we may come▪ Our selves into Achaea safely back; And not be here destroy'd at Ilium. This said, Jove grants them safely to depart. And from him presently his Eagle came, And brought the tender issue of a Hart, And near unto his Altar dropt the same. The Argives when they saw the Bird of Jove, Were to the Fight again encouraged, And who should first repass the Trenches strove. And he, that first came forth was Diomed.
And much before that any of the rest Had any slain, he killed Agelaus, Whom with his Spear he pierc'd from Back to Breast, When from him he his Charret turning was. Then Agamemnon came, and Menelaus, And then the greater Ajax, then the Less. The sixth the King Idomeneus was, And with him came his Squire Meriones. And next Eurypylus Euaemon's Son. The ninth was Teucer with his Bow unbent. Hid with the Shield of Ajax Telamon His mighty Brother to the Field he went, Which Ajax lifting, Teucer chose his man, And having at him aim'd, and shot, and kill'd, As Children to their Mothers, back he ran, And hid himself behind his Brothers Shield. How many were the men he killed thus? Orsilochus, Ophlestus, Lycophon, And Melanippus, Daetor, Ormenus, And Chromius, and last Amopaon. All those lay dead together on the Sands. When Agamemnon saw what work was done By Teucer's Arrows on the Trojans Bands, He to him came, and said, O valiant Son Of Telamon, so so your Shafts bestow, Unto the Argives all an honour be, And to your Father Telamon; For though Unto your Mother marry'd not was he, Yet has he still maintain'd you as his own. And if it please Jove and the Pow'rs divine To make me once the Master of this Town, Your share shall be the next set out to mine, And to your honour shall receive from me A Tripod, and two Horses with the Charre, Or if you will, your bed shall honour'd be With some fair Woman taken in the war. Teucer to this then answer made and said, Of this encouragement no need have I Since we came forth I have no time delaid, But done as much as in my pow'r did lie.
Eight Shafts already have gone from my Bow, And in as many Trojans fix'd have been. Of this mad dog I miss I know not how. Then took he out another Arrow keen, And aim'd at Hector, but he hit him not, But wounded on the Breast Gorgythion Who on fair Castianira was begot, And of King Priam's valiant Sons was one. Who falling on his knees hung down his head Just as a Poppy charg'd with fruit and rain, So had his Cask his Head oreburthened. And Teucer then at Hector shot again. And miss'd again. Apollo put it by. But Archeptolemus his Charioteer He missed not. Hector scap'd narrowly, And Archeptolemus expired there Shot through the Breast. Hector was sorry, but Left him. Cebriones chanc'd to be nigh, And in his hands Hector the Reins did put, And from his Charret leapt down suddenly, And took a heavy Stone into his hand. Teucer the while again his Bow had bent, But drawing did so long, and aiming stand, The Stone from Hector th'Arrow did prevent. And near the Shoulder on the Breast him struck. And broken was the Bow-string with the blow, And his benummed Arm all sense forsook, And sinking on his Knees he dropt the Bow. Then Ajax stept before him with his Shield. Mecistheus and Alastor him convey'd Unto the Argive Ships from off the Field, Grievously bruised, groaning and dismaid. The courage of the Trojans now renew'd, They chas'd the Argives back unto their Wall, And till the Trenches they had past, pursu'd, And Hector at their heels the near'st of all. As when a Hound pursueth a wild Bore, Or Lion, and presuming on his Feet Pinches his Hanch or Side, and then gives ore, Not daring if he turn the Beast to meet;
So Hector chasing them still slew the last. And many of them had the Trojans slain Ere they the Trenches and the Pale had past. But being in they there themselves contain. And comfort one another all they can, And to the Gods and Goddesses they pray, Lifting their hands to Heaven every man, And Hector then turn'd off and went his way. Which Juno seeing, unto Pallas said, Daughter of Jupiter do you not see What Greeks one mad man Hector has destroy'd? Shall we sit still in this extremity? To Juno then Athena thus reply'd, Had not my Fathers wits been at a loss, This furious Hector by the Greeks had dy'd. But he my counsel alwaies loves to cross. He has forgot how oft his Son I sav'd Oppressed by Euristheus tyranny. For alwaies when his Fathers help he crav'd, Down to the Earth from Heaven sent was I▪ But had I known as much as I do now, When for the Dog he went to Pluto's gate, He had for me till this time staid below, And by the odious Styx for ever sate. But now he hates me. And by Thetis led, He must Achilles honour. But my hope is, The time will come I shall be favoured By him again, and call'd his dear Glaucopis. But make you ready now your Chariot, While I put on my Arms; that we may see If Hector will thereof be glad or not, Or if some Trojans rather shall not be Left dead for Dogs and Vulturs to devour. Then Juno to her Charre the Horses brought. To Jove's house Pallas went, and on the floor Threw down her long Robe, and put on Jove's Coat. And then her Breast with Armour covered, And on her Shoulder hung her fearful Shield. Then took her heavy Spear with Brazen head. Wherewith she breaketh Squadrons in the Field.
Then open of it self flew Heaven-gate, (Though to the Seasons Jove the power gave Alone to judge of early and of late) And out the Goddesses the Horses drave. Then Jove to Iris said, Go, to them speak. Tell them an ill match they will have of me. I'll lame their Horses and their Charret break, Unto the ground they both shall tumbled be; And with my Thunder wounded shall be so, That ten years after they shall not be well. For I would have Glaucopis well to know What 'tis against her Father to rebel. But Juno is so us'd to cross my will, That towards her my anger is the less. Then Iris went her way from Ida hill, And near Olympus met the Goddesses, And as she bidden was did to them speak, What fury's this? Whither d'ye go, said she. Jove will your Horses lame, your Charret break, And to the ground you both will tumbled be, And with his Thunder wounded will be so, That ten years after you will not be well. For you Glaucopis he will make to know What 'tis against your Father to rebel. But Juno is so us'd to cross his will That he affronts from her can better bear; But Pallas, at your hands he takes it ill That you should dare against him lift a Spear. Iris, her errant done, no longer stay'd, And to Minerva thus said Juno then, Jove shall no more for me be disobey'd, By taking part in War with mortal men. But let One live, and let another die, As by the chance of War it shall fall out, And let him do what he thinks Equity. This said, her Chariot she turn'd about. The Horses by the Seasons freed and fed, The Charret was set up against the Wall. The Goddesses themselves then entered, And took their places in the Councel-Hall
With th'other Gods. And Jove himself from Ide T'Olympus came, and lighted from his Chare, And Neptune from the same his Steeds unty'd, And set them up, and of them had a care. The Charret he set to the Altar near Cover'd with Linnen fine. Then to his Throne, His Throne of Gold mounted the Thunderer, And made Olympus shake as he sat down. But Juno and Athena silent sat Together by themselves from Jove apart And discontent. But Jove knew well for what; And answer made to what was in her heart. Juno, said he, and Pallas, why so sad? Your fight against the Trojans was not long. And more you had been vexed if it had; So much for th'other Gods I am too strong. The danger scarce begun was when you fled. But had you dar'd the Battle to maintain, You had been by my hand so thundered, You never had t'Olympus come again. Juno at this and Pallas grumbling sate, And Pallas from replying did abstain, Although no less the Trojans she did hate. But Juno was not able to contain. O cruel Jove, said she, what words are these Must we unto our friends be so ingrate, Because we know you can do what you please, As not the Argives to commiserate? We are content since you will have it so, No longer in the War to give them aid: But let us give them counsel what to do, Lest in your anger they be all destroy'd. Juno (said Jove) to morrow you shall know If you'll be pleas'd the Battle to behold, How many martial Greeks I'll overthrow. For Hector shall not be by me controul'd Until Achilles be fetch'd back again, And at the Argive Ships the Battle be About the Body of Patroclus slain. For so it is ordain'd by Destiny.
And for your anger Juno I not care, Though to the end of Earth and Sea you go, (Where pent Iäpetus and Saturn are In horrid darkness) and complain; yet so I will not for your anger care a jot. For you are grown extremely insolent. Thus Jupiter; and Juno answer'd not. Then down the Sun into the Ocean went, Drawing upon the Fields a cloudy Night, Which gave the Trojan Army no content, But to the Greeks more welcome was than Light. The Army Hector call'd to Parliament, And led them to a clean place free from blood, And there they all on foot about him throng. Hector unto them giving Orders stood With Spear in hand eleven Cubits long. Hear me you Trojans and you Aids, said he, I thought we should have now the Greeks destroy'd, And lodged in the Town with Victory. But this my hope is by the Night made void, Nor can we help it. Let us now provide (For Supper) Beeves and Sheep, & Wine and Bread From Troy; and let the Horses be unty'd, And care be taken that they be well fed. Then fetch in wood, and fires abundance make, That with the flame lightned may be the Sky, Lest th' Argives in the dark advantage take, To go aboard and safe to Argos fly. Let them imbark at least in haste, and bear Along with them their wounds uncured home, That others who shall see't may stand in fear, And say, This 'tis to fight 'gainst Ilium. And let great Boys and old Men all night wake Upon the Walls and Tow'rs, and Guards be set, And every Wife at home a great fire make, Lest into Troy the Foe by Treason get. This (valiant Trojans) let be done to night. To morrow I shall further order give. I doubt not but to put these Dogs to flight By th' help of Jove, and Ilium relieve.
But while 'tis Night have on your Guards a care, To morrow early arm your selves for fight. For to the Argive Ships I'll bring the War, And trial make of Diomedes might, If from the Ships he drive me shall away, Or with my Spear I him shall overthrow And send his bloody Armour into Troy. To morrow he his strength will better know. I would I were as certain not to die, And of old age live still free from the sorrow, As Phoebus and Athena do, as I Am sure we shall defeat these Greeks to morrow. Thus ended he. The Trojans full of joy Their sweating Horses soon took out and fed, And some were sent into the Town of Troy, To bring in Beeves and Sheep, and Wine and Bread, While others fetcht in Wood. Then to the Sky Arose the pleasant vapour of the Rost. The Trojans confident of Victory Sat chearful at their Arms throughout the Host. As many Stars as in a Heav'n serene Together with the Moon appear i'th' Night, When all the tops of Hills and Woods are seen, And joyful are the Shepherds at the sight: So many seem'd the Fires upon the Plain. A thousand Fires, and at each fifty men, That by their Horses there all night remain Expecting till Aurora rose agen.
ILIAD. LIB. IX. THus Watch the Trojans kept. But at the Fleet Distracted was with fear the Argive Host, And their Commanders; as when two Winds meet, The Sea between them into heaps is tost. And Agamemnon grieved at the heart, Bad th'Heralds forthwith to th' Assembly call The prime Commanders ev'ry one apart, And not make proclamation once for all; And some of them himself he summoned. When met were all the Leaders of the Greeks, They sat them down with hearts discouraged, And tears ran down on Agamemnon's Checks. As Springs of Water issue from a Rock, So fell the tears from Agamemnon's eyes, And to th'Assembly thus he weeping spoke. My friends what help can any man devise? Jove told me I should conquer Ilium, And unto Argos safe return agen, And now deceiv'd me has, and sends me home With shame when I have lost so many men. And thus he loves to do to shew his might. Therefore my Counsel Argives all obey: Let's hoise our Sails and save our selves by flight; For we shall never take the Town of Troy. This said, the Princes long time silent sit. At last Tydides rising thus reply'd, King Agamemnon so far as 'tis fit In such a publick place I must you chide. Take it not ill, because not long ago You me with want of courage did upbraid Before the Greeks, as old and young well know. Jove giv'n you has the Right to be obey'd,
And grac'd you with the title of our King, But has deny'd you a couragious Spit it, Which now is the most necessary thing. You think too meanly of your peoples merit; As for your self, if you will needs away, Go. That's your way. Your Ships there ready lye That from Mycene brought you into Troy, But leave the rest their fortune here to try. If none else stay, yet Sthenelus and I Will not give over fighting till we know To what side Jove will give the Victory. The Gods (I'm sure) will favour to us show. This Speech the Lords commended very much. Then Nestor rose and to Tydides said, There is not of your age another such, For Counsel wise, in Battle not affraid. None will deny but what you say is right; But you have not said all you could have done; And no great wonder, since for age you might (So young you are) have been my youngest Son. Yet the advice you given have is best; I that am elder what wants will supply, Adding thereto what you have not exprest, To take from Agamemnon all reply. For none but such as have no Law, nor Kin, Nor House, in civil discord can delight. But let us first our chiefest work begin, And make the Youngmen keep good watch all Night And let them all from you (Atrides) take Their Orders. For you are our General. And for the Princes a good Supper make, And all the eldest Captains to it call. It best becomes you that can do it best. For in your Tents of Wine you have good store, And easlier provided than the rest, So many Ships you have to bring in more. Hear their advice, and do what you think fit. Good Counsel now we need the most of all, Since our insulting Foes to near us sit. By this nights Counsel we must stand or fall.
Thus Nestor said, and 'twas agreed upon. The Captains of the Watch then streight went forth; First Thrasymedes that was Nestor's Son; And after him six Captains more of worth, Ascalaphus, and then Ialmenus, Then Aphyres, and then Meriones, And Lycomedes, and Deipyrus: The seven Captains of the Watch were these. And with each one an hundred Spearmen went Betwixt the Pale and Wall, and supped there. And the old Leaders t'Agamemnon's Tent, And by him nobly entertained were. But when they had an end made of the Feast, Nestor his Counsel further open laid, Which formerly had alwaies been the best; And looking t'Agamemnon thus he said. King Agamemnon I'll with you begin, And with you end, since you the Scepter bear, And in your care it lies to lose or win. You chiefly should good Counsel give and hear. Hear then what now is my opinion, Than which a better I think you'll not find, Nor is it now the first time thought upon. But heretofore I was of the same mind, When from Achilles you Briseis took, And I advised you to let her stay, Though my good Counsel then you could not brook, But to your own great too much gave way, Dishonouring the man of greatest might In all the Army, and most honoured By all the Gods, and contrary to Right Taking the Prize which he had purchased. So that the bus'ness we have now to do Is how to reconcile him if we can, What Gifts to give him, who shall with them go, And with sweet language pacifie the man. This said, Atrides penitent reply'd, O Nestor, all you charge me with is true, And for Achilles sake ('tis not deny'd) Jove does th'Achean Army now subdue.
He whom Jove loves worth a whole Army is. But since I made Achilles discontent, I'll make amends for what I did amiss, And send a noble Present to his Tent. I'll name the Gifts I'll give him one by one. Seven fire new Trevets. Talents ten of Gold. Twenty black Cauldrons. Twelve Steeds that have w Each one their Prizes, and yet are not old. A man that hath so many and so fleet I think not poor, but Gold may quickly win, When I consider with their nimble feet How many Prizes they have brought me in. And Women seven, the best of women kind For Beauty and for works of Houswifery. And unto these Briseis shall be joyn'd, And I'll be sworn she goes untoucht from me. And all this shall be sent him presently. Hereafter, if we win the Town of Troy, Let him before the prey divided be, Come in and carry to his Ship away As much as it can bear of Gold and Brass. And twenty Trojan women which he please, Helen except. But if it come to pass That safe to Argos we repass the Seas, My Son in Law he shall be if he will, And as my Son Orestes honour'd be; Within my house three Daughters I have still, Iphianassa and Laodice, And fair Chrysothemis, take which he list And to his Fathers house convey. For I On setling of estate will not insist, But of my own do that sufficiently. Seven Cities he shall have: Phaerae divine, Enope, Ire, and Cardamyle, And Pedasus that fertile is of Wine, Antheia, Aepia, all on the Sea Of sandy Pyle; and rich in Sheep and Kine The people are, and will his Laws obey, And Tribute pay as to a Pow'r divine. All this I'll give his anger to allay.
And this content him may if any thing. Inexorable none but Pluto is, But hated for't. I am the greater King, And elder man; he should consider this. Thus Agamemnon. And then Nestor said, The Gifts, O King, no man can reprehend. The next thing to be thought upon and weigh'd, Is whom we shall unto Achilles send. I think that Phoenix ought to lead the way, Then Ajax and Ulysses, and with these. The publick Heralds two, Eurybates And Odius, and here no longer stay Than to bring water for our hands, that we May first send up our Prayers unto Jove, That our Embassage may successful be. This said by Nestor all the rest approve. When water was brought in they wash'd and pray'd; The Youngmen fill'd the Temperers with Wine; And round about the full Cups were convey'd, And offer'd up unto the Powers divine. When they had offer'd, and drunk what they would, And parting were from Agamemnon's Tent, Old Nestor to instruct them how they should Achilles best persuade, out with them went. And one by one advis'd them what to say, Especially Ulysses. Then they went Saying their Pray'rs to Neptune all the way Until they came unto Achilles Tent. Who sitting, in his hand had a Guitarre To pass the time, and sung unto the same The noble Acts that had been done in Warre By th'ancient Heroes men of greatest fame. Patroclus sat before him looking when He should have done. Ulysses then led in Ajax and Phoenix. And Achilles then Leapt up as one that had surprized been. And them receiving kindly to them said, Welcome my friends, what ere your bus'ness be. To see you I am not a little joy'd, Although th'Achaeans have provoked me,
And to his friend Patroclus order gave. A larger Temperer (said he) set up, For these the dearest friends are that I have Pure be the Wine, and give each man a Cup. Patroclus did so. And sets on a Pot Upon the flaming fire, and puts into't A good Sheeps Chine, another of a Goat, Besides the Chine of a fat Bore to boot. The Blood boyl'd out Automedon it takes And holds it to Achilles to divide, Who of it many equal portions makes. Patroclus makes a fire of wood well dry'd; And when the flame was spent, the Coals he rakes Till they lay even; Then the meat he spits And rostes; and when 'twas roasted up it takes, And on clean Dresser-boards the same he sets; And brought (in Baskets) to the Table Bread; And by Achilles was set on the Meat. Who when he saw the Table furnished Over against Ulysses took his Seat. And bad Patroclus sacrifice, who then The first cut took and threw into the fire, And freely to their meat then fell the men. But when of food they had no more desire, Then Ajax Phoenix jog'd, which was the signe When to begin, for which Ulysses staid. Ulysses then fill'd up his Cup with Wine, And speaking to Achilles, thus he said. All health t' Achilles. Noble is your fare, And by Atrides treated well we were. Your Tables plentifully furnisht are. But that's not it for which we now are here. Our Ships in danger are to be destroy'd; The Trojans are encamped near our Wall Unless you condescend to give us ad, By Hector they are like to perish all; Who threatens he will set them all on fire, And is encourag'd to't by Signs from Jove. To see the morning rise is his desire, And seareth neither Men nor Pow'rs above.
And like a Dog enrag'd, and looking grim, Assures the Trojans he our Ships will burn, And either put us for our lives to swim, Or never to Achaea to return. I am affraid the Gods perform it will, And so to perish here will be our fate. Rise then; if but a little you sit still, All you can do for us will come too late. And then I am assured you will grieve. (When remedy there can be none) in vain: Therefore, while yet you can, the Greeks relieve; Your Fathers Counsel call to mind again. My Son, said he, (when you took leave for Troy) May Juno and Athena strengthen you. But this one Lesson take from me. I pray Remember still your Anger to subdue. Decline all contestation of the Tongue, And let your Conversation gentle be, So shall you win the hearts of old and young In the Achaean Host. Thus counsell'd he. Though you have this forgot, yet now be friends, And since he sorry is, forget th'offence And take the Gifts he offers for amends, Which we esteem a worthy recompence. I'll name the Gifts he offers one by one. Seven fire-new Trevets. Talents ten of Gold. Twenty black Cauldrons. Twelve Steeds that have won Their sev'ral Prizes, and yet are not old. A man that has so many and so fleet I think not poor, but Gold will quickly win, When I consider with their nimble feet What Prizes to Atrides they brought in. And seven fair Women best of all the kind For Beauty and for works of Housewifery, And unto these Briseis shall be joyn'd; And swear he will, she is from blemish free. And all this shall be sent you presently. Hereafter if we take the Town of Troy, You may before the Prey divided be Come in and carry to your Ship away.
As much as it can bear of Gold and Brass; And twenty Trojan Women which you please, Helen except. But if it come to pass That safe to Argos we get ore the Seas, His Son-in-Law you shall be if you will, And as his Son Orestes honour'd be. Within his house three Daughters he hath still Iphianassa, and Laodice, And fair Chrysothemis, take which you list, And to your Fathers house convey her; he On setling of estate will not insist, But of his own do that sufficiently. Seven Cities you shall have. Phaerae divine, Enope, Ire, and Cardamyle, And Pedasus that fertile is of Wine, Antheia, Aepia. All on the Sea Of sandy Pyle; and rich in Sheep and Kine The people are, and will your Laws obey, And Tribute pay as to a Pow'r Divine. All this he'll give your Anger to allay. And though Atrides and his Gifts you hate, Honour'd you are by th'other Argives all, And should have pity of their sad estate, Who in such numbers before Hector fall. Whom you may have the honour now to kill; For now he will your Spear no longer shur, But stand you in the open field he will; For 'mongst the Greeks he thinks there's like him∣nono To this Achilles answer'd, and thus said, Ulysses, I perceive I must be plain. For if I be not so, I am affraid I shall be put to speak my mind again, But to prevent more importunity, What once I say I'll do. Those men I hae Whose Tongues and Hearts I find to disagree, As much as I abominate Hell-gate. I will no more perswaded be to fight By Agamemno or by any Greek, Since they my labour do so ill requite, And they that fight, and fight not sure alike.
For good and bad are equal when they die. Then for my pain and danger in the Wars, What more than any other man have I? With me as with a Bird i'th' field it fares, That to her unfledg'd young ones bringeth meat. She has it in her mouth and hungry is, Yet she forbears and gives it them to eat. With the Atrides twain my case is this, In blood by day I lead a weary life, And sleepless am the great'st part of the night. And why? That Menelaus may win his Wife Achilles must against the Trojans fight. I did so; and from Troy twelve Cities won Upon the Shore i'th' Land eleven more, And all the Prey I sent to Atreus Son, Wherein of precious treasure was great store. A small part he divided 'mongst the Host. Somewhat he gave for honour to the best; But to himself made sure to keep the most. And firm is whatsoere he gave the rest. From none but me his gift he takes away. I am content, and let him keep her still And her enjoy. But why then came to Troy Atrides with such strength? What was his will? Was it not only for fair Helens sake? What then must no man love his Wife but they? Yes, all men of their own Wives much should make, If they have either wit or honesty. And I love mine as well as he loves his, Although she be my Captive. But since she By Agamemnon from me taken is, Ne'er think (Ulysses) to prevail with me. He shall not twice deceive me. But provide (Ulysses) that your Ships not burned be. I know a Wall, a Ditch pal'd, deep and wide Is made by Agamemnon without me. But all this will not Hector long keep out. But with the Greeks when I went to the fight He never durst to show his face without The Scaean gate, save once. And then by flight
He scap'd. And since I am no more his fo, To morrow to the Gods I'll sacrifice, And lanch and lade my Ships, and homewards go. And you shall see me ere the Sun shall rise Upon the Hellespont if you think fit. And how my lusty Myrmidons can row. And so (if Neptune please) the Wind may fit, As in three days we may to Phthia go, Where Treasure plenty I behind me left: And now shall carry thither Gold and Brass, Iron and Women fair, although berest Of her that giv'n me by Atrides was. Tell him all this, and speak it openly, Lest other Greeks put up the like disgrace. As for my self, though impudent he be, He dares no more to look me in the face, I will no more in Battle or Advice With Agamemnon joyn. Let him be glad He could deceive me once. He shall not twice. There let him rest. The Gods have made him mad. I hate his Gifts. And him I value not. Though he would twenty times as much bring forth As now he has, or to him shall be brought, Or all that's at Orchomenus is worth, Or Thebae that Aegyptian Town that can Send twenty thousand Charrets to the field, And all provided well with Horse and Man, Yet so I will not t' Agamemnon yield; No, nor for Gold as much as here is sand, Till he has smarted for this injury, Nor any Wife will I take at his hand Though she should fairer much than Venus be. Nor though she could like Pallas work, or better, I'll not his Daughter take. Bid him bestow her Upon some Prince he thinks more worthy. Let her For Husband have a King of greater power. For if the Gods to Hellas bring me home, Peleus will there provide me of a Wife. Kings Daughters not a few there are; of whom I shall chuse one, and with her lead my life,
And with my Father live contentedly. For all the wealth of stately Ilium, Which they enjoyed in tranquillity When yet the Argives were not hither come, And all Apollo's sacred Treasury Laid up at Pytho is not price enough The Life of any man though poor to buy. Horses, and Kine, and Sheep, and Houshold-stuff May be recover'd, but mans Life can not. My Mother Thetis told me has my end, That if I fight 'gainst Troy 'twill be my lot To dye there, but that Fame would me commend. But on the other side assured me, That if 'gainst Ilium I warred not, But back to Phthia went, my Fate would be Long time to live, and after be forgot. And I advise you and the rest to sail Assoon as may be to your native Land; For you will not at Ilium prevail, Since Jupiter protects it with his hand. And now go tell the Princes what I say, That they may better counsel take to save Their Ships and Men by Sea, because the way Which now they take no good effect will have. Let Phoenix, if he will (not else) stay here. This said, th' Ambassadors were mute, and sorry They from him could no better answer bear Than a denial flat and peremptory. At last unto Achilles Phoenix spake; If you, said he, resolv'd are to be gone And leave the War for Agamemnon's sake, In what estate shall I be here alone? When you to Agamemnon first were sent, You were a Child and understood not War, Unable to say clearly what you meant, Which the first principles of Honour are. And by your Father I was with you sent To show you how you were to speak and do. So that if you to go be fully bent, You need not doubt but I shall be so too,
And should be though I were as young as when I Hellas left, and from my Father fled Amyntor Son of Orminus, who then A Concubine had taken to his bed. My Mother, to the end to make her hate In such a way the old mans company, Was with me oftentimes importunate To court her, and I did thereto agree, And got her love. Which when my Fathe knew, He fell into a mighty passion, And many bitter curses on me threw, And pray'd the Gods I ne'er might have a Son. His Pray'r by Pluto and by Proserpine Was heard, and I no longer would abide At home; but cross'd a while was my designe, By Friends and Nephews that my purpose spy'd, Who pray'd me and retain'd me with good chear; Many good Kine they kill'd and lusty Sheep, And many Swine were dayly sindged there, And much Wine spent, and nightly watch they keep By turns nine Nights together; and fires twain, One in the Court against my Chamber-door, Another in the Porch they kept in vain. For on the tenth the Court-wall I leapt ore, And undiscerned to King Peleus fled Who us'd me as a Father would his Son, His only Son far off begot and bred; Enrich'd and gave me the Dominion Of the Dolopians, who are a part Of Peleus Realm. Now no man like you is, Divine Achilles, whom I love at th'heart, And joy that I have brought you up to this, Though painful to me were your Infancie, Who not at Feast nor in the House would eat, If first I did not set you on my Knee, And into little pieces cut your meat. And often on my Breast you puk't your Wine. But since I knew my Line with me would end, To take you for my Heir was my design Who in my feeble age might me defend,
Master your heart Achilles. For you know The Gods, though stronger and more fear'd than you, With Incense and with Pray'rs are made to bow, Although from men they not receive their due. For Prayers of high Jove the Daughters are; Though lame their feet, and squinting be their eyes; And follow wrath (though she runs faster far) And to the hurt it does, give remedies, And cure all those that show them due respect. But when an angry man they cannot move That reconcilement alwaies will reject, They call for Judgment from their Father Jove. Therefore, Achilles, give respect unto, These Goddesses the Daughters of high Jove, As other mighty men and Princes do. Had not Atrides to redeem your love Offer'd you Presents great, and promis'd more, I never had advis'd you to agree To save their Ships from burning on the Shore. Till that were done you could not blamed be. But since he does so amply make amends, And chosen has good men to intercede, Who are of all the Greeks your greatest friends, Refuse them not the grace for which they plead. Such was the Heroes custom heretofore, When one had done another injury, The damage they had done first to restore, And then with Gifts and Pray'rs buy Amity, But I will tell you how it came to pass At Calydon long since, not yesterday. War 'twixt the Curets and th' Aetolians was, These to defend, the other to destroy. For Oeneus having got his Harvest in, To all the Gods made a great Sacrifice, Only Diana had no part therein, Forgot she was; he did not her despise. But she in anger sent a great wild Bore, That wasted and made havock of his field, And up by th'roots his goodly Fruit-trees tore. This Bore Meleager Son of O neus kill'd,
Assisted by the Youth of many a State That to the Chase with Men and Hounds came in. Between them then Diana rais'd debate About who was to have the Head and Skin. While Meleager with them went to War, The Curets never durst approach the Wall, Although they were the greater number far. But when with Choler swelled was his Gall. (Which often happens to a man though wise) He kept his Chamber and abstain'd from fight, Offended with his Mothers injuries, And of all company eschew'd the sight, But Cleopatra Consort of his Bed, Child of Marpissa, who (by stealth) was Bride Of Idas, who at that time carried For Strength the reputation far and wide. This Idas Child was Meleager's wife. But Idas rashly for his dear wife's sake Against Apollo did engage his life, And him at Bow and Arrows undertake. But Cleopatra then surnamed was Halcyone, that was not so, before Her Father with Apollo fought, because She did her Mother's death so much deplore. With her now grieving Meleager lay, And angry at the Curses of his Mother; Who to the Gods continually did pray Against his life for killing of her Brother; And from her eyes the tears ran down her Breast, And often with her hand the ground she smote, Making to Pluto and his Queen request To kill her Son; which they rejected not. Mean while the uproar heard was at the Gates, And thumping of the Towr's of Calydon. To Meleager then came Priests and States Intreating him his Armour to put on, And save the Town, and offer'd for his pain, As much good Land (to take it where he would, One half for Wine, the other half for grain) As fifty able Oxen labour could.
Then came his Father ratling at his door, His Brothers, and his angry Mother too: But he persisted in his will the more; His dearest friends could with him nothing do. But when the cry and danger now was nigher, And on the Tow'rs the Curets mounted were, And ready now to set the Town on fire, Then Cleopatra to her Husband dear Shew'd th'Image of a Town won by the Foe How butcher'd are the men, the houses burned, Their Wives and Children drag'd away; and so Her Husband's heart again to pity turned. Then went he and repell'd the Enemies, Though what they promis'd him they never gave. But that's not it to which I you advise; But first the ships, and then the Greeks to save; But not without these gifts to go to War: For more unto your honour it will be To give them aid when satisfi'd you are, By Agamemnon for the injury. Thus Phoenix said. Achilles then repli'd, Such honour I seek none. Jove honours me, Since by his will I at my ships abide, And will do till I dead or strengthless be. No more molest me for Atrides sake, But stay with me, and equal to me reign, And such as are my friends for your friends rake, And do not loose my friendship his to gain. Stay then this night, and take your lodging here; My answer t' Agamemnon these will carry; Assoon as morning shall again appear We'll talk of whether we shall go or tarry. And as he spake those words, he winkt upon Patroclus to give order for his bed, That he himself prepare might to be gone. Amongst them then great Ajax spake and said, Ulysses come, our labour here is lost; Let's carry back his answer, such as 'tis To Agamemnon and the Argive Hoast, Who us expect, since obstinate he is,
And can a thought so savage entertain, Unkind and unregardful of his friends, When others for a Son or Brother slain Can be contented to receive amends, And let the man that slew him live in rest, Assoon as they have paid for their misdeed. But you Achilles harbour in your breast An everlasting anger without need, And hurtful to your friends no less than Foes, For 'tis but for one maid he took away; And for her now he seven on you bestows, And much beside your anger to allay. Regard your house. We your domesticks are, Nearer than any of the Greeks beside, And in your honour more concern'd by far. Thus Ajax said. Achilles then repli'd, O Ajax, noble Son of Telamon, I not deny but all you say is well, But always when that man you mention, My choler rising makes my heart to swell. He made me has to th' Argives despicable, As if I were a Fool or Inmare who Of honour in a Town is incapable, And with the Publick nothing has to do. Go therefore let Atrides know my mind. I will no more against the Trojans fight, Till Hector at my Tents and Ships I find, And th' Argive Fleet be flaming in my sight. But if he come unto my Ships, I think, Keen as he is I shall his fury stay. This said, unto the Gods above they drink, And then they with his answer went away. Patroclus then gave order for a bed With woolly Cov'rings soft and Linnen fine For Phoenix, where he lay ti'l day was spread. But with Achilles slept a Concubine, Fair Diomeda whom he brought away From Lesbos when he had that City sackt, And in another part Patroclus lay. Nor he a beautiful Bed-fellow lackt
Fair Iphis whom Achilles gave him when He newly rifled had the Town of Scyros, And now th' Ambassadors were come agen, And to them store of people flock'd, desirous To hear the news, and Wine unto them brought. But Agamemnon first inquir'd and said, Ulysses, will he save the Fleet or not, Or is his choler not to be allay'd? And he Achilles answer then related. The man, said he, retains his anger still. And now 'tis greater rather than abated, And says, to morrow put to Sea he will. And your Alliance and your Gifts rejects, And says he would advise us to go home. Since Jupiter himself the Town protects, He says in vain we stay at Ilium. And bids you order take to save the Fleet. Thus said he, as these know as well as I, Ajax and both the Heralds men discreet, Who all-the while he spake were standing by, And Phoenix too. But he lies there all night, That ore the Sea together they may go, If Phoenix will, assoon as it is light; But forc't is not whether he will or no. When thus Ulysses ended had his story, All silent were a while and much dismai'd With his denial flat and peremptory. At last Tydides to them spake and said, O King Atrides, we have done amiss With Gifts and Prayers thus to seek his aid, That proud before, by this made prouder is. Let him go when he will. Be not afraid, But let's refresh our selves to night with Bread And Wine. For that gives men both strength & heart, And see your men i'th' morn imbattelled, And at the head of them do you your part. his said, the Princes of the Hoast admir'd The gallant Speech of valiant Diomed: And every one unto his Tent retir'd, With a good will to sleep, and went to bed.
ILIAD. LIB. X. ALl night the Princes of the Argives slept, Save Agamemnon, who could take no rest, But with unquiet thoughts was waking kept, And casting for his safety what was best. And frequent as the Lightning flashes are When Jove is making Rain or Hail i'th' Skies, Or somewhere punishing the proud by War; So frequent then were Agamemnon's fighs. And when the fires he saw upon the Plain Made by the Foe, and th' Acclamation And Shouts he heard, he wondred. But agan When he his Ships and People look'd upon, Then by the roots he pluck'd off from his Head Handfuls of Hair, and sigh'd and groaned more; And thought it best then to be counselled By Nestor how he might himself restore. And rising up his Coat he first puts on, And to his smooth white feet his Shoes he ty'd; And then above his Coat, he cast upon His Back a great and tawny Lions hide. And Menelaus too that waking lay And trembling in his bed all night, for fear The Greeks that for his sake were come to Troy Should fall into some great disaster there, Rose up and to his Brothers Tent went in. A Spear he had in's hand, and armed was, Having upon his back a Leopards skin And on his Head a Helmet good of Brass. And said to Agamemnon, Brother, Why So early up? Have you a mind to send Into the Army of the Foe some Spy? I fear you will not find so bold a friend
As thither dares to go i'th' night alone. Brother (said Agamemnon) you and I Must better counsel take than we have done, Since Jove now favoureth the Enemy, And takes in Hector's Sacrifice delight. For so much harm so soon was never done As he to us has done in one days fight; Yet nor of God nor Goddess is the Son. His this days Acts the Greeks will ne'er forget, But go you to the Princes quickly. Run. Call up Idomeneus the King of Creet, And the great Ajax Son of Telamon. While I call Nestor up and bring him to The place which is appointed for the guard, T'instruct the men with what they have to do. Because his Counsel they will most regard. For by his Son the Watch commanded is, A with him we Meriones have join'd. Then Menelaus farther askt him this (That he might fully understand his mind) When they are call'd, what next is to be done? Must I stay here till you come back again, Or after you about the Army run? No, no, said he, where you are now, remain. But going call upon each one aloud, And by the name he from his Father takes, And praise them all, let them not think you proud; Pain is no shame when 'tis for our own sakes. This said they part, and Agamemnon went To seek out Nestor; whom he found a bed, And all his Armour by him in his Tent, His Shield, two Spears, and Helmet for his Head, And Belt of many Colours finely wrought, Which alwaies he was wont in War to use When he his people unto Battle brought. No Labour would he on his age excuse. Now raised on his Elbow, Who, said he, Are you that walk abroad when others sleep? Stay there I say and come no nearer me, Until your name you tell, at distance keep.
Seek you some Officer or Camerade? I Agamemnon am, said he, your friend Whom Jove to bear such miseries hath made As while I live will never have an end; And in my bed no sleep at all I take For fear of some unfortunate event. Unsetled is my Heart, my Limbs all shake, And in this plight I wandred to your Tent: And now I pray you, since you waking lye Come with me to the Watch; for since the Foe Unto our Wall encamped is so nigh, They charge us may by night for ought we know. To this old Nestor answer made and said, Think not Atrides Jove will all things do As they are now in Hector's fancy laid? For harder work he would be put unto If we Achilles can but once appease. But go, I'll follow you, and call upon Tydides and Ulysses if you please, Ajax the less, and Meges Phyleus Son. I wish some other man of nimbler feet Were to great Ajax sent to make him rise, And to Idomeneus the King of Crete, Whose quarter from this place a great way lyes. But Menelaus I intend to chide, That sleeps and leaves the work to you alone. 'Tis no fit time within his Tent t'abide, But to the Princes should himself have gone. To Nestor Agamemnon then reply'd, O Nestor, he is often negligent, And often I have pray'd you him to chide. Yet 'tis not sloth; but my Commandement He always looks for though there be no cause. And yet to night he has prevented me. For up and arm'd before me now he was; And when he came I sent him presently. To call up Ajax and the King of Creet. And at the Watch we both of them shall see, Where I appointed have the rest to meet. Nestor again reply'd. 'Tis well, said he,
The Greeks will of him have a better thought, And teadier obedience he will find. This said, he put himself into his Coat, And ty'd his Shooes on, and his Cloak well lin'd, And took his Spear in hand. Then on they went Amongst the Argive Ships upon the sand. And when they came unto Ulysses Tent, To call and waken him, they made a stand. And Nestor with his voice stretcht to the height Call'd to him by his name. Ulysses streight Came forth and said, Why come you in the night? Your bus'ness sure must be of mighty weight. O Laërtiades, said Nestor then, Take it not ill. Such is our misery. But come with us to call up other men, That we may Counsel take to fight or fly. Ulysses then return'd into his Tent, And on his shoulder hung his painted Shield; And with them first to Diomed he went Whom they found armed in the open field, His Soldiers sleeping lay about him round, And on his Buckler each one had his head, The Butt-ends of their Spears fixt in the ground, Whereof the points like Lightning glittered. But he himself slept on a good Cow-hide, His Head upon a gaudy Carpet laid. Then Nestor came and standing at his side Awakt him with his foot and to him said, Awake Tydides, hear you not how nigh The Trojans are encamped to the Fleet? This said, Tydides leapt up suddenly, And when he raised was upon his feet, Nestor (said he) unhappy restless man That aged as you are take not your ease, When younger men there are that better can Call up the Argive Princes if they please. 'Tis true (said Nestor) I have at my Tent Sons of my own, and others can command, Who might upon such Errands have been sent, But that upon the very brink we stand
Of Life and Death. And since you pity me, Call little Ajax up, and Phyleus Son. For young you are, and can do't easilie. Tydides then a Lions skin puts on Tauny and reaching to his heels, and then Into his hand he took a heavy Spear, And out he went and called up those men. When to the Watch they come together were, The Captains of the Watch were not asleep, But all were sitting at their Arms awake. As Dogs that guarding are a Fold of Sheep Hearing the noise the Hounds and Hunters make When in the Woods they chace some savage beast, And nearer still and nearer hear the cries, They doubt the worst, and cannot take their rest, But list'ning stand and sleep forsakes their eyes; So watchfully spent they the tedious night, And ever when of Feet they heard the tread 'Twixt them and Troy, that way they turn'd their sight; So much they Hectors coming on did dread. When Nestor coming by, observ'd them had, So, so (said he) brave Lads, continue so, And give no cause to Hector to be glad. He and the Princes then together go (All that to Counsel had been made to rise Except Meriones and Nestor's Son Whom they thought worthy with them to advise) And part the Ditch, and sitting down upon The place to which they were pursu'd before By Hector, who retiring thence left clear The ground from dead mens Carkasses and Gore, Of what they next should do consulted there. First Nestor spake. Who dares (said he) to go Unto the Trojan Camp that lies so near, And kill, or bring thence some outlying Foe? Or what they shall resolve upon to hear? Whether (since they have worsted us) to stay So near us or retire into the Town. If this he do and safely come away, He to himself acquire will great Renown,
And by each one that has of Ships command, He for his service shall be well requited. Each one an Ewe and Lamb shall give him, and He to our publick Feastings be invited. This said, they paus'd a while, but by and by Tydides rising spake. Nestor, said he, To go into the Trojan Camp dare I. But 'twould be best some other went with me, More hope and courage is where there are two; What one observeth not the other may. A man alone can little see or do, And single Judgments see but little way. At these words many with him would have gone, Ajaxes both the greater and the less And stout Antilochus old Nestor's Son, And Menelaus and Meriones. But most of all Ulysses long'd to see What projects in the Trojan Camp were laid. For none adventure farther durst than he. Then to Tydides Agamemnon said, Tydides, whom I love, now chuse your man; Regard not Birth nor Scepters, but the cause. Take him that you think best assist you can. And this he said in fear for Menelaus, To this Tydides answer made agen, Since of my follow I the choice must make, Ulysses I prefer before all men, And him for my assistant I will take; So much in diligence he doth excel, And so much care Athena of him has, That I believe we both should come off well Though through a flaming fire we were to pass. Then said Ulysses, Speak no more of me Nor good nor ill. The Argives know me well. Let's go. Two thirds o'th' night are spent you see, As any man that sees the Stars can tell. Then put they on their Arms. And Thrasymed Gave Diomed a Sword (who had forgot o bring his own) and to defend his Head A leather Cap without crest, call'd a Pot.
Meriones unto Ulysses gave His Bow and Quiver, Sword and Dogskin Cap Pleated with thongs within his Head to save If need should be in Combat, from mishap. For 'twixt the leathers tough inserted were Guards of thick selt; of Bores teeth was the brim. Eleon was the first that did it wear, But taken by Autolycus from him. And given 'twas unto Amphidamus, Which he to Molon gave that was his guest, And to Meriones then left it was, And now upon Ulysses head did rest. And being both thus armed, forth they went And by the way a Heron Dexter flew, A lucky signe and by Athena sent, As by the sound made by her wings they knew. Ulysses then unto the Goddess pray'd, Hail Virgin-Daughter of Almighty Jove, That all my labour seest and giv'st me aid, Now more than ever let me find your love. Grant me that I some good exploit may do To vex the Trojans, and come safe from thence. And then Tydides pray'd unto her too. Celestial Maid that with my Father went'st When he Ambassador to Thebes was sent With words of Peace, and coming back atchieved By your assistance and encouragement Such noble Acts as scarce will be believed, If you will aid me as you aided him, O Goddess, I will to you sacrifice A Heifer, and with Gold her horns I'll trim. This said, their Suit the Goddess not denies. When their Devotion now was at an end, Away they went 'mongst Carcasses and blood, Like Lions that on slaughter love t'attend. Nor Hector and the Trojans idle stood. But call'd a Counsel of the Chiefs, and said, Who's he will undertake what I'll propound, And for his pains be honourably paid, And for his Valour far and near renown'd?
I give him will two Horses and a Coach The best that shall be taken from the Fo, That will unto the Argive Fleet approach, And bring me word what they intend to do; Whether their Ships they guard as heretofore, Or mean to quit the Siege at Illum. And beaten thus haul down their Ships from Shore, And ere their work be finished go home. This said, they silent sat. But one there was Dolon by name, the Squire Eumedes Son That master was of store of Gold and Brass, A sorry fellow, but that well could run. Hector, said he, I'll to the Fleet approach. Swear now by Jove, and hold your Scepter high, I shall Achilles Horses have and Coach, And I for you will be a faithful Spy. For down to Agamemnon's Tent I'll go, Where they consult whether to Fight or Fly: For there their resolution I shall know. Then Hector held his Scepter up on high. O Jove, betwixt us witness bear, said he, No Trojan shall these Horses have but you, And yours they shall perpetually be. Thus Hector swore, although it prov'd not true. Upon his Shoulder then his Bow he hung. His Cap of Cat, a Wolfs skin was his Coat. And when he gotten clear was from the throng, With Spear in hand he fell into his trot. And first Ulysses heard the sound of feet. I hear one come, said he to Diomed, Perhaps a Spy that sent is to our Fleet, Or one that has a mind to strip the dead. 'Tis best t'avoid him till he past us be. And then to follow him and drive him on. But left he swifter be of foot than we, And to the City back again should run, Rise and be sure to turn him with your Spear. And when he was a lands length past them goe They follow'd him. And he their feet did hear, And thought some Trojans had been cming on
By Hector sent to call him back agen. But when they from him were scarce a Spears cast, He knew then they were Agamemnon's men, And frighted was; and then his Feet mov'd fast. As two Hounds in a Wood obscure and dim Pursue a fearful Doe or Hare, just so Tydides and Ulysses hunted him When back into the Herd he could not go. When Dolon to the Watch was very near, Athena puts into Tydides head, That some man else might at him throw a Spear, And be thereby before him honoured. To Dolon then Tydides spake and said, Stay, or my Spear shall make you stay. For long I am assur'd you cannot death avoid. And as he spake the word his Spear he flung; And miss'd on purpose, but it lighted near. Dolon affrighted pale and trembling stands, And in his head chatter'd his Teeth with fear. Then in they came and seiz'd on both his hands. And Dolon weeping then for Quarter pray'd, Great Ransome for me will my Father give, For Gold he has enough; and will, he said, Give any price, when here he knows I live. Then to him said Ulysses, Do not fear, Nor think of death. But see you tell me true Upon what weighty bus'ness you are here, When others sleep, and at a time undue. Meant you to rifle any of the dead? Or were you sent by Hector as a Spy, Or undertook the same of your own Head? T'Ulysses Dolon then did thus reply. I was by Hector's promises set on, And should have had Achilles Chariot And Horses, if I to the Fleet had gone, And good intelligence to Hector brought Whether the Ships be guarded as before, Or that the Greeks now beaten mean to fly, And weary of their labour watch no more. To this again Ulysses made reply,
And smiling said, It was no small reward You aimed at. Achilles Horses say ye? To rule them for a mortal man 'tis hard. The Goddess Thetis Son they'll scarce obey. But tell me further; When you came away Where you left Hector, where his Horses are, And where his Arms, where other Trojans stay To sleep or watch, and whether they prepare To go into the Town, or mean t'abide Alwaies so near our Ships as they-are now. T'Ulysses Dolon then again reply'd, This also I will let you truly know. I Hector left at Ibus Sepulcher With other Lords in consultation, The rest about the Bonfires waking were. But certain Watch appointed there was none. But those Confederates that came from far Slept at their ease all night and watched not. For that they trusted to the Trojans care, Having no Wives nor Children with them brought. Ulysses then examin'd him again, How lye the Strangers? Mixt with those of Troy Or by themselves? Inform me and be plain. Nothing (said Dolon) but the truth I'll say. Paeons, Pelasgians, Caucons, Leleges, And Cars lye by the Sea-side on the Sands, The rest near Thymbra quarter, and are these; The Maeons, Mysians, Lycians, Phrygians. But there's no need to tell you ev'ry thing; For if upon our Quarters you would fall, There lye the Thracians new come, and their King Rhesus by name, and utmost lies of all. Such Horses yet I never did behold, Swift as the Wind, and than the Snow more white, With silver cover'd is his Charre, and Gold; Gold are his Arms and make a gallant sight, And fitter for a God than man to wear. But try now whether I say true or no, And send me to the Ships, or bind me here. Then said Tydides with a frowning Brow,
Think not to scape though all you say be true. For if I let you loose, for ought I know You may return agen to Fight or View; But hurt us cannot if I kill you now. As Dolon then beginning was to pray Tydides sword lighted on's Neck so just, That from his Shoulders fell his Head away As he was speaking, and lay in the dust. And from him then they took his Cap of Cat, His Spear and Wolfes-skin Coat, and Bow unbent, And in his hands Ulysses took all that, And to Minerva up his Prayer sent. Hail Pallas, whom we pray'd to for success Before all other Gods, receive these Gifts, And us unto the Thracian Tents address. This said, the Spoils of Dolon up he lifts And laies them in a Tree; and for a mark, They near the way laid store of Boughs and Reeds To find them coming back because 'twas dark. Then with Tydides onward he proceeds, And ev'ry step on Arms or Blood they tread And soon amongst the Thracians they were, That sleeping lay as if they had been dead, And by each one his Buckler and his Spear. Their Horses to the Charret-seats were ty'd. Thus in three Rows the Thracians were laid, Rhesus i'th' midst; which first Ulysses spy'd, And to Tydides speaking softly said, See there the Horses, and see there the Man Rhesus, of whom we were by Dolon told. Untie the Horses; or kill all you can, And I upon the Horses will lay hold. Tydides then made by Minerva bold Amongst them killing went, and never staid (Like Lion fierce in a neglected fold) Till he a dozen of them dead had laid. And whomsoever Diomedes slew, Ulysses following took him by the Foot And from the place a little way him drew, For sear the Steeds not yet accustom'd to't
Should boggle, tremble, and refuse to pass. To Rhesus last of all went Diomed, And kill'd him too. So he the thirteenth was. And panted as he slept; for at his Head He dreamt Tydides all night standing was. Ulysses to the Horses went; And now Seiz'd, and their Heads together tyed has. But for a Whip he made use of his Bow. And gotten forth whistled to Diomed To come away, who gave no ear thereto, But staying with himself considered What further hurt he might the Trojans do. To draw away the Charret by the Pole, Wherein the Golden Arms of Rhesus lay, Or thence upon his Shoulders bear the whole; Or whether he more Thracians should destroy. While thus he studied Pallas by him stood. Contented be, said she, with what is done. To go unto the Ships I think it good, For fear you thither should be forc'd to run. Some other God awake the Trojans may. Ths said, that Pallas to him spake he thought, And from the Thracian Quarter came away, And on one of the Horses backs he got, And tow'rds the Ships at full speed then they ride, Ulysses with his Bow still switching on. But Phoebus with Tydides Pallas spy'd, And angerly call'd up Hippocoon. Who when he came and empty saw the ground Where th'horses stood, & dy'd with blood the field, And sprawling in their blood the Thracians found, Ay me, sad he, they have my Unckle kill'd. The Trojans then in haste and frighted rise, And at the place in great disorder meet, And gaze upon the mischief with their eyes, But they that did it fled were to the Fleet. When flying they were at the Tree, where lay The Spoils of Dolon, there a while they tarry, Until Tydides fetch'd them had away, And to Ulysses given them to carry,
And mounted was upon his Horse agen. Agen Ulysses switch'd them tow'rds the Fleet; And when they near it were, Old Nestor then Who was the first that heard the Horses Feet Cry'd out, The sound of Horses feet I hear; I wish Ulysses 'twere and Diomed. But somewhat else and worse it is I fear; So many sad mishaps run in my Head. He scarce had spoken this but they came in. When they alighted were and welcomed With Hands and Speeches of their Friends had been, Then Nestor thus Ulysses questioned. Ulysses, Glory of the Greeks, said he, Whence are these Horses beauteous as the Sun? Won from the Trojans? But that cannot be. For such amongst the Trojans I saw none, Though I amongst them were in ev'ry fight. Or given by the Gods? Which may be true. For both of you are gracious in their sight, And Jove and Pallas have a care of you. O Noble Nestor, said Ulysses then, Gods can give better Horses if they please. For richer much are they than mortal men. Tydides from a King of Thrace took these, Who was come newly to the Trojans aid; And slain him has, besides a dozen more. And besides these a Spy that them betraid, By Hector sent, your purpose to explore. This said, Ulysses with much people went Triumphing, and the milk white Horses drave Over the Trenches to Tydides Tent. There sets them up, and Wheat unto them gave; But Dolon's Spoils astern his Ship he plac'd, Preparing for Athena's Sacrifice. And then into the Sea they went and wash'd The sweat from off their Shoulders, Legs & Thighs, And after bath, and 'noint themselves with oyl, That done, they sit down to their meat and dine. And being thus refreshed from their toil, Unto the Goddess Pallas offer Wine.
ILIAD. LIB. XI. AUrora rising from Tithonus bed Before both Gods and Men to hold her light, Eris from Jove the Signal carried Unto the Argive Fleet of bloudy Fight. And down unto Ulysses Ship she went That was the middlemost and high'st of all That heard she might be to Achilles Tent, And Ajaxes, that they might hear her call. At th' outsides of the Fleet they quarter'd were; For they upon their Prowess most reli'd: Then Eris with her voice the Air did tear, And horribly to the Achaeans cri'd. Come quickly forth into the Field and fight; Be bold Achaeans; to the Battle come. Incourag'd thus the Greeks took more delight In staying at the War than going home. Fellows, to Arms, then Agamemnon cri'd, And to put on his Arms the first man was; His Leg-pieces he down to th' Anckles ti'd With silver Buckles, Leg-pieces of Brass; And then puts on an Armour on his breast, That had been given him by Cinyres (His antient acquaintance and his Guest) Whilst he preparing was to pass the Seas: For long before the Greeks for Troy set sail, Their purpose was at Cyprus known by fame, And thinking such a Gift might him avail, In kindness t'Agamemnon sent the same. The colour was by Pales distinguished, Ten Black, twelve Gold, and twenty were of Tin: And in it three black Serpents figured As if they creeping were unto his Chin.
Their sides like Rainbows lookt which in the Sky Are shewn by Jove for men to wonder at. Then from his shoulder down upon his thigh He hung his Sword. Studded with Gold was that, Then took his Shield which finely varied was Bossed in twenty places with white Tin; And round about them were ten Orbs of Brass; And black the Circle was enclos'd within. There Gorgo painted was with killing Eyes, And with her standing Terror and Affright: His Belt of silver was, and to the Skyes Returned back agen the glittering light. Wound up lay on it painted a great Snake, Which had three heads, and crowned was each one, And last into his hand two Spears did take, Having his Helmet on his head put on. Thus Agamemnon armed was. And then Juno and Pallas both rais'd such a sound (To honour him before the Greeks) as when A man that's slain falls suddenly to th' ground. Then every one unto his Chariotier Commandment gave upon the Ditch to stay And ready be. The foot all armed were, And forth into the Field were march'd away. But soon again the Horses with them stood. Then Jove amongst them Noise and Tumult sent; And mingled was the Morning dew with Bloud, For on that day much bloud was to be spent. Upon a rising ground now Hector was, Aeneas with him, and Polydamas, And three Sons of Antenor, Acamas, Agenor, Polybus, and th'Army was. And Hector with a round Shield at their head. As when a Star does through the Clouds appear, And presently again is covered; Sometimes i'th' Front was, sometimes in the Rear Giving command; his Arms like Lightning show. As Mowers standing one Rank 'gainst another, A field of Barley or of Wheat to mow; So Greeks and Trojans mow down one the other.
On neither side thought any man of flight, But like to Wolves on one another fly In number equal; and gave great delight To Eris, who (and no God else) was by. The other Gods stay'd on Olympus Hill, Within whose folds they dwell, and murmur'd at Their Father Jove for bearing such good will To Ilium. But he car'd not for that. And by himself he from them went; and then Took pride to see the Greeks and Trojans fight, And look on killing and on dying men, And of their Arms to see the flashing light. Now all the while that mounting was the Sun, The number slain on both sides was the same. But when the Woodman half his work had done, And willingly unto his Dinner came, The Greeks then brake the Trojan Ranks, and on Fell Agamemnon, and Bienor slew, Both him and Ocles his Companion That drave the Horses which the Charret drew. He lighting and assailing him was slain; And Ocles had no time his Spear to throw: For Agamemnon's Spear had pierc'd his brain, Passing both through his Helmet and his Brow. These there he left stript both of Arms and Coat, And Antiphus and Isus then drew near, Both Priams Sons, one legal, th'other not, Upon one Seat, and Isus Charretier. Once by Achilles taken were these men As they were feeding Sheep in Ida hills, And for their Ransome were set free agen; But both of them now Agamemnon kills. For Isus Breast he pierc'd through with his Spear; The other with his sword he overthrew, And seen him had when he was Prisoner, And that 'twas Antiphus (when stript) he knew. As when a Lion with his mighty Teeth Crusheth the tender issue of a Hinde, Which the afrighted Dam stands by and seeth, And grieveth, but no remedy can finde;
And skipping in the Woods for shelter seeks To save her own life; So the Trojans fled Pursu'd by Agamemnon and the Greeks, And thought not on their fellows they left dead. T' Hyppolochus then comes he and Pisander, Sons of Antimachus, a person noted For having Gold receiv'd of Alexander, And for it in the Common-Councel voted. And these two Agamemnon took alive. For by mischance the reins slipt from their hands; And then they saw it was in vain to strive, And Agamemnon now before them stands. Then as they sat together on one Seat, Save us (said they) Atrides, let us live, For we redeem'd shall be with Ransome great, Our Father for us what you please will give. Are you Antimachus his Son, said he, That gave advice to murther Menelaus, Contrary to the Laws of honesty, When of the Greeks Ambassador he was, And with Ulysses sent into the Town? You for your Father's evil-deed must pay. Then from his Char Pisander he struck down; With Breast pierc'd through upon his Back he lay. Hyppolochus was lighted and on foot, And with the sword of Agamemnon slain, Who cuts his Head off, and his Hands to boot. And then upon the Trojans prest again. And great the slaughter was of them that fled, And wonderful the Dust that raised was, And both the Field and Army covered, Forc'd up by Troops of Horses shod with Brass. As Boughs fall in a Wood that's set on flame, And shaken by the violence of wind; So fast unto the ground the Trojans came, When Agamemnon follow'd them behind. And many Horses made their Charrets rattle, Which empty ran about when no man drives. For they that drave them faln were in the Battle, A lovelier sight to Vulturs than their Wives.
But Hector was by Jove set out of sight Of all this dust and slaughter and disorder: But Agamennon still with all his might Pursuing killed, and to kill gave order. Then they that were encampt at Ilus Tomb Retir'd in haste unto the Sycamore, Half the Plain over towards Ilium, And after them Atrides coverd ore With Blood and Dust. But when the Trojans were Got back unto the Beech near Scaea gate, A while they for their fellows stayed there Who swiftly ran fearing to come too late. As when a Lion falleth in the Night Upon a herd of Kine, and one must die, And all the rest are put into a fright, So Agamemnon made the Trojans fly. And all the way he went the hindmost kill'd. And from their Chars some forward fell, and some Upon their Backs, and lay dead on the field. But when unto the Wall they near were come, Then Jove came down to Ida from the Sky With Thunder in his hand, and t'Iris said, Go Iris quickly, and tell Hector I Command him Agamemnon to avoid As long as in the Front he raging is, And let the Fight by others manag'd be. But when he Agamemnon wounded sees And leave the Field, I'll give the Victory To him, and he shall put them all to flight, And to the Fleet go killing all the way, Until the Sun be set, and dark the night. This said, away she went without delay; And down from Ida came to Ilium, And finding him upon his Char, To you From Jove (said she) O Hector, I am come To warn you Agamemnon to eschew, As long as in the Front he raging is. And let the Fight by others manag'd be; Sut when by Spear or Bow he wounded is And leaves the Field, he'll give the Victory
To you, and you shall put them all to flight, And to the Fleet go killing all the way, Until the Sun be set, and dark the night. Having thus said, she did no longer stay. Then Hector armed leapt unto the ground, And with two Spears well pointed in his hand Exhorting went about the Army round. Their Faces then the Trojans turn, and stand. The first that did advance Atrides was. But tell me Muse, Who first came in his way? One of Antenor's Sons Iphidamas, That was brought up in Thrace (though born at Troy) By Cisseus who his Mothers Father was, From childhood till to mans estate he came, And made his Son-in-Law. But then, because The coming of the Greeks was known by Fame, Was thence, although but new espoused, sent To th'aid of Priam and his Sons at Troy, And at Percopa landing t'Ilium went, And now was standing in Atrides way. First Agamemnon threw his Spear and mist. Iphidamas then at Atrides threw, And hit his Belt which did the stroke resist, For massy Silver was the Belt and true, And bent the point as if it had been Lead. Then Agamemnon with his Sword came on, And smote him on the Neck, and laid him dead. Thus dy'd Iphidanas Antenor's Son. And much to be lamented was his case, That far from his espoused Virgin Wife Without receiving from her any grace Should fighting for his Country lose his Life. He given for her had a thousand Kine, And promis'd Sheep and Goats a thousand more. Now slain, and stript was of his Armour fine By Agamemnon and triumphed ore. But Coon then, Antenor's eldest Son Incensed by his Brothers death came in, And pierc'd Atrides Arm close by the Bone (Unseen) the Elbow and the Wrist between.
Then cold was Agamemnon's heart with fear, But gave not over. For as Cö drew His Brother off, He came on with his Spear, And-with a thrust, beneath his Shield him slew, And (on his Brother) then cuts off his head. Thus these two Brothers finished their Fate. Atrides still the slaughter followed With Spear, and Sword, and Stones of mighty weight, Not giving over whilst the wound was warm. But when 'twas cleans'd, and stayed was the Bloud, So cruel then the pain was in his Arm, That on the ground no longer stay he cou'd. Then mounted on his Chariot, he said, Drive to the Ships. For he was in great pain. And on the Princes then the charge he laid, The Fight against the Trojans to maintain. My friends, said he, 'tis your part now to stay The fury of the Trojans from our Ships; Since Jove not suffers me to fight all day. This said, the Chariotier his Horses whips. Which when they felt, away they swiftly went, And stain'd with Sweat and Powder of the Plain Brought wounded Agamemnon to his Tent, From off the Field bestrow'd with Bodies slain. Assoon as Hector saw Atrides gone, Now-Trojans, Dardans, Lycians (he cry'd) Now charge the Greeks with resolution, For he is gone on whom they most rely'd, And Jove assures me that the day is mine. This said, like Hounds encourag'd by the Hunter Against a Lion or a tusked Swine, The Trojans boldly marched to th'encounter, And on them fell with Hector at the head. And as a down-right Wind the Sea, so he The Argive Ranks and Files disordered, And them that fled pursued furiovsly. But tell me Muse, whilst Hector Priam's Son By Jove assisted did the Greeks pursue, And great renown amongst the Trojans won, Who and how many were the men he slew.
Assaeus first, and then Autonous, Oplites, Dolops, and Opheltius, And then Aesymnus, and Agelaus; Then Orus, and the last Hipponous. All these were Princes in the Argive host. But look how many are the drops of Dew, When into th'Air the Sea by Winds is tost, So many private Soldiers Hector slew. And then incurable their loss had been, And fled had to their Ships the Greeks dismai'd, Had not Ulysses then the same foreseen, And to Tydides not far from him said, Tydides, to what purpose stand we here? Come hither man and stand close to my side. To let our Ships be lost great shame it were. Tydides to Ulysses then repli'd. Yes, yes Ulyssis I will with you 'bide, Though we shall take but little pleasure here. For Jove I see inclineth to their side. This said, he at Thybraeus threw his Spear, Which lighting on his lest Pap pierc'd him through. Ulysses slew Molion Priams man; Upon the Field unstript they lest these two. And then into the Trojan throng they ran, (Whilst th'other Greeks from Heclor swiftly fly) Like two wilde Bours that turn upon the hounds That know they may upon their strength rely, And scatter 'mongst the Trojans death and wounds. And there two valiant Sons of Merops kill'd As they together on one Charriot sate. This Merops was in Prophecy well skill'd, And bad them stay, and told them had their Fate. But the two forward Youths would not obey. But ed unto the War by Destiny Unluckily came in Tydides way, Where by his hand then Fortune 'twas to die. Hippodama was by Ulysses kill'd As also was Eyprichus; and now None knew who had the better in the Field But Jove, who locked on from Ida Brow.
And then Agastrophus King Paeons Son Was by Tydides wounded in the Thigh, And would have fled, but Horses he had none. His man that held them for him was not nigh. Yet fought he 'mongst the formost till he di'd. This Hector saw, and towards Diomed His Horses turn'd, and to the Trojans cri'd, Come follow me, and they all followed. And Diomed assoon as he saw this, Though chill with fear, unto Ulysses said, To us this plaguy Hector rolling is; But stand, and let him see w'are not afraid. This said, he straight at Hector threw his Spear, Which hit his Helmet, but glanc'd from the Brass, And never to his tender Skin came near. This Helmet giv'n him by Apollo was. But stun'd he was, and resting on his knees, He kept himself from falling with his hand. Dark are his eyes, nothing at all he sees, And for a while unable is to stand. But whilst Tydides on the plain advanced To get into his hand agen the Spear, Which from the place he aim'd at far was glanced, Hector was mounted, and his Senses clear. Tydides then upon him lookt and said, Thou Dog efcapt an evl death thou hast; And twice been saved by Apollo's aid. But sure I shall dispatch thee at the last: For of a God I also have the aid. But now to other Trojans I'll go on Such as shall come into my way. This said, Away he went to strip King Paeons Son. And then as Diomed was taking from Agasrophus the Armour of his Breast, Paris that leaning stood at Ilus Tomb, To him an Arrow unperceiv'd addrest. Which hit him on the Foot above the Toes, And to the ground clean thorough went the Shast. Then openly into the Field he goes, And coming nearer to him spake, and aught.
Y'are hit, said he, Tydides. Wou'd it had Been on your Belly, that you might have died, The Trojans would of that be very glad, That are so often by you terrified. Proud boasting Archer (said Tydides) know If in your Armour you before me stood To try your Valour and your Force, your Bow And Arrows would not do you any good. You value such a Scratch as this too much. The Weapons of the strengthless blunted are: Mine is not so; but whom it does but touch, His Wife lamenting tears her Cheeks and Hair: His Children Orphans are; and red the ground Whereon he rotting lies; and Vulters more Than Women standing by him will be found. Ulysses then that neer him was before Stept in, and stood betwixt him and his Foes Whilst from his Foot the Arrow he pull'd out. Thn to hs Charret up Tydides goes, And lest the Field where he had nobly fought. And now Ulysses left was all alone, For from him all the rest were fled for fear. And then unto himself he made his moan. Ay me, said he, what now shall I do here? Though many be the Foes, 'tis ill to flie But yet since Jove saves all the rest by-flght, It would be worse if I alone should die. But why dispute I when I ought to fight? None but a Coward from the Fight will run. But he that Honour loves will stand his ground, And be content with what he cannot shun, Whether it be to give or take a wound. While thus Ulysses argu'd in his minde, Hector was near him, and enclos'd him had With Targetiers before him and behinde, Whereof they had no reason to be glad. As when the Hounds by Hunters are set on A wild Boar as he comes out from the Wood, He whets his Teeth, they from him will not run; Even so Ulysses 'mongst the Trojans stood;
Where by him slain first Deiopites was, And Thoon then and Eunomus he kill'd; And after these he slew Chersidamas As from his Char he lighted in the Field. Then leaving these, slew Charops with his Spear, Socus his Brother, Hippasus his Son. Then Socus to him came, and standing near Unto Ulysses with a Speech begun. Ulysses much renewn'd for Crast and Pain, This day you either must the Honor wear Of having Hippasus his two Sons slain, Or lose your own life wounded by my Spear. Then threw his Spear and pierc'd Ulysses Shield. His Breast plate, and his Coat, and toar his Skin. But Pallas him preserv'd from being kill'd; For to the Vital parts it went not in. Ulysses knew the wound not mortal was; Made a step back, and then to Socus said, Fool that thou art, that wou'dst not let me pass On other Trojans hast thy self destroy'd, I do not think you shall this hour outlive; But from my Spears sharp point receive your death, And unto me more Reputation give, And leave your Soul unto the Pow'rs beneath. Then Socus turn'd himself about to fly. But overtaken by Ulysses Spear, That pierc'd him Back and Breast, he fell down dead. Then scornfully Ulysses did him jar. O Socus, gallant man at Arms, said he, By death prevented is your Enterprize; Your eyes shall not by Parents closed be, But shall be peched out by Crows and Pyes. Then from his Shield and Body he pull'd out The Spear which at him was by Socus thrown. The Bloud then from the Wound did freely spout. Which when the Trojans saw, they straight came down, And all together tow'rds him went the Rabble, Then he retir'd, and as he going was Thrice called out as loud as he was able For help; and thrice was heard by Menelaus,
Who t'Ajax said, Ulysses voice I hear, And like the voice of one that is distrest. He hem'd in by the Trojans is I fear. Come let us to him go, and do our best To fetch him off. For valiant though he be, I fear unless we aid him with great speed, He by the Trojans will be slain, and we Loose a good man, of whom we oft have need. Then up they went, and sound him by the Foes Environ'd round. As when a Stag is shot By some young man, he swiftly from him goes Whilst strong his knees are and his bloud is hot. But when he by the Arrow tamed is, The Wolves feed on him in the gloomy Wood; Then comes the Lion and the Prey is his. About Ulysses so the Trojans stood, Till Ajax with a Target like a Tower Came to his aid; then sev'ral ways they fled. Ulysses now no longer in their Power Was from the Field by Menelaus led, And mounted on his Chariot agen. But on went Ajax, and slew Pandocus King Priams Son, and wounded three good men, Lisander, Pylartes, and Pyresus. Then as a River coming to the Plain, And swell'd by Jupiter with showr's of rain More than the Banks are able to contain, Bears Oaks and Pines before it to the Main; So Ajax charg'd the Trojan Troops. But this Hecter knew nothing of. For far off now Upon Scamander Banks he fighting is, And to the ground doth many an Argive throw. There was the noise, there aged Nestor stood, And there Idomeneus, with their Steeds. And Hector that the use well understood Of Spears and Horses, there did mighty deeds. And yet the Greeks retir'd not; nor had done If Paris had not with an Arrow smot Machaon on the shoulder to the Bone. Three-forked was the Arrow which he sho.
And mightily the Argives were afraid Since now the Foe prevail'd, he would be slain. To Nestor then Idomeneus said, O Nestor to your Charret mount again, And with Machaon make haste to the Ships. A Surgeon many other men is worth. For many other men alive he keeps By making Salves and drawing Weapons forth. Then Nestor mounteth and the Horses whips, Which they no sooner feel than they are gone. And quickly brought unto the hollow Ships Machaon Aesculapius his Son. Mean while Cebriones the Charetier Of Hector saw the Trojans were distrest, And to him said, To what end stay we here Since yonder by the Greeks our Friends are prest? 'Tis Ajax that disorders them, I see, I know him by the largeness of his Shield. Now where they fighting are most furiously, Let us go down to that side of the Field. This said, he clackt his Whip, his Horses ran Unto the place where greatest was the Cry, Ore many a Shield, and over many a man, That gasping on the bloudy Field did lye. The Horses Bellies and the Charret-wheels And-Axletrees with bloud were cover'd ore Forc'd up in drops by the swift Horses heels. And Hector rushing in, their Battles tore. But Hector still took heed of Ajax Spear. And fought in other places of the Field. But Ajax struck by Jupiter with Fear Amazed, at his shoulder hung his Shield; And staring on the Foe a while he stood, Then turn'd and softly from them went away. As when a Lion coming from the Wood Down to a Pasture on a Cow to prey, Is hu'd by Dogs and Pesants in the night, And hungry sometimes goes and sometimes stands, But cannot have his Will for all his might, So many Spears are flying from their hands,
And flaming Brands which put him in a fright (Keen as he is) then sullenly he goes Back to the Wood and comes no more in sight; So then retired Ajax from his Foes, Or as an Ass in spight of many Boes Is got into the Corn, and there a bides Though they upon him fall with Blows and Nose, And many Cudgels break upon his sides (For he the force of Boys but little feels) He hardly will be driven out though fill'd, And now and then kicks at them with his heels: So Ajax at the last went off the Field By Hector and the Trojans still pursu'd Upon his Shield received many a Spear; Sometimes his Back sometimes his face he shew'd, So that they could not to the Ships come near. Thus he between the Greeks and Trojans stands While Spears abundance at him hurled were; Some in his Shield stuck driven by strong hand; Some on the ground fell short and fixt were there. But then Eurypylus Euaemon's Son That saw him thus opprest came to his side, And wounded with his Spear Apisaon The Liver through; and on the place he dy'd. But as he stript him lying on the ground Was shot by Alexander in the Thigh, And broken was the Arrow in the wound, And much increased was his pain thereby. Then went Eurypylus into the croud, And cry'd our to the Princes of the Host, Turn and save noble Ajax from this cloud Of Trojan Spears, or else he will be lost. This said, the best Commanders to him go with Spears advanc'd, and Bucklers turn'd before, And place themselves between him and the Fo. And then again the Fight was very sore. Mean while Achilles as he sitting was On high astern his Ship to see them fight Perceived Nestor and Machaon pass, And to Patroclus call'd with all his might,
Come hither friend. Patroclus heard him call, For he was sitting in Achilles Tent, And (which was the beginning of his fall) Immediately rose up and to him went, And said, Achilles what's your will with me? Achilles then reply'd, Patroclus now The Argives, I believe, will bend the knee. For their condition never was so low. But go to Nestor and informed be Who 'tis that he brought with him from the Fight. Machaon by his Back he seem'd to me, But of his Face I could not have a sight, So many Chars and Horses cross'd the way. This said, unto the Ships Patroclus went; But at the Ships arrived now were they, Alighted and gone in to Nestor's Tent: The Horses by Eurymedon unty'd Were cooled by the Sea-side in the air, And of their sweat well cleansed were and dry'd, And in the mean time Ecameda sair That was the Daughter of Arsinous, And taken by Achilles was when he Conquer'd and sack'd the City Tenedus, And by the Greeks to Nestor giv'n; and she To Nestor and Machaon setteth up A Table with a Black Foot smooth and fine, And on it set a Basket, and a Cup, And to each one before him set on Wine. The Cup with nails of Gold was studded ore; Four ears it had, and two Doves at each ear, And those were Gold, and at the foot two more In posture such as if they feeding were. Nestor to Troy had with him brought this Cup. Another scarce could lift it from the Table When fill'd with Wine; Though he to take it up, Old as he was, and easily, was able. And in the same the Woman made the Drink, With Goats-milk Cheese, & white flour sprinkled ore, And left it on the Board full to the brink. Then quenched they their thirst, and drank no more,
But talking sat, to put out of their thought Their ill success. Now at the door o'th' Tent Patroclus was, and in by Nestr brought, And pray'd to sit, but he would not consent, But said, Athilles bad me ask you who It is whom you brought with you from the Fight. And this already I can answer to. Machaon 'tis that sits there in my sight. What need then is there of my longer stay? Return I will with all the speed I can, For fear he should some blame upon me lay Though I deserve it not. You know the man. What makes Achilles (aged Nestor said) Of th' Argive wounded men to take such care? He knows not how the Army is dismaid, Nor yet how many of them wounded are. Ulysses wounded is and Diomed, And Agamemnon, and Eurypylus, And this man whom I with me hither led. Achilles pity has on none of us; Although our safety now lye in his hands. Intends he to sit still till Hector burn In spight of us our Ships upon the Sands, And ev'ry one of us kill in his turn? For now my strength decayed is with age. O that I were as strong as I was then When War 'twixt us and th' Elians did rage, And we our Cattle fetcht from them agen, And slew Itymoneus that took our Kine. For I then went his Cattle to distrain, And take amends for those he took of mine. There he defending them by me was slain, And all his people from his ran away. And there we took of fifty Herds of Kine And of as many Herds of Goars a prey, As many Flocks, as many Herds of Swine, And Horses three times fifty, females all Of colour sandy mixt with sparks of light; And most of them had Foals, and to the Wall Of Pyle I brought this booty all by night.
My Father Neleus joyful was to see't. For yet he thought I was for War too young. Next morn the Criers make the people meet, (All those to whom the Elians had done wrong) The Lords amongst them then divide the prey. Many there were that had been injured, And with their shares contented sent away, Though Pylus were not well inhabited. For Hercules not many years before Had kill'd the best of them. And Neleus then Had twelve good Sons, whereof he left no more Alive but me. This made th'Epeian men Despise our number small, and do us wrong. And Neleus now unto himself did keep The best Herd of the Kine, and from among The Flocks chose one that had three hundred sheep, And justly, since so great a loss had none. For he four Steeds unto the Games had sent Of value great, which all had Prizes won. But by Augias his Commandement, When for a Tripod they prepar'd to run, Together with the Charrs were there detain'd. The Charretiers related what was done. And Neleus then the best o'th' Prey retain'd; And ev'ry man had of the rest his share. This done, unto the Gods we sacrifice. Mean while the Elians for War prepare, And two days after all together rise, And forth o'th' Town went they both Foot and Horse, And with them Molions two Sons, not yet Arrived at the age of Martial Force, And round about the Town Colone sit. Colone is a Frontier-town between Elis and Pyle upon Alphaeus side; Passing the Plain they were by Pallas seen. And she aloud unto the Pylians cri'd, To Arms you men of Pyle. Then in the night We put on Arms, and to the Field we hi'd; And chearfully went ev'ry one to fight. My Horses only were convey'd aside.
For Neleus thought I was in War unskill'd: But I at home could not be made 'abide, But with the rest on foot went to the Field, For on the Goddess Pallas I rely'd. Near to Arene falls into the Main A little Brook. All night by that we lay, And in the Morn betime we march'd again, And to Alphoeus came in half a day. And there to Jove his sacred Rites we paid. To Neptune and Alpheus each a Bull; An Heifer to the heav'nly martial Maid We gave; and when the Bands of Foo: were fall, Then supt we in our Ranks, and armed slept. Th' Epeians still the Town besieging lay; But seeing the War was now so near them crept, They rose; then presently began the Fray. And there the first man that was slain I slew, Which Molius was Augias Son in Law. He wedded Acameda had who knew As many Med'cines as the world ere saw. Him first I slew, and to his Charret mour ted. Then fled th' Epeians scatter'd here and there: For he the best amongst them was accounted. And as they fled I follow'd with my Spear, And fifty Charrets took, and at each one Two men I kill'd; for like a Storm I went; Nor had I left to Molius and Son, If Neptune had not hindred my intent, That took them up and sav'd them in a Coud. Great honour won the Pyleans that day; For on the Plains we chac'd th' Epeians proud, Killing and gath'ring Armour all the way Until we came unto Buprastum, Alesium, and Rock Olene; and there Advis'd we were by Pallas to go home. To Pylus then we went and welcome were. And thanks were given to the Gods, but most To Jupiter the greatest God. And then In general were thanked all the Host, And Nestor namely above other men.
Thus I behav'd my self amongst the Greeks, Whereas Achilles sitting in his Tent Neglecting us his own contentment seeks; Though if our Fleet be lost he will repent. But, O Patroclus, the advice was good Menoetius your Father gave you then When I at Phthia was and by him stood, By Agamemnon sent to levy men. To Peleus house Ulysses came and I, And there we found Menoetius and you. And you upon Achilles waited nigh. And Peleus to the Gods sat Cattle slew I'th' Court o'th' grass (a Gold Cup in his hand) And pour'd Wine on the burning Sacrifice. And you then saw us in the Gate-house stand, Though busie you were then to burn the Thighs. Achilles to us came and led us in, And made us sup, and Supper being done, To tell our bus'ness then did I begin, Which was to bring with us to Troy his Son. Both he and you desirous were to go; And Peleus then unto Achilles said, Strive still to be the best, and let the Foe Be always of your Spear the most afraid. Then to you spake your Father, Son (said he) Achilles is a better man of War Than you, and higher in Nobility Of Bloud; but you in age before him are. Give him good counsel therefore arid suggest What's for his good although he see it not: He will obey when for himself 'tis best; Thus he advis'd you though you have forgot. But do it now. For 'tis not yet too late. Who knows but you may make him change his mind? Or if he still continue obstinate, Or in some Oracle a scruple find, Or Thetis told him somewhat has from Jove, Yet let him send his Myrmidons with you, The Trojans from the Navie to remove, And give th' Achoeans time to breathe anew,
But let him give you his own Arms. Then they (When like unto Achilles you appear Leading fresh Forces) fly will into Troy And rid th' Achoeans of their present fear. This said, Patroclus grieved went his way, And tow'rds Achilles Tent ran back apace Passing by where Ulysses Vessels lay. There were the Altars, there the Market place, There were the Courts of Justice. There he met Eurypylus with th' Arrow in his wound, And from his head and shoulders dropt the weat, And bled apace, but still his Sense was sound. Then ptying him Patroclus spake and said, Ah poor Commanders of the Achoean Hoat, Must we be all so far from home destroy'd, And lye for Dogs-meat on the Trojan Coast? But say Eurypylus, is there no way To keep off Hector, but must perish all? Nothing I know (said he) can Hector stay, But in our flaming Ships we all must fall. For all the best of us here wounded lie, And still the Trojan power grows more and more But, O Patroclus, cut out of my Thigh This Arrow head. For it torments me sore; And with warm water wash away the blood, And Salves apply, the same that Chiron kew, (The best of Centaurs) to be very good, And taught Achilles, and Achilles you. For of two Surgeons in the Army, one As much need of a Surgeon hath as I, And Podalirius to the fight is gone. Patroclus to him then made this reply. How can this now be done, Eurypylus; Since to Achilles I must go with speed With Nestors Answer? yet to leave you ths In torture, were but an ungentle deed. Then in his ams he bears him to his Tent. And there, upon a many Cow-hides spread Laid him, and with his Knife to work he went, And from his Thigh cuts out the Arrow head.
And in his hands he bruis'd a bitter Root; And wash'd away the bloud. when that was done, He cleans'd the Wound, appli'd the Med'cine to't, And streight the blood was stop'd, the pain was gone.
ILIAD. LIB. XII. THus was Eurypylus of pain releas'd. Mean while the Greeks and Trojans fiercely fought, unblest, Nor could the Argive Wall and Trench For on a Hecatomb they never thought Though made their Ships and Booty to defend, Keep Hector and the Trojans long time out. For very quickly cometh to an end Whatere without the Gods Men go about. I deed while Hector liv'd; and angry lay Achilles at his Tent and would not fight, And standing were the Walls and Town of Troy, The great Wall of the Argives stood upright. But when the bravest Trojans once were slair, And many Greeks, and burnt was Iliam That had almost ten years held out in vain, And what remained of the Greks gone home, Then Neptune and Apollo both devise The Wall to ruine, and the Rivers all That in this spacious Mountain Ida rise Upon this Argive mighty work make fall. Aresus, Rhesus, Heptaporius, Aesepus, Rhisdius, Scamander, and Besides these si, the River Granicus, And Smoeis, upon whose Banks of Sand Many a Shield and Helmet scatter'd lay, And many a Demi-God. These Rivers all Apollo turned from their wonted way, Directing them unto the Argives Wall. Nne days perpetually they thither run, And Jove nine days together pour'd down rain, To th'end the work might be the sooner done. And Neptune with his Trident from the Main
Before them went and wrenched out the Stone And Timber which had there been laid with pain The deep'st of all for the Foundation, And made it to the Sea all smooth again. And strow'd again with sand the ample shore. And made the Brooks in their own Chanels run No otherwise than they were wont before. But this not yet, but afterwards was done. For Hector had the Greeks with show'rs of Spears Constrain'd to quit their Walls and Tow'rs so high That rattled terribly about their Ears, And back unto their hallow Ships to fly. As when a Lion or a Boar beset With Hounds, and Hunters, this and that way tries (Close as they stand) through them by strength to get, And passing on their Spears prevails or dies, And as he goes still makes them to give way; So Hector 'mongst his friends went here and there Exhorting them the Trenches to assay. The Horses when upon the Brink they were Boggl'd and whinny'd, and resus'd to pass. For broad it was and not to be leap'd ore; And to descend into, too deep it was, And on each side bristled with stakes good store Fix'd by th' Acheans to keep off the Foe, So that for Horse and Charres there was no way. But very willing were the Foot to go, And only to receive command did stay. And then to Hector said Polydamas, Hector, and you the Princes of our friends, We strive in vain to make our Horses pass Ore such great stakes so sharp'ned at the ends, Having above our heads the Enemy. Where (though we could get down) we cannot fight Though Jove unto our side inclined be, And to the Greeks should bear as much despite, As I, that wish their Name were rooted out. Yet if the Greeks, when we encumbred were For want of room, should turn and face about, And set upon us in the Ditch, I fear.
A man of us would not be left alive To tell at Troy what is become of us. But if you mean to have the bus'ness thrive, Then hear my Counsel, Let us all do thus Till of our Horse and Charrets we have need Let Servants hold them to the Trenches night, And we on foot fight; for if Jove indeed Intend us Victory the Greeks will fly. Thus he advis'd; and Hector thought it best, And from his Charret leapt unto the Sand Arm'd as he was; and so did all the rest, And to their Charretiers they gave command All in their order near the Trench to stand. The Trojans in five parts themselves divide And Hector of the first took the Command. But with himself he joyned two beside, Polydamas and stout Cebriones, And left a meaner man to hold his Charre Of all the Trojan Hoast the best were these. O'th' second Party Paris had the care Joyn'd with Agenor and Alcathous. The third commanded was by Leaders three, First Helenus, and then Deihobus, The third was Asius. From Arisbe he With mighty Horses colour'd like to flame Bred on the bank of Sellis came to Troy. The fourth Command unto Aeneas came; And he likewise two Seconds had, and they Two Sons were of Antenor (both well skill'c. In War) Archelochus and Acams. Lastly, Sarpedon led into the field The Trojan aids; and he assisted was By valiant Glaucus and Asterapoeus. For of the Lycians which he led thither The ablest and the best men he thought these. And then with Bucklers joyned close together Away they march directly to the Foe, And to the Combat had a great desire. The Greeks (they thought) as fast as they could go Would presently unto their Ships retire.
But Asius would not his Horses leave And Man, without the Trench, as others did. Fool as he was himself so to deceive. Upon his Charret tow'rds the Ships he rid. But never came Triumphant back again For all his flaming Horses and his Charre, But by Idomeneus hs Spear was slain. When Hector to the Shps had brought the War The Greeks had in their Wall a Gate wheteat Their Horses to the Field were us'd to pass, And Asius with his Charret drave to that, Which now lest open by the Argives was Their people chas'd by Hector to let in. And all his Party with a mighty cry Marcht after him as if they sure had been The Argives to their hollow Ships would fly. But were deceiv'd. For at the Gate they found Two mighty men that like two great Oaks stood With deep and large Roots fixed in the ground, That many Winds and Storms had long withstood. And apiths they were both; Leontes one, The other Polypoetes gotten by Pirithous. both saw them coming on, And staying on their hands and strength rely. The Trojans led by Asius came on With mighty noise, Orestes, Adamas, (This Adamas of Asius was the Son) Toon, lamenus, and Oenomaus; And ore their heads they held their Shields on high, For feat of Stones and Spears from off the Wall. The Greeks within to one another cry To save the Ships, the Tents, Themselves and All. But when they saw the Trojans went about To scale the Wall they roar'd and frighted were; But the two Lapiths presently leapt out, And furiously fell on the Trojans there. As if two Boars the Men and Hounds withstood, You'd often hear the Boughs before them snap While with their bended necks they tear the Wood; So thick they did the Trojan Armours rap.
For valiantly they fought, in part relying Upon their strength, and partly on the Showrs Of mighty Stones perpetually flying Upon the Trojans from the Wall and Tow'rs As thick as to the ground fall flakes of Snow When by a cold wind stirred is the Cloud, Their Weapons from their hands on both sides go, And Shields and Helmets crack apace and loud. But Asius at this vext to the heart Then spake to Jove, and clapping of his thigh, Ay me, said he, Thou too a Lyer art That mad'st us to believe the Greeks would fly; Who like so many motly Wasps or Bees That in the hollow way their Houses build And for their young resist their Enemies, Till they repel them or themselves be kill'd, Still sharply fight and will not quit the place. Thus Asius said, but Jove unmoved fate, And none that day but Hector meant to grace. And as at this, they fought at ev'ry Gate. I cannot like a God relate it all, The flaming Stones that from the Trojans flew With fire divine up to the Argive Wall On ev'ry side. How th' Argives no way knew To save themselves but for the Ships to fight; And how the Gods that with the Greeks took part Sate discontent in Heav'n and full of spight To see Jove so severely make them smart. But for the fight without, 'twas first begun By the bold Lapiths, though but two they were. For Polypoetes Pirithous Son At Damasus threw first a heavie Spear, And through his Helmets brazen cheeks it went, And through the Bone into the Brain went on; And when unto the Shades he him had sent, He killed Orminus and Pyloon. And then a deadly Spear Leontes threw, Which through the body pierc'd Hippolochus. And on Antiphates his Sword he drew And killed him, and then Iameus,
Orestes, Menon, one upon another. But whilst they stay'd to strip these and the rest; Hector, Polydamas, and many other That of the Trojan Army were the best, Were at the Trench, and stood upon the brink The Wall to break, and set the Ships on fire. But as they stood a little while to think There came a Bird not suting their desire. An Eagle in his Pounces held a Snake, And over Hectors Soldiers carri'd it Alive, but that could yet resistance make, And by and by the Snake the Eagle bit. The Eagle smarting cri'd and flew away, And 'mongst the Trojans lets the Serpent fall, And there amazed they, and gaping stay To see Joves Prodigy before them crall. O Hector, said Polydamas, though you In Courts and Councils cross whatere I say, How good soere it for you be and true, Unless in ev'ry thing I go your way, (Which is not well done, for your Counsel ought In Peace and War to have their Voices free, And never give advice against their thought, But always for the publick good to be;) Yet now I'll tell you, if this Bird be sent Unto the Trojans as a Prodigy, 'Tis not uneasie to foresee th'vent. For this I think the end of it will be: As th' Eagle in his Pounces bore the Snake, But could not to her young ones bear it home; So if the Trojans this attempt shall make, They'll back unto the City smarting come, And many good Companions leave behinde, Whom th' Argives to defend their Ships will kill. And this (I think) will any Augur finde That in's profession has any skill. Then Hector sowrely looking thus repli'd. Polydamas, this counsel I like not; You have a better which you from me hide. But if indeed it be your very thought,
The Gods have sure depriv'd you of your Sense, That bid me not on Jove to set my rest, But feather'd Fowls, that fly I care not whence, Nor whither, right or lest, or East or West. But we to Jove the greatest God will trust, That all the other Gods excells in might. He one Bird has, that still observe we must, And that is, For our Country well to fight. But why are you so much afraid? For though You ne're so many see before you slain, You of your self will have a care I know And not adventure where you may abstain. But if you stay or counsel other men To stay behinde, my Spear shall strike you dead. This said, he led them further on; and then They all with mighty clamour followed. And Jove a mighty wind from Ida sent, Which to the Ships directly blew the dust, That to the Trojans gave encouragement, But to the Argives horror and distrust. Encourag'd thus unto the Wall they go And brake down Battlements, and Posts pluckt out, And Piles that had been planted by the Foe With Leavers strong they wring up by the Root. Thus at the Wall the Trojans laboured, And hope they had the same to overthrow. Before the Battlements the Argives spread Cow-hides, and thence threw stones on them below. The Ajaxes then ran from Tow'r to Tow'r Endeavouring to give the Argives heart, Some with sweet words, and some of them with sow, According as they each one did his part. Fellows (said they) you that excel in War, And you that great strength have, and you that small (For well you know, all men not equal are) Now play the men, there's bus'ness for you all. Fear not the clamour of this threatning man; Indure this brunt, which if you overcome, As (if Jove hinder not) I know you can, We'll course him to the Gates of Ilium.
Thus they encouraged the Greeks. And now, As when great Jove to show his Armory Upon a Winters day sends down his Snow, Innumerable are the flakes that fly And cover Hills and Woods and Pastures green, And all the fruitful works of Husbandry, And cover would (but that the Sea comes in) Both Ports and Shores; for there Snow cannot lye. The Wall with Stones resounded round about. Yet Hector ne're had broken Wall nor Gate But by the Greeks had still been kept without, Had not Jove sent (the Trojans t'animate) His Son Sarpedon. With his Shield of brass Lined with many folds of strong Cow-hide, And which with golden Circles strength'ned was, And two Spears in his hand to th'Wall he hi'd. And as a Lion that had fasted long Comes from the Hill upon a flock of sheep, Will try what he can do, for all the throng Of Men and Dogs that them are set to keep; So boldly goes Sarpedon to the Walls With mighty hand the Battlements to tear. And as he going was to Glaucus calls. Glaucus, said he, what cause think you is there That we in Lycia more honour'd are Than other men, and lookt upon like Gods, And higher set at Feasts, and better Fare, And drink best Wine, and more Land have by odds? Is't not because we foremost are in fight? 'Tis not in vain (they'll say) our Princes have More honour, since they are of greater might, And their lives venture other men to save. Glaucus, if we could death eschew and age By running from the Battle cowardly, D'ye think I foremost would my self engage, Or ever counsel you to follow me? You know the ways to death are infinite. Though we ne're fight we cannot always live. Therefore come on and let us bravely fight, And either honour gain or honour give.
So said Sarpedon. Glaucus him obey'd; And tow'rds the Greeks well followed they went. Then Mnesteus was terribly afraid. For to assault his Tower he saw them bent. And lookt about what Heroes he could spy On other Towers unto his aid to call. He saw th' Ajaxes two, and Teucer by, But too far off to hear. For at the Wall Of Shields and Helmets so great Thumping was That 'twas impossible to hear him call. The Gates resounded no less than the Brass; For fiercely they were fighting at 'em all. Then Mnesteus to the Squire Thootes said, Run quickly call the Ajaxes to me, Both, it they can be spar'd. I am afraid Against these men I shall not able be To keep my place. Keen Warriours they are. But if they be themselves distressed there, Let Telamonius of this place take care, And Teucer use his Bow and Arrows here. Thootes then unto th' Ajaxes ran Along the Argive Wall, and to them said, Mnesteus entreats both of you, if you can, To come unto his Tow'r and give him aid. Keen Warriours (he says) these Lycians are. But if you be your selves distressed here Let Telamonius of the place take care, And Teucer use his Bow and Arrows there. This said, great Ajax said unto the less, Aeliades stay here a while, till I Deliver Mnesteus from his distress. That done, I shall be with you presently. Ajax and Teucer then together go Unto the Tow'r of Mnesteus with all speed, Pandion with them carry'ng Teucers Bow, And at their coming found him in great need. The Lycians like a black and lowring Cloud Ascended to the Wall and fiercely fought. The Greeks resist. The noise is mighty loud. And with a heavy Stone stood Ajax out
That two men scarce could carry, such as now The Earth brings forth, and with the same he stroke icles on the Helmet such a blow As Head and Helmet both in pieces broke. Down like a Diver from the Wall fell he Headlong, and dead upon the ground he lay. At Glaucus-Teucer lets an Arrow flee Which through his Arm unarmed made its way. Glaucus no longer able now to fight, Leapt from the Wall unseen unto the ground, For fear, if of his hurt they had a sight, The Greeks would make a Triumph of his wound. Griev'd was Sarpedon to see Glaucus gone, But not so grieved but that still he fought, And fixt a heavie Spear in Almaon, And with the same his life and all pluckt out. Sarpedon then tore down a Battlement, And wider for the Lycians made the way. But Teucer then an Arrow to him sent. But Jupiter to save his Son that day The Shaft unto his Shield and Belt directed, So that it passed not unto the skin. The Shield and Belt together him protected. And then with Spear in hand came Ajax in, And with a Push that pierc'd his Shield clean through His coming on a little while he stay'd. But with Sarpedon that could little do, That honour sought. Then to his friends he said, Ye Lycians what makes you thus remiss? Can I make way unto the Ships alone? Strong as I am, impossible it is. For many hands much better are than one. This said the Lycians heavier than before (To please their Prince) upon the Argives lay. The Greeks within their broken anks restore, And terrible the Battle was that day. For neither could the Lycians passage make Unto the Ships and break the Argives Wall, Nor Greeks compel the Lycians to forsake The battlements, so fiercely fought they all.
As two men on the Confines of their ground At two ends of a measure tugging stand, Contending earnestly about their bound, And each of them would fain enlarge his land: So for the Battlement they striving stood, And wounded one another Back and Brest, And sprinkled was the Battlement with bloud, Nor was it certain yet who had the best. But as a woman that is fain to spin To find her self and Children sorry food, In one scale Wooll, in th'other Weight puts in Till they hang ev'n, so ev'n the Battle stood Till Hector came, to whom Jove chiefly meant To give the honour of the Victory. Then Hector up the Wall the formost went, And thence unto his Trojans loud did cry, Trojans come on, and break me down this Wall, And set the Argives hollow ships on flame. This said, he he heard was by the Trojans all, And streight unto the Battlements they came. Then Hector at the Gate took up a stone Great and sharp-pointed; two men such as now Could scarce have lifted up so great a one: But Hector with one hand the same could throw; For Jupiter to him had made it light. And as unto a Shepherd is a Fleece Of Wooll, that to be born needs little might; So eas'ly born the stone by Hector is; And standing at the Gate well fortifi'd With Planks well joyn'd, and two cross-bars within, And taking with his right foot back a stride Out flew the stone and at the Gate went in. The Gate then roar'd; the Hinges broken were; The Bars upon the ground asunder lay; And pieces of the Planks flew here and there; And to the Ships now open was the way. And Hector with a countenance like night Flew in. And fire appeared in his eyes: His Armour as he marched shined bright, And light reflected up unto the Skies;
And, two good Spears he grasped in his Fist. And then the Greeks were mightily afraid; For none except a God could him resist. And then unto the Trojans turning said, Now Trojans to the Wall. And presently Great numbers of the Trojans that way pass, And others at the Gate. The Argives fly Unto their ships. And great the Tumult was.
I LIAD. LIB. XIII. WHen Jove had to the Ships the Trojans brougt, He left them fighting there, and turn'd his face (Thinking th'Immortals would no more have fought) And looke upon the fields and men of Thrace, And Mysians, and Hippomolgi (men That live on Milk the goodly Mothers give Of lusty Steeds, and are more honest than The rest of Mortals, and do longer live.) While Neptune from a hill in Samothrace Lookt down and saw the Greeks and Trojans fight. For thence of Ida hill and all the space 'Bout Troy and th' Argive Fleet he had a fight. And grieved was to see the Argives slain, And mightily offended was with Jove, And from the Hill in haste came down again, On foot; and ever as his, feet did move, Under the same the haughty Mountains shook, And the thick Woods, and unto Aegae came. Thither to come four steps he only took. There stands a Temple sacred to his name, Of glistering Gold and never to decay. And there he puts his Horses to his Char. Long Mains of Gold they had, and swift were they. And then in Gold himself array'd for War. And mounted on his Char ore Sea he drives. The Whales on both sides from the bottom rise Their King to see. The Sea her bosome rives, But not a drop up to the Axtree flies. Thus quickly to the Argives Neptune came. Half way 'twixt Tenedus and Imbrus is In the deep Sea a Cave, and in the same (Lest coming back his Horses he should miss)
He sets them up and laid before them Ment, And ty'd them there with Foot-looks at their feet, Strong Locks of Gold, that loose they could not get. Then up he went unto the Argive Fleet, And there he found the Trojans like a Flame At Hector's heels with mighty noise and cry, Greedy and full of hope the Greeks to tame, And then in flames to make their Ships to fry. Then Neptune speaking to th' Ajaxes two In Chalchas shape, You two (said he) can save The Ships, if you but set your selves thereto. For of the Foe no fear at all I have In other parts. Defended they will be By other Greeks. The danger all is here Where Hector like a flame you leading see, That would be thought the Son of Jupiter. If you but think some God bids you resist, And stand your ground when Hector cometh on, And chear your fellows; though Jove him assist, He quickly from your good Ships will be gone. This said, he on them both his Scepter laid. And presently themselves they stronger find; Their Thighs and Legs and Hands much lighter weigh'd, And Neptune suddenly rose from the ground. Just as a Hawk from off a Rock flies at Some other Fowl; so quickly Neptune rose. The lesser Ajax first observed that, And to the greater did the same disclose. Ajax (said he) this was some Deity That in the shape of Chalchas bad us fight. For 'twas not Chalchas I am sure. For I As he went off had of his Legs a sight, And of his Feet and Steps. For marks there are To know a God by from a man. Withal I finde my self much more inclin'd to War. Methinks my hands and feet for Battle call. And so do mine (said Telamorius) And fain I would with Hector have a bout. While they together were discoursing thus, Neptune behinde them busie was about.
Confirming those that to the Ships were gone A little to refresh themselves. For they Had long and painful labour undergone, And heavie at their hearts the danger lay When Hector and his Troops had pass'd the Wall, And of their safety were in great despair. But Neptune coming soon confirm'd them all, And gave them hope their Fortune to repair. To Teucer first he came and Leitus, To Deipyrus and to Meneleos, Meriones and stout Antilochus, And standing near addrest his Speech to those Fie (Argives) fie young men; what shame is thi? Upon your hands I chiefly did rely To save our Ships. If you be so remiss, The day is come in which we all must die By Hector's hands. O strange! Inever thought The Trojans durst to th'Ships have come so neer That heretofore peep out o'th'Town durst not, But like to Hindes that hide themselves for fear Of Leopards, Wolves, and other Beasts of Prey. For so at first they did. But you'll not fight For anger that the King had sent away Dishonoured the man of greatest might. But what though Agamemnon have indeed Dishonour'd Thetis Son, must we therefore Give over fight? Or rather with all speed Endeavour all we can to cure the Sore? But howsoere, you that excuseless are, And of the Argive Army all the best, And Bodies have and Hearts well made for War, I needs must reprehend you. But the rest That weak or wretched are I cannot blame. Fond men, this negligence may bring forth yet Some greater ill. Then come away for shame. For never were the Greeks so hard beset. Hector has broken both the Bars and Gates, And now hard by our Ships he fiercely fights, And with great noise his Trojans animates. Thus Neptune the dismayed Greeks excites.
At th' Ajaxes the Ranks stood firm and close, Nor Mars nor Pallas could a fault have spi'd. They chosen were the Trojans to oppose Whom Hector led. And standing side by side, Shield Shield, and Targer Target, and Man Man Sustain'd, and Spear by Spear assisted was. So close they stood, and labour all they can Lest Hector to their hollow Ships should pass. And Hector with his Troops went swiftly on. As when a Torrent swell'd with showers of rain Breaks from the hill a round and heavie stone, It makes the Wood resound, till at the Plain, Swift as it thither roll'd, it rolls no more; So Hector marching made account to pass Through th' Argive Fleot and Tents to the Sea-shore. But at th' Ajaxes Battle stopt he was. And forced back a little to recoile, Resisted by so many Spears and Swords, And speaking to his Trojans stood a while, And Lycians, and Dardans in these words. Ye Trojans, Lycians, Dardans do not fly. I know they cannot long maintain the Fight, If we upon Jove's promise may rely, Who all the other Gods excells in might. This said, Deiphobus went tow'rds the Foe, Holding his Buckler out before him high, So that it cover'd him from Head to Toe. Meriones that on him had his eye, His Spear threw at him, which no harm did do. For though upon the Buckler fell the stroke, It carri'd not th'intended mischief through, But in the tough Bull-hides the Spear he broke. Then back unto the throng he went, and fum'd Both for the loss of the good Spear he brake, And of the Victory he had presum'd, And went to th'Ships another Spear to take. The rest fought on, and mighty noise there was. There Teucer with his Spear slew Imbrius The Son of Mentor, till the Greeks did pass The Sea to Troy he dwelt at Pedasus,
And to Mdesicaste there was wed. But when the Argives came to Troy, he then Dwelt in King Priams Court, much honoured Both by the King himself and by his men. But now by Teucer's Spear was slain. And as Upon a Hill a goodly Ashen Tree, Unto the ground (cut from the roots with brass) Brings down its boughs; so to the ground fell e. To strip him of his Arms then Teucer goes; Which Hector seeing, at him threw his Spear, And misses him; yet not in vain he throws, But kills another man that stood him near, Amphimachus, that newly to the fight Was from the Ships come back t'assist the rest; And scarcely of the Skirmish had a sight, When Hector's Spear he felt upon his breast. Then to Amphimachus came Hector near, Meaning hs Helmet from his head to take. Which Ajax seeing at him threw his Spear That hit his Shield, but passage could not make. Yet with such strength the Spear fell on his Shield, That backward he was driven from the dead; So that the Argives bore them off the Field. Amphimachus to th' Ships was carried By Mnesttheus and Stichius that led Th' Athenian Troops. But the Ajaxes two, One at the Feet, another at the Head, Bore Imbrius from off the ground into The throng of Greeks like hungry Lions two That carry in their Jaws a Goat which they Had snatched from the Dogs, and were to go Through many Shrubs to carry it away. Him they disarm'd, and to let Hector know it, The lesser Ajax cutteth off his head, And turning round with all his strength doth throw it, And unto Hector's feet 'twas carried. Now Neptune for Amphimachus thus slain, Who from his Loins descended, vexed sore, Went to the Argive Ships and Tents again To chear the Greeks, and hurt the Trojans more,
nd with Idomeneus met as he went, That had a wounded friend brought from the fight, nd streightway back again to go he meant To them that fought and help them all he might. nd Neptune like unto Andremons Son Thoas, whose Father all th' Aetolians swai'd ike Jove in Pleuron and in Calydon, Unto Idomeneus then spake and said, King Idomeneus, what is betide Of th' Argive threats that Ilium they would tame? Thoas (then Idomeneus repli'd) I know not any man that we can blame. There's none of us but understands the War, Nor any that betray themselves with fear, Nor that for sloth to fight unwilling are. But Jove, it seems, will have us perish here. But Too is, you that a ways heretofore Have fought so well, and set on other men, Still hold that purpose never giving ore. T'Idomeneus then Neptune said agen, Idomeneus may that man ne're come back, But in the Field lie for the Dogs a Prey, That at this time is negligent or slack. But now put on your Arms and come away, And quickly. For although we are but two, Yet since conjoyned force of men not strong Can do as much as one good man, let's go. This said, up Neptune went into the throng. Idomeneus then goes into his Tent And arm'd himself, and took in's hand two Spears, And out again he came like Lightning sent To men from Jove to fill their hearts with fears. And scarce come forth, he met Meriones That to his Tent was going for a Spear, And speaking to him said Idomeneus, Meriones my friend what make you here? What are you wounded that you leave the Fight? Or bring you me some news? For I to hide My self from Battle here take no delight. Meriones then to him thus repli'd.
O King Idomeneus unto your Tent I forc'd was from the Battle to come down, And thence to take a Spear of yours I meant, Since on Deiphobus I broke my own. A Spear then said Idomeneus, there are Twenty if you had need of them that stand Upright against the Walls which in this War I took from Trojans vanquisht by my hand. For when I fight I stand neer to the Foe. And that's the cause so many Spears I have, And can so many Shields and Helmets show, And Armours for the breast great store and brave. Then spake Meriones; And I said he Have many spoils of Trojans at my Tent, But setcht from thence so soon they cannot be. For close up to the Foe I also went Amongst the foremost boldly. Which although The Argives take no notice of, yet you That how I still behav'd my self, well know Can bear me witness what I say is true. To him then thus Idomeneus repli'd, Meriones, this need not have been said, I know your courage were it to be tri'd, And men somewhere in ambush to be laid (Where fear and courage are discerned best; For there 'tis seen who valiant are, who not. A Coward's heart still panteth in his breast; And nothing but on death he has his thought; He cannot without trembling quiet sit, But dances on his Hams, and changes hue; And cannot hold himself upon his feet; And shakes his Chaps▪ These things a Coward shew. But in a valiant man there's none of this. He quietly abides without afright, When in the danger he engaged is; And longs for nothing but to come to fight) If you amongst them had been there, I know None of them such a fault in you had found. Or if you had been hurt 'tis sure enow, Nor in your back nor neck had been the Wound,
But either in your belly or your brest. But let's no longer talk like children here, Lest we be blam'd. I think it therefore best You now go to my Tent and take a Spear. This said, Meriones fetcht out a Spear, And with Idomeneus went to the Fight, As Mars, when in the Field he will appear, And with him his beloved Son Affright, And to th' Ephyrians and Phlegyans goes From Thrace to give one side the Victory; So with Idomeneus unto the Foes Meriones went up couragiously, And to him said, Idomeneus where now O'th' left, or right side of the Trojan Host, Or in the midst shall we our force bestow To help the Greeks? For now they need us most. Idomeneus then to him said agen, The middle of the Battle to maintain There ready stand enow, and able men, Teucer good Bowman and th' Ajaxes twain. Hector shall there of fighting have his fill As greedy as he is. Though strong he be He'll find it hard that way to have his will, And come unto the Ships with Victory, And burn them if Jove not with his own hand Throw in the Brands. He must be more than man, Whom Ajax is not able to withstand; Not mortal, such as live by Ceres can, And may be killed with a Spear or Stone. For Ajax with Achilles may compare In standing fight, though able less to run. In that, Achilles him excelleth far. But now unto the Battle let us go And fall on at the left side of the field, And try what we are able there to do, And either Honour win or honour yield. This said, they went together to the Fight, And on them presently the Trojans fell. There was no place for Victory to light, So close they fought on both sides and so well.
And such a mighty Cloud of dust they raise As when great Winds contend upon the Plain Is in dry weather raised from the ways, While one to kill another takes great pain. And horrid of the Squadrons was the sight, That brissl'd was all over with great Spears. Their Armours, Shields, and Helmets, with their light Dazled the eyes, and clamour fill'd the ears. Hard hearted had he been that with dry eyes Had this affliction of the Heroes seen, That from the Sons of Saturn did arise, And but for their dissention had not been: For Jupiter for Hector was and Troy, And meant to honour Thetis and her Son; But not th'Achaean Army to destroy. But Neptune moved with compassion To see the Argives by the Trojans slain, And angry with his Brother, secretly In likeness of a man rose from the Main T'incourage them and give them victory. Though they were Brothers, yet Jove of the two The Elder and the Wiser was, so that Neptune against Jove's will durst nothing do In favour of the Greeks distrest, but what He thought might be effected privily. And thus the Saw from Brother unto Brother Of cruel War was drawn alternately, And many slain of one side and the other. And now half gray came in Idomeneus With lusty Cretans, and the Trojan frighted. For presently he slew Othryoneus, Othryoneus that was by Fame invited To purchase honour in the War at Troy; And promis'd, if Cassandra he might wed, From Ilium to drive the Greeks away. Which Priam to him granted if he sped. And in this hope, strutting he went to fight. There with his Spear Idomeneus him smote. The Spear upon his Belly just did light. And down he fell; his Armour sav'd him not
Idoeneus insulting ore him spake. Othryoneus great praise you'll win indeed If you can do what you did undertake. Come fight for us; and you shall no worse speed. For if you for us win the Town of Troy, Atrides fairest Daughter yours shall be. Come with me to the Greeks that there we may Upon the Wedding-Articles agree. And then to be revenged Asius meant, And was on foot, although his Horses there Breathing upon his back behind him went. And at Idomeneus had thrown his Spear But that to throw he time enough had not; Because the other made the greater hast, And with his Spear had hit him in the throat, And out again at's neck the point had past. And there as some great Oak or Poplar-tree, Or Pine cut down, that by a Shipwright must Be saw'd in Planks falls down, so fell down he Grasping with both his hands the bloudy dust. The Charretier was so amaz'd thereat That he forgot to turn his Charre with fear, And quiet sate. Antilochus saw that, And going neerer, at him threw his Spear, Which through his Arm our and his Belly went, And gasping fell to th'ground the Charretier. Atilochus to th'Ships his Horses sent, And by the Argives now possest they were. And then Deiphobus himself advanc'd And at Idomeneus he threw his Spear, Which grazing only on his Buckler glanc'd Unto the Argives that behinde him were. For as he saw it come he sunk, and hid His body all under his Shield of brass. Yet not from out his hand depart it did In vain; for with it slain Hypsenor was. Deiphobus then crowing said, So, so, Asius does not go unreveng'd to Hell. And thongh the place unpleasant be, I know To have such company will please him well.
Antilochus then to the Body came And kept the Trojans off from stripping it. Mecistes and Alastor hare the same Upon their shoulders to the Argive Fleet. Idomeneus still like a Fury went To kill more Trojans or himself be kill'd. And for the Argives thought his life well spent. Alcathous then met him on the Field, Who was a Suiter to Hippodamie Anchises eldest Daughter, and the best Beloved by her Parents both was she, And of her time exceeded all the rest In Beauty, and in curious Work, and Wit, And a fit Consort for the best of Troy. But Neptune now on purpose bound his feet, And from his Eyes though bright took sight aay; So that he could not fly, nor turn, nor fight, But fixed stood like to a Post or Tree; And by Idomenus with Neptune's might Pierc'd through the Armour, and the Breast was he, And through the Heart, as plainly did appear. For as he bleeding on the ground did lie, The beating of his heart did shake the Spear; And Mars took from him all his Chivalry. Idomeneus then crowed mightily. Deiphobūs (said he) is't not enough That for your one man I have killed three? If not, come on and take a better proof Of what the Seed of Jove in War can do. For Jove got Minos, and Deucalion he. He me, and I whose Ship loads bring of Wo To Troy, unto thy Father, and to thee. This said, Derphobus considered Whether to stay and meet him hand to hand, Or see by whom he might be seconded. And at the Reer he saw Aeneas stand. For he not much good will did Priam bear, Who small respect unto his Vertue paid. To him Deiphbus approaching near, Aeneas, now (said he) you must us aid.
Your Brother-law Alcathons is kill'd, Who oftentimes has fed you with his hand, And naked will be left upon the field B'Idomeneus, unless you him withstand. This said, t'Idomeneus they came away, And with him greedy were to enter fight. And he as boldly did their coming stay. Though two to one, they did not him affright. t as a Boar in unfrequented place, By Dogs and Men pursu'd, stands sullenly Knowing his strength, and looks them in the face Bristled his Back, and flaming is his Eye; So for Aeileas staid Idomeneas, And to his fellows call'd; Alcalaphus, Meriones, Antlochus, and Aphareus. Good men of Wa, and you Derpyrus, Come hither friends, said he. I coming see Aeeas towards me with mighty rage, A valiant man at Arms you know is he, And now is in the flower of his Age. Were I so young, and of the mind I am, I'd honour win of him or he of me. This said they quickly all about him came Aeeas to repel or kill. Then he Call'd Paris to him and Agenor, and Deiphobus, the Argives to oppose. And all of them of Trojans had command, And with their Spears behinde him marched close. As when a Shepherd leads with a green Bough His Sheep from off the Pasture to the Brook, joy'd to see them follow him; so now Aeneas in his Troops great pleasure took. No sooner they were come unto the ground Whereon Alcathous his Body was, But close they fought, and hideous was the sound Of Helmets, Shields and mighty Arms of brass. And there the two that far excel'd the rest Aeneas and Idomeneus would fain Have fix'd their Spears in one anothers Brest. First threw Aeneas, but he threw in vain.
For by Idomeneus declin'd it was, And coming to the ground stuck trembling there. And then threw he and killed Oenomaus, And pierced was his Belly with a Spear. Who falling filled both his hands with dust. Idomeneus pull'd out again his Spear. But to take off his Arms he durst not trust Himself, so many Lances flying were. His Limbs and Feet not supple were and light To throw or shun a Spear. They now were past Their best, yet good were in a standing Fight. But could not from the Battle run so fast. And as he slowly walked off the Field. Deiphobus that alwaies bore him spight A Spear threw at him, but him miss'd, and kill'd Ascalaphus Son of the God of Fight. And on his hands into the dust fell he. But Mars yet knew not that his Son was dead. For in the Golden Clouds by Jove's decree With all the other Gods prohibited To meddle in the battle, quiet sat. About Ascalaphus the strife was all, And first Deiphobus his Helmet gat, But forc'd he was again to let it fall. For in the Arm he then receiv'd a wound Which by Meriones was to him sent, Who quickly took the Helmet from the ground. And with it back unto the Argives went. Diphobus was by Polites (who His Brother was) born forth unto his Charre, And bleeding in hs Charre the Town into. But still upon the Field went on the Warre, And Aphareus there wounded in the throat Ws by Aeneas Spear, wherewith his Head On one side hanging Shield and Helmet brought Down with him to the Earth. There lay he dead. And Thoon by Antilochus was slain, That to him turn'd his back and meant to fly; For by the Spear in two was cut the vein Which all along the Back to th' Neck doth lye.
And down he fell. Antilochus stept in To strip him. But the Foes about him round Threw at him Spears, but never touch'd his skin, Although his Shield received many a wound. For he was well defended on each side By Neptune, who unto him bore good will, Because he ne'er would from the Fight abide, And mongst the Foes his Spear was flying still. But as his Spear at one he aiming stood, He by Asiades observed was, Who to him came as near as well he cou'd And threw his Spear, whereof one half did pass Clean through Antilochus his Shield, and stuck Therein; but th'other half sell to the ground. For Neptune, him preserv'd from that ill luck. So scapt Antilochus without a wound. And Adamas retir'd into the rout. Meriones sent after him a Spear, Which entring at his hinder parts, came out Beneath his Navel, and above his gear, Where wounds most faral are. Then down he falls, And like a Cow that by the Horns is ty'd By strength of Swains, a little while he sprawls, But with the plucking out the Spear he dy'd. And then the Son of Priam Helenus With a broad Sword in hand all Steel of Thrace Upon the Helmet smote Deipyrus, Who there sell down and dy'd upon the place. The Greeks took up the Helmet at their feet. And griev'd thereat was Menlaus so That up he went with Helenus to meet Shaking his Spear. The other draws his Bow. And on the Breast-plate hit was Menelaus. But off the Arrow flew like chaff which fan'd Is from the Corn. But thother wounded was Just where he held the Bow quite through the hand. And dragging Hand and Spear himself withdrew Into the Trojan Troops; where from the wound The heavy Spear his friend Agor drew, And in a woollen bancage wrapt it found,
VVhich in his hand a servant held hard by. And then Pisrindrus went to Menelaus, Betray'd thereto by cruel Destiny. For to have slain him in great hope he was And when they were to one another nigh, First Menelaus threw his Spear, but wide. At him Pisandrus: then his Spear lets fly. But passage being at the Shield deny'd, Beneath the brasen point in twain it crackt. Then to him with his Sword went Menelaus, And he to Menelaus with an Ax, VVhich cover'd with his Buckler ready was. And on his Helmet crest then fell the stroke. But he Pisandrus with his keen Sword hit Upon the Forehead neat the Nose, which broke The Bone, and carry'd present death with it. His eyes unto the ground fell in the blood. Atrides kickt him as o'th' ground he lay, Then stript him of his Arms, and ore him stood Insulting, and reproaching those of Troy. Thus, thus (said he) proud Trojans, you'll at last Be taught to quit our Ships, and have your fill Of bloody VVar, and pay for what is past. You thought, ye Dogs, too little was the ill, Against the Laws of Hospitality To steal away my Goods, and wedded VVise; But further will (if in your pow'r it lye) Deprive the Argive Princes all of Life; And burn their Ships, although no injury I ever did you. But I hope we shall Your greediness of fighting satisfie. But Father Jove, who (men say) art of all The Gods most wise, all this proceeds from you, That to the Trojans false and insolent More favour shew than to the just and true; So that with Peace they never are content. Of every thing there is satiety. Of Sleep, of Love, of Dance, and pleasant Song. And all men else with war may cloyed be. Only the Trojans still for fighting long.
This said, the Armour to the Ships he sent, And 'mongst the foremost Greeks again he fought. And there Harpalion unto him went (Who t'Ilium was by his Father brought. But brought from thence again he never was) And at him throws his Spear, and hits his Shield Right in the midst. But through it could not pass; The stubborn Brass unto it would not yield. Missing his purpose he the field forsook, And fearing to be slain lookt still about, til an Arrow keen him overtook, Sent from Meriones, that past throughout From Buttock unto Badder. Then he sate Expiring 'mongst the Trojans his good friends, And lay like to a Worm benummed, that Upon the ground it self at length extends. The Paphlagonians of him had a care, And sorry for him carry'd him to Troy. His Father weeping followed the Charre, But how to be revenged saw no way. And Paris then with anger was possest, And 'mongst the Argives lets an Arrow fly. For of Harpalion he had been the guest, And well received in Paphlagonie. Amongst the Argives one Euchenor was The Son of Polydus an old Prophet That knew full well how things would come to pass Before the Town of Troy, and told him of it. You must, said he, at home by sickness die, Or going with the Greeks at Troy be slain. But for all that the Young man valiantly Went with the Greeks; but ne'er came home again, Though he behav'd himself with caution there In hope t'avoid both danger and diseases. But Paris shot him 'twixt the Cheek and Ear. And on his Eyes there Death and Darkness seizes. Thus keenly fought they here; But Hector yet Knew not the Trojans that were fighting at The left hand of the Host were so beset, For if he had perhaps been told of that,
He might have giv'n the Greeks the Victory; Such courage Neptune gave unto them there. And sometimes by his strength immediately In battle fighting they assisted were. But Hector vet was where he first made way, Breaking the Argive Ranks, and Wall and Gate, Where of Protesilaus the good Ships lay, And those of Ajax next unto them late; Where low the Wall and sharpest was the Fight. Th' Epeians, Pthians, and Ionians, Bootians, Locrians all oppose their might To Hector's, Trojans, Dardans, Lycians. And led were by good men. Th' Athenians By Mnesthius, Bias, Phidas, Stichius, Meges the leading had of th' Epians, And with him Amphion and Dracius. Medon and Meneptolemus brought on The Pthians. Medon was Ajaxes Brother, And of Oileus the natural Son, Not gotten by his Wife but by another. His Wife was call'd Eriopis. And he For killing of her Brother forced fled To save himself to th' Town of Phylacie, Where Meneptolemus was born and bred. And so the Phthian Leaders were these two, And 'mongst the chief of the Boeotians fought To keep the Trojans from approaching to The Argive Ships to burn them as they thought. But Ajax the swift Son of Oeleus Not all this while departed from the side Of Ajax Son of Telamonius. But as two Oxen which the ground divide Go tugging of the Plow with one consent, Till underneath their Horns their Foreheads sweat, So labouring in the field together went Yoakt, both the Little Ajax and the Great But Telamonius was followed With good Companions, who when there was cause His mighty Buckler for him carried. The other destitute of followers was.
For none but Locrians to the War he led, Who have no use of Bucklers when they fight, Nor Spears, nor Helmets that defend the Head; But came to Troy with Bows and Arrows light. And in a standing Fight durst not abide. But from behind the Argive Ranks unseen, They Hector and his Trojans terrifi'd Incessantly with showrs of Arrows keen, Whilst from the Front with Spears they plagued were. The Trojans courage then was so allaid, That into Troy they all had run for fear, But that Polydamas to Hector said, Hector, you are a man uncounsellable. Because in deeds of Arms you so excel, You think your self in Counsel too most able, As if all vertues must in one man dwell. The Gods to some have given well to fight, And others with the Muses they have grac'd; Others with Dance the people to delight; And in the minds of others Wisdom plac'd. The fruit whereof by many is enjoy'd: It Cities saves, as they that have it know, VVhich quickly would without it be destroy'd, But what we are to do I'll tell you now. The VVar now lyeth only on your hand: For since we past the VVall, some quite give ore, And armed as they were do idle stand, And th'Enemy than ours that fight are more. Therefore retire and call the Princes hither, That it may be determin'd by them all Upon mature deliberation, whether Upon the Argives at their Ships to fall (If so it please the Gods) or otherwise, Since Ajax there resolved is to stay, How with most safety we may hence arise. For they are in our debt for yesterday. So said Polydamas, and Hector thought The counsel not amiss, and streight obey'd. And armed from his Charriot leapt out, And standing on the ground unto him said,
Polydamas, stay you, and here detain The Trojan Chiefs, while to the Fight I go, And give some Orders there; I shall again Be with you quickly when I have done so He mist Deiphobus and Helenus, And valiant Adamas Afiades, And Asius the Son of Hyrtacus, And went about the field to look for these; Of which some wounded were retir'd to Troy, And some in Battle by the Argives kill'd. But found his Brother Paris in his way, Encouraging his men upon the Field. And spake unto him, in ill Language, thus, Unlucky Paris, fine man, Lover keen, Where are Deiphobus and Helenus And Adamas? Where are they to be seen And what is of Othryoneus become? And where is Asius? Now certainly Down to the ground burnt will be Ilium, And thou a miserable death wilt die. So Hector, said, and Paris thus repli'd. Hector, there was for such words now no cause, Sometimes perhaps you may me justly chide. I do not think a Coward born I was. For since unto the Ships you brought the War, We with the Greeks perpetually have fought, But those you miss slain by the Argives are, Save that Deiphobus was carri'd out, And Helenus, both wounded in the hand. Now lead us on to what part you think fit. We ready are to do what you command, As far as strength of body will permit. This said, his Brother reconciled was, And both went to where cruelly they fought About Cebriones, Polydamas, Orthoeus, Polyphoetes, and about Phalces and Palmes and the Children two (Ascanius, Moris) of Hippotion, Who Ilium but the day before come to, And now to th' Battle went by Jove set on.
As when a storm of wind falls on the Plain The Sea erects it self in ridges white, And foaming rolls in order on the Main; So to the Greeks with Helmets shining bright The Trojans one another followed In order with their Captains to the Fight, And Hector like another Mars at th' Head With Buckler round and strong, and Armour bright. His Buckler he before him held far out, That cover'd was his body with the same, And peeping under it he look'd about, And in that posture to the Argives came. And at the foremost Ranks went here and there To try if through them he could passage make; But fast they stood, nor at it troubled were; And Ajax seeing it unto him spake, Come neerer man. Why think you to affright The Greeks? we are not so unus'd to War. Nor are we driven hither by your might; But by the hand of Jove afflicted are. Hictor, I know, to burn our Ships you think; But we have hands as good the Ships to save, And Troy will first, I think, int' Ashes sink. And shortly, I believe, you'll wish to have, And pray to Jove and all the Pow'rs on high For Horses that run faster than Hawks fly, That from the Ships you may go speedily. This said, an Eag'e Dexter presently Flew over them. And they Jove's Prodigy Received gladly with a mighty cry. Then thus to Ajax Hector did reply. Ajax, you love to prate and brag and lye. O that the Son of Jove as sure were I, And had been certainly conceived by Juno Jove's Wife, and as a Deity Like Pallas and Apollo ne're to die, As I am sure great woe will fall this day Upon the Argives all and then be killd If for the coming of my Spear thou stay, And Dogs and Kites shall eat thee in the Field.
This said, he led away. The Trojans shout. So do the Argives, and resolv'd to try The power of their Foes with courage stou. The noise on both sides went up to the sky.
ILIAD. LIB. XIV. Now Nestor with Macaon drinking sat And heard the Greeks and Trojans fighting roar, And to him said, Macaon, hear you that? The noise is greater much than 'twas before. Let Hecamede ore the fire set water, And wash away the blood from off your sore, While I go hence and see what is the matter. But at the Wine sit you still as before. This said, he took up Thrasymedes Shield, And Thrasymedes (his Son) took up his, And with a good sharp Spear went to the Field, And going forth a shameful sight he sees. The Trojans chasing while the Argives slie, And down unto the ground was torn their Wall. And then as when a Wave is raised high By secret Gales, on neither side can fall, Until some certain and prevailing Wind Comandeth in the Air; So Nestor stood, And with two thoughts distracted was his mind, Sometimes to go t' Atrides he thought good, And sometimes to the Battle. But at last Resolved unto Agamemnon goes, Whilst Shields and Helmets, all the way he past Resounded in his ears with frequent blows. And as he went the wounded Chiefs he met, Ulysses, Agamemnon, Diomed. For far off from the Fight the Ships were set, And close unto the Shore lay at a head. Only the foremost hawl'd were to the Plain, And close astern of those was built the Wall. For with so many Ships they cross the Main, That near the Field they could not place them all.
But side by side along the Shore they lay, And took up all the compass of the Bay. The wounded men, to look upon the Fray Helpt by their Spears went softly on the way, Griev'd at the heart, and met with Nestor there, Who with his coming made them more afraid. And when unto them Nestor was come near Then Agamemnon spake, and to him said, O Nestor, Glory of the Argive Nation, I am affraid that Hector will make good That which he promis'd once in his Oration Before the Trojans when he boasting stood. I never will to Troy come back, said he, Till I have slain these Greeks, and set on ire Their Ships. And now performed it will be. O strange! Do all the other Greeks conspire Against me with Achilles Thetis Son, And therefore are resolved not to fight? 'Tis plain, said Nstor, some such thing is done, Ese Jove himself could not with all his ight Have made such work. The Wall is broker down In which to save our selves we did confide; And at the Ships they fight, nor was it known, Nor could it be observed on which side The Greeks that fighting were, were most ditress, So thick to th ground in ev'ry part they fall. But let's consult what course to take were best, If counsel can do any thing at all. But that we all should fight I'll not advise. For what can wounded men in Battle do? To Nestor Agamemnon then replies, Nestor, since now the War is brought unto Our Ships, and that nor Wall nor Trench does good, And much the Argives suffer'd have who thought Their Wall for all the Trjans would have stood, And all our hopes built on it come to nought. (For though I know Jove once was to us kind, Yet now I see out uine he designes, And pleasure takes in changing of his mind, And aids the Trojans whilst our hands he birds.)
Let's all to what I saying am agree. The Ships that nearest lye to the Sea-side, Drawn down into the water let them be, And there till Night let them at Anchor ride. And if the Trojan thn give over fight, Well fech away the rest. For 'tis less shame A danger to esche, although by night, Than needlesly to perish in the same. lysses frowning on him then reply'd, Atrides, what a word have you let fall? You ought of Cowards to have been the guide, And not of us Achns; General. For we by Jove are fram'd for actions high, And to athieve the Wars we undertake How dangerous soever, or to dye. And must we now the Siege of Troy forsake, And after so much labour lost go hence? Peace, let no other Greek hear what you say. Who would have said this that had common sense, And whom so great an Army did obey? Nor is, in how to fly, your counsel right. Must we our Ships draw down from off the Shore, And at the same time with the Trojans fight, Who now rejoice, but would do then much more? And we that fight be utterly destroy'd? For they that were at Anchor on the Main Would go their way the danger to avoid. Thus by your Counsel we should all be slain. Atrides to him then this answer gave. Ulysses your reproof is very smart; Yet not command but counsel 'twas I gave, And better I would hear with all my heart. And so you shall, said Diomed, and though Amongst you all the youngest man I be, e not offended with it. For you know That born I am of a good family. For Porthus three worthy Sons begat (In Calydon and Plearon they all dwelled) elas, and Agrius, and Oeneus that The other two in deeds of Arms excelled.
Of him my Father Tydeus was the Son, But in exile at Argos led his life, And of Adrastus's Daughters marry'd one, And great possessions had he with his Wife. And there a rich and noble house did keep. For Corn and Wine and Fruit he had much ground, And in his Pastures had great store of Sheep, And chiefly was for Chivalry renown'd. Therefore my counsel, if you find it good, You should not for my person take amiss, Since I dare fight and am of noble blood. The counsel I shall give you now is this. Let ev'ry man unto the Battle go, And place the wounded our o'th' reach o'th' shot, That they encourage may against the Foe, Those discontented men that fight would not. This said, they went together to the Fight. Which Neptune spying did not idle stand. But like unto an aged man in sight, Came in and took Atrides by the hand. Achilles heart (said he) now leaps to see The slaughter of the Argives and the flight, And joys therein, so little wit has he. May death and shame upon him for it light. Atrides, do not all the Gods mistrust. For sure I am you'll aided be by some, And see the Trojans sill the air with dust As from your Ships they fly to Ilium. This said, amongst the Greeks he went about, And loud, as if nine or ten thousand men Together on a Plain had made a Shout, He shouted, and the Greeks took heart agen. Now Juno standing on Olympus high Her Brother 'mongst the Argives saw with joy And Jove on Ida with an angry eye; And in her mind consid'ring was which way To cosen him. And was resolv'd at last To go to Ida to him finely drest, And after she had by him been embrac'd To bind him last, in gentle sleep to rest.
Then went she to her Chamber, which her Son Vulcan had for her made with Door posts high, And solid Doors, which of the Gods not one Could open but her self, such mystery Was in the Lock and Key. Then went she in, And fast she lock'd the Door, and there alone e with Ambrofia cleans'd her dainty skin, Till not a speak unmeet was left thereon. Then 'noints her self with sweet Ambrosian oyl, That as unto the House of Jove she went, The scent thereof diffus'd was all the while Throughout the space 'twixt l Earth & Firmament. Then comb'd and pleared she her Golden Hair, And cloath'd her self with her Ambrosian Vest, And many Figures on't embroid'red were, And with Gold Buttons button'd at her Breast. A hundred Tassels at her Girdle hung. And wore a precious Pendant at her Ear Of three rich Gems. And over all she flung A dainty Scarf by which they cover'd were. Then on her tender Feet she ty'd her Shoes. And when her self she fully had array'd, from out her Chamber presently she goes, And Venus took aside and to her said. Sweet child I come a favour to request; But tell me will you grant it, yea or nay. I fear you bear me ill will in your Breast, 'Cause I for th' Argives am and you for Troy. And Venus to her answer made and said, Juno Jove's Sister, do not from me hide Your mind, which to my pow'r shall be obey'd. Juno to Venus then again reply'd. Lend me Desire and Love by which you tame Both mortal men and the Immortal Gods. For to Oceanus I going am, And Tethys (far from hence) that are at odds. For when beneath the Earth Jove Saturn sent, I was by them receiv'd and cherished. But now with one another discontent They will not come together in one bed.
If by this means I him can get within Loves arms again, no jar shall them divid And I from both shall Love and Honour win. And Venus then again to her reply'd, Juno, Jove's Wife and Sister, your request Cannot by me, nor ought to be deny'd. And as she spake she from about her Breast The fine enchanting Girdle streight unty'c. Wherein embroyd're were Love and Desire. Soothing, and Comfort, that sufficient were A Heart though very wise to set on fire. And to her hands she puts it, and said, Here, Take it. There's nothing wanting that you need When you would have a man or God begul'd. Put it but in your Bosome, you will speed. So Juno did, and as she did it smil'd. And to the house of Jove then Vinus goes, But Juno ore Aemathia, and all Preria, and all the Thracian Snows, And never on the ground her foot lets fall; And from the mo untain Athos ore the Deep, And came to Lemnos where King Thoas swai, And there she met the gentle God of Sleep. And took him by the hand, and to him said, Sweet Sleep, to whom both men and Gods all bow, If ever with my Will you did comply, Deny not what I shall request you now. Diffuse sound sleep a while upon Jove's eye Assoon as he with Love is satisfy'd. And I will thank you for it whilst I live. And from my hand you shall receive beside, A Chair of beaten Gold which I'll you give; Vulcan my Son shall make it curiously, Together with a Foot-stool for your Foot. And Sleep to Juno then made such reply As if he were affraid and durst not do'r. Juno, said he, if 'twere another God, Though Ocean the great Sire of them all, durst upon his eyes have sostly trod. But not on Jove's, unless he for me call.
Your Order once (like this) I did obey Before, when Hercules Jove's mighty Son Went off to Sea after he conquer'd Troy. Mean while the strong unruly Winds set on By you, with mighty Blasts at Sea arose, And from his best friends hurri'd him in pain, And at the last threw him ashore at Coos. But Jupiter, when he awat again The Gods at home he all tost up and down, And chiefly would of me have had a sight. Into the Sea then sure I d been thrown, But that I fled, and was conceal'd by night, Till of his anger blunted was the edge. For night great power has with Gods and Men And loth was Jove to break her priviledge. Tencourage him then Juno said agen, D'ye think Jove will as angry be for Troy As he was then for Hercules his Son? But go. Pasiphae you shall enjoy; She's fair and young, and of my Graces one, And with you as a wife shall always stay. Content (said Sleep) but I will have you swear By Styx. Come, on the Earth now one hand lay, The other on the Sea, that witness bear May all the Gods below, that Juno will Give me the Grace Pasiphae to Wife, And that as Wife she shall dwell with me still, That love her dearly as I do my life. Then Juno, as she was required sware By all the Subtartarian Gods (by name They Titans and the brood of Saturn are.) And then together both from Lemnos came To Leslos, at the foot of Ida Hill, And ore the Woods upward their way they took. But out of sight of Jove there Sleep stood still; And as they went the wood below them shook. Then Sleep went up into a high Fit-tree, And there he sat in likeness of a Fowl (All cover'd ore with Boughs and Leaves was he) Call'd Chalcis by the Gods, by us an Owl.
Juno went on to Gargarus, where Jove Saw her and met her with no less desire, Than when the first time to enjoy her love Without their Parents knowledge he lay her, And Jove then standing by her very ner, What made you from Olympus come, said ; Neither your Charre nor Horses have you here. Deceitfully then to him answer'd she, I going am upon a Visit now To th'Father and the Mother of the Gods Oceanus and Tethys; who you know Did bring me up. For now they are at odds, And angry he abstaineth from her bed. But if an, I reconcile them will. The Horses that me brought unharnessed Attend me at the foot of Ida Hill. But that I from Olympus hither came, Was that I would not such a journey take, And not make you acquainted with the same. This said, to Juno Jove again thus spake. You may, said he, at any time do that, But let us now with Love our selves deligh. For never yet upon my heart Love sat For woman or for Goddess with such migh: Not when upon the Wife of Ixion The wise Perithous I did beget; Nor when the fair maid Danae I won That brought forth God like Perseus; nor yet (When by Uropa I two Children got, Minos and Rhadamant both famous men) For her; nor Semele, when I begot Bacchus mans joy; nor for Alcmena, when I Hercules begot my lusty boy; Nor Ceres, Leto, nor your self till now. So much I long your Beauty to enjoy. Fierce Cronides (then answer'd Juno) How? On Ida top, for some o'th' Gods to spy, And tell it to the rest to make them sport? Then so ashamed of it shall be I, That I shall never after come to Court.
You have a Chamber without Chink or Hole Made you by Mulciber my Son, whereat Neither the Sun nor any living Soul Can peep. Go thither if you will do that. And Jove to Juno then again repli'd. That Man or God shall see us do not fear; With such a Cloud of Gold I will us hide, As to the Sun himself we'll not appear. This said, within his Arms his Wife he caught Whilst under them the Earth made to arise Great store of Saffron, Hyacinth, and Lote. There pleased Jupiter with Juno lies, Closely concealed in a Cloud of Gold. Away went Sleep unto the Argive Fleet, And speaking there to Neptune said, Be bold, And help the Greeks a while. Jove cannot see't. I clos'd his eyes as he by Juno lay. He'll soon awake; but help the Greeks till then, Who now before the Trojans dare not stay. This said, Sleep went amongst the Tribes of Men, And Neptune to the Argive Ranks, and cri'd, Shall Hector think to get the Victory Because Achilles is not on our side? No. Of Achilles little need would be If every man would his Companion chear. But now the Counsel I shall give obey. Arm every man himself with a good Spear, And Shield, and Helmet strong, and come away, And follow me. I'll lead you to the Field. Hector (though bold) my coming will not stay. But let the best man take the largest Shield, And to a weaker put his own away. This said, well pleased were the Argives all The wounded Princes arm'd themselves each one; King Agamemnon first the General. Ulysses and Tydides then put on Their Arms, and every way the Field they range, Surveying Men and Arms; and all along Make weak men with their betters Armours change, And give their heavie Arms to men more strong.
Thus armed all and Neptune at the Head, Who with a great and long Sword in his hand Went brandishing as if't had lightned To th'Fight they go; no man durst him withstand And Hector with the Trojans well atray'd On th'other side came on. And then began. Betwixt the Greeks that had the God for aid, And those of Troy led by a valant man A cruel fight. And high the Sea arose Up to the Ships, and Tents. And presently With Alalaes the mighty Armies clos; And up unto the Heavens went the cry. So loud as now, the Sea did never tore When beaten 'twas int' heaps by Boreas; Nor Wind when in the Woods great Oaks it tore Up by the roots; nor th' Wood when fir'd it was And here did Hector first begin the fight, And at the greater Ajax threw his Spear, Which hit him; but upon two Belts did ligh Which one upon another lying were, One of his Sword, the other of his Shield. Hector was angry that in vain he flung (For he was in great hope he had him kill'd) And now retired backward to the throng. Then Ajax in his hand took up a Stone, Of those to which the Greeks their Shius did tye (For there amongst their feet lay many a one) And at him as he parted lets it fly. And as a Top he made it flying spin. It but a little ore his Buckler slew, And hit him 'twixt his Buckler and his Chin Upon the breast, and to the ground him threw. As when an Oak is overthrown by Thunder (Which known is eas'ly by the Brimstone-smell) Men look upon't with horror and with wonde; So gazed they at Hector when he fell. And from his hands went out both Shield and Spear, And Helmet from his head; and with great cry The Greeks rush on, and in fair hope they were To gain his body, and their Spears let fly.
But all in vain. For by Polydamas, Divine Aeneus, and Agenor, and Sapedon, and by Glauus fav'd he was, Who all before him with their Bucklers stand. His friends then from the Battle him convey'd Unto his Chariot and Charioteer That close behide the Squadrons for him stay'd, And in his Charre tow'rds Ilium they him bear. But at the ford of Xambus by the way They poured water on his face, and then In little time, as on the ground he lay, He breath'd and came unto himself agen: Then sitting on his knees he cast up blood; And backward fell unto the ground again; Upon his eyes again the darkness stood, For of the stroke remained still the pain. The Greeks assoon as they saw Hector gone, Took heart, and on the Trojans fiercer were, Then Ajax (of Oileus the Son) Slew Satnius Son of Enops with his spear. His Mother Nëis was a very fine Nymph of the River Satnius. Of the same, Enops upon the Bank sat keeping Kine, And on her got a Son call'd by that name. Him Ajax now struck through the Flank and slew. Then for the Body there was much ado. At him Polydamas a Spear then threw, Which Prothoenors shoulder pierced through. And on his hands into the dust he fell. To th' Greeks then boasting said Polydamas, I have not thrown in vain. I know full well That one Greek or another taken't has To lean on as a Staff i'th' way to Hell. At this the Greeks were griev'd, but especially The heart of Telanonius did swell. (For Prothoenor slain did neer him lie;) And with his Spear threw at Polydamas, Who nimbly leapt aside and it declin'd. But by Arcbelochus receiv'd it was Antenors Son, whose death the Fates design'd,
Who having on his Neck receiv'd the wound, His Forehead and his Eyes, and Lips, and Nose Before his Legs or Knees came to the ground. Then Ajax too his turn, and at it crows. Polydamas, said he, was Prothoenor As good a man in your own estimation, As this man that was Brother to Antenor, Or Son? For he is not unlike that Generation. This said he, though he well knew who it was. Then Promachus, as he drew off the dead Was killed by a Spear from Acamas. And in it Acamas then gloried. Argives, said he, great threat'ners as you are You vulnerable are as well as we, And no less subject to the chance of Warre. How quiet Promachus now lies you see, And so I hope ere long you all shall lie. My Brother not long unrevenged lay. 'Tis good you see to have a Brother nigh. And when he this had said he went away. Peneleus then went to throw his Spear At Acamas, but Acamas was gone. But yet he threw and kill'd another there, Iliones of Phorbas th' onely Son, A man much favoured by Mercury. The Spear beneath his Eye brow enter'd in, And to the ground fell down the bloody eye. The Spear went on unto the Brain within, Then sitting down with both his hands outspread The deadly Spear yet sticking in his eye, Peneleus with his Sword cuts oft his head Which to the ground with Helmer on did fly. Then looking up, he to the Trojans said, Tell this in Troy. And let his Parents mourn. For Promochus's Wife will not be joy'd, When we without her Husband shall return. This said, the Trojans striken were with fear, And lookt about each one which way tody. Now tell me, Muse, Who and by whom slain were When they pursu'd the flying Enemy.
Great Ajax first the Son of Telamon Killed the Mysian Leader Hyrtius Of Gyrtias the strong and valiant Son. Antilochus then killed Mermerus And Phalcis. By Meriones were slain Hippotion and Morys. Teucer flew Prthn and Periphetes, good men twain. At Hyperenor then Atrides threw, And gave him on the Flank a cruel wound, And where the Spear went in, his Life went out, And suddenly he fell unto the ground, And on his eyes sate darkness all about. Put he that far the greater number flew, The lesser Ajax was, Oileus Son. Twas hard to scape when Ajax did pursue; For of the Argives all he best could run.
ILIAD. LIB. XV. WHen flying they had past the Dirch and Wall, They at the Horses and the Charret stay'd With loss of many men, and looking pale And Jove awakt stood and the Field fury ay'd; And saw the Greeks pursue, and Trojans fly And Neptune with the Greeks, and Hector laid Upon the Plain, his Friends there sitting by, And not a little of his Life affraid. For gasping he scarce able was to draw His breath, and blood abundance vomited, Nor knew his friends. When Jupiter him saw, Offended his condition pityed. And then on Juno fiercely lookt and said, Juno, I see all this is done by you; And if you for it with a whip were paid, 'Twould be no more than for your work is due. Have you forgot how once you swung i'th' Air, And had two Anvils hanging at your fect, Your hand with a Gold Chain ty'd to my Chair? Though sorry were the other Gods to see't, Yet had I any seen but go about. Your Manacles or Shackles to untye, I from the Sill of Heav'n had thrown him out, And strengthless made him on the earth to lye. I was not so much griev'd for Hercules When Boreas set on by you, arose As he went off from Troy, enrag'd the Seas. And at the last threw him ashore at Coos, But I to Argos brought him safe again. And this I now repeat that you may try Whether you likely are to lose or gain, Abusing out familiarity.
This said, the Goddess Juno struck with fear, By Earth, said she, and Heaven about it spread, By Styx (which is our greatest Oath) I swear, And by your Life, and By our Nuptial Bed, I never did to Neptune speak a word, To hurt the Trojans, or the Greeks to aid; But all he did was of his own accord, By pity only and compassion sway'd. And from henceforward I will him advise, Seeing what way you lead, the same to take. Then Jupiter with favourable eyes On Juno lookt, and thus unto her spake. F, if we were both one way inclin'd, Neptune would quickly with us both comply. Now if your words dissent not from your mind, Go 'mongst the other Gods, and presently Bid Iris and Apollo to me come. For Iris unto Neptune I will send To bid him leave the Battle and go home. to Hector and the Trojans I intend To send Apollo, to give Hector might, And cure him of his pain, that he may lead The Trojans on, and put the Greeks to flight, That Thetis Son may see them scattered; And he shall send Patroclus to the Field, Who shall the Trojans rout and kill my Son Sopedon, and himself shall then be kill'd By Hector's Spear. And after that is done Achilles in revenge again shall fight, And by his hand stout Hector shall be kill'd Under the Walls of Troy, i'th' Trojans sight, And beaten be the Trojans from the Field, Till Troy by Pallas counsel taken be. Nor till I have performed all I said To Thetis supplicating at my knee, Let any God presume the Greeks to aid. This said, went Juno to Olympus high. As when a man looks ore an ample Plain, To any distance quickly goes his eye; So swiftly Juno went with little pain,
And found the Gods at Wine together set. And at her coming in they all stood up. But Themis forward went and Juno met, And to her hand delivered the Cup, And said, You look as if you frighted were By Jupiter for something. But what is't? You know, said Juno, that he is severe; And you shall hear the matter if you list Together with the other Gods, though bad. They will not all contented with it be; But some of them will troubled be and sad. And griev'd was she, though speaking smilingly. Then Juno went up to her Throne, and sat; And unto all the Gods spake angerly, How! mad (said she) or foolish are we, that Are thinking how agen Jove's hands to tye, Who careless and unmov'd on Ida Hill Knows his own strength and does our Plots despise. And therefore what he sends, be't good or ill, We'll take it patiently if we be wise. Nor must the God of War on Jove complain, Or in Rebellion against him rise Because his Son Ascalaphus is slain. At this, with both his hands Mars clapt his Thighs, And to the Gods above complaining sain, Pardon me Gods, I will revenge my Son, And 'mongst the Argives go and give them aid, Though I should lye amongst the dead. Then on He puts his Armour, and gives order to Terror and Flight his Charret to prepare, And then there had been twice as much ado T'appease Joves anger ere it came to war, If Pallas had not (for the Gods afraid) Pluckt off his Helmet, and set up his Spear, And pull'd his Buckler off, and to him said, Fool, Bedlam, What have you no Ears to hear? You hear what news now Juno brings from Jove. And if you care not though your self be lost, Yet let the danger of us all you move. For Jove will leave both Greek and Trojan Host,
And coming hither seize us one by one, And never ask who guilty is or not. Therefore give over vexing for your Son, For better men than he, by Gods begot, ready here have been and shall be slain. The Gods cannot preserve their Children all. This said, she brought Mars to his place again. And Juno to their houses went to call and Phoebus. You must go, said she, To Jove on Ida. What you are to do, ou will by Jove himself informed be Asloon as you his Presence come into. message done, Juno resumes her place, His and Phoebus down to Ida fly, ad finding Jove, stood still before his face. Nor lookt he on them with an angry Eye; or soon they did his Wives command obey. Then speaking first to Iris; Go, said he, To Neptune quickly, tell him what I say. Bid him no longer at the Battle be, either go t'Olympus to the Gods, Or to the Sea. If he will neither do, him consider if there be no odds As well in strength as age between us two. knows that all the other Gods me fear, And for my coming dareth not to stay, strong as to himself he doth appear. This said, swift-footed Iris went her way om Ida hill, and Jove without delay And swift as any Cloud before the Winds, me down unto the Battle before Troy, And there amongst the Argives Neptune finds, nd going to his side, I came, said she, To speak with you a word or two from Jove. ou must not in the War a Party be. He bids you go up to the Gods above, down to th' Sea, where lies your own command. If you refuse, he threatens you with War, nd bids you have a care t'avoid his hand; And th' Elder is, he saies, and stronger far,
Which you your self he thinks will not deny, Since th'other Gods of him stand all in awe. Neptune to this replying first spake high. Good as he is, said he, it is not Law, Thus to usurp upon my liberty. For Sons and Heirs of Saturn we were three Begot on Rhea. Pluto, Jove, and I. By lot the Rule o'th' Waters came to me. To Jove the Government of Heaven fell, And of the Clouds, and the Ethereal Sky. To Pluto. Darkness, and the rule of Hell. Earth and Olympus did as Common lye. Let Jove then with his share contented be, And not encroach on me. For well 'tis known I hold not any thing of him in Fee, But live as he should do, upon my own. He should not unto me such language use, But to his Children that will be affraid, And dare not what he bids them, to refuse. Thus Neptune spake. Again then Iris said, Neptune, shall I this haughty answer carry To Jove? And will you that I with it go As 'tis? The Wise their minds oft vary; And Fury on the Eldest wait you know. So she to him. Then Neptune thus to her. Iris, this word was spoken in good season. Much worth, I see, is a wise Messenger. But I was vext, because thus without reason (When I his equal am by Birth and Lot) Jove uses me as if I were his slave. Well. For the present, cross him I will not Though I be vext. That answer let him have. And further, That if he without consent Of me, Athena, Juno, Mercurie, And Vulcan, Troy shall spare, our discontent For th' Argives wrong, implacable will be And when he this had said, he Fight forbears, Nor any longer 'mongst the Argives staid, But div'd into the Sea ore head and ears. Then Jove unto Apollo spake, and said,
To Hector go; for Neptune now is gone For sear of my displeasure; had he stay'd, The Sons of Saturn of our War had known. Twas wisely done of him my hand t'avoid. And better both for him and me; but go, And shaking your great Shield the Greeks affright, And strengthen Hector and incourage so That he the Argive Lords may put to flight. And follow them down to the Hellspont, And make them for their hollow Ships to fight. What then is to be done? I'll think upon't. For I intend not to destroy them quite. This said, Apollo left his Father Jove, And down he came to Troy from Ida hill Swift as a Falcon flying at a Dove, And Hector on the ground found sitting still, Not laid, but his Senses come anew, And freely breathing, although very weak, And very well his friends about him knew. There Phoebus standing nigh did to him speak. Hector, said he, why sit you here alone? O kindest of the Gods, said he, you know That Ajax wounded has me with a Stone, So that I am disabled with the blow, And once to day I thought I should have gone To Erebus with other shadows dim; With such a force he threw the mighty stone. Then thus again Apollo answered him. Hector, I Phoebus am, and hither come From Jove, against the Greeks to give you aid, And ever have wisht well to Ilium. Lead to the Ships your Troops. Be not afraid. Hector at this encourag'd was again, And as a Horse at Rack and Manger sed Breaking his Headstal scudds upon the Plain, And high into the Air he holds his head, His Mane upon his shoulders plays with th'Air And proud is in his Freedom to behold The pleasant River and the Pastures fair, To which he had accustom'd been of old,
And swiftly to the same is carried; So swift y now went Hector to each part, And in the Field his Troops encouraged, After Apollo once had giv'n him heart. But as when Swains with Curs to chase a Ro Go forth into the Field, and with their cry Rouse a fierce Lion, they the Prey let go To save it self i'th'Woods or Rochers high, And both the men and dogs are forc'd to fly; Just so the Greeks whilst thèy in Bodies fight, They save themselves; but seeing Hector nigh They troubled were, and lost their courage quite. Then to them spake Thoas Andraemon's Son, Well skill'd at distance or at hand to fight Amongst th' Aetolians better there was none, And few compare with him for Counsel might, O strange, said he, what wondrous sight is is! I verily thought Hector had been slain By Ajax hand: But see he risen is. Some God or other rais'd him has again. He kill'd us has already many men, And many more is likely now to slay. For Jupiter defends him now as then. But come, let's all my Counsel now obey. Let us that most pretend to Fortitude Stay here imbattl'd to receive the Fo, And to the Ships send back the multitude. For thither, I think, Hector dares not go. This Counsel was approv'd, and then stood ou Ajax, Idomeneus, Meriones, Teucer, Meges, and such as were most stout, And one Battalion was made of these Th'impression of Hector to sustain. Till to the Ships the rest retreated were. And Hector with his Troops came on amain, Him self the foremost shaking his long Spear. Apollo march'd before him to the field Concealing in a Cloud his glorious Head, And carri'd in his hand a shining Shield Which whosoever laid his eyes on fled,
'Twas made at first by Mulciber, and then Given to Jove when he came down to fight Against the Squadrons of rebellious men, To make them fly the Field at the first sight. Expecting Hector close the Argives stand, And loud and sharp on both sides was the cry, And many a Spear from every lusty hand, And in the Air Arrows abundance fly, And Spears; whereof some flying home did kill, And others would have done but short they fell. As long as Phoebus did his Shield hold still, Many a Soul on both sides flew to Hell. When shaking it he made the Argives see it, They stricken were with fear, and suddenly Their heavie hearts fell down into their feet, And then they made all haste they could to fly. And as a Herd or Flock is frighted when A Wolf or Lion coming on they see, And no assistance have of Dogs or Men; So th' Argives scatter'd before Hector flee. Then slain by Hector was Arcesilaus, And Stichius who the Boeotians led. The other a good friend of Mnesteus was; Both killed were by Hector as they fled; eas Medon slew and Iäsus. Medon was little Ajax Bastard-Brother, And lived from his Father Oileus, By th'instigation of his Stepmother iopis, whose Brother he had slain. And Iäsus th' Athenian Leader was, But back to Atheas led them not again. His Father was Sphelus Bucalidas. ecestes slain was by Polydamas. Polites Echius slew in the first fight, And Clonius by Agenor killed was; And Deiochus by Paris in the flight Whilst from the Foe each one his Armour takes, The flying Greeks into the Ditch leapt all, And there encumber'd mightily with Stakes Were forced to retire within the Wall.
Then Hector roared to the Trojans, saying, On to the Ships, and let the dead men lie I'll be his death whom ever I find staying, Nor shall he buri'd be or burned by His friends and kin, but in the Fields of Troy Be left for Dogs to tear and haul about. This said, unto the Ships he drave away By th' Trojans follow'd with a mighty shout. Phoebus before them march'd, and with his foot Into the Trench threw down the Earth again, And made an easie and plain passage through it As far as one a Spear can well hurl, when He hurleth for a wager. To the Wall The Trojans go, Apollo there again Before them is, and eas'ly makes it fall, As Children when themselves they entertain With making pretty things upon the Sands, Then comes into their heads another toy, And down they push this with their feet or hands; So easily Apollo did destroy The Argives mighty work, and bring the fight Again unto the Ships. Where now they pray'd, And one anothers courage did excite. Nestor to Heaven held up his hands and said, O Jove, if you the Sacrifice accepted have Of any Greek before he hither came, And promls'd that the Army you would save, O, at our Prayer now perform the same. Let us not perish by the Trojans here. Thus Nestor pray'd, and then Jove thundered, Declaring that his Prayers granted were. At this the Trojans were encouraged, And by their hopes interpreting Jove's mind, Upon the Greeks with greater fury fall. As when a Wave is thrown by some great wind Into a Ship, so pass'd they at the Wall And to the Ships they went with Horse and Char. The Greeks into their Ships went up to fight And with long Spears made for a Naval War And pointed well with Brass, and shining bright.
Greeks and Trojans push at one another, These mounted stood upon their Charrets high, d higher on their black Ships stood the other. Patroclus, that till now sat quietly Because the fight was only at the Wall) And to Erypylus his care appli'd d Med'cines fit to cure his wounds withal. And sat discoursing with him by his side, w when he saw the Trojans were within, And of the Argives heard the woful cries, nd saw the fear and danger they were in, With both his hands then clapped he his Thighs. pylus, said he, I cannot stay; For mightily encreased is th'affray. Your wound be dressed by your Servant may. But to Achilles I must go away. Who knows but I may win him at the last To help the Greeks? This said, away he went, d left Erypylus, and made what hast He could to get unto Achilles Tent. Mean while the Victory no way inclin'd. Neither the Greeks could make the Trojans fly, Not yet the Trojans as they had design'd, Back from the Ships could force the Enemy; But level hung the wings of Victory As when two Scales are charg'd with equal weight Made by the Art of Pallas curiously, The Beam lies level in the Air and straight. And at one time at divers Ships they fought. Directly unto Ajax Hector went, And there sharp fighting was one Ship about. Hector to burn, Ajax to save it meant. ere Ajax with a long Spear in his hand Killed Caltor, Hector's Brother's Son, As he was coming with a flaming brand To fire the Ship, and di'd before 'twas done. This Hector saw, and to his fellows cri'd, Trojans and friends defend the body dead Of clytius Son, and shrink not from my side. And as he spake his long Spear from him fled,
Which (aim'd at Ajax) fell on Lycophron, A man that was to Ajax very dear, But born at Cyther, and Mastors Son, That having kill'd a man durst not stay there, But unto Ajax fled, and with him stay'd, Till now by Hector's Spear struck through the head He di'd. Then Ajax to his Brother said, Teucer, our friend Mastorides is dead. You know how much we honour'd him at home. 'Tis Hector that has slain him. Where are now Your deadly Arrows? And what is become Of (Phoebus gift) your so egregious Bow? Which Teucer hearing quickly with him was With Bow and Quiver in his hand, and shot, And slew the Servant of Polydamas, That had the guiding of his Chariot Clitus by name, who while in vain he sought By driving to where hottest was the fight, From Hector and the Trojans thanks t'have got, The fatal Arrow on his Neck did light. Then down he fell. The frighted Horses shook The empty Charre. Then came Polydames, And by the heads the capring Horses took, And sets Astynous in Clitus place; And gave him a strict charge to hold them nigh, But not to come with them into the Fight. Then Teucer lets another Arrow fly At Hector, which if it had hit him right, He never at the Ships again had fought. But Jupiter was pleas'd to save him now, And brake the Bow-string. Then in vain flew out The Arrow, and into the dust the Bow. And Teucer to his Brother made his moan. Ajax, said he, is't not a wondrous thing? My Bow is started from my hand and gone, Some God or other broken has the String. Yet new 'twas made this morning purposely To last all day. Teucer, said Ajax then, Cannot you let your Bow and Quiver lie, And fight with Spear in hand like other men,
And give unto the Greeks encouragement? No. Though the Gods above should in their hate o let the Trojans take our Ships be bent, Yet let us sell them  a lusy rate. then laid his Bow up in his Tent, And arm'd himself with Helmet and with Shield, And a good Spear, and back to Ajax went, And found him where he left him in the Field. Hector saw that Teucer's noble Bow Was useless now, he to his Squadrons cry'd, s and Lycians come on boldly now, For Teucer now his Bow hath laid aside. brake the String. I saw it with these eyes. For easily it may discerned be To whom the hand of Jove intends the Prize, And to whom he denies the Victory. now upon our side he is you see, And from the Greeks their courage takes away. Then to the Ships let's go couragiously, And let the fear of death no man dismay. why should any of us fear to dye? When for his Country 'tis, it is no shame. And if we make the Enemy to fly, Sav'd are his Wife and Children, Goods, and Name. Whilst Hector thus the Trojans did excite, Ajax unto the Argives spake, and said, We must now either put our Foes to flight, Or make account we shall be all destroy'd Hector here to burn our Ships should chance, Can you go home again (d'ye think) afoot? He calleth on his men. 'Tis not to dance, But fire our Ships if we will let him do't. For us 'tis better in close Fight to die Here all at once, or get the Victory Than here, God knows how long consuming lie And peck in vain at a weak Enemy. Thus Ajax rais'd the courage of th' Achaeans. Then Hector slew the Son of Perimed, ithius that had command of the Phocoeans. And Ajax slew Laodamas that led
The Trojan Foot, and was Antenor's Son. And Otus y Polydamas, was slain Otus that led the hold Ep And was a friend of Meges. He again A Spear threw at Poldama and mist For Phoebus kindness had for Panthus Son. And with a present wit did him assist To turn about and let the Spear go on. And Croesinus there receiv'd it on his Brest, And down he fell. Then Dolops Lampus So (Lampus that was of living men the best And Grandchild of the King Lameda.) To be reveng'd at Meges threw his Spear, Which pass'd his Sheld, but in his Breast plate staid The Breast plate which his Fathr us'd to weat With many Plyes of strong Mail overlaid, And given was to Phyleus by his Guest At Ephyre, where with in martial strife From deadly stroaks of Spears to save his rest. And of his Son it now preserv'd the lfe. But Meges Dolops hit upon the Head, And from his Crest struck off the goodly Main Which he but newly then had dyed red. But Dolops still the Fight did well maintain, Till Menelaus stole unto his Side, And struck him through the Shoulder with his Spear. No longer stood he then, but sell and dy'd, And both of them to strip him going were. And Hector then call'd out to all his Kin, And unto Menalippus specially, Who while the Greeks were absent lived in Prote, and took care of th'Husbandry. But when the A give Fleet to Troy was come, He then return'd his Country to defend, And liv'd in Priam's house at Ilium, And proud the Trojans were of such a friend. And lov'd he was by Priam as his Son, And now unto him Hector spake and said, Have we for Dolops no compassion, Or to defend his body are affraid?
Come follow me. We must no longer play At distance with the Greeks, but either they Must utterly deface the Town of Troy, And kill us all, or we them all destroy. This said, away they both together went To save o Body of their Gosen dead, And Aax with a contrary intent His Argives to the Fight encouraged. Argives, said he, to Honour have an eye, And of your fellows Censures have a care. For slain are alwaies more of those that fly Than those that of base flight ashamed are. This said, though of it no great need there was Amongst the Greeks, they presently obey'd, And at the Ships flood like an Hedg of Brass. But on came Hector not at all afraid. Artilochus then Menelaus said, Amongst us there is none that better can Both fight and run. Why should you be afraid To leap unto the throng and kill your man? This said, away again went Menebaus. Antilochus leapt out before the rest And threw his Spear at Menalippus, as He coming was, and hit him on the Brest. No sooner was he fallen to the ground, Than to the Spoil Antilochus ran in. As quick as when upon a Deer a Hound Runs in, that by the Hunter killed had been. But soon as he saw Hector coming on, As valiant as he was he durst not stay; But as some wild Beast that had mischief done Ere people could assemble, run away. The Trojans follow'd him with clamour loud, And Spears abundance after him they threw. But he ran on and got into the croud. But they unto the Ships the Greeks pursue. For Jupiter to make his promise good To Thetis, hitherto the Greeks dismaid, And in the Battle with the Trojans stood Until he had performed all he said.
But meant to stay no longer with them, than To see some Argive Ship with fire to shine, And then to let the Greeks prevail agen. From the beginning such was his designe In aiding Hector, who now furiously Went on like Mars, or like fire in a Wood, With foam about his mouth, and fire in's eye. And Jove himself came down and ore hi stood To save him when he was hem'd in by Foes, And honour him, since 'twas his destiny That not long after he his Life should lose, And by none but Achilles hand should dye. Now Hector looking where the best men stood And armed best, try'd first to break in there. Keen as he was he there could do no good; So close they joyn'd to one another were, And stuck like great stones in a Tow'r or Rock That of the boyst'rous Winds and Billows high Which break upon it still endures the shock. Then Hector other places went to try, And through he pass'd. Then as a Wave igh grow, When in foul weather forced by the wind Under dark Clouds, into a Ship is thrown The Mist and roaring Sails bring to the mind Of the poor Seamen nothing but to dye; So frighted were the Greeks. But forward he Still went; And as when in the Meadows by The Rivers side thousands of Kine there be, And th'Herdsmen see a Lion to them come, But with a wild Beast know not how to fight, Some go before them, and behind them some, The Lion falleth on them in their sight Between both ends, and killeth only one, The rest all fly; So th'Argives all before Hector and Jupiter dispersed run. But only one was killed and no more. And Periphetes 'twas the worthy Son Of an unworthy Father Copreus, who, When any labour great was to be done By Hercules, did from Eurystheus go
s Messenger to carry the commands. But Periphetes Vertue wanted none. is Feet were swift, and valiant were his Hands, A wiser man Mycena had not one. t slain he was. For as he turn'd to fly, He trod upon the edge of his own Shield, And overthrown upon his Back did lye; And with a stab of Hector's Spear was kill'd. s friends, though many standing by him were, And griev'd to see him fall, did him no good. For ev'ry one now for himself did fear, And out of Hector's way kept all he cou'd. The Greeks-retreated were no further yet Than to between the first and second Row Of th'Argive Ships; but forc'd that place to quit, Near to their Tents themselves they rally now. Where Nestor them encouraged agen. Argives, my friends, be valiant now (said he) And if at any time now play the men. Of one anothers Censures fearful be. Besides, by what you should be moved most, Your Parents, Children, Wives, and Goods and Land, Whether you have them still or have them lost. I you conjure against the Foe to stand. This Nestor said, the Argives to exite: And Pallas from them took the Mist again, That they might see who did, who did not fight Both at the Ships and elswhere on the Plain. t Ajax Telamonius thought not good To stay with other Argives in the throng, But up into a Ship he went and stood With a Ship spear twenty two Cubits long. As when a man that taught has been to guide Four Horses at a time, and in his hand oldeth their Reins while they go side by side, And people on the way admiring stand, He from one Horse unto another skips, And makes them run together to the Town; So Ajax ore the Argives ranged Ships To save them, and the Tents ran up and down.
And terribly unto the Argives cry'd To play the men. Nor Hector 'mongst his Troops Could be perswaded longer to abide; But suddenly as a black Eagle stoops At a great Flock of Geefe, or Cranes, or Swans; So Hector of the Argive Ships to one Flew down, and Jove with his puissant hands Behind him marching alwaies pusht him on. Then at the Ships the Fight began again, More cruel than before. You would have said They had no sense of weariness or pain, So mightily they all about them laid. The Greeks were in despair of their return. The Trojans thought the Argive Lords to rout, And all the Ships that brought them thither burn. Thus minded on each side they fiercely fought. Upon a Ship then Hector laid his hand, Which brought Protesilaus unto Troy, But never back unto his native Land. For this good Ship they one another slay. Arrows and Darts no longer flew about; But now with Battle-axes of great strength In one anothers reach they stood and fought, And with great Spears and of a mighty length, And great keen Swords, whereof from dying hands Abundance fell on either side to th' ground; And covered were with streaming bloud the Sands, That gushed out from many a ghastly wound. But Hector on the Ship his hand held fast, And to his Trojans call'd aloud for Fire. This day, said he, requites our ill days past. To burn these Ships Jove with us doth conspire. And set on fire they had been long ago (For I would gladly at the Ships have fought) But that the Senate would not have it so, And kept both you and me from going ou. But though by Jove then smitten were their hearts, Yet boldly now himself he leads us on. This said, the Trojans bravely play their parts, And with more vigour fought than they had done.
Then on the Deck no longer Ajax stay'd, So many Spears went finging by his head. For if he there had stood he was afraid That some unlucky Spear would strike him dead; And to the far side of the Ship retreats, Leaving the Deck which fenceless was and high, And sat upon one of the Rowers seats, And still upon the Trojans kept his eye. And thence he from the fire the Ship defends, And terribly on th' Argive Heroes calls To do their best. We have, said he, no friends Behinde to save our lives, nor better Walls Than those we made; nor any City nigh, That can or willing are our part to take. But far from home in hostile ground we lie, And hemmed in are by the briny lake; And nothing can redeem us but our hands. This said, he lookt about him furiously To see if any durst approach with Brands, Resolv'd to kill him that with Fire came nigh. And many to the Ship with Fire were sent By Hector; but when they approached near, Ajax continually did them prevent, And twelve he killed with his Naval Spear.
ILIAD. LIB. XVI. THus fiercely fought the Trojans and the Greeks. And with Achilles was Patroclus now With tears abundance running down his Cheeks, Like Springs that from a high Rock streaming flow. No sooner him Achilles weeping sp'd But piti'd him. Why weep you so, said he, Like a Childe running by his Mothers side, And holding by her Coat would carri'd be! Bring you some News that none but you can tell? Menoetius and Peleus still do live At Phthia with the Myrmidons, and well. If not, we both have cause enough to grieve. Or is it that the Greeks are slaughter'd so, And fall before the Ships? 'tis for their price? Speak what's the matter, that we both may know. Patroclus sobbing to him then repli'd, O Son of Peleus, of all Greeks the best, Forgive me if in this necessity I freely speak. They that excel the rest In Prowess, at the Ships all wounded lie. Ulysses wounded is and Diomed, And Agamemnon and Eurypylus, And cur'd may be, but stand us in no sted; Nor does your Vertue any good to us. O Gods let never anger in me dwell Like this of yours. If you cannot, who can The Trojans from the Argive Fleet repel, And save so many lives? O cruel man! The noble Peleus sure was not your Father; Born of the Goddess Thetis you were not. Sprung from the raging Sea I think you rather, And that by some hard Rock you were begot.
if you stand upon some Prophecie, Or Thetis have forbidden you to fight From Jove, yet send some Myrmidons with me, That I may to the Argives give some light. But in your Armour let me be array'd, That when they see me they may think me you, And back into the City run dismay'd, And th' Argives wearied take breath anew. For long the Trojans have endur'd the Fight; And if fresh Enemies they coming see, With little labour they'll be put to flight, And leave the Argive Tents and Navy free. Thus prayed he, but 'gainst himself he pray'd, And rashly su'd to cast his life away. To this Achilles answer made and said, My dear Patroclus what is this you say? I stand not on, nor care for Prophecy, Nor yet by Jove forbidden am to fight; But at my heart it lieth grievously, My equal should oppress me by meer might. A Town I won, in which we found great Prey. For my reward the Greeks gave me a Maid, Which Agamemnon from me took away, Only because more people him obey'd, As if I were a man of little worth. But let that pass. Though once I never meant My Myrmidons should with the Greeks go forth To Battle till the Foes were at my Tent, Yet since the Argive Ships with such a mist Of Trojans on the shore environ'd lie, And th' Argives wanting room can scarce resist, And have the pow'r of Troy for enemy, Take you my Arms and lead unto the Fight The Myrmidons. The Trojans shall not see My Helmet neer, to put them in a fright. If Agamemnon had been just to me, The Ditches had been fill'd with Trojans dead. But now into the very Camp they break; Nor can resisted be by Diomed. To save the Ships Tydides is too weak.
Nor can that hateful mouth of Atreus Son Be heard for Hector, who the Air doth fill With roaring to the Trojans to fall on, And shouting of the Trojans as they kill. Yet so, Patroclus, charge them lustily, For fear the Ships should all be set on fire; Then lost the Greeks are without remedy, And to their Country never shall retire. But now what I shall say give ear unto. To th'end the Greeks may honour me, and send Briseis back with Gifts, you thus must do. When you have freed the Ships, there make an end And come away. If Jove give you success No longer without me pursue the Fight. 'Twill make my honour with the Greeks the less. Nor in the slaughter take so much delight As to proceed up to the Walls of Troy; Lest by some God or other you be checkt. But having freed the Ships come straight away (Apollo has for Troy a great respect) And leave both sides to fight upon the Plain Till (grant it O ye Gods) there left are none, But you and I, the Town of Troy to gain. Thus they to one another talkt alone. Ajax by this time from the Ship was gone, Forc'd by the Spears that from the Trojans flew, And weakned by the hand of Saturn's Son. For at his head the Trojans always threw, And forc'd he was to hold his great Shield high, And weari'd was thereby his Buckler-hand. With Spear in hand no Trojan durst come nigh, But pelting him with Spears aloof they stand. The sweat ran down his Limbs, nor could he well, Though mightily for breath he pull'd, respie. Now tell me Muses that in Heav'n do dwell, How came the Ship first to be set on fire? Thus. Hector with his broad Sword at a blow The Spear of Ajax chanc'd to cut in twain Where to the staff the head was fixt, and so His mighty Naval Spear he shook in vain.
e head of Brass flew humming to the ground. This Ajax saw, and frighted was to see ve thus the counsel of the Greeks confound, To give unto the Trojans Victorie, And went his way. Then in the Trojans came With Brands of flaming fire; and presently The hind part of the Ship was all in flame. Achilles with his hand then clapt his Thigh And to Patroclus said, A flame I see Rise at the Ships. 'Tis time that you were gone, est our Retreat should intercepted be. Away and quickly put my Armour on. This said, Patroclus first of all puts on His Boots of War, and to his legs them ti'd With Silver Clasps; and next of Thetis Son The Breast-plate good he to his Breast appli'd With Golden Stars like Heaven beautifi'd. His Sword then ore his shoulder he puts on, With Silver Studs to hang down by his side; And then his Helmet shining like the Sun He puts upon his head; and last of all he took two Spears that fit were for his hand. But not that which Achilles fought withal. For that none but Achills could command. A great and strong and heavy Spear it was, Made of an Ash cut down i'th' woody hill Of Pelius, and by Chiron given 'twas To Peleus, his mighty oes to kill. Then to Achilles Charre Automedon The Horses Balius and Xanthus ti'd, That were by Zephyrus begotten on Pedarge feeding by the Oceans side; And at their heads he Pedasus did place (A Horse he took at Thebe in the Prey) That with them both was able to keep pace, Though he were mortal, and immortal they. While by his Charre Patroclus arming stands, Apace from Tent to Tent Achilles runs, And calleth unto those that had Commands, To Arm and bring away the Myrmidons.
Then came they and about Patroclus stood Like Wolves that on a lusty Stag had fed, And lapping stain'd the River with his blood, With Bellies full and hearts encouraged. When they together were, Achilles then Appointed who i'th'Field should them command, To Troy he Ships brought with him five times ten, From ev'ry Ship came fifty men to land. And then five Bodies he made of them all, And Captains five by whom they led should be. But was himself the Captain-General; For of the Myrmidons the King was he. Of these five Captains one Menestius was, Who was the River Sperchius his Son, And by the name of Boro then did pass. His Mother was of Peleus Daughters one, And Polydora was her name. And she To Perierus had been married, And for his Wife reputed constantly Before she was of M'nestius brought to bed. The second Bands were by Eudorus led, The Son of Polymela a fair Maid. Hermes of her became enamoured, As at a Dance her Beauty he survay'd. It was upon Diana's Holy-day He saw her dancing, and at night he got Unseen into her bed and with her lay, And his brave Son Eudorus then begot. To Echecles she after married. Her Father Phylas to him took her Son, And unto mans estate him nourished, And lov'd no less than if t'had been his own. The third Pisandrus led that swift could run, And had at fighting with a Spear more ar In bloudy War than any Myrmidon Amongst them all (Patroclus set apart.) The fourth was by the old Knight Phoenix led And of the fifth, charge had Alcimedon. When they were all together gathered, Unto them sharply thus spake Thetis Son.
Ye Myrmidons, said he, remember now, How all the time I kept you have from fight, You have the Trojans threatned hard; and how You said my Mother fed me had with Gall, And in great tumult bid me let you go, Or at the Ships upon the Trojans fall. o there before you is the War you crave. The Trojans are about to burn the Fleet; Do you your utmost now the same to save. Let him that brags of Valour let us see't. This said, the Myrmidons became more keen, Because they saw the King had chang'd his mind; And presently into their Ranks fell in, And close themselves to one another joyn'd. As close as in a Wall are laid the stones By him that means his House shall keep out wind; So close together stood the Myrmidons. Helmets with Helmets, Shields with Shields conjoyn'd. Before them all two good men armed went, Patroclus and Automedon to th'Fight. Achilles then returned to his Tent, Where stood a Chest most beautiful to sight, Which Thetis gave him when he went to Troy, Wherein were Carpets, Coats, and Cloaks laid up, To keep him warm when he a Ship-board lay; And in the same was kept a dainty Cup. In which no other man ere drank but he, Though 'twere to offer to the Gods above. Nor he himself (such was his nicetie) Ere in it drank but offering to Jove. Achilles then with Sulphur scour'd the Cup, And having rins'd it clean with water fair, And washt his hands, went out and held it up Tow'rds Heaven, and thus to Jove addrest his pray' Pelasgique Jove that far from hence dost dwell, But at Dodona men thy counsel know, The Selli there thy Prophets fortunes tell, Though on the ground they sleep, and barefoot go,
That at my Prayer once didst honour me, And broughtest on the Argive Hoast much wo, Once more unto my Pray'r enclined be. Though to the Fight my self I do not go. I thither send my dear Companion. O Jove now honour him. Let Hector know Patroclus is a man of War alone, And not then only when I with him go. And when he has the Trojans driven from The Argive Ships, then grant, O Jove, he may With all his Myrmidons safe hither come, With all their Arms and make no longer stay. Thus prayed he. To half of his desire Jove nodded; but the other half deni'd He granted him to save the Ships from fire; But at returning safe his neck he wri'd. Achilles when he offer'd had and pray'd, Went with the Cup agen into his Tent, And safely laid it up; and not long stay'd, But out agen to see the Fight he went. The Myrmidons now marched orderly. But when unto the Trojans they were neer, Like Wasps incensed they upon them fly. As when at unawares a Traveller Is going by a Wasps-nest neer the way, Which to the common damage stir'd has been And anger'd by a young unlucky Boy, Upon the Traveller they vent their spleen; And all at once with fury on him fly: Just so the Myrmidons occasion take Provok'd by Agamemnon's injury To fall upon the Trojans for his sake. Patroclus yet did further them incite. Ye Myrmidons, said he, Achilles Bands, Remember now couragiously to fight; Achilles honour now lies in your hands The best of Greeks. Let Agamemnon see The fault he did, and know he was unwse, How wide soever his Dominion be, The best of all th' Achaeans to despise.
Then on the Trojans all at once they fly. With them the other Greeks by shouts conspire. The Trojans when they saw Patroclus nigh With stout Automedon Achilles Squire, Their courage fell, their Ranks disordered were, They lookt about which way 'twere best to run. For they suppos'd Achilles now was there, And that his discontent was past and gone. Patroclus first of all lets fly his Spear Amongst the thickest of the Foes, about Protesilaus hollow Ship (for there The Trojans standing close together fought) And slew Pyraechmes who from Amydon, And Axius wide stream the Poeons led. The Spear pass'd thorough his right Shoulder-bone. And when the Poeons saw him fall, they fled. Not only these he frighted had, but all, By killing of a Captain of such fame. Patroclus then upon the rest did fall, And drave them from the Ship, & quencht the flame. The Trojans towards Troy retire apace. Patroclus and the Argives them pursue, Leaving the Ship half burnt upon the place. And on the Plain the Fight began anew. As men see all the Rocks and Woods about When than the Hills the Mist is gotten higher; So when the Fire was at the Ships put out, The Greeks did for a little while respire. For yet the Trojans did not plainly fly, But still resisting went, and losing ground. Here Areïlochus was killed by Patroclus that gave him a deadly wound Upon the Thigh, just as he turn'd about. The Spear went through and passing brake the Bone. And at the wound his bloud and life went out, And on his face he fell down with a groan. Thoas by Menelaus on the Brest Close by his Shield a wound receiv'd and di'd. To Meges Antichus a Spear addrest. But Meges that his purpose had espi'd
Prevented him, and with his Spear him hits Upon the Leg and neer unto the Knee, And all the Nerves thereof asunder splits, And of the wound he died presently. Antilochus then slew Atymnius. The Spear went through his Flank & struck him dead. And Maris then struck at Antilochus, But he prevented was by Thrasymed And slain, pierc'd through the shoulder with his Spear And thus by two Sons of old Nestor slain The two Sons of Amisodorus were, And of Sarpedon good Companions twain. Their Sire Amisodorus kept at home. The foul Chimaera that had done much harts, Devouring people which did that way come, Till she was slain by Bellerophontes arm. Clobulus then pester'd in the throng By little Ajax taken was alive, But after he was taken liv'd not long. For Ajax did him of his life deprive. For on the Neck he gave him such a wound With his broad Sword as made it smoak with blood; And presently he fell unto the ground, And on his Eyes perpetual darkness stood. With Swords Peneleos and Lycon prest Each other hard. For both their Spears had miss'd. Lycon him hit upon the Helmet crest, And broke his Sword. One part staid in his Fist, The other flew. Peneleos him hit Upon the Neck. The Sword so far went in, As from the shoulders it divided it, Save that it hung a little by the skin. Me iones pursued Acamas, Amongst the Trojans that before him fled: And overtook him as he mounting was, And with a wound i'th shoulder left him dead. And by Idomeneus the King of Creet Hit in the Mouth was Erymas and slain. His Teeth all stricken out fell at his Feet, And by the Spear pierc'd thorough was his Brain,
And fill'd with bloud stood staring both his Eyes, Which through his nose and mouth he strove to yoyd, And gasping seeks to cast it out, and dies. Thus the Greek Lords each one his man destroy'd. And then as bloudy Wolves invade the Lambs Or Kids that by the Shepherds negligence Are wandred on the Mountains from their Dams, And kill; for Nature gives them no defence; So fiercely on the Trojaas fell the Geeks. But they no more trust to their hands but feet. Ajax to throw his Spear at Hector seeks, But with him Hector has no minde to meet, But by th'advantage of his skill in Warre Knowing of Arrows and of Spears the sound, To keep aloof from Ajax still took care, And cover'd with his Shield oft shifted ground. And though he knew the honour of the day Would fall unto th' Achaeans in the end, Yet from the Field he went not straight away, But stay'd and fought his people to defend. And then as Clouds rise from Olympus high, And through the Air to Heaven tend upright Before tempestuous winds; so rose the Cry At th' Argive Ships. Then Hector left the Fight, And after him the Trojans take their heels, But in the Trench greatly encumbred were, And many Charret poles they brake and Wheels. And when they of the Trench were gotten clear, Fill'd with affright was ev'ry Path and Way. Thus at the Ships the storm of War gave ore. The Horses that were loose ran back to Troy; And to the Ships the Trojans came no more. Patroclus, where he most disorder found, Thither he drove, and trod the Trojans down, And Charret-seats were tumbled to the ground, And many from their Seats were headlong thrown. But the swift Horses of Patroclus, which On Peleus by the Gods bestowed were, Round no impediment, but leapt the Ditch, Pursuing Hector, who now was not there.
As when with stormy winds th' Autumnal rain Falls heavy on the Earth, from Heaven sent: When wrested are the Laws by men for gain, Who from the Gods expect no Punishment, The Rivers swell; down from the Mountain; side Innumerable Currents headlong run Roaring and foaming to the Ocean wide; And washt away is all mans work and gone: So fled the Trojans. These thus put to flight, He kept the Greeks from going to the Town, As they desir'd; yet gave not over fight, But 'twixt the Ships and River overthrown Were many more; for unrevenged yet Were many Greeks. First Pronous he kill'c, Whom with his spear upon the Breast he hit, Where he was not well cover'd with his Shield. The next he slew was Thestor Enops Son That sate upon his Seat amaz'd with fear, And from his hand the Horses Reyns were gone. Patroclus standing by him with his Spear Strook him upon the Cheek, and there it stuck Fast in his Teeth; and over the fore-wheel To th' ground Patroclus fetcht him with a pluck As to the Bank a Fisher pulls an Eel, And to the Earth he threw him on his Face. Eryalus then to him went, in vain, And by Patroclus slain was on the place. For with a stone he cleft his head in twain. Epaltes, Erymas, Amphoterus, And Echius, Pyres, Damastorides. Euippus, Polymelus Iphius; He one upon another kill'd all these. Sarpedon saw how fast his good friends died, And that his Lycians ready were to fly, He them rebuking with a loud voice cried, Whither d'ye go? For shame stay here. For 1 Intend to meet this man my self and know. Who 'tis that here so furiously fights, And lays so many valiant Trojans low. This said, he from his Chariot alights,
Patroclus seeing that, alighted too; And presently betook him to the fight, As keen as on a high Rock Vultures two; And Jupiter was grieved at the sight. And to (his Wise and Sister) Juno said, Ay me, my Son Sarpedon will be slain. For by the Fates long since it so is laid. And now my mind divided is in twain, To snatch him hence and carry him again To Lycia, or now to let him die, And by Patroclus fatal Spear be slain. And Juno then to Jove made this repie. O Jove, most wilful of the Gods, what say'e? A mortal man condemn'd is by the Fates, And you would now the Execution stay? Do. But take heed how you offend the State. And this I tell you further, if you do Your Son Sarpedon from the Combate save, The other Gods will look to do so too. For Sons at Troy many Immortals have. But since you love your Son and for him grieve, First let Patroclus take away his life, And then to Death and Sleep commandment give To carry him from out the bloudy strise To Lycia, amongst his friends and kin, Who see him will embalm'd and buried, And build a Tomb to lay his ashes in, Which are the honours due unto the dead. This Juno says; Jove to it condescends. And for the honour of his Son so dear For rain he drops of bloud from Heaven sends. When they were come to one another near, First threw Patroclus and kill'd Thrasymed A valiant man Sarpedon's Charretier. The Spear into his Belly entered. Then at Patroclus flew Sapedon's Spear, And hit him not, but Pedasus he slew, The Fore-horse of Achilles Charre, and now The sprawling Horse caus'd a disorder new. The Yoke screeks, and Automedon lets go
The Reyns; whereby the Combatants are parted; Automedon soon found a remedy; For from the Charret seat he nimbly started, And cut the Geers that did the fore-horse tye. The Horses two adjusted were again; And then the Combatants the fight renew. And first Sapedon threw, and threw in vain. The Spear just over his left shoulder flew. But not in vain Patroclus Spear was thrown, That smore him through the Midriff. Heavilie Sarpedon then unto the ground came down, As if 't had been an Oak or Poplar-tree. Or as a Pine cut down i'th' Hill, to be A Mast for some great Ship falls to the ground, So fell to th'Earth Sarpedon heavilie, And with his Armour made the place resound. As when a Bull is by a Lion slain, Under his Paw to th'ground he groaning falls; So groaning fell Sarpedon in great pain, And to his friend the valiant Glaucus calls, And to him said, Now Glaucus valiant be, And set your minde on nothing but to fight. But first go call my best men all to me, And to assist me here joyn all your might. If of my Arms I stript be by the Foe, The shame thereof for ever will abide. So therefore quickly call the people. Go. And when he thus had spoken to him, di'd. Patroclus on the Body sets his foot, And out agen he pull'd the bloudy Spear, With pieces of the Midriff sticking to't. And now away the Horses ready were To run. For no man was upon the Seat; But by the Myrmidons they soon were staid. The grief of Glaucus then was very great For that he knew not how the King to aid, For in great pain his Arm was with the stroke Of Teucer's Arrow at the Argive Wall, And sound no remedy but to invoke Apollo, and upon him thus did call.
Apollo, whether thou in Troy be now Or Lycia, unto my Pray'r give ear; For when distressed men unto thee bow, Thou dost from any place or distance hear. I grievously am wounded in the hand, The pain whereof up to my shoulder goes. No longer now can I my Spear command, When most I need to use it 'gainst the Foes. Sarpedon the brave Son of Jove is slain. His Father of him takes no further care. But thou Apollo now asswage my pain, And cure my wound and make me fit for Warre; That I may bring the Lycians to fight, And I with them the Body may defend. This said, Apollo by his Heavenly might His wound heal'd up, the pain was at an end. The bloud was gone; encourag'd was his minde, And Glauu knew Apollo did it all, And joy'd such favour with the God to finde. Then out he went the Lycians to call. That done he to the Trojan Princes goes, Agenor, Hector, and Polydamas, Divine Aenea, and craves aid of those; But what he said, to Hector spoken was. Hector, said he, your friends you now forger, Who from their Country hither came so far Their lives to venture for your sake. For yet How to assist them you take little care. Slain is the King Sarpedon in the sight, That both with Might and Justice rul'd the I and Of Lycia. Let them not vent their spight Upon the Body slain; but by him stand. The Myrmidons else for th' Achaeans sake Of whom we slew so many at the Fleet, Will in revenge his Armour from him take, And do unto him other things unmeet. This said, the Trojans all were on a flame To be reveng'd. To Troy he was a Wall, Although he thither as a Stranger came, He many led, himself the best of all.
And to the Myrmidons they marcht away, Hector himself before them at the head As angry for Sarpedon's death as they. Patroclus then the Greeks encouraged, And speaking first to the Ajaxes two, Ajax, said he, both you and you, again Fight gallantly as you are us'd to do, Or better if you can. For I have slain Sarpedon with my Spear, who was the man That mounted first up to the Argive Wall. Let's take his Armour off him if we can, And make his Fellows some of them to fall. This said, they into order put their men Trojan and Lycian; Greek and Myrmidon; And to the Body slain return agen, And fiercely one another fell upon. And Jove the place with darkness cover'd rornd As long as they were fighting 'bout his Son. And at the first the Greeks forsook their ground. For then there was a noble Myrmidon Epigeus that King was formerly Of Budeon, and forced thence away For a mans death to Peleus did fly, Who sent him with Achilles unto Troy. And now no sooner layed had his hand Upon Sarpedon's Body, but was slain By a great stone that flew from Hector's hand, And broke (for all his Cask) his skull in twain. Down he upon the dead King falling dies. Patroclus when he saw his friend thus fall, Swift as a Hawk that at a Stareling flies, Up to the Foes ran, and amongst them all He threw a stone, which lighted on the Neck Of Stenelaus, and the Tendon rent. And this gave to the Trojan Horse a check; And back a little Hector with them went As far as one can for experiment, Or at a Foe in Battle throw a Spear; So far back Hector with his Charret went, The Argives them pursuing in the Rear.
But Glancus that did then the Lycians lead Pursu'd by Bathycles and very near, Upon a sudden to him turn'd his head, And deep into his breast he thrust his Spear. And down he fell. The Trojans then were glad, And at the Body fallen boldly stay'd. On th'other side the Greeks were very sad To lose so good a man, but not dismay'd. Meriones then slew Laogonus Son of Onetor Priest of Jupiter, And honour'd like a God in Gargarus. The Spear him pierc'd between the Cheek and Ear. Then at Meriones Aeneas threw And was in hope to give him his deaths wound; But he then stoopt, and ore him the Spear flew; And one end snook, the other stuck i'th'ground. At this Aeneas angry to him said, Meriones, as well as you can dance, My Spear was like your motion to have stay'd, And that it did not, think it was by chance. To him replying said Meriones, Aeneas strong and valiant as you are, You cannot kill men whom and when you please, Your self are subject to the chance of Warre As well as I. And if my Spear fall right (As much as to your hands you trust) you'll die Like other men, and I win honour by't, And to the shades below your Soul will fly. This said, Patroclus came and him reproved. Meriones, why talk you thus, said he, D'ye think the Trojans can be hence removed With evil words till many slain there be? In counsel words may somewhat signifie, But hands in War determine the event. 'Tis to no purpose words to multiplie. This said, away they both together went. And by and by was heard a mighty sound, As if the Woods were felling on the Hills, Of men in Armour falling to the ground. And Swords and Spears on Helmets and on Shields.
Sarpedon cover'd was from top to toe With dust and Spears, and so besmear'd with blood, That wise he must have been that could him know, Though who it was they all well understood, And busie were about him as the Flies That buz in Summer-time about the Pans Of Milk. And all this while Jove kept his Eyes Upon the Battle; and advising stands Whether 'twere best to let Patroclus die Upon Sa pedon, slain by Hector, or Let him go on, and follow those that fly, And of the Trojans make the slaughter more. At last resolv'd he made the Trojans fly. Patroclus then pursu'd them up to Troy, And as he went made many of them die; And Hector was the first that fled away, Not ignorant of Jove's Apostasie. And then the lusty Lycians also fled; Whose King Sarpedon now i'th' heap did lie Strercht out on th'Earth amongst the other dead. And him Patroclus of his Armour strips, His mighty Armour all of solid Brass, And sent it by his fellows to the Ships. Thus slain and stript Jove's Son Sarpedon was. Then Jove unto Apollo spake and said, Go Phoebus bear Sarpedon from the Fight A great way off, and let him be array'd In an immortal Garment pure and bright. But in the River clear first wash him clean, And with Ambrosia anoynt his skin. Let Death and Sleep two Sisters bear him then To Lycia unto his friends and kin, By whom his Body will embalmed be, And Tomb and Pillar set upon his Grave, Whereby preserv'd will be his memorie, Which all the honour is the dead can have This said, Apollo down from Ida came, And bare Sarpedon's Body from the Fight, And far off in the River washt the same, And with Ambrosia his Body white
Anointed, and with Garments sair array'd, Immortal Garments; and into the hands Of Death and Sleep committed it, who layd It down again amongst the Lycians. Patroclus then commands Automedon To drive to Trov. Not well. For had he then The counsel of Achilles thought upon, He had escapt. But Jove knows more than men, And quickly can take from a man of might, And to a weaker give the Victorie Whom he himself encourage will to fight, As now by Jove himself set on was he. But while Patroclus chac'd the Trojans thus, Who sell? Adrestus and Autonous, Epistor, Melanippus, Perimus, Pylartus, Mulius, and Echeclus And Elasus. And taken had been Troy Now by Patroclus, but that Phoebus stood Upon the Tow'r and pusht him still away, To vex the Greeks and do the Trojans good. For thrice he mounted and was thrice put back By the Immortal hand; but when again He mounting was, Apollo to him spake. Retire (said he) Patroclus, 'tis in vain. It is not you that Ilium can win, Nor Thetis Son, a better man than you. Patroclus at these words great fear was in, And far off from the Wall himself withdrew. Now Hector was upon his Charret seat I'th' Scaean Gate, and did deliberate Whether to make the Trojans to retreat, And when they were come in to shut the Gate, Or go to th'Fight. While he consulted thus, Apollo came and standing by his side In likeness of his Uncle Asius, Him sharply did for standing idle chide. Hector, said he, why stay you here? If I Exceeded you in strength as you do me, I teach you would, in such necessity To quit the Field thus, and unuseful be.
Go. To Patroclus now directly drive, And doubt not but that by Apollo's aid You may him of his Life and Arms deprive. Away went Phoebus when he this had said. And Hector then returned to the Fight While Phoebus did the Argive throng dismay. Cebriones still kept his Horses right Upon Patroclus. For upon the way Hector past through the Greeks and killed none. Patroclus then alighting, with his Spear In his left hand, in th'other took a stone, And with it killed Hector's Charrettier Cebriones, King Priam's Bastard Son. Above his Eyes upon his Forehead just Patroclus hit him with the knobby stone. Then from his Seat he dropt into the dust. Broke was his Skull, his Eye-brows crusht i t'one, And at his feet before him fell his eyes. Patroclus scoft and said 'tis nimbly done. And proudly thus insulting ore him eryes. Oh that we had a man could leap like him, And set upon one of our Ships were he, To leap into the Sea and groaping swim! How satisfi'd with Oysters should we be! So quickly down he tumbled to the Plain. I see that there good tumblers are in Troy. This said, he ran unto the Body slain, Himself with his own valour to destroy. And then unto the ground leapt Hector too, And at Cebriones his Body fought He and Patroclus, fierce as Lions two That had a great Stag, slain by chance, sound out; And hngry both, strove who should first be fed. So fought there two each other to destroy. And Hector puld the dead man by the head, Patroclus by the heels the other way. Mean while the Gks and Trojans fighting stood. As when between two Hills two great Winds fight, On both sides strongly staken is the Wood, And Boughs beat one another with great might,
And with a horrid noise together clash, And many lusty Limbs then broken are Of barky Corme, broad Beech, and lofty Ash; So did it with the Greeks and Trojans fare. About Cebriones stuck many a Spear, And many a fledged Arrow from the Bow, And many Shields by great stones broken were, While he along in bed of dust lay low, And quite forgotten had his Chivalty. Now all the while that mounting was the Sun The Weapons flew, and men fell equally. But after noon when half the day was gone The Argives clearly had the Victory, And from the Field Cebriones they drew, And stript there of his Armour let him lie. Patroclus then the Trojans chac'd anew. And there before the Myrmidons leapt out Like Mars himself, and thrice nine Trojans flew. And out again he went; but at that bout, Upon himself untimely death he drew. For Phoebus came (Patroclus saw him not) Wrapt up in Air, and standing on the ground Between the shoulders with his hand him smt, That all about him seemed to go round, And from his head his Helmet then he flung Into the dust, and foul it was all ore, And beaten by the hoofs of Horses rung, That never had been so defil'd before When on Achilles Godlike head it fate. But Jove to Hector gave it now to wear, And only then when near him was his Fate. Moreover Phaebus brake Patroclus Spear, A heavie Spear well armed at the head, And pluckt his mighty Shield out of his hand, And left him of his Arms uncovered. With this Patroclus did amazed stand. And near unto him then a Dardan came, And in the back he smore him with his Spear. Panthoides Euphorbus was his name, And kill'd him not, but back ran to the Rear.
For though he well could fight, and ride, and run, And going first abroad to learn the Wars, He was by no man of his age outdone, And had orethrown twice ten men from their Chars; Yet for Patroclus now he durst not stay, Although he wounded and disarmed were. Then to the Rear Patroclus went away; And after him ran Hector with his Spear And at the Belly struck him through the side. And down he fell. The Greeks were grieved sore. As when at a small Fountain almost dri'd Together come a Lion and a Boar With equal thirst, and drink they both would fain, But fight who shall drink first, slain is the Bore; So now by Hector was Patroclus slain, Though many Trojans he had kill'd before. And Hector then triumphing ore him said, Patroclus, you thought sure t'have stormed Troy. And in your Ships our women t'have convay'd To Argos with you when you went away. Were you so simple that you could not see, That Hector with his Horses and his Spear Protects the Trojans from Captivitie? Now shall you for the Dogs and Fowis lie here; Nor can Achilles do you any good, That bad you ('t may be) when you from him went, Not to return, till dyed in his blood You Hector's Coat had from his shoulders; rent. And vain enough you were to promise it. Patroclus with a feeble voice repli'd, Hector, you now may boast as you think fit, And in your own Ability take pride. T' Apollo first my death I owe, who threw My Armour from my body to the ground; I could have slain else twenty such as you. And from Euphorbus I receiv'd a wound. To bring me down; you were but one of three. But hear me and remember what I say, Hector, you will not long live after me, And only for Achilles hand you stay.
And at these words he was of life berest. His Soul unto th'Infernal Regions fled Lamenting so much Youth and Vigour left; And Hector to him spake again though dead. Patroclus, why do you foretel my death? Who knows but that Achilles may be slain By me first, and before me lofe his breath? This said, he pulled out the Spear again. And presently pursu'd Automedon, Who of Achilles was the Charretier; But he away was carried and gone By Peleus Horses that Immortal were.
ILIAD LIB. XVII. ANd Menelaus understanding now That slain Patroclus lay upon the ground, Careful, as of her first Calf is a Cow, To th'Body went and walkt about it round, Couching his Spear and holding out his Shield, Resolv'd to kill him whosoe'er he was That durst to stand against him in the Field. Then to him said Euphorbus, Menelaus Retire, let me advise you, from the dead. For I am he that gave him the first wound, That with his Arms I may be honoured; Lest with my Spear I strike you to the ground. And Menelaus to him thus repli'd. O Jupiter, in Lion never was, Nor yet in Panther, nor in Boar such pride (Though other Beasts in strength they far surpass) As in these Sons of Panthus. Though they know, When Hyperenor proudly me defi'd, And spitefully did value me below All other Greeks, that by my hand he did. And sorry were his Parents and his Wife Now you succeed will to your Brother's fate. Be gone then if you mean to save your life, And quickly, or you will be wise too late. No Menelaus (said Euphorbus then) Since you have griev'd his Parents and his Wise, 'Tis best, I think, to comfort them agen, By making you pay for it with your life. For though intolerable be their grief, Yet when they see your Armour and your head Brought to them home, it will be some relief. But this by fight must be determined.
This said, he made a thrust at Menelaus, Which he received on his trusly Shield, It entered not, resisted by the Brass, Which bent the point, and passage none did yield. Then as he backward stept to get away He by Atrides on the Breast was hit. The Spear prest with his hand not there did slay, But to his Neck went up and pierced it. And then the ground he with his Armour knocks; And dyed was with blood his dainty hair, Those fine (with Gold and Silver twined) Looks, Like those that Cytherea's Graces wear. As when one planted hath an Olive sprig In open place, and where are many Springs, And stir'd by gentle winds it is grown big, Then comes a storm and to the ground it flings; So by Atrides fell Euphorbus now. As when a Lion cometh from the Wood Into the Herd and seizeth on a Cow, First breaks his Neck, then seeds he on his blood And Bowels, Dogs and Herds men looking on And hueing him, that dare not to go near; So then upon Atrides ventur'd none, So much the Trojans stricken were with fear. And now into the hands of Menelaus Patroclus Armour came; and born away Had been, but that by Phoebus crost he was, That was a friend to Hector and to Troy. And in the shape of Mentes gone was then (Whom now the Cicon Regiments obey'd) To call back Hector to the Field agen, And overtaking him thus to him said, Hector, you here Automedon pursue To take Achilles Horses all in vain, Which never will be won or rul'd by you, And suffer good Euphorbus to be slain By Menelaus at the Body dead Of Menoetiades. Then went his way. And Hector grieved turn'd about his head, And saw how on the ground Euphorbus lay.
Bleeding and naked left by Menelaus. And Hector then enflamed with the fight Like raging fire did through the Squadrons pass, And with great cry returned to the fight. And cold was then Atrides at the heart, And with himself he thus disputing stands; If I should from the Body slain depart, The Greeks would say of me but little good; But if I stay alone here 'twill be worse Than any thing the Greeks can of me say. For he brings with him all the Trojan force. But wherefore do I thus disputing stay? Who fights against him whom a God doth aid, Draws on himself a great and certain ill. My best course then is Hector to avoid, And let the Greeks say of it what they will. But if of Ajax I could get a sight, Then he and I together would not fear With Hector aided by a God to fight, And to Achilles the dead Body bear. Whilst thus unto himself he laid the Case, The Trojans came with Hector at the head, And Menelaus then forsook the place, And going left behinde the Body dead. But oft lookt back. As when a Lion is Compel'd to leave a Fold by Men and Dogs, He oft looks back, and runs not for all this, But tow'rds the Wood still slowly on he jogs Unwillingly; his heart's too big to run; So Menelaus off went safe and sound. And then for Ajax Son of Telamon Lookt round about, and 'mongst his Troop him found Inciting them to fight. For not a man But frighted was by Phoebus and dismay'd And with all speed Atrides to him ran, And standing at his side unto him said, Come Ajax, quickly come away with me To save Patroclus from the Trojans wrath, That to Achilles earri'd he may be Though naked. For his Armour Hector hath.
Ajax inrag'd at this flies to the place With Menelaus, where Patroclus lay When Hector from the Field him drawing was, (Having already snatcht his Arms away) Unto the Trojans to cut off his head, And give the Body to the Dogs to eat. But when great Ajax thither came, he fled, And to the Trojans made a quick Retreat; And order gave to bear the Arms to Troy, Achilles Arms, a noble Monument Of his great deed. But Ajax still did stay, And with his Shield about the Body went. As when a Lion, his Whelps following him, Into the open Field comes from the Wood, And Hunters meets, he looks upon them grim; So Ajax looking by Patroclus stood, And Glaucus then that led the Lycian Bands To Hector went and frowning to him said, Though you be thought a good man of your hands Hector, it is not so I am afraid. Consider first if you the Town can save By Trojans only, without other guard, And of their service how great need you have; And then how lightly you their pains regard. What Lycian again will for you fight? Or how will you defend a meaner man, That left Sarpedon to the Argives spight And sport, and from his body frighted ran, That was your friend and had such service done? So that if I were won to lead them home, You'd finde a little after we were gone, The utmost fate of Troy were on it come. For if the Trojans had as forward been, As men should be that for their Country fight, Patroclus body we in Troy had seen, Fercht from the field, for all the Argives might; And from the Greeks in change we might have had Sarpedons Corps, and brought it into Troy; And all the Greeks thereof would have been glad, So great experience of his worth had they.
But you to Ajax never yet durst go. And when he came to you, you from him ran Into the throng o'th' Trojans. And why so? But that you know he is the better man. Then Hector frowning on him thus repli'd, Glaucus, 'tis strange that such a man as you Should so severely without cause me chide; I thought you very wise, but 'tis not true. You say I dare not with great Ajax fight When I do neither Foot nor Horse-men shun, But only way give sometimes to the might Of Jove when he the Enemy sets on. For he to whom he will gives Victorie, And from the proud their courage takes away. But to the Fight come with me now, and see If I be such a Coward as you say; And do not from Patroclus body make Some of the Argives to retire agen. This said, he turn'd and to the Trojans spake, Trojans, said he, and Lycians play the men Whilst I my self in those good Arms aray Which from Patroclus body slain I took. This said, he from the Field went toward Troy, And quickly those that bare them overtook, And gave to them the Armour he then wore, And th'Armour of Patroclus there puts on, Giv'n by the Gods to Peleus heretofore, Which he when aged gave unto his Son, But were not kept by him till he was old. Then Jove that out of sight in Heaven sate And Hector in this Armour did behold, Poor man, said he, he knoweth not his fae, Which now is neer; and at it shook his head, And said, Though now these heavenly Arms you wear Of this great man whom all men else did dread, Killing the gentle Knight that did them bear, And so unhandsomely, you'll never go To shew them to Andromache your Wife. Yet now you shall prevail against the Fo▪ To please you, since thus shortned is your life.
And as he said it, seal'd it with a Nod. Now Hector having on these Arms and fit, Into his Breast went in the mighty God Of Battle, and with courage filled it. Then Hector like Achilles shining came To his confederates, and 'mongst them went Calling upon the best of them by name, To give unto them all encouragement, Mesthies, and Glaucus, and Thersilochus, Alleropaeus, and Hippothous Mēdon, Disinor, Phorcys, Chromius, And you the skilful Augur Ennomus, And you the thousands that to aid me come, 'Tis not to muster that you called are, But to defend the Wives of Ilium And Babes, against the Greeks that love the Warre. Which to prevent, the Trojans day by day With pay and with free Quarter tired are. Let's therefore fight and either die or slay; For there's no other Traffick at the Warre. And he that shall Patroclus body gain, And (spight of Ajax) fetch it off the Field, Half of his Armour shall have for his pain, And I wil half the Honour to him yield. This said, the Trojans on the Argives fell With all their weight, and made account to gain Patroclus Body. For they could not tell How many Trojans there would first be slain. And then to Menelaus Ajax said, I fear we shall no more return from Troy; And am not for Patroclus so afraid (That to the Dogs is sure to be a Prey) As for my self and you; with such a Cloud Of Trojans Hector thundring cometh on. Go therefore presently and call aloud To th'other Princes. Other help there's none. Then Menelaus cried out aloud, O you that have command in th' Argve Host, And det with Atrides are allow'd, And drink unstinted at the Publick cost,
'Tis hard to call you ev'ry one by name. But you that hear me come away with speed. For to us all 'twill be no little shame To let the Dogs upon Patroclus feed. This said, first little Ajax running came, And with Idomeneus Meriones, Then many more came in; but who can name The number great that came in after these? And Hetor wih the Trojans then came in. And as he Sea that rolleth to the shore Which by some mighty wind had driven been; So to the Fight the Trojans marching roar. The Greeks about Patroclus body staid, All of one minde, all cover'd with their Shields, And on their heads Jove then a great Fog laid, And all the place about with darkness fills. For while Patroclus was alive and serv'd Achilles, Jove took at him no offence, Nor thought that to be Dogs meat he deserv'd, And therefore urg'd the Greeks to his defence. At first the Trojans made the Greeks to flie, And leave the Body, but they killed none, So great a Fog upon the place did lie. Then with his friends again came Ajax on, Of all the Greeks for person and for might The bravest man excepting Thtis Son. The Trojans when the Greeks refus'd to fight▪ The Body seiz'd, and thought the bus'ness done. As when a Boar pursu'd by Hounds and Men Upon them turns, they scatter'd are and flie; So when great Ajax to them came agen, The Trojans scatter'd let Patroclus lie. For when Hippothous was in great hope To drag Patroclus body up to Troy, And to his Anckle tyed had a rope, Arrived to him was his latest day. For Ajax now was come unto him near, And smote him through the Helmet and the Brai Which stained with his blond stuck to the Spear, And down he threw Patroclus foot again,
And with it neer unto the body fell api'd of life by mighty Ajax Spear, Far from Earissa where his friends did dwell, And never for his breeding payed were. And Hector then a Spear at Ajax threw, Which he perceiving did a little shun, very little it beside him flew, And killed Schedius Iphitus Son, That of Phocaeans all was far the best, And did in well-built Panopaea reign. The Spear sharp-pointed enter'd at his Brest, And at his Shoulder out it went again. And Ajax then the valiant Phorcys slew That 'bout the body of Hippothous went. The Spear through Breast-plate and through Belly flew, And as it pass'd the Guts in pieces rent. Then Hector and the Trojan Lords gave way Retiring from the Argive Lords; and thus By th'Argives coming in, without delay Stript were both Phorcys and Hippothous. And now the Trojans had for want of heart Been chased by the Argives up to Troy, And th'Argives gotten had on th'other part Without the Gods an honourable day, Had not Apollo, like to Periphas Anchises Squire t'Aeneas come disguised, That very wise now grown and aged was, And standing by his side him thus advised. Aeneas, cannot you without the Gods As well as the Achaeans gain the day By valour, since in men they have no odds? For Jove had rather you should win than they. Thus Phoebus said. Aeneas knew 'twas he; And with a loud voyce unto Hector said, Hector. and you who the Commanders be Of Trojans, or have brought unto them aid, Oh what a shame 'tis for us thus to run Before the Greeks our selves in Troy to hide! But come, there yet amongst the Gods is one That hath asur'd me Jo is on our side.
This said, before the Trojans he leapt out, And with his Spear in hand stood at their head. And when he made them had to wheel about, Unto the Body he directly led. And with his Spear Leocritus he slew The friend of Lycomed, Arisbas Son; And Lycomed displeas'd, at Hector threw, And hit him not, but kill'd Apisao, Of all that from Paeonia pass'd the Seas, He was in battle of the greatest might Excepting no man but Asteropaeus; Who angry at his fall went to the Fight. But now the Greeks about Patroclus stood So close, with Spears advanc'd, with Buchlers hidden, That there Ateropaeus did no good; For by great Ajax so they had been bidden. Let none from hence again retire, said he, Nor any man before the rest skp out, But stand together till you charged be. Thus roaring to them Ajax went about And thick the Trojans and their Aids now fell, And with their blond bedewed was the ground. Nor did the Argives come off very well; But sewer of them 'mongst the dead were sound. For standing close, one Shield sav'd more than one. Thus keen as fire on both sides sought they here. And such a darkness was the place upon As if nor Sun nor Moon in safety were. But th'other places all about had light, And brightly did the Sun in Ida shine, And gentle at a distance was the Fight, And one anothers Spear did oft decline. But in the middle, where the very best Both of the Argives and the Trojans stood, The pain they suffer'd cannot be exprest Of restless labour and of loss of blood. But of Patroclus by the Trojans kill'd, Antilochus and Torasymed knew nor, But fought in other places of the Field. And that he still pursu'd the Trojans thought,
When for his body who the same should get, Now fighting were the Trojans and the Greeks, And from their Knees and Legs ran down the swear, And stained were with blond their arms and cheeks. As when men set themselves about the skin Of some fat Bull and stretch it ev'ry way, That th'humour may go out, the grease go in, Just so Patroclus body tugged they, Trojans to Troy, and Argives to the Fleet; And thereupon arose this mighty fray. If Mars or Pallas had been there to see't, They had not known on whom a fault to lay, Though angry they had been; such work was then By Jove about Patroclus body set For Trojans and for Argives, Horse and Men. But to Achilles known it was not yet That slain by th'Trojans was his Favourite. For now not far off from the Trojan Wall At a great distance from him was the fight, So that he thought not on his death at all; But having chac'd the Trojans to the Gates Of Ilium, that straight he would come back. For well he knew 'twas ordered by the Fates, Patroclus never should the City sack. His Mother Thetis oft had told him that, As she before had told it been by Jove; But quite Patroclus destiny forgat, Or knew it not, whom he so much did love. The Greeks and Trojans at the body staid Together close, and one another kill'd. And one Achaean to another said, 'Twould be a great disgrace to quit the Field, And leave the body of Patroclus thus. I rather had by th'Earth we swallowed were Than they should have it and crow over us, And to the Town the noble body bear. The Trojans likewise t'one another cri'd, Though ev'ry one of us were sure to die By this mans body, let us here abide. And then the clamour rose up to the Skie.
Achilles Steeds now with Automedon Upon the Charre without the Battle stood; But to the Fight he could not get them on. He to them call'd, but that would do no good. And then he flatters them, then threats, then whips, But for Patroclus griev'd they would not go With th'Argives to the Fight nor to the Ships, But lay down on the ground and wept for wo That they had lost a gentle Charretier. Jove seeing them upon the ground thus laid, And for Patroclus how they grieved were, Shaking his head unto himself he said, Poor, Steeds, why did I you on man bestow That mortal is, and you immortal are And make you also misery to know, And to participate of humane care? There breatheth not upon the Earth so wide So poor a thing and wretched as a man. But Hector on your Charre shall never ride. For he without my leave do nothing can. Is't not enough for him that he hath got Acbilles Arms to please himself in vain? But have Achilles Horses he shall not. For you shall to the Ships return again, And safely carry back Automedon. Though to the Trojans I intend to day The Victory till setting of the Sun, And that by darkness parted be the fray. This said, he strength and courage to them gave. Automedon then to the Troops of Greece As swiftly the immortal Horses drave As flies a Vulture at a flock of Geese. For from the Foe he quickly could retire, And easily upon them go again As oft as the occasion should require; But by his hand no Enemy was slain. For since he was upon the Seat alone, He could not both together fight and guide. But to him came at last Alcimedon Laertes Son, and stood by th'Charret side.
What God, said he, has put it in your head Automedon, amongst so many Spears To be alone knowing your friend is dead, And Hector now Achilles Armour wears? Automedon uto him then repli'd, Alcimedon, a fitter man is none Than you are the immortal Steeds to guide, Since Menoctiades my friend is gone. Get up then you and the good Steeds command, Whilst on the ground I with the Trojans fight. Alcimedon then took the Whip in hand And Reyns; Automedon did then alight. This Hector saw, and to Aeneas spake, Achilles Horses yonder coming are; To us, said he, they are not hard to take. For with them there is no great man of Warre; And if we to them go they dare not stand. This said, Aeneas well contented was, And forward then they go with Spear in hand, And shoulders cover'd well with Hide and Brass. And Chromius with them and Aetus went, And made no doubt but both the men to slay, And then to seize Achilles Steeds they meant, And with the Charre triumphing drive to Troy. ain men that were not sure themselves to save. To Jupiter Automedon then pray'd, Who heard his Prayer, and great strength to him gave. And then unto Alcimedon he said, Alcimedon, keep still thy Horses near, So that upon my back may fall their breath. For quiet never will be Hector's Spear, Until of both of us he see the death, And set himself upon Achilles Car, And put the Squadrons of the Greeks to rout, Or be amongst the foremost slain i'th'War. This said, he to th'Ajaxes cried out, And Menelaus. Ajax, Menelaus, The care of him that's dead to others give; And shew your Valour where there is more cause. Come hither and take care of us that dive.
For Hector and Aeneas both are here. But yet since on Jove's will dependeth all Both good and evil hap, I'll throw my Spear, And let him where he pleaseth make it fall. And as he spake the spear he from him sen; Which chanc'd to light upon Aretes Shield, And passing through into his Belly went. At which he starting fell upon the Field. And at Automedon then Hector threw. But stooping forward he the Spear declin'd; And ore his head through th' empty air it few, And shaking fixt it stood i'th'ground behind. And then the Fight by Mars becalmed was; But with their Swords they had again fal on, But that th' Ajaxes two and Menelaus Came in, that call'd were by Automedon. Aeneas then and Hector shrunk away, And Chromius with them, but Aretus not, But on the ground without his Armour lay. Automedon then mounts his Chariot All bloudy, and the Armour by him set, And said, Though this revenge be very small For great Patroclus death, 'tis better yet, Though this a worse man be, than none at all. And at Patroclus body now the Fight Was greater than before and fiercer grown. For Pallas coming did the Greeks incite, By Jove himself (whose mind was chang'd) sent dow. As when to mortals Jove will signifie Th'approach of War, or Tempests cold and loud, To make men leave their work, and Cattle die, He sets up in the Sky a purple Cloud; In such a Cloud wrapt up Athena came, The Daughter of great Jove, and martial Maid, To th' Argive Hoast their courage to inflame, And to Atrides, who stood neerest, said, In voyce and shape like Phoenix, Menelaus, If you let Dogs Patroclus body tear, That of Achilles so beloved was, You will be scorn'd. Go to him, do not sear.
Phix, said he, would Pallas strengthen e, And save me from so many Spears that fly, Patroclus body soon should rescu'd be. For no man for him griev'd is more than I. But Hector fighteth like a raging flame, And as he goes Jove gives him Victory. This said, Ahna pleas'd was with the same, Because to her he trusted specially, And strengthned both his shoulders and his thighs, And made him bold as is a busie Flie Which beaten off, again upon you flies, And sears not for a little bloud to die. And to Patroclus then went Menelaus, And mongst the throng of Trojans threw his Spear. It chanced that amongst them one there was, Pydes Eëtions Son to Hector dear, And at the wine his good Companion. Him Menelaus with his Spear then slew Just as he turn'd himself about to run, And from the Trojans the dead body drew. To hector then came Phoebus, having on The form of Phoenops Son of Asius, In Hector's grace inferior to none, And standing by his side said to him thus. If you be so afraid of Menelaus, What other Greek will be afraid of you? He never yet good Spear-man counted was Nor is, though Podes now by chance he slew, And vainly now he thinks alone he can Bring off Patroclus body from the Field. This said, unto the body Hector ran. And Jove then lifted up his mighty Shield, And in thick Clouds the Mountain Ida wraps, And dark it was upon the Field as night. And then with Lightning and with Thunder-claps The Squadrons of the Argives puts to flight. Menelaus who the Boeotions led, Hurt in the shoulder by Polydamas, Of the Achaeans was the first that fled, And Leïtus his Mate the second was,
That was by Hector wounded in the Wrist, And could no longer use make of his Spear; But from the battle fore'd was to desist, And looking still about him ran in fear. Him Hector as he running was pursues. On Hector's Shield then Ights a heave Spear That thrown was at him by Idomeneus, But brake in two; and glad the Trojans were. And at Idomeneus then Hector threw, Beside him but a little went the Spear, And lighting upon Caeranus him slew, Who was Meriones his Charretier, And with him came to Lyctus all the way By Sea, and thence he went to Troy by land. And much good service he had done to Troy, For fallen had the King by Hector's hand, And safe had been himself; but now was hit By Hector's Spear betwixt the Cheek and Ear, And struck out were his Teeth, hs Tongue was slit, And falling to the ground expired there. And then Meriones took up the Reyns, And to Idomeneus cri'd out to fly. To little purpose now is all our pains; You see the Trojans have the Victory. Idomeneus to th'Ships then drave away As fast as he could make the Horses go, As being certain they had lost the day. And Ajax did the same acknowledge now. Meriones (said he) and Menelaus, That Jove will to the Trojans give the day, A man may see that little judgment has, So manifestly now he fights for Troy. The Spears thrown by the Trojans never miss, But on one Greek or other always light, Ours seldom hit. What cause is there of this, But that great Jove doth for the Trojans fight? Let's therefore here consider of some way To fetch Patroclus off, and then go home. For to our friends in Greece 'twill be a joy To see us safe again from Hector come;
Who when they to the Sea their faces turn, Despair of ever seeing us again, And think that Hector will the Navie burn, And that we there shall ev'ry man be slain. O that we had some fit man here to send T' Achilles Tent; for nothing yet knows he, That by the Trojans slain is his dear friend. But 'tis so dark I no such man can see. O Jove, give us once more a Sky serene; Remove this Mist that we may see to fight, Or if to kill the Argives all you mean, O Father Jove, yet kill us in the light. This said, Jove had compassion on his Tears. The Sun again his glittring Beams displays. Scatters the Clouds again and th'Heaven clears. And then to Menelaus Ajax says, About the Field go Menelaus now, And seek Antilochus, and bid him go Unto Achilles Tent, and let him know His friend Patroclus slain is by the Foe. This said, away Atrides went. As when A hungry Lion parteth from a Fold, Having in vain provok'd the Dogs and Men That did him from th'expected prey withhold, Watching all night, when fain he would have fed; But all the night the Darts about him fly And flaming Brands which Lions chiefly dread; Away he goes i'th' morn unwillingly; So from Patroclus body parted he Against his will, thinking the Greeks afraid Might leave Patroclus to the Enemie, And to Meriones and th' Ajaxes said, How good a man Patroclus was you know, And how in our defence his bloud he shed, And therefore valiantly defend him now. Let not the Foe abuse his body dead. And when he this had said he went away, Amongst the Argives peeping here and there, Like to an Eagle soaring for a Prey Amongst the Bushes peeping for a Hare;
So he amongst the Argives lookt about Seeking of Nestor's Son Antilochus. Nor was it long before he found him out Cheering his men, and said unto him thus Antiochus come neer and hear from me Sad news; I would it were not also true, That now the Trojans have the Victorie, I think it is already known to you. But further know that slain Patroclus is. Run therefore to Achilles quickly, and Tell him the news. It may be, mov'd by this To help the Argives with his mighty hand, He'll to the naked body hither come (For now Achilles Armour Hector wears). At this Antilochus was stricken dumb, And filled were and swoln his eyes with tears. And there Antilochus no longer staid, But to Laodocus his Armour gave, And he the same upon his Charret laid; For to that end he neer unto him drave. Away Antilochus the ill news, And left to Thrasymed his Regiment. For Menaus did the same refuse; Though of a valiant Commander then The tired Pylians had the greatest need, And to the Ajaxes return'd agen Where lay Patroclus body, with all speed. And when he thither came, unto them said, Antilochus is to Achilles gone, Although I see not how he should us aid. How can he, seeing Armour he has none? Let's therefore now bethink our selves, how we Our selves may bear the body from the Fied; And also how we may secured be Against the Trojans that we be not kill'd. Ajax to this replying said, 'Tis true, And the advice I'll give you will be right. Take up the Corps Meriones and you, And on your shoulders bear it from the Fight.
We two that are of one name and one mind, And in the Field together use to be Will fighting with the Trojans come behind, Till at the Ships the body lain we see. This said, Meriones and Menelaus Up to their shoulders hoyst the body dead. Wilst towards them the back of Ajax was, The Troans with great shouting followed. Just as a Pack of Hounds pursue a Boar Wounded by Hunters, running with great cry, Until he turn; then follow him no more, But scatter'd are, and this and that way fly; So did the Trojans after Ajax ran As long as towards them was not his face. But when he turned, peer him durst stay none, But stood at a great distance from the place. Thus fetcht they off at last the body dead, With at their heels of Trojan Spears great showers; And Argives dropt abundance as they fled, Like houses in a Twn on fire, and Tow'rs. As when two Mules in heavie way are set To drag down from the Hlls some mighty Tree To be a Beam or Mast, it makes them sweat Before into the Plain it drawn could be; So Menelaus and Meriones Sweating and moyling with the body go. And as a Rock that keepeth off the Seas; So Ajax at their backs kept off the Fo. The Trojans led by Hecter and Aeneas Pursue the flying Greeks with mighty cry, As from a Hawk that preys on Birds like these, A Cloud of Scarelings cackle when they fly. And many of them threw their Arms away, And that they came to fight had quite forgot. In and about the Ditch much Armour lay O flying Greeks. But done the Fight was not.
ILIAD. LIB. XVIII. WHilst at the Ships the Greeks and Trojans fought, Antilochus came to Achilles Tent. And found him to the Argive Ditch gone out Presaging in his minde the sad event, And saying to himself, Ay me what's this? The Battle to the Ships is come again; Pray God it be not as I fear it is, The Greeks are routed and Patroclus slain. My Mother told me that the best of all The Myrmidons by th' Trojans should be slain. I bad him not t'assault the Trojan Wall, Nor fight with Hector, but come back again. As speaking to himself Achilles stood, Antilochus unto him weeping came, The news, said he, I bring you is not good. I cannot without Tears relate the same. Slain is Patroclus. On the ground he lies, And now they fighting are with Swords and Spears Who shall his Body have with mighty cries Though naked; for his Armour Hector vears. At this sad news dark were Achilles eyes. And up he takes the dust with both his hands, And throws it on his head; then down he lies, His Face and Coat fulli'd with dust and sands, And tore his hair. And then the lovely prey Of Captive women that had taken been By him and by Patroclus before Troy Affrighted from Achilles Tent came in, And over him they beat their Breasts and moan'd. On th'other side Antilocus was fain To hold his hands, so mightily he groan'd; Lest otherwise he should himself have slain.
His Mother Thetis hearing him complain, Though sitting in the deepest of the Seas, Wept out aloud, and presently her train About her came of the Nereiades. Glaua, Thaleia, and Cymodoca, Nesaea, Speio, Thoa, Halia And Aemioreia, and Cymothoa, Melita Iaera, and Amphithoa, And Doto, Proto, Actaea, Agava, Doris, Dexamena, Dynamena, And Callianeira, and Amphinoma, Pherusa Apseudes, and fair Panopa, Nemertes, and the milk-white Galataea, And Clymene there was, and Callianassa, And Maera, Orithvia, and glorious Amatheia, And (not to name them all) fair Janassa With all the rest, and fill'd the silver Cave, And beat their breasts, and round her stood dismaid. And Thetis then th'account unto them gave Of her great grief, and thus unto them said, Hear me Nereïdes my Sisters dear, And be acquainted with my misery. Ah wretched Goddess that I was to bear The best of all the Heroes; and when he Was quickly grown up to a goodly height, Send him unto the War at Ilium Against the Trojans for the Greeks to sight, From whence he never should again come home; But spend his little time of life in woe, And I can nothing do for his relief. And now I mean to visit him, and know, Snce he not fights, what cause he hath of grief. This said, she with her Nymphs went from the Cave. The Sea before them her smooth water tore, And gentle passage to the Goddess gave, Till they were landed on the Trojan shore, Where lay Achilles Ships upon the sand; And straight up to Achilles Thetis went, The Nymphs attending on her hand in hand, And seeing him so grevously lament,
She held him by the head, and to him said, Why weep you thus sweet Child; what is't you ail? For that which formerly to Jove you pray'd Against th'ingrateful Greeks, I did prevail. To th'Ships they have been beaten from the Field, And know in what great need they stand of you, And have in heaps been by the Trojans kill'd. To this Achilles answ'ring said, 'Tis true But in my life what pleasure can I find, Since sweet Patroclus slain is by his Foes, On whom of all men most I set my mind, And Hector in his Arms triumphing goes, Those mighty Arms giv'n by the Gods that day That you were pleas'd a mortal man to wed, To Pelias. Oh had you been away, And he a mortal woman married! You had not for your Son been grieved then, That never to you should return again. Nor do I wish to live with mortal men But till I with my Spear have Hector slain. By what you say (said Thetis to her Son) Short liv'd you are. 'Your own fate then is nigh. I care not, said Achilles, when that's done I shall be very well content to die. For since I never must return again, And no defence in me Patroclus found, Nor other good men by the Trojans slain, I but a needless weight am to the ground. Oh that Contention lost for ever were And Choler to the heart of man so sweet, Which often make the wisest men to erre! In Agamemnon and my self I see't. But since 'tis past, let's put it out of mind. For dead he is, and cannot live again. And now I'll see if Hector I can find That has my dearest friend Patroclus slain. And then let Jove do what himself thinks good. For Hercules could not avoid his fate, Who most of mortals in his favour stood, But di'd by Destiny and Juno's hate;
And so shall I, when my day shall arrive, Lie still when dead. But now let me gain same Amongst th' Achaeans while I am alive, And make some Trojan or some Dardan Dame With both her tender hands to tear her Cheeks, And sigh, and with her tears her beauty blot, And know my hand from that of other Greeks, And when I with th' Achaeans am, when not. And therefore, Mother, dearly as you love me, Endeavour not to make me here abide. For from my purpose you cannot remove me. Unto Achilles Thetis then repli'd, Dear Child your purpose I'll not reprehend Patroclus body from the Foe to save, Nor that the Argive people you defend. But now you know your Arms the Trojans have, And Hector weareth them; but shall not long. The latest of his days is to him nigh. But go not you into the bloudy throng, Till here agen you have me in your eye. This said, she turn'd to the Nereiades, And to them said, Nereiades dive you To Nereus at the bottom of the Seas, And all you see has hapned to him shew. For I up to Olympus must be gone To Vulcan (if such favour I can gain) To get a good new Armour for my Son. This said, the Nymphs to Sea return'd again, And Thetis to Olympus went her way. Mean while the Greeks before the Trojans fly With mighty cries, and never stopt till they Were at the Ships, and to the wide Sea nigh. Nor was Patroclus body rescu'd yet; For now afresh the Trojans to them came. Which did another fiercer fight beget, And Hector fell upon them like a flame. Thrice laid he hold upon Patroclus foot, And forc'd he was as oft to let it fall, To kill some others. Then again came to't. But from the Body went not back at all.
No more could Hector driven be away From the dead body by th' Ajaxes two, Than can a hungry Lion from his Prey For any thing the Herds-men griev'd can do. And Hector had Patroclus body got, And gained had thereby a great renown, But Juno (though the other Gods knew not) T' Achilles in great hast sent Iris down. T' Achilles straight she came, and to him said, Up terrible Pelides to the Warre, And your beloved friend Patroclus aid; For at the Ships they fighting for him are. The Greeks to save his body are in pain. The Trojans fain would drag him into Troy, And Hector most of all that has him slain, And from his shoulders take his head away, And stick it up upon the Trojan Wall, Leaving his Corps a Prey to Dog and Kite. Think what reproach will then upon you fall. Lie then no longer here, but rise and fight. Achilles then repli'd. Iris, said he, Tell me what God or Goddess sent you down. Juno, said Iris, sent me; none but she. To al the rest my coming is unknown. And then Achilles to her said again, Since they have got my Arms how can I fight? And Thetis bids me from the War abstain Till she return agen into my sight Who is to Vulcan for new Armour gone, And here's no other Armour for me fit But Ajaxes; who, I hope, has it on, And for Patroclus now has use of it. We know, said Iris, Armour you have none. But as you are, upon the Ditch appear. The Trojans from the Corps will soon be gone, And leave it to the Greeks for very fear. This said, the Goddess Iris vanished. Achilles rose, and Pallas to him came, And on him puts her Shield, and on his head A golden Cloud, from which arose a flame.
As when an Isle invaded is by Foes, The Citizens to call their Neighbours in Make Fires, the smoak up to the Heaven goes By day; by night the Flame, and far are seen; Upon Achilles head stood such a flame, And then unto the Ditch he went and shouted, And farther off Athena did the same. The Trojans when they heard it strait were routed. As clear as any Trumpet in the Wars, They heard Achilles voice, and were afraid, And in disorder turn'd about their Chars, But at his flaming head were most dismaid. Thrice shouted he, thrice they disorder'd were; And slain were of the Trojans twelve brave men By their own Chars and Spears encumbred there. In so much haste they turn'd to fly. And then The Greeks the body laid upon a Bed And Bier, and standing by his side lament. And tears abundance there Achilles shed, And that he sent him had did now repent. The Sun by Juno hastned quencht his fire. The Argives on the place stay quietly. The Trojans to without the Ditch retire, And from the Chars the weary Steeds unty. Then presently the Chiefs to counsel call Before they sup, and standing on their feet, This Apparition so scar'd them all, That none amongst them had a minde to sit. And first unto them spake Polydamas Panthoides, Hector's friend; both born one night. He better Counsellor than Hector was, But Hector beter was than he to fight. My friends, be well advised now, said he, It is not safe here on the Plain to stay Until the morning light again we see, So near the Argive Ships, so far from Troy. Whilst this man absent was in discontent With Agamemnon, and forbore to sight, The Greeks were easie Foes; to th' Ships I went My self, and willingly lay out all night;
But if Achilles hither now should come, We must not only here fight for our lives. So proud he is, he'll go to Ilium, And for the City fight and for our Wives. Let's to the City go. 'Tis as I say, And nothing keeps him from us but the night. And if he here shall find us when 'tis day, Some of us will acknowledge I say right. And many flying wish when 'tis too late, They were within the Walls of Ilium, Whom Dogs and Kites shall eat without the Gate. But to my ears may never such news come. But if you will be ruled all by me, Into the Market-place of Troy by night We'll bring our strength, and soon as we can see, Stand arm'd upon the Tow'rs prepar'd to fight. Then let him from the Ships come fight at Troy. And drive about the Walls and do his worst, And having tir'd his Horses go away. Take it he shall not, Dogs shall eat him first. Then Hector frowning on him thus replies. Again, said he, I from you must dissent, Since you to shut our selves in Troy advise. We have already there too long been pent. Troy once was counted rich in Brass and Gold. But since Jove angry was, all that is gone, In Phrygia and in Maeonia sold, And little left in Ilium to be won. But since the Greeks are beaten and dismayd By th'hand of Jove, your fear is out of sea on, Nor will you by the Trojans be obey'd, Nor shal you; though the Trojans thought it reason. And therefore take my counsel, which is this. Go now and ev'ry man his Supper take In Rank and File there where he placed is; And set good Guards, and keep your selves awake. If any Trojan for his Goods lament, He may the same upon the Town bestow In service of the Publick to be spent, Rather than be possessed by the Foe;
And armed in the morn go to the Fleet, And sharply charge the Greeks by break of day. And if indeed Achilles there we meet He were not best oppose us in our way. For from him I will neither fly nor shrink, But either honour from him bear away, Or he from me. Mars common is I think To them that fight; and slain are they that slay. This said, the Trojans heard with great applause, Fools as they were; Pallas had made them mad. But none of them commend Polydamas, That given them much better counsel had. The Trojans presently to Supper went. The Greeks all night about Patroclus stand. And there began Achilles to lament, And on Patroclus breast he laid his hand. As when a Lion coming to his Den Misses the tender Whelps he left behind, He roars, and furiously goes out agen, And through the Vallies hunts, the Thief to find; Such fierce thoughts on Achilles heart then lay. And sighing to the Myrmidons he spake. Oh, what did I to old Menoetius say! I said when we had sackt the Town of Troy, That I to Opus would bring back his Son Enriched with his portion of the Prey. But all we hope from Jove is seldom done. For both of us have the same Destiny With our hearts bloud to dye the Trojan Plain. And as he lieth now, so shall I lie, And never to my Parents come again. But since Patroclus you the first are dead, Your Funeral I will not celebrate, Till I have brought you Hector's Arms and Head, Whose bloudy hand deliver'd your sad fate, And have twelve of the Noble youths of Troy Beheaded in revenge. Till then stay here, Where Trojan Captive women night and day Bewailing you shall stand about the Biere.
This said, he order gave for water hot, To clense Patroclus body from the gore. Into a Caldron (said he) water put, And make a Fire, and set the Caldron ore. Into a Caldron water then they put, And made a Fire and set the Caldron ore. The Flame about it goes. The water's hot. Then washed from the body was the gore. And then again they laid him on the Bed, From head to foot in Linnen they him fold, And on him laid a fair white Coverled, His wounds first fill'd with Unguent nine year old. About the body of Patroclus staid Achilles and the Myrmidons all night Lamenting him. Then Jove to Juno said, You have Achilles brought again to fight Against the Trojans on the Argives side. Are they your Children that you love them so? And Juno then to Jupiter repli'd. Harsh Cronides, what words do you let go? Since mortal men that know much less than we May to a Friend do good, and hate a Fo, Why may not I that boast my self to be The Wife and Sister of great Jove do so, And make my Foes the Trojans feel my hate? Whilst Jove and Juno were discoursing thus, The Goddess Thetis come was to the Gate Of Vulcan's undecaying famous House Of shining Brass, with brighter Stars thick set. That 'mongst the Houses of the Heaven shone. But he was at his Work-house in a sweat, And at his Bellows swaying up and down. For Tripods twenty he had laboured With golden Wheels to go and come agen At his command; but had not finished The Ears and Chains, which he was making then. And whilst this bus'ness Vulcan was about, Thetis was come and at the Gate did stand. And Charis Vulcan's Wife then going out Saw her, and straightway took her by the hand.
etis, said she, 'tis strange to see you here. Much honour'd and a welcom Guest you are, Come in and pleased be t'accept our Chear. Then led her in, and brought her to a Chair, A dainty Chair with Foot-stool joyn'd thereto, And then unto her Husband's Shop she hi'd. For Thetis, said she, you have work to do. And Vulcan glad, to Charis thus repli'd. Is Thetis here that sav'd me from mishap! When for my lameness thrown down from the Sky, Thetis was pleas'd to catch me in her lap, When else I had been in great misery? I wrought for her and for Eurynome Nine year, and made them many pretty things Within a Rock encompass'd by the Sea, As Buckles, Clasps, fine Boxes, Beads and Rings, Which neither Mortal nor Immortal knew, But only Thetis and Eurynome. And now to Thetis I must pay what's due, The Ransom of my life for saving me. Go you and entertain her well, while I My Tools take up, and Bellows set away. This said, the Bellows he took and set by, But in a Chest his working Tools did lay. Then with a Sponge he wip'd his hands and face, His brawny neck, and hairy breast, and on He puts his Coat, and with his staff, apace, Though haulting goes, and waited was upon By Maids of Massie Gold, endu'd with Wit, And Speech, & Strength, and learn'd in Heav'nly Art; And went to Thetis and did by her sit, And joyful at her presence was his heart, And laid his hand on hers, and to her said, Thetis, so welcome to me there is none. Tell me wherein you think I can you aid. And if it can be done, it shall be done. And then to Vulcan Thetis answered, No Goddess ever was distrest like me Whom Jove made subject to a Mortal's Bed, And Peleus Wife constrained me to be,
Who lies at home decrepid now and spent. And when I born unto him had a Son, Of all the Heroes the most excellent, And of his breeding, care omitted none, And when he grown was to a goodly height, He sent was to the War at Ilium Against the Trojans for the Greeks to fight; From whence he never shall again come home. Though yet he live, he takes therein no joy, And I to comfort him no power have, Since Agamemnon taken has away Her whom the Greeks for honour to him gave. And then my Son no longer would him aid; And Agamemnon then sent Gifts and pray'd, And by Embassadors his favour seeks. Then though to th'Fight himself he would not go, Yet he his Armour to Patroclus gave, And Myrmidons t'assist him 'gainst the Fo, And to the Scaean Gate the Trojans drave. And by Patroclus taken had been Troy, Had he not then been by Apollo slain, That unto Hector gave a glorious day, And th'Armour of my valiant Son to gain. Which makes me now come hither to request That you would make new Armour for my Son, A Shield, a Helmet, Armour for the breast And for the legs. For those he had are gone. Then (to her answer'd Vulcan) do not fear. Oh that when for him the harsh Fates enquire, To hide him from them I as able were, As make him Arms for Mortals to admire. This said, unto his Shop he went, and bad His golden serving Statues blow the fire. For twenty Bellowses in all he had To blow as he should, and his work require. And then into the fire he threw in Tin, And Brass, and Silver fine, and pretious Gold; And to the Socker puts the Anvile in, And th'heavie Hammer in one hand did hold,
Into his other hand the Tongs he takes, And forges first a mighty Shield and strong, And many various Figues in it makes, An fastens to the same a silver Thong, And bound the edge about with triple Brass. The Shield it self consisted of five plies, And with great art described in it was The surface of the Earth, the Sea and Skies, The Sun, the Moon at Full, and all the train Of Heaven, Pleiades, and Hyades, Orion, and the Bear men call the Wain That only never dives into the Seas, But always to Orion has an Eye. And in it were two Cities. In the one Good Chear and Weddings, and great Melody, And women at their dores stand looking on To see the Bridegroom as he passed by, And lusty youths that dancing with them go, To Citterns and to Pipes, and Hymen cry, And turn as swift as Tops upon the To▪ And full of people was the Market-place, Assembled at the hearing of a Cause. A man was slain. And this was then the Case. One said that he had satisfi'd the Laws, The other said that nothing he had paid; And on this Issue they will both be tri'd, And have their Proofs before the Judges laid. And clamour great of friends was on each side. The Cryers when they stilled had the cry, Into the Judges hands their Scepters gave, And in the midst, of Gold two Talents lie For him that has the better Cause to have. Before the other Town two Armies stood. The Foe resolved was to plunder it. The Town, to save it, offer'd half their good. The other to accept it thought not fit. Then up unto the Walls the Towns-men sent Their Women, Children, and their men grown old, And all the rest out from the City went, And Mars and Pallas with them, all in Gold,
And taller than the multitude by odds, Who in respect of them seem'd very low. For men are much inferior to the Gods. Then they before the Gate to counsel go. The Enemies themselves in ambush laid At th'watering place upon the Rivers brink, And Scouts sent out, which not far from them staid To tell them when the Cattle came to drink. And when they were informed they were high, And Shepherds two that did suspect no harm, They on the Shepherds and the Cattle fly. At which the other Army took th'Alarm, And rising up from Counsel, with their Horse Pursu'd, and soon they overtaken were. And then began the Fight. Without remorse They one another slay with Sword and Spear. And there Disorder plac'd was and Debate; And one born wounded out, another sound, Another dead was drag'd away by Fate With bloudy Coat and Armour on the ground So lively seemed to the Eye their features In fighting and in fetching off their slain, One would have thought they had been living creatures, And that the Fight had real been. Again Describ'd was in the same a spacious ground, And men at Plough, and at each Ridges end At turning of the Plough about, they found A man that for them did with Wine attend. And then again the Plough about they winde, And lab'ring to the other end go back; And as they plough, still what they leave behinde, Though Golden 'twas, to th'Eye appeared black. A wonder 'twas. Besides, in the same Shield Pourtrayed was a goodly Close of Wheat, And many Reapers working on the field, That threw it to the ground in handfuls great; And Boys that follow'd took it from the ground, And put it in the hands of Binders three, By whom they made were into Sheaves and bound. Which standing by, their Lord was glad to see.
His Squires not far off standing were aside; And at a Tree a Cow kill'd of the best, A Supper for the Reapers to provide, And to the woman gave it to be drest. And in't a golden Vineyard was pourtray'd. The Grapes that on it hung were black, and all The Vines supported and from drooping staid With silver Props, that down they could not fall. A Ditch there was about it black, and on The same a Hedge, the colour of it Tin, And Path unto it there was only one, By which the Fruit in Vintage was brought in. And on it Boys and Girls described were After a Fiddle play'd on by a Boy, That sing, dance, whistle, and full Baskets bear Of Bacchus gifts unto the house with joy. And in it was a Herd of Bulls and Kine, Part Gold, part Tin, and Herds-men four of Gold That to the Pasture drave them with Dogs nine T'a sedgy River; where two Lions bold Upon the horned Herd came from the Wood, And 'mongst the foremost seiz'd upon a Bull. The Dogs went to them neer and barking stood. Then oars the Bull. The Lions tear and pull. And in the same he pasture made for Seep Within a Valley large with Lodges good, And Folds, and cover'd Houses them to keep In safety from the wilde Beasts of the Wood. And in it was a Dancing-place pour tray'd Like that which Daedalus had made before For Ariadne, while in Crete he stay'd, And on it Dancing Youths and Maidens store Go hand in hand. The Girls, some clad in fine White Linen were, and some in Coats well spun Of glossie Wooll, that with the Oyl did shine; And ev'ry one a Garland gay had on. The Boys with silver Hangers were adorn'd And golden Swords, and with their well-taught Feet Sometimes they dancing in a Circle turn'd, Sometimes divided in two Ranks they meet.
And round about of people stood a throng, And in the lovely Dance took great delight. And in the midst two Tumblers sung the Song, And many wondrous things did in their sight. With th'Ocean then he all environed. The Shield now done he went about the rest, And made a Helmet strong fit for his head, And formed was of massie Gold the Crest, And Breast-plate shining brighter than the fire, And Pieces for his legs of ductile Tin. And when he all had done to his desire, He from his Forge return'd and brought it in, And in the hands of Thetis puts the same; Which she received from him joyfully. Then straightway from Olympus down she came, As swift as at a Fowl a Hawk can fly.
ILIAD. LIB. XIX. NO sooner in her Saffron Robe was seen Aurora, holding light above the ground, Than at the Ships the Silver-footed Queen Achilles by Patroclus weeping found, And with him many of his friends dismay'd. Then in, into the midst of them she went, And laid her hand on his, and to him said, My Son, why do you thus in vain lament? Come, since the Gods have slain him, leave him here, And take the Arms which I from Vulcan bring, Such as yet mortal man did never wear; Which, as she lays them down before him, ring. The Myrmidons were troubled at the sight, And turn'd their backs affrighted at the show. Achilles wrath was more enflamed by't. His eyes a fire, and bended was his brow. Yet when he had them in his hands was glad, And with great admiration them survai'd. And when enough beholden them he had, Unto his Mother he repli'd and said. Mother, I see such Arms from Vulcan here, As none but an immortal could have made, And presently will put them on, but fear Lest Flies the body should mean while invade, And in the wounds some filthy Vermin breed. And Thetis then repli'd, Son, do not fear. For I my self to that will take such heed, As, that although it should lie here a year, It shall no worse, but rather better be. Go you, and th'Argive Lords to Councel call And with King Agamemnon there agree, And put your anger off before them all;
And spend your choler boldly on your Foe. This said, she to Patroclus mov'd her feet, And dropt Ambrosia into his nose, To keep his body incorrupt and sweet. Achilles then went down unto the shore, And there the Heroes did to Councel call By name, though they were ready there before. But thither at the news came th'Argives all, Steers-men and Stewards of Provision. And all the rest to th'Counsel thronging in, Though but to see the face of Thetis Son. So long they thought he absent now had been. Tydides also and Ulysses came, Though of their wonds they yet not cured were, Both halting, leaning on their Spears, and lame. The last of all was Agamemnon there, Wounded by Coon, nor recovered yet; But th'Heroes for his coming not long staid. And when they were together all and set, Achilles rose, and t'Agamemnon said, Atrides, what great profit got we by This our unlucky strife about a Maid? I would it had her fortune been to die, Before I Siege unto Lyrnessus laid. To Hector and the Trojans comes the gain. The Greeks with grief will think on't while they live. But since it is too late now to complain, Go forth and orders for the Battle give: That I may to them go again and see If at the Ships they mean to stay all night. I think they will much rather wish to be Within the Walls of Troy than stay and fight. This said, the Greeks were glad and courage take, Assured that Achilles would them aid, And Agamemnon sitting to them spake (Which he excus'd) and thus unto them said. 'Twere fitter (Argive Princes) I stood out, That so my words you might the better hear; But such a number standing are about, My voice, though greater, would not reach your ear.
Nor were it fit for me to go about, And tell my minde to each man in his ear. T'Achilles therefore only I'll speak out, But so, if you attend, that all may hear. I often have, said he, been blamed by The Greeks for taking from you your fair prize, When not in me, but Jove the fault did ly, And in Erinnys and the Destinies, That did me of my wits that day bereave. For what can I do when the Gods do all? Jove's Daughter Ate did me then deceive, From whom, on Men and Gods great troubles fall. Her Feet are soft, because she never treads On th'Earth; but when she mischief has to do, Walks in the Air, and puts it in mens heads, And sometimes does shrewd turns t'Immortals too. For Juno, though but of the Female Sex, That day that Hercules was to be born, Was able Jove the best o'th'Gods to vex, And labour of Alemena to adjourn. For Jove before th'Immortals having said That he a man that day to light would bring By whom his Race in Greece should all be sway'd, You jest, said Juno, you mean no such thing. I'll not believe't unless you first be sworn That he shall of your Seed in Greece be King, That of a woman shall this day be born. This said, straight Jove no fraud imagining The great Oath took. But after did repent. And Juno from Olympus lofty head Leapt down, and t'Argas of Achaia went, And brought the Wife of Sthenelus to bed. And there was she delivered of a Son, That was by Perseus of Jove's discent, Though she but seven months had of him gone. And then to Thebes she to Alomena went, And hindred her that day from bringing forth. Then up to Jupiter she came again, And said, This day is born a man of worth, Eurysteus in Arges fit to reign,
And of your Seed. And Jove in choler then Took Ate by the head, and swung her round, And swore she ne're to Heav'n should come agen. And having said it, threw her to the ground And always after sigh'd to see the pain To which Eurysteus did put his Son; As I do when I see the Argives slain By Hector, grieve to think what I have done. But since that Jove has made me to offend, I for my Errour willing am to pay. Come then, and your assistance to us lend, And quickly bring your Myrmidons away. And all that by Ulysses yesterday I to you promis'd shall performed be. Or presently, if you will for it stay, That you th'atoning Gifts your self may see. Achilles then unto him thus replies. As for your Gifts to give them me or no, Yet only in your choice (Atrides) lies. But now 'tis time we to the Trojans go. To make fine Speeches here is but delay. But let your men o'th'Field Achilles see Through Squadrons of the Trojans making way. The Argives then encouraged will be. Ulysses then t' Achilles answered, Godlike Achilles, mighty as you are, Urge not the Greeks to fight till they be see; They fasting cannot long endure the Ware. And likely 'tis the Battle will be lng; Especially if Gods both sides assist; And Bread and Wine is that which makes men strong. Let therefore now the Argives be dismist. Who can, d'ye think, the toil of Battle bear From morning unto night, unless he first With food his heart and feeble limbs do chear? He would be heavie, hungry, and athirst. ut he that is with food wel satissi'd, Courageous is, and fight will all the day. Hs heart and limbs are strong, and will abde As long as any on the Field dare stay.
Come, let the people now to Breakfast go, And Agamemnon send the Presents in Into th' Assembly where we sit, that so By the Achaeans all they may be seen; And let him take an Oath before us, that Briscis Bed he never went unto, Nor all this while has done unto her, what A Husband to his Wife is us'd to do. And you your anger henceforth bridle must. And you Atrides feast him like a friend, And for hereafter learn to be more just, Nor think't a shame for men their faults to mend. Uysses (said Atrides) I am joy'd The counsel you have given us to hear. For 'tis but reason all that you have said. And I with all my heart the Oath will swear. And let Achilles, though in haste, stay here With all the rest, that they my Gifts may see, And Witnesses be to the Oath I swear. And for the Gifts (Ulysses) presently Go you your self with good men whom you will, And bring them from my Tent, and set them here. For what they are, you well remember still. The same that by you promis'd from me were. And you Talthybius provide a Swine, That we may offer up a Sacrifice To Jove, the Sun, and other Pow'rs Divine. This said, Achilles to him thus replies, Renowned Agamemnon, I think yet Another time for Feast had better been; As when in War a pause we intermit, And whilst yet unabated is my spleen. We see our friends lie torn upon the ground. The Greeks to battle and revenge I prompt. You think my counsel therein is not sound, And seek with Feasting to divert them from't. But let us fasting to the Battle go, And make good Chear when we come back agen, And have reveng'd our selves upon the Fo. For I will neither eat nor drink till then.
For whilst Patroclus mangled lieth here, And they that love him stand lamenting oy, There nothing is that I can think good Chear But Slaughter, Bloud, and Groans of men that die. To this Ulysses did again reply, Achilles, you have not in Greece your Peer, For Martial worth; yet Elder much am I, And more have seen; I pray you therefore hear. The fare of War soon breeds Satiety. Much Straw there is, but Harvest none, or small. If Jove once hold the Scales unevenly, Innumerable are the men that fall. When then an end of weeping shall we see? The Bellies of the Argives must not mourn. They that go to the War must patient be, And let the dead unto their Graves be born, And not weep over them above a day. And we that safe from Fight are come agan, When we are fed can all day sighting stay. All other Exhortation is vain. Let therefore now the Greeks to Breakfast go, Which is the Soldiers best encouragement. Then all together fall upon the Fo. And when he this had said, away he went. And with him took Meges, Meriones, Theas, Antilochus, and Thrasymed, And Menalippus, and added unto these (The Martial Son of Creon) Lycomed. And brought the Presents from Atrides Tent, Sev'n Tripods great, and twenty Caldrons bright, Twelve Horses and sev'n Women with them went, And fair'st of all Briseis made them eight. Talents of Gold Ulysses weigh'd out ten, And took the pains himself to carry that. The rest was carri'd by the younger men, And laid before the Princes as they sat. Then Agamemnon rose, and by him neer Talthybius attended with a Swine, From which Atrides clpt a lock of hair, And lifts his hands unto the Pow'rs Divine,
O Jve (said he) the chiefest of the Gods, O Sun, and Earth, and Furies under ground, That in your hands carry th'Eternal rods To punish such as perjur'd shall be found, My hand I on Briseis never laid, Neither for Bed, nor any other cause; But always in my Tent untoucht she staid, Nor ever by me once attempted was. And if herein I told you have a Lye, Let all the dreadful torments that are due To such as guilty are of Perjury Upon me fall. This said, the Swine he slew. Then out the Stomach of the Swine did cut, And that Talthybius took in his hands, And threw't into the Sea the Fish to glut. That done, Achilles up amongst them stands. 'Tis thou, O Jove, said he, that spoilest all. Briseis at my Tent had stayed still, Nor had her going from me mov'd my gall, But that thou hadst a mind the Greeks to kill. This said, the Councel he dissolv'd, and sent Th' Achaeans to their Ships to break their fast. Then ev'ry man unto his own Ship went, And busie were about their short repast. Mean while the Myrmidons the Presents bear T'Achilles Ships, and laid them in his Tent, And thither also brought the Women were. But th'Horses to the Field his Servants sent. Briseis, when she saw Patroclus lie With many gastly wounds dead on the Biere, She flung her arms about him and did crie, And her white Neck, and Face, and Breast did tear, And weeping over him did thus complain. O dear Patroclus, whom alive I left, Now when I to you am return'd again, Ay me, I find you of your life bereft. How fast my Woes on one another fall! The Husband which my Parents made me wed, And three good Brothers of one Mother all I saw before Lyrnessus Massacred.
And then, Patroclus, you to comfort me, Told me that I should be Achilles Wife, And to him married in Pthia be. But now since you have also lost your life, I never of my Woe shall see an end. And then the other women wept and roar'd, All for Patroclus, as they did pretend. But inwardly their own Fate they deplor'd. The Greeks again about Achilles stood, And urged him, ere he to Battle went, Himself to strengthen with a little food, But could by no means get him to consent. My friends, said he, importune me no more To eat or drink before we go to fight. My heart within me now is vexed sore. Fear not, I shall endure from morn to night. This said, the other Princes from him went. The two Atrides and Ulysses stay. And Phoenix and old Nestor at his Tent, And King Idomeneus, his grief t'allay: But nothing they could say did any good, So fiercely he was set upon the Fight; And looking on Patroclus body stood. And then afresh lamented at the sight. Sweet friend, said he, you wont were to provide Good Breakfast for me when I was to figh; But since that comfort now I am deni'd, In meat and drink I take no more delight. For greater hurt cannot upon me fall, Although for want of me my Father die, While absent from him at the Trojan Wall For this accursed Helen's sake I lie; Nor though my Son Nptolemus should die, Whom I in Scyros Isle left to be bred, Not thinking then that here both you and I Should lose our lives; but that when I was dead He should by you be to my House convey'd, And made to know my Servants and Estate. For Peleus now is very much decay'd, If quite he have not finished his Fate.
When this Achilles weeping spoken had, The good old men that also had their fears For those they left at home, were very sad. And Jove had pity on Achilles tears, And speaking to Athena, Child, said he, Your love to valiant men, I see, is gone. Achilles must no more remembred be. Behold how for his friend he maketh moan, And takes no food, though th'other Princes feast. Let not his strength by hunger be decay'd; Distil Ambrosia into his breast, And Nectar. Straight Athena him obey'd. And swift as any Harpy came away, And arming of themselves she found the rest. But that Achilles strength might not decay She dropt Ambrosia into his breast, And Nectar sweet, and out the Argives went. As when from Jove descendeth a thick Snow, Which Boreas bloweth through the Element; Such of the armed Argives was the show; So bright their burnsht Arms and Helmets were, The lustre up to Heaven did rebound, And smiling all about the Fields appear, And at the moving of their feet resound. Achilles then his mighty Arms puts on, And grinds his teeth, and fire was in his eyes, And hasted to the Battle to be gone; So much his heart did at the Trojans rise. First to his legs the Leg-pieces he ti'd With Buckles of fine silver all along, And next his Breast-plate to his breast appli'd, And on his shoulder then his Sword he hung, Then up into his hand his Shield he took Large, strong, and mighty, radiant was the same, And from afar it like the Moon did look, Or, as to Seamen, on the wolds a flame, That sure are of a storm when that they see, And from their friends to scatter'd be by wind To places where they not desire to be; So then the Buckler of Achilles shin'd.
And next he puts his Helmet on his head, Which shined like a Comet in the Air, So finely Vulcan had it polished, And made it seem to blaze with golden hair. And then to try his Arms if fit they were, He walkt about, and thought he wings had worn. And last from out a Tub he took his Spear (Which by his Father formerly was born, And made by Chiron in Mount Pelion) Which no man but Achilles now could wield, Since Peleus strength decayed was and gone. A fatal Spear to Heroes in the Field. And Alcimus then and Automedon The Horses to the Chariot made fast, And harnest them and put their Bridles on, And back unto the Seat the Reyns they cast. With Whip in hand then mounts Automedn, And after him Achilles not long staid Yclad in Armour shining like the Sun, And roughly to his Horses speaking said, Xanthus and Balius take heed I pray, A little better of your Charretier, Than of Patroclus you did yesterday, Whom dead and stript you left behind you here. This said, his sprightly head low Xanthus hung, Till on the ground his golden Mane was laid. And Juno humane Speech gave to his Tongue. And to Achilles then he spake and said, Yes, great Achilles, we will save you now; But know ye, that your utmost day is nigh, Not by our faults; the Gods will have it o, And, which cannot be shun'd, your Desiny. And that Patroclus is disarm'd and slain, 'Twas not because we lazy were or slow, But that Priamids might honour gain, Apollo slew him with his silver Bow. For we could have gone faster than the wnd, If that could to him any good have done. The thread of life which for him was design'd Was by the Destinies drawn out and spun.
This then said Xanthus, but could not proceed. His Speech the Furies from him took again. Xanthus (repli'd Achilles) there's no need For you to prophecie my death in vain. I know already that I here must die Far from my Parents; yet I mean to stay Till I have made the Trojans hence to flie. This said, his Myrmidons he led away.
ILIAD. LIB. XX. WHilst with Achilles th' Argives armed stand, And on the Plain the Trojans ready all, Jove to the Goddess Thetis gave command The Common Councel of the Gods to call. Then down she came, and calling went about. Ye Gods, said she, Jove calls you to his house. And straight the Rivers from their streams came out All but their Father old Oceanus. The Nymphs from ev'ry Meadow, Spring, and Grove Up to the Mount Olympus went in hast; And when they come were to the house of Jove, In Porches round on polish'd Seats were plac'd. And Neptune also having heard the Call, Leapt from the Sea up to Olympus Hill, And sitting in the midst before them all To Jove he spake, and said, What is your will? D'ye call us hither our advice to hear; To give the day to Trojan or to Greek? For I perceive the Battle now is near. My mind (said Jupiter) you need not seek. For of the Greks distrest I have a care. But on Olympus I intend to stay, And please my self with looking on the Warre. But let the other Gods go down to Troy, And take which side they will. For else I fear, Achilles whom the Trojans did so dread, When in the Battle no Immortals were, And more enrag'd is since his friend is dead; When he has driv'n the Trojans from the Field, Will then directly go to Ilium, And overthrow the Wall which you did build, Before the time (by Fate appointed) come.
This said, the Fight began. On th' Argives side Stood Juno, Pallas, Neptune, Mercury; And Vulcan taking in his strength great pride, Went halting 'mongst them with his legs away. On th'other side, Mars for the Trojans stood, And Phaebus, and his Sister Artemis, Their Mother Leto, and Scamander Flood, And Venus that of all the fairest is. And whilst they: from the Battle stood aside, The Argives mightily encourag'd were, And in Achilles presence took great pride; For long it seem'd they had not seen him there, The Trojans when they saw him shook for fear, So like to Mars he was, his Arms so bright. But when the Gods on both sides with them were, Then all about was filled with affright, And in the Air heard was Athena shrill As from the Ditch, and sometimes from the shore, And Mars sometimes from callidons Hill, And sometimes as at Troy was heard to rote, The Trojans he, but she the Greeks t'incite. Thus by the Gods from Heav'n encouraged The Armies met, and cruel was the Fight, And terribly above Jove thundered, And Nepture shook the Earth on ev'ry side, The Argive Ships, and stately Trojan Tow'rs, The Plain beneath, and lofty Tops of Ide. And frighted with it were th'Infernal Pow'rs, And Pluto starting from his ugly Throne To Neptune cried out his hand to hold, For fear his dismal dwelling should be shown To Men and Gods so hateful to behold. So great a noise the Gods make when they fight. Phoebus to Neptune now opposed is, And Pallas stands against rude Mars his might, And Juno matched is with Artemis, And Mercury against Latona stood. But hei that Vulcan had to deal withal, Was the divine and deep swift-running Flood, Which Xarthus Gods, but Men Scamander call.
Thus were th'Immortals matched one to one. Achilles would have given any good That he had matched been to Priam's Son, T'have made to Mars a Breakfast of his blood. And then Apollo sets Aeneas on T'encounter with Achilles; and array'd I'th' person and the voice of Lycaon Came to his side, and thus unto him said, Aeneas, when the Wine was in your head, I oft have heard you of your self say this, That 'gainst Achilles you in fight durst stand. What say you to him now? See, there he is. Priamides (Aeneas then repli'd) Why would you have me with Achilles fight? I once already was upon Mount Ide Keeping our Cattle, by him put to flight; And thence for safety to Lyrnessus fled. But he the Town Lyrnessus quickly won And Pedasus. And then I had been dead If Jove had not inabled me to run. For Pallas with him was and made him way, Striking his Foes before him with affright, And urging him the Trojans to destroy. 'Tis more than Man can do oppose his mght. One God or other always with him is To put aside the Spears before they come. And whom he aims at he doth never miss, And to the mark his Spear flies always home But if the Gods unpartial would be, Although of solid Brass his body were, He should not eas'ly get the Victorie. Aeneas (then said Phoebus) do not fear, But pray unto the Gods. Your Mother is Jove's Daughter Cytherea, as they say, A greater Goddess by descent than his; And therefore boldly to him go your way. His mighty words and threats you must not fear. This said; he courage breath'd into his breat. Then through the foremost went he with his Spear, And Helmet of strong Brass with glittring Crest.
Now Juno of his going was aware, And calling to her th'other Gods, she said, Neptune and Pallas, let us have a care; I see a danger that ought to be wai'd. Aeneas yonder with his spear in hand, Goes to Achilles with a mind to fight. Let's keep him off, or by Achilles stand, And add both to his courage and his might, That he may know, the Gods of greatest Pow'r Are on his side, and those that stand for Troy In vertue much to us inferiour, And dare not in the Field against us stay; And that we from Olympus hither came To save him now; hereafrer whatsoere Mischances come he must endure the same, Since at his Birth they woven with him were. For if unknown our purpose to him be, To meet a God will put him into fear. 'Tis dangerous Gods as they are to see; So terrible to mortals they appear. And Neptune unto Juno then repli'd, You are too fierce. A fight between the Gods I would not have begin upon our side. Nor does it need; so much we have the ods. But let's go hence to yonder Mountain top, And leave the Battle in the hands of men. If Mars or Phoebus then Achilles stop, We to the Battle will return agen, And send them to Olympus home with shame, 'Mongst other of the Gods at Court to stay, Well beaten at our hands, disgrac'd, and tame. And when he this had said, he led away. And when he come was to the Castle-wall, Which was by th' Trojans built for Hercules By Pallas help, to save him from the Whale That much annoy'd the Trojans from the Seas, He and his Party of the Gods stay'd there Concealed by a Cloud, and looking on. But Mars and Phoebus with their Party were Sitting upon the Brow of Callidon.
Thus from the Field the Gods on both sides staid Consulting how, their friends the day might win. But neither side effectually would aid. For not a God amongst them durst begin. Now cover'd over was the Field with men Both Horse and Foot array'd in Armour bright. The Earth resounded with their feet. And then Two warriours in the midst stood out to fight, Achilles and Aeneas the two best. And first Aeneas with fierce looks went on With Spear in hand, and Shield before his breast. To meet him then advanced Thetis Son. As when to chace a Lion from the Plain The people of the Town with Weapons rise, The Lion looks upon them with disdain, As if he did their multitude despise; But when a Spear from any of them comes, He whips himself int' anger with his Tail, And terribly goes on, and yawns and foams, To kill, or to be killed if he sail: So at the seeing of Aeneas Spear, Achilles did himself to th'Fight provoke. And when they stood to one another near, Achilles first unto Aeneas spoke. Aeneas, why (said he) come you away So far before the rest? To fight with me? Will Priam, think you, make you King of Troy, If by your hand perhaps I slain should be? No. He is wise, and Sons has of his own. Or wll the Trojans set you cut great Lands, Some to be planted, others to be sown When ever I am killed by your hands? But that I hope will never be. You know How once I made you run down Ida Hill. Into Lyrnessus in great baste; and how You nere lookt back for fear of greater ill; And how the Town I won, and led away The women Captives; though 'twas then Jove's will That from my hands you should escape that day, You must not look that you should do so still.
And therefore I advise you to be gone, And in the throng o'th' Trojans to abide. For ev'ry Fool his harm knows when 'tis done. This said, Aeneas to him thus repli'd, Pelides, do not think you can me fright, As if I were a Child, with words of scorn. For if in evil words I took delight, I cou'd as many easily return. We one anothers Parents know by fame. Peleus your Father was, Anchises mine. Your Mother is Divine, Thetis by name; And Venus mine, of the Celestial line. And one of them to day must lose a Son. For 'tis not words can fetch us off this place. But if you'll know my Gereration, I'll by my Father likewise count my Race. For first by Jove was Dardanus begot That rul'd the Dardans under Ida Hill In divers Towns. For Ilium yet was not. But at the foot of Ida they dwelt still. And Dardan Erichthonius begat, That was the wealthiest of mortal men. Three thousand Mares he had, and unto that, As many Foals all feeding on the Fen. And twelve of these were got by Boreas, That leapt their Dams in likeness of a Horse, And ore the ears of standing Corn could pass And never make them stoop; such was their force; And run upon the Sea and never wet Their hoofs, which very wondrous was to see. And Erichthonius did Tros beget. And Tros the Father was of Children three, Ilus, Assaracus, and Ganymed. But Ganymed was taken up by Jove (So fair he was) and t'Heaven carried, To minister unto the Gods above. The Son of Ilus was Laomedon, And he Tithonus got and Priamus, And Lampus, Clytius, Icetaon. But Capys Son was of Assaracus.
Capys begat Anchises, and he me. I need not be ashamed of my Race. Though Vertue lieth not in Pedigree, But given is to them whom Jove will grace. Then let us from reproachful words abstain, Whereof there is great plenty ev'ry where To serve all men that will them entertain, That as a man will speak, so he may hear. What need we like two women in the street, When they cannot agree, to rail and scoff? Who, say they true or false, are undiscreet. For from my purpose you'll not put me off With scornful words, before your force I try, Let's therefore here no longer talk but fight. And as he spake his Spear he letteth fly, Which on Achilles mighty Shield sell right, And terribly it made the same resound. Achilles far before him held his Shield, For fear Aeneas through it might him wound; Though Heav'nly Arms to mortals will not yield, But that he thought not on. Nor did the Spear Well driven as it was and strong, pass through. For of five plies that labour'd in it were By Mulciber, it pierced only two, And those were Brass. There still remained three, The one of Gold, the other two of Tin; And stopped by the Brass it could not be; But coming to the Gold it there stuck in. And then Achilles threw his Spear at him, Which flying with great force pass'd through his Shield, Where thin the Brass and Hide was near the Brim, And over him it flew into the Field. For when Aeneas coming saw the Spear, He crouched low, and held his Buckler high: And though the same proceeded but from fear, It made the Spear above his head to fly. Aeneas at the first amazed stands. But when Achilles with his Sword came on, He stoopt, and from the ground took in his hands, That neer unto him lay a mighty stone,
Which two men, such as now are, scarce could bear, And hit him had on th'head or breast in vain, That with Celestial Arms defended were, And by Achilles Sword himself been slain, If it had not by Neptune been foreseen. Who speaking to the Gods did thus complain. O Gods, said he, great pain I now am in To see Aeneas by Achilles slain, For harkning to Apollo foolshly; Who will not help him though he set him on. But wherefore should we let Aeneas die Others to please, when he no fault has done? Let's therefore save him lest we Jove offend, Who now the off spring of King Priam hates. And that Aeneas Race shall without end The Trojans rule, 'tis ordered by the Fates. This said, to Neptune Juno did reply, If you Aeneas have a mind to save, Save him your self. For well you know that I And Pallas 'mongst the Gods sworn often have, That neither of us shall a Trojan aid, Though Ilium it self were in a flame. Away went Neptune soon as that was said, And to Aeneas and Achills came. And ore Achilles eyes a mist he spred, And drew his Spear out of Aeneas Shield; And to Achilles that he carried, And laid it at his feet upon the Field. And then Aeeas lifted by the force Of an Immortal God skipt to the Rear, Ore many Ranks of Heroes and of Horse, Unto the Caucons that the hindmost were. Where Neptune standing by him spake and said, Aeneas, who was't of th'Immortal Gods, That to engage Achilles you betray'd, That stronger is than you by so much ods? Henceforth take heed you come not in his way, Lest by his hand you die. When he is gone, You boldly on the best adventure may. For of the rest you slain shall be by none.
This said, he to Achilles went agen, And made the mist to vanish from his eyes And round about him lookt Achilles then, And to his feet return'd his Spear espies. And said unto himself, O strange, what's this? The man is gone, my Spear come back I see. Aeneas of the Gods beloved is, And I thought all he said was vanitie. But fare him well. He will not come agen, So glad he is that he hath scaped so. Now I will first put courage in my men, And then unto some other Trojans go. Then through the Argive Ranks he went, and said, No longer of the Trojans be so shy, But man to man go close. Be not afraid, Strong as I am, you cannot think that I Can follow such a multitude and fight. For neither Mars nor Pallas can do that, (Though Gods Immortal) and of so great might, That mortal men cannot resist. Yet what My strength alone with hands and feet can do, I think I shall not any thing forbear, But break their Ranks and make you way clean hrough, Nor shall he joyful be whom I come near. Whilst this Achilles to the Argives said, Hector no less the Trojans did excite. Why should you of Achilles be afraid? With words 'tis easie 'gainst the Gods to fight, That are too strong to fight with with a Spear. And to Achilles now I mean to go, Though Fire his hands, and Steel his body were. For more by half he says than he can do. When Hector to the Trojans this had said, The Fight began, and mighty was the cry. And then for Hector Phoebus was afraid, And presently came in, and standing nigh, Hector (said he) return into the throng. Take heed. With Thetis Son fight not at all Now nor henceforth (he for you is too strong) Lest by his Spear or Sword you chance to fall.
Thus Hector by the God admonished Into the Trojan Troops retir'd again. The Trojans then before Achilles fled. And by him first phition was slain, Whom the Nymph Neis to Olryteus bare In Ida at the foot of Tmolus Hill, Great Troops he brought unto the Trojan Warre, And thought he could the great Pelides kill. But coming on he met Achilles Spear, The fatal Spear, that cleft his head in twain. Achilles then trumphed ore him there Though fallen to the ground he were and slain. So; Otryntides, die there on the Earth; Though where runs Hyllus into Hermus deep, On the Gygean Lake you had your Birth. This said, he left him in eternal sleep, For th'Argive Charret-wheels to crush and grind. And after him he slew Demoleon, A Warrier good, and of undaunted mind, That of Antenor was a valiant Son. Him through the head with Spear in hand he smot, And out together came both bloud and brain. His Helmet though of Brass, preserv'd him not. And after he Demoleon had slain He with his Spear pursu'd Hippodamas, Who from his Charre had leapt unto the ground Frighted, and now before him running was, And gave him on the back a mortal wound, Whereat he blows and roars like any Bull Brought to the Altar for a Sacrifice, When young men by the Horns him thither pull By violence; then down he falls and dies. Unluckily then in Achill's sight Was Polydorus Priam's youngest Son And best belov'd; whom he forbad to fight, Though swiftest of them all he were to run. But he the vertue of his feet to shew, Betwixt the Hoasts ran up and down the Field, Until a Spear Achilles at him threw, And with a wound upon the back him kill'd.
Out at his Navil went the Spear again, And for his Guts to follow made a way. But Hector when he saw his Brother slain, Amongst his Troops he could no longer stay, But going to Achilles shook his Spear. Then speaking to himself Achilles said, The man that slew Patroclus I see here. We must no more each other now avoid. And sowrely on him looking, said, Come near, That I may quickly of you make an end. And Hector to him answer'd without fear, In vain Achilles your proud words you spead. Such words as these may Children terrifie. And I can speak that Language when I list And though you be a mightier man than I, The Victory does not in that consist, But he shall have it whom the Gods appoint Though he be weaker, if his Spear fly true. Which mine may do, and sharp is at the point. This said, his Spear he at Achilles threw. Which back to Hector's feet Athena blew With soft and gentle breath without a sound. And straight Achilles thundring to him flew. But then Apollo snatcht him from the ground. Which is by any God done in a trice; And in a Mist conceal'd him from his sight. And after him Achilles leapt up thrice, And thrice the Air obscure in vain did smie. Then whoopt he after him and threatning said, Dog, an ill death agen thou scaped hast, That fighting, to Apollo pray'st for aid. But yet I shall dispatch you at the last, If any of the Gods for me appear. But now I must to other Trojans go. This said, at Dryops straight he threw his Spear, And sent his Soul unto the Shades below. To meet Demuchus then he went half way, That with his Sword eame toward him to fight. Him with a wound i'th' neck he made to stay; And with his Sword then killed hi
Then by him slain the Sons of Bias were Laogonus and Dardanus, the one With his great Sword, the other with his Spear. And next he killed Tros Alastor's Son, Who not resisted but fell at his knee, And beg'd his life, for being of his age, Hoping for that he pitied might be. But that Achilles wrath could not asswage. He quite mistook his nature like a child. For cruel was Achilles and hard harted; But he sweet-natur'd thought he was and mild. Whereas he never thought how others smarted. And then Achilles gave him such a wound That with the bloud his Liver started out. And there he left him dying on the ground, And for more Trojan Leaders lookt about. Then coming to him he saw Mulius, And strook him through the head from ear to ear. Then with his Sword he killed Echeclus Antenor's Son that to him came too near. Then on the arm he hit Demolion. The Spear stuck in, and forc'd him there to stay. Achilles then came furiously on, And with his Sword he skim'd his head away Helmet and all. Then Regmus with a wound Upon the belly he slew with his Spear, Who from his Charret fell unto the ground. And after him he slew his Charretier Artitbous, whilst he his Horses turns. As a thick Coppice in a windy day, If set on fire unmercifully burns; So went Achillès killing ev'ry way. As Oxen from the Straw tread out the Corn, So trampling went his Horses ore the dead, That with their Bucklers by the wheels were torn, And th'Axle-tree with bloud was covered And Spoaks; in part with droppings from the wheels (For going on the ground the wheels were goy) And partly beaten up with th'Horses heels, And bloudy were his hards; and al for glory.
ILIAD. LIB. XXI. WHen to the River Xanthus they were come, The Trojans at the Ford half of them pass'd, And on the High way fled to Ilium; The other leapt into the Stream for haste, And with the winding flood there swimming strive. As Locusts when by sudden Tier sprung In swarms unto the River fly and dive; So they themselves into Scamander flung. And filled was the Stream with Horse and Men. Achilles on the Bank-side lest his Spear Set up on end against a Tree; and then Achilles leapt in with his Sword; and there He kill'd as fast as he could turn and strike, And with their bloud the Stream was dyed red. And grievous 'twas to hear them groan and sarike, That in the flood were by him massacred. As when the Dolphins in a River are, The other Fish scud to the Banks in sholes, So did it with the swimming Trojans fare, They fled to th'Banks and hid themselves in holes. And twelve of them alive Achilles took, And with their Girdles hands behind them bound, Then eaus'd them to be led out of the Brook. And to the Ships conveyed safe and sound; To slay them at Patroclus Funeral. Then from the River out he came again, And Priam's Son Lycaon met withal That from Scamander flying was in vain. Whom Prisoner he had taken once before, When in his Father's ground he was by night Cutting of Spoak staves from a Sycamore, And on him now the second time did light.
To Lemnos first he sent him to be sold, And bought he there was by Eetion. Achilles for him had good store of Gold. But he got loose and home again did run. And there eleven days he staid; and well Was entertained in his Father's house. The twelfth into Achilles hands he fell Agen, that sent him then to Erebus. Achilles seeing him without a Spear, Without a Shield, and nothing on his head (For he had cast away his Arms for fear When almost tir'd he from the River fled) Achilles grumbling to himself then said, O strange! These Trojans are stout-hearted men, That being sent away, will not be staid, But to the War must needs come back agen. Here's one I sent to Lemnos to be sold, And now is come to fight with me agen. 'Tis strange the Sea could not him from me hold, That can against their wills hold other men. But well, I'll give him of my Spear a tast, And send him to the Earth, that I may see Whether the Earth or no can hold him fast, By which are holden better men than he. Whilst this Achilles said, the man came near, To beg his life; for loath to die was he. To wound him then Achilles lifts his Spear. But under it he got unto his knee, And with one hand laid hold upon his Spear, And on Achilles knee the other laid. And kneeling down before him shook with fear, And lamentably to him speaking said, Achilles, I beseech you pity me, And save my life although 'twere but for this, That I your Pris'ner was. Captivitie At least for life a Sanctuary is. And when you unto Lemnos sent me had, You for me got a hundred Oxens price. And for my Ransom now I should be glad You would be pleas'd to take that value thrice.
'Tis but twelve days since I came back to Troy. And all the way had been in grievous pain, And when I thought I should my friends enjoy, I fallen am into your hands again. O how have I so much incur'd the hate Of Jupiter to shorten thus my life! Or from my Mother cometh my hard fate Laothoe, whom Priam made his Wife? Alhous got her, King of Pedasus. And she of Priam's many Wives was one. For many more beside had Priamus; And by her had me and another Son, And both of us must by you now be kill'd. For Polydore you have already slain, Whilst like a Child he ran about the Field. And for my self (I fear) I pray in vain. But what am I that must no Quarter have? Though by the Father I am Hector's Brother, That sent the good Patroclus to his grave, Yet I am nothing to him by the Mother. Thus pleaded he. Achilles then replied, Tell me no more of Ransome or of Quarter. 'Tis true, I did before Patroclus died, Suffer some Trojans for their lives to barter. But now if any of the Trojans fall Into my hands before the Town of Troy, And those of Priam's Race the least of all Must from me hope to get alive away. But wherefore (friend) should you think much to die? Patroclus a much better man is gone. You see how strong and tall a man am I, And of a noble Father am the Son, And have a Goddess for my Mother. Yet At morn, or noon, or night, with Shaft or Spear I'm sure by one or other to be hit And lose my life. Why therefore should you sear? This said, Lycaon's heart and limbs both fail'd, And of the Spear let's go his hold, and wide His hands he spread and his sad fate bewayl'd. Achilles then his Sword drew from his side,
And gave him on the neck a mighty wound. The Swords whole bredth into his neck he took, And presently he fell dead to the ground. Achilles threw him then into the Brook, And said insulting, Go now to the deep, And feed the Fishes that will lick your blood; Your Mother over you shall never weep, But to the Sea you go shall with the Flood, Where to the curled water leaps a Fish, Upon Lycaon's dainty fat to feed. And until Troy be by us won, I wish That th'other Trojans may no better speed, But flying, by my Spear be tost like Hay (Scamander shall afford them little aid, Though to his Stream they Bulls and Horses slay) Till for Patroclus death they all have paid. With these his haughty words Scamander griev'd, Contrived how Achilles to repel, And how the Trojans best might be reliev'd That to escape into his water fell. Achilles then Asteropaeus spi'd Pelegons Son the Son of Axius, Of Axius the River deep and wide By th' Daughter of King Acessamenus. And to him with a mind to kill him went As he was newly come out of the water. But Xanthus gave him such encouragement (Because Achilles fill'd his Stream with slaughter) That there Asteropaeus for him staid, And both in right and left hand had a Spear And never sought the Combat to avoid. And when they were to one another near, Who are you (said Achilles) and whose Son, That in my anger dares approach me so? For I in Arms encountred am by none But those whose Parents destin'd are to wo. Asteropaeus to him then repli'd. Why ask you me whose Son and who I am? The Forces of Paeonia I guide; To whom eleven days since I hither came.
Of my descent the Author Axius is, The fairest Stream that on the Earth doth ru. His Son was Pelegon, and I am his. Thus who I am 'tis told you, and whose Son. And now, Achillis, it is time to fight. This said, from his two hands his two Spears fly (For both Asteropaeus hands were right) The one of them his mighty Shield did try But pierc'd it not; the plate of Gold withstood. The other gave his arm a little wound Neer to his elbow, and fetcht out some blood, And so beyond him went and stuck i'th'ground. Achilles then his Spear with all his strength Incensed at Asteropaeus threw, Which missing into th'Earth went half its length. Then from his side his Sword Achilles drew. Asteropaeus to Achilles Spear Went back, and at it thrice he pluckt in vain; Then thought to break it; but Achilles there Was with his Sword, and with that he was slain. For by the Sword his belly was so ript, That all his bowels issu'd at the wound. There him Achilles of his Armour stript, And ore him crow'd as he lay on the ground. Lie there, said he; shall Rivers Sons compare With th'off-spring of the blessed Gods above? The Issue of a Brook, you say, you are, But I the Issue am of mighty Jove, For Peleus my Father was, and his Was Aeacus whom Jupiter begot. But greater he than any River is, Then equal to his Race, their Race is not. A River great enough you had at hand, But that you found had done you little good. For nothing can the Pow'r of Jove withstand; Not Achelous with his Royal Flood, Nor th'Ocean it self of Waters King, From whose abundance Seas their water take And ev'ry River, Stream, and Well, and Spring That goeth on the Earth, and ev'ry Lake;
Who when they but a clap of Thunder hear, From Jove some danger presently they dread. This said, from th'Earth he pulled out his Spear, And left o'th'Sands Asteropaeus dead. Where Xanthus from his wound shall wash the blood, And Eels and other fish seed on his fat. Achilles then pursued those that stood Upon Scamander Bank amazed at The sury of the giddy Stream; and when They saw their Leader killed in their sight By th'nand of terrible Achilles, then They ev'ry one betook themselves to flight. Then with his Sword he slew Thersilochus, And after him the stout Astypylus, And Ophelestes, Mydon, Aenius, And after these, Mnesus, and Thrasius. And had shed yet much more Paeoian blood, But that Scamander at it took offence, And like a man above his water stood, And to Achilles spake his mind from thence. Achilles, truly you excel in might, And Acts you do of great iniquitie, And by the Gods assisted are in fight. But though by Jove you should allowed be To kill the Trojans, kill them on the Plain. My Stream so choaked is with Carcasses, I cannot drive my waters to the Main. I wonder you should do such deeds as these. Let those you kill be killed openlie. Go therefore from me. Thus Scamander said. And then unto the River answer'd he, Divine Scamander, you shall be obey'd. But to pursue the Trojans I mean still, Till I have chas'd them up to Ilium. And fight with Hector, if he stay, I will, And see if his or my last day be come. Scamander then unto Apollo spake: Phoebus, said he, you Jove's commandment slight, That bad you of the Trojans care to take, And to desend them all you could till night.
Into the Stream Achilles leaps agen. At which Scamander swelling lifts his Waves, And out he throws the bodies of dead men, And from Achilles hand the living saves. Then throws a Billow on Achilles head. And heavie on his Shield the Current lay; And on the ground by no means he could tread, So fast the River carri'd him away. But ore the water hung an Elmen limb Which he laid hold on. Then fell down the Tree Into the River. And that saved him, And served as a Bridge to set him free. And swiftly then Achilles from him ran. But after him Scamander sent his water, Resolv'd to quench the fury of the man, And save the Trojans in his Stream from slaughter. And then as far as one can throw a Spear Achilles from the Flood obliquely flies Swift as a Hawk; but yet was ne'r the near; For still he water has before his eyes. As when a man makes passage with his Spade For water to his Garden from a Hill, The Stream outruns him that the Channel made; So Xanthus was before Achilles still. And ever as Achilles turn'd or stood To see if any God would by him stand, Above his shoulders rose the mighty Flood, And while he starts from's feet removes the Sand. Achilles then himself bewailing said, O Jupiter (and lookt up to the Skie) Let some God 'gainst this River give me aid, And any other death then let me die. But none I know on whom the fault to lay But my dear Mother, who to flatter me, Said I should die before the Walls of Troy, And by Apollo only killed be. O that I had by Hector's hand been slain, The best of all the men that fight for Troy! But now I perish like a silly Swain Passing a Torrent in a rainy day.
These words Achilles had no sooner said, But Neptune and Athena with him were; And on Achilles hand their hands they laid. Then Neptune said, Achilles, do not fear. Encouraged by two such Gods as we, Pallas and I, and that by Jove's command, Retiring soon you shall the River see. For fear of him you need not hold your hand. But drive the Trojans all to Ilium Save those that fly. And having Hector slain (As we assure you you shall do) then come Triumphantly unto the Ships again. This said, unto the Gods again they came. Achilles boldly waded in the Field, Where many Bodies dead and Bucklers swam. With so much courage Pallas had him fill'd, And in the water stoutly lifts his knees. For Pallas now his strength augmented had. And Xanthus vext before, when he saw this, Foamed and roar'd as one that had been mad; And cried out for help to Simois. Brother, said he, assist me here, to stay This raging man that t'Ilium going is. I am afraid he'll take the Town of Troy. Make haste to help me; and your Channel fill With water both from Torrent and from Spring, And stones and trees bring with you from the Hill, That on this furious man we may them fling; So that his strength shall do him little good, Nor Armour, which upon the Field shall lie Concealed from the eyes of men in mud And sand enough. Thus bury him will I, And make his Tomb. The Argives will not find Where lie his bones. I'll earth upon him throw. They shall not need, if they should be so kind, More Monument upon him to bestow. This said, he foam'd, and full of bodies dead He at Achilles a great Billow bowl'd, Which coming to him cover'd had his head, But Juno chanc'd to see it as it rowl'd,
And unto Vulcan shrikt in great affright, Rise quickly (dear child) Cyllipodion, Xanthus against you coming is to fight, And to defend your self your Flames put on. And I will Zephyrus and Notus call From Sea, that for you shall so blow the flame; That th'Armour, and the heads o'th'Trojans all Shall not be able to endure the same. Go to his Bank, and burn up ev'ry Tree, And then throw fire on him, and never fear, Nor by his threats or pray'rs perswaded be To cease, until again you from me hear. And Vulcan then made ready a huge flame. And first the dead he burnt upon the Plain. Then to the water with his fire he came To send it to the Channel back again. As when a field new moistned is with rain In Summer time, 'tis quickly dri'd agen By Boreas; so soon dri'd was the Plain, And burnt the bodies were of the dead men. And to the River then his flame he turn'd, Where th'Elms and Willows, Tamarisks, and Lote, Sedges, and many other Plants he burn'd That in or by the River grew about. And Eels and Fishes in the water hote Tumbled and turn'd their bellies up with heat; Into such pain by Vulcan they were put; And Xanthus fainting cover'd was with sweat, And then to Vulcan spake. Vulcan, said he, No God is able to resist your might. What are the Trojans or the Greeks to me? Give over. I'll no longer with you fight. Thus spake Scamander, boyling all the while. As when upon a fire of well-dri'd wood The grease of a fat Swine is made to boil; So boiled he, and went not on, but stood Making to Juno his complaint, and said, Why does your Son on me more fiercely fly Than on the rest that do the Trojans aid, And to be blamed more deserve than I?
Let him give over, and I'll do so too; And swear besides, if you my Oath require, That I will nothing for the Trojans do, Although the Greeks should set the Town on fire. This Xanthus said; and Juno hearing it, To Vulcan with a loud voice spake agen, Vulcan now hold your hand. It is not fit T'offend a God too much, to pleasure men. And Vulcan hearing her his fire puts out; And Xanthus back into his Channel went. Thus were they parted and no longer fought; And Juno, though in choler, was content. And then the Gods amongst themselves fell out, And one against another stood in Duel, And Heav'n and Earth resounded as they fought, Giving each other many wounds and cruel. And up unto Olympus rise the Cry, Where Jove sat on his Throne in Majestie, And casting on the Fields of Troy his eye, Laughed to see them fight that could not die. Mars first began, and to Athena said, You, Impudent, that to engage in fight The Gods amongst themselves are not afraid, To satisfie your pride and endless spight, Remember how you on me set Tyide To throw his spear at me, and openly Unto my body you the same did guide With your own wicked hand, and wounded me, I'll pay you now, which was no sooner spoken, But Mars his Spear was at Athena's Shield, Which not Jove's Thunder-bolt could ere have broken. Then took she up a stone that lay i'th'Field, Great, knobby, black, that had been heretofore Set there, of some mans land to shew the bound. And with the same she strook Mars ore and ore. There lay he, and sev'n Acres hid of ground. And over him insulting, then said she, Lie there, and know I can you overcome; And that your Mother glad of this will be For fighting 'gainst the Greeks for Ilium
This said, she from him turn'd. Then to him went Venus, and led him groaning from the place. Pallas (said Juno) see that Impudent That leads him out, and do her some disgrace. Then Pallas to her went, and with her hand Hit her o'th'breast; then both fell on the Plain; For Mars without her could no longer stand Then Pallas over them insults again. So may, said she, lie all that stand for Troy As these do here. Had it not been for them, The War had ended been; we come away; And Troy destroyed with all Priam's Stem. This Pallas said, and Juno smil'd; and to Apollo Neptune straightway neerer came. Why fight we not, said he, since others do! If we stand still, we cannot without shame Return to Jove, where scorned we shall be. Have you forgot how to Laomedon To work for him, Jove once sent you and me, And how our wages was agreed upon, How I built houses for the Trojans all, As he direction gave me standing by, Besides, how hard I labour'd at the Wall, How fair I made it, and how strong and high, And how he sent you (Phoebus) to attend His Herds of Kine upon Mount Ida side, And when our work and th'year was at an end How proudly he our-wages us deni'd And threatned you to bind you hand and foot, And sell you in some Island for a slave, And cut off both your and my ears to boot, And forc'd we were by flight our selves save? Yet for his people you have ever fought, Though by you they deserve to be destroy'd, And will not joyn with us to root them out. To Neptune Phoebus then repli'd and said, O Neptune, you would think me mad, if I Should fight with you for such a thing as man, They are but leaves, now fresh, to morrow die. And when he this had said, away be ran.
For with his Uncle loth he was to fight. His Sister then Diana to him came, That angry was to see him put to flight. Apollo (said she) is it not a shame Thus easily to give the Victory To Neptune? Wherefore carry you a Bow And Arrows, and to nothing them apply? D'ye carry them like Children for a show? Let me not hear you boasting any more That you to fight with Neptune did not fear, As in my Father's house you did before. Thus she. But Phoebus did not answer her. Then Juno angry to Diana came, Bold-face, said she, how dare you with me fight That stronger than you are a great deal am? D'ye think that in your Bow there is such might? I know to women you a Lion are, And Jove permits you which you will to kill. But me to overcome 'tis harder farre Than t'hunt a Stag or Boar upon a Hill. But since you have a mind to understand What I can do, I'll let you see it now. Then both her wrists she seiz'd with her left hand, With th'other from her shoulders took her Bow, And beats her with the same about the ears, And laught to see her wrigling strive to fly. At last she freed her self, and shedding tears She fled (leaving her Bow and Shafts to lie Upon the ground dispersed here and there) Then forth came Hermes and Latona bright. And when they were to one another neer, Leto, said he, I will not with you fight That are Jove's Mistriss. Boast amongst the Gods That you have got the Victory in fight, And by no other means but the great ods You have in strength; and I will not deny't. This said, Latona gather'd up the Bow And Arrows of her Daughter Artemis. To Jove went Artemis to let him know How ill she had been us'd; and at his knees
She weeping sate. And Jove then made her rise, And to her said, Dear child, what God was that That was so rash as t'use you in this wise, As one that openly had done a fault? 'Twas Juno (then said Artemis) your Wife; And she it was that was of all the first To set the Gods amongst themselves at strife. Thus Jove and she between themselves discourst, Then Phoebus went into the Town of Troy. For still he had a care to guard the Wall, For fear the Greeks the City should destroy. But to Olympus th'other Gods went all, One part triumphing, th'other discontent, And sate down by their Father Jupiter. Mean while Achilles fiercely forward went Killing of Men and Horses with his Spear. As in a Town on fire the people all Are busie, and the most of them undone, So did it with the Trojans then besal; Some slain were by Achilles, and some run. Now Priam standing was upon a Tower, And saw the Trojans by Achilles chac'd, And that to turn again they had no power. And down unto the Gates he came in haste; And to the Porters order gave, and said, Open the Gates and let the people in, That from Achilles hither fly dismai'd, And shut them when you see they are within For if that cruel man should with them get Within the Wall, 'twould be a dismal day. The Porters then the Gates wide open set. Then to the Gates the Trojans took their way, Pursued by Achills as they fled. And sure he taken had the Town of Troy, But that Appolo then encouraged Agenor to oppose him by the way. And lest he should be by Achilles slain He at the Beech tree neer him tock his stand When need should be to bring him off again Unwounded from Achills heavie hand.
But when Agenor saw Achilles nigh, He troubled was, and to himself thus spake. What shall I do? if from him I should fly To Ilium the way that others take, He'll overtake me and cut off my head. For swifter much he is of foot than I. What if I let him on the Trojans tread, And I some other way to Ida fly, And hide my self i'th'Bushes there till night? But why do I discourse thus foolishly? I cannot pass the Plain but in his sight; And then I lost am without remedy. But if I stay and fight with him, what then? His body is not made of Steel nor Brass, But mortal is (they say) like other men, And like to other men but one life has. His glorious Acts are Jupiters, not his. This said, he for Achilles coming staid As when i'th'Woods a Panther rowsed is, At hearing of the Hounds he's not afraid, But to the Hunter goes for all his Spear: And though pierc'd through therewith will to him fly Upon the Spear it self; that being near He either may revenged be or die; So resolutely then Antenor's Son Agenor for Achilles waiting staid, And at him aim'd his Spear as he came on. And listing up his voice unto him said, Achilles, Oh, you think this day to win The Town of Troy. There's yet much work to do. For many mighty men there are therein, And many dangers to be waded through. They of their Wives and Parents will take care, And little Babes; but you shall perish here As terrible and mighty as you are. And as he spake, he at him threw his Spear; Which on his leg below the knee did light, And with the stroak resounded-then the Tin. But the Celestial Arms were of such might, That it rebounded back and went not in.
And when Achilles was to throw at him, Away Apollo snatcht him from his sight Concealed in a Mist obscure and dim, And carri'd him in safety from the Fight. And that the flying Trojans might escape Achilles hand, and save themselves in Troy, He took upon himself Agenor's shape, And put himself into Achilles way. Achilles then pursues, and Phoebus flies Along Scamander's Bank upon the Plain, And kept before him still, but in such wise, As t'overtake him he might hope in vain. Achilles thus by Phoebus was deceived Till from the Town he far was led away. Mean while the flying Trojans were received, And thronging got within the Gates of Troy. For none of them without the Gate durst stay To ask, who had escaped and who not; So glad they were of getting into Troy, That how all others sped they never thought.
ILIAD. LIB. XXII. THus were the Trojans driven into Troy Like Deer, and up unto the Wall they went, And from their bodies rub'd the sweat away, And with good Wine renew'd their Spirits spent, And to the wall advancing was the Fo. But Hector hamper'd by his cruel Fate Into the Town of Troy resus'd to go, And staid without, before the Scaean Gate. Then to Achilles Phoebus spake, and said, Why do you thus pursue me (Peleus Son) That am a God? which but by passion swal'd You might have known; but rashly you run on, And only look how you may slaughter men. For else, why could you not contented be, When you had pent the Trojans up; but then Must leave your way so far to follow me, And cannot kill me; for I cannot die? At this Achilles vext was at the heart; And to Apollo answer'd angerlie; Apollo thou the most pernitious art Of all the Gods, that hast me thus misled. For had I unto Ilium kept my way strowed had the Field with Trojans dead Before they could have entred into Troy. But by your fraud that honour I have lost Because the strength of men you need not fear: But I would make you pay for't to your cost, If to revenge my self I able were. This said, to Troy he went a mighty pace, And mighty things conceived in his mind, And stretcht his legs and knees as in a Race Good Horses do, to leave the rest behind.
Old Priam first upon him set his eyes; For brightly from afar his Armour shin'd Like the fair Star that does in Autumn rise, But Agues brings, and is to men unkind, And called is Orion's Dog. So bright Achilles in his Armour did appear, And put the old man Priam in affright, And made him groan and roar and tear his hair. To Hector then he cri'd aloud and said, Hector come in, come in my dearest Son; For mightily I for you am afraid, Fight not against that cruel man alone. Achilles stronger is than you by ods; Lose not your life to give him Victorie. Oh that he were beloved by the Gods No better than he is belov'd by me! He eaten had ere now been on the Plain By Dogs and Fowl, and I been comforted A little, for my Sons whom he hath slain, Or in the Islands far hence trafficked. Iycaon now I miss and Polydore. They came not into Troy with them that fled. Their Mother brought me with her wealth good store To pay their Ransom if they be not dead. If they be slain, 'tis then remediless. Their Parents and the people all will grieve; But yet their sorrow will be much the less If Hector still preserved be and live. Come therefore quickly in (dear Child) and save The Trojans and their Wives, your self and Wife; And do not let Achilles th'honour have Alone to have deprived you of life. Besides, you should some pity take of me That now upon the very brink of age The cruel slaughter of my Sons must see, And Daughters drag'd and hurri'd by the rage Of the Achaeans into slaverie, And Chambers torn by the insulting Fo, And Babes dasht 'gainst the ground expiring lie, Whlst into sewitude their Mothers go.
And after all this, slain must I be too. My Dogs will eat me raw, and lap my blood, And pleased be (not knowing what they do) That at my Table dayly take their food. When young men slain are by the chance of Warre, There nothing is whereof to be ashamed; But when by Dogs abus'd and eaten are White heads and beards, and parts not to be named, There's nothing to a man more miserable. Thus said old Priam togging his gray hairs. But to prevail with Hector was not able. And to him then his Mother spake with tears, And from her bosom layed out a Teat, Hector, if this ere pleased you (said she) Dear Son, I pray you into Troy retreat, And have compassion on my miserie. Come in; between you let there be a Wall. For if you should be slain, your Wife and I Shall not lament you at your Funeral; But at the Ships a prey for Dogs you'il lie. Thus weeping he and she to Hector pray'd, And nothing to them answer'd he agen; But obstinately for Achilles stay'd. And as a Snake roll'd up before his den, With venom fed, when coming towards him He sees a man, and stirred is his gall, Looks cruelly; so Hector looking grim Staid with his Shield set up against the Wall; And grieving, to himself he spake, and said, If I should now into the City go, Polydamas the first would me upbraid, That yesternight advis'd me to do so, Then when Achilles in the Field was seen. But his good counsel I refused then, Which to have follow'd had much better been; Lost by my folly are so many men. And now I fear the Trojans and their Wives Will censure me, and some man worse than I Say I have cast away the peoples lives, Presuming on my strength so foolishly.
So they will say. And therefore better 'tis To venture on Achilles, though I die, A better way I cannot take than this. For should I lay my Shield and Helmet by, And leave my Spear set up against the Wall, And to Achilles thus disarmed come, And offer Helen to restore with all The wealth she with her brought to Ilium; And to the Greeks give half the goods of Troy, And take an Oath that we will nothing hide, Nor any thing out of their sight convey, But bring it forth and faithfully divide. But whither to no purpose runs my mind? I will not do't. For it were but in vain. I ne'r the sooner should his favour find, But by him so much eas'lier be slain. I cannot with him talk from Hill nor Tree, As boys and wenches do. He is too nigh. And therefore here I'll stay for him, and see Whether my Fate it be or his to die. Whilst yet he spake Achilles near him was, As terrible as Mars, and shook his Spear; As flaming fire relucent was the brass, Or as the Sun at morning doth appear. Then Hector durst no longer stay, but fled. Fear nimbly made his feet and knees to move. Achilles no less swiftly followed. As when a Hawk is flying at a Dove, The Dove flies out aside, her self to save; But by the Hawk agen is followed, That gives not over till the prey he have; Achilles so pursu'd and Hector fled, Keeping the Cart-way still under Troy wall; And to the Watch-tow'r came and Sycamore And the two Springs that into Xanthus fall, Whereof the one is always cover'd ore With smoak as if upon a fire it were, And with hot water all the year doth flow. The water of the other all the year As cold is as the Hail, or Ice, or Snow,
And two fine Washing-places built were there, To which the Trojan women us'd to come, And wash their Garments when they sully'd were Before the Argives came to Ilium. This way they ran, and swifty mov'd their thighs. For 'twas not for a piece of flesh or hide, Which of Foot-races is the usual Prize, But for the life of Hector that they vi'd. As when Race-horses run for some great Prize, That used to it are, most swiftly run; So Hector and Achilles now ran thrice About Troy Wall, the Gods all looking on. Then (speaking to the Gods) Behold, said Jove, I Hector see in danger to be slain, A good and pious man, and whom I love; And for him now my heart is in great pain. For he hath made me many a Sacrifice Both in my house on Ida and in Troy; And now before the swift Achilles flies. Say, shall he die, or be convey'd away? Father, said Pallas then, what's this you say? He's Mortal, and by Fate condemned is, And will you now the Execution stay? You may. But th'other Gods will take't amiss. And Jove to Pallas then again repli'd, Sweet Child, it was not seriously meant, But only said. You shall not be deni'd. Do what you please your self; I am content. This said, Athena glad leapt down to Troy. Achilles Hector still pursu'd; and as A Hound in view pursueth all the way A frighted Hare, so coursed Hector was. Nor suffer'd was to double or to squat. For when he to the Gate ran for defence, Between the Gate and him Achilles gat, So that he could not stay for help from thence. Achilles never would the Wall forsake; But Hector still upon the Cart way fled. As men can neither flie nor overtake When in a Dream they think it in their bed;
So Hctor from Achilles could not fly, Nor could Achilles Hector overtake. For Phoebus Hector did with strength supply. But of him then no further care did take. Achilles by a signe all else forbad To throw a Spear, for fear the greatest glory Some other of the Argives should have had, And he come after but as accessory. When to the Springs the fourth time they were nigh, Jove took his golden Balance up, and laid In one o'th' Scales Achilles Destiny, And Hector's in the other; and them weigh'd. Hector's was heaviest, and down fell the same As low as Hell, so much it overweigh'd. Then Phoebus parted. And t' Achilles came Athena nigh, and speaking to him said, Achilles, now (I think) we shall not miss Of killing Hector, but with honour go To th'Ships, as greedy as of Fight he is. For sure I am he cannot scape us now. Phoebus in vain to Jove shall for him pray. But stay you here and breathe a while. Fer I Will to him go and make him for you stay, And so encourage him he shall not fly. This said, Achilles leaning on His Spear Staid where he was. To Hector Pallas came. So like Deiphobus she did appear In shape and voice, he took her for the same. And when she with him was, she to him said, Brother, you still are by Achilles cours'd About the Wall of Troy. Be not afraid. I'll by you stand, and let him do his worst. Deiphobus, said Hector, who before Was dearest to me of my Brothers all, I bound am now to honour you much more, That t'aid me durst appear without the Wall When all the rest remain within for fear. Pallas to Hector then repli'd and said, Brother, my Father and my Mother dear, And friends with their entreaties had me staid,
So dreadful is Achilles to them all. But I would not. But come, let's go and trie Whether it be our fate by him to fall, Or his by Hector's hand and Spear to die. This said, she went before him with her Spear, Lest he some fraud mistrusting should have staid. And when they were unto Achilles near, Hector spake first, and to Achilles said, Plides though before you I have fled Now thrice about the Wall, and durst not stay, Yet now to stand I am determined And fight till either I be slain or slay. But come, let's first the Gods to witness call Of what shall be agreed 'twixt you and me. If by my hand it be your chance to fall, Your body dead shall not abused be. l take your Arms and send them into Troy. Your body dead the Greeks shall have again Entire and not disgraced any way. Do you the like to me if I be slain. Achilles sowrely looking said agen, Talk not of Oaths and Covenants to me, That nothing worth 'twixt Lions are and Men, And Wolves with Lambs on nothing can agree. And you and I shall one another hate, Nor Oaths and Pacts between us will stand good Till we blood-thirsty Mars shall satiate Either with Hector's or Achilles blood. It now behoves you all your Pow'r to show, And be an able man of War indeed. You cannot, as you did, run from me now, Although (I think) you never had more need. For by Athena slain you shall be here, And for the slaughter of the Greeks be paid. This said, he at him threw his heavie Spear. But Hector slooping did the same avoid. And ore his head the Spear then harmless flew. But Pallas quickly snatcht it from the sand visibly, which Hector never knew, And put the same into Achilles hand.
Then Hector to Achilles spake and said, Achilles, you have miss'd. My Fate unknown Is to you yet. And me to make afraid, You have devised sables of your own. Upon my back your Spear shall never fall. If by it to be slain my fate it be, It shall be on my breast or not at all. But how my Spear will speed now let me see. Oh that it would into your body go! The Trojans would the War much better bear, Since from your hand proceeds the grearest wo. And as he spake away he sent his Spear. And on Achilles Shield it lighted just, But enter'd not; and other he had none. Upon Deiphobus lay all his trust. But when he call'd Deiphobus was gone. And Hector then perceiv'd his death was neer; And Oh (said he) the Gods now for me call. Deiphobus (I thought) stood by me here. But Pallas 'twas. He's still within the wall. I shall not scape. I see, Jove here to fore, And Phoebus too, did mean it should be so. They sav'd me oft, but will do so no more. But let me somewhat do before I go; That men may speak of me in time to come; And not ignoble die. And at that word He roused up his fainting heart, and from His side he drew his great and heavie Sword. As when an Eagle stoopeth to the plain From a dark cloud, a tender Lamb t'invade, Or fearful Hare; so Hector went amain T' Achilles brandishing his shining Blade. Achilles angry on the other side Came on, and cruel thoughts had in his mind, And up he kept his Shield his breast to hide, And on his head like fire his Helmet shin'd. And as he went at ev'ry step he trod, His Plume by Vulcan made of golden hair, And to his Crest applied, gave a nod, And ore his shoulders terribly did flare.
As Hesperus at midnight does appear, The brightest Star that shineth in the Sky; So gloriously the point shin'd of his Spear. Thus terribly to Hector he drew nigh. And view'd his Arms to see which way his Spear Might with most ease unto his body pass. But ev'ry where entire and close they were, Save at the neck a little gap there was. At that he aim'd, and with great force he smot Him with his mighty Spear clean through the neck; And yet the Spear his wind-pipe wounded not. Then down he fell, but able was to speak. Achilles over him insulting said, Hector, you thought when you Patroclus kill'd, You safe were, and of me were not afraid, Because you knew I was not in the Field. And like a fool ne'r thought of what a friend To take revenge he left had at the Fleet. Who now has brought you to an evil end, For Dogs to eat, whilst he has burial meet. Then Hector feebly to him said again, Let not by Dogs my body eaten be, But be contented that you have me slain. My friends at any price will ransome me. Take Brass and Gold as much as you require; And to my Father send my body home, To be consumed in the Fun'ral fire By th' Trojans and their Wives in Ilium. Thus Hector said. Achilles answer'd to't, Hector you Dog, speak not of Price to me. If I my self could eat thee I would do't. But by the Dogs I'm sure you'll eaten be. If they would give me twenty times as much, Or buy thy body weight for weight with Gold, And promise as much more, your deeds are such, Your body shall not at that price be sold. Nor shall your Mother lay you on a bed, And over you lamenting stand and how; But in the open field you shall lie dead Until devour'd you be by Dogs and Fowl.
Hector repli'd (though ready now to die) I knew you had a heart as hard as steel. But thus much to you I will prophecie, The vengeance of the Gods you'll for it feel, When one day Paris and Apollo shall, As terrible and strong as you are now, Make you before the Sean Gate to fall. This said, he did, and to the Shades below Leaving his Limbs, his Soul bewailing flew. And yet Achilles did agen reply, And briesly to him answer'd, Now die you. And when the Gods call for me so will I. This said, he from his body pluckt the Spear, And laid it by him down upon the place; And took his Armour off. Then others near Stood gazing at his stature and his grace, And wondring at him, t'one another said, We safely now to Hector may go nigher; His raging fit is very much allay'd Since when unto the Ships he came with fire. Then spake Achilles to the Greeks and said, My Friends, that in the Army have command, Since by the Gods this great man is destroy'd, And lies before you killed by my hand, Who did the Argive people more annoy Than all the other Trojans put together, Let's armed as we are go up to Troy, An see on what they are resolved, whether They'll quit the City, seeing Hector's dead, Or still defend the same without him will. But why should this come now into my head When unbewal'd Patroclus lieth still? For my Patroclus I must not forget As long as I am living and can go. And when I come to th'house of Hades, yet I still shall think upon him there below. But back unto the Ships we now will go. And let the youth of Argos Peans sing, Whilst thither we in Triumph bring the Fo With whose great praise the Town of Troy did ring.
This said, he full of spight on Hector flies, And slits his legs from th'ankes to the heels, And with a rope them to his Charter ties. Then drives away; and rais'd is by the wheels A Cloud of dust; and in it all the while, Along the ground drag'd was his comely head, Once glorious, now by the Greeks made vile, Since to them Jove had him delivered. Which when his Mthe from the Wall beheld, Enrag'd she from her head pluckt off her lood, And threw it from her, tore her hair, and squeal'd. And Priam lamentably sighing stood. About him were the Trojans shedding tears, Sighing, and sobbing, and in such affray As if all Troy had flam'd about their ears. And much ado they Priam had to stay. For down he lay, and spake to ev'ry one, Forbear, said he I will go to this man (As fierce and cruel as he is) alone, And move him to compassion, if I can; And what respect he hath to age I'll fee. For Pelius is old as well as I, That got that mischief both to Troy and me, To th' Trojans all, but me especially. For he hath kill'd me many a goodly Son, Which all together make me not so smart, Nor wounds so deep as Hector's death hath done, Which is alone enough to break my heart. Oh blessed Gods that it had been your will He in his Mothers hands and mine had di'd, That over him we might have wept our fill This sai, the Trojans wept again and sigh'd. Then Hecuba amongst the Wives of Troy Began her plaint. Hector, my Son, said she, Oh my dear Son, my glory and my joy, why should I'mongst the living longer be, Since you are dead and gone that night and day The Trojans (men and women) did defend, And as a God was honoured in Troy, And now are come to an untimely end?
Thus wayl'd his Mother. But Adromache Knew not how Hector sped without the Gate. For at a shining figur'd Garment she Within an inner Chamber weaving sate. And given had her Maids command to set A Trevet on the fire, that Hector might When he came in, wash off his blood and sweat Contracted by great labour in the Fight, Not dreaming of her Husband's death. But when She heard the lamentation at the Wall, And outcries both of women and of Men, She trembling stood, and let her Shittle fall. And then unto her Maids she call'd, and said, Come hither two of you, and with me go. I hear my Mother cry, and am afraid To Priam's Sons there hapned is some wo. I'll to the Tow'r go up my self and see What 'tis. My heart is at my mouth. I fea Lest by Achilles Hector chaced be Alone, and will be killed by his Spear. Oh how I tremble! he can never stay, But out before the rest will always run, And never unto any man give way, As if his strength could matched be by none. This said, our went she like a woman mad, And panting up into the Tow'r she hi'd, Where she no sooner lookt about her had, But saw her Husband to a Charret ti'd, And by Achilles drag'd away, and dead. And presently she fell into a Swown, And all the comely Dressings of her head, Veil, Kerchefs, Rubans, Knots to th'ground came down, And Coronet unto her given by Venus, when she with Hector married. Her Sister laws that stood about her nigh Then took her up with sorrow almost dead. And when again her Spirits to her came, She wept, and spake, and stopt and spake agen. Hector, of women I most wretched am; And you the most unfortunate of men,
Both born to one and the same evil fate, You here in Ilium King Priam's Son. And I in Thibe child infortunate Of the infortunate Etion. And you now to the Shades below are gone, And me a woful Widow here have left, And with me my sweet Babe your tender Son, And cannot (since you are of life bereft) Do to him any good, nor he to you. And though he should escape the Argives now, Yet poverty and woe will him pursue, And other men his goodly fields will plough. A Child that is an Orphan has no friend, And (though with rears) must stoop to whatsoere To the supplying of his need shall tend When he his want of Food no more can bear. So to your friends my Child shall go, and take One by the Cloak, another by the Coat, That give him may some Wine for pity's sake, Enough to cool his lips, but not his throat. Or else some Son of them that sit at meat May rate, or give him a good box o'th' Ear, And bid him quickly out o'th'Hall to get, And tell him that his Father dines not there. Then weeping comes Astyanax to me, That us'd was by his Father to be fed With Mutton fat and Marrow on his knee, And with his Nurse repose on a soft Bed. But since his Father now is dead and gone, Astyanax (whom so the Trojans call Because defended were by you alone (When you were here) the Trojan Gates and Wall) Intolerable grief is like to find, Since at the Ships you dead and naked lie For Worms to seed on when the Dogs have din'd, While all your precious Garments here have I Of womans work, and burn them will, since you Now never in them likely are to lie, Tis to the Wives of Troy an honour due. This weeping spoken made the women sigh.
ILIAD. LIB. XXIII. THus wayl'd the Trojans then in Ilium. To Hellespont th' Achaeans streight went down, And when they to their hollow Ships were come Dispers'd themselves each man unto his own Achilles only staid his Myrmidons Upon the place; and thus unto them spake. You, Myrmidons my stout Companions, You must not from your Chars your Horses ake. With Horses and with Chars we first must go, And for Patroclus weep about his Biere. And when we have by weeping eas'd our wo, Unty your Horses and we'll all sup here. This said, they wayl'd. Achilles first began; And thrice about Patroclus Biere they drave And Thetis (fallen was so great a man) Amongst them stood, and tears unto them gave Which down their Armour fell into the Sand. Achilles bad him then with tears, farewel. And laying on Patroclus breast his hand, Rejoyce, said he, Patroclus though in Hell. For now I to you shall my word make good, Since hither I have Hector dragged dead, For Dogs to eat. And to revenge your blood, Twelve Trojans I will at your Pile behead. This said, he Hector laid upon his face I'th'dust before the Biere disgracefully. The Myrmidons mean while their Arms unlace, And th'Horses from the Chariots unty. And then down by Achilles Ship they sat, Who gave unto them all a Fun'ral Feast, And for them slew both Goats and Muttons fa, And Swine good store, and many a well-fed Beast.
But to Achilles then came in the Lords, To wait upon him t' Agamemnon's Tent, That he might try with comfortable words If he could mitigate his discontent. When they were there Atrides first commands His Ministers to bring in water hot To wash the gore from off his face and hands. Achilles peremptorily said, Not And swearing, unto Agamemnon said, By Jove that is of all the Gods most high, Till I Patroclus in the fire have laid, And rais'd him have a Tomb wherein to lie, And with him burnt these Locks of mine, nor hand Nor face shall washed be by me. But now Let's sup. I'th'morning I will give command That for his Pile we may have wood enough, That speedily the body we may burn. And when out of our sight we have it laid, The people to their business may return. Thus he advised, and it was obey'd. The people then in haste to supper went, And had good chear, and heartily they fed. And when their hunger and their thirst was spent, Into their Tents went ev'ry man to bed. Down went Achilles to the waters side Attended on by many Myrmidons, And in a place clean washed by the Tide He laid him down to sleep upon the stones. Nor was it long ere sleep upon him crept. For labour'd very hard he had that day. For Hector him in exercise had kept Running before him round the Wall of Troy. And then the Spirit of Patroclus dead, Like him in Stature, Garments, Voice, and Eyes Appeared to him standing at his head, And speaking said unto him in this wise. You sleep, Achilles, and have me forgot, Though when I was alive you lov'd me well. Pray bury me, these Spirits here will not Let me come in within the Gates of Hell,
Nor let me mix with those beyond the River, But make me wander 'bout the house of Dis. Give me your hand upon't, for I shall never Return, when once my body burned is. We shall no more together counsel take, Since by my Fate I taken am away, And, you your self, divine Achilles, make Account to die before the Walls of Troy. And then the favour let me have, I pray, That when my flesh consum'd is in the flame; My bones with yours you will be pleas'd to lay, And let the Urn that holds them be the same; That golden Urn which Thetis gave to you. We long with one another lived have. For when Amphidamas his Son I slew, Unto your house I fled my life to save, From Opus being little past a boy, And childishly the quarrel took at Chess; And never meant him ill before that day, And sorry was I for my foolishness. Your Father to his House then took me in, Made me your man, and lov'd and cherisht me, And since so long we have together been, Why should not now our bones together be? Achilles to the shadow then repli'd, Sweet friend, what need had you to come from Hell To tell me this? I for you do provide That all you say may be performed well. Come neerer to me that embrace we may A little while, and one another moan. This said, his arms he spreads; and then away Patroclus sunk, and left him there alone. At this amazed up Achilles starts. Oh, oh, said he, I see 'tis certain then, In Hell there Souls are, though they have no hearts, But Idols only are, and Forms of Men. For by me standing was the Soul all night Of my Patroclus to me dictating, And wonderfully like him 'twas to th'sight; And what he wanted told me ev'ry thing.
This said, again about the body dead Achilles and the Myrmidons lament, And so continu'd till the day was spread; But to the Wood then Agamemnon sent From ev'ry part of th'Army men to Ide, Whereof some Axes carri'd in their hands, And others Ropes. And with them goes for Guide Meriones, and, as their Chief, commands. Ore Hills and Dales then to the Woods they went Driving their Mules before them all the way; And lusty Oaks unto the ground they sent, And cleft them into pieces as they lay. And those unto the Mules with Ropes they ti'd, And ev'ry one of them took in his hand Either a heavie Bough or Limb beside. For so Meriones had giv'n command. This done, they back descended to the Plain Fast as they could through Bry'rs and Bushes store And quickly at the Ships they were again, And laid their wood in order on the shore. Then to the Myrmidons Achilles spake, You Myrmidons put on yor Armus, said he, And Horse-men all your Charrets ready make, And mount into your Seats and follow me. When they were ready, foremost went the Horse, And by a Cloud of Foot were followed. I'th'midst between them carri'd was the Corse With locks of hair thrown on him covered, Which the sad Mourners from their heads had shorn. Achilles went himself next to the Biere, Who for his friend did principally mourn. When at the place of Funeral they were, Upon the ground they layed down the Biere, And quickly in a Pile they heapt the wood. Then cuts Achilles off his yellow hair, And from the body at a distance staid, And towards Greece and Phthia turn'd his eye, And speaking to Spercheius River said, My Father to you made a Vow, when I Return'd, his hair should unto you be paid,
And to the other Gods a Hecatomb, And fifty fat Rams at your Spring to slay. Thus vowed he. But I shall ne'r come home, But here must die before the Gates of Troy. Since then my Fathers wish you not fulfil, Nor I return into my native Land, My hair now to Patroclus give I will. And at that word he puts it in his hand. At this the Greeks a weeping fell agen, And wept had till the setting of the Sun, But that Achilles spake t' Atrides then, And pray'd him that the people might be gone. King Agamemnon, will the Greeks, said he, Be never with lamenting satisfi'd? 'Tis in your pow'r; let them dispersed be Unto their Ships their suppers to provide, For we will of the Fun'ral take a care. But let the Leaders of the Army stay, And such as specially concerned are. This said, Atrides sent the rest away. And then the wood into a Pile they laid. A hundred foot it was from side to side; And on the top the Corps. Then kill'd and flaid Both Sheep and Beeves, and with their fat the hide Patroclus body dead from head to foot. And by it laid the Cattle flaid to burn. To th' Biere Achilles went and laid into't Of Honey one, of Oyl another Urn. And of Patroclus Horses four he slew; And of nine little Dogs he kept kill'd two. And those into the Fun'ral-pile he threw; And last of all twelve Trojans adds thereto. This done, again he to Patroclus said, My dear Patroclus, once again, farewel. Twelve lusty Trojans on your Pile are laid. I'm faithful to you though you be in Hell, But Hector for the Dogs shall be a prey. But Venus 'nointed him with Oyl of Rose, And so preserved him both night and day, That not a Dog did on him lay his nose.
Then Phoebus sent from Heav'n a Cloud obscure The place whereon his body lay to hide, To th'end it might the scorching Sun endure, And not be shrivel'd up nor shrunk nor dri'd. And then Achilles a new bus'ness finds. He could not set on flame the new-fell'd wood, But forc'd he was to pray to the two Winds Zephyr and Boreas. Then off he stood, And to them offer'd with a Cup in's hand, And to them vowed a good Sacrifice, If they from Sea would come, and by him stand, And blow the Fire until the flame did rise. This Iris hearing went unto the Winds To tell them how Achilles to them pray'd. And at good chear in Zephyr's house them finds, And fain they would her with them there have staid, And made her sit; but she refused that. The Gods, said she, feast at a Hecatomb In Blackmoor-land, and I must be thereat, And must make haste, or thither cannot come. To Zephyr now and Boreas I came To tell them that a plenteous Sacrifice Achilles make them will, if on a flame They'll set the Pile whereon Patroclus lies. This said, she parts. The Winds arise and roar, And toss the Clouds before them in the Sky, And at their feet tumble the Waves ashore And then upon Patroclus Pile they fly, And fiercely blow. Inflamed was the Pile, And whistling at it staid the Winds all night, Achilles standing by it all the while Invoking solemnly Patroclus spright. And th'Earth with Wine by Cupfuls watered. As one that mourneth for his eldest Son That then dies, when he should be married; So did he for Patroclus sigh and groan. When in the Sky the Day-star did appear To shew that after him Aurora came, The Pile and Bodies dead consumed were To ashes, and extinguisht was the flame,
Away the Winds went ore the Seas of Thrace, And passing shock the waters of the Deep. Achilles went a little from the place, And weary laid him down and fell asleep. And now 'twas day, the Souldiers came agen. Then with their tramplig did Achilles wake, And up he stood and lookt about. And then He to Atrides turn'd his eyes and spake. Atrides, let us first with Wine, said he, Put out the fire as far as it is spread, That taken up Patroclus Bones may be (For where they lie 'tis soon discovered; Since in the midst we did his body lay, But others, Horse and Men at th'outside lie) That in a Bason of pure Gold they may Reserved be until I also die. And though no great Tomb here I have design'd, Yet may the Greeks that stay when I am gone, When they think good, if they will be so kind And see cause for it make a greater one. This said, the fire they first extinguished; Then down unto the ground the ashes came, And up Patroclus Bones they gathered, And in a golden Pan they laid the same; And back unto the Ships they carrid that, To be reserved in Achilles Tent Wrapt up within a double Kell of Fat. And then about the Pie to work they went. And where the Pile was, that they made their ground, And Earth abundance on the same they lay, Till it became a mighty Hill and round. When they had, done Achilles made them stay And sit o'th'ground to see the games, which he Prepared had the Funeral to grace. Then many Prizes rich he caus'd to be Brought from his Ship and laid upon the place, Brass Caldrons, Tripods, and great Iron Bars, Horses and Mules, and Cattle of great size, And goodly Women taken in the Wars. First for the Horse; he tells each one his Prize.
To th'first a woman that could spin and weave, Together with a Tripod deep and wide. The next a Mare of six years should receive Together with her young Mule by her side. A handsome Kettle to the third he gave, Which never on the Fire had yet been set. Of Gold two Talents was the fourth to have. The fifth a Cup and Cover was to get. Then to them spake. These Prizes here, said he, Lie waiting for the Horse-men on the Plain, If any Horse-men in the Host there be That with their Charrets hope the same to gain, Come in. Had any else these Games set forth, The greatest of these Prizes had been mine. For of my Horses you well know the worth, And that they are Immortal and Divine, Which Neptune gave to Peleus, he to me. But I'll sit out. My Horses shall stay here Hanging their heads as they do heavily, Since they have lost their gentle Charretier. Let any other of the Argves, who Is of his Horses confident come in, And presently prepare himself thereto, And try which of the Prizes he can win. This said, the Horse-men straight themselves present. Eumelus first, Adrestus noble Son, That was for Horsemanship most eminent. Then Diomed with th'Horses which he won From Vinus Son, when by her sav'd he was. Then sitting on his Chariot came forth King Agamemnon's Brother Menlaus, And at it Horses two were of great worth. The one of them Podargus, was his own, The other Aethe very swift she was A Female, and for Agamemnon's known, To whom, when he to Ilium was to pass, She given was by Echepolus, who T'excuse himself of following him to Troy (For very rich he was and loth to go) And with his leave in Sicyon to stay.
The fourth with Horses of the Pylian brood, Was Nestor's gallant Son Antilochus. His Father careful of him by him stood Instructing him, and said unto him thus. Antilochus, you have been taught so well By Jove and Neptune, young man as you are, The Rules of Horsemanship, I need not tell You of the Art, but pray you to take care. Though you know how about the Gole to wind. Their Horses somewhat are than yours more wift. I fear you will in that some damage find; But none of them know better how to shift. 'Tis care not strength makes a good Carpenter, And Ships at Sea are governed by care; Force in foul weather little helps to steer. Best Charretiers are they that best beware. A man that on his Horses speed relies May from the high-way sometimes drive aside, But not come in again. But he that's wise Will always tow'rds the Gole directly guide, And have an eye on him that goes before. The Gole I'll tell you (lest you know it not) A Staff is of a fathom high or more, Of Oak or Pine that is not apt to rot, Standing between two great white stones upright, And for a Monument set up was there In antient time of some deceased Wight, Or formerly there had a Race been there, And to that purpose served now again. Be sure you drive your Horses to it close, And leaning, press a little th' inner Rein, And let the farther Horses Rein go loose. But let the neer Horse to it go as near As can be; so the Stones you still avoid. You'll wound your Horses else and Charret tear, And be asha'd whilst others will be joy'd. If at the Staff you once but get the start, In coming back before you shall be none How good soere their Horses be or Art, Though they the Steeds were of Laomedon,
Or like Arion all their Horses were, Adrestus Horse of the Celestial race. Thus Nestor his good Son instructed there, And having done returned to his place. The fifth and last came in Meriones. Then up into their Seats they mounted all; And then by Lots determin'd which of these Should start the first. T' Antilochus did fall To start the first. The next t' Eumelus came. The third Lot ell t' Atrides Menelaus. The fourth had on't Meriones his name. The best, and last to start Tydides was. Then all arow they stood. Achilles by Shew'd them the Gole far off upon the Plain; And all at once hold up their Whips on high, And beat their. Horses each one with his Reyn; And loud upon them call'd to make them run. Old Phoenix at the Staff was set to stay And be a witness of what there was done, And see there were amongst them no foul play. And swiftly from the Ships they part away, In clouds of dust up to their breasts they fly, And to the wind their spreading Manes display; Their Chars sometimes are in the Air a high, And sometimes on the ground. The Charretiers Sit for all that still fast upon their Seats, And ev'ry one aloud his Horses cheers, While in his breast his heart with longing beats. But when about the Gole they turned were, And coming back agen unto the shore, Then 'twas their Vertue chiefly did appear, And faster went their Horses than before. And now Eumelus Horses foremost were, And Diomed behind him was not far With his Male Trojan Horses, but so neer As if they would have gone into his Char. So neer they were their heads did on it lie, And made Eumlus back and shoulders hot With breathing on them; and the Victorie Had got, or doubtful made at least, had not
Apollo been to Diomed unkind, And from his hand struck out his shining Whip. Tydides then again was left behind, And wept to see Eumelus him outstrip. When Pallas saw what wrong was to him done, She puts the Whip into his hand again, And angry goes unto Admetus Son, And of his Horses breaks the Yoke in twain. On one side of the way then went one Mare, And on the other side the other goes. Down fell the Pole, and with it he; and tare His elbows and his eye-brows, mouth and nose. Tydides in the mean time passed by, And got before them all a mighty length. For Pallas to him meant the Victory, And gave unto his Horses greater strength. Ecind Tydides next was Menelaus, And next to him Antilochus; and he Aloud unto his Horses calling was. Now let's (said he) your utmost vertue see. With Diomed you are not bid contend, Whom victor now Athena means to make, And strengthned hath his Horses to that end; But only Menelaus t'overtake. Were't not a shame that Aethe but a Mare Should leave you two such lusty Steeds behind? But if you now seek how your selves to spare, I tell you this, and true you will it find, You shall be slain. Therefore use all your speed, And when you come into a narrow place, Leave it to me to do what I see need. This said, the Horses fearing mend their pace, And now were close at Menelaus heels. Then neer unto a hollow way they came; And lest they break should one anothers Wheels, Atrides turn'd aside into the same. The other after him a little wide The same way took. Atrides then afraid That he would enter with him side by side, Unto Antilochus cri'd out and said,
Anilochus, you drive too carelesly, The way's too narrow. Pray a little stay Your Horses; broader 'twill be by and by, Lest both our Chars lie broken on the way. Antilochus, then whipt his Horses on So much the faster, seeming not to hear. And when they were a little further gone, Atrides held his Horses in, for fear Their Chars should clashing overturned be, And with them they be thrown into the dust, And to him spake, reviling. Go, said he, Of all the men I know the most unjust, And not so wise as th' Argives thought you were. But yet the Prize you shall not so obtain; But for i first you shall be put to swear. And then his Horses he drave on again. And to encourage them, unto them said, His Horses cannot keep before you long; They old are both; strain hard. Be not dismay For both of you brave Horses are and young. This said, at highest speed agen they fly, And to Antilochus came up again. The Argives on the Race now sat to spy Who foremost coming was upon the Plain. Idomeneus sat in a place more high Without the Race, and heard a Charretier Whose voice he knew unto his Horses cry, And presently two Horses did appear. Of one of them the colour was bright Bay, But on his forehead had a spot of white, And as the Moon at Full ound ev'ry way, And from afar conspicuous and bright. Then to the Greeks he said, Is there no more That see these Horses coming back but I? They are not those that foremost were before; And 'tis another Charretier I spy. Eumelus some mischance has had I fear; And yet about the Gole he turned well. But now I cannot see them any where. Perhaps out of his hands their Bridles sell;
No longer would the Horses then obey, But thrown him somewhere have o'th'field; or born Him in their fit by violence away, And have his Charret overturn'd, or torn. Stand on your feet your selves and mark him well, Whether or no it Diomedes be The Son of Tydeus; for I cannot tell, He like him is, and I believe 'tis he. The lesser Ajax then Oileus Son With evil words t'Idomeneus repli'd, The Mares upon the Field are coming on, But you must talk, though from the purpose wide. Your eyes are now grown old and less can see, And yet to talk you love so much the more; Though at discerning many better be. Eumelus, as at first, is still before. Ajax (said he) of all the Greeks the worst Except at railing, let's a wager lay, A Tripod or a Caldron who comes first, Atrides judge, that you may know and pay. And Ajax then about was to reply; Nor had the quarrel 'twixt them there been staid, But that Achilles who was sitting by, Rose from his Seat, and coming to them said, Idomeneus and Ajax 'tis a shame, For you in evil Language to contend, That others when they do so ought to blame. Sit down, and but a little while attend. They'll soon be here. They strive for Victory, And driving are as fast as ere they can; Discerned then it will be easily Which is the foremost, which the hindmost man, This said, they saw Tydides very neer Plying his Whip; his Horses seem'd to fly; And cover'd was with dust the Charretier; And hard it was the track o'th'Wheels to spy. Then coming in, before the Lords he stopt, And to the ground lept from his Chariot; With sweat his Horses breasts and shoulders dropt. Then Stheelus the Prize neglected not,
But nimbly from his place he to it skips, And by his friends there standing by his side Sent th'woman and the Tripod to the Ships; And having done, the Horses he unti'd. Antilochus next to Tydides was, That not by vertue of his Steeds but slight Advantage gotten had of Menelaus When for them both he found the way too streight. But Menelaus to him was so neer As is a Charret-horse unto the Wheel, Which of his Tayl doth sometimes touch the hair, And makes the Horse to run that does it feel. So neer unto him was Atrides then, That was behind once a Coyts cast or more. But quickly to him he came up agen. For Aethe now ran faster than before. And had they but a little longer run, Atrides by Antilochus had pass'd, And without doubt the second Prize had won. Meriones behind was a Spears cast. Slow Steeds he had and but small skill in Courses. Eumelus whom Athena overthrew Came hindmost and before him drave his Horses, And with his hands behind, his Charret drew. Achilles mov'd with pity was at this, And spake unto the Argives in this wise. Although he come the last, the best he is; 'Tis fit he have at least the second Prize, But Diomed the first, that has it won. And just it seemed in the Argives sight. And from Antilochus the Prize had gone, Had he not pleaded for it as his right. Antilochus then to Achilles spake, Though well, said he, in pity you incline T'Eumelus, yet my Prize he must not take; I won it have, and 'tis not yours, but mine. His Horses good, and Horse-man good he is; And he and they upon the ground were laid By some mischance; I'm not concern'd in this. He should unto th'Immortal Gods have pray'd.
But you, that pity him, and at your Tent Have Gold, Brass, Horses, Women, Cattle store, May out of that when you think fit content Eumelus with the value, or with more. For whosoever means to have the Mare Must for her with me fight. Thus pleaded he. Achilles that great love unto him bare, Was glad, and said, Since you so counsel me, The Breast plate I will to him give of Brass That hem'd is all about with shining Tin, With which Asteropaeus armed was. Automedon into my Tent go in, And quickly to me bring the Breast-plate forth. And then Automedon no longer stands, But fetches out the Armour of great worth, And puts the fame into Eumelus hands. Then up Atrides Menelaus stands, And in his hand the Cry'r a Scepter laid, And silence to be kept i'th'Court commands. T'Antilochus then Menelaus said, Antilochus, what made you me disgrace Justling my Horses in the hollow way When there was so much danger in the place, That't had been best for both of us to stay? But you the Princes hear the Cause I pray, And judge between us both impartially, Lest any of the Greeks hereafter say I did t'Antilochus an injury, And from him got the Mare by fraud or might; And that his Horses than mine better were. But come, I now know how my self to right. Come lay your hand upon the Reyns, and swear By Neptune, that you did not willingly And with prepensed malice cross my Charre. To this Antilochus did then reply, O Menelaus, since you elder are, You know our faults upon the sudden rise, And that before-hand young men study not; Their Wits are present, but the old are wise. To do you injury I never thought.
The Mare is yours; and if you please to send For any thing I have, that too I'll give Rather than with an Oath the Gods offend, And out of Menelaus favour live This said, he put the Mare into his hand, Then Menelaus lookt as fresh and gay As Dew that on the growing Corn doth stand Then when the Fields are in their best array. And to Antilochus repli'd gen, Antilochus I angry am no more. I see you were by Youth transported then. But putting tricks upon your friends give ore, I not so soon forgiven had another; But you so much have suffer'd for my sake Together with your Father and your Brother, That I can easie satisfaction take. And now to shew I got it not by might, Take you the Prize, although it be my share. This said, he took t'himself the Caldron bright; And yielding to Antilochus the Mare, Unto Noëmon gave her to set up (Neëmon was Antilochus his man) One Prize remain'd, which was the double Cup. Meriones the two gold Talents wan. Achilles rising then to Nestor went, And unto him the double Cup he gave. This Prize, said he, keep for a Monument Of my Patroclus lying in his Grave. You shall not for it arm your fists with Lead, Nor with young men at cast of Spears engage, Nor shall you on the Foot-race need to tread. Of all such work you are excus'd by age. This said, the Cup into his hand he laid, Which joyfully he took and thus repli'd. Sweet Son, you nothing but the truth have said. My strength is past, it cannot be deni'd. My hands I scarce can to my shoulders raise, And heavily my seet both rise and fall. Oh, that I were as young as in those days When I saw Amarynceus Funeral
Set forth most nobly in Buprasion. There many Prizes were, and many a man; But like to me amongst them there was none, Epean, Pylian, nor Aetolian. At Fists the Prize from Clytomed I won; And wrastling with Ancaeus I him threw, And Iphiclus, swift as he was, outrun; And with the Spears I Polydore out-threw, And at the Horse-race only was outstript By th'envie of the Sons of Actor two. For sitting on the Charrt they both whipr, And from me won that Prize with much ado. Such then I was. But now to younger men That work I leave. Old age I must obey. But such I was amongst the Argives then. And now, Achilles, here no longer stay. Proceed with other Games your friend to grace: Your Gift, I take, and great content I find In that you shewn have in this publick place Amongst the Greeks you have me in your mind. Achilles having heard these Praises all Of Nestor, brought into the place a Mule, A Prize for him that won at Fist and Ball, A Mule of six years old, and hard to rule. As for the vanquisht, he assign'd to him A lesser Prize which was a silver Cup, That crookt and wryed was about the brim. Achilles then amongst the Greeks stood up. Atrides, and you Argives all, said he, Let two men fight for these at Fist and Ball. The lusty Mule shall for the Victor be; The Cup for him that in the fight shall fall. This said, Epeius a huge man stood up, And that had at this kind of fight great skill, And seiz'd the Mule, and said, As for the Cup, Let any one against me rise that will. The Mule is mine; at this game I am best. Is't not enough that th' Argives value me In Fight but as a mean man like the rest? For no man can the best at all things be.
But let him know, whoere with him contends, I'll break his bones. Which being to him known, He may about him ready have his friends, To take him up when I have knockt him down. This said, Mecestes Son Euryalus, That won the Prize from the Cadmaeans all At Theb's upon the death if Oedipus When celebrated was his Funeral Presents himself. About him busie was Tydides wishing him the Victorie, And gave him of strong Leather well-wrought Lace Wherewith the Balls unto his wists to tie. The Champions up their fists together have, Which when they met so quick and mingled were, That which was which a man could not perceive, But how they rattled at their heads might hear. Euryalus then chanc'd to look aside, At which Epeius such a blow him hit Upon the cheek, that he was stupifi'd, And could no longer stand upon his feet. As when the Sea is curl'd by Zephyrus, A little Fish leaps up and falls agen; So started at the stroak Euryalus And fainted. To him went Epeius then And took him up. His friends that by him stood Led him away trailing his feet behind, His neck aside hanging, and spitting blood; And wandring out of order was his mind. Achilles other Prizes then brought forth For Wrastlers; and for him that did the best, A mighty three-foot Pot esteemed worth By th'company twelve Oxen at the least. And for the vanquished a lesser Prize, A Woman that in many works had skill; And to the Argives speaking said, Arise You that contend for the great Tripod will. Then up rose Ajax, up Ulysses rose, And having girt themselves stood on the place, And presently extend their arms, and close; And one another with twin'd arms embrace.
As when a Carpenter to keep the wind Out of a house the Timber bows and pleats, So were their arms with one another twin'd, And each of them keeps fast his hold, and sweats, And squeez'd until their sides were black and blew. And weary were the Greeks with looking on When neither Ajax. yet Ulysses threw, Nor he the mighty Son of Telamon. And Ajax then unto Ulysses said, Let's lift each other; and withal him lifts, And hop'd upon the ground to have him laid, But he then not forgetful of his shifts, Struck with his right foot Ajax on the ham So that to turn him Ajax strength did lack. Then both together to the ground they came, One on his breast, the other on his back. And now Ulysses to lift Ajax is. And from the ground he heav'd him, but not high, And in he clapt one knee between both his, Then both upon the ground again they lie. Agen they rise, and had not so giv'n ore, But that Achills to them goes, and says, You both are best; torment your selves no more, But equal Prizes take and go your ways, That other Greeks for other Prizes may Their vertue shew. This said, they him obey'd, And from their bodies wipt the dust away, And with their Coats themselves again array'd. And then Achilles brought new Prizes in, A silver Temperer that six gallons held, And by Sidonian workmen made had been, And all that ere they made before excell'd, And by Phoenicians into Greece was brought And giv'n to Thoas, and from him it came T'Eunaeus Jasons Son. Eunaeus bought Lycaon of Patroclus with the same. This was the Prize for him that swiftest ran. A great far Ox the second was to take; And half a Talent, Gold the hindmost man. And then Achilles to the Argives spake.
Arise, faid he, that for this Prize will run. Then Ajax rose Son of Oileus The lesser Ajax. And then Nestor's Son (The swiftest of the Youth) Antilochus. Arow they stand. Achilles to them shows The Gole about the which they were to run. Together then they start; and foremost goes The nimble-footed Ajax Oileus Son. But next him and so neer Ulysses is, As from a womans Distaff comes the thread, And on his steps trod ere the dust aris, And breathed all the way upon his head. The Greeks upon him called all the way To do his best, and wisht him Victorie. Then to Athena did Ulysses pray. O help me my good Goddess now, said he. And when almost they ended had the Race, Then chanced Ajax in the Dung to fall Of Cattle which had kill'd been on the place B'Achilles for Patroclus Funeral, And fill'd with Cow-dung was his mouth and nose. Ulysses on the Temp'rer laid his hands. And Ajax spitting Dung again arose, And with his Ox before the Argives stands. Oh, oh, said he, 'tis Pallas hath done this, Who as a careful Mother of her Child, Upon Ulysses always waiting is. And when he that had said th' Achaeans smil'd. Antilochus th'half Talent took of Gold, And smil'd, and to the Argives said, You see The Gods still give most honour to the Old. Ajax in age a little passeth me. Agen Ulysses older is than he. And younger men with these cannot contend At running of a Race, except it be Achilles. Whom he finely did commnd. Achilles of that commendation glad Unto Antilochus repli'd again; To your half Talent I'll another add. That word of yours shall not be said in vain.
Achilles then brought forth the Shield and Spear And Helmet of Sarpedon (for till he Was killed by Patroclus his they were) And said unto the Greeks, Now let me see Two valiant men well-arm'd conrend for these; And he that first draws blood shall bear away Ths Thraian Sword won from Asteropaeus. The Arms in common they shall both enjoy, And at my Tent they both shall feasted be. Up then great Ajax, up Tydides rose, And came forth armed from the Companie, And looking grimly one to th'other goes, And thrice to one another fiercely leapt, And Ajax Spear pass'd through Tydides Shield; But by the Breast-plate from his flesh was kep. Good was his Breast-plate, and not apt to yield. But still at Ajax neck Tydides aim'd, Above his Shield still pushing with his Spea; At which the people standing by exclaim'd; For then of Ajax life they stood in fear, And to Achilles cri'd to part the Fray Betime, and let them equal Prizes have. And by Achilles then dismiss'd were they; But yet the Sword he to Tydides gave. And then of Iron he brought out a Sough Such as at first it from the Fornace came, The which Eetion was wont to through; Amongst whose Goods Achilles found the same, And to his Ship he brought it with the rest. And said to th' Argives, He this Prize shall gain, That lets us see he throw it can the best. It will his Plough with Iron five years maintain. He needs not to the Town for Iron go. Then Polypoetes and Leontes rise, And Ajax, and together stand arow; And last of all unto them comes Epeius. First threw Epeius, and well laught at was. And next to him Leontes threw the same. Then Ajax threw and did them both surpass. But when to Polypoetes hand it came,
As far as doth a Shepherd throw his Hook Seeing his Sheep stand still or straggle out, So far threw he. The Prize his friends then took And bare it to his Tent. The people shout. Achilles then brought other Prizes in, Ten double, and ten single Axes keen, The which the two best Bow-men were to win, And said, Now let your Archerie be seen. And on the Sands erects a Ship-mast high, And at the top he ti'd a Dove unto't With slender thread, and said, Your skill now try. For he that dead the tender Dove shall shoot, Shall have the double Axes fr his Prize; The single he that breaks the thread shall win. Then Teuer and Meriones arise, And Lots they cast which of them shall begin. And to begin to Teucer sell the Lot. And first he shot. But should have made a Vow A Hecatomb to Phoebus, but forgot. And therefore Phoebus would not him allow To kill the Bird. But yet he brake the threa. And tow'rds the ground, it hung down from her feet. The frighted Dove in th'Air hovered, And mightily the Argives shout to see't. Mriones then quickly drew his Bow, (For th' Arrow fitted on't already lay) And presently to Phoebus made a Vow Of his first Lambs a Hecatomb to pay. And seeing how the Dove amazed went Above his head this way and that way round, His Arrow keen he quickly to her sent, Which pierc'd her through, and brought her to the ground. The wounded Dove unto a Mast then flies, And there her Feathers sheds, and hangs her head, And having sitten there not long she dies. The Argives gazing at it wondered. And then Meriones away did bear The double Axes. Teucer took the rest. Achilles then new Prizes fetcht; a Spear, And a new Caldron worth an Ox at least.
To throw the Spear then rose the King Atrides, And after him stood up Meriones Idomeneus his Squire. Then said Pelides, There shall be no contention for these. We know how much you are more excellent At this than any of th' Achaeans here. Take you these Prizes therefore to your Tent, And give unto Meriones the Spear, If you think fit. Atrides was content, And to Meriones he gave the Spear, And by Talthybius the Caldron sent Unto the Ships; and all well pleased were.
ILIAD. LIB. XXIV. THus end the Games. The Greeks dispersed are, And ev'ry man returned to his Tent, And busie was his Supper to prepare; And after they had supt to bed they went. Achilles all the night slept not a wink, But on Patroclus worth, and company, And on their common suffrings still did think, And lay upon his bed unquietly. And weeping sometimes laid himself on this, Sometimes on that side, sometimes on his face, And sometimes on his back, and sometimes ris, And walkt upon the shore from place to place. And soon as ere he saw the morning come, He Hector to his Charret ti'd again; And drag'd him thrice about Patroclus Tomb, And then went in, and left him on the Plain With dust all over hidden, but not rent. For Phoebus had him cover'd with his Shield, That torn his body was not as they went. The Gods mean while sat looking on the Field, And griev'd to see Achilles shew such spight. And some of them advised Mercurie To steal away the body from his sight. To this the other Gods did all agree, But Neptune, Juno, Pallas angry were With Priam and with Troy, for Paris sake, For that he Venus did so much preferre, And of the others small account did make. Thus pass'd it then. But twelve days after came Apollo to the Gods in Councel set, And said, Ye Gods uniust, you are to blame. What Sacrifice did Hector ere forget,
That to his Father, Mother, Wife, and Son That for his death lament, he must not come, And buri'd be, since he is dead and gone, And have a Funeral in Ilium? But to Achilles fury you give way, Whose breast is void of all Humanity. As Lions on mens Cattle love to prey; Savage and proud on men so falleth he Asham'd of nothing. Though another man That had a loving Brother lost, or Son, When he has wept a while give over can, And bear the ill that cannot be undone. But he with Hector's death is not content, But drags his body at his Chariot, Not caring how we may the same resent. He'll find at last 'twere better he had not Upon the senseless Earth have shown such spigh. To this in anger Juno then repli'd, If equal they had been, you had said right, But that they equal are it is deni'd. For Hector was a mortal womans Son; Achilles Mother a great Goddess is Thetis, that nurst was and brought up by none But by my self. The Gods can witness this, Who, when I made her noble Peleus Bride, Came to the Wedding all, and you too then Were with your Fiddle there well satisfi'd, Perfidious God, companion of mean men. Then Jupiter to Juno spake and said, Look not so angerly upon the Gods, Nor for Achilles honour be afraid. 'Twixt him and Hector I know well the ods. But Hector we of Mortals love the best, I do at least, of all the men of Troy. He never is behind-hand with my Feast, But Flesh and Wine pays duely at my day. But we'll not Hector from Achilles steal; Nor can, since Thetis for him is awake. Call Thetis hither; for with her I'll deal To make him for his body Ransome take.
This said, into the Sea leapt Iris straight Between the Isles of Imbros and of Same. The water roar'd and started at her weight; And she to th'bottom like a Plummet came. Where in a hollow Cave the Goodess fate, Her Sea-nymphs all about her sitting round, She in the midst bewailing her Sons fate, That was to perish on the Trojan ground. And going to her neer, Thetis, said she, Jove calls you to him. She repli'd, Why so? What has that mighty God to say to me? I am not fit amongst the Gods to go. But well. I go. I dare not disobey. And on her head then throws she a black hood. Then up they went, and Iris led the way. (To let them pass the Sea divided stood) And being landed leapt up to the Sky, When Jove in Councel and the Gods were met; Where Thetis was received lovingly, And next himself by Jupiter was set. There Juno Nectar, Pallas gave her place. And Jove unto her spake. Thetis, said he, I know your grief, but such is now the case, You could not from th'Assembly spared be. Nine days amongst our selves we disagree Concerning Hector's body what to do. The most would have him stoln by Mercury; But for your sake I would not yield thereto. But go you, Thetis, to your Son and say The Gods are angry and I most of all, That Hector's body at the Ships doth stay Unransom'd and without a Funeral; That he release it may for fear of me. Mean while to Priam Iris shall be sent To bid him go t' Achilles speedily, And with fair Presents fetch it from his Tent. This said, she from Olympus took her flight T' Achilles Tent, and found him sitting there, Where he Patroclus still lamenting sigh'd; And with him friends providing Dinner were.
And killed had a fat Sheep in his Tent. Then in she went and sate down by his side. How long, said she, will you your self torment? Be comforted, and for your health provide; And take delight in womens company, For here you know you are not long to stay, And that at hand is now your Destiny. And hear what I from Jove must to you say. From Jupiter I come, who bad me say The Gods are angry and he most of all, That Hector's body at the Ships doth stay Unransom'd and without a Funeral. The Ransome therefore take and let him go. To which Achilles a short Answer gave. Let him that will (since Jove will have it so) The Ransome bring, the body he shall have. Whilst Thetis and her Son discoursing were, To Priam Jove swift Iris sent away. Iris, said he, this Message from me bear To Priam, and relate what now I say. Bid him unto Achilles Tent to go, And carry with him other Trojans none But one old Squire his Charret to look to, And bring away the body of his Son; And honourable Presents with him bear, Wherewith Achilles may be well content. And bid him death and danger not to fear, So good a Guardian with him shall be sent. Hermes shall guide him to Achilles Tent, And being there he needs not fear at all. Achilles will not kill him, but prevent The hurt that might from others on him fall. He wants not judgment, care, nor piety, And pity has for them that to him pray. This said, flew Iris from Olympus high To Priam's house, where little was of joy. His Sons about him weeping sat, and he I'th'midst involved in his Cloak so just, That one th'impression of his limbs might see, His head and neck bedawb'd with dung and dust,
Which he himself had thrown upon his head. His Daughters and his Sons Wives howling went About, for Brothers and for Husbands that were dead, And to the Shades by th' Argives had been sent. Then Iris unto Priam coming near With soft and gentle voice unto him said, Priam be bold, for no ill news I bear (For trembling sate he, and was sore afraid) Jove bids you to Achilles Tent to go And carry with you other Trojans none But one old Squire your Charret to look to, And bring away the body of your Son; And honourable Presents with you bear, Wherewith Achilles may be well content. He bids you neither death nor danger fear, So good a Guardian with you shall be sent. Hermes shall guide you to Achilles Tent. When you are there, past is the danger all. Achilles will not kill you but prevent The harm that may from others on you fall. He wants not judgment, care, nor piety, And pity has on them that to him pray In their distress, and at his mercie lie. When Iris this had said, she went away. Then Priam said unto his Sons, Arise, And make a Waggon ready out of hand; And to a Cedar Chamber down he hies, Where his most precious Houshold-stuff did stand. And thither call'd his Wife, and to her said, Jove's Menssenger t' Achilles bids me go With Ransome for my Son. I'm not afraid. But what think you? Is't best to go, or no? At this aloud she shrikt and said, Ay me, What now is of the wit you had become, For which so wise you once were thought to be By men abroad and by your friends at home? Will you go put your self into the hand Of him that hath your Sons so many slain, A man that does not pity understand, Nor faith? No, no, he'll not from you abstain.
But since the Fates designed had before His birth, to th'Dogs he should be made a prey By this hard-hearted man, you may deplore Him here at home, and from Achilles stay. Oh, that between my teeth I had his heart, That to revenge my Son I might it eat. It would no little ease be to my smart, And less the loss of him I should regret. For Hector only for his Country fought, And of his Enemies was not afraid, Nor did him wrong, but valiant was and stout. Then Priam to his Wife repli'd and said, Nay Wife, since to him I am bent to go, Disswade me not, nor ill Bird to me be Here in my house, and bode me ill. For know, Whatere you say, 'twill not prevail with me. If now a Priest or Prophet to me came And this had said, I thought it had a lye. But howsoever, come what will, I am With Hector in my arms content to die. This said, the Chests he presently unlocks, And out he lays twelve Robes for womankind, As many Coats, as many single Cloaks, And unto those as many that were lin'd, And further twelve rich Carpets out he lay'd, And when he that had done, he Gold brought forth, Whereof he layed by ten Talents weigh'd. And two great black three-footed Pots much worth. And unto those he set bright Caldrons four; And the fine Cup which giv'n him was when he From Troy to Thrace was sent Embassadour. So long'd he to set Hector's body free. I'th'Porch then standing many Trojans were, That sorry for his grief were thither come; To whom he said, Rascals what make you here? Find you not cause enough of grief at home, That you must hither come to trouble me? As if too little 'twere to lose my Son. Hereafter you will eas'lier killed be, Since Hector who defended you is gone.
As for my self, before I see that day, I hope to be within th'Infernal Gates. Then with his Staff he drave them all away; And turning in again his Sons he rates. Paris and Agathon and Helenus, Pammon, Polites, and Antiphobus, Agavus, Deiphobus, Hippothous. These nine he rated, saying to them thus, Make haste unworthy Sons. I had been glad If you in Hector's stead had all been slain. Oh how unfortunate am I that had So many and so valiant Sons in vain! Mestor and Troilus both valiant men, And Godlike Hector. Sure I am accurst. Since Mars of these depriv'd me has agen, And now I none have left me but the worst, Domestick Wolves, the bane of Lamb and Kid, And good for nothing but to dance and lye. Why stand you still? Were you not by me bid The Waggon to prepare? Then out they flye, And speedily the Waggon forth they bring, And Yoak well fitted with an iron Pin; And fixt it to the Poles-end with a Ring, And Cord nine Cubits long to keep it in; Which thrice about the Boxen Yoak they wind, And to the Waggon laid the Ransome in; And to it then the lusty Mules they bind, Which by the Mysians given him had been. That done, King Priam's Horses to his Charre Were by himself and by Idaeus ti'd, Of which he always taken had such care, That while they fed he stayed by their side. Then Hecuba came to them with a Cup, A golden Cup of pleasant Wine, that they The same to Jupiter might offer up Before unto their Foes they went away. Here, take this Cup, said she, and pray to Jove That he will let you see a lucky flight Of that great Bird which he the most doth loye, That you may be assured by the sight
That safe you shall agen return to Troy. For if that favour to you be deni'd I should advise you by all means to stay. And Priam then to Hecuba repli'd, This counsel (Wife) of yours with reason stands. Jove pleased is when to him men look up. For water then he call'd and washt his hands, And from his Wife receiv'd the golden Cup. Then looking up to Heav'n, O Jove, said he, Of all the Gods most glorious high and great, Grant me that I may well received be B'Achilles at his Tent, and well retreat. And that thereof I may be confident, Now shew me of your Bird a lucky flight. This said, Jove presently an Eagle sent, Of colour spotted over black and white. As wide as is a Princes Gate or more, So wide her Wings the mighty Eagle spreads, And as it over Ilium did soare, The people joy'd to see it ore their heads. The old man then went up into his Seat, And through the City to the Plain did pass. The Waggon wherein lay the treasure great Before him driven by Idaeus was. And so far went his Sons, and Sons-in-law; And then return'd agen into the City. When Jupiter upon the way him saw In this estate he moved was with pity; And unto Hermes turn'd his eyes and said, Since you mens company do most frequent, And whom you will can quickly hear and aid, Go and guide Priam to Achilles Tent. But so as to be seen by none, until He thither safely come. And Mercury No sooner understood his Fathers will But sets himself about it willingly. And first his Shoes unto his feet he binds Ambrosian Shoes that over Sea and Land Bear him as swift and lightly as the Winds, And then his Red he took into his hand,
Wherewith he layeth sleep on Mortal eyes, And takes it off again when he thinks good. Then down to Troy and Hellespont he flies In likeness of a Youth of Royal blood When Doun begins t'appear upon his face. Idaeus now and Priam at the brink Of Xanthus were, and night came on apace. And there they made their Mules and Horses drink. Idaeus neer them then saw Mercury, And in great fear to Priam cri'd, I see A man (O Priam) coming. Let us fly, Or to him go and fall down at his knee. And horribly was Priam then afraid, His hair with fear upon him stood upright. Then Mercury unto him came, and laid His hand on his, and to him said, 'Tis night; What makes you be abroad? Do you not fear Your Foes the Greeks? If any of them knew That you were with so great a Treasure here, In what a pitiful estate were you? For you and he that's with you both are old, And neither of you can himself defend. But as for any hurt from me, be bold. I hither come t'assist you as a friend, So like, me thinks, you to my Father are. And Priam then to Mercury repli'd, 'Tis true you say. And yet the Gods a care Have of me still that send me such a Guide, So great a man, so comely, and so wise, That blessed are the Parents you begat And Mercury to him again replies, Indeed old man, you say the truth in that. But whither bear you your best goods away? To some strange City till the War be done? Or are the Trojans all now leaving Troy, Since killed is the best of them, your Son That might with any of the Greeks compare? Tell me, said Priam (pray ye) who are you, And whence ye come, and who your Parents are, And how my Son and his hard Fate you knew.
You mean to try me now (said Mercury.) At th'Argive Ships I Hector frighted saw, And how he made the Greeks before him fly, And how he tost them in the Field like straw, Where we stood by with wonder looking on. Achilles had forbidden us to fight. His man am I, by birth a Myrmidon, And stood amongst the rest to see the sight. My Father is Polyctor, very rich, But now an old man is and like to you. And seven Sons he has in all, of which I am the last. And Lots at home we drew Which of us with Achilles should be sent To th'War of Troy. The Lot then fell to me. And with Achilles in his Ship I went. And hither come the place of fight to see. The Greeks by break of day will hither come, And try if now the City they can win. Impatient of their stay at Ilium They cannot by their Leaders be kept in. Then Priam to him said again, Since you Achilles Servant are, is Hector yet At th'Argive Ships, I pray you tell me true, Or cut in joynts thrown to the Dogs to eat? And Hermes unto this again replies, Nor Dogs nor Fowl upon him yet have fed, But at the Ships he still neglected lies, And though he have twelve days now there been dead, Yet is his body uncorrupt, and free From Worms that breed in other bodies slain. And though it ev'ry morning dragged be About Patroclus Tomb, doth whole remain And undefac'd, the bloud all washt away. You would admire to see him look so fresh, And clensed of the filth that on him lay, And at his wounds how closed is the flesh, Though many from the Greeks receiv'd he had. So kind the Gods were after he was dead. These words of Mercury made Priam glad. And thus again he to him answered.
Yes, yes, 'tis good to give the Gods their due, A thing that Hector never did omit. And therefore to him they this favour shew, Although his Soul be in th' Infernal Pit. But now t'Achilles Tent be you my Guide; And at my hand this handsome Cup receive. Again you try me (Mercury repli'd) I dare not tak't without Achilles leave. For of his anger in great fear I stand. Without a Bribe I'll with you go along To what place you think fit by Sea or Land. Though 'twere to Argos; none shall do you wrong. For sure, so wretchedly I do not look, But that a man may of me stand in fear. Then up he leapt, and in his hands he took The Whip and Reyns, and serv'd as Charretier. When they were come to th'Argive Ditch and Wall, The Watch that placed was the Gate to keep, Their Supper to provide were busie all, And Mercury there laid them all asleep, Took off the Bars, the Gate wide open laid, And in the Charret and the Waggon went With all the wealth for Hector to be paid; And forward pass unto Achilles Tent, Built for him by his Myrmidons, and high, With Fir-trees tall, and cover'd over head (To keep it out of danger from the Sky) With the deep vesture of the flowry Mead And to it had a great Court pal'd about, And in the Pale a high two-valved door For Chars and Waggons to go in and out, And one great Bar of Fir-tree and no more, So great that it requir'd three common men Upon the lofty Gate to set it on, And three such men to take it off agen. None but Achilles shut it could alone. This Gate then Hermes open to him laid, And with the Char and Waggon in he came, Then leaping to the ground to Priam said, Old Father, I a God Immortal am
Hermes, and hither sent to be your Guide, From Heav'n on purpose by my Father Jove. But by Achilles I'll not here be spi'd. Gods must not shew to men such open love. But go you to Achilles in, and try What favour from him at his knees you'll find, And put him of his Son in memory, And Father. That will work upon his mind. This said, t'Olympus Hermes went his way. Then to the ground leapt Priam from his Charre; And going in he bad Idaeus stay, And of the Mules and Horses have a care. Achilles at his Supper now was set, And waiting on him stood Automedon And Alimus, the Table standing yet; But sup'd he had and appetite had none. His other friends at distance from him sat. And Priam to them then came in unseen, And kist the hands there of Achilles, that Of many of his Sons the death had been. As when a man that kill'd another has, And to another Prince for safety flies, Men at him stare; so he amazed was When be saw Priam stand before his eyes. The rest admir'd the comely man to see, And both on him and one another look. But Priam then upon Achilles knee Laid both his hands, and thus unto him spoke. Godlike Achilles take into your thought Your Father that an old man is as I, And into trouble by his Neighbours brought, And has no friend on whom he may rely. Yet he has many Intervals of joy, And thinking on his Son is comforted With hope to see him back return from Troy. Undone am I; for all my hopes are fled. When th'Army of th'Achaeans landed here, I by the Gods with fifty Sons was blest; Whereof sixteen my Wife did to me bear, And other women in my house the rest.
But in this War the most of them are lost. And now by Mars reduced are to sew. And Hector which of all I loved most, Is lately, O Achilles, slain by you. His body to redeem I hither come With pretious Gifts, and fall before your knee, That I may bury it in Ilium. Upon your Father think, and pity me. Yet is my case more pitiful than his. For what calamity can greater be Than th'hands that have my Children kill'd to kiss? This said, Achilles wept. And from his knee, With his, the hands of Priam gently mov'd; And then aloud they both lamented. He For Peleus, and Patroclus whom he lov'd, And Priam for his own calamitie, And through the house were heard to sigh and groan. Achilles, when his fit of tears was laid, And eased was his heart, came from his Throne, And rais'd th'old man that on his knees yet staid, And to him spake. Alas, old man, said he, You much have suffer'd, and your pain I feel. But how alone durst you to come to me, That slew your Sons, unless your heart be steel? But come, sit down. In vain lamenting is, The hurt that's done tears cannot take away, Since so 'tis order'd by the Gods in bliss, That men shall live in pain, and they in joy. Two Barrels in his Cellar Jove has still Of Gifts to be bestow'd on mortal Wights, One full of Good, the other full of Ill. And usually to mingle them delights. For they that only ill receive from Jove Exposed always are to injurie, And begging up and down the world shall rove, And both by Gods and Men despised be. So Peleus at the first receiv'd much good, And did in wealth his Neighbours all surpass, And with his Subjects in great honour stood, And joyn'd in Wedlock to a Goddess was.
But after this the Ill unto him came To leave no Chi'd behind him to succeed, But only me that so short lived am, And from him live to vex you and your seed. And you, O Priam, once were rich, they say, And all that was in Lesbos did injoy, And over all the Hellespont did sway, And that all Phrygia did you obey, And with great store of Children blest you were. But now you only fights and slaughter see, And patiently you Hector's death must bear. He cannot with your tears revived be; Much sooner you may suffer greater ill. T'Achilles Priam then again replies, O Thetis Son, to sit I have no will Whilst at the Ships my Son unburi'd lies. But bring him forth that I my Son may see, And you the Presents I have brought enjoy. And prosperous unto you may they be, And safely I again return to Troy▪ Achilles angry then, Old man, said he, Provoke me not. I'll put into your hand The body of your Son, because to me From Jove my Mother came with that command. And very well I know you Priam are, And that you hither had a God for Guide. What mortal to the Army come would dare? Or could have pass'd the Watch and not been spi'd? Or open to you could the Gates have set? Therefore take heed, and anger me no more, Lest the command of Jove I should forget, And without Hector send you out adoor. This said, old Priam was afraid and fat. Out went Achilles with Automedon And Acimus, his two good Servants, that He lov'd the most, Patroclus being gone. And they the Horses and the Mules unti'd, And from the Waggon in the Goods they brought, Only (wherewith the body dead to hide) They left behind a handsome Robe and Coat.
Achilles then his drudging Maids appointed To bear the body to some Chamber meet, And see the same well washt and well anointed, So secretly that Priam might not see't, Lest grieved he should something do or say, That might so far Achilles anger move, Than in his passion he should Priam slay Forgetting the Commandement of Jove. And being washt, anointed, and array'd, Achilles laid the body on a bed, Which his two Servants in the Waggon laid. This done, he to Patroclus spake and said, O my Patroclus if you hear in Hell That Hector's body I have sent to Troy, Forgive me, since I for it paid am well With Gifts, whereof what's fit to you I'll pay. This said, Achilles to his Tent retir'd, And sat upon the Seat from whence he ris, Your Son, said he, is freed as you desir'd, And on a bed laid in your Waggon is▪ To morrow with him go by break of day. But let us not our Supper now forget; For Niobe twelve Children lost, they say; Yet did she not for that refuse to eat. Six lusty Sons, six Daughters fair they were, And killed all, only for saying this, [Leto but two, and she did many bear.] By Phoebus they, and these by Artemis, The Goddess Leto's Daughter and her Son. Nine days and nights they lay unburied; For Jove had chang'd the people into stone, And then the Gods with Earth them covered. Yet Niobe when she had weeping done, Received food; and now doth somewhere lie Ith'Woulds of Spylus, and turn'd to stone The hurt done by the Gods takes patient lie. Come then old man and lay your grief away, And for the present think upon your meat, And weep for Hector when you come to Troy, For true it is your loss of him is great.
This said, forth goes Achilles, and appoints A Sheep for supper to be kill'd and flayd; Which straight was done, and cut out into joynts, And pierc'd with Spits unto the fire was laid. And, when it was well roasted, taken up. Automedon o'th'Table laid the bread. Achilles made the Messes. Then they sup, And on the meat they laid their hands and fed But when of food they had no more desire, Priam admir'd Achilles form and face. Achilles Priam did no less admire, In his aspect and speech there was such grace. When on each other they had lookt enough, Priam began, and to Achilles spake. Dismiss me if you please (Achilles) now, That I a little sleep at last may take. For since my Son was slain, I never slept, But rolling on the soiled grass have li'n Perpetually, and for him sigh'd and wept, Nor until now touch'd either Meat or Wine. Achilles then to th'women gave command I'th'Porch without to set him up a bed, With handsome Coverleds of Purple, and With fine soft Blankets see it covered. The women quickly his Command obey'd, And two Beds ready made i'th'Porch without. Achilles smiling then to Priam said, Old man I from my Tent must turn you out; Lest some man should from Agamemnon sent With counsel come and chance to see you here, And let him know that you are at my Tent, And the Bedemption of your Son deferre. But ere you go, old man, pray tell me right What time is needful for his Obsequies, That I so long may keep the Greeks from fight Then Priam to Achilles thus replies. You know Achilles very well how farre The Hills and Woods are distant from the Town, And how afraid to go the Trojans are. We need nine days to fetch the fewel down.
The tenth he shall be burnt and buried. Th'eleventh a Mount upon him shall be laid. The twelvth we'll fight again if there be need. To this Achilles answered and said, Old man, the time you asked granted is. So long th'Achaeans shall from fight forbear. This said, in Priam's hand he layed his, That of his faith he might not stand in fear. There in the Porch slept Priam and Idaeus. And then unto his bed Achilles went. And there he slept, and with him fair Brisëis Within an Inner Chamber of his Tent. The other Gods and Men slept all the night, But sleep approached not to Hermes eyes, But thinking lay on Priam, how he might Conduct him safely from his Enemies. Then up he rose, and went to Priam's head And to him said, Ho, Priam sleep you here? Since you redeem'd have Hector's body dead, You think you nothing farther have to fear. Although you for him paid a lusty price, Yet if alive Atrides find you here, Your Sons and friends shall pay that value thrice. This said, he suddenly awakt with fear. And calling to Idaeus made him rise. Then Hermes to the Waggon and the Charre Himself the lab'ring Mules and Horses ties. And now into their Seats they mounted are, And through the Argive Camp then Hermes drove Unseen till past Scamander ford they were. Then Hermes left them and return'd to Jove. And now the morning was display'd and clear. Then sighing on they went to Ilium, But were by neither man nor woman spi'd, Till up into the Tow'r of Pergamum Cassandra went, and thence she them discri'd, And weeping to the people cri'd and said, Ye men and women all of Ilium, If ever you at Hector's coming joy'd, Run to the Gates; I see him hither come.
Then, man nor woman left was in the Town, But Hector to behold went to the Gate. First came his loving Wife and Mother down, And in the Waggon by him weeping sate. The people in a throng about him staid Lamenting and lamented had all day, But Priam from his Char unto them said, Trojans, unto the body dead give way. And when within the house I have it laid, Then for him weep till you be satisfi'd. When this was said, the people him obey'd. And to make way, themselves they then divide Then to the house they brought the body in, And plac'd it on a bed. Then Singers by They set, the lamentation to begin. Their Song they sung; to which the women sigh. Then to lament Andromache began. O my dear Husband you have lost your life Unhappily, that were but a young man, And made a wretched Widow of your Wife, And with me left behind a tender Son To evil fate begot by you and me. To see him grow a man I hope have none; This City first I fear destroy'd will be, Since you are gone that was our sole defence. T'Achaia now the Wives of Troy must go, And with them I. And you my Child must hence, And in vile work employ'd be by the Fo, Or you may by some spightful man or other Be from the Wall or some high Tower thrown For Hector's sake, that killed has his Brother, Or Father, or his Son before the Town. For many of the Greeks has Hector slain. He went not to the Battle bashfully. For which the Trojans now are in great pain, And I your loving Wife especially. O that you thus should in the dust be laid, And not give me your hand before you di'd Without a word upon your Death-bed said For me to think on. Then the women sigh'd.
And Hecuba began. Hector, said she, Of all my Sons to me you were most dear. And when arrived was your Destinie, You by the Gods, though dead, beloved were. My other Sons, when any taken by Achilles were, beyond-Sea carri'd were And sold, and made to suffer slavery At Samos, Imbros, Lemnos, or elsewhere; But when of life he had deprived you Because his friend Patroclus you had slain, About his Monument he oft you drew, Though that could not bring him to life again. But now he sent it to me has again As fresh and as well colour'd as if by Apollo's gentle Shafts he had been slain, This said, agen the people sob and sigh. Then Helen took her turn. Hector, said she, Whom best I lov'd of all my Brother-laws (For you were so, since Paris marri'd me, Though when I marri'd him accurst I was) Now twenty years 'tis since I came to Troy, And never did an ill word from you hear; And when your Kindred of me ill did say, You took my part, and made them to forbear. Since you are gone my joy is at an end, And in your death I moan my own estate That now amongst the Trojans have no friend, Who hate me as the Author of their Fate. This said with tears, provokt the peoples pity; But Priam then unto them spake, and said, Go Trojans now and fetch wood to the City; You need not of the Argives be afraid. Achilles when I parted from his Tent Eleven days allow'd my Son t' inter And fetch down wood without impediment; So long the Argives should from fight forbear. This said, to th'Hills with Oxen and with Wains And Mules they went, and busie were about This work nine days together and took pains. Upon the tenth the body was brought out,
And on the top of the great wood pile laid, And fire put to't; and all day long it burned. And all the night. When morning was displaid, Again the Trojans to the Pile returned, And th'Embers with black Wine extinguished. His bones then by his Brothers and his Kin Were from the ground together gathered, And by them to an Urn of Gold laid in. The Urn with Purple Robes then cover'd over Into a Grave (which soon was made) they laid. The Grave with many and great stones they cover. And last of all (because they were afraid Before their work were done the Greeks would come) They sent out Scouts on ev'ry side to spy. And ore his Grave in hast they raise a Tomb. This done, away they went, and by and by To Priam's house they came again, and there He made a splendid Supper for them all. Then home they went well pleased with their hear. Thus ended noble Hector's Funeral. FINIS.
bust of Homer THE WORKES of Homer Engl: by T: Hobbes portrait of Hobbes London Printed for W: Crooke at the green Dragon, without Temple Barr. 1677.
HOMER'S Odysses. Translated out of Greek, By THO: HOBBES Of Malmsbury. The Second EDITION. LONDON: Printed for W. Crook, at the green Dragon without Temple-Barre. 1677.
Licensed, Roger L'Estrange.
THE LIFE OF HOMER: Collected and Written By J. Wallim. HOmer, whose proper name was Melesige∣nes, was born in the Country of Aeolia, about 160 years after the Siege of Troy, which was about the year of the World 3665, of Critheis Daughter of Melanopus and Omy∣ris, who after her Father and Mothers death was left to a Friend of her Fathers at Cuma, who when he found she was with child, in displeasure he sent her away to a friends at a place nigh the River Meles; where at a Feast among other young women she was dilivered of a Son, whose name she called Melesigenes, from the place where he was born. Critheis went with her
Son to Ismenias, and after to Smyrna, where she dressed Wool to get a livelyhood for her self and Son. Phemius the Schoolmaster, ta∣king a fancy to her, married her, and took her Son into the School, who by his sharness of Wit outwent all the School in Wisdome and Learning. In a short time after, his Master dying, he taught the same School, and gained great reputation by his Learning, not onely at Smyrna, but all the Countries round about; for the Merchants that did frequent Smyrna with Corn, &c. did spread his Fame about: Amongst which Merchants, one Mentes Master of a ship of Leucadia took that kindness for him, that be perswaded him to leave his Seool and travel with him, which he did, by whom he was maintained well and plentifully in his Tra∣vels. They went to Spain, from thence to Ita∣ly, and from Italy through several Ctries, and at last came to Ithaca, where a violent Rheum fell into the Eyes of Homer, that he could not travel any further, so that Mentes left him with a friend of his called Mentor, a person of great Riches and Honour in Ithaca, where Homer learned the principal matters relating to Ulysses Life: But Mentes the next year came back the same way, and finding Homer recovered in his eyes, took him in his Travels. They went through many Countries till they came to Colophon, where he fell into his old distemper of his eyes, and there grew
quite blind; after which he adicted himself to Poetry; but being poor, he went to Smyrna, expecting to get better encouragement there; but being disappointed of his expectation, he went to Cuma, and as he went he rested at a Town called New-wall, where he repeated some of his Verses: and one Tichio a Leather seller took such delight to hear them that he enter∣tained him kindly for a long time. After, he proceeded on his Journey to Cuma, and when be came there he was well received, and he had some friends in the Senate that did propose to have had a maintainance settled on him for his life, but it could not be carried. At this place he first received the name of Homer, from his Blindness. From Cuma he went to Pho∣caea, where lived one Thestorides a School ma∣ster, who invited Homer to live with him; and by that means he got some of his Verses, and after went to Chios, where he taught them as his own Verses, and got great reputation by them. When Homer heard that Thestorides bad thus abused him, he followed him to Chios, and by the way at a place called Bollisus was taken up by a Shepherd as he was keeping his Masters Sheep: the Shepherd did relieve him, and carried him to his Master, where he lived sometime, and he taught his Children, yet he could not rest till he had been at Chios to discover the Cheat of Thestorides, who when he heard of Homer's coming, be left Chios,
where Homer tarried some time, and taught a School, grew rich, married, and had two Daughters, one of which died young, the other he married to the Shepherd's Master that took him in at Bollisus. When he grew old he left Chios, and went to Samus, where he staid some time singing of Verses at Feasts and at New Moons at the chiefest mens houses in all places where he was. From Samus he was going to Athens, but fell sick at IOS, and there died, and was buried on the Sea-shore. Long after, when his Poems had gotten an univer∣sal applause, the people of IOS built him a Sepulchre.
HOM. ODYSS. LIB. I. TEll me, O Muse, th'Adventures of the Man That having sack'd the sacred Town of Troy, Wandred so long at Sea; what course he ran By winds & tempests driven from his way: That saw the Cities, and the fashions knew Of many men, but suffer'd grievous pain To save his own life, and bring home his crew. Though for his Crew, all he could do was vain. They lost themselves by their own insolence, Feeding, like fools, on the Suns sacred Kine. Which did the splendid Deity incense To their dire fate. Begin, O Muse divine. The Greeks from Troy were all returned home, All that the War and winds had spar'd, except The discontent Ulysses onely; whom In hollow Caves the Nymph Calypso kept. But when the years and days were come about, Wherein was woven his return by fate To Ithaca, (but neither there without Great pain) the Gods then pitied his estate, All saving Neptune, who did never cease To hinder him from reaching his own shore, And persecute him still upon the Seas Till he got home. Then troubled him no more. Neptune was now far off in Black moor land (The Black-moors are the utmost of Mankind, As far as East and West asunder stand, So far the Black-moors borders are disjoyn'd.)
Invited there to feast on Ram and Bull. There sat he merry. Th'other Gods were then Met on Olympus in a Synod full, In th'house of Jove, Father of Gods and Men. And first spake Jove, whose thoughts were now upon Aegistus death, which he but then first knew, By th'hand of Agamemnon's valiant Son, Who to revenge his Fathers blood him slew. Ha! How dare mortals tax the Gods, and say, Their harms do all proceed from our Decee, And by our setting; when by their crimes they Against our wills make their own destiny? As now Aegistus did Atrides kill Newly come home; and married his wife; Although he knew it was against my will, And that it would cost him one day his lif. Sent we not Hermes to him to forbid The murder, and the marriage of the wise, And tell him if the contrary he did Orestes should revenge it on his life? All this said Hermes, as we bad him. But Aegistus, for all this, was not afraid His lust in execution to put. And therefore now his dearly for it paid, Then Pallas moved on Ulysses part, And said, O Father Jove, the King of Kings, Aegistus fate was fit for his desert, So let them perish all that do such things. 'Tis for Ulysses that I live in pain, Poor man, long absent from his friends, forlorn. In a small Isle, the Centre of the Main; Kept from his home doth nought but grieve and mourn. The Isle is beautifi'd with goodly trees. And in it dwel's a Nymph. Her Fathers name Atlas, that all the depths of th'Ocean sees, And beareh up the Pillars of the same, And Heaven and Earth to boot. His Daughter 'tis That with fair words and gentle courtesie Detains Ulysses. And her meaning is For ever there to have his company.
Whilst he, alas! even dies for very grief. To see the smoak of Ithaca he wishes, And would take that for some, though small relief. And yet you are not mov'd. Were not Ulysses His Sacrifices on the Trojan shore Both free and bountiful? They were, you know, In th'Argive Camp, I dare say, no mans more. Why therefore, Father, should you hate him so? To her, the mighty Jove made this reply. Child, what a word is this that you let fall? Do I neglect Ulysses, or do I Ulysses hate, that amongst mortals all For wisdom and for piety excels? Neptune that backs and shakes the earth, 'tis he Whose breast with anger and revenge still swells Against him, for his Sons calamity, The Godlike Polypheme, Cyclops the great, Whom on Thoosa, Phorcys Daughter brave Neptune the King of Waters did beget, Embracing her within a hollow cave; And him Ulysses has depriv'd of sight. For which, though Neptune do not him destroy, He crosses him with dangers day and night, And drives him up and down our of his way. But well, let ūs that are assembled now Bethink us how to bring him home. 'Tis odds 'Twill cool his rage. He has not strength enough T'oppose the power of all the other Gods. Then Pallas said, O Jove, of Kings the Kings, Since the blest Gods have thought good, and de∣creed Ulysses to his native soil to bring, Let's Hermes send unto the Nymph with speed, In th'Isle Ogygia, to let her know Our sentence, that she may the same obey. And I to Ithaca mean while will go. And cause his Son to call without delay The Common Councel; and to make him bold, To warn his Mothers Suiters to be gone, And feast no longer on his Herd and Fold, As they before had insolently done.
To Sparta too, I'll send him, and to Pyle T'enquire about his Fathers Navigation, That in the world by travel for a while He may acquire a greater reputation. This said, upon her seet her shooes she bind, Ambrosian golden shooes, that do her bear On land and water swiftly as the winds. And takes in hand her brazen-headed Spear; A heavy, massie, and strong Spear, the same Wherewith, when angry, she the armed bands Of mighty men of War does eas'ly tame. That was the Spear she carried in her hands. Then from the high Olympus leapt she down T'Ulysses house, and stood in the Hall-door I'th' shape of Mentes that possest the Crown O'th' Taphian people, whom he reigned or. And thence beheld the Suiters in the Court Sitting upon the hides of beeves, which they Themselves had kill'd, and wanting other sport, Playing at Chess they pass'd their time away. Mean while their Officers and Serving-men Were busie mingling water with the wine, Others the meat divide, others make clean, Set up and rub the Tables till they shine. Telemachus now with the Suiters sate Fancying, in case his Father should appear, Brought home by th'Gods or by some lucky fate, How then these knaves would slink away for fear; And he again recover his estate, And in his own land rule without a Peer. He was the first that spi'd the Goddess, and Then presently he hast'ned to the door; Receives her Spear and takes her by the hand, And both co in, she after, he before. You shall (said he) stranger be welcome here: But first let's sup, and afterwards wee'l find Sufficient time both for me to inquire, And you to tell your busines and your mind. When they were come into the stately Hall, Her Spear within a case he sets upright
T'a Pillar, in which case the Spears were all, His father left behinde going to sight. Then led her to a chair, which stood upon A dainty Carpet curiously wrought, And put t'her feet a stool to rest upon, And for himself a handsome stool he brought: Then did a Mad in a fine golden Ewer Bring water for their hands, and pours it on Over a Bason large of silver pure, And set a table to them, for both, one. From others seats remoter than to fear Their rudeness might offend her, or that they Might peradventure listening overhear What he and she did of Ulysses say. Another sets on bread and other things To eat, such as in her charge were at home. But flesh of many sorts the carver brings, And the cup-bearers often go and come. Then came the Suiters in, and took their places All on a row. To each a Table stands, And golden boul, one way look all their faces, The waiters bring in water for their hands. The Maids in Baskets bring both bread and meat On which they lay their hands with great good will, And heartily and hastily they eat, And to the brim their cups the Servants fill. When they of hunger had pluckt out the sting, The lusty Suiters thoughts converted were To dancing, and to hear the minstril sing, Sports that are consecrated to good chear. To Phemius the minstril that was by Unwillingly, forc'd by th'unruly throng, They brought a Cittern, and he presently Began to play, and then to sing a song. But to the Goddess Pallas, in her ear Telemachus began to speak his mind, Not being, willing any else should hear. Excuse me, friend, that I say what I find. You see the eare of these men what it is, Singing and dancing. And no wonder, since
That which they spend is not their own, but his Whose bones lie somewhere naked far from hence Unburied, it may be on the ground, There torting as he lies i'th' dew and rain, Or else at Sea, perhaps, if he be drown'd, The waves his body roll upon the main. If him at home the best of them should meet Safely arriv'd in Ithaca, he would Much rather wish, I think, for nimble feet Than to be rich in garment or in gold. But Oh! He's dead, and of some cruel death; And though some tell us he is coming home, 'Tis comfortless, for he's bereav'd of breath. To Ithaca I ne'r shall fee him come. But let this pass, and tell me truly now Your own, your Fathers, and your Countries name. And further I desire you'll let me know, Whence are the Mariners that with you came Unto this Town, and tell me this likewise Where rideth the good ship that brought you to't. For verily I can no way devise How you should come on horsback or on foot. And tell me were you never here before, Nor saw my Father whilst he here abode? For strangers came to visit him good store As having much converst with men abroad. I'll clearly speak (said Pallas) t'every thing My Father was Anchealus, and I Mentes, my City Taphos, and I King; My people to the Oa themselves apply. At present bound I am to Temisa For Brass, and Iron I carry with me'th ther. Under mount Neron, not near Ithaca My Ship at Reith rideth safe from weather As for your Father, we were mutual Guests, (Ask the old Lord Larres) from With one old Mad alone his meat to dre, He lives  Country house, he'll tell you There creeps & e' in his Vineyard up and down. And I came hither now, cause  was old
By some, his Son Ulysses was in Town. But 'ts not so. The Gods do him withold From his dear wife, and native Country still Within an Island, where the Savage men By force detain him much against his will: But all in vain, he shall return agen. For I presage, and come it shall to pass, That am no Prophet, nor Birds understand; Though he were tied there with Chains of brass, He shall get loose and see his native land. But say, are you indeed, that are so grown, His Son? Your heads and eyes are like (I mark) For we were well to one another known, But 'twas before he did for Troy imbark With other Princes of the Argive youth; Fut never saw him since. That I'm his Son (Said he) my Mother says. But who in truth Knoweth who 'twas that got him? I think none? If I might chuse my Father, I would be His Son that groweth old on's own estate. But whom they tell me is my father, he Of all men is the most unfortunate. Then said the Goddess, Howsoe'r that be, The Gods will never nameless leave your kind, That are the Son of fair Penelope, And so well fram'd in body and in mind. But say, What Feast is this, and who these be. You have no cause to feast. Their conversation Pleases me not. 'Tis rude, unmannerly. What is't a Wedding, or is't a Collation? Friend, since you ask (said he) take the whole story. This house was rich, my father being here, But th'unkind Gods have taken hence that glory: For where he is, a word we cannot hear. Less had I griev'd, if he his life had lost With other Argive Lords under Troy wall, Or (the War done) 'mongst those that love him most. Then had he had a noble Funeral, At which th' Acheaan Princes would have been, And th'honour had redounded to his Son.
But now alas! devour'd by Harpies keen, Unheard-of and unaskt-for he is gone, Leaving me here behind to sigh and grone. Besides, the Gods have giv'n me other care Bitter enough. 'Tis not for him alone My heart is rent. There other mischiefs are. How many Lords within these Isles do sway Same, Dulichium, Ithaca, and Zant, So many Suitors duly every day For marriage with my Mother the house haunt. Whilst she can none put off, and will none marry, They spend my corn and wine, and catle kill, And eating here and drinking still they tarry, And me perhaps at last they murder will. Then Pallas said, Is't so? 'Tis time indeed Your Father hither were come back agen, Having so long been absent hence, with speed To lay his hands upon these shameless men. Oh! that just now within the gates he stood Of th'outer Court, I would desire no more, Arm'd with two Spears, Buckler, and Helmet good, Such now, as I have seen him heretofore. From Ephyré he took our house in's way, Where first I saw him merry drinking wine. For he had been with Ilus, him to pray To give him for his shat a medicine, Wherewith to make them all they wound to kill. But he refus'd, fearing the powers above. And 'twas my Father gave't him for good will: For why, he did him very dearly love. If such as then, Ulysses should appear Amongst the Suiters now, short liv'd, I trow They'd be, and have but bitter wedding chear. But when he shall come home, Gods only know, Or whether you shal see him any more. Mean while consider by what means you may Gt the unruly Suiters out of door, That so oppress you, and your house annoy. And first observe what I shall you advise. Convoque the people to the Market-place;
Protest the Gods against their injuries, And let the whole assembly know your case. Say, if they needs will wed her, let her go Back to her Father, who the match should make, And offer for her what is fit; and so Which of them she likes best him let her take. And for your self, I think it your best way, In a good Bark of twenty Oars abroad, T'enquire what men can of your Father say, Or what some lucky signe from Jove may bode. Go first to Pyle, enquire of Nestor; Then To Sparta. Ask of Menelaus, whom Of all which had at Troy commanded men The Gods t' Achaia brought the latest home. If of his safety and return you hear, How much soever they waste your estate, Indure their riot yet another year. If dead, come back, and fairly celebrate He Rites, and give your Mother whom she will For Husband. Then bethink you, how you may By open force, or howsoever kill These shameless Suiters that your means destroy. Be fool'd no more. You're now at mans estate. Aegistus slew Orestes Father. He Aegistus slew. Who does not this relate With honour to Orestes memory? And you, my friend, you are a goodly man. Take heart. Gain honour. I must now be gone; My crew with patience no longer can Stay for me; therefore think what's to be done. Your counsel (said Telemachus) is such As might become a Father to his Son. I'll not forget it. Though your haste be much, Stay yet a while; be not so quickly gone. Wash and take food, and then go merrily; And with you a fair present from me take, Whereby to keep me in your memory; Such as kinde friends to one another make. Then said the Goddess, Now I cannot stay. As for your Present I will not deny it,
But take it at my coming back this way, How much soe'r you mean t'oblige me by it. This said, she mounted from him to the Sky In likeness of an Eagle, to his wonder, Who thought it was some God, and grew thereby Bolder, and on his Father more did ponder. And streightway to the Suiters went, who were Now come again into the house, and seated A Song which Phemius then sung to hear, Containing how the Grecians retreated Unfortunately from the Trojan shore By Pallas doings whom they had offended. Penelope that heard it and was more. Concerned than they all streightway descended. She entred not but in the door did stand Vail'd with a Scarf which on her head she wore, Having a waiting-woman on each hand, And to the Singer thus said, weeping sore. Phemius y'have better Songs, why sing you then This sad one? Fitter 'twere the deeds to tell Of mighty Gods, and mighty deeds of men, Which sure would please the Company as well. Sing one of those, and let them hear and drink, Give over this. You touch my interest, And wound my heart in forcing me to think Upon my Husband, of all Greeks the best. Then said Telemachus, Good Mother why Should not the Singer chuse what Song to sig, Whose part it is to please the Company It is not he that does the evil bring. 'Tis none of Phemius fault, but th'act of Jove Who deals to all men, all things as he please. Should he not sing the Songs that men most love The new'st? The Greeks sad passage o'r the Seas! Be patient, many more besides Ulysses, Come short from Troy by one fae or another, Nor are you th'only wife her husband misses. Many men else are lost. Therefore good Mother Go to your work again above, and see Your Maids do theirs, leave censuring of Songs
Unto us men, and specially to me, To whom the greatest power here belongs. Then to her Chamber up she went again With her two Maids, and thee began to weep, Being for her dear Husband in great pain, And wept till Pallas clos'd her eyes with sleep. Men while the Suiers into clusters ran, And one t'another his thoughts uttered With noise enough. But there was not a man That did not wsh to have her in his bed. Then to them spake Telemachus; D'ye hear Proud Suiters of my mother, let's I pray Give ear unto the Singer, and forbear Clamour. To morrow is the Council day, There I shall warn you publickly, no more To haunt my house, but each man home to go, And there to feast by turns on your own store; And if you be not willing to do so, But your own means to spare, shal think it best To feast your selves on one mans substance all, And ruine his estate, go on and feast While I upon the Gods for vengeance call. O that the mighty Jove would so ordain, That all mens actions might be repaid As they deserve! Then should you all be slain Within my doors. After he this had said, The Suiters bit their lips, and silent mused At the strange boldness of Telemachus, And at the language which the Young man used, To which none answer'd but Antinous. The Gods (quoth he) have taught you a high strain Of Language, and undaunted Oratory. But if their meaning were that you should reign Here, o'r us all, I should be very sorry. Telemachus repli'd, Think what you will. If Jove consent, why should not I be King? What harm is it with wealth my house to fill, Besides the honour it will with it bring? In Ithaca there many Princes be, You'll say, would be as glad to rule as I.
No matter, whosoe'r be King, not he, But I am King in my own Family. Who (said Eurymachus) shall have the hap To reign in Ithaca is hard to guess, It lies yet folded up within Jove's lap. None shall, Telemachus, you dispossess Of house, or lan̄d, or goods, by violence, As long as there in Ithaca be men. But tell me who that was, that now went hence. Where he was born, and where he dwells, and then His errand, whether business of his own, Or some news from Ulysses, brought perchance, And went so soon away, t'avoid being known. He was no mean man by his countenance. Then said Telemachus, My Father's dead, We never shall again see one another. With Messengers I trouble not my head, Nor Southsayers that do but sooth my Mother. The man my Fathers old acquaintance was, Mentes Anchialides, and his Town Taphos, and he thereof the ruling has. His people for their Trade by Sea well known! Thus said he, though he doubted not at all But 'twas some God. Mean while the Suiters staying For th'evenings coming on, to dancing fall, Or listen to the minstrel's Song and playing. The evening came, the Suiters went away, Telemachus went also to his bed In a warm stately Chamber, where he lay Ranging the many cares he had in's head; Euryclea a Torch before him bore, Daughter of Ops, now old, but at the time Laertes did her purchase heretofore For twenty Oxen, she was in her prime. He honour'd her as if sh'had been his wise But from her bed perpetually forbore, T'avoid suspition, and domestick strife. Sh'had nurst Telemachus, and lov'd him more Than did the other Maids, and now she stands To lght him. He unlocks the door, goes in,
Takes off his Coat, puts it into her hands, She foldeth, brusheth, hangs it on a Pin. Then forth she went, and by a silver Ring Pulls to the Door. And there all night he lay Remembring Pallas words, and pondering Upon the business of the following day. LIB. II. SOon as the Rosie Morning did appear, Telemachus himself array'd and shod, Puts on his Sword, and takes in hand his Spear, And out he went appearing like a God. And streight unto the Cryers gave command, To call the People to the Publick place. The People met. And then with Spear in hand He to them takes his way; and followed was By two white Dogs. Then takes his Fathers Throne; His Elders gave him way; all on him gaze. For why, the Goddess Palbas of her own Had set Authority upon his face. The first that spake was old Aegyptius, Stooping with age, of great experience: One Son of his whose name was Antiphus, Went to the Siege of Troy, but coming thence He died in the Savage Cyclops jaws, When with Ulysses he was in his den. Euronymus one of the Suiters was; The others with their Fathers dwelled then. But still he grieved was for Antiphus. The tears ran down his cheeks, and weeping he Rose up, and said unto th' Assembly thus, Ye men of Ithaca, I pray hear me:
Since we to Troy Ulysses sent with Ships, We ne'r convoked were to Parliament. What need have young or old men of our Lips? And who is he that now doth us convent? Has he informed been of some Invasion, And unto us-the same would first report? Or on some other Publick great occasion Would give us Counsel? The Gods bless him sor'. Telemachus then presently up stands, Though well contented with his Fathers praise. The Crier puts the Scepter in his hands. And to Aegyptius first he speaks, and says, Here am I, that the people have convok'd. Nor do I any news or counsel bring. But by my private suffrings am provok'd. Which here I offer t'your considering. Is it not grief enough, my Fathers loss, That ruled like a Father to us all, But that I must yet bear a greater cross, To see his house to utter ruine fall? My Mothers house the Suiters daiy fill, And of the best of you they Children are. She wedded must be with her Fathers will. But to her Father go they do not dare. But in my house continually they stay, And Sacrifice my Beeves, and Goats, and Sheep, My wine exhaust, and much they cast away. For why, Ulysses lost is on the deep. And I my self unable to defend. But shall I so be still, or once be able To bring upon these men unjust their end, Whose injuries no more are tolerable? Take it to heart. Think how 'twill taken be By other States. Fear from the Gods some change, That are not pleas'd with such iniquity, And may in closer order make you range. By Jove I you adjure, and Themis, who Convokes Assemblies, and revokes again, Forbear these evil deeds your selves to do, And of your Sons the liberty restrain.
Leave me to suffer misery alone. Hurt none but me. Unless my Father have In hatred of you some great evil done, And for revenge these men such power you gave. But better 'twere for me, that you than they Should spend my Treasure and my comings in. For if among so many men it lay, Begging I might from them the value win. But for my case no help can now be found. So said Telemachus in choler high, And from him threw the Scepter to the ground. Nor could forbear to let fall tears and sigh. The people piti'd him, but silent sat. None but Antinous durst answer make. Telemachus, said he, too passionate You are, and too much liberty you take. The Peoples hatred you would very sain Draw to the Suiters, and procure them shame. But from your Mother cometh all your pain; And therefore her, not us you ought to blame. Three years are gone and past, the fourth is this, Since she her Suiters baffled has with Art, Putting each one in hopes by Messages, And Promises that he had gain'd her heart. Moreover, setting up a Beam to weave, Suiters (said she) since dead Ulysses is, Stay yet a little while, and give me leave To make an end but of one business. I must for old Laertes make a Cloath, Which in his Sepulchre he is to wear. T'offend the Wives of Greece I should be loath. For to accuse me they will not forbear; But say I very hasty was to wed, If I go hence and not provide a shroud Wherein Laertes may be buried. Out of such wealth, that might have been allow'd. Her Suiters all were well content. And then All day she wove, but ere she went to bed, What she had wov'n, she ravell'd out agen. Three years her Suiters thus she frustrated.
In the fouth year her woman her betraid, And in we came, whilst she the web undid. And then to end it she could not avoid. Since now her purpose could no more be hid, To your complaint the Suiters answer thus, (Take notice of it you and all the rest) Send back your Mother to Icarius. There let her marry whom they both think best. But if she think to vex us longer yet, Caring for nothing but for Pallas Gifts, To have the reputation for wit, And skilfulness in curious work and shifts, Wherein th' Achaean wives she doth excel, Both old and young, Tiro, Alomen', Micen', Although with us she hath not dealed well. But if to use us so she longer mean, So much the longer with you we shall eat. Which to Penelope will be a grloy. But we consume shall so much of your meat, If long we stay there, that you will be sorry. For so long as she dodges with us thus, No whither from your house will we depart. Then to him answered Telemachus, Antinous, I ne'r shall have the hear: To send my Mother hence against her will. Abroad my Father is, alive or dead. That I her Father should repay, were ill, For forcing her to leave her Husbands bed. And from the Furies I shall suffer worse. For if I force her from my house to go Whether she will or not, she will me curse. And men will of me be revenged too. If it displease you that she stayeth here, You have your remedy; you may go home And, eve'ry one make all the rest good chear By turns, and into my house never come. But if you needs will feed on me alone, I can but to the Gods, for vengeance call, And reparation for what is done. Which may enough be to destroy you all.
This said, two Eagles coming were in fight, And when they were the Market place just o'r, Th'assembled heads surveying, stopt their Hight, And on their broad and levell'd wings they soar. Then having torn themselves both neck and cheek, They to their right wing rise and fly away. What this should mean th'assembly was to seck. And to them thus did Alitherses say. Hear me ye men of Ithaca (said he) And you the Suiters that are most concern'd. Destruction is rowling toward ye, Although it be not by your selves discern'd. Ulysses from his Friends will not be long. And now from Ithaca far off is not, Seeing what daily done is in the throng. And how to kill the Suiters lays his plot. Nay many more besides the Suiters may Of their misfortune chance to have their part, If they desist not soon and come away. I speak not this at random but on Art. For all must come to pass I told him then, When with the Argive Lords he went to Troy, That after twenty years he should agen Return with pain, his men all cast away. Then said Eurymachus, Old man go home, And there to your own Children prophesie, Lest to them any harm hereafter come. A better Prophet for these things am I. Under the Sun be many birds that fly, And yet not all of them do fortunes tell. Ulysses far hence dead is certainly I know not where. I would thou wert as well, For then you would give over to inflame Telemachus who but too angry is; In hope to get some Present for the same, If he will give it. But I tell you this, If any old man with his wisdom dare To set against us any young man here, He shall be sure himself the worse to fare. And when 'tis done he shall be ne'r the neer.
We'll set a Fine upon your head so wise, Which you to pay will not be well content. I my self will Telemachus advise His Mother may be to her Father sent, To make the Match, and on the Dower agree, Such as becomes him to his Daughter dear. Till that be done no hope at all I see The Suiters should desist. For they not fear Telemachus, as haughty as he is, And full of words; and much less do they care▪ For such deceitful Prophecies as this, For which you only the more hated are. Mean while Telemachus his Goods decay, And he shall never make them up again While she persists her Suiters to delay, And makes us all expect her love in vain. And 'tis her vertue makes us thus to strive Amongst our selves who shall her favour win. For many other Ladies we could wive, And be sufficiently delighted in. Then said Telemachus, No more will I This matter to you press, or to the Woo'rs. You and the Gods know all, I do not lie. But I demand a Bark of twenty Oars. For I intend to travel for a while, To hear what men can of my Father say. To Lacedaemon I will go, and Pyle, Or seek from Jove some notice of his way. And if alive he be and coming home, Though to my cost, I'll stay another year; If dead he be, then back again I'll come, And Rites of burial will give him here Splendid and well becoming his estate, And let my Mother her own liking take. Having thus spoken, down again he sate. And then Ulysses old friend Mentor spake. With whom Ulysses left his house in trust. Hear me, ye Ithacesians, said he. Let no King ever be hereafter just, Nor to his people soft and gentle be,
Since you Ulysses have so soon forgot. That ever rul'd us like a Father kind. But I the Suiters so much accuse not, Although on force and fraud they set their mind. (For 'gainst Ulysses goods which they devour They stake their heads in hope he'll ne'r come home) And you that many are, and have the pow'r To check them sit as if you all were dumb. And then rose up Leocritus and spake: Mentor, said he, more busie much than wise, That would about a Supper quarrel make. Ulysses were he here I'd not advie. To seek by force the Suiters to remove. For though he much be wish'd for by his wife, She would not of his coming well approve; But he the sooner be depriv'd of life. And you the people now may hence retire. Mentor and Alitherses will provide A Bark for what place ever he'll desire. And if at Ithaca he mean t'abide, No news he will hear of hm a great while. But never t' Ithaca shall come agen If he to Lacedaemon go or Pyle. This said, dimiss'd and scater'd were the men. And to Ulysses house the Suiters went, Telemachus to the Sea-side, and prai'd, O God that gavest me Commandement To pass the Seas canst not now be obey'd. I am both by the Town and Woo'rs delai'd. Then in the form of Mentor, Pallas came, And standing by Telemachus, she said With such a voice as Mentor's seem'd the same. If in you you retain the Spirit brave Your Father had to make his word his deed, Then also the assurance I shall have To tell you in your Voyage you shall speed. But if Ulysses Son you be not right, For ought I know you may this labour spae. Few Sons exceed or reach their Fathers might, But commonly inferiour they are.
But since in you I see your Fathers Wit, I hope your Voyage shall have good success. Therefore no more with th'Woo'rs in Council sit, Expect from Fools to have no more redress, That see not their own end that is so nigh. Nor shall you long be forced here to stay. For with a good ship furnish you will I, And with you will myself go all the way. Mean while go you into your house agen, And put up store of wine and of cold meat, And good bread, which the marrow is of men. I'll for you Marriners together get. In Ithaca are good ships old and new Good store, of which I will go chuse you one, The best of all that come within my view, And make it ready that we may be gone. This said, to th'house return'd Telemachus. The Woo'rs in killing Cattle were imploy'd, And streight unto him went Antinous, And laughing, took him by the hand and said, Telemachus, bold and brave Orator, Fear from us neither evil word nor deed. Eat and drink merrily as heretofore, We'll see you furnished with what you need Both Ship and Men, and see you soon convei'd To Pyle, that of your Father you may hear. Telemachus then answered and said, Antinous, can I be merry here? D'ye think that yet too little was the wrong The Suiters did me, my estate to waste, When I perceiv'd it not, as being young? But since I grown am, and my childhood past, And somewhat know, and more hear others say, I'll do my best to bring them to their end, Whether I go to Pyle or here do stay. And yet to go to Pyle I do intend, And think my passage will not be in vain. For I go like a Merchant not a Guest, As if to me no ship did appertain. It must be so. The Suiters think it best.
This said, his hand from his hand he snatch'd out. And then the Suiters that were in the Court, Some give him evil words, and others flout, And one another with him make good sport. He'll come from Pyle with Succours, God knows what (Said one) or Sparta, which shall on us fall. Or poyson bring from Ephiré; and that Put in the Temperer shall kill us all. Who knows (then said another) if he go, But he his Fathers fate may also have Whilst seeking him he wanders to and fro; Which would to us no little trouble save. His goods amongst us we should soon divide, And to his mother leave his houses free, And him she chuses to lie by her side. Thus they derided him. Then down went he Into a large and high rooft room where lay In Chests packt up great store of cloth of Gold, And Garments very many rich and gay, And many Barrels of sweet wine and old, Which for Ulysses were preserved there When he returned to his native soil. In the same room many brass Vessels were, And many Barrels of sweet smelling Oyl. And double were the Locks upon the Door, Whereof the Nurse Euryclea had the Key. Telemachus call'd for her, and says to her, Come Nurse, this night I am to go away. Fill me of wine twelve Pitchers of the best Next to that which you for my Father save, And fine flour twenty measures at the least, In good thick leather satchels let me have, Quickly. For when my Mother is a-bed To Lacedemon and to Pyle I go, That of my Father, if alive or dead There any news be, I the same may know. Euryclea then wept and sob'd, and said, Dear Child, why will you go from hence so far Alone? Your Mother you will make afraid, Of whom so dearly you beloved are.
Your Father far off is already dead, And by the way the Suiters seek to kill you, And share your goods amongst them by the head. I pray stay here and do not go. Why will you? Nurse, said Telemachus, be of good chea 'Tis by the counsel of a God I go. And I require you solemnly to swear You'll not my going let my Mother know. Telemachus to th'Suiters went agen, And Pallas in his likeness to the Town, For his transporting to procure him men, From house to house she goeth up and down. And of Noemon borrowed a Bark, Who not unwillingly it to him lent. And now the Sun was down, the Streets were dark, And down to the Sea-side the Goddess went. And the good ship into the Sea they hale, And in it stow all that was needful for't. The Mariners were there together all, And ti'd the ship at far end of the Port. Mean while the Sutters merrily carouse, And Pallas then their fancies to confound, From the Sea-side went back into the house, And from their hands the cups threw to the ground, And with the love of sleep possest their Eyes, And made them nod and let their Eye-lids down. And not long after from their seats they rise, And for that night took lodging in the Town. Then like to Mentor both in Foru and Voice, Temelachus he calleth out of doors. Your men are ready at the Port, she says, There they expecting you sit with their Oars. Then out they went, and Pallas led the way, And found the Rowers ready on the Beach. Telenachus then said, Come back I pray, To th'house with me, our Victual thence to fetch, Which well put up I there have ready laid. But nothing of it does my Mother know, Nor any else but I and one old Maid. Then with Telemachus to th'house they go,
And to the ship at once bring all away, And stow it as Telemachus though sit. Pallas and he embark without delay, And at the Stern they both together sit. And now the Marriners their Tackle ply. First in the midst they set the Mast upright, And it unto the ship with strong ropes tie, And then their Sails they hoise up to their height Which Pallas with a lusty gale from West Kept full all night. The Ship the Sea then gores. The water swiftly running from her brest By both her sides wounded and broken roars. And then unto the Gods they offer wine, And to them all were praying for a while, But specially unto their Guide Divine. Then sail'd all night, and were next morn at Pyle. LIB. III. UP from the Sea the Sun leapt to the Sky, To hold the light up before Gods and men. Telemachus with all his Company Unto the Town of Pyle arrived then. Then Nestor had a Sacrifice in hand To Neptune, and upon the Sea-side stood, And with him store of people on the sand. Black Bulls he eighty one had to him vow'd. Nine seats there were, five hundred to each sear, And to the sae nine Bulls appointed were. The Entrails broi'd upon the coals they eat, The Thighs to Neptune burnt to ashes were. The ship then came within the Port to land, And disembarqu't, upon the shore they staid
With furled Sails the Ship did by them stand. Then Pallas to Telemachus thus said, Telemachus, by no mears bashful be. For wherefore did you undertake this task, But of your Father to hear certainty? To Nestor then directly go and ask, If of Ulysses any thing he know. He'll tell you truly. He's too wise to lie. Mentor (said he) I'm young, and know not how With one so old to answer and reply. Telemachus (said Pallas) do not fear. You'll somewhat prompted be by your own brest. (You never by the Gods neglected were) The God that loves you will supply the rest. Then up to Nestor they directly went, And Pallas foremost. All about him there They found upon the Sacrifice intent, (His Sons and Lords) to hasten the good chear. Some broaching, and some roasting were of meat. And presently about the Strangers come, And with their hands salute them, and intreat To sit. And then Piststratus went to'em, Saluted them, and took them both by th'hands, And for them (since there was no empty seat) Laid Sheepskins with the wool upon the sands; And of the Entrails gave them part to eat. And to her hand held up a cup of Wine. To Neptune (said he) offer up your vow, For he expresly is the Pow's Divine, That we to worship be assembled now. And having drunk, give it to this mans hand, That he may aso give the Gods their due, For all men of the Gods in need do stand. And I thought fit to give it first to you, 'Cause you are th'elder, th'other young as I. Then Pallas from his hand receiv'd the Cup, And pleased was to see his Equity. And then to Neptune sent her Prayers up. Neptune (said she) have to my Prayer regard. First Nestor and his Sons with Honour bless,
And of his people th'Hecatomb reward. And give Telemachus and me success. Thus prayed she, and gave for what she pray'd. And to Telemachus then gave the Cup. And he to Nptune the same Prayer said. The meat being ready now and taken up, And into Messes cut, themselves they feast. And when of hunger extinct was the force, Then to his Guests Nestor his speech addrest. Friends, said he, now we time have to discourse. Tell me who are you, whence d'ye cross the Main? Is it for Traffick? Or d'ye pleasure take, As Pyrates walk at Sea, to and again, Others to spoil to set your lives at stake? To this Telemachus with confidence (Which into him the Goddess did inspire, The better to obtain Intelligence, And reputation to himself acquire) Answer'd: O Nestor Nelëiades The glory of the Greeks we hither came From Ithaca on no State-business, But of my Father to seek news from Fame. Unblest Ulysses who at Ilium Together with you fought before the Town. Of th'other Chiefs we hear what is become. But where Ulysses di'd is still unknown. Whether at Land he slain were by the Foe, Or by the Sea devoured he hath been. But at your knees we hither come to know, What you since then have heard of him or seen. Wandring about, born to calamity. Let no respect, or pity mitigate Your Story, howsoever sad it be. Nothing but naked truth to me relate. And I beseech you for my Fathers sake, If he before the Town of Troy did well Perform the Service he did undertake, That nothing but the very truth you tell. O Friend, said Nestor, since you bring again To memory our miseries at Troy,
Under Achilles first by Sea, what pain We suffer'd then; and after when we lay And fought before King Priam's Royal Seat What we endured, what great men we lost. The doughty Ajax, and Achilles great, That were the Chief of all the Argive host. The valiant Patroclus, and my Son Antilochus, both valiant in fight, And if an enemy were put to run Before him, he could hardly scape by flight. But numberless were our sad chances there; No mortal man can count them one by one. And if you five or six years should stay here, You'ld weary be of asking, and be gone. Nine years we plots contriv'd to take the Town, Which Jove made prosperous with much ado. Ulysses had for plotting the renown. For none compar'd himself your Father to. If it be true you are Ulysses Son; And I confess, hearing you speak your mind, And stedfastly your person looking or, Much respect for you in my self I find. While we together were at Troy, we rever In Council or Assembly disagreed. But what was for the Argives good we ever Endeavour'd what we could to get decreed. But when of Troy we had destroy'd the Town, And back unto our ships again were come, Then Jove upon the Greeks began to frown, Intending to them ill returning home. For few there were amongst them just or wise, But on themselves they drew down their own fate. Which made the Goddess Pallas to devise To set the two Atrides at debate. Then of the People they a meeting call At almost Sun-set, and the people came (Having their heads with wine disorder'd all) Th' Atrides told them why they call'd the same, Where Menelaus votes to cross the Seas, And each man to his Country to repass.
But this advice his Brother did not please. To stay there yet a while his counsel was. And first a Hecatomb to Sacrifice, The Goddess Pallas anger to appease. But Agamemnon therein was not wise. Men cannot change the will o'th'Gods with ease. While they contending were with words unmeet, One part arose resolv'd to stay all night, And in the Morn to o aboard the fleer, And each one tow'rds his home to take his flight. And shipt our Captive Women and our Prey. One half we were, and came to Tenedus. The other half with Agamemnon stay. And Pallas then again divided us. And one part back to Agamemnon went. But I with all my own ships homeward fled. (Knowing that Jove to the Greeks evil meant) So did the Son of Tideus Diomed. At Lesbos to us Menelaus came, Where we which way to go consulting stad Chius wihin, or else without the same. And for direction to the Gods we prai'd. Of the wide Sea t' Enboea they bid sail, That we in safety be the sooner might. And sent us therewithal a lusty gale Which brought us to Gerestus when 'twas night. And there to Neatune we burnt many Thighs. On the fourth day the Ships of Diomed To Arges came. The same Wind staid th'Skies Till I at Pyle was safe deliered. So came I home, sweet Child, and cannot tell Which of the Greeks came safe home, and which not. But what has since been told me I know well (And so far as is reason you shall know') The Myrmydons, they say came safely home, Conducted by stout Noptolemus. And Philoctetes very well did come Unto his Fathers house Pallatius. Idomeneus to Creet brought all hs men That were not slain at Ilium in fight.
How Agamemnon, when come home agen, Was butchered, I need not to recite. Nor how he came, nor of Aegistus plot, Nor yet how bitterly he smarted for't. 'Tis good, you see, to have a Son begot, That can revenge his Father in that sort. And you, my friend, that tall are and well made, Be valiant, and get 'mongst men good same. Telemachus then answered and said, O Nestor, but my-case is not the same. Sharp the revenge was of Atrides Son, And far and wide will matter be for Songs, But from the Gods such power I have none To be revenged of the Suiters wrongs. O Friend (said Nestor) since I have been told, That many who your Mother seek to marry, Without your leave do with your house make bold, And spending of your substance daily tarry, Is it because you are therewith content? Or are you foro't to bear such injury Because your people are against you bent, Provok't thereto by some Divinity? But who knows but at last they may be paid For all the Injuries which they have done, And insolence, by the Achaeans aid, Or peradventure by your self alone? For if of you Pallas as careful were, As carefully she did your Father guide At Troy (a God to man ne'r did appear So plainly as she there stood by his side.) If Pallas were so kind to you, you'ld see The Suiters quickly would forget to wooe. Then said Telemachus, 'Twill never be, Although the Gods should give consent thereto. Telemachus, said Pallas, what a word Have you let fall? A man may be with ease Though far off, to his native Soil restor'd By any of the Gods, if so he please. And I at home had rather lose my life Fighting than sitting as Atrides di'd,
Slain by Aegistus and his own bad wife, Basely by them in whom he did confide. And yet the Gods unable are to save A man from death, although he be a friend, Whose end the cruel Fates determin'd have. Then said Telemachus, Let's make an end Of this discourse. Ulysses latest day Determin'd by the Gods already is, And I to Nestor somewhat else will say; For three mens ages do but equal his. O Nestor, I would fain informed be How Agamemnon was of life depriv'd. And Menelaus, where mean while was he? And how Aegistus had the Plot contriv'd. Was it that Menelaus too long stai'd, Aegistus ventur'd on a better wight? I'll tell you all the truth (then Nestor said.) And yet what you your self have guess'd is right. For why, if Menelaus coming home Aegistus in the house alive had sound, He never had at Argos had a Tomb, But eaten been by Dogs above the ground, And Fowls of prey. Nor had he had the pitty Of th' Argive women, nor lamerted been, But lien had i'th' fields far from the City. For why, a vilder act was never seen. For when at Troy we ended had the strise, Long time it was before we came away. Then Siege laid he to Agamemnon's wife, And secretly hidden in Argos lay, And she at first refus'd, and counsel took Of a Learn'd man, whom Agamemnon left Going to Troy his wife to overlook, But soon Aegistus him of life-bereft. For in a desert Island he him kill'd, And left him for a booty to the Kites, And then unto Aegistus she did yield, And richly were pe form' the wedding rites. Then on the Altars many Thighs they burn, And with them rich mens baubles, and gold stuff
For why, for so unhop't-for a good turn, They thought they could not thank the Gods e∣nough. Now coming Menelaus was and I, And were as far come as to Sunum, When Phrontis, his good Steers-man chanc'd to die, The best that in a storm e'rship brought home, And hindrance of his coming this was some To bury him. But when he put to Sea, And was with all his ships in safety come Under the windy Mountain of Malea, Then an ill passage for them Jove provided. The wind then whistled, and the water danced, And into two parts was the fleet divided; And one part to the Coast of Creet advanced, Where Cydons dwell, near Jardan Rvers mouth. There in the Sea standeth a Stone upright That breaks the water when it rolls from South, So that it comes to Phaestus without might; And there the men came in and sav'd their lives. But all the Ships upon the Rock were split. The other part the wind to Aegypt drives With Menelaus. Five ships were in it. Whilst Meelaus did in Aegypt stay, And visit Princes, and their gifts receiv'd, Aegistus made the Argives him obey, And Agamemnon of his life bereav'd. And sev'n years in Mycene reigned he. But then Orestes came, whom they not knew, From Athus to them unexpectedly▪ And there the slayer of his Father slew. And seasted th'Agivès at the Funeral Of him and her. That very day did come King Menelaus, his ships laden all From Aegypt with his costly Presents home. And you, my friend, take heed you do not stay Too long abroad, leaving your goods among So many Knaves that waste them ev'ry day, And will consume them utterly ere long. But go to Menelaus who came last, And wandring has among much people been.
A Bird could hardly so much Sea have past In a years time, as wandring he has seen. Therefore to Sparta go with ship and Crew. Or if by Land, my Coach is ready for ye. Also my Son shall go along with you And ask of Menelaus all his Story. He's wise. Besides the truth he'll nothing say▪ This said, the Sun was down, and dark the Sky. Nestor, said Pallas, you before us lay That to which we have nothing to reply. Now slit the Tongues, and let wine temper'd be, That we may offer to th'Immortals all. The light is gone, and need of sleep have we. So Pallas said, and they to offering fall. The Waiters then brought water for their hands, And young men to them all brought temper'd wine. The Tongues lay on the fire, each one up stands And offers wine unto the Powers divine. And when the Offering was at an end Telemachus and Pallas were about To go aboard, and there the night to spend. But Nestor on the other side cri'd out, The Gods forbid that you should lie aboard As if I were a man so rude or poor As not good bedding for a friend t'afford. Since then I have of Rugs and Bedding store, And many Sons alive with me at home, That able are my friends to entertain, And 'tis Ulysses Son that's to me come, Surely this night he shall with me remain. O Nestor, then said Pallas, that is right. And at your house to lodge for him 'tis best. But at the ship I needs must lie this night, His purpose to make known to all the rest. Amongst them there no old man is but I, The company t'encourage that expect Telemachus. Not with Authority, But my advice they'll follow for respect. The next day with the Cancons I must be About an old and not a little debt.
And then that he may Menelaus see, With strong swift horses on his way him set. This said, the Goddess Pallas went away In likeness of an Eagle to the skies. The people star'd, and knew not what to say, And Nestor wondring saw it with his eyes. And took Telemachus by th'hand, and said, A good man you will be Telemachus And valiant, that are by a God convoy'd: And this same God that guided you to us, Is none but Pallas daughter of grea: Jove, That did at Troy your Father always guide. Let me and mine, O Goddess, have your love, And amongst men a Noble Fame and wide. A Heifer on your Altar shall be laid That ne'r bare Yoke, a Yearling from the field; And gilt shall be her horns. So Nestor prai'd. And Pallas hearing, to his Pray'r did yield. And Nestor to his house then led them all, Both Sons and Sons-in-law, and being there, They sat on Charis and Couches in the Hall, Then Nestor bids one fill the Temperer With Wine that aged was eleven year, From out a Vessel first uncover'd then. And when the Wine and Water mixed were, Then Nestor prai'd and offered. And when The Offrings to the Goddess ended were, The rest unto their lodgings went away. Telemachus by Nestor stai'd was there, And in a soft and costly bed he lay. And near unto him lay Pisistratus▪ Who of the Sons of Nestor was the last, And Nestor in the inmost part of th'house, Where, by the Queen his wife, his bed was plac', Soon as Aurora did the day restore, The old Knight Nestor rose up from his bed, And sat upon the Bench before the door, Of marble white and smooth that glistered. His Father used to sit there before, King Neleus, but that since he was dead,
And that King Nestor now the Scepter bore There sat he now, and to him gathered Were all his Sons. Echephron, Stratius, Perseus, Aretus, Godlike Thrasymed. Pisistratus. (Dead was Antilochus.) Along with them Telemachus they led. Then to his Children Nestor spake and said, Do quickly, Sons, what you shall from me hear. A Vow I made to Pallas must be paid, Who did to me so visibly appear. Let one of you unto the Pastures hie And bid a Herdsman bring a Heifer home; One to Telemachus his Ship quickly; And bid his mates, save two, all hither come. Another bid the Gilder hither come, To gild the sacred Heifers horns with speed. The rest stay here to look to things at home, That all things may be ready that we need. Seats, dry wood, and fair water. So said he. Then busie were they all. The Heifer came, And all Telemachus his Company. The Gilder came, Laerces was his name, And every tool that to his Art belongs, And necessary is, had in his hands; His Anvil, and his Hammer, and his Tongs. And Pallas also now amongst them stands. Then fell the man to work on Nestor's Gold, And so elaborate it was when done, That it might please the Goddess to behold. Then came in Stratius and Echephron, And by the horns they led the Heifer in. The Bason and the Ewre, and Barly white Aretus brought; and with an Axe full keen Stood Thrasymed ready the Beast to smite. Then Nestor prai'd, and from the Heifers head Cut off some hair, and into th'fire it threw. Then prai'd the rest; and Barly sprinkled Upon the fire, and Thrasymed then slew The Heifer with his Axe, and cut in twain The tendons of the neck, and down she fell;
And Nestor's Wife and Daughters shout amain To see the sacred act performed well. Pisistratus then cuts the Victims throat, And up they held it to let out the blood Into a Pail which Perseus thither brought, And to that purpose ready with it stood. The life together with the blood outflies. Then from the Body they the Bowels draw, And next cut off the Shoulders and the Thighs. As is of Sacrifice the Ritual Law. And them slit into two parts they display, And cover them all over with sweet fat. Shoulder on Shoulder, Thigh on Thigh they lay. And Nestor on the Altar burneth that, And with it on the fire black wine he poured. By him a spit was ready with five points. The fire the Thighs, the men th'Entrails devoured. The rest divided was in smaller oynts To rost on spits. Telemachus the while Into the Bath retired, and was there Well bathed, and anointed with sweet Oyl By Polycaste Nestor's Daughter dear And in a Robe and Coat clad gloriously, And came as if no mortal he had been Into the Hall, and sat down Nestor by. The meat now ready straightway was brought in▪ Then in the young men came to fill them wine. When they with flesh and wine were satisfi'd, Then to his Sons, said Nestor, Children mine The Horses to the Coach see quickly ti'd. Away they go, and to the Coach they set The Horses swift; and in it bread and wine A Maid laid in; and with it choiest meat, Which none but God-fed Kings eat when they dine Up to the Seat then went Telemachus (The Seat was large and capable of two) And after him went up Pisistratus, And Whip and Reins he took his hands into. Toucht with the Whip, the Horses take the way, And all the day long made their Harness shake.
The Sun went down, dark were the streets. Then they At Pherae were. And there their rest they take. There Diocles, Orsilochus his Son, Son of Alphaeus them did entertain, And with fair Gifts presented them each one. But soon as Morning did appear again, Their Horses to the Coach again they tie, And from the Porch drive them into the way. Toucht with the Whip again away they fly. The Sun now down, and ended was the day. LIB. IV. ANd then to Lacedaemon come were they, And drove up to the House of Menelaus. At home they found him. For there on that day A double Wedding celebrated was. One, of his Daughter, fair Hermione Whom he before at Troy had promised Of Neoptolemus the wife should be. And on this day the same accomplished. And her he sent unto the Myrmidons Where reigned he. To Pthia she was brought: And then the second Wedding was his Son's, Whom on a Woman bond he had begot. And Megapenthes nam'd. (For Helens bed Fruitless was after fair Hermione.) And he Alector's daughter married. Of Lacedaemon Citizen was he. And now they merry sat that bidden were, Making good chear, and hearing Voice and Fiddle, And wondring at two Tumblers that were there, That moving to the time stood in the middle.
Mean while by th'Horses th'utter Gate without Telemachus stood and Pisistratus. Then Eteoneus by chance came out, A careful Servant of Menelaus. And having seen them, in he went agen, And being neer to where his Master sate, O King (said he) there are without two men Like Great mens sons with their Coach at the gate. Shall I take out their Horses? Or shall I Tell them where they may lodged be elsewhere? At this Atrides grieved, made reply, Eteoneus, sure once you wiser were. Have we not oft by strangers heretofore In our necessity relieved been? And I pray God it may be so no more. Go, loofe the Horses, and the men bring in. This said, he went again with Servants more. Takes out the Horses. Ties them to the Mangers, And throws before them Provender good store. Sets up the Coach, and then brings in the strangers, Who at the beauty of the house amaz'd. (For bright it shined as the Moon or Sun) And when they had sufficiently gazed, To where the Bathing-room was walked on. After they were well washed and anointed, And clothed with soft nappy Cloak and Coat, That they should near him sit the King appointed, And near unto his Throne their Chairs were brought. A Maid the golden Bason and the Ewre To wash their hands over a Caldron brings, (The Caldron also was of silver pure) Another on the Table laid good things. Another Bread. The Carver also cuts Of every sort of meat the choicest bits, And them on Trenchers on the Table puts. And Menelaus pointing to it sits And heartily invites them to fall to. Eat now, said he, we shall have time enough When you have supp'd to ask you where and who, Your Ancestors are not obscure I know.
Such Children are not got by wretched men. And as he spake he took from his own Mess As much as both his hands could comprehend Of good Chine-beef, and gave it to these Guests. And then they laid their hands upon their meat. But when their hunger and their thirst was gone, Telemachus that near sat to his seat Whisper'd Pisistratus, You, Nestor's son, Do you not mark the splendour in this house Of Brass, Gold, Amber, Silver, Ivory? Such sure the house is of Olympius, So many and so glorious things I see. But Menelaus heard him. Let, said he, No mortal man with Jupiter compare. His house decays not, nor goods wasted be. What men compare with me I do not care. For why, my Goods I paid for very dear With pain and peril in my coming home, And wandring up and down at Sea eight year Before I could into my Country come. I was in Cyprus and Phoenicia, Came to the Cydons and Erembians, To Aegypt and to Ethiopia, And to the fertile grounds o'th' Libyans. Where ev'ry year the Sheep three times do breed, And all the Lambs fall horned from the Dam. Nor master nor his man there stands in need Of Cheese or Milk, or tender flesh of Lamb. While I my Goods amongst them wandring got, I lost my Brother by his wife betrai'd. And therefore in my riches glory not. And all this to you have your Fathers said. Absent, I lost my house, and much rich stuff. Had I my fellows sav'd I led to Troy, I'd been content with the third part thereof. So all to all I've ltle cause of joy. For all my friends at Troy lost griev'd was I, And sometimes wept, yet sometimes also not. For quick of tears is the satiety. But one there is, when he is in my thought
I neither food nor sleep desire to take. For all the while we were besieging Troy, None suffer'd so much for the Argives sake As did Ulysses, nor so oft did pray. And more perhaps he is to suffer yet. Long stays he, and whether alive or dead He be, I can from no man notice get, Nor from my sorrow be delivered. Mean while as for a Son of life beref: Laertes weeps. So does Penelope. Telemachus whom young Ulysses left, Spends his best age in pain and misery. This said, Telemachus before his eyes Held up his Purple Robe, the tears to hide Drawn from him by his Fathers Miseries. And Menelaus when he that espi'd Consider'd whether best it were or no To tell him first what he had heard or seen About his Father, or what he would know To let him ask. But Helen then came in Like to Diana in great Majesty. Adreste came in with her with a Chair. Alcippe a soft Carpet layed nigh. Her Basket brought in was by Phyl fair. At Thebes in Aegypt it was given her By Polybus his wife Alcandre, when King Mnelaus travelling was there, And Polybus gave to him Talents ten Of Gold, and Lavers two of Silver sine, And two three footed Caldrons of good Brass. Then by Alandre t'Helena Divine A silver brim guilt Basket given was With fine and curiously spun thred prest full With Distaff on it more thred yet to spin Ready invested with soft Purple Wool. This was the Basket Phylo then brought in. Then Helen sat, and by her Husband old What thitherto had past: I know said she, King Menelaus, now I them behold The Guests that are come to you, who they be,
But shall I tell you what I think or no? I'll tell you true. I never yet saw one So like another as ths man is to Telemachus, Ulysses onely Son. Whom when with other Greeks to Ilium He went to fetch away this Monky me By bloody War, he left a Child at home. Then Menelaus spake. Since you, said he, Have put it in my minde, I think so too. His eyes, his feet, his hands, his head, his hair Are like Ulysses his, who I'd tell you now What misery for me he suffer'd there, But that it makes him weep and hide his eyes. Then to Atrides said Pisistratus, The truth to you, O King, I'll not disguise. This is Ulysses Son Telemachus. But jealous of his Tongue and fearful is Before a man experienced and wise, Lest he should say something at first amiss, And lay his weakness open to your eyes. Nstor sent me along with him for guide, Because he so much longed you to see, And hear what of his Father was betide, And by you holpen and instructed be. Unhappy is the Child whose Father's gone, And this is now Telemachus his case. For of Ulysses news he can hear none, Who to defend him left none in his place. How, how! then sad Atrides, I have here The Son of one that I esteemed most, And for my sake suffer'd and did more there Than any other in the Argive Host. To whom I meant, had we come safely home, To shew more kindness than to any one Of all the Greeks. Assoon as we were come. I had to Argos brought him and his Son; Built them a City; made both but one state, And laid the Cities round about us waste; And often there with one another sate; And only death our Friendship had displac't.
But by the Gods these thoughts are rendred vain. They have Ulysses from his Country kept. This said, they could fom tears no more abstain. Joves Daughter Argive Helena then wept, And Menelaus and Telemachus. Nor could Pisistratus his tears restrain, But on his Brother thought Antilochus, That by the fair Aurora's Son was slain. And him remembring, to Atrides spake. Atrides, oft have I heard Nestor tell, (As oft as we did of you mention make) That you 'mongst men in wisdom do excel. I pray you think not I take any pleasure To act at Supper-time the rites of mourning. For that another time we shall have leisure, Unless we look no more to see the Morning. Not that I weeping for the dead condemn, Or cutting off of hair. It is a debt We owe to our dead friends. And one of them My Brother is, whom I cannot forget. He was not of the Greeks the meanest man. For swift he was of foot and bold in fight (Which you than I much better witness can) To kill his Foe in battle or in flight. Dear friend, Atrides answer'd, you have said What might an older man have well beseemed To say and do; and Nestor's stock bewray'd, Whose wisdom is of all mens most esteemed. 'Tis easie to discern the race of one To whom a happy life the Gods shall grant, As unto noble Nestor they have done, Long life, and Sons discreet and valiant. Let's put off for the present tales of sorrow, And to our meat again our minds apply. Bring water for our hands. Betimes to morrow We'll talk of this Telemachus and I. This sad, Asphalion came in with water. They wash'd, and on the meat their hands they laid. But in the mean time Helena Joves Daughter An Antidote into the wine convei'd.
An Antidote that vertue had to keep The man that drank it mixed with his wine So as for all that day he should not weep, Nor for whatever should befal him whine. No though his Father or his Mother di'd, Or Friend or Brother slain were in his sight. By cruel Enemies that them envi'd. Such was of Helens Medicine the might, Which t'her in Aegypt Thon's wife given had, Where many Drugs of wondrous vertue grow, Some here, some there, and some good, and some bad. For all men there the Art of Physick know. For why, from Paean spung are all those men. The Antidote put in, she bad the wine Be born about. And then she said agen, King Menelaus offspring of Gods divine, Descended from the Gods are also these. And Jove good fortune gives sometimes to one, And sometimes to another, as he please. For he can do whatever can be done. Feast then, and merrily together sit, And please your selves with stories. I'll tell one, And which as to the time, is not unfit, Of what at Troy was by Ulysses done. I will not tell you all the pranks he plaid, But onely how he came into the Town, With canvas Mantle o'r his shoulders laid, Bloody with stripes, from no hand but his own; And by the name of Dectes there did pass, And as a slave went freely up and down, When such man in the Fleet at all none was. And was to every one but me unknown. I question'd him, and he at first was shy. But when I bath'd him and anointed had, And cloth'd, and tane an Oath of secresie, He told me what designe the Argives had. Then having gotten much Intelligence, And many of the Trojan people slain, He safely to the fleet departed thence Leaving their Wives lamenting there in vain.
But I was glad. For changed was my minde, And griev'd by Venus t'have been made so mad, To leave my Child Hermione behind, And my good Husband when no cause I had. Then Menelaus said, Your Story, Wife, Is to the purpose. Countries I have seen Many; and oft with Heroes in my life In Councels sitten; but was never in The place where any like Ulysses sat. I'th'Wooden Horse, I'll tell you what he did. (No man did ever such a thing as that) The Princes of the Army there lay hid Death and destruction bearing into Troy. Some Daemon then that was no friend to us, Made you come forth our Counsel to destroy. And with you also came Deiphobus. And thrice about the Wooden Horse you went, And called to us ev'ry man by name, And our Wives voices so did represent, As not to be discerned from the same. I'th' midst Ulysses, Diomed, and I Heard well your call as we together sat, And ready were to go forth, or reply; But by Ulysses hindred were of that. But Anticlus had answered certainly, Had not Ulysses when he heard her call, Laid hand upon his mouth immediately, And held, till you were gone. That sav'd us all. 'Twas much (then said Telemachus) but this Was not enough the man alive to keep Though made of steel, whose end determin'd is. But now, O King, the time is come for sleep. Then Helen to her women order gave To see their Beds made ready; and lay on Fair Purple Rugs, and under them to have Soft Blankets, and fine Coverlids upon Before the liouse in Chamber o'r the Gate. But in the inmost of the Palace lay King Menelaus with his Royal Mate, And rose again together with the day.
And when he had himself attir'd and shod, And hung his trusty sword had by his side, Out of his Chamber came he like a God, And to Telemachus himself appli'd. Telemachus said he, what bringeth you To Lacedaemon o'r the Sea so wide? Publick or private bus'ness? Tell me true. Telemachus unto him then repli'd. To you, King Menelaus, I am come T'enquire what of my Father is betide. My house is full of Enemies at home, That me consume; and there resolve t'abide. I'th' fields they fruitless make my husbandry. My stock they eat; and would my Mother wed. This made me come to know the certainty Whether my Father be alive or dead. Whether you saw him after he left Troy Wandring abroad. (For he was born to woe.) Or of him any thing heard others say. Let tenderness hide nothing that you know. If in the Argive Host he useful were In Counsel or in Battle, when need was, Tell me the truth be't never so severe. To this, much grieved, answer'd Menelaus. Yes, yes (said he) there many enter'd be Into a strong mans house while he's away. And are in hope to dwell there constantly, Though not so valiant, as he, be they. As when a Stag and Hind entring the Den Of th'absent Lion lulls his whelps with tales Of Hills and Dales, the Lion comes agen And tears them into pieces with his nails; So shall Ulysses all those Suiters slay. O that the Gods, Apollo, Pallas, Jove, Amongst the Suiters set him would one day, Such as when with Philonelid he strove, And threw him flat, and made the Argives glad. If such as then Ulysses should be there, Short would their lives be and their wedding bad. But to the matter whereof you would hear,
I can say nothing upon certainty, And my own knowledge. But what I was told By Proteus. And tell I will no lie, Nor any thing of what he said with-hold. Before the Land of Aegypt Pharos lies, An Island, and therein a Haven good Against whatever wind shall chance to ise. And ready to depart my ships there stood. A days sail distant stands it in the Main; But 'cause the Hecatomb I offer'd not, The Gods a long time did me there detain. For they are angry when they are forgot. There twenty days together we were pent, Though fain we would have put again to Sea; And our Provision had quite been spent, But that I then met with Idothë. She daughter is of Proteus. And he A Herdsman old of Neptune is, and has The charge his Sea-calves kept and fed to see. His daughter met me when alone I was. My Company their dinner to provide, With Angle rods were fishing on the strand. Then said she to me standing by my side, Why stay you here and nothing take in hand: To help your self, as if a Child you were, Or negligent, or loved misery, Suffring your self to be so long pent here? Or can you no way find to be set free? What God you be soever (answer'd I) Thus much unto you I must plainly say, That in this Isle I stay unwillingly, And for my freedom to the Gods I pray. But tell me you (for Gods know every thing) What God is it that to this place me ti'd; And what it is that must me from it bring. I'll tell you then, said she, and nothng hide. By an old Sea god haunted is this Isle, Call'd Proteus, that nothing says untrue, Servant to Neptune. Whom if by some wile You could but catch and hold, he'd answer you
To all you ask. And he my Father is. He'll tell you how to get your ships to Sea; And how you shall get home. He knows all this, And what's there done. So said Idothoë. But how (said I) is't possible for man Upon a God Immortal to lay hold, When he foreseeing it avoid it can, If how to do't he be not by you told? I'll tell you (said she) how it may be done. Hidden in the Curls of the Sea each day Brought in by Zephyrus, he lands at noon, And on the Sand himself to sleep will lay. About him will his footless Sea-calves lie, And of the brine abominably smell. And thither bring you in the morn will I, And how to place your selves instruct you well. For three more must come with you lusty men, Whom you shall chuse from out your company. The old Sea god his flock will number then, And having done, i'th' midst of them will lie, Just as a Shepherd lies amongst his sheep. Now waver not, but bold and constant be. Assoon as you shall see he is asleep, Lay hold on him, and keep it constantly. For he in divers shapes will with you struggle. He will be any Serpent that he please. Himself he'll into Fire or Water juggle. Therefore hold fast, left he your hands disseize. When of himself he shall contented be In his first form the matter to debate; Take off your hands, and set the old God free. Then of your business him interrogate, What God it is that hath your hurt contrived. How you shall put to Sea. Which way go home. This said, into the Sea again she dived. Then full of thoughts back to my ships I come, And supt. And when we supped had 'twas night. Then slept we by our ships upon the sand. But when Aurora had brought back the light, Then went I with my three men to the strand,
And prayed to the Gods; my men I chose; Such men as for the purpose fit I thought. Idothoe then from the Sea arose, And in her hand four Sea-calves skins she brought All raw, her Father thereby to betray. And with those skins upon us on the shore Scrap'd hollow by her, like Sea-calves we lay. And there our lodging had been very sore, (For so abominably do they stink, That no man neer them can endure to lie. Is it good lying with a Whale d'ye think?) But that she for it had a remedy. Ambrosia she with her brought, and laid The same unto our noses one by one, Which the ill savour of the Fish allai'd. And thus we lay expecting till 'twas Noon. Then all at once the Sea-calves came ashore, And there themselves they bedded or derly. At noon came Proteus and counts them o'r, And first were counted my three me and I. Then lay he also down. And by and by He fell asleep. Then we unto him ran, And laid hands on him with a hideous cry. And he to shew his wondrous art began. A shaggy Lion first he seem'd to be; And then a Dragon; then a Leopard; And then a Boar; then Water; then a Tree. But still we kept ou hold, and prest him hard. He weary was at last, and then he said, Atrides, how came you by so much skill To hold me thus? What God has me betrai'd? What needed you to vex me? What's your will? What need, said I, have you from me o hear, That bound am to this Isle, and know not how To put to Sea, nor what God holds me here, When you can tell me (for Gods all things know.) Then back, said he, to Greece you cannot come, Till you to Aegypt do return again, And pay to all the Gods a Hecatomb. That done, you shall pass safely o'r the Main.
Thus Proteus said. But that I must go first Back into Aegypt, an ill and long way, My heart to hear it ready was to burst. 'Tis hard, said I, but I'll do all you say. But tell me of the Argives first, if they With their good ships came all in safety home, That I and Nestor left behind at Toy. How many by the way they lost, and whom. Some of them scap'd, said he, and some are lost. But of the Princes lost are only twain In their return. (Upon the Trojan Coast You know who d'd.) And one the Gods detain: First Ajax ships by winds are laid aground At Gyroe, Rocks that on the Deep look down, And 'gainst the Sea protection there had found, However Pallas did upon him frown, But that a high provoking word he spake. I'll pass, said he, although the Gods say no. And Neptune then the Rock he sat on brake. Both he and it into the water go, Where, when he had drunk brine enough, he di'd. Your Brother also safely past the Sea, And came to Argos. (Juno was his guide.) And when he was come near to Mount Malea. Forc'd by foul weather he disbarked, where Thyestes formerly his age had spent. But now his Son Aegistus dwelled there. The Gods then chang'd the wind, and homeward went. Full glad he was, and kist the ground for joy, And from him fell the tears abundantly. Aegistus that log sought him to destroy, Had plac'd a man on purpose to descry Th'arrival of the Fleet; whom he had hired To watch upon a Hill a year together, For Talents ten of Gold that he requred, And tell him when the Fleet from Troy came thi∣ther. The Watchman sw them, and t' Aegistus went And gave him notice of their coming in. Aegistus then t'effect his bad intent, Chose twenty lusty men, and them within
An Inner room he placed out of sight. And a great Supper bids his men provide; Then down went, Agamemnon to invie, With Horses and with Coaches to th'Seaside, And brought him up to Supper in great state. Then rose the Traitors that in ambash lay, And killed him as he at Supper sate. Not any man alive went thence away That with Atridis or with him took part. When of his story he had made an end, To break with pity ready was my heart. In streams down on my cheeks the tears descend. I wished never more to see the Sun, And weeping on the sand my self roll'd. But when my Lamentation was done, Then Proteus said again, Your wee ping hold. Tears are no remedy. But make haste home. There lives Aegistus, or if he be slain Already by Orestes, you will come To his Interment. This chear'd me again. And then I asked further of him this, Since you have told me what's become of two, Tell me, the third that stays abroad, who 'tis, Alive or dead; though that will gieve me too. It is (said he) Ulysses. Whom I saw In th'Island where Calypso dwells, o'th'shoar Weeping, who fain would come to Ithaca, But with him neither has a Ship or Oar. And you, O Menelaus, shall not die In Argos (for 'tis otherwise decreed) But be convey'd t' Elyzium. For why, Of Jupiter you wedded have the Seed. There humanes lead their lives in greatest ease. No Snow nor Frost there is. Refreshed there They are by Zphyr's rising from the Seas. And Jove's Son Rhadamanthus dweleth there. This said, into the Sea he went agen. But I with thoughts confused in my head Returned back unto my ships and men. And soon as we had sup'd the night was spread.
Then back again into the Nyle we go, And offer'd to the Gods a Hecatomb; When we their anger had appeased so, For Agamemnon there we rais'd a Tomb. When this was done, for Argos we set sail, And quickly to our native soil we came. Th'lmmortal Gods gave us a lusty gale, And all the way continued the same. Telemachus, yo've heard all I can say. But must not therefore streightway take your leave. Until th'eleventh or twelfth day you must stay, The Presents I intend you to receive. A Chariot you shall have and Horses three, And a fair Cup emboss'd to offer wine, That in your Vows you may remember me. Then said Telemachus, I here have li'n Long time already. And my men at Pyle Are weary of expecting me. Else I Could stay a year, and never all that while My minde have on my house, or Family. So much I taken am with your discourse. But let my Present be some Monument. To Ithaca I'll never carry horse, They for the Plains are more convenient. Large Plains, which you have here in many places, And where store is of Wheat, and Rice, and Lore. In Ithaca there is no ground for races, Nor Pastures good enough to feed a Goat. In th'Isles about it, gallop can no Horse. In th'Isle it self, nor gallop, nor be fed. When he had made an end of his discourse, Atrides smiling on him stroak'd his head. 'Tis spoken, said he, like a gallant man, And that descended is of Noble bloud. I'll give you other Presents (for I can) In place of these, that shall be full as good. A Monument kept in my Treasury, Of massie silver a fair Temperer, The work of Vulcan, which was given me At Sidon, by the King, when I was there
Whilst they together thus discoursing staid, The bidden Guests, fat sheep, rich wine bring in, And bread their Wives upon the Tables laid, And about Supper busie were within. And now the Suiters at Ulysses house Were throwing of the Stone and Darts. And by Antinous sat and Eurymachus Chief of the Woo'rs. Then came Neomon nigh. Unto Antinous he spake, and said, When will Telemachus return from Ple? My ship I lent him, and am now afraid, I shall have need of her my self the while. For over into Elis I must pass. Twelve Mares of mine there go, and with the same Twelve unbroke Mules, with all their Foals, at grass. And some of them I would fetch home and tame, At this they star'd. For never dreamed they That in good earnest he would go to Pyle, But in the fields would with some Hersman stay, And there from us conceal himself a while. Antinous then askt, When parted he? What company went with him hence? His own Servants and Husbandmen (for that mght be) Or youngmen of the best accounti'h 'Town? And tell me further, was it willingly You lent your ship? or were you fore't thereto? To this Noemon did again reply, I lent it willingly. What should I do? Who would not yield to such a man's request (When he has need and asks) as well as I? And with him went of Ithaca the best, And Mentor chief of all the company. If he it were not, 'twas some Deity. For (which is strange) I saw him yesterday Before the Sun was mounted half the sky. Yet went the ship the night before away. This said, he went his way. Antinous And th'other sate there yet, and wondered. The Suiters left their sport, sat down, and thus Antinous the Case then opened,
And in an angry tone, with fiery eye, 'Tis true, said he, Telemachus has done A work to us of great indignity. We thought he never could that way have gone. We many are, and men. Yet he a Boy Has got a ship, and of our men the best. But may Jove him, before he us destroy. Give me a good ship, e'r we be opprest, And twenty able men. And in the Strait 'Twixt Ithaca and Same I will lie, And for their coming back from Pylus wait, And entertain him with hot coming by. The Suiters all were pleased with the Plot, And then they 'rose together and went in. But Medon had heard all. Which they knew not. For he without the Court was, they within. And to inform Penelope he went, And when she saw him coming in a door, Medon, said she, what are you hither sent To bid my Maids trouble themselves no more, With how the Suiters they shall entertain; But onely for themselves make ready meat? Lest when they hither come to sup again, It prove the last that they shall ever eat. Telemachus his wealth you wasted have, As if your Fathers never told you how Ulysses with them did himself behave That never did unkindness to them shew In Deed or Word. Although a liberty Kings often take, one man to love or hate Above another, without telling why. But he cause of offence to no man gave, But of good turns received heretofore Your nature altogether senseless is. O Queen, said Medon, would it were no more. But I must tell you somewhat worse than this. The Suiters have conspir'd to kill your Son (Which Jove avert) as he is coming home. For he to Pylus is and Sparta gone T'enquire what of his Father is become.
This said, Penelope was stricken dumb, And filled were with tears her eyes. But when Her voice at last again was to her come, She spake to Medon, and him asked then. Medon, said she, why went my Son away? What need had he upon the Sea to ride? Meant he his name amongst men to destroy? And Medon to her then again repli'd, I cannot tell. Perhaps encouraged By some o'th' Gods, or Presage of his own T'enquire about his Father whether dead, Or on what Coast he is by fortune thrown. This said, her tears she could no longe hold, And lets her self sink down upon the Sill. Then came her Maids about her, young and old. Did ever Gods, said she, bear such ill will To any woman as they bear to me? Why deal they with me worse than with the rest? O my dear Husband! What a man was he! All manly vertues lodged in his breast. Through Hellas and through Argos known was he. Of him the Gods unkind me first berest. And now away my Child must taken be That to sustain the House at home was left. Sluts that you are, and of his going knew, Why was it not to me discovered? For had I of it been inform'd by you, I had him stai'd, or he had left me dead. To Dolius let one or other go (The Servant which my Father gave to me, And with Laertes at the Lodge is now, And of my Garden has the custody) And tell him what the Suiters are about. That he may to Laertes tell the same; And he unto the people may come ou, And them against these wicked men nflame. Then spake Euryclea. Dear Child, said she, Kill me, or let me live as you think best; No longer shall the truth concealed be I knew all this. So did none of the rest.
I furnish'd him with all that he commanded, Sweet Wine and Flour. But first he made me swe I would not tell you till it was demanded, Or that the same by others told you were; For fear lest with much weeping hurt you take. But wash, put on clean Garments, and up go Into your Chamber, and your Prayers make To Pallas, who your Son to save knows how. The griev'd old man, why should you further grieve? Hated is not Arcesius his seed By all the Gods. For I cannot believe But some of them will help them in their need, And both their Houses and their Lands protect. This stopp'd her sobbing, and her weeping staid. Then went she up, her self she washt and deckt, And to the Goddess Pallas thus she prai'd. O Goddess, if you well accepted have The Victims by Ulysses sacrificed Upon your Altar here, his Son now save, And bring to nought what th'Wooers have devised: Her Prayer granted was. Then shouted they. The Suiters heard it in the Hall, and one T'another said, 'Tis for her Wedding-day. She knows not we intend to kill her Son. Thus said they, but upon no ground at all. Alcinous then spake. Madmen, said he, Such words as these what mean you to let fall? What if within they should reported be? Come rise, thus, gently, and the work effect To which we all have given our consent. Then did he twenty able men elect, And down unto the water-side they went, And first of all they laid their ship afloat, And in it with white Sails the Mast they laid, And fit their Oars. Then in their Arms were brought. The Mast then rear'd was, and the Sails diplaid. Then went they t'Anchor in the open Sea, And staid till night. And then abord they cat. Then to her Chamber went Penelope Grieving, and tasting neither drink nor meat,
Casting about whether more likely 'twere Her Son should scape, the Suiters hands, or die. Just as a Lion that enclosed were With Toils about, would cast which way to fly. When her sad reck'ning sleep had blotted out. Dissolv'd her strength, and closed had her eyes, Pallas another bus'ness went about. She made an Idol in a womans guise, Like to the Daughter of Icarius Wife of Eumelus (at Pherae dwelled he) And sent the same unto Ulysses house, T'allay the sorrow of Penelope. In at the Key-hole then the Idol goes Into her Chamber, and stood at her head. Penelope, said it, amidst such woes How can you sleep? But now be comforted. You must no longer weep nor grieved be. For from the Gods you no such cause shall have. For of your Son the safe return you'll see. To this Penelope then answer gave. Sister, said she, 'tis strange to see you here. You come but seldom. For far off you dwell. And now you bid me weeping to forbear, When how much cause I have you cannot tell. A good and noble Husband I have lost That had a Lions heart within his brest. Hellas and Argos of his valour boast. What vertue is there that he not possest? And now my Child at Sea is in a Tub, And has no skill in Fight or Parlament. I fear extreamly lest he meet some rub. For him more than for th'other I lament. What may besal him on the Sea I dread; And what at Land, if e'r to Land he come. For many Foes he hath that wish him dead, And wait to kill him as he cometh home. To this again repl'd the Idol dim, Take courage, be not frighted for your Son. He has a guide that taketh care of him. A better would be wished for by none.
Tis Pallas. For of you she pitty takes. And what I said, I said by her Command. Penelope again this answer makes, Who ere you be, answer one more demand. Is my poor Husband yet alive, or no? Then said the Idol, That I do not finde. Nor will I tell you what I do not know. Then through the Key-hole went, and turn'd to wind. Then wak't Penelope, and joyful was T'have had a dream so evident and clear. Then o'r the humid Plain the Suiters pass, Destruction to Telemachus to bear. 'Twixt Ithaca and Same, middle way, There lies an Island, and but small it is, Yet hath it on each side a good safe Bay. There watcht the Wooers. 'Tis call'd Asteris. LIB. V. UP rose Aurora from Tithonus bed, Before the Gods and men to bear her light. The Gods were then to Counsel gathered, And Jove amongst them, of the greatest might▪ And there before them Pallas open laid The painful life Ulysses did endure. O Jove, and all ye blessed Gods (she said) Henceforth his people let no King enure To gentle Government, but keep them down, And to their honesty no longer trust, That of Ulysses are forgetful grown, Whose Government so gentle was and just. And now he pent up lieth in an Isle Where dwells Calypso; and to come away
Has neither Ship nor men, and all the while Weeping for sorrow forc'd he is to stay. The Suiters also seek to kill his Son, And lie to meet him in his coming home. For why, to Pyle and Spart he is gone, To hear what of his Father is become. Why Child (said Jove) why say you this to me? 'Twas you that sent Telemachus away. And you consenting were to our decree, Ulysses should come back and th'Wocers flay. Go you and bring Telemachus from Pyle, And send the Suiters home that lie in's way. And Mercury (said he) go you the whie And tell the Nymph Calypso what I say. The Gods in Councel sitting order'd have, Ulysses shall return to Ithaca. And first upon a Raft himself shall save, Without a Convoy in Phaeacia In twenty days; and there be honoured, And to his Country richly sent away, With Brass and Gold, and Garments furnished, More than his share had mounted to at Troy, Though he had brought it thence all safely home. For why, by destiny ordain'd it is That to his friends he honourably come. No sooner Jupiter had spoken this, But that his shooes upon his feet he binds, Ambrosian, Golden Shooes, wherewith he flies On Land or Water, swifter than the winds. Then takes the Rod wherewith upon the eyes Of Mortals, he lays on or takes off sleep, And with his Rod in hand jumpt down to th'Hill Pierius, and thence into the Deep. And over the wide Sea he passed, till At last he was arrived at the Isle Where was the Nymph Calypso resident. And like a Cormorant was all this while That hunts the Fishes. Then ashore he went. And coming to her Rock found her within. Upon the hearth a fire was of sweet wood.
There did she sing, and as she sung did spin. About the Cave many fair Trees there stood. Beech, Poplar, and the Cypress of sweet smell; And many Birds, Hawks, and Sea-crows and Owls Within their branches used were to dwell; And (such as haunt Sea-water) other Fowls. The Rock it self with Vines was covered, And Grapes abundance hanging were thereon! Four Springs arow four ways clear water spread. Sweet Meadows were about it many a one Stuck full of Violets and flowers gay, Which though a God, he saw with admiration, And for a little while he there did stay Pleas'd with the beauty of the habitation. And then into the spacious Cave he goes. At the first fight Calypso knew him well. For perfectly one God another knows, How far soever they asunder dwell. Ulysses now was gone out to the shore, To look upon the Sea that kept him in, To sigh and weep as he had done before. At Hermes coming he was not within. To Hermes seated in a glistering Chair The Goddess fair Calypso then begun. Tell me beloved Hermes your affair. If it be possible it shall be done. Come nearer, and with food your self restore. Then sets she him a Table, and lays on Of Nectar and Ambrosia good store. Then Hermes took his food, and having done, Goddess (said he) since me (a God) you ask, You may be sure I tell you shall no lie. Jove sent me'gainst my will. For such a task Who undertake would, think you, willingly? For first a horrible long journey 'tis; And then no Town to bait at by the way On Hecatomb or lesser Sacrifice. But what God is there dares Jove disobey? There is, said Jove, a man th staid is here Of th' Argives that besieged Ilium
The most unhappy. There they staid nine year. The tenth they took it, and were coming home. But by the way they Fallas had offended. And she against them raised stormy weather, In whch Ulysses Mates their lives all ended. But he himself by storms was driven hither: Him Jupiter would have you send away. For he is destin'd not to die from home, Nor any longer from his friends to stay. But back unto his house and Country come. Calypso troubled at it answered, Malicious ye Gods, and jealous are, That think much Goddesses should Mortals wed. See but how hardly did Orion fare, After Aurora was become his wife. How angry at him, O ye Gods, were you, Until Diana took away his life, With Shasts invisible before 'twas due. And so when Ceres with Iäsion Themselves delighted with the gift of love, How soon it was by th'other Gods made known, And with a Thunder-bolt he slain by Jove! And now they angry are with me. And why? Becaue I taken have a man to bed Who in the Sea had perish'd, had not I Receiv'd him in my house and cherished. For when his Ship with Thunder Jove had split, And all his Company away were cast, Him on the Mast unto the Rudder knit, The wind and waves brought hither at the last. And here I him receiv'd and loved well, And meant to give him Immortality. But since Jove will not let hm with me dwell, And I cannot resist him, Farewel he. Eur o'r the Sea I shall not him convoy. For in my power I have no Ship, nor men That have the art to walk in liquid way. Prompt him I will how to get home agen. 'Tis well, said Mercury, send him now hence. The manner how, is left unto your will.
Be wise, and do not Jupiter incense, Lest he upon you bring a greater ill. This said, away went Mercury. And she Unto Ulysses went to the Sea-side. Himself lamenting sitting there was he. And when she came his eyes were not yet dri'd. For now he lov'd the Nymph less than before, And lay with her a-nights unwillingly. A days he weeping sat upon the shore, And on th'unbounded Sea oft cast his eye. Then to him said the Nymph, Poor man, alas, No longer weep, but fall your work unto. For on a Raft you are the Sea to pass, And I will tell you what you are to do. Cut down great trees, and them together joyn With bands of brass, and on them make a Deck: And on it I will lay both Bread and Wine And water fresh, hunger and thirst to check. And Garments I will give you and a Wind, That you may safe go home and speedily; Unless the Gods be of another minde. For stronger they and wifer are than I. At this Ulysses troubled was and said, Plooked for a Convoy me to waft. For on this Sea a man would be afraid Though in a ship; much more upon a Raft. I will not therefore pass upon a Raft Unless to do me no more hurt you swear. And when he had said that, Calypso laught, And of his head she stroaked down the hair. You are (said she) a true bird of the nest, As by your answer very well I see. By Heaven and by Earth I do protest, And Styx, which is the greatest Oath can be, I'll never any thing hereafter do That shall procure you hurt in any case. And what at present I advise you to, I would my self do, were I in your place. For why, the Fates I also must obey, And in my breast no Iron heart I bear.
This said, she turn'd and homeward tool her way, And on her steps Ulysses follow'd her. When they were come together in the Cave, She made him sit where Hermes sat before. And meat and wine the best that Mortas have The Maids upon the Table laid good store. Before Calypso they laid other meat, Ambrosia and Nectar, food divine. There face to face they sit, and drink and eat. When she refresht him had with meat and wine, Noble Ulysses (said she) that long so To see your House and Wife without delay, If what you were to suffer you did know Before you there arrived, you would stay And live with me here, and Immortal be. Nor than that Wife for whom you take such care Less fairer or less wise can you think me. Women with Goddesses cannot compare. Goddess (said he again) I know all this. Penelope I not compare with you In form or stature. For she mortal is, And you Immortal. Yet (though this be true) I cannot chuse but wish my self at home. And though I were to perish in the Deep By th'anger of the Gods, and never come, I'd rather suffer that, than always weep. For patience long since I learned have Sufficiently in tempest and in fight. This said, they both in one part of the Cave To sleep went, where in Love they took delight. And when the morning was again displa'd, Ulysses cloath'd himself with Cloak and Coat. The Nymph her self in a great Robe arrai'd Of dainty stuff with Gold all over wrought, Which on her loins a golden Girdle ti'd, And cover'd with a golden Scarf her head. And how Ulysses o'r the Sea so wide Should safely pass, she there considered. Then puts a Plainer and an Axe in's hand Two edged, with a Haft of Olive-tree.
Then shew'd him where the greatest Trees did stand; And all the way before him walked she. And when they were arrived at the Wood, Beeches they finde, Poplars; and Fir-trees high Already dry, that lie light on the Flood. Calypso to her Cavern back did hie. Mean while Ulysses twenty Trees brought low, And hewed them, and plain'd them skilfully, And laid them on the ground all in a row, At corners square, and of one length they lie. And then wih Wimbles back Calypso came. Then pierced them, and set them one to one. And with strong joynts and nails fast bound the same. And by the time that all this he had done, As a good ship as broad it was and long. Then for his Dcks he placed stoops upright On every side, and many to be strong; And laid upon them planks at equal height. Then made his Mast, and set ït up on end, His Rudder, and a place to sit and guide, And laid on boughs from waves it to defend, And all his Cordage made of good Cow-hide. And then with Levers set his Raft afloat. Four days in making of the Raft he spent. When he had done, and all his work had wrought, Upon the fifth the Nymph away him sent. But first she bath'd him, and with clothes arrai'd Fine and perfum'd. Then wine of pleasant taste One Goat-skin full upon the Raft she laid, And one of water, greater, by it plac'd. And Sweet-meats, and good flesh of ev'ry kind. And after he his Sails had hoist and spread, She fill'd them with a warm and chearful wind. Then he astern sate down and governed. And on Bootes look'd and Pleiades, And on the Bear, which people call the Wain, Which dogs Orion rising from the Seas. But she her self ne'r dives into the Main. This Btar she bad him leave on the left hand. Then seventeen days he sail'd, on th'eighteenth day
He came in sight of the Phaeacian Land In that part where it nearest to him lay. Which look'd as 'twere upon the Sea a skin. But now by Neptune, who returning was, Ulysses Raft from Solymi, was seen. For o'r those Mountains Neptune was to pass. Who wounded at the sight, with anger keen, Thus said unto himself, What, what, f finde While I in Ethiopia have been The Gods about this man have chang'd their mind The Isle Phaeacia is near at hand, In which he destin'd is himself to save. But yet, I think, before he be on Land He struggle shall with many a lusty Wave. Then with his Trident he the Sea enraged, And made a night of Clouds the Sea upon, And 'gainst Ulysses all the Winds engaged, And from their Quarters they came out each one, Eurus, and Notus, Zephyr, Boreas, Each one a mighty wave against him roll'd. And then Ulysses heart near broken war, And with himself, himself he thus condol'd. Ay me, what will-become of me at last! I fear the Nymph Calypso all this knew, Who told me then that as I homeward past I should meet danger. Now I finde it true. With what thick Clouds Jove cover'd has the sky! In what a tumult is the Sea! And how On ev'ry side the Winds the Water ply And storm! My death (I see) is certain now. Thrice, four times (Argives) happy were you, who. For Agamemnon's sake were slain. Would I At Troy in Battle my life lost had too, I'th'show'r of Spears about Achilles Body. Then had I had a noble Funeral, And great among the Greeks had been my Fame. But now a wretched death will me befal. For ever will unheard-of be my name. This said, he dasht was 'gainst a point of Land, Which with great force whirled the Raft about.
And then the Rudder flew out of his hand; And he into the water was cast out. Of divers Winds then follow'd one great blast, And Sail and Tackle o'r-board far off bears, And in the middle breaks in two the Mast, While he was in the Sea o'r head and ears. At last he rais'd his head above the pickle (His heavy Clothes a while had hindred him) Then from his hair into his mouth did trickle The brine, which he spits out, and falls to swim. And when he had his Raft recovered, And plac'd himself i'th'midst; then both together The wind uncertainly them carried From place to place, now hither and now thither. Just as the wind in Harvest blows Pease-straw Upon the plain field whilst it holds together; So on the Sea without a certain Law Ulysses Raft was driven by the weather. In this distress by Ino he was seen A Sea-nymph and Immortal she was then, Though Woman (Cadmus Daughter) she had been. And now in figure of a Water-hen, She sat upon the Raft and to him spake. What meaneth Neptune that he hates you so? Do what he can your life he shall not take; Do what I bid you. Off your Garments throw, And quit the Raft. And to Phaeacia Swim with your hands. And there you shall finde rest. For so it is ordain'd by fatal Law. Here take this Scarf. Apply it to your breast. And fear not death. But when you come to Land Throw't in the Sea as far off as you can. Then turn. This said, she put it in his hand, And diving there alone she left the man. Ulysses grieving to himself then says, What is it now I am advis'd unto! Ay me! Some other God now me betrays, To quit my Raft. I know what I will do. For since my refuge is so near at hand, Such Counsel I will not too soon obey.
But do what does with greatest reason stand. Upon my Raft I mean so long to stay As it shall hold together and be one. But when the wind has broken it in pieces I'll swim; since better counsel I have none. While with himself consulting was Ulysses, Neptune with wind the water sets upright Into a high and formidable wave, And threw it on the Raft with all his might, Which all the parts thereof asunder drave. Just as the wind scatters a cock of hay, So scatter'd was Ulysses Raft of Trees. Whilst he on one of them astride did slay, And of his Garments there himself he frees. Then Ino's Scarf applies he to his breast, And on the troubled Sea himself he laid With open arms. To swim he now thought best. Which Neptune seeing, thus unto him said, Go wander now upon the Sea in woe, And do not make account that this is all. This said, away to Aegae did he go, Where many men that need him, on him call. When he was gone Pallas the Winds did lay All but a lusty gale of Boreas, And broke the waves before him all the way, That to Phaeacia he might safely pass. Two nights and days perpetual he swam, And was of drowning all the while afraid. But when the morning of the third day came, The air was calm, and all the winds allai'd. And now unto the Isle he was so nigh, That from a high Wave he could see the shore. And glad he was. As when about to die Li'n has a man long time by sickness sore, Is by the Gods recover'd suddenly, Glad are his Children; so Ulysses was To see the so much wish'd-for Land so nigh, And thither made what haste he could to pass. When he was gotten so near to the shore That one might hear another when he calls,
Torn by the Rocks he heard the water rore. (Loud is the Sea when on hard Rocks it falls.) There neither Haven was nor place to land, But upright Banks and Cliffs, and brows of stone. And every where too deep it was to stand. And now again quite was his courage gone, And speaking to himself he said, Ay me, This is the Island. Jove has brought me to't, That what must help me onely I might see, But not upon it ever set my foot. There is no landing here. Rocks high and steep, And unaccessible are all about. The Sea below so rugged is and deep, That from it there will be no getting out. If I should try, some mighty wave, I fear, Against some rugged Rock will carry me, And make me finde but woful landing there Amongst so many sharp stones as there be. But if I swim along the Coast to finde Some Port or Beach though stormy to land on, I fear I shall again by some great wind Far off from shore into the Sea be blown; And there by some great fish devoured be (For many such are fed by Amphitrite) Which Neptune may command to swallow me. For well I am acquainted with his spite. While he thus doubted, came a mighty Wave That cast him to the Bank amongst sharp stones. But for the Counsel Pallas to him gave, He torn his skin and broken had his bones. A Rocher with his arms he then imrac't And held it till the Wave roll'd back again; And thought the danger of it now was past. But then the same Wave bore him to the Main. As looks a Polypus when he is dragg'd From out his hole, stuck full of stone and sands; So, when Ulysses left his hold, were shag'd With broken skin all over both his hands. And now, had not Athena giv'n him wit He perisht had. For up his head he puts
Above the briny Sea, and having spit He with his stretched arms the water outs. And swam along the shore; but kept his eye Continually upon the Land, to see If any landing place he could espy. At last before a Rivers mouth came he; And knew it was a Rivers mouth. For there Within the Land smooth water might be seen, And 'twixt the Rocks a pause there did appear. And here Ulysses thought fit to go in. And in his minde unto the River spake. Hear me, O King, from Neptune's rage I fly, And of a man distrest some pitty take, That at your Knee and Stream here prostrate lie. Th'Immortal Gods their Suppliants respect, When they before them humbly lay their want. What ere your name be, do not me neglect That am afflicted, and your Suppliant. This said, the stream stood still and sav'd the man. But weary were his knees and arms. And Brine Abundance from his Mouth and Nostrils ran. And all his body swell'd was. And in fine Speechless and breathless was he like ore dead. But when he came unto himself again The Scarf he to the Stream delivered, Which carried it agan into the Main. And Ino took it then into her hand. Then on a Bulrush-bed himself he lad, And glad he had escaped, kist the Land. But fearing still unto himself he said, Ay me, what will become of me at length? For in the River if I spend the night, So much already wasted is my strength, With frost and dew I shall be killed quite. If up the Hill I go into the Wood, And in some Thicket there lie warm and sleep, I fear I shall for Beasts and Fowls be food. At last concludes into some Wood to creep. A Wood there was unto the River nigh; Two Thickets in it were; of Olive one,
The other was of Phylia close by, So twin'd they were together that not Sun, Nor Wind, nor Rain to th'ground could find a way. Between them of dry leaves a bed made he, And over head and ears there close he lay. For leaves there were enough for two or three, To keep them warm although cold weather 'twere. As when a man takes up a brand of fire In Country-house, few neighours dwelling near, To warm himself withal if need require; So buried in dry leaves Ulysses lay. And then Athena closed up his eyes With sound and gentle sleep to take away Sad thoughts suggested by his miseries. LIB. VI. THere slept Ulysses. But Athena went Unto the people of Phaeacia, Who once dwelt near a Nation insolent, The great Cyclopses in Hyperia, And by the odds of strength were there opprest. But by Nausithous transplanted were To Scheria, that they might live at rest. Who built thēm houses, and a City there, And fortifi'd the same with strong walls round, And Temples built, and gave them shares of land. But he departed was, and under ground. And now Alcinous had the Command. His house it was the Goddess went unto, And int'a Chamber gay (where lay abed A Godlike Maid asleep) with less ado Than could a gentle wind have entered.
This the Kings Daughter was Nausicaa. Within the door shut close, on each side one, Two of her Waiting-maids asleep she saw, And as the Graces fair to look upon. Then standing at Nausicaa's Beds-head, In form of Dymas Daughter, there she stai'd, Who of her age was, and most favoured, And to Nausicaa she spake, and said, Careless Nausicaa, what do you mean, When to your Wedding-day you are so near, To let so many Garments lie unclean? You would be glad your self fair clothes to wear, And give to them that are to lead you out. For even such things as these procure good fame Amongst the people that dwell round about. Your Parents also take joy in the same. Come therefore, to the River let's be gone By break of day; For I will with you go, And help, that you the sooner may have done. I'm sure your Wedding is not far off now. For sought you are in Marri'ge by the best Of all the Town where you were born and bred. Go early to your Father and request You may with Mules and Coach be furnished. That Aprons, Gowns, and Mantles you may bear Unto the washing place. For far 'tis to't, And for your person so 'tis comelier Than to be seen to go so far on foot. This said, the Goddess up to Heaven went, Where is the dwelling of the Gods in bliss. A pure and undecaying Firmament Which by no wind moved or shaken is, Nor wet nor slabber'd is with showr of Rain, Nor clouded, nor approacht unto by Snow; But bright and shining always doth remain. Here dwel th'Immortals, and no sorrow know. Thither went Pallas. Then Nausicaa Awak'd, and through the house went to relate Unto her Parents what a Dream she saw. Her Mother by the fire-side spinning sate
With distaff laden with fine purple-wool. Her Father going out, she met i'th'Hall, Call'd by the Lords sitting in Councel full, And waiting for him to consult withal. And to him said, Pray Father shall not I Allowed be a Coach your Clothes to bear (Which in the house sulli'd and spotted lie) Unto the River-side to wash them there? For you your self when you to Councel go Would gladly have your Garments clean & sweet. Your five Sons, whereof two be wedded now, Would fain with clean Clothes at the Dancings meet. So said Nausicaa. But to her Father To talk of Wedding she forbore for shame. Yet what she thought on he could eas'ly gather, However she dissembled had the same. Dear Child (then said her Father) you shall have Both Mules and Coach with handsome covering. Unto his Servants then command he gave To see it done. And out the Coach they bring, And to it set the Mules. Then came her Mother, And laid in things to eat, of relish fine, And such as eaten are with bread, much other; And in a bag of Goat-skin pleasant wine. When in the Coach the Garments all were plac't Nausicaa went up into her seat, And with her took (when their toil should be past) A cruse of Oyl to help wash off the sweat. Then out, with whip and reins in hand did drive. And then with strained limbs and clatt'ring feet The Mules soon at the River side arrive, And pasture for them there was very sweet. And there the Mules first they unharnassed, Then pusht them off to graze on the Bank-side. The Clothes in Pits with water covered They tread, and who shall fastest tread, they vi'd. Then on the Beach the Garments wet they spread Upon the cast-up Pibbles one by one. Then washed they and dri'd themselves, and fed; And left the Garments drying in the Sun.
And after they with food were fatisfi'd, It came into their mindes to play at Ball, And spend the time so till the clothes were dri'd. The tune, Nausicaa sung for them all. As when upon Mount Erymanthus high Or on Taygetus stands Artemis, And many Rural fair Nymphs playing by. But she than all the rest much taller is: And the wild Boars and Harts delights to see, But more her Mother Leda to see her, For though they fair were all, yet fairer she; So shew'd Nausicaa and her Maidens there. And when 'twas time that they should homewards go, And that the Clothes into the Coach were laid, And Mules set to, Athena thought on how Ulysses should awake and see the Maid, And be conducted by her to the Town. Nausicaa then throws the Ball and misses; ; The Ball unto the River falleth down. Then shout the Maids. At that awakt Ulysses. And sitting up unto himself he said, Ay me, where am I now? 'Mongst men unjust, And such as of the Gods are not afraid? Or good and godly men, whom I may trust? But female a e the voices which I hear. Are they some Nymphs that haunt the Mountains high, Or keep the Meadows green, or Waters clear, Or are they Mortals whom I am so nigh? But why go I not out my self and see? Then with strong hand he wringed off  bough With many leaves upon it from a Tree, To cover what became him not to show. Then as a Lion confident and bold, Howe'r it blow or rain with fiery eyes Comes from the Mountain to a Herd or Fold, And on the flock at last his fortune trie; So came Ulysses boldly from the Wood Stark naked, forc'd to't by necessity, And in the presence of the Maidens stood. The sight was terrible and made them fly.
Nausicaa fled not, but hid her eyes. Off stood Ulysses with himself to weigh Whether to speak from thence was the more wise, Or else himself before her feet to lay. To stay there right at last resolved he, Lest she should take his coming near her ill. Then said, O Queen, I beg upon my knee That you with patience hear my Prayer will. You are a Goddess, or of Humane race. If Goddess, you can then no other be Than Artemis Jove's Daughter. In your face. Such beauty is; in height such Majesty. If mortal, and of Humane race you be, Thrice happy are your Parents and your Brothers How glad in the Processions they will see, How much they are more grac'd by you than o∣thers. For such a branch I ne'r saw with my eyes On mortal stock. To see't I am amazed. But once a Palm at Delus saw arise In the same manner, and long on it gazed. (For that way went I once well followed, Which the first cause was of my trouble sore) And then, as I do now, I wondered, For I had never seen the like before. T'approach unto your knees I was afraid, Or shew my self. But such is my Estate. For twenty days upon the Sea I stra'd, And here in storms was thown ashore by Fate From th'Isle Ogygia last night, and fear I am to suffer yet more misery, And that the Gods will persecute me here. And since my landing you the first I see. Now ptty me, O Queen, and shew me where The City stands. And t'hide my nkedness Give me some rag if there be any here And may Jove you with all you wish  bless, A Husband and a House, and Conco . For man and wife to live in unit Is the great'st blessing can be understood. It joys your Friend, and grieves your Enemy.
Nausicaa then speaks, and to him says, You seem to be a good man and discreet, But Jove on good and bad such fortune lays, Happy or otherwise as he thinks mee. And since distress is fallen to your share, You must contented be to suffer it. But seeing to this place ariv'd you are, You shall have Rayment, and what else is fir. The City I will shew you, and the name The people of this Isle are called by. Pheacians they are call'd. And I am Daughter of him that has th'authority, Alcinous the King. And then she cri'd Aloud unto the Maids to make them stay. Why (said she) run you so away and hide? D'ye think the man will carry you away? For why, no Enemy can come in hither, The Gods so with the Sea have wall'd us in. Nor stranger dwells here. But by evil weather To come to land this man hath forced been. Let's do him good. From Jove come Beggars all. And welcome to them is whate'r they get. Our givings to him will be very small. Go therefore set before him Wine and Meat, And wash him in the River, in such part As cover'd is from wind. And then they did (When they had given one another heart) Set him in such a place as they were bid. And gave him th'Oyl to scour his skin withal, And by him a good Cloak and Coat they laid, And then they bad him to his washing fall. Ulysses answer'd then, and to them sad, Stand further off, I pray fair Maids; for I My body naked am asham'd to show. Then stand they off, and tell their Mistress why. (For washing he must have put off his bough.) Then wash  his head and shoulders wide, And with his hand from's head stroak'd down the brine, And with the Clothes that laid were by his side Arrai'd himself, that comely were and fine.
Then Pallas to him came, and made him look Taller and broader than he was before; And from his Hair the colour gray she took, And made it like the Hyacynthine flower. As one by Vulcan or Athena taught Gold upon Silver skilfully had spread; So Pallas on Ulysses beauty wrought, And graceful Majesty upon his head. Then sat he on the Sands. Nausicaa Then said unto her Maidens, Do you hear, How poor he look'd the first time we him saw. And now how like a God he does appear. And by the Gods, it may be, he was sent To dwell amongst the people of this place. With such a Husband I could be content (If he would stay) and think it no disgrace. Go Maids and set before him Wine and Meat. Away they went, and did as she them bad. And he fell to, and heartily did eat. For long before he nothing eaten had. Then harnessed the Mules and set them to, And folded and put up the Garments all. Nausicaa went up with Maidens two. And then unto Ulysses did she call. Rise, Stranger to the City let us go, That I may send you to my Fathers house, Where all the best Phaeacians you'll know. But hear you (for I think you cautelous.) Whilst in the Fields the Coach is on the way, Amongst my Maidens follow it apace. But when you see it neer the City, stay. And that you may well understand the place, A Tow'r there is, you'll see it, for 'tis high. There 'twixt two Havens is a narrow way, You'll see it by the Masts, for Ships there lie. Near it the people meet o'th'Market-day. And there a Temple fair of Neptune stands, Of free-stone from the Quarry hewn and fit. For the Phaeacians imploy their hands On Shipping, and no other art but it.
For Bows and Arrows they care not a pin, But for such things as serve to pass the Seas. Ships, Cordage, Oars thy take their pleasure in, And spend their time and labour upon these. I am afraid these men will censure me, And say (for Censurers are many here) This handsome and tall fellow who is he, That's with Nausicaa, from God knows where? Where did she find him; Must he marry her? From some far Country he is landed here Wandring by Fortune, or a Traveller. For sure I am no such man dwelleth neer. May be some God from Heav'n descenc'ed is, And to live with her always hither come, So, then to wed a Strager better 'tis, Since she thinks none is good enough at home. For many seek her, and the best men here. So will they say, and 'twill be to my shame. For if another that had done it 'twere, I should my self condemn her fo the same, For 'tis unseemly a fair Maid to see, That subject is t'her Parents Government, Converse with any man, unless she be First married, or their Parents give consent. And therefore, Stranger, if you mean to be Convoyed by my Father to your home, Do a I tell you. Near the way you'll see A Grove of Poplars. When you thither come You'll finde my Father's Vineyard, from the Town As far as one that Holla's heard can be, And when you thither come, there sit you down Till at my Fathers house you think are we. Then to the City go; ask where does dwell Alcinous. For you shall meet with none, Though but a Child, but can inform you well. So well his house is known to every one. And there go in, and on, until you finde My Mother. Whom you'll by the fire side see Spinning; and Maids at the same work behinde The Pillar under which sits working she.
My Fathers Chair by the same Pillar stands Where, when he drinketh, like a God he is. Pass by it to my Mother, and your hands, If you mean to get home, lay on her knees. If once her favour you can but obtain, You need not fear, but you your friends shall see, And to your house and Country come again. This said, her Whip upon the Mules laid she. The Mules start swiftly from the Rivers side, For nimble was the motion of their feet. But she for those who went afoot, did guide The swiftness of their pace as she thought meet. When they were come t'Athena's sacred Grove, The Sun went down; and there Ulysses staid And to the Goddess, Daughter of Great Jove, That he might good reception finde, he prai'd. Hear me Jove's Virgin daughter, hear me now, Since still you did refuse to help me then, When Neptune sought at Sea my overthrow, Grant that I may be welcome to these men. Thus prai'd he, and was by Athena heard, Though to him face to face she would not come, But of her Unkle Neptune was afear'd, That n'r forgave him till he was at home. LIB. VII. WHilst there he prai'd, Nausicaa went on, And staid her Coach the utter gate without, And like to Gods her Brothers came each From out the house, & her stood round about. (one, The Mules they eed, th'appare' they took in, Nausicaa streight to her Chamber went;
Eurymedusa made a fire therein; Who ta'ne by Rovers on the Continent Was given to the King Alcinous, That like a God was honour'd by the Nation Of the Phaeacians at home. And thus She of Nausicaa had the Education. A fire she made her, and her Supper brought. Ulysses then into the City went. Pallas of air had made him such a Coat, As he could not be seen; lest insolent And sturdy Towns-men should him mock and jear, Or ask him Questions, who, what, or why. But when he was unto the Gate come near, Pallas appeared to him openly, Like a young Maid with Pail upon her head. Ulysses then spake to her, and said thus: Sweet pretty Girl, will you be pleas'd to lead Me to the house of King Alcinous? For I a Stranger come and no man know, Nor ever in my life was here before. Yes (then said Pallas) I will you it show, For 'tis the next unto my Fathers door. Go softly, thus, and I will lead the way. For ou folk Strangers do not well indure. But in good Ships their honour wholly lay, And the wide Sea to pass themselves enure. For Neptune given to them has this gift, That their good ships fly like to thought or wind. This sad, the Goddess led with motion swift; And on her steps he treading went behind. And through the people so he past unseen For why, the Goddess Pallas, for good will, A wondrou mist of Air had wrapt him in. The looking at the house he there sood still. The Havens and the Ships he wondred at▪ The Market-place, and Walls so thick and high. Then Pallas said, Alcinous house is that. There sup the King and Queen now merrily. Thugh you a Stranger be, fear not, go n. The bold than fearful always better speed.
And first of all the House you'll find the Queen Arete is her name. Both from one seed Descended are she and Alcinous, In Periboea Child of Eurimedon. The God o'th' Seas begot Nausithous Who two Sons had; Alcinous was one. The other was Rexenor, who no Son But one fair Daughter onely left behind. Arete was her name. Besides her none. Alcinous and she in Wedlock joyn'd. And he to her so much respect doth bear, As no man living to a wife bears more. And honour'd is by all her Children dear. The people like a Goddess her adore, And b'ess her when she comes into the street. And loving to them all is also she. For a wise woman is she and discreet. When they fall out she makes them to agree. If you her favour can but once obrain, You need not fear but you your friends shall see, And safely to your Country come again. And when she this had said, away went she O'r Sea, to Marathon in Attica T'Erecthus house. And he now was to enter Into the house. But long he laid the Law Unto himself before he would adventure. Entring he saw the Walls lin'd round with brass, And fring'd about with colour of the sky. The door within golden all ove was, And all appear'd like Heaven to the eye. The Door-posts Silver glorious to behold, The Lintle-tree upon them silver too. The Sill was brass, the Ring to pull it, Gold. And by the Door great Dogs were standing two. Of silver one, the other was of Gold, As wath bfore the Royal Gate to stay, Immortal Dogs hat never can grow old. And round about them all, Thrones every way, All cover'd with a dinty Stuff and fine. The work of Womens hand. There us'd to eat
The King and Lords, and drink and make good cheat. His Rches was a never dying Teat. About the Altar were set Boys of Gold That to the Guests, asloon as it was night, With burning Torches they the Light might hold. For now the Sun had born away his light. Fifty Maid-servants were at work within, Some at the Mill were grinding whea: for bread, And others with their Distaves sate to sin, And others Cloth were weaving with the thread. Like to the Leaves of a high Aspen-tree Their fingers went. So much they did excel In all the works, that taught by Pallas be, The Women that in other places dwell; As do these men all other men surpass In all things that belong to navigation. For Wit and Art more Pallas given has To them, than Women of another Nation. Close by the House a dainty Orchard is Four square and fenc'd with hedge and pale about, Of Pear, Pomegranate, Apple, Olve-trees, And Fig-trees. For the season ne'r goes out Summer nor Winter, for by Zephyrs some Are made put forth, and others ripened; Pears after Pears, apples to apples come; Grapes are by Grapes, Figs by Figs followed. And in it was the Vineyard of the King. Grapes in some places by the Sun were dri'd, In others staid till Vintage ripening. Upon some Vines no flower yet was spi'd. And Grapes on some to blacken now began. Green beds of Herbs there were on ev'ry side; And through it from two Springs the water ran, And to and fro the one did winding glide The other to the house his stream did ear, And under ground was to the Town convey'd, And rose a Fountain for the people there. And when Ulysses had all this survey'd, Then went he in, and found them in the Hall Sitting at supper, and to Mercy
There offring up of Wine. Which last of all At Bed-time men do offer usually. And on he went up to the King and Queen, And both his hands upon her knee did lay. Pallas had kept him in the Mist unseen. But thither come the Mist streight fell away. Amaz'd they were when first they saw the man. And like to men that had been stricken dumb, Ulysses then t' Arete thus began. O Queen Arete, to your knee I come, And to the King and those that with you sit. May the Gods grant you all much happiness, Long life, and your Possessions to transmit T'your Children, and your Honours still possess; And may you me send presently away Unto my House. Long absent I have been. This said, he sat down by the fire. And they Said nothing, such amazement they were in. At last old Echineus spake, that knew Both what in former times and now was fit. O King Alcinous is't good think you To let the Stranger in the Ashes sit? We silent sat to see what was your will. Pray make him rse, and to a Chair him bring, And bi the Squire to temper Wine and fill, That we to Jove may make our Offering, Who with poor Strangers keepeth company. And bid the Maid before him set such meat As she within has in her custody. This said, Alcinous rose from his seat, T'Ulysses went, and took him by the hand. And to a Chair him led where sat his Son Laodamas, to whom he gave Command To give him place, although he loved none So dearly as he lov'd Laodamas. Who next unto him us'd to sit at meat. Then by a Maid brought in a Bason was And Ewr of Gold, to wash ere he did eat. Another Maid before him layed Bread, And other good things on hs Tale laid,
And heartily thereon Ulysses fed. Alcinous then to the Squire said, Temper the Wine, Pontonous, that we Wine-Offering to Jove may offer up, In whose protection all Suppliants be, And round about presented be the Cup. Then went about the Wine from one to one. And when the Sacred Offering was over, Then said Alcinous, Since we have done, Let's go to bed, and soon as we discover Aurora rising, hither come again, And make unto the Gods a Sacrifice, And this our Stranger farther entertain, And how to send him to his house advise, That safely he may go, and joyfully, And swiftly to the place where he would be, How far soever hence his dwelling lie, Nor on the Sea delay or trouble see Until his Native Country he be at. But what his Fate is after he is there, Be't good or evil he must suffer that. But if it be some God that sitteth here 'Tis only our Devotion t'approve. For to that end Gods let themselves be spi'd, To sit with men at Holy Feasts they love, And not themselves in Caves like Giants hide. To this Ulysses said, O King, lay by That thought of yours. With Gods I'll not compare, For Body or for Mind. Of Misery If man can boast, to boast 'mong them I date. For I more Tokens can produce of VVoe Than any man that shall with me contend, Though all I tell not that I can. Yet so I fain would of my Supper make an end. No Creature is so fierce as is the Gut, And so loud barketh when it is forgot, That out of mind it never can be put, But will be heard whether one will or not. So 'tis with me that am afflicted sore, Yet stll my Belly bids me eat and drink,
And forget all I had endur'd before, And on my misery no more to think. And so, since now I hunger to go home, Forget not with a Ship me to supply To morrow. For were I once thither come I could be well contented there to die. When this was said, he was by all commended. He speaks discreetly, let him then, said they A speedy conduct have. When all was ended, The rest unto their Houses went away. Only Ulysses staid, and by him sate The King and Queen. Tables removed were, And all that to the Supper did relate. The Queen then mark'd what Garments he did wear, And that she and her Maids had made them, knew. Stranger, said she, VVho are you? VVhence? & more, The Garments you have on, of whom had you? Had you them on then when you came ashore? Grievous (said he) O Queen is your Command, That calls again (when past it is) my pain. Yet will I answer make to this demand. An Island lieth far hence in the Main, Ogygia 'tis call'd. Calypso there The Daughter fair of Atlas lives alone, Nor God nor Man she has to dwell with her; And I by Fate upon that Isle was thrown. For Jove my good Ship had with Thunder split; My Fellows in the Sea all perished. But I the Rudder had, and held by it. And thus nine days and nights I wandered, And thrown was on that Isle the tenth at night. Calypso there received me and fed; And Immortality have had I might, If I had with her there inhabited. But I to that would never give consent. Yet there by force I stayed seven years (For want of Ship and Men) in discontent, Washng the Clothes she gave me with my tears. The eighth year come, she did my going press, Whether by Jove's command I cannot say,
Or whether 'twere because she lov'd me less. Then on a Raft of Trees I came away. Bread and sweet Wine upon the Deck she laid, And Garments gave me fair, and a good Wind. And good for seventeen days the weather staid. On th'eighteenth near your Coast my self I find. And glad I was, though still unfortunate. For more I was to suffer by and by. For Neptune rais'd against me in his hate, A Storm of Winds with furious Waves and high. And then I forced was the Raft to quit. The Trees asunder floated here and there, The Storm so broken had and scatter'd it. Then swam I. 'Gainst the rocks the waves me bear, And falling off, they cast me back again. Again I swam, and to the River came. And there I saw the landing smooth and plan. And from the Wind defended was the same. There landed I half dead, and now 'twas night. Then up I went and in a Thicket lay Cover'd with leaves abundance dry and light. And slept till almost spent was the next day. For then the Sun was setting. There I hear The voice of women playing by the Brook. And going our I saw your Daughter there, That like a Goddess come from heav'n d look. To her I made my Pray'r in this distress. Wisely she answer'd and beyond her age (For th'younger commonly consider less) And gave me food my hunger to asswage. Of her I had the Garments I have on. Nay Stranger (answered Alcinous) 'Twas in my Childe an indiscretion, That she not brought you with her to my house. To this Ulysses answered and sad, 'Twas not her fault we came not both together. She bid me I would not, but was afraid What you and they would think that saw me with her. For jealous and mistrustful mortals be. To the again Alcinous repli'd,
From such i'l thoughts I always have been free. O Jove, and Pallas make you here abide. Such are you, and our thoughts so well agree, That you Nausicaa should have for Bride, If you would with me live here willingly, And for your house and walth I would provide. But 'gainst your will I will not make you stay. (From such iniquity the Gods me keep) To morrow shall be ready your Convey, And till then go you to your bed and sleep. And here be men, that when the Wind shall fail, Can row you on how far soe' you'll go. The hands can do as much as any Sail, Although beyond Euboea they must row. For farther no Phoeacian ever went. But thither once they carried Roadamant, Of Tityus to see the punishment, Son of the Earth that terrible Giant, Yet that long voyage cost them but a day Going and coming all the way at ease. But you your self, when you are on the way, Will see how stoutly our men plough the Seas. This said, Ulysses joyful was, and prai'd, Make all this good O Father Jove (said he) The Glory of the King will be displai'd, And quickly in my Country I shall be. Whilst they together thus discoursing staid, Arete bad the Maids to make his bed, And see fair purple Rugs upon it laid, And under them soft woolly Blankets spred. Then went away the Maids into the Porch, And made his Bed, and soon came back agen, And stood before Ulysses with a Torch. Come Stranger, said they, all is ready. Then Ulysses to his Bed went willingly. Alcinous in a room lay far within, Where formerly he used was to lie, That was prepared for him by the Queen.
LIB. VIII. SOon as Aurora was again espi'd, The King Alcinous rose from his bed. Up rose Ulysses and came to his side. And to the Publike-place the King him led, To sit in Councel with his Princes there, And being there they sat together nigh. Pallas the while that did great favour bear, T'Ulysses welfare always had an eye, In likeness of Alcinous his Squire (Who by his Office did the Councel call) Their favour for Ulysses to acquire, Went through the Streets, and there unto them all Said one by one, Make haste. To Councel go. A Stranger new-come to the King you'll see That like a God Immortal is in show. This said, unto the Councel-House they flee. And filled was the House, and ev'ry Seat, And of his person all admir'd the Grace. For Pallas made him had more tall and great, And laid more Majesty upon his face. To make him welcome to those men she meant, And gain him honour at their Exercises When they should put him to experiment. Alcinous unto them then arises. Hear, said he, Princes of Phaeacia, This Man (who 'tis, or whence, I cannot say, Cast here ashore) till then I never saw. Since 'tis our Custome, grant him a Convoy. For no man yet unto my house did come By force of weather wandring on the Main,
Lamenting and desiring to go home, That can affirm he sought our help in vain. Come then, let's launch a good new Ship, and chuse Out two and fifty lusty Youths to row. And let them ready have their Oars to use, And to my house, when that's done, let them go. And you the Princes thither come with me, That we may well the Stranger entertain. And let the Singer too sent thither be, To give us sometimes of his Art a Strain. This said, the Princes to his house he led. The Squire unto the house the Singer sent. The fifty two as they were ordered Down to the Haven where the ship lay went. The Ship they launch, and up they set the Mast; And then the Yards and Sails they hoised high; Their Oars, where they be placed should, they plac't. This done they let her in the Water lie. Then also to the house went these men up. The Porches, Court, and rooms with men were fill'd Some old, some young. The King to make them sup, Two Kine, eight Swine, & twice six fat Sheep kill'd. These flay'd and dress'd, and to the Tables brought, Came in the Singer, whom the Muses kind Had taught to sing divinely. But, could not Or would not him preserve from being blind. Pontonous the Squire then led him in, And set him by a Pillar in the Hall, And hung his Fiddle o'r him on a Pin, And how to reach it shewed him withal. Sets him a Table and a Basket by, And a great Bowl of Wine before him plac't To drink as often as he should be dry. And when their thirst and hunger was displac't The Singer sung the Song in most request, How once Ulysses and Achilles great In high and bitter language did contest When at a sacred Feast they sate at Meat. And how King Agamemnon pleased was, To see the two best of the Greeks fall out.
For Phoebus told him so 'twould come to pass When he at Pythos asked him about The Issue of the fleet design'd for Troy. This Song Demodocus sung to them then; Which to Ulysses was of little joy; But he his tears to hide before those men Before his eyes his Cloak of purple drew, And when the Singer ceas'd, his eyes he dri'd, And from before his face his Cloak withdrew, And of the Wine perform'd the Sacrifice. And when the Lords call'd for the Song-anew, (For they to hear him took no small delight) His Cloak again before his eyes he drew, And as before again he sob'd and sigh'd. Alcinous, none else, observed it, And well enough could hear him sigh and groan. For he the nearest there did to him sit, And would not to the Princes make it known. But speaking to them all said onely this, Since you with feasting are well satisfi'd, And Musick (which to Feasts annexed is) Let now our mens activity be tri'd, That when the Stranger is where he doth dwell, He to his Friends and Countrymen may tell How much we do all other men excel At Wrestling, Buffets, Leaping, Running well▪ Then went the King and Princes out a door; The Squire then took the Singer by the hand, And hung the Fiddle where it hung before, And him led out amongst the rest to stand. Unto the place they went; and follow'd were By people numberless the sport to see. And many lusty Youths amongst them there, Stood out to shew their great ability. Out stood Elatreus and Acroneus, Eretmeus, Thoon, Nautes, and Prymneus, Ambasineus and Amphialus, Proteus, and Ponteus, and Anchialus. Ocyalus, warlike Euryalus, And he that of them most their eye dd please
(Except the first Son of Alcinous) For Countenance and Shape Naubolides, And then Alcinous his three Sons rise, Laodamas, Halius, Clitoneus. And first they all contended for the Prize Of who at Running could his Feet best use. Then start they all at once, and swiftly run As if they flew. And here the Victory The Kings Son Noble Clytoneus won, And past them all a lands length very nigh. Euryalus at Wrestling was the best. Amphialus at leaping Victor was. Elatreus surpassed all the rest To throw the Stone. At Cuffs Laodamas. When all was done Laodamas up stood. Come friends, said he, let us the Stranger try If he at any of these Games be good; For in his person no defect I spy. His Thighs, his Knees, his Arms, his Neck are strong. Nor over-aged, yet he seems to me. Only he hath endur'd the Sea so long, As for that cause he may excused be. For than the Sea nothing more potent is To break a man how strong soe'r he be. Go, said Euryalus, 'tis not amiss Tnvite him to it, and his minde to see. Then to Ulysses said Laodamas, Come Stranger, Father. Pray, your vertue show. 'Tis no dishonour for you in this place To shew your skill at any Game you know, As long as Feet and Hands continue strong. Come try, and cast your careful thoughts away. Your Convoy ready is. 'Twill not be long Before you shall be set upon your way. Laodamas (then said Ulysses) why To these your Games invite you me in scorn, Upon whose heart so many sorrows lie, And am to nothing with much hardship worn, And publickly a Suppliant now sit, And to the King and People grief profess?
Think you that Pastimes for such men are fit, As from their Country wander in distress? Then spake Euryalus, uncivilly. No, no, said he, I do not think you are Much us'd to Pastimes of activity, But rather one that of a ship takes care That Merchant-men from place to place conveys, And mindful of your Fraught are, and can tell Which are to sudden wealth the nearest ways, What Merchandize will not, and what will sell, And in such boisterous Games has little skill. Ulysses frowning on him then repli'd, My friend, such words are indiscreet and ill. The Gods their Gifts as they think it divide. To one, of Beauty they deny the grace, But give him Language steddy and discreet, Whereby he honour'd is i'th'Publick Place, And men gaze on him going in the street. T'another they have giv'n a fair aspect; Like that o'th'Gods, but have deni'd him wit. So finde I in your person no defect; Only you want the grace to say what's fit. Your words have put me into passior. In these your Games you say no skill have I. I thought my self inferiour to none Whilst on my youth and hands I could rely. But tamed now my strength is with much woe Wandring at Sea and often hurt in fight. Yet of your Games I'll make a trial so, Weak as I am. So much your words me bite. This said, he took up a much greater stone Than that which the Phaeacians had flung, Nor hollow as a Coyt, his Cloak still on. And when above his head he had it swung, Swiftly away the Stone flew with a hum, Which made the brave Phaeacian Seamen couch, As o'r their heads they heard it singing come, And outwent all the other marks by much. For Pallas in the likeness of a man Did set a mark at where the stone did light,
And said the difference be discerned can By feeling, though a man had lost his fight. And to Ulysses said he, Do not fear That any man i'th'Town shall out-throw this. Ulysses very glad was this to hear, And that amongst them stood one friend of his. Then of himself, began to speak more high. Come Youths throw first as far as I have done, And then as far or further throw will I. And for the other Games come any one Since your sharp words provok't me have thereto, Bassets, or Wrestling, or to run the race, And see if you at these can me out-do, Any of you except Laodamas. For I to him am come as to a Friend Of whom I hope for succour in my need. He were a fool that with him would contend Without whose help his business cannot speed. But of the rest not any I refuse; And will contend with them for Mastery. For I know all the Games the best men use. To use the Bowe none abler is than I. When many of us had a minde to kill Some noted Foe, and all at once did shoot, Though every one of us had the same will, My Arrow was the first that sound him out. At Ilium in trials of the Bowe None sound I better than my self but one. 'Twas Polyctetes. Of those that are now I think my self inferiour to none. With those of former time I'll not compare, As Hercules, or Eurytus that durst Challenge Apollo. Apollo took a care That Prize should not be plaid, & kill'd him first, As far as other men can shoot an Arrow, So far I able am to dart a Spear. But lodging I have had at Sea so narrow That I may be out-run by some man here. So said Ulysses; and all silent sat Except the King, who thus unto him said,
Stranger, there's no man here offended at The words you say. For open you have laid Your Vertue, when you were thereto constrian'd By the unjust reproaches of this man. For such it is as by none can be stain'd, But those that nothing say discreetly can. And hear me farther what I have to say, That t'other Hero's you the same may tell, Who with you and your Wife shall feasting stay, In what from other men we bear the bell. For Cuffs and Wrestling, not much praise we merit, But our good Ships and Feet are wondrous swift. And these Gists from our Fathers we inherit, Dance, Song, Feasts, Fiddle, and of Garments shift, And Baths, and Beds. Dance you that dance the best Before the Stranger, that his riends among He may say how much we exceed the rest Of men, in Ships, in Running, Dance, and Song. Fetch out the Fiddle. Then the Squire went in To fetch the Fiddle. And the Judges rise, In number nine, who had elected been By publick vote, of Games to hold assize. And order took for large room in the middle, And made it to be plained well and even. When this was done, then brought out was the Fiddle, And by the Squire was to the Singe given. Then came the youngmen that had learnt to dance, And of their age were yet but in the flowr, And to the middest of the place advance. Their Feet play up and down like drops in show'r. Such sparkling feet Ulysses ne'r had seen. The Singer as he played sung the song Of Mars and Venus, and what love had been Held secretly between them all along. And how in Vulcan's house they us'd to meet; And what he gave her; how the prying Sun As they imbrac'd each other chanc'd to see't, And told her Husband Vulcan what was done. How Vulcan to his Forge in anger went, And on his anvil hammer'd out strong Chains,
Which neither could be broken, nor selent. And when he made an end had of his pains, Into the Chamber went where stood his Bed. His Net o'th' Bed-posts, and the Beams he threw Like Spider-webs about a Chamber spread; And then to go to Lemnos made a shew. So subtile were the Chains and finely wrought, They could by none, although a God, be seen. Hw Mars to warch his going failed not. When Vulcan was gon out, then Mars went in. How Vnus entred in, new come from Jove, And by him sate. Mars took her by the hand, And to her said, Let's go to bed, my love. Vulcan is now at Lemnos gone a land. And how they went to bed and made the Net Fall down upon, and hold them as they lay. And how they knew no way from thence to get, But must till Vulcan came to free them stay, How Vulcan from hard by came quickly in. For back he came before he was half way. For by the Sun advertis'd he had been, And angerly turn'd back without delay; And roaring to the Gods, he said, D'ye see What work is here, and how unseemly 'tis? And how Jove's Daughter does dishonour me Because my Limbs are maim'd, and whole are his? I grant he's fair, nor doth as I do hault. Ought she to love him therefore more than me? For that my Parents is, and not my fault. But come ye Gods all, and their posture see. I hate the sight, yet they must not therefore Hope e'r the sooner for that, to be free. The Net will suffer them to move no more, How keen soever on their love they be. And till her Father shall the Dow'r repay Which for the Girl although incontineat, I paid him down, 'cause fair she was and gay, There they shall lie. This said, the Gods streight went To Vulcan's house. Neptune and Mercury, And with them with his Silver Bow, Apollo,
And many others. But (for modesty) No Goddess could perswaded be to follow. Assoon as they perceived had the craft, Which standing in the door they had survey'd. At first aloud they altogether laught. And by and by to one another said, I see that evil works do ill succeed. The slow has gotten of the swift the better. Vulcan of Mars the God of greatest speed. And that by Arts which make his Ransome greater. And how Apollo did the Question put To Mercury, if he content would be In such strong Chains with Venus to be shut, While all the Gods are standing by and see. How Hermes said, O Phoebus, that I were In Mars his place, and did with Venus lie, And thrice as many Chains about us there, Though all the Gods and Goddesse; stood by. And how the Gods at this laught out again, Save Neptune onely, who did never cease T'importune Vulcan and his wrath restrain, And that he would the God of War release; And that himself would pay him what was due If Mars did not. How Vulcan said agen, If Mars should fly, shall I imprison you? Unsure the Suretiship is of fled men. And that again Neptune replying said. Though Mars should run away, yet I will not. And how that Vulcan at the last obey'd, And Mars and Venus out of prisor got, And he to Thrace went, but to Cyprus she; Where she a Temple and an Altar had, And by the Graces that her Servants be Bath'd and anointed was and Godlike clad. These of the merry Song were the Contents. Ulysses was well pleased with the same. And of the rest delighted was the Sense. Alcinous then called our by name Laodamas and Halius to dance. None else for either of them was a match.
And they into the midst themselves advance The one to throw a Ball, th'other to catch. One threw't up high reclining on his hip; The other of the same the downfal watch't, And taking from the ground a lusty skip, His feet above ground, in the air it catcht. When this was done, they laid aside the Ball, And danc'd with often changes on the ground, Applauded much by the Spectators all, Who with their praises made the place resound. O King (then said Ulysses) what you said Of how your men pass all the world beside In Noble Dance, can never be gainsaid. I see it to my wonder justifi'd. The King well pleased to the Princes spake. A worthy man the stranger seems to me. Let's think upon what Present him to make. Twelve Princes in Phaeacia there be, And I the thirteenth am. Let's ev'ry one Bestow on him a handsome Cloak and Coat, Besides a Talent of pure Gold. That done Let it be all together to him brought, That he at Supper may sit chearfully. And you Euryalus go speak him fair. For what you said before was injury. Go therefore with some Gift your fault repair. This said, to fetch the Gifts they sent the Squire. Then said Euryalus, O King, since 'tis, That also I present him, your desire; I will for reconcilement give him this My Sword, with Scabbord all of Ivory, And silver Hilt. The Present is not poor. And giving it, O Father though (said he) I said amiss, pray think upon't no more. And may the Gods restore you to your Land, Since absent from your Friends you live in pain. Ulysses took the Sword into his hand, And to Euryalus thus said again, And you my Friend may you still happy be, And of this Sword for ever need have none,
Which reconciling you have gven me. And as he speaking was he put it on. The Sun now set, the King no longer tarri'd, But with the Lords went to his house to Sup. Along with them the Squires the Presents carri'd Unto the Queen Arete to lay up. Alcinous then said unto the Queen, Let a fair Chest be streightway hither brought, And for the Stranger see there be laid in A comely and a well-wash'd Cloak and Coat, And of warm water let a Bath stand by, That washing he may see the Presents there, And sit at Supper the more joyfully, And hearken to the Song with better chear. And I will give him this my Cup of Gold, That offring up unto the Gods the Wine, As often as he doth the Cup behold, He may both for his own health pray and mine. This said, the Maids commanded by the Queen, Set up a Caldron with a triple foot, Then make fire under, and pour water in. Keen was the fire, and soon the water hot. Mean while the Queen came in, and with her brought A curious Chest, and into it laid in The Gold, and with it every Cloak and Coat, That by the Princes given him had been. And then unto Ulysses said, Take care You binde it fast, lest you be rob'd by one Or other, whilst aboard you sleeping are, Lest any thing should missing be and gone. And when she thus had him admonished. Ulysses of the Chest pull'd down the lid, And girt it with a Cord of various thred, Thereby to know if any it undid. For that trick he by Circe taught had been. A Woman then unto Ulysses said, There stands your Bath, which way you please go in. Then went he in, and not a little joy'd. For after he had left Calypso's house Warm and sweet water he had never seen,
But roll'd by Neptune always was in souse; But had with her carefully treated been. When him the Maids washt and anointed had, Out from the Bath he came amongst the men With a clean Cloak and comely garments clad. To th'Door the bright Nausicaa came then, And to Ulysses said, Stranger farewel, And may you safely at your Land arrive. Remember that into my hand you fell, And owe to me that you were kept alive. O (said Ulysses) Daughter of the King, To you the Ransome of my life is due. And if the Gods me to my Country bring, As to a Goddess I will pray to you. This said, he went and sat down by the King. And now the Meat in Messes some divided; Others the lusty Wine were tempering, And by a Squire the Singer in was guided; And at a Pillar in the midst made sit. Ulysses half a Chine of Pork and sat Cuts off, and in the Squires hands putteth it, And said unto him, Give the Singer that. Singers through all the world have reputation, And well respected be in ev'ry land. The Muses teach them Song, and love the Nation. Then went the Squire and put it in his hand, Demodocus receiv'd it and was glad. Then fell they to the Meat before them laid. When Thirst and Hunger overcome they had, Unto the Stranger then Ulysses said, Demodocus, you all men else excel. The Muses sure did teach you, or it was Phoebus himself. For you have sung so well The acts that did 'twixt Greeks and Trojans pass, And all related that they did at Troy, Or suffer'd there, or when they homeward came, As if your self behld had their annoy, Or had from some Spectator heard the same. Stand forth and sing now of the Horse of Wood Made by Epeius, but by Pallas helpt,
Stufft by Ulysses full of Warriours good, Which in Troy. Town destruction to it whelp't. If this you sing in order as 'twas done, I'll make the World with your just praises ring. Then at the Gods Demodocus begun, And how the Fleet went off the shore did sing; And how they fir'd their Tents; and how the Lords Of Greece, i'th' Councel of the Trojans sate Inclos'd and hidden in the Horse of boards, That by the Trojars was fetcht in in state. The Trojans siting round about debate. And many a foolish speech they ttered And on three points they there deliberate. And voted what the Gods determined. The three points which were most insisted on Were whether they should cut the Horse in twain, Or throw it down the Rock it stood upon, Or let it, to appease the Gods, remain. I'th'end they all resolved on the last. For by the Fates it was determined That Ilium should then be layed waste, When o'r its walls a great Horse entered, And in his Belly brought the Enemy. And how the Argives from the Horse came out, How divers ways they went and cruelly Killed and burned as they went about. Ulysses then, like Mars, with Menclaus Unto Deiphobus together hie. And for a while there sharp the Battle was; But to Ulysses fell the Victory. This sung Demodocus. And then upon Ulysses cheeks the tears ran down apace. As when in fight a Woman looketh on, And sees her Husband fallen on the place. That fought had for his Town and Children dear; There sprawleth he, she o'r him falls and cries, But back and shoulders is well basted there, And carri'd captive by the Enemy. As wofully as then this woman wept, So wofully Ulysses now sheds tears.
But from the King it was not secret kept, Who sitting next him all his groaning hears. And speaking to the Princes sitting by, Let us, said he, Demodocus release. His Song not pleaseth all the Company: It makes the Strangers sorrow to increase, And brings some grief or other to his mind. Then let him hold; that we and he together May in this meeting equal pleasure find. The cause we met here was his coming hither, That we might give him Gifts and send him hence. A Guest is as a Brother to be us'd, As all men know that but pretend to sense. And you my Guest you cannot be excus'd, If you not answer truth to all I ask. Say what's the name your Parents call you by. You must no longer now keep on your Mask. Children new-born not long unnamed lie. Tell me your Land and City where it is, That my good Ship may know where you would (be; For in Phaeacia no Steersman is Nor Rudder as in other Ships you see. Whither men bid them go they understand, And pass in Clouds concealed o'r the Main, And where the Havens be in every Land. No fear they have of perishing or pain. And yet my Father to me once did say, That with our Convoys Neptune was offended, And that one day our good Ship to destroy, As it returned homewards he intended. And from men hide our City with a Hill. But whether that shall be performed now, I cannot tell. It lies in Neptunes will, And not concerneth you at all to know. But tell me now what Lands you wandring saw, What Nations, and what Cities you came to; What kind of people, Civil, or without Law, Civil or kind to Strangers, Godly or no. When you heard sung the woful Fate of Troy, Why did you weep? The Gods that built the Town
Decreed thereat much people to destroy, And that their Fate should be sung up and down Lost you some Kinsmen there or near Ally, Which might in time of danger you bestead? Or some good friend? A wise friend standing by Is worth a Kinsman in a time of need. LIB. IX. To this Ulysses said, Renowned King Alcinous, methinks delightful 'tis To sit as we do here, and hear one sing, And specially so good a Voice as this. I, for my part, do never more rejoyce, Than when I see men sitting at their meat Chearful, and listening to a pleasan: voice, And see the Cups go often and retreat. This is a thing that I love best; but you Had rather hear the dangers I have past, Which fright me yet, and do my pain renew. But which shall I tell first? which next? which last? For they be many. First my Name I'll tell, And place, that whensoe'r you thither come You may there lodge, although far off I dwell, And am uncertain of my getting home. I am Ulysses Laertiades, And far and wide I am reputed wse 'Mongst men that love subtile conveyances, And known I am by Fame up to the Skies. My place is Ithaca, in which is store Of Wool. Mount Neriton is cloath'd with wood; A goodly Hill, and many Islands more Lie close about it, yeilding store of food.
Dlithlum, Same, and the woody Zant, On th'East of Ithaca are scituate. Another Island, which is called Ant, Lies Westward of it, but is low and flat. Rocky is Ithaca, and uneven ground; But breedeth able men. Nor have I known The man that to his own minde ever found A Country that was better than his own. From mine Calypso kept me in a Cave T' have been her Husband; so did Circe too: But neither of them my consent could have, So much could love of my own Country do. For though far off I might have better Land, Yet should I from my Kindred absent live. But now 'tis time to let you understand What passage to me Jove was pleas'd to give. From Troy to Ismarus we first were blown Within an Isle, Cicons the Natives are; And soon we plundered and burnt the Town, And of the Plunder each man had his share. The Wives we Prisoners made, and to the Sword We put the men: and then withount delay dd command them all to go aboard; But they, Fools as they were, would not obey: For they to kill, eat, drink, themselves apply, Beeves, sheep, & wine, which they had on the beach, Cicons mean while to Cicons so loud cry, That to the Continent their voices reach. And presently came others, numberless As leaves in Summer; stout and men of skill, To fight on Horsback with much readiness, Or else on foor, according as they will. J had decreed us mischief, and the hour Was come: And just before our ships we sought, Spears were our Weapons, which with all out power We lanced on both sides with courage stout. Whilst the Sun mounted we resisted well, But after Noon they pressed us so sore, That with the falling Sun our courage fell; And then in haste we thrust our ships from shore.
From out of every Ship six men we lost: And then with heavy hearts our Sails we hoise, And grieved for our Fellows left the Coast; But first to ev'ry of them called thrice VVhom slam by th'Enemy we left behinde, Then Jove with Clouds both Land and VVater vails, And Night came on us with a surious winde From the North part of Heav', and tore our Sails In three's and four's, and all our Ships were tost Hither and thither, side-ways with their blasts, And one anothers way hindred and crost. Then took we in our Sails, and down our Masts, For fear of death, and laid them on the Decks, And with our Oars rowed our Ships to land; Two Nights and Days we staid, while grief did vex Each minde, and labour tired had each hand. But when the Morn had led forth the third day, VVe then set sail, and left their course to th'winde; The which (we sitting still) did them convey According as the Steers-men had design'd. And I had safely come to Ithaca, Had not the North-winde with the tide o'th' Sea, When I was come to th' Cape of Malea, Forc'd us without the Isle of Cytheré. The horrid Winds now found me on the Main, And toss'd me into one anothers hand: Nine days together I endur'd this pain, Upon the tenth they cast me on a Land Where dwell a People call'd Lotophagi, That have and live upon a fruit full sweet I'th' Continent. We went ashore; there I Made them take in fresh water for the Fleet. Then having quickly sup'd, I chose out two Of my Companions to go and see What men they were; with them I sent also A third, who went as Messenger from me. They quickly went; but mingled with those men Who meant no harm, but gave them Lote to eat, Which made them hate returning back again, And suddenly their Country to forget:
And with the people there resolv'd to stay, Forgetting home for love of Lote. But I Sent those that quickly fetched them away By force, and under hatches did them tie. The rest I bad unto their Ships to haste, Lest eating Lote they should return no more. Aboard they quickly come, and each one plac'r In order, beats the grey Sea with his Oar. Then to the Land of Cyclopses we row, Men proud and lawless, that relie for food Upon the Sky, and neither plant nor plow; Yet have they Barley, Wheat, Wine very good, Unplow'd, unsown, fetch'd up by show'rs of Rain. They have no Courts of Councel, nor of Right. On huge high Hills themselves they entertain, And in their rocky bellies pass the night. Each man gives Law to his own Wife and Brood. Nor do they much for one another care. Before the Port an Isle lies clad with wood, Not very near, nor from it very far. VVild Goats in great abundance were therein: Because there dwelt no men that might them kill, Nor wretched Hunters ever enter in, To tire themselvs running from Hill to Hill. For the good Ship with the Vermilion Cheeks The Cyclopses have not, nor Art to make All that is needful for a man that seeks Trade, and to pass the Seas must undertake. The Island else they quickly might adorn. The Land is good; to th'Sea sweet Meadows lie, And plentifully would yield VVine and Corn, If it were helped with good Husbandry. Anchors and Cables in the Port needs none, Nor any Rope to tie the Ship to Land; And when the Master thinks fit to be gone, VVith the first VVinde they take the Oar in hand. VVithin the entrance riseth a sweet Spring From out a Cave, shaded with Poplars tall; Thither to shore our Ships we safely bring. Some God was Guide. Nothing we saw at all.
Dark night it was, and nothing to e seen; The Air about us thick, and from the Sky The Moon could not shine through the Clouds be∣tween, Nor Waves, nor Isle appear'd to any eye. Then took we in our Sails, and went to Land, And waited for the coming of the day, And in the mean time slumbred on the Sand. But when we saw appear the morning gay, Admiring th'Isle, we walked to ad fro, Whilst the Nymphs (sprung from Jove Aegiochus) Refreshment on my Soulders to bestow, Down from the Mountain brought the Goats to us. And presently from out our Ships we take Our Bowes and Arrows keen and came away, And of our Company three Troops we make; Then shooting, soon we had a lovely prey. Our Ships were twelve, to whch hey equally Divide the Spoil; for every ship had nine, Save onely mine had ten: Then merrily All day we fit and feast on Flesh and Wine. For we had Wire enough as yet unspent, Of that we got and brought away with us, Which ev'ry man had in o Budgets pent, Then when we took the Twn of Ismarus. Close by we saw the Land of Cyclopses, And smoak, & heard the voice 'th'men, & Sheep And Goats. 'Twas night, and on the Sand o'th'Sea Our selves till morning we refresht with sleep. But when the rosie morning'gan t'appear, My Fellows I together call'd, and spake: You, my Companions, by the Ships stay here; I with my Ship and Crew will undertake A trial of this people, wheher wlde, And proud, and in olent their Nature be, Or whether they be men of nature milde, Godly, and loving hospitality. This said, I went aboard, and bad my Crew Imbark themselves. Aboard they quickly come, And futing each man in his order due, With stroak of Oar they made the grey Sea foam.
Arriv'd, we of a Cavern saw the door, Both high and wide, and sheep and goats there lay Abundance sleeping. It was shaded o're With boughs that downward grew of Lawrel gay. Before it was a Court well fenc'd with stone And lusty Oaks, and many a Pine-tree high. I'th' Cave a Giant lodg'd, who us'd alone His sheep to feed, no other Cyclops nigh. It was a huge and ugly Monster, and Lookt not unlike a rocky Mountains head That does 'mongst other hills asunder stand, With a great Perriwig of Trees o'rspread. Then bad I my Companions to stay And guard the Ship, save that by lot a dozen I took of them along with me, and they, By chance, were the same men I would have cho∣sen. With me I took a Goatskin full of Wine, Pleasant and strong, by Maron given me, Evanthes Son, Priest to Phoebus Divine, At Ismarus, to save his Family, Fearing the God in whose Grove he did live. For which sev'n Talents of pure beaten Gold, And a large Silver Bowl he did me give Freely, besides twelve Budgets of Wine old, Pure, pleasant, precious drink it was, which none Knew of besides himself, his Wife and Maid; Of the Men-servants that he kept, not one. Which when he drank, he usually allaid With water pure, full twenty times as much: And when a man so temper'd had his Cup, Yet still the fragrant smell thereof was such, He hardly could forbear to drink it up. This Goatskin I took with me in a Case, Expecting of some great and gastly man, That knew nor Law, nor Right, to see the face; And landing, quickly to the Den we ran. We entred in, but did not finde him there; But gaze we did at ev'ry thing with wonder: Shelves full of Cheese as much as they could bear, Pens full of Sheep and Goats, each sort asunder,
Old, younger, young'st; all Vessels to the brim, Pans, Trays, and Milking-Pales were full of Whey. My men desir'd me not to stay for him, But make what haste I could to get away, And take some of his Cheeses from the shelves, And Sheep from out the Pens, and then to go, And setting up our Sails to save our selves. But I would not, though 'thad been better so. But I dfir'd to see the man, and try If from him some good gift I might obtain; But they with fear were ready for to die, And could not think upon him but with pain. Then kindled we a fire, and kill'd and fed On Flesh and Cheese, and for his coming staid. He came, and a great burthen carried Of wither'd Boughs, which at the door he laid. His Supper with this Wood he meant to dress, And threw it down with such a hideus noise, As frighted us to th'innermost recess O'th' Cave; there lay we, and supprest our voice. Into the Cave he comes, he and his Flock, All that was milch; the Males he let without, Rams and He-goats, and the Door with a Rock Stops up, which two & twenty Cats scarce mought Bear above ground, and then to milking fell; But first he sets unto each Ewe her Lamb, In order due, to see them suckled well, And each young Goat he puts under her Dam. Half of the Milk he turn'd to Ourds, and put Them into Wicker-Baskets to set up: The other half he into Tankards put, For drink to serve him when he was to sup. When he had ended all his business, He made a fire, and thereby sp'd us out. What are you, says he, whence d'ye cross the Seas? Is it on business, or d'ye rove about As Pyrats wak at Sea, to and aen, And are content to set their lives at stake, So they may mischief do to other men? Our hearts dismaid before, this language brake.
We fear'd his hollow voice, and body great; But yet I made him answer, and said thus: We are Achaeans, making our retreat Homewards from Troy, but winds have forced us Upon this Coast (for Jove would have it so.) We are a part of Agamemnon's Bands, Whose glory for his sacking Troy, is now Renown'd both far and wide throughout all Lands. And now our selves we prostrate at your feet, Hoping for some good thing as Visitants; Such as all men have commonly thought meet; Or for the Gods-sake, as to Suppliants. As Suppliants we before you here do lie, With whom, and Strangers, Jove still goes along, He is the God of Hospitality, To punish whosoever does them wrong. Thus I. But he replied with fell intent, Stranger, thou art a fool, or com'st from far, That counsel'st me to fear the punishment Of Jove, or for the blessed Gods to care. The Cyclopses care not at all for Jove Aegiochus, or any other Gods. For why, we stronger are than those above; And if we strength compare, we have the odds. No, no. 'Tis not the fear of Jupiter Can me from thee, or these with thee restrain, Unless I please. But tell me truely where The Ship that brought you rides, and do not san. This was to sound me. But I saw his mind, And a deceitful answer did intend. My Ship was wreckt by Neptune, and by wind Thrown 'gainst the rocks, a the lands furthest end. Where all besides my self and these were drown'd. To this he answer'd nothing, nor said more; But snatching up a couple from he ground, Knocks out their Brains, like Whelps against the floor. Then outs them into joynts, and on them fed: Nor did he flesh, or bone, or entrails leave, Like hungry Lion on the Mountains bred. Then weep we, and to Jove our hands up heave
To see such work, and have no remedy. When he with humane flesh his Belly deep Had fill'd, and drunk the mlk that stood him by, He laid himself along amongst his sheep, And slept. And then I saw I might hm slay: 'Twas but to draw my good Sword from my side, And gently on his breast my hand to lay, And to the hilts the Sword in's body hide. Upon new thoughts that purpose I gave o're; For certainly it had destroy'd us quite: So great the stone was that lay on the door, That to remove it was past all our might. So there we sighing staid for day: and when The Rosie-finger'd Morning did appear, He made a fire, and milkt his flock agen, And the young Kids and Lambs new suckled were, When all his work was at an end, and past, Two more of my Companions he takes, And on those two he quickly breaks his fast, And for his Flock the way he open makes. For easily he took the stone away, And then again with no less ease he did Set up the same, and in its right place lay, Than of a Quiver one would do the Lid. His flock with noise he drives up to the Hills, And in the Den leaves us to meditate How to revenge (with Phoebus help) our ills. At last within my breast this counsel sate. Near one o'th' Pens there lay an Olive-Tree, Straight, and the boughs cut off, which when 'twas dri'd Designed was a Walking staff to be Of the great Cyclops; which when we esp'd, Of some good Ship we thought might be the Mast, Or of a Bark of twenty Oars or more, That Neptune's rugged waters might have past With a great burthen safe from shore to shore. Of this a fathom I cut off, and gave it To my Companions to taper it: They smooth'd and taper'd it as I would have it; I sharpned it at point as I thought fit.
Then in the fire the same I hardned well, And laid it by with Dung all cover'd o're, Which in the Cave from so much Cattle sell; For Sheep & Goats there always were good store. From all my Company, who did not fear To help me thrust this Bar into his eye, I took out four by lot, and such they were As I my self did wish; the fifth was I. At Ev'ning he returneth with his sheep, Into the hollow Cave he brings them all: Without, he neither sheep nor goat did keep, By Presage, or upon some Heav'nly Call. Then with the stone the Caves mouth up he dams. And milks his She-goats and his Ews each one: And suckles all his young Kids, and his Lambs. But after he his work had fully done, Another couple of my men he took. Then having in my hand an Ivie Kan Of good black Wine, I thus unto him spoke: Cyclops, since you have eaten flesh of man, Here, drink this good black Wine upon't, and see What excellent good drink we had aboard, Whereof I've hither brought a taste to thee, Hoping you will some kindness me afford, And some assistance in our Voyage home. But so intolerably furious You are, that no man will dare near you come, Knowing how cruel you have been to us. When I had said, the good Wine he drank up, And was extremely pleased with the same: And straightway calling for another Cup, Tell me (quoth he) right now what is thy name; And I will give thee that shall please thy heart. We Cyclopses have Vines that yield good Wine, Which from the Earth by Rain from Heaven start: But this some branch of Nectar is divine. When he had said, I gave him Wine again. Three times I fill'd the Kan, and he as oft Drank't off. But when it came up to his brain, Then spake I to him gentle words and soft.
Cyelops, since you my name desire to know. I'll tell it you, and on your word rely. My name it Noman; all men call me so, My Father, Mother, and my Company. To which he soon and sadly made reply, Noman, I'll eat you last, none shall out live you Of all that here are of your Company; And that's the gift I promised to give you. And having said, he laid himself along With bended neck, sleeping and vomiting Gobbets of Humane Flesh, and Wine among. All he before had eaten uttering. The Bar with Embers then I covered, Till (green as 'twas) with heat I made it shine; And with few words my men encouraged, Left any should have shrunk from the designe. The Bar now hot, and ready to flame out, And (though green wood) yet glowing mightily, To him my Fellows carried now stour, And set the point thereof upon his eye. But I my self erecting with my hand, Twirled the Bar about, with motion nimble, As Joyners with a string below do stand To give a piercing motion with a wimble. So whilst the Brand was entring, I it turn'd. The blood that down along it ran was hot; And with his Eye the Lids and Brows were burn'd, And all his Eye-strings with the fire did strut As when a Smith hath heat his Ae or Spade, And quickly quenches it while hot it is, To harden it, it makes a noise; so made His great moist Eye the glowing Brand to hiss. He roared so as made the Rocks resound, And from his Eye he pull'd, with both his hand, The burning Brand, and threw it to the ground; And so a while he there amazed stands. And thence for more Cyclopses cals; and they (Wh dwelt about in every hollow Cave) Came in, some one, and some another way; And from without the en ask'd what he'd have.
What ails thee Polyphemus so to cry In dead of night, and make us break our sleep? Goes any one about to make thee die, By force or fraud, or steal away thy sheep? Then Polyphemus answered from his Cave, Friends, Noman killeth me. Why then, said they, We have no power from sickness you to save; You must unto your Father Neptune pray. This said, they parted each one to his own Dark-Cavern: Then within my slf I laught To think how with my Name the mighty Clown I so deceived had, and gull'd by crast. The Cyclops for the stone now groap'd about, Found it, and threw it down, though pained sore; Thinking to catch us at our coming out, Sitting with Arms extended in the door. Such fools he thought us: but I formerly Had thought upon the course I was to take; And all my cunning, and my Art to try, Since no less than our lives was now at stake, This Counsel 'twas that in my breast then sat; Male-sheep there were within the Cave well sed, Fair, big, and deeply clad in wool and sat, And these, with twigs ta'ne from Cyclops his bed, I bound together three and three; each three Bore one under the middlemost fast bound: One Ram, by far the best of all bore me Under his breast, my hands in deep wool wound. Thus hung we constantly, expecting day. The morning came, the Males to pasture hie, (The Ews with strutting Udders bleating stay.) Their Master sitting there in misery, Laid's hand upon their backs as out they past, Ne'r thinking of their Bellies we were under. Me heavy with his wool and me came last, To whom the Cyclops said, seeming to wonder, Why, silly Ram, art thou the last to come Out of the Cave, that formerly was ever The foremost to go out, and to come home, And foremost at the going to the River;
But now art last? Is't for thy Masters eye, Which Noman and his Fellows have put forth? O couldst thou speak, and tell me where doth lie Hidden within, that Noman, nothing worth, I soon would with his brains besmear the floor, And ease my vexed heart within me so, Which Noman hath within me wourded sore. This said, he let the Ram that bore me go. Got forth a little from the Den and yard, I left my Ram, and set my Fellows free: Unto my Ships I brought part of the Herd, That to our Fellows we might welcome be, We that escapt: But they began to weep For those we left behinde us dead, till I Commanded them to fetch aboard more Sheep, And after that their Oars again to ply. They brought in more, and each man takes his seat, And in due order, with his Oar in hand, The water grey into a foam they beat, And rowed us a little way from land, As far as one that hollows can be heard; So far I stood from shore, I hollow'd then; Cyclops, Cyclops, why were you not afraid To kill and eat, as you have done, my men? For since you Strangers do so ill intreat, And of the Gods themselves no reck'ning make, You ought to have expected vengeance great, And that your wicked deeds should you o'retake. The Cyclops then provoked with this mock, Threw a great stone at us with all his might; And first he swing'd round o're his head the Rock, Which just behind the Rudder chanc'd to light; And so much stir'd the water falling in, That what with th'eddy and tide from the Main, Brought back to th'Land, and sure we dead had bin, But that I quickly thrust it off again. Then bad I my Companions to row Still further off, till we were out of fear. They pli'd their Oars again; and we were now At twice the distance that before we were.
And then again I to the Cyclops spoke, (Though my companions would have hindred me) Why (say they) will you still the man provoke? How great a stone, how far he throws, you see, How hear to Land we were, how near to die. If he but any one of us hear speak, A Rock will straightway from him hither fly, And knock our brains out, and our Vessel break. So said they; but with me could nothing do, I was resolv'd to vex him bitterly. Cyclops, quoth I, if any ask thee who, What was his name that rob'd thee of thy eye, Say 'twas Ulysses, Prince of Ithaca, Son to the old Laeres. He it was. At which the Cyclops howling answered, Ha. I see old Prophesies are come to pass, For Telemus Eurymedes that here Dwelled, and telling Fortunes went about, Told me I should by name Ulysses fear, As he that one day should my eye put out. But I some strong and mighty man expected Of Stature great, should come to do that deed, And never such a little Wretch suspected, Nor ever did of being drunk take heed. But come Ulysses nearer, that I may Give you a precious Gift as you deserve; And also to my Father Neptune pray, That you upon the Seas he would preserve. For I his Son, and he my Father is, And to my sight again restore me can; He, and no other of the Gods in bliss, Nor any Pow'r on earth. So said the man. Cyclops (quoth I) I would I could as well Send thee now down to Pluto's ugly Den Depriv'd of Life and Soul i'th' deepest Hell, As I am sure thou ne'r shalt see agen. Then held he up his hands to Heav'n and praid, Hear me, O Neptune, if thy Son I be, And thou my Father truely, as 'tis said, Grant that Ulysses never more may see
His Native Soil; or if perhaps by Fate It be decreed he shall return again, Let him return both wretchedly and late, His Ships and Men lost, and at home meet pain. His prayer granted was; and then he threw A greater stone, first swinged it o'r his head, Which by good chance above the Vessel flew, But almost to the shore us carried. When we were come into the Isle again Where all the rest of our Fleet then abode, Expecting our return, in grievous pain, And wondring why we were so long abroad; Then with our Sheep we landed on the Beach, And 'mongst the Backs divided them with care, Their just and equal number unto each, That no Ship might be wronged of his share. On me my Fellows over and above Bestow'd a Ram, which on the Sand there-right I made a Sacrifice to mighty Jove; But in my Off'rings he took no delight, And was contriving how to make away My Ship and Fellows, and destroy them quite. There on the shore we sat and spent the day With Flesh and VVine from moning unto night. All night we slept upon the shore; and when The morning had again the day restor'd, I presently commanded all my men To loose the Ropes, and put themselves aboard Aboard they go and beat the Sea with Oars, All for their Fellows which were eaten, sad. And forward to the Main we take our course, For that we had our selves escaped, glad.
LIB. X. AT th'floting Isle Aeolia we landed, VVhere Aeolus the Son of Hippotas Beloved of th'Immortal Gods commanded. His House was walled all about with Brass. Th'ascent unto it was all one smooth stone. Twelve were his Children six sons and their wives; In Wedlock he had joyn'd them one to one, And with him in his house they led their lives. And made good chear; all day the house they make To ring with mirth, and smoke with boil'd & roast. At night their loyal Wives to Beds they take, Richly set out with Coverings of great cost. A month he entertain'd me with delight, Askt me of Troy, and th'Argive Fleet, and how The Greeks got home. And him I answer'd right To ev'ry thing as far as I did know. And when I left his house, he was content T'assist me friendly in my Voyage back With a West wind, and all Winds else he pent Into a tough and strong Neats-leather sack. (For Jove had made him Master of the Winds, To hold their breath, or blow as he thought fit) And with a Silver string the Sack he binds: No VVind could stir but as I order'd it. But all this did no good for want of Wit. Nine days we sail'd fore-right, and came so near To th'Ocast of Ithaca, that we could see't By th'light of Beacons that were fired there. But then with weariness I fell asleep; For I had e'r till now the Helm let go,
Nor suffer'd any else my place to keep, I long'd to see my Native Country so. Mean while my Fellows to discourse begin, Thinking much Gold and Slver was 'th' Sack By Aeolus Hippodates put in, Which now to Ithaca I carri'd back. And, Oh did one unto another say, How much this man is lov'd where e'r he coms! He brings from Troy a great share of the prey, Though we go empty handed to our homes. Now Aeolus has giv'n him God knows what. Come quickly let us while we think upon't, And sleeping he upon the Deck lies flat, Undo the Sack, and see how much there's on't. This wretched Counsel taken by the Crew, The Budget they undid, to see my store; And then at once the furious Winds out-flew, And whistling, snatcht our Shp away from shore. My Fellows wept, I studi'd which was best, To fall into the Sea and end my pain, Or patiently to live among the rest. I chose to live, as better of the twain, And hood-winkt laid me down i'th' Ship. At last We found our selves upon th' Aeolian shore On which th' unruly Winds our Ship had cast, Just at the place where we set forth before: And there we landed, and short Supper made With my Companions on the rocky shore. I one man with me, and a Herald take, And went up to the Porch before the Door Of th'Hall, where Aeolus sat banqueting Amongst his Sons and Daughters. They admir'd. What Wind, said they, did you now hither bring? We furnisht you for what place you desir'd. Some Devil crost you. Softly I repli'd. Of our misfortune other cause was none But my mens folly, who the Bag unti'd The whilst I slept; you can repair wht's done. Their Father answer'd at another rate; Hence Rascal, hated of the Gods above:
I entertain none whom the Gods do hate. Away, I say, th Gods thee do not love. Thus sighing we were sent away. And though We were already tired with the Oar, To Sea we put, and forward still we row, Six days and nights entire, ne'r giving o're. Upon the seventh day we landed near To Lestrigonia, the Royal Seat Of Lamus and his Race. The Herds-men there, When from the field they bring their Sheep or [neat, Hollow to those at home; then they a-field Their Cattle drive. To one of little sleep The site o'h' place doth double wages yield, By ending one day Cows, another Sheep. For it is sated just' twixt day and night. Into the sot we came, the which within On each side was beset with Rocks upright, Whereof two made it narow coming in. My Fellow; with their Ships were in the Port Near to the City. For the Sea was still, And not a Winde stirring of any sort. But I kept mine without, suspecting ill, And with a Rope had ti'd it to the Rocks. hn up a Hill I went to look about, But could no signe espy of Man or Ox. Then down I came again, and straight sent out T'enquire what kinde of people lived there. A Herald then and two en more I sent, Who as they going on the High-way were That from the woody Hill to th' City went, Met with the Daughter of Antiphates That was of Lestrigonians the King. She had fetcht water from Atacies; Artacies the name was of a Spring. They askt her of the King and of the People. Her Fathers house she shews. They thither hie, And finde the Queen there looking like a Steeple, And straight abhor'd her as a Prodigie. Then she her Husband from the Market-place Calls home, who straight intended to dispatch 'em,
And la'd his hands on one; but in that space The rest escap'd by flght, he could not catch'em. But then he raised with a mighty shout The Town and Countrey, who in numbers great Liker to Giants than to Men, came out, And with huge stones of a mans weight they beat My Men and Ships. A woful noise and wild I heard of dying men, and tearing planks. VVhen they had slain my men, they them enfil'd, And carri'd them like Fishes hung in ranks. VVhile they did this, I had no other hope To save my self, but quickly with my Sword (My Ship being ti'd to th'Rocks) to out the Rope, And make what haste I could to get aboard. My Crew into the Ship leapt all at once, And row'd for life, till they got sat enough From land, to stand in ear of throwing stones, And glad they had escaped, onwards row, The rest, both Ships and Men, all perished. Next at Aeea Isle ashore we run, VVhere the wise Goddess Circ' inhabited, Aeetes Sister, Daughter of the Sun And Perse Daughter of Oceanus. There in a good afe Harbour quietly VVe rest our selves. Some God conducted us. There full of grief two days and nights we lie. Soon as the Morn had shewn us the third day, VVith Spear in hand, and Sword girt at my thigh, Up to a Mountains top I took my way, Some word of man to hear, or work to spy. Through the thick VVood I saw a smoke arise About the place where th'House of Circe stood: Then with my self I did a while advise VVhat I should do. At last I thought it good To make my people all to dine, and then Safely with company to go or send. So back I came unto my Ship and Men. But by the way (some God was sure my Friend) A gallant Stag came by, whom heat and thirst Invited had down to the Stream Divine.
At him I quickly threw my Spear, which pierc't Both his sides thorow, close beneath the Chine. Down dead he falls. On's neck my foot I set, Pluckt out the Spear, and laid it on the ground. To make a Rope, I Twigs and Rushes get, And his four feet together fast I bound. Within his legs I place my head, and bear His body on my neck. 'Twas hard to rise, Leaning with both my hands upon my Spear. He was too great to take up otherwise. I threw him down o'th' shore and chear'd my Crew. Friends (quoth I) though our present state be bad, Death shall not come, I hope, before 'tis due. Come, let us eat and drink, and not be sad. This said, they straightway from the ship descend, And gaze upon't, for 'twas a mighty Beast: And when their wondering was at an end, They washt their hands, and drest it for their feast. And all the remnant of the day till night VVe made good chear with VVine & Ven'son store. After the Sun had born from us his light, VVe laid us down to sleep upon the shore. But when the Rosie Morn appear'd again, I said to all my men, who grieved were: My Mates, although I have endur'd much pain, I must intreat you patiently to hear. We know not where is VVest or East, nor where The Sun does rise or set, nor where we be. To me does little hope as yet appear: And therefore we must go abroad and see. In a low Island, rising through the Trees, I saw a smoke when I stood on the Hill. Though I had utter'd no more words but these, They heard them with a very evil will. Of Cyclops and Antiphates they speak That had devour'd their Fellows formerly: And ready were their hearts with grief to break. They weep and whine, but without remedy. Of my Companions then two Bands I make; Of one Eurylochus had the command,
The charge o'th' other to my self I take: And two and twenty men were in each Band. Who should go first abroad, and who should slay, We were content should be by Lodefin'd. To go, fell to Eurylochus. Away They weeping went, we weeping staid behind. Down in a Dale they Circes Palace found Built of square Stone. The place was full of shade. Lions and Wolves about it lay o'th' ground, Whom Circe tame with Magick Arts hath made; These flew not at my men, but laid their Noses Upon them lovingly, and wag'd their Tails As Dogs salute their Masters. Circe's Doses So much above their Natures fierce prevails. Erylochus i'th' Door stood with his Band. The Goddess Circe busie was within; For she a wondrous fie work had in hand, Past art of man, and sung as she did spin. Then did Polites, whom I lov'd most dear Of all my Crew, speak out unto them all: My friends, quoth he, somebody singeth there, A Goddess or a Woman. Let us call. This said, they call, and she sets ope the Gate, Bids them come in. Fools as they were, they enter All but Eurylochus. Without he sate, Suspecting somewhat, therefore durst not venture. She places them, and sets before them food, Cheesecakes of Cheese, and Honey, Flour & Wine; But had mixt something with it not so good Of wond'rous Vertue with an ill designe. For with a Wand, assoon as they had din'd, She drove them to the sties, and there them pent: For body, head, hair, voice, all but the minde, Right Swine they were, and grunted as they went. There to them threw she Acorns, Crabs and Bran, The things wherewith Swine commonly are sed. Eurylochus staid long, but not a man Came out to let him know how they had sped. Then back he comes: at first he could not speak, Though he endeavoured; he grieved so,
The sighs and sobs his words did often break, Till urg'd by us that long'd the truth to know. At last he said, Renown'd Ulysses, we Passing the Woods, as we commanded were, In a dark Vale a stately Palace see; A Goddess, or a Woman. dwelleth there. We call'd, and straight she opening the Gate, Bids us come in. They ill advised enter All but my self. Alone without I sate, Suspecting fraud, and durst no further venture. Lost they are all: for if they could, I know Some of them would have come and brought me word, For I staid long enough. This said, my Bowe I took, and at my side my trusty Sword, And bad him guide me back the self-same way. Then fell he at my feet on both his knees, And weeping me intreats to let him stay; Your life, quoth he, amongst the rest you'll leese. To this I said, Eurylochus stay you Here at the Ship (since you are friphted so) Eating and drinking with the rest o'th' Crew; Necessity compelleth me to go. This said, I went along the shore, till I Was at the entrance of the Valley, where The house of Circe stood. Then Mercary Encountred me. In form he did appear Of a fair youth, whose Beard but now began In a soft down to peep above his face, Which is the prime of beauty in a man. Alas, said he, what make you in this place 'Mongst trees and shrub? For I can tell you this, Your Mates at Circe's house are lodg'd in sties, They now are Swine; you'll of your purpose miss. You cannot set them free though you be wise, But rather you will with them lie. But well, I'll give you such an Antidote as you Need not to be afraid of any Spell; And will besides, her purpose to you shew. To make you drink shell temper you a Cup, Which shall not (for the Antidote) bewitch you;
And when she sees that you have drunk it up, With her long Wand she presently will switch you. Then to her with your naked Sword in hand, As if you purpos'd to out off her Head. Then she will shriek, and weep, and trembling stand, And buy her life with proffer of her ed. You must not then refuse the Goddess love, If you intend your Fellows to restore: Yet make her swear by all the Gods above She never will attempt to hurt you more. Then gave he me the Herb. The Flow'r was white, The Root was black; the Gods o call it Moly, And gather it, who have no stint of might. For men to think to finde it is a folly. Then Hermes parting mounted to the Sky, And I to Circe's house went on my way, And musing stood a while, but by and by I call'd, and she came forth without delay, And calls me in. I enter with sad heart; There in a glorious Chair she made me sit Studded with Silver-Nails, and carv'd with Art; Then puts a low Stool to it for my seet, And brought the Potion in a Golden Cup, Which she had temper'd to her ad designe. And soon as ever I had drunk it up She switch'd and bad me go lie with the Swine. Then start I up with my drawn Sword, and make As if I purpos'd to cut off her head. Then did she shriek most fearfully and quake, And weeping to me these word; uttered: Who, whence are you? what is your Fathers Name? That this drink worketh not, is very strange. If any else but tasted had the same, He soon had of his figure found a change. But you a stubborn heart have in your breast. Are you Ulysses, that should hither come, As Hermes told me oft, and be my Guest, When from the Trojan shore he sailed home? Put up your Sword; and that we may confide In one another better without dread,
Let's to my Chamber go, and side by side Compose the things we differ in a Bed. Circe, (said I) Oh how can I be kinde, When you to Swine my Fellows turned have? And now you have me here, 'tis in your minde To make me tame, and keep me for a slave. I'll not come near your Bed, unless before You take an Oath by all the Gods above You'll never go about to hurt me more. This said, she swore, and I gave way to love. On Circe Waiting-women four attended To do the service of the house, and were From sacred Rivers, Springs and Groves descended; Each had her proper work assigned her. One does the Chairs with coverings array; Another does the Silver Tables spread, And on each one of them a Basket lay Of Gold, and into it she puts the Bread. The third does in a Silver Flagon mix The Wine and Water in a Silver Pot: The fourth to make a fire brings in the sticks, And for a Bath makes ready water hot. Circe her self the water tempered Into a just and comfortable heat, And pour'd it on my shoulders and my head, Washing my Limbs, till I my toil forget. And when I bathed and anointed was, She put upon me a sair Coat and Vest, And led me in, into the Dining-place. And to my Chair and Table me addrest. One Maid a Golden Bason, with the Ew'r, To wash our hands over a Cauldron brings; The Cauldron also was of Silver pure. Another loads the Table with good things: Another on the Table sets on Bread, And then the Goddess Circe bids me eat. But other dangers running in my head, I had but little stomack to my meat. Which she observing said, Ulysses, why Do you thus sullenly your meat refuse,
And like a dumb man sit? D'ye think that I Intend against you some new Art to use? Have I not sworn? To which I answered, O Circe, how can I be pleas'd d'ye think (When you my Fellows keep disfigured And pounded up in Hog-sties) t'eat and drink? If you mean well, set them at liberty, And in the shape of men before my eyes, That I may look on them, and they on me. With Switch in hand then out of doors she hies And opens all the Prisons; out they come, And were to look to Pigs of nine years old. She drives them with her Wand into the room, And makes them stand there whle I them behold. Then Circe went amongst them, and each one Smear'd with an Unguent which straightway did make Their hair fall off, and undid all was done; And presently a humane shape they take, Greater and fairer than they had before. They know me all, my hand with theirs they press. So glad they were, their eyes for joy an o're. The whole house wept, and Circ with the rest. This past, the Goddess said, Ulysses, go And bring your Ship a-land, and let her lie; Your goods within the rocky Caves bestow, And make haste back with all your Company. This pleas'd me well Down to the Sea I hie Where my Companions I weeping finde; But soon as I appear'd they presently About me came, their care now out of mind. As when from Pastures fat a Herd of Cows Well-fed return at Evening to their home, Their Calves will not be kept with in the house, But play, and skip, and round about them come: So did my Fellows soon as they me saw Come skipping out o'th' Ship, with no less joy Than if they had been come to Ithaca Their Native Country from the Town of Troy. Our joy (said they) Ulysses cannot be Greater when we at Ithaca arrive,
Which we so wish for, than 'tis now to see That you from Circe are return'd a live. But tell us, pray, how di'd our Fellows there. But first (said I) hale up your Shp to Land, And in the Rocks hide all tha's loose in her, And come with me to Circe out of hand. There shall you see your Fellows how they live; In want of nothing that they can devise. To these my words my Fellows credit give; Eurylochus alone though otherwise. Wretches (said he) what mean you? will you go? Have you a longing to be Lions came, Or Swine, or Wolves, and being transformed so, To live at Circe's house, and guard the same? Remember Cyclips, and how all they sped That dar'd to put themselves within hs Cave, By too much valour of Ulysses led. Bethink you well how you your selves may save. When I heard that, I drew my Sword, and meant, Although he were my Kinsman very nigh, T'have made his head fly. But of that intent I was made frustrate by the Company, That interposing spoke me lair, and said, Let him stay here, but we'll go every man, While he looks to the Ship, since he's afraid. Thus having said, to march they straight began: Nor staid Eurylochus behinde, for I Had so affrighted him he went with th'rest. Mean while at Circe's house my company Were bath'd and oyl'd, and cloath'd with Coar and Vest. Feasting we found them in a stately Hall. But when we saw them, and heard every thing That had befan them, suddenly we all Wept out so loud, as made the house to ring. Then Circe said, Ulysses why d'ye weep? I know your suffrings both at Land by men, And what you have endured on the Deep. Drink Wine, eat Meat, and merry be agen. Recruit your hearts with courage till they be As strong as when from home you first set out;
Put all your danger out of memory, Nor trouble more your weari'd minds with doubt. These words of Circe did our spirits chear, And made us willingly fall to our meat. Both then and ev'ry day throughout the year In Circe's house we freely drink and eat. But when the season was come round about, And months and days of th'year had made an end, Then my impatient Fellows call'd me out, And said, Strange man, do you no more intend To see your Country Ithaca? Shall we For ever stay with Circe here? Have Fates Decreed that you your house no more should see, But perish here together with your Mates? This my Companions said, and said but right. Then what remained of the day we spent Eating and drinking merrily. At night They to their own beds, I to Circe's went; Where prostrate at her knees, I press her hard To keep her word, and let me go my way; My mind, said I, is going thitherward Now, and my Fellows ask me why I stay. Renown'd Ulysses (answer'd Circe) here Against your will with me you shall not stay. But ere you go unto your Countrey dear, You must t Voyage make another way. You must to th'house of Hades first repair: For with Tiresias the Prophet blinde You must consult concerning your affair. He knows what course the Fates have you design'd. Though blinde his eye, yet is his judgment clear. For why, to him Proserpina alone Hath granted to peruse Fates Register, And know the History of things not done. The Ghosts to him stand up when he goes by. At this my heart was ready ev'n to break, And in the bed long time I weeping lie, And turn'd, and wish'd for death. At last I speak: Circe (said I) who shall me thither guide? Never man yet to Hell went in a ship.
Then to me Circe presently repled; Uysses, let not that thought break your sleep. You need but set your Mast up, hoise your sail, And ten sit still; you shall not want a Winde: For Boreas to wast you will not fail. When you are come to th'Oceans end, you'll finde The woody Shore and Grove of Proserpine. There the tall Poplar, and soft Willow grows; And there it is your Bark you must put in. Then go along the shore to Pluto's house. And you shall see where into Acheron Cocytas falls which is a branch of Styx, And with it also Pyriphlegeton, And a great Rock where the two Rivers mix. Close by that place make with your Sword a Pit A Cubit wide, and round about it pour Wine mt with honey, and pure Wine after it; Then water pure, and over all throw Flow'r. Such is the drink that's offer'd to the dead. And further to them you must make a Vow, That when you be at home, and out of dread, You' I gratifie them with a barren Cow. But to Tiresias you must alone Promise at your return to kill a Ewe All over black. The Ceremonies done Which to the dead by common law are due, Then of the Bam and Ewe let out the blood Into the Pit; their heads to Hell-ward place, And turn your back, and so go tow'rd the Flood. Then shall you see the Ghosts come out apace. Bd your Companions mean while to flay The slaughter'd Sheep. To Pluto must you and To his Queen Proserpine your Prayers say, Then sit down at the Pit with Sword in hand. Let none come near the blood until you see Tiresias the Toeban Prophet come. 'Twill not be long before he with you be; He'll tell you all the ways to bring you home. This said, Aurora had the light displaid, And Circe cloath'd me with a Coat and Vest,
And with a pure white Robe her self arraid, With a Gold Girdle girt beneath her Breast; And put upon her Head her Vail. Then I Went through the house to make my fellows rise, And gently said unto the severally, Let's go; for Circe now doth so advise. And well content they were. But safe away I could not bring them all. For there was one Elpenor, neither forward in a Fray, Nor yet of very much discretion; Heated with Wine o'r night, himself to cool, Up to the houses top he went to sleep; But wak'd with noise the rest made, like a Fool Ne'r thought of coming down the stairs steep Backward; and so to th'earth he headlong fell, And broke his Neck-bone, & lay dead o'th' ground. And his Soul leaving him, went down to Hell. The rest came forth, and stood about me round. To these I said, You think without delay That we to Ithaca ae going now; But Circe bids us go another way, Of old Tiresias the minde to know, The Theban Prophet, who is now in Heil. This broke the very heart-strngs of my Mates; They sob and tear their hair, but cannot tell How to avoid what's once decreed by th'Fates. Then to our Ship we weepng went. Mean space Circe a Ram and black Ewe there had ti'd Unseen to us, we found them on the place. For Gods, but when they list, cannot be spi'd.
LIB. XI. WHen we were come unto the Sea-side, where Our Ship lay which we shov'd into the deep; VVe rear our Mast, pull up our Sads, & bear Aboard with us one Male, one Female Sheep. And so for Hell we stood, with fears in mind, And tears in eye. But the fair Circe sent To bear us company, a good fore-winde That kept our Sails full all the way we went. To winds and steerage we our way commend, And careless sit from morning till 'twas dark; Then found our selves at th'Oceans farthest end, VVhere up to Land the wind had forc'd our Bark. Here dwell the Cimbers hid in Clouds and Mist, VVhom thou, O Phoebus, with thy golden Eye, Nor coming from the Sky to Earth e're seest, Nor when from Earth thou mountest to the Sky; But live, poor men, under a horrid night. Here seek we for the place of which the wise Circe had told us, and soon on it light, And thither fetcht the sheep for sacrifice. Then with my Sword i'th' ground I dig'd a Pit, And round about it VVine with Hony pour; And round again pure VVine pour after it, Then water pure. O're all I sprinkle flour: And vowed to those feeble folk, to kill Assoon as I to Ithaca should come A barren Heiser, and the Altar fill VVith many more good things I had at home. And promis'd to Tiresias alone A fat black Ewe, the best in all my Coats.
When I my Vows and Pray'rs had ritely done, Of both the Victims straight I cut the throats. Their reaking blood stream'd down into the Pit; Out come the Ghosts, Maids, Youths, decrepit Age, And tender Virgins, they all sented it; And Warriours clad in goary Arms, all rage, And rushing out of Hell, with hideous cry, About the blood bustling they go and turn, Which not a little frighted me. Then I Bad flay the Victims, and their bodies burn, And say their Pray'rs to Pluto and his Queen. With Sword in hand I sat on the Pits brink, Resolv'd till I Tiresias had seen, That not a Ghost a drop of blood should drink. First came my Souldier Elpenor's Spirit, Which left the body just when we set sail, So that we had no leisure to inter it. His heavy fate I did with tears bewail. How now (quoth I) Elpenor? art thou here Already? Couldst thou me so much outstrip? I first came forth, and left thee in the Rear. Hast thou on foot out goe my good black Ship? Then said Elpenor, Islue of Jove, Divire Ulysses, I had come along with th'Bark, But that the Devil and excess of Wine Made me to fall, and break my Neck i'th' dark. I went to bed late by a Ladder steep; At top o'th' house the Room was where I lay: Wak't at the noise of parting, half asleep Headlong I hither came, the nearest way. Now I adjure you by your Father, and Your Wife, and Son, and all his Seed to come (For I assured am that you will land Where Circe dwells before your going home) To see I have the Rites due to the dead. Fear th'anger of the Gods above, and burn My body with my arms, from foot to head. And cast on earth to cover o're my Urn. This done, for men hereafter sailing by, Raise me a little Tomb of Earth by th'shore,
That they may ear'ly see where 'tis I lie. Lastly, upon it upright plant my Oar. All this (quoth I) I'll do upon my word. Thus we discours'd amongst the shades. He stood While I continu'd with my naked Sword To keep the Sprights from tasting of the blood. Then came Anticlia my Mother's Ghost. Alive I left her when to Troy I faild To fight against it in the Argive Host. Now seeing her, exceedingly I wail'd. And though I grieved were to keep away My Mother from the loved blood; yet still In the same posture patiently I stay, Till I might know Tiresias his will. Then came the Soul of old Tiresias, And of the Gilded-Staff he had in's hand. Poor man (quoth he) perceiving what I was, What brought thee hither to this ugly Land? Stand back a while, and take your Sword away, That I may drink, and the Unerring word Of Fate deliver to you. I obey, Retire, and up I put my trusty Sword. Then said the good old Prophet, You are come, Honour'd Ulysses, to inquire of me, What the Gods say about your going home. I tell you true, 'twill not be easily. I think you'll not escape at Sea unseen Of angry Neptune, who I do not doubt Will do his worst, and make you feel his spleen, For Polyphemus eye which you put out. Yet for all that, you may to Ithaca Safely return, if you can but command Your passion when in th' Isle Thrinacia, An Island lying in your way you land. There feed the Kine of the all-seeing Sun, And Flocks of goodly Sheep. Hurt none of these, Then shall your Ship her course with safety run At length to Ithaca, though not with ease. But if you touch them, I denounce a wrack To your good Ship, and death to all your Crew.
And though your self may happen to come back At last, and this unhappy Fate eschew; 'Twill be alone, and in a ship not yours, Besides that, when you are returned home You'll fall into the danger of the Wooers, Who for your Wifes and Meats sake thither come. But you will be reveng'd of these; and when You shall have made away these Wooers, go With Oar on shoulder, to a Land where men Inhabit, that the briny Sea not know, Nor ever mingle salt with what they eat, Nor ever saw the ship with crimson face, Nor yet those Wings which do the water beat (Call'd Oars) to make your good ship go apace. Now mark me well, when thou shalt meet a man Just at the end of Neptune's utmost bound, Bearing upon his shoulder a Corn fan, Stick down thy lusly Oar upon the ground; There Sacrifice to the Worlds Admiral, For new admittance, a Ram, Boar and Bull; Then home again, and offer unto all The Gods by name an hundred Oxen full. Your death will not ungentle be, for which Age shall prepare you, and your Soulunglew Insensibly. Your people shall be rich Which round about you dwell. All this is true. Tiresias (quoth I) when he had done, 'Tis well. My Mother yonder I espe Amongst the shades; she knoweth not her Son; What shall I do to make her know 'tis I? That (quoth he) I'can tell you easily. What Soul soever you admit to drink, To what you ask will make a true reply; Those you put back, back into Hel will slink. The Prophet having thus my fate foretold, Into the house of Pluto back retir'd. I o're the blood my former posture hold, But let my Mother drink as she desir'd. She knewne then, and wept. My Son, said she, How came you to this place of ours so dark?
Th'Ocean and so many Gulphs there be 'Twixt you and us, that but with a good Bark No living man can pass. Come you but now From Troy, and all this while have wandring been You and your Company? You have I trow, Your wife Penlope by this time seen. Mother (said I) the cause I came this way VVas to ask counsel of Tiresias. Since I with Agamemnon went to Troy, In Ithaca or Greece I neve was. But Mother, tell me pray you, how came you Unto this place? was it by Sickness long? Or did Diaa with a death undue Send you down hither to this feeble throng? And tell me if my Father and my Son Remain as formerly in their estate; Or that some Prince of Greece my wife have won, Supposing me now cast away by Fate. Tell me besides, whether Penelope Remain at home together with my Son, Assisting him to rule my Family; Or whether she be married, and gone. Your wife (said she) does still continue there; For your long absence weepeth days and nights. Your Son still holds his own, and makes good chea, Oft he invited is, and oft invites. Your Father from his Vineyard never budges; Rich Coverlets and Bedding he refuses; Ne're comes to th'Town; in winter with his Drudges To lay him down, sleep by th'fire he uses. In vile array in Summer-time he creeps, Till Vintage pass, about his Fruit-trees round, And visits them each one; at night he sleeps On Bed of heaped leaves upon the ground. Thus lies he griev'd and pining with the thought Of your sad fate, afflicted too with age. The like sad thoughts me also hither brought. I neither died by Diana's rage, Nor any long consuming Malady; But very woe, thinking that you, were dead,
My Noble dear Ulysses, made me die; My Soul thus hither from my Body fled. When she had spoken, I would very fain Have ta'ne her in my arms; three times I graspt At the beloved Shadow, but in vain. Mine arms I closed, but did nothing clasp. Sore griev'd hereat, I said unto my Mother, I am your Son, why do you fly me so? Why may we not embracing one another, Although in Hell, give ease unto our woe? Hath Proserpine, my sorrows to augment, Sent me a Phantome in my Mothers stead? Oh no (quoth she) my Son, sh'ad no intent T'abuse you. 'Tis the nature of the Dead. We are no longer Sinews, Flesh and Bones; We are Substances Incorporeal. All that's consumed i'th' Fun'ral fire: when once That's done, it in it self stands several; Flies like a Dream. No, go your ways to th'light, And tell all I have told you to your Wife, That she may know in this perpetual night The dead enjoy an everlasting life. When we had thus discours't, the Ladies came Sent out by Proserpine to taste the blood; Daughters and Wives to Princes of great Fame, And round about me at the Pit they stood. But I to know each one that came to drink, Studi'd a while; then thought this counsel best, With Sword in hand t'abide upon the brink, Whilst one was drinking to keep off the rest. There was not one but I enquir'd her name And Pedegree. All told me who they were. And fist of all the well-born Tyro came, Who said Salmoneus was her Ancestor, And that of Cretheus she had been the Wife, And on Enipeus had enamour'd been Once on a time whilst she remain'd in life, On Enipeus far'st stream that e're was seen. Upon whose Bank Nptune that chanc't to spy her, On Enipeus sweet stream drew her aside,
And at the Rivers mouth laid him down by her Between two Waves rais'd high, their deed to hide. When he Loves work had done, Thou shalt (said he) E're th'year be ended, bring forth Children twain, Who Princes both of great Renown shall be. I Neptune am; the Gods ne'r work in van. See you that they be educated well Till they shall be at mans estate arriv'd. So o you home: my Name you must not tell. This said, into the rowling Sea he div'd. Her time being come, she was delivered Of two great Boys, Neleus and Pelias, Who for the service of high Jove were bred. One King of Pile, th'other of Iolcas was. The noble Lady Tyro, beside these, Did many other goodly Children bear: Amatheon, and Aeson, and Pheres; But these her Husband Cretheus Children were. Next came the Daughter of Aesopus (who Through Theban fertil Plains and Meadows runs) Antiope. Of Jove she boasteth too, That by him she conceived had two Sons; Their names were Zthus and Amphion. They The Founders were of Thebes; with walls & Towers, And sev'n strong Gates they fenc't it ev'ry way Against Invasion from all Neighb'ring Powers. Amphitrion's wife Alcmena there I saw, That lov'd by Jove brought Hercules to life. And the King Cretheus Daughter Megara, That was the Mighty Hercules his wife. I saw there also the unfortunate Mother of Odipus, Jocasta bright, That blindly did a horrid act, by fate, Which the Gods pleasure was should come to light. Not knowing him, she marri'd her own Son; Not knowing him, he his own Father slew: When they perceived both what they had done, She hang'd her self; her Furies him pursue. Chloris I saw, whom Neleus did wed For beauty, got by the Son of Jeus;
And with great Dowse he gain'd her to his bed; Her Father Amphion rul'd Orchomenus. She Queen of Pyle, by Neleus had three Boys: Nestor, Chronius, Periclumenus; And one fair Daughter to make full their joys, Pero by name, for beauty wonderous. The Princes round about were Suiters to her; But Iphiclus had Neleus Cattle ta'ne, And Neleus was resolved to bestow her On him that could his Herds fetch back again. There was a Prophet undertook the Task; But ta'ne by Clowns, and into Prison pent, For answ'ring Iphyclus t'all he could ask Was freed, and did the thing he underwent. I saw the Wise too of Tyndareus there, Fair Leda; she two Twins unto him bare, Pollux good Cuffer, Castor Cavalier: Twins, and alive, though under ground they are. And have obtained of their Father Jove Both to be Canonized Gods; but so, As he that is to day in Heav'n above, Shall be to morrow amongst men below. Iphimedea, Alciaeus Wife I saw, that did two Sons to Neptune bear, Otus, and Ephialtes; of short life, The greatest, and the fair'st that ever were Except Orion; each at nine years old Between the Shoulders was nine Cubits wide, And was in length nine Cubits four times told, And all the Gods in Heaven terrifi'd; And threatned them with war, and Heav'n to storm. They Ossa set upon Olympus high, And Pelius on Ossa; and so form Against the Sky a mighty Battery: And surely they had storm'd it had they been At mans estate. Their Beards were not yet grown. Apollo kill'd them with his Arrows keen, E're on their Cheeks appeared any Down. Phaedra and Procris there I also saw, And Minos Daughter Ariadne, whom
eeus was bringing towards Attica From Creta; but he could not bring her home, Diana killed her in Dia Isle On Bacchus quarrel. There I did behold Mera and Ciymene, and th'VVoman vile Eryphile that her own Husband sold. To name the Ladies all I saw, would make My Tale to last all night. 'Tis bed-time now Here or aboard, though not till you think fit; Till you think fit, and give command to row. This said, the Company deep silence seiz'd, Delighted with the things they heard him speak. The Queen her self Arete no less pleas'd, At last resolv'd the silence thus to break. Princes, what think you of this man so rare, His Look, his Stature, and his Noble Heart? My Guest he is, but you have all a share In th'honour of this Visit. E're he part Make him a Present to releve his need. Be liberal, have no respect to thrift; For you the Gods from fear of want have freed With wealth abundant. Do not pinch your Gift. Old Echinus said, The Queen says right; We shall do well her counsel to obey: But since in King Alcinous lies the might, 'Tis better first to hear what he will say. Then said Alcinous, It shall be so, Unless I bear the name of King in vain; Let not the Stranger till to morrow go; Till we prepare our Gift he must remain. As for his Passage we will all provide, And chiefly I that do the Scepter bear. To whom the wise ulysses thus repli'd: Renown'd Alcinous that Reignest here, Though a whole year you should command my stay, It will not rouble me. Nay, that I'd chuse, Since you intend to send me rich away: For I am sure I shall no honour loss By coming richly home. Kings that have store Of wealth, are better commonly obey'd,
And by their Subjects are respected more, Than those whose Treasuries and Chests are void. There be (the King said) many that can lie; But there is form and sense in all you say: Both your own Fate you tell with Harmony, And of the Greeks with whom you went to Troy. I should be well content to sit up here All the night long, so you would undertake To tell me ev'ry thing that you saw there. To him Ulysses then did answer make: Renowned King Alcinous, you know There is a time for talk, a time for rest; But since you long to hear, I'll tell you now Whom else I saw, and what Fate them opprest. And first the saddst end of thoe that had Escap'd the fury of the Enemy, And in their Countries landed were and glad, Were murther'd by a Womans Treachery. The Female Ghosts scatter'd by Proserpin, Some one way, some another, thither came Atrides Soul, first of the Masculine; And others with him, whose Fates were the same. No sooner he the blood had tasted, but He knew me, sorely wept, and would have cast His arms about my waste, but could not do't: For now alas his strength was gone and past. I grieved to see him, and thus to him said: King Agamemnon, what Fate brought you hither? Were you by Neptune on the Sea betrai'd, And hither sent by fury of the weather? Or landing to finde Booty, me with Death? Or else besieging of some Town were slain? Or for fair Women were bereav'd of breath? Then Agamemnon answer'd me again: Noble-Ulysses, I lost not my life By Neptune''s fury, nor in fight at Land For Booty or for Women; but my wif Did basely kill me by Aegistus hand. At my first landing he invited me, And slew me then when I at Supper sate.
Just as a man would kill a Cow, so he Kill'd me. There's no such woful death as that. My Friends were butcher'd like so many Swine, Which when within a mighty rich mans Hall Numbers of men invited are to dine At Wedding, or at Feast, are made to fall. You very many men have seen to die In ranged Battle, and in single Fight; But never felt such pity certainly As you had felt, had you but seen this fight, How we 'mongst Tables on the ground did he That ran with blood. But my heart most did rue To hear Cassandra, Priam's Daughter, cry, Whom close beside me Clytemnestra slew. Then though I were at the last gasp, I tri'd If groaping I might finde my fallen Sword: But the curst woman pusht it from my side. I di'd, to close mine eyes she'd not afford. Nothing so cruel as a Woman yet Did Nature ere produce; a thought so ill In any other breast did never sit, As her own loving Husbands blood to spil. Yet this my Wife, to the eternal Shame Of all the Sex, not only of the bad, But ev'n of those that have no evil Fame, Betrai'd my Life, and of my Death was glad. Jove meant to Atreus Seed (said I) great spight By Woman-kinde. By Helen first. At Troy For her sake many lost their lives in fight, And Clytemnestra now did you betray. Therefore (said Agamennon) never trust A Woman more, although she be your own. Tell her not all you think Somewhat you must. And somewhat keep t'your self, to her unknown. But you Ulysses need not fear your wife, Icareus Daughter, fair Penelope; She loves you better than to take your life: A Wife so wise will scorn disloyalty. VVhen we for Troy set forth together, then She gave suck to your Son; but he is grown
A man by this time, and takes place with men; Is rich, and one day shall his Father own, And he and you at home embrace each other. But I was not allow'd my Son to see; But was first murder'd by his wicked Mother. Now hear ye, if you will be rul'd by me, Let no man know before-hand, when and where You mean to land in Ithaca. Beware Or suffering your Bark in sight t'appear. Remember still, women unfaithfull are. But tell me, have you nothing all this while Heard of my Son Orestes? whether he At Sparta with his Uncle be, or Pyle: For dead he is not, I know certainly. Alas (sad I) Atrides, How should I That wand'ring was at Sea, hear any news Whether alive or dead he be? Or why Should I with Tales uncertain you abse? Discoursing thus, and weeping there we stood, When Great Achilles Soul appear'd to us; And with him also the two Spirts good Of flout Patroclus, and Antilochus, The Soul of Ajax, Son of Telamon, Was also there, who 'mongst those Warriours tall The goodliest Person was, except the Son Of Peleus, who did much excel them all. Achilles drank, and presently me knew, And said, Ulysses, what brought you to Hell? What Plot upon the Dead you hither drew, Where none but Shades of wretched Mortals dwell? Achilles (said I) I was foc' to come T'inquire of th'Wizard, old Tiresias, What the Fates say about my going home, Whether or no, and how 'twill come to pass. For since I came from Troy I have not seen Not Ithaca, nor any Grecian shore: For tost and crost at Sea I still have been; But you are now as well as heretofore. Like any God we honour'd you at Troy, And here among the Ghosts you are obey'd.
Death hath not chang'd your state. You still enjoy A Regal Power. To this Achilles said: Talk not to me of Honour here in Hell; I'd rather serve a Clown on earth for bread, Than be of all things Incorporeal That are, or ever shall be, Supreme Head. But tell me of my Son Neoptolemus, Whether he came to Troy, and how he fought; And of my aged Father Peleus, Whether he keep hs place, or be put out. For since much time his vigour hath decaid, Some Foe, it may be hath usurpt his place In Pthia, and in Hellas where he swaid, And put hm with his people in disgrace. But were I now above, and strong as then. When for the Greeks I fought at Ilium, And slew so many of their bravest men, And to my aged Fathers house should come; If there I were, 'twould not be very long Before I made some of their hearts to ake That go about to do my Father wrong, And would by force his honour from him take. When he had done, I made him answer thus: Concerning Peleus I can nothing say; But of your Son, stout Neptolemus, I know enough; 'twas I brought him to Troy From Scyros Isle In Councel always he First spake his minde, and never spake but well. Nestor, and I sometimes, and only we Th'advice he gave were able to refel. In fight he sought no shelter in the throng, But ever out he ran before the rest, To shew his courage and his strength among Those Foes that were in Troy esteem'd the best. The names of all he slew I cannot tell; They are too many. But' was by his Sword That Great Eurypylus in Batte fell, Of all the Trojan Aids the goodlist Lord, Excepting Memnon. After, when we were Wihin the Wooden-Horse conceal'd, and I
The power had of ord'ring all things there, I never saw your Son to wipe his eye, Or to wix pale, as many of us did. He ever longed to be set on land From out the hole in whch we all lay hid; And to his Hilt he often put his hand, And often to his Spear. And when at list We won and rifled had the Town of Troy, He home into his Countrey safely past, His Ship well laden with his part o'th' prey. And which is more, he came off safe and sound, Though Mars each way threw deaths and wounds Amongst the croud, he ne'r received wound Neither from them that shot, nor them that fought. about This said, the swift Achilles Soul retir'd, Strutting into the Mead of Asphodel, Proud of his Son, to hear what he desird. Then other grieved Souls their stories tell. Only the Soul of Ajax stood off mute And sullen, because I did from him bear Achilles Armour in that sad Dispute, Where Pallas and the Trojans Judges were. I would I had not had that Victory, Which cost the life of him that was the most Admir'd by all, for form and Chivalry, Except Achilles, in the Argive Host. I gently to him spake. Ajax, said I, Forget that cursed Armour now at last; And since you dead are, let your anger die: For why the Gods determin'd had to cast Those Arms amongst us for a punishment, Offended with us, what e're was the matter, And us'd them as an Engine, with intent Our greatest Tower, which was your self, to batter. For whom the Argives did lament no less Than for Achilles, Thet is Son. Come nigh, And hear what I can answer, and suppress Your mighty heart a while. So ended I. To this just nothing he repli'd, but went Int' Erebus 'mongst other Shadows dm;
Yet there, I think, he would have been content To speak to me, if I to speak to him. But I desired others Souls to see. Then Minos there, the Son of Jove I saw With Golden Scepter, dealing Equity To Souls that stood, and sate to hear the Law. Next after him I saw the Great Orion; A mighty Club he carried in his hand; And hunted the wilde Boar, and Bear, and Lion, Which when he lived he had kill'd on Land. There also saw I Titius. He lay Upon his back, stretch't out full acres nine. He the fair Leto had upon the way To Pytho injur'd; Leto Jove's Concubine. Two Vultures on his Breast, on each side, one, Sate dipping of their Beaks into his Liver. He stirreth not, but lets them still alone; And thus devouring it, they stay for ever. And Tantalus I saw up to the Chin In water clear, and longing fore to drink; But as he bow'd himself to take it in, Some Devil always made the water sink. Close o're his head hung pleasant Fruit, and ripe Pears and Pomegranals, Olives, Apples, Figs; Which ever when he ready was to gripe, A sudden winde still whiskt away the Twigs. And Sisyphus I saw, who 'gainst the Hill With hands and feet a heavy stone doth roll; But when unto the top he brings it, still The naughty stone falls back into the hole. Then to't he goes afresh, with no less pain He heaves and sweats, and dusty is all o're. And when 'tis up, he labour'd has in vain, For still it serves him as it did before. Then Hercules I saw, I mean his Spright, For he is with th'Immortal Gods above, And taken has to wife Hbe the bright, Daughter of Juno, and of Mighty Jove. The dead about him made a fearful cry, Like frighted Fowl. A Golden Belt he wore
With wilde Beasts wrought, and slaughters cunningly, The like shall never be, nor was before. He saw, and knew me presently, and spake; Renown'd Ulysses, why left you the light? Alas, were you constrain'd to undertake This task, as I was, by a meaner Wight? Who, though Jove's Son I was did me constrain Full many other labours t'undergo. But he thought this would put me to most pain, Th'Infernal Dog upon the Earth to show. I did it though, and drag'd him up to th'light, By Mercury's, and by Athenas aid. Having thus said, he vanisht out of sight 'Mongst other Phantoms. But I still there staid, Hoping more Hero's of th'old time to see; And more had surely seen of Heav'nly Race, These is, Pirythous, whom t'had pleased me, If longer I had dar'd to keep my place. For then, from out of Hell, with hideous cry, Thousands of Souls about me gathered, And frighted me; but most afraid was I, Lest Proserpine should send out Gorgon's Head. Then went I to my Ship and Company, And for a while our Oars at Sea we pli'd: But after we were on the Main, then we A fair Gale had, and past the Ocean wide.
LIB. XII. THence over th'Ocean back we come away, And at the Isle Aeaea we arrive. There are the Bowers of Aurora gay; There 'tis that Phoebus doth the day revive: And there we disimbark upon the Sand, And having slept a while, attend the day. When day was come, my Fellows I command To fetch Elpenor's body dead away. With wood from off a Promontory near, Weeping, his Body we to ashes burn Together with his Arms, and th'earth we rear (To be a Monument) upon his Urn; And on the same we fix his Oar upright. These Ceremonies done, came the Divine Circe, that knew we landed were that night. Her Maids brought to us bread, & meat, and wine. And standing in the midst, Poor men (said she) That come from Hell, and thither must again; Twice-mortals, take your food, and merry be With flesh and lusty wine, forget your pain. To morrow you shall fail again, and I Will to you all your dangers open lay, Lest you by same malicious subtilty, By Land or Sea, should perish by the way. This pleas'd us well, and all day long we sate Eating and drinking wine, until 'twas dark, And somewhat e're we saw it evening late, My Mates lay down to sleep beside the Bark. Then Circe led me by the hand aside, And askt me all that I had seen in Hell;
Nor any thing at all from her I hide. 'Tis well, said she. Now hear what I you tell. First you must pass the Sirens, who invite All Passengers that Sail before the place To land. But whosoever lands, that wight Of's Wife and Children ne're more sees the face. These Sirens in a Meadow sit and sing, Where dead mens bones in heaps about them lie Rotting, and rivel'd skins lie scattering. Pass on, and their enchanting Musick fly. Command your Mates to tie you to the Mast; And that if you make signes to be set free, They heed you not, but binde you still more fast. That you alone may hear their Melody, Dam up your Fellows ears with chafed wax. When you are gotten out of hearing quite, And have the Sirens far off at your backs, Another danger soon will come in sight. Two ways there are; but which of them to take I'll not advise you, both of them are naught. Your self upon the place your judgment make, Of which I'll give you only a short draught. Two Rocks there be that with inclining brow Hang o're the Sea, which roaring runs between; By th'name of Wanderers the Gods them know, Because in changed posture they are seen. Whereof the one does to such height ascend, That never any Birds that way take wing, Nor fearful Doves when they to Heaven tend, Ambrosia to th'Immortal Gods to bring. One of these Rocks doth vanish now and then, But Jove still sets another in its stead. This way ne're Ship did safely carry men, But dash'd was 'gainst the Rocks, and perished. The good Ship Argo only pass'd that way To and from Colchos safely; yet that too Had perish'd, but that Juno did convey The same (for love she bare to Jasun) through. The other Rock unmov'd, with pointed head, Pierceth the Clouds, and reaches to the Sky
In Winter, and in Summer's covered, And wrapped up in Mists perpetually. Nor could a mortal man climb up unto 't, Although he were indu'd with twenty hands, And with as many nimble feet to boot, So smooth it is, and so upright it stands. th midst o'th' Rock you'll see a Cavern dark That looketh Westward. That way you must row. The mouth o'th' Cave is more above your Bark Than th'youngest man can shoot to with a Bowe. There 'tis that Scylla dwells and barks: her voice Like to a Lions whelps voice is; but she A mighty Monster is; 'twould not rejoyce A God, much less a man her shape to see. Twelve feet she has in all, and ugly ones. Six huge long necks; and to each neck a head. And in each head for teeth sh'has rows of bones, And every row of them envenomed. Half of her body in the Cave she hides; But all her Heads she putteth out and watches For Dog-fish, Dolphins, and what Fish besides The Sea afford, & Whales she sometimes catches. Ne're did bold Saler boast that pass'd that way, That he had scaped safely by her Den; Or that a mouth of hers did want its prey, But from him snatch'd away some of his men. The Rock that's opposite is not so high, But there the passage is exceeding narrow. For you, Ulysses, if you please to try, From side to side can eas'ly shoot an arrow. Out of this Rock grows a great Sycamore, Under the which Charybdis hidden lies, And suddenly the water does devour, And suddenly again she makes it rise. Thrice in a day the water rises high, And thrice a day again the same doth fall. But when it talls, take heed you be not nigh; Keep Scylla side; better lose six than all. When she had made an end: Goddess, said I, Tell me I pray you when I have got free
From th'evil which Charybdis means me, why On Scylla I may not avenged be. Fie, fie, quoth she, are you at fighting till? Dare you against the Gods oppose your might? For Scylla is an everlasting ill. Row on apace, and save your selves by flight. 'Gainst such a Monster remedy there's none, But row as fast as e're you can away. For if you stay to put your Armour on, She'll stoop again, and take another prey. Row swiftly on, and to Cratais cry, That in her Belly the foul Monster bore, And she will keep her in as you go by, That she shall not assault you any more. Next at Torinacia-Isle you shall arrive, Where feed the Suns broad-horned Kine & Sheep. Sev'n Herds there be, in each one ten times five, As many Flocks, which Sol's two Daughters keep, Phaetisa and Lampetio Divine; Their Mother was Neaera that did bear And bring them up, and to them did assigne The keeping of their Fathers Cattle there: These if you suffer quietly to feed, You shall get home again, though with some pain; But if you hurt them, know it is decreed Your Ship and Men shall perish in the Main. And though your sef you save, your Ship you'll loose, And Mates, and in your passage finde delay. This said, the Rosie-finger'd Morning rose, And Circe up the Island went her way. But I went to my Ship, and call'd my Crew To come aboard. Aboard they quickly come, And sitting each man in his order due, VVith stroak of oars they make the grey Sea foam. The Goddess Circe also was so kind, As when we were gone off, and Sails had spread, To fill them wth a favourable wind. So sate we while the Steers-man governed. Then to my Mates with heavy heart I spake: Not one or two of you alone must hear
What Circe said, but al, that you may take Your own advice, since 'tis a common fear. You must not hear the Sirens melody, But row with all you might till we be past. To me alone she gives that liberty, But so as first you binde me to the Mast. Binde me you must upright both hand and foot, And so as I may not the knot unknit: And if I wink upon you to undo't, Then take more Cord and binde me faster yet. Whilst I my Fellows thus informing stood, The Island of the Sirens came in sight: For nimble was our ship, and the winde good; But suddenly we were becalmed quite. Some Daemon sure had laid the Waves asleep. Then took we in our Sails, and laid them by, And with our Oars in hand provokt-the Deep, And in a milky path we forward ply. Then from a Ball of Wax I pinch a bit, Chafe it, and into th'ears of one it put; And so to all in order as they sit. Which soon was done, the weather being hot. Then streight they rise and binde me to the Mast At th'arms and feet: the knot behind they tie; And then upon their seats themselves they plac'd, And row'd till to the Island we were nigh, When to the Island we were come so nigh, As that a man that hollows may be heard, The Sirens knowing when we should come by, Had tun'd themselves, and had their Song prepar'd. Come, come, much prais'd Ulysses, come away, The brightest glory of the Greeks come near: No mortal man did ever come this way, That did not to our Musick lend an ear. Delight they sound, and wisdom carried hence. Say, stay your good black shp, forbear a while To beat the Sea; please and inform your sese. Come disimbark your selves upon our Isle. We know what feats of Arms were done at Troy Between the Greeks and Trojans all along.
We know what's done on th'whole earth every day. Come, come a land, and listen to our Song, And this they sung with so much harmony And sweetness in their voices, that I fain Would have recovered my liberty, And to them winkt, to be set loose again. But 'twould not be. My Mates regard my words, And not my winks, and sit still at the Oar. Eurylochus and Perimede bring Cords, And binde me harder than they did before. When we had left the Sirens at our backs So far as not to hear them any more, My fellows from their ears pull out the Wax, And me unto my liberty restore. We had not sailed far, when there appeard An angry Sea before us all in smoke; And thumping of the mighy Waves, we heard Upon the stubborn Rocks at every stroke. Besides, the Sea so mighty loud did roar, As with one dismal Hum it fill'd the Ear, And made my Mates each one let fall his Oar, So much their Senses were benum'd with fear. Still stood the Bark. Then I among them go With gentle words, new courage to convey Into their failing hearts, to make them row; And passing by, to every one I say: My Friends, we all have many dangers past, And greater much than what we now do fear. Remember how from Polyphemus vast By my good conduct we deliver'd were. I do not doubt but you remember it. My counsel therefore also now obey. Row close along the shore, the Gods may yet Deliver us, but by no other way. But you that have the guiding of the Ship, Steers-man, to you I speak, mark what I say, Steer her without the Smoke; for if she slip Aside, though little, we are cast away. This said, my Fellows speedily obey'd. Of th'Monster Scylla not a word I told;
Lest they should throw away their Oars, dismaid, And for their shelter run into the Hold. But Circe's counsel I had quite forgot. I arm'd my self, and took into my hand Two Spears, though she expresly had said not; And looking upwards at the head I stand. But she appeared not. I look'd so high And long upon the hideous Rock, my sight Began to fail, and now we were close by That dismal streight, which doth us all affright. Here Scylla stands, and the Charybdis dire Lies vomiting the Sea, which sings and dances Like water in a Kettle o're the fire, And vapours to the highest Rocks advances. But when the Sea it sucketh in again, It sounds like thunder in the hollow stone. And we could see the bottom very plain; Sandy it was, and black to look upon. Whilst we our eyes upon Charybdis fix, And stand amazed at the horrid sight, Suddenly Scylla stoopt, and snatch'd up fix Of the best men I had to row o fight. I from the Ship that never stir'd my eye, Soon saw their sprauling arms and legs i'th' air, And heard them lamentably to me cry, And name me in their uttermost despair. As Fishers in a Horn mix fraud and food, And from the Bank at th'end of a long Wand, To catch the Fry cast it into the Flood, Then pluck them up, and throw them on the land: So lifted were my Mates. Of my mishaps This was the saddest I did ever see, When she my men cham'd in her ugly Chaps, Roaring and holding out their hands to me. From Scylla we unto the Island row. Where feeding were Sol's sacred Sheep and Kine. Before we landed I could hear them low; Which brought into my minde the Prophesie Of old Tiresias the Theban Bard, That counsel'd me this Island for to shun
Of Circe also I like counsel heard, And not to land i' th' Island of the Sun. Then speaking to my Fellows, Friends, said I, This Island sacred is to Sol; this place Tiresias and Circe both bid fly, And not to disimbark in any case. For if we do, for certain they declare The greatest mischief that e're men befel: Therefore keep out to Seaward, and beware Of landing here, and then we shal be well. But then Eurylochus to me began: You have, Ulysses, a hard heart, quoth he; There is no labour but you bear it can; Your limbs of stubborn steel composed be. But you consider not your Mates are ti'd With their continual tugging at the Oar, And that refreshment is and sleep requi'd, Which is not to be had but on the shore. But you would have us wander in the night, When in the night the greatest winds arise, The bane of ships; and when depriv'd of light, To save our selves we can no way devise. What if great winds should blow from South or West, Which often happens, though their King not know Or not consent? Therefore I think it best To night to sup ashore, to morrow row. So said Eurylochus, and was commended By all my Mates and presently I knew One Daemon or another had intended To ruine me, together with my Crew. Then said I to Eurylochus, 'Twere vain To strive against o many men alone. But you shall take an Oath that you'l abstain From hurting of the Cattle of the Sun. Of Cire's meat there's lest us yet good store. This said, they took the Oath; which having done, They put into the Harbour, and ashore They Sup. And when their hunger now was gone, Their Mates remembring that in th' hollow Rock By th' monster Scylla were devour'd, they weep
And wall, and with their hands they knock Their breasts, and in that posture fell asleep. The Stars had climb'd a third part of the Sky, When with a Whirl-winde Jove together fetcht The Clouds from ev'ry patt, and suddenly On Sea and Land a dismal night was stretcht. And when the Rosie-finger'd Morning came, Our Ship we to a hollow Cave advance, Wherein the Sea-Nymphs Seats and Couches have, And where they are accustomed to dance. Thither I call'd my Mates, and said again; Friends, we have meat and drink aboard, be wise, And from the Herds and Flocks of Sol abstain, Who heareth all we say, and all espies. To this did my Companions all assent. But for a month there blow no other wind Than South and East; so that we there were pent I'th'Island longer than we had design'd. My Mates, whilst they had bread and meat aboard, Forbore to meddle with the Sacred Kine: And fetch'd in what the Island did afford Of Fish and Fowl, to have wherewith to dine. Up I into the Island went aside, The Conduct of th'Immor al Gods t'implore, That some of them 'twould please to be my Guide, And me unto my Countrey to restore. And in a place defended from the wind I wash'd my hands; and then with tears and sight Before the Gods I poured out my minde, And they a sweet sleep poured on my eyes. Mean time Eurylochus bad counsel gives To his Companions. All deaths, quoth he, Are hateful to what thing soever lives: But death by hunger is the worst can be. Let's kill some of the fattest of these Cows, And sacrifice unto the Gods on high; And to appease the Sun, let's all make Vow To build a Temple to his Deity Enrich'd with Gifts. If not content with this, For a sew Cows displeas'd he seek our death,
For once to gape and die, far better 'tis Than strive with hunger till we lose our breath. This said, my Fellows all his counsel take, And chase Sol's sacred Herds, that graz'd hard by; And then for recompence their Vows they make To build a Temple to his Deity. But when they made their Vows, Chaplets they wear Of tender leaves pluckt from the spreading Oak. VVhite Barley they had none, the which men bear, VVhen in their danger they the Gods invoke. After the vow perform'd, the Kine they slay, And take their Thighs and cover them with fat; And one of them upon the other lay, To burn upon the Altar. After that, Their Offering of Drink they pour'd upon The Altar, as the Sacrifice they barn. It ought t'have been of VVine; but having none, They pour'd on water fair, which serv'd the turn. When th'Entrails by my Fellows eaten were, And fire consumed had the Sacrifice, The rest they roast on Spits, and made good chear. Just then it was that sleep forsook my eyes. And back again I walk'd down towrds the shore. But coming near, perceiv'd the vapour rise Of roasted meat. Then to the Gods I rore, You give me sleep, and take away my life; So strange a thing my Mates the while have done. Swiftly Lampetio to Heav'n flies, And carries up the news unto the Sun. The Sun in choler all the Gods defies, Unless they right him of this injury. Jove Father, and you other Powers Divine, Revenge me of Ulysses Company That have so insolently slain my Kine. It was my joy to see them in the Morn, And in the Evening, e're I went to bed. Revenge me, O ye Gods! of this their scorn, Or I'll go down to Hell and light the Dead. No Phoebus (answer'd Jove) hold up your light For Gods and mortal Men to see their way.
As for the men that did you this despight, Their Ship at Sea with Lightning I'll destroy. At this discourse in Heaven was Hermes by, And heard his Father make this sad Decree: And he again told all this History To th'fair Calypso, and she told it me. VVhen to my Fellows I was come, I rate Them all full bitterly, and one by one; But all in vain, for now it was too late: The Gods by Signes detested what was done. The skins did creep, the flesh o'th' Spits did low, Both raw and roast. Six days in th'Isle we staid Feasting on Phoebus Kine, the seventh we row; For then the fury of the winde was laid. VVhen we were out at Sea we fix our Mast, And up into the winde our Sails we draw, And had the Isle so far behind us cast, That nothing else but Sky and Sea we saw. Then Jove, when far from Land he saw our ship, Just over it a dismal black Cloud hung, VVhich made it dark as Night upon the Deep; And then our good ship run not very long. For presently from VVest a sudden blast Came roaring in, and vehemently strains And breaks the Cordage that upheld the Mast; VVhich falling down, beats out the Steerers brains. He drops into the Sea. The Mast hangs o're At Stern. The Yards lie cross the sink. And all the while both Heaven and Sea did rore VVith Thunder loud, which made our hearts to shrink. And by and by into the ship Jove threw His Thunder bolt, which whirl'd it round about. It smelt of Sulphur rank; and all my Crew Into the Sea it suddenly threw out. They like to Gulls from wave to wave were born, But I kept still aboard, till at the last The Rudder from a-stern the Ship was torn, And fell into the Sea, and with't the Mast. The Mast had hanging on it broken Ropes, VVherewith I bound them both together fast,
And sare upon them as my latest hopes, Until the fury of the Storm was past. The storm now laid, th'wind came about to th'South, And carri'd me before it, till the Sun Next morning rose; and then we were i'th'mouth Of dire Charybdis, just when she begun To swallow up the Sea. Then up leapt I, And on the spreading Sycamore laid hold. But to't I could not climb; the boughs so high I could not reach: and far off was the root. There by the hands I hung, expecting when Charybdis should cast up the Sea, and bring The Rudder and the Mast to th' top agen. Mean while, in th'air I patiently swing. What time the Judge ariseth from his seat, Ending the brabbles of contentious men, And all come weary home to take their meat, Then came my Mast and Rudden up agen. And I into the Sea close by them drop. Then having soon recovered them, again I place my self a stride, once more, a top; And with my hands I rowed on the Main. If Scylla this had seen, undoubtedly I had been lost. But 'twas the grace of Jove, That all this while she did not me espy, But kept her self retir'd i'th' Rock above. Thus wandred I at Sea nine days out-right. O'th' tenth at night the Gods brought me to land In th' Isle Ogygia, where Calypso bright Receiv'd me with a charitable hand. But how she treated me, I need not say; You and the Queen already know it well, From the Relation I made yesterday; Nor do I love the same Tale twice to tell.
LIB. XIII. THis said, all silent and delighted were. Alcinous then said, Ulysses, since You safely to me are arrived here, You shall not lose your way in going hence. But Princes you that daily with me sit, Drinking good Wine, and hearing Musique sweet, And given to the Stranger have what's fit, I'll tell you what yet farther I think meet. Garments he has a Chest-full, and good store Of Gold, Plate, and of other Gifts he has. Take my advice. Let each man give him more, A Caldron, or a three-foot Pot of Brass. I know to each man 'twill be too great largess, But by the Peoples Contribution We'll make amends. The Town shall bear the charges. The motion pleas'd, and 'twas agreed upon. Then went they ev'ry man to his repose. And soon as Morning did again appear, Aboard the Ship the Vessel they dispose. Alcinous himself directed where. And then into the Palace they return, And sacrifice to Jove a well-fed Beast, The Thighs upon the Altar there they burn; And with the rest they make themselves a Feast. Demodocus before them sung and plaid, Who for his Art was famous in the Town. Ulysses to the Sun lookt up, and staid Longing and wishing that it would go down. As one that hath at Plough been all the day, Hungry his Belly, feeble is his Knee,
Beholds the setting of the Sun with joy; So glad Ulysses was Sun-set to see. Then to Alcinous and all the rest, Offer, said he, unto the Gods their VVine. I have already all that I request, And many Gifts, which may the Fow'rs Divine Make happy to me. Let me now depart, That I may see my dear VVife and my Friends. And blest may you stay here with joy at heart, Comfort your VVives, and obtain all your ends. And strong and worthy Children may you have; Nor 'mongst the people trouble or disease. This said, they prais'd him all, and counsel gave The Stranger to conduct safe or'e the Seas. Alcinous then call'd for VVine, and bad Pontonous present it to each one, Until unto the Gods all offer'd had, That so Ulysses sooner might be gone. Pontonous brought VVine, and carri'd it From man to man; and each man drank his Cup, Blessing the Gods in order as they sit. VVhen all had drunk, Ulysses standeth up, And speaking to Queen Arete, he said, Happy for ever may you be, O Queen, I take my leave. Be you for ever oy'd In King Alcinous as you have been, And in your Children and your People all. And when he this had said, away he went. Alcinous did then a Squier call, VVhom with Ulysses to the Ship he sent. Arete to her women sent. One brought Fine bread and store of black wine of the best. Another brought with her a Cloak and Coat. Another brought, to lay them in, a Chest. Which by the Marriners were quickly stow'd Aboard the good Ship, with the wine and bread. And for Ulysses many Rugs they strow'd O'th' Deck, a stern, with linen at his head. And then aboard he went. VVhen he was lain, Their Seats they take, and parted from the Strand,
Reclining dasht with Oars the liquid plain, While sleep Ulysses bound had foot and hand. As when four Horses gallop o're a plain, The way runs swiftly by the Coaches side; So did the good Ship mount upon the Main, And to the Stern the water swiftly glide A Hawk could hardly with it have kept pace, A Hawk that of all Fowl the swiftest flies; So swiftly ran the Ship on th'Oceans face, And with her breast the rising water slice; Bearing a man for wisdom like a God; That past had fearful Billows on the Deep, And many bloody paths of War had trod, The thought whereof was now remov'd by sleep. Above the Earth now risen was the Star Days Messenger, and brightest of the Sky. The Ship was then from Ithaca not far. A Port there is, which from a Deity Is called Phorcys; a Sea-Deity. Two jetting Rocks defend it from the wind, When once within a Ship will safely lie. There needs no Cord a floting Ship to bind; At the Ports head grows a large Olive-tree, And near it an obscure and pleasant Cave, Where the Nerelades delight to be, And there they Bowls of Stone, and Beakers have. The Bees make honey there. Besides there be Long Beams of Stone, whereon the Nymphs do weave Rich Purple-Garments, wonderful to see, And Fountains which their running never leave. Two Doors there are, one North, Men go that way; The other to the South more Saced is, Th'Immortals here go in, and none but they. The Gods have to themselves reserved this. All this Ulysses Convoy knew before; And here the Ship arrived safely lands, And half her length lay dry upon the shore. Such was the strength of those Phaeacian hands, The lusty Seaen when they landed were, First took Ulysses sleeping as he lay
Bedding and all, and to the Land him bear And lay him from the Sea a little way. Then they unship his Goods, Gold, Vestures, Brass, Gifts given him by the Phaeacians; Which at the foot of th'Olive tree they place, Out of the way, lest Passengers should chance To steal them while Ulysses was asleep. When this was done the Convoy stayed not, But rowed out the Ship into the Deep; Nor Neptune had Ulysses yet forgot, But said to Jupiter complaining then, What honour from the Gods can I expect, When the Phaeacians that are but men (Although descended from me) me neglect? For though Ulysses I destroyed not, Because his coming home you had decreed; Yet that he should be brought home thus, ne'r thought Asleep, and painless, and with so much speed, Enricht with Gold, and Brass, and Vestures store, As much as had come to his share at Troy. This the Phaeacians have done, and more; In this licentiousness they take a joy. Then answered Jove. Neptune, wha's this you say? The Gods neglect you not. It cannot be That are the eldest and of greatest sway Of any of them. If Man injure thee, To take revenge enough your own pow'r is. I will not hinder you, do what you please. To Jupiter then Neptune answer'd this. I could, O Jove, have been reveng'd with ease, But that I fear'd you would offended be. And now I'll tell you what I mean to do. Assoon as I the ship returning see, I'll fix it, that they may no more do so. Besides, their City with a Hill I'll hide. O but (said Jupiter) were it my case, When from the City people all espi'd The ship hard by, I would a Rock there place In likeness of a ship not far from Land, To make men wonder, and then round about
The City make a mighty Mountain stand. This said by Jove, the God of Seas went out To Scheria (where the Phaeacians First planted were.) The ship came swiftly on, And on it Neptune laid his mighty hands, And roots it in the Sea, turn'd into Stone. The Rowers t'one another say, What's this? Who hath our good Ship fixed in the water? And yet above the water still it is. Thus sad they, but knew nothing of the matter. Then spake Alcinous. Perform'd (said he) Is what long since I heard my Father say, That Neptune angry was that Strangers we, Who e're they were, did to their homes convey, And threatned had with a great Hill to hide The City, and destroy the Passage-Boat. This by my Father then was Prophesi'd. And now, you see, at last about▪ is brought. Therefore be rui'd by me. Convoy no more, But let us unto Neptune Sacrifice Twelve chosen Bullocks, and his grace implore To set no Hll there. So did he advise. And then to Neptune they their Prayers make Standing at th'Altar, King and Princes all. And now Ulysses lying was awake, But to his mind the place could not recal. For Pallas had about him cast a mist, That at his coming he might not be known; But she her self instruct him as she list, Till he the Suiters all had overthrown. All things seem'd to him other than they were, Paths, High-ways, Creeks, Havens, Trees and Rocks. And rising up he was he knew not where, And with his open hand his Thigh he knocks. Ay me (said he) whither am I come now? To civil, or to wild and lawless men? Where shall I hide my Treasure? whither go? Would I were at Phaeacia agen. To other friends I might have gone from thence, And t'Ithaca obtained a Convoy,
Here for my Treasure I see no defence. Left here to others they will be a prey. I see the Princes of Phaeacia Are not so just as I take them to be. They promis'd to set me at Ithaca, But have to some place else transported me. Jove that sees all, and pun sheth the ill, Will be revenged also of these men. But come, my Presents number now I will, The Seamen may have ta'ne some back agen. His Garments and his Plate then nmbed he, And nothing missing was of all his pelf. Then walkt he softly along by the Sea Lamenting and bewailing of himself. And then came Pallas to hm. She had on The Body of a Shpherd young and tender, As if she had of some Prince been he Son; Lin'd was his Coat, the thead was fire & slender, With Dart in hand, and fine shoes on his feet. Ulysses who beheld her was much joy'd, And forth himself advanced, her to meet. And first he to her spake, and thus he said: Joy to you be, and good-will towards me; Save for me these my Goods, and save me too. You are the first I meet here; at your knee I bow my self as men bow Gods unto. Tel me (I pray you) true, What I and is this? What Town? Th'Inhabitants what men? An Isle, or of the Continent a piece? To this the Goddess answered agen. Simple you are, or very far hence dwell, To ask what Countrey this is. For 'tis not A place obscure; for known 'tis very well Both East and West, though but a little spot, And rugged ground, not fit for galloping; Yet Corn it bears abundantly and Wine; And is well watered both with Dew and Spring, And nourisheth great Herds of Goats and Kine. Of Wood of ev'ry sort there is good store. Though from Achaea far men say is Troy,
Yet Ithaca is talkt of on that shore. These words unto Ulysses were great joy. And to the Goddess then he answered (Falsly; on Fables keeping still his hold, As one that always Plots hath in his head) I have (said he) of Ithaca been told Far hence in Crete, and now am thither come With these my Goods, but leaving to my Child About as much as I brought out from home, And here I am alone, a man exil'd. For of Idomeneus I kill'd the Son Orsilochus, for swiftness of his feet. So excellent, there was not any one That could out-run him in the Isle of Crete. Because I had refused a Command Under his Father at the Siege of Troy, And would command my own, he took in hand To have depriv'd me of my share o'th' Prey, Which to my dangers and my deeds was due. For which, by night with one Companion Near the High-way I with my Spear him slew, And in the dark escap'c when I had done. And to Phoenicia by Sea I went; And hired with a good part of my Prey, To Pylus or to Elis to be sent. But adverse winds forc't us another way. And wandring there arrived in the night. And streight into this port we brought the Bark, Ne're thought of Food, though very well we might, But went ashore, and lay down in the dark, And there I slept. The Mariners mean while Take out my Goods and lay them on the shore, And back unto Sidonia they sail, And after that I never saw them more. At this the Goddess smil'd, and stroak'd his head, And in a womans shape before him stood, Of stature tall and like to one well bred, The craft that catches you had need be good. You cannot though at home your wiles forgo, And your fain'd Stories, though there be no need,
So close they stick to you from top to toe. But now no more of that. For 'tis agreed 'Mongst Mortals you, amongst Immortals I For Counsel and Invention excel. Did you not know me that perpetually Have at your need assisted you so well? And now am come to help you to secure. The rich Phaeacian Presents you have here, And tell you what at home you must endure; Affrons and scorns, you shall finde many there. Then said Ulysses, Difficult it is. For any mortal man though very wise To know a God, that can their form dismiss, And when they will, put on a new disguise. When th'Argive Army was besieging Troy, Goddess I know how gracious you were then. But after (the Town sackt) we came away, And scatter'd had the Gods our ships and men, And I was wandring on the Ocean wide, I never saw you, never had your aid, Save at Pheaia you were pleas'd to guide Me to the Town, and hasten me dsmaid, But I beseech you (for still do I doubt This is not Ithaca that I am at, But some place ele, and that you go about With comforts feign'd my sorrows to abate.) Tell me if this my Countrey be indeed. Pallas sad then, Suspicious still you are. I cannot therefore leave you in your need, Since wise you be, and willing to beware. Another man that had been long away, Had straight gone home to see his Wife and Son; But that for you is not the safest way, Nor had it yet been opportunely done. Know how she'll take it first: She keeps within, And spends in weeping both the night and day, I know full well the Fates his coming spin, But that his Mates shall first be cast away. But with my Uncle Neptune had no mind To be at odds, that in such choler is,
For making of his Son the Cyclops blind. But come, I'll shew you Ithaca. First, This The Port of Phorcys is, This th'Olive-tree, There near it is the gloomy Cavern, where The Nymphs Naîades invoked be. And by you in that Cave much worshpt were. The Hill so cloth'd with wood is Neriton. This said, the Mist dissolves, and then Ulysses. His Native Countrey joyful looks upon, And falling on his knees the Soil he kisses. And then to the Naîades he praid, Hal Daughters of High Jove Naîades, Ne'r to have seen you more I was afraid; But oft we shall again, if Pallas please To give me life, and prosper my dear Son, Your Altar fill with Gifts as heretofore. The Goddess Pallas when his Pray'r was done, Answer'd, Let that thought trouble you no more. But come, let's now see how your Goods to save, Now presently. 'Twere well that they were laid Within some Rock at bottom of the Cave. Then went she in, and Caves in Cave survey'd. Ulysses brought into the Grot his Store, Garments, and heavy Brass, and Golden Plate; Which Pallas plac'd, and laid a Rock o'th' door, And then in counsel both togther sate The Suiters to destroy. Pallas first spake. Ulysses (said she) think on how you may Your just revenge of the proud Suiters take, That use your House and Substance as their prey; That marry would your Wife by force. But she Still keeps them off with hopes and promises, Expecting your return continually, But than of Marriage thinks of nothing less. O, said Ulysses, But for your advice, I died had as Agamemnon did. But now, O Pallas, find out some device, How of the Suiters best I may be rid. And by me stand inspiring courage stout. As when we pull'd Troy's head-gear off her head.
For then to master them I should not doubt Three hundred though they were. Then answered: The Goddess Pallas, By you I will stand; You cannot fight, but I shall of it know, And bring unto you such a lucky hand, That with their Blood and Brains the ground shall [flow. Come, First I'll make you to men pass unknown, I'll shrink your skin that's now so fair and fresh, And from your head take off that hair so brown, And cover will with such array your flesh As men shall hate the sight of. Then your eyes I'll shrivel up, that were so full and bright, That in this habit th'Woo'rs may you despise, Nor your wife know you standing in her sight. Then go you to the Master of your Swine That loves you, and your Son, and your Consort, And to direct you to him take this signe. He's at Crow-Rock, thither the Swine resort, And t'Arethusa's Well. For why, the Oken Berries with that sweet water make them fat. Stay there till to him you your mind have spoken, And well inform'd your self of your estate. To Lacedaemon I the while will go. To call your Son Telemachus away, Who thither went by Sea, that he might know What Menelaus there of you could say. Then said Ulysses, Goddess, since you could Have told him all your self, why did you not? Meant you that also he be wandring should While other men stay feeding on his Lot? Trouble not you your self with him, said she. I sent him and went with him with intent To shew him to the world abroad. And he At Spartae treated is to his content. 'Tis true, the Suiters with a Ship are gone To wait for, and to kill him by the way. But I believe before that that be done, Some will lie low that now your goods destroy. And as she spake, she stroakt him with her Wand, And rivel'd seem'd his skin (which was before
So sleek and fair) as if it had been tann'd. And gray his hair, rivel'd his eyes all o're. And then she gave him an ill-favoured Rag Torn, foul, and smutted filthily with soot, And over that the pill'd skin of a Stag, And Satchel full of holes then added to't With twisted-string. And up their councel brake. The Goddess Pallas thence to Sparta past, To bid Telemachus his leave to take Of Menelaus, and go home with haste. LIB. XIV. BUt he in rugged way, o're Mountains steep, Through Woods obscure unto Eunaeus went, Whose Office was the herds of Swine to keep; And of his Servants was most diligent, And found him in the Porch before the Door. The house was handsome, and high-built and great, Nor to it was adjoyned any more, Well fenc'd from wind it was, and a warm seat, Built by himself on purpose for the Swine Of his good Lord Ulysses that was gone, With Stone that hew'n was from the rocky Mine, Besides those of Laertes and hs Son. And with a quickset-hedge enclosed round, And Pales of heart of Oak the hedge without Set close together, and stuck deep i'th' ground. And thus the house was fenced round about. Within the Court twelve lodgings were for Swine, And ev'ry one of them held five times ten; And there the female and the teeming lyen. The males lay out, but much diminisht then,
For the proud Suiters eaten had the rest, Eumaeus having sent in every day One of the sattest of the Herd and best, And yet three hundred and threescore were they. Near to the Swine four Dogs were ever lying, Like to wild beasts; and by Eumaeus fed. Himself was leather to his foot applying, Made of a good Cow hide well coloured. Three Dogs attending were the Herd. The fourth Convoying was a Swine unto the Woo'rs, The other three ran fiercely bawling forth When they Ulysses saw come near the doors. Ulysses wisely then his Staff lets fall, And presently sits down upon the ground. But had Eumaeus not come in withal, And unbeseeming fortune he had found. Who letting fall the leather for his shoe, Running and rating came in to his aid: And snatcht stones up abundance at them threw, And then he to Ulyssis spake and said, Old man your self almost to death you brought By those accursed Dogs, and me to shame, As if my sorrow great enough were not, But that there must be added to it blame. While sitting here I for my Master weep, And feed his Swine for other men to eat; He somewhere swallow'd up is in the Deep, Or wanders up and down for want of meat. But come, Old man, into the Lodge let's go, That when of Meat and Wine you have your fill, You may then tell me whence you are, and who, And how much you have suffered of ill. This said, he led him in and made him sit, And under him he store of rushes laid, O're that a Goatskin, thick with hair was it Of which a speckeld wild Goat had been staid. Ulysses glad to see the man so kind And very hearty, answered and said, May all your Pray'rs like entertainment find With Jove for whatsoever you have prai'd.
Stranger (then said Eumaeus) it was never My custome any Stranger to neglect. The Poor and Stranger are in Gods hand ever. Few are my Gifts, and but of small effect. For Servants of young Masters stand in fear; And by the Gods my old one fast is bound From coming home. 'Twas he that gave me here A house and fair possession of ground As much as fits a Master to his Swain, And helpt me too contentedly to wive, Which taketh off a great part of my pain. Also the Gods have made my labour thrive. How happy had I been if he had staid! Accursed be that Helen and her Kin. For, for Atrides sake he Anchors wai'd, Himself much misery engag'ng in. Having thus said, he girded on his Coat, And fetcht in two young Pigs; not long he staid, But kill'd, sindg'd, jointed, roasted, piping hot Before Ulysses with the Spits he laid, Then strows them over with the flour of Wheat, And in an Ivy Bowl he tempers Wine; And sitting o're against him bids him eat. Eat, says he, Servants food, the lesser Swine. The great ones are the pamper'd Suiters fare. The blessed Gods hate evil works, and love Them that do well. But these men little care For mercy or for vengeance from above. Yet enemies and lawless men, when they Disbark upon anothers Land, and there With Prey their ship have laden, come away; And of revenge stand always in great fear. But these men know not, nor by Voice Divine Assured are Ulysses now is dead; Yet neither will go hence, nor have designe To seek by lawful ways his Wife to wed; But stay and waste his Substance without hee. For not a day went o're their heads that they Did sacrifice one only Beast or two; And Wine abundance drink and cast away.
Ulysses his estate and wealth was such. In Greece nor Argos, no Prince in Epire, Nor twenty had in Ithasa so much And if to have it reckon'd you desire, Upon the Continent twelve herds of Kine, Twelve herds of Goats, as many flocks of Sheep, As many Swine-houses replete with Swine, Which Herdsmen of the Countrey there did keep. And here, upon the Islands farthest end There be eleven herds of Goats. Of these The Goat-keeper does ev'ry day one send, The best of all, the Suiters proud to please. And daily I the best of all my Swne. Thus said he. But Ulysses silent sate, Eating his Meat, and drinking of his Wine, And plotting in his head the Suiters fate. When he had supt, Eumaeus to the brim Fill'd up his Cup with Wine. Ulysses then Glad that Eumaeus so well treated him, Drank, and the Cup deliv'ring back agen, Friend, (says he) that so rich and valiant man Your Master that was for Atrides lost, If I have seen him, do you think you can Know him? God knows I have seen many a coast. Then answer'd he, There is no Stranger able Nor with his Wife nor Son to get belief. The news they tell both take but for a Fable Invented by their want to get relief. Many poor men come to Penelope, And make her weep in vain with Tales untrue. And where you think you shall rewarded be With Coat or other Garment, so can you. But he's devour'd by Beasts or Fowls at Land, O Fsh at Sea have on his body fed. And on the Shore his Bones lie clad in Sand. Bu howsoere it be, the man is dead; And to his friends has sorrow left behind, But to me chiefly, who, go where I please Shall never such another Master finde, Nor ever be again at so much ease,
No, though I should unto my Countrey go And Parents that have got and nourisht me; To see them though I wish, I long not so As I Ulysses long again to see. Whom though now absent I call by his name, He was so kind, and took such care of me, That of such small respect I feel some shame. A second Father he should called be. Friend, said Ulysses, since so hard it is To make you hope he will so soon be here, Know that I have not rashly told you this. What I have spoken I will also swear. If true, with Coat and Vest my news requite; If not, then not, although ill raid am I. Of him as of Hell-gate I hate the sight That can by want be made to tell a Lye. Know Jove the chief of Gods, and then the Host That hath provided for us this good Chear, And in Ulysses house doth rule the roast, Ulysses will be here some time this year; This Month expired, or the next begun, And be reveng'd of th' Wooers impudent That have dishonoured his Wife and Son. Then said Eumaeus, Leave this argument. For your good news nothing will be to pay. Nor will Ulysses ever come again. Drink Wine, and no more on this subject say, I cannot think upon him without pain. And swear no more. True be it all you say. To me, Laertes, and Penelope, And to Telemachus 'twill be great joy, For whom my sorrows much augmented be; He sprang up like a branch to mans estate. I thought he would in Prowess prove no less Than's Father was whom he did imitate In Wit and Figure and in Comness. But now the Gods bereav'd him have of Wit. He's gone to Pyle to hear what men there say About his Father, whilst the Suiters sit Waiting at Sea to kill him by the way.
But him let's leave a while with Pow'rs above Whether to let him de, or bring him back, Waiting upon the pleasure of high Jove. And now of your own woes untie the sack, That I may know them. Tell me truely now Your own, your Fathers, and your Countries name. And further I desire you, let me know Whence are the Mariners that with you came Unto this Town, and tell me this likewise, Where rideth the good ship that brought you to't. For verily I can no way devise How you should come on Horsback or on Foot. Then said Ulysses, Were we here alone, And meat and drink for so long us attend, And all the rest about their work were gone, The year would sooner than my Story end. Of Crete I am, and rich my Father was, And many Children more he had. But they Begotten were according to the Laws. But of a Concubine the Son was I. My Father was Castor Hylacides, That was for wealth in Crete much honoured; And for his Children, but lov'd me no less Than those he had begot in lawful bed. When he was dead and gone, my Brothers proud. Divide his state amongst themselves by Lot, And little of it they to me allow'd. But for all that a good rich Wife I got; My vertue won her. I no shun-field was, Nor from my stock degenerate she saw; (Though from me now my strength be gone, alas) But you I think can know Wheat by the Straw. For now with hardship I am much decal'd. Mars gave me Courage, and Athena Skill To beat up Quarters, and by Ambush laid With Stratagems my Enemies to kill, Of being slain I never had a thought, But foremost still I leapt out with my Spear; And of the Foes to death I still one brought, Unless his feet than my feet swifter were.
And such I was in War. But Husbandry, And keeping home, though that bred children store, I car'd not for. But Ships I lov'd to see, And War, Darts, Bows and Shafts I loved more. Yet horrible they be to other wights. For, for such things the Gods have temper'd me. Many things are there wherein one delights, Which to another man unpleasant be. Before the Greeks went to the Siege of Troy Nine times had I commanded on the Seas, And always our Success was good that way, And of the Prey I chose what did me please Beside my share. And wealth came in apace. Wise I was thought, and honour'd much in Crete. And when Jove had decreed Troy to deface, Idomeneus and I went with the Fleet, Or else we must our credit quite have lost. Nine years we fought, the tenth we took the Town. And setting up our Sails we left the Coast, And by the Gods were tossed up and down. But Jove determin'd me more trouble yet. For needs I would to Aegypt go and trade. A month I staid at home, then forth I set With nine good ships, and an ill Voyage made. For when six days I feasted had my Crew, And to the Gods devoutly offer'd part; A good strong wind from the North Heaven blew, And from the Coast of Crete we then depart. Smoothly we sail'd, safe our arrival was, Nor man nor ship had any harm at all. From shore to shore we did in five days pass, And in the Nile we let our anchors fall. Then I my Fellows bad aboard to stay And guard the ships, and some to places high I sent to watch, but mov'd by lucre, they On plunder and on rapine had their eye. The fields they waste, and kill the men, and make Women and Children captives. Then the cry Arriving at the City, Arms they take, And next day carly to the field they hie,
VVith Horse and Foot then thundered the field. Their Armour lightned. My men frighted were. Some taken and made slaves; some flying kill'd; And all the rest ran scatter'd here and there. Then I (though t'had been better there t'have di'd, So many woes have since befallen me) Pull'd off my Helmer, laid ray Spear aside, And Buckler too, and kneel'd at the Kings knee. He rescu'd me, and home with him me brought, Sitting by him that did his Chariot drive. Though in their heat many to kill me sought, Yet the King brought me to the Town alive. Seven years I there remain'd and riches got. For every man almost me somewhat gave. Then thither came a Merchant that had not His fellow in all Aegypt for a Knave. His house and riches in Phoenicia were, And he with Lyes entic'd me to his home; VVith him I went. And there I staid a year. And when the Months and Days about were come, He set me in a Ship for Libya; And there together with our Goods we sate, He cracking of the profit he foresaw, And I suspecting, though it were too late. VVith him I went. And when the Ship was forth, VVe steer'd our Course without the Isle of Crete, For by good luck we had a wind full North. But Jove determin'd had we should not see't. For when the Island we had left behind, And nothing else appear'd but Sea and Sky, Jove fetcht the Clouds together with a VVind Just o're the Ship, and dark 'twas presently. And therewithal into the Ship he threw His Thunderbolt, which whirl'd it round about. It smelt of Brimstone rank. And all the Crew Into the Sea it suddenly cast out. And they like Gulls from wave to wave were tost. But Jove to save me, put into my hand The Ships tall Mast which with my arms I cros. And after nine days came at last to land.
And in Thesprotia was cast on land; And the Kings Son who chanc't that way to pass, Listed me up as I lay on the sand; And by King Phaedon well receiv'd I was. He cloth'd me with good Garments Coat and Vest. I askt him of Ulysses what he knew. As he went home (said he) he was my Guest, And what he then had gotten did me shew; Of Brass and Iron and Gold there was so much, As might ten Ages feed a man alone, The Treasure that he shew'd me there was such. But he, he said, was to Dodona gone, There at the Holy Oak to be advis'd (Since he from Ithaca so long has been) VVhether 'twere better to go home disguis'd, Or so as to be known when he is seen. The King to me in Holy Form did swear, That for the Conduct of Ulysses home, Both Ship and Mariners then ready were. But when I went from thence he was not come. A Ship of that place in the Harbour lay Ready to part. The King bad land me there. But they resolv'd were of another way; VVhich made me yet more misery to bear. VVhen of that Land they were got out of fight, To sell me for a Slave they did agree, My Coat and Vest they take from me there right, And gave me the torn Coat and Rags you see. Late in the Ev'ning they were at the Land Of Ithaca, and bound me fast i'th' ship. But they to Sup thought fit upon the Sand, And leaving me, out of the Bark they skip. But from my Bonds some God sure set me free. Then down I went and to the Sea appli'd My breast, and round the Ship swam speedily, And in a great thick Wood my self I hide. Sorry they were, and put to Sea again. To stay and seek me they lost labour thought. Thus by Jove's favour I alive remain, And to the house of a good friend am brought.
Then said Eumaeus, I confess the Story (Poor man) of this your wandring and your pain, Has had the pow'r to make me verry sorry. But of Ulysses what you say is vain. I not believe a word. What needed you, So wise a man as you appear to me, In vain to tell me any thing not true; When I my self am sure 'twill never be? For all the Gods have shewn themselves his foes, That neither suffer'd him to fall at Troy, Nor the War done, his best friends to compose His Body for the Grave. For either way He honourably buried had been To th'honour of his Son. But he is dead, Unspoken of, devour'd by Harpies keen; And I despis'd sit here to see Swine fed. And never to the City come, but when Some news is brought unto Penelope, And she send one to call me. I come then, And many listning to the news I see. Some griev'd and wishing for his coming home. Some that seek nothing but shot-free to feed. And these men wish that he may never come. But I of what they say take little heed. Especially, since an Aetocián, As he from place to place for Murther fled, Came to my house, and I reliev'd the man, And after found that I was cozened. He said he saw him with Idomeneus In Crete, and that for certain he would come (His Fleet much hurt repaired) to his house, Rich, at the next Spring, or the next Autumn. Therefore, old man, since you are come to me, Think not your Story any thing avails, Nor that false hopes provoke my Charity. My Bounty looks on want and not on Tales. Pity, and fear of Jove my favours guide. Ulysses to this answers him, and saith, Since you trust not my Word, nor Oath beside, And in your breast resideth little faith,
Let's make a Bargain. If Ulysses come, Then a good Coat and Vest shall be my due, And a safe Conduct to Dulichium. If not, and that I told you prove untrue, Then make your Servants throw me from a Cliff High and upright, That others may beware To cosen men into a false belief Of things they know not, but uncertain are. Then said Eumaeus, Yes, 'twere a fine deed, And noble, t'entertain a man with love, And with good chear relieve him in his need, Then kill him, and beg pardon then of Jove. But now I wish the Swine from field were come. For time it is of Supper to advise. And while they talk, the Swains the Swine bring home. And with great noise they pent are in the sties. Then did Eumaeus to his Servants call, From out the Herd to choose one of the best His far-come friend to entertain withal, And mend their own fare also with the rest. 'Tis long since others the work to us leave To seed the Swine they eat. Having said that, Out went he, for the Altar wood to cleave; And they brought in a five-year-old Pig fat; And laid it on the Hearth. Eumaeus there Remembring well the Gods (for he was wise) First from the fore-head clippeth off the hair, And in the fire the same did Sacrifice. Then did he all the Gods above invoke, That soon and safe Ulysses might arrive, Next that he takes a piece of the cleft Oak, And at a stroke did him of life deprive. Then others take the work into their hands, And with keen steel they quickly cut his Throat. That being done, with many flaming Brands They sindge from head to tail his hairy Coat, And lay him open. Then Eumaeus came And folded up the fleshy Thighs in fat. And then into the Fire he threw the same. The rest they cut in lesser parts. And that
They ròast on Spits; and being roasted well And taken up, on Chopping-boards they put it. Eumaeus then (who thereat did excel) As he thought fit did into Messes cut it. But one Mess for the Nymphs and Mercury He set aside; and over that he pray'd. The rest he set to each one severally. But to Ulysses the whole Chine was laid. Jove (said Ulysses) be to you as kind As you to me, and grant all your request. Friend (said Eumaeus) now your Supper mind, Such as it is. Gods give what they think best. Then to the Gods he offer'd the first cut, And fill'd a Bowl, and offer'd part of that. The Bowl then in Ulysses hand he put. Ulysses it receiv'd, and down he sat. Mesaulius then sets before him bread, Who thither brought from Taphos was to sell, And had been by Eumaeus purchased. Then heartily unto their meat they fell. And when to eat they had no more delight, Mesaulius took off the Bread; and all Prepared were for sleep. But cold the night And Moonless was; besides much rain did fall. Ulysses to the Company then spake, Tempting Eumaeus; and to get a Cloak From him, or from some other for his sake. Hear me Eumaeus (says he) and you folk, I have a Tale to tell. This foolish Wine To laugh and dance is able to provoke Grave men sometimes that have no such designe, And to speak that which better were unspoke. But out it shall, since I so much have said. O, that I were as young and strong as when Before the Town of Troy the Watch we laid, And lodged were amongst thereeds i't'h Fen, By Menelaus and Ulysses, led, And me the third; the wind at North all night, We lying with our Bucklers covered. With rain congeal'd, our Armour all was white.
And they slept well wrapt up in Cloak and Coat, Safe in their Bucklers from the freezing wind. But like a fool my Cloak I had forgot. I did not think I should such weather find. And when a third part of the Night was gone, I nudg'd Ulysses (who did next me lie.) He felt me, and to him I made my moan. Noble Ulysses, I am like to die, The weather kills me, I have but a Coat. My Cloak some Daemon made me leave behind, And of such cold quite took away the thought. I cannot tell what remedy to find. No sooner said, but remedy he found; For able was he both to shift and fight, And said unto me in a whisp'ring sound, Peace, lest we heard be by some other Wight: And then with Head on Elbow, Friend, said he, I dreamt we from the Ships too far lie here. Let some to Agamemnon go and see, If he would have us rise and come more near. Then up rose Thoas Son of Andraemon, And down he laid his Cloak, the which I kept, And swiftly did to Agamemnon run. I'th' Cloak I wrapt my self and soundly slept. Were I as young and strong as I was then, Some one a Cloak would lend me for respect, Or else for kindness, 'mongst so many men. But now my Rags are cause they me neglect. Old man, then said Eumaeus, You have told Your Story well. Each word to purpose is. To morrow shake your Rags against the cold. Of what is needful now you shall not miss. Of Cloak and Coat there's none of these has shift. But when Telemachus from Pyle comes back, From him you will have all you need, of gift. And then you neither Cloak nor Coat will lack. And be convey'd to what place you desire. With that he rose; and woolly skins of Sheep, And shaggie Goat-skins near laid to the fire. And there Ulysses laid him down to sleep.
And over him a Cloak Eumaeus laid; Both thick and soft it was, which he had kept And with it in sharp cold himself arraid, And thus Ulysses warmly cover'd slept. By him the young men lay. But to the sties Eumaeus went. For fit he thought it not To lie far from his Swine, and out he hies. Mean while Ulysses of hs kindness thought. Eumaeus first of all his Sword puts on O're his great Shoulder. Then against the weather A thick warm Cloak. And again that upon A great Goats-skin, the skin and hair together. And then with Dart in hand, for his defence (Gainst Men and Dogs) well armed at the head, To where the tusked Swine lay parted thence, Within a Rock from wind safe covered. LIB. XV. ANd then to Lacedaemon Pallas went To urge Telemachus his leave to take Of Menelaus, to whom she had him sent, And home again what speed he could to make. Telemachus, and Nestor's Son she found Within the entrance of the house abed; The Son of Nestor in a sleep profound. Sleep came not in Telemachus his head. Thought of his Father open kept his eyes. Then Pallas to him said, Telemachus, To stay so long abroad you are not wise, Leaving your Goods with such men in your house,
As lawless there your Substance do devour, Lest afterward you to no purpose come. Importune Menelaus with all your pow'r, Or else your Mother you'll not finde at home. Her Father and her Brethren bid her marry Eurymachus. Of all he bids most high. Take heed what Goods out of your house they carry. You know what thoughts in Female breasts do lie, They will their present Husbands house promote, But for their former Children little care. For he once dead, they have no longer thought Of how his Children after him shall fare. Therefore return you, and commit to some Maid of your own for faith and care well known, Such Goods as in your house you have at home, Until you have a good Wife of your own. I tell you more; remember what I say, The bravest of the Sniters lie in wait As you return, to kill you by the way, 'Twixt Ithaca and Same in the Streight. They'll fail, I think, of what they go about, And sooner some of them their Graves shall find. But howsoever stear the Isles without. The God that keeps you will provide a wind. And when at Ithaca you are on land, Unto the Town your Ship and fellows send, But go you to Eumaeus out of hand, Who, though he keep your Swine, is much your friend. Then Pallas mounted to the Sky. And he Pisistratus awakens with his foot. 'Tis time (said he) that on our Way were we. Let's to the Coach, and set the Horses to'c. Then said Pisistratus, Too dark 'ts yet To travel with a Coach. Let's therefore stay, 'Twill soon be morning. Let's our Presents get, And by Atrides self be sent away. For Guests use a waies to remember those By whom they have been entertain'd with love. This said, the morning by and by arose, And Menelaus toward them did move
Telemachus then puts on hastily His Coat and Cloak to meet him on the way; And when they were to one another nigh, Telemachus first spake, and thus did say. O King, Atrides Menelaus, now, Ev'n now dismiss me, let me go my way. Then said Atrides, Ev'n now you shall go; I purpose not to make you longer stay. For I conceive 'tis not a good mans part, To make too much or little of his Guest, To hold him when he gladly would depart, Or press him to be gone e're he thinks best. In Hospitality this Rule is true, Love him that stays, help forth the going Guest. Stay then and take my Gift along with you, And your Break-fast of what we have the best. For he that will a great days Journey make, Will finde both joy and profit in his meat. And if to visit Greece you pleasure take, I'll with you go, and with you I'll retreat, And to the Argive Cities be your Guide, And be presented by each Princely man With whomsoever we at night abide. Two Mules, a Gold Cup, a brave Pot or Pan. Then said Telemachus, I needs must go, (My Father seeking lest my self I lose) I have left none my Goods to look unto, And rob'd my Treasure may be by my foes. When that was said, forth Menelaus goes, To give unto his Wife and Maids command For Break-fast of what then was in the house. Then Boetheides who lodg'd near at hand Came in; and, bidden by Atrides, cleaves The wood, makes fire, lays down the roast. Him to his bus'ness then Atrides leaves. And down came to his Treasure of great cost, He, and his Son, and Wife Helena. There Within a Room lin'd with sweet smelling wood. A Temp'rer to his Son he gave to bear Of Silver pure, which 'mongst the Vessels stood.
And from a Chest where Robes for Matrons were She took up one, with great varety Wrought by her self, which she her self did bear, Shining and bright as any Star i'th' Sky. And forth unto Telemachus they come. Then said Atrides, Jove grant your request, And safely may you t'Ithaca come home. See here my Gift, of all I have the best. 'Tis massie Silver gilt about the brim, By Vulcan made; but then it was possest By th' King of Sidon. I had it of him When by the way from Troy I was his Guest. Then Helen said, This Gift too take from me, Of Helens handy work a Monument, To give to her that your dear Wife shall be. Think it mean while as to your Mother sent. Then gave it to Telemachus his hands. I'th' Coach Pisistratus then placed all, And at the goodly Gifts amazed stands. Atrides then led them into the Hall, And made them sit, and while they sitting were, A grave Mad-servant from a Golden Ewre, To wash their hands pours on the water clear Over a Bason all of Silver pure. One Tables sets, another lays on Bread. And from their store many good things brings out. The Messes Boetheides severed. Atrides Son the Wine delivered out. When their desire of Food was satisfi'd, Up rose Telemachus and Nestor's Son, And to their Coach they the swift Horses ti'd, And in the Coach were, ready to be gone; And were already got the Court without, But after them Atrides followed, And in his hand a Gold cup he brought out Of Wine, and standing at the Horses head, Brave You h; (said he) to Nestor me commend, That as a Father was to me at Trey. Farewel, and may you to your Journeys end With safety travel and arrive with joy.
Then said Telemachus, All this l'll say, I wish at home I may so treated be Within my Fathers house at Ithaca, Besides the Presents you have given me. As he said this, an Eagle dexter flew And seis'd a great white tame Goose grazing near The standers-by shouted and cri'd, Shu, shue. But yet away the Eagle bore him clear. And none but with the sight was well content. Then to Atrides said Pisistratus, This Prodigy, unto you is it sent From Jupiter? Or is it sent to us? While what to answer he was taking care, Helen prevented him. I will, said she, First tell you what hereon my own thoughts are, And to my mind by th'Gods insused be. You saw the Eagle come down from the Hill, Where nature placed him to dwell and breed, And kill that Goose: So shall Ulysses kill The Suiters that upon his Substance feed. Or, it may be, already there he is Devising for the Suites some ill end. O Gods, then said Telemachus, that this Were so indeed! To you then should I send As to a God my Vows. This said, away They whip their willing Horses through the Town, Which on the plain their Harness shake all day, And were at Pheres when the Sun went down. There Diocles Orsilochus his Son, (Orsilochus by Alphaeus be got) Dwelt, and of entertainment want was none, Nor acceptable Presens were forgot. And when the Morning had her self arraid, Again they put their Horses to the Coach, Which when the Whip they felt once, never staid, Till to the Town of Eyle they did approach. Then sad Telemachus to Nestor's Son, You promis'd, I you Father should decline. But since we here are, now can that be done? And therefore let us both our Counsels joyn.
Friends you and I, and friends our Fathers were; One age we have; this Voyage is some tie, Draw me not from my ship, but leave me here, Lest th'old man force me at his house to lie In kindness when I have such need to go. This said, Pisistratus considered What to make good his promise he should do. And then this Counse came into his head. Turn off (said he) the Cach to the Sea-side, And Menelaus G fs a Shipboard stow, And get aboard. Your small stay here I'll hide, So your departure shall my Father know. For sure I am, if he know you are here, So violent he is, he'll hither come, And call you to his house and stay you there, And be a hind'rance to your going home. And though away youl not be empty sent, Yet will he doubtless very angry be. This said, unto his Father home he went. Telemachus then bad his Company To see prepar'd all things for Sayling fit, And go aboard; aboard went also he. The Rowers on their Seats in order sit. Thus they about their going busie be. Then came a Stranger that a Prophet was, And fled from Argos then for Homicide And by descent was of Melampus race, And stood near to Telemachus his side. For this Melampus once had dwelt in Pyle And rich, but fled by Neleus opprest, And bound he lay in Prison for a while. But afterward he got himself releast, And brought to Neleus his Herds again, And had his Daughter Pero for reward. But left her with his Brother to remain For wife. And then did Pyle no more regard. But went to Argos, where a wife he got, And Children wain had, first Antiphates. And he the valiant Oicleus begot, And Oicus begat Ampareu,
That was belov'd by Pallas and by Jove, And yet he lived not till he was old. He di'd at Thebes, betrayèd by his love, That him discover'd for a Chain of Gold. Almaeon and Amphilochus he got. But Mantius, Melampus second Son Cleitus and Polyphides then begot. Cleitus was fair, but Children he had none. Auror a snatch'd him from he Earth when young. For Mortals he in beauty did excel, And placed him th'Immotal Gods among. And Polyphides Phoebus loved well; And to him gave the Gif: of Prophesie. And since Amphiraus was dean and gone, To soretel any thing with certainty Upon the whole earth like him there was none. Displeased by his Father Mantius, At Hyperesia he prophesi'd. His Son it was, call'd Theoclymeaus, That then stood by Tel machus his side, When he the blessed Gods was praying to. And said, Since worshipping I finde you here, By him you worship, tel me truly who You are, your Father who, and dwelling where Stranger, then said Telemachus, I dwell At Ithaca, born there; my Fathers name Ulysses if he live; but who can tell? And to hear news of that, I hither came. Then answer'd Theoclymenus, And I From Argos Town for killing of a man, Pursued by his Kin, am fore't to fly. Take me aboard that only save me can. Welcome you are, then said Telemachus. Aboard let's go, where you shall have such chear As we can make, and hath contented us. Then took and on the deck he laid his Spear; And up into the Ship he went, and at The Stern he plac'd himself, and close by him The Stranger Theoclymenus down sat. Then bids Telemachus the ship to trim.
And straight the Mast upright they set and bind; And hoise their Sails with ropes of good Cow-hide; And Pallas sent them a good strong forewind, And swiftly did the Ship the Sea divide. The Sun was down, and doubtful was the light, When he to Pherae came and passed by. And then by Elis coasted he all night, And came unto the Thoae Islands nigh; And thought upon the Suiters in his way. Ulysses and Eumaeus supping sat. And when their hunger they had put away, The Tables gone they leasure had to chat. And then Ulysses had a mind to know Whether Eumaeus rather had he staid Ich' Lodge with him, or to the City go, And to the Company he spake and said, Hear me Eumaeus and you all his Friends, I stay here helping to consume your meat. My mind me to the City rather bends. For Bread and Wine there begging I shall get. But I must then entreat you to provide Some good man to go with me. Being there Necessity it self will be my guide To find the houses where there is good chear. And if I go unto Ulysses Doors, Unto Penelope I can tell news, And make my self well known unto the Woo'rs, And they to give me meat will not resuse. I can do any service that they will, (Thank Mercury to whom I owe that good.) Few be they can compare with me for skill To make a Fire, or to cleave out Wood, To roast and carve Meat, or Wine to give out, Or any thing that Great Mens Servants do. Ay me, (Eumaeus said) Poor man, what thought. Is this of yours? D'ye long to perish so? As you must do, if you among them stay. Their insolence is known up to the Sky. You are not like their Serving men. For they Are young, and are apparell'd handsomely
With Coat and Vest. Their heads and faces shine With Unguents sweet. Stay therefore here with me There's none that at your staying doth repine. Nor I, nor any of my Company. Telemachus when he comes home agen, Shall give you Garments, a fair Coat and Vest. And good Shooes also to your feet, and then See you convoy'd to what place you think best. To this Ulysses-answered, and said, O that Jove lov'd you but as well as I! You have me from a wreched wandring staid. The Belly brings to men much misery. Then said Ulysses, Since I am to stay, Say, of Ulysses Parents, if you know His Father and his Mother, whether they Be both remaining yet alive or no. To this Eumaeus said, Laertes lives, But wofully and weary of his life; Still for the absence of his Son he grieves; But more lamenteth the death of his Wife. The loss of her was that first made him old. She di'd for grief, thinking her Son was dead. As sad a death it was as can be told. May we from such death be delivered. While she was living, though she grieved were, When cause there was I could have askt her mind Freely. For why, with her own Daughter dear She brought me up, and never was but kind. This Daughter Ctimene, when come of age (For she the youngest was) to Same went To a rich man given in Marriage. But I well clad in Cat and Vest was sent (And shooe upon my seet) into the field, For she a purpose had to do me good. But now the time does no such kindness yield. And yet the blessed Gods provide me food. For they so well have multipli'd my Swine, That we have still enough of meat and drink, And wherewithal to make a poor man dine, Although the Suiter; riot make them shrink.
ot since this woe Penelope befel, 'Tis harsh to her to hear of business. Yet Servants need her both to ask and tell All that belongeth to their Offices, And also sometimes, may be, need they had I'th' house to eat, and carry somewhat home Of that whereof Servants are most part glad, And which unto their Lodges never come. Ho, said Ulysses, since it doth appear You were a Traveller when but a Boy, Tell me, I pray, what your Adventures were, And what your sufferings were upon the way. Was your Town plund'red by the Enemies, And you brought hither as a part o'th' prey? Or been by Thieves (for you were no ill prize) As you kept Sheep or Cattle, brought away? Then said Eumaeus, Since to hear the Story Of how I hther came it is your pleasure, Sit patiently, the Wine there stands before ye. For sleep and joy the long nights give us leasure. It is not good too soon to go to bed; For too much sleep is but a weariness. The rest that will may go, and (morning spread) Drive forth the Swine; which is their business. Mean while let us sit here, and drink, and chat, And Stories of our sad Adventures tell. For much contentment there is ev'n in that, To them that suffer'd have and come off well. But to my Story now. An Isle there is Under the Tropique of the Sun, not great, Call'd Syria, but very fertile 'tis, Well stor'd with Kine, and Sheep, and Wine and Wheat. Where Famine never enter'd nor Disease Amongst the people. When a man was aged, Dian' and Phoebus made him die with ease, And gentle shafts the pain of death asswaged. Two Towns it had. Their Laws were not the same; But of them both my Father was the King. Phoenician Merchants, Rats, then thither came, And in their Ships did many Baubles bring.
There then was in my Fathers house a Maid, Phoenician born, that well could sowe and spin; As washing Clothes she at the Seas side staid, One of these Merchants sooth'd her into fin. (For good Work women may be made do that If fltter'd well.) And then he askt her name, And whence she was. And truth she told the Rat. From Sidon (said she) a rich Town I came, And Daughter am of wealthy Arybas. But Taphian Theves took me by force away, As homewards from the field I going was, And sold me to this man with whom I stay. Then said the Merchant man that did her wie, Will you to Sidon home return with me, And see your Parents? They are still alive, And rich as heretofore. I will, said she, If you and all your company will swear, At Sidon you will set me safe ashore. And when all sworn, and agreed on it were, The woman spake again, and this said more: If any of you see me in the stree, Or at the Well, speak not at all to me, Lest any of the house should chance to see't, And tell my Master. Jealous he will be, Put me in Bonds, and seek you to destroy. Buy quickly what you buy, and ready be And secret. When you mean to go away, Then send a privy Messenger to me. For all the Go'd I can lay hand upon I'll bring, and somewht else Boat-hire to pay. For I the charge have of my Masers Son, Much profit he will yield if brought away. Playing without I'll take him by the hand And lead him to the Ship. Much worth he'll be. Transported into whatsoever Land. And home again (this said) returned she. A year it was before these Merchants went. Mean while they bu and lade the Ship. And when They had their fraught, straightway a man they sent To bid the Maid make haste away. And then
A man unto my Fathers house they sent: A crasty Merchant with a Chain of Gold And shining Aber, on which were intent My Mother and her Maids. They much behold, And take into their hands, and for it bid. Mean while the man a no gave with his head. The woman quickly understand him did; And by the hand me out a door she led. Aboard went he. The woman lookt about, Saw standing on the Tables many a Cup Lest by my Father, and his Guests gone out. And presently she three of them took up. Out went she leading me that simple was. The Sun went down, and dusky was the Way, And to the Ship we unpursued pass To th'Haven where the Merchants Vessel lay. And then go they, and with them we aboard. And sail'd before the Wind six days and nights. And to us Jove a fair gale did afford. Diana on the sev'nth the woman smites. And suddenly into the Sink she fell, And her they throw into the Sea for chea. To fishes. But the rest arrived well At Ithaca. Laextes bought me there. You see now how I hither came. Then said Ulysses, Truly you have past much woe. But Jove in part your sorrows hath alla'd, That in a good mans house at ease are now, That gives you meat and drink with a good will. With him you live a happy life. But I Have longer wandring been, and must be still. Thus 'twixt themselves did they say and reply, Then went to sleep. The night was almost past. And with the Morn Telemachus was night. Quickly his Mates take down the Sails and Mast, And row the Ship to land, and there her tie. Then on the Beach they quickly break their fast. And with fresh water temper their old Wine. And when desire of Meat and Drink was past, I'll (said Telemachus) go to my Swine,
But to the City will return at night, Next Morn I'll feast you with good flesh and wine, Your labour in my Passage to requite. And then said Theoclymenus divine, What will you do mean while (I pray) with me? Unto your Mothers house must I go too, Or to some other man commended be? Then answered Telemachus, No, no. To bring you to my house in vain it were. My Mother in my absence you'll not see. She seldome to the Suiters doth appear. At top o'th' house at work still sitteth she. But I will recommend you to another In Ithaca of best repute; his name Eurylochus, and best he loves my Mother. And what my Father did would do the same. But folded up it lies ye: in Jove's lap, Whether he first shall marri'd be or dead. As he this said, there did a Faulcon hap (Apollo's Bird) to fly above his head Dexter, and in his Pounces held a Dove. And as he plumed her the feathers fell Scatter'd as they descended from above (Which Theclymenus observed well) Betwixt Telemachus and the Ships side, And to Telemachus said secretly, This from the Gods is, and doth good betide Both to your self and your Posterity. I knew that it portended at first sight, No family but yours was here to reign. O, said Telemachus, that that were right, Such Love, such Gifts you then should from me gain, As men that saw you should your fortune bless. Pyraeus then his friend was standing by. To him he then his Stranger did address: You are my best friend of the company, Unto your care this Stranger I commend To be well treated till I come again. Though long you stay (said he) I do intend The best I can your friend to entertain,
And with some Gift. Then to the ship he goes, He and his Mates. They on their Benches sit. Telenachus then putteth on his shooes, And takes a Spear that for his hand was fit. The Ship about they to the City row. Telemachus pursuing his designe, On foot unto Eumaeus forth did go, His faithful Servant, Master of the Swine. LIB. XVI. EUmaeus and Ulysses risen were, And men, for Dinner, sent out to fetch Hogs, And fire was made. Ulysses chanc'd to hear One tread without, and whining of the Dogs That barked not. And to Eumaeus said, Some one of your acquaintance now comes in. I hear his feet. The Dogs are well appai'd. These words scarce said, Telemachus was seen. Eumaeus, who then temp'ring was of Wine, Lets fall his Cups, and meets him at the door; Kisses his head and hands, and both his eyne, And presently with tears his eyes run o're. As when a loving Father sees his Son That had been ten years absent, and for whom He had lamented long, come home alone; So glad was he Telemachus was come, And hug'd him as one that had scap't but than From death, and weeping said, O are you come? I never thought to see you more, sweet man, Since first I knew to Pyle you went from home. But come, come in dear heart, that I may fill My self with looking, you're not oft among
Your Herdsmen in the field, but almost still I'th' City, in the Suiters dismal throng. Yes, said Telemachus, for why, I come To see you, and to ask about my Mother, Whether she still remaining be at home, O gone be with a Suiter one or other, Leaving her Husbands Chamber and his Bed With Cobwebs hung for want of Furniture. No, she yet stays (Eumaeus answered) And great the grief is which she doth endure; And day and night the tears fall from her eyes. Telemachus went in. His Father there To give him place did from his Chair arise. Sit still, said he, I'll find a Seat elsewhere In my own house. This man will one provide. This said, he past unto another Seat, To which Eumaeus a Wool-sell appli'd With Rushes under it. Then brought in meat, Trenchers of meat reasted the day before, And in a Basket sets on bread of Wheat, And in an Ivy-Tankard Wine good store. And o're against Ulysses takes his seat. Then on the meat prepar'd their hands they laid. When Thirst and Hunger nothing more requir'd, Telemachus unto Eumaeus said, And thus about his new-come Guest enquir'd, Father (said he) I pray you tell me now His own, his Fathers, and his Countries name. And farther I desire you let me know Where are the Mainers that with him came Unto this place. And tell me this likewise, Where rideth the good Ship that brought him to't. For verily I can no way devise, How he should come on Horsback or on Foot. To this Eumaeus answered agen: He says himself that he was born in Creet, And seen the Cities has of many men, Wandring about. For Jove so thought it meet. Thesprotian Rats got him aboard their Ship, And forced were in Ithaca to land.
There he sound means to give them all the slip. So came to mine, and from mine to your hand. Ig've him you, as you think best to use. To this again Telemachus reples, That which you say, Eumaeus, is bad news. How to receive him I cannot devise. I am too young to save him with my hands, If injury be done him by the Wooers. And at this time my Mother doubtul stands, Whether to stay within my Fathers doors, And with the people her good name maintain, Or with that Suiter wed and go away, That to her shall afford the greatest gain. But since the Stranger at your house doth stay, I'll give him Garments a good Coat and Vest, A Spear in's hand, and good Shoes to his feet, And him convey to what place he thinks best, Or if to keep him here you think it meet, I'll hither for him Garments send and food, That he no charge be to your Family. To set him with the Suiters 'tis not good For me nor him, they so unruly be. He'll be derided there, and I shall grieve: But 'gainst so many men what can be done? The strength of one man cannot him relieve. Ulysses then made answer to his Son, O Friend (said he) it bites my heart to hear What of the Suiters in your house you say, Haw 'gainst your mind they proudly domineer. Is it because you willingly give way? Or that your people by Divinity Adverse are to you or your Government? Or are your Kindred that should stand you by In Quarrel and in Battle, discontent? O, were I young and of the mind I am, Or that I were the Great Ulysses Son, Or he himself, and wandring hither came, I'd have my head cut off by any one, If I were not reveng'd upon them all. And though they were too hard for me alone,
I'd rather in my own house fighting fall, Than daily see such ugly things there done. Strangers abus'd; Maids tous'd ill favourdly, And Corn and Wine consumed without end, And to no purpose foolishly. For why, They never shall arrive where they intend. Then said Telemachus, No word o'th' Gods Hath me deprived of the peoples love, Nor any Brother is with me at odds, Nor any other cause I know but Jove. How many Lords within these Isles do sway, Same, Dulichium, Ithaca, and Zant, So many Suiters duely every day For Marriage with my Mother my house haunt. Whilst she can none put off, and will none marry, They spend my Corn and Wine, and Cattle kill, And eating here, and drinking still they tarry, And me perhaps at last they murther will. But what they shall do none but God can tell. But Father go you to Penelope, And let her know I am arrived well. And let no other person know but she. And after you have told her tarry not. Make haste. At your return I shall be here. For many are they that my death do plot. True, said Eumaeus, but not ill it were To let Laertes know it by the way, Who when his grief but for Ulysses was, Did oversee his Workmen all the day, But since by Sea to Pylus you did pass, He neither oversees his Husbandry, Nor eats his meat, as still he did before, But groaning and lamenting wofully Liveth. Telemachus did thus reply, The case is hard. But grieved though he be, Let him alone; go not out of your way. For first I wish my Father here to see, If in my choice to have my wishes lay. But pray my Mother thither send a Maid, To tell Laertes secretly the news.
When to him thus Telemachus had said, Eumaeus on his eet ti'd on his shooes. Ulysses and his Son now left alone, Came Pallas to them. At the door she stood. But by Telemachus she was not known. God are not known but by whom they think good. Ulysses knew her. Far she was and tall, And of a grave wise Maton had the look; And by the Dogs perceiv'd was. For they all Whining and errifi'd the place forsook. A signe t'Ulysses she made with her brow. Then he went forth, and she unto him spake. Son of Laertes, wise Ulysses, now Your Son with your designe acquainted make. And when you have the Suiters fate contrived, Go to the City both. 'Twill not be long Before I at your Combat be arrived, And give you my assistance in the throng. Then stroakt him over with a wand of Gold, And presently his Rags were Cloak and Coat. His Cheeks were plump. His Beard black to behold. To which his goodly Locks unlike were not. This done, the Goddess mounted to the Skies. Ulysses to the house again retir'd. But from him then his Son turn'd off his eyes. So much this alteration he admir'd He thought it was some God, and to him said, You are some God descended from the Sky. Your colour's better, better you arraid. Save us. Our Gifts shall on your Altar lie. And then Ulysses said, God I am none. What ail you with the Gods me to compare? For I your Father am whom you bemoan, And for whom you have had such pain and care, And then embrac'd and kiss'd his Son, and wept, So that the ground he stood upon was wet, Though hitherto his eyes he dry had kept. But by his Son believ'd he was not vet. You're not (says he) my Father, but some Spright That flatters me into more misery.
Of mortal men there's none that has the might To do such things without a Deity. A God indeed can mans decay redeem. You were but now an old man ill arraid. And now like one new come from Heaven seem. To this Ulysses answered and said, Telemachus be not amaz'd too much. Other Ulysses you shall never see. I am the man, although my luck be such, As after twenty year not known to be. The change you see was by Athena wrought, That made me what she list (for she can do't.) A Beggar old, or Youth in a fine Coat, And handsome Cloak, and other Garments to't. For easie 'tis for Gods on mortal men To lay on glory, and the same displace. This said, Ulysses sat him down. And then Telemachus his Father did embrace, And then they both together wept and sob'd. As Eagles or as Vultures when they see Their Nests by Country-people spoil'd and rob'd, And young ones kill'd before they fledged be; So wept these two, and weeping there had staid Perhaps until the closing of the day, But that Telemachus t'Ulysses said, Father, how came you t'Ithaca I pray? Where are the Seamen that set you ashore? For sure I am you could not come by land. In a good Ship, said he, I was brought o're From th'Isle Phaeacia, and left o'th' Sand. That people, Strangers all that thither come, Convoy unto the place where they would be. And when I was desirous to go home, At Ithaca asleep they landed me, Enricht with Presents, Garments, Gold and Brass. And in a Cave hidden have the same. And as I by Athena counsel'd was, The Suiters fate to weave I hither came. Tell me how many now they are. That we Consider may if we two and no more
Shall be enough to get the Victory, Or must we of some else the aid implore? O Father (said his Son) you are renown'd For a good Counsellour, a man of might, But very hard the thing is you propound, That two men should against so many fight. They are not only ten, or two times ten, But many more. Their number (let me see) From out Dulichium two and fifty men; And with them lusty Serving men twice three. From Same chosen men come twenty four. Twenty from Zant, and twelve of Ithaca. Redon the Squire, a Fidler, and what more? Two Cooks that of a Feast had learnt the Law. 'Twill be but ill revenge to fight them all. Therefore I think it best to look for aid, And some good Neighbour to assist you call. To this Ulysses answered and said, Consider then and cast it in your mind, Whether we two, Pallas and Jove to boot Will serve, or must we other succours find? Then said his Son, O Father, that will do't. Those friends indeed would serve us very much. Immortals against Mortals have great odds; Higher they stand, and of themselves are such, As would too hard be for all th'other Gods. Yes, said Ulysses, if the Woo'rs and I Come but to Battle once, 'twill not be long Ere such good aids will have the Victory, And make an end of this unruly throng. But you Telemachus go early home To morrow morning; mingle with the rabble, I after you will with Eumaeus come Like to a Beggar old and miserable. Where if you see me us'd ill-favour'dly, Thrown at or pull'd about the house y th'heels, As unconcern'd, endure it patiently, What pain soever thereby your heart feels. But yet with gentle words you may persuade them. For sure I am they will not you obey,
The Gods Immortal have so stupid made them As on themselves to bring their fatal day. But now to what I say attentive be. When Pallas shall me prompt, I'll with my head Make you a Signe. Assoon as that you see, Let th'Arms in th'Hall away be carried. And say (if any Suter ask wherefore) The fire hath hurt them, and they are not now Such as Ulysses left them heretofore, When with the Greeks t'Ilium he did go. Or say, For fear some Quarrel should arise By th'indiscretion of one or other, You thought the counsel would not be unwise, To take them thence. One drawn Sword draws an∣other. But two Spears, two Swords, & two Shields keep still, To take in hand when we the onset make. Jove from mistrust and Pallas keep them will. And farther from me this instruction take. As I your Father am, and you my Son, Of my return a word let no man hear, Father, or Wife, or Servant any one. To speak of it in company forbear. But let's of the Maid-servants you and I Endeavour what we can to know the mind. And your Men-servants also I would try, From whom you honour or dishonour find. Father, then said Telemachus, you'll see, I am not lose of tongue But 'tis not good The men to question. 'Twill lost labour be, Because without the house they have their food, Though there they havock of your substance make. Do as you please. 'Tis a long business Of ev'ry one of them account to take. Inform your self of th'womens wickedness. I would not willingly go up and down To ev'ry Lodge, what there is done to see. For our work done, theirs will be better known, If you with Signes from Jove acquainted be Thus they discours'd. The Mariners mean while Had brought into the Haven of the Town
The Ship that brought Telemachus from Pyle. Then drew it up to land, the Sails pull'd down. The Presents unto Clytius they bear, And to Penelope a man they sent, That of her Sons arrival she might hear, And how unto Eumaeus Lodge he went, And sent the Ship to put her out of fear, Lest she should for his absence longer weep. Eumaeus was for the same bus'ness there. He from his Lodge, the other from the Deep. He told the Queen th' arrival of her Son. And to her Maids the other told the same. And when they both their Messages had done, Back to Telemachus Eumaeus came. At this the Suiters vext, lookt down and sad, And out o'th' Gates together went, where they Amongst themselves a consultation had, And to them thus Eurylochus 'gan say. 'Tis very strange, Telemachus is come. We thought he never should return agen. But since 'tis so, to call our Fellows home, Let's hire and man a Boat with Fishermen: His words scarce out, Amphinomus comes near, And turning towards th'Haven them espi'd Furling their Sails, and laughing said, Th'are here, You need not any Messenger provide. Some God sure told him of them, or else they Saw the Ship coming by, but were too slow To over take her. This said, they away Down to the waters-side together go. And up unto the land the Ship they hale; Their Servants what was in her bear away. And then to consultation they fall, Nor with them suffer'd any else to stay. To them Antinous began and said, The Gods Telemachus have strangely kept. Our Scouts from Morn to Night o'th' Mountains staid, Nor on the land by night we ever slept, But rowed up and down until 'twas day. We thought he could not scape in any wise.
And yet some Daemor brought him has away. Come, let us how to kill him here devise: For whilst he lives our work will not be done. Crafty he is, and can his purpose hide: Nor have we yet sufficiently won The people of the Town with us to side. The multitude to counsel he will call, And ranting tell them that we go about To murther him, and, so enflame them all That from our Country they will cast us out, And make us beg our bread. Which to eschew Let's kill him in the Fields, or in the Way; Divide his goods amongst us as is due; His Houses to his Mother leave we may, To give to him with whom she means to marry. If this you like not, but that he shall stay, And have his Fathers state, then let's not tarry, But each man to hs own house go his way, And there contend who shall the best endow her, And in her favour the superiour be. Or let the Fates dispose the happy hour To whom she has a mind to. So said he. Then spake Amphinomus the noble Son Of the rich Nisus Aretiades, Amongst the Wooers inferiour to none, And best of all Penelope did please. Telemachus (said he) I would not kill. 'Tis dangerous to slay the Royal Blood. But let us first of Jove enquire the will. If he command, I'll dot, and say 'tis good. If he forbid, I wish you to desist. So said Amphinomus, and 'twas thought fit. And presently the Council was dismist And then into the house they go and sit. And now Penelope resolv'd t'appear Before her Suters sitting in the Hall. For to her Son she knew they Traytors were. Medon that with them was had tld her al. Down to the Hall she went, and in the Door Having a Woman at each hand, she stad,
And proud Antinous rebuked sore. Antinous, you Traytor impudent (she said) In Ithaca the Glory you have got Of Wit and Eloquence. You are beli'd. Madman, what all you my Sons death to plot, And to his Strangers here to shew such pride? Poor Strangers have their Passport from the Gods. To do them wrong is great Impiety. And worse between themselves to be at ods. You know your Father hither once did fly, Fearing the People whom he had offended, Joyning with Tophian Thieves to make a prey Of Thesprote Cattle, and were here defended Against the Thesprotes, though our friends were they. They slain him had, and seised his estate, But that Ulysses saved him, and now For to require him what d'ye, O ingrate? You eat his Cattle, and his Wife you wooe, And kill my Son, and daily me molest. Desist, I tell you, and the rest perswade To leave these evil courses, you were best. To this Eurylochus then answer made. Icarius Daughter, wise Penelope, Fear not. None shall lay hands upon your Son, As long as I am living and can see, Who does, his blood shall on my Spear down run. His Father oft has set me on his knee, And given me good Wine, and good Meat rost, Afraid of any Woo'r you need not be. Telemachus of all men I love most. Of death from Gods hand none can warrant you. But as for us you may securely sleep. So said he, and yet then his death did brew. Away went then Penelope to weep, And wept till Pallas came and clos'd her eyes. And to Ulysses and his Son at Night Eumaeus came. A Swine they sacrifice. And then did Pallas from the Sky alight, And with her Rod return'd Ulysses old, And ill arrai'd, for fear he should be known
T'Eumaeus or Penelope, and told By them to others, and abroad be blown. Telemachus then to Eumaeus said: Eumaeus, are you come? what news from Town? The Suiters are they come that me way-laid? Or do they for me still look up and down? Then said Eumaeus, I did not enquire, Upon my Message only was my mnd. That done, to make haste back was my desire. But there I chanc't a Messenger to find, Sent by your Mates to tell Penelope, And he the news t'your Mother first did tell. I saw a Ship that new came in from Sea, But whether that were it, I know not well. Aboard were many Arms and many Men. And though I were not sure, I thought 'twas it. Telemachus on's Father smiled then, But so as that Eumaeus could not see't. Then came their Supper in, which they fell to. A Supper good they had, and were well pleased. And when their hunger had no more to do, With gentle sleep their fear and care disseised. LIB. XVII. SOon as the rosie Morning did appear, Riseth Telemachus; his Shoes puts on; And takes into his hand his heavy Spear; And hasteth to the City to be gone. And said unto Eumaeus, Father, I Am going to the City, there to see My Mother, that will never cease to cry, And sob till in her sight I standing be.
But the poor Stranger guide you to the Town, With broken meat and wine himself to feed, Such as he gets by begging up and down. I cannot maintain all men that have need. Tak't how he will. For I love to speak plain. Then said Ulysses, Sweet Friend, nor would I Here in the Country willingly remain. For Beggars wants great Cities best supply. Here at the Lodge no service I can do. And now to learn of others am too old. With this man to the City I would go, But warm me first I would. For very cold This Morning is. I fear this hoary frost. Far hence the Town is, and my Garments thin; And which I reason have to fear the most, My rags will to the air betray my skin. Telemachus then speedily went home, With mischief to the Suiters in his head. And when he to the Palace-gate was come, T'a Pillar sets his Spear, and entered. Euryclea was cov'ring Chairs i'th' Hall, And saw him first, and straight unto him went; And then the other Woman-servants all Declared with much kissing their content. Then like Diana or fair Aphrodite, Penelope came shedding tears of joy, And on his shoulders laid her arms milk-white, And kist his head and eyes, and thus did say: Telemachus my dear Child, are you here? I never thought again your face to see, Since of your Father news you went to hear At Pyle by Sea, without acquainting me. But tell me what at Pyle they of him say. Mother (said he) pray let me take my breath, My thoughts in great disorder are to day; I come but now from out the jaws of death. But with your Maids go to your Chamber now, And in your fairest Garments you array, And to th'Immortal Gods all make a Vow A perfect Hecatomb to them you'll pay,
If Jove be pleas'd our losses to restore. But I unto the Market-place must haste, To treat a Stranger whom I sent before, And till my coming with Piraeus plac't. Penelope then to her Chamber went, And put her self into her best array. Her Vows to all th'Immortal Gods she sent A perfect Hecatomb to them to pay, If Jove be pleas'd her losses to restore. Telemachus in hand then takes his Spear, And with two Dogs at's heels went out a door; And Pallas made him like a God appear. The people all admir'd him as he came; The Suiters all about him gathered, And spake him fair, while in their hearts they frame Plots and devices how his blood to shed. But he his seat amongst them quickly quits, To Mentor and his Fathers antient friends Altherses, Antephus, with them he sits, And there the time discoursing with them spends. Piraeus not long after cometh in, And brings his Stranger with him to the place, Who there a very little while had been But that Telemachus hard by him was. Then said Piraeus to Telemachus, Send of your women some to fetch away The goodly Presents you left at my house. No, said Telemachus, let them yet stay, I know not yet th'event of our affairs. If th'Wooers kill me and my Goods divide, I rather had they should be yours than theirs. If I kill them, and God be on my side, Then send them, and I'll take them joyfully. And brought away the Stranger with him home. And by and by the Suiters thither hie. And when they all into the house were come, On Couches and on Chairs their Cloaks they lay, And presently into their Baths they go. And bath'd and oyl'd again themselves array, And sat them down. And Supper ready now,
A Maid then water in a Golden Ewre To wash their hands over a Bason brings. The Bason also was of Silver pure. Another on the Tables lays good things, That in her keeping were, and sets on Bread. Penelope sat spinning in the door. And then they heartily fell to and fed. And when desire of meat and drink was o're, Unto her Son Penelope then spake: I will, said she, upon my Bed lie down, Though there I ever weeping lie awake, Since he went with Atrides to Troy-Town, Since you would not vouchsafe to let me know The news you heard, before these men came'in. Mother (said he) the truth I'll tell you now. We went to Pyle, and Nestor we have seen. And lovingly we entertained were. For as a Father entertains his Son Come home from far; so were we treated there, And welcome to his Children every one. But that Ulysses was alive or dead, He met with no man that could tell him true. But us to go to Sparta counselled, And said, If any, Menelaus knew. And us with Coach and Horses did provide (Where we saw Helen, bane of Greece and Troy) He also sent his Son with us for Guide, And thither come receiv'd we were with joy. Atrides of my coming askt the reason. I told him all the truth. He answer'd then, Oh ho, into the strong mans house by Treason Are entred many weak and heartless men. As when a Stag and Hinde entring the Den Of th'absent Lion, lulls his whelps with tales Of Hills and Dales, the Lion comes agen And tears them into pieces with his nails; So shall Ulysses all these rascals slay. Oh that the Gods Apollo, Pallas, Jove, Amongst the Suiters bring him would one day, Such as when with Philomelide he strove,
And threw him flat, and made the Argives glad, If such Ulysses once amongst them were, Short would their lives be, and their wedding bad. But of the matter, whereof you enquire, On my own knowledg I can nothing say, Nor will with rash conjectures you beguile. I told was with Calypso he doth stay (By Proteus and old Sea-God) in an Isle, And would come home, but wants both ship & men To pass him o're the broad back of the Main. This said, we took our leaves, a fair gale then Quickly convei'd us o're the liquid plain. After Telemachus had spoken tus, Penelope her heart was ill at ease. And then spake to her Theoclymenus: Wife of Ulysses Laertiades, This man (said he) knows not, hear me. For I Jove's mind foresee. Jove first, and then the Ghost That takes the care of this best family, And dwelling in it doth maintain the rost, You know Ulysses is now in this Isle, Sitting or creeping, and observes these Wooers, What evil deeds they do. And he the while The Destiny contriveth of the doers. I saw the same at Sea by Augury, And said unto Telemachus no less. Oh that the Gods would make it true, said she, I'd so reward you that men should you bless. While they together thus within discourse, The Suiters were gone out to throw the Stone, And Darts upon the Green before the doors As they at other times before had done. Now Supper-time drew near. Sheep home were brought. From ev'ry field. Then Medon to them spake, (Who 'mongst the Suiters had most favour got) Come in, says he, and care of Supper take. For of these Games, I see you have your fill. In supping early damage there is none. Agreed they were; none thought the motion ill. They then into the Hall went every one.
On Couches and on Chairs their Cloaks they throw. Great Sheep, fat Goats enough they sacrifice And franked Swine, and from the Herd a Cow. Mean while Eumaeus to the City hies, Ulysses with him, to whom thus he said: Come Father, let us to the City go, Since 'tis my Masters will. You should have staid If my advice you would have hearkned to, But the Commands of Masters are severe; The time o'th' day already is much spent. And though it will be late e're we be there, I fear, e're it be night you will repent. And then Ulysses to Eumaeus said, I hear, I understand, I pray go on. Only of rugged way I am afraid, Give me a good strong staff to lean upon. Then on his shoulder he his Scrip did throw; Given he had a great Staff to his mind, And they two to the Town together go, Leaving the Swineherds and the Dogs behind. Ulysses like a Beggar old and lame, And all his Rayment ragged was and wretched. But when they near unto the Fountain came, From which the Citizens their water fetched, The Fountain sweetly streaming and well made B'Ithacus Neritus, Polector Kings, That flieth from a high and chilling shade, Where in a Poplar Grove arise the Springs, And there an Altar is, and on the same The Passengers to th'Nymphs pay offerings. When we were there, Melanthus to us came, And Goats, the fattest of his Herds, he brings. Whither now goest thou with this Beggar here, This Trouble-feast, who begging scraps and snuffs, (Not Swords and Kettles) many blows shall bear Of flying Foot-stools, and get many Cuffs. Would thou wouldst give him me my Lodge to keep, And lead my Goats afield with a green bough, And live on Whey, and my Goat-houses sweep, And his great knee unto such service bow.
But hang him, he has such a custome got Of Idleness with begging of his food, That labour for his living he will not. But this I tell you, and 'twill be made good, When he within Ulysses house appears, Many a footstool in the Hall will fly From out the Suiters hands about his ears. This said, he pass'd, and kick'd him going by. Ulysses still stood firm upon the path, Thinking to strike him with his great staff dead, Or otherwise to kill him in his wrath. But in the end his wrath he conquered. Eumaeus then held up his hands and pray'd: Nymphs of these Fountains, Daughters of Great Jove, If the sat Gifts here by Ulysses laid Upon your Altars were receiv'd with love, Gant that he may come safely home again By some good Spirit to his house convai'd. Then (to Melantheus said he) all in vain Will be your triumph, and your pride allai'd, Wherewith you to the Suiters daily go. And Knaves remain the Cattle to abate. Then said Melantheus again, O ho! How boldly does this Dog, this Raskal prate! Whom one day I shall from hence ship away, And make of him somewhere abroad good gain. Would th'Wooers, or Phoebus, but as surely slay The Son, as 'tis t'expect his Father vain. When this was said, away he went apace, And coming to the Suiters in the Hall, Against Eurymachus he took his place, Whom best he loved of the Suiters all. And there the Waiters set before him meat. The Women of the Pantry brought him bread. Ulysses and Eumaeus were not yet Arriv'd, but near, for close they followed, And of the Fiddle they could hear the din. Ulysses said unto Eumaeus then, 'Tis a fine house Ulysses dwelled in, And eas'ly known from those of other men,
The Court with Wall and Hedge is fenced strong, Having strong Gates, with two Locks great & fast. Some Feast here is; I hear the sound of Song, And Fiddle, which with Feast the Gods have plac't. Then answered Eumaeus, 'Tis well guest, And other things you mark as well as this. But let us now consider what is best, In that which at this time our bus'ness is. Go you in first, and put your self among The Suiters; or if you think better so, I'll first go in, but do not you stay long, Lest you of one or other take a blow. I hear, I understand. Go you in first. The Seas and Wars have taught me patience. Of all my suff'rings this is not the worst. Of blows and throws I have experience. And may the Suiters henceforth have the same. The Belly forceth Mortals to much Woe. But there is no force can the Belly tame. It sets the Good Ship on the Sea to go, Which t'one another evil fortune bears. While they discoursed thus before the door, Ulysses Dog held up his head and ears, Argus by name, that had been long before Well lookt to, ere Ulysses went to Troy. They with him cours'd the wild Goat, Deer, and Hare; But all the while his Master was away, The Servants of his keeping took no care, But on the Dung before the Door he lay, Which there was heap'd to manure Fields & Leas, From many Mules and Cattle faln away. There lay the old Dog Argus full of Fleas. And as Ulysses near was couch'd his ears, And fauned with his tail, but could not rise. And which Eumaeus did not se, the tears Ready to fall were from Ulysses eyes. And then Ulysses to Eumaeus said, This is a very well-shap'd Dog I see. 'Tis strange to see him on a Dunghil laid, I know not whether also swift he be,
Or for his beauty only was he fed, As Lords make much of Dogs for being fine, And at their Tables see them cherished. Then answered the Master of the Swine: The Master of him is of life bereft. If now he were the same for shape and deed He then was when Ulysses here him left, You'ld quickly see he had both strength and speed. There was no Beast he once saw in the Wood That could escape him. For not only swift, But also at a Scent was very good. But now himself scarce able is to lift. For why his Master being dead and gone, He was not left unto the Womans care. And when the Master is not looking on, Men servants of their duty careless are. For half the vertue taken is away Of whosoever is to service ti'd. This said, into the house he went his way. And Argus, having seen his Master, d'd. Telemachus, the first that saw him enter, Unto him nodded to come to his Seat. A Chopping-board was near him by adventure. He took up that, whereon to eat his meat. And near Telemachus he plac'd the same. A Waiter sets before him flesh and bread. And after him Ulysses also came Like an old Beggar torn and tattered. And said t'Eumaeus, Give the Beggar this, And bid him go and try the charity Of all the rest; and tell him hurtful 'tis For Beggars to have too much modesty. Eumaeus then streight went unto the Guest, And said, Telemachus doth give you this, And bids you try your fortune with the rest, For modesty to Beggars hurtful is. And then Ulysses to Eumaeus says, God bless Telemachus and make him great, And always grant him that for which he prays. And then with both his hands receiv'd his meat.
And as the Fiddle with the Feast gives o're, Ulysses when he eaten had his meat, Sate quiet on the Sill and said no more. But still amongst the Woo'rs the noise was great. Then Pallas comes and stands Ulysses by, And bids him try the Suiters as they sat Which of them had, which wanted charity, Though they the same men would be for all that. Then rising up, before the first he stands, And to the right hand onward still he goes To every one, and holds up both his hands, Like one that well the Art of Begging knows. They gave him meat, and wondred at the man, And one another askt, Who is't, and whence. And then Melanthius to speak began: I saw hm, said he, but a little since Brought hither by the Master of the Swine. But who he is, his Kindred, and his place, It is not in my power to divine. This said, Antinous in choler was. O noble Master of the Swine, said he, What made you here to introduce this Guest? Think you that yet too few the Beggars be, That you must needs invite this trouble-feast, Your Lords estate the sooner to eat up? Good as you are (says he) you say not right. No man a Stranger e're call'd in to Sup, And him on no acquaintance did invite, Unless he were a man that mo men need, Prophet, Physician, or Armourer, Or Fidler at a Feast; for when men feed A Song doth adde delight unto the chear. These use to be invited ev'ry where. Who ever call'd a Beggar in to eat? But to the Servants you still cruel were, And of them all you me the worst did treat. But I care little whilst Penelope Alive is, and Telemachus her Son. Telemachus then bad him silent be. Eumaeus (said he) let him now alone,
He loves to quarrel, and set others on! Then to Antinous he turn'd and spake, Is this as from a Father to his Son, To bid me, make my Guest my house forsake? I'll never do't. Give him what Alms you will, Nor shall my Mother, nor I, nor a man, Nor woman that here dwelleth take it ill. But eat than give, it seems you better can. Then said Antinous, These words are great, And passionate, but spoken without need. If thus we all go on to give him meat, He may himself three months together feed. This said, his Footstool to his foot he drew. Ulysses with his Scrip went to the Sill, (For it was full) meaning to beg anew. And first he tries Antinous his will. Give a poor Stranger (says he.) You appear Amongst th' Achaeans here to be the best. For like a King you look, and reason 'twere You should in bounty exceed all the rest. And I abroad your goodness will make known. I could for riches once with most compare, And kept a great and free house of my own, And askt what want you, man, not what you are. And many Servants had, and things that pass For happiness amongst us mortals all, Till t' Aegypt I by Knaves perswaded was To sail. I'th' Nile we let our Anchors fall. There I my Fellows bid aboard to stay And guard the ships; and some to places high I sent to watch. But mov'd by lucre they On Plunder and on Rapine had their eye. The fields they waste, and kill the men, and make Women and Children captives. Then the cry Arriving at the City, Arms they take, And next day early to the fields they hie With Horse and Foot. Then thundered the Field, Their Armour lightned. My men frighted were. Some taken and made Slaves, some flying kill'd, And all the rest ran scatter'd here and there.
To th' King of Cyprus I was made a Gift, Dmetor by name, the King of Aegypt's Guest. And to come hither thence, I made hard shift. Then said Antinous, Stand off you're best. What Devil to molest us sent this Rogue Unmannerly, that with such impudence To beg presumeth here, and to cologue? Stand off. Or ill at ease I'll send you hence. They that have given have done foolishly, And at another's cost been charitable. No wonder in such superfluity. Ulysses then retired from the Table. O, O, said he, I had but little skill, That from the Aspect have inferred Wit. Not give (I see) a crum of salt you will To a poor man that humbly asketh it. Antinous at this enrag'd at th'heart, Look'd on Ulysses angerly and said, To part hence safely thou not likely art; Since to my face thou dar'st me thus upbraid. This said, he threw the Footstool at his head, Which touch'd his shoulder, but remov'd him not. Then to the Sill himself he rendered, Shaking his head with vengeance in his thought. Ulysses then unto the Suiters spake. A man (said he) not much is griev'd a blow In fighting for his Kine or Sheep to take. But he did for his Belly at me throw. If any care the Gods of poor men have, Antinous before he marri'd be, Is like enough to go into his Grave. Antinous replies, Sit quietly And eat your meat, lest taken by the heels The Servants hale and drag you out o'th' Gae, Or use you worse, your tongue so runs on wheels. At this the rest all discontented sate, And one among the rest unto him said, Antinous, it was unjustly done To use a Stranger so. The Gods arraid In poor mens habits mens deeds look upon,
And notice take, who well does, and who ill. Telemachus was grieved at the heart For what was done, but did no tear distil, But shook his head, & hop'd to make them smart. When what had pass'd was told Penelope, Apollo strike him to the heart, said she. If I my wish had, said Eurynone, No Suiter of them all the Morn should see. Then said Penelope again, 'Tis true, They all be enemies, and mean us evil. But he the fiercest is of all the Crew, And rageth in the house like any Devil. A Stranger in distress comes to the door, Whom want constrained had to beg his bread. The rest all give him somewhat of their store, But he a Footstool throweth at his head. While she thus and her Women talking were, Ulysses supping sat upon the Sill. I fain (said she) would have the Beggar here. Fetch him Eumaeus, talk with him I will. I'll ask him if Ulysses he have seen, For many Men and Cities knoweth he. Eumaeus then made answer to the Queen: If once the Suiters would but silent be, You would be pleas'd his History to hear. Three days and nights he staid with me an end. And of his suff'rings much e told me there When new arriv'd; but came not to the end. As when a man that knows the Art of Song, Sings lovely words with sweet & well-tun'd voice, The man that hears him thinks not the time long; So I in his strange Story did rejoyce. He said Ulysses was his Fathers Guest, In th'Isle of Crete where reigneth Minos race. Himself (he said) with many woes opprest, The Fates at last him turnbled to this place. And that he heard Ulysses is hard by, And that into Thesprotia he's come Alive and well; enriched mightily With Treasure which he now is bringing home.
Then said Penelope, Go call me hither The Beggar. I my self will ask him all. And mean while let the Suiters chat together Where they think best without or in the Hall. For merry they must be, since they seed here, And their own Corn and Wine and Cattle save, And with ou Gattle make themselves good chear, And on our Corn and Wine no mercy have. For such as was Ulysses here is none, That should defend us from their injuries. But were he hither come, he, and his Son, Would bring destruction on these enemies. This said; it chanc'd Telemachus to sneeze. She laught, and for the Beggar calls agen. You see Eumaeus, Jove with me agree, And certainly slain shall be all these men. Go call the Beggar, and say this from me, If I find true what he shall to me say, He shall with Coat and Vest rewarded be. Eumaeus to the Beggar went his way. And when he near him was, Father, said he, Penelope desires to speak with you. About Ulysses she inform'd would be, And said, If she find all you say be true, She clothe you will with a fair Goat and Vest, Which you stand most in need of. But for food By begging in the Town you'll get it best, Where they relieve you will that shall think good. Ulysses to Eumaeus answered, Penelope I quickly can inform. For he and I have jointly suffered. But from the Suiters I much fear a storm. Their insolence is known up to the Sky. Just now a Footstool one threw at my head, When given him no cause at all had I, Nor could I by her Son be succoured. Therefore intreat Penelope to stay Until the Sun be set and Suters gone, And by the fire-side hear what I can say. You see what woful Garments I have on.
Then back Eumaeus went with his excuse, And came without him to Penelope. How now (said she) does he to come refuse? They that are bashful but ill Beggars be. Not so, O Queen (said he) he is discreet. He prays you stay till seting of the Sun, Fearing some danger from the Woo'rs to meet. And for you also then 'will best be done. I see (quoth she) the Stranger wants not Wit. For in the world never so many men Contriving mischief did together fit. So said Penelope. Eumaeus then Went down and put himself into the throng, And to Telemachus said in his ear, I have been absent from my Swine too long. I go, and to your care leave all things here, And chiefly of your life to have a care. Many there are that bear you evil mind, And how to take your life contriving are. But may they first their own destruction find. Then said Telemachus, And so 'twill be. Farewel. But I advise you first to dine. The bus'ness here leave to the Gods and me. Then din'd he and went back unto the Swine, Next Morning with more Victims to return. And full he left the Hall and Court with men, Who there themselves to Song and Dancing turn. For less than half the day remained then.
LIB. XVIII. THen came a Beggar to Ulysses Gate. The man to see to was both great and tall, Though but a lither sellow. Down he sate Boldly within the Porch before the Hall. He had a greedy gut, and named was At first Arnaeus, then Irus; for he went On errants oft, when ever there was cause. The Wooers favour made him insolent. This Beggar thought to drive Ulysses thence. Dost see those Princes how they wink at me, And by the heels would have me pluck thee hence? Though to do that I should ashamed be. Go from the door Old man lest I should do it. Up therefore quickly and be gone; arise Before that with my fists I force you to it. Ulysses frowning answer'd in this wise: Strange man, I neither do thee harm, nor say Thee any ill. Here's room for thee and me. I do not envy you the meat which they Shall give you here, how much so e're it be. Envy not other men; I think you are As well as I a Beggar; but forbear To threaten me too much. You're best beware, Old as I am, lest I your lips besmear And breast with blood, and so have better room. For to Ulysses house I'm confident Thou never wilt be able more to come. This made the Beggar more impatient, O (says he) how the Raskal prates! 'Twere well To beat the Raskals teeth out, while his Tongue
Thus runs on wheels, till to the ground they fell. Let these see fight the Old-man with the Young. Whilst in great heat they quarrell'd at the door, They by Antinous observed were, Who laughing said, There never came before Such sport to th'House. The Beggars standing there Will go to cuffs, I pray let's hold them to it. Then up they start, and round about them stand. There are o'th' fire good padding full of suit, Of these, let him that conquers lay his hand On which he will. So said Antinous, And have the priviledge, and none but he To beg within the Porch before the house, And of our talk at meat a hearer be. The motion pleas'd. And then Ulysses spake: The match is hard, an Old-man'gainst a Younger, Yet this my Belly bids me undertake. And I'm acquainted more with blows than hunger. But I must first intreat you all to swear Not to help Irus, nor a heavy hand To lay on me, but both of us forbear, And justly 'twixt us both as Neuters stand. When all had sworn, then said Telemachus, Stranger, if thou dare combat with this man None else shall do thee hurt. Antinous, Eurymachus, and I defead you can. This said, Ulysses cover'd kept his gear, But shew'd his shoulders wide, & his strong thighs. His large breast and his brawny arms appear. And Pallas standing by inlarg'd his size. At which the Suiters greatly wondered, And one unto another softly said, Irus has pull'd an old house on his head. And Irus then was mightily afraid. But yet by force the Servants brought him out, His flesh still trembling on his limbs with fear, Shew not thy self a Coward and a Lout; Nor fear a man worn out with many a year. For if he get the better, thou shalt go Unto King Takim, and there by his Law
Thy nose and ears, and privy parts also Shall be cut off, and dogs shall eat them raw. This made him quake more yet. Into the lists They brought him so. Both ready were to fight. Ulysses then thought how to use his fists, Whether to beat him down or kill him quite. But not t'offend the Suiters thought it best To strike him gently. And when they were near Irus did hit Ulysses on the breast. Ulysses Irus struck just under th'ear. He broke the bones, at's mouth the blood gusht out. He fell, squeakt, shed his teeth. The Suiters were With laughter almost dead, that stood about. Ulysses drag'd him to the utter-gate, And set him to the hedge, as 'twere a Signe, And put a Staff in's hand. As there he sate Ulysses bad him keep out Dogs and Swine. Think not thy self, quoth he, of Beggars King (That art a very wretch) and wandering Souls. This said; ore's head he threw the twisted string By which his Scrip hung rag'd and full of holes. Then sat him down i'th' Porch. The Suiters enter All laughing in, and as they passed by Greatly congratulated his adventure. Stranger, said they, Jove and the Gods on high, Grant thee whatever thou shalt most desire, That hast reliev'd us from the Raskal there. We'll send him to King Takim in Epire. And glad Ulysses was his praise to hear. Antinous a Haggas brought fill'd up With sat and blood, and to't Amphinomus Two loaves of bread, and with't a gilded Cup Of lusty Wine, and said unto him thus; Hall, Father, Stranger, rich and happy be As ere you were; though many miseries Oppress you now. He answer'd him, I see Amphinomus, you prudent are and wise. So was your Father. Nisus was his name. Prince of Dulichium, both rich and wise.
You are his Son, as I am told by Fame; Therefore I will a little you advise. There's not a weaker Creature lives o'th' ground, Or goes, or creeps upon it than a Man. Who whilst he's strong, and all His limbs are sound, He makes account that ail he never can. But when the Gods shall have decreed him woe, He less endures it than another can. Such is the nature Jove has assign'd to This weak and short-liv'd Creature called Man. For I my self was rich, and lived in Great plenty, and was very insolent, Bold on my strength, my Father, and my Kin, Therefore let no man be too confident. But rather quietly God's Gifts enjoy. These Suiters here bring this into my mind Who of an absent man the Goods destroy, And that at last unto their cost they'll find. For this I tell you (mark well what I say) That he will soon, nay very quickly come, And that will be to some a heavy day. Pray God that at his coming you keep home. This said, he drank, and to Amphinomus Return'd the Cup, who shook his head in vain. For not long after by Telemachus Amongst the rest of th'Wooers he was slain. Then Pallas puts Penelope in mind T'appear unto the Wooers that she might Before her Son and Husband honour find, And further bring the Suiters thoughts to light. Penelope then laught not knowing why. Eurynome (said she) my mind says go, And shew your self before the Company. Which heretofore I never thought to do. I hate them, yet I mean to go to th'door, And bid my Son their company o shun, And mix himself with those ill men no more. Dear Child, said the old woman, 'tis well done. Go tell him whatsoever you think fit, But wash away the tears first from your eyes,
And 'noint your Cheeks; they must sometimes remit And hide their grief, that will be counted wise. You have your wish, your Son now is a man. Penelope then answered her again; Restored be my beauty never can: 'Nointing and washing now are all in vain. The Gods, Eurynome, then took away All beauty from me when Ulysses went With Agamemnon to the Siege of Troy; Such words afford me now but small content. Call Hippodamia and Autonoe. For why, I am asham'd my self alone Amongst so many men in sight to be. They shall go with me, on each side me one. But when th'old woman was gone out, and staid, Then Pallas pour'd sweet sleep upon her eyes, And on her face a greater beauty laid, And also made her limbs of larger fize, And whiter than the purest Ivory. Having so done the Goddess rise to th'Skies. Her Maidens coming made a noise, and she Awak'd, and with her hand she strok'd her eyes. I've had (said she) a very gentle sleep. O that Diana such a gentle death Would send me presently, nor let me weep My life out, nor with sorrow give me breath, Sorrow for my dear Husband, best of all The Grecian Princes, and that said, then down She goes to th'Porch before the door of th'Hall With her two Maids, she would not go alone. And so stood at the door within their sight, But with her Scarf her Cheeks a little shaded. A Mad stood at her left hand and her right. When she appear'd Love all their hearts invaded. Her speech then to Telemachus sh'addrest, Telemachus (said she) your Wit's less now Than when you were a Boy. 'Twas then at best. And backward more and more it seems to grow. Now you are tal, and come to mans estate, And 'counted are the best mens Sons among,
Of your discretion you begin t'abate. Why else d'ye let your Stranger suffer wrong? If you your Guests thus treat, what think you, can Men say of you, that's good or honourable? You'll be reproach'd and scorn'd of every man, And taken for a man unhospitable. Mother, said he, you well may angry be; And yet I better know what's good and ill Than heretofore. But these men hinder me. I cannot without help do all I will. The Quarrel 'twixt my Guest and Irus was None of the Suiters act, by chance it rose, As they sate begging from some other cause, And Irus only bare away the blows. O Jupiter (I wish) and all the Gods, That all your Suiters were in Irus case, (Who yonder sits like one that's drunk, and nods) Either here right or in some other place, Unable to go home. I'enelope And her lov'd Son so talkt. And then Eurymachus, if all the Lords (said he) Which now through Args bear rule over men Should see you now, more Suiters you'ld have here (For you do far all woman-kind surpass) And come betime to taste of your good chear. None such for fair and prudent ever was. No, no, said she. For wher Ulysses went With th' Argive Princes to the War of Troy, The Immortal Gods took from me my content, And with it all these Ornaments away. Were he come home that took a care of me, I should more honour have and beauty so. But now I lead my life in misery, The Gods some evil on me daily throw. My Husband when he parted hence to fight For Agamemnon 'gainst the Trojans, laid At taking leave on my left hand his right, And all those words of counsel to me said: Expect you cannot (Wife) that we that go Over the Sea unto the Siege of Troy
Shall all come safe away. The Trojans know How t'use the Dart and Bowe too, as men say; And are good Horsmen also, and can see All their advantages in ranged field. Therefore I know not what my luck will be, Either to come again, or to be kill'd. My Father and my Mother I therefore To you commend, to see them cherished, As they are now, or (in my absence) more. And when Telemachus is grown, then wed. Take whom your self like best, and leave this house, This said, he parts. Ay me, the time is come I must embrace a Marriage dious, And I must leave this my most blessed home. Suiters were wont when they a Woman woo'd Of noble Parentage, to please her all They could, and strive who most should do her good; Mine daily eat and drink me up in th' Hall. This said, Ulysses was well pleas'd to see His Wife draw Presents from them, and was glad, And th'Wooers by her over reacht to be With her fine words, when other thoughts she had, Then said Antinous: Penelopt, Fair and wise Daughter of Icarius, Beceive what e're by us shall offer'd be. It is not good, good Presents to refuse, Yet till you chuse some one whom you think best To be your Husband, we resolve to stay, And be each one of us your constant Guest, And never absent from your house a day. And with Antinous they all agree, Who her presented with a fair, large, rich And divers-colour'd Robe, with four times three Buckles of pure and beaten Gold, and which As many clasps of Gold had joyned fit. Eurymachus his Present was a Chain Of Gold and Amber-Beads alternate. It Shin'd bright as is the Sun-shine after rain. Enrydamas two Pendants gave, of which Each had three Gems and polisht very bright,
And both for Art and Workmanship were rich, Reflecting to the eye a lovely light. Pysandrus Son of Polycterides Gave her a costly Necklace. All the rest With some good Gift endeavoured to please The fair and wise Penelope the best. This done, unto her Chamber up she went With her two Maids that did her Presents carry. Th'Woo'rs with dancing and with merriment, (Their wonted pastime) for the Ev'ning tarry. The Ev'ning came, and then the Lamps were lighted, And Torches, and the Fit-saves long lain dry, Which to that purpose had with Tools been fitted And ready lay to light the Company. The Lights the Maids took up by turns & bore them. Then said Ulysses, Maidens, if you please, To save your pains, I'll bear the Light before them. I'm us'd to labour and can do't with case Though they should stay and sit up till to morrow. You may go up unto the Queen and there Sit and spin with her, and divert her sorrow. At this the Wenches'gan to laugh and jeer. And one of them (Melantho) him revil'd With bitter words. Her Father Dolius hight. Penelope did treat her as her Child And in her company did take delight. But yet she could not put away her grief. The Wench was fair, and too familiar was With Prince Eurymachus, one of the chief Of all her Suiters. And this woman 'twas. And thus she said, Sure (Stranger) thou art mad That wilt not here nor elsewhere go to bed. Is it because thou too much ine hast had? Or is't a humour in thy nature bred To prate so boldly in such Company? Thy Victory o're Irus may perhaps Have made thee wild. A better man than he May chance to send thee hence with bloody chaps. Ulysses looking sourly answered, You Bitch, Telemachus shall streight-way know
These words. He'll cause thee to be tortured. They fearing he would do't, away they go. Ulysses ready stood to take in hand A torch when bidden; casting in his mind How he might safely carry on the grand Mischief against the Woo'rs he had design'd. And Pallas yet not suffer'd them to keep Themselves in any bounds of Modesty, But fix Ulysses anger yet more deep. Eurymachus then said to th'standers by To make them laugh, Ulysses to disgrace, Hear Sirs I pray, what now comes in my thought. The man comes opportunely to this place, 'Tis sure some God that him has hither brought To give us greater light. For from his head Methinks I see arise another flame Besides the flame the Torch gives, and so spread Upon his bald pate doubled has the same. Then says t'Ulysses, Man wilt thou serve me To pluck up Thorns & Bry'rs, and Trees to plant? Thou shalt have meat enough, and clothes, and fee, And shooes, and whatsoever thou shalt want. But since thou haft been us'd to idleness, I doubt thou ne'r wilt labour any more, But rather feed thy carcass labourless, And wandring choose to beg from door to door. This said, Ulysses answer'd him agen: Eurymachus, if we two were to try Our labour, in a large green meadow, when The days are long, the weather hot and dry, With equal Sithes from morning unto night; Or with two equal oxen fed and strong Were fasting put to plow to try our might Which of us labour could indure most long; Or if an Enemy to day should land, And I a Helmet had fit for my head, And Target, and two fit Spears for my hand, Then you should see whether I fought or fled, And not reproach m' of sloth or poverty. You are too cruel, and you do me wrong,
And think your self a man of might to be, Because they weaker are you live among. But should Ulysses come and find you here, You'ld think the door (though it be very wide) As you are running out too narrow were. So glad youl'd be your heads to save or hide. To this Eurymachus with bended brow, And furious eye, answer'd, Wretch that thou art, And dar'st so saucily to prate. How now! 'Twill not be long before I make thee smart. Is it because thou too much Wine hast had? Or is't thy nature always to be bold? Or is't t'have beaten Irus makes thee mad? This said, upon a Footstool he laid hold, And threw it at him, but it hit him not. Ulysses sunk on's knees, the stool flew o're His head, and a Cup-bearer next him smot On the right hand, and down he falls o'th' floor. Much the disorder then was in the room, And one unto another next him said, I would this Beggar hither had not come, But somewhere else before had perished. For what ado about a Beggar's here? The pleasure of our Dinner all is lost. Then said Telemachus, Can you not bear (Madmen) your wine and chear both boil'd & rost? When fill'd, why do you not go home and sleep? Go when you will, I drive you not away. The Suiters at this boldness bit the lip, And thought it strange, but yet did nothing say. Then said Amphinomus, Let's not fall out With any man for speaking truth, nor be Rude and unkind. Cup-bearers, bear about To every man the Cup of Charity. And so go each man home, for now 'tis late (Leaving the Stranger with Telemachus, Whose Guest he is) and our selves recreate With gentle sleep each one in his own house. Then Meleus to each man presents a Cup, Whereof unto the Gods they offer'd part.
When this was done each one his Wine drank up, And then unto their houses they depart. LIB. XIX. ULysses in the house remain'd; and staid Contriving how the Suiters to destroy. And streightway to Telemachus he said, Carry the Armour in the Hall away. And tell them gently (if they ask wherefore) The fire has hurt them, and they are not now Such as Ulysses left them heretofore When with the Greeks he did to Ilium go. Or say, For sear some quarrel might arise By th' indiscretion of one or other, You thought the counsel would not be unwise To take them thence. One drawn sword draws an∣other. Blemachus then calls his Nurse, and said, Euryclea, shut all the rooms up fast. Be sure to keep within door every Maid, Till I my Fathers Arms have elsewhere plac't. The smoke does spoil them all. But I will now Free them from soot. I'm glad (said she) at last To see your husbandry. But I would know Who 'tis shall light you when the Maids are fast. My Guest (says he) this Stranger whom you see. For here he feeds, and nothing has to do. How far soever hence his dwelling be, I think 'tis reason he should help me too. The Nurse did what commanded she had been. They laid up Helmets, Bucklers, Swords & Spears; And Pallas with a Lamp came in unseen, And up and down the Light before them bears.
Then (Father) said Telemachus, I see The walls, beams, roof, and all the pillars shine Like any sire, and certainly there be Within the house some of the Powers Divine. Peace (said Ulysses) be not curious, The purpose of the Gods you cannot find. Go you to bed. I must go through the house To find the Womens and your Mothers mind. Telemachus then to his Chamber went In which before he worted was to lie, Leaving his Father in the house, intent On how (with Pallas) to make th' Wooers die. Forth comes Penelope into the Hall More than Diana, more than Venus fair, Her Maids upon her were attending all, And set down for her a most stately Chair Made by Iemalius of Silver plate, And Iv'ry turned, white as any Snow, And Footstool thereto fix'd. And there in State Sat down the sair Penelope, and now The Housmaids enter in and take away The Tables, and the Bowls, the Cups, and Bread Which (the Wooers gone) about the room still lay; And having made a fire there went to bed. Melantho then Ulysses bitterly Rebuk'd again. Art thou here (said she) still, To peep at th' Women in the night, and spy What they are doing? An't may be hast the will To stay all night. Go quickly. Get thee gone. Th' ast supt. Lest thou be driven out of door With brands of sire. To this new insolence Ulysses answer'd gentilie than before. Why d'ye pursue me thus? Is it because I am not fine, but have ill Rayment on? The time has been I rich and wealthy was, And Beggas I did much bestow upon. Not looking on the men, but on their want. And many Servants had. Of that which makes Men called Rich, I knew not any scant. But Jove not only Riches gives but takes.
Think therefore that your Beauty will decay, Or of your Mistress you may lose the grace, Or that Ulysses may come back one day. And though he ne're return unto his place, His Son Telemachus knows all you do; Knows better now what's good, and what is worse. Then be hereafter modester. Go to. Penelope o'reheard all this discourse. Bold Bitch (said she) I know what deeds you've done, Which thou shalt one day pay for with thy head. Did not I tell thee when the Woo'rs were gone That I to speak with him had ordered? Eurynome, I've much to say, said she, Unto this man. Set here a Chair, that so Sitting I may hear him, and he hear me. For there are many things I'd from him know. Ulysses sat. Penelope began. The Question I will ask you first is this. What is your Name, and who your Parents be, And further tell me where your Country is. When she had said, Ulysses thus replies, O Queen, through all the world your praises ring, Your vertues known are up unto the Skies, No less than of some great and happy King, That maintains Justice, and whose fertile ground Bears store of Wheat and Barley, and whose Trees Are charg'd with Fruit, and all his sheep stand sound, And under him a valiant people sees. And therefore ask me what you will beside. My Kin and Country to my self I'd keep. For then my grief I can no longer hide, Or think thereon, but ready am to weep. Which here would be no seemly thing to do. For why, your Maids might peradventure think, And you your self, it may be, think so too, My tears came not from sorrow but from drink. Stranger (said she) my Beauty, Form, and Worth Th' Immortal Gods took from me then away When first Ulysses with the Greeks went forth To that abominable Town of Troy.
But were he here, that had the care of me, I should more honour have, and beauty so. But now I lead my life in misery. The Gods upon me troubles daily throw. For all the Lords that in these Islands be, Same, Dulichium, and woody Zant, And Ithaca it self, Suiters to me, My house continually together haunt. And there devour my Cattle, Corn and Wine, So that of Strangers I can take no care, Nor can my self dispose of what is mine, Nor Messengers receive that publike are. But longing for my Husband fit and pine. They press for Marriage, I to put it by. Then came into my thought (some Power divine Sure prompt me) to set up a Beam. So I A Beam set up, and then began to weave. Suiters (said I) since dead Ulysses is, Stay yet a little while and give me leave To make an end but of one business. I must for old Laertes make a Cloth, Which in his Sepulchre he is to wear. T'offend the Wives of Greece I should be loath. For to accuse me they will not forbear. They'll say I very hasty was to wed, If I go hence and not provide a shroud Wherein Laertes must be buried, Out of his wealth. That might have been allow'd. My Suiters all were well content. And then All day I wove; but ere I went to bed, What I had wov'n I ravel'd out agen. Three years my Suiters I thus frustrated. In the fourth year my women me betrai'd; And in they came while I the Web undid; I could the wedding now no more avoid, But I was rated by them much and chid. What I am next to do I cannot tell; My Father and my Mother bid me marry; My Son is weary, and takes not very well That th'Woo'rs devouring him should longer tarry.
But for all this I long to know your Stock. For sure you come not of the fabled Oak, Nor are, I think, descended from a Rock. To this Ulysses answering thus spoke: Wife of Ulysses, since you so much press To know my Kindred and from whence I come, Although the telling grieve me, I'll confess, For I have now long absent been from home. In the wide Sea a fertile Island lies, Innumerable therein are the men, Creta by name. Many diversities There are of Tongues; and Cities nine times ten. There dwell Achaeans and Cydonians, And antient true Creatans, Tribachichs, And also Dorichs and Pelasgians, Who divers Dialects together mix. And Cnossus the prime City was of these Where Minos reigned; the great Minos that, Who often used with great Chronides Familiarly of old to sit and char. Minos my Fathers Father was, and he Deucalion begot. Deucalion First got Idomeneus, and then got me. He went to Troy. My name is Aithon. There 'twas I saw Ulysses. He came in As he went homeward, and with much ado T'Amphisus. For by winds he forc'd had been This place, though no good Port, to put into. Then streight went up, Idomencus to see, With whom he had acquaintance, as he said. 'Twas ten days after that, or more, that he For Troy with th'other Greeks his Anchors wai'd. I entertain'd him kindly with my own. Gave him a handsome Present too, and then I made him to be feasted by the Town Upon the Publike Charge himself and men. Twelve days the wind continued at North, Which kept the Fleet perforce within the Bay, On the thirteenth th'wind changed, and came South, And then they set up Sail and steer'd for Troy.
'Twas so like truth, she wept. As when the Sun Dissolving is the Snow upon a Hill, Innumerable streams of water run, And the low Rivers of the Valley fill: So wept she for her Husband sitting by; Who griev'd and piti'd her, but never wept; As hard as horn or iron was his eye, And by design himself from tears he kept. After with weeping she was satisfi'd, Stranger, said she, I'll ask you somewhat now By which most certainly it will be tri'd, If you my Husband as you say did know Or entertain'd him, and his company. What kind of person was he, and how clad? How serv'd? To this Ulysses made reply. Though twenty year ago it be, and bad My Memory; yet what I can recal, I will relate. He wore a Purple Vest Unshorn, and lin'd. Before embroider'd all. Two clasps of Gold. And in it was exprest. A Hound that did between his foreseet hold A Fawn that sprall'd and labour'd to get free. Which was so lively done, and all in Gold Performed was, that wonder 'twas to see. His Coat (I markt) so soft it was and fine As is the fold of a dry Onion, And as the Sun, did gloriously shine, And women gaz'd upon him many a one, Such were his Garments, but I know not whence He had them. You know better that than I; VVhether he so appareli'd went from hence, Presented by some of his Company, Or given to him somewhere by some Guest. For he was much beloved far and near, And of th'Achaeans all esteem'd the best, Amongst the Greeks he hardly had his Peer. And I him gave a Purple double Vest, A Sword and Coat edged with fringes trim, And brought him to his Ship. Amongst the rest A Herald was; and I'll describe you him.
Round shoulder'd was he, curled was his hair, Swarthy his face, Eurybates his name. Ulysses to him much respect did bear, Because their thoughts for most part were the same. When he had done, she could no longer hold, But wept again, and sorer than before; For she found true the tokens he had told. But when this show'r of tears was passed o're, Stranger (said she) I piti'd you before; Now as a friend you shall respected be. 'Twas I gave him th'Apparel he then wore And the Gold Buckles to remember me. But I shall never see him more at home; In an unlucky hour he cross'd the Main To that accursed Town of Ilium. Then thus Ulysses answer'd her again: O Noble Wife of Laertiades, Blemish no more those your fair eyes with tears, For your Ulysses. Set your heart at ease. Not that your sorrow as a fault appears. What VVoman that her Husband of her youth, And to whom Children she had born had lost, Could choose but grieve and weep, although in truth, She could not of his Vertue greatly boast? But that you would give ear to what I say. I say Ulysses is not far from home; He's in Thesprotia hence a little way Alive, enrich'd with Presents he is come. His ship and men all perishe in the Main, Then when he left the Isle Thrinacie, Because Sol's Sacred Kine his men had slain, Hurled they were by Jove into the Sea. Ulysses only scap'd; for sitting fast Upon the torn-off Rudder by the waves, After much labour came to land at last. In th'Isle Phaeacia. There his life he saves. Much honour there and precious gifts he got. They realy were to have convey'd him home, Safely to Ithaca, but he would not; Else long ago he might have hither come:
But he thought best to travel longer yet, And pick up Presents which way ere he went, Before his going home much wealth to get. For at designing he was excellent. Phidoa himself King of Thesprotia Swore to me this; and that both Ship and Men Were ready to convey him t'Ithaca, His Countrey. But he could not stay till then. For now a Vessel ready to set forth Stood for Dulichrum. But he shew'd me all Ulysses Treasure, which might serve, for worth. Ten ages to maintain a man withal. But he (he said) was gone o're to the Main. There at Dodona with Jove's Oak t'advise How to return to Ithaca again; As he was openly, or in disguise. So then he's safe; and soon he will be here. He cannot from his house be long away. And which is more, I will not doubt to swear, And witness call the Gods to what I say. Hear Jove of Gods the bst, and high'st; and thou The Guardian of the house that we are in. Ulysses shall come to this place you know, E're this month end, or when the next comes in. Penelope then answer'd: Stranger, Oh That this would so fall out, you then should see Such friendship from me, and such gifts also, That men should bless, and say you happy be. But, Maids, go wash his Feet, and make his Bed, Lay on warm Rugs, and handsom Covering, His Limbs to cherish till the day be spread. Then wash and 'noint him that my Son may bring And set him in the Hall at Dinner by him. For he that wrongs him shall not be allow'd To come into my house another time. How angry at it e're he be, and proud. Stranger, by this I mean to let you see I better know to entertain my Guest Than many women do, though poor he be, Far from his home, and in vile Garments dress.
To this Ulysses answer'd her again, O Noble Wife of Laertiades, Since I left Crete, on Ship board I have lain. Soft and fine bedding give me little ease. Many a night have I past without sleep, And often slept have on a homely Couch, The custome I have so long kept I'll keep. Nor shall your Maidens my feet wash or touch Such as wait on you, but if there be any Old woman here that hath endured much, As I have done, and years have lived many, I am content my feet be wash'd by such. Then said Ponelope, Ne're man came here Within my house from forein Countrey yet So prudent as you are, whose answers were To every thing so wise and so discreet. There is a woman such as you desire, That nurst and brought up that afflicted man, Though she be very weak, she'll make a fire, And wash your feet, but nothing else do can. Rise Euryclea, wash the feet of one That's like your Lord. Such feet & hands were his, Woe makes men old as well as years that run. So said Penelope. And th'old woman rise; And weeping held her hand before her eyes. O my dear Child, O Jupiter unkind! Who more devout, who burnt to him more thighs, Or fatter, or doth lesser favour find? He prai'd to live so long that he might see Painless, the education of his Child Telemachus, but granted 'twill not be. He now perhaps is where he is revil'd And mockt by women in some great mans Hall, As thou, O Stranger, hast been scorned here, And wilt not suffer any of them all Either thy feet to wash or to come near. I'll wash your feet as I am bidden by Penelope, and for your own sake too. It is not her command alone. There lie Thoughts on my heart that urge me thereunto!
Poor Passengers come hither very many, But one so like Ulysses never came. For Person, Voice, and Feet I ne'er saw any Come to this house that had so near the same. Ulysses answer'd, Woman, so they say All that have seen us both. It may be so. She with her Kettle bright then went her way For water wherewithal her work to do. Cold water she brings in, and pours on't hot. Ulysses sate by th'fire, but turn'd that thigh That had the scar to th'dark, that she might not Find it and force him t'appear openly. She was not long about him when she spd The Scar a Bore had made above his knee When he was hunting on Parnassus side, At's Grandsires in his Uncles Company. His Grandsire was Autolycus, that was His Mothers Father nam'd Anticlia. He in Hermetique Arts did most surpass, And to his Daughter came to Ithaca, That newly of a Son was brought to bed. Euryclea laid the Child upon his knee. Autolycus, you are to give, she said, The Name. How shall it named be? Then said Autolycus, Since I of many Both men and women have incur'd the blame, A fitter name I cannot think on any. Therefore I say, Ulysses be his name. And when he's grown a man sead him to me, To Mount Parnassus, whither if he come, He shall of what I have partaker be, And from me go not ill-contented home. And this the cause was that he thither went. Autolycus and's Sons there take Ulysses By th'hand, expressing very great content. Antithea his Grannam his head kisses And both his eyes. Autolycus appoints His Sons to have the Supper very good. A Bullock fat they kill, stay, cut in joynts, Roast, and in Messes distribute the food.
And so they feasted till the day was done. And when 'twas dark parted and went to sleep. But when Aurora had proclaim'd the Sun Which ready was above the Hill to peep, Then to Parnassus up the Hunters go, The Hounds before went searching out the scent. Autolycus his Sons were there also. Ulysses with them; next the Dogs he went. And in his hand shook a longshaded Spear. The Dogs drew tow'rd a VVood. So close it was That neither rain nor wind e're entred there, Nor yet the beams o'th' Sun could through it pass. And heaps of wither'd leaves there lay therein. VVithin this Thicket lay a mighty Bore. Only the noise of Hounds and Men came in, VVhen they were very near, and not before. The Bore rusht out, and fire was in his eye, Brisled his neck. Ulysses ready was. The Bore first wounded had Ulysses thigh, The Spear did through the Boars right shoulder pass. Slain was the Bore. And of Ulysses wound His Unkles took the care, and skilfully They caus'd it to be closed up and bound, And with a Charm the blood stope presently. His wound soon cured very glad they were, And him with many Gifts send glad away. At home they ask, and he relateth there The Story of the hunting of that day. Euryclea on the wound had laid her hand, And well assured was 'twas none but he. VVhich made the water in her eyes to stand. And now her joy and grief one passion be. Her Speech stuck in her Throat; her hand lets fall Her Masters foot. That down the Kettle threw. The water runneth out about the Hall; And knowing now what she but thought was true, You are Ulysses, said she, O my dear. And tow'rd Penelope she lookt aside, As if she meant to say, Your Husband's here. But Pallas that did mean the truth to hide
Still made the Queen to look another way. And he with one hand stopt the Nurses breath, With th'other held her fast to make her stay. Why Nurse, said he, mean you to be my death? Since at your breast I nourished have been; And none but you knows me in this disguise; These twenty years I here was never seen. Let none else know it in the house. Be wise. For this I tell you, and will make it true, That of the women some I mean to slay. When by my hand the Gods the Woo'rs subdue, If you bewray me, you shall fare as they. Then said Euryclea, What needeth this? You know my heart can hold like stone or brass. And who is honest, who dishonest is I'll tell you, if your purpose come to pass. No Nurse, then said Ulysses, tell not me. You need not. I shall know them ev'ry one. Permit all to the Gods, and silent be. For they best know what best is to be done. Then out she went more water to fetch in, The first being spilt. He washt and 'nointed was. And covered the place where th'wound had been. And nearer to the fire his Chair he draws. Then to them came Penelope, and said, Stranger, I'll ask you but a little more. 'Tis almost bed-time, and when we are laid, Our grief in gentle sleep is passed o're. But all the day my tears are my delight. Or of my womens work the care I take. And after I am gone to bed at night A thousand dismal thoughts keep me awake. As Philomela sitting in a tree Mourns with a lamentable voice and shrill For Itylus, and turneth restlesly, Whom Zethus Son did by misfortune kill: Just so my mind divided is in twain: Whether to keep my Servants with my Son, And my dear Husbands bed, and here remain, Or marry one o'th' Suiters, and be gone.
To marry and he gone I could not yet, My Son too young was yet to rule th'estate. And now grown up, it makes him vex and fret To see them daily feast within his Gate. I'll tell you now a dream; expound it you. I've twenty Geese feeding i'th' yard without. A mighty Eagle from the Hills down flew, And brake their necks; dead they lay all about. The Eagle straightway mounted out of sight. I dreaming wept. To see them at the trough, Feeding on steeped Wheat, I took delight. And to bemoan me Ladies came enough. And then methought the Eagle came again, And on a Beam which through the wall did start He sat, and said in humane Language plain, Child of Icarius trouble not your heart. The thing you see is real, not a dream. The Geese the Wooers, I the Eagle was, And now return'd and sitting on the Beam, I am your Husband, and will bring to pass The death of all your Suiters. Then wak'd I, And went into the Court my Geese to see, And found them all there feeding heartily, Unhurt, and well as they were wont to be. Woman, then said Ulysses, no man can Expound this Dream but as himself has done, That says and does. Ulysses is the man. The Suiters will be killed every one. Then said Penelope, Dreams are without Such order as to make a Judgment by; And at two Gates, men say, they issue out, The one of Horn, th'other of Ivory. Those that pass through the Horn, to men of skill, Never say any thing but what is sooth; But find a word of truth you never will In those that come through th'Elephantine tooth. But I much fear that my Dream came this way. For I have promised to quit this place, And come already is th'unlucky day That must determine who shall gain my grace.
Twelve Axes here Ulysses set a row Like twelve Boats laid along upon their sides, And at a distance standing with his Bowe, Through ev'ry one of them his Arrow glides, And this shall to my Suiters be the Prize. He that most easily shall bend the Bowe, And through the Axes all his Arrow flies, Leaving this blessed house with him I'll go. Then said Ulysses, Let the Suiters try If they can bend the Bowe, and thorow shoot Through th'Axes if they can, for sure am I, Ulysses will be here before they do't. Stranger, said she, whilst you discourse, my eyes To sleep will never be enclin'd. But since The force of Nature on all Mortals lies, I up into my Chamber will go hence, There is my Bed, washt nightly with my tears Since first Ulysses went to cursed Troy, Wailing my Husbands absence wak'd with fears; And yours in what part of the house you'll say. This said, unto her Chamber up she went. And with her all her Maids. And there she lies, And for her Husband did afres lament, Till Pallas threw a sweet sleep on her eyes. LIB. XX. ULysses in the Court lay out adoors On a Cow hide; and on him skins of sheep New kill'd and sacrificed by the VVoo'rs. There lay he, but he could not fall asleep. Eurynome a Rug laid on him too. Out came the Maids that wont were to commit
With the proud Wooers gigling and laughing so, And pleasing one another with their Wit, As made Ulysses in his mind to cast Whether to start up quick and kill them all, Or let them now go on and take their last Farewel of those they had to do withal. As when a Bitch stands by her Whelps and spies A Stranger coming near will bark and grin; So at this sight of their debaucheries Ulysses heart provoked barkt within. Hold heart, said he, when Cyclops eat my men, Thou didst endure till counsel set thee free; The danger now is less. Hold out agen. And so it did, though he lay restlesly. As one that has raw flesh upon the fire, And hungry is, is ever turning it; So turneth he himself with great desire 'Gainst th'Wooers to devise some mischief fit. Then Pallas came and standing at his head In Womans shape, O wretched man, said she, What makes you toss and turn so in your bed? The house is yours, your Wife and Son here be. Then said Ulysses, I was casting how I might alone these Suiters insolent, That always here are many, overthrow; And if I kill them, then again invent How to escape and save my self by flight. To this the Goddess an'wered, and said, Another man would trust a meaner wight, Though mortal, and rely upon his aid. But I a God immortal am, and say, Though fifty bands of men should us oppose, You should their Herds of Cattle drive away. Enjoy securely therefore your repose, A torment 'tis to watch all night, to one That is already drencht in misery. Sleep then. This said, sweet sleep she threw upon His eyes, and from him mounted to the Sky. And now Penelope awak'd and sat On her bed weeping. Having wept her fill,
She to Diana pray'd, and said, O that You would now shoot your Arrow and me kill, Or that some great wind me away might bear, And o're a Rock throw me into the Main, Ne'r to be heard of, or as th' Daughters were Of Pandareus, whose Parents both were slain By th' Gods. But Venus th' Orphans nourished With Butter, and with Honey, and with Wine. Juno with form and wit them furnished. Diana gave them stature. Artifice Divine Pallas them taught. Then Venus went to Jove To get them Husbands; for best knoweth he The Issue of Conjunctions in Love, Whether for better or for worse they be, While Venus absent was on that affair, By Harpies foul away they carried be. And giv'n for slaves to th'Furies in the Air. Oh that the Gods would so dispose of me; Or else Diana send me under ground, That I may with Ulysses be, and not To please another meaner man be bound. Grief all day long is but a woful Lot, And Sleep is some amends. But unto me It evil Dreams along with it doth bring. This night my Husband seem'd i'th' hed to be; No Dream I thought it, but a real thing. This said, the Morning fringed had the Sky. Ulysses musing lay upon his bed With closed eyes, and thought she certainly Knew who he was, and stood at his beds head. Then rose he, and his sheep-skins bare away, And Rug into the house; but the Cow-hide He carri'd out, and then to Jove did pray: Hear Jupiter, with lifted hands he cri'd. O Jove and Gods, if by our VVill Divine, Tost both at Sea and Land, Thither came; By fatal Word within, without by Signe, To me now presently confirm the same. Jove heard his Pray's, and straight it thundered. This made Ulysses glad. Then spake a Maid
The fatal word. Twelve Maids to furnish bread Were to grind wheat continually employ'd. Eleven their work had done and went to Bed. The weakest still staid grinding, and thus praid: Jove who without a Cloud hast thundered, Grant me poor Maid my wish, and then she said, O Jove, that Father art of Gods and Men, Let never more these wicked Suiters tast Meat in this house, nor ever come agen That pain me thus. This Supper be their last. Ulysses with this word, and with the Thunder Well pleased was, and thought assuredly With Pallas help the Suiters to bring under, And many though they were to make them die. Then th'other Maids came in and made a fire Within the Hall. And then too from his Bed Telemachus rose, puts on his attire, And Sword and Shoes. His Spear with brazen head He took into his hand, and stood i'th' door, And to the Nurse Euryclea he spake: What meat, what lodging had this Stranger poor? Or was there none that care of him did take? My Mothers nature (wise as she is) is such Highly to honour men of less desert; But for this Stranger perhaps cares not much. Then said Euryclea, She has done her part; Wine he has had as much as he thought fit. She askt him if he had a mind to eat. He answer'd, that he had no appetite To bread at present, nor to any meat. She bad her Maids set up a standing Bed. But he, as one in love with misery, Would none of that, nor bed, nor coverled, But on the ground resolved was to lie, And make his Scrip the Bolster for his head, And for a Bed to take a raw Cow-hide, And Sheepskins with the wool for Coverled Without the door; and we the Rug appli'd. This said, Telemachus with Spear in hand To Council goes, and his Dogs follow'd him.
Then Euryclea gives the Maids command The rooms of th'House to dress up und make trim. Rise Maids, said she, sprinkle and sweep the Hall, Lay Cushions on the Chairs, with Sponges make The Tables clean, the Temp'rer and Cups all; And see of water that there be no lack. Go to the Spring, and fetch fair water thence Quickly. You know to day is Holiday. The Suiters will not now be long from hence. So said the Nurse. The women her obey. For water to the fountain went twice ten, The rest did diligently work within. The Maids that went for water came agen; And the proud Woo'rs by that time were come in. And then came in the Master of the Swine Eumaeus, three Swine frankt and fat he brought, There to be ready 'gainst the Suiters dine. In all his Swine-sties better there were not. And he unto Ulysses kindly spake: Stranger how fare you 'mongst the Wooers here? Do they more pity now upon you take Than formerly; or still deride you there? O, said Ulysses, that the Gods would give These men what to their insolence is due, Who in a house not theirs so lewdly live, As if no modesty at all they knew. Then came Melanthus from a place hard by. He had the charge o'th' Goats, & brought the best. And spake unto Ulysses spightfully: Art thou here still to beg, and to molest The Company? D'ye mean before you go To taste my fingers? Is there no good chear In other places 'mongst the Greeks, and so You mean to dwell continually here? Then came a third that charge had of the Kine, Philoetius by name, with him he brought A Heifer and more Goats, on which to dine, Over the water, in the Ferry-boat Philoetius askt Eumaeus in his ear, Who's this, that's new come hither, & from whence,
What Countryman, and what his Parents were? For, for his person he may be a Prince. God can make Princes go from Land to Land And beg, when he will give them misery. This said, he took Ulysses by the hand, And spake unto him kind and lovingly: Father, I wish you as much happiness As ever you enjoy'd before. But now, I see you are in very great distress. O Jove! What God so cruel is as thou? Though born thou wert, yet pitiest not to see The torments of Mankind. To think upon Ulysses makes me weep. It may be he Thus begs somewhere, with such apparel on, Or else he's dead. O then I am undone. He set me o're his Herds when but a Boy; But infinite they're grown since he is gone, Or man would quickly all Cow kind destroy. But mine the Suiters force me to bring in For them to eat, and ne're regard his Son. The Goods to share already they begin Of th'owner, that so long now has been gone. And I devising was what I should do, To take my Cattle with me and be gone, And one or other Prince to give them to. But that I thought would be unjustly done, For they Telemachus his Cattle were. Again, I thought it labour very so To stay and keep my Masters Cattle here For others in his absence to devour. So here abide I, and my self I flatter With hope to see Ulysses one day come Back to his house, and the proud Suiters scatter. Thus said the Master of the Kine. To whom Ulysses said, Honest you seem and wise. I therefore will a secret to you swear, By Jove on high you shall see with your eyes Ulysses (if you wish to see him) here, And all these domineering Suiters slay. Then, O, said he, that Jove would have it so.
For I should let you see in such a stay Quickly how much these hands of mine can do. Eumaeus also did like Prayer make To see Uysses there. So ended they. While they discours'd, the Suiters counsel take How they might make Telemachu away. Then o're their heads an Eagle flew on high Sinister, with a fearful Dove in' foot. Then said Amphinomus, Let's lay this by, And think of Supper, for we cannot do't. The Suiters all approv'd of what he said, And in they went, and there or Bench and Seat Within Ulysses house their Coats they laid, And set themselves to kill and dress their meat. Then from the Herd they sacrific'd a Cow, And many well-grown Sheep, and Goats well fed, And many a very fat and pamper'd Sow; Th'entrails they rosted and distributed. Eumaeus gave out Cups, Philoetius Bread, M. lanthus from the Temp'rer fill'd out Wine. The Suiters on the meat before them fed With Stomachs good, and drank the blood o'th' Vine. Telemachus Ulysses in the Hall Hard by the threshold sets, and there he sat On an ill-favour'd stool at Table small, And gave him his just share of th'entrails fat, And for him fill'd a great gold Cup with Wine. Sit here, said he, and fare like other men. Fea neither blows nor scoffs. The house is mine, Ulysses is the owner of it. When He first possessed it, he gave it me. And you my Mothers Suiters, mock no more, But keep the peace as long as here you be; For else perhaps arise may trouble sore. At first the Suiters knew not how to take Telemachus his words, and silent were, Admiring that such threatning words he spake, So many men provoking without fear. But by and by Antinous said thus, Since Jove appeared has in his defence,
Let's put these threats up of Telemachus. Else we should quickly spoil his eloquence. So said Antinous. But Telemachus Car'd not at all for any thing he said. When peace within doors was concluded thus, In other Rites o'th' Feast they were imploy'd. The Hecatomb they bear throughout the Town Into Apollo's shady Grove divine. The upper-joynts in Messes they divide; So fill'd their Tables and sat down to dine. The portion of Ulysses was no less Than other Suiters had, nor more. For why Telemachus had order'd every Mess Should equal be, and men serv'd equally. Amongst the Suiters was a very Knave, Ctesippus was his Name, a rich mans Son; And therefore hop'd Penelope to have. This man to th'Wooers made a motion. Hear me you Suiters of Penelope: This Stranger here is equal made to us, And therefore reason 'tis that also we Should love the Strangers of Telemachus. Lo, here's a Gift I'll give him, that he may Bestow it, i't please him, on him or her That empts the Chamber-pots, or giv't away To any of Ulyes Bond men here. With tha he hurled at Ulysses head A Cows-foot, but he turn'd his head the while, And from the stroke himself delivered. Then smil'd Ulsses a Sardanique smile. Telemachus his anter could not hide. 'Tis well, said he, you did not hurt him here. For else, bel eve it you had surely di'd O'th' place, ru through the body with my Spear, And never found a Wife here, but a Grave. Therefore give over this behaviour wild. Of good and bad I now some knowledge have; And do not alwaies take me for a Child. What's past I bear, the havock of my Cattle, My Corn and Wine consumed lavishly.
'Tis hard for one with many t'enter battle. Use me no longer as an Enemy. For fighting to be slain I'd rather chuse, Than see my Guests or Servants harshly us'd, My women, as they pass about the house, To be so basely tug'd, touz'd, and abus'd. This said, a while the Suiters silent were; But not long after, Agelaus spake. Let's not, said he, against a truth so clear Struggle, and what is said in ill part take; Nor harshly use the Stranger any more, Nor any Servant of Telemachus. But yet I have a silly word in store For him, and for his Mother, and for us. Whilst there was hope Ulysses might come home, The Suiters had done best at home to stay, Expecting him, and not have hither come. But since there's none, to's Mother he should say, Take one of them for Husband; which you please, And most shall give you. So shall he enjoy His Fathers means, and eat and drink at ease, And she with her new Husband go her way. To this Telemachus replying says, By Jove, and by my Fathers misery, Who now is lost and dead, or somewhere strays Far off from Ithaca, it is not I That do my Mother keep from marrying Whom she thinks good. I do advise her still To take the man that shall most Treasure bring. But I'll not make her do't against her VVill. So ended he. Then on the Suiters faces Pallas sets up a laughter not their own, Nor to be stopt; their Senses she displaces, Their meat was bloody, & their hearts were down, What i't poor men, said Theoclymenus, Your heads and faces are wrapt up in night; You weep and groan; the walls  beams of th'hous To me seem bloody; and left there is no lght. The Hall and Porch, methinks are full of Sprights Ready to go to Hell; the Sun has lost
is place in Heaven, nor are there any lights; And dismal darkness hath the House engrost: t this they laught. Then said Eurymachus, This Stranger is not very well, let him y those that wait be guided from the House To th'Market-place. For all within is dim am, said Theoclymenus, not blind, I can go the Market-place alone. have both eyes and ears, and feet and mind: With these I can go hence. Guide need I none, nd go I will. For evil is hard by, Which none of you the Suiters shall escape That have so much abus'd the Family: This said, he parts, and left the Woo'rs to gape On one another, and with insipid jests To vex Telemachus, and themselves please, And all upon Telemachus his Guests. The words that one of them then said were these; lemachus, of all men you're least able To make an Entertainment or a Feast. or first you for this Beggar set a Table, Who eats and drinks as stoutly as the best, But can no work do, nor has any force; A very burthen to the earth. And this A Prophet would be, and loves to discourse Of Ill to come. My counsel therefore is That you would put these Strangers both aboard Some ship, and send them into Sicily. They that way may some profit you afford. Thus said the VVoor's, but little cared he, But silently the signe expecting stood His Father should have giv'n of falling on. Penelope mean while sat where she could Hear plainly what was said by every one. And now the Suiters merry Supper made, And laughing sat, and fed on much good chear: But After-Supper worse none ever had. For of the wrong themselves beginners were:
LIB. XXI. PEnelpe the Suiters strength to try Who soon'st could bend her Noble Husbands Bowe, And through the Axes make his Arrow fly, And whom she was to marry, now to know, To a high Chamber up the stairs she went, Wherein Ulysses precious goods did stand. There hug upon a Pin the Bowe unbent; The well made Key she carri'd in her hand, This Bowe was given him by Iphitus At Spar. But Ulysses with him met First at Messena. For it sell out thus. Ulysses then was thee about a debt. Messena-men their ships had put ashore At Ithara, and thence had ta'ne a Pty Of sheep, which was in number fifteen core, And with the Shepherds carrid them away. This was the cause Ulysses thither went. 'Twas a long way, and he scarce past a Boy. But by his Father and the Lords was sent T'ask reparation for this annoy. But Iphus twelve Maes had lost. Each one A young ule had that follow'd hero ehind (Which of his death were the occasion) And at Mssena these he thought to find. Bu as he was returning back again, And came unto the house of Hercues, That mighty man first did him entertain, And ater, klling him his Mares did seize. This was the man that to Ulysses gave The Bewe. And from him had a Sword and Spear.
But Hercules had sent him to his Grave, Erc they had tasted one anothers chear. This Bowe he carried not to Ilium, Nor ever had made use of it in fray. But often had it in his hand at home. For only as a Monument it lay. Penelop: now standing at the doo, Quickly the Bolt strook back with her great Key. The Valves fly open suddenly and roar; As when a great Bull roars, so roared they. Penelope wnt in, and up she stept Upon a board where on were standing Chests, In which mongst odours sweet the clothes were kept, The costly Garments, Robes, and Coats and Vests. Thence to the Bowe she reacht, and from the in She took it as it hung thee in the Case. And fitting down, her lap she laid it in. Aloud she wep, and tears ran down apace. And when she long enough had weeping been, The Bowe she did unto the Suiters bear, And Quiver with it full of Arrows keen. The Axes by her women carri'd were. Then with her Scarf she shaded both her cheeks, Having a Waiting woman on each hand. Unto her Gallant Suiters thus she speaks: Hear me you lusty Suiters that here stand Using this House not yours, continually To eat and drink in at anothers cost; And for it do pretend no reason why, But as contenders who shall love me most. Lo here; to him I make my self a prize, Who this good Bowe with greatest ease shall bend, And whose aim'd Arrow through these Axes fles, With him from this most blessed house I'll wend. This said, Eumaeus th'Axes and the Bowe By her command unto the Suiters bers; And as he went, his eyes for grief o'reflow. Nor could Philoetius abstain from tears. For which Antinous gave them ths reproof: You foolish Clowns, what alls you to shed tears?
Has she not for her Husband grief enough? That you must adde your sorrow unto hers. Sit silently, eat and drink quietly. Or if you needs must weep, go weep without. Leave the Bowe here, the Suiters strength to try, And that it may be carried round about. Not that I think there's any man among Us all can bend it as Ulysses could. (For I remember him though I were young) So said he, though he thought he bend it should, And also shoot through th'Axes every one, Though he were only the first to be shot. For he the other Suiters had set on, And was the first contriver of the Plot. Telamachus then to the Suiters spake, Sure Jove said he, bereav'd me has of sense. My Mother tells me she'll a Husband take, And leaving me depart with him from hence; And I here merry am that should be sad. But be't as 'twill, the Game must now begin, For such a wise as ne're Achaia had, Nor in Mysen' or Argos was e're seen, Nor Pyle, nor Ithaca, nor in Epire. But what need I set forth my Mothers praise? You know't your selves: Therefore I you desire To put off all excuses and delays. And I my self will be the first to try This mighty Bowe, whether I can or no, And through the Axes make the Arrow fly. 'Twill grieve me less to let my Mother go; Since I have strength to bend my Fathers Bowe, VVhy should I doubt of governing his State? And from him presently his Coat did throw And Sword, and then fell to delineate The ground whereon the Axes were to stand. On one long line he set them all upright. The VVoo'rs admir'd the justness of his hand; For why, the like was ne'r done in his sight. Then went he to the Sill to try the Bowe. Thrice he essaid it and was near it still,
And thrice again relenting let it go. Once more had done it. But 'twas not his will. For then his Father checkt him with a wink. Alas, then said Telemachus, must this Be all my strength? Too young I am I think. Come, let one take the Bowe that elder is. This said, the Bowe and Arrow he laid by, And to the Seat went where he sat before. Then said Antinous, The Bowe let's try In order as we sit. Let him therefore Try first, whose Table next the Cupboard is, And so to the right hand up one by one. The other Suiters all approved this. Leiodes was the first; so he begun; His place was low'st. He to the threshold went To try his force. But to his tender hand And feeble arms the Bowe would not relent. Then down he laid it there, and lets it stand; And to the Suiters spake: This Bowe, saies he, I cannot bend, some other tak't in hand. It's like of many Lords the death to be, When by the strongest it comes to be man'd. For better 'tis to die than live and miss The hopes you hither come for ev'ry day. And what is't any of you hope but this, That you Ulysses Consort marry may? But when he shall this Bowe have understood, Let him some other Lady wooe at case Amongst th' Achaeans whom he shall think good, And let Penelope take whom she please. This said, the Bowe and Arrow he set by, And to the Seat went where he sat before, And by Antinous was angerly Assoon as he had spoke, rebuk'd therefore. What say you? That this Bowe the death shall be Of many Lords? Why so? 'Cause you have not The strength to bend it? Others have, you'll see, But you for bending Bowes were not begot. Then to Melantheus he turn'd and said, Let fire be made, and a great Chair set by't,
And let upon it Cushions be laid. And let us have good store of Tallow white T'anoint and warm and supple make the Bowe, And try if we perhaps may bend it then. Fire, Chair and Cushions came, and greace enough, But to no purpose; too weak were the men. Antinous yet and Eurymachus Gave it not over; these two were the best Of all the Suiters that came to the house. No hope at all remained for the rest. Eumaeus and Philaetius then went cut Together; after them Ulysses went, And when they were the Gate and Court without, Himself unto them to discover meant. And fair he spake them: Master of the Kine, And you Eumaeus, Master of the Swine, Shall I keep in, or speak a thought of mine? To speak it out my heart does me encline. What if Ulysses should come suddenly Brought by some God, and stand be ore this rout, On whose side, his or theirs would you then be? What your mind prompts you to speak freely out. Then answer'd him the Master of the Kine, O that the Gods above would have i so. You'ld see the vertue of these hands of mine. The Master of the Swine then said so too. When now the hearts of both of them he knew, He spake again and said, 'Tis I am he, That after twenty years return to you; And know you longed have this day to see. Of all my Servants I find only you That wish me here. If therefore it shall please The Gods by me the Suiters to subdue. I'll give you wealth enough to live at ease, And Houses near me, and shall wedded live, And Brothers of Telemachus shall be. And that you may assuredly believe Ulysses speaks it, you a sig e shall see. With that he pull'd hi Rags beside his Thigh, And lets them see the place the Boar had rent.
Then when upon Parnassus Mountain high He with his Unkles Sons a hunting went. And then they fling their arms about Ulysses, And kiss his hand and shoulders, weeping sore; And he again embraced them with kisses, Nor had till Sun-set weeping given o're But that Ulysses hinder'd it. Give o're, said he, Your weeping, lest that some one come out hither, And tell within what here without they see. Go in, but one by one, not all together. First I'll go in, and then come you. Now mark. I'll pray the Suiters I the Bowe may try. If to my motion they refuse to hark, Give it into my hand as you pass by. And you Eumaeus bid the Women shut The House-doors all, nor suffer any one O'th' men without the House his head to put. And though within they hap to hear men grone, That they stir not, but ply their business. The utter-Gate Philoetius lock you fast, That to the House there may be no access. This said, into the Hall again he past, And after him his Servants. Now the Bowe Was in Eurymachus his hand by th'fire. He warm'd and ru'd, and did what he could do. But for to bend it he was ne're the nigher. At this he vext, and took it heinously, And, O, said he, 'tis not for my own part I troubled am, but for the Company. 'Tis chiefly that, I take so much to heart. Nor is it for a Wife that I complain; For in Achaia Ladies be enough, But that we hope Penelope to gain, Although we cannot bend Ulysses Bowe. Then said Antinous, 'T will not be so. This day unto Apollo sacred is, And not a day for bending of the Bowe, Therefore to lay it by is not amiss. And let the Axes stand still as they do; (For 'tis not like they will be stoln away)
And so go in and offer Wine unto The God. The Bowe may till to morrow stay. And bid Melanthus in the morning bring Goats of the fattest, and whereof the savour May from Apollo of all Archers King, For bending of the Bowe procure us favour. They all agree. Into the house they went. The Officers for hands the water hold; The Waiters fill the Cups, and them present. And when they drunk had each man what he would, Then spake Ulysses to the Suiters thus: Hear me, ye Suiters, what I have to say, Antinous, and you Eurymachus, For to you two 'tis chiefly that I pray. Since you the bending of the Bowe remit To th' Gods to give to whom they please; and they To morrow doubtless will determine it, Let me now of the Bowe make an essay. That I may know whether my strength be spent, And what I could before now cannot do. Whether I still be firm or do relent With hardship, and with want of looking to. These words of his made all the Suiters mad With fear that he indeed would bend the Bowe. Antinous gave him language very bad. Thou wretched Stranger, is it not enough That of our Feast thou hast an equal part, And that of our discourse (and none but thou Stranger and Beggar) made a hearer art? 'Tis wine that makes thee not thy self to know. For wine serves all men so that drink too much. Wine hurt Burytion the Centaur great. His carriage in Perithous house was such Among the Lapithae sitting at meat, That angry with't they were and all arose, And with sharp iron cut off both his ears, And with the same they pared off his nose. A way the cause of his own harm he bears. From that day on, Centaurs and men are foes. Themselves men hurt by wine immoderate.
So if you bend the Bowe, your ears you'll lose. For you'll find here no prating Advocace. But to King Takim forthwith you shall go, And he will of you make a cruel end. Therefore sit still, and let alone the Bowe; Nor with men younger than your self contend. Then said Penelope, I'd have you know, Antinous, that you did very ill To wrong Telemachus his Guest. What though He bend the Bowe, d'ye think I take him will For Husband? I am sure you think not so. Let none of you be sad with fear of that. Then to her said Eurymachus, No, no; That's not the thing that we be troubled at. 'Tis of our Honour that we jealous be. For how will men and women, think you, prate; But that such Suiters wooe Penelope As could not bend Ulysses Bowe, but that A Beggar that past by by chance could bend it? Which unto us will be no little shame. Who (said she) live on others means and spend it, Should not stand much on Honour and on Fame. Besides, this Stranger is well made and tall, And of a great man says he is the Son. Give him the Bowe to try his strength withal. For this I'll promise him, and see it done. If he do bend it, I'll on him bestow Good Cloathing and a handsome Coat and Vest, Shooes to his seet, Dart, Sword with edges two, And send him to such place as he thinks best. Then spake to her Telemachus her Son: Mother, to give the Bowe or to deny't, Is in my pow'r, and hinder me can none In Elis, or Achaia, or here right From giving it unto this Stranger here, If I think fit. But Mother, pray go now Up to your Chamber, and look to your work, And leave to us to dispute of the Bowe. She mused on, and thought his counsel wise; And being in her Chamber sore did weep.
For th'absence of her Husband, till he eyes By th' Goddess Pallas closed were with sleep. Eumaeus now had brought the Bowe about, And come it was to where Ulysses sar. The Suiters all at once then cried our, Swineherd, Rogue, Lout, what meanest thou by that? If the Gods please to favour our designe, Thou shalt be slain and carried out of sight, And there devoured be by thy own Swine. This put Eumaeus into a great fright Telemachus then roar'd on th'other part, Bear on the Bowe (t'obey all is not best) I'll pelt thee (though that thou my elder art) With stones home to thy Hogsties like a beast. For I the stronger am. O that I were But so much stronger than these Suiters all, I soon of some of them the house should clear. They laught at this, and bated of their gad. Eumaeus then took up the Bowe agen, And gave it to Ulysses in his hand. This done, Euryclea he called then. It is, said he, Telemachus command To lock the doors all; and that if you hear Noise in the house of blows, or groaning men, Let none go forth, but at their work stay there. This said, Euryclea went in agen, And lockt the doors. Philoetius likewie Went silently and shut the utter-Gae, And with a Ship-rope that lay by, it ties, And coming back sits where before he sate; And lookt upon Ulysses, who to know What work the worms had in his absence made, This way and that way turning was the Bowe. At this the Suiters one t'another said, This Beggar surely has no little skill In Bowes or in Bowe-stealing, or of's own He has one like's, or make one like it will, He doth examine it so up and down. Another said, As he shall bend the Bowe, So let him find, as he is begging, Alms.
So mockt they. When he view'd it had enough, And holden it a while had in his palms, He bent it. As a Fidler does not spend. Very much labour the sheeps gut to strain; So he, Ulysses his strong Bowe to bend Did put himself to very little pain. Then with his lest hand he the string essaid, It sounded like the singing of a Swallow. The Suiters then began to be afraid, And mighty claps of Thunder straightway follow. Jove's Token very welcome was t'Ulysses. Then to the Bowe he set a Shaft, and there Sitting, shot through the Axes, not one misses. The rest of th'Arrows in the Quiver were. Then turning to Telemachus, he said, I have not sham'd you, nor have miss'd one Axe, Nor long a bending of the Bowe I staid. You see then that the Woo'rs me falsly tax. But now 'tis time for After-uppering Fire day be done, and raking such delights, As Cups. Discourse, and pleasant Musique bring; For these of Feasting are the common rites. Then to his Son, with's eye he beckoned. Telemachus that well him understood, With Spear in hand and Helmer on his head, Came unto him, and close by his Chair stood. LIB. XXII. ULysses then himself delivereth Of his soul Rags, and leaps up to the Sill With bowe in hand and arrows ript with death, And spake to th'Wooers boasting of his skill,
Suiters, said he, this Match is at an end. Jove speed me now. Another Mark have at, Which none ere shot at yet. Apollo send Me luck to hit. As he was saying that, T'Antinous the Shaft he did address, Who had the Cup in's hand about to drink. Than of his death he thought of nothing less. For one amongst so many who would think, How strong soever, durst do such a thing? The Arrow pierc'd his neck from throat to polt. The wound receiv'd, he turns round staggering; The blood stream'd out; away he threw the bowl; And overturn'd the Table with his fee; Both bread and meat lay scatter'd in the Hall. The Suiters bustle and in clusters mee; Of this great man amazed at the fall. Then one of them unto Ulysses said, Stranger, this was ill shot; thou killed hast The greatest man in Ithaca. Thou'st plaid Thy last prize. To the Crows thou shalt be cast. But yet they held their hands; for why, they thought 'Twas done by misadventure, not contriv'd. For proud and foolish they perceived not The fatal hour was to them all arriv'd. Then said Ulysses with a sullen eye, Dogs, dead you thought me, and spent my estate; With you my women you compell'd to lie; And would have wedded, whilst I liv'd, my Mate. No fear you had neither of Gods on high, Nor of revenge from any mortal man; But now a vengeance to you all is nigh. At this they frighted were and looked wan; And each one peept about what way to take To save his own life, if he could, by flight. None but Eurymachus t'Ulysses spake. If you Ulysses be, you say but right. Much harm is done you both in house and field; But this Antinous Author was of't all; He set us on, and here lies justly kill'd. For wedding of your Wise his care was small.
His care was how to make himself here King (Which Jove not suffer'd him to bring to pass;) And to destruction how your Son to bring He chiefly thinking and designing was. And since that he deservedly is slain, Spare your own people; we'll repair what's done. And what is spent we will make up again, And recompence with twenty Cows each one; And Brass and Gold till you be satisfi'd. If not, there's no man can your anger blame. To this Ulysses with a sour look repli'd Your whole estates, and added to the same How much soever you can elsewhere get Too little is to bind me to desist, Until the Suiters shall have paid their debt. Two ways before you lie, take which you list, To fight or fly, if you will death avoid. But fly, I think you cannot. So said he. Eurymachus then to the Suiters said, The man will not lay down his Bowe you see; But since 'tis in his hand, and Arrows by, And stands upon the threshold of the door, His shafts will fly at us continually, And till we all be slain will not give o're: Let's therefore take up Tables for defence Against his shafts, and (Sword in hand) run all Unto the door at once and drive him thence, And people of the Town together call. This said, his Sword with double edge he drew, And thunder'd him with words. But howsoever A deadly shaft first from Ulysses flew That enter'd at his Brest and stuck in's Liver. Down fell his Sword, he turns himself quite round, And throws his blood about him every way; Kicks down the Table, meat and Cup, to th'ground, And with his brow beating the floor he lay; And sprawling made the Seat shake with his feet; And endless darkness lay upon his eye. Then rose Amphinomus and death did meet. He thought from thence to make Ulysses fly.
But by Telemachus prevented was, That slew him with his Spear upon the place. From back to breast the well-thrown Spear did pass; Down with a thump he falls upon his face. Telemachus i'th' body left the Spear. For why, he had good reason to mistrust Amongst so many Swords, if he staid there, He might be killed by some blow or thrust. Then to his Father as he by him stood, To fetch down Arms, said he, 'Twill do no harm, Two Spears, a Buckler, and a Helmet good, And both I hiloetius and Emaeus arm. Run quickly, said Ulysses, while there be Arrows remaning, lest they force me shou'd To quit the door. Then quickly up ran he Unto the room wherein the Armour stood. Eight Spears, four Bucklers, and four Helmets good He took, and to his Father came again. And first he arm'd himself, and ready stood. The two good Servants themselves armed then. Ulysses Arrows till they all were gone Kill'd each his man, and one by one they fall. But when they all were spent and left was none, He sets his Bowe to lean against the wall. Over his shoulder he his Buckler cast, And puts his well-made Helmet on his head. The two Spears with his hand he griped fast. And then his posture he considered There was i'th' wall a certain window high, By th' Sill whereof a way lay to the Street, To which he bad Eumaeus have an eye, And near it stand. But one way was to it. Then Agelaus to the Suiters said, Why does not some man to that window haste, And to the people cry aloud for aid, That so this Shooter may have shot his last? Then said Melantheus, No, no, 'tis in vain; The street-door and the Court-gate stand so close, That one good man the place may well maintain Againsthov many s'ever them oppose.
But well, I'll fetch you Armour to put on, And Weapons I will bring you out of hand. For where they by Ulysses and his Son Were laid, I know the room and where they stand. Then up he went. Twelve Bucklers he brings thence. As many Spears, as many Helmets too. The Suiters then prepar'd for their defence; And now Ulysses knew not what to do. But to Telemachus he turn'd and said, Th'll woman sure, or else Melantheus has For th'Woors gotten Arms and us betraid. No, Father, answer'd he, my fault it was. The door I left unlockt, and but put to, Which some body observ'd. Eumaeus now Go lock it fast. Withal consider who, The women or Melantheus serv'd us so. Whilst thus they talk, Melantheus went once more To fetch down Arms; Eumaeus saw him then, And told Ulysses, Him we thought before To be the man, is thither gone agon. Shall I go now and kill him (if so be I can) or bring him hither to you, to endure What you think fit for all his villany? Then said Ulysses, We two will be sure Telemachus and I, to keep these men From going out, and therefore go you two And bind hs hands and feet together. Then Betwixt his body and his legs put through A Rope, and at his back tie boards. And so Close to a Pillar hoise him up on high Unto the beams of th'house, that he may know His fault, and feel hs Pain beore he die. Then up they went, and stood without the door On each side one. Melantheus was within At the far end, looking for Armour more. And after there he long enough had been, Out with a Helmet in one hand he came, A Buckler in the other, great but torn. Laertes in his youth had bon the same, But now withlyng it was mouldy worn.
As he came out they seiz'd him suddenly, And in again they drag'd him by the hair; And then his hands unto his feet they tie, And up they hoise him as they bidden were. This done, Eumaeus said unto him jeering, In that soft bed, Melantheus, easly You will observe the Mornings first appearing, That for the Woo'rs your Goats may ready be. Then armed both, and locking up the Door, And breathing courage to Ulysses come. So that upon the threshold there were four; But many were the Suiters in the room, Then down unto Ulysses Pallas came In Mentor's shape, to whom Ulysses said, You are my friend, and our age is the same; For old acquaintance let me have your aid. Though thus he said, he thought i Pallas still. The Suiters clamor'd. Agelaus spake: Mentor beware, the course you take is ill Against us all Ulysses part to take. For 'tis our purpose when these two are slain Father and Son, that you the next shall be, And of your rashness suffer shall the pain, And with his Substance your own mix will we. Nor shall your Sons, Daughters, or Wife live here. Pallas was angry at these words of his, And chid Ulysses then, and askt him where His courage was. And what, said she, is this The man that bravely fought nine years at Troy, And kill'd in fight so many gallant men, And he whose prudence did the own destroy, And whines so at his coming home again? Come hither Milk-sop, saies she, stand by me, And how your old friend Mentor shall requite The kindness you have shewn him, you shall see. Yet presently she would not end the fight. For further yet she would the Courage try Both of Ulysses and Telemachus. And in a Swallows shape she up did fly, And sat upon a black Beam of the House.
Mean while the Suiters by Agelaus, Amphimedon and Demoptolemus, Eurynomus, Pisandrus, Polybus The best of all the Suiters in the House, (For many had been killed with the Bowe) Encourag'd were. Friends, said he, let's be bold, And at them all our good Spears let us throw. So shall we make the man his hands to bold. Mentor with theirs, his fortune will not mix, He and those hopes are gone. Upon the Sill There are but four. Let's throw at once but fix, That if Jove please, we may Ulysses kill. When he is gone, the rest we need not fear. The Suiters all approved this advise. And then they lanced ev'ry man his Spear; But Pallas made it fall out otherwise. For from the Beam she soon blew here and there The flying staves, whereof one hit the door; The two side-posts, and the walls wounded were. When of the Spears the danger was past o're, Then said Ulysses, Now our turn it is To cast our Spears at this unruly rout; That not content with former injuries Do what they can to take our lives to boot. This said, and taking aim, their Spears they threw, Ulysses killed Demoptolemus. Telemachus Eury ades then slew. Eumaeus with his Spear kill'd Elatus. Pisandrus by Philoetius was slain. The Suiters then to the rooms end retreat, And to the four gave time to take again The Spears that in the wounds were sticking yet. Again they lanced ev'ry man his Spear. The Swallow on the Beam still puts them by; And by the door, walls, posts receiv'd they were. Telemachus and Eumaeus only Had little scratches; one upon the Wrist. Eumaeus on the Shoulder. But the skin Scarce broken was. And both the other mist. And then the four amongst the throng threw in
Their Spears again. And then Ulysses slew Eurydamas. And by Telemachus Was slain Amphimedon. Eumaeus threw, And killed Polybus. Philoetius Then smot Cesippus and through ier'd his brft, And over him insuling thus he said. Bold Paeor that in love art with hy jest, And to say any thing art not afraid, For the Cows-foot t'Ulysses thrown take that, Ulysses kill'd too Damarides. Telemachus Ieiocrates laid flat With Spear in hand. When they had killed these, Pallas aloft hed forth her frightful shield. And then as Catle stung with a Gad fly, In heat of Summer run about the field, So round about the Hall the Suiters flie. As when the Vultures stoop down from the Hill Upon the Fowl; these couch close to the plain, Threated with heavy Clouds, they slay and kill, These cannot fly away, nor turn again; So they upon the Suiters fiercely all, And winding with them as they shift their ground, They killing went. All gore-blood was the Hall, And made with thumps & groans a dismal found. Liodes then kneel'd at Ulysses feet To beg his life. I came, said he, as Priest, And told them their behaviour was unmeet, And always give them counsel to desist. But nothing that I said would they obey, And of their own destruction Authors are. There's not a woman in the house can say I did amiss. Must I like thse men fare? To this Ulysses with a sour look said, Did you come with the Suiters as their Priest? Then surely for them you have also prai'd, That of my coming home I should have mist, That with these men you daily might here board Your sef, your wife, and children. Therefore die. With that he took up Agelaus Sword, Which when he di'd fell from him and lay by.
And withit at a stroke cut off his head. But Phemius the Minstrel scaped free. For thither he came not for meat or bread; The Suiters forc'd him of necessity. He had his Fiddle in his hand, and stood Within the door, and studi'd what to do, Whether unto Ulysses go he shou'd, Or out a door unto the Altar go Ih Court, whereon with many a fat beast Ulysses oft devoutly had serv'd Jove. And having paus'd, at last he thought it best To go t'ulysses and his mercy prove. Then down he laid his Fiddle on the floor, Between the Temp'rer and a studded Chair. Then went and fell upon his knees before Ulysses, and thus to him made his prayer. Save me Ulysses, and consider that If you me slay, it after you will grieve. I am a Singer, but was never taught. For Song to me the Gods did freely give. I sing to Gods and men, and have the skill To sing to you as to a God. Therefore Of cutting off my head lay by the will. Bsides, Telemachus can tell you more; I was not hither drawn with smell of roast. Eut many men and strong brought me by force. Telemachus that knew this was no boast, Cri'd out. Hold Father, 'tis not our best course To slay the innocent; and I would ain Save Medon too, that lov'd me from a Boy, And took care of me, if he be not slain By coming in your or your Servants way. Under a Sat Medon himself had laid, And wrapt himself up in a raw Cow-hide, And hearing what Telemachus had said, Skipt nimbly out, his Cow skin cast aside, And falling at Telemachus his knee He to him said, O Friend, loe here I stand; Forbear I pray, and to your Father be A means that also he may hold his hand.
For whilst his anger 'gainst the Suitets staid, That wasted have his goods, and him despis'd, Killing each way about him, I'm afraid He might perhaps kill me too unadvis'd. Ulysses hearing answer'd thus agen, Take courage man. There is no danger nigh. And this remember and tell other men, That Justice better thrives than Knavery, Go now into the Court and stay without Both you and Phemius, that I may do The bus'ness in the house I am about. Then out into the Court away they go. And on the Altar of the God they sat Looking about, still fearing to be slain. Ulysses to be sure that none remain Alive, and under Seats or Tables squat, Scarcht well the Hall, and found they all were dead, As Fishes on the shore lie out, and by The heat of Phaethon be murdered, So did the Woo'rs one on another lie. Then to Telemachus Ulysses said, Tell Euryclea I would speak with her. Telemachus his Father straight obey'd, And scraped at the door that she might hear: Nurse (says he) Mother of the Maids come out. My Father to you somewhat has to say. She heard him well, and presently without More words the door she open'd with her Key. And found Ulysses standing 'mongst the dead Besmear'd with blood. As when a Lion has Upon a Cow at pasture newly fed, With goary brest and chaps; so dight he was. Th'old woman there beholding so much blood, And Carcases so many lying dead, At such a mighty work amazed stood; And was about to whoop, but hindered Was by Ulysses. Hold, said he, within Your joy, and let it not appear in vain. To glory over dead men is a sin. These men the Gods, and their own sins have slain.
For neither from above they fear'd the Gods, Nor men respected good or bad beneath, And therefore now have felt the Heav'nly Rods, And brought upon themselves untimely death. But tell me Nurse-how many women be That me dishonour and do wickedness. Fifty, said she, do serve Penelope, And learn to work and wait, no more nor less. Of these there twelve be that are impudent, And care not for me, nor Penelope. Telemachus was young; the Government To him of Maids might not well trusted be. But now I'll to my Ladies Chamber go, Where she's asleep Some God has clos'd her eyes. To tell her you are here. But he said, No; First call those women who do me despise, And have behav'd themselves dishonestly. Euryclea, obeys and and goes her way, And call'd those women; Come away, said she, Telemachus i'th' Hall does for you stay. Mean while Ulysses call'd Telemachus Unto him, and his faithful Servants two, Trusty Eumaeus and Philoetius; Hear me, said he, what I would have you do. Make these lewd women carry hence the dead, The Chairs and Tables in the Hall make clean, And when that bus'ness they have finished, Into the Court make them go forth agen, Into that narrow place 'twixt th'house and hedge, Till they forget the Suiters Venery, Make them of your sharp Swords to feel the edge, And for their stoln unclean delight to die. Then came the women down into the Hall Wailing, and tears abundantly they shed, And presently unto their work they fall. Into the Porch they carry out the dead. Ulysses giving order standeth by. Telemachus then and Philoetius, Also Fumaeus do with shovels ply The Pavement dawb'd with blood, and cleanse  house,
Scraping together dust and blood; and that The women also carry out adore. But when this bus'ness now an end was at, There rested for them yet one bus'ness more. They brought them thence into the narrow place, From whence there was no hope at all to fly. You, said Telemachus, for the disgrace Done to me and my Mother, must not die An honest death This having said, he stretcht Between two Pillars high a great strong Rope, That with their feet the ground could not be reacht. Hung there, they sprawl'd awhile, but could not drop. Then down they drag'd Melantheus; and his Nose And Ears with cruel sleel from's head they tear; And brake his Arms and Legs with many blows; And to the Dogs to eat they threw his Gear. Their work now done, they washt their hands & feet, And to Ulysses in the Hall they went, Who having found the place not very sweet, For Brimstone call'd to take away the scent. Euryclea, said he, ferch Brimstone hither, And Fire, and also wake Penelope; And bid her Maids come to me all together, But hasten them to come. Then answer'd she, Dear Child, 'tis well said. But first let me go And bring you better Cloaths, a Coat and Vest. These Rags become you not. Then said he, No. Bring me fire first, and after do the rest. Then Fire she brought and Brimstone presently, Wherewith he aired both the Court and Hall, The Nurse then up goes to the Rooms on high To call the Maids. T'Ulysser they came all. They weep and sob, and all embrace Ulysses, And kits his head and shoulders, shake his hand; And he again saluteth them with kisses. Weeping for joy they all about him stand.
LIB. XXIII. TH'old woman to the upper Rooms ascended, To wake Penelope, and let her know Her Husband was return'd. Her joy amended Much had her pace, and well she ambled now. And standing at her head, Rise Child said she; The Gods at last have granted you your wishes. Come down into the Hall, where you shall see The so long by you wisht-for man Ulysses. The Suiters he has killed ev'ry one, Who needs the Stewards of his house would be, In despight of Telemachus his Son; And live upon his Substance lavishly. To her again Penelope thus spake: The Go, Euryclea, sure have made you mad. The Gods can wise men fools, and fools wise make; The Gods have done you hurt, more Wit you had. You do me wrong, that know how little sleep I have enjoyed since he went to Troy. I never so well slept since, but still weep. And now you come and wake me with a toy. Be gone, if't had been any Maid but you I should have sent her not well pleas'd away. But to your age some more respect is due. Go down again into the House you may. Dear Child, said she, I mock not, for 'tis true. Ulysses is i'th' house. That Stranger's he. Telemachus and no man else him knew. And known to others would not let him be, Till they these proud and naughty men had kill'd. Penelope then starting from the bed
Embrac'd the Nurse; her eye; with tears were fill'd. And as yet doubtful still she questioned. Euryclea is all this true you say? Is he indeed come home? Be serious. How could he the proud Suiters all destroy, He being but one, they many in the House? Nor saw, nor askr I, but I heard the groans Of dying men; for up we were all shut Within our doors, and lockt up all at once; And of our lives into a fear were put; Till me your Son Telemachus call'd out To come t'Ulysses. In the Hall he stood. And there in heaps the slain lay him about, That like a Lion stood besmear'd with blood; You would have joy'd to see him. Now they lie I'th' Court all in one heap. But busie he Is airing of the house, a great fire by; And for to call you hither has sent me. But come, that in each other you may joy, For now at last your wishes granted be; Ulysses come; your Son is past a Boy; And their revenge upon the Woo'rs they see. Nurse, answered she, triumph not out of season. For to be glad to see him in the house, You know there none is that have so much reason, As I have and our Son Teemachus. But 'tis not truth you tell me. What you say Will come at last to nothing else but this, It was some God that did the Suiters slay, Hating the sight of what they did amiss. There never man came to them that can boast He parted from them without injuries. So by their wickedness their lives they lost. Ulysses may have perisht for all this. Euryclea to this again repli'd, Dear Chid, what words are these that from you come? Ulysses stands i'th' Hall at the fires side, And yet you say he never will come home. But well, I'll tell you now a surer signe: When I was washing of his legs and feet,
I saw where th'wound was giv'n him by the Swine; And had then told you had he thought it meet. But with his hand for that cause stopt my breath. Come, I will lay my life on't willingly. If it be false put me to cruel death. To this Penelope did then reply, The purpose of the Gods, wire though you be, You know not, Nurse. But I'll go to my Son, And there upon the place with him I'll see What men are slain, and who the deed has done. Then down she went consulting in her breast, Whether at distance it were best to try, Or else directly go unto the Guest, And there receive and kiss him presently. But when into the Hall she entred was, Where sitting was Ulysses in the light Of a good fire, she went and took a place That was to where he sat just opposite. Ulysses lookt o'th' ground expecting what His Wife would say, but long time she spake not. But gazing on her husband mute she sate, As one that's in a trance, and has no thought: But by and by surveying him she thought 'Twas he. But seeing him so ill arraid, Her mind was chang'd. She thought that he 'twas not. Telemachus his Mother chid, and said, Mother, hard-hearted Mother and unkind, Why sit you at such distance from my Father, And have so little care to know his mind? When many Questions you should ask him rather. Another woman would not keep off so From her own Husband that away had staid Twenty years long, and suffer'd so much woe, But at their meeting somewhat would have said. Son (said she then) I am astonisht so, I cannot speak, nor look him in the face. But whether he Ulysses be or no, I shall be certain in a little space; For we have signs between us of our own, Which we shall soon know one another by,
That to none living but our selves are known. Ulysses to his Son then smilingly Said, Let (Telemachus) your Mother try me, Perhaps she know me better will anon. The cause why now so little she sets by me, Is that I have ill-favour'd Garments on. But now let you and I look well about. Who kills one man, unless great friends he have, Must leave his Kin and Country, and go out. But we have kill'd both many men and brave. Therefore consider what is to be done. Father (said he) let that be your own care. So wise as you are men say there is none. Our hands to do your pleasure ready are. Why then I'll tell you what is best to do. Put on your Coats; and let the women all Into the Hall in their best Garments go; The Minstrel play; and they to dancing fall; That he that stands without, or dwelleth nigh Unto the house, or travelleth that way, When he shall hear such mirth and melody, May think, This surely is the Wedding-day. That so before this slaughter Fame have spread, Depart we may from hence into the field, And 'gainst the people of the Town make head, And take such counsel more as Jove shall yield. When this was said, the Mer their Coats put on. The Damsels dress themselves, the Minstrel sung And plaid upon his Fiddle, and each one To dancing sell, with it the Palace rung. And one that heard this as he stood without, Said to another by him, She is Marri'd. Fie, Fie, she could no longer now hold out. So said he, ignorant how things were carri'd. Mean while Ulysses bath'd and oynted it B' Eurynome, and also richly clad With a fair Robe and Coat. And beside this, Taller and greater Pallas made him had. And varnished with black his curled head. As one by Vulcan and Athena taught
Gold upon Silver skilfully had spread; So Pallas on Ulysses beauty wrought. Then from the Bath he like a God came in, And sat him down before his Wife again; And with her to discourse did thus begin. Woman (said he) to speak to you is vain. Above all women hardned is your heart. What woman else that had her Husband seen After twice ten years absence thus apart From him to sit, contented would have been? Make me a Bed, Nurse, what should I do here? Man, said Penelope. Nor mightily Imagnifie nor scorn you. What you were When you went hence, full well remember I. But go, Nurse, make for him the bed that he Himself fram'd, by the Chamber-door without. Thus said she, but to try if that were he, Yet griev'd him to the heart, and made him doubt. Woman, said he, who has remov'd my bed? It cannot be but by a force Divine. With my own hands 'twas wrought and finished, To th'end thereby it might be known for mine. I'th' Court an Olive-tree stood great and tall, Thick as a Pillar. I about it made A Chamber. Of good Stone I made the wall. And cutting off the boughs the roof I laid. And in the wall a good strong door I form. When this was done, I cut up by the root, And smooth'd with Iron Tools a lusty Corm, And setting it upright fixt the bed to't, And pierc'd the wood with wimbles where 'twas meet. And laid on Silver, Gold, and Ivory. A purple-thong unto the door I fit. This is the signe for you to know me by. Whether it still remain I cannot tell, Or ta'ne away and down be cut the Tree. This said, and she the signe remembring well, The tears rowl'd from her eyes. Thus weeping she Acknowledgeth and runneth to Ulysses; About his neck her milk-white arms she lays,
And both his Shoulders and his Head she kisses, And, O Ulysses, be not angry says, The Gods have giv'n you wisdom, but deni'd To satisfie our youth with mutual joy; Take it not ill I have you thus far tri'd; Since horrour hath possest my mind alway Lest some deceitful man (for such there be Too many in the world) should hither come, And flatt'ring bring me into infamy. Helen of Argos would have staid at home And not gone with th'Adulterer of Troy, Had she consider'd that th' Achaean Lords Might chance to come and fetch her thence away Again into her Country with their Swords. This speech inflam'd his love, and wet his eyes. As a man shipwrackt swimming for his life, Rejoyceth when the Land he near him spies; So welcome was Ulysses to his Wife. She hung upon him still, nor had let go Till Morning but for Pallas, who would not Let Phaëton and Lampus, th'Horses two That draw the Morn, be set to th' Chariot. Then said Ulysses to Penelope, O Wife! my troubles ended are not yet; For still there many more remaining be; Long time 'twill be ere to the end I get. Tiresias did tell me this in Hell, When I went thither of his Ghost to know Whether I with my Mates should come home well Or not to Ithaca again, and how. But come, 'tis bed-time, let us satisfie Our selves with sleep. Then said Penelope, Your bed made ready shall be presently. But since you mention'd have the Prophesie, Tell me what sard Tiresias. I know You'll tell it me one time or other, why If you will may you not tell me it now? To this Ulysses did again reply, Because you long to know't, I tell you then, Tiresias advised me to go
With Oar on Shoulder to a place where men Inhabit that the briny Sea not know, Nor ever mingle salt with what they eat, Nor ever saw the ship with crimson face, Nor yet those wings which do the Water beat (Call'd Oars) to make the good ship go apace. Now mark me well. When you shall meet a man, Just at the end of Neptunes utmost bound, Bearing upon his shoulder a Corn-fan, Stick down your lusty Oar upon the ground. There sacrifice to the worlds Admiral For new admittance a Ram, Boar, and Bull. Then home again, and offer unto all The Gods by name a hundred Oxen full. Your death will not ungentle be, for which Age shall prepare you, and your Soul unglew Insensibly. Your People shall be rich Which round about you dwell. All this is true. Then said Penelope, If this be all, Since your old age the Gods will happy make, The sorrow yet to come can be but small. Whilst thus this couple t'one another spake Mean while their bed with cov'rings soft was clad, The Maids return'd i'th'Hall before them stand. Euryome a Torch to light them had, And carri'd it before them in her hand. Then parting left them under Marriage-Law. Telemachus and the good Servants two, When they had to the Dancers said Hola, Unto their Beds within the Palace go. Ulysses and Penelope their joy Converted had into a new content; She to Ulysses telleth the annoy She suffer'd from her Suiters impudent; What havock they had made of Cows and Sheep, And many Barrels of her Wine had wasted. And he to her, what hurt o'th' Land and Deep He done and suffer'd had. While his Tale lasted Well pleas'd she was, and had no list to sleep. He told her how the Cicons he had beaten;
How Lote from love of home his men did keep; How Cyclops his Companions had eaten; And in revenge how he had made him blind; How, to convey him home he did obtain Of Aeolus a leather-bag of wind, Which breaking Prison blew him back again. And how in Laestrigonia he lost His good ships all but one, in which he was; Told her the wiles of Circe; what the Ghost In Hell, said to him, of Tiresias, To whom he went his fortune for to know, In a black ship; and with his Mother there Dscoursed; and saw many a one laid low That in the Argive Host had been his Peer; And how he heard the tempting Sireus sing In consort, and scap'd safely by; and how By th'shifting Rocks, Charybdis vomiting, And Scylla's clutches he did safely ow; How to Ogygia he came, and how Calypso kept him in a Cave, where she To be his wife did promise to bestow Upon him Youth and Immortality. How to Phaeacia he came, where he Much honour'd was, and thence by Sea did come Enricht by publique liberality With Brass and Gold and costly Vestures home. And at these words sleep seised on his eyes. When Pallas thought Ulysses satisfi'd With bed and sleep, she makes the morning rise, And day from Mortals now no longer hide. Ulysses rose, and speaking to his Wife, We have, said he, both of us had much wo; You for my absence weeping out your life, And I, because the Gods would have it so. But since we now again united be, Look to the goods within. My folds I'll fill Partly with booty from the Enemy, And many also my Friends give me will. Now to my grieved Father I must go, And therefore with your Maids go up again:
For ere the Sun be up, the Town will know That in my House the Suiters all are slain. Do not so much as look out, or enquire. This said, he puts on Arms. To m also His Son and his two men he did require. Then they got up, and there stood armed too. Then open'd they the door and forth they went. Ulysses led the way. Daylight was spread. But Pallas out of Town them safely sent Into the Field, and undiscovered. LIB. XXIV. MEan while unto the house came Mercury. A Golden Rod he carri'd in his hand, Wherewith he lays asleep a Mortal eye, And opens it again with the same Wand. And at the bloody-heap he calls away The Suiters Souls. They all about him fly. And as the Rod directeth them the way, They follow all, but screaming fearfully. As in some venerable hollow Cave, Where Bats that are at roost upon a stone, And from the ledge one chance a fall to have, The rest scream out and hold fast one by one; So screaming all the Souls together fly. And first pass by Oceanus his Streams, Then by Sol's Gate, and Rock of Leucady; And then they passed through the Town of Dreams, And in a trice to th'Mead of Asphodel, And saw the Soul there of Peleiades, (For there the Souls of wretched Mortals dwell) And of Patroclus and Nestorides.
The Soul of Ajax Son of Telamon Was also there, who 'mongst those Warriours tall, The goodliest person was, except the Son Of Peleus, who did much excel them all. To these Atrides Soul came from hard by, And theirs whose death had joyned been with his, And by Aegistus hand were made to die. Then to Atrides said Achilles this Atrides, we thought you of all the Host That came to fight against the Town of Troy, Had been by the high Gods beloved most; For in the Army you bore greatest sway. Yet afterwards the first you were to fall. T'had better been Commanding t'have been slain. Then had you had a noble Funeral, And Tomb, whereby your glory might remain. But now you di'd a miserable death. To this Atrides Soul thus answered, Happy were you at Troy to lose your breath With other Argives that there perished Fighting about you in your dusty Bed Stretcht out, your feats of Horsmanship forgot, But fighting we all day continued, And till we gain'd your Body ceased not. Nor had we ceased then, but for the storm. And then we bare your Body to the Fleet, And there the blemishes thereof reform With water fair and warm, and Unguents sweet. The Greeks about you wept, and cut their hair; Your Mother and her Nymphs then come & roar'd, Th' Achaean Army was in such a sear, That they were ready all to run aboard. But Nestor, whose advice most carrant was, Cri'd, Stay you Argives, this s not the noise Of armed Foes, but Thetis now doth pass With all her Nymphs; of them this is the voice. Then they all fearless staid. And the Nymphs stood Mourning, and clothed him with Garments meet. The Muses nine in turn with voices good Singing, made all the standers to weep.
And seventeen days both Gods and men we mourn. On the eighteenth we Sheep and Cattle slay. And then in Godlike Cloaths your Body burn With many Unguents sweet that on it lay. Both Foot and Horse many the Pile sustain, And loudly shout, and Vulcan makes an end. Only the Bones and nothing else remain, Which with pure Wine and Unguents sweet we blend. Your Mother sent the Urn, by Vulcan made, But given her by Bacchus, and therein Noble Achilles your white bones we laid, Mixt with Patroclus you delighted in. By yours, the ashes of Antilochus, Whom next Patroclus was to you most dear, We placed in an Urn apart, and thus Over you all one Monument we rear, High to be seen from Sea by them that now, Or shall hereafter sayling be that way. Your Mother also to the Gods did vow T'have noble Prizes for the Lords to play. At Princes Sepultures I oft have seen Propos'd rich Prizes to provoke the strife Of noble minds; but that like these had been, I never any saw in all my life. So after death renown'd your name will be. But what am I the better, to whom Jove Did for my pains a wretched Death decree (Such was the pleasure of the Gods above) B' Aegistus and my own Wives bloody hand? Thus they to one another talkt in Hell. There Mercury came to them with his Band Of Woo'rs that in Ulysses Palace fell. Of these Atrides knew Ampimedon, (For he in Ithaca had been his Guest) And speaking to him first, he thus begun. Amphimedon what ail'd you and the rest, To come to this dark place so in a throng, The flow'r of Ithaca, of equal years? If purposely a man should seek among Your people all, he should nor find you Pes.
Were you by Neptune drowned in the Main, And hither sent by fury of the weather? Or landing to find Booty were you slain? Or fighting for fair women were sent hither? Come tell me freely; I have been your Guest. Know you not I t'your Fathers house did come With Menelaus, Ulysses to request That he would go with us to Ilium? Then said Amphimedon, I know it all, And how we all deprived were of life, I'll tell you true, and manner of our fall. Ulysses absent, we all woo'd his Wife. She none deni'd, nor any married, But casting how of life us to bereave, To set a Loom up came into her head, As if she somewhat did intend to weave. She sets it up, and did begin to weave. Suiters (said she) since dead Ulysses is, Stay yet a little while and give me leave To make an end but of one business. I must for old Laertes make a Cloth Which in his Sepulchre he is to wear. T'offend the Wives of Greece I should be loath. For to accuse me they will not forbear. They'll say I very hasty was to wed, If I go hence and not provide a shroud VVherein Laertes must be be buried. Out of his wealth that might have been allow'd. The Suiters then were all content. And then All day she wove, but ere she went to bed, VVhat she had wov'n she ravell'd out agen. Three years her Suiters she thus frustrated. In the fourth year her women her betrai'd; And in we came while she the VVeb undid. She could the VVedding now no more avoid. The Robe when it was finished and done She washed clean, and it before us laid. As bright it shin'd as either Moon or Sun. And then ill Fortune brought Ulysses home To th'House where dwelt the Master of the Swine.
And thither too Telemachus did come From sandy Pylus safely through the brine. And both together there our death contrive. That done, they both into the City come. Telamachus the first was to arrive. The Master of the Swine brought th'other home. Like an old Beggar with a Staff in's hand, Apparell'd in such miserable gear, That, that was he, we could not understand, Nor no man else, although he elder were. We mock, we rate him, throw things at his head. He patiently endured all his harms, Until by Jupiter encouraged From out the Hall he took away the Arms; And in an upper Chamber lockt them fast. Then craftily he bids his Wife to send To us his mighty Bowe, our strength to taste. This the beginning was of our ill end. For much too weak to bend the Bowe were we. But when it was unto Ulysses brought, Fearing by him lest it should bended be, We all at once cri'd out, Hold, give't him not. Only Telemachus cri'd, Let him try. And then 'twas put into Ulysses hands. Ulysses bent it very easily. Then leapt he to the Sill, and there he stands; And round about he lookt upon us grim; And first of all he shot Antinous, At whom he took his aim, and killed him; And with his Arrows, after, more of us. And one upon another down we fall. 'Twas plain, some present God there gave him aid, For then he follow'd us about the Hall Till all on heaps at last he had us laid. Of Groans and Blows it made a dismal sound. And thus, King Agamemnon, died we. Our Bodies yet there lie upon the ground. Our Friends yet unacquainted with it be. That else would wash our wounds and us lament, Which to the Dead are Ceremonies due.
Then said Atrides, O vertue excelent Of your fair Wife. Happy Ulysses you, That with great valour have her repossest. My Wife Tyndareus Daughter was not such. Your Consorts fame will be hereafter drest In noble Songs, and the Sex honour much. But my Wives name shall stand in Ballads vile, And sung in filthy Songs the Sex disgrace. Thus they discoursing were in Hell. Mean while Ulysses cometh to Laertes place. About it many Lodgings were; wherein His necessary Servants all were laid; And there they fed, and sat, and slept. But in The house it self one old Sicelian Maid, That of his person always had the care. Ulysses then, lest Supper they should lack, Said to his two good Servants, For our fare You must again unto the Town go back, And fetch a Swine the fattest in the Sties, Mean while I'll to the Vineyard go and try Whether my Father know can with his eyes, After so long an absence, that 'tis I. This said, his Servants armed homeward hie; And to the Vineyard goes Ulysses then. But Dolius he there could not espy, Nor any of his Sons or of his men. His Sons and Servants all abroad were gone For thorns to mend the hedges of the ground. Laertes in the Vineyard all alone Placing of earth about a Plant he found. On him he had a soul Coat full of patches, And ugly Leather-Boots, those patcht also; But good enough to save his legs from scratches. Gloves of the same against the Briars too. A Goatskin Headpiece he had on to boot. Ulysses when he saw him in this plight Worn our with age and so much sorrow to it, Under a Tree stood weeping our of sight. And then bethought him whether it were best T'embrace and kiss him, and crectly ay,
I am Ulysses, or first talk in jest, And give him time his person to survey. Resolv'd at last, his Father he goes nigh, Who with his head down, dig'd about a Plant. Old man, said he, your skill is good. For why, Your Garden neither Art nor care does want. Nor Plant, nor Fig, nor Vine, nor Olive-tree, Nor so much as a Leek but prospers here. One thing there wants (I pray not angry be) You look not to your self. Ill Cloaths you wear, And also pale and yellow is your hue, Which cannot be imputed to being aged. 'Tis not because you do no work that you He little sets by that has you engaged. There's nothing in your aspect of a Slave. The look and stature you have of a King, And the appearance of a King would have, If you, what's due to age had ev'ry thing. Whose Servant are you, and who owns the ground? And say if this be Ithaca or no. For this man whom upon the way I found, Is not so wise as certainly to know. I askt him of a friend that I had here Whether alive he were or dead. But he Whether he dead, or living still he were, Unable was at all to answer me. My house a Stranger on a time was at, Which of all Strangers I did love the best; That said he came from Ithaca, and that Laertes was his Fathers name. This Guest I entertain'd as kindly as I could With Viands good, whereof I had good store. And gave him Talents ten of well-wrought Gold, And beside that I gave him these Gifts more: A Pot for temper'd Wine of Silver bright; Twelve Ca pets fai; twelve Robes; twelve Coats that were All lined through; and twelve more that were light; And four Maid-Servants, both well taught and fair, Such as he from a greater number chose. Then said Laertes, Ithaca this is,
Now held by wicked men. But you will lose Your Presents all, and of requital miss. But had you found my Son Ulysses here, He would have kept of Amity the Law, And well requited both your Gifts and Chear. But say, how long it is since you last saw And entertain'd my Son, if yet e be; But he at Sea devoured is by Fish Far hence, or else to Beasts and Fowls is he Somewhere, poor man, at Land become a dish; Neither his Father nor his Mother by, To wind him and to shed tears o're his bed; Nor yet his Wife weeping to close his eye, Which are the honours due unto the Dead. Tell me also your dwelling and your name, Your Parents and your City what they be; And where the good Ship lies in which you came, And what men with you came in company, Or with some Merchants in their ship, and they Departing hence have left you here alone? To this Ulysses answering did say, I'll answer to your Questions each one. My City's Alybas, and of the same Apheidas is the King. His Son am I, And called am Eperitus by name. Far hence at the lands end my ship doth lie. And since Ulysses from me went away, 'Tis now five years, and with good Augury That we should meet again another day, And joy in mutual hspitality. This said, Laertes overcome with woe, Took up the scalding dust with both his hands, And pour'd the same upon his ead of snow, And sobbing thick and weeping there he stands. Ulysses heart up to his nostrils swell'd With piy to behold his Fathers woe, And to him leapt; and's arms about him held, And said, The man you weep and mourn for so Am I, come after twenty years again. Give over sobbing now; for (though in haste)
I tell you must, The Suiters I have slain, And made them of their crimes the fruit to taste. Then said Laertes, If indeed you be My Son Ulysses, let me see some signe To know you by for certain. Then said he, Behold the wound received from the Swine On Mount Parnassus, when I thither went T'Autolycus my Mothers Father, to Receive the Gifts he promis'd me. You sent Me thither, and so did my Mother too. I'll tell you too what Trees you gave me when I walking once was with you there. And I Askt you of all the Trees the names (for then 'Twixt Man and Boy I was.) And severally As I the Trees names askt, you told the same. Pear-trees thirteen; Apple-trees half a score; Rankles fifry (to the Vines you gave that name) All of them in their season Berries bore; And forty Fig-trees. Tho'old man knew it all; Embrac'd his Son, and with abundant joy Fainted, and sinking ready was to fall, But that his Sons embraces were his stay. Then coming to himself again he said, Jove Father and you Gods (Gods there are yet.) The Suiters for their evil deeds have paid, But now I fear the Town will on us set, And with themselves make all the City rise In Cephalenia. Then said his Son, Fear not. Of that we'll by and by advise. Eumaeus and Philoetius are gone To get a Supper ready at your house. This said, into the house they come away, And find Eumaeus and Philoetius At work to cut out Meat and Wine allay. Mean while Laertes oyl'd and bathed is, And by his Maid in seemly Garments clad, And Pallas standing by him added this, A larger stature than before he had. As of a God his presence did appear. Ulysses seeing him, admir'd, and said,
Father, you greater now are than you were, Some God has Beauty on your person laid. Then said Laertes, O ye Gods on high, Jove, Pallas, and Apollo, had I been Such as I was at Neritus, when I Stormed the Town, and armed had come in, When you and the proud Suiters were in fight, I had made many of them bend the knee. And you would have rejoyced at the sight. So to his Son Ulysses talked he Supper brought in, they sit; and then came in O'd Dolius, sent for, from his Husbandry, And his Sons weary. Working they had been. The Nurse had bidden them come speedily. They wondered to see Ulysses there. But he to Dolius then gently said, Pray for a while your wondring to forbear. We hungry are, and long have for you staid. Then Dolius embraced him, and said, Since long'd for you are come, and unexpected, And to u by the Gods have been convey'd; All hail; and by the Gods be still protected. But tell me if Penelope yet have The news received of your coming home, Or shall we send her word? That labour save (Repli'd Ulysses) for she knows I'm come. This said, he sat him down. Hs Sons also With decent words Ulysses entertain, And ay their hands in his. That done they go And by their Father sat them down again. Now Fame divulged had the Suiters fate; And people howling came in ev'ry way. And gather'd were about Ulysses Gate, To fetch the bodies of the dead away. And those that out of Ithaca had liv'd, To Fishermen they gave to carry home. And staying on the place, though sorely griev'd, Amongst themselves they into counsel come. Eupeithes Father of Antinous That first of all slain by Ulysses was
Spake first, and weeping for his Son, said thus. See how much mischief this man done us has. He carried hence our Ships and ablest men; And lost them all, as one that had design'd Our utter ruine. Coming back agen He killed hath those whom he left behind. Come then, let's to him quickly, lest mean while He should pass over the wide Sea, and get Protection at Elis or at Pyle, And we so shn'd as we were never yet. 'Twill be a scorn to our Posterity To let the murder of our Children so Stay unreveng'd, and put up cowardly. For my part, to my Grave I'd rather go. Come quickly then, lest we prevented be. This said, the people for him pity had. Then came in Medon, who had scaped free, And Phemius that scap'd too, and was glad. And Medon to th'Assembly spake, and said, Ulysses of himself could not have done This mighty deed without th'Immortals aid, I saw when present I was looking on, A God stand by that him encouraged, In Mento shape he plainly did appear; And then about the room the Suiters fled, And fell befre Ulysses in their fear. Next him spake Alitherses, who alone Saw Fore and Aft. Hear me, you men, said he. Of this great slaughter I accuse can none But ev'n your selves that gave no ear to me, Nor yet to Mentor. We you counselled The licence of your Children to take down, That spent the Substance, and dishonoured The Wife of him that was of such renown. My counsel therefore to you now is this, Not to proceed, lest on your selves you bring More mischief yet, and of your purpose miss. So said he then, but little profiting. For more than half with alalaes up start, And cry aloud, To Arms, go on, proceed.
But quietly sat still the lesser part, That with Eupeithes Judgment disagreed. When they had clad themselves in glist'ning brass, Without the Town they came to Randezvouze In open field. Eupeithes Leader was, Seeking revenge where he his life shall loose. Then Pallas to her Father came, and said, O Father, King of Kings, what do you mean, The War shall last between them, or be staid? To this her Father answer'd her agen: Child, why d'ye ask me that? 'twas your request, The Suiters for their insolence should pay. Do what you please, but yet I think it best, When you have done, that Peace for ever stay; And ever reign Ulysses and his race. Which to confirm, Oblivion I'll send Of former Acts the image to deface. Then gladly Pallas did from Heaven descend. When now Ulysses and his Company Removed had their hunger wth good chear, Ulysses said, Some one go forth and see Whether the Ithacesians be near. And then one of the young men standing there Went forth and saw them as he past the Sill; And turning back, Arm, said he, they are here; And then they all put on their Arms of Steel. Ulysses and his Son, and Servants four, Six Sons of Dolius. And the old men Laertes were and Dolius two more. Aged they were, but necessary then Then arm'd, Ulysses leading, out they go. And Pallas both in person and in voice Resembling Mentor in came to them too. Ulysses seeing her did much rejoyce. And looking on Telemachus, he said, Telemachus, this Battle will declare Who Courage has, who not. Be not afraid. That you dishonour not your stock beware. Father, said he, you shall see by and by, You need not be ashamed of your Son.
Laertes this discourse heard joyfully And to the Gods cri'd out in passion, O ye kind Gods, and happy day is this! O joy! My Son and Grandson are at strife Which of the two the most Courageous is, And ready to buy Honour with his life. Then Pallas to Laertes said, My Friend, Son of Arcesius, whom the Gods do love, With all your force your Spear now from you send. But pray first unto Pallas and to Jove. He praid, and threw his Spear, which th'Helmet smot Of old Eupeithes, and went into's head. Down dead he fell; the Helmet sav'd him not. His Armour rattled, and his spirit fled. And then fell on Ulysses and his Son, Upon the foremost both with Sword and Spear, And surely had destroy'd them ev'ry one, Had not Jove's Daughter Pallas then been there. She to the People call'd aloud and said, Hold Ithacesians. The Quarrel may Whithout more blood be ended. They afraid Of th'Heavenly voice began to run away. Ulysses yet not ceased to pursue The Captains of his foes, till from above In Thunder Jove his sooty Bolt down threw. Then Pallas said, Beware; offend not Jove. And glad was then Ulysses to give o're. By Pallas were propounded terms of Peace In Mentor's shape; and each part to them swore. And thus it was agreed the War should cease. FINIS.
THE CONTENTS. LIB. I. IN a Council of the Gods (Neptune absent) Pallas procureth an Order for the restitution of Ulysses. And appearing to his Son Telemachus in humane shape, adviseth him to complain of the Suiters before the Council of the Lords, and then to go to Pylus and Sparta to enquire about his Father. LIB. II.Telemachus complains in vain, and borrowing a Ship goes secretly to Pyle by Night. And how he was there recevied. LIB. III.Nestor entertains him at Pyle, and tells him how the Greeks departed from Troy; and sends him for further information to Sparta. LIB. IV. His entertainment at Sparta, where Menelaus tells him what besel many of the Greeks in their return; that U∣lysses was with Calypso in the Isle Ogygia, as he was told by Proteus. LIB. V. The Gods in Council command Calypso (by Mercury) to send away Ulysses, on a Raft of Trees; and Neptune returning from Aethiopia, and seeing him on the Coast of Phaeacia, scattered his Raft; and how by the help of Ino be swam ashore, and slept in a heap of dry leaves till the next day. LIB. VI.Nausicaa going to a River near that place to wash the Cloathes of her Father, Mother and Brethren, while the Cloathes were drying plae with her Maids at Ball; and Ulysses coming forth is fed and cloath'd, & led to the house of her Father King Alcinous, where being received, the Queen after Supper taking noice of his Garments, gave him occasion to relate his Passage thither on the Raft.
LIB. VII.Alcinous entertains him, and grants him a Convoy; and both he and the Lords give him Presents. LIB. VIII. The next days entertainment of Ulysses, where he sees them contend in wrestling and other Exercises; and upon provocation took up a greater stone than that which they were throwing, and over-threw them all. And how the King asked his Name, his Country, and his Adventure. LIB. IX.Ulysses relaes, first, what befel him amongst the Ci∣cones at Ifmarus. Secondly, amongst the Lotophagi. Thirdly, how he was used by the Cyclops Polyphemus. LIB. X.Ulysses his entertainment by Aeolus, of whom he recei∣ved a fair Wind for the present, and all the rest of the Winds tied in a Bag; which his men untying, flew out, and carried him back to Aeolus, who refused to receive him. LIB. XI. His Adventure at Lestrigonia with Antiphates, where of twelve Ships he lost eleven, men and all. How he went thence to the Isle Aeaea, where half of his men were turn'd by Circe into Swine; and how he went himself with the other half, and by the help of Mercury recovered them, and stayed with Circe a year. LIB. XII.Ulysses his descent into Hell, and discourses with the Ghosts of the deceased Heroes. His passage by the Sirens, and by Scylla and Charibdis. The Sacriledge committed by his men in the Isle Thrinacia. The destruction of his ship & men. How he swam on a plank nine days together, and came to Ogygia, where he stayed seven years with Calypso. LIB. XIII.Ulysses sleeping is set ashore at Ithaca by the Phaeaci∣ans, and waking knows it not. Pallas in form of a Shep∣herd helps to hide his Treasure. The ship that conveyed him is turn'd into a Rock; and Ulysses by Pallas is instructed what to do, and transformed into an old Beggar-man. LIB. XIV.Ulysses in form of a Beggar goes to Eumaeus the Master
of his Swine, where he is well used, and tells a feigned story, and informs himself of the behaviour of the wooers. LIB. XV.Pallas sends home Telemachus from Lacedaemon with the Presents given him by Menelaus. Telemachus land∣ed, goes first to Eumaeus. LIB. XVI.Telemachus fends Eumaeus to the City to tell his Mo∣ther of his return. And how in the mean time Ulysses discovers himself to his Son. LIB. XVII.Telemachus relates to his Mother what he had heard at Pyle and Sparta. LIB. XVIII. The fighting at Fists of Ulysses with Irus. His admo∣nition to Amphinomus. Penelope appears before the wooers, and draws Presents from them. LIB. XIX.Telemachus removes the Ars out of the Hall. U∣lysses discourseth with Penelope. And is known by his Nurse, but concealed. And the hunting of the Bore upon that occasion related. LIB. XX.Pallas and Ulysses consult of the killing of the wooers. Ulysses makes himself known to Eumaeus and Philoetius. LIB. XXI.Penelope bringeth forth her Husbands Bowe. Which the Suiters could not bend, but was bent by Ulysses. LIB. XXII. The killing of the Wooers. LIB. XXIII.Ulysses maketh himself known to Penelope, tells her his Adventures briefly, and in the morning goes to La∣ertes, and makes himself known to him. LIB. XXIV. The Ithacesians bury the Wooers, and sitting in Council resolve on revenge. And coming near the house of Laer∣tes, are met by Ulysses, and Laertes with Telemachus and Servants, the whole number twelve, and overcome, and submit. FINIS.
