h2534 12300381 59152
The Doctrine of LIFE, OR OF MANS REDEMTION, BY The Seed of Eve, the Seed of Abraham; the Seed of David, &c. as it was taught in severall Periods of Time, from Gen. 3.15. till Christ came in the Flesh, to fulfill all Typicall Prefigurations of him by his Death. WHEREIN ALSO Sundry other Fundamentall Points are discussed and cleared from some common mistakes. As Daniels Chronologie of SE∣VENTY SEVENS, which is cleared from the uncertainty which too many Expositors have unadvisedly cast upon it. And about the Jewes calling; that it must not be understood of any Return to Canaan, or of their Restauration to a perspicuous Common wealth any more, but of the calling of a Remnant of them to the Faith, in the Countries where they live dispersed. And with the true nature of our LORDS SUFFERINGS: with sundry other such like Points, as may be seen in the TABLE. Propounded by way of Question and Answer, with Annota∣tions thereunto annexed; Divided into three Parts. By Edward Holyoke of New-England. Come and see, John 1.46. LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Nath. Ekins, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Gun in St. Pauls Church-yard, 1658.
To his Beloved, and much Honoured Bro∣ther John Bridges of Hackney Esquire, and to his dearly Beloved Sister his wife, and to their Religious and well deserving Sons Colonel John Bridges, Captain Ro∣bert Bridges, Major William Bridges, Matthew Bridges, Brook Bridges, and Francis Bridges Esquires, peace be multipli BEloved and much honoured Brother, though the Lord Jesus to whom all things are made subject, hath separated us by the great Deep, yet I have you oft in remembrance, and cannot forget our alli∣ance, and indeered love and acquaintance that hath been between us from our childhood, both in the Country, and in the City of London. You have a great Family, and like to have, through the Lords blessing, a numerous posterity, and my desire is to shew that I have some interest in them, being also my bone and my flesh, as Laban said to Jacob: and I suppose you will be well pleased, if I endeavour in any thing to further them in the knowledge of the Son of God. This I now present unto you and them, was done many years ago for the most part, as I think, you may remember, and then I made some marginal notes to attend upon the several answers to the seve∣ral questions that are propounded in the two first parts: some things I have since added concerning the Covenant of God in Christ, made with our Fathers in Gen 3.15 and Gen. 9. and Gen 12.1, 2, 3. and in Gen. 17. This I did because of the errors that get quickning in these times, and for the same cause I have affixed divers other weighty and profitable points in the third part of this Treatise. I hope the whole will be a means to shew, that the Covenant of God in Christ, is one and the same in all ages, though the outward administration differ, and that the Covenant to Israel of old was not onely in the carnal, and fleshly promise and covenant, but also in the spiritual promise and Covenant, even the same that is now made with us in the new Testament of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God. Dear Brother, and Nephews, you have known my manner of life, studies, and endeavours, and I blesse the Lord, I have had comforta∣ble experience of that course of study which I have followed: I mean
chiefly of the book called the Consent of Scripture. And let me speak as I think, If men would use that course of study, together with the blessed Scriptures, it would settle in us and in our posterity, the true knowledge of religion, and the certainty of everlasting salvation. The whole Scripture and all learning should be contrived unto Christ, as Gods servant did in the Consent of Scripture, and so Ste∣phen did; he drew all the holy story to Christ in Acts 7. and so the Apostle Paul, he drew all the Law to Christ, as Rom. 10 doth make it evident, being conferred with Deut. 30. Some in New England have seen this frame of mine, and have de∣sired that it might be made more common by printing, and indeed I cannot write so many Copies, as to communicate it to you and to that generation, except it be by Printing. It may be you will marvel I dare be so bold as to Print it in this evil time, but indeed I dare not but do it, and I believe this labour of mine will talk with many sorts of spirits, and I hope that Gods people will judge the best of this my undertaking: other things I have, if the Lords providence please so to order it, that must be made more publick, because I have a great desire thereby to provoke others to the diligent study of the blessed Scriptures. Dear Brother, and much honoured Nephews, as Salus populi is the care of Magistracy; so the edification of the Churches ought to be the painfull care of godly Teachers: and we ought to know that Fa∣milies are little Churches and Common-weals, and the Seminaries of greater Corporations; & that Parents are intrusted with children and servants: it is not a small honour that Christ hath conferred this trust on them: and verily, if Families be neglected, the Churches will fail. Let us with all godly industry make this promise good to our selves and posterity, in Isa 59.21. As for me, this is my Covenant with them, saith Jehovah, my spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, saith Jehovah, from henceforth, and for ever: and that this promise and covenant may be conferred on you, and on your posterities for ever, is the affecti∣onate prayer of. Your assured and ever loving brother In the surest bonds, Ed. Holyoke.
Some DIRECTIONS TO THE GODLY READER. For the Reading of the Holy SCRIP∣TURES. LEt me be bold, as having obtained mer∣cy of the Lord, to give some advice to godly Families. 1. Let children be brought up constant∣ly to read all the five books of Moses knowing it was the Son of God, the An∣gel of his presence, the Angel of the co∣venant that gave Moses the lively O∣racles for his Israel. Omit not one chapter, and that which some think not so usefull, read somewhat the more carefully, belie∣ving the Apostles Doctrine, 2 Tim. 3.15, 16, 17.
2. Read the 12. first Chapters of Gen. often, and after every book of Moses, read the Epistles to the Romanes, and to the Hebrews, or one of them, sometimes the one, sometimes the other, because it is said, the Scriptures of the Prophets is the faith of the Nations, Rom. 1, 2, 3. and 16.25, 26. &c. &c. 3. Know that Moses is the Text, and that the holy histo∣ry of the Prophets is an Exposition of Moses, and when chil∣dren, or any young man, though a Scholar, is well versed in Moses, and the Prophets, they will more clearly understand the New Testament, that it hath no new Principles, but then they will see that the Sonne of God came to be a Second Adam, and an holy Witnesse and Teacher of the Truth, sent down from the Father to be confirmed in his Office of Mediati∣on, and that as Eternall God he taught Moses and the Pro∣phets, and in this Seat they shall behold the face of Christ to shine like the Sun, through all the Bible. 4. Observe, that the Apostles do prove their Doctrine from the Old Testament, as in the Epistle to the Romanes, chap. 1. and 2. and 3, 4. in all the chapters he handles the corrup∣tion of our nature, and that great point of the Justification of a sinner, from Genesis 15. by the evidence of Abrahams faith, and from Psalm 32. from Davids Testimony, and in Rom. 10.56. &c. from Deuteronomie 30.11, 12, 13, 14. where he opens to us all Moses, as I have shewed in the Dialogue. And he handleth the Doctrine of Election, and rejection, from Genesis, Exodus, Deuteronomie, and Job &c. 5. Observe, that the Epistle to the Galthians doth large∣ly: expound Genesis 12, 1, 2, 3. and know, that Abraham could Teach, and gather Observations, and Deductions out of the Promise in Genesis 12. as well as the Apostle, and it is evident also, that he did so, for the instruction and com∣fort of all his Houshold and posterity, as the book of Job with Genesis doth witnesse. 6. Observe, that the Epistle to the Hebrews doth lead us
through all the old Testament from the first of Genesis to Ma∣lachy, yea further even to the stories of the faithfull Martyrs, in the Macchabees, and from Dan. 7.8, 10, 11, and 12 chap∣ters: the events of which chapters for a great part are after the Prophesie of Malachy, in the story of the Macchabees. &c. 7. Observe, that the Apostle Peter, being an Apostle of the Circumcision, doth in his Epistles allude much to the phrases of the old Testament, and so doth Judas Thaddaeus in his Epistle, and both Peter and Thaddeus doe shew, that as there were false Prophets of old, that spake from the old Ser∣pent, so there should be such under the New Testament, that would resist Christ and his Mediatorian Kingdome, as Cain, Balaam and Kore did. 8. Observe, that the Apocalyps doth exceed in this way of expressing things, by selected words and sentences, from the old Testament, and from old events, and from the low Jerusa∣lem, to open new matters, concerning the Church of the new Jerusalem from heaven, and of the destruction of the enemies thereof, and thus all the Revelation must be expounded, and whosoever doth not so will misse. 9. I would yet give further direction to young men, yea to young Scholars. First reading of the blessed Book of God, as it lies in order, by 14 chapters a day, by which means the Bible is read over in three moneths. In the second reading, confer the Genealogie, and the Chronologie, as in the Table prefixed, which will shew you what principall men lived in such a state of time, and most of the men are Fathers to our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom he took humanity, and it should delight us to know his Genealogie: and all the other names of persons are considerable as attendants on his stories. And I wish that young men would transcribe the Table of our Lords Genealogie, twice or thrice over, it would teach them more than they are aware of, and im∣print things in their mind. It is but one page, no great matter to do. 10. Then to make use of the Genealogie of Noah's sonnes, and Nephews for Geography, which will much help the
understanding, so that one moneths Meditation at times up∣on these two Tables, will furnish you with plentifull nions, and with such a ground work, that you cannot but make use of them all the dayes of your life▪ and in this manner read it the third time, and the fourth, and by thus doing you will come to a sweet taste and relish of the phrase of the holy Scriptures, which will be of more use to your mind and heart, than you can at first conceive, I know this counsel and exhortation is of God, and to help your proceeding, you have the holy Chronologie set down in many varieties of expressions, to stir delight in the study of the Scriptures. 11. in the Table of Genealogie, you have the times (though briefly) set down, in which are shewed, what Prophets lived in the times of the Kings of Judah: in your second, and third, and fourth reading the Bible, endeavour to bring the Prophets to their proper times with the Psalms, it will be much to edifi∣cation. And remember that, because men mind not Genealo∣gie, Chronologie, and the Geographie of the Scriptures, they fail commonly in their Narrations. 12. The Dialogue Will shew you what was the Doctrine of Chrift touching mans Redemption in every age, to the vessels of mercy, his severity to the seed of the serpent, for despising and persecuting the Professors of this blessed Doctrine. 13. Consider, that the Kingdome of God in Christ, the seed of the woman, and the second Adam is the matter of all the Bible: Adam had that theam to preach on for 930 years, and Sem, the sacrificer to Jehovah, God most high, taught this Doctrine 500 years after the Flood, and confirmed Abra∣ham in that Doctrine 75 years, and consider that all the larger writings that were breathed by the holy spirit teach no other matter but this, and giveth promises of grace for accepting this, and punishments for contempt of this all Cains posterity perished in the Flood, then the Babel-builders, then Jeroboam, and the ten Tribes, and the people of Judah were afterwards burned by the wrath of Christ for despising this Doctrine of life: and after this great salvation was preached by the Lord
himself, and confirmed by his hearers with all gift, of the spi∣rit: the Jews for contempt thereof were cast off, and the world was given over to Arrius, Turk and Pope. Objection, If a man read so much at a time, as you have now prescribed, he will not remember, and so not pref, and a man had better read a chapter in a day, and meditate on it. Answer, I know it is a most sweet and heavenly mercy to un∣derstand what we read, but if a godly heart endued with cou∣rage will take this course for one year, in his youth, the phrase and course of the holy Scriptures will be the more familiar to him, and his knowledge, understanding, and affections will far more increase (through mercy) then in reading a chapter or two in a day, and at last he will remember ten times more, than rea∣ding a little. 2, And let none say, that fourteen chapters a day will hinder time in our callings, for an hour and a quarter in a day will read fourteen chapters and Psalms one with another, and what is that? we may purchase wisdome with the losse of a little sleep, especially in a morning, it is said, Buy the truth, bu sell it not, &c. and redeem the time, for the dayes are evil. I doubt not he that will be constant, will say, it is as profitable an hour, as ever he spent. 3 I take it for granted, that he that will hearken to this counsell must be godly disposed and full of courage, for Christ our Lord doth give to his servants, not the spirit of fear and slothfullnesse, but of courage, of love, and of a sound judge∣ment: I confesse that Gods people had need be backed with hea∣venly strength in this degenerating time to meditate in the Law of God day and night: But a good heart must mind what Christ said to Joshua, chap. 1. (and he had as much businesse in his hand as any man that now liveth) Oh that I could per∣swade young men to trace me in all these directions, I know the Lord would then blesse them. 4 I have heard of a godly man in London, that did read over the ibe twelve times in one year, and that made him so prompt as he was in the holy Scriptures, and yet he was diligent in his
calling, and died wealthy: he pleased not himself in much steep, and shunned unnecessary pratling discourses, and vain, frothy company: he was of a sober, and stayed conversation, his name was Mr. Roger Cotton, a Woollen Draper in Can∣ning street. But alas, there are but few at this day, that do search into Gods word, the wealthy, and principal of state, remit that work over unto others, as a base work for themselves to regard, but God doth greatly chastise the world for this neglect, and Hosea from God, doth thus complain of the people of Israel. I have written to him the great things of my Law, but they were counted as a strange thing, Hosea 8. read chap. 4. 5. I pray the beloved Reader to consider, that these dayes, are dayes of triall, of shaking and winnowing, both of the out∣ward and inner man, and that Satan, is a great Malig∣nant, both of godly parents, and their children, and that he la∣bours to plunder them of an able, godly, and learned Ministe∣ry, and of the Sabbath, and of the seals of the Covenant, yea, of the Covenant it self (as touching their infants) and Sa∣tan would not have children catechised by forms (which was yet the prctise of the Apostles times, Heb. 6.1, 2, 3.) that so they might be a prey to every foul spirit, but the Lord our God will rebuke Satan and all his instruments. 6. Consider there hath been ever, and in these dayes is an aptnesse to depart from the Gospel of Christ, but that neither we, nor our posterity should apostate publick and private ordi∣nances must with all godly care be attended. All cannot be Angels of Churches, and the Angels of Churches receive gifts and graces from Christ for the good of the Church. It was an holy wish in Moses, to say, I would all the Lords people were Prophets, and that he would put his spirit upon them, and who is but would so wish? but yet ever since the world began, Christ in his administrations never did it, nor ever will, there∣fore they that despise ordinances, it is of Satan, and also for men to think they are above the holy Scriptures, and need them not, and that therefore they look for new Apostles, this is also most certainly of Satan the old liar and deceiver.
7. Let all such at neglect the Ordinances of Christ and the blessed Scriptures, pretend never so much illuminations, and Revelations of the Spirit, and new light, &c. all such vanity, is but Ignis fas, thus, even thus did the old Serpent deal with our first Parents, but Christ, that restoreth all things, saith to his disciples and children, To the Law,Isa. 8.28, 19.20. and to the te∣stimony, and if men speak not according to it, there is no morning light in them, it is also said.Psal. 138.. The Lord hath magnified his word above all his name, and also hath said in his new Testa∣ment, Search the Scriptures John 5. &c. &c. They are not worthy the new name, by which God hath called his chosen, I mean the Christian name, that set light by the word of Christ, and a godly, learned, teaching Ministery. 8. They that look for new Apostles, and are not content with the Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles, Christ never pray∣ed for such, he prayed for them that believe in him, through their word and preaching, John 17. that makes the Spirit of Christ, (he foresaw this evil) to admonish us to be mindfull of the words and commandements of the Apostles, and he that knoweth God, heareth the Apostles, and they know not God that do not hear their doctrine, and the apostle Paul saith, That he with the other were the last Apostles, 2 Pet. 3.2.1 John 4.6. 1 Cor. 4.9. Judas Thaddeus 17. 9. Their faith is not worth a rush that neglect or reject the Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles,Ephes. 2.20. the holy doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ with which he inspired, and sent his apostles to preach to all nations, is most pure, glorious, and full of all consola∣tion, and they filled the world with the fruit of their doctrine, which hath remained to this day, and shall to the end by a faith∣full succession of an holy ministery, 1 Cor: 11: 26. Brethren, beloved, you know who saith, What singular thing do ye? An unbeliever; and a misbeliever will provide meat, drink and cloathing, and lay u what they can for their children, and will give wages to their ts, and it is well so to do, but what singular thing do ye do that which none of the will do, let your children which Christ hath trusted you with, and which you
have born to him (let Satanical spirits blaterate what they will) be precious to you,2 Iohn 4. Ezek. 23.37. Deur. 6.6, 7. train them up in the blessed Scriptures, that you and they may be blessed, as those two blessed and godly Matrons, the mother and grandmother of Timothy, and also be carefull of your servants, that they may blesse God for you, when God shall visit their hearts: and know this ye godly Parents and Masters,An acute a∣phorism of that Rman of God Mr. John Trap Ye are really, what ye are relatively. 10. You see what leaven is laid by the marked of the Beast, the Papist, and by the Anabaptist, and the wretched Gorton, &c. &c. If the honour of the word of God, the blessed Scrip∣tures be glorious with you, if the glory of the Churches of Christ be of any value with you, if the glory and comfort of the Covenant of God in Christ, be of account with you, teach your children unweariedly the sweet Scriptures, that they may be delivered from the vanities and idols of these inchanters. 11. But above all, Popery is to be taken heed of, and indeed the Dialogue was and is chiefly intended against it, It is the greatest mysterie of iniquitie in the world, and the most be∣witching; for there is nothing in it, but will please an unrege∣nerate and carnall heart. The Papist will have people to believe the Church of Rome is the mother of all Churches, and all must be subject to her, and they have great shews, and outward glory to perswade, and false authority to compell men so to esteem her. It is true, at the first the Church in Rome was a famous Church & a worthy daughter of the heavenly Jerusalem (which is the mother of all true Churches) and she was a noble off spring of the most high Sacrificer,Rom. 16.17. but when she would not keep her place, but caused scandala from the Apostles and Prophets doctrine and would be above her Father, and her mother, and all her sisters, by playing the imperious whore in her Fathers house,Lev. 21.9. then she lost her true glory, and burning shall be her end. But yet Papists will plead for their mother, but we must not yield them motherhood in that sense as they would have it, we may yield them by the authority of the Scriptures, that Rome is called a Woman, a Mother, and set forth by outward orna∣naments
most glorious and dazelling to the carnall eye: but yet further, (and that marres all) she is called a Whore, and mo∣ther of fornications. I will transcribe the Scripture, Apoc, 17: 4. And the Woman-Whore (verse 1.) was arrayed in pur∣ple and scarlet-colour, and decked with gold and precious stones, and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand full of a∣bominations and filhinesse of her fornication, and upon her forehead a name written, Mysterie: Babylon the great, the mother of fornications, and abominations of the earth. That chapter is against the seven-Mountain city, which city, when Saint John wrote, reigned over the Kings of the earth, Revel-ation 17. ult. Thus the Spirit spake to the seven Churches of Asia, of Romes motherhood, and it is best, that all people take mo∣therhood in that sense, as the spirit taught the churches: so it is charged upon us, Apoc. 2. and 3. for if we do not, better we had never been born. The true mother of all the faithfull is not so manifest to be known, but the mother of fornications and abominations is as apertly described by the Spirit, that it is a wonder, (but that Gods counsell must stand, Ap c. 13 8.) how men should misse to know the one or the other? But why do I say a wonder, whereas the truth of the Gospel of Christ is called a Mysterie: and so the falshood of the Kingdome of Satan in the Beast like a Lamb, is called a Mysterie, and so much the more it is a mysterie, because in the false Church, there is a deepnesse of Satan, in mannaging his Kingdome, that he doth in many things assimulate the true Church, there is a notable instance of this in Prov: 8. and 9.
Prov. 8. Wisdome (in the true Church) standeth in the top of the high places, by the way, in the Places of the paths,Jer. 7.2 and 17.19. she crieth at the gates, at the entry of the city, at the coming in at the doors, O ye simple, understand wis∣dome, chap. 9. Who so is sim∣ple, let him turn in hither, as for him that wanteth under∣standing, she saith to him, Come eat of my bread and drink of the wine which I have mingled; forsake the foo∣lish and live, and go in the way of understanding, &c. &c. Prov. 9.13. A foolish wo∣man is clamourous she is sim∣ple, and knows nothing, not∣withstanding, she sitteth at the door of her house, on a seat in the high places of the city, to call Passengers, who go right on their way. Who so is simple, let him turn in hither; and as for him that wanteth understanding, she saith to him, Stollen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant: but he knoweth not, that the dead are there, and that her guests are in the depths of Hell. Wisdome standeth in the high places of the city, in the places of the paths. So doth the foolish woman sit at the doore of her house, on a Seat in the high places of the city (the more is the pity that she hath such toleration) the false Church will advance her self to be more eminent, and too often she is so esteemed of all those that follow the Lusts of the flesh, the Lusts of the eye, and Pride of life. Wisdome sweetly inviteth, and cryeth to the sonnes of Men, to hearken to sound wisdome and understanding. The foolish woman will exceed, for she will be clamorous, consider the ten Tribes,1 Kings 15. they all protested, they worshipped God that brought them out of the Land of Egypt, when they worshipped the Devils of Dan and Bethel. Will you behold an∣other clamorous company of the foolish Woman, Achabs, and Jezabels Prophets. And yet lift up your eyes, that you may behold another company, but they were learned Reconcilers, and Moderatours of Baals and the Temples Religion: there∣fore
I may not call them fools, for they were Priests Prophets, Dreamers, Diviners, Inchanters, Sorcerers, Jeremiah 26.Jer. 7. They could bun in∣cense to Baal, and yet come to worship in the Temple. 8, 9, 10, 11, and 27.9 And I should do them wrong, if I should not remember another multitude of clamorous fools, the worshippers of Diana, Acts 19. read Apocalyps 13.12.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Wisdome saith, she will teach the simple understanding: And so the foolish woman of the ten Tribes pretends to teach the simple understanding (babbling against Judah) that they had the truth. Wisdome, saith she hath bread and wine for those that do at∣tend her. The false company saith, they want not pleasant bread and sweet waters for their guests. The ten Tribes thought the Religion of Jeroboams Calves better, sweeter, and pleasanter, than the Eternal wisdomes Re∣ligion of the Temple, unto which they were so earnestly and Pathetically, and comfortably invited, in the nine former chapters of the Proverbs, and by all the Prophets, and were Proud, Scornfull, and stubborn Despisers of all the Prophets Admonitions. But what came of all the guests that followed this clamorous foolish woman? What became of Jerobams house, of Baasaes of Omries, of Jehues, &c. Thus, as the Apostle speaketh in his dayes, so it hath been e∣ver, and will be still, That Satan transformeth himself in∣to an Angel of light: So it is not a strange thing, that his Ministers can transform themselves, as if they were the Mi∣nisters of Righteousnesse. Thus we have a brief Compendi∣um of the mysterie of godlinesse, and of the mysterie of ini∣quity, and nothing in the world can describe these two unto us, but the Holy and Blessed Scriptures, and to this day this hath been the Controversie between Christs two faithfull Witnesses in the Reformed Churches, in their Teaching, Writing, Profession, and Sufferings against the false Lamb, and his worshippers. Now in this case, what should we do, say unstable and
carnall hearts; we know not what course to take, we are in a staggering condition: truly unstable Soules, are ever rea∣dy for the wolfs mouth, a fit prey for the smooth, subtil Serpent, and his seed. People must be constantly admonish∣ed: weaken Popery, weaken all: this the Layalans know well enough. Turcisme is no mysterie, and all the unclean spi∣rits of errour, is no mysterie. Therefore in few words, O ye godly Families, study the holy Scriptures, they are the Inheritance of all the Israel of God. And verily, the most faithfull Witnesse hath said, (and then he spake of the old Testament) Ye erre not know∣ing the Scriptures, nor the Power of God. Misbelievers know not God: Wherefore, if ye cry after knowledge, and lift up your voice for understanding,Prov. . if ye seek wisdome as Silver, and search for understanding as for hid Treasures, then certainly you shall understand the fear of the Lord, and find the know∣ledge of God; for the Lord giveth wisdome, and out of his Mouth in his holy Scriptures cometh knowledge and under∣standing. And this also will follow, That no weapon that is formed against you shall prosper, and every tongue that riseth in Judgement against you, you shall con∣demn: this is theThis is a rich and great heri∣tage. Heritage of the servants of Jehovah, and their Rghteousnesse is of me saith JEHOVAH, Isai∣ah 54.17. To conclude, it is said, he that asketh receiveth, he that seeketh findeth,Mat. 7. and to him that knocketh it shall be open∣ed. The secret of Jehovah (that is, the Misterie of Christ) is with them that sear him, and his Covenant to make them know it. He will cause the meek to go according to right, and teach the humble his way, Psalm 25.
Two or three Directions concerning the rea∣ding of the following Dialogue. First read the Text of it often, to see how things in the course of the Bible follow one another; then the margins at your leasure for explication. 2. Let none be discouraged at the largenesse of this Dialogue, for it is not intended, that children or any should learn it without book, but the substance of it they will have in their minds before they be aware. For, 1. Hereby a faithfull mind, that hath his wits exerci∣sed in the word of righteousnesse, will often in a day runne over all the Bible in sundry varieties, if he mark the Chronolo∣gie, and the chief persons in the Genealogie: for by marking the times, and the persons that lived in those times, he will remember their stories, as it is common to do in worldly af∣fairs. 2. I have not cited every verse to the chapter I menti∣on, because I would have the Reader to mark the coherence of things the better, and though the verse be not named, yet some part of the chapter is expressed: and you are to remember, that the holy Apostles, when they cite a Text, they name onely the Prophet, or more generally the Scrip∣ture, not naming the Prophet, Rom. 9.13.15, 17.25. 1 Pet. 2.6 &c.&c. And observe that Speech, John 15.25. The Psalms are called their Law: that term hath deep Meditation; for the term Law comprehends all the Scriptures, and the Do∣ctrine of salvation by Christ, and that saying of James 4.5. Do ye think, that the Scripture saith in vain, the spirit
that dwelleth in us, lusteth to envy, but there is no one particular Text in all the Bible, that hath those words, and yet the whole Book of God (and I think every particu∣lar Prophet) doth shew this corruption of our nature, that the Spirit, that dwelleth in us lusteth to envy. And where the verse is cited, you may misse of that edification which you may attain, unlesse you mark the scope, for the holy Spirit doth in divers verses drive to one chief Conclusion, therefore you must consider many verses, and it may be the whole chapter, before you find the true sense of a verse. I will not excuse my want herein, in not citing every verse, But beloved, all my labour is to gain this of you, to delight in all the Blessed Book of God. And if this ef∣fect be attained, I shall think my labour well bestowed: and out of this desire, I hope, it may come to passe, I may be encou∣raged to do you further service. E.H.
CHAP. I. OF the UNITY of the GOD-HEAD, AND TRINITY of PERSONS. Also of their Properties and Workes. QƲestion, I. What Scriptures do shew the Ʋnity of the God-head, and the Trinity of Persons, with their properties and workes? Answ. very many, of which I will pro∣pound only some to consideration. Deut. 6.4. Heare O Israel, the Eternall our God, the Eternall is One.Gen. 1.1.2. In the beginningIf the know∣ledge of God in Trinity had not been the ground of life, God would never have declared himselfe to us in the plurall number, for his eternall wisdome fore-saw what warrs would come for that, betwixt Jewes, Turks, and Arrians, and his true faithfull ones, and God the God of peace would never have placed a name pluall in his first Scripture, but for peace to life, to the fallen Sons of Adam. Elohim [Gods] he created the Heavens and the Earth; And the Earth was without forme, and void,
and darknesse was upon the face of theThe Spirit of Elohim is sometimes cal∣led the Spirit of God, the Father, 1. Joh. 4.13. Apoc. 11.11. and sometimes the Spirit of the Son, Gal. 4.6. Rom. 8.9.1. Pet. 1.11. because it proceeds as well from the Son as from the Father, Joh 14.16.26. compared with Joh. 16.26. deep, and the Spi∣rit of Elohim, [Gods] moved upon the face of the wa∣ters. In the beginning was the WORD, and the WORD was with God, and the WORD was God, the same was in the beginning with God. All things were madeA things were created by him, and for him, Col. 1.16. consider that Gen 1. & 2. shewes that, and all the rest of the Bible shews this. by him, and without him was made nothing that was made: In him was life, and the life was the light of men, Joh. 1.1.2. And Elohim said, Let US make man according to OUR Image, Gen. 1.26. And Jehovah said, The man is become as one of US, Gen. 3.22. And Jehovah came downe to see the City and Tower, and Jehovah said, let US go downe, Gen. 11.7. And it came to passe, when they, Gods [Elohim] caused me to wander, Gen. 20.13. He built an Altar there, and called the place El-Bethel, because there they, Gods, appeared unto him, Gen. 35. 7. But none say, where is the Puissant my Makers, Job. 35. see Braughton on Job. Let Israel rejoyce in his Makers, Psal. 149.2 Thy Maker is thy Husbands, Esa. 54.5. Remember thy Creatours, Eccl. 12.1. By the WORD of Jehovah were the Heavens made, and all the hosts of them by the SPIRIT of his mouth, Psal. 33.6. I am with you saith Jehovah of Hosts, with the WORD by whom I made a covenant with you, when yee departed out of Egypt, and my SPIRIT remaining among you, that yee should not feare, Hag. 2.5. Go and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Fether, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19. For there are Three which beare record in Heaven the Fa∣ther, the WORD, and the holy Ghost, and these three are one, 1. Joh. .7.
Yee worship yee know not what, we know what we wor∣ship, for salvation is of the Jewes, but the houre cometh, and now is when the true Worshippers, shal worship the Father, in Spirit and truth, for the Father seeketh such to worship him; God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him, in spirit and truth, Joh. 4.22.23.24. Jer. 10.1. Heare yee the word which Jehovah speaketh unto you, O house of Israel. 2. Thus saith Jehovah, learne not the way of the Heathen, and be not dismayed at the signes of the Heavens, for the Heathens are dismayed at them. 3. For the customes of the people are vaine, for one cut∣teth a Tree out of the Forrest: the worke of the hands of the workman with the ax. 4. They deck it with Silver and Gold, they fasten it with Nayles and with Hammers; that it move not, 5. They are upright as the Palm Tree, but speak not, they must needs be borne because they cannot go, be not affraid of them, for they cannot do evill, neither is it in them to doe good. 6. For as much as there is none like unto thee O Jehovah, thou art great, and thy name is great in power. 7. Who would not feare thee, O King of Nations? for to thee doth it appertaine, for as much as among all the wise men of the Nations, and in all their Kingdomes there is none like unto thee.. 8. But they are altogether bruitish and foolish; the stock is a Doctrine of vanities, 9. Silver spread into Plates is brought from Tharshish, and Gold from Ʋphaz; the work of the Workman, and the hands of the Founder, blew and purple is their cloathing, they are all the works of cunning men. 10. But Jehovah is the true God, he is the the living God, and an everlasting King, at his wrath the earth shall tremble, and the Nations shall not be able to abide his indignation. 11. Thus shall yee say unto them, the Gods that have not made the Heavens and the Earth, even they shall perish from
the Earth, and from under these Heavens.God gives raine, and he witholds raine, Deut. 11.14. Amos. 4.7. Psal. 147. Sing unto Je∣hovah who covereth the Heavens with clouds, read Job. 36. & 37. 12. HE hath made the Earth by his power, he hath esta∣blished the world by his wisdome, and hath stretched out the Heavens by his discretion, 13. When he uttereth his voice, there is a multitude of waters in the Heavens, and he causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the earth, he maketh lightnings with raine, and bringeth the wind out of his Treasures. 14. Every man is bruitish in his owneVaine man would be wise, though man be borne a wild asse colt, Job. 11.12. knowledge, every founder is confounded by the graven Image, for his molten Image is but false-hood, and there is no breath in them. 15. They are Unity, and the work of errours, in the time of their visitation, they shall perish. 16. The Lords portion is his people, Jacob is the lot of his inheritance, Deut. 32. how gracious is this reciprocation. See the uses that the Saints should and have made of it, Psal. 73.16. & 119.57 Lam. 3. Christ is the portion of the faithfull, and they are his portion. The portion of Jacob is not like them, he is the for∣mer of all things, and Israel is the tribe of his inheritance, Je∣hovah of Hosts is his name. Jer. 23.23. Am I a God at hand saith Jehovah, and not a God afarr off? can any hide himselfe in secret places, that I shal not see him, saith Jehovah? do not I fill Heaven and Earth, saith Jehovah? Psal. 135.6. Whatsoever pleaseth Jehovah he doth in the Heavens and in the Earth, in the Seas and in all deep places, vid Dan. 4.34.35 & Ephe. 1 11. QƲestion, 2. What may be learned from these Texts. Answ. These Scriptures teach us to know the most glorious God in his nature and properties, in his works of Creation and providence: Also the Unity of his essence; and that there is a distinction in the unity of essence, by which de∣scription wemay plainely see that he cannot be likened to any thing, nor any thing made like to him; Therefore all Idolls and Images of him are vanity and wicked, and are to be ab∣horred, and that he only is to be feared, beleeved in, wor¦shipped. &c. And all this will more cleerely appeare by certain positions which may be gathered out of these Texts.
QƲest. 3. Which be they? Answ. 1. These Scriptures teach us that God is a Spi∣rit most perfect and infinite, and therefore impossible to be conceived of us as he is in himselfe; and therefore we must content our selves with such a knowledge as he hath, in his word, revealed to us, according to our capacity, in his names and properties. 1. His names are,It is good to observe how the attributes and titles are taken one for the other, as Deut. 18.13. Mat. 5 48. So that Elo∣him, Jehovah, and Father are all one, and so we shall finde in other Scriptures. These names, titles, and pro∣perties, do ex∣pound the proeme of the decalogue, and the first com∣mandement, and the Proeme of the Lords prayer, and the first petition. Elohim. Jehovah, Adonaj, Shaddaj, Jah, Tzur, &c. which signifie the Mighties; the eternall being of himselfe; and the giver of being to all things else; the Stay of the World; the All-sufficient the giver of life and breath; the Rock, &c. these and others are abridgments of the Bible, and the Bible a commentary on them, 2. His properties, some of them are incommunicable, and some communicable; the incommunicable are simplenesse (or unmixednesse) infinitenesse, eternitie, omnipotency, un∣changeablenesse, immeasurablenesse, &c. no creature hath these. 3. The properties communicable, are, being, life, good∣nesse, power, wisdome, justice, holinesse, truth, mercy, &c. These he communicateth to his creatures, yet they are but in a measure in them as qualities, but in God essential, in the crea∣tures weak and imperfect, but in him each of them is infinite in all perfection, and by these things in the creatures which we see and perceive, the invisible things of God are understood; Some call these, names and properties, titles and attributes. 4. These Scriptures affirme that there is one God, and but one, for there can be but one infinite and eternall being, Creatour and Governour. 5. The distinct persons in the God-head, are from these Scriptures to be learned, the Father, the WORD, and the holy Spirit. Other Scriptures do further direct us how they are distinguished by their order, properties, an works. 1. By their order, the Father is the first person of him∣selfe, the Son is the second person, only of the Father, he
holy Ghost is the third person from them both. 2. By their properties,Joh 1.14. Joh. 15.26. the Father from all eternity be∣getteth the Person of the Son, the Son from all eternity is begotten of the Father, the holy Spirit from all eternity pro∣ceedeth from them both; These are incommunicable pro∣perties in the Persons, the Fathers relative property is to be∣get, and not to be begotten, and therefore he is the first per∣son in order; so, for our better conceiving, we may say, a Per∣son in the God-head is a subsistence or a being, considered in his relative property. (A) 3. By their works, to the Father is ascribed creation, election, predestination, and adoption; to the Son redemp∣tion, to the holy Ghost sanctification. Again, the beginning of every action is given to the Father, the dispensation to the Son, the perfection and consummation to the holy Ghost, these in some respects may be said to be communicable pro∣perties in the persons. The reverend Mr. Richard∣son, Mr. Yates, and Mr. Anto∣ny Wotton, &c. Also it must be considered that every title, attribute, or property, that in generall is spoken of the Deity, is spoken of, and attributed to each person; as the Father is Jehovah, so is the Son, so is the holy Ghost, Joh. 12.41. Act. 28.25. conferred with Esai. 6.3. to 10. The Father, the Son, the holy Spirit be one, co-essentiall and co-eternall, infinite and unchangable, &c. And so in the attributes, just, holy, good, mercifull, &c. each person is so infinitely and unchangably, &c. Also in respect of the Creatures, the attributes are com∣municable to each Person, as the Son is called Father, Esai. 9. So it may be said of the holy Spirit who begetteth and re∣neweth us by the word of truth, the Father is our teacher, and so the Son, and so the holy Spirit, the Father sanctifieth, the son sanctifieth, the holy spirit sanctifieth. Therefore it is very usefull to observe two things in the persons, their co-operation, and distinct manner of working, the one is necessary in regard of this, that they have the same essence, and therefore cannot but co-worke in every thing; the other is, likewise, as necessary, because each person hath
his distinct manner of subsisting. All operation flowes from their essence, co-operation from their unity in it, and distinct manner, from the distinct manner of their subsisting. One essence, one operation: and Three being One, must needes work inseparably, and one being Three must needs worke in a distinct manner. 6Through faith we understand that the worlds were builded by the word of God, that the things which are seen, are not made of things which had ap∣pearance, Ebr. 11. 6 It is the thrice holy Jehovah, the Father, the Son, and their spirit, all Three one infinite nature, that hath created the heavens, and the Earth and Seas, and all things in them, whether visible or invisible, in a sweet dependency of order. And He the Eternall Being, gave them all their being with perfection of qualities that (B) was fit for each creature in its order and kinde 7 It is the same everlasting God, that in his providence from the beginning to the ending, doth in a most holy, just, wise, and mercifull order, preserve and govern all things with all their circumstances in the heavens, earth, seas. (C) There∣fore called an everlasting King. But this King and (D) Kingdome is more specially to be understood of the son of God, as Mediatour, to whom the Father hath committed all authority and power. Ʋt infra, 8. The true God being thus glorious, and a spirit infinite, is therefore impossible to be perceived by our senses, or com∣prehended in the short span of our understanding; for hee is like to nothing in heaven earth or seas, neither can all the wisest men of the world, make any thing like to him: but if any think so to do, they dote, and are follish, and vain, (as Isui 40. and many more Chapters do speake) and their ima∣ges are no Gods (E) nor resemblances of him, but works of errours and lyes. They can do neither good nor evill, those that make them are like unto them, and so are all that put their trust in them. And all that worship God by them are (F) haters of the eternall God, and are hated and accursed of him. 9 Here it is shewed that Gods worship is cheifly spiritual, (G) and all outward worship, otherwise then hee hath ap∣pointed, is hatefull and abominable and uncomfortable; as
here and in other scriptures, ceremonious, and superstitious, vanities and makers of images, are reproved as bruitish sense∣lesse and hopelesse. 10 God being One, and none other beside him the supream Governour, whose is the Kingdome and power over all things, he is only to be feared, loved, trusted in, prayed unto and obeyed; therefore he hath given us ten commandements, with this entrance, That he is Iehovah our (H) Elohim, the Eternall, the Mighty God, our creator and Redeemer, and he hath taught us to pray to him, who is the everlasting fa∣ther, from whom all helpe comfort and defence cometh, and is to be praysed and glorified in all his workes of goodnesse, mercy, wisdome, justice &c. 11 God being a most simple, spiritual, eternall, and infinite Nature: It followeth that he seeth at one instant, and toge∣gether, past, present, and to come, all things in heaven, earth and seas. There is nothing so invisible to our eyes in any place, or so spirituall to our understanding, but he seeth eve∣ry particular. Nothing is so secret as the imaginations of our thoughts, yet God seeth them. Many uses hence, an un∣derstanding and beleeving heart will make for spirituall obe∣dience, and carefull watchfullnesse over his whole man. Psal. 139. all of it, and 119 168. Job 31.4. 1 Chron. 28.9. Men not understanding or not beleeving, say in heart, there is no God, or like the wicked in Job, chap. 22, and Psal. 94. Who say, Jehovah shall not see, the God of Jacob will not regard. But God doth both, as the Psalme is notable. Secondly, Hence a world of outward Christians, do shew themselves but Atheists. Yea thirdly, The godly, not seriously and con∣stantly considering this, fail much in their sincerity for ho∣ly and just obedience. 12. Another singular use is for afflictions, When wee have any cause of fear, wee may be preserved, that this passion do not too much assaile us; by meditating often, wee may be throughly acquainted with (I) our God, his titles, properties, and attributes, both incommunicable and communicable: Also of his works of creation, redemption, and Government; in
any evill felt or feared, we may quickly turn and seek to god, and so may not fear above measure, as David saith, (K) They that know thy name will trust in thee, Psal. 9.10. Againe, When I was afraid, I trusted in thee, Psal. 56.3. Remarkable also is this in Jehosaphat, 2 Chron. 20.12. Also transcendent in those three noble confessors, and Martyrs, Dan 3.16.17.18. So in all temptations, yea in death it selfe. These things when they are well graffed, and as nailes fastned in our soules, will prepare us to contentednesse in all adverse things. But let a man be carefull allwaies to keep a conscience void of offence, toward God and toward man, then hee shall not need to fear for any sudden fear; for the Eternall Being will be for his as∣surance: But an unfaithfull heart of unbeleif cannot tell whither to turn him in affliction and distresse, this is manifest in Kain, Saul, Ishcariot and Achitophel. 13. The mighty Elohim, the eternall Being hath created and disposed all things in Christ for the good of his Elect. Therefore the Prophets shew that Gods Jesurun, portion and inheritance should not be as the Idolatrous heathens and such like blind ignorant sots, (L) They must not learn their A∣bominations, nor to be afraid of any of the signs of the hea∣vens, the constellations, eclipses, or strangnesse of any of the fiery, ayery, watery, or earthly Meteors: God hath ever used them (as all are his servants) for the good of his church and the world, and for the destruction of the wicked, as in the Flood, Sodom, Aegypt, &c. so it is sayd, the Heavens fought, and the Stars in their course fought against (M) Si∣sera, Jud. 5. The stars by their influence in their Constellati∣ons raised stormes, winde, raine, hail, inundations, &c. Com∣pare with this Job 38.22.23. and Jos. 10.11. also Exod. 5. and the troubles of Pharaohs pursute, of Israel in the Red sea, Exod. 14.24.25. Psal. 77.16.17.18.19. meditate on Psal. 18. and 28.3. &c. and Psal. 104. and 148. and 1 Sam. 7.10. and 12.17. and 14.15. and much of Jobs booke.
ANNOTATIONS upon Chapter 1. In Q. 3. N. 5. The same order of the persons in existence, is the same in o∣peration, both in the creation, and in the new creation or regeneration. For the spirit of Elohim, first of the Father, and Secondly of the son, mo∣ved, hovered, or as one may say, sate (a Metaphor from birds that fit on their eggs,) on the face of the waters, to hatch or bring forth out of that created Chaos, all the visible and sensible creatures, as it followes in the sixth dayes work. As for the other, the Love of the Father, draws on the sons redemp∣tion, and their spirit works it up by sanctification, &c. This is an irrefra∣gable bond of working, which the creature cannot frustrate; and Jeho∣vah changeth not, Eph. 1.2. to 16. 1 Cor. 8.6. 2 Cor. 4.4. 2 Cor. 13.13. Joh. 5.19. and 14.26. and 15.26. and 16.7. In N. 6. [That was fit for each cretaure] though the creatures do now groan under corruption, yet it is a miracle of beauty that things are placed to be so excellently subservient to each other. The baser and infe∣riour serve the next above them, the livelesse serve the Vegetives, the Vegitive the sensitive, the sensitive the Rationall, the Rationall are to serve the eternall Lord God. In N. 7. [Therefore] who is he that sayth that any thing falleth out which Jehovah commanded not? From the mouth of the highest procee∣deth not the evill and the good? Lam. 3, 27.38. Broughton reads it, Are not two sparrowes sold for a farthing, and one of them shall not fall on the Ground without the Father? Matth. 10. Is there evill in the City, and the Lord hath not done it, Amos? 3.6. Let us be humbled for our Atheisme, that looke so much to second causes, (God alters times and seasons, and o∣ver-rules his means, as in the plague in 1636. it being most in winter∣ly season.) And as for fretting and tormenting our selves about events, every e∣vent is an Oracle of God, then no disputing: Yea, be the instruments what can be, it is just, wise, or a mercifull event, and all to his glory. Why doth living man murmur? a man for the punishment of his sin, Lam. 3. Therefore David was in a sweet temper when he sayd, I opened not my mouth, because thou didst it, Psal. 39. 2 Sam. 16.10. So then what ever be the second causes, yet the most high God ruleth all in all things in Heaven, earth, sea, and in all deep places, Psal. 135. His providence reacheth as far as his creation. We say it raines, it snowes, it freezeth; ir misteth, it thundereth, it bloweth, and that the stormy windes do raise the waves &c. We may so speak impersonally, for the holy scrip∣ture alloweth the Phrase: But yet wee must looke, and our children must be taught to looke to Jehovah the Eternall Being. He sayth to the
snow be thou upon the Earth, and likewise to the small raine and the great raine of his strength; he thundereth, he raiseth the stormy winde &c. Job 17.38. and Psal. 104. and 107. These things should be in us from our infancy, that our Faith, Fear, Love, Joy, Hope, Patience, should abound towards him, who doth all things by his wise Counsells, and for the good of his chosen. In N 7. [Kingdome] Although the Kingdome of God be much spoken  of in the holy scriptures, yet it hath a more retyred and speciall sence, then is commonly thought upon, this Kigdome is that mediatoriall Kingdome of Christ, and therefore all power in Heaven and Earth was not first given to him in Matth. 28.18. For God hath governed the world by his son ever since Adam lost the government by his fall, Gen. 3.15. And therefore it is sayd, Jehovah from Jehovah rained fire and brimstone up-Sodom and Gomorrah, Gen. 19.24. In N. 8. [Nor resemblances] We ought to be very carefull in prayer, &c. That we fashion not God in our conceptions to any shape. We ought  not to thinke of the God-head like sottish heathens, or superstitious Papists, Acts 17. Esa. 40, Rom. 1. Therefore let us helpe our children from the breasts with true knowledge. In N. 8. [Haters] For God saith, I will visit the iniquity of Fathers upon the third and fourth Generation of them that Hate mee, as in Exod.  chap. 20. In N. 9. [And all outward worship] Selfe-will worshippers are brui∣tish wights, they worship they know not what, for all their babling and  prating, Act. 17. Joh. 4.22. Jeroboam and his Preists thought and taught that they worshiped the true God in his calves, but God hath told us that hee worshiped Devils. A Papist thinks hee worships Christ, when hee kneeles before a golden, silvery, woodden, stony, or painted Crucifix. But the spirit saith, It is the worship of Devills, 2 Chron. 11.25. Apoc. 9 20. In N. 10. [Our Elohim] Meditare ever more of Gods Attributes and  properties, as a helpe in Prayer, and as a meanes to preserve faith and obedience, and to prop us against all temptations to sin, and when through Weaknesse overtaken by sin, meditate on the same. This will be a meanes to make us that we shall not conceale or hide our sins: For by concealing we disgrace Gods Attributes and properties, but by con∣fession we give Glory to Jehovah, the God of Israel, that he sees us, knows us, that he is just, if he judge and condemn us, that he is holy and cannot abide iniquity, that he is mighty, and able to plague, save, and deli∣ver. And this is a gracious way to make entrance to the Attributes of Mercy, Grace, Patience, loving kindnesse, Consolation, &c. &c. When men will conceale and hide their sins, they labour to make themselves no better then Atheists, Ezeck 9.10 Psal. 86.14. and 94 7. First, The Apostle saith thus of Gods Attributes of strength: Do we provoke the Lord to anger, are we stronger then he? 1 Cor. 10. Jeremiah
exhorteth not to glory in the wisdome, strength and riches of this world which come to naught, but in the wisdome, strength and riches that may be found in the true knowledge of God, Je. 9.23.24. Job. 22.25.  Apot. 3.18. and make the comfortable expression of an incom∣municable Attribute, in Mal. 3.16. There is both terror and comfort in this Attribute, the living God, it is a fearfull thing to fall into the hands of the living God, then it is a living wrath unto hypocrites, that shall last to all eternity, and observe how this is pressed by the Aopstle to the revolting Hebrewes despising the blood of the covenant, and cleaving to the false Doctrine of the traditions of their Fathers, Ebr. 10.1. Pet. 1.18. Moses pressed this upon the deceitefull hearts that were in Israel in his dayes: But to the godly this title of living God is as comfortable, for he is their living joy, living consolation, living peace, living glory with God after this life: and therefore while we live here let us medi∣tate as. David did, Jehovah liveth, and blessed be my Rock, Psal. 18.46. This was his comfort in all the stormes, floods and windes, that assaulted him in diverse tryalls, as this Psalme and others shew, he built on the Rock. This Psalme is expounded of the Son of God, who ruleth all, Rom. 15.9. And he saith to his Disciples, Joh. 14. Because I live, yee shall live also, lively stones built on him the living Rock, this he said to them and to us, because of the tryalls he foresaw would affront them. It is well for us that Jehovah liveth; Also observe how Moses dealeth in pressing his exhortations, Deut. 7.9. Againe, he is wise in heart, and mighty in strength, who ever hardned himselfe against him and pros∣pered?  Job, 9.4.3. When a man addresseth himselfe to prayer, it is a ground of faith, to begin with some Attribute, and with all to remem∣ber some promise as is suitable to our petition, this is an high poynt of Christian wisdome and piety, the Saints have used so to doe, Dan. 9.2.3.4. Rom. 15.5. Neh. 1.8. A man that hath not some knowledge of God in his attributes, and faith concerning them cannot pray with that profit to his inner man, as else he might do. What man can pray as he ought to doe, if he beleive not Gods emnipotency, omnipresence, and omnisciency, and so of the other attributes, above noted. Oh what shall we say, we are not able to order our speech concerning the attri∣butes and works of God, by reason of our darknesse, Job. 37.19. N. 12. [Our God his titles &c.] Observe the sweet influences that some glorious starrs have yeilded (which have risen in the horizon of a Church) from the consideration of Gods attributes, the (RR) Mr. Dod on Exo. & 34. D. Preston and others; oh we of little faith; God wil set al his attributes on work for us, his attributes are of unspeakable consola∣tion to an holy soule; so on the contrary they are of thundering terror to the Vessells of wrath and dishonor, Psal. 147.5.6. That worthy man, (though a private man) Mr. Henry Church is worthy of joyfull memori∣al for his Miscellanea philo theologica speaking of the Attributes of God. N. 12. [they that know]. The holding of God by faith is better then our holding of him by reason. God is able to do, and doth excee∣ding
abundantly above all that we can aske or thinke. Gods name is as his nature is, secret, and not to be sought: this may wonderfully strength∣en faith, for if God were not above, and greater then our apprehen∣sions, he could not helpe us infinitely Eph. 3.29. and faith maketh a man to set too his seal, that God is true; faith giveth God the honour of all his properties and attributes. Assur shall not save us, we wil not ride upon hor∣ses, neither will we say any more to the works of our hands, ye are our gods, for in thee the fatherlesse finde mercy, Hos. 14. Again it is said, My defence is in God who saveth the upright in heart, Ps. 7. and 112.6, 7.8. Prov. 3.26. In N. 13. [They must not] The mysticall Babylonians called the  year 88. the climactericall year of the world, and trusting to their vaine superstitions, took the opportunity of that fatall yeare, as they suppo∣sed, utterly to overthrow the Church of God in England and the State there, which before they could not do. The Angell of the pit, the false Prophet, and all his deceived worshipers, layd up all their hopes upon this years destiny. But for Israels and Jesuuns sake, (as against old Babylon) God frustrated the tokens of the lyars, and made the Divi∣ners mad, and turned the wise men backward, and made their know∣ledge foolish: For they, as Balaam and Haman could not prevaile with their inchantments and sorceries, & counsells, neither could their A∣strologers, the star gazers, the Monthly Prognosticators, stand up & save them from the miseries that came on themselves. Foolish Idolaters mistake their Calculations, and do not consider, that the Eternall our holy one, the creator of Israel, our King, hath made the Earth, & created man up∣on it, and that his hand hath stretched out the Heavens, and that he commandeth all their Hoasts for the service of his Redeemed. It is hee that commandeth deliverances for Iacob Isa. 44 45 47 Psal. 44. Ʋi. The thankfull remembrances of Gods mercies by the R.D. Carlton. pag. 130. In N. 13. [Sisera] So again consider for the year 88. for by allu∣sion,  the story of Sisera is Cited in Apoc. 16. to shew like events against Abaddons kingdome. And while we make Christ our Judge, our Sta∣tute maker, and our King, Hee will be Lord Admirall of our Seas, that the Enemy shall not come with their ships against us, they shall not strengthen their Mast, nor spread their sailes, &c. He will save us, Esa. 33. Deut. 33.29. And see how he will make the creatures bustle for us in our distresse, Psal. 18.6.7. &c. Psal. 77.14, 1 15.16. and 114.1 Sam. 2.10. God hath no portion in the world or any inheritance but his Church, to which he will be a sun and sheild, every man will plead for and defend his inheritance, much more wil our Redeemer do it for his inheritance his Church and people. Beloved Reader it is sayd, This is life eternall that they know thee to be the only very God, and whom thou hast sent Jesus Christ. Joh. 17.3. This first Chapter, in some measure, hath spoken concerning the knowledge of God: Now all the rest of his booke doth endeavour to declare the knowledge of the sending of Jesus Christ, and this knowledge should not be a thing indifferent with us, because the excellency of this knowledge tendeth to the enjoyment of life everlasting, 2 Tim. 3.15 16.
CHAP. II. Hath divers Questions and Answers, with An∣notations from Gen. 3.15. to the Flood of Noah. In which space of time, the Doctrine of Re∣demption by the promised seed of the woman is Explained. QƲest. 1. What is the first promise concerning the sending of JESƲS CHRIST for our Redemption? Answ. Gen, 3.15. I will put Enmity between [AA] thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed. HEE shall breake thy head, and thou shalt break his heel. QƲest. 2. What do you observe out of this Text? Ans. That the Son of God who was before the begining, and with the Father in the beginning, is here first promised to be manifested a second Adam, to dissolve the works of the De∣vill for mans Redemption. QƲest. 3. Open the Text more largely. Ans. In this Text the Person & office of Christ is taught, his person, that he is as all other men (sin only excepted) the seed of the (a) woman That is the Son of God is made man, and as it is here prophesied, so it is also historyed, from what persons concerning the Flesh he came, and how the Son of God took mans nature, in Luke 3.23. he was (as men suppo∣sed the son of Joseph, but properly) the son of the blessed and belovedMary the bles∣sed Virgin, the Mother of our Lord, is in namelest out of Luc. 3. but in matter certained, for the term son, through all these hath relation to our Lord Jesus. The spirits intent is to shew, not Josephs, but Christs naturall line. Virgin Mary, ofEli is not Josephs Father,! for Matthew saith, Iacob begat Joseph, but thus it is, a married man hath two Fathers, his own proper Father, and the Father of his wife, as David had Jesse and Saul. Eli, of Matthae, of Levi, of Melchi, of Janna, of Joseph of Mattathas, of Amos, of Naum,
of Esli of Nagge, of Maath, of Mattathias, of Simei, of Joseph of Judah, of Joanna, of Rhesa, of Zorobabel. Of Salathiel, of Neri, of Melchi, of Addi, of Cosom, of Elmodam, of Er, of Jose, of Eliezer, of Jorim, of Matthat of Levi, of Symeon, of Judah, of Joseph, of Jonan, of Eliakim, of Melea, of Mainan of Mattatha, of Nathan, of DA∣VID. Of Jessai, of Obed, of Boaz, of Salomon, of Naasson, of Amminadab, of Aram, of Esrm, of Pharez, of Judah, of Jacob, of Isaac, of Abraham. Of Thara, of Nahor, of Saruch, of Regu, of Phaleg, of Eber, of Salah, of Cainan, of Arphaxad, of SHEM. Of Noah, of Lamech, of Methuselah, of Enoch; of Jared, of Malaleel, of Cainan, of Enos, of Seth, of Adam, (d) of GOD. QƲest. What understand you by his Office? Ans. The first Adam not keeping for one day the go∣vernment committed to him, the Son eternall would take mans nature that he might (e) governe, he was made (f) Heir of all, far above all principality and power, might, and Domi∣nion, and every name that is named, not in this world only, but also in that to come. And all things in Heaven and Earth and Seas were subjected to him the second Adam, as indeed all things were created by HIM and FOR HIM. And he is before all things, and by him all things consist. And in him all the elect, both them which are in Heaven, and them which are in Earth, are reconciled, and gathered as under one head. He was consecrated by God the Father from the day of (g) mans fall to be Mediator, and head over all things to the Church, which office he did execute, as he is a Prophet,
Preist, and King, in the time of the Old Testament in his Types bothKings, Preists, Prophets, fist borne, &c. persons and things. And when the fullnesse of time was come for the making of the New Testament, be him∣selfe tooke unto him our Nature to do the Will of the Fa∣ther. Quest 5. What are the benefits that come to us from the person and ffie of Christ? Answ. They are unsearchable, but I will name some prin∣cipall. 1. Satan (h) brought man to offence, and so out of the favour of God, and to shame of face, and to the fear of Bon∣dage; (i) Christ the second Adam procured Reconciliation, Justification, and (k) Adoption. 2. Satan brought mans soule to darknesse, sinfullnesse, or to death in sin; (l) Christ the second Adam gives it know∣ledge, righteousnesse, and (m) the life of holinesse. 3. Satan brought mans body to miseries, death and cor∣ruption; (n) Christ the second Adam sustaineth it in this its pilgrimage, and perfectly restoreth it to life and incor∣ruption in the Resurrection. 4. Satan caused the first Adam to be expelled from the Tree of life, and the Paradise terrestiall, and brought all this world (o) under curse, and so subject to vanity, and (p) corruption: Christ the second Adam restoreth to the faithfull a comfortable, and sanctified use and service of the (r) crea∣tures, and will make a new world for his and their glory to dwell still with God, and to feed upon the Tree of life in the Paradise celestiall, and command Satan with his seed in∣to eternall flames. Add also unto this, that Christ the second Adam, the head of all principality and power, restoreth to them that are in him adopted, the attendance of theRead Psal. 34. and 91, Ebr 1. Col. 1.16.2. Rom. 6.17. Esa. 37.36. Abrams, Lots, and Jacobs stories, and Daniells booke Ebr. 13.2. holy Angells.
Quest. What other observations out of this Text Answ. 1. God hath decreed what shall be the estate of the corrupted masseHath not the Potter power over the clay to make of the same lump, one Vssell to honor, and another to dishonor, who art thou, O man that disputest, Rom. 9. For the manifsstation of Justice and mercy, there are elect and reject in all ages. of man-kinde; that some shall be the seed of Satan, (t) and the children of perdition, and that some shall be elected, predestinated, and adopted Sons of God, by Faith in Christ, (u) and heirs of salvation. II. God out of his free love and mercy made this promise to our first Parents, of giving his only begotten Son, when they neither desired it, much lesse deserved it; nay this mistery of his will, and this way of salvation could not (y) enter into their heart, till God in whole eternall councill and decree it was hid, did reveale it. And this is the State of all mankind, from the first Adam till the Spirit of Christ, by che∣rishing the waters of the LAW, beget in us, to a new light and life, even a new creation, 2 Cor. 4.6. III. The Son of God being promised, that he should destroy in mans nature as a second Adam, the (a) works of the Divill, the holy Spirit taught the Saints in all ages, that they should not allow or practise the dead works of dark∣nesse, or of the corrupt (b) nature of the old Adam, but labour for a new life by faith and regeneration in the second Adam, in whom we are (c) compleat. And hitherto per∣taine many of the LordsRead Ezek 16. & 36 Jer. 31. & 32. & 33. Esai. 42.1. to 17. &c. gracious promises, and all the com∣mandements, exhortations, motives, examples, prayers, vowes, covenant: to be heavenly,Read Deut. 30.6. Jer. 32.38.39. to love the Lord and the word of his truth, to walk before him in godly feare in all well pleasing, and so all the Saints ever did: as Adam, Habel, He∣noch, Noe, &c. also hitherto pertaine theReduce al de∣hortations, as love not the World, nor the things of the world, 1. Joh. 2. set not your affections on the Earth, Col. 3. and on the contrary, educe the exhortations: as seek the things above, Eccl. 11. & 12. dehortations, threatnings, curses, and examples of sin, and punishment in walking contrary.
IV. From this first preaching of the Gospell, we must attentively minde this, that Jehovah who was, who is, who will be still the same, (d) doth rule all ages to one sum of salvation in Christ. And to this faith he ever calleth his e∣lect (e) by his word and Spirit, from the communion of Devills and the wicked world, to have communion with him and his Son Jesus Christ, our Lord by way of Ordinances. The reason that God hateth the wicked, is, God teaching this con∣tinually from the beginning, yet the wicked rebell and joyne with Saan, 2 Cor. 4.4. V. * In all ages for teaching,ead Psal 44. & 79.1. Thes. 3.2. Col. 1.24. &c. for his S. observation. beleiving, and professing this glorious Doctrine of Christ (f) great disputations, con∣tentions, sorrows, tentations, persecutions, in body, goods, name, and life, come unto Michael, Christ Jesus and his (g) Angells, by Satan and his Angells: yet Christ went through all con∣quering: and so faith in him and in his word doth make us conquerors. Many sweet promises belong to this head. VI. The duty of all Christian beleivers, is to be unfained in brotherly love, (h) holding one another with a dear pure heart fervently, and to resist the Divill and his members, (i) and to have no fellowship with the workers, nor with the works of wickednesse. Behold severity through all genera∣tions; when the Church walked contrary. VII. Because this Text of Gen. 3.15. is a promise of Christ, that he should take humanity, & destroy Satans works, therefore in it, implicitely are the petitions of the Saints for all good concerning soule and body; Intercessions as re∣specting the communion of Saints, deprecations to be deli∣vered and protected from all evill, and holy imprecations a∣gainst the seed of the Serpent. Also hence issue, the (k) praises and thanksgivings, for receiving good for our selves, or others, both in respect of spirituall blessings, and in that all (l) creatures of each days creation (whether visible or in∣visible) in Christ, are servants and freinds to the elect. Hence also proceede praises and thanksgivings for (m) deliverance and protection from Satan, his seed and works.
QUest. 7. Did God ordaine any publick worship to his name, presently after the fall of our first Parents, and after the promise? Answ. As God (n) taught our first Parents the Doctrine of faith, so he taught them prayer and sacrificing, and blessed the seventh day and sanctified it, for a day of rest, for study how God rested from Creation in the Redemption by Christ, he being promised to be Heire of all. (o) Sacrifice was used from the day of Adams Apostasie, teaching of life coming by death. Adam taught his Sons, and his Sons Sons, to the eighth successive Childe, and those that offered in faith discerning the bloud of the covenant did please God, had peace, and reconciliation with God, and were made heires of the righteousnesse that is by faith, the Church in Adams family with GodsThe Ordinan∣ces were the preaching of the word of faith. 2, Prayer. 3. the Seale of the promise. Ordinances is called (p) the presence of God. TheMr. Ains∣worth on Gen. 4.14.16. Presence of God in holy Ordinances is most glorious and comfortable, to which the faithfull in all ages of the Church resorted with holy feare, exceeding joy, praise, and thanksgiving, Psal. 42. & 43. & 84. & 100. &c. QUest. 8. Who beleived this report concerning the second Adam, and to whom was the arme of the Lord revealed? Answ. Adam and his Sons * Habel, Seth, Enos, and the rest of the godly Fathers, and their godly posterity to the Flood. QUest. 9. Who hated this Doctrine, and persecuted this way of life in Christ. Answ, Kain was the first that began the † War of the Serpent against the (q) holy seed. And this persecution by men that followed Kains wayes, goes on to the end of the World.
QUest. 10. Was there any apostasie from this faith and way of salvation afore the Flood? Answ. Christ the Light and Life shined in darknesse, but he was not comprehended of the Sons of darknesse: for beside the Doctrine and practise of bodily exercise in Kain, there was (r) a great apostasie, and that quickly of the Sons of the open Church, who having a forme of godlinesse, but denying the power thereof, despised the Doctrine of regeneration, grei∣ved the holy Spirit, and corrupted the calling on the name of the Eternall: And the cheife occasion of all this was by (s) un∣godly marriages, with Kains (t) worldly glorious house: from all which issued (u) a confluence of all iniquity, set∣ting Light by Gods long suffering while the Ark was making, committing all ungodly deeds, and uttering hard and bitter speaches against the Heavens. And so it is in all apostasies. † Remember still, that in all apostasies of the Church, the faith∣full cannot be visibly glorious. QUest. 11. What came to the faithfull that did first cleave to the faith, (which was once delivered to the Saints) and that walked with God? Answ. Through (x) faith, they obtained good † report with God, God was not ashamed to be called their God, and their Father, & they his Sons, & he accounted that the world was not worthy of them, and therefore he prepared for them an Heavenly (y) City and Countrey, for they had gracious promises of Gods favour, through his covenant in Christ, the true Noah, who doth comfort us concerning our workes, and concerning the sorrowes of our hands, and concerning the earth which God hath cursed. † wherefore they had preser∣vation and deliverance from the severe destruction of the World by Waters. Thus God was a rewarder of them, that by faith did diligently seek him. This doth teach us how pre∣cious faith is in the Son of God, that should come into the World.
QUest. 12. What came on the (z) co:̄upters of the Faith, the despisers and wantons, and feasters, and mockers, and mur∣derers, the seed of the serpent, that walked after their owne lusts? Answ. Kaine was cursed (a) and excommunicate, and Christ did execute Judgement, and bruised his posterity, and the Apostates in his fearfull severity in the Flood, washing their bodyes away, and cast their spirits into eternall prison, for their unbeleeving, disobedient striving against the (b) Spi∣rit of Christ in his Prophets, preaching the Gospel: So dange∣rous it is, when people will not be wiseConsider Psal. 2. through the whole volume, how Christ breaketh the plots, counsells &c. of the ser∣pents seed. and kisse the Sonne. The next generall judgment of the world, and of wicked and ungodly men shall be by fire. God hates (c) the wicked, un∣beleevers and hyppocrites in all ages, like Devills, according to that most constant doctrinall position, 2 Joh. 9. Whosoever transgresseth and abideth not in the Doctrine of Christ, hath not God; he that abideth in the Doctrine of Christ, he hath both the Father and the Son. QUest. 13. How long was it from the first pronouncing of the curse upon the Earth, to the open manifection of it by the Floud of waters? Answ. It was sixteen hundred fifty and six years.
Some Annotations upon this second Chapter, with References to the number of the Que∣stions, and Letters of A, B, C, &c. In Answer to the first question in expounding Gen. 3.15. This scrip∣ture is the Basis of all the Doctrine of Gods Counsell concerning Re∣demption by Christ; this scripture declares the decree of Gods eternall counsell and covenant, as it was concluded and agreed on by the holy Trinity for mans Redemption from Satans head-plot. Satans plot and purpose was to spoyl man, and so consequently to have spoyled and un∣done the whole work of God in the Creation: But this that sets forth an heavy threatning against Satan, and the serpent his instrument, that one from the seed of the woman should break his headplot, and heal that misery which he brought on man, and because that should be done, a new heaven and a new earth should be made to the praise of Gods coun∣sells, which over raught the plot and project of Satan. So this scripture containes in it, a threatning to the serpent and his seed, and a promise to Eve & to all her beleeving seed of Christ. Beloved Reader, concerning this Text and the threatning in it to the terror of the serpent and his seed, be pleased to read Mr. Pynchons booke of the meritorious price of mans redemption, printed 1655. there you will have plentifull satis∣faction; but for this little worke I purpose cheifly to enlarge my selfe, not as it is a threatning, but as it is a promise concerning Christ. The refore I will further observe from Gen. 3.15. I. That in this Text, The eternall Gospell hid in God, before the foundation of the world, was now in Paradise manifested, even the hid wisdome. II. To this first and precious promise, the Apostle hath respect, when he saith, He was made an Apostle of the faith and truth, that is for the hope of eternall life, which God that cannot lye, promised before the times of the world, but made his word of promise manifest in due time by the sen∣ding of Iesus Christ, Tit. 1.1, 2, 3.2 Tim. 1.9.2. Pet. 1.4. The times of the world are counted by the birth of the first ten Fa∣thers to the flood, Thence by ten holy Fathers to the promise to Abra∣ham. Thence to the coming from AEgypt. Thence to the building of the Temple. Thence to the burning of it by Babels King. Thence to the end of the captivity in Babel. Thence by seventy sevens of yeares to the death of Christ, or to the glorious redemption of man, by the death of our Lord Jesus Christ.
III. This comprehendeth the Faith of Gods elect, which was once de∣livered, that is, first and once for all, delivered to the Saints, and ne∣ver after to be changed. All other promises of Christ, are but commora∣tions and expositions of this. The Doctrine of Faith can be but one, be∣cause there is but one God, and one Mediator, Eph. 4. Note this phrase againe once delivered but still expounded. This is Genus generalissimum. And for this faith, the Saints of all ages have contended to keep and up∣hold it against the serpent and his seed, as all the Epistle of Iudas Thad∣daeus is upon this argument. All sins and punishments come on the world for despising this faith, and comforts for imbracing, 2 Thes. 1.8. IV. From this first preaching of Christ till the mystery of God, which he hath spoken by his holy Prophets and Apostles be finished, wee must mind this constantly, that Gods purpose was not to bring man fallen, to life by the remains of any naturall abilities; there was a Bar that wee should not think of any hope in that, Gen. 3. ult. But by a new and living way in the second Adam. This is a Covenant of Grace, not to him that worketh, but to him that beleeveth and receiveth the Son of God as Mediator, him hath God exalted (in holy doctrine from the begining) with his right hand to be a Prince and a Saviour, for to give change of mind and forgivenesse of sins to all the Israel of God, Acts 3.21. & 5. 31. Now this new way is very foolishnesse to us naturally, therefore wee dream of great excellencies in our corrupt, dead, stinking graves: But we must hear the voice of the Son of God in his owne ordinances, Iohn 5. and he must say to us, live, afore we can have the first Resurrection, as we cannot have the second without his powerfull voice, Ioh. 5. Isa. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. V. If the first Adam or any of him could helpe themselves, what need the Son of God to be promised from the beginning, to be a second A∣dam, and to appear to destroy the works of the Devill? 1 Joh. 1. and 3. he only knew how, and was only able to mannage the whole offic of me∣diation, and to performe all righteousnesse, according to covenant in his own person, without pressing, and by his glorious Ordinances effe∣ctually to call, and unquestionably to justifie, and to prepare for glory all them of his mysticall body which the Father gave him. Neither A∣dam nor any of his posterity had such abilities, and for any thing they could do, they should have born their own iniquities, which was such a yoke, that neither Patriarch nor Apostle were able to bear; change of mind and forgivenesse of sins was ever preached to be by the second Adam, Luke 24.47. Be it knowne therefore to all men (saith this first promise) that through this blessed seed, the son of God made man is preached to us the forgivenesse of sins, and by him all that beleeve are justified (that is, made free) from the guilt of sin and punishment, from which we could not be justified or made free by the Law of Moses, Acts 13. The world was 3960 yeares from the Apostasie of the first Adam, to
the Redemption by the second Adam, and who in all that time saved himselfe from death, Death reigned over all, old and young; it is the second Adam that conquered death, the reward of originall sin, and hee rose againe for the justification or freedome of all. Gods Children from sin and feare of death. Oh that selfe conceited and proud iniquity would once stop its mouth; for every mouth shall be stopped, and all the world shall be subject to the judgement of God, Acts 13. and 15. Rom. 4 ult. What the Law of works could not do, the election hath obtained, Rom. 11. VI. Mark that from this first and maine free promise, God hath convey∣ed all comforts, of wisdome, justification, (or Freedome) Sancti∣fication and Redemption, on fallen man, and no way else can or ought to be sought after: It could never have entred into the heart of man to thinke of this way, if God of his rich Grace had not first declared this rich mystery of his will in a free promise; how could our first fallen Parents have thought of a Redeemer, much lesse of the meanes of ob∣taining such a Redeemer at the hands of God. This mystery was ordai∣ned in Gods eternal Council and providence, before the foundacion of the world was laid, to be revealed upon Adams fall, his ways are unsearch∣able, his wisdome, mercy, power, and love is past finding out, and doubtlesse our first parents and all their faithfull posterity, could but with admiration, say the Epitaph not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath entred into the heart of man the things that God ath prepared for them that love him 1 Co. 2. Of him and through him, and to him are all things. To him be glory for ever Amen, Esa. 43.25. Esa. 48.9, 10, 11. Rom. 11. Jer. 31.33. Jer. 32.39. Ezek. 36.25.26. VII. Christ was promised a Redeemer, not only from the guilt and punishment of sin, but to make us in himselfe Sons of God; even new creatures. VIII. All outward comforts come by promise in Christ; severall godly persons of late years have done well in composing Treatises of the promi∣ses. IX. It is to admiration, That Jehovah the eternall God, should seeke to enter into a covenant of Grace with fallen man, with the slaves of the Devill, with enemies, and with children of wrath, that he should en∣ter into a free promise and Covenant with us to be our God, and to make us to be his people. See his kindnesse to the polluted infant in Ezek. 16. X. All things are made subject to Christ, as the heir of all from the first day of Adams fail, but Satan doth labour with all sedulity to with∣draw mans Blind heart from the understanding of this doctrine, and doth labour to suggest fond imaginations of idolatry, superstition, bodily exercises and Fables &c. to corrupt it, and by persecution to hinder it; yea to abolish it: This is a Doctrine of Faith which no naturall man can at∣tain
untill his mind and divine illumination be regenerate and made ca∣pable to comprehnd this hid mystery of God in Christ. All precepts, promises and threatnings, are ordained to bring fallen man to obey the Son of God as mediator. All the victory, administra∣tions of Christs Kingdome by the word, seals, censures, &c. are for this purpose till the mediatorian Kingdome be redelivered, 1 Cor. 15. But all things are cheifly intended for the Elect, 1 Cor. 14.32. 11. The second not on Gen. 12.13. may be of use here. 12. Thus from the first preaching of the Gospell, we must observe why Christ is called Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, not only in cau∣ses and effects, but also of all divine Revelation in the blessed scrip∣tures, all runs on him. All the Promises, Threatnings, Commandements, Examples, Chastisements, &c. all drive us to Christ, he also is Alpha and Omega in all the praises of the Church, he is also the maine matter and marke of the holy Bible, All things were created by him and for him, and he is before all things, and by him all things consist, and hee is the head of the body, the Church, Col 1.18. In 3. Q. [The seed of the woman] Hence Children should be first  taught to read Gen 3. with Luke 3. and Luke 4 together for two princi∣pall ends, first, To know, how Jesus our Lord is of the blessed Virgin Ma∣ry of Eli, and of Adam and Eve naturally, and in this respect the Gene∣alogie of men in Luke 3. are the glory of mankind, being all Fathers to the Son of God after the flesh. 2. The better to compare the sorrowfull combate of Adam, being killed on his first day, from the life of the soule to death in sin, with the glori∣ous combate and victory of our Lord the second Adam, driving Satan to flight, and the reason why the Son of God should take hold of mans na∣ture, is purposely handled by the Apostle, in Ebr. 2. Ebr. 3. Ebr. 4. Ebr. 5. Great is the mystery of Godlinesse, God manifested in the flesh, It is most glo∣rious to consider it, and how it hath been diligently taught in every age from Gen. 3.15. and for the better knowing of this mystery, the Law of Moses was made, the Tabernacle, and the frame of the world, and well might David and Solomon say with admiration, That God would dwell with man on earth, also in his apparitions to the Saints before the Flood, and to the Patriarchs and Prophets,, he spake with us, (marke this corporation speech in Hos. 12.4.) At Bethel, and dwelt among us, in his Tabernacle and Ordinances, then in the Temple till the captivity, then in the second Temple, and then at last he became very man, making our flesh his Tabernacle, and dwelt among us, Joh. 1.14. Cor. 6. but his speciall residence in us is in our hearts by Faith, These things made singing affections in the Saints of old, Ps. 40. Ps 100. Ps: 135. Ps. 147. Ps. 149. Ps. 149.1 Chr. 16.1 King. 8.2 Sam. 7. Joh. 17. Ex. 15. and any that duely consider this, cannot but sing praises to the God of our Salvati∣on.
In Q. 3. [Of Adam in the Genealogie] When the holy spirit bringeth Genealogies from the first man unto Jesus our Lord, it may teach all men that the world was made and had a beginning, so Moses Law taught Misgraim, that is the Egyptians and others in his time, and Ezra the Persians too, before Aristotle and such Athean praters, 1 Chron. 1.1. see Bro. in Manuscript. In Q 4. and Answ. [He might govern] Genesis sheweth how that by the word of Jehovah the Heavens were made, all the setled Army of them by the spirit of his mouth, and when man fell, the word telleth, That for the destroying of the workes of the Serpent, hee would be made flesh, and have a Tabernacle in our nature, and so to be a second Adam to govern all things. In which point the Patriarks faith is evidenced by the charge of Joseph to carry his bones with theirs unto the Land of Ca∣naan, where our Lords Resurrection should be a testimony of a new world, see Bro. in Appo. 1.108. The government of the world to come (for so the Jewish Doctors did stile the dayes of Messiah) is that meditore∣an Kingdome which the holy Prophet so magnifieth to endure through all ages and generations, Ps. 8. Ps. 45. Ps. 93. Ps. 145. &c. And this Kingdome of Christ the second Adam is handled in 1 Cor. 15. Ebr. 2. Eph. 1.22. from Ps. 8. Namely, That the Son eternall should rule as the mediator of his Church, till all things be restored, but then his Kingdome shall be delivered up when the last enemies death & Sathan are perfectly subdued and destroyed, Then all the elect which have been called, justi∣fied and adopted in Christ by the word of his kingdome & by the work of his spirit, shall be presented unto the father, and all prophesying, and  all other new victory, sweet helps of our edification in the body of Christ, shall cease, for then shall be the fullnesse; Eph. 4.11.12.13. In Q 4. [Heire of all] David with great admiration doth handle this in Ps. 8. He the second Adam upholds all by the word of his power and this he shewed in Noah, when all beasts and Elements obeyed him at the flood, and so at the destruction of Sodom, Jehovah from Jehovah  rained fire and brimstone, Gen. 16. and so in the days of Joshuah, 10.11 In like sort, those noble and excellent descriptions of Christ his per∣son and Office (in the three fold Offices of Prophet, Preist, and King) are wonderfull for all sorts of heavenly and terrible Doctrine, in Psal. 2. Psal. 45. Psal. 110. Esa 9. Dan. 7. Dan 9. Dan. 10. Daq. 12. and that in Apot. 1. may well comprehend the summe of them all, but all of them should first be minded as expounding, Gen. 3.15. Eph. 1.22.23. Col. 1.14.15. & the Epistle to the Ebr. all of it, He is the blessed & only potentate to the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, 1 Tim 6. Apoc 19. Joh 3.35. The Father lo∣veth the Son and hath given all things into his hands, wee must reve∣rence the Heir, and beleevingly obey him, for Christ is appointed a Prince and a Saviour, to give change of minde and forgivenesse of sins. This was taught from the beginning, that hee should be this horne of Salvation, and of this Doctrine, there have been prophets to declare it ever since the world began, Luke 1.70. Act. 3.21.
In Q. 4. [From the day of mans fall] All the time from the time of mans fall to the restoring of all things by the Messiah, is called, The World to come, and it is subjected to the Messiah, Ebr. 2.5. but the restitu∣tion of all things is first prophesied in Act. 3.21. In Q. and Answ. 5. [Satan brought man, n. 1.] Man was ever the  object of Satans harred: and as Christ was man of the seed of the decei∣ved woman, and appointed to combate with Sathan for mans Redemp∣tion: so Christ was the object of Sathans most deadly hatred: but such was the perfection of his obedience under his greatest enmity, that hee spoiled principalities and powers, even in his death on the crosse, Col 2.15. and this comfort also belongs to all the persecuted Saints, that this great Red Dragon is chained, Apoc. 20. and shall shortly be utter∣ly troden under our feet, Rom. 16. In Q. 5. [Christ the second Adam] Christ destroyeth Sathans workes,  not only in us, but from without us, and this is n unchangeable truth, in all those that are called according to Gods purpose, Joh. 13.1. Christ is the restorer of all things, in him wee have all things that appertaine to life and godlinesse; he is the Corner stone that couples all the building, and there is no other name under Heaven whereby we can be saved, Act. 4 None but Christ, as blessed Lambard said, Him hath God the Father sea∣led, Joh. 6.27. Him hath God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Saviour to give repentance to all the Israel of God, and forgive∣nesse of sins, And this is a sure rule from the beginning, He that belee∣veth on the Son hath everlasting life, and he that beleeveth not the son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him, Joh. 336. so then cursed was he that said, Si & illa, & illa colantur; neque esse noxium, si inter Gentilium aras & Dei Ecclesiam quis transiens, utraque vnercur; and little better are the Atheisticall moderators of our dayes, 1631.1632.1633. 1634.1635.1636.1637. In Q. 5. [And Adoption] And now little Children abide in him (the  second Adam) that when he shall appear, we may have boldnesse, and not be ashamed before him at his coming, 1 Joh. 2. By him wee have a∣doption, Joh. 1.12. and his spirit doth enable us to cry Abba Father, mark these scriptures, Ebr. 4.14.15, 16. Rom. 8.15. Eph. 2.18. Rom. 5.1, 2. In Q 5. N. 11. [Christ the second Adam] Now Sathan the old Ser∣pent,  spirituall weaknesses, and the God of this world, doth, by Gods just judgement, make war against us, about super-celestiall things, and wrastleth cunningly to hold us still in our most miserable estare of blind∣nesse, imprisonment, and bondage: but, by the power of the second Adam, and by the word of his Grace, we are set free, and such as are blinde do receive their sight, and by his grace we are made able to stand, resist, and overcome: his Grace is in us and over us, and the Apostle of the Gentiles salutes them all thus, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, Amen. Esa. 42.6.7. Esa. 49.9. Ephes. 6.1. Ioh. 2, Rom 7. Esa. 45. 24.
In Q. 5. [The life of holinesse] In him was life, and the life was the light of men, Ioh 1. Ioh 8.12 The second Adam saith, I am the light of the world, he that followeth me shall not walke in darkenesse, but shall have the light of life, his Law restoreth the soule, Psal. 19 Ps. 23. Ephes. 2.1. Eph. 4.24. Col. 3.10.1. Co. 15.49. Esa. 11 9.1 Ioh. 1. Ioh. 2 4. He is the true Shepherd and Bishop of our Soules. In Q 5. N. 3. [Christ the second Adam] The appearing of our Sa∣viour Jesus Christ, as it was promised, hath brought life and immor∣tality through the Gospel, 2 Tim. 1. Marthas and our Lords conference was heavenly, the shewes; that she expected life and immortality through him, Ioh. 11.21. and 1 Cor. 15.1 Thess. 4. And Iohs faith for this point is worthy of all consideration Ioh 19. Ps. 46.15. Ps. 17.15. Sin reigns to death through the first Adam, but grace reigns through Righteousnesse (or freedome) to eternall life through Christ the second Adam, Rm. 5. The comparisons of the first and second Adam, are most sweet, in Rom. 5. and 1 Cor. 15. Secondly, Consider further, how our Lord doth sustaine us in this our pilgrimage, he is said to hold our soules in life, in him wee live, he is our life and the lenghth of our dayes he provides and gives meanes of life, meat to eat, and cloathes to put on, he is our preserver in all places, and at all times, he speaks to diseases to come and to go, and when hee plea∣seth to withold his preservation wee languish and dye, the Godly have the feeling and knowledge of all this, they finde they have their life from Jesus as from a common stock, even for the body, he is a second Adam to us, that his life might be made manifest in our mortall flesh, Ioh 7.20. Ps. 30.2. Cor. 4.8. Jehovah i.e. Christ is thy life through Israel, Deut. 30.20. not Moah, nor Ammon, nor Edom. In Q 5. N. 4 [under curse] All afflictions are comprehended in this and the like sayings, First, cursed is the earth for thy sake, for in sor∣row thou shalt eat of it, Gen. 3 17. Secondly, I will greatly multiply thy sor∣row, Gen. 3.16. Thirdly, I will put enmity between the Serpent and the wo∣man, and thou, Sathan, shlt bruise his foot-stoole, Gen. 3.15. For the two former, see how Christ doth for his chosens sake destroy Sathans workes in Ps. 8. Ps. 107. Ps. 128. Ioh 5.23. Hos. 2.18. 1 Tim. 4. Tit. 1.15. 1 Tim 2.14.15 The creatures are joyfull to be imployed for the churches uses, Ps. 65. Ps. 67. Es. 44.23. Hos. 2.21.22. They are puri∣fied from the usurpation of the curse, made usefull, serviceable, and san∣ctified by the Covenant, and by the word of promise, and by holy and humble prayer, Ezk. 36.37 But many cases of conscience do often a∣rise for these things in our hearts, If Christ destroy Sathans workes, how is it that there be so many afflictions, restraints, crosses, &c. in our per∣sons labours and estates, whereas in the meane time the wicked do com∣monly prosper? All is answered in Iohs booke and in Ps. 73. Ps. 30 Ps. 37. All the affliction of the godly is either for the tryall of Graces, or for the purging of vices; by Christ the curse is removed and afflictions
are sanctified, and by his discipline made wholesome medicines, the counsells of God are unsearchable, but what he doth is in wisdome, love, and righteousnesse, and in that respect hee makes all to worke together for good to them that love God, why then should wee dispute, mur∣mur, distrust, or judge hardly of our selves or of others that fear God, or have an ill opinion of the Lord God; every event is an Oracle, Be dumbe therefore before the shearer, the more we strugle the lesse we prevaile, no wise Father doth greive his child willingly, so God doth not afflict wil∣lingly, Lam 3.31. but when need is, 1 Pet. 1. Lay therefore thy face to the ground in a holy submission, that so there may be hope, Lam. 3.27. Esa. 28 23. And as for that third saying, That Sathan shall be at enmity with the wo∣man, and shall bruise, consider Psal. 129. Rom. 8.28.2 Thes. 1. &c. all these sums of afflictions must call to remembrance the sin of our first Pa∣rents, in whom all have sinned, Rom 5.12. In Q. 5. N. 4 [Vanity and corruption] All Ecclesiasts must here be considered, which sheweth from a plentifull induction, the variety of  Gods Providences to finde the instability and passing away of all under the Sun, that so we might be diligent all our life long, to see how the soul may stand in judgement for the hope of eternall comfort, Gods aim is to bring us to this, saying nothing but Christ, Ps. 73. and to this not to love the world, nor the things that are in the world. 1 Ioh. 2.15. 1 Cor. 7. 31. In Q. 5. N. 4 [Service of the creatures] The very creatures do joy both in the temporall and spirituall good of the Church, (as hath been  touched above) Luke 15.10. Ps. 65. Ps. 67. Es. 43.23. Apoc. 5.11.12.13. Ps. 24 Ps, 91. The Angells, the Stars, the Heavens, the Rivers, the Seas, the Earth with windes, stormes, tempests, haile, &c. Ps. 18. Iud. 5. Ps. 11 All these are ordered for the good of Christ and his Church. Ps. 96. Psal 98. And Christs intercession doth mitigate the curse Gen. 8.21. Psal. 128. I will once more breifly summe up these four heads. The first old Adam was a figure, (but in a contrary way) of the se∣cond Adam that was to come, The first Adam by his sin was the corrupter of all things, the second Adam the restorer of all things, by his obedience procuring our Regeneration & Justification; the godly are a new creation, old things are passed away, all things through Christ are become new to them, and hence that speech is glorious, All things are yours, wheher the world, life, or death; whether things present or things to come, all condi∣ons, all events are yours, all the Ordinances, all the Officers both of Church and Common-weale are yours, all the Angells are yours, all the promises and precepts are yours, Christ is yours, God is yours, yee are Christs, and Christ is Gods, 1 Cor. 3. In Q. 6. N: 1 [The seed of Sathan] This is the malignant Church, But observe through all the holy story, how the Son of God the second Adam
hath whet his sword, bent his bow, and prepared his arrowes against them, he hath both promised and sworne to the Church, that hee will have war with him from generation to generation, even untill Sathans head-plot is wholy broken, Ps. 7. both by giving them over to spirituall judgements, and to outward plagues, Thou hast troden all them that erre from thy statutes, for their deceit is falshood, thou puttest a∣way all the wicked of the earth like drosse, Therefore I love thy testimo∣nies, Ps. 119.116. Jer. 6.30. And in the promise to Abraham, God doth curse them Gen. 12. and Lev. 26. The holy spirit doth also in detestation describe them by many infamous titles and comparisons, Seed of the Ser∣pent, Gen. 3.15. Mal. 3. Angels of the Devill, Sons of Belial, &c. these are the multitude that go the broad way to destruction; as may be seene in the Apostacy of the old world, and in the Apostacy of Nimrod, and in the Apostacy of the ten Tribes, by the perswasion of Jeroboam, and of the two Tribes not long after: so liwkeise it fell out in the Kingdome of the King of Locusts. In Q. 6. [Adopted Sons of God] These are the Church militant, yet great is their glory in the Covenant and in the promises that are made to them in Christ; they have glorious Titles, They are called the Sons of God, the Angells of Christ, the truest of the living God, his spouse, his portion which God hath created for his promise, Es. 43. This is that Kingdome of Christ that endureth to the end, and that consumeth all other kingdoms that oppose the little flock that go the narrow way that leadeth unto life. In Q. 6. N. 11. [God made this promise] God was the first teacher of the glad tidings of the Doctrine of faith, to open the blind eyes, and to turne men from darknesse to light, and from the power of Sathan to God: When Adam was become poor, blind, miserable and naked, God was pleased to give his collyrion eye salve from the promise of Christ, for that declaration of Redemption by the seed of the woman was de∣nounced as a threatning to the Serpent, but as it was spoken in the hearing of Adam and Eve, it implyed a promise of Redemption to them from Sathans head-plot, so the promise was also made to once ungodly Abraham before his calling, where now was free will, merits, works foreseen, &c. Read Esa. 42.7.16. Esa. 43 25. Psal. 103. All is of free Grace. In Q. 6 N 11. [Nay it could not enter] This made the Apostle to break forth into joy and praise, because God doth to us (not to the Angells that fell) above all that we can aske or thinke, Eph. 3.20.21. Christ saith, I was sound of them that sought me not, Es. 65.1. and of this wonderful mercy did David and Aethan sing; Psal 40. Psal. 89. Psal. 103. This is the great and wonderfull thing of Christs Law that David prayed that he might see with opened eyes, Psal. 119.18. and Paul for the Ephe∣sians, Eph. 1.18. Great and glorious is the mystery of Godlinesse, that the Son of God should be manifested in the flesh for the effecting of all this, to
the elect, Gen. 3-15. and Esa. 57.15. is very pertinent, yea all the blessed Scriptures are the Revelation of these glad tidings of the Gospell from Gen. 3.15. In Q. 6. N. 11. [Till the Spirit of Christ] The word is of no effect  without the spirit, neither doth the spirit ordinarily worke without the blessed meane, (never contrary) to his own divine Revelation; as God commanded the light to shine out of darknesse: so he gives a command to his word to be a light and a Lamp in our dark hearts, by the operation of his spirit, and by this meanes he makes his exhortations, covenants and promises to be effectuall means for the reconciling of our enemy, cogita∣tion: The learning of Christs Law, doth worke in us a new creation; Eph. 4.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. The Law of Christ the true shepherd is a Doctrine of restoring and converting the soule, Ps. 19. Ps. 23. of his own good will, begat he us with the word of truth, so sweet and precious is the Law of Christ. In Q. 6. N. 3. [The workes of the Devill] from the First Adam we  have his image and likenesse, even corruption of corruption; corrupt we are in blood, in flesh, in will; this was the worke of the Serpent, and that it might be destroyed, the eternall word became flesh, the second Adam, that so from his infinite fullnesse wee might have grace for grace; being made Sons in him by faith, that speech is heavenly. As we have the image of the earthly Adam, so we shal bear the image of the heavenly Adam, not only in the second but also in the first Resurrection. The second Adam in both is a quickning spirit, the begotten is like unto him that begetteth; else no communion with God and Christ, and God is only the God of such, 1 Cor. 1.30.1 Cor 15.49.1 John 1.1. Ioh. 5.4. Parents are meanes to beget, and (with travaile) to bring forth children after the image of the first sinfull Adam, like the foale of a wilde Asse,, so they should with all holy care and diligence travell in birth again till the second A∣dam be formed in them; if any man be in Christ the second Adam, he is a new creature, and partaker of the divine nature, 2 Cor 5.17.1 Ioh. 4. 17.1 Pet. 1.22. Col. 3.10. and see how the old and new Adam are com∣pared, in Eph. 4.17. &c. The scripture saith, that the second Adam had not the spirit by measure, but that all fullnesse pleased to dwell in him, and that he was filled with the spirit of the Lord; with the spirit of wis∣dome, counsell, strength, understanding, knowledge, and of the feare of Jehovah, and that of his fullnesse wee all have, in some measure, answe∣rable grace, Es. 11 2. Es 42.6, 7. Christ is the head of the body, Rege∣generation by the matter of holy doctrine, and by the spirit was taught to Nicodemus to be from Christ the second Adam, Ioh. 3. Hence many cases of conscience may arise in the mind: If Christ have destroyed Sa∣thans workes in us, how is it that sin is of such force in us, All this is answered in Rom. 7. and Rom. 8. and Rom. 12.3. Gal. 5.16, 17, 18. Es. 42.3. Es. 57.15,
In Q. 6. N. 3. [Of the corrupt nature] This state is in no wise to be rested in, be wee never so formall in Religion outwardly: The unregenerate cannot please God. his prayer is turned into sin, his sacri∣fice is an abomination, his wisdome is enmity against God. The good workes of the Heathens, yea of the Scribes and Pharisees, though ma∣terially good, were but splendida peccata, their hearing of the word, and showes of profession comes to no fruit; as in the three former sorts of ground, Mat. 3. As in Kain a great heir, Achitophel a private coun∣sellor, Herod a King, Iscariot an Apostle, Symon Magus a great Schol∣lar, &c. &c. Their execution of Lawes for civill policy, through Christs over-ruling is turned to good for society of humane life, and sometime a wall of defence for the Church, as the Apostle Paul found Neroes au∣thority long a defence against the Masters of traditions. Our Natures are so corrupt, that our spirits are most vile for hatred, enmity and fretting against God and Christs Kingdome, evermore in war as ene∣mies; beaing weapons against him, Rom. 6 Bet to anger God, for Sa∣than the Prince of darknesse rules in the Children of disobedience, Eph. 2. Col. 1. Rom. 1.1 Cor. 1. Jam. 4. Rom. 8 7. In Q 6. N. 3. [In whom we are compleat] If a man wade into the depth of all that is in the first old Adam, he cannot be compleat, whether Philo∣sophy, humane Traditions, commandements and Doctrines; but in Christ the second Adam, are all measures of heighth, depth, length, breadth yea and all treasures of Wisdome, Knowledge. Fortitude, Justice, Temperance, Freindship, Love, Patience, earning of Bowells, &c. And this we shall finde if we measure it with a golden reed, Job 28.1 Cor. 2. and 3.2 Tim. 3.15, 16, 17. Esa. 11. to 9. Eph. 4.21.22. &c. 1 Job. 3. 8, 9, 10. He enlightneth, changeth and guardeth both heart and mind, enlivens the conscience, makes the memory retentive of good things, sweetly turns & draws the will, mortifies the inordinacy of the passions, & rules the min all holy majesty, neither to be dull in want, nor wanton in fruition, casteth down vain imaginations, bringeth into captivity every thought, commands the senses, clears and settles the fantasie, teach∣eth to order speech and silence, subdueth the members of the body, to be weapons and servants unto righteousnesse and holinesse. Breifly he liveth, he thinketh, he speaketh, he worketh all in us, Of him, and through him, and for him are all things, that God in him may be glorified. This is the influence that cometh from the second Adam, in his Ordi∣nances publick and private, to all the building of his mysticall body, un∣till we all reach unto the unity of faith, and the Knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the ful∣nesse of Christ, without whom we are void and without form, darkness, dead, dry stakes, (2 Cor. 4.) and out of whom wee neither have nor can do nothing. But following the truth in Love (as the truth of this hea∣ling Doctrine, is to be sought and found only in JESUS) we grow up in all points into him which is the head, even Christ himselfe, by whom all the body conveniently joyned and fastned together by every point
of the furuitre according to the operation of the spirit, which is in mea∣sure of every severall part, reneweth increase of the body unto the e∣difying of it selfe in Love. A proud Laodicean Arminian, thinkes and speaks contrary, which shewes he is not only ignorant of Christ and his learning, but of his own naturall Philosophy, Nosce teipsum, What naturall abilities did and would worke, we see Jer, 4.22. Job 28. Rom. 1.1 Cor. 1. But no change of heart to fear God in Christ; here heathens who could say, Video melio∣ra, deteriora sequor, might see further with the Apostle, Rom. 7.23. &c. But man sold unto sin, can neither hear nor see where God openeth not the eyes, and here the spirit teacheth the godly to groan, with sighings unspeakable, (See Mr. Bro. upon Lam. 1.11.) When we read in the ho∣ly scriptures, or elsewhere, of errours in judgement, and sins in practise in heathens and others, then refer all hither, to thinke upon the poy∣son of the serpent, breathed into the natures of our first Parents, which could never by all humane learning be healed. The truth is, man is most adverse to be cured till Christ by his word and spirit illuminate and quicken, The Pharisees were the most excellent of all naturalists, yet they could not attain to the Law of Righteousnesse, (or freedome from sin and guilt) Rom. 7.8, 9, 10.11. chapters, Phil. 3.3, 4, 5. &c. The plaine reason is, they despised to know this glorious hidden mystery of Christ the second Adam, and missed the meaning of the Law. In the 6. Quest. N. 3. [Doth rule all ages] The second Adam and  his doctrine is the light, the way, the truth and the life to all gene∣rations The song of all ages is, Salvation is of our God, and of the Lambe Apoc 5 9. and Chap. 7.10, 11, 12. This is the true Catholik faith, faith in Christ ever one and the same, although the outward Administration did differ, Psal. 100.5. & 119.89. & 135.13.1 Pet. 1. JESUS CHRIST yesterday and to day is the same, also for ever. Christ the Rock of all ages Esa. 26 4. Ebr. 13.2 John 1.2. He that cometh to God must beleeve that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently (by faith in Christ Jesus) seek him. This is a ruled case from the beginning, No man cometh to the Father but by the Son, The cloud of witnesses from Habell to our Lords dayes confirmeth this. Ebr. 11. all of it: And the clouds shall not catch up any to glory, but those of the same holy faith. This faith is the charge and commandement of the Lord, which the Saints are to keepe in∣violable from age to age, without spot of heresie, or vanity of mans tra∣ditions. In Q. 6. N. 4. [To this faith he calleth his elect] The faith of Gods  elect is glory, and the righteous Nation that keepeth it entire, and wal∣keth in it, is a most glorious people, not the like in the earth, if we con∣sider the King of Saints, his Lawes, his government, and the purity of his subjects. Of this company of faithfull soules, and their King, their endearednesse each to other, the Canticles singeth, yea all the holy stories
shew the same from the first to the last, Prov. 8.31.2 John. 9. Ibid. N. 5. [Great disputations, contentions, &c.] Here is the faith and patience of the saints, here are they that keep the commandements of God and the faith of JESUS, Apoc. 13. and 12. and 14. When the Lord God spake that of Gen 3.15. fire was cast into the Earth, and a sword was sent, ever since there hath been divisions, factions, and con∣tentions, Three against two, and two against three. Hitherto pertaine all the warrs, plottings, devises; deceits, slanderings, cavillations, moc∣kings, scones, scoffings geerings, thrasonicall boastings, murders, massacres, treasons, &c. of them, of that wicked one. It is not liberties and states that the Seed of he Serpent so much shoots at, but blood, All that will live goldly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution, and yet in all tryalls whatsoever, faith is victorious. Christ sometimes builds his Jerusalem, Temple, street, and wall in troublous times; Note, where∣as sufferings might be just punishments for sin, the Lord God in his un∣speakable goodnesse, and in honour to the Saints, maketh them to be for testimony to his truth. [And his Angells by Satan] Many cases of conscience arise out of this, if Christ bruise Satans power, how is it that we suffer so many tri∣alls; hence many doubtings, feares, teares, distractions, unrulinesse of passions? Psal. 73.1.1 Sam. 27.1. All is answered, Rom. 8.17, 18. Dan. 11.35. Mat. 10.1 Pet. 1.1 John 15. and 16. and God over-ruleth all for the good of his children, Apoc. 1.18. Psal. 33.10. and 76.10. and 94.19. and 119.75.2 Cor, 1. Phil. 4 5.6.7. Heb. 12. Be humble, and live the life of faith with temperate affections, and in the sober use of all good means, and all wil be well. 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31, 32. The spirituall armour belongs hither, Eph. 6 Afflictions are compared to darknesse, to waves of the sea, &c. God can still them, Psal. 89. and 93. wee looke not to the decree of God concerning sufferings, Gen. 3.15. that it must be so, wee propound selfe ends in profession of the Gospell. Verily we do not consider why we were borne, and for what cause we came into the world, if we did, all reasonings of our hearts would be silenced, then let us meditate that good confession that the Lord Jesus witnessed before Pilate, Iohn 18.37. In Q. 6. N. 6. [Brotherly love, holding one another dear] This is, and was the message that was taught from the beginning, 1 Iohn 3.11. Kains and Habells story is there remembred. This 6 point is the summ of. the second Table, and handled by exposition and example continually, See the later part of the Epistles to the Churches, to Rome, Corinth, Ga∣latia, Ephesians, Colessians, Heb 10.24.25. Act. 4.32. Psal. 133. Ioh 15. compare 1 Iohn 3.23. and 4. ult. 2 Iohn. 5.6.2 Tim. 1.13. In Q. 6. N. 6. [And to have no fellowship] This enmity and warr of Michael and his Angells against the Dragon and his Angells, cannot, and therefore must not be reconciled, it is a cursed worke to endeavour it, And indeed either side holds one another Anathema. God hath put the enmity betweene the seeds, and who shall joyne that, which God, by
principles of unreconcilable distance, hath perpetually divorced and se∣parated, it was never yet reconciled, though Satan and his prophets and the false brethren in their owne ungracious projects have laboured, Gen. 6.2.3.4. &c. Numb. 31.16. Apoc. 2. Iud 2. and 3.1 King 11.1. and in Nehemiahs and Ezras dayes, God hath forbidden it, and plagued the transgression in the old and new Testament, 2 Cor. 6, and 7.1. Apoc 3.14. See Ezraes sadnesse, chap. 9.14. the affinity of Loegria with Gallia hath brought heavy wrath. In Q 6. N. 7. [Praises and thanksgivings] He is thy Praise, and he  is thy God that hath done for thee thse great and terrible things which thine eyes have seen Deut. 10, For the duty of praise, Psal. 95. and 96. and 100. and 103 and 108, and for all kinds of blessings, spirituall and corporeall, and the assured hope of eternall, let us delight in this duty of praise and thanksgiving. In Q. 6. N. 7. [Of each dayes creation] All the Hosts of the Heavens and  Earth worship him, if he give but a watch-word to any of his creatures, to any of his hosts, they rebell not against his word, his word runs very swiftly in them, Ps. 136. and 91. &c see this in all the stories of the word and especially when the saints offer up strong cryes to Jehovah of Hosts. a terrour to the seed of the serpent who engage all the armies of Heaven and Earth and seas against them, 1 Sam. 7. See much of Ps. 18.6, 7, 8, &c. In Q. 6. N. 7. [For deliverance] Psal. 136.23.24. Apoc. 15. and 19. All the plagues of Pharoah shew this, His plagues were from Iehovah Ehim from each dayes creation in Ge. 1. The thankfull remembrance of Gods mercy to our blessed England, is worthy of happy memory, Eph. 3.20.21. In 7. Quest. and Answ. [Christ who is Alpha and Omega, the first and  the last, is the first and the last teacher of his own religion and worship] Man not precisely cleaving to divine revelation, is an idolatrous, super∣stitious, and selfe-willed foole, although hee will make great shew of wisdome and humility. In Q 7. [I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus  Christ and him crucified] This holy Doctrine is breathed constantly in all the holy scriptures from the beginning. Sacrifice was a seal of justifi∣cation (or freedome from guilt of sin and punishment) that is by faith. Sacrifice was still taught with the Doctrine. God made a covenant with man fallen by sacrifice, and when they sacrificed they prayed, Gen. 12.8 1 Sam. 7.9, Yea Habel Gen. 4. Eb 11. consider Ps. 20. all of it. and Gen. 15. God promised, Abraham beleeved, and to strenghen his faith, sacrifice was added, and it is say, God made a covenant with Abraham the same day. From the time of mans fall, beasts were killed for sacrifice, and it kindled first with fire from Heaven. The tame, quiet, and mild kinde as Ox, Sheep, and Goat, and birds not devouring, as Turtle and Pigeon and other little birds, no beasts of prey nor birds of prey, but such as feed upon seed are fit for sacrifice. These shewed that the second Adam by his combating with Satan through his constant patience and ho∣ly
obedience unto death, should procure our justification or freedome from Satans power. Also such manner of sacrifices taught us mortificati∣on following Christ, and profession of a quiet and harmlesse life. For no Tyrants can sacrifice to God, but just quiet and patient folke, 1 Tim. 2.8. And the keeping of the fire once kindled, taught them not to quench the spirit. That speech of Apoc. 13. must here be minded, Christ was the Lambe slaine from the foundacion of the world: slaine in the decree of the blessed Trinity, and in the Church by types of the Lords owne ap∣pointment. In Q 7. [The presence of God] Holy convocations, together with Gods Ordinances, was so called in after times, called also the Courts of God, there is Gods residence, there he keeps Court, and glorious is it to consider, Exod. 20 24. and chap. 29.43.44.2 Cor. 6. For it is sayd, There will I meet with thee. There we sit at his fet, as his disciples, to heare his words; at the posts of wisdome wee must attend Prov. 9. There is the beauty of holinesse, his own commanded worships: There is the provision of the heavenly housholder, there the blessed shepheard feeds the flock of his fold. Oh see the comforts that an holy soule doth there finde, Psal. 23. and 36. and 40. and 42. and 65. and 84. and 95. and 100. and 132. &c. The Saints as Habell have blessed com∣munion with God their exceeding joy, there the Saints, the Israel of God rejoyce in his Makers, the children of Sion rejoyce in their King, Je∣hovah their God is with them, the joyful shout of a King is among them, There the holy voluntaries, the army of Heaven, assemble and compass their commander, and blessed and holy is the communion that the Saints have there one with another, and especially it shineth when there is none unclean and profane of their company. Infinite are the uses of applicati∣on, how that we in all things must remember, That holinesse becomes his house, and presence for ever, What preparations, longings, and atten∣tion to meet such a King, such a Father, such a Bridegroome, &c. in∣such holy Ordinances, and before men to shew forth the virtues of him that hath called them, that as their King is holy so they to be holy in all manner of conversation. Solemn assemblies without mixture of mens in ventions is a deare blessing, it is an Eden, the very Garden of God, E∣zek. 28. Cant. 4 3. In 8. Quest and Answ. [Habel] Now faith is the expectation of that which is hoped, and the tryer our of things which are not seen, for by it the Elders were well reported of. By faith Habel offered unto God, a more excellent sacrifice then Kaine, by which he obtained witnesse that he was righteous (i. e. jstified, that is freed from sins, guilt and desert) God te∣stifying of his offerings; and by it he being dead yet speaketh, Eb. 11.4. So Habels faith did speak to the revolting Hebrewes, how and from whom they must expect justification and salvation. In 9. Quest. and Answ. [Began the war] Where, as it is sayd, the seed
of the serpent shall bruise, it sheweth they should be of great power, out∣ward glory and temporall felicity, as from Kaine through all the holy stories, Psal. 44. and 73. and 79. Job 12 and 22. Apoc. 13. &c. &c. In Q 9. [The holy seed] Habel for love to Christ, was the first that was  accounted as a sheep for the slaughter, that was killed for the word of God and faith & testimony of Jesus Christ Hence the Proverb begins to take place, The just is an abomination to the wicked, Observe hence that the wicked are one corporation from Kain to the end of the world, and all the godly from Habel to the end of the of the world are another corporation in Christ. And therfore what persecution Kain did to Habel, wicked men are now guilty of, Psal. 66.6. Hos 12.4. Mat. 23.35. for they would have done the same to our Lord, to the Prophets, as Kain did to Habel, if they had then lived. And ungodly men have, do, and will fulfill the measures of their forefathers impieties, in persecutions, massacres, trea∣cheries, gunpowder-plot, cruell mockings, &c. ungodly men cannot trample on God; but they reach as high as they can against his image, both in his Ordinances, and his saints, and his graces in them, this is the highest step they can go; as Achab, Jerom, Joash, & Jehoiakim, fretted against God, and they would be revenged by imprisoning and killing his Prophets. Christ & his Doctrine have been called & esteemed, nathema, even from the beginning of all that wil not receive his Doctrine in the love of it: so it was accounted of Kain, when Christ would not accept his bodily exer∣cise, so he saith, Visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, Exd. chapt. 20. So they despised his Statutes, and did abhor his judgements, Levit. 26 15. In 10. Quest. and Answ. [A great Apostasie] All flesh had corrupted his way both in religion and conversation, Gen. 6. Job 21. and 22. Mat. 24. Iudas Thad 14.15. So Iudah were corrupters, Esai. 1. Ier. 6. They were but flesh, they cared not for regeneration (nor the Doctrine of it) to serve the Law of God in their minds, for the imagination of their heart was only evill continually, They mocked the religion of the Second Adam, Ion 21. and 22. they desired not to know the waies of Christ. In Q. 10. [Ungodly marriages] The Sons of God the visible Church  regarded not Gods distinction of the holy seed, so after times found them to be snares and traps, treachery, profanesse, and abomination to the Gospel, Common-Weale, and Family. In Q. 10. [Glorious house] Glorious for Cities, Wealth, Musick,  Pleasures, Feasting, Strength, Arts, and vaine deceitfull beauty; the flourishing estate of the wicked doth commonly prevaile for apostacy with the open Church or multitude. In Q. 10. [A confluence] When people have not a sincere care to  know, but set light by the faith of the Son of God, the mystery of godli∣nesse, then all ungodlinesse and unrighteousnesse will be seene in mens conversations, This is evident through all ages of the holy story, and in all Common-Weales, Families, and persons at this day, which either
retaine not, or cast off the mystery of Faith in a pure conscience, no religion teacheth nor worketh in the heart and carriage such strictness of a peaceable and holy life, as the paterne of wholesome words, faith and love which is in Christ Jesus, Deut. 4.5, 6, 7, 8. And verily there can be neither holinesse nor righteousnesse in truth, but in them that are renewed in knowledge, after the image of him that created them, that is of the man Christ Jesus, the second Adam, the Lord from heaven, 1 Cor. 15.47. Esa. 11.1. to 9. In Quest. 10. [Remember] After our first Parents were turned to dust, the rest of the holy Fathers dyed not long one after the other (except Henoch) yet they had three witnesses of Christ to the floud, that conte∣sted against their apostasie, Methuselah, Lamch, and Noah; But Henoch had before spoken of, terror to the wicked, and godly Lamech of comfort to the faithfull. In 11. Quest and Answ. [Through faith] Now faith is the expectati∣on of that which is hoped, and a tryer out of things which are not seene, for by it the Elders are well reported of, by Faith Noah being warned of God of things not seen, as yet moved with feare, prepared the Arke to the saving of his house, by which he condemned the world, and was made heir of the justification that is by faith, Eb. 11. A beleever will be care∣full of the salvation of his houshold. In Q. 11. [Good report] Faith in the Son of God is most glorious, faith evidencing things not seen, made all the Elders honourable in a good report, in life and death, and after death, whose faith we are ex∣horted to follow; a godly man should so walke, as all hee doth should evidence to the soule things not seen, All Ecclesiastes tendeth to confirm this in us, as godly Lamech testified. In Q 11. [Sons] The floud in the faithfull doth shew the benefit of adoption and covenant, the faith of God is not without its effect, though many did all away, and the Ordinances were unsavoury to them, 2 Cor. 2.16. Our Natures so universally depraved, that whilst we are in the flesh unconverted we cannot please God, without saith it is impossible we should please God, or that God should please us, Jus divinum 31. In Q 11. [City and country] They beleeving on the Son of God had everlasting life, and came not into condemnation, but passed from death to life: Minde it, a present possession, and immediate passage, no judg∣ment intervenning, nor torment, All the faithfull till the fulness of time had perfect joy in an immortall state of life and glory with God in the Kingdome of Heaven, Matt. 8.11. and therefore are termed, Them in Heaven, Eph. 1.10. and the family of Heaven, Chap. 3.15. Away then with the dotages of Lymbo and purgatorie, and all other cursed opinions of the heathens, and heathnish Kingdome, Abyssigena, Apoc. 9. Psal. 17. and 22. 4, 5. Psal. 36.8.9. Dan. 7.18. Psal. 49.15. and 73.24. Esa. 3.10. Pro. 14.32. Job. 5.24.
In Q. 11. [Wherefore they had preservation] The fleed was a sacra∣ment  to the faithfull of Salvation to which answereth Baptisme, 1 Pet. 3. Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it, they should deliver but their own soules, by their righteousnesse faith the Lord God, Ezek. 14.14. confer this to Gen. 6. many observations may be collected see the effectuall saith of Noah, which he shewed by his workes, belee∣ving he seared, made the Arke, and was carefull to save his houshold, he prayed for the wicked mocking world, he stood in the gap to turne a∣way wrath, so Jb prayed for his freinds, and God heard him, so Daniel Chap. 2.18.23. and was heard, so Christ had heard Noah, but would no more after the decree came forth for one hundred and twenty yeares, so Jeremiah prayed, but at last would not be heard; hee was forbidden to pray. Things come to an extremity, when Gods forbids his remem∣brancers, if the whole state will not humble themselves, yet let Noah Daniel, and Job do it, they shall have comfort, they shall be sealed to be kept safe, When Unbeleevers, despisers, mockers, feasters, drinkers, and all abominable shall be shut out of the Arke, and the heavenly Ierusalem to be in the floud and lake of fire. Ezekiel and our Lord citing Noahs sto∣ry, gives to consider of the like generall Apostasie of the Jewes. And that the Apostasie of the old world was as generall as the Jewes both in Ezeki∣els dayes and our Lords. In 12. Quest. and Answ. [Corrupters of the faith] This phrase is  e∣legantly expressed in Apoc. 11.8. The Papacy was an apostate policy, and did depart from and corrupt the saith, and so the whole earth was cor∣rupt. Therefore God hath and will corrupt that policy, as God did cor∣rupt the corrupters. G. 6. The former be stamps of the later. Hench prophesied of the destruction of the Apostates of the old world, saying, Behold the Lord cometh with thousands of his holy ones to give Iudgement upon all men, and to rebuke all the ungodly among them, of all their wicked deeds which they have ungodly committed; and of all their cruell speakings which wicked sinners have spoken against him, Iudas Thaddaeus v. 14.15. St. Peter shews they were mockers, 2 Pet. 3. and Job 21. and 22. sheweth, how they despised the Gospell. Thaddaeus and Peter, by allusion, shew the end of all false Teachers, and their deceived, that follow their pernici∣ous wayes: So when the state of Iudah became mockers, judgement was at hand, 2 Chron. 36. read Matth. 24. Luke 17. for the sins of the old world, the fooles make a mock of sin, Prov. 14.9. Be not mockers least your bonds encrease. Scoffers shall eat the fruit of their owne wayes, Esa. 3. Prov. 3. Scoffers made a wonder of the Prophets, and perished, 2 Pet. 3.4. and so in after times. Habbak. 1.5. Act. 13.41. 1 Pet 4.4.4. Esa. 8.18. In Q. 11. [Excommunicate] He that hath the Censures of the church,  deservedly executed on him, is in dreadfull condition, little better then a fugitive or a vagabond: but it was the great Anathema maranatha that was given Kain and his posterity, as Henoch told them, He commeth, Kain
did not love the Lord Jesus Christ and his holy doctrine, Kain hated Ha∣bel, because his own works were evill and his brothers good. Such Kains were in after-times, Es. 38.20. and the Pharisees were such, and so now all those are such that follow their doctrines of mens traditions and bodily exerecise, &c. Woe be to them that follow the wayes of Kain, Thad. 11. Woe be to the wicked, it shall be ill with him, &c. Esa 3.11. Job. 11.20. Pro. 14.32. In Q. 12. [The Spirit of Christ] Whereas Moses saith, The spirit of  Iehovah, Gen. 6. Peter citing that story, saith, The spirit of Christ, Gen 6. 1 Pet. 3.18.19. so for Jehovah in Exod. Levit. Numb. Deut. Saint Paul saith, Christ, 1 Cor. 10. VVe must marke diligently such expositions of the scripture, even from Christ himself, Luke 24.45 This made the Apostle to say, The holy scriptures will make us wise to salvation, through the faith which is in Christ Iesus. 2 Tim. 3. CHAP. III. Hath diverse Questions and Answers with Annotations, How Redemption was taught from the Flood, till the Pro∣mise to ABRAHAM: And the Seed of SHEM is explained. QUest. 1. How and to whom was the Councill of God in Christ revealed after the Flood? Answ.The old Testa∣ment writes Shem, the new Testament writes Sem, Luke 3.36. To Shem the Son of Noah. QUest. 2 What is the Scripture?
Answ. Gen. 9.26. Blessed be Jehovah theGod was not ashamed to be called the God of Shem for he had prepared him a Son after the flesh, who after the spirit of holinesse is the son of God, and God blessed for ever, Rom. 1. & 9. God of Sem, and Chanaan, shall be his Servant. God perswade Japheth to dwell in the Tents of Sem, and Chanaan shall be his servant. QUest. 3 What observe you out of this Text? Answ. I. He that was called the seed of the woman, is now called the God of Sem. Christ Jesus our Lord came of Sem according to the flesh, Luc. 3. II. That Jehovah Sems God was the only blessed and true God, none like him, nor any beside him. Therefore the Reli∣gion of the God of Sem was [A] the true religion, and for this cause in Israel, (Sems faithfull posterity) it was graci∣ously exclaimed, that blessed are the people whose God is Je∣hovah, Psal. 33. and Psal. 144. III. That unto this blessing in Sems tents, Sems own fami∣lies, Japhets and Chams were to have regard. IV. It is prophesied, that when the Prerogative of Sems tents was out, the other families of the sons of Noah should be perswaded to imbrace the faith, and so be brought into e∣quall covenant as it is sayd, [B] That the Gentiles should be fellow heirs, and of the same body, and joynt partakers of his promise in Christ by the Gospel, Eph. 3.6. V It is the mighty work of the spirit to make a man know & [c] to perswade the heart by beleeving to obey the mystery of Christ. All the wisdome of the wise and prudent of this world is not sufficient, till God draw, teach, and perswade us to the Kingdome of his son. VI. Parents should in all fervency, pray unto God for their posterity, that they may be wrought upon and perswa∣ded to obey the gospel, and such faithfull prayers shall not be lost.
VII. In Noahs story we may see the example of godly chil∣dren that honour their Parents though they are old,Prov. 10.12.23. & 14.9. & 11.12, 13. & 12.16. & 17.6. & 18.3. & 22.10. & 23.22. with all tendernesse caring for, covering and pittying their infirmi∣ties and weaknesses. Love covers a multitude of sins, therefore Sem and Japheth had a most joyfull blessing pronounced on them, the fruit of which, themselves and their posterity did finde. VIII. That scorners of Gods truth and his servants (though they have infirmities) are cursed, being the seed of the Ser∣pent, and hence also note, wicked men procure much evill to their posterity, both in their example and for Gods judge∣ments. IX. As long as Sems godly houseConsider what God did for Salem and Si∣on, while they knew him, and advanced his name and religion in his Tabernacle, Psal. 76.1, 2, 3, 4. held the faith of Christ sincere, then Chams and Chanaans posterities were servants, but when they walked contrary to Christ, he in fury walked contrary to them. So if wee hold Sems God to be our God and be constant in the faith of Sems Tents, to which we were allured and perswaded by the Apostles and disciples of our Lord Jesus Christ, the God and Son of Sem; God will assu∣redly make that servant of servants, and all that cursed policy of that mysticall Nimrod, to be aThis is a point as evident as the clearest sun at noone, that the subduing of ours and gods enemies, is a benefit tyed to our constancy in true religion. see the thankfull remembrance of D. Carlton. p. 236. servant of servants. * Marke this question, the corruption of mans nature was so great after the apo∣stacy of our first parents that they were un∣der the power of satans darknesse, unrecoverable in respect of man: But presently the Lord God taught them the way of life to bring them back again to him their soveraigne good. Gen. 3.15 and by holy prophets, continued the same doctrine both before and after the Floud, Gen. 26.5. & 18.19. the revelation of the second Adam is mans only comfort, and all that receive him, and beleeve in his name shall live, John. 1.12. Act. 26.18. QUest 4."Who kept the way and charge of Christ-Jehovah in his Commandements, Statutes and Lawes, the religion of Sems Tents after the Floud, Gen. 26.5. Answ. Sem; Arphaxad, Selah, Heber, Peleg, and the rest of the godly Fathers, and their faithfull posterity to the dayes of Terah and Abraham.
QUest. 5. Was there any that contemned and apostated from the God of Shem, and his true religion? Answ. Yea, Cham and Chanaan, and Nimrod the grand∣child of Cham, drew away many of the sons of the open or vi∣sible Church to despise Christ in Shem, sirnamed Melchisedeck, who was ordained over them King and Preist, who governed in Justice and peace, so that there was a great apostacie of Sems own families, Japheths and Chams. QUest. 6. Shew further how this apostacy went on? Answ. The outward glory of the false church was so great, that some of the Fathers of the holy line, as Terah and Abraham, fell to the idolatry of Nimrods Kingdome Jos. 24. But they being called, repented, Gen. 11. QUest. 7. How did Christ break and bruise the seed of the serpent for their enmity and wickednesse that would not bave him to reigne over them? Answ. I. With his unspeakable severe judgements, for even those families for despising the faith, were excommunicated and cut off both Father and child, from being of the houshold of God by the confusionSo Judah for despising the faith, were plagued by a Nation of a strange tongue, Deut. 28 49. so the world by the man of sin, 1 Cor. 14. mind seriously Jer 44 26. of tongues, and so were No-people, and foolish Nations, by being estranged from the life, justice, and peace of God in Christ, that they did not hear nor see the light of his truth for two thousand years, but followed Divells, the Prince of the darkness of this world in endlesse and lawlesse Idolatries; and of all the miseries that befell them, they in speciall lost the Sabbath, which would have kept them in the faith of the creation and redemption. And let this sinke into the hearts of all men, that all men ever were and will be Atheists, or Idolaters that Christ speaks not to in their owne language by his holy law, and to this answer ever seriously minde, 2 Joh v, 9.
II. From these dayes, the wrath of God was revealed from Heaven against them for their ungodlinesse and unrighteous∣nesse by wars and commotions, and suffered them to walke in their own wayes, by giving them up to a regardlesse mind, and to the power of grosse darknesse and wilfull ignorance, and to their hearts lusts and vile affections, &c. &c. QUest. 8. What benefit had the godly in Sems Tents and house, by cleaving to the faith of Gods Elect? Answ. Through faith they obtained good report with God, and confessed that they were pilgrims and strangers in this cursed world, wherefore God was not ashamed of them to be called their God, and accounted that the world was not worthy of them: And as he promised, builded and prepared, so they hoped for an heavenly City and Country. And Sems Tents had this glory, that all the while that those families were cut off, the hidden mystery of godlinesse was carefully kept in his Tents and house, and the Hebrew Tongue also, as all the old Testament doth witnesse. QUest. 9. Then the Prerogative of Sems Tents did not al∣waies continue? Answ. No; When the God of Shem tooke mans nature of the seed of the woman, and gave his life a Ransome, not for the Hebrewes or Jewes only, but for the Heathens also: Then that he might raigne and judge the world in righteousnesse, he turned the curse of tongues to preach to, and perswade all those families to obey the same faith, from which their forefathers had apostated, even to the Religion of Shems Tents. QUest. 10. How and to whom was the Revelation of the my∣stery of Christ continued to be revealed after the blessing to Sem?
Answ. In the promise to Abraham, that Christ should come of him according to the flesh. QUest. 11. How many yeares are from the floud to the pro∣mise made to Abraham? Answ. Foure hundred twenty seven yeares, and so from the promise to our first Parents whom the Serpent murdered, unto the promise to Abram given presently upon the death of Terah, whose faith the Serpent corrupted to flames of I∣dolatry, are years two thousand eighty three. QUest. 12. How many Chapters of Genesis are contained in those 2083. yeares. Answ. The eleven first chapters, and also part of the first chapter of 1 Chronicles, and also Luke part of chap. 3. Note that all the rest of the holy scriptures doth not containe so many yeares for the writing of them. A breife summe of the former Questions and Answers. JEhovah our God, Jehovah is one, the Father, the Son, and the holy spirit be one, coeternall, and co-essentiall. The Son is called the word, by the word the Father made the world, and by the spirit beautified the heavens. And because the word would become flesh the world was made to serve once Adam the first. The Angells that grudged at that fell for ever, and deceived Adam, and made him dead in sin, and brought him to be dayly turning to dust untill hee dyed. And for him the whole frame of the creation was pronounced corrupt; but after divine Revelation, he beleeved that Christ made of a wo∣man, made under the Law, God being in him, to reconcile the world unto himself, should give him free forgiveness for justi∣fication by faith, and renew the inner man in knowledge, ho∣linesse and righteousnesse, and raise up his body, and make a new world by his power, Whereby he can subdue all things to himselfe.
All faithfull travailed in soule to have Christ brought forth to the knowledge of their posterity that all might know that all this world was made obedient to a man at the first; which man fell from God his first day, and then God opened his counsell, that the Son eternall would be made man of a wo∣man, to destroy the works of the Angells that fell, who all are collectively Satan. Satan brought Adam to loose the life of his soule, and his body to death and dust, and all this world to corruption: Christ kindled light in Adams soule, and after 930 years hea∣vinesse for sin took it to his joy, and will raise up his body, and make a new world, that all men who will receive the abun∣dance of Grace of free forgivenesse for justification, may reigne by Christ, and all who will not regard this mercy so clear as the sun, they all, by Adams fall dead in sin, shall be damned for ever with the Devills. This is the travell of the christian minde, speech of this, full of joy, is in all the books of the old and new Testament. Or thus. The summ of the Bible is short, how of Gods eternall coun∣sell the world was made for man, because the son of God by whom he made the world would be a man to give life to them that rested in this wisdome. All this dia∣logue will evi∣dence this, or doth desire so to do. * The faith of Gods elect in the incarnation and resurrecti∣on, how it hath been followed or contemned from the be∣ginning, with plaine and civill carriage in Gods wayes, and satanean in the contrary, and how * the goodnesse and severi∣ty of God hath beene answerable, This containeth * the summe. And the story of four thousand years to Jerusalems fall by Rome, hath no more. And all should gladly hear of this all their life, and see Christs bright face still to this summe. The book of God is open and easie to be understood, Prov. 8.9.
Annotations upon the Questions and An∣swers of CHAPTER 3. Quest. 3. N. 2. [The true Religion] If any should question what Re∣ligion Sem was of, the Answer may be, that he was Preist to Jeho∣vah  the most high God, the maker and possessor of Heaven and Earth; as also that it was the same to which the Sons of Japhet were perswaded by the blessing of tongues, and by the ministry of the Sons of Sem, Gen. 14. Act. 2. Apoc. 14.7. 1 Thess. 1.9, 10. And so Sems blessing did containe the same faith that the blessing did which God gave to Abraham, Gen. 12. Marke well the Doctrine to the seven Churches of Japhets house in all the Apocalyps, and so in all the Epistles of the Apostle of the Gentiles, and in the Epistles of the Apostles of the circumcision. Again, he was of the same Religion and holy faith of his Father Noah, who inherited the righteousnesse that is by faith, and who pronounced this lessing on Sem. Heb. 11. Quest 3. N. 4. [That the Gentiles] The greatest favour that God be∣stoweth on men in this world, is to make them of his family true mem∣bers  of his Church: Ezekiel remembreth this to the Apostate Prince of Tyus, chap. 28.13, 14. The godly Jewes foreseeing the calling of the Gentiles, (by the promises and prophesies of Gen. 9. and 12.) rejoyced in spirit, that Christ should raigne over them, Psal 67. and 97. 1 Rom. 15.12. Zach. 8. and 14.9. And the Gentiles seeing the performance were glad, Act. 13.46. But for two thousand years, Satan the strong man kept a large and great possession by metamorphosed Fables and Idola∣tries. In Quest. 3. N. 5. [And to perswade] Universall and free will to good (in the state of unregeneracy) is vain and vain glorious Doctrin. Noah  was not of this faith, and the calling of the Families to the faith, by the preaching of the Apostles, argueth the falshood of such Tenents. Ob∣serve the speech of Christ to the Apostle concerning his Ambassage, Act. 26.18. not only illumination, but a turning from the power of Satan in the will and affections, is all done by the mighty worke of Christ in his own Ordinances. The fashioning of the spirit is his prerogative, Esa. 11. Eph 1.19 20, 21, & 2.1 2▪3. &c. and by his strengthning and preventing, we stand to our dying day, 1 Pet. 1.5. The spirit convinceth false opinions, and teacheth the true doctrine, Eph. 6.10.11, Rom. 7.8 Ezek, 11.19 and 36.26. Phil. .13. That all iniquity may stop her mouth Thus it is sayd of all that have the Prerogative of Sons, which are born not of blouds, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, Joh. 1.12, 13. The house of Japheth needed much perswasion
and beseeching to imbrace the word of reconciliation. They had excel∣lent naturall parts, as their writings shew which made them despise the gospell, The Grecians sought after wisdome, 1 Cor. 1. Therefore God gave them a son of Sem, an Apostle of exquisite parts and learning, that he demonstrated all their wisdome to be foolishnesse, and cast downe their high imaginations by the invincible weapons of the spirituall war∣fare. N. 8. Q. 3. [That scorners] Let inferiours beware of Satans deceits in causing them to slight, yea in heart, their superiours, though for their sins and infirmities. And let Superiours give no occasion, but be sober, grave, temperate, sound in the faith, in charity, in patience, &c. Tit. 2. But it is not for infirmities that the children of the wicked one hate the godly, but for the image of Christ that shines in them, for they can bear with the same sins in their own, yet the wicked are glad, and in∣sult to see the holy image of Christ stained by any blot of the Saints, and this by Gods just judgment is a stumbling block to the wicked, to harden them in their sinfull courses. N. 8. [Procure much evill] Cham is cursed to his youngest Son Chana∣an, Gen. 9. Exod. 20 5. Also it is observable, how the wrath of Christ hath followed Chams posterity, that the Negroes are slaves in diverse coun∣tries to this day, even servants of servants. Quest. 5. [And Nimrod] King Abaddon may fily be compared to Nim∣rod, both infamous cut-throat hunters, both intruders into other mens possessions, both abhorred Christs Kingdome of Justice and Peace, Gen. 10.9, 11, 12. 2 Thes. 2. My Son fear the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change, for their destruction shall rise sud∣denly Prov. 24. This is also notable, as in Nimrod, so in Korah, in Absolom, in Sheba, Ben-Bichrio in the unlawfull Kingdome of Ephraim, and in the whole policy of the man of Sinne: See in all the transgression and the pu∣nishment and beware what, did it prove madnesse of counsell in them to change Melchisedecks Kingdome for Nimrods Kingdome? so it is to change the true Melchisedeck for King Abaddon, so they abhorred Christ the Lord of glory for the unclean infidells the Caesars, John 19.15. N. 8 [Over them King] One ornament of Kings may here be re∣membred which Sems story doth show, which is the antiquity of a king∣dome, and the fatherly government thereof, that before Tyranny sprang in was, Mr. Bro, Treatise of Melchiz. N. 8. [Justice and Peace] A worthy example for Princes so to rule by just Lawes uncontrolable, then they shall rule men willingly subject, for they have from Christ honour and authority above their Brethren so to governe, But none can well rule, that cannot well obey the sceptor of Christs Kingdom Psal 45. It is hard when he that cannot order his own life, shall be made the Judge of anothers, for the Kingdome of Christ is in righteousnesse and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. The apostate families felt none of this, Princes and subjects that seek not so to order
and to be ordered in their policies, shall finde the power of Christ cros∣sing their purposes, and plaguing their dominions. N 8. [Of Sems owne] The Church is not visibly glorious at all times, of sixty seven families there was but one family that held the faith and the Hebrew tongue, and that was the line of Christ of Sems house, so Israel in Egypt revolted, often in the book of Iudges, and under Jerobo∣ams kingdome, after in Iudah and after the returne from captivity, and under the Papacy, and now after reformation will not Apostacy be a∣gaine, when that the Son of man shall scant finde faith on the earth at his second coming? For as it was in the dayes of Noah, so shall it be at the day of the coming of the Son of man, Mat. 24. &c. Quest. 6. [And Abraham] Abraham once ungodly (yea after his cal∣ling, he much failed) rejoyced in him that justifieth the ungodly, Jos. 24.2 Rom. 4. so after mysticall Nimrod how many good men have been overtaken with their outward glory, yea many strong men of great parts have beene wounded by that whorish Church, Prov. 7. Apoc. 17. Quest. 7. N 1. [Those familes] The families of Noahs sons despising Sem, a King of Justice and Peace, were cut off or two thousand yeares, so the Jewes for despising Sem the great and reverend, the true King of Justice and peace, were cut off to this day, Rom. 11. from Noahs days, all heathens were Lo-ammi, and Loruchamah, no people and unpitied, a foolish nation, barren and a desolate widow to our Lords dayes, Deut. 32. Psal. 113. Esa 54.1, 2, 3. Ephes. 2.1, 2, 3. Psal 119.118. Q. 7. [From the life, Justice] But when light was revealed to the Gentiles, and the glory of Jehovah was risen upon us, It is said, I will make thy government peace, and thine exactions righteousness. Marke the allusion, This was under the King of Salem, and Tzedek, Justice and Peace kisse each other, as it did of old in Sems Tents, Psal. 85. Then peace on earth, and good will towards men. Q. 7. [Nor see the light] Now darknesse covered the earth, and gross darknesse the Nations. Esa, 60. So Pope Nimrod by his mysticall Babylon, caused such darknesse by confusion of Language, and all holy speech. All languages of Europe, and much of Asia, if not all Asia, have been con∣founded by the means of mysticall Nimrod, and his rebellion, A∣por. 9. Q. 7. [For two thousand years] All the time of this ignorance, God hated them like devills, till the time hee would judge the world in righteousnesse, that is, favour the world in mercy, Act. 17. Psal. 97. from this time to the Apostles, the whole world did lye in wickednesse, 1 Job. 5.19. Q 7. N. 11. [In their own wayes] God left them to walke in their own waies of endlesse and lawlesse idolatries, and superstitions, and ill manners, judgement, and practise wholy corrupted, as the holy scrip∣tures and humane stories shew. The Philosophers of the heathens spake much of the earth, &c. and to the height of heaven, but unto Paradise
above the Heavens, no thought of theirs could ever come. They had no Lampe of Grace, not the best learned of them, their sage, as Py∣thagoras, in tongue, confessed God to be one, but they knew not the holy Trinity, and that the eternall son would be manifested in the flesh, to come a man looking through our walls, and to come a Judge of all, nor that he framed the world for man, because he would dwell in our Tabernacle, (Mr. Bro. Apoc. pag. 20.) That regeneration is by faith from him the second Adam, by hearing the doctrine of divine revelation, that he should destroy death, and him that had the power of death, by his own death and resurrection, and give us a Resurrection, and that be should be a mediator between God and man, as Prophet, Preist, and King, Lord of Angells, the head of all principality and power, that a company of people were in him elected, and should be called out of this present world, to whom he should be wisdome, justification, sanctification and redemption, &c. in these things the outward Jew was dull of hearing, Rom. 2. and 3. Phil. 2. Heb. 5.11. much lesse could the wisdome and Philo∣sophy of the heathens once thinke of these things, Col. 1.26. yea alas for pity, how weakly and poorly are these things either taught or known, and experimentally in mind and conscience felt, and answerably in life practised in most of our congregations, of our blessed England. This must be proper to true christians; no marvell the holy spirit doth taunt the wisdome of the worlds wise Masters, and chargeth the saints to take heed of their Philosophy and vain deceit, verily it is not fit for Christi∣ans to be trained up in their pedagogie, 1 Cor. 1. they were haters of God, Rom. 1. Col. 1.21. and haters of his people, Psal. 83. Hest 9.1. Then all that time they were not in the state of universall grace, but in very deed of universall wrath, such a wofull famine of hearing the word of the Lord, holy justice gave them over unto. So when the would did depart from the faith of the true Melchisedeck, it was given over to Turk and Pope, and all force of error, and were far from Justice, Peace, and Truth, the Reverend Doctor Ames in his Medlla, pag. 244 editio quarta, citeth a fit testimony for this. Non pium igitur minus quam prudens suit illud maximi artium magistri P.R. judicium & votum: Hujus Philosophiae doctrinam, si mihi fuerit op∣tandum quod assequi velim, malim ueas ex Evangelio per cruditum aliquem probatisque moribus, Theologum, quam ex Aristotele per Philosophum tradi. Puer impietates mullas ex Aristotele discet, quas verendum ne nimis sero de∣discat. Beatitudinis finem in homine terminari, virtutes omcs hominis fa∣cultate penitus contineri: Eas ex hominis & natura, & arie, & industria comparari. Deum, ad haec opera quamvis magna & divina, tamen vel adjuto∣rem, vel artificem nusquam adhiberi: divinam providentiam ex hoc numa∣nae vitae theatro removeri, de justitia divina verbum nullum fieri, Beatitudi∣nem huminis in hac caduca vita constitui, &c. Quest 8. [To be called their God] This is a word of Covenant as God spake to Abraham, Gen. 17. and as it was noted above, God is
called the God of Shem. Andoh! most glorious priviledge of the Saints (through the mediator) in all ages. Marke these Texts from the first to the last, Gen 6.18. and 17.7.8. Exod, 19.5. and 20.2. and 29.45.46. Jer. 31.33. 2 Cor. 6.18. Gal. 3.29. Tit. 2.14. 2. Pet. 2.9. Apoc. 21.3. Hence it is that the Saints say, from Gods interest in them, and theirs in him, Our God, my God, my portion, my Rock, my Shepherd, &c. and Jesurun is Gods portion, Jer. 10. In this they boast, praise, and sing, My welbeloved is mine; and I am his, Cant. 2.16. Psal. 44. and 48.2 Coron. 25 6.7. Psal. 42. and 43. Deut. 10.21. The observations of the properties, and workes of God should here be minded, which are in chapter first spoken of. Q. 8 [Heavenly City] The Saints of old knew as well as them of the New Testament, That if the earthly house of our Tabernacle were dissolved, they should have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternall in the heavens. They had all the same spirit of faith, compare the  Cor. 4. with chap. 5.1. to 12. and Eccles. 12.14. &c. upon the dissolution of the one, the holy soule possesseth the other; here is no interposition of time, nor of any tormented estate. Q. 8. [The mystery of godlinesse] The mystery of Godlinesse was hid∣den in types and figures from the ages and generations of the Apostate families, Eph. 3. Col. 1.26. But in Judah was God known, his name was great in Israel, in Salem was his Tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Sion, Psal. 76.1.2. He shewed his word unto Jacob, and his statutes and Judgments unto Israel, he dealt not so with any nation, and as for his judgements they had not knowne them, therefore they sayd, Praise ye J A H. Psalm. 147 So that Israel did enjoy the true knowledge of God in Christ, and were the houshold of God, having the covenants of promise, and the seals of the fame, and lived and dyed in the con∣stant hope of immortality in glory; read diligently Eph. 2.11, 12, Act. 26.6.7. And this we must understand concerning the true hidden mystery, hid in types and figures among godly families, untill Moses and then to the Nations while Israels fleece only was moystened by the dewes that fell on mount Sion, but after the ending of the seventy sevens, Dan. 9. then the Gospel was openly revealed and made known to all Nations of Noahs families, and yet in those dayes, yea now in these dayes, it is an hid mystery, too too manifest experience doth witnesse in kingdoms, townes, and families, 1 Cor. 2. Q 9. [The heathens also] All those noble prophesies in Moses Pro∣phets, and Psalmes of the calling of the Gentiles, do comment on the blessing to Sem, and the Promise to Abraham. The holy Prophets rejoy∣ced in spirit, foreseeing the glorious calling of the families to the Faith, we should have the like affection to the calling of the Jewes, Rom. 11. Q. 9. [By sending his disciples] The Apostles were sent unto them to open their eyes to turne them from darknesse to light, from the power of Satan to God, that they might receive forgivenesse of sinnes and inheri∣tance among all them (of the old Testament) which are sanctified by faith in Christ, Act. 26. Eph. 1.11, 12, 13, 14.
Annotations, How Redemption was taught from the Promise to ABRAHAM, till the Law of the Passeover, or the coming forth of EGYPT. QUest. 1. What is the scripture in which the Revelation of the mystery of Christ was made known to Abraham? Answ. Gen. 12, 2. And I will make of thee a great Nation, and I will blesse thee, and make thy name great, and thou shalt be a blessing. And I will blesse them that blesse thee, and curse him that curseth thee. And in thee shall all the families of the Earth be blessed. QUest. In what doth this scripture teach, instruct, convince, correct, and comfort. Answ. I Of the cursed and most wretched estate of the apo∣state families; and unrecoverable in respect of any ability in themselves, God hiding from them by Babells Languages, for many generations, the glorious mystery of the Gospell of his Son, that they became Loammi and Lo-ruchamah, that is, not Gods people, nor pitied: and ever enemies to God and his people, walking in all courses of unperswadeable disobedi∣ence. II. It is prophesied by this great and precious promise, that the families shall be delivered from the misery of that a∣postasie, by the Son of God, who was sent of the Father into the world in fullness of time to be a blessing, to make knowne the riches of the glorious mystery of his will, to reconcile them to be Gods people, and to be under mercy through his gracious Redemption, and by the same to reconcile the en∣mity of Jew and Gentile. III. Here it is taught who Christ is, touching his person,
that he being God, is also man of the Seed of Abraham,Gal. 4.4. Eb. 2.16. Saint Matthew chap. 1. doth shew the history, and the promise full∣filled. As also how Christ Immanuel doth blesse us, saving his people from the guilt, punishment, and dominion of their sins, by his precious death and sacrisice. By which hee brake the Serpents head-Plot, Gen. 3.15. in his constant patience and obedience, at the very same time when the Serpent and his seed put him to an accursed death on the tree, as a notorious sinner. By this performance,Gal. 4 5. Rom. 3 25. this manner of the blessing of A∣braham came on the Gentiles, Gal. 3.13.14. IV. By faith in the promise we are reconciled, justified; and adopted, and so are no more servants in bondage, but heirs in Christ. V. Whereas it is sayd, in thy seed, all families of the Earth are blessed, it sheweth there is the same and no other way or means of eternall life and salvation to Jew and Gentile, but only and alone the Lord Jesus Christ, nor any comfort in this world, but as given us by promise and covenant through faith in Christ in the use of the meanes lawfully used, Where∣fore all other Religions, Additaments & inventious of men are abominable, and all communion with such is no better then the communion with devills. VI. We have not forgiveness of sins, life, and the inheri∣tance of heaven,Act. 3.26. Tit. 3.5 6. Gal. 3.16.17, Abraham had not-wherein to rejoyce as of himselfe, he did not prevent God, but God prevented him. by workes of our doing, or will in our choosing, but all is of free grace and free promise. VII. The Lord God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, doth give,"The Lords Prayer, and all the prayers of the Saints be∣long hither, Gal. 4.6. Rom. 8.15. so note here, that Gods promises are the foundation of prayer, David, 2 Sam. 7.27. & Dan. 9.2. &c. as the effects of his promise, his spirit to cry "Ab∣ba Father, and to seal assurance of reconciliation, justificati∣on and adoption, and to be an earnest of that inheritance of the Saints in light, and to worke mortification, and to begin the life of glory in sanctification. This the Lord God doth worke in those only that looke for salvation in Christ as sons by the promise, not as servants for workes or images.
VIII. In that the eternall God, the Gentiles shall be blessed in Christ, it is a speech manifestingOf eternity all Gods works were known to him, as the A∣postle James saith, Act 15. This is hand∣led, Rom 8.9, 10, 11. chapters the purpose of Gods election and predestination in Christ, as the spirituall blessings are handled by the Apostle to proceed out of those eternall fountaines, Eph. 1. under the word blessed, are comprehen∣ded the unsearcheable riches of Christ the second Adam, who of God is made unto us the efficient cause of wisdome,Or freedom, or forgiveness. justi∣fication, sanctification, and redemption. IX. The precious promises in Christ understood and belee∣ved, transforme or metamorphose a man, and make him par∣take of the divine nature, so that they which beleeve in God, must, as from a new principle, in uprightnesse of heart walke in the spirit, be alwaies zealous to shew forth good workes, and with all due care flee the corruptions that are in the world through lusts. This is, to keepe the mystery of faith in a pure conscience, and this wee are to do by restipulation of Cove∣nant. X. As Abraham was blessed, that is justified, in beleeving the Gospel preached unto him, so shall those that walke in the steps of the faith of our father Abraham, who is the Father of us all, that is, of all such that so beleeve as he did. XI. The Doctrine of justification by faith in Christ is very ancient, being taught Abraham afore Romes foundation was layd, or Rhomulus or Rhemus, or a Pharisee or Papist were borne. XII. God will blesse them that blesse this Doctrine of Christ to Abraham, And he will curse them that curse and persecute thisLet the Ana∣baptist consider whether all godly parents ought not to curse their te∣nets, in deny∣ing infants to be in the cove∣nant, & in de∣nying the seale to them. doctrine of Christ, and his people, for it shall be sayd to all such, Cast out the Servant and her Son, &c. Gal. 4. XIII. This also may be observed, as the families of the sons of Noah, were cursed and out off from the Gospell and peace of God by the confusion of tongues at Babylon; Christ would turne this to a blessing in tongues understood at Salem, cre∣ating the fruit of the lips to be peace, to the far off and to the the near, Jew and Gentile, so the Gospell the word of faith in our own Languages is a most deare blessing. Accursed be
the contrary endeavours of the mysticall Babylon, against the Kingdome of Justice and Peace in the Jerusalem, that is from heaven. XIV. Us Gentiles of the posterity of Japheth,Zacharias and the blessed Virgin remem∣ber the promise with thanksgi∣ving, Luc. 1. have great cause to praise and blesse God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath performed this promise, and hath blessed us with all spirituall blessings in heavenly things in Christ. Mo∣ses and the Prophets call upon us for this duty, and so our godly predecessors did, Psalm. 18.67. Rom. 15. Act. 13. A∣Apoc. 7 XV. As God doth curse him that obeyeth not this doctrine of Faith, so they that teach a diverse or contrary way of ju∣stification, then by faith in Christ, are to be abhorred and accursed of all the Saints. Moses, the Psalmes, Esayas and all the Prophets open this scripture of the Gospel of Christ to Abraham, in many par∣ticulars, (this is a gemm to them all) not only of the speciall blessings in us and for us, but of the particularThe temes, families, nati∣ons, Gemiles, Heathens, and in the New Testament, Gre∣cians & tribes are very often to be taken in one sence. nations that revolted from Sems blessed God, how they should be called again to Sems God: All Nations shall blesse him, and be blessed in him, Psal. 73. Esa. 11. and 66. Act. 2. QUest. 3. Did God add any Sacraments or Seals to the word of his Covenant and promise? Answ. Besides the sacrifices the eternall God ordained Cir∣cumsion. QUest. 4 What did circumsion teach them? Answ. I. Jehovah made it a seal of his promise, and covenant of blessednesse in Christ, to be a God to Abraham and to his seed. Therefore it was a seal of Gods Reconciliati∣on, Justification, and adoption, and God did thus keepe his covenant with them. Of Gods reconciliation, because God all sufficient doth condescend to enter into covenant with sinfull man.
Of Justification or remission of sins because it is a seale of the justification that is by faith, God did justifie the circumci∣sion by faith, and all the policy of Israel did, or should have professed the same; God gave it for that same end, Rom. 4. Of Adoption, because God selected Abraham and his seed, and preferred them above all Nations to be a chosen ge∣neration, a royall Preist-hood, an holy nation, a purchased and peculiar people. And therefore also God had sayd to Pharaoh, Israel is my first borne, Exod. 4. and 19. II. It is signified and sealed to them, to fathers and their in∣fant children, their reconciliation with God by putting off the sinfull body of the flesh, in which they were conceived; and by consequent the putting on the new man: So mortifi∣cation and sanctification, or regeneration is taught. Moses and the Prophets ever drew them to the spirituall meaning, and to rest in the outward worke. and the faithfull did thus keep their covenant with God. The Saints made excellent u∣ses of this seal of faith for instruction and consolation of their owne soules, as of their posterity, as Moses, Manoah, Jo∣nathan, David, Esaias, &c. Exod. 6.12. Deut. 30.6. Judg. 14.3. 1 Sam. 14.6. and 17.36. Esa. 6. And observe the A∣postle Paul what he saith in Rom. 2.29. Col 2.12. III. It sealed to them both to Fathers and their infant chil∣dren, the blessed Estate of the immortality of the soule, and the resurrection. IV. It was a seale of entrance into the Church and policy of Israel, which is called the kingdome of God, to distinguish from the Apostate families. For all Israel, they and their chil∣dren, were by speciall priviledge federally holy, Exod. 19.5.6. Deut. 7.8. 1 Cor. 7.13, 14 Matth 21. V. It was a seal to the deed of gift of the Land of Chanaan, (the Land of Rest or promise) to Abraham and his naturall seed and proselytes: And of all outward necessary comforts for this life, both of provision and protection. VI. It sealed to Abraham, that he should be a Father, not of the Jewes only, but of many nations, that when that deed of gift, the Prerogative of it was out, the Gentiles should
be called to the faith, fathers and children to be made disci∣ples, and so become Abrahams see, and the kingdome of God. This is so expounded in the Epistle to the Galatians, and in Matth. 21.43. and 28.19. Acts 2. and 3. and 11.17. and 15. VII. Thus we may see what a Catechism out of the pro∣mise, and out of the seal of Circumcision the holy Prophet Abraham might teach his houshold, as he did, and as God testifies he would. Now out of all this, let this be noted, that the promise concerning Christ to Abraham, was not onely of temporal blessings to him and his posterity, but also of spiri∣tuall: and that chiefly. And Circumcision sealed the same, and no other doctrine but what the promise taught.Let Rom. 15.8. be throughly studied of us. They are vain talkers and deceivers of mindes that teach other∣wise. QUest. 5. Furthermore, To Whom did God instruct his Church in expectation of Christ? Answ. To Judah the fourth son of Jacob in these words. Gen. 49.10. A Tribe shall notOr, fail to Iudah. Shebet a tribe is in Moses, 32 times, as the learned observe; and never a Scepter in him but a Tribe: and so Tremellius. depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, till his Son shall come: and toIehovah the hope of their Fathers: that is, Christ the hope of Israel, Jer. 50 7. Acts 28.20. observe how Iacob left the faith to his posterity, on his death bed. Let it be for example. him shall the gathering of the peoples be. QUest. 6. What do ye observe out of this text? Answ. 1. This prophecie and promise doth look back to the promise to Abraham concerning the great mystery of godliness, God manifested in the flesh, for it is foretold that Christ should also come of Judah. II. When other tribes should despise for the faith of Christ & be scattered, but Judah should hold the faith throw a succession
of holy Scribes and Teachers of the Law (and them chiefly of the holy line of Christ) and his Tribe endure till Christ his Son came. III. Whereas it is sayd, the peoples shall be gathered to Christ, the meaning is, they shall be called to the faith, and in his Name and Law shall the Nations trust. This prophesie is expounded by Esaias Chap 11 10 and 66 19 20 John 11 51 53 &c. QUest. 7. Who had the knowledge of the Son of God in this state of time, revealed and testified by the spirit, in these exceeding great and precious promises, and the seale of Circum∣cision? Answ. Abraham, Jsaac, Jacob, and the twelve Patriarks and many of their Godly posterity in Egypt: also Lot, Job, and others in divers places. QUest. 8. Who were they that disregardedHeb. 11.26. reproached, and despised the doctrine of life in Christ exhibited in these pro∣mises (and the seal of Circumcision) to Abraham and Judah? Answ. Nachor the brother of Abraham, and many of his posterity: many of the posterity of Abraham by Keturah: the posterity of Lot, Ismael,As Esau was profane and despised the covenant so his posteri∣ty: they profanely left the seal of circumcision, which was conferred on their Father, Zerem. 9.26. Esau, and their posterities: the Canaanites, the Egyptians, yea all the families that fell away in the revolt of Nimrod. QUest. 9. Was there not an Apostasie in the Church from the faith of Christ taught to Abraham, Isaac, Iacob, and Iudah? Answ. A great apostasie: for Israel in Egypt forsook the faith of their Godly ancestours, and followed the idols, and
religion of Egypt. Read Ezekiel 20. and 23. QUest. 10. What was the hope and comfort of the faithfull, for these times, in cleaving to the faith? Answ. Through faith they obtained good report with God: and confessed that they were pilgrims and strangers on the earth,Heb. 11.13. Gen. 27. all of it. and strove for the blessing of the heavenly inheri∣tance. Wherefore God was not ashamed of them to be called their God, and filled their hearts with joy, that by faith saw the dayes of Christ, and provided for them the eternal recom∣pense of reward in the heavenly City,Luk. 20.35, 36, 37. and Countrey and Kingdom: for he accounted them his children, and worthy to enjoy that world and the better resurrection. QUest. 11. How was the wrath of God revealed from heaven against those that did mock, curse and despise the faith of Christ and his people? Answ. VVars and broyls amongGen. 14. four Kings against five. Kings of divers coun∣treys: Ismael the son of the bondwomen cast out, Esau gi∣ven up to hardness of heart. Sodom and Gomorrha burned with fire and brimston. II. All apostate families were further separated from Christ and the Church of God from the dayes of Abraham by uncircumcision,Gen. 34 14. Ephes. 2.11. and in great reproach called uncircumci∣sion of them which are called Circumcision. QUest 12. How did Christ pour out his fury, and his anger for the apostasie of Israel in Egypt? Answ. God gave up Israels babes to the sword of Pharaoh and to be drowned in the river Nilus, Ezek. 20.7, 8. Exod. 1.
Annotations upon the Questions and Answers of the fourth CHAPTER. IN the first Quest and Answ, note, The Promise of Christ to Abraham, is often renewed to him, also it was given to Isaac and Jacob This is the foundation of that speech, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of I∣saac, and the God of Jacob, this is my memoriall to all generations, that is, to all of their faith whether Jew or Gentile, Exod. 3.15. Gal. 3.6. 2. Also observe on Gen. 12.3. it is said And in thee shal all, But in Gen. 22. 18, it is sayd, And in thy seed shall all, so the new Testament useth the same variety of Phrases, for in Act. 3.25. it is sayd, In thy seed shall al. but in Gal. 3.8. In thee shall all, yet Saint Paul in chapter 16. expounds it at large, and saith, To Abraham and his seed were the promises made. This is noted, that we might confer scriptures, that neither Jew nor Gentile, might trust in Abraham or any of the saints, but in that holy seed, the Son of God that took humanity of Abraham. 3. In Gen. 1 2.3. [And I will blesse] The Promises of God in Christ are the foundation of all comfort to the Church, whether in his good∣nesse to it, or severity to the malignant company, that curse and do all ill offices to the church. Why did God do all that is spoken of in Psal. 105. in every verse both to his church, and to the children of the wicked one? The reason is rendred in verse 42 He remembred his holy promise to Abraham his servant, and the effects of that promise did not stand in force for Moses time alone, but for one thousand generations, as verse 8. and that is the intent of penning this Psalme, Mich. chap. 7: re∣membreth his promise, and expoundeth it with terror to the seed of the Serpent, but with joy to the Saints, for the pardon of sin, with∣holding of anger, shewing mercy and compassion, and burying of sinns as in the sea, and all this accompanied with another grace of subduing our iniquities, (all these expound the promise) a godly soul doth as much desire to have sin subdued as pardoned, so justifcation, mortification, and sanctification are taught in the promise. The blessed and beloved Virgin and Z charins do both comment on Micah, Luke 1. and the Psalme 106. must be considered as Psal. 105. 4. Minde further, how this promise is pursued in Levit. 26. and Dan. 9.24. and Act 3. Gal 3 and 4. for the faith of this promise, was taught both to the Jewes; Acts 3. and to the Gentiles, Gal. 3. and indeed all the Bible dilateth on that of Gen. 3.15 & Gen. 12.3, and this of Gen. | 12.3 is but an exposition of Gen. 3.15 5. yet further observe, that as Jehovah the eternall Lord, doth remem∣ber the promise to a thousand generations, Ps. 105.8. so likewise all the Israel of God that are of Abrahams faith, are reciprocally to remember it, as 1 Chron. 16.15.16. marke it well, As God saith, The promise is his memoriall, so it should be our memoriall, and especially we should re∣member
it in the dayes of affliction, for then wee most need so to do, consider Exod. 3.15. for then Israel was in great affliction, and Moses was sent to tell them that God was mindfull of his memoriall. Consider Nehemiah 9. 6. And lastly, note the promise is called a Covenant, Act 3. and Gal. 3. and so the promise, Gen. 3.15. must be considered as a covenant that God made with our first parents; as Christ is the hope of the promise made unto our Fathers, Acts 26.6, 22, 3. Jer. 50.7. so he is the hope of the covenant, Esa. 42.6. Quest. 2. N. 1. This first point is handled by a Son of Abraham, Rem. 1. & 2. & 3. The book of Job teacheth of the corruption of nature, (ta∣ken from Parents) and of redemption, so it sheweth how Abraham taught his posterity, & how all the faithfull of old, taught their children by tradition, and all true and sound tradition before the scriptures agre∣eth with the scriptures, & so must all tradition since the scriptures, Ps. 78.1, 2, 3, 4. &c. Jobs book was afore the Law of faith was written by Moses. Ibid. N. 11. This second is handled, Rom. 3. & 4. & 5. To these two points confer the notes of N. 4. and N. 5. in page 21. All of the first Adam miserable, and no blessduesse but in Christ the second Adam, all the Acts and the Epistles &c. abundantly open this. Ibid. N. 5. [In thy seed all families] In Christ all are gathered, Eph. 1.10. The glory of this blessednesse (to procure the salvation of the e∣lect) God will not give to any other mediatour, Esay. 42.1. &c. This blessing came on Abraham in his uncircumcision, Rom. 4. and so observe these blessings are handled to the uncircumcised, the familes of Japheth, the Romans, Corinthians, Ephesians &c. Therefore Turkes, Jewes and all misbeleevers are excluded from all hope of comfort. Ibid of Question 2. N. 5. [Only and alone the Lord Jesus Christ] all scripture speaketh exclusively concerning any other, 1 Joh, 5.11.12, 13. so the Apostle Peter is plaine, This is the stone cast aside of you builders, which is become the head of the corner. Neither is there salvation in any other; for among men there is given none other name under heaven, whereby we must be saved, Act. 4. God would in due time shew this his justificati∣on of a sinner, and that he might be just in all his promises, and a ju∣stifier of him who is of the faith of JESUS. Rom. 3. Ibid. of N. V. [Given us by promise] We cannot, we may not pray or expect any blessing temporall, spirituall, or eternall, but by covenant and promise in Christ, Levit. 26. Deut 28.7, 12, still looke to the promise. The promise is sure by faith to all the seed, it can be sure no way else; faith doth realize and evidence things promised to our hearts, God is keeper of covenant, and in that faith resteth. In God things promised have their consistency, and therefore they shall have a being on us in due time, Deut. 8.18. And we must take blessings as blessings of the co∣venant, and redemption in Christ (all mercies to the Saints are the price of bloud) not as common favours with the world, that have the
sun and rain, &c. else we shall not be of those generations that praise God through Christ, Ephes. 3.21. Hos. 2.19, 20, &c. else our mouthes will not be filled with laugher, and our tongue with singing praises to our God, Psalm 96.98. & 136. & 137. Lev. 26. Ibid. of 2 Quest. N. VII. seal assurance] As the spirit sealeth to the heart of the believer the doctrine of the Covenant and promise, so the seals of the Covenant are made effectual by the spirit, for the further con∣firmation of the justification that is by faith, to none other persons but to the children of the promise and covenant made with Abraham, Acts 3. Rom. 4. And none other persons can understand what this saying of cove∣nant and seal meaneth, but those that are redeemed from the earth, Apoc. 14.3. Ephes 1.13, 14. & 2.18. Rom. 8.15, 16. N. 9. which believe in God must] Faith is a wise and an obedient grace, saith worketh by love, Rom. 6.7, & 8. chapters, handle this; Gal 5.6. the Apostle opens this as a part of the blessing in the promise, Acts 3.25, 26. Christ destroyeth sin in his and sanctifieth. If any be in Christ he is a new creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. old things in the old Adam are passed away, and all things become new in us, from the second Adam. The ten Com∣mandments belong to this point, and handled as an use from Gods mer∣cy and covenant in Christ, Exod. 20.1, &c. Rom. 6. chapter and 12. chap∣ter, and the later parts of the Epistles to the Galatians, Ephesians, co∣lossians, and by holy Zacharias, Luke 1.74. & ubique. See the practise of this in holy Job, his effectual faith, and diligent love, and patience of hope from the godly instruction of Abraham in the promise. The co∣venant of grace is reciprocal, the seals also teach the same. It is glorious to keep the mystery of faith in a pure conscience. And this is an easie yoke to an holy and humble soul: his commandments are not burdensome. Mat. 28.20. 1 Iohn 5.3. And after the Lord hath spoken peace by justi∣fication we must not turn again to folly that grace may abound Psal. 85. Ro. 5 & 6. And they that put away a good conscience will make ship∣wrack of faith and blaspheme. Briefly, this is a sure character of the Saints of God, that all that call on the name of the Lord with a pure heart do follow righteousness, faith, charity, peace, &c. and such on∣ly are vessels of honour for our heavenly masters use. Observe yet further, the Popish Company, and many others that are ignorant, when they speak of good works, their thought darteth chiefly on almes-deeds, prayer, fasting, &c. But withall teaching and believing the doctrine of opere operato, at the Pharisees: Whereas by good works is meant not only those, but all the duties of charity of the first and se∣cond Table, both toward God and toward man: yea all to be done in faith as regenerate in the Second Adam, that God the Father in him may be glorified: And where the true faith of our glorious Lord Jesus Christ is planted it will so shew it self: And this is the true sense of James 2. of shewing our faith by our works, and our Father A∣braham,
and Rachabs story are conferred to this exposition. Again, ob∣serve that commonly those that so call for those good works care not for sound teaching of the word of God, but rather carry a grudge against it, and holy assemblies, and the sincere professors and preachers. And a∣lasse, what are their prayers, almsdeeds, fasting, &c. for matter, man∣ner, or end It may be questioned, if they be materially good. And let such take heed that for manner, or end, they are no better than Kains, Genesis chap. 4. then theirs in Psalm 50 and Esay 1. and 58. and the Scribes and Pharisees, who did all those things and more too, and yet crucified the Lord Jesus Christ the Lord of glory, who would have had them come to a more exact and joyful righteousness. But they could not call JESUS, the Lord, but held him, his Kingdome, his doctrine, and his disciples anathema, as of old they did Esay 8.18. & chap. 65.5. & 66.5. all John 9. N. 10. In the steps of the faith of our Father Abraham] There are ma∣ny that do not walk in the steps of the faith of Abraham, as the Anabap∣tist that saith, infants of believing parents are not in the covenant of God in Christ, and so ought not to have the seal conferred on them; therefore they do not administer the seal, but scoff at it, as Patience did in New England. Now see Abrahams faith, He did not only believe that the children that came of Israel were in the covenant of God in Christ, but he believed the same touching the infants of the Gentiles: therefore in testimony of his faith he circumcised his house, the same day the covenant and promise was renewed to him, Gen 17. And all the tribes to our Lords dayes did observe circumcision. And the promise is sure to all the seed of whom Abraham is a Father, not only to that seed that is circumcised, but also to them of the Gentiles that are uncircum∣cised; for he is said to be the Father of us all, according to that which was spoken to him. That he should be the father of many nations. Therefore the Anabaptist is far from walking in the steps of the faith of Abraham: and they run into sad uncomfortable errours: First, They deny God to be the God of infants, having no right nor portion in the covenant. Secondly, If infants be not in the covenant of God in Christ, they shal not be partakers of the better resurrection: O ye parents consider it. Thirdly, They will not present them to Christ in his ordinances, that he should teach them: what is this? but a dedication of their infants to Moloch, to the divel to be devoured. Whereas the godly parent hath great comfort that if the children of Idolatrous parents were born to God, (God so accounts in respect of his covenant) Ezek. 16.20. how much more have godly parents comfort that their children are born to God. Let the Apostles reasoning Rom. 4.16, 17. to the end of the chapter be throughly minded, and let Gods people observe providences, whether many of the Anabap∣tists do not turn to Sadducism, denying the resurrection, or as vile opi∣nions: for it hath been observed, not without cause, that Anabaptistry
is a cloke of all filthiness, and our times have found it to be so. Surely they that are of the faith of Abraham, shall be blessed with faithfull A∣braham: For so it is said, Many shall come from the East, and from the West: from the North, and from the South, and shall sit down with Abra∣ham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdome of Heaven, Mar 8. Luke 13. Rom. 4 13. and so they became the Israel of God, Gal. 6.16. The promise of blessedness in Christ is in extent as large to all converted Gentiles, and to their seed, as to Abraham and his seed. N. 11. The doctrine of Justification by faith] Abraham believeth in him that justifieth the ungodly: who counted his believing for his justi∣fication before he received circumcision that he might be the Father of the believing uncircumcised Gentiles: so it is not heresie, as the circum∣cised Pharisee then, and the baptized Papist now would bear the world in hand. What, the Gospel not before Popery? mark here two sayings, Gal. 3.8. The Scripture foreseeing that God would justifie the Gentiles through faith, preached before the Gospel to Abraham, saying, In thee shall all the Gentiles be blessed. And from this promise he had the justification that it by faith, and before circumcision, Rom. 4. The other text is Heb. 4. For unto us the Gospel hath been preached as also unto them: that is to the peo∣ple of Israel that came out of Egypt, Exod. 12. Minde the sayings of the new Testament illustrating for us the old covenant, that we may see Anti∣quity gloriously triumphing over Popish cursed Noveltie. Holy Luther, and multitudes before him, and others after him, by preaching this everla∣sting Gospel have routed the armies of King Abaddon that he shall never make up his troups again. N. 12. God will bless them that bless this doctrine] Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee, Psalm 122. they shall be as the bright Sun that love Christ, Jude 5. Blesse Christ and Abraham, that is, all of his faith, and thou shalt be blessed, thou and thy posteri∣ty, as Lot found that blessed Abraham: and so the very Amorites, Aner, Escol, and Mamre, Gen. 14. and it is probable the Gibeonites might be of their posteritie, being a remnant of the Amorites: Under the term A∣morite all the Chanaanites sometimes are understood. How did Christ pity them in suffering Israel to make a league with them, and for Sauls cruelty. And they were the Nethinim that returned with Judah from cap∣tivity, Jos. 9 22. Ezra 8.20. Ibid. N. 12. Cuse and persecute this doctrine] Dost thou curse? Wilt not bless the holy seed, and the holy doctrine? Read thy doom; as he loved cursing, so shall it come unto him, as he delighted not in blessing, so let it be far from him, Psalm 109. Wilt not exercise bowels to the body of Christ? the curse shall enter in thy bowels. Doest not hear? Let them be confounded and turned back that hate Sion, let them be as the grass upon the house tops, which withereth afore it grows up, where∣with the reaper filleth not his hand, nor he that bindeth sheaves his bo∣some. Neither do they which go by, say, the blessing of Jehovah be
you, we bless you in the Name of Jehovah, Psalm 129. Thou that hast spittle in thy mouth, and an aking tooth against Christ, and the sin∣cerity of the faith, hear what one of thine own prophets have said. Num. 24.9. He couched, he lay down as a Lion, as a great Lyon, who shall stir him up? blessed is he that blesseth thee, and cursed is he that curseth thee. Mark how the promise to Abraham, and Jacobs blessing was carried by tradition among the children of the East, and how Balaam durst not but remember it to terrifie Balak in his Enterprize. What saith Christ to Pharaoh, Kill my childe, and I will kill thy childe; Israel is my first-born (the heir of the world) it thou afflict him, I will slay thy son, thy first born. And consider Psalm 105. how it pursueth the promise and co∣venant to Abraham for Israel, and against the seed of the Serpent. And thus it must be considered for Israel all the time of the old Testament, and for the Israel of God till the end of the world. He that meddles a∣gainst Israel, meddles with a burdensome stone, and putteth fire into a sheat to burn his house, Psalm 2 10, 11, 12. Zach. 12.3.6. What gat Balak and the Princes of Midian, and Balaam, that sought to curse? God cursed them, and the false Prophet felt it. So though the Balaks and Balaams of mystical Egypt, and mystical Babylon have cursed, and do seek still the destruction of our nation, especially of the Gospel: yet while we keep our covenant they shall never prevail. Balaams counsel was more dangerous than his curse; for his counsel being followed brought a plague. O ye Princes, O ye people do ye not know that the sincere Word, and the holy seed is the subsistence of your Kingdomes and common-weals, towns, and families? Esay 6.13. Every childe of God is a publique good. Minde one thing more how those thor did seem to be of the truth and were brethren touching the outward circumcision, yet cursed the servants of Christ, that would not walk in their waies, traditions, devises and abominations, Esay 66.5. and in after times they so used the poor blind man, John 9. So have the cruel Prelates used the dear servants of the Lord: they did curse, yet Christ did bless, and hath and will pay his enemies home that abuse his ordinances: for if any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, anathema maranatha is his heavy Censure, 1 Cor. 16.22. Ibidem N. 12. Cast out the servant and her son] Without shall be ly∣ars. Lyars in judgement as all Papatines be. Whosoever transgresseth and abideth nor in the doctrine of Christ hath nor God: he that con∣tinueth in the doctrine of Christ, he hath both the Father and the Son, 1 John 2.24. 2 John 2.9. Be it that they sometimes confesse the do∣ctrine of Christs person, yet both in their doctrine and practise they de∣ny it, because they deny him in his offices and administrations for which he became such a person and such a Mediator And oh what lying blas∣phemies do they utter against the holy records that testifie of the eternal Son the Mediator. Popery is a mystery of iniquity.
N. 13. The word of faith in our own languages] In the Law it is written, with men of other tongues, and other lips will I speak unto this people, and yet for all that they will not hear me, saith the Lord; Wherefore tongues are for a sign, not to them that believe, but to them that believe not, but prophesying serveth not for them that believe not, but for them which believe, Esay 28.11, 1 Cor. 14.21. This looks back to Nimrods rebellion, they despised the faith taught by Noah, Sem, and the rest of the godly fathers (before Abraham) in their knowen lan∣guage; therefore Christ cut them off from the faith by strange languages. When Israel despised the things of the Law of Christ written for their comfort; see how he, in this, would avenge the quarrel of his covenant, Deut. 28.49. and fulfilled it, Ier. 5.15. 2 Chron. 36. If it be then such a deer blessing to have Moses and the Prophets, our Lord and his Apo∣stles speak to us in our own language, let the saints worship God with hearty praise and thanksgiving, so did David Psalm 103.7. and 147. 19. All are abominable, idolatrous and false worshippers and unclean infidels that Christ speaks not to in their own language by his blessed Gospel: as all the Babylonian builders, and their seed to this day, and the my∣stical Babylonian builders: It is much to be considered, that when the churches departed from the Apostles doctrine, Christ confounded the Europian and Asian languages. VVhen it was prophesied of the calling of the Gentiles to the faith of the Gospel, it is said, I will turn to the peo∣ple a pure language, which was fulfilled when Christ sanctified all tongues as it is said, We do here them speak in our own languages the wonderfull works of God, Acts 2.11. Zeph. 3.9. VVhereas, for two thousand years, the Gentiles, Noahs families, called on idols names. We little consider the severity of the wrath of Christ in the confusion of tongues, what a plague it is, and will be to the end of the world; most sad is that scri∣pture, Jer. 44.26. 3 Quest. of his covenant and promise] God did not first give a seal and then made a Covenant, but first made a Covenant and a promise, as to our first parents, Gen. 3.15. and then taught them of the seal, the Sa∣crifices: so to Noah God made a Covenant, and then gave him the seal of the Floud, and of the Ark: so in Gen. 9. first the Covenant, and then the Rainbow: so to Abraham: so each godly parent must seek to know God in Christ in the Covenant, and to be in covenant for them and their children. And it is to be marked, Cham had an outward bles∣sing in the covenant with his father, for he was of Noahs houshold, Heb. 11: 7. and he and his children had continued in the same, if he had not and his son mocked and scorned his father; for which both of them were excommunicated: and Chams house feared not, but waxed worse and worse against Christ and his Kingdome, and set up a tyranny in Nim∣rod, to give the affront to Sems blessing. Again note, when the merciful God made a covenant with all flesh, man and beast; were not young, as old comprised in the covenant? a sucking chile and a lamb as the parent, Gen. 9.9, 10, 11.
Quest. 4. Of justification or remission of sins] The apostate and adulte∣rous generation in our Lords daies (that did adulterate the faith) missed, stating Circumcision as a part of the Law or Covenant of Works, (a school distinction of their own, neither of Moses, nor of the Prophets) whereas it was rightly understood, a law and seal of faith in Christ, and the seal of justification that is by faith. Their fac hoc, is, credere, in our Lords interpretation of the Law; to believe in him whom the Father had sealed and sent to be the true manna and sacrifice, and their perfect justification and freedome, as was told them, Acts 13.38, 39. And as they missed in stating circumcision a Law of works ex opere operato, to ju∣stification: so they did of all the politic of Moses, that it did initiate them unto, which yet they could not do, being too heavy a yoke, Acts 15. Now they despising Christ the end and scope of the law of Moses, they made their own justification, their idol and vanity, and so provo∣ked Christ to their rejection: confer Deut. 32.21. with Rom. 10.19. That speech is very strong that the Lord Jesus spake, Iohn 7. that circum∣cision was not so much of Moses, but observed of the Fathers before Mo∣ses was born. They should have considered in what sense Abraham recei∣ved it, and used it, Rom. 4. Ibidem, God did justifie the circumcision] so this is clear, God did justi∣fie the infants of Israel, for else he would not have commanded circum∣cision to infants: this was to comfort all godly parents, that although they knew their children were conceived in sin and born in iniquity, yet God knew how for his covenant sake, (not for our sakes) to justify, that is, to free infants from sins guiltiness, filthiness, and desert; and to com∣fort godly parents of the Gentiles touching their infants: the Apostle saith, God is not the god of the Iews only, but of the Gentiles also, for he that justifies the circumcision will justifie the uncircumcision. And God is a husband to the once barren and desolate woman, but fruitful in children as the former married wife, Israel. Doth not the promise save infants as well as grown men? and doth not our heavenly father declare his counsels that his will is to save infants as well as grown men? that he enjoyns the seal to infants: and saith, that he will be their God: and the Lord saith not, he will be the Father of grown men rather than of in∣fants. And a godly parent hath as great hope of his dying infants, as any Anabaptist can have of their grown men. Ibid. of Quest. 4. Of adoption.] This adoption of Israel hath a double consideration: general and speciall, visible and invisible: visible, in covenant, in respect of the Apostate families that were cut off Gen. 10. & 11. invisible, the faithful in Israel. All did profess the faith (except in their apostasies to the false faiths and religions of Earl-Peor, and Mo∣loch, and Chemosh, &c) So they were not all faithful, no not in outward profession. They were Christs own, afore he came to his own (all Exod. &c.) his own by visible priviledges, yet many a time they grieved him and his holy Spirit, Psalm 78 & 106. so many of them slighted this a∣doption
by joyning themselves to Peor, as the sons of the open Church followed Kains wayes Gen. 6. even so it is now; some in the Church born after the flesh, and some born after the Spirit, yet both make a visible Church of Christ it cannot be, it must not be denyed. It is not sound reasoning from a visible Church estate, to the doctrine of election. If any be further contentious, beware of them, Rom. 16.17, 18. Quest. 4. N. 11. Putting of the sinful body] It shewed how distastefull man is to God in his sinful estate of the first Adam, and no communion with God but by regeneration in the second Adam, 1 Joh. 1. Therefore observe what Esaias, Ezekiel, John Baptist, and our Lord, and Stephen said to carnal Israel, boasting to be Abrahams seed. Esay 57.3. Ezek. 16.3. Ioh. 8.44. Acts 7, 51. Matth. 3.9. That they were neither Gods chil∣dren, nor Abrahams seed, not treading in the steps of the faith and works of Abraham. ibid. N. II. The putting on the new man] An Israelite being circumcised yet the old Adam was not so put off, nor the new Adam so put on, but that birth sin did remain: yea so remained, that through the Bias of lusts and sinful appetites, and by temptation, and not taking heed to themselves, and keeping their souls diligently, omissions of duty, and many actuall sins did bud forth. For although by faith in Christ the saints were justified, or freed from the guilt and punishment of sin, inheriting the justification that is by faith, yet there was corruption in them issuing from that original or birth-sin, that we still are yoked with all: we are in Christ Jesus justified from the reign of this sin, but not from the be∣ing of it in us. Gods counsel is such to make us humble. This the saints of old felt and acknowledged, and bewayled, and prayer for further mortification, Psalm 51. And those Scriptures from two Apostles that were both circumcised and baptized shew the truth of this, Rom. 7.1 John 1.8. Phil. 3.12, 13. Therefore every godly soul must observe three things; 1. That we slight not any sin in thought, word, or deed, Rom. 6. & 7. And 2. to be careful that we content not our selves with bodily exerccise, Phil. 3.1, 2, 3, &c. And 3. not to be discontent that Gods counsel is such that perfection is not attaineable in this life; that was the sin of our first parents, they were Seekers to be in a better estate then they were stated in: they were discontent and hearkned to Satan. While we are in this vale of tears, this must ever be in our hearts, 1 Ioh. 1. If we say we have no sin we deceive our selves, and truth is not in us, but if we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all our unrighteousness, and minde that of the Apostle. Phil. 3.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, &c. Satan and his instruments will by all means corrupt our hearts in these three things. Ibidem N. II. Drew them to the spirituall meaning] The faithful worship∣ped Gop in Spirit, and rejoyced in Christ Iesus, Ier. 4.4. Phil. 3.3. but a circumcised carnal Israelite thought opus operatum enough, as a Law of works, and so in all their ceremonies. And note this, as the doctrine of
the covenant is reciprocal, so of the Seal, as they did teach and seal all comforts from God, so they did binde them closer to God in Christ by faith and filial obedience. N. III. of the 4 Quest. their infant-children, &] Let us consider two or three words more of that which is said touching the infants of Israel, that departed this life. It is Gods promise and covenant that are workfull, and his Spirit did blesse circumcision for the joy and comfort of parents for their infants reconciliation, justification, sanctification, and adoption and hope of immortal glory. The same covenant and pro∣mise doth belong to the Parents of the Churches of the Gentiles for their infants in the seal of Baptism. Is the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the holy Trinity the God of the Jewes onely; and not of the Gentiles also? yea of the Gentiles also. Thy Makers are thy Husbands, Esay 54. faithful is he that hath promised, and he will do it. Therefore he is reconciled to our infants, and will justifie, and sanctifie, and adopt them and bring them to immortal glory. They by circumcision were circumcised into one body, as is evident in all the Church politic of Moses. And so by baptism we are all baptized into one body, whether Iews or Greeks. The promise and covenant is ours as well as theirs, (as the Epistle to the Galatians upon Gen. 12.2, 3. sheweth) and baptism sealeth the same: and the Covenant and seal is in extent (excepting the obligation of Ce∣remonies, and some judicials) as large for application to all converted Gentiles to them and to their seed, as of old to Israel, and their seed. The false teachers of these dayes say the Covenant with the people of Israel was carnal and fleshly, &c. but this is not so: not so in Gods intent when he gave those promises, and made that covenant, and ordeined that seal of his covenant: not so, in the judgement of the faithful, and in their whole conversation which was heavenly, as all Heb. 11. Luke 1.55, 72, 73, 74. Again not so, for after they came to Canaan, they did not reject Canaan, nor city, nor Temple (but in apostasie) nor sacrifices, nor washings, &c. as Psalm 50. Esay 1. Ier. 7. yet God plagued them, which was for despising Christ in those ordinances: so their table was made a snare to them: and Christ was a stumbling Stone to them, as he was to Kain. That which was ordained for their welfare, they made their ruin. And so if we do no more but outward exercises in a shew of godli∣ness, and deny the power thereof, and live wickedly as they did Psalm 50. Esay 1. Ieremy 7. The Angel of Gods presence, our glorious Lord Ie∣sus Christ will not spare our misdeeds, 1 Thess. 4, 6. &c. These false tea∣chers abuse the holy Scriptures, as in that of Heb. 8. It is said, better promises, &c. but they must be asked what better promises than Genesis 3, 15. & Genesis 12.3? Let such know there are not better promiss in old or new Testament: and indeed those two promises contain all the doctrine of the Gospel, as in part before is shewed. They must excogitate the true interpretation, by seeking how our Lord, and his Apostles con∣vinced the false glosses the Concsion made of Moses Politie: for we all
must know theirs and ours is the same Covenant (as often said) onely new for Administration in fulfilling all promises and prophecies. Let us confer, Exod. 19. & 29.45. Lev. 26.15. with Apoc. 21.3.2 Cor. 6.16. Gen. 3.15. with 1 John 1.2, 3. and chap. 3. Jos. 1. with Heb. 13.5. Rom. 4. with Gen. 15. & 17, &c. This must be often spoken and medi∣tated, for we are dull of hearing. Again, better promises, hath respect to Deut. 30. Psalm 40 and 95. in Deut. 30. Christ promiseth that he will circumcise their heart, and the heart of their seed, to love him, Jeho∣vah their God, and to keep his commandments, &c. This Christ spake to them, that they might not be deceived to think that their salvation stood in outward observances; as in circumcision, &c. but in serving God in their spirits in the Gospel of his Son. And so this to be understood in all Moses ceremonies. The bloud of Oxen and Goats and Rams did not, could not purge their conscience from dead works, but their conscience would still be to them, for all their bodily exercise, an ill, accusing and condemning conscience. Their salvation was established upon better promises, and a better hope, That Christ by his own most perfect sa∣crifice, and bloud-shedding should be a sweet smelling savour to God for us, and procure eternal redemption. And while we, as strangers, converse in this world, he would be mortification, and sanctification, by his word and spirit, Mic. 7. John 3. Yet let the godly take heed they neglect not ordinances, and outward observances of Christs institution, though they be as the bark and shell, yet they are such a bark and shell, that a Chri∣stian cannot have life kept within him without them: as a tree will not live without his bark, nor the kernel prosper without his shell. Publique administrations and family ordinances, and secret duties, are of that consequence, that he that carelessly neglecteth them is in danger of gangrenating errours both in doctrine and manners. N. VI. Not of the Jews only, but of many Nations] Gen. 17.5. It is promised by the Lord Iehovah the performer of his promises. For a Fa∣ther of many nations have I made thee: This speech was spoken at that time when God renewed his promise and covenant in Christ with Abra∣ham, and added the seal to that covenant teaching thereby that he would not be, the God of Israel only, but in due time the God of the Gentiles also; therefore the Covenant is to the infants of the Gentiles, as of the Iewes: and all faithful are Abrahams seed, and the Israel of God, Gal. 3 & 6.16. and if the covenant be to the infants, then the seal: none dare deny it, but those that care not for the education of their children in godliness and honesty, for the hope of the resurrection unto eternal life. Abraham durst not deny the seal, but with all joy went about it. Again, consider Mat. 19.13. & Mark 10.13. little chil∣dren are comprehended in the Covenant, For of such is the Kingdome of heaven. Yea, observe further, Of such is the Kingdome of God, that is, of the Church of God, as Matth. 21.43. The Kingdome of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation that shall bring forth the fruits there∣of.
So then Israels infants were of the kingdome of God, and so are the Gentiles infants. Did the Kingdom of God consist of the parents and infants of Israel in the old Testament? surely then godly parents and their infants of the Gentiles are in equal honor. He that shall hill an infant shall be put to death as justly as if he had killed a parent. So the murderous, accursed, doctrine of Anabaptists that would murder chil∣dren is as wicked as to kill a godly parent. For the Lord God doth justi∣fie and wash infants from their sins in his Covenant, and bring them to glory, as well as their godly parents. And again, seriously minde, The covenant of God in Christ by circumcision was in full force to the death of our Lord and Saviour, Luke 1.59. and Circumcision was a seal of the covenant of grace to the infants of the faithful, and infants were in covenant as is evident: and now after our Lords death were they not in covenant? Did our Lords death disannul the Covenant of his grace in respect of them? absit, absit. It was about six or seven weeks from our Lords death to Peters sermon, Acts 2. And the holy Apostle in the con∣clusion of his Sermon doth exhort his auditors to receive the ordinance of Baptism in the name of Jesus Christ for the Remission of sins: and to shew he spake by the same Spirit of God that gave the promises, doth affirm that the promise and covenant is as firm to infants as ever it was, and therefore saith, The promise is made unto you and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shal call, Acts 2.39. In chap. 3.25, 2. It is said, the Jewes were the children of the Pro∣phets, and of the Covenant which God made with our Fathers, say∣ing to Abraham, Even in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be bles∣sed. First unto you hath God raised up his son Jesus, &c. so the Jewes had the first prerogative of the blessing in their kinreds, and of the re∣surrection of Christ; and then secondly the Gentiles have the like por∣tion in the blessing, and in our Lords resurrection, Rom. 2.10. consider for these things, Rom. 4.16, 17, 18, &c. to the end of the chapter. Quest. 5. & Answ. on Gen. 49.10. And to Him shall the gathering of the people be] O give thanks unto Jehovah, for he is good, for his mercy en∣dureth for ever. And say ye, Save us O God of our salvation, and gather us together, and delivr us from the heathen that we may give thanks to thy holy Name, and glory in thy praise. Blessed be Jehovah the God of Israel for ever and ever, and all the people said, Amen. 1 Chron. 16. Psal. 147.2. The Apostle saith the same, Grace be to you and peace from God the fa∣ther, and from our Lord Jesus Christ; who gave himself for our sins that he might deliver us from this present evil world, according to the Will of God which is our father: to whom be glory for ever, Amen, Gal. 1.3, 4.5. Eph. 1. 10. Abraham was gathered from the world, and Christ hath and doth still gather and deliver us out of the world to be of his Israel, John 11.52. so observe Iohn 17. Quest. 7. & Answ. Abraham, Isaac, Iacob] they to testifie their faith in the Promises of Christ built Altars in divers places, and called on
the name of the everlasing God. And therefore observe, the Apostle saith he served God with pure conscience from his forefathers in the pro∣mise of life, which is in Christ Jesus, 2 Tim. 1.1, 2, 3. and therefore the promises to the Fathers with the seal of circumcision were not carnal and fleshly, as Mateologists wickedly prattle: if they were carnal to them, so they are to us, for the promises and covenant belong to us, as hath been laid from Acts 2.39. and chap. 3, 25.26. Surely the faith of a good Christian is builded on Christ the Comer stone, and on his religion pra∣ctised of the godly Patriarks, and on the blesse, holy scriptures, and hope in the resurrection: all which by the work of the spirit doth make a man watchful to keep a good conscience in Church, in Common-Weal, by Land or Sea, at home, abroad, in sops, in labours, &c. see how all is taught in promise and seal. He that is such an one shall look death in the face, and needs not to be afraid before whom he comes, nor needs be ashamed of the groundless criminations of schism, heresie, and blasphemy, &c. diligently ponder Acts 24, 14, 15, 16. Quest. 9. & Ans. A great apostasie, for Israel in Egypt] Read Ezek. 23.8. Israel with his family came as a pure virgin into Egypt: and so con∣tinued all the dayes of Iacob: and Ioseph while he lived held the whole house in life and faith: but the Egyptians afterwards infected their po∣weritie with idolatry: even in her youth lay they with this virgin Isra∣el, and bruised the breasts of her virginity, and powred their whore∣domes upon her. False worship being a work of the flesh pleaseth and quickly insinuateth into our corrupt nature, especially being conversant with idolaters. Let all people beware of mystical Egyptians: And let Common-weales, Churches, and families note, that false worship, and heresie increaseth and somenteth all projects of ungodlynesse and un∣righteousness. Ezek. 16.6. and 20. must also here be considered to the captivity, both of Israel and Judah: They were by apostasie rather of the Amoite and Hehite then of Abraham and Sarah. They were in the bloud of their false religion, being foully corrupted with the idols of Egypt: and so they were dead till Christ by his own law said unto them live: So were we, being under the bondage of Rome-Egypt, until Christ, by his everlasting Gospel, made us to live, Apoc. 14.6. & 20.4, 5. And note as Terah his corrupt worship continued long in Israel: so did that of Muzrajim (i. e.) Egypt, Jos. 24.14. Ezek. 23 8. Quest. 10. & Ans. God was not ashamed] But God will be ashamed of adulterers and adulteresses, that follow superstitions, lusts of the flesh, lusts of the eyes, and pride of life; for such do and will deny Christ, and be ashamed of him and his word, and such cannot be pilgrimes and strangers, and seek things celestial, Iames 4. 1 Ichn 2. Mark 8. Col. 3.1. Ibid. To be called their God] Christ saith, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Iacob, this is my memorial to all ge∣nerations, that is, to all of their faith and heavenly conversation, whe∣ther
Jew or Gentile, Exedus 3.6, 15, 16. Hebrews 11. Ibid. Heavenly City and Countrey] The faithful to the fulness of time were in heaven, and part of the blessed familie of the heavenly Father, Ephe. 1.10. & 3.15. All the faithful in Israel were the adopted sons of the Eternal, their God, (and if sons, then heirs, Rom. 8.) so they were, living, and so they were, dead. Therefore the living might not sorrow as the heathens that had not certain knowledge of the joyful and glori∣ous state of the immortal souls of the faithful, nor any hope of the re∣surrection, Luke 13.28, 29. They might not cut themselves for the dead, nor make any print or mark in the flesh, Levit. 19.28. Dent. 14. 1, 2, 1 Thess. 4 The loving kindeness of Iehovah, is better than life, because though life departs, yet we be, and live for ever in him. There∣fore it is said, God is the God, as of Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, and so of every true believer, even when his body is dead and turned to dust, and therefore Abraham must be held in spirit to be and live with God, and shall have the resurrection of the body, Luke 20.37.38. Matt. 22.24. Mark 12. The faithful enjoy the same inheritance and happiness with Abraham, and this is one part of the blessedness in Christ promi∣sed to Abraham. And Christ saith of Moses being dead, Moses my ser∣vant is dead: he was still the Servant of Christ though he went up to Mount Nebo, and dyed: and we know he doth live, for he appeared when Christ was transfigure, and death is one of the works of the di∣vel which Christ was to dissolve. Christ was promised from the begin∣ning to destroy the works of Satan now called the old Serpent, Acts 26. 6. Josh. 1.2. 1 John 3.8. Heb. 2.14, 15. 2 Tim. 1.10.
CHAP. V. With Questions, Answers, and Annotations on them, How Redemption was taught From the Law of the Passeover to the building of the Temple. QUest. 1. Proceed to declare what Noble Pillar did Wise∣dome hew out to which the holy and golden Chaine of times is fastned, by which life and salvation was taught to the Saints? Answ. This is theAlthough they apostated to the idols of Egypt: yet by the bloud of the Passeover God chose them again, but again rejected them for their idols and vanity when Christ our Passeover is sacrificed for us. Passeover, Exod. 12. QUest. 2. How many yeares were from the Promise to Abra∣ham, to the Passeover, or to the comming from Egypt, or to the giving of the Law? Answ. Four hundred and thirty years. QUest. 3. How much of the Scripture is contained in those 430. years? Answ. From the beginning of the 12. of Genesis to the 12. of Exodus, the book of Job, and also part of the 1. & 2. ch. of 1 Chron.
QUest. 4. How doth the Passeover, &c. teach of Christ? Answ. Christ is called the Lamb of God that taketh away the sins of the World: also our Passeover. Mark what the Ho∣ly Ghost saith, Heb. 11.28. The Levites in Hezekiahs dayes taught the good knowledge of Jehovah, that is Christ. The Levites taught the meaning of the Passeover as Moses by faith institu∣ted it. 2 Chr. 30 22. mark and consider the Psalm 22. & 40. and 110. what was taught in those three great congregations, the assemblies of holy beauty. Through faith he kept the Pas∣sover, and the sprinkling of bloud, lest he that destroyed the first born should touch them. The 12. of Exodus will afford many meditations. And although three moneths after the Passeover they had the Law in two Tables given, full of terror to humble man, yet by a still and soft voice, a pattern of hea∣venly things were enjoyned, as a Tabernacle made with hands, the Priesthood of Levi: the Breast-plate with ƲRIM and THƲMMIM. The Ark of the Covenant, the bloud of peace offerings, sin-offerings, whole burnt-offerings, ho∣ly incense, washings, cleansings, redemptions, attonements, remissions, the Manna, the brazen Serpent, and holy gar∣ments of ministration, and other holy feasts beside the Passe∣over, distinction of times, in new Moones, years of Rest, Ju∣bilees, &c. enjoyned. All which do teach of Christ, the truth, Who is Jehovah our righteousness: Christ is all, and in all. QUest. 5. But were not the moral and ceremonial Laws gi∣ven to disannul the promises, that we should seek righteous∣ness or justication, by doing of outward works through our own will and power? Answ. In no wise: For although the Law of the passeover came 430. years after the promise, yet it cannot disannul the faith in Christ taught in the promises. The same must be said of all the Ceremonies. QUest. 6. Wherefore then did God give the Law? Answ. I. Because in those daies both among the a∣postate families, and in Israel when they lived in Egypt all
ungodliness and unrighteousness did exceedingly abound. Therefore the Law was added because of transgressions, that the offence of sin might abound to our feeling, and that we might be loathsome to our selves. And it must be noted that the Law was not declared to Israel only, though chiefly to them, but to the mixt multitude that came with Israel from Egypt. II. That it might be a School-master to lead unto Christ, to seek the justification that is by the faith of Him. For Christ was the end, drift, and scope of the Law for justifica∣tion to every one that beleeveth. Moses politie ever aimed at him, for Moses wrote of Christ. And the Prophets, and Hi∣story still expound Moses, Psalm 40. Esay 53. Daniel 9.24. And our Lord, and his Apostles, expound Moses, and the Prophets. III. Although our Lord Jesus Christ abrogated the Cere∣monial Law, in respect of the actual performance, and took away the (a) curse of the Law to all that believe: They were cursed and plagued if they did not observe the ceremonial as well as the moral: for both were contained in the book of the Law, Deut. 27. ult. Mal. 1.14. yet the mor∣al Law was and is still in force to be the rule of a sober, righ∣teous, and godly life, and so taught in all the New Testament. And with all we are to note that the Ceremonial is inscructive and the moral is to humble, as well as to direct in the wayes of peace and holiness. Quest. 7. Produce one text more out of Moses which may further open the mystery of Gods will in Christ. Answ. Deut. 30.11, 12, 13, 14. This commandement which I command thee this day, is not hidden from thee: neither is it far off. It is not in heaven, that thou shouldest say, who shall go up for us to heaven, and bring it to us, that we may hear it, and do it. Neither is it beyond the Sea, that thou shouldst say, who shall go over the Sea for us, and bring it to us, that we may hear it, and do it.
But the Word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou mayest do it. Quest. 8. What hence, in brief, do you observe? Answ. 1. The holy Apostle called this text the word of faith, and doth expound it of Christ concerning his incarna∣tion and resurrection, Rom. 10.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. 2. Moses bringeth his whole Law to this summe, and so the prophets, that Christ the son of God was to come down from heaven, and to be man, and to suffer many and great afflictions from the Serpent and his seed, and being the first from the dead, is to give life and light unto the world. The wicked ever despised this life and light in Christ, accounting this wisdom foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.23. & 2.8. 3. This Scripture, with some verses preceding, and subse∣quent, sets forth to the spiritual man, the excellency, the glo∣ry, the brightness, the facility, the preciousness, the stedfast∣ness, and the efficacy of the Law of God, being a revelation from heaven, and a most blessed instrument of God, to pre∣serve his people if they cleave unto it, to live in his covenant, to comfort in affliction, to restore the Church decayed, cum∣bred, and overwhelmed with errours, and for conservation of outward and inward consolation, &c. But apostasie from it, brings all Curses and utter ruine. And therefore it is a most rich favour to Jesurun; to all the Israel of God, that they are glorified with such an inheritance of lively oracles? 4. When Moses had wrote of the Creation, of the a∣postasie of our first parents, of the curse of all things visible, of the incarnation and redemption in the Promises. Taberna∣cles, and Sacrifices; Of Melchizedeks and Levies Priesthood, &c. Then saith he, this doctrine is not an hid doctrine. Moses face did not so shine with brightness, as the Law did shine in the hearts of the faithful, that looked to Christ, (the holy seed of the woman) the end and scope of the Law. It was hid to none, but the blinded by Satan. We should labour to reduce history and prophecy with the New Testament to Moses.
QUest. 9. Who were followers of the doctrine of Justifica∣cation by faith, taught by tradition in the doctrine of the seal of circumcision was believed of the faithful 406, years, to Israels coming from Egypt. the Promises for two thousand five hundred and thirteen years, and now writ∣ten by Moses. Answ. All the Patriarks, as is said, the people of Israel that came out of Egypt, and that were in the wilderness, and the faithful, both Rulers and people, in the Books of Josuah, Jud∣ges, Ruth, Samuel, &c. and especially our Lords Fathers from Abraham to David (the first fourteen) are to be remem∣bred, Mat. 1.17. QUest. 10. Who were the seed of the Serpent; hating, brui∣sing, cursing, and persecuting the Religion and People of Christ, his Israel? Answ. The Egyptians, Amalek, Moab, Ammon, Midian and the Canaanites, &c. QUest. 11. Did the Church constantly reverence the religion of the Tabernacle? Answ. The eternal WORD came unto his own in pro∣vidences and ordinances, but his own received him not; for six hundred thousand in the Wilderness at once, through an evil heart of unbelief, murmured, tempted, and denyed Christ, and despised the Land of Promise, and would have gone into Egypt again: and many followed the religion of Peor. And af∣ter in Canaan, many  time they revolted and rebelled against Him, called also the Angel of Gods presence, despising his statutes, abhorring his judgements, and so brake his covenant, and vexed his holy Spirit. Jesurun chose new gods, were de∣filed with their own works, following divers Religions, Idola∣trous and foolish opinons, both of their forefathers, as of the Canaanites, and of the peoples about Canaan.
QUest. 12. How did Christ manifest his goodnesse while his people obeyed him according to his Written word, as now and after, he ever called them to it? Answ. Through the obedience of faith, they obtained good report with God: and God was not ashamed of them to be called their God and vouched them before all to be his peculiar people. This he shewed by his joyfull presence dwelling among them in his Tabernacle, whence joy, peace, victorie, plenty, and all outward comforts attended them in the promised earthly Rest, and to all that, by faith in the promises, saw the daies of Christ, joy and hope of entrance in∣to the eternal Rest, Tabernacle, and inheritance. QUest. 13. How did Christ, in this age, bruise the head, po∣wer, and dominion, and enmity of the Seed of the Ser∣pent? Answ. 1. He cast upon It is through all the old Testa∣ment, Mitz∣rajim where it is translated Egypt, Esay 43.3. Mitzrajim, that is the Egypti∣ans the fierceness But if thou shalt indeed obey his voice, and do all that I speak, then I will be an enemie to thine enemies, and an adversary to thine Adver∣saries, Exodus 23. of his anger. Amalek discomfited, and utter ruin denounced: Midian plagued, the Canaanites de∣stroyed, and other enemies subdued. II. Now a The first separation and rejection of the families was by the confusion of tongues, 2. by Circumcision. 3. By the Lawes given by Moses. third time Christ shewed his anger and en∣mity against the families by a partition wall of ceremonies, and an hand-writing of ordinances that they were further se∣parated, and made aliens from the Common-weale of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and were without God in the world. Thus in every age observe how Christ called and kept his elect from the commu∣nion of Divels, and the wicked world: yet God shewed much mercy to the heathens through the limitation of Circumcisi∣on, Exodus 12.
QUest. 14. What severity was on the Church for their re∣voltings from the fiery Law, and lively oracles which Mo∣ses received from the Angel, Jehovah, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? Answ. Him the Angel of Gods presence, who had the name of God in him, was turned to be their enemie, and would not pardon their transgressions, but sware they should not enter into his earthly Rest: so that heavy chastisements befell Israel in the wildernesse, and in the Land of Canaan, plagued by enemies on every side, untill the Transmigration (a) of the Land, (that is, the removing of the Ark (b) from Syloh) yea untill the daies of David. Bear diligently still in minde, with all fear and trembling, how Christ afflicted the Church for their communion with divels, and idolators, Psal. 78. all of it. Annotations upon the Questions and Answers of the fifth CHAPTER. QUest. 2. Forth of Egypt] The deliverance of Israel from E∣gypt is much celebrated in the old Testament. And amongst other things of that bondage, this is twice noted, from a peo∣ple of a strange Language, Psalm 81 & 114 Israel could not be ignorant of the language of Egypt, but I think their idolatrous Priests, had a mumming language in their devotions; like Rome-Egypt that taught our forefathers in their devotions in a language they understood not: for which we have as great cause to sing praise to God, as well as Israel of old, that we are saved from that cruel bondage. Quest. 4. and Answ. The breast-plate with Ʋim and Thummim] Con∣sider from this time, that as the twelve Tribes followed the faith in the promises to their godly ancestours, so the Ʋim and Thummim that was placed among the twelve precious Jewels upon the Breast-plate of the High Sacrificer, never uttered any other faith. And the same Jewels are the foundation of the Christians Jerusalem from heaven, So our high
Sacrificer more excellent then Aaron, who is Ʋrim and Thummim, light, life and all perfections, all in all: all fulness dwelt in him: and he came from the bosome of the Father, and walketh in the midst of the VII. Golden Candlesticks, and never uttered any other faith but what he taught in Moses. The Apostle alludeth unto this when he exhorteth to put on the breast-plate of Faith and Love, Faith in Christ is our light and life, and love is the perfecting and fulsilling of the Law: and all our thoughts, speech and action should ever intend these two. In Christ we are made sacrifices, and therefore with a constant spirit carry this Breast plate before God and man. Ibid. The Ark of the covenant, the bloud of peace-offerings, &c.] All these things were shadows of good things to come, and enjoined till the time of reformation, when the new and living way was manifested. The land of Canaan was also a shadow of the true rest in the Kingdome of heaven: so David taught carnal Israel, Psalm 95. which the Apostle handleth to the revolting Hebrews, And Moses verily was faithful in all his house as a servant, for a Testimony of those things which were to be done and spoken after, Heb. 3. God did draw them by these ordinances, to give them to understand who should be their justification, cleansing, sin-offeing, &c. by many outward things and promise, to the spiritual: but when they made their belly their God, and minded earthly things, and thought to be justified by the outward action: Then God shewed them to be poor elements, as at Syloh and Salomons Temple burnt by Babel, &c. yea, once more it is said, God would shake them, & Dan. 9.24, 25, 26, 27. shewes by whom and how. Salomon told them of this also. The labour of the foolish doth weary him, for he knoweth not how to to go into the City, Eccles. 10.15. They knew not Christ the way, the truth, and the life for the heavenly City and Countrey: not like children of faith of their faithful father Abraham. The holy Prophets and Priests taught the meaning of the sacrifices in the great congregation, Psalm 40.6, 7. They preached Gods justificati∣on of a sinner, and kindeness in Christ that would come to do Gods will, They declared Gods faithfulness and truth that he would perform his promise concerning the sending of Jesus Christ, his death, resurrection, and ascention, Psalm 22 & 16. & 68.18. conferred with Ephes. 4.8, 9, 10, 11. And the holy Tribes instantly serving God day and night in this hope went thrice a year to the Tabernacle and Temple (which were the great Congregations) to hear these things taught, and to profess the same in their holy conocations. Besides the Levites in their fourty eight Towns every Sabbath, and all other Prophets and Teachers in all their Synagogues (which were very many) had Sabbatical convocations, and they preached upon Moses. And there were divers Universities, or Schooles of Prophets at Kijabjearim, at Bethel, at Jericho, &c. to edu∣cate young men for knowledge to teach this most noble and glorious do∣ctrine of faith in the Son of God that should come into the world to make our flesh his Tabernacle.
Ibid All which do teach of Christ] The holy Prophets Psal. 50. Esay 53. & 55 1, 2. &c. giving the people true Expositions of the Law, shew that Christ is the end of all: all priviledges of the Jewes, and Gods own ordinances they not discerning or seeking Christ by faith in them were nothing: nothing bread but Christ: and in outward performances, and bodily exercise to be most bountiful, most exact, accurate and un∣rebukable is a bestowing cost and pains, and not for bread, for all is but dung and doggs meat without Christ. See how the Apostle urged this to the Jewes from Esay 55.1, 2, 3. Acts 1.38, 39. read Mich 6.6. The Law of Moes politie was not given that we should be justified ex opere operato, by bodily exercise, it was given for signification, humiliation and direction, that Christ might be our life, without him it is a killing letter: for so it is weak, and e are weak But carnall Israel mistook the Law, and so believed, John 6. Their bodily exercise in eating Manna, did not bring them into Canaan; for they dyed in the desert. And our Lord most heavenly draws all Moses to himself, that he was the true Man∣na, and was sent of the Father to be the true bread. And there opens all the sacrifices, that his flesh and bloud was the true sacrifice of which (though now ascended) by faith we must feed or dy, and never come to the happy resurrection of the heavenly Rst. And this was, and is the heavenly Fathers will in the old and new Testament. The spirituality of ordinances was cumbersome to them as to Kain, Gen. 4. wherefore Christ in his wrath made them a snare to them, and a stumbling block: And this was the reason they hated Christ and his Apostles to the death, Be∣cause Christ, doctrine drove man out of himself, and so all their labour to be lost for salvation, seeking to enter in at the strait Gate, and yet were not able Eccles. 10.15. yea it is natural (alass) to us all to rest in outward performances (as Kain) and not to care for Christ, the second A∣dam, and the justification, that is by the faith of Him. The Ceremo∣nial Law was weak to justifie Rom. 8.3. for it was impossible that the bloud of Oxen, Goats, washings, &c. could cleanse the conscience from the guilt and filth. The moral could not justifie because we were weak, nothing in us was able to do any thing to satisfy the justice of God; and because the carnall heart of many, being covered with a veil could not discerne Christ (the end and intent of the Law) yet they knew that they must labour one way or other to have peace with God, and their own conscience, they would thousands of Rams; and thousands of Rivers of oyl, and would be exact in outward doings for justification. And they durst not touch about the spiritualness of the Law, for it is the very pangs of death to understand the Law rightly, Rm. 7. Though sometime it could not be but the conscience was affrighted, then they did busie themselves in outward acts of fasting, praying, almsdeeds, washings, &c. to quier their heart. And this was their Divinity, and they were cur∣sed by their censors that taught the Law otherwise. The Pharisees are the true Fathers of the Popish company: and we may very well yield
the Papist antiquity (because they talk much of antiquity) even Esay 1. & 58. yea higher Psalm 50. yea Gen. 4. in Kain, who was the first that practised this doctrine. The Phrisees thought Christ came to destroy the Law, when he taught his holy doctrine; he answered he came not to destroy, but to fulfil it by or∣thodox exposions. But they saw how it will go with them if Christs do∣ctrine were received, and they would rather kill him, so it is now: where the word of Christ is truly taught, it makes the carnal heart mad, and to persecute. I did desire to remember these things often, because of the cursed corruption of our nature, who are so ready (yea every mothers child of us) to contend our selves without Christ, and to rest in bodily ex∣ercise. The Churche were warned of this evil springing in the Apostles times, 1 Tim. 48. And we have cause to fear that not only Papists, but thousands of Protestants are leavened with this leaven of the Pharisees which is but hypocriie. Quest. 5. u mine not the Moral] I use the term Moral as godly Di∣vines do because it is the holy Law of Christ that shall last for ever, when the ceremonial was abolished. And people must be taught, that it is that which is called the form of sound doctrine, of faith and love which is in Christ Jesus: and we are to understand, that the Son of God, the Angel of Gods presence, who hath the name of God in him, who is very often called Ienovah: he gave the Law as Mediator, between God and man to train up his people in faith and love. And all the Law, and the Prophets, are but expositions of the ten words, therefore faith in Christ is taught in the Law: as 1 Joh. 3.23. This is his commandment, that we should believe in the name of his Son Iesus Christ, and love one ano∣ther as he gave commandement: Again it is said, when we carry our selves proudly, and do not walk charitably one towards another we sin against Christ, Rom. 14.1 Cor. 8. All relations in their obedience serve Christ, Ephes. 5.14, 15. & 6.5, 6. Col. 3.24. 1 Tim 6 3. Ibid. seek justification by doing] This was the false doctrine of the conci∣sion, and hath cast them off to this day: see how sweetly the Lord Je∣sus calls them from this error, Iohn 6.27, 28. &c. This is an idolatrous errour of all our hearts: to be spiritual, to come to God by faith in Christ, and in our whole conversation so to be spiritual: to come to God by faith in Christ, and in our whole conversation so to walk as seeing him that is invisible, as Hbel, as Mses and all faithful: Oh how hard! how impossible! such a power of darkness and weakness is upon us. O Lord God, the way of man is not in himself, till thou turn us from dark∣ness to light, from the power of Satan to thy self. The glorious wisdom of Moses Law, which standeth for the Marrw still but not for the out∣ward Sabbath, circumcision, Tabernacle, and other rites of Levi. That Christ from the Law plagued the concision, and made the Law held as their Table for the in ood  succour them, to be their snare unto death. They would not enter into the rest of Christ; where Baptism and the Lords Supper are no burden, (Mr. Bro. on Lam. 1.14.) where Christ is
not sought and found in his own ordinances, all (not the moral, but also the ceremonial) savours death, 2 Cor. 3.7. to 16. what are we then to think of mens precepts, voluntary religion, and self-willed humbleness. Take notice what our Lord taught, Mat. 15.3. John 6.27, &c. and his Apostle, Rom. 10.3. Phil. 3.3. &c. Colos. 2.23. Quest. 6. Num. II. Moses politie ever aimed at Him] The Law Morall and Ceremonial was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ: grace is two fold, the one of Justification from the guilt and curse of the Law, the other of sanctification, the righteousness of the Law being fulfilled in them that are in Christ Iesus. who inables them by his spirit most willingly to walk therein: delighting in the Law of God concerning the inner man. And Christ was the truth and substance of the Ceremonial Law, as all the Epistle to the Hebrews sheweth: all was sponsorious of a better hope in him, Heb. 7.22. & 8.6. And this was that the saints so fervently prayed for teaching and understanding the wonderous things of the Law, how all was sponsorious of comfort in Christ, Psalm 119. And so of this did Ethan sing, Psalm 89.1, 2, &c. Ibid. Quest. 6. N. III. The Ceremonial Law] That is, Gods ceremo∣nial Law: no man hath power to institute or sanctifie as of himself any teaching sign or ceremony of person or thing, time or place to worship God thereby, or to take away that which the: Lord hath ordained, Moses durst not add or diminish any thing: no not any other colour as green, which is as pleasant as blew, purple and scarlet, all colours of blood and susing. The pattern was his Direction▪ And therefore was Moses cal∣led faithful in Gods house, the Church of God, the Pillar and ground of truth. Will worship is a corruption of all our hearts, it likes us bet∣ter then Gods commandments, Amos 4. Mat. 15. Luke 16.15. And we have great confidence in it that it pleaseth God. But it brings shame at last to any State: and all the Priests of Bethel cannot quench the fire that it will kindle, Amos 5. Hos. 10.14, 15. And let all will-worshippers minde that however they have a shew of wisdom in their will worship, yet it makes the people forget their Maker, Hos. 8.11, 12, 13, 14. 1 Kin. 12.33. Amos 5.21. & 8.10. And this too evident of later years in the ungodly dealing of the Prelates in their hinderance of sound teaching of the word in most paroches of England. Ibid, N. III. and the moral is still to humble] Doubtless the Moral Law must be taught; it is a part of Christs mediatorian kingdom, God the Father made Him Lord and Christ to all the Israel of God, and obedi∣ence is better than sacrifice, It is a point of faith to believe that Christ gave the Law, Exod. 23.20, 21, 22. They of old were commanded to hear him, and so we under the New Testament, must hear the Belo∣ved Son, and reverance the Heir, Mat. 17.5. Matth. 21.98. It is said, Felix called forth Paul to hear him of the faith in Christ; and as he was teaching of righteousness, temperance, and of the judgement to come,
Felix trembled, Acts 24.25. Therefore the Law ought to be taught, it belongs to the faith of Christ. And godly teachers are to lift up their voice like a Trumpet to make mens hearts shake and tremble for rebellion against the Mediatour: and therefore the godly teachers 40.50. and 60. years ago taught the way of the Lord more perfectly then many now do. vid. infra. the note on Levit. 26.17. chap. 8. Quest. 7. & Answ. Ʋpon the text of Deut. 30.] Moses speaks this of the Law, the Apostle of Christ taught in the Law, Rom. 10. So Esaias faith, In his Law shall the nations hope, Esay 42.4. Matthew saith, In his Name, Mat. 12.21. The Apostle calleth this text, the word of faith, and the just do live by faith: Moses sheweth the Law of Jehovab, that is Christ is a law of Love, and the Apostle calleth it, A law of Faith: So then it is a form of Wholesome words of Faith and Love, which is in Christ Jesus. And how precious, sweet, dear, rich, pure, is the Law of Christ, being a Law of Life in him, Deut. 32.47. Therefore Stephen saith, that Moses received from the Angel of the Covenant, lively Oracles, Acts 7.38. And so the Apostles received from him words purer than snow, whitter than milk, sweeter than honey, or the honey comb, words of spirit and life to preach unto the dead apostate families, John 6.63. So the Sacrifices, washings, tabernacle, the land of promise, &c. profited nothing, were a killing letter, having the veil on the heart. The words and doctrine that Christ spake to Moses, they were spirit, and they were life. And so David knew, (and all of faith) when he cryed to Christ to be his sprinkling, and his hyssop, Psalm 51. And so Esaias and Stephen taught them: and the Apostle, Rom. 10.6. Exod. 20.2. And all expo∣sitions of the ten words were a killing letter not looking to that which is within the Veile, even the grace and truth of our Lord Jesus Christ, Acts 15.11. The Prophets and Apostles unveil Moses face most bright∣ly, they have made it as open, even as Moses made it when he took off the veil when he went to speak with Christ, Read. Quest. 8. & Ans. N. II. To be man and to suffer] Mark the cause of the Apostle, I am accused for the hope of the promise made of God unto our Fathers, Psalm 16.10. & 22.29. & 40.6, 7, 8. Acts 26. this was a constant doctrine from the beginning, and to be declared from age to age to the end of the world, that the Son of God should come down from heaven to be a second Adam, and to give himself a sin-offering to death and be raised from the dead, 2 Tim. 2.8. and so in this doctrine Christ is our bread and drink, Joh. 6.27, 28, 29, &c. The pattern was not yet to come down from heaven to take our nature to be his Taberna∣cle, and his flesh and bloud by sacrifice to be our bread and drink, Iohn 1.14. & 6.54. And till the Son of God came to be and do thus, All that Christ revealed to Moses was sponsorius, and an introduction of a better hope, that is, Christ hoped for, by all faithfull of the old Testament, by whom they and we come unto God, Hebr. 11.1, 2, 3, 4. Iohn 14.6. Heb. 8 Ephes. 1.10, 11, Esay 15 1, 2, 3. Acts 13. Ibid. N. II. Accounting this wisedome foolishness.] And the light shi∣neth
in the darknesse, and the darkness comprehended it not, Joh. 1. . It was ever a stumbling block and foolishness to the wise and prudent of this world, to the natural man: Iohn 6.52.60.1.1 Cor. 1. & 2. And so is was to many while Moses was yet alive, Deut. 31.11, 27, 28, 29. such waited but for an opporeunity of Moses death, and Ioshuahs, and the godly Elders, then they did shew themselves: so blessed Paul spake of Wolves and apostasie, Acts 20. It is hard for us to deny all of the first Adam, and wholly submit to be taught and guided in the do∣ctrine of the second Adam, the Lord from heaven. Quest. 8. & Answ. N. IV. Of Melebisedecks and Levies sacrifice hood] See the Apostles disputation concerning Melchesedeck (Heb. 5. & 6 & 7.) who was still alive, after a sort, in discription. As the holy Prophet Da∣vid taught the people of his dayes, and what use they should make of the Land of Promise, Psalm 95. and of the use and end of the sacrifi∣ces and washings, &c. Psalm 40. & 51. So he taught them that Levies Priesthood should have an end; for that our glorious Lord Iesus Christ is made a sacrificer for ever ofter the order of Malchesedek, and not after Aarons order of the Levitical Priesthood; where neither the persons or things that Levi did, could justifie the doers, or commers thereunto. Now the Lord Jesus Christ he was promised and prophecied of in all the old holy volume of the book of God, that he was made a Mediator, and a Surety (a Sponsor) of such an Administration that should perfectly save and justifie them that came unto God by him. He was of God the Fa∣ther (none else could) made a Sponsor, a surety. All the sacrifices that he commanded our Fathers they did them, till the fullness of times did come, and then he did send his beloved Son and Servant in whom his soul delights, he took unto him true humanity and was a Sponsor, a Sure∣ty of a better Testament, (i.e.) The Mediatour of the New Testament, for their full conolation: to comfort them concerning their works, and concerning the sorrows of their hands, and concerning the earth which God hath cursed. He shall do that which all Levites tribe could not ex opere operato. Levies Priesthood could not cleanse the conscience from the guilt of our sinful works, not procure a blessing on our Labours, nor make a new world: his Priesthood could not cleanse the conscience from dead works, to serve the living God, &c. And for this cause Christ was a Sponsor of a better covenant. And Christ himself faith, he will be∣come this Sponsor and Mediatour to answer the will of the Father. Lo, I come to do thy will, O God, thy Law and appointment (for the re∣demption of thy people that thou hast given me) is in my heart to give my self a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling favour of rest God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not counting their trespasses unto them. For be made him to be a Sin-offering for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. Much more might be said, but let the people of God study the Scriptures their inheritance. God hath a time and a day wherein he will burn up the hay, stubble, and
rotten wood of impertinent applications and interpretations. Ibid. N. I V. Is not an bidd doctrine.] It is not an hidden thing nor a wonder for thee O Israel: for this doctrine that the Son of God should come down from heaven to be man hath been taught to thy Fa∣thers from the beginning, and that he should be the great High Priest and Sacrifice, and that he should raise himself from death to give hope to all faithful of their resurrection. Israel should not make doubt of this doctrine. Yet it is a Wonder as Ethan sings of it, Psalm 89. great is the mystery of Godliness. But this hath been ever taught in the Church, this doctrine is the faith of Gods elect, and the Churches possession, Ioh. 1. Levi the Tribe appointed to reach divinity should never have been graven in the bright and pleasant Smaragd, if the stories of this Art had been dark. et had been a fitter stone for darkness. The minde of man may have abundant satisfaction, and strong confidence concerning the doctrine of the way of life, by holy and humble diligent study of the Scriptures: And they that will not believe Moses and the Prophets will not believe though one should rise from the dead. Quest. 9. and Answ. Taught by tradition] Note, the doctrine of faith one, and the same whether by Tradition or Writing. For those 2513. years, the faith of the Gospel was propagated by tradition by great pro∣phets of long life, and great authority and sacrifices as seals of the Co∣venant added for confirmation of doctrine. Quest. 10 and Answ. Midian] Although Abraham taught his houshold the faith of Christ, as is seen in the book of Ioh, yet many of his posterity apostated to that idolatry, religion and opinion, with which he was corrup∣ted, at YR, others fell to the false faith, religion and opinion of Peor, Jos. 23. & 24. and did seek to curse the true faith of Gods elect, and the holy people of that profession, Num 23. & 24. Midian was of Abraham by Ketrah. The world was then full of false opinions and heretical Do∣ctrines as now: they could plead for Nachors Teraphim, for Peor, for Chemosh and Milham, &c. but Israel must hearken to the Law and Testimony that Christ gave them: so Moses and Iosuah most pathetically, a little before their deaths, exhorted them, to regard the holy Law, and not to follow the traditions of their fathers, or of the Nations, Ios. 24. Deut. Quest. 11. and Answ. And wou'd have gone into Egypt again] Like them are our Popish fools, that would go into Rome Egypt again, for their Fish, Flesh pots, Leeks, Garlick, Onions, Cucumbers, Melons, their doctrines of bodily exercise, of Images, Pilgrimages, the dotage of Purgatory &c. goodly Cates sure, to be compared to the heavenly Man∣na of Gods word, and Gods dwelling in his tabernacle among us. We do not consider the glorious presence in Christ in his Ordinances and prote∣ction, &c since he brought us from among them. By the Gospel, the way of Christ, the face of God shineth upon us. The Gospel is the object of promise, joy and gladness to every honest hearted Christian. Let our apostate hearts remember Lots wife in looking back to Rome-Sodome. Christ complained Israel would none of me: Oh that we could think of
these things: What one nation on the earth hath been like us for mer∣cies, and how ill have we requited the Lord? as Israel did so do we, Psal. 81. Deut. 32. Ibid. Of their forefathers.] The idolatry of Terah and Abraham conti∣nued above 500 years, to the death of Iosuah, yea long after, Iosuah 24. 2.14. Observe how fast idolatry and superstition, and will worship sticks in the heart of posterity. Although they had the fiery Law expounded by Moses, and miracles to confirm them of the truth of that Religion, that holy faith of the Son of God Moses, taught, and possessed Canaan, in the obedience of that holy faith, and many chastisements for Apostasie to Baal Peor, &c yet many of their hearts were false, So it is with us at this day in our nation; although God hath spoken to us by his Son, & have the blessed Scriptures, which have in them a blessed comforting, flaming light, and brightnes, and 70. years and more under Gods gracious husbandry, yet how rebellious! Oh mourn for the Corruption of our natures, and see how the tradition of a false religion from fore-fathers prevailed and prevaileth with many afore the written word. Our Tea∣chers must earnestly press the reading of all the holy Scriptures: but surely they do but coldly and seldome do it. The Serpent and his seed are great enemies to the holy Scriptures, and a surer note of a wicked man need not be sought after, then the slighting and the scorning of the Scriptures. Ibid As of the Canaanites] And an Angel of the Lord came up from Gilgal to Bochim, and said, I have made you to go up out of Egypt, and have brought you unto the Land which I sware unto your fathers, and I said, I will never break my covenant with you: And you shall make no league with the inhabitants of the Land: you shall throw down their altars, but you have not obeyed my voice. Why have you done thus? Wherefore I also said, I will not drive them out from before you, but they shall be as thornes in your sides, and their Gods, (their religion) shall be a snare unto you. And it came to passe when the Angel of the Lord spake all these words unto the Children of Israel, that the people lift up their voice and wept. And they called the name of that place Bochim, and they sacrificed there unto Jehovah, Judges 2. observe all that chapter. Quest. 12. and Answ. Joyful presence dwelling among them] It is a joyful thing indeed, and a glorious priviledge to have the Tabernacle reared, that Christ may dwell among us, and for us to tread in his Courts. Look what any Father, Husband, or King is to a Kingdome and familie, such is Christ to his. After Christ had promised many blessings Levit. 26. as the basis of all he saith, And I will set my Tabernacle among you and my soul shall not abhorre you, and I will walk among you, and will be your God, and ye shall be my people. And look these texts for meditation to see the glory of Christ in his Tabernacle as our Prophet, Priest, and King, Exodus 20.24. & 25.22. & 29.42, 43 & 30.6.36. Psalm 2. 1 Sam. 12.12. Psalm 45. & 47. & 48. & 84. & 95. & 100. & 145. &
146, &c. So when they were to come from Babel this is mentioned as the foundation of all comfort, Ezek. 37.26, 27. also we must mind what is to be done of us: ye shall reverence my sanctuary, and keep my sab∣baths, and never appear before Christ empty, Exod. 23.15. Levit. 26.2. Now observe the same glorious mercies are related and applyed to us un∣der the New Testament, 2 Cor. 6.16. Apoc. 21.3. and their holy pra∣ctise in their worships, 2 Cor. 7.1.1 Cor. 11. & 14. And their Alms-deeds every Lords day in their holy meetings, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. as Deut. 16.16, 17. Now of the uses of application, how many? how great? how full of comfort and terrour? First, to instruct, God would not have a Church or family in the world, but because he would have holy worship: Religion is the essence of a Church, family, or person. 2. The world is not continued but for this. 3. Great are the priviledges of the Church that Christ is among us by his ministery and ordinances, for our Prophet, Priest, and King. 4. What an heinous wickedness it is to interrupt or pull down holy things 5. They are cursed of God that do so. Secondly to exhort, 1. to study, 2. to procure, 3. to maintain, 4. to be zealous for, 5. to esteem above all, and to be thankful for: 6. to take up with content, 7. to relish, this glory, Psalm 42. & 63. & 122. & 132.8. To lay to heart to mourn for the absence and desolation of holy things, Dan. 9. & 10.2, 3 Lament 1. & 2. & 3. Thirdly, To reprove the wretchedness and deadness concerning these things, Acts 18.17. &c. Also we must ever observe, that Moses Taber∣nacle was according to the Pattern of that which was in heaven. They that enjoyed the peace of God in the earthy tabernacle, had the same still in the heavenly, as Psalm 15.1, 2. And it is said our Lord, with his own bloud went through the veil of his flesh, into the most holy place, the very heavens, as the high Sacrificer went with bloud into the holy place made with hands. This touched often, and needful to be obser∣ved in all the Ceremonies of Moses, else we shall have a veil over our hearts, as Jewes and Papists, who see not Christ the end of all these things that were to be abolished. Ibid. 12. Quest. and Answ.—Victories] By faith they waxed valiant in Battel, and turned to flight the Armies of the Alians. Their faith saw the dies of Christ, that he would overcome him that had the pow∣er of death, the Devil. the Prince of darkness, the old Serpent. There∣fore by faith they overcame the Serpents seed. All true souldiers should be doctors in divinity, such will conquer with small loss, as Israel under Josuah, and the Elders surviving Josuah, who delighted in the study of Moses, Jos. 1. & 23.6. And Davids Captains by knowledge of Moses were mighty in Battail, Heb. 11.34. Quest. 13. and Answ. N. I. Analek discomfited] Amalek of Esau de∣spised the faith as Esau his Father, and became a fierce persecutor of the faith of Christ, and his people, which was the break-neek of that
State. Gods curse, and the Churches War were never reversed nor ap∣peased to the daies of Haman. A warning to persecuting States, espe∣cially to mystical Edom. The form of the pattent and promise that God gave to Abraham. is for comfort to all the Israel of God for ever; I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee, as see in Numb. 24. and Balaam foretels the like destruction to Kittim as to Amalek: The same enmity, the same war, and the same curse shall follow the Serpents seed in perdition to the end. N. II. a partition wall] This was the vail and covering on all nations which Christ would abolish, Esay 25. Dan. 9.24. &c. Ephes. 2.15. God hated the apostate families like Devils, that he gave by Moses an hedge of Lawes to keep Israel from amity and communion with them And this was one special Law, that certain Beasts, fowls and fish prohibited (to distinguish them in diet from heathen) are called unclean. So be all without the Gospel in their high learning, Ro. 1.21, 22. as Socrates, Plato, Tully, Varro, Plutarch, and the civilest. These things were continuall occasions of enmity between an Israelite and an Heathen, Ephes. 2.15. Hest. 3.8. Ibid. N. II. Separated and made Aliens] But being blessed in Christ, (when the vessel was let down from heaven, Acts 10.) they and their children were equally stated in all those glorious priviledges of Israel, Eph. 2.11, 12, 13, 14. Let Anti-poedobaptists consider it: and hence forward call not your children common or unclean: and do not reason against the comforts of your selves and children, where the merciful Lord God gives you no warrant so to do; nay, is it not a daring speech against God and his covenant, to say the infants of believing Gentiles are common and unclean, whereas Christ saith they are clean and holy, 1 Cor. 7. Ibid. N. II. without God in the world] Compare just divine severity. When the X. tribes had revolted from Davids house, and the religion of the Temple. They were almost in as bad a case for salvation as the hea∣thens. Observe Ephes. 2.12 &c. It shall be further noted hereafter, that it may be deligently marked. Quest. 14. and Answ. From the Angel Jehovah] Be carefull to observe how Christ is called Angel, and Iehovah, Exod. 3. and in many other places. Also in Exod 23. mark this speech; Behold, I send an Angell before thee to keep thee in the way, and to bring the into the place which I have prepared. Beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him not, for he will not pardon your transgressions, for my Name is in him. He is the express Image of the fathers person, Hebrewes 1.2, 3. confer Matthew 17. 5. Iohn 12.47, 48, 49, 50. All the Churches of the New Testament should hear him what he by his Spirit saith to the Churches. And the seven golden Candlesticks felt his hand as heavy, as the Golden Can∣dlestick of Israel: both provoked him, and both felt: he was a con∣suming fire. Ibid. Plagued by enemies on every side] Among many particular evils
that Israel was plagued with, note this, that false religion brought pe∣nury, and was the decay of liberty of trades and commutation of civil commerce, &c. Jud. 5.6, 7, 8.1 Sam. 13.19. corruption in religion and trouble of State ever go together: Then was War in the Gate, Jud. 5. The State of the Common weal, commonly followeth the State of the Church. Princes in all their Governments should so mannage their affairs in righteousness, temperance and godliness to be a Commenta∣ry on Psalm 2.10, 11, 12. and let them remember Davids last words, 2 Sam. 23.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Mr. Fox in Acts and Monuments towards the later end of Henry the seventh hath a worthy speech concerning this.
CHAP. VI. With Questions, Answers, and Annotations on them, How Redemption was taught unto David, and others. QƲest. 1. Declare further how God opened the mystery of his will for mans Redemption in after times. Answ. Christ was promised to David the sweet Psalmist of Israel, who in holy Psalmes taught his people the histo∣ries past, and the prophecies to come, which draw unto Christ and his Rest for mans Redemption, as if the matters were present. And in those dayes and after: the brightness of Christ in holy prophesies doth so plentifully shine, that they cannot here be conveniently abridged. QUest. 2. and Answ. The Psalms and Prophets are indeed a most sure word of prophesie, and a glorious light enlight∣ning the eyes to see the Person and Office of Christ the Morning Star, according to the promises to Hevah and Abraham: There∣fore now onely express a few texts how the Saints of the old Te∣stament, professed experimentally the doctrine of the apostasie of our first parents, and of the promises? Answ. Psalm 51. ver. 5. Behold, Joh. 15.14. & 2.5.4, 5, 6. I was born in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive me. Ver. 7. Purge me with Hyssop, and I shall be clean, wash me and I shall be whiter than snow.
Ver. 10. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me. Ver. 11. Confer this verse con∣cerning David with Cains murder and excommuni∣eation from Gods presence and terrour of conscience, Gen. 4. Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me. Ver. 12. restore to me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit, &c. Psalm 130.3. If thou, O Jah, shouldst mark iniquities, O Lord who shall stand, Ver. 4. But forgiveness is with thee, that thou mayest be feared. Psal. 143.1. Hear my prayer, O Eternal, give ear to my supplication: in thy faithfulness answer me, and in thy righ∣teousness. V. 2. And enter not into judgement with thy servant for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. Psal. 32.1. Blessed is the man whose transgression is forgi∣ven, whose sin is covered. V. 2. Blessed is the man unto whom Jehovah counteth not in∣iquity, and in whose spirit there is no guile. V. 3. When I kept silence my bones waxed old through my roaring all the day long. V. 4. For day and night thy hand is heavy upon me, my moi∣sture is turned into the drought of summer▪ V. 5. I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquitie have I not hid. I said I will confess my transgression unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the punishment of my sin. Gen. 15.16. And he believed in Jehovah, and he counted it to him for righteousness. Hab. 2.4. Behold his soul which is lifted up, is not upright in him▪ But the just shall live by his faith. Psal. 22.4. Our fathers trusted in thee, they trusted, and thou didst deliver them. V. 5. They cryed unto thee, and were delivered, they trust∣ed in thee, and were not confounded. Esay 26.3. Thou wilt keep him in continual peace, whose minde is staid on thee: because he trusteth in thee.
V. 4. Trust ye in Jehovah for ever; for in Iah Jehovah is the Rock of all ages. Jerem. 17.7. Blessed is the man that trusteth in Jehovah, and whose hope Jehovah is. V. 8. For he shall be as a tree planted by the waters, and that spreadeth out her roots by the river, and shall not see when heat cometh, but her leaf shall be green, and shall not be carefull in the year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding fruit. Hab. 3.17. Although the fig tree shall not blossome neither fruit be in the vine, the labour of the Olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat, the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and no heards in the stalls. V. 18. Yet will I rejoice in Jehovah, I will joy in the God of my alvation. V. 19. The Lord Iehovah is my strength, and he will make my feet like hindes feet, and he will make me to walk upon mine high places. Psalm 66.18. If I regard wickedness in my heart, the Eter∣nal will not hear my prayer. Psalm 103.1. Bless the Eternal O my soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy name, V. 2. Bless the Eternal, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits. V. 3. Who forgiveh all thine iniquities, who healeth all thy diseases. V. 4. Who redeemeth thy life from destruction, who crowneth thee with loving kindeness, and tender mercies, &c. QUest. 3. What do you, in general, observe out of these portions of Scripture? Answ. These Scriptures are a confession of faith, procee∣ding from the holy Spirits illumination, and experience in the inner man, agreeing with the doctrine of the promises, where∣in the faithful soul applyeth the doctrine of the corruption of nature, and of justification, and the fruits thereof unto spe∣cial
uses of information, confession, prayer, and praise, con∣taining two parts what we are without Christ, and what we are by Christ, for he is the Mercy-seat. Quest. 4. What more specially may, and is to be minded? Answ. I. It is necessary that each one, Job 11.12. & 14.4 & 15.14.16. Gen. 6.5. & 8.21. Gen. 1.27. compa∣red with 5.3. Psal. 51.5. & 58.3. Esa. 48.8. and circum∣cision enjoin∣ed in infancy sheweth the corruption of nature. though in a vi∣sible Church-estate, know and be perswaded of the truth of the doctrine of the uncleanness and filthiness of the corrupti∣on of nature, taken from parents derived from the first Adam, and that all actual sin proceedeth from this birth-sin as from a fountain. 2. That the Son of God became a Second Adam to be to all that receive him, and believe in him, a fountain for sin and for uncleanness, and to renew and create in us his glorious I∣mage, and to repair the lapses and decayes of the same. The graces of which are from his fulness, as a well of water sprin∣ging up unto eternal life. 3. The regenerate upon conscience of guiltiness can never be in quiet till with godly sorrow he do freely and ingenuous∣ly confess his sin, which being done by the convincing power of the Spirit of Christ, the soul which groans and sighs from the same Spirit earnestly longeth and prayeth for reconciliati∣on, and restoring to former favour, peace, and joy with God, which is more sweet and satisfactory then all contentments in this World, and on the contrary the withdrawing or withhold∣ing from the conscience his gracious Divine aspect nothing more dejecteth. 4. No man can stand before God to be justified, if God should judge him according to the Law. 5. Here is shewed the blessedness of the saints touching justification, and how them of the old Testament understood the doctrine, that it consisted in transgression forgiven, in sin covered, iniquity not imputed (speeches importing one, and the same thing) which grace is only procured by Christs re∣demption and satisfaction figured in the Gospel-Law. And
when the Lord God preaching his free promise of grace and peace in Christ Jesus by the words of reconciliation, doth by his spirit unite a man to Christ, then at that instant he re∣ceiveth and believeth in Christ as Mediator of his attonement, justification, and salvation, and by this faith in Christ the saints in all ages had good report, Heb. 11. 6. No man can fear God, that is to say, serve God as his Child, unlesse he be set free, that is, justified from sin by faith and forgiveness. Faith resting upon Christ, and apprehending (at least a possibility of) forgiveness, worketh love, obedience, reverence and godly fear, Luke 7.47. Ro. 5.1. Esa. 26.3, 4. Heb. 4.5-56. & 1.0.16. to 23. Psa. 130. & 62. S. Rom. 10.14. Also hope, joy, pa∣tience, perfect or continual peace, quiet waiting upon God, and stirreth up to prayer with boldness and confidence. 7. In coming unto God we must do it with an humble heart from an inner feeling of our sins and corruptions, and a true desire to be eased or justified from thern; not only for re∣mission of guilt and punishment, but mortification and san∣ctification. For no man that stands upon his own righteous∣ness, or alloweth, or is indulgent to himself in any sin, secret or open, of omision or commission, can be an humble and upright supplicant, and petitioner to God, nor can look for audience. 8. The saints go only to Jehovah in prayer, and onely to him for forgiveness, and all kindes of mercies, who hath set up his throne of grace onely in Christ. Our Lord in his doctrine of prayer, teaching us to pray, confirmeth this, Matthew chap. 6. Here is to be noted the glorious use of faith, not onely for justification, but how necessary it is for us in this our pil∣grimage, in all estates, conditions, and varieties of life, that it settleth the heart, and banisheth from the inner man heart∣rending thoughtfulness, that the minde, will, and affections, are conserved from heaven in a flourishing green tempera∣ture: the word of promise, and the blessed Spirit that sealeth the promises do so water, nourish and restore the soul, that it is carryed above all wants and difficulties, &c.
10. Before we can have any comfort to be delivered from any danger by the seed of the Serpent, or from any other affliction, or for assistance, consolation, or direction in any thing for our selves or for the Church, we must go to God by faith in Christ for forgiveness of sin. 11. The inner feeling and apprehension of Justification, Psal. 103.1, 2, 3. & Psal 32.1, 2, 3, &c. Mortification, and Sanctification, doth greatly affect an ho∣ly soul with thankfulnesle and prayse, and denyal of self-sufficiency, &c. deeply admiring the blessed Jehovah in those, and in all other fruits, comforts, and effects of his favour, &c. &c. Quest. Go on to shew to what other famous Pillar the Spirit of endless wisdom hath fastened the holy and pleasant Chain of times which direct and draw unto Christ? Answ. To the building of Salomons Temple, a figure of Christ the true Temple. Quest. How many years are from the Lamb of the Pas∣sover, or since the comming from Egypt, to the Temples foundation? Answ. Four hundred and fourscore years. Quest. What Scriptures are contained in those four hun∣dred and eighty years. Answ. Exodus 12. to the end of that book, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuterenomy, Josua, Judges, Ruth, two Books of Samuel, the first of Kings to the 6. chap. and most of the first of Chronicles: and the two first chapters of the se∣cond of Chronicles, and very much of the book of Psalmes.
Annotations upon the Questions and Answers of the sixth CHAPTER. Qvest. & Answ. David the sweet Psalmist] David sung most sweetly of Christ, and his Kingdome: of his Person (both of his divine and humane nature) and offices, and the be∣nefits thereby. He spake of Christs humiliation and exalta∣tion. This Patriark and prophet in holy Psalmes speaking by the Spirit of God; 2 Sam. 23. Mat. 18. calleth Christ his Lord, Psalm 110. the Son in whom they that trust are happy Psalm 2. Also after God had pro∣mised him Christ, he called him David beloved, Psalm 130.10. Mat. 3.17. &c. Quest. 2. and Answ. Psalm 51 7. Purgeme with hyssop] The High Sa∣crificer purged the unclean with hyssop: he was to do the outward acti∣on, and could do no more: David did not believe the doctrine of bodi∣ly exercise. So John Baptist saith, I baptizlyou with water, but the Mes∣sias with the Holy Ghost, So Daniel goeth to God in Christ, who is the true hyssop, and he that sprinkleth the conscience for justification and sancti∣fication, as St. Peter taught the circumeision, 1 Pet. 1.3. and St. Paul in the Epistle to them, Heb. 9. and 10. So David confessed he was a Le∣per, and unclean spiritually, crying to God to be purgd, and cleansed as Lepers, and other unclean were purified, Levit. 14.6. Num. 19.18. By this we see they had knowledge what the Ceremonies meant, and the Law was written in their hearts, and so their mindes, and on the Table of their heart, Prov. 3.3. & 7.3. and none but God could so write it, and this was from his covenant in Christ, he being their God; also this shewes they had expounded of the Law. The Modern Jews could say (and they had it from their ancient El∣ders) and an excellent saying it is, What Aaron did on earth, Michael (that is Christ) did in heaven: But yet they should go one point of faith further, That every Sacrificer must be taken from among men, to teach us to believe that the Son of God should take mans nature to end Moses, and to be a sacrificer for ever, Heb. 5.1, 2. &c. But they doubted and said, Who can go up to heaven to bring Christ down to dwell in our Taberna∣cle and who can go to the deep of the earth to bring Christ frm the dead. They believed not JESUS to be Jehovah, and by the Godhead to raise the manhood, and that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto Himself: not counting their trespasses to them, and that he made him to be a sin-offering for us, who knew no sin that we might be made
God the Fathers righteousness or justification, pardon, forgiveness, free∣dome, and atonement in Him. Upon Psalm 143.1. Hear my prayer, O Eternall] As it was observed at the beginning that each comfort comes to us by way of free promise and covenant, (unthought of, and undesired on our part) so it is in this duty of prayer, helped us in the duty, and promised in the Mediatour to hear us, Psalm 50.15, Gen. 46.1. Ephes. 2.18. we could neither know what to pray, nor had the face to look up to God. But this through the work of the Spirit makes the saints (them of the old Testa∣ment, as well as we of the New, as Ephes. 2.18, 19. weeboth) to utter their Groans, and sighes to the God of Covenant: Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you, John 16. In all thy waies acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy waies, Prov. 3. By faith in Christ Habel drew near, or came to God, in assurance of ac∣ceptation, Heb. 10, 22. & 11.4. A promise believed most lively stir∣reth up to prayer, 2 Sam. 7.27. Dan. 9.1, 2, 3, &c. Ezek. 36.37. Gen. 32.9. The unchangeableness of Gods counsels, and the stability of the promises, yea, and the fruits of our Lord Christs death, do not dispense from the duty of prayer, yea they are wrought for our good by his ordi∣nance, Num. 16.46, 47. Quest. 3. and Answ. The Spirits illumination] The Spirit enlightneth the eyes of the understanding experimentally to know the mystery of God, who is the Father, and of Christ. It convinceth of sin and un∣cleanness, abaseth all our righteousness, sheweth the fountain for wa∣shing of guilt and filth: sealeth reconciliation in the assurance of ju∣stification and adoption: frameth the foul a new Creature, to humble filial and sincere obedience and invocation: it recovereth from-salls, and comforts in affliction, and carrieth the heart aloft in praises and thanksgivings, &c. Quest. 4. and Answ. N. 1. From the first Adam] By one man sin entred into the world in whom all men have sinned, Rom. 5. Mark there the sweet comparisons of the first and second Adam: Again, that which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit, John 3. Every man is born an ignorant Ass-colt, born an Atheist and Idolatour: born of a false worship, an hypocrite, a blasphemer, and a profaner of Gods Name and Worship, forgetfull and unmindeful, and slighting Gods sanctified time of Worship: born with a stubborn spirit against the duties of all religions, born a murderer, an adulterer, a thief, a false accuser, and slanderer, a covetous uncontonted person. In all things the thoughts of mans heart is evil from his youth. Therefore the Spirit testifieth that wear all born dead in sin and children of Wrath by nature. But alasse! How dully do we thinke of these things? Ibid. N. 1. Became a second Adam] David looked to the Tabernacle God would rear, not such a one as was made with hands, but from the
similitude of that which was on earth, he looked to the heavenly thinge themselves: Faith did evidence to him things not seen. David saith to God in Christ, reconciling the world to himself, wash me. So the Apostles shew this washing and cleansing, as from him, that is, from the beginning, but manifested to be a second Adam to be seen, selt, and handled, even for this great mercy, 1 John 1.7. Apoc. 1.5. Tit. 3.5. 1 Pet. 1.2. Ibid. N. 2. repair the lapses and decayes] The just man falleth scaven times a day, but he riseth again, God will uphold that he shall not fall finally: and David prayed for upholding, Psalm 37.24. & 51.12, Pro. 24 16 and God doth uphold us in all our temptations, that there will be an issue out of them, Psalm 73.23. 1 Cor. 10.13. N. 3. wharawing or with hold,] How much more shall the bloud of Christ, who through the Eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works, to serve the living God, Heb 9 14 & 10.22. 1 John . 20, 21. N. 4 According to the Law] We most hence learn to undervalue our best abilities, and to be humbled for our exactest performances. There∣fore Christ ordained sacrifice for the sins of their holy offerings, Deut. 16. And that the High Priest should bear the iniquity of their holy things, which the children of Israel shall hallow in all their holy gifts, Exod. 28.38. And the Saints were sensible of this; confessing we are all unclean, and that all our righteousness is as filthy raggs, Esay 64.6. if the best man dare not justifie his actions, his actions cannot justifie him: the most regenerate doth not what he would and should, Rom. 7. a godly man sees cause to hate somewhat he doth in his best actions. The Law of Christ, Exod. 20. is more spiritual than the best man. If we con∣demn our selves, we justifie the Law, that it is holy, just, and good. N. 5. That it consisted in transgression, forgiveness] By the grace of for∣giveness, we stand justified from sin, or we stand, being made free from sin: the Law maker may forgive sin, and so doth, but yet in the Media∣tour, and so we may stand. Then being justified by faith, we have peace toward God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, Rom. 5 1. This verse, yea all the chapter is but an inference from the former doctrine in chap 3. of justification, and from the Testimony that Abraham and David felt in themselves, Rom. 4. Again, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen, it is God that justifieth, that setteth free, that forgiveth Romans 8.1. all our comfort dependeth on forgivenesse of sin. When an Israelite offered sacrifice, it is said, his sin shall be forgiven him, so he stood just by the grace of forgiveness, by faith in Christs sacrifice. So the doctrine of justification by faith in Christ hath witnesse of the Law, and the Prophets. No new doctrine, Levit. 4. & 5. & 6. Romans 3.21, 21, &c. Habel offering in faith inherited the righteousness or ju∣stification, that is by faith, Heb. 11. so in the Seal of the Lords Supper, Matth. 26.26. forgiveness of sins is only spoken of as the foundation of
all blessings, the most admired priviledge of the Saints, drawing all o∣ther after it, as adoption, peace, joy, &c. as non-forgiveness drawes wrath, and all other miseries after it. If sin be such an evil how unva∣luable is the sacrifice of the body and bloud of the Lord Jesus Christ. N. 7. From an inward feeling] every one should be affected with grief and godly sorrow for his birth sin, as David Psalm 51. This saying should alwaies sound in our ears, that the Eternal God said, It repenteth me that I have made man: also this, the frame of mans heart is only wicked all the day, Gen 6. which is handled, Rom. 7. I do not that which I would, but that which I would not, that do I: O spoiled man that I ant, who shall redeem me from this aye sinning body. The wicked heart selleth himself to do all iniquity as A chab, 1 King. 21.20. But the god∣ly heart is sold against his will, as holy Paul, Rom. 7.14 we cry out and so we ought, upon particular sins, but are no humbled as we ought for the corruption of nature. The cause is greater than the effect, as in good, so in ill: The word of exhortion belongs onely to the weary and laden. Matth. 11. The whole will not seek the Physitian. To this man will I look, to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trembleth at my words, Esay 66 He healeth the broken in heart and bindeth up their wounds, Psalm 14.1 Chrn. 34.27. Esay 61.1. Mat. 5 3, 4, &c. From all that hath been written hitherto in this book, and shall be writ∣ten, let men consider, whether the People of Israel of the old Testament were not under a covenant of Grace, and whether they had not the law of God written in their hearts, as well as the Israel of God under the new Testament. Ibid N. 7. Or alloweth, or is indulgem] A man whose sin is forgiven, covered, not imputed, his spirit will be without guile: so the 1 Pet. 2.1. is urged upon the doctrine of the former chapter, Psalm 26. &c 32. & 66. 18, & 51. Prov. 28.13.14. The holy soul prayeth as sincerely and affe∣ctionately for upholding, in the path that is called holy, as for pardon. N. 10. Afore we can have any comfort] Observe the coherence of mat∣ter in these Psalms, so Jacob Gen. 46 1, 2, &c. Ezra 3.3. & 8.21, 22, 23, 31. Excellent in Samuel, who by faith and prayer in the bloud of the Covenant put to flight the Armies of the alians, 1 Sam. 7.9, 10. Heb. 11.32. There must be a dayly use and improvement of faith and pray∣r, in all occasions and conditions, especially as touching sin, and day∣y transgressions against holiness and righteousness in matter, manner, or end, in omission, or commission. We need to cry for cleansing of our secret faults to be pardoned and justified by him that justifyeth the un∣godly. As Abraham that was a believer, and a worshipper of God in Gen. 12. & 13. & 14. yet needed daily the use of his faith to be comfor∣ted in him that justifyeth the ungodly, Gen. 15. Rom. 4. do shew, and therefore he builded Altars in every place he came unto.
CHAP. VII. With Questions, Answers, and Annotati∣ons on them, How Redemption was taught from the foundation of the Temple, to the burning of it. QUest. 1. How doth the Temple teach concerning Christ? Answ. 1. That in due time the Son of God would make our flesh his Tabernacle or Temple, and dwell among us, Iohn 1.1.4. This was it that Salomon admired, saying, Is it true indeed, that God will dwell with man on earth? 2 Chr. 6.18. So did Agur Ben Jakeh, Prov. 30.19. 2. All that looked towards the Temple in faithful prayer should be heard. Christ is the true Temple in the heavenly Je∣rusalem, to whom they that look in prayer shall be heard. QUest. 2. Now after the Temple was built, who were obedient to the faith looking after the portion and inheritance in Christ the off spring and sen of David, and Root of Jssai Answ. Salomon, Asa, Jehosophat, all the godly Kings of the house of Judah, with many of the Sacrificers, Prophets and people, very many were of the faith of Abraham afore the Temple and after, as many as the siars of heaven in mul∣titude, and as the sand of the sea-shore which is innumera∣ble. All these through faith obtained good report, and all
these dyed in the faith that was first taught in Paradise, &c. em∣braced by Abel. Henoch, Noab, and all the faithful to the end of Daniels Seventy Sevens, which faith we are exhorted to follow. Our Lords fathers from David, Nathan, &c. to Zorobabel, must here specially be remembred: this line from Nathan is in Luke 3. QUest. 3. Was there any apostasie from the faith of the king∣dome of David in Christ, and the worship of Jehovah in his holy Footstool upon the then holy mountain? Answ. Yea, and that lamentable: after Salomons death Jeroboam the man of sin that made Israel to sin, of the Tribe of Ephraim drew away (as Nimrod) ten Tribes to rebellion, and to worship his Devils at Dan and Bethel. And besides the Worship of his Calves they were defiled with divers kinds of idolatry of the heathens: they filthily corrupted them∣selves, and dealt like a foolish people, and unwise, as a na∣tion void of counsel, forsaking Christ, the God of their Fa∣thers, and followed the blindness of the God of this world, Jesurun kicked with the heel, &c. Deut. 32. QUest. 4. Did all the Kings of Israel follow the Abomina∣tion of Ieroboams Calves? Answ. All but Shallum, and Hosea; Jeroboams house did, and so Baasaes, and Omries, and Jehues, and the rest? QUest. 5. Did the house of Judah wholly cleave to God? Answ. No, they also moved him to jealousie with their vanities, and Stephen chargeth them with this, Acts 7.42, 43 They mocked the messengers of God and despised his words and misused his Prophets, &c. 2 Chron. 36. Acts 7.52. detestable things: many of their Kings and
Princes, the great high counsel, the Sacrificers, Prophets, and people, most grievously revolted, and followed the pre∣cepts of men, and the statutes, ordinances,Salomon foretold them of their evils, Eccles. 10, 15, 16, 17. Rcho∣boam that foolish childe, that would not be admonished (Eccles. 2.) paid the price of that: so King Joram, and King Jo∣ash, &c. but look into Davids court and Hezekiahs, Psalm 101. Pro. 25.1. way and manners of Aholah apostate Israel, and the heathens their lovers: und even as Israel forsook Iehovah their Father, the God of their Fathers, and so became the Harlot Ahliobah. And in their apostasie advanced the wicked and unworchy, but scorned and oppressed the Gospel, and the godly con∣tinually. QUest. 6. Did not God send to his people Israel holy prophets o call them to repentance towards God, and faith in the Messias? Answ. From the daies of Moss, the Eternal God being full of compassion still raised up holy Prophets, who testified to them by his good spirit, and called them from the back∣slidings of their forefathers to the faith of the Law and Testi∣mony. And in all ages it is seen, that prophecying is the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel,So the A∣postles by the word of Christs mouth made a new heaven, and a new earth, Esay 66. Apoc 21. & 22. and a recreation of the World. Samuels and Elias times had proof hereof. QUest. 7. How was the goodness of God exercised toward Judah, keeping the truth of the Gospel? Answ. The gracious Lord God ever shewed his blessed protection over them, and alwaies things went well in that State. A most evident testimony, that the maintenance of the plainness and sincerity of the Gospel, according to the Written Word, is the most renowned, and perfect beauty, and greatest glory of a Kingdome, Dent. 4.8. Ezek. 20. all of it, Psalm 147.19.20.
QUest. 8. How was Christs severitie exercised towards Isra∣el, the ten Tribes, the Harlot Aholab for their apostasie? Answ. 1. They dis-esteeming the glorious Law of Ieho∣vah their God; and despising the holy Prophets, God depri∣ved them of true Prophets, and gave them over to the lying spirits of false Prophets, and foolish and idol-shepheards; by whom they were merchandized, blinded, deluded and sedu∣ced, to walk in their own counsels, in statutes that were not good, and in judgements by which they could not live, the life of a State or Church. 2. He did pour out his fury, and accomplish his anger, by bringing upon them famine, pestilence, and other heavy mi∣serics, by Intestine garboyls, and by secret corroding mis∣chiefs within their State, and by forreign enemies, chiefly by the Kings of the house of Aram, and by the Kings of the house of Ashur, who at last carried them away captive out of their own land, so that they became jezreel, Lo-rucha∣mah, and Lo ammi till our Lords dayes, then they were ga∣thered, pittied, and made Gods people by the preaching of the Apostles of the circumcision, Hosea 1. & 2.3. 1 Pet. 2.9, 10. QUest. 9. What came to Judah, the Harlot Aholibah for her revoltings? Answ. The same spiritual plagues (Esa. 6.9, 10. and 29.9.) that came to her elder sister Aholah, and also open manifestati∣on of anger andFor jealou∣sie read Deut. 29.20. Ezek. 16.38. & 9.5, 6. Salomon told them what would come to their whorish state, Prov. 6.34.35. jealou∣sie is the rago of a man, be will not spare in the day of vengeance. furious jealousie,Esay 30.3.5. Jer. 26 27, 36. Hosea 10.6. 2 Chrow. 24.24. & 28.19. that shame of State, sie read Deut.Esay 1.6. & 3.1, 2, 3, 4. Mic. 6.3. 2 Chron. 28. The colloguing and complying with Israel, and the nations, never did them good, but hurt, as their Forefathers with the Canaanites, Jud. 2. & 3. sickness of State2 Chron. 28 20. 1 King. 22. 2 Chron. 22.3, 4, 5. Mich. 6.16. intanglements of StateMich. 1.9 Hos. 5.13. and the Earthquake in Judah had its events in their State, Esay 6.4. Zach. 14.5. and in∣curable
wounds of State (through counsels, treaties, and af∣finity with the harlot Aholah, and the Nations) befell them: yea, astonishing sorrows by cruel enemies, and by being cap∣tivated to Babel, which tyrannized over them seventy years. Then Solomons race was ended, his Kingdome overthrown, the City and Temple burnt. QUest. 10. How many years had passed from the foundation of the Temple to the burning of it, and the third captivi∣ty upon that? Answ. Four hundred twenty seaven years. QUest. 11. What Sciptures are contained in those four hun∣dred twenty seaven years? Answ. The first Kings, chap. 6. to the end of that Book, the second of Kings, the second of Chronicles, from the se∣cond chap. many of the Psalmes, the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles. Esaias, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habbakuk Zephaniah, the three former chapters of Daniel, much of Jeremiah, and much of Ezekiel, o much as touch∣eth the nineteenth of Nebuchaduezzar, or the eleventh of Zedekiah, or the third Captivity. The Annotations upon the Questions, and answers of the seventh chapter. THe first Quest. and Answ. Is it true indeed] so Salomon had also said of Christ, that his delight was to be with the sons of Adam, Pro. 8. Therefore by faith Salomon built the Temple looking to things not seen, 2 Chron. 6.18. Great is the mystery of godliness, God manifested in the flesh, 1 Tim. 3. ult. Cant. 2.9-17. Mark Stephens Oration, Acts 7. The lamb is in the Temple in the heavenly Jerusalem, Apoc. 21. He is
the Holy of Holies, Dan. 9.24. And Christians are the Temple of God, 1 Cor. 3.16, 1 Pet. 2. Apoc. 15. God plagued old Babylon with horrible vengeance for the burning of the material Temple, Jeremiah 51.11. So he hath and will destroy mystical Babylon for crucifying Christ and Christians. Ibid. Agur Bn Iakeh] He beleeved the greate mystery of Godliness, when he spake these words. There be three things which are too won∣derfull for me, yea four which I know not. The way of an Eagle in the ayer, the way of a serpent up a rock: the way of a ship in the midst of the Sea, and the way of a Manchilde in a virgin, Prov. 30.18, 19. Esay 7.14. The same word for manchild is in Job 3.3. 2. Quest. & Ans. And all these dyed in the faith] All these with the faith∣full for the times of the old Testament were reconciled by the bloud of the Mediatour, and gathered into one head, even Christ the Head. And therfore when it is said they were gathered to theirfathers or people, they departed from that part of Gods family on earth to the other part of the family that is in heaven. Note also these Scriptures. That in the dis∣pensation of the fulness of the times (Dan. 9 24.) he mightbring to one Head, by Christ himself, all, both them which are in heaven, and them which are on the earth, Ephes. 1.10. Of whom hath name the whole family in heaven, and in earth, Ephes 3.15. And by himself to re∣concile all unto himself (making peace by the bloud of his Cross) both them which are in the earth, and them which are in the heavens, Col. 1.20. confer to this 1 Som. 7.9, 10. Heb. 11.32, 33, 34. Psalm 22. 4, 5. Psalm 49 It is said the godly shall enter into peace, Esay 57.2. Then none of Gods family were in any Popish purgatory, or in any po∣pish Lymbecks, the cursed heathenish dotages of Virgil and Ovid. The Pit-bread Locusts had Sun and aire much darkned, when they knew not whether mans soul ascended or descended, and whether the soul go∣eth to heaven, or Gehenna, to joy or torment, marke diligently, Ephes. 1.12, 13. for these words, that we —in whom ye, &c. Quest. 3. and Answ. The Kingdome of David] The revolting from the house of David, and the Religion of the Temple: these two trans∣gressions were the foundation of all other sins in the Church and State of the ten Tribes, Hosea 10.10 They forsook the Tent, Tabernacle, or Temple of Jehovah, and went to their own Tents and Gods: and then followed murders, slaughters, oppressions, &c. &c. Ibid. Jaroboam the man of sin] Ephraim broken in judgement willing∣ly walked after the commandment of Jeroboam. Because Ephraim made and instituted many Altars to sin. Altars shall be to him sin, They had enough of their own counsells, Psal 81. Ezek. 20.25. Christ will not be found, neither do spiritual blessings come to us, but in the spirits way, the conduits of Christs own Ordinances, they only work a transfor∣mation, Rom. 12.1, 2. Ephraim provoked Christ to anger most bitter∣ly, 1 Kings 12.28. and chap. 15. Hosea 8.11. 2 Cor. 3 3. Gal. 3.5. Hosea 12. Mich. 6. uls.
Israel, the harlot Aholah by breaking Wedlock, moved Christ to jealousie, and in time corrupted Judah by their counsels, and made her Aholibah. So Rome is called the great Harlot, and the mother of Har∣lots that corrupted, and seduced the Churches by her sorceries, and made them harlots, Ezek. 16.38. Apo. 17. As Jeroboam, so the Pontificalitie is called the man of Sin, that made all the world to sin, 2 Thess. 2. Apo. 17. Now the harlot and foolish woman, the ten Tribes, babbles loud, and disputes smoothly and subtilly against Judah, as if Wisdom and Truth were with them, Prov. 9.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. so doth the woman-Whore of the seven Mountain City, plead and write against all refor∣med Churches that have come out of Babel; as the godly in the ten tribes forsook the Communion of the Calves of Dan and Bethel, 2 Chron. 11.13, &c. Ibid. and to worship his Devils] They sacrificed to Devils, not to God, Deut. 32.17. Christ by Moses prevented the pretensed counsels of idolaters, Jeroboam he pleaded he had not forsaken God, but that he worshipped God that brought Israel from Egypt. But the same spirit that spake by Moses, calls his Calves, Devils, 1 Kings 22.28, 2 Chron. 11.15. Quest. 4. and answ. Jeroboams house did, and so Baasaes] All that go to her return not again, neither take they hold of the waies of life, Pro. 2.19. For great toyl they took, family after family, to maintain the faction of Jeroboams iniquity. But God swept them all away as dung, till all was gone, Prov. 5.9, 10. 1 Kings 14.10. They perished in their waies and courses, against the Kingdome of Christ, as David foretold, Psalm 2.12. Quest. 5. and Answ. Moved him to jealousie] They fretted Christ their husband (humanitus dictum) and brake his heart with their who∣rish hearts and eyes, Ezek. 6.9. and 16. all of it; and so the twenti∣eth, and three and twentieth chapters. Judah the harlot Aholibah, she fol∣lowed idols, horses, money, wealth, pride, and their lovers; she wea∣ried her self with these lyes and vanities, Ezek. 23. & 24, Jer. 2.18, 19, 20. false religion and earthly confidence must go together. But see, sincerity needs none of those poor refuges, Psalm 20. read Esay 2.6, 7, 8, 9. & 29.13. with chap. 30.1, 2, 3. and good Kings must not greatly multiply horses, nor money; nor bring their people back into Egypt, Deut. 17. Princes are not wise, nor learned, that either lead not their people out of Rome-Egypt, or that would reduce them thither, Rome is called Sodom and Egypt, for filthiness and cruelty, Apo. 11. Ibid. With their vanities] Dreams and Precepts of men, a policy of Satan, and the lying spirits his Angels, to make men forget the Law of Jehovah, and his sincere worship: when the precepts of men were urged in, or, for Gods worship, the Patrons of these things caused the holy Teachers to be prisoned in secret corners, or they were forced to
hide themselves in secret corners from the tyranny of such wise, under∣standing prudent prophets, and Seers: such deep heads that were able to add to Gods word; yea, that would hide their counsels from Iehovah, their breath and being. They turned things up and down, if one pro∣ject took not, they tryed another, if not that, then a third. So Haman cast Pur, not considering Iehovah saw them, and that he would dash all in pieces like a potters vessel: see the other pranks of these sleepers, gid∣dy, blinde, staggering, and wonderful ignorant in the things of Christs Kingdome: but expert in cogging and craft to polish and maintain mens precepts. These evils came from the apostasie of Israel, and from the plots and projects of Omri: (of him more anon) Who would think such men to have been in the state of Judah. Ibid. 5. Quest. and answ. The great High counsel, &c.] Esa. 5.19.23. & 8.18. & 28.14. & 29.19, 20, 21, & 30.8, 9, 10, 11. & 57.3, 4. Psal. 82. Amos 2.6, 12. & 5.10, 11. Mich. 3.1, 2. & 7, 5. Ezek. 8.11. and 11.2. Then said he unto me Son of man, these are the men that de∣vise wicked Counsel in this Citie, &c. So Christ, and his Apostles, and disciples were signs and wonders to the State of Israel: so it was in af∣ter times, Acts 13.40, 41. and to this day: The State of Judah shed much innocent blood in the daies of Manasleh, which Christ would not pardon. Quest. 6. and Answ. Testified to them] They called for fruits from the husbandmen of the vineyard to the end of the Seavensy Seavens, but when they had killed the heir, the vineyard was let out to the Gentiles, Esay 5. Neh 9.26. Jer. 7.25. Mat. 2.33.34, 35, &c. Ibid. Chariots and Horsemen of Israel] The Ordinances of Christ are drawn along by holy prophets. He tideth on prosperously with truth, meekness, and righteousness; and terrour, Psalm 45 3, 4, 5. And Christs Chariots, and his horsemen, were the strength of their State, Psalm 20. yet David and the Godly Kings, neglected not outward means, 2 Sam. 8.4. They that endeavor for to deprive our Land of Godly and able Teachers; are as treacherous to our Land, as they that would en∣deavour to set on fire the Navy Royal. They that would not have a godly able teaching Ministery would have our Land to be as the State of the ten tribes, 2 Chron. 15.3. Ibid. Samuels and Elias.] Samuels memory shall be blessed in the Church for ever for advancing holy learning by erecting schools of Pro∣phets: a worthy president for all godly Commonwealths. They are po∣ssessed with satanical and Julian fancies that would not have Schools of Prophets: Christ will curse such, and their posterities. Quest. 7 and Answ. blessed protection] Upon their glorious faith was a defence: and the last speech of Moses was made good through all their State, while they hold their glory, Deut. 33, 26, &c. That Scrip∣ture is full of heavenly joy to all Christian States, that hold the faith of Christ sincere, Esay 4. Where this glory is seated, there shall be a defense
Blessed hast thou been, O England, who is like unto thee? O people, saved by Jehovah from the eed of the Serpent sundry times, but especi∣ally in eighty eight, and in the Gan-powder plot, and in 164, &c. Ibid. Written word,] The sweet blessed Scriptures are to make Kings and Common Weals wise and learned, that the wrath of Christ burn not up their States, and in special the books of Kings, and Chronicles with the prophets of their times, are for instruction to Christian Kings, and polities in many things of State, but chiefly to take heed how the true Church doth tamper with the false and apostate in treaties and af∣finitie, Psalm 2. 2 King, 22. 2 Chron. 34. & 35. &c. The holy Scriptures will yield more fundamental conclusions, and sure rules for government, then all the Machiavels in the world. Quest. 8. and Answ. Aholah for their apostasie] Our blessed, gracious and merciful Lord God doth never cast off his people till they have first cast off and contemned his word, for then idolatry will begin, and all ungodliness and unrighteousness like a torrent will follow. Then will God hisse for a flie, and a Bee. What Prince is able to keep a flie, or a Bee from comming near his Court, yea, or into his Chambers and Ex∣cheqers, God is as able to bring an enemie, even of their lovers to enjoy and possesse them: See the stories of Rchoboam, Ioram, Ioash, A∣maziah, &c. 2 Chr. 12. & 21. and 24. & 25 And Pharoah with all his wisdome, and multitude, Ezek. 29. and 30. and 31, &c 32 could not prevent, Nebuchadnezzar from his spreading his royal Pavilion near his Court Gate, Jer. 43.9, 10. and who caused that the Babylonian Prin∣ces sate in the Gate of Ierusalem, but the Lord Iehovah the God of re∣compenses, Jer. 39. Esai. 42.24. Esay 5.26. & 7.18 Pro. 13.13. Jer. 6. & 7. 2 Kings 22.13. Ibid. N. 1. and gave them over to the lying Spirits] Wo to them saith God when I depart from them: then followed a secret dedication of them to devils, transferring his right of them to idols, Ephraim is joined to idols, Let him alone Hos. 4.17 Acts 7.47. 1 King 22.23. Psal. 81. Ezek 14.9. and so 2 Thess. 2. Apoc. 16.13. 1 Tim. 4. Ibid. N. 1. To walk in their own Counsels] Ezek. 20.25. Psal. 81. 2 Kings 17.8. Hos. 10.6. & 13.1. Observe Mich. 6. ult. Salomon fitted many Proverbs, and told them, the words of the wise, do bear grace, and that the words of the fools of the ten tribes, and of Judah also would be foolishness, and wicked madness to swallow them up, Eccles. 10. Behold still how Christ the Corners stone was rejected, and became a stone of offence, to both the houses of Israel, as Esaias and David had told them Psalm 69.22 Esay 8.14. and 28.16 and so is ever to all that will not receive him in the way of his own ordinances, and mark how these texts are pressed by our Lord and his Apostles in the Acts, Evangelists, and in the Epistle to Rome, and 1 Pet. 2. and this is written for us, Rom. 15. confer Esai. 6.9, 10. with John 12.40. & Acts 28.26.27, &c &c. Ibid. N. 1. Could not live the life of a State, &c.] Observe how the
Holy Spirit compares the dead State of the ten tribes being in Apostasie, with the apostasie of the families, 2 Chron. 15.3. with Ephes. 2.1. to 12. Dead from a Church life, Hos. 13.1. false worship breeds atheism and corruption in manners: heresie frets like a gangreane, and such Authours and fautours wax worse and worse. The ten tribes were with∣out the true God by their apostasie, and so the heathens were atheoi, a∣theists without God in the world, and note, that speech of Asa, King of Judah, was spoken of Israel, before the idol Bal was brought into Israel 2 Chron. 15.3. Ibid. 8. Quest. and Answ. N. 2. He did pour out his fury] God was an∣gry for the provocation of his sons, and of his Daughters, Deut. 32. Gods four sore judgements followed Aholah and Aholibah, for their back∣slidings, Ezek. 14. and the Earthquake in Amos 1. had in Israel its e∣vents; Jeroboam the second, his son, was two and twenty years in get∣ting his Fathers Throne: such trouble in State, all plagues, and curses; Levit. 26. Deut. 28. came on them not for breaking a Covenant of Works, but for accounting Christ and his Kingdome, Anathema. They did (as all apostates do) loath his word, they abhorred his Statutes, they obeyed not the Son of God, the Angel of Gods presence, as Mediatour, and so had not life, John 3.35, 36. they served not God in their spirits, in the Gospel of his Son. He that hath not the Son of God, hath not the Father, 1 John 5.12. 2 John 9. and so come all plagues and curses on men. Let the wilde Olive branches fear. Ibid. Ʋpon them famine, pestilence] Famine and Pestilence are chiefly the Plagues of the meaner sort, and the sword is the plague of the rich, Ezek. 21.14. when the heavens dealt with the subjects, Levit. 26. the Governours felt the other The spirit of Christ hath long and wonder∣ful patience afore the sword cometh, Lev. 16 23, 24, 25. & then the sword doth avenge the quarrel of Gods covenant (not a covenant of works but for despising the covenant in his Son) against the godliness of high place, who were, and are the hinderers of all good, and the promoters of all evil, as it is said, A great man grieveth all, and he hireth the fool, he hireth also the transgressors, Prov. 26.10. Ibid. By secret corroding mischiefs] Christ was as a Lion to tear in pie∣ces by their domestick dissentions, as in the overthrow of the houses of Jeroboam, Baasa, Omri, Iehu, &c. and by forrein enemies; and also he was as a Moth insensibly eating and consuming their riches, honour and people by one ill project or other. And for this read Hosea 5.12. Ibid. House of Assur) They made Israel, Iezeel, Loruchamah, and Lo∣ammi, till the latter daies, as Hebr. 1.1. But then they were gathered in Christ, and pittied, and again made Gods people. The Apostles of the circumcision preached to them that were dispersed in Asia, Galatia, Pontus, Bythinia, Cappadocia, and Chaldea, &c. 1 Per. 1.1. and chap. 2. all tribes then are called Iews. Ephraim mixed himself with the hea∣thens Religion, therefore God mixed them among the heathen.
Ibid. Out of their own Land] There nettles and thornes grew in their pleasant palaces: then the thorne and thistle grew on their Altars (weeds of the curse, Gen. 3.) And then they cried to the mountains to fall on them, and to the hills to conver them. Let England look to their back∣sliding to Altars, Hosea 10. To thrust away the Gospel by mans inventi∣ons is to make our houses, as well as Gods house desolate, and so our Lord tells the Jewes, Mat. 23.38. Judah and Israel dashed themselves against the Corner stone, and were broken. 9. Quest. and Answ. For her revoltings] Idolatry is a State-ruining sin, Psalm 106.36. the prayers of the Saints could not prevail for their reigning idolatry, and false worship, Jer. 15. & 16. Ezek. 14. King Moses by his most fervent intercession, and abolishing idolatry procu∣red pardon: but note in that false worship, there was no innocent bloudshed. Idolatry divides the heart from Christ, and subjects it wil∣lingly to follow the commandements of men, and of the man of sin: Jeoboam should see such events of apostasie that they should fret and and curse their King, and their Gods, that is the false religion they so pressed, and see neither help from heaven, nor earth, but all full of anguish and darkness, Esa. 8.21, 22. Hos. 9.6. & 10.8. Deut. 28.34, 65, 66, 67. Their State-politicians could not prevent, nor their State Surgeons, heal the wounds that God made in their State. The wisdome and turning of devices of the wise, and prudent Counsellors of State was booteless, all was but the weaving of the Spiders Webb. Esay 29.15. & 59, 5. Jer. 30.12. Hoses 5. all of it. They sinned a∣gainst Jehovah the hope of their Fathers, Ier. 50.7. Iob 12.17, 18, 19, 20. To backsliding and adulterous Israel, Christ her Lord gave a Bill of divorce, and put her away; yet Iudah her sister, being also treache∣rous, feared not, but went and plaid the harlot also, Ier. 3.7, 8. The mindes of these two sisters were alienated from Christ, and so his minde at last was alienated from them, read Ezek. 23. Ibid. And affinity with the Harlot Aholah] Mark State affairs in Iudah. They saw Omi was a mighty Prince, overcoming Zimri and Tibni who stood in competition with him for the Kingdome of Israel, and that A∣chab possessed all in peace, that his Father Omri had settled. Iehoso∣phat thought it good state-policie to make affinitie with him, although he followed Ieroboam-man of sin his Religion, but it was the ruin and almost the rooting out of his house, &c. for mark, first Iehosaphat, being in his visits with Achab was solicited for association in a league for War, to which with reluctation he yielded. For he might not in Court cour∣tesie shew himself so weak and discrepant to think that four hundred prophets were so to be slighted, as to follow the humour of one singular self-willed, refractorious fellow, Michaiah. So he went with his Bro∣thet Achab to battel to Ramoth Gilead; but there he was in danger of his life. Jehosophat although a goodman, yet in that no good Statesman to weaken Iudah to help these with men, and all ammunition (although
circumcised Israelites) that hated the Gospel: He was reproved, and wrath was upon him, a Chron. 19 2. He joyned with Achaziah of Achab in a Navy to go to sea for gold, but Christ was displeased with it, and plagued Jehoshaphat, in that the ships were broken, so that project took not, 2 Chron. 20. Psal. 8. ult. 3. Joram, Jehosaphats son, (who married Achabs daughter) after his fathers death, forsook the Gospel, and followed Jeroboams Religion, the two Devils of Dan and Bethl, and caused Jerusalem, and compelled Iudah to commit fornication, to worship Devils, 2 Chron. 21. 2 Kings 8.18. All worship what Christ hath not commanded is the worship of De∣vils Levit. 10. and 17.7. Psal. 106.39. 1 Cor. 10. All their projects of State must justifie that affinity, els all the provisions in Law against Ieroboams revolt, had been a reprof to Achabs daughter, & so her faction prevailed for the corrupting the calling on the name of Jehovah, as, of old, Satans project was Gen 4.26. conferred with chap. 6. and this seed of false worship sowed in Iudah did gow to an evil harvest, Hos. 6.11. And did stick so fast, that it could not be weeded out for 180 years, till the dayes of Hezekiah King of Iudah; for the businesses of their State were agitated according to the modells and plots of Omri, that maintained the faction of Ieroboam, man of sin, his Religion: as Micah challenged the State in Achaz his days, that the Statutes of Omri were kept, and their way and their counsells. Behold the working of that affinity. But Hezekiah that good King made reformation according to the primitive institution, 2 Chron. 28.2 2 Kin. 16.3. and 17.19. yet Manasse fell again to Achabs idolatry; so fast false worship cleaves to our nature. 4. This Joram, after his fathers death (as Turks now do) killed his six brethren, and many Princes: very like, his brethren and the Prin∣ces did dislike and protest against his courses, about idolatry and tyranny and had no heart to the faction of Ieroboam, man of sin, his Religion, therefore the Queen and her Counsellors might say to the King, An't like your Majesty you can never be in safety, and rule as King, while your brethren have fenced Cities, and while the Princes do not approve your proceedings: frame mischief by a Law, and off with their heads, 2 Chron. 21. Psal. 94.20. Now Davids house are Belial and thorns, 2 Sam, 23. Mark, here false worship inttroduced, then the liberties and priviled∣ges of the subjects are invaded. That Subjects might not so much mind: Apostacy in their Princes, means were excogitated to busie them by ru∣mours of this and that project, and also for their particular estates, till false Religion had gotten footing, this is the very heart and counsell of apostate and idolatrous Princes. 5. Ioram lost the regency and principality of Edom 2 Chron. 21. 6. Libnah one of the prime Cities of Judah rebelled, because he for∣sook the Religion of Jehovah, that is; in very deed, the Gospel of the Son of God, the God of his fathers, 2 Chron. 21. when the Magistrate thrusts out the Gospel, then Christ divides the hearts of the people; A∣postacie in the Prince, breeds Apostacie in the subjects. Christ pours contempt upon Princes, Ps. 107.40.
7. The Lord Jehovah stirred up the spirit of the Philistims, Arabians, and Cuhim, who invaded Judah, and took much spoil even out of the Kings house, and captived his wives and all his sons, save one, 2 Chr. 21. Deut. 28.30, 31, 41. oppressions filled their Exchequers, but the enemies emptied them, he poureth contempt upon Princes, Job 12 21. 8. He died of a rotting disease in his bowels, that they fell out, be∣cause he slew his own bowels, worse befell not that persecutor Antiochus, 2 Mic. 9. Riches avail not in the day of wrath, but righteousnesse de∣livereth from death, the like plague came on that bloody tyrant Herod, Acts 12.23. 9. He was not esteemed worthy of honourable buriall, as his noble predecessors: the land being glad it was rid of such a Tyrant and Apo∣state; He poureth contempt upon Princes 10. His son Achaziah knew all this, yet he feared not God, but walked in the way; that is, the Religion and mannes of apostate Israel, 2 Kin. 8.27. 11. His idolatrous mother was his Counsellour, and because there were not States-men wise enough in Judah, the counsllours of Jeroboam, man of sin, his Religion must be sent for, and so the secrets and myste∣ries of State in Iudah, must be discovered Ah poore Iudah, how sick and intangled was thy State?  Chon 22 3 4. can such with well to, and procure the weal of Mount Sion? Psal 122. Apo 14.1. 12. As the two fathers, so the two bethren joyned in league; for Achaziah joined with Iehoram King of Israel in battel against Hzael of Aram, who held still Ramoth-Gilead: so Achaziah being not onely a very wicked man, but as bad a States-man, wasted also the strength of Iudah. 13. Achaziah going to visit Joram, being sick, was slain by Jehu; as he was of the house of Achab by the mother, so he perished with it, 2 Chr. 22.6, 7. Complices in tyranny and idolatry, complices in punishment, Hosh. 5 5. 14. Many idolatrous Princes, and 40 young Gentlemen and Courti∣ers of the kindred of Achaziah, going down from Iudah to comple-ment∣it, with the children of the King and Queen of Israel, there Iehu found them and slew them. These apostate Princes of the faction of Ierobam, man of sin, his Religion, (and it may be pensioners too) that put their hands to kill the good Princes, God met with them by Iebu, 2 Chron. 22. Let this teach Courtiers, the eye of Christ is in Kings Courts. 15. Athaliah the wife of Iehoram (daughter of Achab, and it may be of Iezabel) being Queen Regent six years in Iudah, seeing her son Acha∣ziah was slain by Iebu, she seiseth like a cruell tyrant on the children of her son Achaziah, and slew all but a yong infant of a year old. O sick Iud∣ah, sick, sick, sick, 2 Chron. 22 Isa. 1.5, 6, 7. 16. She being Regent, governed in an idolatrous and turbulent man∣ner, to the hearts grief of the honest Subjects: for, she being King cut off
idolatry was banished, the Gospel was restored, and the Land was qui∣et, 2 Chon. 23.21. Christ poureth contempt upon Princes. 17. The sons of Athaliah, that wicked woman, for the time of those six years had broken up the house of the Lord, and had committed abo∣minable and idolatrous sacriledge. It should seem she had sons whom she tendred by some other man, 2 Chron. 24.7. These evils and others, yea and others which are not written (Deut. 28 61) followed good Je∣hosaphats bad affinity, with Achabs wicked house. 18. Mark through all the holy story, what pollution of blood from that Ammonean, and Achabean breed, ran in all the Royall descents to the Captivity. That you be not mistaken, you must observe, that there were two Kings of Iudah, and Israel, reigning at one time, of the same name, Iehoram. Also two Kings, both called Achaziah, and near of the same time, Io∣ram, and Iehoram are all one name: and so in King Iehoash of Iudah, and King Iehoash of Israel. The Table of genealogie prefixed will help your observation. Other State-affairs in the stories of other Kings reigns, beginning with King Azariah (alias Ʋzziah) and so forwards, compared with the pro∣phets, will afford many meditations. I think it not amisse to touch a little from the story of Salomon for this matter of affinity. In policy he might make affinity with Pharaoh, a great Potentate, to strengthen himself being a King of peace, by this course he thought to maintain it for him and his successours, but it proved otherwise. Although Pharaohs daughter might prove a proselite, and forget the Religion of her own people, and her fathers house, and cleave to the truth of Christ, as it is thought she did, to be a figure of the Gentiles calling to the true Salomon. It might be a great mercy to her to be of the true Church, and of the houshold of God. But very like it it was done of Pharaoh, but as a snare to work their own interests against Israel. No trust to be had in idolatrous people, for so of this affinity came no good to the Church of God. 1. There was no succession of this proselyte-daughter. 2. The State of Egypt maintain∣ed a Faction, and fostered Traytors, and enemies to Salomon, and the State of all Israel, as Ieoboam that lifted up his hand against the King, and Hadad the Edomite, 1 Kin. 11. So Egypt nourished two factions in Sa∣lomons life-time against him. 3. And Shishak King of Egypt (might well be the brother of that daughter) who five years after Salomons death in∣vaded Iudah, and warred against Rehoboam, that apostate fool, Eccl. 2.19. 2 Chron. 12.13. and 13.17. Marriages do not alwayes unite houses and kingdomes, as in the Seleuco-Pagidae, Dan. 2 43. and 11. So France and Spain knock one against the other: (16 36) Rome is called E∣gypt, and it hath nourished traditours and proditours against Christian Princes of the Reformation. This should make all Christian Reformed States to be very watchfull and diligent concerning any treaty with A∣baddons
Kingdome, for he in allusion is compared with Ieroboam, called the Man of sinne, 2 Thes. 2. and Romes polity, is called Egypt in a mysterie. Quest. 9. and Ans. and the nations] sometimes they gadded, and trea∣ted with Assur, but that framed not; sometime with Egypt, that also failed, Ier. 2.16, 17, 18. False worship taketh heart from a State. This folly, madnesse, and sillinesse, other Prophets reprove in Ephraim, Esay 29. Hos. 5. and 7. The whorish State, her feet cannot abide in her house, therefore she did wander, Pov. 7.11.12. Hos. 9 2 Ezek. 16.33. &c. and chap. 23.14.15 &c. God plagued them by their lovers. They pleased themselves in the children, and manners of strangers, Isa. 2.6. wise States-men of old were carefull of this, Iob 15 19. and the godly retur∣ned from Babel, Ezra 4. Hezekiah was to blame, Isa. 39. Our nation changed their glory, and loved Kttims Religion, therefore God pla∣gued and did trouble them with Italian Monsters, Ier. 2.25. Deut. 28.43.44. Hos. 7.9. It is to admonish, 1 Cor. 10.11. and to make States wise, and learned, Psal. 2. read Ezek. 16. and 23. for their Babylonian lovers, and compare things: for Rome is called Egypt and Babylon in a mysterie. Vide Mr. Cade Instit. Lib▪ 1 pag. 128. and the Appendix. Also insinuations for corruption of manners will make the sweet yoke of Christ burden∣some, and will work further change of our way, as things go on uncom∣fortably at this time, anno 1636. Ibid. —Yea, astonishing sorrows.] The Lamentations of Ieremiah, and Psa. 80, and 89, &c. &c. compared with the history, shew astonishing sor∣rows with the causes, and this was one chief cause: for the sins of her Prophets, and the iniquity of her Priests, that shed the blood of the just, They, they the chief cause of all evil, and Ierusalem admonish∣ all States to be warned by her example, Lam. chap. 1. and 2.14. and chap. 4. Ibid. Then Solomons house ended.] David shewed, his house would not be upright with God, but would be Belial and thorns, and should be burnt; A terrour to Princes that will not rule justly, and in the fear of God, 2 Sam. 23. Observe, Lam. 2.5, 6. The Lord is become a very enemy, he hath swallowed up Israel, he hath swallowed up her palaces, he hath de∣stroyed his strong holds, and he hath increased in the daughter of Judah mourning, and lamentation. And he hath violently taken away his Taber∣nacle, as it were of a garden, he hath destroyed the places of the Assembly. Jehovah hath caused the solemn Feasts and Sabbaths to be forgotten in Sion, and he hath despised in the indignation of his anger, King and Sacrificer. Let not the wild olive branches be high-minded, Rom. 11.
CHAP. VII. With Questions, Answers, and Annotati∣ons; Shewing how the Covenant of grace was taught and op∣posed in this space of time; from the burning of the Tem∣ple, to the end of the Captivity of Babel. QUest. 1. Shew some Scriptures concerning the Captivity of Judah under the Babylonian Kingdom, with other things thereupon depending. Answ. Levit. 26.14. observe how the holy history, and the prophets comment upon this Scripture of Moses: ve∣ry useful to confer history to prophecy. to the end of the chapter. 14. But if ye will not hearken to me, and will not do all these commandments. 15. And if ye shallconsider here how the holy Gospel Law of Chist delivered to Moses, was unsavory to the outward Israelite: it was a sa∣vour of life to some and to others a savour of death to death, so it ever was, and ever shall be: as it was to Kain and Habel, and Esay 6.9, 10. & 11. chapters, 2 Chron. 2.16. despise my Statutes, or if your soul abhor (c) my judgements, so that ye will not do all my command∣ments, but that ye break my covenant. 16. I also will do this unto you, I will appoint even over you ter∣rour, consumption, and the burning ague, and that shall con∣sume the eyes, and cause sorrow of heart, and ye shall sow your seed in vain, for your enemies shall eat it.
17. And I will set my face against you, and ye shall be slain before your enemies: they that hate you shall reign over you, and ye shall flee when none pursueth you: 18. And if ye will not for all this hearken unto me, then I will punish you seaven times more for your sins. 19. And  will break the pride of your power, and I will make your heaven as iron, and your earth as brass; 20. And your strength shall be spent in vain: for your Land shall not yield her increase, neither shall the trees of the land yield their fruits. 21. And if ye walk contrary unto me, and will not hearken unto me, I will bring seaven times more plagues upon you, accor∣ding to your sins. 22. I will also send wild beasts which shall rob you of your chil∣dren, and destroy your cattel, and make you few in number, and your high waies shall be desolate. 23. And if ye will not be reformed by these things, but will walk contrary unto me: 24. Then will I also walk contrary unto you, and will punish you yet seven times for your sins. 25. And I will bring a sword upon you that shall avenge the quarrel of my covenant: and when ye are gathered together within your Cities, I will send the Pestilence among you, and ye shall be delivered into the hands of the enemy. 26. And when I have broken the staff of your bread, Ten Women shall bake your bread in one Oven, and they shall deli∣ver you your bread again by weight, and ye shall eat and not be satisffed. 27. And if for all this, ye will not hearken unto me, but walk contrary unto me; 28. Then I will walk contrary unto you, also in fury and I, even I will chastise you seaven times for your sins: 29. Moses foresaw captivity and Dan 9. doth comment on all this chapter. And ye shall eat the flesh of your sons, and the flesh of your daughters shall ye eat. 30. And I will destroy your high places, and cut down your Sun-Images, and cast your carcases upon the carcases of your filthy idols, and my soul shall abhor you.
31. And I wil make your Cities wast, and bring your sanctuaries unto desolation, and I will not smell the savor of your seed odours. 32. And I will bring the Land unto desolation, and your e∣nemies which shall dwell therein, shall be astonished at it: 33. And I will scatter you among the heathen, and I will draw out a sword after you: and your land shall be desolate, and your Cities wast. 34. Then shall your land enjoy herMark how the holy Story commenteth on all Moses. Sabbaths, as long as it lieth desolate, and ye be in your enemies land, even then shall the Land rest, and enjoy her Sabbaths. 35. As long as it lieth desolate it shall rest, because it did not rest in your Sabbaths, when ye dwelt upon it. 36. And upon them that are left of you I will send a faint∣ness into their hearts, in the Land of their enemies, and the sound of a leafe driven shall chase them, and they shall flee as fleeing from a sword, and they shall fall when none pursueth. 37. And they shall fall one upon another, as it were before a sword, when none pursueth, and ye shall have no power to stand before your enemies. 38. And ye shall perish among the heathens, and the land of your enemies shll eat you up. 39: And they that are left of you shall pine away in their ini∣quity in your enemies lands, and also in the iniquities of their fathers shall they pine away. 40. If they shallSo Daniel did, and God remembed his Covenant in Christ, Dan. 9.24, 25▪ 26, 27. read Ezek 36. confess their iniquity, and the iniquity of their fathers, with their trespass which they have trespassed a∣gainst me, and that also they have walked contrary unto me; 41. And that I also have walked contrary unto them, and have brought them into their enemies lands, if then their uncir∣cumcised hearts be humbled, and they thenA justified person wil ju∣stifie God in all his providences, so Neh. 9. all of it: Dan. 9.5. If we judge our selves, God will not judge us,? but remember his covenant 1 Cor. 11.1 Ioh. 1. The better a manis, the more unworthy he thinks himself to be, Iob 42.6. accept of the pu∣nishment of their iniquity. 42. Then will I remember my covenant with Jacob, and also my covenant with Isaac, and also my covenant with Abraham,
will I remember, and I will remember the Land. 43. The land also shall be left of them, and shall enjoy herObseve 2 chon. 36.21. though the pro∣phets departed this life, yet the ward of Christ dyed not, Zach. 1.5, 6. Sabbaths, while she lyeth desolate without them, and they shall accept of the punishment of their iniquitie, because, even for because they despised my judgements, and because their soul abhorred my statutes. Though we be unfaithful in many acts of unbelief, and break our cove∣nant, yet the Lord is faith∣ful he cannot deny himself, Tim. 2.13. though he cause grief yet will he have compassi∣on according to the multitude of his mercies. N="44" 44 And yet for all that, when they be in their enemies land I will not cast them away, neither will I abhor them to destroy them utterly, and to break my Covenant with them, for I am Je∣hovah their God. 45. But I will for their sakes remember the CovenantThis cove∣nant as the same with Ia∣cob, Isaas, and Abraham, ver. 42. of their Ancestours whom I brought forth out of the Land of Egypt in the sight of the Heathen, that I might be their God, I am Je∣hovah. Jer. 27. 1. In the beginning of the reign of Jehojakim the son of Josiah King of Judah, came the word unto Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying, 2. Thus saith Jehovah to me, make the bonds and yokes, and put them upon thy neck. 3. And send them to the King of Edom, and to the King of Moab, and to the King of the Ammonites, and to the King of Tyrus, and to the King of Zidon, by the hand of the Messen∣gers, that come to Jerusalem unto Zedekiah, King of Judah. 4. And command them to say unto their Masters, thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel: thus shall you say unto your Masters. 5. I have made the earth, the man and the beast, that are upon the ground, by my great power, and by my stretcht out arme, and have given it unto Whom it seemed good unto me. 6. And now have given all these lands into the hand of Ne∣buchadnezzar the K. of Babylon, my servant, and the beasts of the field, have I given him also to serve him. 7. And all Nations shall serve him, and his son, and his sons son, until the time of his land come, and then many Nations, and
great Kings shall serve themselves of him. 8. And it shall come to pass that the nation or Kingdome which will not serve the same Nebuchadnezzar the King of Ba∣bylon: and that will not put their neck under the yoke of the King of Babylon, that nation will I punish, saith the Lord, with the sword and with the famine, and with the pestilence until I have consumed them by his hand. 9. Therefore bearken not to your Prophets, nor to your Di∣viners, nor to your dreamers, nor to your enchanters, nor to your sorcerers, which speak unto you, saying, ye shall not serve the King of Babel. 10. For they prophesie a ly unto you, to remove you far from your land: and that I should drive you out, and ye should perish. 11. But the nations that bring their necks under the yoke of the King of Babylon, and serve him, those will I let remain still in their own land, saith Jehovah, and they shall till it, and dwell therein. Jer. 25.9. Behold I will send and take all the families of the North, saith Jehovah. and Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babel my servant, and will bring them against this land, and the inhabitants thereof, and against all these nations round a∣bout, and will utterly destroy them, and make them an astonish∣ment, and an hissing, and a perpetual desolation. 10. Moreover, I will take from them the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride, the sound of the milstones, and the light of the candle. 11. And this whole land shall be a desolation, and an asto∣nishment, and these nations shall serve the King of Babylon, seaventy years. 12. And it shall come to pass when Seavensy years are accom∣plished that I will punish the King of Babel, and that nation saith Jehovah for their iniquitie, and the land of the Chaldeans and I will make it a perpetual desolations.
13. And I will bring upon that land all my words which I have pronounced against it, even all that is written in this book which Jeremiah hath prophecied against all nations. 14. For many nations and great Kings shall serve themselvs of them also: and I will recompense them according to their deeds, and according to the work of their hands. 2 Chron. 36.14. Moreover all the chief of the Priests, and the People transgressed very much after all the abominations of the heathens, and polluted the house of Jehovah, which he had hallowed in Jerusalem. 15. And Jehovah the God of their Fathers sent to them by his Messengers, rising up betimes, and sending them, because he had compassion on his people, and on his dwelling place. 16. But they mocked the Messengers of God and despied his Word, and misused his Prophets until the wrath of Jehovah a∣rose against his people, till there was no remedie. 17. Therefore he brought upon them the King of the Chal∣dees, who slew their young menNow the sword doth a∣venge the quar∣rel of the Cove∣nant Levit. 26. What covenant? of woks? no such matter, but the Covenant of grace in Christ, They would not have Christ, the Heir as King to reign over them by his word, and holy, ordinan∣ces: therefore they were slain before his face, by the chaldean, Luc. 19.12. to 27. Grace despised, brings the heaviest Plagues, yea all plagues here and hereafter. with the sword, in the house of their sanctuary, and had no compassion upon young men, or maiden, old men, or him that stooped for age, he gave them all into his hand. 18. And all the vessels of the house of God, great and small and the treasures of the house of Jehovah, and the treasures of the King, and of his Princes, all these he brought to Baby∣lon. 19. And they burnt the house of God, and brake down the wall of Jerusalem and burnt all the palaces thereof with fire, and destroyed all the goodly vessels thereof. 20. And them that had escaped from the sword carried he a∣way to Babel, where they were servants to him and his Sons, un∣til the reign of the Kingdome of Persia.
21. To fulfil the word of Jehovah by the mouth of Jeremiah until the land had enjoyed her Sabbaths: for as long as she lay desolate she kept Sabbath to fulfil Seavensy years. Jer. 29.10. Thus saith Jehovah that after the seaventy years be accomplished at Babylon, I will visit you, and perform my good word toward you, in causing you to return to this place. 11. For I know the thoughts that I think towards you, saith Jehovah, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you an expected end. 12.See, how this is a com∣mentary on Levit. 26.40, 41, 42. Also how Daniels prayer looks to Moses and Jeremiah: and that God re∣members his Covenant as is seen, Dan. 9.24, &c. Observe how promises quicken to prayer. We should be more studious and conversant in them than we are Our slightness will hin∣der much our consolation in sad houres, read Ezek. 36 31, &c. They must pray and did pray: but the blood of the covenant brought them from Babel, Zach. 9.11. Then shall ye call upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you. 13. And ye shall seek me, and finde me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart. 14. And I will be found of you, saith Jehovah, and I will turn away your captivity, I will gather you from all Nations, and from all places whither I havedriven you, saith Jehovah, and I will bring you again unto the place whence I caused you to be carried away captive. Pertinently it may be here remembred, that the Son of God by his Spirit in the Prophet Esaias, foretold above two hundred years, how Cyrus King of Persia should conquer Babel, send Judah home from captivity, and give letters pa∣tents for re-edifying Jerusalem, and the Temple. Esay 44.24. Thus saith Jehovah thy Redeemer, and he that formed thee from, the womb, I am Jehovah that maketh all things, that stretcheth forth the heavens alone, that spreadeth abroad the earth by my self.
25. That frustrated the tokens of the lyars and maketh di∣viners madd: that turneth wisemen backward, and maketh their knowledge foolish. 26. That confirmeth the word of his servant and performeth the counsel of his Messengers, that saith to Jerusalem. Thou shalt be inhabited, and to the Cities of Judah, ye shall be built, and I will raise up the decayed places thereof. 27. That saith to the deep be dry, and I will dry up thy Rivers. 28. That saith of Cyrus,Read more of Cyrus in Esay 45.1, 2, 3, 4 13. whom God raised up by a strong hand to conguer Babel, to return Israel home, and to build the City Jerusalem. He is my Shepheard, and shall perform all my pleasure, even saying to Jerusalem, thou shalt be built, and to the Temple, thy foundation shall be laid. This is the prophecy, now follows the History. 2 Chron 36.22. Now in the year of CyrusWe must consider here that Cyrus & Darius Dan 9.1. were fel∣lows in gover∣ment, who joined their Forces against Babel, as it is prophecied, Esay 21. Go up against Babel, O Elam, besiege Babel O Media. And marke here by conferring, Dan. 9.25. Cyrus his proclamation, is that going forth of the word of commande∣ment of returning the people, of building the Temple, and city: as when Daniel was in humble prayer, then Cyrus was drawing his Letters Patents, even at the same in∣stant of time: and the Angel Gabiel is disparched from heaven with a joyful message to tell Daniel so. Let us think of it, upon humbling our selves surely some message is comming from heaven. King of Persia, that the word of Jehovah, spoken by the mouth of Je∣remiah might be accomplied, Jehovah stirred up the Spirit of Cyrus King of Persia, that he made a proclamation throughout all his Kingdom, and put it also in writing, saying. 23. Thus saith Cyrus King of Persia, all the kingdomes of the earth, hath Jehovah the God of Heaven given me, and he hath charged me to build him an house in Jerusalem, which is in Judah, Who is there among you of all his people? Jehovah his God be with him and let him go up.
QUest. 2. What Collections do you take notice of in these Scri∣ptures of Moses, and the Prophets? Answ. For brevities sake, I will name but few, and those main principles out of the doctrine of Christ that Moses spake in Leviticus. 1. Let this be observed of all that have their senses exercised in the word of righteousness, to confer History with prophecy, whether in promises and threatnings: We shall see God to be Iehovah in all: to be Being, and to give being, as to all his works, so to his words, whether they concern persons, fa∣milies, Cities, Churches or Kingdomes. 2. VVhereas it is said, that Iehovah spake to the Patriarks, and to Moes (in all his five Books) in most places we must conceive it spoken of the second person, of the holy Trinity the Redeemer, the Angel of the covenant, to whom the hea∣venly Father hath committed all authority and power as Me∣diatour: yea also this attribute of Jehovah throughout all the old Testament, must be so understood, some few places ex∣cepted, wherein the first person, or the third, is also to be considered. Examine this by Psalm 18.49. & 117. with Ro∣mans 15.9, 10, 11, Psalm 68.18. with Ephes. 4.8. Psalm 97.7. with Heb. 1.6.1 Cor. 10, 4.9. with Num. 21.6. Esa. 6.9, 10. with Iohn 12.41. Our Lords most heavenly speeches in the Apostle Johns Gospel will shew us the reason of all, cha. 5.17. and so forwards. 3. Among all the corruptions (from the first Adam) that is in us, note this, that we hold Christ his Kingdom and Or∣dinances anathema, this is expressed by Moses, there is in us a contrariness to God,confer Lev. 26.15. with Zac. 11.8. These tearms, abhorring, loathing, &c. of the old Testament is in effect the same of the new: the preaching of the Gospel to them savoured death, unto death, and so it doth in the daies of the New Testament, Gods people must be diligent to mark phra∣ses, though different in words, yet the same in force and value. a despising his judgements, abhor∣ring, loathing and hating him, his word, statutes and com∣mandments
mandements. The New Testament speaks the same as the old, when it saith, the wisdom of the flesh causeth enmity against the Law of God, by nature enemies in our minde by evil workers, also haters of God, fighters against God, and such a stubborness is annexed, that we are unreconcileable. Much may be said of this in the sad effects thereof, that men meeting with cross providences, when his folly perverts his way, his heart frets against Jehovah, that is, his breath and being, and saying he is a hard master, and that his waies are not equal: yea alas, what do the regenerate finde in them∣selves of murmuring, fretting, impatience, distrust, &c. But the second Adam dissolves the works of the devil, by his spi∣rit in the administration of the Gospel of his Kingdom, heals all in the elect, Ezek. 36.25, 26, 27-37. Mich. 7.19. 2 Cor. 5 11-15 & chap. 10 4, 5, 6 &c. 4. Whereas in Levit. 26. Moses saith from Christ, sicknes∣ses, diseases, sorrowes on the labours of our hands, the teeth of wilde beasts, pestilence, famine, sword, captivity, &c. a∣venge the quarrel of his Covenant: we must advisedly under∣stand, This is not meant of a covenant of works, but the co∣venant of his Grace, the lawes of which they have despised and abhorred: and so in Deut. 5. & 29 Jer. 34. all of it, and many other places there is mention made of the covenant, and it is but the renewing or dilating on that, as is noted Exod. 24. which they violated. For the whole covenant is, Jehovah is our God in Christ, and that we vouch him so to be in love unto him, and in love to our neighbour, as it is said, to love the Lord our God with all our heart, minde, soul and strength &c. and our neighbour as our self: and this is ratified by the bloud of the covenant, Exod. 24. And they not obeying his Gospel-Law, is as much as to say, we will not have this man to reign over us; therefore it is said, those mine enemies (and Israel were Christs own citizens, Luke 19.27.) that would not have me the Heir to reign over them, bring them hither and slay them before me, Luke 19 27. 1 Thess. 2.16. & 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Christ Jesus our Lord as eternal God to Moses, and
the Prophets, and Christ Iesus our Lord as God-man in his New Testament in his own speeches, and in his Apostles do∣ctrine doth not differ: and when our great Rabboni had redu∣ced the ten commandments into two, then he saith on these two commandements hang all the Law and the Prophets; and so where it is often said, Obey my voice, Jer. 7.23. it must be understood of the obedience of faith, (receiving Christ, and believing in him, and obeying him, John 3.36.) which despised,The wrath o the Lambe is great wrath, Apoc. 1.16. brings the heaviest plagues, as those eight and twentieth fold punishments, Lev. 26. and thoses curses, Deut. 28. Luke 23.28, 29, 30. and so Exod. 23.20, 21. and Matth. 17.5. do explicate on the other in sense and meaning: and John 6.27. must be brought to this undurstanding. 5. The Law of the Lord is a converting Law, it restores the soul, that is, it is the word of Christ, by which, and by which onely he doth by his Spirit work in the hearts of men to turn them from darkness to light from the power of Satan to God, for it is the power of God to salvation, restoring, converting, regenerating the soul to know, believe, fear, and love Jehovah their God, and to love their neighbour. And the New Testaments doctrine and commandment is the same, 1 John 3.24. & 4.21. Faith and Love is the Pattern of whole∣some words, (or healing doctrine) ever taught from the be∣ginning. This is the Ʋrim and Thummim which Christ puts in the heart of all them that the Father drawes unto him: the Apostle (alluding to the High Priests Garments) phraseth the Brest plate of Faith and Love. They that despise Christs Gospel, that is, his Law, Esay 2.3. & 11.9. & 42.4. despise the doctrine of regeneration, and such cannot mortifie their passions, but will bite and devour one another (Esay 11. much of it, Gal. 5.15.) as Cain did Abel. See how and why their Story is cited, 1 John 3. And by that we may see, how easily reducible all that Epistle is to Genesis, yea to all Moses, and if this Epistle, then all the New Testament.
QUest. 3. What other Collections? Answ. The Scriptures of the Prophets shew. 1. That Iehovah of hosts, the God of Israel had made Ne∣bucharetzar Monarch of all nations, and that the Kingdome of Babel should keep, them the State of Iudah in subjection, Seavensy years. And that Nebuchadnezzar was great by con∣quest and not by inheritance. 2. That the Kings of the Kingdom of Babel for those se∣venty years should be in number three, which are these, the first is said to be Nebuchadnezzar, the second is his son, the third is his sons son. Other Scriptures shew their names, that Evil-Merodach was the Son, and his Sons son was Bel-shaz∣zar. 3. We are to note, that part of the third year of Jehoja∣kim King of Iudah, and more of the fourth is the first year of Nebuchadrezar, as Dan. 1.1. and Jer. 25. compared do shew And in this first year of Nebuchadrezar, King Jehojakim, Da∣niel, Hanariah, Azariah, Mishael and other Nobles were captived. This is the first captivity. But the King was sent home again. 4 Here it may be convenient to remember that the heathen annalls and chronicles in many things are no true relations, because they confound the Stories of Elams, Arams, Ashurs, and Babels Monarchies: For now Ashur was no Monarch, but was under Babel. Ashur had been a great Tree, Ezekiah 31. But now Babel was the Tree, Daniel 4. And Aram had been a Monarchy afore Ashur, and Elam had been a Monar∣chy afore them all, Gen. 14. But it may be Nimrod or Belus was the first hunter after tyrannical Monarchy. QUest. 4. Did all submit themselves to this Conqueror, Ne∣buchadnezar, that God had established and advanced over them?
Answ. Jechonias King of Judah, by the advice and coun∣sel of Jeremiah, submitted; who though captived, and many of the people, yet they had many comforts following them to Babel. 1. They were the basket of good figs, whom God would greatly respect: Ezekiel, Mordecai, and many godly went in this captivity. 2. Although they were captived, and wanted the glorious sanctuary, and its publique ordinances, yetThe ble∣sed glory of Jehovah from his place in divers remo∣vings came to them. Read Ezek. 9 & 10. & 11. This might put them in minde of the utter removing of his vineyard from them to the Gen∣tiles, as the Lord told them near the ending of the seventy seavens. Christ who is the truth of all the shadowes was to them a Sanctuary, whom in spirit they worshipped,In the cap∣tivity Christ recompensed the loss of publique ordinances with most gracious providen∣ces, Ezek. 11.16. and much of Danel, who was then a great favourite: and would be as Ioseph, and so his three cousins Dan. 3 Hanamah, Misacl, and Aziab, they would be great comforts to the brethren captived. Many precious promises are to this company, both of protection, and return from captivity. 3. They and their children should be chief in restoring re∣ligion at the return from captivity. This company are the se∣cond captivity. QUest 6. Who resisted? Answ. The Kings of Eypt. Tyrus and others, which brought upon them ruin and desolation. Jehojakim returning home, purposed rebellion, which was to his destruction. Ze∣dekiah and his people would not hearken to the word of the Lord, and to the perswasions of Jeremiah, but believed false prophets, and Zedekiah brake his Oath of subjection to the King of Babel, and rebelled, whom with his subjects God se∣verely plagued, by famine, pestilence, sword, and captivity. This company are the basket of vile and bad figs, and the third captivity. QUest. 7. What more may be observed? Answ. Here we are diligently to minde, What God did
with those stavesMark also the metaphor of cruel plough men Psal. 129. rods, axes, sawes with which he did beat, saw, and hew his Church withal. Each enemy did rage and smite a little while, till God who is wounderful in counsel and excellent in workingEsay 10.7. &c. Deut. 30. 2, 3, 4. &c. Levit. 26.41. Mic 7.9 Psal. 119.67.71. Esay 27.9. Hebr. 12.10 performed his (not their) intent, work and purpose. Then upon theThis duty in sincerity performd ever sped well, God speaking peace to his people, 2 Chr. 20. Dan 7.1 Sam. 7. Psalm 84. Hest 4.16. humiliation of his peo∣ple he alway heard their cry,He had ever respect to his glorious and great Name, Exod. 34. Num. 14. Deut. 32. Ezek. 20. and this the Saints perpetually remember to God, Psalm 74. & 79 149. his promise and covenant is ever working. and remembred his cove∣nant in Christ, breaking the head and head-plot of the seed of the Serpent, in his unsearchable judgementsConsider Psalm 2. & 110. through all stories at the word, from Kain to all that follow his waies. putting a∣way all the wicked of the earth like dross treading and tram∣pling them in theLet this text of Esay 63. be cited no more impertinently, not erronionsly, Apoc. 19. teacheth to ex∣pound it. Wine-press of his anger and fury, and overthrowing Kingdome after Kingdome with great desolati∣on, as it is said, Lo I begin to bring evil on the City whereupon my name is called, and should ye be utterly unpunished? Read Jer. 23. & Esay 30. Very many more are the observations which these Scrip∣tures of Moses and the Prophets will afford to the wild Olive branches: but to the godly and deligent student they will be familiar. QUest. 8. Was not the Kingdome of Salomon restored after the captivity? Answ. 1. No, They were told that they should never have an earthly Kingdome any more, for God had sworn that Je∣chonias of Salomons posterity (and of the direct line of the Royal descent) should dy childless, and that none of his seed nor of Jehojakim his father should bear rule any more in Ju∣dah, Jer. 22. & 36.30. 2. Also God had told them in Babel, that the 4 Kingdoms signified by the four mettals of the Image, & by the four beasts Dan. 2. & 7. should over-rule their outward estate, and that the Crown and Kingdom should be overturned, overturned, overturned, and cast to the ground, till he came to whom it belonged, that is Christ the King.
QUest. 9. If Salomons race was ended in Jechonias, how was Gods promise fulfilled that Christ should come of David, according to the flesh? Ans. David (besides Salomon) had a son of Bathsheba cal∣led Nathan, and of him our Lord Jesus Christ linealy descended. QUest. 10. If Jechonias dyed childeless, how is it said that he begate Salathiel, 1 Chron. 3.17. and Mat. 1.12. Answ. Salathiel was the Son of Jechonias by legal right of succession to the kingdom, not son by nature: and so Ezra teacheth 1 Chron. 3. That Jechonias being inSee how Tremelius translates 1 Chron 3.17. the term Assi is not a proper name. strait prison adopted Salathiel his heir. And in the same manner the Evan∣gelist Matthew handles our Lords case, declaring that he was right heir to the kingdome of Israel. QUest. 11. Which are the Kingdoms signified by the four met∣tals, and by the four Beasts, Dan. 2. & 7. Answ. By the Head of Gold, and the Lion is signified Babel, the Brest and armes of silver, and the Bear, signifie the Medes and Persians: the Belly and sides of Brass, and the spotted Leopard, the kingdom of Graecia: the thighs and legs of iron and feet of iron and clay, and the Beast with ten horns the kings of Gog in the north, and the kings of the South. QUest. 12. What was the end of those wicked kingdomes that oppressed the Saints the holy Hebrews? Answ. The whole Image was beaten to dust and made as chaff before the winde: the four Beasts were cast into the fire unquenchable before the Son of man came in the clouds. QUest. 13. What reasons may be rendred, why God did abo∣lish some of Moses Ceremonies, and Salomons race, and e∣verthrew Temple, City, and kingdome? Answ. Israel which is after the flesh looked not to the sure mercies of David in the eternal throne and kingdome promi∣sed
to them in Christ. But that which was for their welfare be∣came to them, through misbelief, an occasion of falling: they stumbled at the Stumbling Stone, and seeking by the outward work to be justifyed (as Esay 1. & 58.59 & Psa. 50. com∣plains) and made their Belly their God, and minded outward and earthly things: therefore God did shake all those poor ru∣diments by Babel, (read Jer. 3.16. & 52.13.17. &c.) and once more finally said he would that they might be better perswaded to embrace the New Covenant, that God had pro∣mised to make with them: to look to Christ the end of the Law, and to entertain his easie yoke, and to enter into his rest, to be more spiritually minded, to look to him the true Salo∣mon, and to his Priesthood and kingdom. QUest. 14. How many years was it since the 19. of Nebuchad∣nezar, or the third captivity, to the end of the Captivity. Answ. Full 50 years: then the golden head was made dust, the Lion thrown in the fire. Then Cyrus K. of Persia overthrew Babel,The eighth Chapter of Dan. for the fufilling of it belongs to the time of the Seventy Se∣vens, and like∣wise much of chap 2. and 7. and made a decree for the return of the people and buil∣ding of the Citie and Temple in the first year of his Reign. QUest. 15. What Scriptures are contained in those 50. years. Ans. Part of the last chap of 2 Kings, and part of the last chap. of 2 Chr. much of Jeremiah, and much of Ezekiel, so much as is noted to be after the 11. of Zedekiah, or the burn∣ing of the Temple: the 4, 5, 7, & 8. (a) chapters of Daniel, the prophesie of Obadiah. The Annotations upon the Questions and An∣swers of the eighth CHAPTER. QUest. N. 4. Moses saith from Christ] People should be taught this constantly that the Son of God, to whom the Father hath committed all authority and power, so as Mediatour, he gave the Law. And when we are careless or wilful and break the law,
and do not obey it, then we dishonour the Son: for this is the holy re∣vealed will of the Lord that all men should honour the Son, as they honour the father, Exoa. 23. Mat. 17.5. So it is said of Servants, they serve and obey Christ when they perform their duties in con∣science to their masters: the same is said of wives and children. And so we must say of all relations divine and humane in all the Ten Words, Mark Jeremy chap. 34. all of it. That is a great Word which is spoken. Obdience is better than Sacrifice. This well understood will make to vanih the term Legalists, and the vain do∣ctrines, that have been about keeping and walking in the Law of the Lord: as though it were not made for the righteous to be a rule of life; but we may not once to think to be justified by the doing of it, for the Law is more spiritual, then the best Christian in the world. But we ought to be very careful that we walk in his holy covenant that our hearts by his spirit may comfort us, that we are honest subjects of the Kingdome of so good and gracious a King: And let such take heed that will not thus be Legalists that the Lord Jesus Christ the King, do not send forth writs against them as out-laws, that will not obey his com∣mandements, but be as untamed Heifers: for he hath (as we see) many Marshals (such as is sicknesses, diseases, &c.) to attend him to serve his processes, from which there can be no escaping, if once the decree come forth. But do I say, no escaping? yea it may be upon godly humiliation not only escaping; if not that, yet abatemnt of the chastisement, or else all will be sanctified to us, that all shall be for our good: for he that is our King and Law giver is also our sacrifice of propitiation and recon∣ciliation to all that judge themselves, and confess their sins, and forsake their iniquities, for he is merciful and just in his promises to pardon them that by the assistance of his Spirit walk in his righteous Law. All his providences are to humble, and to bring us to the obedience of faith in him our holy Mediator, and blessed are they that do his commande∣ments, Apoc 22.14. Ibid. N. 5. The Law of the Lord is a cnoverting Law] The Law Cere∣monial and Moral was a regenerating and converting Law by the spirit of Christ to them of the old Testament. Although the Lord Jesus end∣ing all the Ceremonial Law in his offering up of himself as a most per∣fect sin-offering, and his bloud a perfect sprinkling, is our compleat cleansing and justification, yet still teacheth us the Moral law, as his New Testament sheweth to obey God in him, whom all the Israel of God must know, that God the Father hath made him Lord and Christ; as to be our Priest and Teacher, so to be our King and Commander: yea as to be any one of them, so to be all of them to us. And all this is to present us to God an holy people, 1 Corinth. 15. ult. Colloss. 1.28. John 17. The Law was not given by Christ with that terrour to be to us onely
a Law of works (as many understand works) but it was a Gospel Law, teaching of Faith and Love which is in Christ Jesus: and it was given in terrour to make men fear to despise the Son of God as Mediatour. All the preaching of God to the Patriarks, and by Moses, and the Prophets, was to bring man back again to God by preaching Jesus Christ the Medi∣atour from God, and his mediation was ever manifested since the fall of our first parents. And our Lords Apostles taught the same holy do∣ctrine among all nations for the obedience of faith, read Rom. 1.5. and 16.25.26. Nicodemus a Teacher in Israel should have known all these things. Iohn 3. Quest. 7. and Answ. And should ye be utterly unpunished] When the Church is afflicted then let the world look for a scourge: for in the pro∣sperity of the Church the world fares the better: let the world blesse the Church, it shall then have many outward comforts. The world should now be wise to consider, that to vex the Church of God, to curse Abra∣ham is the ready way to bring plagues on it self. But it is said the whole world lies in wickednesse, and so it will still be, and we must expect it. Quest. 8. and Answ. N. II. Overturned, &c.] That speech of Ier. 22.29. O earth, earth, earth, write Iechonias childeless: and that speech of Ezek. 21.27. Overturned, overturned, overturned, must be diligently observed together, the one for the ending of Salomons house, the other for the Kingdom. Although God overturned Salomons King∣dome, and ended his progenie, yet he failed not David of his truth, and mercy promised, but he raised up One, even Christ, our of his loines, after he was dead, and set him upon his throne, and his throne shall stand for ever, Luke 1.32.33. which opens Psalm 89. And Gods promise to David, 2 Sam. 7. And concerning the refusal of Salomons house in Iechonias, and the choosing of the house of Nathan, mark the words of the blessed and beloved virgin, Luke 1.51. He hath shewed strength with his arm, and he hath scattered the proud in the imaginations of their heart; he hath put down the mighty from their seats and exalted them of low degree. Quest. 10. and answ. in a threefold Charge] The mighty and great God saith Jer. 22. Words by his servant the prophet ending the succes∣sion of Salomon with greater proclamation to all the world than Davids oath at the first had brought it into honour. The ending of Salomons house was one of the weightest matters in all the government of the world, to shew that Christ his Kingdom is not of this world, Mr. Bro. in Manus. Quest. 11. and answ. and the Lion] When the State of Iudah, by be∣ing conversant with Lions, became a Lioness, and brought forth Lions that roared on the subjects, then God brought upon them the Lion-Babel, and other hunters who spread their nets from them, Eze∣kiel 19. Ibid Kings of Gog in the North] By Gog and Magog is meant the kings
of the North the fourth Beast, or the iron leg, Ezek. 38. & 39. Dan. 2. and 7. skilful ought we to be to discern the proper Gog and Magog from that spoken mystically, Apoc. 20. Quest. 12. and answ. The four Beasts] To the carnal and worldly mind∣ed the wicked Kingdomes of this world seem glorions powers, as in the image to Nebuchadnezzar: but to the spiritual minded they are as salvage Beasts that go to a fire unquenchable. So the state of mystical Babylon is glorious in the world. Apoc. 17.4. but their end shall be as Sodoms, Apoc. 14.10. & 19.20. Quest. 31. and answ. The sure mercies of David] That glorious Tem∣ple of Stone, and all Moses Ceremonies, and that golden Throne of Salomon, and that store of gold, and plenty of silver as stones, strong Cities, and Chariot Cities, stately buildings, fourty thousand stalls for Horses, plenty of all provision, royal furniture, and all princely ac∣commodations, curious delights of eyes and ears, &c. were not the sure mercies, and holy things of David, For all was vanishing into vanity, when Rehoboam shewed himself a fool, both in matter of State and cor∣rupting the Gospel, 1 Kings 10. Eccles. 2.19. The sure me cies are shew∣ed to the circumcision, and to the uncircumcision, Esay 55.1, 2, &c. 1 Pet. 1.3, 4, 5. 2 Cor. 4.18. Acts 13.34, 35. &c. And all the Epistle to the Hebrews, Esay 57.15. & 66.1, 2 Mat. 5. & 6. & 7. Hosea 1.7. Zch. 4.6. And the true gold and clothing is from the true Salomon, and the firm building is on Christ the Rock, Apoc. 3.18. Mat. 7. That these things might be graffed, and as nailes fastened in our hearts, look further within the veile of these matters. Salomons wives over-wrought him to suffer, and by his charges to build idol places, whereupon he saw he had occasioned Gods threatning for the renting and overthrow of his Kingdome, and foreseeing the destruction of the Temple, Citie, and Kingdom, he writeth his Gospel, That all under the Sun is vain, and the Kingdome of Christ is not of this world, but the promise of the eternal Throne to David was spiritually to be taken, and to his Scepter all must yield subjection, that hope to stand in judgement, when he calleth all to accompt for their works, with every secret thing, whether it be good or evil. And Salomons case alone, (noble in the vanity of this world, and the first, and the last that had all this world at will) might have taught Herod, Pilate, Caesars and Concision, that the pomp of this world is not fit to breed poverty of spirit, to breed mourning, to breed meeknesse, to breed hunger and thirst after righteousness, to finde the Kingdom of heaven. And that the King eternal, invisible, blesseth men only to his invisible Kingdome. Ibid. Seeking by the outward work to be justified.] Opus operatum, bo∣dily exercise, even this, now at this day is the foolish conceit and pra∣ctise of all the carnal Christians in the world, Eccles. 5.1. The coming unto God by faith in Christ, as Habel, they care not for, as Kain. In the story of Kain and Abel, the carriage of all deceitfull hypocrites, and
true Worshippers is contained. Outward religion may be the vessel of an incarnate Devil, as well as of a sanctified soul: it is as capable of hypocrisie, of murder and uncleanness, and all iniquitie, as of sincerity &c. as in Kain, Iscariot, and the Whore in the proverbs (Prov. 7.14.) whom the ten Tribes followed as an Ox to the slaughter, and the whore (in Apoc. 17.) whom ten Kingdomes followed drunken with the wine of her Fornication The opinion of self-sufficiency, and resting in out∣ward performances brought many plagues to the whole house of Israel, and to captivity, as Psal. 50 &c. &c. And at last scattered them (as Kain) into the four windes of the heaven, and made their habitation desolate to this day. And this doctrine of bodily exercise, and mens a∣ditions brought apostasie as a plague, to the Christian Churches, 1 Tim. 4.1. to 8. The warming our hearts with such sparks will make us ly down with cold comfort in darkness and sorrow: For it is a forgetting of God, and they have base, barren, and unworthy conceits of the Holy One of Israel, that think he will comply with such idolatrous, and easy de∣votions, for they could not do less to an idol. Pelagian heresies, and bodily exercise will eare out all power of godliness: the one is the do∣ctrine of popery, and the other is the religion of popery: compare Col. 2 23. with cap. 3.1, 2, 3. and minde Esay 1. Psalm 50. Jer. 7. Ibid. and once more finally] Dan. 9.27. shews by whom. And this speech yet once more, signifieth the removing of things shaking as made with hands, that the things which shake not way remain. Wherefore seeing we receive a Kingdome which cannot be shaken, let us hold Grace by which we may serve God aright with reverence and godly fear, for our God is a consuming sire, Heb. 12. Hag. 2. Mark how this speech opens, Dan 2.44 and chap. 7. Therefore Abaddons Kingdome is to be held a∣nathma, of all true Christians, for building of ther which Christ hath sha∣ken, and adnulled. But what care Princes for these things, they will rather embrace the enchanting whore, Apoc 17. than make the word of God their delight, but Christ hath and will burn and shake their King∣domes and Common Weals. Ibid. David foretold them this.] David shewed his house could not be upright with God, but would be thornes, and must be burnt: and that therefore they should expect a better King and Kingdom. So the revol∣ting and wavering Hebrews through misbelief concerning Christs King∣dome and Priesthood would prove to be but thornes and briars whose end was burning, Psalm 22 & 40. & 95. 2 Sam. 23. Observe Ethan, all Psal. 89. Heb. 6.8. & 10 29, 30, 31. Quest. 14. and answ. and made a decree for return] as Jehovh pro∣mised that a remnant should return, so he performed. For Israel hath not been forsaken, nor Iudah of his God, of Iehovah of hosts, though their land was filled with fin against the Holy One of Israel, Ier. 51.5.
CHAP. IX. With Questions, Answers, and Annotations, for the time of the seventy Sevens, in Dan. 9. Shewing how Redemption and the Covenant of grace was taught and opposed in this Space of time. QUest. What remaining Text doth yet continue the golden chain of times, with which Gods eternall Counsel, and rich∣es of his glorious mystery in Christ, was further revealed to the Elect? Answer. Dan. 9.24, 25, 26, 27. This Scripture is a Text full of shining glory, overshining all the Doctrine of the old Testament, and an Abridgement of the new. QUest. 2. Repeat the Scripture, with some more of that Chap∣ter, as a preparation to observe the Angels heavenly message the better? Answer, verse 1. In the first year of Darius, the son of Acha∣suerosh, of the seed of Madai, in which he was made King over the Realm of the Chaldeans. 2. In the first year of his Reign,  Daniel marked by books the number of the years, whereof the word of Jehovah, had been unto Jeremiah the Prophet, for the accomplishing in the ruines of Jerusalem seventy years.
3. And I turned my face to the Lord God, and sought by Prayer and Supplication, with Fasting, with sackcloth and ashes. 3. And I prayed unto the eternall my God, and made my confession and said, O Lord, the great and dreadfull God keep∣ing the Covenant and mercy to them that love him, and to them that keep his commandements. 5. We have sinned, and we have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have rebelled, even by departing from thy Precepts, and from thy judgements. 6 Neither have we hearkened unto thy Servants the Prophets, which spake in thy name to our Kings, to our Princes, and to our fathers, and to all the people of the Land, &c &c. 20. And as I was yet speaking, and confessing my sin, and the sin of my people Israel, and presenting my supplications be∣fore the eternall my God, for the holy Mountain of my God. 21. Even as I was yet speaking in prayer, the man Gabriel, whom I had seen afore in a vision came unto me, flying with ve∣hemency untill he touched me at the time of the Evening ob∣lation. 22. And he gave understanding, and talked with me, and said, Daniel, I am now come forth to give thee skill of under∣standing. 23. At the beginninng of thy prayers came forth the word which I am come to tell thee, because thou art greatly beloved; Therefore conceive the word, and perceive the clear vision. 24. Seventy sevens of years are exactly accounted for thy people, and for thy holy City, to finish Trespasse-offerings, and to end sin-offerings, and to make reconciliation for ini∣quity, and to bring righteousness everlasting, and to seal vision and Prophet, and to shewVi. M. Bro. translation of Daniel in English, prin∣ted at Hanaw. Ebr. Messiah. CHRIST, the Holy of Holiest. 25. Know then, and understand from the outgoing of the word to restore and build Ierusalem untoEbr. Messi∣ah, so v. 26. CHRIST the King, shall be seven sevens, and sixty and two sevens. In the other it shall be restored and builded, Street and wall, and troublous shall these times be.
26. In that after the Sixty and two Sevens CHRIST shallThe suffe∣rings of the Messias, allusion often touched in the new Te∣stament, Acts 26.23. The angel sealeth Bala∣ams Prophe∣sic concerning Kittim, Italy, to be the cru∣cifier of Christ Num. 24.24. hereby. suffer, but not for himself. Thereupon the City, and Holy Place shall he destroy, and the Kings own people in the next generation, and their end shall be with a Flood, and at the end of the war shall be a finall judgement of utter de∣solations. 27. But he shall confirm the covenant for theNot for the Iews onely, as Luc. 22.20. but for the many, as Mat. 26 28. Rom. 5.15.1 Iohn 2, 2. many, the last Seven and half that seven shall bring to an end Sacrifice & Of∣fering. Afterward by an Army of unclean, lothsome infidels he shall make a desolation, even untill utter destruction, and finall judgement come flowing on the desolate. QUest. 3. What speciall Observations are in this Scripture? Ans. As the motions of the heavens declare the glory of God: so the army like ordered times in Gods word, is worthy of all ad∣miration, all serving Christ. This Scripture doth shew the fi∣nishing of the golden chain of times, of the old Testament, in a pleasant Sabbaticall account, The Seventy Sevens are from Daniels prayer for freedome from Babel, untill the Son eter∣nall, the King of glory doth purchase an eternall freedome for all that believe the glorious Gospel. 2. This Prophesie was given in the first year of Cyrus and Darius, who overthrew Babels Kingdome, and sent the Jews home that year with a most comfortable Proclamation of Subsidy over CXX. Provinces, and with commandement  building Jerusalem and the Temple, which with the wall, and the Streets of the City, were reedified within the Seven Sevens. 3. This Scripture is a glorious revelation from heaven, concerning Christ the King, the Holy of Holy: who by his just, peaceable, and spirituall government, uncontrollable teaching, and never ending Priesthood, should finish tres∣passe offering, and end sin offering, and make reconciliation for iniquity, and bring righteousnesse everlasting: and seal, that is, confirm all the visions and Prophesies, that he was the
end that all aimed at: himself being the true Prophet, Sacri∣ficer and King, altar and Sacrifice, so in himself ending all Abrahams, Moses, and the Temples Ceremonies, both per∣sons and things. 4. Here is declared whither the benefit of all Christs suf∣ferings tend, that he suffered not for himself, but for us, the just for the unjust, he was wounded for our transgressions, and broken for our iniquities, he gave himself for us, an offering, and a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savour to God. 5. Gods people for endeavouring to perform any worthy work for the advancement of the Gospel, and the common weal, must expect troubles and all oposition of slanders, re∣proaches, false accusations, and whatsoever els, the seed of the Serpent can possibly do, the books of Ezra and Nehemi∣ah, shew this in re-edifying Jerusalem, the wall and the Temple. 6. Whereas the Angel told Daniel, that he was sent to make him skilfull of understanding, we must know, that Da∣niel knew all but the time which bringeth a greater clearnesse to all: therefore the appointed time, the very year, day and hour of fulfilling this prophesie is not a triviall, or an uncer∣tain thing, but is that which the Angel calleth skill of under∣standing: and therefore he doubleth a charge to the Prophet to understand and consider. 7. This is remarkable as by the coming from Egypt, re∣corded for the very day, the day of the promise to Abraham may be certainly known which was the self same day, 430 a∣fore. so the day of our Lord, death being known, which was answerable to the promise and Passeover, this Prophesie also of the Seventy Sevens, being exactly 490 years afore it, may be known to agree in time with it. Glorious is the wisdome of God, herein to honour his feasts with most heavenly sto∣ries, that promise and seal, truth and figure might mèet to∣gether. 8. This Oration of the Angel sheweth how long Sems Tents should hold their glory, and be accounted holy, and that at
the end of the Seventy Sevens, or 490 years,The ending of the Seventy Sevens, the time of refor∣mation. the heathen should have the Partition wall of ceremonies broken down, and the hand writing of OrdinancesEpies. 2.14, 15.16. Col. 2.14. blotted out, and the old enmity between Jew and GentileIsa. 11. and 60.17, 18. Eps. 2.15. abolished, and be brought into equall covenant, and that Christ the King would destroy his own Nation, and demolish City and Temple with perpetuall devastions as with the Flood of Noah, and make a new Jerusalem from heaven, because all Nations could not de∣pend on the City in Canaan, read Isa. 63 23. 9. Observe that the Romanes for killing of Christ, are called like the unclean beasts in Leviticus, unclean lothsome Infidels, and Rome it self, of all Cities in the world, for that, is specially cursed, the Apocalips is a full declaration of this. 10. Whereas the Angel saith, Christ shall confirm the Co∣venant, for the many, and shall end Moses ceremonies, and by his onely Sacrifice once offered bring in everlasting justifi∣cation or freedome from sins, guiltinesse, and desert, Pope∣ry is to be abhorred and accursed, that doth revive Moses ceremonies, the handwriting of Ordinances, with repetiti∣on of Priest, Altar and Sacrifice propitiatory. And we in the Lords Supper do protest against Jews and Popery, that CHRIST ended all by his death once performed, through which he is to all the faithfull a most complete and perfect re∣conciliation for all iniquity. QUest. 4. Who gave heed to this word of Prophesie spoken by the holy Angel from heaven? Answ. The Forty nine thousand, Ezra? that left. Babel for Jerusalem, with the holy Prophets and Governours, Zo∣robabel, Nehemiah, Haggai Zhrih, alachi, and our Lords, fathers and kindred fom Zble, Mat 1. Luk 3. and the Mahabean martyrs, and so many of Israel, as had hope of salvation thought of Jem in all places  they were scattered, read Jeremiah Chap 51.50.
QUest. 5. Who also in the new Testament? Answ. Zacharias, and his wife Elizabeth, John the Baptist, old Simeon, and Anna the daughter of Phanuel, and many in Israel and Jerusalem, that waited for Christ, the hope and consolation of Israel, and Jews before the full end∣ing of the Seventy Sevens came from all countries to Jerusa∣lem, looking for the Kingdome of heaven, then to appear, as Daniel foretold, chap 2. and 7. and 9. And John Elias cried, and our Lord, and his disciples preached, that, The King∣dome of heaven was come, Mat. 3.2. and 10.7. Luke 19.11. QUest. 6. Who were enemies that did hate and cruelly mock and persecute the doctrine of God and his people? Answ. The wicked Kingdome signfied by the Bear, Leopard and beast with ten horns, Hamans wickednesse, and Sanballats and others under the Government of the Breast and Arms of silver must be remembred. QUest. 7. Who did neglect and apostate from this prophesie of so great salvation? Answ: Many in Israel that associated with Sanballat, and Malachi sheweth that some began to be Atheists, and to speak stout and wearisome words against God and his do∣ctrine. The Angel foretold ofAntiochus caused stars to fall. Dn. 8. & 11. so did the tail of the Dragon, the new Anti∣chus, Apc. 12.2. Thes 2. The fourth beast cast down truth to the ground, Dan . forsakers, and wicked deal∣ears against the holy Covenant (of Daniels own people) un∣der the iron legs and fourth Beast. Also Zacharias spake of wicked Shepherds that loathed Christ and his Kingdome. And that came to passe in those Hereticks and false Teachers, the Sadduces, Scribes and Pharisees. They were great oppug∣ners of all Gabriels heavenly message, as in all the Evange∣lists the Acts, and in the Epistles to Rome, and to Galatia, to the Hebrews is seen.
QUest. 8. How did Daniels holy people find Gods goodnesse in cleaving to this Doctrine? Answer. By faith they obtained good report with God: and God was not ashamed of them to be called their God. By faith the Jews in Esther escaped the edge of the sword. Also we are to consider, that Zachariah, Haggai, and Malachi en∣large Gabriels Oration for many things, that a fountain for sin and for uncleannesse should be opened by the King and Sacrificer, even Iehovah of hosts, that should glorifie the se∣cond Temple with his presence. And that although the low Jerusalem and Temple should be destroyed, a larger should be builded, and a better raised up, And the Covenant shall be confirmed, with the many Gentiles from East to West, among whom in every place, incense of prayer, and pure offering of lips, praising of God shall be offered unto his holy name; That Him, the Angel of the Covenant, the Sun of righteous∣nesse shall arise with healing in his beams, and that God en∣rolls in the book of life all that fear him, and thought upon his name, to glorifie them in that day of the better resurrecti∣on, to shine as the brightnesse of the firmament, and as the stars for ever and ever. Quest. 9. How was Gods service executed on the Seed of the Serpent, the open enemies of his name and people? Answ. Streams of fire came from the fierie Throne, through the Mediation of the high Sacrificer in the heavens, which o∣verthrew the thrones of Kingdomes,Dan. 7.9, 10. Zac. 1.12, 13. and destroyed the strength of the Kingdomes of the heathens, contained in the image and Beasts, Dan. 2. and 7. That same vengeance hanged that Courtier and favourite Haman, and his sons, and brought to confusion their assassines, and others were told that they
had no right, nor portion, nor memorial in Jerusalem, Nehem. 2.10. QU. 10. With what reward did Christ recompence the disobedi∣ence of scandalized revolters from the Doctrine of salvation? Heb. 2.1. An. 1. Malachi denounced, that Gods wrath should burn them up as an oven: and tormenting sorrows befell them a∣fore and after the bright morning Star of Jacob appeared, as Zachariah also had foretold them; for as they abhorred and loathed Christ and his Doctrine, so Christ abhorred and loathed them, leaving the lost sheep to perish, that would needs be perishing, whom yet he pitied before that wrath came on them to the utmost. 2. And Christ the Rock of Israel, having confirmed the covenant for the Jews, and the many of all Nations, the last year of the last Seven, did forty years after grind to powder the Jews his own people, by the Romane infidels, and destroy∣ed City and holy Place with utter and smallThen the corner stone fell on the Iews, and the vineyard was let out to other hus∣bandmen. Mat. 21.41. &c. desolations, and such miseries and sorrowsRead Heb. 25.31. and Iosephus on the wars of the Iews. befell the Ntion, that they could rather have wished the mountains to fall upon them, and the hills to cover them, read Luke 23, 39, 30. QUest. 11. But shall not the Land of Canaan, City, and Temple, and Kingdome be restored to the Jews? Answer. They shall never be restored, yet the Jews shall have a generall glorious calling in all places where they are scattered, when the fullnesse of the Gentiles is come in, and when they are called, and the veilThen they shall see the 12 Tribes o∣ver our gates, and the apo∣stles doctrine to be fastened in Aharons jewels, Apo. 21 taken off their heart, and know Christ and his spirituall government, they will e∣steem Canaan and Ierusalem, no more than any City or coun∣trey in the world; they will then look to the heavenly Rest, (yet here begun) and to the holy City from heaven, in which the Lord God of hosts, even the Lamb is the Temple, Apocal. 21.22.
QUest. 12. What Scriptures are contained in those Seventy Sevens? Answ. The two last verses of the last of Chronicles, Daniel the 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. chapters, Ezra, Nehemiah, Hester, Haggai, Zachariah, Malachy, and the 4 Evange∣lists, which finish their storie with the death, resurrection and ascension of Iesus Christ our Lord, whose death was the very last day of the Seventy Sevens, or 490 years, at the time of the Evening Sacrifice. Note all the rest of this New Testament was written within 70 years after our blessed Saviours ascension. QUest. 13. What do you observe in the Scriptures of the old Testament, as speciall occasions of the Churches apostacies and revoltings? Answ 1. Wicked marriages, as is manifest from the times of the old world to Malachies dayes. 2. The open or visible Church never careth for, nor clea∣veth to the written word, unlesse there be faithfull Governors, but ever men are declining to their own vain inventions. 3. Wicked sacrificers, and false Prophets, who came with∣out Gods sending, both came with outward shews of truth, but were base sycophants and parasites, alwaies falsely accu∣sing and persecuting the godly, and flattering Princes and people in their exorbitant courses. 4. The abuse of sweet peace, health, and plenty, turning these blessings of the Gospel, to pride, wantonnesse, idleness, gluttony, drunknnesse, oppression, worldly confidence, and carnal, and carelesse security, for Church and Common-weal, &c.&c.
QUest. 14. How many years hath Palmoni the wonderfull Numberer, numbred from the Creation to the Redemp∣tion? Answer. The Sun in his Tabernacle of the heavens had joy∣fully run his race, as a servant to the SON of righteousnesse, Three thousand nine hundred and sixty years, from the first promise of Christ to Evah, till the SUN lost his light, the SON brake the Serpents head dying, rising, and ascending. QUest. 15. How many Iubilees were there? Answ. From the Conquest and partition of the Land of Canaan, by Iesus the son of Nun, unto the conquest of JESVS, the son of God over Sin, death, and Satan, and all our enemies, are twenty eight Iubilees: our Lord and Saviour the Lord Iesus Christ, who is the second Adam, and Sem the Great and Reve∣rend,The Jubilee year a won∣derful , the joyfull sound of the Trumpet, in the acceptable year of the Lord sounded all these things. The victorious combate, with the Serpent and his seed, and his triumph over them, the fullnesse of times, the Sacrifice of eter∣nall Redemption, the just for the unjust, the open recovery of Paradise, the resurre∣ction of the most holy, the true Temple destroyed and raised, the day of salvation, the Jews Prerogative ended, the Gentiles called, the enmity of Jew and Gentile abolished, the shadows flee away. Christ shook and ended the things made with hands, the Sun is darkned, the Vail of the Temple rent, because the way into the ho∣ly heavens was opend by a better Priest and Sacrifice, &c. &c. &c. died in a * Iubilee year. The ancient, holy Hebrews had an excellent and wonderfull saying among them, that, The Divine Majesty, dwelling in our Tabernacle, will be to Israel in a Iubilee, remission, redemption, and finisher of Sab∣baths.
Annotations upon the Questions and An∣swers of the ninth Chapter. QƲest. 2. and Ans. upon the 2. verse of Dan. 9.] The reading, stu∣dy, and meditation of the holy Scriptures, a great furtherance to prayer. A man cannot pray with sound spirituall comfort, that is ignorant in them, as is manifest in this verse and the rest of the Chapter. Blessed is the man that delighteth in them, and in them doth meditate day and night, Psal. 1. And anathema maranatha be that man of sin, and his locusts and Kingdome, that with-holdeth and for∣biddeth the reading and study of the holy Scriptures to the people. Ob∣serve well, 2 Sam 7.27. Gods revelation, the ground of prayer: yea bold∣nesse in it. Upon Daniel 9 23. Conceive the word and perceive it, &c.] By this com∣mandement doubled for vehementer charge he condemneth the world that regardeth not to be instructed in this doctrine, sent from heaven by an Angel unto Daniel, and penned for all Nations use. Wherefore we must give better heed unto the speech, lest we perversly swarve: for if the word spoken by angels fall out sure, and every trespasse received just re∣compence of reward, how shall we ever escape neglecting so great a charge of our King, to our own salvation, where the vision is so clear, that no doubt can be moved by any plain heart, that will rest in the clearnesse of the most bright message by an angel of glory, who coming to teach all the world, was to shine in words, as Stephn by him did in the face, Acts 6 when he spake the angell Gabriels words, that Jesus of Nazareth would destroy the place, City, and Temple, and change the Laws which Moses gave. To this day the blind Jews stand in this, that the Laws of Moses shall stand for ever, Maymon Tom. 1. delege perek 9. Therefore God fore-seeing their dullnesse of hearing, would have an an∣gel of light to teach them by this Prophesie 490 years, when from the year of that message unto Daniel, the Laws of Moses should have their end, and none of the Scribes when Herod was affrighted, nor any of the Iews, as is seen by their answers in all the Gospel, objected disa∣greement for the time, which thing had been done, if there had been any colour of disagreement in time, but they could not conceive of Christs person and office, how that he should be the most holy, and King, and yet dy for our redemption: how he should be Davids Lord, and yet his son; of these things the main objections arose. Now let us look unto the Text, sil. Mr. Bro. on the text on both his english Daniels.
Upon Dan. 9.24. &c.] In this Scripture we come to behold in its flaming brightnesse of the King that is Sacrificer also, by whom and for whom death is vanquished, sun is cleansed, Iustice is brought, redemption is wrought, a vision is sealed, our soul is healed, sacrifice abolished, and the Temple destroyed for defacing of this doctrine, the Iews be reiected for embracing this doctrine, the Gentiles be elected to open calling, Mr. Bro. in S. sight, surely the angel his message concerneth, the sum of all the Bible. The Jews went weeping to Babel, seeing Salomons house and Kingdome ended, and the Temple burnt, and all Moses ceremonies shaken, but they returned rejoycing, bringing sheaves of all comfort, by Gabriels heavenly message of the seventy sevens concerning MESSIAH the King, the Holy of Holy. Upon Dan. 9.25, Out going of the word to restore &c.] mark the word of Proclamation of Cyrus, Ezra 1. how it answereth this Prophesie. Meditate also how pleasing it is to our God to have a tender affection to his cause. Daniel mourned and prayed for the holy City, and the holy Mountain, and had a gracious answer by the holy angel, compare Dan. 9 21.22. Also observe a speech in Zephaniah, I will gather them, that are sorrow∣full for the solemn Assembly, who are of thee, (such are the children of Si∣on, the genuine members of Christs mysticall body) to whom the reproach of it was a burden, Zeph. 3.18 Psal. 137.5, 6. So Daniel again was affect∣ed when he mourned so bitterly when the building of the temple was hindred by Cambyses, in Cyrus his absence, Ezra 4 Dan. 10.2, 3, 4. No losse to the losse of holy things, when they are gone God is gone, and the enjoying of them, no gain so great, and no time so ac∣ceptable, Lam. 2.6, 7. Hs 9 12. Ezek. 9, 3. & 10 4.18, 19. and 11.22.23. Michs idolatrous contestation in a contrary must be the thought of every Holy soul, for the esteeming, procuring, and upholding of Holy Assemblies, Jud 18 24. Upon Dan. 9.26. The City and holy place shall be distroy] The holy Mar∣tyr Stephen was called into question, and lost his life for this glorious Doctrine of the holy Angell, and yet his countenance before the Coun∣cill was like the Angels that brought the message, Act 6.13, 14, 15. and all Chap. 7. How did Despisers wonder and perish, when Stephen and Paul taught this, Act. 6 & 7 Act. 13.41, 45. & 21.28. they wonder∣ed, and in the end perished: As of old they wondered at the Prophets, Esai. 8 18. Jer. 26 6, 7, 8. Hab. 1.5. so they did at our Lord and his Apostles Doctrine. And verily so it is at this day where ever the Com∣mandements of God, and the faith of Jesus is truly and zealously taught. Upon the same verse, & verse twenty five, about the attribute Messiah, which in this message of the Angell is twice expressed as a proper name of the Son of God, who became a Son of man (the Son of Adam) Dan. 7.13 to fulfill all the Angels message. And from this time of Dan 9. this attribute Messiah was very usuall among the faithfull and profane, Joh. 1.41. & 4.23. And the Jewes at that time commonly speaking
Syriack, spake the terme Messias, and speaking Greek, they uttered the Greek terme, Christ: so that as oft as we read the Greek terme, we must remember the other Terme of the Hebrew or Syriack: And all the Or∣thodox Churches in Christendome hold Messias here to be the Son of God, our Redeemer, vi. Mr. Bro. on Daniell, and in Advertisment, pag. 33. Upon the verse 27. and halfe that seaven] of this last seaven, the first part is passed over in silence, for a preparation, the latter halfe doth Christ bestow in confirming the covenant for the Many, beginning at his Baptisme, ending at his death. 3. Quest. and Answ. N. 1. As the motions of the Heavens] The creation was made to serve the Son of Enosh, Psal. 8. so the revolution of the year, all are his Servants, Psal. 119. (lamed-part) No Army is order∣ed more comely then the times in Gods word, Dan. 10.1. And Gods people must learne to know that the times as well as the ceremonies and tipes teach of, so they lead unto Christ, for the Golden Chaine of times are fastned to famous Pillars, as is prefixed to this Book. N. 11. This prophecie was given] Read Esai. 44. & 45. with Ezr. 1.1, 2. concerning Cyrus, his Letters Patents of building the Temple and City, and returning the people. But Cyus (going to war in Scythia) was plagued for not leaving better order at home, that his Letters Patents were not throughly executed, for the good of Gods people, and Cambyses, Daius, Hystaspis and Xerxes, for questioning and damning the Patent, felt Gods wrath and their Kingdomes, Ezra 4. and 6.11, 12 Est 1. trouble in Dan. Hyst court. Ibid Sent the Jews home] The blood of Gods Covenant in Christ sent them home, as from Egypt, so from Babel, Zach. 9.11. Col. 1, 20. the blood of the Covenant is our comfort in any disconsolate condition. Ibid. That year with a most remarkable Proclamation over an hundred and twenty Provinces] Then the Nations did hear of their demanding and enquiring of the way to Sion, upon the hope of the Son of man, his coming to shew the Kingdome of heaven to all Nations, and to shake even the heaven of Moses policy, Jer. 10.4, 5. they presented Sion in the dust before glorious Babel, (and they then ought so to do, but not now) Psal. 102.13, 14. So Moses, and all the Nobles of all ages, Heb. 11.24, 25, 26 ye that have escaped the sword, go away stand not still, remember Jehovah a far off, and let Jerusalem come into your mind, Jer. 51.50, Psl 137.5, 6. So all ye that have escaped mysticall Babylon, go away stand not still, remember Jehovah, and let the glory of the heavenly Je∣rusalem, come into your mind, be ye separate be at a distance in all ho∣ly zeal, still come out from among them, touch nothing of theirs, nei∣ther Laws, nor their phrase, nor apparrell, make a covenant, as Neh. 10. 2 Cor. 6.18. what if your name be put out as evil, remember Isa. 66.. John 9.34. and 16.2. 2 Cor. 6.17. No. 3. And seal, that is, confirm all the vions and Prophesies that he
was the end all aimed at] Among many Prophesies that might be related, I will name now that of Jer. 31.22. The Lord hath created a new thing in the earth, A woman shall compasse a man; that is, a woman Virgin. The holy Spirit of Christ prosecuteth the foundation of Doctrine, which he laid down in Moses, of the blessed seed of the woman, Gen. 3.15. and of Shiloh Gen. 49. that a tribe should not fail to Judah till Shiloh came. Now Judah being in Babel, and held captive, the Prophet doth from the Lord comfort them, that although they were in heavy calamities, and much disconsolate, Jer. 30, 31.32, 33. chapters) yet Judah should return, and have a policy to buy and sell, and that Jerusalem and Temple should be built, and the Cities of Iudah inhabited, and that that New thing should be accomplished, a woman Virgin shall compasse a man. All promi∣ses were made in Christ, and should be yea and amen in him to the glory of God. And this is promised to be as sure as the heavens order, that God would not fail of his promise he made to David and Israel (al∣though Salomons house and Kingdome were ended) yea to all the elect from the beginning, in sending Christ Iesus to be born of a Virgin, and that in him the Church should have unspeakable consolation. This made the people of God to be so refreshed, as a man is by sweet sleep, Ier. 31 26 But Ieremiah told them not, nor any Prophet as yet, How long, (Psal. 64.9.) that should be for the performance, that was reserved for a more fit season, when they were to come from Babel, then they had the time told them by an angel from heaven, which did much heighten their consolation, wherein all comfort was promised by that glorious message of the angel concerning the Messias (compassed by the woman-Virgin) to perform all the promises, visions, and Prophesies, by finishing and en∣ding all sin-offerings, and trespasse offerings, and make by himself a re∣conciliation for iniquity, and bring in everlasting righteousnesse by his perfect sacrifice once performed: so by this Doctrine the godly were pre∣served and strengthened greatly in their faith and hope of Christs co∣ming in this determined time. And seing it is said, Christ shall seal Vision and Prophet, is taught that he shall restrain apostasie through preaching his glorious Gospel, that they fall not away as the Jews did, in that most grievous and al∣most universall revolt, in and from the dayes of Antiochus Epiphanes, Dan 8 13. and 11 30, 31, 32. Our Lord Jesus Christ in his coming was the morning star, and the SUN of Righteousnesse, and his brightnesse did visit us as holy Zchariah saith, Luc. 1 7.8. For those times were most de∣plorable in corrupting all holy Doctrine, as it was greatly darkened by these three Shepherds, Zac. 11. concerning the holy Trinity, the sons inconation, his death and resurrection, and concerning justification, and all Moses polity, as all the Epistle to the Hebrews sheweth. But the Lord Jesus, and his Apostles from him, made all clear again. Also this Prophesie of the angel from heaven, was wonderfull to the
comfort of the people of God under their pressures by Persia, Javan whole, and Javan parted. This Prophesie is marvellous, if we consi∣der the times. Oh who is sufficient to expresse the things of Gods bles∣sed word. Ibid. N. 3. Everlasting righteousnesse.] The mentioning of everlasting righteousness, justification, redemption doth shew the Law made no∣thing perfect, but was sponsorious, and an introduction to a better hope in Christ, for Christ by his own blood entered once through the vail, that is, his flesh, into the holy place, into the very heavens, to appear now in the fight of God for us, and obtained eternall Redemption, Heb. 9. For it is not possible that the bloud of Bulls or Goats should take a∣way sinne (Heb. 9. and 10) or give enterance into the heavens, but the blood of Christ did Col. 1.20. and in this faith all the faithfull from the beginning of the world died, and went to the heavenly City, and countrey and inheritance, Heb. 11. and Col. 11.12. And all the faithfull evermore knew this our blessed Mediatour, to be Jehovah our justifica∣tions, Jer. 23.6. No. 4. Suffered not for himself, but for us.] Zachariah saith, they shall mourn, and be in bitternesse when they consider this, as they did in Mark 16.10. Acts 14. and 2.37. which is an history to the Prophesie of Zac. 12. And so should we consider and do. This Text of Daniel is a fit Meditation for preparation when we come to the Supper of the Lord. N. 6. Therefore the appointed time] As in Moses, the Law had an ex∣presse day and hour for their sacrifices, even from the beginning: so it was no lesse needfull to have from God an expresse warrant, when sacri∣fice should be ended: specially seeing all the world was bound to regard sacrificing at Jerusalem, so long as it was to continue if they hoped for Gods favour. And also to know most exactly when the Jews Prerogative did end, and the partition-wall should be broken down! Ibid. Is not a triviall, or an uncertain thing] Talk no more so exceed∣ing proudly, let not arrogancy come out of your mouth, for Jehovah is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are weighed, and times pre-ordained and determined, 1 Sam. 2.3. Acts 17.26. N. 8. Ceremonies broken down] Christ shook the things made with hands, and settled the polity of his Kingdome in the heavenly Jerusa∣lem, Dan. 2. & 7. Hag. 2. Apoc. 21. Heb. 12.27. There is the Throne of the Son of David, Apoc. 4. & 5. & 22. 1. Luke 1.31.32, 33. Ibid. Perpetuall devastations] In the Vision of Ezek. 1. although ter∣ror of fierie desolations, and captivity for seventy years, yet there was a Rainbow in the vision, to shew that God in wrath remembreth mercy; for there was a return, but for the desolations by the Romane Infidels in Daniels and Zachariahs Prophesies, and our Lords. speaketh, Mat. 24. no Rainbow mentioned; and consider the phrase of sping, out Levit. 18. 28. Num. 31. ult. after the chana anites were spued out, the ever returned: so it hath the Jews who shall never return and to be in such a condition,
as we are taught now adayes. Heare O ye people, O all ye. Ibid. As with the Flood of Noah] The men of the old world, resist∣ed the holy Ghost, the Flood destroyed them, and so the Jews resist∣ed, and a flood of miseries hath ever followed upon them to this day. Acts 7.51. The Apostle remembreth Noahs and Sodoms story to the Cir∣cumcision, and so doth Judas Thaddeus, v. 14, 15. of the judgement of the old world, when the Lord came with thousands of his holy ones to plague the old world, faith was scant found on the earth; so in the overturuning of the Kingdome of Iudah: and so at our Lords first coming, the Church was in a sad condition of ig∣norance and heresies, by the means of the wicked Shepherds, Zac. 11. And before our Lords second coming, there will be another apo∣stacy after a Reformation, when faith will be scant found on the earth, Luke 18. for it is said, the ending of the world shall be like the ending of the old world Mat. 24. The times shall exceedingly degenerate into outward shews of bodily exercise, and into atheisticall scoffing and se∣curity, Mat. 25.3. 1 Thes 5.1.2, 3. 2 Pet. 3. and so it was afore the desola∣tion of Jerusalem, by Nebuchadnezzar, 2 Chron. 36. And upon that gene∣rall defection the Lord Iesus will appear in the clouds with his mighty angels. Christ will not come in a glorious time of Reformation, but in a time of generall defection. No. 10 And we in the Lords Supper do protest, &c.] The Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper, is a Seal of ending Moses polity, given by the Creatours wisdome and authority. The end of Moses Ceremonies could hardly be taught the Jews. So God by an angel of light and glory gave them words for that to reckon ever since they came from Babel, how for they were year by year to the Redemption by our Lord, and to the end of the shadows, that must flee away, and be cancelled, Cant. 2. Col. 2.14. And therefore let all Gods people mark diligently, that the ending of Moses Ceremonies required as certain a warrant, as their be∣ginning had, even for the very last day. And so stand the angels words clear in their own simplicity for ending of them. And the Authority of the Lords Supper standeth upon that, when Bread is given for the bo∣dies of Sacrifices, and Wine for their blood. All soundly learned, and of stayed judgement, will refuse all colour of learning that contradict∣eth. In the words of an honest man spoken in like sort, (as the an∣gel spake to Daniel) none would doubt what should be the true mean∣ing. The more to blame are we, who pervert the words of the living God, to make Questions thereupon, to set light by the Rock of our sal∣vation, as though one thing might be spoken, and another thing meant. Mr. Broughton, Sede Olam. 18. assert. 2. upon Dan. 9. Ibid. No. 10. Death once performed] the Epistle to the Hebrews by Christs fore-sight, was written of purpose, to teach this, and convince the contrary. As Popery is full of Paganisme, So it is of Judaisme.
Quest. 4. and Answer. The forty nine Thousand.] Who are thus descri∣bed in Daniel. Michaels people. The Saints of them, The high Trinity. The stars of heaven, Dan. 8. The holy people. Daniels holy people. The Army of heaven. Their Religion, the truth and the holy Covenant. The Temple called the Sanctuary and the holy. And chap. 7.25. mark that verse. Glorious holy moun∣tain. These terms cannot belong to the State of the Jews of these last dayes, Heb. 1.1. for these 1580 years, for these are proper and peculiar phra∣ses to them of the old Testament, when as yet the partition Wall was not broken down, and the Gentiles were not as yet brought with∣in the Covenant, when not as yet the vessel was let down from heaven, Acts 10. therefore onely the Jews State for the time of the Seventy Se∣vens is the afflicted in Daniel, chap. 2 and 7.8. & 10, and 11 & 12. by the image and four beasts. All these terms are in the Prophesie of Daniel. Ibid. Left Babel for Jerusalem] the hope of the SON OF MAN, who should come with the clouds of heaven, and have Kingdome, pow∣er and glory over all Nations, and for ever perswaded them to leave Ba∣bel, Dan. 7. Ezra 1. Jerusalem the beauty of holinesse ever loved and long∣ed for, and laboured for by the Saints. Quest. 5. and Answ. And Jews before the ending of the Seventy Sevens] the glorious Prophesies of Isaiah, of Amos, of Dan. 2 & 7, and 9. &c. &c. of the Kingdome of Christ made all the Nation of the Jews to expect it, as Luke 17.20. and 19.11. and 23.51. Acts 2. John 1. they by Daniel look∣ed the Kingdome of heaven should appear, though most of them knew not in what manner, through misunderstanding of the Scriptures, Acts 13.27. Luke 24.21. Their false Teachers had greatly clouded all holy Doctrine. Quest. 6. and Answer. That did hate and cruelly mock.] Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth, (since their peregrination In E∣gypt, Ier, 2 1.3. Ezek. 23.3.) may Israel now say, Ps. 129 yea the Church may say this from the first to the last. It began in blood, and hath grown up by blood, and shall end in blood, as it was redeemed by blood. Let the godly when they come to the Lords Supper think on this, and ever pre∣pare for trialls, and take up the crosse. Qu. 7. and Ans. And to speak stout and wearisome words.] Apostasie from Gabriels holy Doctrine, Dan. 8. and 9. and 11.12 chapters, consider. Judahs manners, in profaness, adultery, perjury, violence, &c. In brief for not remembring the Gospel-Law, that Christ gave in Horeh for all Israel,
Mal. 4. These things shew, that they shall cease to be of the holy City for this, diligently read Haggai, Zachariah and Malachi. Ibid. Great oppugners of all Gabriels heavenly Message.] They were zealous Ministers of traditions, mens precepts and bodily exercise: they were serious in trifles, and trifled in serious things. (The frame of spirit of all superstitious hypocrites, Col. 2.) They made false glosses on the holy Text, and great enemies to the Gospel, &c. They are followed step by step of the Popish faction and their friends. But those that love. the shining glorious appearing of our great God and Saviour Jesus Christ will abhor to be like such hypocrites, that do all to be seen of men, that care for nothing but pompous out-sides, and bodily exercise, (opus ex ernum operatum) yet mannaged with great shews of humility, with great shew of wisdome, and great shews of zeal, and neglecting the body, and defended by Pharisaicall, and Locust-Scorpion cruelty, and by cogging, and dice-play Doctrine in all craftinesse, Eph. 4. Such did, and do hold Christ and his Doctrine Anathema: It was ever so with the seed of the serpent, ever since God spake, Gen. 13.15. and so it will be to the end. Mark what the Christ the angel of Gods presence said of old, And if ye shall despise my statutes, or if your soul abhor my judgements, so that ye will not do all my commandements, but that ye break my covenant, Levit. 26.15. Deut. 7.10.—and repayeth them that hate him. Observe what Malachi saith, that Christ will be refiners fire, and Fullers sope, to the three Shepherds, (whose soul abhorred Christ) and their Doctrine, which he was in Mat 5, 6, and 7. chapters, and chap. 23. and so he was to the Churches of Asia, Apoc. 2, and 3. and in all other, by his apostles, and so to this day he is to all traditionists, &c. Quest. 8. and Answer. And thought upon his name to glorifie them.] The four beasts successively afflicted the people of God; yet observe what is said for their consolation, Dan 7.18. That although the beasts shall take away the earthly Kingdome of the Saints, of the most high Ones, (the holy Trinity) yet they shall possesse the Kingdome for ever, yea for ever and ever: The losse of the one is the enjoyment of the o∣ther. So all that follow their faith are said to be partakers of their in∣heritance in light, Col 1.12. Psal. 36.5. with this note, consider the for∣mer notes of the immortall State of the faithfull, them in heaven, and the family of heaven, Ephes. 1.10. and 3.15. Quest. 9. and Answer. —hanged that Courtier and Favourite Haman.] Let fawning and flattering Courtiers, that have a secret sting against the godly, and wayes of holinesse, remember this man their predecessour, and likewise Doeg, that mischievous and deceitfull tongue. Achitophel, that acute oracle of counsell, Shebna the Treasurer, a fautor of athe∣isme, and all debauched courses, Isa. 22. and those Princes and Presi∣dents that could find no quarrell against gracious Daniel, but for the Law of his God. And those Deputies, that by plausible pretences, lies and slanders, did insinuate into the hearts of the Kings of Persia, to damn
the glorious Letters Patents of Cyrus King of Persia, and those counsel∣lours, that were pensioners to hinder the Gospel, Ezra 4. And those Courtiers, that would have the King to put Jeremiah to death for preach∣ing the word truly, and at last put him into amiry dungeon, &c. Now that you may see Christ rules in Princes Courts, in the midst of his enemies: he rooted out Doeg, Psal. 52. Achitophel, seeing his projects took not, hanged himself. Shebna was banished, and a godly officer substituted in his place. And for those Princes and Presidents, we see their sudden destruction, Dan. 6. consider Ps. 9, 10. The sword, famine, and pesti∣lence met with Jeremiahs accusers. And as wrath came from the fierie Throne upon the Kings of Persia; so it fell, we may be sure, on their creatures, Dan. 7. Ibid. Had no right nor portion, &c.] That speech of the truly Noble Nehemiah, that famous, godly, and honourable Courtier, is full of pier∣cing terrour, and a brave contestation to affront the stoutest stomacks, that hinder the welfare of Sion. And these Texts will further explain it, Phil. 3.2.3, 4 Eph. 2.10, 11, 12. Jer. 10.16. Apo. 12.14, 15, 19. if no porttion among that part of Gods family on earth, then no portion with the o∣ther part of the family in the heavens. Ibid. Ierusalems polity.] Nehemiah genealogized the people, that none, but of the true faith, and posterity of Abraham might dwell in the holy City, or have communion with them in holy things, Neb. 9.2. so they were genealogized in the Lambs book of Life, that are Citizens with the Saints in the Ierusalem, that is above, Apoc. 3.12. and chap. 7. and 21. Heb. 12.23. Psal. 87. But the unclean in faith or life, are shut out, Neh. 6.63, 64, 65. Ezek. 13.9, Apoc. 20. and 12. Isa. 4 3, Let every man know if he will enter into life, he must shew his genealogic, Iohn 3. 1. &c. 1 Iohn 3. Ti. 3. Many Gentlemen glory much if they can derive their genealogie from Ancestors, from or beyond the conquest of Eng∣land, by King William; which it may be they and their Ancestours had little in them worthy of commendation. But never think of any of these things in Gods Book, especially of the Genealogle of our Lord Ie∣sus Christ, who became man to adopt us the sons of God. If Nobility and Gentry could shew that they follow in regeneration the steps of faith and holinesse of the ancient Patriarks, Prophets and Apostles, then it were glorious, whereas all their lineall succession is but vanity, being inflamed with idolatrous, and superstitious lasciviousnesse and fol∣lowing Cains ways. What eared Isaiah, Ezekiel, Iohn Baptist? Our Lord when the Iews boasted of Abraham, that they came of him, Isa. 57.3. Ezek. 16.3. Iohn 8.44. Mat. 3. Christ saith to the unbelievers and hypocrites, Ye are of your father the devil. Men that hate Christ, and his word, and his servants, their genealogie is from Satan and Cain, 1 Iohn 3.12. and the faithfull, theirs is from Abraham, yea from God and Christ, Gal. 3. 7.29. and chapter 4.31. Iohn 1.13. Let all Phil: 3. be considered with this note.
Quest. 10. and Answ. N. 1. And tormenting sorrows.] Note some special God gave over into the hands of one another, and into the hands of: their Kings, the Herods, and the Cesas, Ioseph Liber 13. chap. 19. &c. Then Christ brake both his staves, by which they were strengthened, he brake the staffe of beauty, bereaving them of the duty of his Ordinances, and brake also the brother-hood of Judah and Ephraim. And much of this came to passe when the tribe of Levi cared not for the sacrifice-hood, and would be Kings contrary to Jacobs, and Moses will, Gen. 49. Deut. 33. Then they and others became Sadduces, and killed 50000 Pharisees. This is the fruit of hereticall Doctrine and mens Traditions. The poore of the flock that waited on Christ, and valued him above all, observed these things, Zac. 11. Ibid. For as they abhorred Christ.] As their fore-fathers moved Christ to jealousie by revolting to idols, so they did by mens traditions, and false Doctrine, which is as bad as idolatry: yea it is idolatry and vanity, Deut. 32.21. compare with Rom. 10.19.1 John 5.21. Observe how the A∣postle Paul citeth that Text of Moses. They despised the eternall Son, and his righteousnesse, the new and living way: Bodily exercise was not the living way, and so they despised God the Father, 2 John 9 but that brought upon them the day of violent fire and wrath to the utmost, as it is said, despisers wonder and perish, Acts 31.41, Heb. 10.27. 1 Thes. 2.19. False Teachers, and their deceived never prized nor admired Christ and his word, read Phil. 3. Quest. ibid. N. 2. with utter and finall desolations] Your house, that is, the Temple shall be dosolate while the world standeth, Mat. 23. Luc 13. And this came to passe about 40 years after our Lords ascension. Not such a desolation and transgration, as was at Shiloh, or at Jerusalem by Ba∣bel, or as that three years, & half by Antiochus with restauration, but utter desolations: as experience for 1500 years. The affliction from Egypt had a fore-told limitation, so had Babels, so that of Antiochus, and Israels pro∣per glory was limited, Dan. 9.24. But how carnal Israels affliction is not limited, and earthly Canaan, and Jerusalem, shall never have proper and peculiar glory. Quest. 11. and Answer. They shall never be restored.] Let Ezk. 16.43. to the end of the chapter, be well considered, both for the captivi∣ty to Babel, and the utter desolations by Rome, as Ezekiel compares Iu∣dahs state with Sodoms unrecoverable, so our Lord, both to Sodom, and to Noahs flood, Mat. 24. mark well, Num. 33. ult. Again note, where the Apostle saith, Sacrifice and offering thou wouldest not have, &c. by a cosequent he meant, Neither would he Temple, City, and Kingdome, which were all figures till the time of setling. Christ should be and was the building in which God would delight, and therefore these sha∣dows shall never be restored, unlesse we say Sacrifice and offering shall. Why, do we not, as Mr. Finch and Mr. Brightman, &c. make the Jews expect things seen and temporall? No no, they will rejoice to be of
the holy City from heaevn, and will never care to make a corporation. in the Low Jerusalem. Ibid. Then any countrey or Citie in the World] Then they will believe the doctrine of their apostle Peter (the Apostle of the circumcision) as their Godly forefathers dispersed in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, Bythinis, and Chaldea; and mind the heavenly inheritance, that is un∣corruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not, and the spiritual Tem∣ple, 1 Peter 1. & 2. and 2 Pet. 1.19, 20, 21. How sweetly doth the A∣postle draw them from their carnal sense of Ezekiels prophesie, under the terms of Canaan, Citie and Temple. So the apostle to the Hebrews draws them to the heavenly Government of Christ in the Jerusalem Cele∣stial. And that the Low-Jerusalem, & all that hold of the policy of it, now ended by the Son eternal, were briars and thornes, and near rejecti∣on, cursing, and the destruction of violent fire, and wrath to the utmost; compare 2 Sam 23.1. to 7. with Hebrews ch. 6. & 10. As their fore-fathers did, so the children: as Stephen laies that heavy crimination on them. Ibid. The Lamb is the Temple] Seeing the Lamb is the Temple, and that he destroyed the material Temple, and all the politie of it: for if the Priest-hood be changed there must be of necessity a change of the Law: old things are all passed, Then surely it is abominable to have Priests, Altars, Sacrifices, Candles, Incense, Copes, Linnen Ephods, Musick, Distinction as of Mosaical daies and times; as Rests, Jubilees, new Moones, distinction of meats, annointings, &c. in our Ecclesiasti∣call administrations: yea, or an Ecclesiastical politie answerable to Levi of a subservient Clergy, under one universal high Priest on earth. Christ our Statute-Maker hath forbidden all Levitical ceremonial wor∣ship, Iohn 4. There is no Typical ceremonie left unto us in his New Te∣stament but the two Seals of the covenant of the New Testament, and Gods Worshipes must worship him in Spirit and truth; Spirit is opposed to bodily exercise of our carnal hearts; Truth, is opposed to the shadows, rites, types and ceremonies by which Christ saith, The hour was coming that the Father would refuse to be worshipped. And the Son, by whom the Father spake taught none such to be repeated; much less others by man to be invenced They are tyrannical ecclesiasticks that force ceremonies Col. 2. Before Christs coming, the Wisdom of God, as the old covenant needed, instituted many types and ceremonies, but the fulness of time being come, two signs, seals and memorials, Baptism and the Lords Supper were ordained. Seeing the Lord God of hosts even the Lamb is the Temple, and we all with open face, see the shining of the Sun of righteousness; all Moses Ceremonies, and others of mans invention should be left: It is else as if we were still under pupillage, and now it is bondage from which Christ hath justified us, that is, made us free. The servants of Christ in these things must not be the servants of men, but still contend and fight the good fight, for the utter abolishing what he hath abolished, and what in his last Will and Testament he never
bequeathed nor commanded, Gal. 4. Greek Fathers began the Name Priest and high Priest, to be fitted to their doctors. But in the end the gangrene crept to ham unspeakable, that Satan by Turk and Pope ru∣led the world. For the god-Pope, the high Priest of the Papacy he made a Mosaical subservient Clergy, He made another peculiar holy Citie: He made Priests and annointed them, and Priests must serve at an al∣tar, and an altar must have a sacrifice, then his Priests must have holy garments of ministration, and so copes came in, and holy Temples, &c. many as well as Papists ignorant of the Scriptures think it not amiss to retain many ceremonies of Moses, (which the Son of God commanded for a time) not knowing he came in the flesh to do Gods will and to abo∣lish those his own ordinances: Innocent the third maintained that the Ceremonies of the Law were not abolished. And all popery is excee∣dingly leavened with this heresie. Due Plessis in his Treatise of four Books of institution, pa. 1. Lib. 1. chap. 7. It is a denying of Christ in part to use any of Moses ceremonies: must it then be religion to use any humane significant ceremonies in Gods worship? Quest 13. and Answ. N. 1. wicked marriages.] Judah hath dealt trea∣cherously and an abominotion is committed in Israel and Jerusalem: For Judah hath profaned the Holiness of Jehovah, which he loved, and hath married the daughter of a strange God: Jehovah will cut off the the Master, and the Scholar out of the Tabernacle of Iacob, although he offereth an offering to lebovah of Hosts. Treachery, abomination, and profaneness, Mal. 2.11, 12. Ezra 9. & 10. Nh. 13. consider Io∣suah chap. 23.6, 7, to 12. For the word of God and Marriages: wicked women of high place; and wealthy, a grievous evil to the Church of God. N. 2. The open or visible Church.] Most men care not for Gods holy and plain religion, 2 Kings 17. Ezek. 20. The greater part in open po∣licy careth but for his life. As in Salomons time, all were of great shew, but soon after his death Ephraim turned all, but Iudah, to Worship calves, not God: So great Constantine helped the Christians, but few of his men cared for God. Our own age and Countrey shewes the same. All our na∣tion generally had a liking of the Gospel both the Magistrates, and the Ministery, all the daies of Queen Elizabeth, and the beginning of King Iames his Reign, England remembred the flames in Smithfield, &c and 88. and 1605. But towards the later end of K. Iames, and in K. Charles his reign how degenerare? N. 3. Wicked sacrifices and false Prophets] All apostasic commonly be∣gan at the Sanctuary: the greater part of the Prophets and Priests did most wickedly, and were become hypocrites. From them wickednesse went into all the land. They were blinde Leaders, sleeping Dogs, dumb dogs, pressing their own dreams. The preaching of the true Prophets was in horrible contempt, with them: Such were Hananiah, that taught revolt, and Shemajah the Neclemite, the Dreamer, that reputed Iere∣miah
for a mad man, and would have had him tortured. Achah and Ze∣dekiah, those two lecherous villains that prophesyed lies: that man plea∣ser Ʋrijah, 2 Kings 16. Amaziah that would not have the tell-troths, the true Prophets, to come to the Kings Court, nor to preach in the Kings Chappel, Amos 7. Pahshur, that put Ieremiah in the Gate-house, and in the stocks. Eliashib that profance and treacherous Prelate, Neh. 13. compared with Mal. .11, 12. and those Priests that nothing but the bloud of the Prophets would quench their thirst. And those Prelates that convented the Son of God, and his Apostles before them, impriso∣ning, whipping and murdering them; &c. &c. But as the eye of Christ is in Princes Courts; so it is, be they assured, in the Courts of his san∣ctuary; although such think Christ hath forsaken the earth. And when his jealousie began to be poured out, it began at the Sanctuary, Ezek. 9.6. Read Ier. 28.29. what came to Shemajah, Hananiah: Achah and Ze∣dekiah were rosted in the fire, fellowes full of burning Lusts, burning was their end, as Sodomites. Amaziahs wife plaied the whore (and in Gods holy severity of judgement given over to filthiness) which made him to have many an heavy sigh, when he went up to his Altar at Bethel, to officiate, a plague of all terrour when God punisheth sin with sin: as Hose 4.14. Amaziah his sons, and his daughters should be slain, and himself must go into captivity. Pahshur was made Magormissaib, and the bloud of Christ, and his Servants was heavy upon those Kains, &c. Ibid. N. 3. Alwaies falsely accusing and persecuting the Godly] Elias, Ieremiah, and Amos were accused as troublers of the Church and ene∣mies of the State: and the cause of famine, &c. whereas those, and such were the props of the State, and mourned and prayed for the peo∣ple, Jeremy 7 & 18. And note it again, who did accuse but the R R F F and the apostate Nobility of their times, Ieremy 26. & 38. 1 Kin. 17.1. & 18 17, 18. Amos 7.10. Ier. 29.26. and so it was in our Lord and his Apostles, and so it was and hath been in our times. The wic∣ked Priests and Prophets were ever the cruellest enemies of the Saints: they made many Widowes, imprisoning and killing their godly husbands for not hearkning to their dreams, and lies, and mens precepts, and for not putting into their mouths, Ezek. 21. Mich. 5. Hosea 9. Lament. 4.13. Ibid. N. 3. flattering Princes and People.] They made their Kings glad with their wickednesse, and Princes with their lies: for they were so deluded, that although the Prophets and Priests made merchandize a∣gainst the Land, they would never acknowledge nor mark it, Jeremy 14.18. Hosea 7. Jeremy 6.14. Lament. 2.14. They healed the hurt of the daughter of my people, saith Christ, sleightly, saying, peace, peace, when there was no peace. They walked in lies, and strengthned also the hands of the wicked, that none returned from his wickedness. They smooth their tongues, and cause my people to erre by their lies and light∣ness
They were the occasion of all profaneness, cruelty, and hypocri∣sie in Princes and People. And at last all might see, that those dirt-dau∣bers of their untempered mortar, they were they, that brought misery and shame to the State, Ezek. 22. N. 4. The abuse of sweet peace, and health, &c.] These are promised as blessings of Obedience to the faith of the Son of God: blessings of the covenant of grace in him; as godliness hath the promise of the things of this life, and of that which is to come, Levit. 26 Deut. 28. Psalm 81. Esay 1. Those were not blessings and curses, to the Church, for do∣ing, or not doing a covenant of works, but for believing, or despising the Son of God, as Mediatour, Exod. 23. and would not have him to reign over them. N. 4. Pride, idleness, wantonness, &c.] Esay 2. & 3. & 5. & 2 S. Eccless. 10.16, 17, 18, 19. Amos 6.1. men in times of peace and plen∣ty quickly fall away. Think of Salomons and Constantines times, so it is said, Jesurun waxed fat and kicked; Thou art waxed fat, thou art grown thick, thou art covered with fatness, then he forsook God that made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his salvation, Deut. 32. Ease slaies the foolish, and the prosperity of fools destroyeth them, Prov. 1. Quest. 14 and answ. How many years hath Palmoni] Palmoni an attri∣bute of Christ, Dan. 8.31. much to be meditated. He numbreth our tears, and wanderings: He numbreth the hairs of our head: He num∣breth the Stars: He numbreth the times in the holy Scriptures in a most pleasant frame, by the ages of holy Fathers, by promises and types, by Sabbaths and Seavens: and he will teach us so to number our daies that we may apply our hearts to wisdome. Ibid The Sun in his Tabernacle] The Suns chronicle draweth all along to the Sons righteousness. It is not a small matter in consideration, that the whole frame of the Celestial Orbs should be so wheeled by him that made day and night, Summer and Winter that the Suns journeys should be so guided that all Israels stories do fall out in time according to their ceremonies, to be the harmony of all the Bible, and the joy of Christian∣ity; of this very thing David the sweet singer of Israel, and the other Prophets did joyfully sing and speak, and made many heavenly ditties and comparisons, Psalm 8. & 19. & 103 21, 22. & 119 89, 90. Psalm 136. 7, 8, 9. & 148.3. Jeremy 31.35 36. & 33 20. &c. A godly Mathe∣matician should consider this. Profance, abominable hath been, and is the endeavour of some men to teach us of Christs coming, by the buil∣ding of Rome, by the Archontes or Mayors of Athens, by the foot-races, and horse-races, &c. of the Satanical games of the Olympiads of the Heathens: as gamestry is much prejudicial to godliness, so this heathe∣nish gamestry-doctrine to the holy Chronologie of the blessed book of God. Ibid. Quest. and answ. 14, Ru his race as a servant] The Suns name in Hebrew is Shemesh, a servant, to perform service. 1. Especially to
the second Adam, as all are his Servants, Psalm 8. & 119.91. And 2. in him to the Church holding sincerity, Jos. 10. And it shall not smite thee by day, nor the Moon by night, Psalm 121 And 3. to all the world through his general good providence. Deut. 4 Mat. 5. And 4. that mankinde should not worship that which the creator hath made their daily servant. Quest. 15. and answ. Dyed in a Jubilee year] The Jews never kept in their own land any more a Iubilee, for 40 years after our Lords death, Titus Vespasian raced to the ground, Citie and Temple, and sold the Jewes as flaves. This came to pass as our Lord foretold, Deut. 28.68. Zac. 14.1, 2, 3. Matth. 4. Luke 21. & 23.28, 29, 30. Read Iosephus on the wars of the Jewes. Ibid. will be to Israel in a jubilee] They might well cast this to be so: by the Seavensy Seavens, which did 490. years foretel the death of the Lord of Glory. Ibid. Remission.] Or freedome, or Justification: our holy Apostle (seeing the fulness of time) more fully and gloriously, addeth, Wisdome and Sonctification, 1 Cor. 1.30. if the Son shall make you free, then are ye free indeed, John 8. He that was before the beginning, and promi∣sed from the beginning did appear to destroy, unloose, dissove the works of the Devil, 1 John 1. & 3. This expounds Genesis 3.15. He gives li∣berty to the Captives, Esay 61. Rom. 7. then was the just captivity deli∣vered to go to his heavenly possession, and to the heavenly familie of our Father which is in heaven, Lev. 25.23. Remember ye the Law of Moses my servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb, for all Israel, with the statutes and judgements, Mal. 4. Observe well this conclussion of the old Testament: the Written Word, the glory and inheritance of the Saints, and let them most highly account thereof: The spirit of Christ foreseeing the false do∣ctrine of those three Shepheards, Zachary 11. and the afflictions of the Army of heaven in the daies of the fourth Beast, and the iron Legs thus forewarned the Elect Daniel 7. & 8. & 11.28. to 33 & 12.3, 4.10. This text of Malachi well minded, would stop the prattle now a daies, that Moses Politie was a covenant of works, and not a covenant of Grace in Christ.
CHAP. X. Shewing how God ordered the Several Cap∣tivities of his people for the planting of Religion among the Heathens as a pre∣paration to the Covenant of Grace under the Gospel. QUest. 1. How was Gods providence seen {in bringing a∣bout famous matters) concerning the People of Israel, and that the Heathens of Noes families might have a general pre∣paration for the daies of Christ? Answ. 1. The Jewes being carryed to Babel, the Land of Nimrod, of the house of Cham, were a great means of good to those heathens, for the knowledge of the true God, and of the faith of the Messias; for they were bidden to say when they came to Babel. Thus shall you say unto them, the Gods that have not made the heavens and the earth;The learned say this verse of. Jer. 10. is in the Chal∣dean Lan∣guage. they shall perish from the earth, and from under these heavens, Jer. 10. We are also to consider that many Jewes believing the pro∣phets, that their countrey should become under Babel, fled into other Countreys, where they would have Synagogues. 2. Daniel being advanced and famous in Nebuchadnezzars Court, did inform the King very much of the true God, in his opening of the dream of the image of four mettals, upon which the King acknowledged the God of Israel, and pre∣ferred
Daniel over the province of Babel, and above the wise∣men of Babel, Dan. 2. 3. Daniels three noble cousins, Hananiah, Azariah, and Mishael, denying worship of Babels gods in the presence of King Nebuchadrezar, that mighty Monarch, and at the As∣sembly of such an huge concourse of peoples, nations and languages, at the dedication of the golden Image, and upon their denyal to be cast into the burning furnace, Who by faith escaped the violence of fire, Heb. 11.34. And the Kings pro∣clamation, over every nation and language, setting forth the praise of the God of Israel: and that none should speak a∣miss of the God of Shadrach▪ Meshac, and Abednego. These things must of necessity cause great consideration among the heathens, seeing also the King made their cause more famous by their advancement. 4. Daniels opening the dream of the Tree: The Kings proclamation over the world, unto all Nations, Peoples, and Languages, that dwell in all the earth, in which telling of his own abasement for seven years, and of Daniels opening of the dream, would cause the nations to think better of the Jewes although captives. And Daniel being at the opening of the dream, a famous Courtier of thirty five or thirty six years standing, and a great favourite, had and would still tender the cause of his own nation. 5. Another proclamation concerning Daniel chap. 5. (be∣ing now an old Courtier, and an attendant on three Kings) upon the reading and expounding the hand-writing on the Wall, and upon that, investing him again with great autho∣ritie. 6. The glorious prophecy of the Seavensy Seavens of the precise year and day, and hour of the death of Messias to end all Moseh's politie, was a light to all the East, as those Noble Sages who came from Persia, as we may guesse, knew by the prophecy of Daniel that the Son of man,Matth. 2. the king of the Jewes should come in the clouds, and in humiliation for our Redemption: the image of four mettals, and the four beasts
being beaten to dust, and cast into the fire, Dan. 2. & 7. That then a glorious heavenly kingdome should be erected over the world. And we must advert the confluence of the Jews from every nation under heaven to Jerusalem,Luk. 19.11. upon the ending of the Seavensy Seavens looking for the kingdom of heaven then to appear. Daniels prophecies of the Seventy Sevens and the utter abolishing of those four kingdomes by the birth of our Lord, gave them that knowledge. 7. The prophecies of Cyrus to be a Conquerour of Babel, and a restorer of the Church, Esay 44. & 45. & 46.11. & 48.15. naming him long before he was born for the convin∣cing, instruction, and comfort of Cyrus himself, of Israel, and of the Nations, Noes families, that Jehovah the God of Israel, was the true God. The Jewes having Synagogues a∣mong the heathens, could tell of these things of Cyrus to them, and by this means, many might be won to the faith, as it is said Esay 45.6.14. They should come to the East and VVest to the Politie of Israel, and leave their idols. The godly Jewes reading and believing their own Prophets, might be as Prophets to the heathens: and histories do shew that the Jewes were skilful in prophecy. 8. The overthrow of Babel by Cyrus and Darius, and upon that, the first year of Cyrus a Proclamation over one hundred and twenty Provinces, where Jewes were scattered, of a ge∣neral subsidie to send them home with Riches and Honour, Ezra 1. The godly Jewes being among the heathen, by these matters, and others, could and might well speak of comfort to many of them for salvation, that they might still listen for the ending of the Seavensy Seavens, when God would piti them in Christ, for that liberality towards his people for their Brasse, God gave them Gold: for Iron, Silver: for Wood, Brasse: for Stones, Iron: and made their Officers, Shalom, Peace: and their Exactors, Tzedek, Righteousnesse, Esay 60. For their carnal, Christ gave them spiritual things. Ob∣serve whence is the Gold: and best clothing, Apocal. 3.18. one hundred and twenty Provinces paid a Subsidie for the re∣lief
of the people of God, one hundred and twenty Jewes converted them to the faith, Acts chap. 1.8.15. and 2.1, 2, &c. 9. Daniels continued advancement under Cyrus and Da∣rius, and by faith stopping the mouths of Lions, Hebrews chap. 11.33. And Darius, his proclamation unto all peo∣ple, Nations, and Languages of the true God, and of his everlasting Kingdom, and gracious administration, which pro∣clamation was occasioned by Gods miraculous saving his ser∣vant from the Lions: this would give them to consider of such a glorious martyrdome. 10. The conspiracy of Haman,From Esthes daies all tribes are cal∣led Jews, and it may be a∣fore. Ier. 44. and his Sonnes (the last known off spring of Amalek) against Gods (a) people dwel∣ling in one hundred and twenty seven Provinces, who by faith escaped the edge of the Sword, Hebrews chap. 11.34. Letters of Commission going into all those Provinces to de∣stroy them? and again Letters of Commission sent by Post to contradict the former, that the People of God should be delivered, and to stand for their lives. These things made the Nations and Languages better bethink themselves, and to consider more of Israel, so that many became Proselytes. In those one hundred and twenty seven Provinces we are to think, the Jewes had Synagogues in divers places, in which they performed holy exercises of Religion, and so also might make many Proselytes, which gave further occasion to thatI know the proper Machi∣avil, was but of late years: but Satan their Master and such have been from the beginning. Machiavilian Statist, and Atheist Haman to plot a∣gainst them, and to accuse them to Ahasuerosh, that is, Da∣rius Hystaspis, Esth, 4. There is a certain people scattered abread among the people, in all the Provinces of thy Kingdome: and their Lawes are divers from all people, neither keep they the Kings Lawes. Therefore it is not for the Kings profit to suf∣fer them. If it please the King, let it be written, that they may be destroyed: and I will pay ten thousand Ta∣lents of Silver into the Kings treasuries, &c.
All these things are remarkable that the Heathens might more willingly hearken to the Jewes, and might very well say to them, as Zachariah saith, That ten men shall take hold out of all languages of the Nations, even shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, We will go with you, for we have heard, that God is with you. Observe, Zachariah chap. 8.20, 21, 22, 23. But that was chiefly ful∣filled in the Apostles. How many did hang upon the skirt of one Apostle Saint Paul? Not Ten, but many a ten thou∣sand in Asia, and Arabia, Achaia, Macedon, and Thes∣saly, &c. When he caused the Gospel of Christ to abound from Jerusalem round about unto Illyricum, and also to Rome, &c. Read  Corinth. 11.28. Romans 15.19. Col∣los. 1.6. 11. The interchangeable Wars of the Kings of the North and South, of the house of Japheth, Dan. 11. caused the Jews to be more scattered into all quarters, and where they came they had Synagogues in divers Cities, as the new Testament shew∣eth: and by the occasion of those Wars, the Greek tongue began to be almost universal and familiar, that the Apostles might more conveniently publish the Gospel, and write the new Testament in Greek. 12. Gods providence over-ruling Kingdomes, and State-policie:This 12. Ob∣servation is of∣ten noted by Mr. Bro. one of the Kings of the South, Ptolomy Philadel∣phus, commanded seventy two Interpeters, learned men a∣mong the Jewes, to translate the Old Testament into Greek. This was a special Preparation and means of good to the a∣postate families of the Sonnes of Noah, that they might be perswaded to embrace again the faith of Sems Tents, Zacha∣ry 8. ut supra. These things shew that Christ was great over Gog, Ezek. 38.23. & 39.21.
Annotations upon the Questions and An∣swers of the tenth Chapter. N. 3. Hananiah, Azariah and Misael.] These noble Worthies that ha∣ted Babylons idolatry, with burning zeal doth teach our Nobles to hate mysticall Babylons idolatry, and superstitions, that crucified Christ, that pierced his hands and feet, and would nail all feet and hands from walking in Gods wayes, and working in his truth. Ibid. who by faith escaped.] That glorious sentence for salvation, The just shall live by faith, which Habbakuk spake to comfort the Saints in the captivity of Babel, and in all after times, yea it was the stay of their heart ever since it was said, Cursed is the earth for thy sake &c. And the seed of the Serpent shall bruise the heel of the holy seed, Ge. 3.15. Faith stayeth on the rock of Israel, God in Christ was the rock of their heart and por∣tion for ever, Psal. 73. another Scripture faith, Trust ye in Jehovah, for in Jah Jehovah is the rock of all ages, Isa. 26. And again, My God is the Rock, in whom I will trust, 2 Sam. 22.3, 32, 33, 47. And the terms of the New Testament are agreeable; it is said, Ye believe in God, believe also in me; for he is the Rock. Mat. 16.1 Cor. 10. And they are pronounced happy that trust in the Son, Psal. 2. and curled that make flesh their arm, Jer. 17. And gracious Hannah saith, there is no Rock but our God, 1 Sam. 2. Ibid. The violence of fire.] By faith they looked to things not seen, they by faith knew, that JESUS the Son of God by the blood of the Cove∣nant would save them from the wrath to come, the vengeance of eternal fire, the second death, 1 Thes. 1.10. N. 4. Would still tender the cause of his own Nation.] Daniel a Subject maketh a golden state for the Church under tyranny: so did honoured Mordecai Hest. 10 Good States-men seck the wealth of the Saints: so did Eliakim, when he was substituted in Shbaaes place, Isa. 22. Obadiah was of great and good use in Achabs Court, 1 Kings 18.13. Nebemiah a no∣ble pattern of courage, fidelity, and zeal to God and the King: forget not holy Joseph, none of these were temporizers, Psal 122 and 132.1, 2, 3, &c. Remember Ahikam, and those Princes, that had somelise of Religion left in them, that saved the holy Prophet from the blood thir∣stie Priests, and false Prophets, Jer. 6. N 6. As those noble Sages, who came from Persia.] Daniel so tende∣red of Princes, and so Religious would cause the mysterie of Christ to be known in the Court and Palace at Susan, as Saint Paul in Csars Court, Phil. 1. Daniel, a pattern for young and old Courtiers: and
such shall find more favour at last, both of God and their Prince, then they that flatter with their lips, Dan. 8.2. Susan was in the Province of Persia or Elam. N. 8. Of a generall Subsidie.] Daniel, a wealthy subject, doubtlesse, would further help in this matter, his care for the returned would answer the effects of his prayer, Dan. 9. as Mordecai did afterward further the cause of Christ, as Esther 10. N. 9. And by faith stopping the mouths of lions.] Daniel knew by faith, that the Son of man would stop and deliver us from the mouth of Sa∣tan, that roaring lion, the accuser of the brethren, who goeth about seeking whom he may devour, whom resist stedfast in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions are accomplished in your brethren which are in the world, 1 Pet 5.9. N. 10. Offspring of Amalek] Amalek was of Esau, who with his posterity despised the blessing of the Gospel, and hated the Israel of God, even to Herod, To this story of Haman the Agagite, of Amalek, we must re∣member, Exod. 17.15, 16. and Num. 24.20. of terrour to all apostati∣call fierce persecutors of the holy seed. Ibid.—They escaped the edge of the Sword.] They knew by faith, that the MESSIAS, the King would by his death frustrate the counsell of Satan, and all the power of darknesse, and deliver all the children of God from the bondage and fear of death, and spoil and triumph over the principalities and powers of darknesse, the spirituall wickednesses, even all the Legions of Devils that war against us concerning super-celestiall things, Eph 6. Ibid. Letters of commission.] this story fell out about seventeen years before Zachariah prophesied, that he might well say from God, He that toucheth you, toucheth the apple of his eye, Zac. 2. Ibid.—Atheist Haman, to plot against them, and to accuse.] See how Satans seed folowed Hamans project, Acts 16.20, 21, 22. and 17.5, 6, 7. And all times have not neither will want such shamelesse liars, and cur∣sed dogs, that accuse the Saints to Princes, Hos. 7.3. The Locusts and their King, and their friends were ever most vigilant and sedulous in this thing; and no marvell, for Sathan the accuser of the brethren dealt so against the holy One of Israel, Luc. 23.2. Their throats are open sepulchres, the poison of asps is under their lips▪ But our Lord and his apostles, though few and mean were better subjects to Cesar, than their lying, numerous malitious adversaries. Acts 17.7. and 24.5, 6, 7. &c. Oh that Princes and Nobles would search into matters, that they would read Gods Chronicles with diligent study, as it is their duty, Deut. 17. They would find all to be false, that Haman speaks against Mordecai and the Jews, mind a story, 2 Sam. 16. flattering Ziba tells a most shamefull lie: too many such about Princes, that accuse honest subjects, and make Princes trespasse against their Subjects, as good David did, that gave Mephibosheths lands away upon a false accusation. But David said he would do otherwise,
in ruling the Common-weal: He said, he would sing of mercy and judge∣ment, and that a slanderer and a liar should not be in his Court, or roi∣all City, Psal. 101. But alas, alas, what with sycophants, and backbi∣ters, and gifts, as lying Ziba presented to David, 2 Sam. 19. Kings and Nobles trespasse against the faithfull of the Land, and remove Land∣marks. It is pertinent to confer Dan. 6. that wicked men can find no∣thing for the most part against the Saints, but concerning the Law of their God: as it was then, so it is now, Acts 16.20.21. 1 Pet 4. Let none of you suffer for evil-doing, but as a Christian, &c. Ibid. And their Laws are divers from all people.] What Laws? none but the holy Scriptures of the blessed God: thou adversary and enemy, thou wicked Haman. See the contrary in good Princes and Nobles, that good and truly noble and Royall Darius, Artaxexes, and his privy coun∣sellours, who honoured the Laws of the God of heaven, he knew that Gods Laws were not hurtfull, but profitable to him and his Government and that his subjects ought to walk in them. View his letters patents well, which he never questioned nor revoked, that King and his coun∣sellours, let them be patterns to their Peers, Ezra 7 Ibid. Neither keep they the Kings Laws.] There your Lorship hit 'em: they will not obey the Kings Laws. The idiome now of profane and super∣stitious hyocrites self-willed in humility. Help O eternall, they have said with our tongue we will prevail, our lips are our own, who is Lord over us, Psal. 12. and 120. Isa 57. Psal. 131.18. Let the lying lips be put to silence, which speak grievous things proudly, and contemptuously a∣gainst the righteous, and make their own tongue to fall on them, Psal. 64. Acts 17.6, 7. Ibid. And I will pay ten thousand.] But Lord Haman, this sum of mo∣ney would not have recompensed that great dammage, that the King would have sustained, no not in the bondage, much lesse in the destru∣ction of so many honest, and lthfull subjects, and so it was told you to your face, you know when, Hest. 7 shall voluntary gits and contribu∣tions of such drosse Statists corrupt the breasts of Princes, to make and confirm the Decrees and Canons, &c. to undo their bst subjects, absit, absit, Es. 10.1. Psal. 94.20. Prov. 25.4.5. wherefore hearest thou mens words, saying, David seeketh thy hurt? Now therefore, I pray thee, Let my Lord the King hear the words of his servant—If Jehovah have stirred thee up against me, let him accept an offing but if they be the children of men, cused be they before Jehovah, for they have driven me out this day, from abiding in the inheritance of the Lord, saying go serve other gods, 1 Sam. 7.4 and 26.
CHAP. XI. Shewing why there were no more Prophets after Malachy to our Lords incarnation. FOr the better understanding of the reason, three things must be well observed. 1. The times of Daniel concerning Christ and his Church, and the exact time of our Lords death. 2. Concerning the church of the Iews standing or falling in these times. 3. Concerning concerning the enemies of the church, in these three things the times will be coincident, which must be diligently observed. First, touching Christ, and the exact time of his death, it must be remembred,The Seventy years of Ba∣bels captivity ending, Daniel hd this mes∣sage from heaven. that the Lord God had sent an holy an∣gel from heaven to Daniel with that heavenly Message of the Seventy Sevens of years, wherein MESSIAH the King should finish trespasse-offerings, and end sin-offerings, and make reconciliation for iniquity, and bring in everlasting righteousnesse, and seal Vision and Prophesie, and that MES∣SIAH the holy of holy should confirm the Testament for Iews and the Many, and should end Sacrifice and offering by his most obedient sufferings and death, giving himself a sweet smelling sacrifice of savour to God for our Redemption, Dan. 9.24. &c. This Prophesie foretold the year, moneth, day and hour of Messiah his death, the angel Gabriel at the time of the e∣enng sacrifice or ninth hour came then to Daniel, to tell him
that at the Seventy Sevens the Messiah should suffer, and his Prophesie was performed and fulfilled at the ninth hour of the day, for then our Lord gave himself a Sacrifice for the sins of the Iews and the Many of all Nations, and said all was finish∣ed, when he yielded his holy soul into the hands of the hea∣venly Father. 2. We must know that Daniel knew all the holy Doctrine of the angels Message, but the time of fulfilling all visions and Prophesies, for the exact time of Christs death. No Pro∣phet ever told that time but Daniel: this must be advisedly con∣dered. Now when the Church of God had the time of Christs death exaxctly foretold, which Kings, Priests, and Prophets, and all godly did desire to see and hear This gave the faithfull a∣bundant satisfaction. 3. When Daniel had such glrious Prophesies of ch. 2. and 7. and 8. and this blessed Revelation from heaven, in chap. 9. for the rejoycing of the hearts of the people of God,They forsook Bahel to go to Jerusalem, though in the dust. Psal. 02.14. This compa∣ny that retur∣ned were pre∣cious feed for after times. Psal 126. Haggai end Malachy shew, that the mes∣siah shall sd∣denly come to the second Temple, be∣fore it be de∣stoyed, so they open Dan. 9.24 &c. then 49000 with Zorobabel were perswaded to forsake Babel in hope of the coming of the Son of Man, in the clouds of hea∣ven, and to have Kingdome, power and glory over all Nati∣ons, Jeremiah sheweth that the deliverance from Babel, should be more glosious than that from Egypt, Jer 30. and 31. and 32. and 33. excellent things are spoken for the returned from Babel, but Daniel onely tells the time of the death of Christ. 4. When David had thus declared the exact time, then Haggai further conecrated the returned against their discou∣ragements, that the Temple Zorobabel built, should be of greater glory than Salomons, because the MESSIAH, the desire of all Nations should come and fill it with his glorious presence, by teaching in it, doing miracles in it, and in it, give peace to all the Israel of God. Likewise Zachariah, commenteth much on Daniel, that Zion and Jerusalem should rejoice because the King of Isra∣el was coming, but in a lowly manner, as our Lord tol them, the Kingdome of heaven did not come in him, with great shews of outward observation, and he told them of the un∣dervaluing
King MESSIAH, how he was bought and sold, as for a slave, for thirty pieces of silver: this expounds Dani∣el, for the sufferings of Messias, yet at that day he would be a fountain for sin, and all uncleannesse unto all the godly fa∣milies of Judah, and Levi, for the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and all faithfull, as Daniel sheweth, Christ shall suffer, so Zachariah sheweth, the blessed shepherd shall be smitten, and the flock shall be scattered; these things shew the sufferings of Messias, not for himself being just, but for us. 6. Daniel having shewed of Messiahs confirming the Covenant for Jews and the many of all Nations, Malachy expoundeth this, saying from the rising of the SUN unto the going down of the same, the name of the Lord should be great among the Gentiles. Also he sheweth of Messiah the mes∣enger, of the covenant in whom they delighted and expected. Also he sheweth of him the SUN righteousnesse shall appear with healing in his beams, and prophesieth of John Elias the Baptist; to be Christs Messenger, to prepare the way for his com∣ing: and the Nation of the Jews were so taken with John Bap∣tist; that they thought he was the MESSIAH; for that time had many thoughts and questions. 7. Daniel foretold the destruction of the low Jerusalem, as with the Flood of Noah, in the next generation after the Se∣venty Sevens were ended at our Lords death, Zachariah saith the same,Zac. 14.12. that it should be very terrible: Also he sheweth of the heavenly Jerusalem, the new Jerusalem, so Esai 2, 1, 2, 3. Micah 41.2. Esai 54. speaks of his glory. Titus Vespasian destroyed the low Jerusalem forty years after our Lords ascension, and the Lord Jesus gave them an assured token of the same, Luke 21.20. The Church standing. Secondly, touching the Church of God, especially the faithfull rejoiced to think of the determined time of the Se∣venty Sevens, and did calculate the years since their return from Babel, so that they could not misse to know the time of MESSIAH his coming. And nothing was ever objected
against our Lord or his apostles about the time.Zac. 11.11. The poore of the flock still waited for the accomplishment of all things, especially the godly families of the house of Nathan (Salo∣mons brother by Batshebah) that came of Zorababel,All the god evermore waited for Christ their blessed hope, Isa. 25.9. now much more. And as they did thus for his first com∣ing, so should we for his se∣cond coming, and with more joy, but alas; and the godly families of the house of Levi, chiefly them of Shi∣mei: and old father Rabbi Simeon greatly waited for the Mes∣siah, the consolation of Israel, and so did that old Matron the Prophetesse Anna, of the Tribe of Aser, who spake of MESSIAH in that Synod, to all that looked for Redem∣ption in Israel and Jerusalem: So she and Simeon, Zacharias, and his wife Elisabeth, and the blessed Virgin, with many o∣thers, blessed and praised God for the performance of his promises: all the godly now know that the Kingdome of hea∣ven was come, and that was John Baptists theam, Mat. 3. 2. As Anna was godly, so her father Phanuel, and it seems his father was godly, tnd believed the Doctrine of the Seven∣ty-Sevens, for he spake to his children of seeing God in the flesh, Phanuel importeth seeing of God, or we shall see God. Jacobs story hath Peniel, & Panuel,Zac. 4 Luke 2. Gen. 32. And gracious An∣na cried, grace, grace, to the righteous branch, & to the Lamb, the true Temple. The birth of Anna was about the 54th Se∣ven; her fathers might be in the 47th seven, & his fathers might be in Antiochus Epiphanes time, about the 40th seven. To these we must consider of the house of Zarobabel, he had two son, Abihud, and Rhesa, Mat. 1. Luke 3. of Abihud these, Sadoc,These lived in the time of Ianan whole and Ianan parted. Achim, Eliud, Eleazar, Matthan, Jacob, Joseph, the husband of Mary. Of Rhesa these, Mattathias, Maath, Nagge, Esli, Naum, Amos, Mattathias, Joseph, Janna, Melchi, Levi, Matthat, Ely Mary. These might be contemporary in sucession with the former godly, under the Kings of the North and South. 3. I do desire somewhat to inlarge. The godly returned from Babel, were a foundation of glorious mercies to the Church, they were a godly seed, and left a godly seed, which held on successively, how godly were they in Ezra, Nehemi∣ah, Esther, Haggai, Zachariah and Malachi. It were too long to gather all that might be said.
First, by the gracious Proclamation of Cyrus, the retur∣ned, as they had Jerusalem ever in their mind, so now their faces looked thitherward,Jer. 51.50. Psal. 102. though it was desolated in the dust, yet they preferred it before glorious Babel, and other state∣ly Cities and Palaces in Chaldea, or Persia, 2. Being come the incumbent neighbours of Samaria, &c. did envy them, therefore they builded the altar, and offered sacrifice, calling on the name of Jehovah, the everlasting God, as Abraham, Isa∣ac, and Jacob, their godly forefathers had done. 3. Set on Temple work, and being hindered, upon better opportuni∣ties set on the work again with great courage, as Ezra 4. and 5. 4. In the second return by Ezra ch. 7. and 8. what a godly company came with him?Many mo re∣turned after∣ward. Zac. 8, what fasting, prayer, and thanks∣giving used they. 5. When Ezra, being come, saw their unequall yoking in marriages with infidels, how did they re∣pent of it with godly humilation, and amend it by putting away their strange wives, and the children by them? Doubt∣lesse, a sharp corasive to flesh and blood. An holy seed in the Church of God is most precious, that is, Gods end, and should be our intendment. 6. In Nehemiah, is seen how full of courage, labour, and diligence they were in building the wall of Jerusalem, and how God did comfort them in reproaches of the enemies. 7. Upon the complaint of the oppression of one another, these evils were repented of and amended. 8. Their reverent de∣meanour in the exercises of publick Ordinances, in teaching, prayer, hearing of the word, all done with much love, re∣joycing and thanksgiving, very imitable. 9. Kept solemn fasts. 10. Made solemn renewings of their Covenant, and for the maintenance of the worship of God 11. Consder their loving association to come out of the Cities of Judah, one of ten to dwell in Jrusalem. 12. Holy care taken for the Sabbath. 13. In the book of Esther, how many godly were in 127 Provinces? What fasting, prayer and thanksgiving was a∣mong
the Jewes, who by faith Escaped the Edge of the sword, Hebr. 11, 34. of that cruel bloudy massacre intended by wic∣ked Haman. 14. It is shewed in the Prophet Haggai, they obeyed in teaching of the Lords message, and were careful to promote the building of the Temple. 15. Zachary declareth they humbled themselves in hear∣ing of the word, and turned from their sinful courses against Gods holy Worship, and love to one another, and did love peace and truth. 16. The inhabitants of one Citie did exhort the inhabi∣tants of another City to the Worship of God. 17. Yea, the Jews having Synagogues in all Countreys should make many Proselytes, and take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, and be of Israels Common weal, to learn the faith of Sems Tents. 18. They had great zeal against false Prophets, Zachary 13. 19. Malachi sheweth what an holy seed the returned were that although there were many Hypocrites, and Atheists, Wantons, Sacrilegious, among them, yet there were many godly that feared the Lord, and spake often one to another to incourage in godly waies:Mal. 4.1. and the Lord God took notice of their Godly communion, and they were a blessing to themselves, and the State of Israel: and the Lord God pro∣mised many comforts to them: but a day of wrath was com∣ming which should burn the wicked up as an Oven. Iosuah was  a self Seeke to grappl what he lis for his grea service, by the Elders granted  he request Iosuah 19.50. of their godliness, meekness, courage zeal, wisdome, &c. Looking into the manners of the people to amend what was amiss: they were not self-lovers, nor self-seekers, and would not suf∣fer their servants and attendants, to oppresse or grinde the people (not like them in Amos 4.1.) that is a great matter to be observed in a Common-weal. 20. Zorobabel lived long, but Nehemiah longer, near to the end of the Persians, to be a Noble Corrival against San∣ballat,
who also lived long, to see Alexander the Great. These things I write to shew what a godly seed, the returned were, and so continued to the end of the Persian Monarchy. 21. And the fruit of these comforts went on the dayes of Antiochus Epiphanes in many godly called,Dan. 7.18. Saints of the most High. Antiochus times reach to about two hundred and eigh∣ty years of the Seventy Sevens.Dan. 12.3. Daniel prophecied that in the dayes of Antiochus there should be wise and faithfull Teachers that did instruct many, and turn many to righteous∣ness. 22. That although those daies of Antiochus were the sad∣dest times that ever Israel before had, yet Christ had noble Worthies that stood to the Truth, and did not shrinke for Sword,Dan. 11.33. Heb 11.35. Flame and Captivity, that they might enjoy the bet∣ter resurrection, to shine like the Stars, for ever and ever. And this godly seed still successively sprang up to our Lords daies in the godly Families, as hath been noted: For Daniel 12.4. sheweth that those times would cause much action a∣mong the godly:Daniels book a treasury of Wisdome for the time of the 77. and e∣ver, Dan 12.4. and Daniels book for the time of the Sea∣venty Seavens, was a wonderful treasure of wisdom to teach them knowledge for many occurrents: many did search throughly, and knowledge did much increase. These times of Javan in the Kings of the North and South, were times of much agitation on all sides and occasions. Thus far of the holy Seed for these times, which were he substance, and stay of the State, as others formerly for their times, Esay chap. 6.13. of the falling away from the faith of many in Israel. II. Daniel spake, as of many particular events touching the Kings of the North and South, so of the Apostasie of the visible Suns of the Church, of many in Israel which came to passe in those sad calamitous times of Ptolomy Philopater, K. of Egypt, and in the daies of Antiochus Epiphanes King of the North. Daniel sheweth how many were drawn away by Philopaters allurements, and became lawless. VVhereas o∣ther of their Brethren being constant in the faith had great deliverance,Dan. 11.14.3. Macca. and the apostates shame and disgrace.
Of Antiochus it is recorded, Thus by oraf and deceit, he did prevail against many of the Jews, and made them forsake the holy Covenant, and with these he had intelligence, how to do mis∣chief against the faithfull, and the Temple, and Jerusalem. Daniel sheweth the vilonesse of his wicked King, chap. 8.24, 25, and chap. 11.28, 30, 31, 32, 33. Let the godly Reader see the Commentaries of Mr. Broughton on Daniel. Zachariah foretold of the Civill Dissentions among the Jews, and how they would oppresse one another,Those three wicked She∣pherds, with the former false Prophets, were thieves and robbers, but the sheep did not hear them, Joh. 10. Dan. 12. and forsake the Law of faith given by Christ to Moses, and follow heresies. There were three wicked Shepherds that hated sound doctrine, and made false expositions on the holy Text, and many fables, and many traditions, and did not cleave to the Law that Christ, the Angel of Gods presence, gave to Moses at Horeb, with the Statutes and Judgements; Malachy 4. This fulfils ch which Daniel foretold, That although Godly Teachers did turn ma∣ny to righteousness, yet the wicked would do wickedly, and none of the wicked would understand. Wherefore God gave them into the hands of one another and into the hands of their Kings, the Levitical Kings,Vid. Tremel. on Zach. 11. and the Herods, and the Caesars. Malachi sheweth that Saddwois was beginning in his daies, c. 3.14.15 which greatly increased. This was a strong faction and prevailed much against the Pharisees, that they made sad and woful Tragical slaughters, of one another:Gen. 49. Deuter. 33. and many of their High Priests were of this faction. The Priests would be Kings, not remembring Jacobs and Moses Testaments. Jacob shewed that of right, Judah should have the Government of the State: Moses shewed how the Tribe of Levi should be exercised; but they neglected the Prieshood, and the covenant of the Priesthood, therefore the imprecation of Moses fell on them. Then Christs brake both his Staves: Beauty and Binders: The Beauty of his Ordinances, they had till about these times,Zach. 11.10. Dan. 11.35. & 12.10. which now were grieveusly corrupted, therefore God depri∣ved them greatly of that Glorious Mercy, and in his anger brake the staffe of strength. They despised the godly Teach∣ers
that had suffered sore afflictions many waies for the faith of the truth: Therefore God gave them over into the hands of wicked Shepheards, that never sought their Good, Zachary 11.15, 16, 17. So Achab for despising Michaiah, was given over to believe four hundred lyars to his destructi∣on: So under the new Testament, 2 Thess. 2. As for Christs other Staff, Binders, We must remember that Ezekiel had prophecied that when they returned from Babel, Judah and Ephraim should be as one Stick in his hand and so they were after the return:But we must know many of Judah and Is∣rael continu∣ally returned. as Zac. 8. & 9. & 10. For of the fourty nine thousand that returned Ezra 2. Ten or twelve thousand were of the ten Tribes, and this unity continued all the time of the Persians, and to about one hundred and fifty of Javan, consi∣der, Zachary 9.13. how they conjoined: But for their apo∣stasie, Christ brake this Staff also, that the Brotherhood of E∣phraim and Judah, was almost utterly dissolved. The event of which was borrible distractions, emulations and contenti∣ons very sad and grievous. The poor of the Flock, as is no∣ted, observed all these things, Zachary 11.11. Miserable and deplorable was the State of these times, and which continued until our Lords daies. And when He came he sealed Vision and Prophecy by teaching, and sound expo∣sitions of the Law, and so much restrained this apostasie, by himself, and his Apostles by him; and cleared all holy Do∣ctrine, and opened the truth of the Scriptures how, and of whom the Prophets,Luke 24.2 Thes. 2.1 Tim. 4.1, 2, 3 2 Tim. 3.1, 2, the Psalms and Moses spake, and the faithful believed. This apostasie was as dreadful, and in many things like the apostasie of the Lawlesse man of sin, for the sixt, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh, twelfth, thir∣teenth, fourteenth Centuries, then the fourteenth Century the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ began to consume with the breath of his mouth that Wicked Romilus; and the glory of Christ continued more and more to this day; blessed be his holy name of all the Saints for ever.
Thirdly,Of the ene∣mies, of the Saints the Jewes. Concerning the Enemies of the people of God in the times of the Seavensy Seavens. 1. Daniel foretold what troublesome times should befall the returned from Captivity, under the Persians, for Seaven Seavens, that is fourty nine years, both to them that return∣ed, and to them which were not yet returned. In those Sea∣venty Seavens, by the returned the Temple was builded, and the City Jerusalem re-edifyed, with the wall and distinction of Streets. Ezra and Nehemiah shew what troubles they had by the Seed of the Serpent in performing those Noble Enterprizes. And for them not returned, the book of Esther shewes the cruel and malitious intendment of that wicked Haman the A∣gagite, of the posterity of Amalek. The Persians reigned eighty years, after the Seaven Seavens, they reigned in all one hundred and thirty years. Also Daniel foretelleth how Javan in Alexander should afflict.The King of the North was that Gog and Magog Ezek. 38. & 39 Also how the Kings of the North and South. The Ten hornes collaterally should long afflict. This Daniel shew∣eth by an Historical Prophecy in many particular events to the daies of Ptolomy Philopater, and Antiochus Epiphanes,The 8.10, 11. & 12. chap. of Daniel are all in the time of the seventy seavens. and Ptolomy Epiphanes: all that time of Javan in those Kings of North and South, they were a Beast horned to gore the peo∣ple of God, and had Iron legs to trample under foot the plea∣sant Land, that is the Land of Israel, Immanuels Land. But after Antiochus Epiphanes, the Fourth Beast, Daniel 7. failed much of the strength of his hornes,Before and af∣ter Antiochus Epiphanes death, Christ strengthened, Iudah and E∣phraim against Iavan, Zac. 9.13. and the legs of the image, Dan. 2. were day now, as Iron; part∣ly strong and partly brittle, and so continued, till at last Kit∣tim the Romans possessed all, as hath been noted. The Kings of the North the Seleucidae reigned two hundred seventy years, the Kings of the South, i. e. Egypt, reigned two hundred ninety four years: But we must understand the years of these Kings of North and South were contemporary. So
these stories of the Medes and Persians, Javan whole, and Javan parted, will reach 430 of the Seventy Sevens, and the other 60 years to our Lords death, for the most part the Ro∣manes ruled. If the godly Reader will make use of Mr. Bro. Commentaries on Daniel, the preface thereof will shew him the Kings of Persia, and the Kings of Javan, their number and succession, and the number of their years, and all these Kings are to be confined within the compasse of the Seventy Sevens, all the stories, both of the four beasts, Dan. 7. and of the four mettalls, of the image, Dan. 2. Mr. Bro. is so large in his Expositions of Daniel, that there is not need of inlargement at this time. Also let the Reader mark his Consent of Scripture, for the orderly disposing of the times. Furthermore, they should not have nor needed any moe Prophets, for that they should be greatly scattered shortly after Malachies dayes, and their State continuallly shaken for hundreds of years (before the holy incarnation) by the interchangeable warres and victories of the Kings of the North and South:Mal. 4. therefore the Law of Moses was so strict∣ly enjoined to them to remember it, which would have pre∣served them from all those errors and apostasie they fell into. Again the Hebrew tongue after the return from Babel, cea∣sed from common use: even the returned spake a mixt lan∣guage, as Nehemiah sheweth: so they should have no more Prophets for the Hebrew tongue. And we are to mark the lively Providence, touching the families of Scripture, Babel, the eldest wicked monument,Mr. Bro. in his notes on Dan. 5. which was built to the great ruine of all the godly families, by Nymrod the Nephew of oursed Cham, to the great grief of SEM and Japheth, whereupon Adams tongue was made 70. of one. Which Babel ended the Jews language, the first tongue, that it was common in no King∣dome after that. And the greek tongue shortly after Ma∣lachies dayes, became to be the most common tongue in the world, that the the apostles did use it, and write the New Te∣stament in it.
Furthermore, for Jews, that look for such Prophets, they should consider, that Jerusalem and the Temple should have utter,The Rulers and people of the Jews did not know the meaning of their own Prophets, Act. 13.27. All the Pro∣phets, and the Law prophe∣prophesied untill Iohn, Mat. 11.13. so our Lord and his apo∣stles shall pro∣phesie in his speeches, and their writings, untill our Lords second coming. and finall desolations in the nea generation after the Seventy Sevens, and such Prophets were to be no longer than Israels Prerogative lasted, which was at the ending of the Se∣venty Seven: for it is said, God hath in these last dayes spo∣ken to us by his Son, who hath told us all thing, and sealed vision and Prophet for the old Testament, and hath given by himself, and by his apostles, visions and prophesies, for the new Jerusalem to the end of the world in his new Testament. Therefore those that now look for new apostles, Prophets and miracles, do and will run into all vanity and errour, as the Jews did, that regarded not the cloing up of the Prophesie of Malachy, and for us of Japhets families of the new Testament, we are charged to remember the commandements, and words of the holy apostles our Lord Jesus Christ, which charge not being observed, the Church fell into errours, fables, and Do∣ctrines of Devils. Thus, I suppose we, may see they needed no moe Prophets to foretell the exact time of Christs death, John Baptist was a great Prophet, but he pointed with the finger, that Christ was come, and the chief point of his Ministry, was to pre∣pare the peoples heart for Christ, that in him they might be blessed, and saved from the curse that was coming on the dis∣obedient: so old Simeon, with Zachurias and Anna a Pro∣phetesse did declare Christ was come, of whom Daniel and all the Prophets spake, and John-Elias, the Baptist, preach∣ed to all Israel, saying, the Kingdome of heaven is come, as Daniel had foretold, chap. 2. and 7, and 9. Briefly sum up the premises, seeing the holy angel from heaven had told Daniel in the Seventy Sevens of the exact time of the death of the MESSIAH, to end Sacrifices and offerings, and of the four mettals in the image, and of the four beasts, and of the wicked Kingdomes that were taught by them, and of all them to be destroyed by the birth of the Son of Man the MESSIAS, that is, Babel, Medes and Per∣sians,
Javan Whole, and Javan parted, and the afflictions by them on the stars of heaven, the Jews, and of the full date of Israels peculiar glory, by the utter desolation of the City Jerusalem, and the Temple, and that Ezra, Nehemiah, Est∣her did comment on Daniel, and that Haggai, Zachariah and Malachy, had reproved the sinnes of their present age, and also had much enlarged and opened Daniel in many things to the dayes of the coming of the Son of Man. Now no more Prophets needed,Mal. 4. but onely to remember the Law of Moses, the servant of the Lord, which he commanded unto him in Ho∣reb, for all Israel, with the Statutes, and judgements. They should study it till the coming of CHRIST, and the coming of his fore-runner, Mat. 11.13, 14. for it should be to them a most sure word,Therefore they needed not the URIM and THUM∣MIM. and School-master This conclusion of Malachy, with his Speech of John-Elias, doth intimate a ces∣sation of such holy prophets, for all was spoken, that need to be spoken. People should diligently be exhorted privately and publick∣ly by them, whose place it is in chief so to do, to read the ho∣ly and blessed Scriptures diligently, and for this above hand∣led, to read togetherThese 6 books were in the time of the Seventy Sevens. Ezra, * Nehemiah, * Esther, Haggai, Zachary, * and Malachy, with Daniel, these six last books do much comment on Daniel. And the godly Reader would be ex∣horted to mark the chronologie of the holy Scriptures, and the chief persons in the times. Thus I have endevoured to relieve the studious and godly about that doubt and question, concerning, why no more Prophets after Malachy, to the dayes of MESSIAS, the King, the holy of holies.
CHAP. XII. Being an Answer to the five things lost in the Second Temple. They might have named more then five as you will perceive. BEloved Reader, It may be worthy of good consideration to say somewhat of those five things, that Solomons Temple had, which some Modern Rabbins of the Jews complain they wanted in the Temple built by Zorobabel, and thus they num∣ber them. 1. The fire from heaven to consume the Sacrifices on the Altar. 2. The sacred Monuments of the Ʋrim and Thummim that were put into the Breast-plate of the High Priest. 3. The Ark of the Covenant, wherein were put the two Tables of stone written with the finger of God. 4. The Mercy-seat and Cherubim from between which the holy Oracles were given. 5. The manifest breathing of the holy Ghost upon the Prophets. These were great outward glories of the first Temple. But let us consider of them. 1. For the fire from Heaven to burn upon the altar:It should seem to be so, for it is said, God testified of his gifts, Heb. 11.4. I will transcribe what Mr. Broughton saith of it. When Adam first sacrificed, fire from heaven kindled it: and Habels Sacri∣fice, respected of God (is in Octaplo) was fired by God: that fire was kept until the Flood. Then again Noahs sacrifice was kindled from heaven, and that fire was kept by Great Sem or
Melchizedeck. Abraham sacrificing had fire (first in record) from Heaven. And in Moses and Salomon, that is expresly told, and thence gathered to the former: so when the Jews came from Babylon,If they had had fire, Anti∣ochus would have put it our again, taking away the daily sa∣crifice for 3. year and a half, Dan. 8.11. they sacrificed, but no direct mention is made of fire, yet their private story Salseleth Hakabalah saith they had fire from heaven. See Mr. Bro. in Apoc. 190 Now one would think this to be true, because so many promises of comfort by Jeremiah and such a godly company returned, they might have that glory, although there is no mention of it. Gods counsels are unsearchable: But the Angels, message from heaven of the Messias was a great satisfaction to them. Malachi saith the second Temple should have this honor that Christ in his do∣ctrine should be refiners fire no purge the corruptions of their Rabbins touching all sacrificing. 2. For the Ʋrim and the Thummin, Daniels Prophecy of the Seavensy Seavens hath as glorious Light and Perfection of Doctrine, as ever the Ʋrim shewed, which also was brought by an angel of light and glory. This prophecy sheweth when Messias that had all light and perfection in him should come, and would bring light to us all:The Messias when he com∣eth will tell us all things, Job. 4. Heb. 1.1 so the Saints of the Most High were exceedingly comforted in him, that would reveal and tell us all things, better than the oracle of Ʋrim, for he came from the Bosom of the Father to reveal the whole myste∣ry of the Kingdome of Heaven: For He should seal vision and Prophesie. And so Christ was Ʋrim and hummim in the hearts of the faithful, and hath made us Kings and Priests to carry on our Breasts and Hearts,1 Thes. 5.8. the Breast-plate of Faith and Love. 3. The Ark of the covenant:Jer. 3.15, 16. mark that text of Jeremiah, they should want it, yet Christ saith they shal have godly Tea∣chers. the Prophet Jeremiah fore∣told, the Ark should be no more, they shall say no more, the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, neither shall it come to mind, neither shall they remember it, neither shall they visit it, neither shall that be done any more. Babel shook these patterns of heavenly things in part, and Rome should end all. The Seavensy Seavens was a relief to the Saints, concerning this Once shaking by Babel, it shewed of Messias the King, the Most Holy, who had the Law of God
in him most perfectly that from his fulness we all should receive and grace for grace: The Ark was golden within and golden without, it was plated with gold upon Sittim Wood, so our Lord, although he took flesh, was golden within and golden without: perfect in his inner man without sin, and perfect in his conversation, the Messias, the Holy of Holy. And although they had not the golden Pot of Manna, yet all faithful of the Jewes did feed upon it for the time of the Sea∣venty Seavens, as all Christians do now feed upon it. Apoca. 2.17. Christ took away such things that they might looke to him the true Manna, as he shewed them most heavenly, John 6. 4. For the Mercy-Seat, and Cherubim: the Holy Angel Gabriel from Heaven foretold, Daniel 9. in the Seavensy Sea∣vens, (though they lost that outward glory) who should be our Mercy-Seat of Reconciliation for all iniquity, the Hila∣sterion of all comfort, bringing in everlasting righteousnesse, or freedome or justification. So the faithful in the Seavensy Seavens did meditate, and did hope still in the full accomplish∣ment of it, at the end of the Seavensy Seavens. So they nee∣ded not these outward things. And to all the faithfull the Lord God sent holy Angels to be Cherubim, visibly to the re∣turned from captivity, and to all faithful after, invisibly. And although they lost Moses and Salomons Candlesticks, yet the returned were a golden Candlestick, and two Olive branches of Golden oyl, which signified a replenishing of the Church with all graces of the Spirit: so the Lord God taught them, to meditate things spiritual rather than to glory in outward things. The holy faith and doctrine of the Seavensy Seavens, and walking in the light of it in peace and truth, made them a glorious golden Canalestick. 5. For the manifest breathing of the Holy Ghost upon the Prophets; they wanted not this for one hundred and thirty years after the Return from Babel, all the time of the Persi∣an Government. The Jewes say Ezra was Malachi, and he lived long, the Holy Ghost breathed in him: and likewise in Haggai and Zachariah. Daniels Prophecies with Haggaies,
Zacharies, and Malachies, and the study of Moses, and the Prophets breathed the holy Ghost in the Saints of the Most High, in the after-times, who were men of Wisdome, and did instruct many, and, as it said, did turn many to righteous∣nesse all the time of the Seavensy Seavens, confer diligently, Dan. 8.9, 10, 11-24. & 11.28, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35. & 12.1.4.10. Zacharias, John Baptists Father, Simeon, to whom the Holy Ghost revealed himself, and likewise to Anna a Prophe∣tesse; these were under the second Temple: and so in the be∣ginning and ending of the Seavensy years, the holy Ghost breathed in some special persons. So that they did not so much want these outward things, because the spiritual were conferred more abundantly: the outward Jew looked carnally, but surely the Second Temple had more glory then the first;Hag. 2.9. None of all the Prophets told the definitive time of fulfilling the promises, to perfect the event of the Predictions of the Prophets, and the joyful singing Hosanna to the King of Israel, who made the day to break and the shadows to flee away, &c. &c. The Second Temple had this glory, and the performance of that which Moses Tabernacle, and Salomons Temple, with all their appendancies figured. Therefore these things being well considered, we may well give Sentence that the prophecies of Daniel, cha. 2.7, 8, & 9, 10, 11, 12. chapters, with the Prophecies of Haggai, Zacha∣riah, and Malachi were a thousand fold more comfort to the Faithful then the loss of those exteriours could be sorrow. That worthy noble man, Lord Plessi. Truenesse of Christian Religion hath written somewhat of these five things, chap. 29. pag. 455. Thus Christ was taught yesterday. Heb. 13.
The SECOND PART OF THE DIALOGUE: Drawn from the NEW TESTAMENT. CHAP. XIII. How the New Covenant, or the way of Re∣demption: was taught or opposed under the first preaching of the New Testament. QUest. 1. Hitherto we have in part seen how God, at sundry times, and in divers manner, spake of Redemption to the Fathers and faithful of the times of the old Testament. Now give me some text in the New Testament which may call to minde the Prophecies of the old Testament, that our hearts may be comforted being enriched in the full assurance of understand-standing to know the mystery of God, even the Father, and of Christ?
Answ. Matthew 17.5. This Scripture is very pertinent. This is my Beloved SonPsal. 2. Es. 9.6. Prov. 30.4. 2 Sam. 7.14. in whom I am wellEsa. 42.1. Psal. 132.10. pleased,Exod. 23.20, 21, 22, as Moses received the lively ora∣cles from the Angel of the covenant to teach Israel: so the Apostles received from him words that have spi∣rit and life to teach the Is∣rael of God, John 6. Hear Him. This text doth graciously look back to all the Prophesies that have been spoken of: that now he was come: this is He He that was promised in Paradice to Eva, and after∣wards to Sem, to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Judah, David, &c. and figured by the Passeover, Tabernacle, and Temple, Cloudy-fiery-pillar, Manna, Rock, Brazen Serpent, The Sa∣crifices, &c. By Melchizedecks, and Aarons office, and pro∣mised in Daniel to be the complement of all. All the New Testament commenteth on this Oracle that came from the ex∣cellent glory. QUest. 2. and Answ. What are the points that you observe out of this Scripture of Mat. 17.5? Answ. 1. The Gospel consisteth in the true knowledge and belief of the person and office of Christ.John 17.3. 1 Cor. 2.2. Col. 2.3, 4, 5. 2. The doctrine of his person is clear, in that the Father calleth this man Christ his son, so that he is the son of God and man: where this word Son is not to be understood in re∣gard of Creation as were the Angells, or of adoption, as are the elect, but by nature and generation eternal and in-ef∣fable.John 1.18. Col. 1.15. 3. Observe, the distinct person of the Father acknowledg∣eth the distinct person of the Son, to which add out of Mat∣thew 3.17. the distinct Person of the Holy Ghost. 4. This Son is called Beloved, to shew that in that love the Father hath to the Son,Pro. 8.31. Ephestans 1.6. John 1.14, 15, 16. there flow the joyful streams of love to his Elect, so that he is the fountain of grace unto us. 5. Unto those two points of his Person are joined two of his office, answering unto them. first, In the beloved he is well pleased. This sheweth the Mediation of his sacrifice-hood to God for us, Secondly, Him being Son, he would have heard,
this sheweth the Mediation of his Soveraign Kingdome from the Father over us. 6. This Mediation of his Sacrificehood is to be understood in two parts. First,John 17. What he did for us on earth. And secondly, What he did and doth for us in heaven. On earth, he made intercession for us, and was delivered to death a sacrifice for our sins, and was raised again for our justification from sinne and death to a resurrection.Rom. 4.25. 1 Pet. 3.18. Rom. 5.1. By his death and Sacrifice he purchased reconciliation, justification, and adoption, also the word of reconciliation, and the mini∣stery thereof. In heaven, he entred with his own bloud into the holy Heavens, and purchased eternal Redemption, and the possession of the heavenly Mansions,John 14.2. & 17. and in his ascention is our Fore-runner thither, to prepare them: he sitteth at the right hand of the Father, making request for us: he pre∣senteth all our supplications,1 John 2.1. There is one God and one Mediatour, 1 Tim 2. Ayoc. 8.3. Eph. 3.12. & 2.18. intercessions and giving of thanks for our selves and others. The effect of these things are joy, peace, hope of glory, the giving and the in dwelling of the holy Spirit, who mortifieth sin, sanctifyeth our natures, bles∣seth all holy means, quickneth in duties, perswadeth and assu∣reth of free accesse to the throne of grace, &c. more then we can ask or think. 7. These words In whom,1 Cor. 3.11. do exclude from this mediation all other Saviours, and Mediatours whatsoever, and condem∣neth such doctrine as stubble for the fire. 8. In that he decreed to please himself with Christ: it sheweth our free election, justification, adoption and salvati∣on,Galat. 1.4 Mat 11.28. Iames 1.18. to exclude all mans merits, free will, and works fore seen, and to establish an unspeakable comfort to the man that findes in himself that God hath given him faith, that he may know God hath predestinated him unto Salvation in his Beloved Son. 9. The second part of his office is his Soveraignty in this, Hear Him, which sheweth his Soveraign authority over all Na∣tions, which standeth in this, that He is the chief Prophet over
all Kings, Powers, and Principalities, and in all things Head to his Church. 10. Under the word, Hear, is commanded our obedience, that we should hear Him with our ears, hearts, and deeds, that is, by learning his word, by believing it, and practising it by works. 11. This word Him, is spoken exclusively, there is no o∣ther Head of the Church but Christ: none other to rule and make Lawes and Offices, and Officers, for the well ordering thereof but Christ: none other Priest or Sacrificer to offer sacrifice for reconciliation of iniquity: and lastly none other inThat doctrine of the Papa∣lines, that Christ is not in heaven sole mediator of intercession, anathema sit, Rome. 8.34. Heb. 1. & 8. Acts 2.36. & 5.31. heaven to offer with his own odours the prayers of the Church militant. QUest. 3. and answ. What Seals hath Jehovah our King, Judge and Statute-maker, the Lord of the House, hung and fastened to the writings of his new Covenant? Answ. Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord. QUest. 4. Shew first what is considered jointly in these two? Answ. Both these are memorials, signes and seals, (as strong as the worlds frame) to repenting and believing Recei∣vers of whatsoever Gods word hath revealed for their hope and comfort of life temporal, spiritual, and eternal. They, by the work of the Spirit represent and seal the whole doctrine of the covenant and promises made to our Fathers; and also it must ever be remembred, they are reciprocal, and for resti∣pulation, as the covenant; and being added to the covenant more firmly binding, strenthning, and comforting to faith, o∣bedience, and thankfulness. QUest. 5. What do you conceive to be taught us in Baptism? Answ. Baptism is to teach and seal unto us.
1.1 Mat. 3. Acts 2.38, 39, 40, 41, 42.2. Acts 2.38. and 22.16.3. Gal. 3.26, 27.4. Rom 6.5. Tit. 53.6. 1 Cor. 15.29. Rom 6. Col. 2.12. and 3.3. To all which we must joyn the calling on the name of the Lord with good understanding, Acts 22.16. 1 Pet. 3.21. Concrning our entrance into the Church, and politie of Christs Kingdome, and the priviledges of the same to di∣stinguish us from other polities. 2. Concerning our justifiation. 3. Our adoption. 4. New birth or sanctification. 5. Mortification. 6. The resurrection. QUest. 6. What do you consider in the Supper of the Lord.? Ans. This should be written in all hearts, that they one∣ly be happy, which in the Lords Supper protest the abundance of grace, of free forgivenesse for justification, to reign by Christ the second Adam. 2. The Bread broken and without mixture, the wine pour∣ed out and without mixture administred in the Primitive sin∣cerity and plainnesse, dispensed by a lawfull Pastour, and ta∣ken with holy judgement and faith, our souls feeding upon the eternall Son, his incanation and Redemption, is a Seal of mercy, of faithfullnesse, builded and established in the very heavens, to stay us in Christ, and in his holy Doctrine. The authority of the Speaker, promising, covenanting, and now sealing, who made the world by his word, must be look∣ed unto. 3. As our eyes judge of the frame of the world, and our minds to what invisible use all was made subject to the second Adam: So our eyes must judge of Bread and Wine, and our minds, that Christ our onely, and most holy, and perfect high Sacrificer, offered himself a Sacrifice for us. 4. When Sacrifice was to end at the Supper of the Lamb Christ Jesus our Lord, the Son eternall, whom we must hear, to seal the end of Sacrificing, gave for beasts flesh and blood, (which figured his Body and Blood) Bread and VVine, to be in Covenant-speech, his body and Blood.
5. As all faithfull of the old. Testament, kept with all Re∣ligious observance, the Gospel Statutes and testimonies of circumcision, the passeover and Jubilee, &c. to the death of our Lord Jesus Christ at his first coming: so shall this pre∣cious ordinance, yea, and all the ordinances that it seals to, continne to the judgement of the great day. And the Saints must evermore celebrate and observe it with an eye to his se∣cond coming. This should be a constant Meditation with the people of God. Read a lit∣tle treatise in∣tituled a fruit∣full Sermon on Rom. 12. but man by nature of a stubborn dis∣position to di∣vine revela∣tion, will not be charmed, though the charmer charm never so wifely. Here should be inserted concerning the offices and officers of Christ for the government of his churches, and the mini∣stration of the holy things thereof. Much hath been writ∣ten Pro and Con. but questionlesse, that church politie, that is according to the words and commandements of the a∣postles of our Lord Jesus Christ is best, and will agree and stand with the polities of Christians, yea of heathen com∣mon weals. And nothing but Popish ambition, tyranny, coveteousnesse, idlenesse, doth resist Christs government, of which if the territories of Princes were rightly posses∣sed, they would glory in it, * both for safety of person and State; Kings being just,Kings that set light by gody and just government shall find Christs provi∣dences to be iron and fire to their com∣mon-weals. 2 Sam, 23.7. and ruling in the fear of God, need not fear losse by Christ, for that his Kingdome is not of this world. VVhat his Kingdome is, and who his Sub∣jects are he sheweth, Mat. 5. John 18.37. QUest. 7. Who believed the most sure word of Prophesie and the Record that God the Father witnessed of the Son? Answer. The apostles and disciples, and many others, afore our Lords death, the 3000 converted at one Sermon, and 2000 and many more added presently after, and in succeeding times 144000 Jews, and innumerable martyrs and confes∣sours, of all Nations and languages, as the Acts, the Epi∣stles to the Churches, and the Apocalips do shew.
(†) Now the Kingdome of Christ spokeng of in Daniel, c. 2 & 7 is fully manifested, when the image of four mettals, and the four beasts, became as chaffe before the wind, and were consumed by rivers of fire, and that the Son of Man was come, and had ascended to the Ancient of des, then to him was given Kingdome, power and glory, that all peo∣ple, Nations and tongues should serve him. Thus Pro∣phesie and history do sweetly agree. QVest. 8. Then by this that you have said, it doth manifest∣ly appear, that all Nations, which were of the families of the Sons of Noah, had no other faith for salvation taught them, but what was taught in Sms Tents. and by the Sons of SEM? Answ. Most true it is, for all that was taught to Eva, to Sem, to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Judah, Moses, David, Sa∣lomon, Daniel, and all the Prophets in the old Testament, the same faith and none other, (as the new Testament sheweth) Christ taught his Apostles and disciples, who went from Jeru∣salem, Sems tents, to the uttermost parts of the earth by our Lords commandement with the gift of tongues to disciple all nations by preaching the word of truth, the Gospel, concern∣ing the incarnation of the Son of God, his sufferings, death, re∣surrection from death, his ascention, and shining, glorious ap∣pearing at his second coming to judge the world. That work they performed by the strength of God, who confirmed their Doctrine with signes, wonders, and divers miracles, and gifts of the holy Ghost. Then tongues, nations, and peo∣ple of all Kingdomes departed from the power of darknesse by faith and obedience to the Kingdome of Christ, giving ho∣nour and glory for ever, to the king eternall, holy, invisible, God onely wise. 2. As Christ our salvation came of the Jews, so the scrip∣tures of the old and new Tstament, which reach the salvation came from them, and because the saints from the dayes of the apostles have obtained the same like precious faith, as Salem,
Sems tents had of old, the state of the Church is terme a Jrusalem from Heaven: and the names of the twelve Tribes upon the twelve Gates of this ie, do shew, that all must be of their faith that enter therein, And the names of the Lambs twelve Aposties, upon the twelve precious Jewels, (the same as the High sacrificer ware on his Brest) the twelve foun∣dations of the Wall, teacheth and convinceth that all must be builded on their most holy doctrine, that will be within the corporation of the Holy City. The Annotations upon the Questions and An∣swers of the thirteenth CHAPTER. THe first Quest, and Answ. This is he that was promised] Christ the hope of the promise made unto the Fathers, Acts 26.6. Heb. 11. all: Christ the hope of all the Israel of God, Acts 28.20.1 Tim. 1.1. Ob∣serve the gloriousness of Christ in all the old revelation of him, yet in manner of doctrine they had not perfection to see and feel the word of life, 1 John 1. But we know that the Son of God is come, and hath given us a minde to know him, which is true, and we are in him that is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. This same is very God and eternal life. Babes keep your selves from Idols, that is, from all false doctrine, 1 Joh. 5.20, 21. Quest. 2. N. 9. The Father doth love and honour the Son, (and hath committed all power into his hand, as Gen. 3.15.) for humbling him∣self, and laying down his life for his sheep: so do the Angels: so do all the Saints, John 10. Phil. 2. Apoc. 5. Christ is a great King, and wit∣nessed concerning it, a good confession before Pontius Pilate, John. 18.37. He is Fore-leader and Commander over the House of Jacob, even over all the Israel of God, Iew and Gentile. Luke 1.32, 3. Gal. 3.7. & 6.16. Esay 55, Christ will be received as King, Prophet, and Sacrifi∣cer in Sion the heavenly, or he will fill all places with dead bodies, Psa. 2.8.9. & 110. Deu. 18.18. Heb. 3.1. Ephes. 1.21, 23. Mat. 28. Hebr. . 1. If Angels and Moses must be heard, and disobedience was justly recompensed, much more the Son eternal must be heard, to whom Ma∣se was but a servant, Heb. 2.1, 2, 3. N. 11. This word Him is spoken exclusively] y divine dispensation he alone passeth all acts from God to man, and from man to God, 1
3.23. & 5.11, 12, 13, he is the One Mediatour between God and man Hebr. 2.17, 18. 1 Tim. 2.5. Observe evlusive speeches, although the terms onely and alone, be not alwaies expressed; for in divine revelation there is not from Gen. 3.15. to the end of the Apocalips, the least hint of any other Name under heaven: he is the Alpha and the Omega of all the holy and blessed Scriptures: so the promise to Abraham is exclusive: no blessedness but in Christ the holy seed of all holinesse: and so expoun∣ded by two Apostles, Paul and Peter, to the Jewes and Galatians, Acts 3. 25. Gal. 3. Ibid. Is no other Head of the Church] Christs Supremacy: he is Lord of our faith, and binder of conscience by his Laws. To the Church he is Prophet, Sacrificer and King: and the same to every particular per∣son, for his particular comfort and calling: as his person is not divi∣ded, so neither his offices: he is not a sacrificer for any, but also he is a prophet to teach, and a King to govern: he is a Prince, and a Savi∣our to all the Israel of God. If Christ is not thus received, his Father is not honoured in Kingdomes, families and persons. For this eleventh observation ponder these Scriptures, Ephes. 1.22. Jam. . 1. Ephes. 4. 8, 11, 12, 13. Mat. 23.8. Acts 2.36. & 5.31. Quest. 3. What Seals hath Iehovah] commonly to call them Seals, is the best and aptest term and suiteth even to the capacity of the meanest, to be soonest conceived. Because in this (as the Jewes proverbially say well of the holy Spirits familiarizing with us) God speaks according to the language and dealings of the Sons of Adams: it is used Rom. 4. as also the true sign or token, Gen. 17. Ibid. the Lord of the house] None may ordain a Seal, but he that hath ordained the writings of the Covenant. God only inspired the holy wri∣tings, and he only can add seals to his covenant, in them. As none can make a true deed or lease and seal it, but the true Landlord in whom the Propriety is. Therefore all Popery is to be aursed, that addeth writings and Seals. The Apostle glorieth only in this, What I received of the Lord that have I delivered unto you, 1 Cor. 11. Thus, he as Moses, faithfull in the house of God, Heb. 3. Quest. 4. and Answ. They are reciprocal] Ever since the Gospel was taught Gen. 3.15. God made a covenant with the faithfull and their seed, as with Adam and Habel understood it thus: he walked in good works, 1 Iohn 3.12. God renewed the covenant to Noah before and after the Floud, and he was godly. But the Terms of the covenant in open record is more fully declared in after ages, Genesis 17. and there it is shewed there is a restipulation on our part concerning Gods promises, commandments, threatnings, curses, admonitions, counsels, good ex∣amples, &c. we ingage our selves in all, when we apply the Seals. Our Lord saith, Go teach and baptiz, and teach them to observe all things, Mat. 28. So the Tenant binds himself when he subscribes or puts to his seal. Quest. 5. and answ. Baptismis for to teach and seal] Baptism is a Seal
of ending circumcision, and all Abraams and Moses ceremonies (the same may be said of the Lords Supper,  supra) much more it bindeth to abhor humane religious traditions and precepts. And we should not care to be judged as culpable for the not observing of them, Col. 2. A circumcised Israelite was bound to keep the whole Law and our baptism bindeth us to look only to Gods commandements what he hath comman∣ded us, Mat. 28.20. Quest. 6. and Answ. N. 2. without mixture] The Wine not to be mixed with Drakes, bloud nor water: nor Bread or Wine to be mixed with poyson, as the Papal Hostia was, when they gave it to the Emperour Henry the seventh next Albertus. A fine device of the seed of the Ser∣pent, to kill Princes and Nobles that stand in their way. Any action feazible and consequent for the Throne of King Abaddon, is and must be a Declamation on that Theame of theirs, sides non observanda cum ae∣reticis. O ye Princes and Nobles beware of such Scorpions: trust none of them that hate the sincerity of the Gospel, lest you finde their do∣ctrine of Transubstantiation too true, when they are such cursed Sorcer∣ers, that can turn bread into poison: pretending to give Christ our life, they give death, and sacrifice your precious lives upon their Altars. They can and will give you a secret sting, for they are Scorpions and Sorcerers. Also the Bread and Wine neither to be adored nor conjured with cros∣sings, or any other fantastical, Popish, Devilish, humane device, but in all plainess the holy seal of the Covenant to be administred in both kindes, according to the primitive institution. As King Josias said, Keep the passeover of the Lord your God, according to all that is in the book of the Covenant, 2 Kings. 23. Kings should so speak to their subjects, if they have any portion in the Covenant. Ibid. With holy judgement and faith] We must discern by faith as Habel, Heb. 11.4. The Lords body crucified, and the bloud of the covenant shed: opus operatum is not enough. It is the Lords seal of the forgive∣ness of sins. Alale, alass! for want of sound reaching in the most of our assemblies. Ibid. To stay us in Christ, &c.] Not only for increase of faith concern∣ing our effectual calling, justification, adoption and redemption, and for nourishment and strength to walk in the waies of holyness and righ∣teousness, being made comformable to his image renewed in us, &c. but for supporting us in the daies of trial and affliction, which in this seal is represented by the sufferings of our Lord, to whom we also must be con∣formable in sufferings to take up our cross daily. As it is the cup of glad∣ness of salvation, so it is the cup, yea of bloudy sufferings, if our hea∣venly Father will put it into our hands. N. 4. which figured his body and bloud] The Pope, and his corporation corrupted from the plainesse that is in Christ, making an Altar, Priest, and Sacrifice have missed wholly of the truth in Christ. By that blas∣phemous
idol of his masse, and other inventions they have abolished the remembrance of the death and sacrifice of Christ Jesus our Lord in the holy seal of the covenant. Ibid. Bread and wine) by Seal of things without life, by Bread bro∣ken, and bloud of the grape, by the term Supper, the whole tenor of Christianity is meant, Apocal. 19.9. But the acceptation of the Seal is an open action to distinguish us (more then baptism doth) from others. The King of Locusts, and his Locusts are fatal enemies to this seal of the Covenant in their idolatrous Nothing of their Sacrament of the Altar, setting forth Christ both unbroken and unbloudy, which cannot repre∣sent nor seal Christ for reconciliation, remission of sins, or nourishment. As the Ordinance of Christ is blessed, and shall be lessed to the day of his comming, so this abominable corruption is cursed and shall be ac∣cursed of all that love our Lord Jesus Christ, to the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen. As in the Ordinance of the Passeover, the Angel of the Covenant did execute judgements on the Gods of old Egypt, so where this Ordinance of the Lords Supper is truly administred, the ido∣latry of the breaden gods of Rome-Egypt are demolished. Ibid. To be in Covenant speech, his body and bloud] a seal of most high matters is most highly to be esteemed: But none without Athean mad∣nesse will say, The Seal is the King: the Kings authority it should have, to be as himself: but none of wit orgrace, would make it the King himself. All wise know proper speech and civil. The Gospel thrice and St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11. tell that Iesus gave bread and wine, and that the disciples are and drank what he gave, that no miracle was here, but the native manner of a Covenant. Eye-sight is Gods testimony by creati∣on, Law, and allowed ever even in the seal of the Covenant, which may contain no matter litigious. And if the Apostles or Greck Fathers had said, the bread and wine were altered from their taste and nature, for so much, the heathen would have sworn; the world never bare wic∣keder Magicians, nor worthier of death by Mases Law, which Christ gave as eternal God, and came as man, to be judged of man how he did perform all; so that the native power of reason which he planted in all souls for sense of eye sight, taste, feeling, smelling, and hearing of words should judg of him, that he performed all justice to plain capacity of all nations, and required none to believe further then Logick common to every man, would require assent, or tell of open Rebellion against the truth. Transubstantiation, a monstrous term for a monstrous matter, Mr. Brou. in Apocal. At the figure of the Star (*) according to the words and commandments] Though it be but a mans Testament, yet if it be confirmed, no man dis∣annulleth, or addeth thereto, Gal. 3.15. Heb. 9.15, 16, 17. neither altereth the Legacies, nor addeth others, nor taketh away, nor maketh other Executors or Overseers, &c. Men must not be Rectifters of Christs Testament, which is confirmed by the death and bloud, (as in his type,
Exod. 24) Of him the Testatour. And the seals bind us all to look to the holy evidences. Men may as well pull away the seals, as falsifie the plain truth in the writings: They bind us to observe whatsoever Christ hath commanded, as circumcision did Israel, Exod: 12. Gal: 3: 5, the an∣gel of the pit, and his pit-bred creatures corrupt the evidences, and ut∣terly pull off one of the seals, they are great impostors: Quest. 7. and Answ: Martyrs and confessours of all Nations:] Us hea∣thens were from Noahs dayes, Loruchamab, and Loammi Deut: 32.21: and so the ten Tribes, Hos. 1 but both in Christ Ruchamah and Ammi: so that now many come from the East and West, Isa. 49. to be blessed with faithfull Abraham, and to sit down with him, and Isaac, and Iacob and all the Prophets in the Kingdome of heaven: no sitting there, unlesse of Abrahams faith, without shall be liars, mark the terms of the Co∣venant: I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Iacob. This is my memoriall to all generations, that is, to all of their faith, whether Jew or Gentile, else they are protested against, not to be of Abrahams, Gal. 3.7, 8. John 8.39.40, 41. &c. and have been, and shall be broken off, Rom. 11.17. and cast out Gal. 4.30. At the mark of the †. Then to him was given Kingdome, power, and glory.] See how our Lord commenteth on Daniel, chap. 2. and 7. All power saith he is given to me in heaven, and in earth, therefore go and disci∣ple all Nations, &c Mat. 28. Quest. 8. and Answ. 1. But what was taught in Sems Tents.] The Scriptures of the Prophets, the faith of the Nations, Rom. 1.2. and 16.26. The same faith and Covenant, although the outward administrati∣on did differ. How glorious is the Scriptures consent. The Saints from the beginning to the ending have one and the same God and Saviour, one and the same faith, the same hope, the same Covenant, the same premises. Behold how all is administred by one Mediatour, from one e∣ternall being, who is A. and Ω. confer Gen. 3.15. and 6.18. 1 Iohn 1.1, 2. &c. Exod. 19.5, 6. Apoc. 21.3. 2 Cor. 6.16. Exod. 29.45. Ios. 1.3. Heb. 13.5. Ibid. Who went from, Jerusalem Sems tents.] The faith of Gods elect came to us from Ierusalem, Sems tents, not from Rome Babylon, with babbling language, as the Locusts prate, see Isa. 2 1, 2, 3, 4. Micah 4. Luke 24.47. The heavenly Ierusalem began to be built in the earthly, Acts 1.2. And there were the Master-builders, and others with them that made up 120. then they converted 5000. and many moe at seve∣rall times, these with many others, with the Apostles by persecuti∣on, were scattered, East, West, North and South, to build the hea∣venly Ierusalem. Now the lively waters in this City, and from Christ the true temple, issue and run into all the world, and then multitudes of Jews and Gentiles came to keep the feast of tabernacles, crying H∣sanna, salvation to God and the Lamb, with palms in their hands, Zac. 14. Ezek. 47.1, 2. Apoc. 7.9, 10. Col 1.8. 2 Thes. 3.1. 1 Pet. 1.1.2, 3. &c. &c. &c. Christ expounds Ezekiel, that he was the Temple from whom
the quickning waters flow, Iohn 4. and 5, 8, 9, and 7. and the Councell Acts 15. expounding Ami 9. expounds Ezekiels last chapters, and the other Prophets, and the Epistle to the Hebrews, and the first of Peter doth the same, and we must note, when the word was made fruitfull o∣ver the world, then, and not before, Titus Vesp. destroyed the low Je∣rusalem. Ibid. with the gift of tongues.] By the blessing of tongues, they that were once darknesse are made light in the Lord, Ehp. 5. the confusion of tonges brought darknesse, and from that time to this, the glorious my∣stery of Christ was hid in types and figures among the godly of Sems house, from the ages and generations of apostate families. Ibid. Resurrection from death.] From death, Acts 2.27.—ex , phrases gracae de hominis morte perturbant inassuets, , contra epituros, dum spiravit Graetia, personuit, idque ubt de justis sermo eraet, hebehatur felicissimum, Christianis satis erat, ,. Apud Patres, , haec duo, idem Hebraeis erat, ire in paradisum, & ,. Dolendum, Gehennum, & gehenaeos dolores ex ignoration vocum consuetudinum, circa salutiferum D N. mortem tam morti∣feros errores peperisse. Mr. Bro. in his second Edition of his Latine con∣cent p. 151. Ibid. Then tongues, Nations, and people of all Kingdomes.] A Jerusa∣lem Catholick, Then the Kings of Tharshish and of the Isles brought pre∣sents, the Kings of Sheba, and Seba brought gifts, doing homage to the eternall King; then the root of Jessai stood up for a sign of healing, (he healeth our natures, Isa. 11.) and rest to the Nations, the families of the sons of Noah, of Assur, of Mitzraim, of Pathros, of Chush, of E∣lam, of Shinar, Hamath, Pul, Lud, Tubal, &c. Now Japheth is per∣swaded, and all families of the earth did blesse the true Salomon, and were blessed in him, Psal. 72. Isa. 11. and 66. Acts 2. 1 Pet. 1.1, 2, 3, 4. That speech of Moses, Deut. 32. and cited Rom. 10. must here be minded, They have moved me to jealousie with that which is not God. and they have provoked me to anger with their vanities, and I will move them to jealousie with those that are Lo-ammi, no people, I will provoke them to anger with a foolish Nation. A Metaphoricall speech of divorcing terrour to the Jew, and of Matrimoniall loving kindnesse to the Gentile, see the jealous envy of the Jews, Acts 13. & 14. and 17. 1 Thes. 2.15, 16. Eph. 2, 7. Luke 20.16 Mat. 2 1.43. Ibid. N. 1. By faith and obedience.] Untill Christ did shine unto us heathens, and turn us from darknesse to light, and from the power of Satan to God, we should never have once thought upon, much lesse have walked in the way of life, universall grace and free will to walk in holi∣nesse and righteousnesse, from naturall abilities, are foolish, proud, fantasticall, erroneous conceits. The Ephesians and Golossians, &c. were dead in trespasses and sins, till Christ the second Adam by his
Gospel did shine in their minds: yea and after conversion wrought in them, both to will and to do of his own good will, Eph. 2. Phil. 2.13. Ibid. N. 1. Giving honour and glory.] O let the Nations be glad and sing for joy, for thou shalt judge the people righteously, and govern the Nations upon earth, Psal. 67. and 96.10.11, 12, 13. Acts 17.31. Jehovah reigneth, let the earth rejoyce, let the multitudes of the Isles be glad, Psal. 97. Let the Gentiles praise God for mercy, Psal. 18. Rom: 15. Re∣joyce ye Gentiles with his people, Deut. 32. And when the Gentiles heard it, they were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord, and as many as were ordained to eternall life believed, Acts 13. Isa. 54.1, 2. N. 1. Obtained the same like precious faith.] This faith is it that maketh us Citizens with the Saints, and of the houshold of God, and of the common-weal of Israel, and to have interest in the covenants of pro∣mise, and hope of immortall glory, and they shall not be citizens with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the heavenly city and countrey, that are not of their faith, they have no right nor portion, nor memoriall in Ie∣rusalem Mat. ch. 8, Luke 13. The faithfull being cityzens, then they have, they and their children, the priviledges of the City in Ezekiel, and Apo∣calips, they being of the houshold of God, they and their children have chambers in the City, they being made inheritours, they and their chil∣dren have a portion in the Land Ezekiel speaks of, Eph. 2.19. and 3.5. But these words, they are spirit, and they are life. A glorious inheri∣tance, Eph. 1.18. and the measures of the Temple, who is Christ, the heighth, depth, length, breadth, of whose love, mercy, kindness, and compassion, &c. is immensurable, passeth knowledge, and in whom we are an holy Temple, to be the habitation of God. Jehovah Sham∣mah, Eph. 2.21, 22. Who filleth all his with the fullness of his goodness, and favour, as the cloud of his presence filled the Temple. Oh mercy to be admired, but what a small portion do we understand. Ibid. N. 2. And the names of the Lambs twelve apostles, upon the twelve precious jewels.] This sheweth, they taught no new Doctrine, but the same which the Tribes had of old, Exod. 28. Apoc. 21. URIM and THUMMIM in the breast-plate of Faith and Love, stood among the twelve Tribes, as all rules of faith, and carriage of life is in the twelve Parriacks stories, and the New Testament hath no more, nor other foun∣dation, surely the true story of the twelve Tribes taught Apoc. 21. by their names teach others a passage into the City. As the Urim and Thummim was placed among the twelve stones: so where Christ breaths in his Ordinances, we are taught of God, whereby the faith∣full are precious jewels, and such are glorious in Eden, the Garden of God, Isa. 54. Ezek. 28. These Meditations will make to vanish those con∣ceits, that Moses polity given by Christ, was not a Covenant of grace. And these things well considered will stablish us against the prattle of the Anabaptists, and Antinomians. We are debtours to the Jews to
this day, Rom. 15.17. All heavenly and spirituall Doctrine came to us from Sems Tents, and by the Doctrine of Sems sons, the Prophets and apostles, all Doctrine is to be tried, and not by the best Orthodox Churches. Ibid. N. 2.—.The twelve foundations of the Wall.] The apostle Paul was graven on the Jasper, first foundation, so he should be the head of the Church, not Peter. The twelve Jewels had the names of the twelve apostles, then where is Peter above the rest? his Epistles are pearls and so are Pauls and the other apostles, the Spirit of God spake in them, and no one could be above another, but each stood a foundation on the Rock Christ, the eternall Son of God, Ephes. 2.20. There are strong∣er proofs, or moe arguments to make St. Paul or Saint John head of the Church, than any Papalyn can bring for Saint Peter, vide Mr. Henry Ainsworth, and Mr. Bernard, Mr. Ainsworth against Locust Ainsworth, Mr. Bernard Khemos against Rome, page 130. CHAP. XIV. With Questions, Answers, and Annotations; shewing who have the Spirituall bles∣sings of the Covenant, and who the Curses. QVest. 1. and Answ. Who were enemies that did rage and imagine vain things against the Christ of God, the Rock, up∣on whom the Church is builded, despising the Counsel of God a∣gainst themselves? Answ. The high Sacrificers, the Pharisees, Sadduces, and Scribes, Herod, Pontius Pilate, and the loathsome Romane infidels, the Caesars and their people, persecuting this faith: first in crucifying the Lord of glory, and after persecuting the Church for 300 years, and it is remarkable as it is said, in
the Alpha of the word, that the seed of the Serpent should per∣secute the seed of the woman, so it is said, in the Omega of the same, that the Dragon, the old Serpent, the Devil and Satan doth persecute the seed of the woman, that is, Them that keep the Commandements of God, and have the testimonie of Jesus Christ. QUest. 2. How doth the goodnesse of God reward the faith of the Saints in the holy and constant profession, of his name? Ans. By faith they obtained good report with God and, God is not ashamed of them to be called their God, whence pro∣ceedeth sweet peace of conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost, who stirs them to, and helps them in that most hea∣venly exercise of prayer, whereby they have unspeakable consolation in all their tribulatin, for that the Spirit of Christ doth inable them by patience to possesse their souls, and work in them, and seal unto their hearts an assured and live∣ly hope of things not seen, of eternall rest, and a Crown of righteousnesse, which the Lord will give unto them at that day, and to all those that love his bright appearing. QUest. 3. What severity was executed on those that set themselves, and took counsell together against the Lord his anointed, the King of Mount Sion? Answ. The thrice holy, the Lord God omnipotent, which was, which is, and which will be, sitting as a King on a Throne, in the heaven of the Church, and administring the govern∣ment thereof to the end of the world, by the Mediation of the Son eternall, who being the Lion of the Tribe of Judah,The Jews, and Romanes despising Christs King∣dome, and sa∣crifice-hood were plagued greatly, as Psal. 2. & 1 10. The seven Seals, and four horses did plague the Empire. did tear in pieces the Jews his own people (spoken of a∣fore) and the Romane Empire, for he riding as on a white horse of Justice and Power, plagued the world by the horses and Arrows of his vengeance,Red horse. bloudy Warre,Black horse. Famine,
Pale horse. Pestilence, and through the cry of the innocent blood of Martyrs, a grave of destruction, following the unclean in∣fidels, the Emperours and their people, to the ruine of the Empire; that all men cryed to the mountains to fall upon them and the hills to cover them, and in the world to come end∣lesse misery, and vengeance in the Lake of flaming fire. QUest. 4. Had the Church rest after 300 years? Answ. Yea, for God raised up Constantinus, a good Christian Emperour, so that the Church had rest, and did wonderfully increase, but this peace was quickly interrupted by the tares of ambition, schisme and heresies of Ecclesiastical, Teachers. QUest. 5. Did Constantinus continue the Romane Empire? Answ. No, he removed the Seat of his Empire to Constantinople, so that Rome in Italy was little set by for ma∣ny years, and often burned by the Goths and Vandals, and at last by them brought to an extream ruine. Then the sixth head or polity of Rome was made dead. QUest. 6. Was there not an Apostasie from the faith of the Prophets and Apostles Doctrine, after the Empire of Rome was made dead. Answer 1. Yea, for the Spirit spake evidently, that there would be an apostasie or falling away: The misterie of iniqui∣ty was working in the apostles dayes, and quickned secretly still by divers means, Doctrines of Devils, and worship of De∣vils, with sundry corruptions, superstitions, and heretical Do∣ctrines were continually springing. The Churches left their first love, zeal, watchfullnesse and diligence. and when the Empire, the with-holder was dead, presently after, multitudes
of hereticks arose,2 Thes. 2.6. which with covetousnesse and ambition of Bishops exceedingy furthered the appearance of King A∣baddon, and his Locusts out of their bottomlesse Pit. 2. For the first, second, and third Centuries, this was ge∣nerally received of the faithfull Jew and Gentile, that God was One in holy Trinity,Apot. 7.9, 10. and Ʋnity, and salvation was ascri∣bed to God, and the Lamb Christs sole mediation. And in the Confession of this faith, all the Saints, the Elders and people cast down their Crowns before Gods Throne, and fell down before God and the Lamb with all joyfull acclama∣tions of praise, blessing, honour, glory and power, for the mighty Creation and gracious Redemption. 3. But after those three Centuries, hereticks and false Teach∣ers, more corrupted the Doctrine of God and Christ, and Saints, and angels, were glorified as Mediatours, and pray∣ed unto, &c. But the Lord God takes care, (as Apoc. 7.) for his elect both of Jews and Gentiles, that they might be kept safe: the foundation of God remaineth sure, and hath this Seal: the Lord knoweth who are his. Therefore he takes or∣der for their sealing to be kept from the deceit of the perillous times that hastened, and those that are sealed make a most ho∣ly, solemn, and glorious confession of the faith, according to the Prophets and apostles Doctrine, and by this Confession, the sealed servants of God are known in all ages: The rest of the seventh Chapter shews the gracious priviledges of the Saints. 4. And Christ forewarned the backsliding of the Churches by the seven Trumpets, and shewed much mercy for the fourth fifth, and sixth Centuries, by stirring up the Spirit of some Christian Emperours for summoning Bishops to Councels to represse their ambition, contention, schisme and heresies, of the which, the first four generall Councels were the most or∣thodox. 5. Also in those Centuries were many worthy fathers, who by teaching and writing with great constancy resisted Satan in his undermining of the faith. Onely one thing they did not
so discern, Satans project and enterprise, the mystery of ini∣quity, the spirituall Supremacy, one of the greatest heresies, most of them being so corrupted with desire of priority and superiority. QVest. 7. What other things might be a means of the fur∣therance of the mysterie of iniquity? Answ. The open or visible Church by certain steps insensi∣bly, not all at once corrupted, and schismed from the synce∣rity and plainnesse of Doctrine of the written word, and the gifts of the offices of Christs ministerie, and the ministrati∣on of the Seals of the new Testament, and censures, and fol∣lowed and mannaged their own decrees, orders, additions, inventions, and heathenish superstitious, ceremonies and tra∣ditions, with wordly wisdome, pomp, ambition, hypocrisie, self-willed humility, faction, covetousnesse, envy and cruelty: extream corruption in manners, 2 Tim. 3, 1. &c. And even thus it was in all apostasies of the Church since Moses wrote. Adde also to these, that the Teachers and Pastours rejected the fountains of Hebrew and Greek, from which all things proceeded, a great decay of all right proficiency in all Divine and humane studies.Read and consider these things as sin, and the pu∣nishment of sinne: the de∣solation of ho∣ly things ne∣ver come, but as effects of great sins, and a fore-runner of mighty plagues. Esa. 5. So Mat. 21. QUest. 8. How was Christs severity manifested on the Churches for their idolatry and apostasie from the Com∣mandements and words of the apostles Doctrine, not hearing what the Spirit spake to the Churches? Ans. 1. Christ the Lamb slain cast fire on the earthly apo∣state world, despising his Person and Mediation; plaguing (. it by) the ambition, heresie, spirituall whoredome, &c. of the falling and wandring starres, and the badnesse and negligence of Emperours (but especially of Apolluon, King of the Pit, that did exalt himself, and his Catholick Locusts against them all to be Pests and Tempests of hail,Vid. Mr. Cade Lib. 2.73, 74. fire and
blood, a Mountain full of fierie, bloody, bitter, poysoning, and unutterable miseries! to all States and Churches. These things were in the four Trumpets, yet as Preparations to the fifth Trumpet and first wo, in which all these evils were coincident and compleat. Of the which fifth Trumpet and first woe, the Pontificality, and its Corporation is an ex∣plication. 2. Idolatry and other sinnes increasing in all hardened im∣penitency, the King of Mount Sion plagued the Christian world by four messengers of his wrath let loose from Eu∣phrates, that is, the people of the Eastern Countries, which troubled lesser Asia, and also much of Europe, with horri∣ble vastations, and at last possessed great part. But least that the Popish, and Turkish Factions, should wholly drown the world with raging & impetuous innundations of outward and Spirituall calamities, the angel of the Covenant descend∣ed, cloathed with a cloud, and a Rainbow about his head, his face as the Sunne, his feet as pillars of fire, and in his hand the little Book of Scripture opened; and standing on the earth and sea, roareth like a lion, thundereth, and swear∣eth secret, bitter, and inevitable destructions to the E∣nemies. Also God tormented the King of Locusts Sodomitical-E∣gyptian Corporation, by the two Prophets, in their teaching, praying, and martyrdome, and by their resurrection; which caused a great Earth quake in the Papacy, that a tenth part of the King of Locusts politie fell. This is under the sixt Trum∣pet and second Woe. 3. Christ, the Rock, and Lion of the Tribe of Judah doth grinde to powder, and also tear in pieces mystical Babylons politie, by Kings and Princes, that in the later times should fall from the Papacy, and they and their People following the Lamb. And also maketh a further earthquake in Star-Worm∣woods Kingdome by greater voices of godly Teachers and Witnesses that with the eternal Gospel fly through the hea∣ven of the Church, preaching terrour to the Corrupters of
the faith, and the eternal blessed reward to the Saints. This is under the seventh Trumpet, and third Wo. 4. Thus God hath once revealed all unto the end in Seales, and Trumpets by sevens, to teach the profane world of the resurrection. The rest of the Apocalyps repeateth again and again in sundry varieties, as briefly is touched, these matters of Empire and Papacy, and affliction of the Church by them, and the overthrow of the King of Locusts, and all his corpo∣ration of mystical Babylon. Deprivation of all their spiritu∣al and corporall merchandise, and temporall destruction with all shame, horrour and lamentation, and their eternall sor∣row in the world to come: and lastly the glorious joy and comfort of the saints being revived from their dead State un∣der mystical Sodoms polity, to be of the corporation of the Holy and Beloved City. Each blessing is here begun, and shall be perfected when the Lord Jesus shall shew himself from heaven in that day of his bright appearing. Annotations upon the Questions and An∣swers of the fourteenth Chapter. QUest. 1. and Answ. The High Sacrificers, the Pharisees] Isael which is after the flesh despised Christ, and his Rest, and fell after the same example of disobedience and unbelief (or mis∣believing disobedience) as their Fathers both in the Wilder∣nesse, and in the revolt of the ten Tribes, and of Judah also, and would not receive the word of exhortation, Heb. 3. & 4.10, 12 & 13. chapters. Ibid. That the Seed of the Serpent] All that persecute the faith are the seed of the Serpent from Kain to Caesars and Popes. But the gates of Hades could not prevail, because Christ had the keys of death and Hdes. Here observe, that the Apocalyps in two sorts draweth all the Law unto it. It sheweth Christ from all the Law and Prophets, and the curse of
mystical Babylon from all the old cursed since the Serpent deceived Eva. Jehovah from Gen. 2. & 3. & Exod. 3. & 6. is expoundd in Apocalyps, i. e. Who was, Who is, Who Will be: and this draweth to the last acts looking to the first Counsels, that all may be seen to depend upon One God. The Apocalyps setteth forth the last acts. Therefore they that expect new Revelations besides that which was let us by the Lord Jesus the Son of God in the writings of his Prophets and Apostles, shall ne∣ver be settled in a sound judgement in the Gospel: and those that pre∣tend they have new Revelations, in such thoughts, they are of them that add to the word of God: but let such temble at the curse, Apoc 2.18, 19. Such shall bear this blame, that they are an adulterous generation they would adulterate the faith, Mat. 12.39. Quest. 2. and Answ. by sait they ebtained good report with God] Heb. 11.1, 2. conferred with chap. 12.1, 2. and Rom. 1.5. & 16.26. Gal. 3.8, 9. Apoc. 14.12. & 21.3. & 2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18. As many as received him to them he gave prerogative to be the Sons of God, to them that believe in his name, John 1.12. & chap. 5.24. is fit for this answer both of the commendation of faith, and the blessed fruit of be∣lieving, eternal life and rest. Ibid. heavenly exercise of prayer] Who shal stand before the son of man at that day of his bright appearing: even such that watch their hearts, & that pray much: watch therefore & pray continually that you may he count∣ed worthy to escape all these things that shal come to pass, Luk. 21.36. Ibid. Of eternal Rest, &c.] As all the faithful of the old Testament in their blessed spirits had an immortal life, with God in the heavenly Ta∣bernacle, in the boom of Abraham (the happy part of Hades) in Pa∣radise, and were the heavenly family, so all since that have died in the faith are In heaven, and also of that blessed family. We are taught to pray Our father which at in heaven, therefore as our affections should e hea∣venly, so heaven is our Countrey. And therefore a they of old were not to mourn immoderately, being the sons of Jehovah their God, Deut. 14.1, 2. neither are we to sorrow as men without hope of the better resurre∣ction, 1 Thess. 4 Behold what love the Father hath given us that we should be called the Sons of God. 1 John 3.1. This adoption is from the Son of God who died and rose again, to give us hope who is Lord of quick and dead, Rom. 14, 9. Quest. 3 and answ. Sitting as King on a Throne] Observe the fourth and fifth chapter of the Apocalyps is to be considered as a Platform of the divine Majesties administration through the stories of the Church, and the enemies thereof: we shall finde mention made of the Throne of God, and the twenty four Elders, and the four lively wights, under the Dracon Caesars, and Dracon Papacy, and after that, the King of Mount Sion beginneth to consume the Kingdome of Abaddon, with the breath of his lips, and to shine in glory to the comfort of his people, Apoc. 11.16.
& 14.3. & 19.4. The Rainbow about the throne Apoc. 4. is an ∣lusion to Gen. 9. and Ezek. 1. and is to be remembred through all the stories of the troubles of the Church; also minde that in all the Apoca∣lyps the Church is tearmed commonly heaven, to shew that its Polyten∣m, conversation, trading, dealing, should be heavenly; and also that the State of Abaddous Kingdome is called the earth, and the bottomless∣pit, as indeed it tends to these two. Quest. 4. and answ. The cares of ambition Schismes and Heresies of Ec∣clesiastical Teachers] Note that Church-men, and for the most part Bi∣shops were the beginners of Schisms, and founders of heresies, and then with open and full mouth like dogs (Enemies of the heavenly Icru∣salems peace and glory, Apoc. 21.) they cryed, heresie, heresie, schism, schism, faction, faction, sedition, sedition, anarchy, anarchy, of all that would not obey thei constitutions, &c. so of old it was, The Lea∣ders of my people have caused them to erre, who destroy the way of their paths, Esay 3. So the Scribes and Pharisees made constitutions and ca∣nons, &c. and then all were questioned and hereticks that questioned their traditions, John 9. Acts 24.14. & 28.22. Ma. 15. They can∣not be truly called Schismaicks and Hereicks that cleave to the Words and commandements of the Apostles of our Lord and Saviour, but they that do depart from the puritie and sincerity of the Apostles doctrine, Romans 16.17 Mark what is said, of your own selves (and St. Paul spake to Bishops) shall men arise speaking perverse things to draw disci∣ples after them Acts  so such, although Bishops, were Schismaticks, factious, sedious and heretical persons; and it was they that brought all to anarchy, and Princes became subject to King Abaddon, that law∣less man of sin. And let Princes take heed of such Spirits that still speak lies through hypocrisie. The Prelates of our native Countrey for most part, have been exceeding culpable in urging their Canons and inventi∣ons, and for setting the hearts of Q. Elizabeth, K. James, and K. Chars against faithful Teachers. Quest. 6. and answ. Yea, for the Spirit spake evidently] 1 Tim. 4. Now the Spirit speaketh expresly that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith giving heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of de∣vils, speaking lies through hypocrisie having their consciences seated as with an hot iron. Teaching not to marry, and to abstain from meats, which God hath created to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe and know the truth. It hath been observed before for the old Testament, and so it must be for the New, that the Government of Christ (for essentials) is the same. The plot of his counsels, expressing it self in an uniform manner. Men of old time apostating and pleading against the Gospel were given over to Devils and false Prophets. So, men despising the healing doctrine in the Words and commandements of the Apostles were given over to lying Spirits and strong delusions of lse
Teachers. Mr White, Way of the true Church page 385. hath this speech cited out of Egesippus. That the Church continued a Virgin undefiled, as long as the Apostles lived, but when that generation was passed, the conspiracy of wicked heresie, through the seducement of those which taught other doctrine, took beginning: Consider the like speech, Iud. 2 6, 7. and so long as the flames in Smithfield, and other cruelties of King Abaddon, and his Locusts were fresh in memory, so long Orthodox Bishops and zealous Protestants, and no peace with Rome and our good Laws were executed against the Locusts, and other Babylonish trayte∣rous sectaries, of the man of sin: but now against Christ and his am∣bassadours and servants: how were the godly of late disgraced at the as∣sizes, &c. and now the Catholick Roman church, is a true church of Christ, &c &c. The first love and works are best, Apoc. 2. and we hope and pray Christ will make his Scriptures good upon us; which are written, Hosea 2.6.7. & Ezk. 20.32, 33. &c. &c. Ibid. N. 11. For the mighty Creation] Aoc. 4. Setteth forth Gods glo∣ry in the Creation: and affordeth meditation against Heathen Romes Gods. They worshipped Stars, and Juno in the aire, Aeolus in the winde, Neptune in the Sea, Pan in their sheep, &c. &c. These were their Divs and Divas, He gods, and Shee gods. &c. And this was the the cause of the wars against the heaven of the Church, Apoc 12. whe∣ther Jupiter, Apollo, &c. and the heathens oracles, or the eternal Son and his Gospel were to be followed: and the same war was with the tail of the Dragon, for their refined idolatry. Ibid. and gracious redemption] Apoc. 5. Gives Meditation for Christs Mediation, by whom all is restored, who is the Head of all Principali∣tie and Power, as all Creatures acknowledge, joying that they shall be for the service of Christ, for being turned to service of idols they groan in Gods esteem as corrupted. This is against the Divos and Divas of the New Empire of Holinesse in title. They had and have Patrons, and Patonesses of Countries, Cities, Houses, Cattels, Trades, &c. as the old heathen. As the covenant of God in Christ was the same in the old and New Testament, onely the outward administration changed: so the idolatry is the same, onely the names and administration changed, putting a new face on things. But the Lord Jesus Christ is the head, and all things are put under his feet, Psal. 8. and he ruleth all for the comfort of his redeemed: All things were created by Him, and for Him. See for one trade or handicraft, of great use in the world what is said, Esa. 54.16, 17. and as the Smith may be an enemy, yet he is further incouraged by Counsellors, and men of State, who sit and conspire against the Lord and his People, the Saints, by slanders and lies, and false suggestions, &c. But Christ over rules the trade and Counsel of the Smith, Vul-kain was the God of Smiths to th Heathens: a Clement a titulary Saint to the Papists. The Jews from heathens had Citic-gods, Ier. 2. so Vigilins was the tutelary Saint of the valley of Trent, Hist. Council Trent. lib. 2. But
when the Saints held the faith sincere, see their holy protestation, Psal. 46. & 48. & 127. and well they might so protest upon the promise, Exo. 34.23, 24. And who hath been the Redeemer and Protector of England (not tabulous St. George) from the people of that cursed Kingdom of the Beast in all those treasons and invasions of theirs, specially in eighty eight, and one thousand six hundred and five. The eternal God hath been our refuge, his everlasting arms have been under us, he hath been the Shield of our help, and the Sword of our glory But we may now sear the Scripture of Deuteronomy. 31.16, 17. &c. will be fulfilled in our nation, and that we nor our children shall see such se∣venty six years of the Gospel with such protection, peace, plenty, ri∣ches, honour, victory, and all prosperity, as leemy 13.11. ah! our glory is departing. N. 4. The Spirit of some Christian Emperours] but in after times Princes had not that love to the truth: for Emperors strife was with the Popes for authority, little or nothing for Divinity. And so alass to this day men would never search Gods word, the wealthy and Principal of State, but remit that over unto others, as a base work for themselves to regard, whereby God then and now doth cast of the world: and hence it was that subjects in Parliament, ever stood greatly for their own liberties: but for the sincerity, liberty, and power of Christs ordinances they ne∣ver so contended: wherefore he chastised them, and will still in cau∣sing their Liberties to be infringed, and their Land-markes to be remo∣ved. N. 5. The spirituall supremacy] Heresin pestileissimam, vid. Mr. Cade, justif. lib. 1.53. The mystery of iniquity did not simply consist in Supe∣riority. But the B. B. and D. D. not holding sincerity to the Head and Foundation, Christ Iesus, inventing each his opinions, and superstitions drawing disciples after them. And they would be angry, &c. if they were not believed and obeyed, because that they did was not without a shew of wisdome and Holinesse, Col. 2.16, 18 23, and this went on by de∣grees from age to age, till all iniquiti was perfected in the Pontificali∣tie, Cade Iustif. lib. 2.57. lib. 1.31. Corruptions began even from the Apostles times. But the Papal authoity chiefly corrupted and darkned the glory and honour of Christs kingnome in all things. It corrupteth the written word, the Seals of the covenant, the Ministery of Christs ordination, and the Censures, &c. Therefore the warning of the Spi∣rit must prevail with Gods people to remember the commandments and words of the Apostles, that is their doctrine, the Pattern of wholesome words. All learned in things controverted concerning the Worship of God, or any doctrine should have recourse to the Scriptures of the Pro∣phets and Apostles, for definitive sentence, not to Fathers and Coun∣cils, nay not to the best reformed churches. Therefore of old it was said, To the-Law and to the Yeslimony, Esay 8. and also it is said, He that knwth
God heareth us, 1 John 4. But man born a wild asse-colt would be self∣wise. And we naturally bear in us an onimious minde to Gods revelation, ever since our first parents hearkned to Satan, Gen. 3. Oh cursed cor∣rupted nature, that is now more ready to follow man or devil, then the Son of God, Christ Iesus, the second Adam. Christ is wonderfull ten∣der of his own ordinances, he is nice, touchy, and jealous: this ma∣keth our corruption fret, vex, and fling, and to hate Christ, Exod. 20. thinking him to be too curious, as Kain, Gen. 4. because his own com∣manded or dinances is our rule, and him to be worshipped in them, with-all the minde, all the soul, all the strength, all the understanding, even all our alls. And an honest heart will say as the Saints have said, Thy  dis very pure, therefore thy Servant lveth it: a gain, I hate vain in∣ventions but thy law do I love, Psalm 119. An holy soul is as scrupulous, as jealous, as nice, as Gods is. It is impossible but he should be so in the regenerate part: and he will not speak in thought, that Gods com∣mandements are burdensome: but unbelievers and superstitious hypo∣crites and masters of traditions in a raging and fretting mood (they are so alwaies) called Christs ordinances, bands and cords, Psalm 2. Quest. 7. and Answ. With worldly wisdom, pomp, ambition, &c.] Mr. White, way to the true Church, pa. 140. Mr. Cade justif. lib. 2.256, 257, &c. Wretched and unlearned Scholars turned all the doctrine of God, to ambition and tyranny; superstition and heresie: Politicians to pro∣fanenesse. In those daies and after the sweet influences of comforting aires and windes of wholesome doctrine was with held, and did weakly breath in the church, and shortly turned to hellish smoke out of the pit, Apoc. 9. But the sealed of God in all ages Christ took care of. Then was fulfilled, that which was prophecied, The time will come when they will not suffer wholesome doctrine, or healing doctrine: but having sore ears after their own lusts shall beap to themselves teachers. and shall turn their cars from the truth, and shall be given unto sables, 2 Tim 4. Acts 20.30. Then they became naked of holy truths, Apoc. 16.15. The second Adam and his doctrine is the garment with which our inner man is bravely clo∣thed, Romans 13.14. Ephestans 4.20, 21. Apocalyps 3.18. Ezekiel 16. Quest. 8 and answ. Nt. Christ the Lamb slain cast fire on the earth] the seven Trumpers sound the mischiefs that wicked apostate Rome should cause, consider Psalm 110 for their robellion against the true Mlchze∣decks kingdome and sacrifice-hood, Iude 11. Ibid. as preparations to the first Trumpet] The mystery of iniquity was working from the Apostles times, and men successively arose that spake and wrote perverse things: wherefore the reformed are too blame in two respects. 1. In yielding too much to the Papalines to prove points from the
Ancients, for that doth not saiss them, and there is no end with them. 2. To urge against their Brethren, that desire sincerity, the opinions and practise of the Fathers in doctrine, church-politie, or ceremony. The Apostles being Prophets, and foreseeing evils, gave this precept, To remember their words, 2 Pet. 3.2. And it is safest so to do. This must be often pressed & thought upon by all that love our Lord Iesus Christ, with incorruption of spirit It was said plainly, Beware lest any man carry you for a spoil, through the traditions of men according to the rudiments of the world. Augustine was of mind that Councils and Bishops ought not to be objected for trial of controversies, but the holy Scriptures, August. Cont. Max. Wherefore give the controversie about altars no quiet, no not for an hour, for the truth of the Gospel else will not continne with crifice to officiate upon his altar. Mordecai was sure to overthrow Ha∣man. God had sworn and said, that be would have war with Amalek til he was rooted out. O yee servants of the Lord contend by meek writings, by fervent prayer, and bold confession, for the maintenance of the faith once given to the saints, for Christ hath sworn and said, Romes apostate politic should be perishing to the end, Exod. 17. Num. 24.2 Thess. 2. Apoc. 10. & 17. lars are a main prop for Abaddons Kingdome, and it is a complying with it, and therefore some learned men have done amiss in pleading for that innovation. Ibid. and fist wo] Whereas Christ pronounceth Wo, Wo, Wo, to the apostate churches, it sheweth the ignorance and vanity of a childish, belly-god spirit of many that say it was a good world in the daies of Po∣pery, of such good neighbourhood, plenty, and prosperity, and cheap∣nesse of things. Thus of old apostates pleaded against Christ and his Pro∣phet Ieremiah ch. 44. But his answer will stop all mouthes, but the obstinate in superstition, profanesse and mans inventions: lyea such are ig∣norant of our own chronicles that so speak. Quest. 8. and answ. N. 2. which troubled lesser Asia] The seven churches of Asia, and others falling from the faith, Christ removed their Candlesticks by the Turk, which shall be further touched in the com∣parison of the seven Trumpets and seven Vials Ibid. and by their resurrection] The two Prophets that were killed by the beast stand upon their feet: that is, other godly of their spirit Christ raised for the good of the Church: as the Spirit of Alias rested on Elisha. N 4. Thus God hath once revealed] The eleven former chapters of the A∣pocalyps revealeth the State of the church to the end of the world: and the rest of the Apocalyps goeth over the same things with sweet va∣riety. Ibid. Eath blessing is here begn, and shall be perfected] all the saints
that are in this vale of tears do sit in the heavenly places, and have chambers in the Jerusalem that is from heaven. And here God wipeth all tears from our eyes. And when they change this life they fully pos∣sesse that of which they had an earnest, as the godly of gold were in the heavenly Tabernacle, Psalm 15.1. The heavenly Father hath but one family, yet two Tabernacles, or two dwelling places, the one in heaven, the other on the earth: When any of his Servants hath done so much service or factorage (Polytuman, Phil. 3.20.) as he thinks fit, then he calls for him home, from that part of the family on earth, to the other in the heavens to possesse the joy of his Lord. Here an en∣trance is given us into the everlasting kingdome of our Lord and Savi∣our Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1. here we pass from death to life, John 5. It is said we are in the second Adam renewed after the image of God that created us, and as here we bear his image, so shall we bear it in the heavens, and there be fully satisfyed with it, Psalm 17.1 Cor. 15.49. and further the Scripture saith, he that hath prepared us for immortall glory after our earthly house of tabernacle is taken down, is God, who hath also given unto us the earnest of the Spirit. Another Scripture saith, He hath made us meet to be partakers of the inhertiance of the Saints in light, 2 Cor. 5.1, 2. Col. 1. We are made meet in this life for that blessed possession. Christians trained up in the word of Christ, must hold anathema the Ovidian and Vrgilian doctrine of the Popish purgato∣ry, &c. Beware left there be any man catry you for a spoil through Phy∣losophy and vain deceit, Col. 2.
CHAP. XV. Questions, Answers, and Annotations, Proving that Rome in Gods just Judge∣ment, is the place that he hath given unto the power of Satan for the setting up the mystery of iniquity. QUest. 1. and Answ. What place by Gods unsearchable judgement was permitted to Satan for the setting up of the Mystery of Iniquity? Answ. Rome in Italy, for after those ruins it was brought unto, it began in process of time to be in credit again. Then Satan used all signes, and lying wonders to advance there the Throne of the Beast, the man of sin, or the Pontificalitie:As most churches so Rome in speci∣al was broken off by mis be∣lief: and for not continu∣ing in Gods goodness, as they were forewarned, Rom. 11. And when the Pontificalitie was set up by the decree of God, then nations from East to West; obeyed and Worship the Pope, and the image of the Imperial State as of old time they did the profane Emperours, Whereas if it had not been for the Pontificality, Rome and its Empire should never have been revived, but left a most filthy lodging of Oxen and HogsStuchus against, Vallo, Lib. 1. in the beginning. Even this do the Roman Catholicks themselves con∣fesse. And so there the wounded Head was revived by the Pontificality.
QUest. 2. But Rome (totidem literis) is not named in the holy Scriptures to be the Mother of Whoredomes and abo∣minations. How do you know that all these evils were thence to arise? Answ. By divers notes and marks. 1. It is evident that the fixt Head of the Roman State and Power, the Politie of Roman Caesars, crucified our Lord. 2. By the Locusts and their King, the Angel of the bot∣tomless-pit, which can agree to no politick corporation in the world but to the Pope, and his spiritualty. QUest. 3. and Answ. How is the King of Locusts descri∣bed? Answ. 1. It is shewed that the King of Locusts was a star in the heaven of the Church, but did opostate, and became not a Messenger of the Church of Christ, but the Angel of the Pit. 2. The keyes which formerly he had being an Angel, and a Star, were for the honour of CHRISTS King∣dome, but apostating his keyes, are the keys of the bottom∣less pit. 3. When he used the keys of Christs authority well, then light of truth he taught, to the opening of the kingdome of heaven, and to glorifie Christ; but apostating with the keys of the Dragon, and his own authoritie, he let out of the pit a smoak of heresies to corrupt the earth, and to darken Sun and air, Christ the Sun of Justice, and his Mediation, and the Scriptures by which light cometh to our eyes. So in all this he is not a Star of Heaven, nor a Messenger of the Congregation of God, but Apolluon, a King of Pit-dark∣nesse. 4. In that the Holy Spirit gives the King of Locusts the ap∣pellation of Apolluon, it was to teach the sealed of God, that
all his Politie, his Lawes, (crossing common reason) his mass, his idolitry; hisEspecially on Gen. 3.15. translating she for he. false translating of Scripture, his false li∣tigious rules of faith, his false miracles, lying signes, and wonders,Mr. Calvin and others write of their Reliques. forged reliques, his reviving of Aarons offi∣ce and ceremonies,As elo∣quent and learned Vire∣tus in his Christian dis∣putations hath shewed so also a book of the three conformities. and heathenish customes, and fables, &c. &c. that all tendeth to eternal destruction: so he is ano∣ther Apollo, a Devil of Delphos, destroying all such as spake at his mouth. QUest. 4. How are his Locusts described? Answ. 1. Out of the smoke of the Pit, the Popes Clergy ariseth, They be Locusts for their Great swarms, and idle bellies, bred from the pit (fruges consumere nati) to consume the fruits of other mens labours: Millions of Monks and Friars, &c. void of all actions for Political use, are fitly com∣pared to Locusts. 2. They be as Scorpions having stings in their Tayls, she∣wing they be false Prophets by close-poisoning and terrifying doctrine, to sting and vex, inthral and torment the hearts and minds of men. 3. They are for the Wars which they are their king cause and make, and for strengthning and defending their own au∣thority and doctrine, as horsesThis is too manifest ever since the Bishop of Rome got the Supremacy by the Murderer Phocas. ready for battel, with wings of Chariots, with Breast-plates of iron. Also they have teeth of Lions to devour all, and to hold fast that, which by fraud our violence they have once gotten. 4. They would seem to have no secular power, yet their dealings shew they wear Crowns like Gold: as hating Gods ordinance of Magistracy. How have they and Abaddon their king contested against Princes, how have they given the af∣front to the greatest Potentates, &c. &c. 5. For private State in pretence they are said to have fa∣ces of men: for cloyster keeping, and womanly-life, and for many of women-sex in their orders, they are said to have hair like women. This denoteth also their counterfeit mode∣sty
and simplicity, and alluring inticements by good words and fair speeches, deceiving as Balaamites the hearts of the simple to spiritual fornication. 6. They are three unclean spirits like frogs, spirits of De∣vils, that come out of the mouth of the Dracon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet, from whom they have commission to creep into kings Courts, to teach and persade by false miracles, and froggy slimy, unclean doctrines of devils, to ignoble and dan∣gerous attempts, cruel and tyranical projects, &c. But their croaking hath not that event for their purpose, under the Phi∣als, as under the Trumpets. These notes all agree most fitly to the Roman Catholicks. QUest. 5. How furthermore hath the holy Spirit described Rome in its abominations? Answ. By the arms, that God hath set out the Empire and Pontificality: first by the great red Dracon and his tail: by the body of the Dracon, is meant the Empire under the Caesars: by the tail is meant the false Prophet, that deceived the world with false doctrine. QUest. 6. How secondly? Answ. The Empire is described by one Beast coming out of the Sea, who hath seven heads and ten horns: yea al∣so in this Beast is comprized the Pontificality, being the Revi∣ver of the wounded Head. This beast hath his arms, from che four Beasts in Daniel chap. 7. For Rome having subdued all those Countries that those Beasts ruled, and being like them for idolatry and cruelty in afflicting the holy City descending from heaven, is a monster compounded of all four: Being a Beast of seven heads and ten horns, mouthed like a Lion, footed like a Bear, and spotted like a Leopard.
QUest. 7. How thirdly? Answ. By the Beast that arose out of the Earth, hav∣ing two horns like a Lamb, which meaneth the false Prophet, the Angel of the Pit, the usurping Vicar of Christ, which is the Pontificality, or the Corporation of Popes. QUest. 8. What is meant by the seaven Heads of the spotted Beast? Answ. Two things: First the seven Hills on which the Ci∣ty of Rome was builded. Secondly, the seven Kings or Poli∣ties, or kindes of government, that were and should be of that City. QUest. 9. How many governments had been when the Apo∣stle wrote? Answ. Five had been, one then was, and another should come after. QUest. 10. What Head was it that then was? Answ. The Caesars ruling the Empire. This descripti∣on of a City that then reigned (when the Apostle wrote) over the Kings of the Earth, by seven Hills, and seven changes of Government agreeth with no City in the World, but Rome. QUest. 11. How long did that Head live, which was alive, when the Apostle wrote? Answ. About three hundred years, and then godly Con∣stantinus made it dead, as is said, removing the Constanti∣nople.
QUest. 12. What Government did come after the Caesars, the fixt Head was wounded to death? Answ. The Pontificality, that is, the Government of the Roman State by Popes; This is meant by the Beast with two Hornes like a Lamb, who revived the wounded Head, of the Empire, and made it to live. So the double power of the Pontificalitie is a Seavensh, and after a sort an eighth Head or Politie. QUest. 13. What is meant by the ten horns of the Spotted Beast? Answ. The Kingdomes that committed fornication with the great Whore, and that gave their power to uphold the kingdom of the Beast, that revived the Empire. QUest. 14. How further is Romes Policy under the Em∣pire, and the Corporation of the Papacy, described? Answ. By mystical allusions to Countries and Cities: to Sodome for filthiness of life, pride, excesse, idleness and op∣pression: to Babylon and Egypt for false Religion, bon∣dage, and cruelty. And observe, it is said plainly, That our Lord was crucified in the great City, or large Common-weal, which Spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt. And Apol∣luon the King of the Pit, the King of Locusts, and his Lo∣custs did cruelly murder the faithful Witnesses of Christ; that they found in that their policy. QUest. 15. How doth the Apostle to the Thessalonians, set forth unto us the Beast with two Hornes, like a Lamb? Answ. By what he is, and by what he doth.
1. He is called like JeroboamAs God taught Adam to give names to expresse natures, Gen. 2. so God in these names teach∣eth Princes and People what they shall finde, in the Beast, that was, and is not, and yet is. A man of sin: called the Son of Perdition, like Ishcariot, a new Antiochus, an ad∣versary, and in the estimation of his corporation, a God: called also the Wicked and Lawless: add hitherto the other names, and titles of the Father of the Papacy: an apostate Star, Wormwood, Angel of the Pit, King of Locusts, Abaddon, Apolluon, i. e. destroyer, false Prophet, Beast of the Pit, Beast like a Lamb, Healer of the wounded Head, Tayl of the Dragon, Antichrist, PopeThe common name which we and Papists give the Pope unawares, is to be marked, how Christ over-ruleth our tongues, for Pope and Daemon are all one, as learned have observed. or Daemon. 2. His actions are, he causeth an Apostacy or Rebellion from the faith, and when that apostacy came to the height, he set him and his corporation above all authority of the Ma∣gistrate. And in the Church or Temple of God would do those things, which are proper unto God: forgiveth sins, maketh new articles of faith,Vid. Mr. White, way to the true Church Epistle to the Reader, and Mr. Ju∣nius on the Apoc. 13.12, 13, &c. maketh his Decrees to be obeyed and followed, as, yea before, and above the very Scrip∣turesHe dispenseth with Gods Law. of God, and Lord of faith and conscience, &c. and saith of himself; I am a God on Earth, and that all the Kingdomes of the World are his, and giveth them to whom he will. Now all this iniquity is administred in a my∣stery by the effectual working of Satan with all power and signs, and lying wonders in all force of deceit and violence.
Annotations upon the Questions and An∣swers of the fifteenth Chapter. QUest. 1. The man of sin or the Pontificality] The Corporation of Popes is termed as one man. Mark such Corporation spee∣ches: Moses speaketh to all Israel as to one man: so all the wicked from Kain to the wicked Jews are but one corporation: yea to the end of the World, Mat. 23.35. So the four Beasts are tear∣med four Kings, that is four Kingdomes, Daniel chap. 7. So the ten horns of the Roman Beast are ten Kings that is Kingdomes that gave their power to the Beast. And all the godly from the begin∣ning of the world to the ending are one corporation in Christ, Ephesians 1.10. Quest. 3. N. 3. with the keys of the Dragon, and his own authority] Keys argue deputation of office, as Esay 22. Matth. 16. Apoc. 1. And we may see what deputation to office Satan gave the Beast like a Lamb, Apoc. 13.11, 12, 13, &c. So here note King Abaddon is Satans Lieute∣nant to destroy Hebrews and Greeks, Jewes and Gentiles, by advancing and urging his Keyes, to the rejecting not only the holy doctrine of Christ in the old and new Testament, but those two languages of He∣brew and Greek, and making a Scripture of his base Latine, and ur∣ging it upon the Church. Therefore he ought to be esteemed, of Jew and Gentile, not only Abaddon but Apolluon. Ibid. Smoke of herestes to corrupt the earth.] Apolluons apostatical kingdome did corrupt the earth: and the seven thunders of Gods judg∣ments of the Lord God omnipotent attend to corrupt it, as in the seven Vials: as God did corrupt the corrupters, Gen. 6. Ibid. and the Scriptures by which light, &c.] the lawless man of sin, and his Locusts by their strong violent, and usurped authoritie, and false doctrines set up a Religron more after Homer, Ovid, Virgi, and Plu∣tarch then after the Prophets and Apostles: such a fearful darkness they brought upon all the doctrine of Christ: that to this day our nation in many places is full of heathenish customes and traditions. N. 4. His false litigious rules of faith] even their own learned men that were at rent could not understand the meaning of some points, and wrote one against another, like the old Babylonian builders. Things were so crastily set downe of purpose, like the oracles of Apollo. vid. the Hist. Coun. Trent. page 229. edition 1620. read Mr. Cade Justif. pag. 281. and 282.
Quest. 4. N. 1. Out of the smoke of the pitthe Popes Clergy ariseth.] Thus view them. Devouring Locusts, Stiging Serpions, Ar horses. Rnng Li ns. Crowned usupers, Croaking frogs, Spirits of Devils. All noisome creatures, vermine not to be suffered in any wise or godly polity: they are the creatures of a Destroyer: These attributes shew their conditions. Warm weather of policy puts quickning in the Locusts, and then they will devour, and if you look not to them betime, they will prove stinging Scorpions, then barded horses, then rending lions, then crowned usurpers; if they find not their party strong enough, then they creep like frogs into other Kings Courts, to excite to war; and then Spirits of Devils to walk over Land and Sea to destroy all them that op∣pose them: they are the stigmaticall sworn slaves of Satan, and Abaddoon: O ye Princes and Nobles, and Gentry, and Commonalty, our fathers found them so, vid. the reigns of King Iohn, Henry 2. and Henry 3. &c. N. 2. Poysoning and terrifying Doctrine.] Singultu cruentato: the Scor∣pions sting mens hearts, that death was desired rather than life, Apoc. 9. 6. Vid. Mr. Cad, his worthy labours, Iustif. lib 1.128. & lib. 2.88 & 89. and the Appendix, li. 1 & 3. So we may observe how the Histories of our forefathers do comment on the Aocalips. Also observe these sting∣ing Scorpions in their Doctrin: of Purgatorie (especially on mens death beds) pilgrimage, and anathemaes, and treasons, &c. And how no man must dare to question any thing, vid. the book of the Spanish Inqui∣sition. N 4. They wear Crowns like gold] Note, not onely King Abaddon wears a Crown, but it is said his Locusts have Crowns like Gold, each Locust dethronizeth, and uncrowneth godly Princes in his heart. A sharp Winter of policy will and must make the Scorpion-Locusts flee to the hedges to hide themselves, or else we shall all grieve it is good to remember the two noble Henries of France. Let our Nobles, Gentry, and Commons, all our blessed Nation, advisedly think of businesses fort posterity. The Spirits of Devils are traversing the earth and Seas, as much as Becket, Petrus de uibus, and the Arch-Priest under Heny the fourth, Gardiner, Bonner, Raviliac, &c. &c. Ibid. N 4. Hating Gods Odinance of Magistracy.] Obedience to Prin∣ces, the Doctrine of Sems Tents, and the sons of S m, Rom. 13.1 Pet. The contrary is the Doctrine of Apolluons Tents, and his Locusts, and their deceived, who make but a mock of Princes and Governours, as it was
foretold of such, Likewise these silt by dreamers defile the slsh, despise dominion, and speak evill of Dignities, Jude 8. N. 5. By good words and fair speeches.] Like the old schismaticall Ro∣manists, that by such means made Divisions and offences against the Doctrine of Christ, See how the mystery of iniquity began to work e∣ven in Rome in the apostles dayes, Rom. 10.17.2 Thes. 2. In Rome they not onely schismed from the holy Doctrine, but from the righteous Do∣ctrine of lawfull powers ordained of God. Rom. 13. N. 6. To creep into Kings Courts.] Such are fittest for Achabean Kings Courts, which hate the true Michaiahs. Let Jehosaphats Court look to it. They can never make an holy Court, if there were 400 of them, and 450. If Jehosaphat notwithstanding what Michaiah said, will yet go to Ramoth Glead, with Achab, Jeroboam-man of sinne, his Religi∣on—Let the Princes of the Papacy wrangle together: Let the Re∣formed maintain the glorious Gospel, and keep at home, and stand upon their defence, and not weaken themselves in men and money, and am∣munition: yet to do as Simeon and Judah did, and to help the Lord a∣gainst the mighty, Jud. 1. and 5. Note also, as it was a plague to Pharaoh, and old Egypt, that God brought frogs into his Land, into his bed-chamber, and upon his bed, and into the Egyptian houses, so it is a plague that the frogs of Rome-Egypt come into the Territories of Princes, to have entertainment either into their Courts, or their subjects houses, chambers and beds. The same must be noted for the other plagues of blood, darknesse, blains, boils, and sores that were on old Egypt, are and shall be on old Rome-Egypt. Apoc. 16. Ibid N. 6. Cruel and tyrannicall projects.] They said, as their Prede∣cessors, we have a Law, and by our Law they ought to dy, and that it was not lawfull for them to put any man to death, and so craved aid of the secular power, which men durst not refuse. The Popish compa∣ny and their friends make Decrees and Cannons, and Princes must be their men to punish the transgressours. Thus they make Princes executi∣oners of their best subjects. Vide Mr. Cade Justis. p, 166, 167. &c. and who were worst enemies to the Prophets, our Lord, and his Apostles, but the Ecclesiasticks of their dayes, whose eyes ran a whoring after their fathers idols and vanities, Icremiah durst not humour, but reprove the wicked apostate Prelates, therefore forsooth the King and Princes must put him to death, Ier. 26. So because our Lord from Galilee to Ie∣rusalem taught against the traditions of the Elders, and reproved their errours of bodily exercise, their superstitions, their ignorance, blindness, hypocrisie, and false glosses on the Law, therefore he was a perverter of the Nation, and a mover of sedition, and so it was in the case of the apostle Paul, and therefore our Lord and his apostles must be put to death. Trouble wicked and apostate Prelates, you are ipso facto, a sedi∣tious person, and a troubler of the State. O ye Magistrates take heed how you give c edit to the flatteries and Diabolicall slanders of such
creatures, that you stain not your hands with innocent blood, Luc. 3.5 Acts 24.5, 6. R. B. Latimer in a Letter to King Henry 8. sheweth how it was the practise of the Scorpion locusts, to conveigh their own inventions, and Proclamations under the Kings name and authority. Princes that have cast off mysticall Nimrod, and have made their Common-weals our Lords and his Christs, will not rule subjects as the Princes of mysticall Egypt and Sodom, to conquer honest Subjects, as such apostate Shepherds did of old, which were rebels and robbers, Ezek. 1. Ezek. 33. such know not the wayes of peace, which is the fruit of holy and just government; but godly Princes in the policy of the heavenly Jerusalem, will be as it is wtitten, I will make thy goverment peace, and thine exactors righteousnesse, Isa. 60. as Ezekiel further saith, chap 45.9. and 46.18. Sad events have been when Princes have remo∣ved the Land-marks. The Covenant with the Gibeonites was a Land. mark, which was broken and severely plagued, Achabs and Naboths sto∣ry confer, see the plottings, and projects. Princes that will have their wills and lusts satisfied, mind nor him that ruleth in the heavens. See a Land-mark concerning the liberty of the Subject. Christ ordained, how transgressed, how plagued, Jer. 34. Again, Ihriakm thought his Kingly Prerogative would bear him our in covetousnesse, oppression, in∣nocent blood, and in usiug the labours of his Carpenters and masons, without pay, Ier. 22. what came to this son of Belial. So here were Land-marks of an ancient sanction, of mens possessions, of Iberties, and of goods transgressed, and mightily plagued. God is Jehovah, his Judgements are for ever unchangeable, he is neither wearied by long processe of time, nor won to give his blessing in oneage, to that which he hath carsed in another. There are Land-marks of Christs own ma∣king in those ten words, Exod. 20. (and in other places expounded) be∣tween all relations divine and humane, which none may wil ully vio∣late, but will fall on the point of his own sword, Hos 5 Deut. 27 Job 24 Prov 28.16. Quest. 6. and Ans. This beast bath his arms from the four be sts in Danie The Apocalips, and some other places and parcells of the new Testa∣ment is a new Prophesie of Christ, of new States, and governments, both of the Church, the new Ierusalem, and its enemies, but expressed in old terms. This we must well observe how the Spirit of endlesse wis∣dome and foresight, contriveth like revolutions, and the former to be the stamps of the latter. If we mind not this, we shall run (as we do) into great confusion of story: so he that is A. and Ω. from the beginning to the end, ruleth the world in a most wise course to shew his judge∣ment and mercy: where in this last book of the Apocalips, calling old speeches to new matters, goeth through the Alphabet of old ages, that he may be seen to join the first and last stories in wise order, Mr. Bro. in Apoc 304. and upon Daniel page 3. chap. 13.9, 10.
Quest. 9 and Ans. Five had been] The seven heads of the Romane Beast afflicting the Church, Apoc. 13. 1. Pompey, 2. Crassus, 3. Julius Caesar, 4. Brurus w. Cassius. 5. Antonius, 6. Caesars, 7. Popes, The Popes their double power is a seventh, and after a sort an eighth head: these are the seven States over the faithfull, as John and all the Jews knewthe story ofe six of these heads. their story full well. The Church hath great comfort, that the Pontificality is the last head of the Beast. Heathen stories may sit those other States of Rome, of 1 Kings, 2. Consulls. 3. Decemviri. 4. Dictators. 5. Trumviri. 6. Caesars. 7. Popes. The more fall out fit, as often many do to one speech, the more Rome that crucified Christ is condemned, when God turneth con∣tinuall revolutions to have Rome called into mind. Quest. 12. and Ans. So the double power of the Pontificality] Caesar and Ponisix. It is worth the noting, that the Caesars titled themselves Pon∣tisex, that sheweth the Pontificality revived the wounded head of the Caesarian Pontifex. Quest. 13, and Answer, what is meant by the ten horns of the spotted beast?] Ten Tribes followed Ieroboam, the Man of Sin, Ten Kingdomes followed King Abaddon the Man of Sinne, Ten Tribes rebelled against the Kingdome of David, and the Religion of the Temple. Ten Kingdomes under the Papacy despised, the Kingdome of the Son of David, and the holy Temple in the hea∣venly Jerusalem. Steuchus a mysticall Babylonian recordeth the Kingdomes of Europe, that gave their power to the Beast, 1. Spain, and Portugall, 2. Hungaria, 3. Great Brittany, 4. Denmark, 5. Rssia, 6. Croatia, and Dalmatia, 7. Arragon, 8 ohenna, 9. Suevia, and Nornegia, 10. Dacia. These paid Tribute to the Pope. Quest. 14. and answ. By mystiall allusions to Countries, and Cities, to
Sodome, for filthinesse] no sin so vile, but it reigns in an Apostate Church, so it reigns in Abolah, and Aholibab, Ezek. 23. are said to do worse than the heathens before them, to transcend in excesse of impie∣ties, Sodom and Gomorrba. The apostate State of King Abaddon be∣came the mother of Harlots, and all abominations of the earth, Christ, his holy Gospel is cords and bands, post and rail to mans cor∣rupt nature, but that taken away, men do degenerate into all profanesse. Ibid. That our Lord was crucified] As long as we protest in the Symbo∣lon of our faith, that the eternal Son, the Lord of glory was crucified by Pontius Pilate, Rome must be held accursed The Pontificality doth not take away the curse, but continues it, because it revived the wound∣ed head, and doth as it did, persecuring Christ in his witnesses, Them that keep the Commandements of God, and the faith of JESUS CHRIST. Ibid. called Sodome and Egypt.] The former be stamps of the latter, it is said, I am Iehovah thy God, which brought thee out of the Land of E∣gypt, out of the house of bondage This is a Preface to all the Comman∣dements: so the same must be a reason to all the Israel of God, to walk with God, for bringing us out of Rome-Egypt, out of that house of cruell bondage. Look what cause Lot had to be thankfull, for saving him from Sodoms destruction, such cause have we for being delivered from Rome-Sodome, and what cause of thankfulinesse and praise Israel had for deliverance from Egypt and Babylon, such have we for that great and marvellous deliverance from Rome-Egypt, and Rome Babilon. All those Psalms of praise, wherein deliverance from Egypt is mentioned must be sang of us for Rome-Egypt, and the holy Spirit teacheth us so to do, Apoc 15.3. & 19.1. All the faithfull under the new Testament are the Israel of God, Gal. 6 Note this by the way, if we under the new Testa∣ment are under a Covenant of grace, then was Israel of old under a Co∣venant of grace, for we fing their songs. Observe the note in chap. and page infra Again consider, is Rome called Egypt; What shame should cover those apostate mouths and faces, that say, there is little or no difference, and an easie reconciliation may be made between the faith of the Church of England, and the Romane? What an aposta∣ticall slander is that to our Vine and vine-dressers, that our God brought forth of mysticall Egypt, yea to our Princes and Parliament, in all their Statutes that they made against the people of that cursed religion: when as manifest a difference God hath made, as of old he did between old Egypt and Israel, Exod. 8.22, 23. and 10 23. &c. as the RR FF. D.D. D. Jewel. D. Abbot. D. Fulk, D. Carlton, D. Reynolds, D. hitakers, Mr. Perkins, and all our worthies have demonstrated. See also Mr. white way to the true Church, who wrote most whitely, the Epistle dedica∣tory, and the Epistle to the Render But very like none of all these, neither Princes, nor Parliaments, Books of Controversies, Teachers, and Laws understood, what is Popery, properly so called, as Bishop Lawa saith in a book of his. But for all their plotting, the old enmity shall
never be reconciled, while light and darknesse continue, God hath put the enmity, Gen. 3.15. What, will ye reconcile the Kingdome of Christ, and the Kingdome of Abaddon, of Satans darknesse: goodly dayes men, thou thinkest saith God, that I am like to thee, Psal. 50. These umpires, forsooth, will make Christ yeeld something, yea any thing on his part, and the false Lamb must yeeld something on his part, and so our Athe∣isticall hearts think a good end is made. There was a time when our Laud said, No peace with Rome, What a spirit of slumber and giddinesse hath covered our Seers? Christ was angry of old for these sins of his sons, and of his daughters, halting between two opinions. And thirdly, is Rome called Egypt, then the Magistrate must not bring the people of Israel back to Egypt, nor go to Egypt for horses, or any help, Deut. 17. Accur∣sed be their project, that by fair speeches, and plausible pretenses, but indeed speaking lies through hypocrisie, do insinuare to corrupt the breasts of Princes, to reduce their people into Rome-Egypts bondage: Judah is blamed for these projects, Isa. 30. & 31. Most of the stories of old Egypt and Babylon must mind us of their allusions. Note two things, 1. Israel doted on the Egyptians, and Babylonians their lovers, traver∣sing projects with them, Jer. 2.Ezeck. 16. But Christ befooled their doings, that these nations were their plague, and ruine. 2. A deal of profane∣nesse, oppression, and much wickednesse they brought from Babel, as Ezra, Nehemiah, and Zachary do shew. Let all true English hearts, that love Christ and his Gospel, and their native Countrey, greatly humble their souls, and pray that the Ephah of wickednesse (Zac. 5.6.) may be carried unto its own place, into the Land of mysticall Babylon. O hea∣vens be astonied at our 2 evils. Ah Lord God, what iniquity do we find in thee, what iniquity is in thy ordinances, thy commandements, thy Gospel, thy true Christian servants, all which now are reputed vile, mean, and as anathema, but thou hast not been to us in these a wildernesse, or a Land of darknesse, but a God of glory, riches, honour, plenty, victory and protection from those accursed of that cursed Religion of the breaden God. O unthankfull Nation. Let our souls weep in secret. Quest. 15. N. 1. Antichrist.] And what if the title Antichrist e not totidem literis attributed to the Pontificality, yet if the other titles are to be applied to it, then this is truly predicated of that Corporation; must not he be the Antichrist (can we think a worse to come) for persecuting them that held the testimony of JESUS, and for cleaving to the word of God, Apocalips, chap. 13.12. Ibid. N. 2. I am a God on earth.] Like the proud Prince of Tyrus, Ezek. 28 2. But that Tyrian God was not a God, but a man in the hand of him that killed him. The holy Spirit hath phrases from Tyrus its destru∣ction, to shew how the Lord God will render the mysticall Tyrian god, his strength, his glory, and his Gammadims, and all that love his mer∣chandise, a thrice execrable terrour, and make them die the death of the unbaptised, and settle glory in the true Church, the Land of the li∣ving
Jehovah of hosts hath purposed, (and let us believe it) to stain the pride of all glory, read Ezk. 26. & 27. & 28. & Isa. 23.9. Apoc: 18. Consider like revolutions, and how the former be stamps of the latter. Ungodly Princes and men of place have proud thoughts, and think them∣selves some Deity: This comes from the old Adam, to whom Satan said, Ye shall be as gods, Gen. 3. CHAP. XVI. With Questions, Answers, and Annotations; Proving that the mystery of iniquity be∣gun to get head from Constan∣tines time. QUest. 1. and Answ. How long was it before the mysterie of iniquity came to the full? Answer, 1. From Constantines time, Ecclesiasticall Teach∣ers were never quiet, but still aspired after Supremacy, and drew Princes to their factions till 600 years after Christ, then about that time, Boniface the third Pope of Rome, obtain∣ed by the help of the murderer Phocas, to be called uni∣versall Bishop. And this universall Supremacy did so increase untill the tenth Century, that then Satan was let loose every where, and few Martyrs and Confessours were found to hold the Testimonie of Christ sincerely and constantly. The Lo∣custs and their King Abaddon had so obscured Sun and air, the office of ChristThe holy Bible tho aire to see Christ. and Law, by which we see him, and prevailed in the world by all deceiveablenesse of unrighte∣ousnesse among them that perish, because they received not the love of the truth in the holy and blessed Scriptures.
2. Note, that the Pontificiality continued in that heighth of Supremacy to about the 13th and 14th and 15th Century. All which time it was and is still upheld by Rebellion, treaso∣nable and cruel practises, unsatiable Covetousnesse, and ambition, and by speaking lies through hypocrisie, and by strong delusions in false Doctrine, concerning the holy Scrip∣tures, Latine-service, the attained Supremacy, images, per∣jury, covenant-breaking, urging unlawfull oaths, and kil∣ling of Kings, giving Dispenlations for incestuous marria∣ges, dissolving one to contract another, and all for Popish in∣terests, to shore up their tottering Babylon, &c. And also their Index Expurgatorius, corrupting all good ancient au∣thours, and their own Modern, yea sleighting with great con∣tempt, the worthyM. cade Ju∣sti. ib. 1 p, 48. Mr. White way, &c. 323. all that 47. di∣gression. ancient fathers, calling them Here∣ticks, lyars, orroneous, instead of the great things of Gods Law, they obtruded their lying Legends, &c. Mind also their detestation of the thoughts of any Reformation, either of Doctrine and manners, &c. &c. &c. 3. Oh the abominations of that apostate Church: Oh the intricate and investigable paths, the flatteries,But her steps are not as her lips, Prov. 5.3, 4, 5. Rom. 16.18. smooth∣nesse and fairnesse of speech, pleasurable delights of eyes and ears, &c. clamourous and impudent subtilties, lies, and slanders, formall pretences of palliated holinesse, and out∣ward strength and glory of that great whore, enchanting, and merchandising the Kings of the earth, and the Nations, all which that Church yet mannaged with a secret Scorpion-like stinging terrour in their Legates and Emissaries, Bulls, and Breves, &c. 4. What pen can delineate the miseries of the Christian-world, when and after the polity of Apolluon became a perfect mountain of fire, and that specially appeared in the deepnesse of Satan, when he drew all the West for 200 years, into those calamitous and superstitious Warres, the 11. and 12. Centuries, for the Low Jerusalem, that all the force of the Kings and Princes of the West was weakened to be under the Pontificality. In those dayes was the Jerusalem from heaven,
the holy and beloved City of Christians besieged, as if old Gog and Magog were alive, and still the Papacy will fight a∣gainst it, till Michael, the mighty angel of the Covenant, our Lord JESUS CHRIST, utter the seven Thunders of his power under theThey shall feel unawares the power of Christ, the se∣venth Trum∣pet, as Jeri∣cho felt the se∣venth day the seven Trumpets. seventh Trumpet, and the seventh Phiall against Abaddons Kingdome, to give the enemie a finall de∣struction. QUest. 2. What is that you call the mysterie of iniquity? Answer, It is the spirituall Supremacy of the Pontifi∣calitie, that the Sea and Church of Rome onely, with the Head thereof, is the oracle of the world, and of infallible judgement and cannot erre, and that therefore all States and Churches, as children must be subject to him the Head, and to her as Mother,As old Baby∣lon said, I shall be a Lady for ever, so mysti∣call Babylon saith, she sits as Queen. Their wisdome and their know∣ledge pervert∣ed them, Isa. 47. Apoc. 13. Queen and Mistris. And this is the faith of its Corporation, which also hath through the trans∣formation of Satan into an angel of light, some points of truth conjoyned, but exceedingly defiled and over clouded with worldly decrees and humane devices, heresies, and blas∣phemies, which in conclusion contradict and overthrow the truths they hold, and renders their polity execrable to the Saints and their King, the holy one of Israel. QUest. 3. Who were followers of the King of the Pit-dark∣nesse, and Pit-bred Locusts, that revived the Empire. Answer, Kings, and peoples, and multitudes and Nations, and kindreds and tongues, small and great, rich and poore, bond and free, who wondered at the glorious rising and stan∣ding of this new kind of Govenour and government. This Corporation of the Papacie, the Locusts, and other mysti∣call Babylonians, fitly enough call, the Romane Catholick Church. But the First and the Last, the faithfull and true Witnesse, teacheth to call it the Kingdome of the Beast.
The annotations upon the Questions and An∣swers of the sixteenth Chapter. QƲest. 1. and Answer, N. 1. Ʋntill the tenth Century.] 1000 years there were Churches, and many godly that did reign with, and live the life of Christ.Apoc. 10.6. But the tenth Centurie, reckoning from the Apostle Iohns death) Rome the cause of fall to all, and then the State of the Church or a great part was a dead State, being wonder∣fully estranged from the testimony of JESUS, and the word of God, the onely mean of the first Resurrection. Ibid. N. 1. Among them that perish.] Those in the Book of life, and the sealed of God, the Locusts did not hurt; but others turning their ears from the truth were given unto Fables, 2 Tim. 4. This Spirituall judge∣ment was on Israel, Isa. 29 9. A gainsaying people shall be hardened, and given up to their own hearts lusts, Rom. 10.11. Psal. 81. N. 2. Ʋnsatiable Coveteousnesse.] Unsatiable covetousnesse and ambiti∣on introduced many corruptions in Doctrine, as it was foretold, the love of money the root of all evil, and makes men erre from the faith and a godly life, 1 Tim. 6. another Scripture saith, and through covetousnesse shall false Teachers with feigned words make merchandise of you, 2 Pet. 2. And the souls of men was one kind of the vendible things in Rome-Babylons politic, Apoc. 18.13. and here must be remembred their Phari∣saicall Coban obbing all Churches. N. 11.—Images.] Old Babylon was a Land of graven Images, and were mad upon their idols, Jer. 50.33. Dan. 3. so mysticall Babylon; Papists although plogued by the Turks warres would not repent of their idola∣try, Apoc. 9.20. as Israel Ezek. 16.26. Ibid. And killing of Kings.] For illing of Kings (of whom they are jealous) see a book of the State mysteries of the Jesuites, that is translated out of French, and dedicated to Sr. Tho. Penistone Knight and Baronet by Peter Gosselyn, printed by G. E. for Nicholas Bourn. Qui cum Iesu itis, non itis cum Iesuitis, the indoctrinated Iscariots of the world. Ibid. Any Reformation.] See the history of Councell of Trent, page 553. and all our godly mens labours, by teaching and writing, that all the reformed Churches may truly say of mysticall Babylon, as the Saints said of old Babylon. We would have healed Babylon, but she is not heal∣ed, forsake her, and let us every one go into his own Countrey, for her judgement reacheth unto heaven, Jer. 51.9. All the godly writings and endeavours of the Reformed Churches, shall rise up in judgement against them.
N. 3. Subllties and lies] See Sir Edwin Sands relations of his tra∣vels, he shews their sleights in reports, &c. all histories and experience of Reformed Churches shew their plots and devises. But Jethroes Speech doth comfort the Church, Exod. 18.11. Subtle Hypocrites, and Inventers of false Religion, Christ will defeat all their counsels. Job 5.12, 13. read Mr. Cade of Popish policies, lib. 1. p. 6. lib. 2. page 159. Ibid. N. 3. Great Whore] Because of the multitude of the whore∣domes of the well-favoured Harlot, the mistresse of witchcrafts, that selleth the Nations through her whoredomes, and the familles through her witchcrafts, The two Sisters followed the idolatryes of Ninive, Neh. 3, 4. 2 Kings 16. Ezek. 23.5. so did the Nations the glorious well-fa∣voured Whore, through her enchantments, Apoc. 17.1, 2, 3 4, 5. &c. And the same plagues that came on the former shall come on this latter 2 Pet. 2.1, 2. N. 4. a perfect Mountain of fire] Where King Abaddons Locust and subjects be maintained, it will make that Kingdome a burning Aena. The King of Locusts, and his Locusts, the great incendiaries of the World, and all is to minister advancement to Popish interests. They excite Princes against Princes, yea Turks against Princes of Christendom and Princes against subjects, &c. Ibid. N. 4. Drew all the West for two hundred years] Wo and alass, it is to think of those miseries when presently after, Apoc. 20.7. the tenth Century, Satan was let loose. That age was an unhappy age: even as the Locust Genthrard spake, and the Locust Bellarmine saith, Never age more unlearned or unhappy. Cited by Dr. Ʋsher, in answer to a Jesuit, pa. 7 Mr. Cade, lib. 1. pa. 40. Ibid. 4. For the Low Jerusalem] Christ had told that Jerusalem should be desolate so long as the Gentiles calling continueth, even to the worlds end, Marth. 24 Luke 21. as he caused Moses to foretell Deut. 28.63. Num. 33.56. But the Pontificality the false Prophet to weaken Princes who would be deceived, and not excell in Gods word, as they most of all might do: He caused them to go from England, France, &c. men women, and children to recover the cursed Land. Compare the aposta∣sie of Nimrod, and the man of Sin in Israel, with the apostasie of my∣sticall Nimrod, the man of sin in the Christian Church; and the mise∣ries thereupon depending. Far from Justice and Peace, 2 Chron 15.3, 4, 5, 6. How do men of power that are crafty and plausible draw men a∣way from the Gospel of Christ? Ibid. As of old, God and Magog.] By God and Magog, Apoc. 20. is meant all oppressours of the faithful Christians, whether Turk or Pope, s Michael our Prince, captain of the Lords host, calmed old Ggs waves, Daniel 12. So he will mysticall God and Magog, Apocalyps chap. 10. & 20. Quest. 2 and answ. It is the spiritual Supremacy] The Locusts say such
as submit not to the Popes supremacy do renounce Christianity Mr. Cade Justif. lib. 1. pag. 98, If Satan had not mightily possessed mens hearts, Rome the only place plainly cursed, should not rule Religion. But the rejected of God must strive, where God warneth to do otherwise, Mr. Bro. in Sinai Sight. The Romists seeking to have Rome a peculiar Citie, do revive the shadow of the old Covenant: for now we are not tyed to no one Mountain, much less to Ahaddons City of seven Mountains, John 4.21. And the name Catholick, used of old in the Church destroy∣eth that opinion. Catholica quesse potest quae Romana diciu? And seeing the partition Wall is broken down between Jews and us, why make they another partition between us and them Rome for this and all of that Synagogue, are to be hld accursed till our Lord cometh, for it is accursed. And some of our Divines do little better than Judaize about the Jewes possessing Canaan and Jerusalem. Ibid. Some points of truth conjoined] The Whores cup of Fornications was gui'ded with some truths, but filled with the waters and wine of Sodome, and doctrines of Devils, A Mystery. By thy Witchcrafts were deceived all nations; cauterized consciences speak lies through hypo∣crisie, Apoc 18.23.1 Tim. 4. Ibid. Heresies and blasphemies] And I saw a Woman sit upon a scarlet colurd Beast, full of Names of blasphemy. Their translations, Psal¦ters, Rosaries, &c. shew this. The Lord hath rebuked such Satans, and still will. Quest 3. and Answ. Kings and Peoples, and Multitudes, &c.] Here you may behold a Roman Catholick: here is their universality, multitude unitie, outward glory, &c. let them boast: but rather let them trem∣ble, and consider Apoc. 13.8. & 17.8. They whose Names are not written in the Lambs book of life from the foundation of the world followed the beast. Their Diets, Councels, Parliaments, Synods, &c. were to inslave themselves to serve a Beast, and blasphemous Whore, a Witch, &c. God shall send them strong delusions to believe lies, 2 Thess. 2. Be wise now therefore O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the earth. Serve Je∣hovah, kiss the Son, the Heir of heaven, Psalm 2. Mat. 21.38. Hebr. 1.2. O ye Princes study your Kingdomes, Principalities, and your com∣mon-Weals. O ye Nobles and Judges study to advance the Gospel, the glory of any Nation, that embraceth it, and that walketh after it. Oh be perswaded it is a good, light, and easie yoke, 2 Chron. 12.8. ye are the chief Bishops from God and Pastors: oh do not ye by negligence or trans∣action of your power to the unworthy, cause the Lords flock to be scat∣tered.
CHAP. XVII. With Questions, Answers, and Annotations, Concerning the two Witnesses, and the mark of the Beast: And the decay of the mystery of iniquity. QUest. 1. Who kept the Testimony of Jesus, and the word of God that came from Sems Tents in the times of the rising and height of the Pontificality? Answ. Many in the times of the rising of it, and there were here and there two Witnesses, some that followed the true Lamb, and that in the height of it, prophecyed, misliked, and cryed out against the proceedings of the mystery of iniquity. But this company were not so conspicuous and visibly glori∣ous, being for divers Hundreds of years driven as into a Wil∣derness through a red sea of fire and fagot by the Beast of the Bottomless pit, the counterfeit Lamb, and the prevailing fa∣ction of his six hundred sixty six apostatical number, yet at the last, the Brethren overcame by the bloud of the Lamb, and by the word of their Testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the death. QUest. 2. Then the papacy would not bear with such as con∣tested against it? Answ. Christs faithful witnesses were caused to mourn in Sackcloath: No man might buy or sell that would not Wor∣ship
the Image of the Beasts imperial State re-erected in the Pontificality,Like their forefathers, the servants of servants, the cursed Canaanice. Deut. 2.28, 29. and receive the Mark of the Beast, in his hand or forehead, or the name of the Beast, or at least be of the number of his name: yea, else were most cruelly used (as is said) throughout their large Common-weal. That Whorish Church, was and is drunk with the bloud, and martyrs, of Je∣sus. QUest. 3. What do you understand to be the mark of the Beast? Answ. The Popes Canon-Law telleth that none may live under the Empire, but by yielding to the Popes Lawes, in his subscribing to his Imperial and Ecclesiasticall Supremacy, and oath of fidelity as a mark on the hand, and some open token of communion with him, and profession of his decrees as a mark in the forehead: The saying of the Ave Maria, went over all to the poor beggars, and reverence to the cross, and comming to their most wicked Mass. Forbidding and re∣fraining from reading and teaching the holy Scriptures, but for licensed and auricular Confession. Briefly all differing from their Dracons Lawes were heretiques, and mightnot use policy having not the marks of his Politie. QUest. 4. Did then the Pontificalitie and Papacy (as the old Empire) porsecute the faith of the Prophets and Apo∣stles doctrine. Answ. Yea, for it is said that the latter Beast like a Lamb with two horns, did all that the former Beast did. He had the voice and speach of the Dracon-Caesars: and did maintain the same War against theFor the wars of the dragon-Caesars, and dragon-Pope, see for∣mer notes. Saints, and for the same cause, and that was, the keeping of the commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus. And this is the very mark of those that have Gods Name in their Foreheads.
Note as the old Beast-like enemies fought against the faith of Jerusalem Sems Tents, and the People of God: so Rome-Egypt, Rome-Babylon, with like cruelty and intestine ha∣tred both in the Caesars, and Popes against the same glori∣ous faith of Jerusalem the holy. City that came down from heaven. Kain began the War, the Pontificality and Papa∣cy follow Kains waies. The former be stamps of the latter. As there is a like revolution of time, so there is of other matters of Christs administration. QUest. 5. But the mystery of Iniquity the spiritual Supre∣macy did not still continue in that strength and repute in the Christian world, as it had in former times? Answ. The Apostle foretold that the Lord Jesus would consume that wicked, that man of sin, and his corporation with the Spirit of his mouth, and abolish it with the bright∣nesse of his coming; so the fifteenth century, the Lamb, the King of mount Sion appeared with one hundred and forty four thousand, attending on him who caused the Gospel to break out again, and the light of it in the holy city increased to our daies that Christ the Sun of Iustice shineth and reign∣eth in England, Scotland, France, Germany, &c. Blessed be his glorious name. And let the four and twenty Elders, and the sour lively Wights, and all that fear God both small and great, give thanks and sing Hallelujahs with all hearty cou∣rage, as Apocal. 15. & 19. QUest. and Ans. 6. Shall the Papacy be still decreasing? Ans. Yea, for the preaching of the eternal Gospel fal∣leth Rome-babylon, and buildeth Jerusalem. This the Sword of Christs mouth, hath consumed the Kingdome of the Beast: and chiefly through this, Abaddon the son of perdition, the angel of the bottomless pit, and his cursed earthly politie and corporation shall be perishing to the end, and is every day go∣ing to utter perdition.
QƲest, 7. But the Polity of Rome. Egypt is strong by power and subtill counsells, through the Kings and Princes that give their power to the Beast, and through the swarms of innu∣merable Locusts, and all his Worshippers: all which are confe∣derate with him, and say,So said the Atheists of old Egypt, and old Babylon, Dan. 3.15. Exod. 5.2. Jer. 50.34. who can warr with the Beast as Apocal. 13.4. Answ. Strong is Lord God of Hosts, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, that will judge the great Whore, and over∣throw that habitation of Divels, that hold of every foul Spi∣rit, that Cage of every uncleane and hatefull Bird. For he fitteth as on a White Cloud with a sicle in his hand, and as on a White Horse of truth and might, and in righteousnesse doth judge and make Warr. And the godlyThe called, the chosen, the faithful, are on the Lambs part, Apoc. 17 14. WarrioursAll those cry mightily to him that sits on the Cloud, to thrust in his sicle, and their prayers are heard, Apoc. 14.15. Prin∣ces, † Teachers and † people, as on White Horses in his truth and might will follow him. † And that we might be assured of Mysticall Babylons de∣struction,Gen 6.11, 12, 13. & 11.8. Jos. 10.11. Jud. 4. & 5.19. Jer. 25.10. Nah. 3.4.17. Ezek. 17. & 28. Deut. 2.27, 28. with Apoc. 13.17. Esai. 63.3. the holy Spirit alludeth to the stories of the old e∣nemies, the old world, Sodome, Egypt, Chanaan, Edom, Tyrus, Niniveh, Babel, and apostate Jerusalem, & to the four cursed Kingdomes in Daniel chap. 7. & to Gog and Magog, Ezek. 38, & 39. As Gods wrath and vengeance came on them, so most surely shall the cursed, bloody, heathenish, apostaticall po∣lity of King Abaddon be trodden in the wine-presse of the wrath of the Lord God omnipotent, and perish. The sevenThe seven Phialls shew how Rome shal as it dealt in the Trumpets, as shall be more largely shewed hereafter. Phials set forth this, how the just God doth pour out plagues on the Throne and Kingdome of the Beast.
QUest. 8. Shall the Gospel of Christ increase in glory? Answer, It shall: Christ will raise up holy Teachers, who shall by his great power cause the earth to be lightned with glory. And the Temple and Testimony which the Beast of the Pit had shut up, shall be further opened, and the Lord the Almighty One shall reign. The same Kingdomes that gave their power to the Beast, shall regain, and shall revive from their dead apostaticall condition, and hate the Whore, that loathsome Corporation of the King of Locusts, make their Kingdomes our Lords and his Christs, for they shall em∣brace the Gospel which shall shine among them. This is cal∣led the marriage of the Lamb, Apoc. 19. And verily, as that whorish Polity hath been desolate and naked, in respect of England, Scotland, and much of Germany, &c. so shall it be of France, and Spain, and others, when Gods purpo∣ses are fulfilled. QUest. 9. What is the finall judgement given on the second beast with two horns like a Lamb, who is the Beast of Em∣pire revived, and also with his Locusts is the false Prophet? Answer, It is said the Beast was caught, and with him the false Prophet which worketh miracles before him, by which he deceiveth them that receive the mark of the Beast, and wor∣ship his image, both were cast alive as Sodomites into the Lake burning with fire and Brimstone, and shall be torment∣ed with the Devils day and night, for ever and ever. Even so, Amen, Lord God omnipotent, holy, just and true are thy wayes, and judgements, O King of Saints, QUest. 10. What is the judgement on them that are seduced by the great, glorious, and Catholick Whore, and were drunken
with the cup of the Wine of her fornications, that had the Mark of the Beast, and did worship his image? Answ. They shall drink of the Cup of the wrath of God, the wine mixed in the cup of his anger,Psal. 11.6. and 75.8. and shall be torment∣ed for ever and ever, without rest day or night in fire and brim∣stone, in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb, Apoc. 14. This should be a most serious admo∣nition, for men to come out of mysticall Babylon, mysticall Egypt, to use no garments, no prayers, no laws of the Popes making. QUe. 11. What are we to think of all that go under the name of Papists, that are under the Papacy? Answ. Fearfull judgement is pronounced on all those that worship the image of the Beast, or have his Mark or print of his name in hand or forehead, but sentence is not so passed on all that are of the Number of his name, yet they are in great danger, unlesse they obey the voice from heaven, Come out of her my people. O thrice blessed is that Kingdome, O thrice blessed is that family, O thrice blessed is that person, that not onely hath gotten victory over the Beast, and o∣ver his image, and over his Mark, but also and over the number of his name. QUest. 12. What is the end of all that know not God, and which obey not to the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, which will not be of the Corporation of the holy City? Answ. Everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power: for so it is said, without shall be dogs and sorcerers, and fornicators, and murderers, and idolaters, and the fearfull and unbelievers, and the abominable, and whosoever loveth, and maketh a he, Apoc. 21. and 22.
QUest. 13. What is the end of the godly that would not obey the Papacy, and of all that sincerely walk with God? Answ. The Apostle John heard a voice from heaven, say∣ing, Write, blessed are they that die in the Lord, even so saith the Spirit, for they rest from their labours, and their works follow with them.Phil. 3.12. They shall not be unclothed, but clothed upon: in them mortality be swallowed up of life. 2 Cor. 5.4. Luk. 20.35.36. And in the day of the all-joyfull resurre∣ction, our weak, vile, and corrupt bodies, shall be raised up incorruptible, and be fashioned and made like our Lords glo∣rious body. And the Saints that are alive, and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall have instead of death a sudden and unspeakable * changing in their bodies, and shall together with them of the Resurrection, be caught up in the clouds to meet the Lord in the aire, and to be ever with the Lord, not to die any more, but are equall unto the angels, and shall shine like the Sun in the Kingdome of their Father, Amen, Even so come LORD JESUS. Annotations upon the Questions and An∣swers of the seventeenth Chapter. QƲest. 1. and Ans Here and there two witnesses.] See Mr. White, Way, &c. page 384. &c. and Mr. Cade, Justif. l. chap. 4 and lib. 2. chap. 1. and ma∣ny others, Christ still raising up his witnesses, was an argument that his cause should live till better times. All the power of the Western world, that Pope, and Emperour, and other horns of the Beast could make, could not root out the Church, nor the faith of the Primitive purity. It did and shall increase in spite of fire, and fagot, prisons, Massacres, Index Expurgatorius, &c. the King of Locusts, and his Lo∣custs prevailed against the bodies of the Saints, but not against their Testimony to the true faith of Christ. Ibid.—Prophesied, misliked, and cried out.] Here is a sore combate
of Michaels servants, called the patience of the Saints, as with the Casars, so now with the Tail of the Dragon, the King of Locusts. All the fight was for the salvation and power, and Kingdome of God and his word, and the authority of of Christ and his Testimony, Apoc. 12.10. and this still is, and must be intended for unto banishment, spoiling of goods, bonds, and death: Yea it shall be contended for till the se∣venth Trumpets sounding sheweth Christs reigning over the Kingdoms of the world in the glorious manifestation of his Ordinances, Apoc. 11.15.19. Ibid. For divers hundreds of years] In those dayes the Temple was shut, and Christs Ordinances abandoned by the authority of the Beast with two horns, like a Lamb, so there is two kinds of authority, and for this was the great strife, Jehosaphat much reformed the State, and took away the high places, that had Groves, but the other high places stood still, for the peoples heart was not able to comply with purer worship, 2 Chron. 20.33 So in our dayes our people are full of superstitions, and hate faithfull teaching, therefore pure Reformation shall not be yet, nay now the the things not reformed by Queen Elizabeth and King James, are a means of introducing moe things of Popish abominations. Ibid. Of his 666. Apostaticall number.] Observe the Romane Catholick Church of Kings, multitudes, peoples, Nations and kindreds, and tongues rejoiced, when the Beast of the Pit had killed the two wit∣nesses, and Martyrs of Iesus, so they are the many that go the broad way, and Christs witnesses sew that go the narrow way. Papists ask where was your company before Luther, the answer is easie, where was it not? and they themselves knew and saw where it was well e∣nough. They did not murther men that were invisible. And it doth not alter the Cas in respect of truth, that Christs witnesses were mean, weak, and few, Christ was among them, 1 Cor. 14.11, 12, 13.2 Cor. 4.8. 9, 10, 11. and 13.4 vid. Mr. Cade, lib. 2. page 181. &c. What unreasonable prating do the Locusts use, (the foolish woman is clamorous Prov. 9.) that we must shew a visible glorious company, prosessing the Gospel in all ages, when the Spirit forewarned of perillous times, and of aposta∣sie from the faith:and evermore they that spake or did any thing to que∣stion Popish Doctrines, or their usurped power were killed, &c. Question 2. and Answer, No man might buy or sell.] Apoclyps 11. and 12. and 13. and 14. chapters, set forth their cruelties, the just is an abomination to the wicked, & contra, a Proverbof expe∣rience from the first and last Counsells. It is more dangerous to speak against, and withstand their decrees and decretalls, than the com∣mandements of God, a speech of the good and noble Lord Cobbam, is worthy of place, loe good people loe, for the breaking of Gods Law, and his great commandements, they never yet cursed me, but for their wn Laws and traditions, most cruelly do they handle me and other, men. Thus that good Noble man spake to the people with a loud voice
of those bloudy stinging Scorpions, the Bishop of Canterbury and other Locusts. Babylonian Lucifers that exalted themselves against the King∣dome of Christ, and the Laws of the Land, Acts and Monuments 731. of the last Edition. Whores that break wedlock are cruell, Ezek. 16. and 23. Sicut Patres vestrietiam vs, Acts 7.51. How are mens inventions yet pressed in these dayes of the Gospel (1636.) But for Gods Comman∣dements how slighted. Experience, the Saints of God, both godly ministers, and people have of this continually. Ibid. worship the image of the beasts imperiall State.] The imperiall State of the Pontificality was a glorious image, that all the world won∣dered and worshipped, but John and all gracious know that that State is a Beast, and is going into the lake of fire. Quest 3. and Answ. In subscribing, &c.] All had, must have communi∣on with the Beast in one manner or other. Gods marked hated the Beasts mark, and the Beasts marked hated Gods mark. Ibid. Revecnce to the Crosse.] So do the Bishops in their Canons, that in the sign of the Crosse in Baptisme, the child is dedicated thereby to him that died on the Grosse, Can. 30. And many of our people, that will not be Papists, yet are very superstitious, and defend themselves by the Crosse in Baptisme, Mat. 18.7. Luc. 17.1. That is a sad speech which Christ saith, Cursed is he that maketh the blind to go out of their way, and let all the people say, Amen, Deut. 27. Ibid. Of the 3. Quest. and Answ. Forbidding and refraining from read∣ing and teaching the holy Scriptures.] It is great wickednesse, that any should forbid any of the simplest to read the holy Bible, or any godly learned, requested by a company not to expound it, as in the Primitive Churches, this order for every man able and faithfull to utter his gift continued to the time of Theodoret, yea long after, Theod. upon 1 Cor. 14. See what the Spirit faith by the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 4.10.2 Tim. 2.2. But Gregory the ninth, a Pope of Rome prohibited, that no Lay-man should preach, of whatsoever degree he was. Quest. 4. and Answ. He had the voice and speech.] Laws be the Speech of a polity, so that many have fitly compared the new Religion, of the Pontificality with old Romes, because it is so stuffed with old hea∣thenish Customes, after the Theologie (rather the Popologie) of Vir∣gil and Ovid, &c. Adde hereunto the Popes decretalls over-ruling States, are wicked commonly, and the more they be, being urged by men un∣lawfull. Ibid. Keeping of the commandements of God, and the faith of Jesus] Blessed is he that watcheth against cunning craftinesse and deceit, that he may keep his garment close to him. Apoc. 16.15. Christ hath made us Kings and Priests, and then we must bear holinesse in cur hearts and forcheads. And let the just hold on his way, and let the clean in hands increase in courage, Job 17.9. Apoc. 21.11. Truth is better than our lives or States: be independent, and God will be with the good; for whoso∣ever
saith the Lord shall be ashamed of me and of my words among this adulterous and sinfull generation, [that is, that doth adulterate the faith by hereticall Doctrines and mens Precepts and traditions] of him shall the Son of man be ashamed also, when he shall come in his own glory, and the Fathers, and the holy angels, Mak 8. Luc. 9. Here note, how the Corporation of the seed of the Serpent, esteemeth Christ and his servants, and the holy Doctrine, anathema. And contrarily the Corporation of the holy seed, esteem the Serpent and his seed, and their commadements and inventions, anathema, maranatha. This hath been the deadly feud and enmity and war from the beginning, ever since Kain flew Habel. This is the fire, sword, and division that Christ hath sent on the earth, Gen. 3.15 Mat. 10. Luc. 12. This must be constantly observed for Kingdomes, towns, and families, and persons. Qu. 5. and Answ. The King of mount Sion appeared with 144000.] Observe the allusion in the term Mount Sion, which sheweth, all that follow the Lamb under the new Testament, harp the same song of holy faith, as the faithfull of Mount Sion of old, Apoc. 14. answerable to this the A∣postle sweetly protesteth, Acts 26.6, 7. and all the Epistle to the He∣brews sheweth this most evidently. Likewise any part of the old Te∣stament, cited or paraphrased, or any way expressed by our Lord and his apostles, proveth that cursed Popery should be accursed, that objecteth. novelty to our most holy faith, and this well considered will strengthen the godly Student, against the Anabaptist and Antinomian, &c. In Apocal. chap. 7. there were 144000. that the first Beast warred a∣gainst: and in chap. 14. the same number (that held the faith of the Patriarchs and Apostles) The second Beast warres against them. The tenth Century Satan was let loose to deceive, and then the Churches were in a dead State from a Church-life, but now the Churches begin to recover life, to live again is, as it were, a Resurrection, as the Jews in the return from Babel, Ezek. 37. Apoc. 20. Ibid. And all that fear God, both small and great gave thinks.] None but one made gracious, as Iohn can see the holy Ierusalem, and sing praise, Ezek. 43.11. Worldly look to worldly pomp, and every man as he bears a person Christian, will praise the Lord God for his salvations from the idolatry, heresie, strange language, and tyranny of the man of sinne, of Rome-Egypt, Psal. 98.1, 2, 3. Psal 114. Oh the searfull judge∣ment of Christ giving the world over to slavery and befottednesse in for∣mer times: Rejoice over her thou heaven, and ye holy Apostles, and Prophets, for God hath avenged ye on her, read attentively, Psal. 81. and in all this book of the Apocalips compare old things with new. Quest. 6. And chiefty through this Abaddon.] States miss much the mark that think to overthrow the Kingdome of Abaddon, if liberties, and not the quarrell of the Gospel be not syncerely intended. Let the King of Swedens doings advise them; And consider Zac. 4.6. chiefly so must the Temple be built, and Fathers and Councels, Doctors, and School men,
are not the sword of Christs mouth, much lesse a dumb, base, idle, and proud ministery: those and these humane helps we have used long e∣nough. Ibid. Shall be perishing to the end.] As those four beasts Day perished by the time of our Lords first coming, so the Romane Beast made of those four shall by his second. A greater curse cannot be to terrisie us in partaking with them. For what State will seek to uphold the Kingdome of the Beast, King Abaddon must sink with it, as a great milstone that Christ casteth into the sea, and let each State whose Kingdome is the Lords, and his Christs, take heed how they tamper in leagues and Trea∣ties with any of the horns, that yet uphold and give their power to the Beast, and mark events. Christ hath and will preserve his Common-Weals that rule for him, that in truth defend his faith, as D. Cariton in his thankfull remembrance hath evidenced to our ingratefull and forget∣full Nation. Will we not yet mind that theam of theirs, nulla fides observanda baereticis: yea it is more than a theam; it is one of their Papall Laws, a Canon in the Couneel of Constance, Sess. 19. Will not we believe a man to be bald till we see his brains, vide Cade Justif. lib. 2. 80, 81. &c. and the apdendix: Ques salvos suscita, ques destruit demen∣tet. Just with God that they that will not know his holy faith, should not know reason. The children of Noph, and Tahpanbes have broken thine head (contrary to Gen. 3.15.) Jer. 2. Isa. 9.13. and 30.4. The har∣lot Aholibah doted on the Egyptian and Babylonian worships, which were her ruine: they sent for the brave Gallants of Babel clothed in∣red attire, a type of Scarlet Cardinals of mysticall Babylon, Ezek. 23, 14, 15. Hos. 9.2. and 10.6. &c. &c. Dear Queen Elizabeth would not suffer Jerolamus Martinengo to come over into England for any Treaty, Hist Council of Trent 440. but now Treaties, and Locusts are either sent for or suffered to swarm. Alasse what means it? that an ambasadour should be sent to the seven Mountain, City, of mysticall Babylon. What have we to do to drink the waters of Tyber, Jer. 2.18. (1636) Ezek. 23.16. in King Edwards dayes the State sent for P. Martyr, and Martin Buer, and for many years countenanced men of their Spirit, but now &c. The syncerity of the Gospel is the sure Basis of all prosperity to a State: and notwithstanding all this, Elias, and Elisha, and Samel, &c. will be the Chariots of Israel and the horsemen thereof. False Religion and oppression is the earthquake of a State, as Mr. Cade most affectionately sheweth in the Appendix. Quest. 7. and Answ. That gave their power to the beast.] The Kings that did traffick with the Pope continually for his confirmation, they felt Christs anger for it, for he would have them know, that by him Kings reign, that all power in heaven and earth is his, that the most high ru∣leth over the Kingdomes of men; as the proud King of old Babel, who was made a beast, did confesse to warn the Beast of mysticall Babylon, of his blasphemous arrogancy, Prev. 8. Mat, 28.18. Dan. 4. Rom. 1.1. i.e.
Kingdomes that will not stick to Gods covenant shall find this Scripture made good on them, 2 Chron. 12.8. Ibid. The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.] The Lamb shall over∣come and revenge the blood of his servants, Apoc. 19. Five beads were fallen for Gods peoples sake, when John wrote, and the sixth head was wounded to death for persecuting the faith, so shall the seventh Head feel the curse of the living God Ibid. That will judge the great Whore.] God shall judge them and his Prophets, and their enemies shall judge them, and the righteous men shall judge them after the manner of adulteresses, and blood is in their hands, Ezek. 16.38. and 23.45. Ibid. That hold of every foul spirit.] Whom do these foul spirits, con∣science-cauterised hypocrites seduce? on whom do these Vultures, kites, and ravens seise on? surely on none but those men and women, that have sore and itching ears, and cannot abide sound Teaching, and have no love to the truth, and laden with sins, and led away with divers lusts, lusts of the eyes, of flesh, and pride of life, 1 Tim, 6.10 2 Tim. 3, 6, 7. and 4. and 3, 4.1 John 2.16. Apoc. 18.2 This verse of Apoc. 18.2. may be an allusion to Isa. 13.21.22. as old Babylon was troubled, Zim, Jim, and Ohim, so mysticall Babylonians in our Land, in these dayes of darknesse have been troubled with spirits, and hobgoblins, and night-terrours, &c. But blessed be the father of mercies, the God of all consolation for the Gospel of his Son, which hath scattered these evils from us. Ibid. For he sitteth as on a white cloud, with a sicle in his hand, and on a white hose.] Let the Saints remember with joy how Christ the King rode on a cloud, in bringing Israel out of old Egypt, so now in bringing us his Isael out of Rome Egyt, Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O most mighty, Psal. 45. in Apoc. 6.2. Christ rode as on a white horse in his in∣struments the angels invisibly, men visibly against the Casars, till he had wounded to death that head of the Romane State: so now against the reviver of the wounded head, he rode on a white horse, Apocal. 19.11. as against old Egypt. Hab 3.8. Jehovah shall reign for ever, and e∣ver. Moses and all faithfull so sing, Exod. 15. Apoc. 15. At the figure of the † The holy spirit alludeth to the stories of the old ene∣mies.] Apocalyps 18. &c. sheweth the great fall of mysticall Babylon from old stories (Oh that our brethren would be conversant in the holy Scriptures) the Romane polity killing men for the Prophets and Apo∣stles Doctrine, is as guilty as if it had killed them and all holy in the same faith. All the righteous blood shed from Habel the righteous to this day shall be required of them, and it should admonish our Nobles, Gentry, ministery and Commonalty, to take heed how they comply with that bloody, whorish Church, lest they acquire the guiltinesse of its massacres, treasons, Gun-powder plot, &c. consider Job 9.4. to help the Reader to compare the Apcalyps with old stories, somewhat I will mention for these present expressions.
The old world, Gen. 6.11, 12, 13. corrupted the earth by apostasie, and God would corrupt, that is destroy it, so the Lord will corrupt the policy of the man of Sin, Apoc. 11.18. God plagued Sodom. Gen. 19. Rome is called Sodom, and God will destroy it, Apoc. 11.8. We know how God plagued Egypt. Rome is called Egypt, Apoc. 11.8. and many of the plagues of Egypt are and shall be on Rome-Egypt, Apoc. 16. Sicho the King of the Amorites would not suffer Israel to buy and sell bread nor drink: so the Popish policy. Apoc. 13.16. but God destroyed the one, and will the other, Edom Isa. 63. with Apocal. 19.15. Tyrus, Ezek. 27. 30, 31, 32. with Apoc. 18.15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Niniveb, 3, 4, 17. Apoc. 17.4. and for Ninivebs Locusts, Apoc. 9. Apostate Jerusalem, Jeremiah 25.10. Apoc. 18; 22; 23. Of the four beasts in Dan. 7. spoken of afore, in applying them to the Romane beast. All the Apocalyps, almost every Sentence is taken from the Prophets, expressing old rerms for new States, and places, and times, but that would be too long a work here to describe, it is done other where. Quest. 8. and Answ. The same Kingdomes that gave their power.] A man even bymans wit, might marvell why Princes would suffer such a deceiver, as Apolluon to stand one year, his Doctrine being against all light of the blessed Scriptures, & each Prince being able to cast him from his Territories. Gods wayes are unsearchable. God hath chosen a few onely, and none can come to Christ, unlesse the heavenly Father draw him, but the things revealed belong to us and our children. Ibid. They shall embrace the Gospel.] The holy City shall be yet more glorious. The streets of the City are pure gold, as clear as glasse, then shall the Saints walk chearfully, when Gods commandements and the faith of Christ are purged from the filthy scum of mans inventions. Our Lord Christ, the Teacher appointed of the Father, and his apo∣stles in their Doctrine were like Refiners fire and fullers sope to the Rabbies of traditlons and bodily exercise, Mat. 5. and 6. and 7. and 156 and 23. but they were not able to abide it, but as Cain, persecuted with intestine hatred: so Christ in his martyrs, and his angels in the Refor∣med Churches, hath been and will be as refiners fire and fullers sope to the King of Locusts, and his Locusts Doctrine, he will purge his floor of the fulsome stuffe, and the chaffe of the decitfull hypocrites. Ibid. And verily, as that whorish polity hath been.] As Israel in Egypt under Pharaoh, so the cause of the Gospel seemed unrecoverable under the Egyptiacall Kingdome of the Man of Sin, but the sayings of God are true; he is Jehovah, performer of promise, as Israel felt for old E∣gypt, Exod. 6.3. so we have felt for Rome-Egypt, and as we have seen the loving kindnesse of God, so shall others, Rome-Egypt, shall be more and more desolate. Que. 9. and answ. With his Locusts, is the faise Pro phet.] The Pon∣tificality is a Beast of Empire in its power, and it with its Clergy is the false Prophet, a Corporoation speech, false Prophet; that is the body of false Prophets.
Ibid. Cast alive as sodomites.] The common-weal of King Abaddon is called Sodome, and his Catholick company and Church faith of her self, she is a Queen, Apoc. 18. yet she is but the Queen of Sodome and Babylon: all the Kings and Princes that are of that polity, let them fear the punishment of Sodome, unlesse they repent, and make their common-weals our Lords and his Christs. Quest. 10. and answ. Without rest day and night.] God gave men over, that loved not the truth, to believe lies, that they might be damned. Terrour, it is said without Rest, and then what lies and witcherafts do they teach and believe, of Masses, Trentalls, Requiems, Dirges, Libera me's, &c. No rest to them that follow the Beast. Ibid. To use no garments] Their Cannons and prayers, and apparrell, are all bent to a blind drift, and not fittest to have been used in our tongue, the whole frame is out of order, Mr. Bro. in Apoc. 94. and 156. Quest. 11. and answ. But sentence is not so passed, &c.] We judge well of many of our forefathers, that they are Saints in heaven, for they made divers good Laws against Devilish Popery, and were still com∣plaining of Popish enormities, and many in their last Wills, would not bequeath any thing to maintain Popish Masses, &c. &c. and in their judgement and affection were much against Popery, and did come very far out of that polity, yet through fear went under the name of Papists, and the number of his name, and durst not, through the diligent tyranny of the Scorpion-Locusts, openly confesse the truth, as there are now such in Spain and Italy &c. that hate Popery, yet go under the name of the Beast, and the God that multiplieth to pardon, the God of all mercies, no doubt did, and doth passe by the weaknesse of his servants in those dayes and places of darknesse, but that is no comfort to Papists that are in Reformed Churches, for they in obstinacy still worship the Image of the Beast, and have his mark, both in hand and forehead Ibid. Come out of her my people.] They must not be of worldly glori∣ous, mysticall Babylons part that will condemn her, but absolute free from her. We must be as in a wildernesse, as Israel from Egypt, and as on an high mountain in the Spirit, as John and Ezekiel afore Christ will shew us the glory of his own ordinances, and the great Whore, and her a∣bominations, and till we be ashamed of all the wickednesse that we have received from the man of sin, we cannot so clearly see the form and fa∣shion of heavenly things, Ezek 43.10, 11. Forty nine thousand were perswaded to leave old Babylon, in hope of Christ his first coming, so they that hope of comfort at Christ his second coming, must come out of all mysticall Babylons polity, R. R. B. Jewell and other Worthies of Christ in our State, Def. Apol. chap. 22. Divis. 1. But in departing from the Papa∣cy. Godly Teachers must not think of a new Constitution of Churches, but of Reformation, part off all additions from the holy Scriptures, from offices in the Church, and officers, seals and censures, and the
open profane from seals, and the Primitiye apostolick purity will appear, if we otherwise do, we shall not avoid the ungodlinesse of Anabap∣tistrie, and other pratlers that do dischurch Churches and Members. Ibid. O thrice blessed.] The Lord JESUS faith, Blessed is he that read∣eth, and they that hear the words of this Prophcie (of the Apocalyps) and keep those things which are written therein, Apoc. 1. and 22.7. Again, Blessed are they that do his commandements, that they may have ight to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the City, Apoc. 22. 14 Mark the phrase, Blessed are they that do his commandements, what is this? a covenant of works, is not this the same language of Levit. 26. and Deut. 28 and 30 vain talkers must vent their Mateologisme? Quest. 12. and answer, That know not God, &c.] Many will not be Pa∣pists, and yet are ignorant (and love to be so) superstitious, ungodly, and unrighteous in all their life, they hated knowledge and did not choose the fear of the Lord, and such shall eat the smit of their own wayes, Prov. 1. and 5.12 Answer, without shall be dogs.] Without, the Lord Jsus Christ in his holy ordinances coth make a marvellous separation of the precious from the vile, but at that day shall be the perfection, Psam 1. Mat. 25. Also note all these sorts of sinners are not to be understood as commonly men appre∣hend them, but they stand in opposition to the peace, quietnesse, holinesse, zeal, purity of worships, truth, grace, and glory of the heavenly Jerusalem.—Shall be dogs.] The Concision were dogs and murderers, Psalm 22 Phil. 3. and cast our, Gal 4. they resisted the building of new Ieru∣salem, maintaining bodily exercise (opus operatum) their idol and vani∣ty: this made their house and habitation desolate to this day. And is not this written for our admonition. Those mine enemies which would not that I should reign over them, bring hither and slay them be∣fore me. Luc 19. 2 Thos. 1.9. as it was observed at the beginning that CHRIST his Doctrine, and servants were held anathema of the god∣lesse, so it will ever be. Ibid. And sorcerers.] Or poisening Sorcerers, read Thankfull Remem∣brance, page 193. Aias translates venefiei, Apoc. 22.15. It is thought the Jesuites are such creatures, the book of their State mysteries menti∣oned doth imply such things, it must be taken also spiritually, bewitch∣ing people by feined words, &c. to make them believe false Doctrine, Gl. 3.1. All this the Locusts must do, for we are sure that the holy Lord God doth not answer them by dreams, nor by Ʋrim, nor by Pro∣phets: so that the next course is to go to Eudor, they know who will there readily attend them, 1 Sam. 28.6. Ibid.—And the fearfull.] And I say unto you my friends, Be not asraid, of them that kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do, Luk. 12. I, I, a he that comforteth you. Who art thou, that thou should∣est be afraid of a man that shall die, and the Son of man who shall be made as grasse, and forgettest Ibovah, the eternall being, thy maker,
that hath stretched out the heavens, and laid the foundation of the earth in the waters, Isa. 51. If Gods word bear Supremacy in our hearts, and faith evidence to us things not seen, we shall as men of another spirit and independent as those three noble martyrs and Confessors, Dan. 3. and as Daniel himself, chap. 6. as Moses Heb. 11. as Calch and Iosua, &c. &c. Quest. 13. and Answ. — Saying, Write.] Observe still the bless comforts of the written word, and mark the command Write, Apoc. 14.13. Psal. 103.18. Ibid. —For they rest from their labours.] Let him that hath an ear to hear, let him hear what the spirit saith to the Churches. Those that keep the commandements of God and the faith of Jesus, Write it, they shall have rest. They shall have Rest that follow the true Lambs Re∣ligion, let liars and cursed dogs bark never so much to the contra∣ry. let all that bear the name of Christian, hate and accurse the fa∣bles of the heathenish Papacy of Purgatoty, that men walk when they are dead, and their vain Doctrine of prayer for the dead, and their anniversaries, and other ceremonies and superstitions number∣lsse, as the Christian Disputations of Mr. Viret shew. O ye all that are Gods Iesurum, the Israel of God, study the blessed Scriptures, your inheritance, cursed, smokie Poperie, and all deceitfull vain Doctrines will flee before the glorious light of the word, Amen, Amen. A Postsrcipt BƲl ye Beloved, Remember the words which were spoken before of the Apostles of our LORD IESUS CHRIST, 2 Pet. 3.2. and Iudas Thad∣daeus verse 17.1 Iohn 4.6. &c. &c. The holy spirit seeing and foreseeing that false Teachers were and con∣tinually would arise after the apostles times with fair speeches, flatte∣ring and feigned words, philosophy, a shew of wisdome, cogging and vain deceir, spurious Epistles, feigned revelations of the spiri, and hocriticall lies and slanders, and by bringing in fables, superstitious, voluntary humility, will-worship, mens Precepts, Decrees, Doctrines of Devils, perverse things, damnable heresies, and rejection of Magi∣stracy, to cause divisions and offences to beguile men, and to carry them for a spoil from the plainnesse and simplicity of the Apostles Do∣ctrine,
and these evils were pursued by all deceit and violene of flesh and blood, being driven on by the fury of spirtuall wickednesses, principalities and powers, the rulers of the darknesse of this world, that did war against the Church about super-celestiall things: therefore this warning and many others were given to regard the Prophets and Apo∣stles Doctrine. Thus the Holy Ghost did as is noted in the conclusion of the old Testament, referre them that feared God to the Law of lively oracles, given by the inspiration of the SON OF GOD, the angel of the Covenant, and by the ministery of Moses at Horeb, Mal 4. Thus Christ was taught to day, and so shall till the time of his coming, 2 Cor. 11.26. Heb. 13.8. The Caesars persecuted the faithfull for The word of God and the Testimonie of JESUS. Apoc. 6.9. ch. 1.9. Keeping of the commande∣ments of God, and holding the testimony of JESUS. Christ, Apoc. 12.17. The Popes persecured the faithfull for Keeping of the Commandements of God and the faith of Iesus, Apoc. 14.12. The Testimony of JESUS, and for the word of God, Apoc. chap. 20.4.
THE THIRD PART. CHAP. XVIII. Of the seven Trumpets in Apocalyps 8, 9, 10, & 11. chapters: In which the Popes Rising to his Antichristian Hierarchy is first de∣scribed, compared with the seaven Phials in chap. 16. under which the Antichristian Hierarchy doth fall, and is consumed by degrees. THE Seaven seals destroyed the Roman Empire, and the seven Trumpets do forbid that Rome being over∣thrown (as Jericho) should be built again, and as Hiel endeavoured to re-edify Jericho, contrary to Gods will, for which act God in Justice took away his eldest and youngest son. So Princes that joined with the Pope to hate the Greek Empire, that they might se up Rome, for which act the Lord in justice made it the means of their wo and great misery. The comparison of the Phrases for the Trumpets in Ap. 89, 10, & 11. chapters, with chap. 16. for the Phials is diligently to be marked for the understanding of the true scope of the Apocalyps. The Phases con∣cerning
the Plagues; for the ruine of the Papacy in the Phialls are won∣derfully fitted to the former Phrases in the Trumpets, by which the Popes rising was first described. SECT. 1. The first Trumpet, and first Phiall.. UNder the first Trumpet, Satan endeavouring to advance his project, The Mystery of Iniquity, then the Earth had haile and fire mixed with bloud cast into it: which metaphoricaly importeth stormy, fiery, and bloudy contentions, which Church-men were full of, from Constantines times, about Pority nd JESUS Christ his alone mediation wa neg∣lected, this made the profession of christianity to be full of Hypocrisie, and ful of coldnesse in the pure worships among people, & thereby love to the truth waxing cold, the people began to be given over unto fables, &c. for when B.B.Unlearned Schollars tur∣ned all to am∣bition and heresie to po∣liticians to propsenenesse. strove for superiority, then Monachi fel to idlenesse, and to extol Saints and Angels, &c, and to hate painfull and orthodox Schollers, as Athanasius, Chrisoslome, Basil, &c. In like sort from the first Phiall) most greivous Ulcers and Boyles of State are powred upon the Popish Earth: The plague of old Egypt is up∣on the mindes of Papists, his Jannes'es and his Jambres'es, namely on their seduced ones that resisteth the truth, after the LAMBS appearing on Mount Sion, with his 144000 attending on him, in the fourteenth Century, but more in the fifteenth. SECT. 2. The second Trumpet and second Phiall. UNder the second Trumpet, the Mystery of Iniquity still increasing to∣wards the sixth Centry, Ecclesiasticks never ceased affecting supe∣riority, and the spirituall supremacy (one of the greatest Heresies) that they became a Mountaine (but not as yet come to his full growth) of fire cast into the Sea of Nations: burning and throwing out sulphurious and bloudy matter of contention, by heresies, errors, Ceremonies, &c. every where, so that true Religion was burned up greatly, both in Ma∣gistrates and men of place, and in ordinary Christians, and in Teach∣ers compared to ships. This was a further degree of misery to the Church, (more then the first Trumpet warned) to the quickning of the Beast. In like sort, under the scond Phiall, the Sea of Nations, namely the most potent Kingdome of King Abaddon hath been and is within it self, full of bloody commotions, through diverse factions, and sharp contentions, which came out of the Phiall of Gods anger, to consume the bowels of that viperous Hierarchy: and holy Martyrs discovered that the whole Sea of Ordinances of their Religion, was of no more soul nourishment, then the putrified blood of the dead, so that all be∣came
his marked, were like the dead Sea Asphaltes, being full of hypocri∣sie, trusting in bodily exercise, idolatry, sorceries, idlenesse, murthers, pride, covetousnesse, filthy lusts, &c. This also was a great plague to the King of Locusts, and to his Locusts.The conscio∣nable study of the holy Text, from the He∣brew and Greek Testa∣ments was much neglect∣ed by flothfull contempt, and onely transla∣tions from translations were used with us, bred uncertainty, and it bred disdain, and it bred blind∣nesse, and it bred con∣tempt of Christ, and at last it bred re∣jection to Machomed, and to the man of sin. Locusts went from all pro∣fessions, as Franciscans, Dominicans, Carmelities, Priests, Le∣vites, &c. SECT. 3. The third Trumpet and third Phial. 3. UNder the third Trumpet, a great star fell from the heaven of the Church, which denoteth an apostasie of many learned men, and they became wormwood, and each one to strengthen his Faction, made bitter by false and bad expositions, the sweet fountains and waters of holy Scripture, so that a third part of their Church became dead in all abominations, and through much addition of heathenish Customes. They instead of being comfortable and clear lights, were but stinking torch lights, and full of contentions, which caused much innocent blood to be shed. This did further help on to the three Woes of great misery, that were yet to come on the world. So in like sort, the third Phial pours out wrath upon the Papal foun∣tains and and Rivers, their canons, decretalls, cathedrall Expositions, Monastick studies, all their divine Services, as they called them, &c. Also their feigned reliques, Papal dispensations, Papal indulgences, hal∣lowed amulets, holy Shrines, &c. &c. all which were rivers from their Sea, to conveigh and transport maintenance and glory to their glorious Monarchy of the King of Locusts, King Abaddon. All these things by this Phial were made known to be but rotten dotages, lying sables, This bred effusion of much blood in all countries from their Princes, Shipmen, and their people; which also in all occasions, as rivers and fountains did shew their Subsidious relation to the great Pontifician Sea, by all endeavours, but especially, in that their Princes were then Car∣nifices, the executioners of the Papal Breves and determinations, &c. against the Saints, and Prophets. Now these from the just judgement of God do drink blood, measure for measure, by the Princes Teachers, and people that fall from the Papacy, God is unchangeable in his ju∣stice on the Cains of the earth, from the blood of Abel the righteous to this day, as he was, so he is, and will be still the same. Our native countrey chiefly did pour out this phiall in wickliffes dayes, bur more in K. H 8. and K.E. 6. and Q.E. and K.J. And Luther and o¦thers did it in Germany. SECT. 4. The fourth Trumpet, and fourth Phial. 4. UNder the fourth Trumpet, the apostate churches not being warn∣ed by the three former Trumpets, the fourth sounded a further
degree of apostasie, that sad and dark evils of most grievous blinde∣nesse and ignorance should be in the Church (yet in these times, Christ that restrains apostasie, had his two Witnesses) that a third part of Sun, Moon, and Stars, were smitten with the day and the night. Jacob expoundeth Sun, Moon, and Stars to be his Church: Learned men and Scholars greatly fell away, that the Mountain of fire came to a further greatnesse, and more burned in the world. In like sort (under the fourth Phial) a great part of Apolluons Sunglorious universality (and by Synechdoche, all his inferiour glories) is smitten by the godly Witnesses: as Elias smote Achab Kingdom, that brought it into a desperate burning feaver: and as men so affected speak strange things; so the Pseudo-Catholicks be in a great boiling heat, torment and vexation, because as it is seen in all Countreys, more or less cast off Popery. So that whereas they should have repented and glorified God for his inestimable mercy of the everlasting Gospel, they fret as Moab and Balaam, and utter great blasphemies. SECT. 5. Of the fifth Trumpet, and sist Wo, and fifth Phial. 5. IN the fifth Trumpet is shewed that the Beast Abyssigea, when he with his Locusts crept out of the Pit of deep darknesse, they conjured up with them a smoke of all former errours and heresies and heathenish customes that Christ the Son of Justice, his Throne and Kingdome, and his blessed Law (the air by which we see him) were darkned. And also he with his Locusts set up a pompous throne exer∣cising universal Supremacy in temporal and spiritual things like old Babel. And so as old Babel is calld a destroying Mountain: so now Abad∣don of mystical Babylon became a Mountain of fire of most grievous ca∣lamities to all Christendome: What an incendiary was he. 1. Against Constantines Kingdome in exciting the Turk to invade it. 2. In the Wars for the Low Jerusalem after the Tenth Century. 3. By intestine Garboyls among themselves still to uphold Popish interests. 4. By cruel dealing against any that contested their enormities: as will be said more in the sixt Trumpet. The name of the King and Beast of the Pit is Abaddon and Apolluon a destroying and beast-like Prince. As his Name is, so is he. And his Locusts are filled with his spirit of all deceit, hypocrisie, and cruelty. See more of this in them, and their King in their Dialogue. The Pontificality or Corporation of Popes whose Kingdome was so glorious, and whose Throne so radiant that all the world wondered
(Apoc. 13.3, 4.) at the beams thereof; and thence he like the Sun did rule the day of that State, (so that his Creatures and Parasites say, he is as the Sun) And from this throne he sent his Decretals, and the power of his counsels, and the fulminations of his excommunications &c. into all his Kingdome to the terrour and amazement of all opposers (our native Countrey is a sufficient commentary of this) A very Levi∣athan, Iob 41. A Dragon as Pharoah of old in his Waters, Ezek. 29. and acted by the old Red Dracon. This is the first Wo. In like sort in the Phials that glorious earthly Throne, Kingdome and Supremacy is made vile and much darkned, for more godly Teachers in pouring out the fifth Phial, have polluted the Pride of all the glory of that mystical Tyrian god, and brought into Contempt, in some places, all the honourable of that earthly State.Ezek. 28.2 6, 7, 8, 9. Christ the mighty Angel roared like a Lion in his faithful wit∣nesses. Apoc. 10.3. & 19.14. They discovered Abaddons and his Locusts hidden abominations and blasphemous impieties that some well-minded and couragious Princes have taken from him his u∣suped authoritie: and yet in spirituals they have, and do still tamper with him in temporals, as Venice and others, and now his Throne is much ecclypsed, that it shines not in many places, his mandates are sligh∣ted, his excommunications are of no terrour, &c. And now the King of Locusts in some kingdomes is experimentally known to be Apolluon, an apostate Star, the grand impostor of Christendome: the man of sin that made all the World to sin. He and his Locusts got land by begging for monasteries and got o∣ther unclean cages, for unclean birds of every wing: Locusts of all professions, by these he had a great Kingdome, and his Throne of Go∣vernment was set up in every nation: all which together made his great Polis, or large Common-weal. So that now under the fifth Phial, the Throne and kingdome of the Beast is darkned by contempt and pillane of land in some of the king∣domes that had given their power to the Beast: and all the other king∣domes will do the same; as England hath done of late in the extirpa∣tion of the Tail of that episcopal Hierarchy. But yet in all this mercy of glorious light and reformation, the Beasts marked, are transported with implacable ury and envy: for so it is said They gnawed their tongues for sorrow and blasphemed the God of hea∣ven, for their pains and sores (of State) and repented not of their works of their idolatry, murthers, sorceries, fornications, and thefts, &c. deifying the Pontificality and teaching his Decrees to be infalli∣ble. This is often laid to the charge of the Papalines, they repented not: like old Babel of whom it is said, We would have cured Babel, but she is not cured, Jer. 51. This argues great obduration of heart, like Pharoah like Iericho, like the Chantanites, &c. their state is com¦pared with and alluded to these old Enemies of the Gospel: Therefore they shall not repent till they be all destroyed, as the other were.
It is hard, yea impossible for men to repent which will not learn from the word of God how their case standeth; and they have so blasphemed the holy and blessed Scriptures, and corrupted them as far as in them lieth putting she for he to bring the virgin Mary into Christ his honour to destroy the Bible, and the world, G. 3.15. making Peter the Rock of the Church, &c. thus they have most reproachfully corrupted the blessed Seriptures, and cannot minde them in sincerity, because the Lord Jesus hath in his just judgement blinded their eyes, stopped their ears, hardened their heart for their utter confusion. SECT. VI 1. I think it will be pertinent to touch a little the tenth chapter of the Apocalyps (before I go to the sixth and seventh Trumpet) for it is most comfortable for the Church to observe it against the evils that came, and are yet upon the Church by the Beast of the Pit, and by the Turkish desolating forces under the fith, & sixth and seventh Trumpet, and under the first second, and third Wo, and under the fifth and sixth, and seventh Phials: yea all the Phials do expound this tenth chap∣ter. 2. This chapter sets forth a glorious description of the mighty An∣gel of the Covenant, the Lamb, the King of Mount Sion, that although king Abddon came out of Pit-darknesse with his Locusts to darken all knowledge of Christ, and his Word, yet here it is for the joy and com∣fort of all the godly that our mighty Redeemer is come from heaven, and is described full of glory. And this description of Christ is from Moses, Esaias, Daniel, Ezekiel, Mat 7. and Apoc. 1. 1. He is clothed with a cloud, and his feet as Pillars of fire: this re∣members the conduct of Israel from Egypt, to assure us of the same mercy of Redemption from Rome Egypt, what old Egypt found and felt Rome Eggpt shall feel the like. 2. The Rain bow rememreth Gen. 9. and Esay 54. Ezek. 1 that in all stormes, flouds and inundations of Pope Dracons Tyranny (Apoc. 12. & 13.) the Rainbow doth assure us that God will remember his co∣venant for his church: and that the Waters of trouble, the rod of the wicked shall not ever be upon the Lot of the righteous, Psalm 124. and 125. 3. His face is as the sun-shining in his strength, Dan 10. Mat. 17. Apoc. 1. his eyes in every place behold the evil and the good. Christ is greater than Moses, Moses face did shine, but not as the sun: For Christs glory darkned his (yet not his but Christ which he put on him) for when he came to Christ, he put off his vail. If we pursue the te∣nour
of the Law that Christ gave to Moses, our faces shall shine as M∣ses, through Christs brightnesse upon us, if we delight to study the holy Bible. And his face so shining, doth assure us that he will utterly dispell the Popish frogs, and that in the Lords due season the whole earth shall be filled with his glory, Apoc. 18. 4. One foor on the Sea, and another on the land, doth shew from Da 12. and Psalm 8. that the Lamb slain, though he once were the afflicted Son of sorrowful Enosh, yet that now he is lred above eve∣ryname, and that to him all power in heaven and in earth, was and is committed, and that he rules all by Sea and Land: and therefore little children and faithful evermore did,Apoc. 6. & 7. & 12. & 13 & 14. chap. and evermore shall say Ho∣sanna to him that now is in the highest heavens. The great Cry of Ho∣sanna destroyed the Caesars Empire, so it shall the Reviver of the Em∣pire, King Abaddon. 5. His voice is as the voice of a Lion when he roareth: he being the Lion of the Tribe of Judah: hath made all the Beasts of the Pit to tremble: and this teacheth what the Pope and Turk shall find: Christ with his called, chosen and faithful, full of courage in teaching the Gospel, shall take the prey and recover the spoil, and the King of the Pit, his Locusts and all his marked shall not be able to help themselves from his just judgements. 6. The seven thunders from him uttered their voices of secret un∣unspeakable wrath to the Enemies of the Church: which the Phials in chap. 16. declare abundantly: and the enemies shall not perceive it, but go on in hardness impenitency as Pharoah did, to their utter de∣struction. 7. Christ hath in his hand the little book of the Holy Scriptures al∣waies open for great consolation to the Church, from which the Holy Angels of the Churches, and other Witnesses do still prophesy to nati∣ons and Kings of their great Trespass in advancing the seven Mountain City. All Abaddons power and his Locusts could never shut this book, nor hinder prophesying. This our native Countrey shewed in the days of King Henry the eight and Queen Mary. and in times before See the story of the Saints Marbeck and Tindal, &c. &c. 8. All this is mannaged with an oath to comfort and stablish the hoirs of promise that the Lord Christ the only Potentate (1 Tim 6.) will put an end to all the troubles of the Church under the voice of the seventh Trumpet: and last Wo, and seventh Phial: 9. It is of necessary consequence to observe some circumstances a∣bout the sad times of the fifth and sixth Trumpets, because some say the Beast of the Pit, King Abaddon did utterly root out the church of Christ, and that no visible true church did appear when Anti-christ possessed all in outward shew. 10. But this is impossible: for the promise is that the gates of (Hades) death and destruction, should not so prevail, Matth. 16.8. and that
promise also is firm as a Rock, which saith, that Christ must reign till he make his enemies his footstool, 1 Cor. 15.25. Abaddon could not put he Son of God, the Rock and his cause so under his feet; for as i aid, Christ the great angel of the Covenant did ever shew that he uled as King in his Kingdome of mount Sion (Apoc. 14.) and had ever one foot on the Sea, and the other on the Land, and the fifth had sixth Trumpet, to rule all things both by Land and Sea, and that he had the little book of the holy Bible ever open in his hand, which he still put into the hearts of his witnesses to prophesie, though in sackeloth, and full of troubles, Apoc. 11. this book Christ still kept open in spight of all the new Antiochus devises. 11. Therefore let this teach us with strong assurance, that though the Papacy did so overspread, yet that Christ had here and there two wit∣nesses, some godly ones that held the fundamentall truths, when the Beast of the Pit had most darkned the surface of Christendome, and they are also called the two Olive branches, and the two Candle-sticks, which Christ made still to abide before him, that in every age his Saints might see the light of holy Doctrine. 2. This likewise is for great consolation to the Saints, that the Gospel of the Kingdome, as it hath, so it shall continue, notwithstanding all the opposition that hath been and shall be in the world against it, 3. Hence many are sharply to be reproved and rebuked, that think and utter blasphemies, that Christ did not reign, and that he had no witnesses under the Papacy, and that the Beast of the Pit had annihi∣lated the Church of God. And hence new upstarts, vain men that wait for new apostles, and new Rvelations, would dischurch the Refor∣med Churches, and dischurch members thereof, that have come (according to the commandement) out of mysticall Babylon. And in great wickdednesse they cast off Magistracy, and the ordinances of the publick ministery, and the care of Religion in family, &c. and so themselves become very antichrists, yea, some in new England, 1. Do abhor the baptising of the infants of godly parents. 2. Account our Con∣gregations antichristian. 3. Make no regard o sanctifie the Lords day. 4. Despise Magistacy. 5. Scorn our godly Teachers: the Lord grant that such as do openly professe this abomination, may never have a to∣leration among us, but if the Lord please to be gracious to them to en∣lighten their minds by the word of truth, then they will soon see how they are given to Satan, and lying spirits, 12. Remember that aposta∣sie from the faith was foretold, and that the brethren must be put in it, that they might be carefull to be nourished up in the words of faith, and in good Doctrine, such holy brethren ever were, and ever shall be, be∣cause God from the beginning hath elected such to salvation, through sanctification of the spirit, and the belief of the truth. 13. Can such a thought enter into our hearts, that the Man of sinne hath destroyed Christs kingdome utterly, that it should not have a being ever since the
apostles dayes. Let us mark what our Lord Jesus Christ hath said to his apostles, I have chosen you, and ordained you,Iohn 15.16. that ye should go forth among the Nation, and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain. Let us not therefore be deceived, that Antichrist hath ever been able to root out the Kingdome of Christ, although they killed some witnesses, yet still Christ raised others to prophesie, and the most holy faith is builded on Christ the rock, the polity of the heavenly Jeusalem is builded more sure, then that the seed of the Serpent should ever be able to pre∣vail so far, as to destroy it utterly: It is builded on the twelve found a∣tions of the faith of the holy Patriarks and apostles Doctrine, and this city is compassed with a wall of holy truth unvinible. And what hath shaken Abaddons Kingdome, but the prohesying of the two witnes∣ses, from the opened book, that is in Christ his hand. Thus much by way of Parenthesis to Apoc. 10. Now I will go on with the Trumpets and Phials. SECT. 7. The sixth Trumpet, and second wo, and sixth Pbia. 1. THe sixth Trumpet sheweth how Christ raised up the Turk from Eu∣phrates: they were four evil Angels or messengers of Christs wrath, before whom Christ roared as a Lion, so that nothing could hinder them: they are described in terrible manner to plague the idolatries of the apostate Churches, whom Christ sent to destroy the third part of men, who came westward, and wasted the Asia Churches, those wars were most fearfull and bitter, and because the seven Churches of Asia, and others fell from the faith, Christ therefore in his just judgement remo∣ved their candle-stick by the Turk, who brought lamentable crrours and profanenesse into Asia, and at last into Europe. But Rome was the cause of the fall and of weakning to all; for the Pontificality seeking to ad∣vance its Supremacy, did by all means weaken Constantines Empire, and the Popish Princes did assist the Papacy therein, for the Pontificality, and its frog locusts excited the Turk to war against the Greek Empire, and to overthrow new-Rome, or Constantina, but Princes to their sorrow and detriment, saw that it was unrecoverable to this day, and so will be till Princes cast off the Man of sin (that made them to sin) and receive Christ as their King and Law-giver. Here was great wo the churches of the East, and then it came to the West. 2. So in like sort, under the sixth Phial, the Turk getting the Greek Em∣pire, Christ maketh him to plague the Papacy (The kings of the East from Euphrates in the sixth Phial are the same people, and scourge of Christ, in the sixth Trumpet that are mentioned in the sixth Trumpet, Apocal. .) And we may well say, that the Lord Jesus Christ the onely poten∣tate made the Turk in some sense to be an Armageddon in part to the
Papy,When the Turks plague the Papacy, then the frogs croak up and down in Kings Courts, and so when the re formed Churches de∣parted from the man of sin (as the godly from Ieoboam, 2. Chron. 11.13 16.) and his policy, then frogs bestirred themselves in Kings courts, mark now in Apoc, 16. and the 13. verse is immediately inferred from the 12. verse. and to some Papal Princes that were excited to those wars by the frogs, as histories shew. But it must chifly be understood that when the Reformed Churches one after another departed from the Papacy, then the frogs that came out of the mouths of th Boast, and false Prophet, and the Dragon, did creep into Kings Courts, and stirred them to warre against the two witnesses, the two Candle-sticks, and two O. live-trees. But Christ made all the enemies projects and ende∣vours to be an Armageddon to themselves, as among the Waldenses and the Albigenses, &c. and in Bohemia, &c. The Beast hath and still rageth and warreth with the Saints in many places, as he can muster his forces. 3. But under the Phials Satan and the double power of Rome, although they stir up all their forces against the Reformed churches by their three froggy spirits, Devilish Emissaries, yet they do not fight more pro∣sperously than Jabin King of Canaan at Mageddon, to be cut in pieces. Then the great and onely Potentate, Christ Jesus the great angel, Apo. 10. shewed how he had one foot on the sea, and the other on the Land, and over-ruled war, and guile, deceit and violence, nor to passe bounds. Then the Rainbow in the cloud, and the feet as Pillars of fire were remembred and manifested. Then the Saints did sing the song of Mo∣ses and Deborah, to the praise of the angel of the covenant, Jehovah of hosts mighty in battel, and still we have cause to sing Hallelu-Jab for those and our deliverances, and other countries shall have such mer∣cies, and sing such praises. But the people of God must be carefull to watch and keep their gar∣ments, that when those frogs have croaked up any expedition against us, the Lord Christ may not behold the nakednesse of our unworthy walking ecclesiastically or civilly, lest he depart from us, when he seeth any fil∣thinesse in our camps. 4. Also under the sixth trumpet we must be carefull to observe that although the power of the Beast of the Pit hath been great and spread far and near (and it is yet great) yet there was the societie of holy people two witnesses, that did worship God as in his Temple, and still he hath looked to them, as to Israel of old from the Temple, ever mea∣suing them, and caring for them, but yet the King of Locusts and his Locusts, the seed of the Serpent shall do a deal of mischief, trampling the holy city, in all their large Polis, where ever they shall find such as are holy wor ippers, how then can the pratling Locusts say, where was your Church before Luther. 5. Though the Beast and his marked are strong in worldly power, yes the two Witnesses by their praying, prophesying, and martyrdome, were as great a vexation, and a torment of wo to the Papacy, as ever Elias and other Prophets, were to Achabs and Jezabels Kingdome by their prophecying, praying, and sufferings, yea martyrdome in the full intent and indeavour of Achab and Jezabel,
And the Martyrs are as Moses plaguing mystical Egypt with spiritual plagues, as with spiritual darkness, &c. And the two Witnesses by praying, prophecying, and suffrings brought great troubles to the Popish kingdom, not only by peoples falling from them many seeing the Pontificality an incendiary of all their troubles depart from it, and not only that, but in taking up armes in their de∣fence as in Bohemia and others to this day: yea, not only that, but by intestine troubles in the Papacy it self, the Princes thereof full of tu∣mults among themselves as was in Achabs kingdome, this wrought much good to the reformed in two things. 1. The enemies were so busied about their own interests that they could not so well minde how the reformed got strength. 2. When the Papal Princes were thus weakned, then the Protestants could stand upon their defence. And this also was a great torment to the Beasts Kingdome, that the two Prophets that were slain did stand upon their feet again (that is Christ raised up others of their spirit, as Elisha was raised up with the spirit of Elia. (that is gifts of Elias) rooted out of Achabs kingdome So the martyrs caused a great Earthquake of State in Star-Wormwoods kingdome to its fearful terrour amazement and overthrow in many pla∣ces, that a tenth part of that large Polis, or Common-Weal fell since the preaching of the everlasting Gospel. SECT. VIII. The seventh Trumpet, and third wo, and seventh Phial. UNder the seventh Trumpet, and third Wo is shewed the further Torment and Wo of the ungodly and profane kingdome of the Beast of the Pit after that the Martyrs had by prayer, prophecying and martyrdome called for fire to burn it. And under this seventh Trumpet it will in further events of things be more fully manifested to the great rage and anger of the King of Locusts, and to his Locusts, and to all his marked, when in Christs appointed season every nation, kinred, tongue, and people of the Papacy shall submit to the Everlasting Go∣spel, to fear God, and to give him glory, and to worship him that made the heaven and the earth, and the fountains of water: and upon this mysticall Babylon shall fall more and more by faithfull Angels, one after another (Apoc. 14.) But this will not be of Kingdomès together all at once, casting off baddons Kingdome, but it will be successive, one Coun∣try and Kingdome after another. 2. Now the seventh Phiall is much like the seventh Trumpet: one will explaine the other; But this we are diligently to observe, that in
the fifth Trumpet, it is mentioned that the Ayre is darkned, as well as the Sun, the Ayre is such a medium, that by it we see the light of the Sun, the blessed and holy Law of Christ, his lively Oracles, is the Ayre by which as the onely Instrument we see the Son of God. This Ayre was darkned by the cursed smoke of Heresies, from the pit of darknesse, blaspheming the purity of the Hebrew and Greeke Testaments, hindring by all possible meanes, Translations into our owne Languages, and for∣bidding the Study of the Scriptures, urging their unsound Translations, as authentick,Especial. Gen. 3.15. corrupting most Satanically, the holy Rolls not fearing an eternall Pillory: obtruding also idle and erroneous, and he∣reticall expositions, wicked Decretalls, golden Legens, Apocrypha Books, their Rosaries, Missals, Ladies Psalter, transcendently blasphe∣mous, Heathenish customes, &c. &c. By all which the Beasts marked knew, What and Who King Abaddon was: these declared him to them. By these they saw and beleived him to be their God, their most holy Father, that he had power to for∣give sin, and had power to send them into Purgatory, and to recall them, &c. &c. There was a kind of invisible spirituall power, that wnt from him to all his marked. How did they reverence him, and submit them∣selves to him in his Cardinals, Nuncioes, Preists, Jesuites, even all his Seminaries and Locusts of every kind. 3. Now the wrath of Christ in the seventh Phial, is powred on all this smoke, this pontifician Ayre, all these were dispelled by the light from Christs Throne set up in the reformed Churches; by the Angels that he sent, holy spirits invisibly his Christan servants visibly. They by learning Hebrew and Greek, and teaching in the Scholes of the Prophets: And by the helpe of the blessed Spirit of Christ, the great Rabboni, and Doctor of his Church, did by sound and learned Transla∣tions and Orthodox expositions, and by many excellent and worthy en∣deavours, both by teaching and writing (the Enemy being Judges) and by the practise of noble Arts and Sciences, especially Printing, and by couragious Parliaments in the dayes of King Hen. the eighth, and King Ed. the sixth, and Queen El. and King James, and King Charles, and by Diets in Germany, &c. make such Voices, Thundrings, and Lightnings in the Popish Ayre,Yea the Lord Jesus hath so ordered in his providence that some learned in the Popish King∣dome have been a means to overthrow i as Aias Mont. that it did dispell the foggs and smoke that Apolluou and his Locusts had formerly raised: and as the Angel-Jehovah, at the giving of the Law of his Gospell, did by his voice with Thunder and Earth quake dispell the Idolatry of old Egypt from his Israel, so now a∣gainst Rome-Egypt, he did thunder and send forth lightning by zealous Luther, Tuelancton, and diverse Martyrs in Germany, &c. and by pain∣full Tindall, &c. and by Martyrs in England, Germaney, France, Scotland, &c. And after this by faithfull prophesying, and Orthodox writings of many worthies of the Lord in England, Scotland, Geneva, &c. but yet something is still to be reformed for the be-smoked Ayre is not ful∣ly cleared amongst the best reformed in some points.
4. In Abaddons Kingdome, that shall yet be by the just providence, of Christ a further terrible Earth-quake of his Government, that it shall be greatly divided, the Cities of the Nations shal more and more fal from it, which will also be a cause of more wars and commotions, and such fierce∣nesse of wrath shall come on the Papacy, as there did on the Chanaan∣ites, by haile, Jos. 10. and such alteration of policy shall be in the King of Locusts Kingdome, as if Islands and Mountaines were not found, and such alteration and breaking, as of theGen. 6. the Earth is cor∣rupted, and I will corrupt them, saith Christ Jeho∣vah. old world corrupted, and Chanaanites destroyed, that the Isralites might dwell in their sted; and the Kingdomes of the world shall become our Lords and his Christs, and he shall reign for ever and ever. 5 Then the twenty four Elders which sate before God on their-seats shall fall on their faces, and worship God saying, We give thee thanks O Lord God Almighty which art, and wast, and art to come, because thou hast taken to thee thy great power, & hast reigned, and the Nations were angry, and thy wrath is come, & the time of the dead, that they should be judged, and that thou should give reward unto thy Servants the Pro∣phets, and to the Saints, and them that feare thy name both small and great, and shouldst corrupt them that corrupt the Earth. And the Temple of God wasThe apost∣ate and wick∣ed Kings of Judah shut the Temple, so did both godly 2. Cor. 6.16. opened in Heaven, and there were seen in his Temple, the Arke of his Testament, and there were Lightnings, and Voices, and Thundrings, and an Earth-quake, and great haile, Apoc. 11. the Man of sin, by burning and distroying the holy Temples of Christ, Teachers, and godly Congregations, 1. Cor. 6.15 19. Ch. 3.16.17 6. Thus great Babylon shall heare the voice of the seventh Trumpet as Jerico did, and feele the seventh Phial of Gods wrath in the Lords due season, when Nations opprest by them shall learne skilfully to sing Hallelujth, and with understanding shall praise the Lord: the Lord must, for vaine is the helpe of man, consume that bad King Abaddon of Kit∣tim Italy, in the end at his glorious appearing as those Beasts in Daniel, by the first comming of Christ into the World were wholly consumed, for whom God sate on a firy Throne, so the Beast compounded of those foure shall not wholly perish untill the second coming of Christ, for whom a white Throne of Justice is openly revailed, by sentence thence the false Prophet Pope, and the Beast of his Authority, shall ay feele Gods wrath untill they be both ast with the Dragon into eternall fire. Amen.
SECT. IX. Consider these things advisedly about the Phials. 1. THe seven Phials doe distinguish the manner of Christs dispensa∣tion, not the time, as it is apparant. 1. Because these Phials are not yet powred out in all the Kingdomes that gave their power to the Beast, as not on Spaine, &c. 2. All these Phialls have been, and are now in further execution in our Native Country. 3. The holy Spirit, as is noted, transfers the plague of the Papacy in dispelling its Ayre to the seventh Phial; under it, it shall be utterly dispersed (though as yet it is still much in some places) from all the Countries where the Beasts Kingdome hath been and yet is. 4. As the firy Mountain of Abaddons Kingdome, increased by de∣grees, and in some CountriesGreat Brit∣tany was the last that fully yeilded to Romes politie, and the first that cast it off. Jer. 28. more and sooner then in others, so it decreaseth in the same manner. If this had been seriously marked, some would not have not been (may I say) so peremptory, and definitive for the Popes utter destruction in 1650. or 1655. we are not to talke what the Lord Christ can doe, but rather to observe the course of his providence, as it hath been exercised since Wickliffs dayes, both concer∣ning the enmity and wars of the holy seed, and the seed of the Serpent, I wish, as Jeremiah said to Hananiah, that the Lord would performe your words which you have propheseyed. But it shall not be so. 5. Rome, Kittim, Italy, shall be a mark for Gods Judgements to the end, it shall hold some strength in their iniquity to the end. For the Church shall be troubled in one place or other with Dogs, Murderers, Fornicators,There shall be persecution and vexation from the seed of the Serpent in one place or other, more or lesse, secret or open, while the Church re∣maineth in this World: notwithwanding all that is alledged for the glorious personall reigne of Christ here on Earth, they mistake the Tropes used in the Prophets, from the visible to he invisible Church here on Earth. Sorcerers, Lyars, and other abominable. Let us not flat∣ter our selves, the seed of the Serpent shall be to the end; and all out∣ward Enemies shall not be put (though more and more weakned) un∣der the feet of Christ till the end. The Heavenly Jerusalem hath been from the Apostles dayes, and shall be to the end, and the seed of the Serpent shall bruise to the end. The holy Spirit doth shew us the Coun∣sell of Christ, that there is no age in which the vanity of this cursed World shall not be manifested, Gen. 3. Eccl. 1. Such peace as many talk of under Christs personall raign is not for this World, but for the World to come. &c.
6. There is no Phiall powred on the Turks tyranicall Kingdome, for he was raised up, only to be a scourge to the Apostasie of the Greek Churches, in the Trumpets, and of later yeares of the Papacy in the Phials. But when the Kingdomes that gave their power to the Beast of the Pit, and his Kingdome of Kittim, doe revolt from him, and embrace the Gospell in sincerity and purity, then God will throw that Rod of the Turke into the fire. Chap. XIX. The dead Bones, Ezekiel, 37.11, 12. &c. must not be understood of the Jewes calling after our times, but only of their returne from Babel. THen said he unto me, Son of man, these bones are the whole House of Israel, behold they say our bones are dryed, and our hope is lost, we are cut off for our parts. Therefore Prophesie, and say unto them, thus saith the Lord God; Behold O my people, I will open your Graves, and cause you to come out of your Graves, and bring you into the Land of Israel—and I will place you in your own Land. 1. The coherence of this Scripture, about the dead bones, with the former Chapter is not to be understood of the Jewes, calling at all af∣ter our times, but must properly and only to be understood of their return from Babel, the Land of the North, and other Countries where they had been scattred by the Kings of Ashur and Babel. 2. But before I go on, I will premise some principall over-ruling providences of Christ, which the holy story doth declare unto us; 1 Concerning the progeny of Salomon being extinct, 2. Concerning his Kingdome being overthrown, 3. Concerning the Temple and City burnt, and laid in an heap of dust, and thus Christ in the indignation of his wrth did loath both King and Preist, 4. Concerning themselves
in sad captivity, 5. Concerning the Temples holy Vessells carryed cap∣tive, 6. Concerning other grivous evils of scorne and derision, and of other dayly dangers, both corporall and spirituall, Dan. 1. & 3. Who is able to recount their sorrows and calamities: Now being thus dis∣consolate: It is no marvaile it caused them to say, our bones are dryed up,So the Apostle useth this same argument, 2. Cor. 1.9. to his comfort, so Esai. 26.19. & Hos. 13.14. and our hope is lost, we are cut off for our parts. But now at last is pleased the Lord God to comfort them by an allu∣sion to the Doctrine of the Resurrection, that as surely as they beleived the Doctrine of the Resurrection, so surely God could and would revive their dead State. Now we are not to think that the Prophet doth com∣fort any but the present age then in Bondage and captivity, and there∣fore he doth not prophsie of the Jewes calling to inhabite Chanaan a∣gaine, and build Jerusalm againe, now after our times, as too many doc mis-interpret the Prophets meaning. 3. They were so disconsolate under Babels Yoke, that when Cyrus made that Proclamation, of their returne, Ezra. 1. they thought they rather dreamed, then that it was a truth of their deliverance granted, Psal. 126. Mny acts of un-beleif were in their hearts, and in their speaches, and so it is with us in afflictions: Yet Christ was faithfull in his promises, he cannot deny himselfe. Some object, that the Apostle then in Rom. 11. might well then have spared the Jewes in so deep a question as touching their calling. Answ. I dare not say so, for the Apostle being a Prophet, it was as authentike as if Esatas or Ezekiel had foretold it. And by the same an∣swer it may be questioned (notwithstanding all the plausible speaches of some) whether any Prophet of the old Testament did prophesie of the Jewes calling yet to come, for the Apostle doth only by allusion, cite Esaias and Ezekiel to shew that as the Lord God did formerly shew his power and mercy in their restauration from Babel, so he would once a∣gaine call them to the faith, after so long a time. To the same effect the Apostle dealt in Act. 13.40, 41. in citing Abakuks prophesie. Abakuk propheseyed of the Chaldeans to arise; But the Jewes then would no more beleive that Babel should overcome them, then they beleived the Apostle Paul, citing Abakuks words of Gods wrath, by the Romans, to make an end of them. And so Saint Paul doth, in like manner, cite Dan. 11. in 2. Thess. 2. concerning the man of sin, the new Antiochus of Rome by allusion only. 4. Whereas the present age of Ezekiels days was so disconsolate, and lamented, one would think the Prophet comforts them, and doth not  of men that should live two thousand years after, it is not ration∣  to think (most impertinent assertions) As if a godly soul, or a  under greivous pressures and afflictions at present, should  for consolation, must the Teacher then tell stories to  that neither they nor theirs for many genera.
5. Again these in captivity were godly and faithfull, and knew they were chastised for not regarding Gods The Iews now are per∣swaded of no such thing, al∣though fore∣warned, Heb. 10.25, 26, 27. covenant in Christ, and there∣fore they did humble themselves and confesse their sins, as Levit. 26. foretold and had gracious promises of return to Canaan, and of building city and Temple, and that the City should be builded on its own heap, and that they should have a policy to buy and sell, Ier. 32. and the Pro∣phet Ieremih knew well enough that the godly in the state of Iudah were or would be much cast down in their spirits, even as Ieremy himself was concerning their most grievous calamities, as Ier. 32. It was n that age of God people, that needed this satisfacti∣on. and thereupon the Lord God did comfort him and all the godly of those dayes, and did revive their hearts in divers passages (even as he did by Ezekiel) see Jer. 29.30 31 32, 33. chapters. 6. But the Jews now are not godly, but grievous apostates, for they hold Christ, and his Gospel, Kingdome and people anathema, they are exceed∣ing hard of heart, and blaspheme our Christ, & look for Christ yet to come, not one of 100 is godly of them, nor have been for many hundred years. 7. A glorious calling of the Jews from Rom. 11. is not denied in all pla∣ces where they are scattered, and will not this be a wonderfull glory to them and us, that they in all places where they are shall yield obedi∣ence to the Gospel. This should suffice, for more cannot be proved, and when Christ came we Gentiles were received into their sheepfold, Iohn 10, Other sheep I have, &c. but hereafter the contrary, Rom. 11.11. To provoke them to follow them, that, was their glory, this ours. 8. So certainly, this speech of Ezek. 37. was spoken for the present disconsolate age, These were not yet cast off,All Zac. z. was consolatory to the returned who were vex∣ed by the Sa∣maritans, and others, Ierusa∣lem, being as yet unwalled, although the providence of Christ was as a wail of fire for them, till it was walled. nor cut off from their own people, but they onely were as yet Gods people, and that made Zacha∣riah say * that the Lord will yet choose Sion and Ierusalem, and that yet he would be jealous for Ierusalem, and Sion. This was to comfort them under many pressures, being under the government of the Persians, and under such like pressures, they should be under Iavan whole, and Ia∣van parted, namely in much affliction, therefore it was fit and conve∣nient, so to comfort them, for the Lord doth alwayes speak sitly to his olive, and so the Lord did yet choose them, even after this, for the time of the Seventy Sevens of years, in which space of time they should be the peculiar holy people, and Ierusalem should continue to be the ho∣ly City, but after the Seventy Sevens of years were accomplished, accor∣ding to Dan. 9 they had not any peculiar priviledge, nor ever shall. We ms not regard that strange Doctrine, that teacheth otherwise, but what tends to that Sion in Hebrews 12. and in Apocalyps 14.1. and to that Jerusalem Hebrews 12. Gal. 4. Apoc. 3 and 21. in too many things we do hinder the conversion of the Jews in Judaizing with them: They hope for the building of Ierusalem, and daily pray for their return to Canaan, and many of us thus Judaize with them, in teaching their return thither to b a glorious Church again. 9. And whereas the people of God in Jeremiahs and Ezekiels dayes were
much dejected in spirit, for the sorrows which they felt by Babel the gol∣den head (as they had cause) & went weeping to Babel, not clearly discern∣ing Gods counsel, yet at the end of the captivity, the holy counsels of God were fully opened by Gabriel the holy angels glorious message from hea∣ven to Daniel,This Text of Dan. 9.24. did comfort them for the losse of the Ark, Jer. 3. and the sha∣king of the rest of the Ce∣remonies, and because the Lord foresaw what he would once more do by the Romane po∣lity, therefore he gave to Daniel that glorious reve∣lation, that they should expect the MESSIAS, the holy of holy, to confirm the Covenant for the many by his death. Dan. 9.24. That they need not mourn nor lament for de∣stroying Salomons Progeny and Kingdome, because the holy angel had told them of the MESSIAS their King greater than Salomon, who was also of the house of David, for it is said, he shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the most high, and the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David, and he shall reign over the house of Jacob, for ever, and of his Kingdome there shall be no end, Luc. 1.32, 33. and hence we learn that Christs spirituall kingdome shall never be ended, nor overthrown, nor his heavenly progeny extinct, who are Prin∣ces and Priests in all the earth, Psal. 145.16 and the Metropolis of his kingdome, is the heavenly Sion and Jerusalem, builded by the Gospel, over all the four quarters of the world and this city 1500 mile square, compassed about with a wall of precious truth, invincible, that no pow∣er of the enemie can scale it, or make any breach in it, and the founda∣tions of the wall are twelve, compounded of twelve precious Jewels, (The holy Doctrine of the Lambs twelve apostles) that there can be no Satanicall pioneers to make any mynes to blow it up (no, if they be as deep in their counsels as Garnet and Faux, of that hellish crue) and the Temple within this holy city, is so glorious, that it secretly affrights all opposers, more than that in the times of Psal. 48. For the Lord God of hosts, even the LAMB is the Temple, who is also the Rock of defence of his Church. 10. Now though all this be our glory under the new Testament, yet the Doctrine of many is contrarie, for in effect they teach the Jews to la∣ment and mourn for earthly Canaan, and for the low Ierusalem and Tem∣ple. Teachers may as well follow their Thalmudicall fables, as this do∣ctrine, and so they do in part, for they look for a pompous Kingdome in Canaan, and continue against Gods oath, the line of Salomon, Ier. 22. These things will be touched again, as the argument calls for it. 11. The Prophesie of Amos chap. 9. is expounded in Acts 15. by the holy Councel, and it will confine all our expositions that we make upon Esaias, Ezekiel and Zacharias, for such a calling of the Jews, as I have shewed. The last of Amos expounded by the Apostles themselves, I take it is a key to open all these matters: to this agree the words of the Prophets, Acts 15. he speaks plurally, Prophets, yet cites but Amos, and let us marke how the apostles interpret, and because almost all the Pro∣phets shut up their Prophesies like Amos, therefore I suppose Amos and that Councell do expound them all, and so Amos will expound, Jer. 30. 31, 32, and 32. and 33. chapters, some part of them, as also Ezek. 37. the latter part of it, as it shall be touched about the two sticks, which come next to be considered.
CHAP. XX. Of the two Sticks, Ezek. 37. in confutati∣on of them that say, it is not yet fulfilled that Ephraim was joyned to Judah, also some observations are annexed from Zach. 2. Zach. 8. Zach. 9. Zach. 10. and chap. 11. SECT. 1. ANswer. 1. It is evident by an expresse promise, that the other Tribes, as well as Judah should return from captivity out of the Land of the North and from other countries where they were scattered, Consider these Scriptures. Jer. 3. In those dayes the house of Judah shall walk with the house of Is∣rael, and they shall come together out of the Land of the North, to the Land that I have given for an inheritance to your fathers, with this verse, the 16, and the 17th verse should be minded. Jer, 50. In those dayes, and in that time, saith Jehovah, the children of Israel shall come, they and the children of Judah together, going and weep∣ing, they shall go and seek Jehovah their God, and many such expressions the Prophets have. 2. The 49000 that did return with Zorobabel, Ezra 2. many of them might be of the ten Tribes, for at this time all the Tribes were called Jews, but before I go further I would note two things. 1. The angel Gabriels glorious message from heaven of the Seventy sevens, and the holy Doctrine therein contained. 2. The mild governmentalthough the Medes and Persians were likened to a savage Bear to Babel, Dan. 7 yet they are likened to a tame Ram for the comfort of Israel, Dan. 8. of the Kings of Persia, under Daius Artaxast 41 year, that so favoured Ezra and Nehemiah, and eight years under his successor Daius, and 42 years under Artaxtrxes his successor, almost 100 years, this long space was of much
rest to Israel. These two things doubltesse would cause many to remem∣ber Sion and Ierusalem, and to return and flock to Canaan. And in the time of that comfortable quietnesse they might get Cattel, Silver and gold, apparrel, &c. as in these 80. years of David & Salomon, Ez. 38. how did they increase in riches, and honour, in multitudes? and so in our native Country, in the dayes of Q.E. and K.I. How did England increase in peo∣ple, honour and wealth by our blessed peace, which the Lord in great mercy gave us for 66 years? 3. Again, it is said plainly, 1 Chron. 9. that some of Ephraim and Manasseh were of them that returned, and some of Bethel that idolatrous City of the ten Tribes returned,V. Tremel. in 1 Ch. 9 & Neh. 11.12, 3 these of Ephraim, and Manasseh were an earnest that more should return, and Mr. Pemble, Zach. on 13. sheweth that of the 49000 that returned, 12000 of them were of the ten Tribes. and it is shewed that they dwel∣led with Ivdah in Ierusalem, and many moe in the other Cities of Iu∣dah, this is an history to the prophesie of the two sticks to be as one. SECT. 2. SOme object that those of the other Tribes besides Judah, were but a sprinkling & not worthy of consideration in respect of the Prophesie. Answ. 1. I think we may be much to blame to say so, . what is 38000,38000 besides the Levites, and Nethi∣nims and their servants and hand maids, in all 49000. that returned (suppose they were all of Iudah) to the infinite numbers of Iudah that were carried captive, & that still remained in the nations abroad? that number would be but a thin replenishing of the land of Iudea, and Ierusalem, and Benjamin, and we are not otherwise to think, but that many moe of Juah returned afterwards. 2. I suppose I may take up the argument of the Apostle, that the pro∣mises of God were not without effect, though so many of the ten Tribes did not return, as did of Iudah, some did return, though not to the State of a Kingdome by it self, yet we are not to make question, but that multitudes did return after ward according to the Prophesie,The term Na¦tions, Ier. 3.17. may intimate Iiphraims na∣tions, as Gen. 48.19. many myriads of them, as is evident by the wars under Javan, as Dan. 11 and Ezek. 38, and 39. shews that very many of the whole house of Israel, did replenish the land of Judah and Benjamin, Iosephus and the Maechabees shew it was so, and it is said, there were besides them that had returned, and that did separate themselves from the filthinesse of the heathens, Ezra 6.21. and Darius Artaxast gave great incouragement, Ezra 7 13. 3. Iudahs Tribe was principally to be nominated in the returned, be∣cause of the Prophesie to Iudah, the fourth son of Iacob, who should have his Tribe chiefly to exist, because of his Shitob, according to Ia∣cobs Prophecy.So Tremelli∣us, Gen. 49. A Tribe shall not sail to Judah till his Son shall come.
4. This is considerable that all the time of the Seventy Sevens, the Tribes were kept in some distinction, yea, untill the destruction of Ieru∣salem by Titus, but not so afterward,The Iews write that none knew their own Tribes. Dr. Lightfoot, and others shew the va∣nity of their modern ge∣nealogies. for they could not, being so scattred. The deceitfull unbelieving Jews did trouble the believing Gentiles, by darkning the holy Genealogies of the Scriptures by their endlesse genealogies; for after the Evangelists, Matthew and Luke had cleared the case of our Lord, by uncontrollable private Records, which the Jews could not deny, that our Lord sprang out of Judah, then the apostle charged the Churches to take heed of (not onely that, but to avoid) Jews fables, and their endlesse genealogies. And now let us consider the 21. verse of Ezek. 37. I will take the children of Israel from among the heathen whither they be gone, and will gather them on eve∣ry side, and bring them into their own Land. Can we think, but that this was spoken of to the present age, and therefore in that respect it cannot be understood of the Jews calling yet to come; for we all know, they shall not be called till the fullnesse of the Gentiles be come in, and when is that? I will gather them from among the heathen, when is that? mark it, for the Lord speaketh reproachfully [the heathen] but now many of the Jews are among Reformed Churches, which cannot be called heathen. The Apostle said long since, whether we be Jews, Scythians, bond or free, all are one in Christ Jesus, shall we then be accounted dogs, unclean. Certainly, Ezekiel so speaketh of Israel, that the heathen should have nothing to do in their policy, as long as their Prerogative did continue: and whereas Ezekiel saith [wither they be gone] he calls to mind all their oppressors, as well ashur, as Babel, and from [these heathen] they shall be brought into their own Land, but when the Iews are called to the faith, they will est em of Canaan no better than any other countrey; as indeed they ought not. 5. Now we will touch a little of Zachariah, who utters many con∣solatory promises, and prophesies to the present age of his time (and for the times of the Seventy Sevens) because they were slack in returning to theirIt is a sin∣gular observa∣tion (I think of Broaldus) that Hamans Plot against the Iews in 127 Provinces was a chastisement to them for their slacknesse in returning, they loved their outward comforts, and settled habitation too much, they should have done, as 2 Chron. 11.13, 16. I hope the Lord will remember poor new Eng∣land, and our posterity, as Ier. 2.2, 3. brethren that had already returned, & had elt some hardship by some of the former Kings of Persia, and were put into many fears by San∣ballat and his associates of the Samaritans, yet the Lord God promiseth that he would put into their hearts to return, to be as one with Iudah. 6. I will expresse some Scriptures of Zac. 26, 7 Ho, ho, come soth, and flee from the Land of the North, saith the Lod, for I have sed you a∣broad as the four winds of the beaven saith the Lord. Deliver thy self O Zi∣on, that dwellest with the daughter of Babylon. This earnest call of the
Lord might well cause Ezra and his company to return, and of them many might be of the ten Tribes, as well as of Iudah; his return was four or five years after, for this Prophesie was uttered in the second of Darius Artaxast, and Ezra returned in the seventh 7 Zachary 8. sheweth that the returned were somewhat disconsolate, because Ierusalem was so scant of inhabitants, as (Nehemiah 11.) read Zac. 8. Therefore God promiseth, I will save my people from the East countre,, and from the West countrey, and I will bring them, and they shall dwell in the midst of Ierusalem, &c. in verse 13. it is said, And it shall come to passe, that as ye were a curse among the heathen, O house of Iudah and house of Israel, so will I save you, and you shall be a blessing, fear not, we are not to doubt, but the Lord brought them of the ten Tribes, as well as of Iudah, read verses 20.21. 8. Zac. 9.13. When I have bent Iudah for me, and filled the bow with Epraim, and raised up thysons O Zion against thy sons O Javan, and made thee as a sword of a mighty man. The Lord made Iuhah and Ephraim a bew and arrows against the enemies, in the dayes of the Seleuco-Logidae, as the Macchabees shew, and this sheweth that many of the ten Tribes had returned, as well as Judah. See Tremellius on Zac. 9. Zach. 10.6. I will strengthen the house of Iudah, and I will save the house of Ioseph, and will bring them again to place them, &c. and they of Ephra∣im shall be as a mighty man—I will hisse for them, and gather them v. 10— I will bring them again also out of Egypt, and Ashur into Gilead, and Le∣banon, &c. These speeches and others do shew, that Ephraim had retur∣ned as well as Judah, and were as one stick 10. And the new Testament sheweth, that Israel in the Tribes were multiplied, great multitudes fol'owed the Lord Jesus where ever he came, and he dwelt and taught much in those places where captivity began by the Kings of Ashur, there the light of the Gospel first began, in the Land of Zabulon and Naphtali, Esaias had prophesied it should be so Esai. 9, And there are histories and writers, that shew how at the holy feasts of the Jews, there were hundreds of thousands that assom∣bled, which sheweth, that many of the ten Tribes had returned, and were as one stick joined together in holy worship. 11. And this will further be evidence by Zac 11. that they had re∣turned, both Iudah and Israel, and were as one, because the Lord threat∣ned them, that he would break the brotherhood of Ephraim and Judah, for their departing from the faith, and did not regard the Law of the Angel of the Covenant, which he by Mases gave at Horeb; for he had charged them by the Ministery of Maachi, to remember the lively ora∣cles,Mal. 4 4. with the Statutes and judgements, that were commanded for all Israel, for they should have no more Prophets ill John-Elias. 12. But they followed the wicked doctrine of the three shepherds, Sad∣ducisme, Pharisailme, &c. & many Jews that despised the holy Covenan, became treacherous; therefore God brought upon Jerusalem &c all Jullea,
heavy miseries that they destroyed one another before our Lords incar∣nation and after: very many sorrows by civill dissentions, and schismes, so that then was broken the brotherhood of Judah and Ephraim, and thus, Zac 11. must be understood of these times, and to this effect. 13. And further to dilate on the Text. They took Jerusalem from one another by domesticall seditions, and they cut down the Cedar-great men, spoiling and destroying the great ones among themselves, and the great ones did roar like Lions on the meaner sort, as they had gotten power over them, so their vintage of consblations was taken away, not so much literally to be understood, but the Temples holy worships, were heathenishly, and otherwayes corrupted, and their exercises in their Sy∣nagogues were greatly suspended; for as either of their factions prevai∣led, they blessed themselves, as though the Lord God favoured them! But the Lord took his pity from them, and did deliver them every one into the hand of his neighbour, and into the hands of their Kings, the Se∣leucidae, the Herods and the Romanes, whom they also called to their quarrells, and yet for all this, Canaan was yet the holy Land, and Ierusa∣lem was yet the holy city, & Sion the holy mountain, for in all these trou∣bles the Lord had a care of the poor of the flock that waited on him. 14. the stories of these things are manifest, and that Zach. 11. must not be understood of the times, after [now our dayes] many passages will tedder and confine the times of some mens apprchensions, as that Scripture of their under-valuing MESSIAS their King, the Lord of glo∣rie, at the price of a slave, and so applied by the Evangelists, upon which followed a further breach of brotherhood, and civil dissentions,Zac. 11.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. horrible distresse and wrath, vid. Tremellius and Zach. and Iosephus on the wars of the Jews. 15. Zach. 11. may well and must be accommodated to the times somewhat preceding our Lords dayes, and some what after, but there is not the least shew of intimation, of applying the Prophet to the Jews calling now after our times. Let the godly Christian Student, diligent∣ly read the Scriptures (We erre not knowing the Scriptures) and then Jose∣phus and Macchabees and other authors: and with all observe the times, the families or Nations, and the places of their habitations, and for the times of the new Testament, mark allusions, as hath and will be touch∣ed, but so far as Propriety will reach for times and persons that must be still adhered unto.
CHAP. XXI. Of the Jewes calling, the 12, 13, & 14. Chap∣ters of Zachary, that it cannot be applyed to the Jewes calling yet to come, as many Ministers do too un∣advisedly teach. WEE are to consider many passages in Dan. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, & 12. Chapters, 1. That all the time of the Holy Angel, Gabriels message of the Seventy Sevens, the Jewes were called the holy people, Michaels people, Daniels people, their Religion is called the truth, Sion and the Temple is called the ho∣ly Mountaine, Jerusalem the holy City, and the only place of holy wor∣ship in the World, Joh. 4. And the Son of God is called MICHAEL, the great Prince before his blessed Incarnation, and that he had over them a speciall regard during the date and lease of their prerogative of the Seventy Sevens. 2. Therefore we are diligently to observe, Zach. 12. that although those troubles were among them, yet still Jerusalem was the holy City, and that God had respect to them, because the holy faith of the Gospell was among them, and also among the Godly dispersed Jewes, and the same holy faith was maintained by the many godly that exhorted one another, but the most of them were of the meaner sort, called the poor of the flock, and for their sakes, Jerusalem was a burdensome Stone to all the ungodly, whither the Heathens, or the lawlesse Apostates of Da∣niels people (Dan. 11.) And sometimes the better part that had some life of Religion were their Leaders, and did governe them, and they were as a Torch of fire in a sheafe to burne and devour the Enemies, and Jerusalem was defended, and as yet, adhuc permaneat, did abide in her own place, and so it was to abide untill the ending of the Sventy Se∣vens, Zach. 12.6.
3. And whereas Zachariah saith in Chap. 12.6. Jerusalaima adhuc permaneant, Jerusalem is there, and I think in all other places in the old Testament, in the plurall teaching them celestial meditations (as Psal. 15.1.) And that although the Saints of them the high Trinity, should yet inhabite the Low-Jerusalem, in much affliction, they should notwith∣standing account themselves but strangers (Levit, 25.23.) and should rather look to the Jerusalem that is above, the sight of true peace, the Heavenly City, as Abraham, Jsaac, and Iacob did to the Heavenly Coun∣trey, Eby. 11. 4. This speach that Ierusalem should yet abide, and be inhabited, is consolatory, both for the present State of the Church against the plot∣tings of Sanballat, &c. and for that Daniel had shewed that Iavan in the fourth Beast, should bring great affliction of trampling Daniels holy peo∣ple, and taking away the dayly sacrifice, and altering the times. (of the the holy Feasts) and the Law. And that Antiochus should distresse the holy Mountaine, Ierusalem, and the Temple, &c. notwithstanding all these troubles Jerusalem should yet abide an holy City (They were not yet to be cut off from their Olive Tree) And Gods dealing for his peo∣ple was a burdensome Stone, and a Torch of fire to all the Hornes of the fourth Beast, and all the Enemies to the ending of the Seventy Sevens. 5 And Zach. 12. saith God, would raise up noble worthies for them, so God gave them sometimes valiant men to be for their comfort, as the worthies of old in the reign of David. Valiant in acting and suffering for the truthes sake that was only among them. The Jewes were then the holy people, and Ieusalem the holy City, and Sion the holy Moun∣taine, thoughSo Babel going about to dash Ierusa∣lems hope, is bent to set his Throne above the highest, in destroying his Temple, but Gods venge∣ance was a burthen some stone to make the golden Head, dust, Esai. 14. Jer. 50. Dan. 2. Antichus had greatly polluted the Temple. And the godly the poor of the flock did observe these things, and still did inha∣bite Ierusalem (or still did so desire, though driven into Mountaines and Dens, and Caves of the Earth) looking for the Kingdome of Heaven to appeare, now drawing on towards the ending of the Seventy Sevens. And for their sakes, as is said, God destroyed all Enemies that came a∣gainst the holy City Ierusalem, whither the Heathens, or the Law-lesse Jewes that profaned the holy covenant, Dan. 11. 6. And we must not slightly passe over this Epithet, Ierusalem the Holy City. It is so called at the beginning and ending of the Seventy Se∣vens, & likewise so called at the begining of our Lords Preaching, and at his Resurrection, Mat 4 & 27 marke, it was so, at that very time they had crucified MESSIAS their King, the Lord of glory, but after our Savidurs aeension, that title was never bestowed upon it. For then the date of their prerogative was out, and the Gentiles brought in∣to equall Covenant. But for the whole time of the Seventy Sevens, as the Angel from Heaven had declared, while the preferment of the cir∣cumcised Jew was in honour, Christ had a speciall eye to them and the Low-Jerusalem. As when it was destroyed by the Chaldean, the Lord
bade his dispersed people to remember it in all Countries. Ier. 51.50. and so Daniel did and 49000. though in the dust, Psal. 102. But after our Saviours ascention, and sending the Spirit, furnishing his holy Dis∣ciples with gifts to be Master-builders for the erecting the New Jerusa∣lem, there is not any word of intimation in all the Evanglists, Acts, Epistles, or Apocalyps (nay, nor in any Prophet of the old Testament) that they should remember the Low-Ierusalem, &c. But more of this hereafter. 7. Ierusalem, the sight of peace, the faithfull held and looked to hold in possession till our Lords dayes, Esai. 66. Psal. 110. & 95. would in∣struct them so to beleive, as they did. Observe well, 1. King. 11.13.32.36. & 2. King. 21.4. Ier. 51.50. Dan. 9. Psal. 102. And we must consider that although the Kings of North and South afflicted Is∣rael and Ierusalem, Dan. 11. and had a great hand in bruising the holy people, yet Christ plagued those Kings and Kingdomes. And although the Jewes in the times of the Macchabees were mutinous and became wicked and Law-lesse, and brought much trouble to their own Brethren, as also did the Remainders of the Selucidae, the Herods, and the Ro∣mans, yet among all these Enemies of the faith, Christ caused from his firy Throne (Dan. 7.) that Rivers of fire ran among them; God had ever a speciall eye of regard to them for his promise sake, Zach. 2.8. 1. King. 11.32. He shall have one Tribe for my Servant Davids sake, and for Jerusalem the City which I have chosen, out of all the Tribes of Israel. The Providences of Christ in a constant progresse, of the holy story, made this promise good to the ending of the Seventy Sevens. Then was the Period of Israels peculiar glory.
CHAP. XXII. Expounding Zac. 12.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Verses. 1. ZAchriah sheweth how the faithfull should mourne for the sins of the times, every godly Family, cheifly them of Da∣vids progenie, of the Family of Nathan (Solomons Bro∣ther by Bathhebah) of whom our Lord lineally ascended. As also of the godly of the Tribe of Levi, and all the godly Families that did remaine, for then to them was the blessed Fountaine for sin and uncleanesse opened. And our godly translators doe confer, Act. 2. in the 3000. converted by Peters Sermon to be an History to this Prophe∣sie. And Act. 1.14. is fitly to be conferred for their godly private ex∣ercises. 2. Also we must diligently observe how John Elias, the fore-runner to Christ, by his powerfull Ministry did turne the heart of the Fathers to the children, and the children to hearken to the wisdome of their god∣ly Teachers, that the evill Spirits of the three Shepheards, and their Doctrine was much quailed, and were made ashamed of their evil wayes. And our Lord Jesus Christ the great Apostle, from Heaven coming af∣ter Iohn Baptist, he brought his Fanne of holy Doctrine in his hand, and by his holy Spirit separating the chaffe of persons and Doctrine in won∣derfull manner, as in Mat. 5, 6, & 7. chapters, and at other times, which Sermons of Christ made them rage against him, and were never quiet, laying snares still for him, till they had his life. And when they had smitten this blessed Shepheard, and destroyed the Temple of his precious Man-hood, he raised it againe and gloriously ascended. Then afterward the Lord Christ gave a mouth and wisdome to his holy Dis∣ciples and Apostles, that all false Doctrine, and all Worldly wisdome of Satans Kingdome, fell (like Dagon) before them. All their idols of the Doctrines of justification (ex opere operato) bodily exercise, and their Traditions of their Abotheru, and the Sadducisme of the Sadducies,
and other errors among them. All these idols of theirs, and the Hea∣thens were famished and so perished, Zeph. 2.11. 3. That Doctrine of Justification of bodily exercise was the great controversie of those dayes, and it was their idoll and vanity, as Deut. 32. compared with Rom. 10. that idoll cleaving to the letter, made them despise MESSIAS their King, whose most precious obedience, through his manifold sufferings made his death a most acceptable Sacrifice, and so it was the end of the Law, for justification to every one that beleiveth, and by him all that beleive are justified from their sins guilt and punish∣ment,Moses Doctrine given by Christ taught the sure mercies, Act. 13. Deut. 30. Such an idol it was, and is, that it hath cast off the Jewes to this day; For by it they despi∣sed the Son of God and his justification. which the bodily exercise of all the Law of Moses could not doe. And that they might not think of justification by bodily exercise from the Temples worships, Christ destroyed City and holy Place to this day, who brought to us by his once offering up of himselfe to an everlasting Righteousnesse or Iustification. 4. After the Jewes had rejected the corner-Stone, their King for Caesar, many heavy and unexpressable sorrows came upon the Jewes and Jerusalem continually, untill by the Roman power, Titus Vespasian, who came against Jerusalem, took the City, rifled the Houses, and the un∣cleane infidell Souldiers ravished the women, slaughtered multitudes, and carryed may thousands of Iewes Captives, and sold many numbers of them for Slaves. All this came to passe about forty years after our Lords ascention. Our Lord sitting on Mount Olivet, and beholding the City told these things of Zachariah (Ch. 14.1, 3, 4) to his Disciples, Mat. 14. Luc. 19. & 21. 5. And the Apostle as a Prophet,Act. 13.40, 41, 1. Thes. 2.16. Ebr 6 8. & 10.26, 27, 28, 29, 30. Act. 13. threatned by allusion, Hbb thicks prophesy against them (noted before) that as the Chaldean had done, the Romans should execute further and greater wrath upon them, even wrath to the utmost. And so the Apostle had told the re∣volting Hebrewes, that they and their Nation would be Bryars and Thornes, and must look for violent fire to consume them. Moses and David fore-saw all these evils; Deut. 32.22. 2 Sam. 23. Then the corner Stone which the Builders refused, fell on them and bruised them to powder. 6. The Prophet Zachariah having spoken of the dstruction of the Low-Jerusalem, makes this transition to speak by way ofJer. 31.38, 39. Is literally propheticall, and performed in Nehem 3. but this of Zac. 14.6. is alle∣goricall, see Tremel. on Zach. 14.10. &c. allegory of the building and setting up of the High Jerusalem: As by the returned from Babel, Jerusalem was builded from Benjamins Gate, &c. so sure shall the Heavenly Jerusalem be builded, notwithstanding all oppositions of Enemies. And whereas it is said. Zac. 14. Jerusalem shall be inhabited in her own place: it is to be understood that the Heavenly Jerusalem should begin to be builded in the Earthly, as it was fittest. Thence the Law went forth of Sion, and the word of the Lord from Ierusalem, then the Mountaine of the Lords House was lifted above all Moun∣taines, and all Nations ftowed unto it, to build on that Mountaine, and this promised blessing was performed before Salem was abolished.
and the word of the Lord did not faile, that Iapheth must have religi∣on from Some Tents. 7. There were skilfull Master-Builders at Salem, the Fishers of Gali∣let, and the other Apostles with others to the number of six score, and five thousand after, which, with the Physitian of Antich, and the Tent-Maker of Trsus that might carry the healing and wholsomeOur Lord in his Apoc. 21. expounds, Zach. 14. & Ezek. 47. For these waters that run thorough the streets of the Heavenly Jerusalem, and no better waters shall ver come among us then what the holy Prophets and Apostles have let us in their most sweet, and blessed writings. Let us beware of deceitfull opinions of new Apostles, and new Revelations. waters of holy Doctrine to the uttermost parts of the Earth. Oh how wonder∣full and un-utterable was the glory of Christ in and by them, that he was King over all the Earth, that, as the Apostle saith, God was not the God of the Iewes, only, but of the Gentiles also, Rom. 3. 8. Zac. 14.12. sheweth that all montanous opposions could not hinder the building of this Heavenly Ierusalem, this City was lifted in glory and did and doth abide notwitstanding all the wrestlings of the misbeleiving and unbeleiving Iewes, and the Roman Empire against it. And all that fought against his Holy City, both the Caesars, the old Pontificality (the sixth head of the Roman Beast afflicting the Church) and the new Pontificality, the Papacy, the seventh Head (and Turke afterward) found great severity of thundring wrath and terrour of most bitter plagues: as if their filthy flesh rotted from their bones, and their idolatrous and adulterous eyes did consume in their holes, and their blasphemous tongues in their mouths. 9. And the Lord MESSIAS to whom the Father of Heaven had committed all authority and power, raised tumults among them, first on the Iewes, then on the Caesars Augusti, and their people in most fear∣full manner. That the Caesars and their Assassines had death, and a gulph and grave of destruction by intestine garboiles in their Armies, destroying one another for three hundred years, the six seals do also shew this in Ap. 90 Ap. 6. 10. Zach. 14.16. When the Heavenly Ierusalem was builded on twelve precious Foundations, all of precious Iewels, the Prophets and Apostles Doctrine,These are the same waters Ezekiel speaks of, that came from the Tem∣ple, Ezek. 47. and Christ Je∣Asue, expounds, Zac. and Ezek. in Apoc. 21. & 22. then those holy waters (as is noted) of healing Doctrine issued, and had free course into all quarters under Heaven, East, West, North, and South, and every quarter had three Gates into the City. And the godly in all times of the New Testament, did flee like Doves to nestle in this City, they came to itConstantly, continually, from mouth, to mouth, &c. Esai. 66.23. these are allegoricall expressions. anniversarily to keep the Feast of Tabernacles. And the Apoc. 7. is an Historicall pro¦phesie, that 144000. of Israel, the twelve Tribes that held the faith, and an innumerable company of all Nations come to this City to blesse and praiseAll Nations did blesse him, as they were in him, Psal. 72.17 Gen. 12.1, 2, 3. the Eternall Son of God, who did Tabernacle or Temple in our nature for  edemption: and when they came, they brought
Palme-Branches in their hands, crying Hosanna, Salvation to our God that steth on the Thorne, and to the LAMBE for evermore. 11. And they that will not come to the Feast of Tabernacles, to serve Christ Iesus (the true Tabernacle or Temple) in his holy Assemblies in this his Ierusalem they shall have no Raine to moisten their dry and barren hearts. They shall not know what meanes the Dewes that fall on Mount Hermon, and the sweet small Raine that distilleth on the Holy Mount aine of Sion (Apoc. 14.1.) All the Gentiles that will not yeild obedience to the faith of the Gospell, Christ will bring upon them positive and privative plagues, as the stories of the Church shew this in all the Centuries, in all Countries. 12. And because Christ Iesus our Lord hath made us Kings and Sa∣crificers to God, his Father, Holinesse to Jehovah, which was graven on the front place of the high Sacrificer, shall be written on the Horse Bridles, and on every Pot in the Heavenly Ierusalem, thus Zachariah, as Dan. 9. & Esai. 66. sheweth an utter abrogation of the Ceremonies of Moses, Chanaan, City, Temple, and worships. 13. And let this be noted that the holy Apostles expounding the Prophets, never taught the Saints that ever they should expect any out∣ward glory to returne to Chanaan, City, Temple, or Kingdome, but taught them of the Heavenly Iusalem, and therein the Lord God of Hosts, the Lambe to be the Temple, and the holy worship to be chefly spirituall, prayer to be every where in lifting up pure hands and hearts in all godly qualifications, as our Lord Messia told the woman of Sama∣ia, Ioh. 4. 14. And therefore the Apostle Peter, the Apostle of the circumcision, taught the scattered Tribes of Israel, in Pontus, Asia, Galatia, Bithinia, Ca∣padocia, and Chaldea, of the Heavenly inheritance that fadeth not (as Canaan) and that themselves were lively Stones in the spirituall buil∣ding, to be an holy Preist-hood to offer up spirituall sacrifice, acceptable to God by Iesus Christ the true Temple. And that they that were and had been for many dayes Lo-ammi, and Lo uchamah, Hos. 1. & 3. were now by the glorious Gospell made Gods people, and had obtained mer∣cy and pity, and warnes them that they be not as their Fathers, to stum∣ble at Christ, and his Doctrine. And further instructs them that the Prophesis which they so looked, to be fulfilled in an outward manner, were not to be taken properly and literally, as Ezikiels Land, City, and Temple, is taken to this day of the Jewes in propriety of spach, that Pe∣ter blameth: And the teaching otherwise was damnable heresie, and a denying of Christ Jesus (as the Apostle said of Circumcision, Gal. 5.2, 3, 4) as experience also tels us these fifteen hundred years. And therefore let Teachers beware how they harden Jewes in their idol and vanity. Solomons Kingdome was shaken, but we receive a King∣dome that cannot be shaken, the Low-Jerusalem was destroyed, but the Heavenly City cannot; The Preist hood of Levi is passed away, but
Christs Preist-hood abideth for ever, &c. and we crosse all the Do∣ctrine of Christs new Testament to plead any more for Terrestials. Chap. XXIII. Expounding, Zach. 12, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. & Zach. 14.10, 11, &c. SECT. I. It is objcted that Zac. 12.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. is not fulfilled. AND; I will poure upon the House of David, and upon the in∣habitants of Ierusalem, the Spirit of grace and supplications, and they shall look upon me whom they have perced, and they shall mourne for him, as one mourneth for his only Son, &c. and the Family of the House of David and Nathan shall mourne, and the House of Levi, and the Family of Sbimei shall mourne. 1. I think, Act. 1.14 is an History to the prophesie for Davids HouseThe Apostles argument is strong, that al∣though must did not mourne yet the saith ul∣nesse of God is not without effect, and God had not cast off all, the Apostle reasons from himselfe, as if there should not have been no more then him∣selfe, Rom. 3. & 11.1, 2, 3. but in the Acts there were five thousand and more, and in e∣rusalem, suly the faithfull are but a little stock. these all continued with one accord in prayer and supplica∣tion, with the women, and Mary the Mother of IESUS. and with his Brethren. In this company was some of the House of David, and some of the Family of Nathan, and some of the House of Levi, for it is said, a great company of the Preists were subject to the faith, Act. 6. and Ba∣nabas a Levite became a gracious Son of consolation to the Church: And that the Lord powred on the inhabitants of Ierusalem, the Spirit of his grace and supplications is historied in Acts, ch. 2.37 and many more afterwards, ch. 4. and in after times of every Tribe twelve thou∣sand, Apoc. 7.
2. I doubt not but when the Iewes be hereafter called according to Rom. 11. they will mourn for their own sins; and for the sins of their fore Fa∣thers, but we must stick to propriety, unlesse it opposeth the analogic of faith in other Scriptures, that so we may confer History to prophesie, and that is one of the surest ways of understanding the Holy Scriptures, if we n rightly attaine unto it. 3. For now we are not to expect new Revelations to tell the Church which man is of the House of David, and what of the Family of Nathan, or which man is of the House of Levi, and of the Family of Shimei. But if we will understand, Zach. 1. of the Iewes calling yet to come, we must expect new Revelations, and some that have a propheticall Spirit to tell the Church which man is of which Family and Tribe: But the truth is, this distinction of Families must be as evidently manifested by their geneologies at the time of the Jewes calling, by the preaching of the Gospell, as it was to Zachariah, when he prophesyed that the House of David, and Family of Nathan, and the House of Levi, and the Family of Shimei should mourne, that so the Saints then may be com∣forted in that prophesy, that it was fulfilled by themand to them. 4. For unlesse they be genealogized, how shall, they know that the Prophet spake true for the consolation of their named particular Fami∣lies. And there will be further reason of this distinction, they of Judah and Lvi being the noblest Familes, and so should be perspicuous, and exemplary to all the Jewes, for they are so spoken of that they should go before the rest in holy Worships. Either the Iewes have now evident demonstration in their genealogies for these Families, or else a Prophet must arise to shew them these Families, but the former they deny, they say that none knowes his Tribe, much lesse of which cheif Family: Then a Prophet must arise to shew them, which is of David, and which is of Levi, that the particular promise to those Families may be applyed to them, and then they in speciall only are to regard it. 5. Againe, it may be the Families of Nathan and Shimei, may be ignorant or carelesse to performe that worship, but if a Prophet declare to them which is of which Family, and call upon them, it might be a comfortable invitation to performe the worship fore told, that the bles∣sing promised might be made good to them, Zac. 13.1. And as I con∣ceive this distinction of Families, must be as evident for the performance as it was in the dayes of the prophesie. 6. Distinction was kept carefully in some Families, all the time of the Seventy Sevens.P Chr. 24. And the wisedome of God saw it was very needfull it should be so, our Lords genealogie was undoubtedly known, though much in private records, and so Zacarias, Iuc. 1. of the course of Abia, Levi, the eighth course, and Paul of Benjamin by Father and Mother, and Barnabas a Lvite. But these distinctions of Families . Tribes could not be so kept after the desolation of Jerusalem by the Romans, who lcat∣ed them into the soure winds of the Heaven for 1600. yeares toge∣ther,
the wisdome of God therefore saw it was most needfull to confound all their Tribe genealogies; and themselves now say, that none know∣eth certainly of which Family, and of which Tribe any of them be, and if any of them shall affirme otherwise, yet by Apostolicall canons we must not believe them. 7. And some moderne Doctors of theirs that follow their Fore-Fathers steps in denying the Lord Jesus Christ, write thus,Mr. Broi col. 37. in the days of Messias the King, when his Kingdome shall be setled, and all Israel gathered unto him, all they shall be genealogiced according to their Families. Thus if we will not stick to propriety, we must run to Jewish Fables and endlesse genealogies, and look with them for new Revela∣tions, and so not cleave fully to the words and commandments of the Apostles of our Lord and Saviour. 8. There is also a like necessity of genealogies, if we refer Eze. 37. to the Iewes calling yet to come, that they might know which is of Ju∣dah, and which is of Ephraim. But what hath been above written must serve for this also. SECT. II. Also it is objected and much pleaded for, from Zac. 14.10.11. &c. that Ierusalem in Chanaan shall he restored, that the Iewes shall have a Kingdome there, and all Nations must flock to them, &c. 1. ANsw. We dare not understand, Zac. 14.10. &c. literally, for if an Angell from Heaven should preach that our posterity must keep a worship anniversary at Ierusalem, namely there to keep the Feast of Tabernacles, he must be held anathema, for it is plain ludaisme and not a genuine interpretation of the Prophets meaning, and con∣tradicteth the most sure word that bath been given by any holy Angel to Daniel, Chap. 9. That Seventy Sevens are exactly accounted for, Ierusalem to be an holy City, and that in the next generation following the ending of them, the City and holy Place should have finall and utter desolations, which hath been verified for these fifteen hundred yeares, and more. 2. This of Zac. 14. hath the same analogie of faith, with Esai. 6. from month to month, and from Sabbath to Sabbath shall all flesh come to worship before Iehovah at a Jerusalem, and Mal. 1. expounds, Da. 9. & Esai. 66. & Zach. 14. From the rising of the Sun to the going down of the same, my name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be offered unto my name, and a pure offering, for my name shall be great among the Heathen saith Jehwah of Hosts. And the Lords conference with the woman of Samaria is pertinent:Job. 4. And the Apostle Paul sheweth that after our Lord and blessed Media∣our
had given himselfe a Ransome for all, and that Testimony in due time, as Dan. 9. had fore-told, then saith the Apostle, it is the will of the Lord, that men pray every where lifting up pure hands, 1. Tim. 2. 3. Must the Teachers of England teach their Auditors, that they must keep an anniversary worship, namely the Feast of Tabernacles in Low-Iorusalem in Chanaan, or else that such greivous judgements both privative and positive, as are there threatned will come upon the Na∣tion, Zac. 14.17.18. Or must I teach these things to my Children, and must my Children teach their Children so, and theirs the after Genera∣tion, as all are bound to doe, if it be understood in a literall sence, Ps. 48. (as some have intimated for Jerusalem in Chanaan) but I dare not receive this Doctrine, and therefore I say to mine, take heed what you heare, and I am assured that time will shew that such as expound other∣wise about the Jewes calling have run into many absurdities. CHAP. XXIV. Gog and Magog in Ezek. 38. & 39. must be taken properly, but Gog and Magog in Apoc. 20. must be taken in a mystical sence. SECT. I. 1. THE consent of Moses, and the Prophets, and of the New Testament, is wonderfull in places, times, and Fami∣lies, but few minde such studies, and that makes many write and speake at randome, drawing prophesies and stories to the times after the great mysterie of godlinesse was manifested
(the holy Incarnation of God manifested in the flesh) when their events are before it. 2. The Apocalyps all of it is by allusion to the old enemies of the Low-Jerusalem, as the stories of Egypt, Babel, Tyrus, &c. are alluded unto, that the heavenly Jerusalem should have many enemies in all quarters. The Apocalyps expresseth new times, states, and govern∣ments in old terms, so it openeth all the old Testament for us, that all the old enemies fought against Christ and his Kingdome then, as now Rome and Turk do against Christ and his holy City from heaven. 3. Magog, Meshech, Tubal, &c. were Nations known in Ezekiels dayes, and without mixture, and their dwelling undoubted. But now the Lord God hath made great confusion and scattering of all Nations by th warres and commotions that have been in the world, that those places are not known by such Princes and Nations. 4. The very phrase of the holy Prophet, concerning the Nations he describeth, Magog, Meshech, Tubal, Gomer, Togarmah, and the North-quarters, that is, the North quarters from Israel, with the times, do ar∣gue, that it was of Israel that returned from Captivity, from all the Countries of Ashurs and Babels dispersion (not of the Romane) And it cannot be said, that the Jews now are in such a captivity as formerly, unlesse it be the spirituall captivity to Sin, Satan, and Unbelief: at all Nations are, without the Gospel. These Considerations would make one conceive that the Prophecie of Ezekiel, chap. 38. and 39. must be be∣fore the ending of Gabriels Seventy Sevens. People must be taught to di∣stinguish between Gog and Magog spoken in propriety, and of Gog and Magog taken mystically. 5. If we regard the holy story well, we shall find that most Prophesies of these things reach not much further than the first coming of Christ, Balaam goes as far (if not further) as any Prophecie of the old Testament concerning Kingdomes, and Countries, and their affairs: He prophe∣fied of Kittim afflicting Heber (the Jews or Hebrews) and especially of Christ Jesus, the chiefest of all Hebers sons, and so all Christians, as in the Caesors and Popes. 6. Tremellius, Mr. Forbes, and many others expound, Ezek. 38.39. to be of the Nations that were under the Kingdome of Seleucidae, called the Kings of the North in Dan. 11. SECT. 2. I Think it is to good purpose, to examine some verses in Ezek 38. and 39. concerning Gog. Thus it is said, chap. 38.16. 1: And I will bring thee against my Land, that the heathen may know me when I shall be sanctified in thee O Gog before their eyes.
The Lord God of Israel did not bring Gog and his armies unto the mountains of Israel to war onely, but that the knowledge of God might be dispersed among the heathen, by the dispersion and affliction of his people, doubtlesse those wars had that effect, doubtlesse it caused after a while much dispute in many points about Religion, and the calling of the Gentiles now drawing on, and for these dayes of affliction, it is said, many shall greatly search, and knowledge shall increase, Dan. 12. So then the persecution of the two witnesses by the Beast of the Pit, caused much study in Christendome, as it did warring with mysticall Gog. The warres among the Seleu-lagida were many and great, and many fearfull slaughters among them, the which the Jews could foretell to the heathen by the Prophefles of Ezekiel, Daniel, and Zachariah, Dan. 11. and 12. as by an historicall Prophecy, and it is reported by divers writers, that the Jews were skilfull in Prophecies, and By Daniel they might have understanding to foretell many events about the Kings of the North and South, yea, and of many other great matters about the coming of Messias, Mr. Bro. hath this in the Consent of Scripture, Anno mundi 3910, that Sybil writ that which Virgil is thought to follow, and Lactantius citeth, may well be made by some witty men, taught of a Jew, or the spirits otherwise might well speak of those times what Daniel taught plainly. These things of Gog would cause much knowledge of Jehovah, the God of Israel, for it is said, the Heathen shall know the Lord God of Israel when these things should have their events above Gog and Magog, Thubal, Meshech and Togarmah, &c. There were great expe∣ctations in the world, but especially of Israel by Daniels Prophecies, which would cause great rumours among all sorts: so we may well think that Jehovah the God of Israel brought those wars of Javan, in the Land of Gog, for this purpose, that the heathen may know me, saith Jeho∣vah, the ever-living God. By these wars there was spread a report among the heathens what Laws Israel had, better and more ancient than all the heathens: and although the heathens captived the Jews,A wonderful providence of Chist. yet their Law captived the heathens. This rumour of the holy Scriptures stirred up Ptolomie Phi∣ladelphus King of Egypt, to endeavour to have the old Testament tran∣slated for his Library, which was done for him by seventy two learned Interpreters of the Jews. And this their work to this day, is called the Septuagint. 1. Ezek. 38. ult. Thus will I magnifie my self, and sanctifie my self, and I will be known among the Nations, and they shall know that I am Jehovah. Christ did make himself great over Gog, by the bloody slaughters, that he sent among his Camps, but all these troubles of Gog among the people Israel, were so ordered as is noted, that the heathen might know Jeho∣vah the Lord God of Israel, therefore there was a further Providence of Christ, to shew his power to be great over Gogs Kingdome in the leser,
Asia, when in Antiochia, the chief City of the Kingdome of the Seleucidae, (Kings of the North) the saith of the Gospel of the Son of God, so pre∣vailed, that the disciples of Christ were there first called Christians. So the seven Churches of old Gogs kingdome, doth further look to Ezekiel, That these events may plainly shew they are an history to the Prophecy of Ezekiel, and Christ in theire own language doth conquer them to his Kingdome and faith of the Gospel. 3. Ezek. 39.23. And the heathen shall know, 'that the house of Israel went into captivity fo thr iniquity, because they trespassed against me, &c. This Text will afford these meditations, 1. It must be well observed, that the knowledge of all the providences of Christ that befell Israel by As∣su, and Babel came not to Israel, as the heathens had foolish conceits of the people of God, which made them have these Proverbs in scorn of Israel, yea in scorn and desion of Iehovah the God of Israel, that they wre a Nation born to bondage, and their holy Religion was a barbarous suerstition, &c. 2. But now the heathens by the Septuagint, and the Jews being so dis∣persed among them of Iavan in Gogs countrey, and in Egypt,The heathens by these provi∣dences of Christ and by his word that they began to have among them, know what iniquity was, and for what principal ini∣quity Israel was dispersed by Assur, and Babel. did know that all these captivities came on Israel for their iniquities and aposta∣sies from the faith of the Gospel of the Son of God. 3 These things might be a means to procure much knowledge of the Lord God of Israel among the heathens, and it did so, for Zac. 8. shews that the heathens should take hold of the skirt of him that is a Iew, and so consort much with the people of God, and this reason should the hea∣thens themselves give, we have heard that God is with you: yea, further they should say, Surely our fathers have inherited lies, vanity, and things wherein there is no profi, Ier. 16. 4. The wayes of Christ are unsearchable; for this knowledge might well come among the heathens, by the Iews daily conference, and by preaching the word among them, in their Synagogues, and by the Sep∣tuagints translation. The Septuagints translation was much used among them. Saint Luke and the Apostles chiefly used that translation, and cite many times the Text of their translation (as learned men observe) and the godly Proselites did much read it doubtlesse, and the prophane hea∣then might also read it, because Horace and Ovid mock at their Sabba∣tismes, as the Chaldeans had done. It is also as true, they might have knowledge by the Iews being so di∣spersed, and having Synagogues in all great Cities, by which means Iews matters would e much celebrated. Beloved Reader, if we were better versed in the holy Scriptures of the Son of God, we should know more of him, and the mannaging of his Mediatorian Kingdome in mercy, and severity from Gen 3 15. cocerning the holy Seed, and the Seed of the Sepent.
SECT. 3. OBject. Some say, there shall be a great Battell, which hath never as yet come to passe, as Ezek. 39. and Apoc. 20. 1. But for answer we ought to understand the warriour there and here are of divers times, and peoples and places (as is above noted) That of Exckiel is of Israel and the low Jerusalem, this of Gog and Ma∣gog in the Apocalyps, is meant of the troublers of the Church (the holy City from heaven) wheresoever, and that at divers times. 2. Neither place, either of Ezekiel, or of Apocalyps most be under∣stood of any one Battel, there never was, nor ever shall be any such one Battel, as some would understand in Ezek. 39, although it be said that all the arms and weapons of war, of bows, and arrows, bucklers, shields, &c. should serve the Cities of Israel to burn seven years, and they shall not need to go to the woods and forrests, to fetch home fuell to their fires What, shall not the Cities of Israel fetch home fuell for their necessary uses, for their families to burn for seven years? We must labour to understand better, when the literall sense must admit of alle∣gories, Tremellius understands seven years to be very long, and very often, numeu fintus pro infinito. 3. Gog and Magog, and all the North quarters mentioned, are the Kingdome of the Seleucidae, one of the iron legs, Dan. 2. and explained chap. 11. and their war with the other leg, the Lagidae of Egypt, and their camping in Israel brought great troubles to them for 250 years, and moe, so that all their arms, utensils, and weapons of war should last se∣ven year for fire-wood: and because they were a continuall vexation to Israel for above 250 years, it is spoken as one battell: such are Corpo∣ration-speeches, and so the Apocalyps must be understood, not of one battel, but after the tenth Century, then the holy City of Christians was besieged in all quarters, and is still even to this day, and yet still it shall be vexed by the Beast and false Prophet (that also is a Corporation speech) for the Beast-like Empire of the Papacy, and the false Pro∣phet-Pope, and all his Clergy have been in being these 600 years and moe, and is still as yet in being, and so for a while shall be, till they be with Satan cast into the Lake of fire and Brimstone. 4. Corporation Speeches must be observed diligently, as, Man of sin, not to be attributed to one man,2 Thes. 2. but it is the Pontificality, the whole Corporation of Popes, they are that Man of sin, that Adversary that exalts himself, &c. and so the two Witnesses, are not properly two, but they are all the godly, that have, do, and shall witnesse against the Beast, and false Prophet, the holy Scripture is full of of such manner of speak∣ing. Moses often speaks to all Israel as to one man, so it is said, the
Prince of Tyrus was in Eden the garden of God,Ezek. 28. but it is not meant of that Prince of Tyrus in Ezekiels dayes, but of him in Davids and Salomons days: lie in Ezekiels dayes was an apostate and an enemy to Israel and, did not care for that honour, as to be of the houshold of God, and common weal of Israel, in which Hyram Prince of Tyrus rejoiced, 1 Kings 5. 5. It is not said, Israel shall have such a battell against Gog, but that Gog and his companies shall fall on the mountains of Israel, and this came to passe by the Ptolomies of Egypt, overcoming Gog the King of the North in divers battells. The Sel uco-lagidae made marriages to strengthen one another, but it did not take that effect, for they dealt deceitfully one with another; therefore it is said, they shall be de∣stroyed one of another, Ezek 38.21. But all this came  them for afflict∣ing the Saints of them, the holy Trinity, and Christ was a burdensome Stone to them for their oppressing Ierusalem, the holy City. 6. It is true also the Jews had (as in the Macchabees and Iosephus) a great hand divers times against Gog, as against Antiochus the vile, and afterwards also. CHAP. XXV. Some Observations on Jeremiah 30, 31, 32, 33 Chapters. IT is evident; that the Prophet must in these Chapters be taken in proprier for the return from Babels captivity, and from all other Lands of the North. where they were chiefly scattered For Jer. 30.18. Ezra and Nehemiah do shew the fulsilling of that 18. verse. Also chap. 31.23. these words, ayet, they have been often touch∣ed, and for chap 31.38, 39 Nehemiah in chap. 3. is an expresse history; for chap. 32. the godly being much disconsolate, yea Jeremiah himself for that incurabl: breach (in mans apprehension) and grievous wound in the Common weal of Israel, yet Jehovah the performer of promises doth assure them they shall return from Babel, and have a policy to buy and sell, to set and let, &c. and this promise was as sure as the order of the heavens, and chap. 33. hath speeches of like comfort.
The godly it may be were troubled,Heb. 6.8. and 10.27, 28, 29. as the Thessalonians, 2 Thes. 2.1.2. For when the Jews saw that Babel had so ruinated them, they could not chuse but have many sad thoughts of discomfort, that they should never return: So when the Churches saw wrath so full of fierie indignation on the Jews, they thought the day of Christ was at hand. The Apostle satisfied them, and the Pro∣phet Jeremiah comforts them with this speech [as yet] and the Pro∣phets often reiterate these words, which must be marked. And in all those prophesies of their return, there are many promises of Christ mixed, for he is the radix of all comforts to the Church, be∣cause God will send Christ to destroy Satans work and his seed, and to blesse us, All promises are made in him to be yea and Amen, as that promise to Achaz, although he despised it, Esai 7. and would not put the safety of his Kingdome on such promises, but would seek as his stubborn and un∣believing heart taught him, help from Assur, but because God had made promise [yet] to protect Ierusalem, the City he had chosen to put his name there, therefore he would protect it, and because our heavenly Father would send his Son to be immanuel, God with us: therefore he would yet save Iudah, Sion and Ierusalem. Ieremiahs Prophecies are of this na∣ture to be understood. Esaias before Ieremiah, had said by prophecie, that although Babel had sorely afflicted the Church,Isa. 14, 1.2, 3. notwithstanding the Lord would have mercy on Iacob, and would yet choose Israel, and set them in their own Land, the Land of Iehovah, called elsewhere the Holy Land, and plea∣sant Land, and so it was to the ending of the Seventy Sevens, but then any Land, City and Assembly, where the Gospel of Christ was and is taught, believed, and professed, was and is as holy as that Land.
CHAP. XXVI. That the Covenant of God in Christ made with Israel in Deuteronom. is the very same, that God made with Israel in Exodus and Leviticus, and so to the end of the 19. chap. of Numbers, in answer to them that hold the former to be only a covenant of works, and the latter in Deut. to a covenant of grace, because it is said in Deut. 21.9. beside the Covenant which he made with them in Horeb. Mr. Ainsworth saith, it is the same Covenant, but onely re∣newed to the children. And Tremellius speaketh to the same effect, we must remember, that Malachi in shutting up the old Testament chargeth Israel from Christ to cleave to the Law, given by Moses at Horeb, Mal 4. as the onely good means to se∣cute them from the Apostasie that would come upon them in the dayes of Antiochus Epiphanes, yea it began even in the dayes of Malachi, then stout words were spoken, that it was in vain to serve God, &c. Like the apostacy of the old world,Dan. 11.14.30 31, 32. Job 21. 14, 15. and 22.17. Mal. 3.13, 14. And the angel foretold of the lawlesse crew of Daniels people, that would deal corruptly concerning the holy covenant. 2. It was greatly consequent to renew the covenant to the children, for now all their fathers were dead of the first numbring: and so it was very fit that the children should be taught the fathers holy Religion, by way of covenant, the better to watch over their hearts, before they went over Jordan, to possesse Canaan.
3. Moses repeats divers passages of Christ in three former chapters of Deuteronomie as a preparation, and then most pathetically exhorteth to the obedience of Christ, Deut. 4. and prosecutoth the same exhortation in chap. 5. where he repeat. Exod. 20. and mark the second and third verse of chap. 5. in these words,The word one∣ly must be un∣derstood, as in Cor. 1.17. Deut. 6.13. & 10 20. and so the Rabbins of the Jews un∣derstood it, vid. Mr. Ainsworth Not with our fathers [onely] made Jehe∣vah this Covenant, but with us. This doth not onely look to them of the first numbring, that died in the wildernesse, but to Jacob, Isaac and A∣braham, and so Tremellius, it was verily the same covenant for substance, that was made with Abraham, renewed in the wildernesse, and exhibi∣ted fully and plainly in Christ, but in respect of times and persons, it is called a divers form of covenant, vid. Heb. 8. So he, yea, I doubt not but we may go higher, even to that promise of God to our first Pa∣rents, Gen. 3.15. and to Noah Gen. 6. Promise and covenant are often taken promiscuously, and it is for our comfort so to understand. It is much for our edification and comfort in the holy faith, so rounder∣stand the same promise made to our first Parents concerning Christ (for they had sacrifices to seal the covenant of their salvation to him, the same was made with Noah Gen 6. and the same with Sm (whose God was God, blessed for ever) Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, and in that cove∣nant all the visible Church were ingaged, before Moses to observe it, and it is called the way of Christ and his charge in his commande∣ments, statutes, and Laws, Gen 26.5. These were enjoyned by Christ, and by most godly tradition propagated in godly families from father to child, untill Christ commanded Moses to put all these Laws and histo∣ries of Genesis into writing, with sundry other Laws, because the Church was now grown into a large common-weal, and were to dwell in a Land by themselves, as Christs peculiar people. I will adde one Text in Leviticus to stablish our hearts in sound Do∣ctrine, chap. 25.23. The Land shall not be sold for ever; for the Land is mine, for ye are strangers and sojournens with me. This text shews what all the Polity of Christ by Moses aimed at, even faith and love in the Son of God Christ Iesus: this text hath irradiant beams over all the holy Doctrine. What a worthy exercise might a godly Oratour of a congregation, a Scribe taught unto the Kingdome of heaven, that hath his wits exercised in the word of righteousnesse make hence to an Au∣ditory? 1. You are strangers and sojourners with me. How might he amplisie this from other Scriptures? 1 Chron. 29. Psal. 39. and 119. Heb. 11. by the godly example of the Nobles of all ages, 1 Pet. 1. and 2.11. 2. From the coherence of matter in the verses preceding, and fol∣lowing, that those that confesse in heart this Doctrine of Christ, that they are but strangers and sojourners in this cursed world, they must not oppresse and vex one another, in setting and leting, in buying and selling, but deal justy and mercifully one with another.
3. It will afford an heavenly meditation to consider, how and why the Lord should say he is a stranger, and sojourner in this world, surely this Text sheweth how Light, Life, and immortality was brought to light by the Gospel in Moses, and in Leviticus. 4,All Deutero∣nomie is the a∣bridgement of Moses Sermons for one moneth. The Apostle, Heb. 9. doth di∣late much on Exodus, and sheweth it was a Covenant of grace in Christ. Deuteronomie must be understood to be the same covenant with Ex∣odus and Leviticus, for we must observe that the Son of God, the holy Angle of Gods presonce repeateth diverse Laws that were formerly com∣manded in Exodus and Leviticus, the holy Law with the exposition was first delivered in Exodus and Levitecus, See Exod, 10 21, 22, 23. and 24. chapters, and that holy covenant was made in the bood of the covenant, Exod. 24. as it is said, Assemble my Saints together, that have made a co∣vanant with me by Sacrifice, to walk in his holy Law, and as the breach of it is charged on them, Ps. 50. So it is the same covenant that is made with the children in Deut. for (as it is said) Moses repeats the Law to them, Deut 5 and makes large Expositions upon it, and then renews the covenant, even the same Covenant in Deut. 29. Note also that the same promises for obedience to the law of the Gospel, and the same curses are spoken to the fathers, as are repeated to the children, Lev. 26. Deut. 28. Yea, which must be well observed, Numbers 20.Numb. 20. to the end of that book, and all Deut. is but the history of one year, and A∣haron died the fortieth year, in in the fifth mo∣neth, Num. 33. and forwards may and must be called Deutera-nomie, a second Law, for all is spoken to the people of the second numbring, all the Fathers being dead. Consider Num. 28.2. also confer Exod. 19. with Deut. 76. and 14.1. and 26. And the covenant that Iosua made with Israel a little before his death, is but the renewing of the former, and saith Mr. Ainsworth in Deut. 29.1. Here the covenant is renewed between God and the people, and it is the same in effect with the covenant made at Horeb, Exod. 19. and 24. save that Christ who is the end of the legal covenant is here more clear∣ly recalled, and saith he on Exod. 20.2. here he especially intendeth the covenant of grace made with his people, whereby they are blessed that have Jehovah for their God, Psal. 3.12. and Tremellius speaketh to the same effect, and divers others might be cited to their sence. Men man and will speak their pleasures, but let us take heed, we do not darken Gods counsels by our own words, or by his words mis-inter∣preted.
CHAP. XXVII. Short Collections out of Genesis, Job, and some part of Exodus; shewing that the Gospell of the Son of God (Mark. 1.1, 2) was manifested and taught among the faith∣full before Moses wrote the same. SECT. 1. CHRIST the eternall word, the light and life of men, inspi∣red holy Prophets in all ages to teach men his way and charge, which consisted in Commandments, Statutes and Laws, from the apostasie of our first Parents to Israels com∣ing from Egypt, that is two thousand five hundred and thirteen years, all which Laws were to bring men to feare and love Jehovah, and to love the holy Seed, their Brethren, and to give no just occasion of offence to any, no not to the seed of the Serpent, Gen. 18.25. & 26.5. And that this holy faith and religion might abide, and the fruit of it remaine, Christ gave holy Prophets, who were of long life, and of great authority, which were a great helpe to preserve the faith for those years, and propagate the same by tradition to posterity, till those com∣mandments, statutes, and lawes were written. And because many things before the Floud and after the Floud doe set forth the Law of faith rather by way of narration then by manifest precept (though doubtlesse they were commanded even from the be∣ginning
I will breifly set down some particulars, in which the Son of God reveiled himselfe even before Moses. 1. The Holy faith for Doctrine was taught in that great and preci∣ous fundamentall promise coucernig the Son of God, his person and office, I will u enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her sd: He shall break by head, and thou shalt break his heal, Gen. 3.15.2. We are to consider that this holy promise or covenant was o∣pened by diverse providences and ordinances, which the Saints most re∣ligiously observed, that so they and their posterity might abide in the Doctrine of Christ, and not transgrese from it. For they knew, they that did not so, had no communion with the holy Trinity, but they that did abide in it, had communion both with the Father and the Son. SECT. II. 1. TThey had Sacrifices to make profession of this holy faith of the son of God taking humanity of the Seed of the Woman to be the Mediatour and Procuratour of justification, sanctification, wisdome and redemption, by his death, and sacrifice, and thus sacrifices ever taught of life com∣ing by death Now we are to consider how this way and charge of Chist was made known to Moses in commandments, statutes, and laws, he wrote the very some that was formerly practised by the Saints, Christ indeed commanded more laws to Moses, because the church of God became into a great common∣weal and kingdom; Therefore hence ob∣serve that all ancient godly tradition is according to the written word. 2. Moses is fre∣quent in this. They had Altars, on which they sacrificed their offerings, which made the sacrifices acceptable, because it sanctified the offering, sig∣nifying the in effable Divinity of the Son of God made man to uphold the humanity in that great work of our Redemption. 3. So in Moses most sericusly the Sabbath is enjoyned, like∣wise in the Prophets. The holy Trinity; Father, Son, and holy Spirit, Jebovah, Eloim appointed the Sabbath, to be a signe between him and his people, that in it they might meditate on the mighty Creation and gracious Re∣demption. And it was to sanctify them unto himselfe, and to sperate them from all the prophane, and so to be a means of holinesse in their persons, soul, body, and spirit. The Sabbath was made for man to me∣ditate how the holy Trinity rested in Christs Redemption. And the Subbath was kept before it was commanded in Exo. 20. for Moses speaks of it in Ex. 16. as being observed before, and teacheth them there fur∣ther the holy use of it, as it was at the first enjoyned, Exd. 16 23. but Israel in Egypt apostating from the faith, and following the Idols of E∣gypt, neglected the Sabbath very great ly, as the word Remember, in Exo.
20.8, doth argue, and we see that where men care not for, or do corrupt the holy Doctrine of faith, that they either neglect the Christian Sab∣bath, the Lords day; or utterly cast it off Eze. 20. And 100 manifest mise∣rable experience in our days, of rejecting the fourth Commandment and its Doctrine, as Papits doe the second Commandment, do witnesse. Again, further note, all the Patrarchs entred into the Sabbaticall Rest, from Gen. 1. to Moses times: God did not rest but in Christ, and the Sabbath taught that, and the faithfull kept it, but the Families most wickedly followd Nimrod,Gen. 26.5. and would not be perswaded to embrace the faith of Ses Tents, which was the charge of Christ contained; in Commandments, Statutes, and Laws, which Abraham observed, there∣fore the Families were cut off from the Sabbath, and all the Ordinances of it, and then followed abominable and law-lesse idolatries. The ob∣servation of the Sabbath would have kept them in the faith of the Cre∣ation of the World, and the faith of Redemption. Object. But it is not said, they kept the Sabbath. Answ. It is comprehended most certainly in the charge of Christ, which was contained in Commandments,Gen. 26.5. Statutes, and Laws, which were extant in Sems and Abrahams dayes. We may object as well, they kept not Sabbaths for the times of three hundred and fifty years, all the time of the Judges, and but little mention of it for many years together. And it is not recorded that they kept the Sabbatical year of Rest, butonly once in Zedekians reign, and he a wicked King, and it is not recorded, they kept any Iubilee yeare. But we ought not to doubt but they did keep Sabbaths, and the years of Rest, and the Jubilees. 4. In all their Sacrifices they invocated the holy name of Jehovah, the everlasting God,Psal. 116.17. Psal. 20.1.2, 3, 4. yea all of it. Gen. 21.23. This is in commendation of Abra∣hams faith, and in opposition of all the idolatries of the Families. Here I think it is meet to observe, sometimes offrings are mentioned and no Altar and sometime Altars and no Offring, and sometime both are mentioned, but not calling on the name of Jehovah, and sometime an altar was builded, and invocan was performed, and no sacrifice is mentioned,So in Moses and the Pro∣phets, holy con∣vocations are called the pre∣sence of God. False eatheys do as their first evil master did, Satan promi∣sed our first Parents wey, when himselfe was a Servant of coruntion, Satan used flat∣tring speeches and fair words, and great swelling words of vanity, Ye shall be as Gods, &c. Gen. 3.5., semetime calling on the name of Jehovah is mentioned, but no Altarnor Offering But we may be assured that all the faithfull did all three; built Altars, brought Ostrings, and made invocation, all this before Moses. 5. The place of worship where the Saints assembled is called the pre∣sence of God, Gen. 4. there he did put the remembrance of his name. The Lord God thus shewed great merey to enjoyn such assemblies for our good, we should else ay forget our MAKER and Redeemer, and by this nercy of Sabbaths and alsemblies enjoyned, we have communion with
God, our exceeding joy in the redemption by Christ, Observe dili∣gently. Although our first Parents were shut out of Eden Garden or Paradise, and from that Tree of life, yet the Lord God would have an Eden in another way for the comfort of his chosen ones. For where He puts the remembrance of His Name, that is an Eden, a Garden of God, as Israel having Gds Ordinances among them. The Ensigne of his presence was there set up for fourteen hundred yeares. And it is called Eden, the Garden of God, Ezek. 28.13. And there Christ the Tree of life was fed upon by holy O. dinances. No marvell that Salomon did sing so much of this Garden, out of which he had almost excluded him∣selfe from the Tree of life, but the Icdidia was helped to overcome him∣selfe, and all Satans Instruments. We should much think on this, what a blessing it is beyond comparison, that God should make us his Gar∣den, and set up his Tabernacle among us, the Church is called the Gar∣den of Eden, from the first we are excluded by Adams sin, but in this we are Inhabitants by faith in Christ, and there Christ doth meet with us to blesse us, Exo. 20, 21. Exo. 29.43. And so Israel was Gods Garden, Cant. 4. and so is the Church gathered from the Gentiles, Apoc. 2.7.2. Cor. 6 16.17. And marke how Ezek. 28. and Cant. 4. and Apoc. 2. doe allude to the first stories. It is said to us, to him that overcometh will I give to eat of the Tree of life, which is in the midst' of the Para∣dice of God, this looketh to the first stories. Ever since Adams fall mans corrupted nature is exceeding apt to for∣sake the faith, and to cleave to the false Doctrine of Devils. Our first Parents were pild by Satan of Gods Image, and of created comforts, and shut out of Paradise, &c. to be sojourners here, they and their chil∣dren as pilgrooms, in hope of a better Countrey by Christ, 1. Pet. 1.3, 4. We are poore grooms, pild and pold by Satan and his Seed, and so shall be till we come to our Father which is in Heaven, 2. Cor. 5.1, 2, 3, 4. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Here we are pild-grooms and sojourners in this cursed World, but live in hope of the Heavenly Paradise through the blessed tydings of the Gospell of Christ, who hath brought life and immortali∣ty to light, by that promise of Gen. 3.15. Israel being made Gods Eden and Garden, they had the Tree of life among them, so the Church of the Gentiles, while they abide golden Gandlesticks, and overcome false Doctrines and worldly lusts, they doe and shall cate of the Tree of life, and shall be nourished by it con∣tinually, Apoc. 2 & 21. & 22. The meditation of these things are a re∣freshing, but my intent is not now for manifold explications. The god∣ly soul by holy study will help to enlarge an hundred fold. 6. They had the Law of distinction of Beasts and Fowls, of clean and un cleane, and might offer in Sacrifice only of the clean, Gen. 7. the like Law of distinction is Moses. 7. They must not eat bloud, that they might have a reverend appre∣hension of the bloud of Redemption by Christ, Gen. 9. the like is in Moses.
8. They had diverse kinds of Sacrifices, the Meat-offering of Kain, but the offering of Habell was of Beasts, also they had Burnt-Offerings, as in Noah (the effect of Noahs sacrifice is termed as our Lord his passion) and Drink Offerings,Ephes. 5. and Oyl Offerings, Gen. 35. 9. They had Sacrifices often, Job 1. they knew as they asked for dayly Bread, so they needed dayly forgivenesse of sins, so in Moses they had a dayly Sacrifice; this Antiochus put downe for a while, Dan. 12. 10. The cheif Father was Preist, andJacob wrest∣led for that ho∣nour of the birthright. most commonly the eldest, as in Exo. 24, son was trained up to that function, yet for many hun∣dreds of yeares they had a peculiar Preist, Sem the Son of Noah, sir-na∣med Mechizedek (a figure of the Son of God, Sem the great and reve∣rend (Deut. 28.) the great High Pfeist of our profession) who was Sacrificer to Iehovah; God most high, Possessour of Heaven and Earth. And he was a directour and strengthner of the godly in holy wayes for five hundred yeares after the Floud (to the fiftieth of Isaac) Sem was a great stay to the Church of God, to uphold the faith so shaken, against the revelt of Nimred and the apostate Families, Gen. 11. 11. They paid Tythes to maintaine holy worships, and other charita∣ble uses; And so it was in Moses. 12. They had Teachers which were Preachers of righteousnesse (of the justification that is by faith) which of old was called propheseying, Noah was a Preacher of this righteousnesse, and the godly Peophets did teach others the ways of Christ, as it is said, Abraham would, and so did Iacob, &c. and so it was under the polity of Moses. 13. The Spirit of Christ in the Prophets did strive with the people of their days, to turn them from darknesse to light, from the power of Satan to God, Gen. 6. Neh 9. 14. Although the Prophets were godly, yet what ever profection or any earthly or spirituall comfort they had from the Lord, all was of grace, as it is said, Noah sound grace in the eyes of the Lord (Gen 6) to be saved by waters, and if of grace, it is no more of works. So Moses saith, understand this day, it is not for thy righteousnesse that God brought you from Epypt, and placed his Tabernacle among you, and gave you Chanaan, but Gods love and mercy, Deut. 9. 15. The corruption of nature taken from Parents is told, Gen. 5. that they were but flesh, that the thoughts of mans heart were evill from his youth, Gen. 6. & 8. and so all the apostate Families were un-rege∣nerate; Iob is plentifull on this subject:Col. 3.5. Rom. 12, 1. This sheweth how Abraham taught his Hous hold, and Circumcision taught the same, and the offer∣ing and burning of the rump, kidneys, and far, taught them Mortifica∣tion. 16. In matters of doubt that concerned their particulars, they went to holy Prophets to equire of God, as Rebecca did to Eber, or her Fa∣therinlaw Abraham. Gen 20. and so it was in Moses, if any doubt did a∣rise they asked Moses, and he inquired of God for them.
17. We are constantly to observe, that the same holy Covenant made to our first Parents, was continued to some speciall persons for the com∣fort of the present age, and posterity, as to Noah, Sem, Abraham, &c. 18. As occasion was offered, they made vows to God, to bind them∣selves to a watchfull care, and to chearfull thankfullnesse, and willing obedience, and so it was under Moses. 19 In all which holy Doctrine, and holy profession of it, they knew that without faith in the Son of God, it was impossible to please God: therefore in all their worships they came in faith, receiving and resting on Christ in the holy promise and Covenant, Gen. 4. Heb. 11. and so Moses taught them in Exed. 12. and in Dent. 30. 20. And by this holy faith receiving the Son of God (as Mediatour from the Father; for their Prophet, Sacrificer and King,Receiving and accepting the Son of God in all his Offices, trusting in him for doctrine, government, and exiation. That speech of John ch. 1.12. As many as re∣ceived him, is expounded of them that be∣lieve in his name. Remem∣ber it still for a more clear de∣finition of faith is not rev∣ealed. and resting on him for Doctrine, expiation and government, were adopted the sons of God, (Gen 6.) and were made heirs of the Julification that is by faith, Heb. 117. and this receiving and believing on the Son of God, was accounted of God above any righteousnesse they could do, and this is the same holy faith, that the Son of God imbreathed in the Prophets and Apostles, to teach and write, and all Moses taught the same Do∣ctrine, Deut. 30. Rom. 10. 21. Want of love to the brethen, hypocrisie, envy, ill Gestures, and hanging down conntenance, bodily exercise, murderous thoughts, &c. in the woship of God, is reproved, as in Cain, and Christ in all, Moses called them to holinesse, truth, and love, &c.See hers how the Prophets expound Moses and teach the people of their generations. and the Prophets do so expound him, Psalm 50. Esai 1. God seeth not as man seeth, the Sacri¦fice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, but the prayer of the righteous is his delight, again the Sacrifice of the wicked is an abomi∣nation to the Lord, how much more when he bringeth it with an e∣vil mind Proverbs of experience from the first and last counsels, Prov. 15. and 21. David saith. I will wash mine binds in innocency, and so compasse thine a ta, Psal 26. So Christ faith to us, Let men pray every where, fung up pue hands, without wrath and doubting, 1 Tim. 2. 22. That the holy faith of the holy Son of God might not be violated or adulterated, they were to take heed of unequall yoking, by ungodly morriages, Gen. 6 1, 2, 3, Christ in Moses speaks mch to this purpose. 23. Upon any great design they sought God by the intercession of Christs Sacrifice, as Jacob Gen. 46.1 2, 3. And Abraham still shewed the same in building altars, so did the faithfull in after times, as Psalm 20.3. 24. To all the holy Doctrine revealed, they had Seals of the Cove∣nant. The Sacrifices were Seals of the justification that is by faith, and the flood was a Sacrament of saving by waters, as Baptism is to us, 1 Pet. 3 21. Christ renewing his Covenant to Abraham instituted Circum∣cision, a seal of faith, Rom. 4. and so in Moses was the Passeover, and the other Sacrifices.
25. It was required of all that did call on the name of the Lord to be upright in heart, and to walk as before him, and to testifie their faith by good works of obedience, as Habel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Job, &c. the same is taught us, 2 Tim. 3 Tit. 3 and Christ in Moses taught all this. 26. They had washing or persons and garments, that they should hate the garment sported by the flesh, or for any defilement of worship, &c.&c. Thus for many things we may see,The Modern Doctors af the Jews say, that all was Tohu, till Abraham, that in him their glory might begin, Mr, Br. 1 in Mele. p. 75, 76; all was not a Tohu, an emptinesse from the apostasie of our first Parents, to the death of Terah, that apo∣stated to idols, but that the Gospel of Christ was revealed to out first Parents, and by them taught, as is evident to the Fathers, and great se∣verity came on despisers, neglecting the word of faith, both in the flood, and in the confusion of tongues. And we may well perceive what was their conversation, Jesus Christ, yesterday, and to day, and the same holy Doctrine in him shall be for ever. Their conversation was acccording to Christs way and charge, in his commandements, statutes and laws, as in all Genesis, and Job: it is said, they walked with God, and before God. Hence we may see and discern the close life that is scattered in the short sayings of Moses, (especially) for 2083 years, to the death of Terah, in Gen. 11. and in all Genesis, and to the twentieth of Ea∣odus. CHAP. XXVIII. Of Divine Tradition. I Think it is to some purpose to write a litle about Tradition, in refe∣rence to the last mentioned short Osevations. 1. Although the Church was taught by Tradition for 2513 years,From the crea∣tion to Israels coming from Egypt, is 2513 years. yet the written word, was no other Doctrine, thn was formerly taught, by Tradition for all Genesis and much of Exodus was first delivered by Tradition till Moses wrote Genesis. 2. The Eplstles to the Romans and Galatians. open, Gen. 12. & 15. So John 1. and 1 John 3.8. open. Gen. 3.15. So the Apostles Doctrine and wri∣tings
are answerable to Gods Doctrine by Tradition for those 2513 years.Ezek. 28. 3. That which Moses received by Tradition since Adam, or by inspi∣ration, or both, till he was 80 years old, was no other than Christ gave him on Mount Sini (which he wrote when he was shepherd to Israel 40 years) So it is said by faith Abel offered, by faith, Araham when he was tried offered Isaac, and by faith Moses kept the Paleover, and this holy faith hath commendation, for all the godly of the old Testament, Heb. 11. And the same faith we of Japhets house are exhorted to follow, that Christ may be to our consolation to day, as he was to them yester∣day. 4. And for that 2513 years, wherein Religion was taught by Tradition, Gods providence so ordered the affairs of his Church, that while the fa∣milies that hoped in Christ were few, there were (as is noted) rate pro∣phets, long-lived, and of great authority, who although the Gospel was not written (for ought we know) till Moses times, were most able to strengthen the faithfull of their times. 5. The men that continued the Gospel by infallible Tradition, from the creation to the giving of the Law, are the first ten Fathers afore the flood. Nine of them living together, were a noble consistory to uphold the faith, so shaken by the Apostasie of their own children, and the wicked families of Cain 6. Then after the flood there were nine Fathers also of the holy line that lived together, worthy Pillars against Nirods revot: these nine were Noah, Sem, Arphaxad, Selah, Eber, Peleg, Regu, Serug, Naho, and so Sem, Arphaxad, Sela, Eber, might and did instruct Abraham, Sem, Selah, Eber, and Abraham might and did teach Isaac, Abraham, Isaac and Eber taught Jacob, Isaac and Jacob the twelve Patriarchs, who left many godly that lived to Moses. Moses Parents were godly, Heb. 11. There was but 64 years between Josephs death, and Moses birth. 7. More briefly thus, Adam taught the Gospel to Mathuselah and god∣ly Lamech, they two to Noah and Sem, Sem taught Isaac, Abraham and Isaac taught Jacob and Isaac and Jacob the twelve Patriarchs, and they in Egypt held Religion sound while they lived, and Joseph lived after Ja∣cobs death 50 years, and Levi 70 years after, and there was 42 years between Levies death, and Moses birth. 8. The wisdome of God is admirable in the long life of the few fami∣lies of the old holy men, to preserve the faith by Tradition, that Sem, who lived with godly Lamech, and Machuselah, who saw Adam, taught the Gospel to Isaac. These four men, Adam, Lamech, Sem, Isaac, could reckon years above 2000, but when mens ages were divers times shor∣tened, and at lst brought to 70 years, Psal. 90. and when the Church of God consisted of many families, and that the purity of Religion was forgotten and neglected (after the death of the said Patriarchs) of the most in Egypt (for Israel in Egypt fell to the idols and Religion of Egypt) then
God commanded Moses in the wildernesse to write the word of faith, and ever after it was the Standard and Cannon of faith and manners, as all the Prophets after, and our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Apostles kept themselves to the written word, and to this all the Israel of God is enjoined. To the Law and to the Testimony saith Esaias, Starch the Siptues, saith the Lord Jesus. Let the word of Christ dwell richly in you in all wisdome, saith the Apostle of the Gentiles, &c.&c. This word of Christ, is the holy Scripture, and it teacheth us wisdome to salvation, 2 Tim. 3. we are exhorted to give heed to the old Prophesie, 2. Pet. 1. and thrice blessed are they, that with an honest and good heart so do 9. All the Patriarchs were Bishops for their families, , using all care to teach theirs from their Fathers speech, what Sem, i. e. Melchizedeck learned of Mathuselah, taught of Adam, of the holy Tri∣nity, and how our Lord should come of Judah, the King of glory, the eternall, the framer of the world, of that poor shepherd, to be man, to have his Tabernacle in us, to look through the windows within our wall, and also how Christ by death should vanquish him that had the power of death, they did know that he should come down from heaven, and did feed upon his flesh and blood, comforted in sorrow by this hope: they would not misse to catechise their sons in this point, as Joseph gave , to feed his brethren, Gen. 47 12. so all godly gave , to feed their families souls. In one word, , never used afore, but in Josephs story, with the Septuagint. Our Lord his gracious tongue calleth us to the Patriarchs story,Luke 12.42. compared with Gen. 47.12. to look to the Kingdome of heaven, not to the earth, which God hath cursed, so Mr. Br. in Lords Fam. Luke 12 42. 10. Observe a little more concerning Tradition in those 26. Collecti∣ons above, that we should consider that the Spirit of Christ in the holy, Prophets by Tradition, and in the Law written by Moses is like it self, one and the same Doctrine, and all for the glorifying of Christ, as it is said, The spirit of Prophesie is the Testimonie of Jesus: He is the mark of all, Apoc. 19. Let us consider briefly for the new Testament: therein also God took the same course, though not for so long a time by Tradition, I conceive it is a good instruction for us, to strengthen us against the false Positi∣ons of Romane Catholicks, concerning their unwritten verities, for we shall easily perceive God to be without shadow of change, whether by Tradition or writing. 1. The Birth Life and Death, the Doctrine and Miracles of our Lord Jesus Christ were by Tradition, till the four Evangelists had written them, but when written, then it was the rule of our faith, John 20.30, 31. 2. The teaching of the Corinhians, the Institution of the Supper of the Lord was a Tradition, 1 Cor. 11. ,.
3. The Doctrine of the Resurrection of the dead to them was by Tra∣dition; 1 Cor. 15. , the 1 Cor. 15. was the same Doctrine, he taught them. 4. The Apostles teaching of the Man of sin, that Son of Perdition, was a Tradition to the Thessalonians, 2 Thes. 2.5, 15. 5. Painfullnesse and diligence in a mans calling, was a Tradition, 2 Thes. 3. 6. The Doctrine of Devils should ever be remembred, or tradited to Posterity, to be warned, and taken heed of; all the Doctrine of the Gospel should be tradited or delivered by the faithfull to others, that there might be a godly feed in the Church, 1 Tim. 4 6. 2 Tim. 2.2. But all these Traditions are now written by the Apostles, yea what they taught was according to the Scriptures of the old and new Testament, as ever they proved their Doctrine b the old Testament. 7. The Doctrine to the Galathians was by Tradition at the first, but we see what the Doctrine was by the Epistle unto them, it could not be but by word of mouth at the first, and they were accursed that taught other Doctrine than the Apostle taught by preaching and Tradition, and the same was as is written; else the Apostle had incurred the anothe∣ma pronounced by himself. Again, consider the Doctrine to the Gala∣than, was no other, but what was taught to Abraham, Moses, and the Prophets. 8. Observe again, 2 Thes. 2.15. and 3, 6. These two places shew what Traditions he gave them when he was present, none other than those he wrote unto them, as confer chap. 2.5. and chap. 3, 10. So we may be sure by such conference of Scripture, that none of the Apostles gave any Tradition by mouth contrary to their writings, & contra. 9. Now then, Traditions are of two sorts, some agreeable to the Scriptures, some disagreeable, that make the word of God of no autho∣rity. The Pharisees are the true fathers of the Pontificality and Papacy for these latter, but for the former, all that fear God, and love the Gospel, and love their posterity, will follow the example of the old faithfull, Psal. 78 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and obey the commandement of the Spi∣rit of Christ, of holding fast, and standing fast in the now-written word, and the comandments of the Apostles; of our Lord and Saviour, 2 Pet. 3: So this Apostle exhorted the Saints of his Bishoprick, to regard the Prophets, and reproved them for follwing yain Traditions of their fathers, 1 Pet. 18. and 2 Pet. 1.20.21. And therefore to conclude with the Text of Romanes,The same holy Lord God as Abraham worshipped, Gen. 21.33. in chapter 16.26. When the Apostles and Disciples were inabled with the gift of tongues, they were sent, by the commandement of the everlasting God, among all Nations to preach the Gospell and mystery of Christ, by the Scriptures of the Prophets, for the obedience of faith.
Blesse Jehovah, O my soul, and all that is within me blesse his holy name. Blesse Jehovah, O my soul, and forget not all his Benefits—who mde his wayes known to Moses the Prophets, and his holy Apostles, Psalm 103.7. CHAP. XXIX Being an answer to them that say, that the Polity of CHRIST, given to Moses, was not a Covenant of grace. SECT. 1. TO answer this sorry assertion, we are to consider, that Moses on Mount ivai talking with the Angel of the Covenant, saw the whole Doctrine of our salvation, in what sort all ages had and should have it among men, what Moses saw his Law offereth to our fight. The Prophets and Apostles saw the very same, and happy are they onely, which study to see these things. The Dialogue with its annotations, and ch. 14. doth endevour to shew this, and therefore I shall not now be large: I will touch a little of Circumcision, and of the Passeover, and of the place of holy wor∣ship, with the practice of the Saints, I will speak somewhat promiscu∣ously upon all, in which the errours of the Concision will be occasional∣ly spoken of. 1. Crn cerning the Seal of Circumcision, we must mark diligently the Doctrine of it by the Lord himself, Gen. 17. and of his Apostle, Rom. 4. and of the practice of faith in the Sits, how they understood it, and made use of it, the Dialogue sheweth these things. 2. Of the Passeover, it was a Doctrine of faith in Christ, as it is most evident by Exodus 12. Heb. 11. Iohn 29.1. C. 5. &c. and the pra∣ctise
of the Saints is much to be observed, 2 Chron. 30.22.—The Le∣vites taught the good knowledge of the Lord concerning the Passeover, and they did eat throughout the feast seven dayes, offering Peace-offer∣ings, and making concession to the Lord God of their fathers. Thus the Levites taught the good knowledge of Christ-Jehovah in the Pas∣seover, as well as the Apostle, to us, 2 Cor. 11. They made confession of their sins, and of their faith in the Son of God, thus the godly and faithfull did, and did not doubt and say, Who can go up to heaven to bring Christ down to dwell in our Tabernacle? or who can go to the deep of the grave to bring Christ from the dead? but they confessed the Son of God should come to be a second Adam, and give himself our Passeover to be sacrificed for our atonement, and that the Godhead would raise the manhood to ascend the heavens to find eternall redem∣ption, and heavenly mansion for us. And the Apostle doth shew us how and what they understood of the Passeover, and the feast of unleaven∣ed bread, 1 Co. 5. So it is said of Iosias, that he commanded the peo∣ple to kee the Passeover unto Jehovah their God,2 Chron 35. as it is written in the Book of the Covenant. What is that, a Covenant of works? No such matter, but a Covenant of grace in Christ. Thus in brief of the Seals of Circumcision and the Passeover, which were seals of the justifi∣cation which is by faith, and all parts of worship that Circumcision ini∣tiated them unto, must be understood of the Doctrine of a Covenant of grace, Covenant and Seal must not differ, neither do they in Gods ordination, Psalm 119.04.128. 3. Of the places of worship, these are to be understood generally, and specially: the place of their generall worship was of all the Tribes to∣gether, the more speciall and particular places were their Syna¦gogues. O both which we must observe what Gracious Promises of the presence of CHRIST is spoken Exod 20. In every place where I record my name, I will come unto thee, and blesse thee, Exod. 29. Where I will meet with you to speak with thee, and there I wl meet with the chil∣dren of Israel, and Israel shall be sanctified by my glory, and I will sanctifie the Table of the congregation and the Altar: I will also sanctifie both Aaron and his sons to minister unto me in the Priests office,The same is said to us for all the faith∣full christians are the Israel of God, 1 Cor. 6. Gal 6. Apoc. 21 and I will dwell a∣mongst the children of Israel, and will be their God, &c. &c. Ʋnto the place which the Lord your God shall chuse out of all your tribes to put his name there, unto his habitation shall ye seek, and thither thou shalt come, Deut. 1 5. and seek his presence evermore, Psal 105.4. 1 Chron. 16.11. Who is able to utter the comfort of these Scriptures. 4. God in Christ was the Shepherd of Israel, and they are called the sheep of his pasture, and in all places where he put his name, there he fed his flock first at Shiloh, 350 years, seven Jubilees, and after, in , to the end of the Seventy Sevens, in both places three times a year, most solemnly they did enter the Courts of Iehovah, there they ascended his presence with great joy, praise, and thanksgiving, &c. The godly did
so2 Chr. 29. and 30 & 35. and when they did not serve the Lord with gladnesse of heart, see what was threatned and performed, Deut. 28 47. &c., & all were exhorted so to do, also they had other smaller Sabbatical Convocations in their Synagogues, the Tents of the Shepherds, where al∣so Christ fed them, and where God manifested himself, it was called the presence of God, and the gate of heaven, where alwayes the ladder stood, as the godly Shunamite found, and many thousand even among the ten Tribes, 2 Kings 4. Thus the Common-weal of Israel was the Kingdome of God, above 1400 years. 5. I will shew some Scriptures, where the Saints felt the comfort of the promises, when they did meet with Christ in the greater and lesser Assemblies, Psalm 65.4. Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and causest to come to thee, that he may dwell in thy Courts: we shall be satisfied with the goodnesse of thy house, of thy holy Temple: So Psal. 36. Let the god∣ly heart meditate on Psal 42 an 63. and 81. and 84. and 100, &c. and in Psal. 122. In all their holy assemblies they testified heir faith in he in∣carnation and redemption by the Son of God The twelve Tribes came to bear witnesse by their faith, to that holy Testimony of the Son of God, in expectation of him the Testimony, to be manifested in due time, 1 Tim. 2.6. and the twelve Tribes, instantly serving God, day and night, did hope of immortality in the Resurrection of the Son of God, the second Adam, the Lord from heaven, Acts 26.6, 7. 1 Pet. 1.2, 3, 4, 5. 6. A little more for the smaller Sabbaticall Assemblies, Psalm 111. It is is said, I will praise the Lord with my whole heart, in the Assembly of the upright, and in the congregation. The Hebrew word, as the learned say, signi∣fieth lesser Assembles, and in Psalm 74. it is spoken in a mournfull man∣ner, that heathens making inrodes into the Land of Israel, burnt up all the Synagogues of God in the Land, which sheweth the great benefit Gods people found in the exercises there performed. Now the new Testa∣ment is plentifull for these Sabbaticall Convocations, how the dispersed of Israel practised in all nations. This hath been plentifully shewed of late, in a book entituled, A Discourse, touching the Jews Synagogues, that there is no necessity to insist more upon this Argument. SECT. II. Now I will speak promiscuously upon what hath been observed, with refe∣rence to the errours of the concision. 1. ALthough the Law of the passe over came foure hundred and thirty yeares after the Promise, yet that was not another Cove∣nant, but a further exposition and confirmation of the former promises. The Concision mistooke the meaning of the Law, and regarded not the promises teaching of Christ, but thought after the Law was given by Moses, to be saved by bodily exercise, whereas the Law, truly under∣stood, was but an expansion or dilatation of the promises.
2. And they might have learned the same from their fore-Fathers, even the pattern of the holy faith and love that is in Christ Jesus. For Abraham, when he called upon God, he called upon him by an Altar and Sacrifice, as it is said, Abraham built an Altar, and called, on the name of Jehovah, theThe same holy saith was taught to the Gentiles at the commandment of the everlast∣ing God, and not Gentiles worship the same everlast∣ing God as Abraham did, Rom. 1. & 16.20. everlasting God, so Jacob, although Joseph had sent for him with all necessary accommidations for the journey to Egypt, yet he durst not, or rather would not proceed till he had sought God by the intercession of Christ, Gen. 46.1, 2, 3. To teach us what we should doe in all our journies and undertakings, so it is said when they sacrificed, call upon me, in the time of trouble, and I will hear thee and thou shalt glorifie me, Psal. 50 See Psal. 20.3. And so Samuel by faith in Christs sacrifice, had good report, and put to flight the armies of the Aliens. And thus also did David and Salomon, and all the Pro¦phets, and all the faithfull. 3. And Malachi by Christs command, concludes all the old Testa∣ment to Israel, to regard the holy Law that he gave in Horeb, and to look for no more Prophets till John Elias the Baptist, but study the sta∣tutes and judgements of the Law and cleave to it, that Fathers and Children might be blessed, Mal. 4. 4. And thus the Concision should have understood all, for Moses wrote not a new Covenant, for Abraham received circumcision as a seal of the justification that is by faith, and so all Israel should have pro∣fessed the same in faith, as our Lord tells them, that circumcision was of the Fathers, not so much of Moses, Joh. 7.22. 5. It is true, circumcision did further oblige Abraham to keep the way of the Lord and his charge which was comprehended in command∣ments, statutes, and laws, and those Lawes, &c. with many others that Christ ordained, Moses wrote, as hath been at large before noted. 6. And what did this way and charge of the Lord tend unto, even surely this, repentance towards God and faith in the Son of God, our Mediatour, and love to the holy Seed. Which way and charge was taught ever since the promise, Gen. 3.15. even the Breast-plate of wholesome words, Faith and Love. And all Moses and the Prophets and Apostles doe still bring their Doctrine to these two heads, Faith and Love which is in Christ Jesus. 7. This is in Habell, how he made the like holy uses of the Sacri∣fices, as 1. Pet. 4.1, 2. Tit. 2.14. he did bear on his Breast, Faith and Love, as he was a beleiver, so he ceased from sin, being purified to be of Christs peculiar people, and was zealous of good works, as it is said, his works were good, Habel by all this we see, was gathered into Christ the Head, Eph 1.10. 8. The promise saith to Abraham that in the holy Seed, Christ we are blessed, what is this blessing, but cheifly in spiriturall things in Christ Jesus, Eph. 1. Him to be our Peace-Offering, Sin-Offering, Trespasse-Offering, Whole burnt-Offering, to be our Washing, clean∣sing
hissop, &c. And in the yeares of Rst and Jubilee, to be our free∣dome (or justification) from the bondage and servitude of sin (as deaths) death and Satan, and to be our fore-goer into the mansions of the Heavenly Paradise. Luk. 23 &c. &c. Now the concision mistook all, and turned all to be their own idoll and vanity in their bodily exercise to be so justified from sins, guildnesse, and filthinesse. 9 Questionlesse Moses polity was a Covenant of grace in Christ and not a bare covenant of works. For all the ceremonies were impli∣cite promises, all sponsorious of a better hope in Christ, and because they despised to beleive this, God was a consuming fire to them, though they were never so exact in bodily exercise, Ebr. 12. examine well, how the Apostle speaks the same speach to the Hebrewes, as Moses did to them of his time, Deut. 4.24. 10. And whereas Saint Paul saith, that the Law of the Passeover came four hundred thirty yeares after the promise, Gen, 12.2, 3. He doth not speak it as his judgment that it was a new covenant, or all the Laws following it, to be a covenant of works; but reasoneth a∣gainst the false Apostles, taking up their phrase, a Law of Works, for he knew and hath witnessed that Christ delivered to Moses the Law of faith, Rom. 10. conferred with Deus. 30. 11. And whereas the Apostle saith, Rom. 10.5. For Moses descri∣beth the justification that is by the Law that the man that doth these things shall live by them. This speach he citeth as it may be supposed from the allegations of false teachersThere is a Law for the ransome of the Soul by half a Shekel of Sil∣ver, and so this was a tradi∣tion even in the Apostles dayes. The Jews dispersed sent Silver to the Temple for their Redemption, but the Apostle calls it a vain tradition of their Abothenu, not looking to Christ the end of all, read Exod. 30. 12, 13.1 Pet. 1. so did Papists in carrying the Hst to sick mens houses, &c. that so interpreted all Moses to be of the outward letter to build their comfort on themselves by bo∣dily exercise. And in this doing, they must not misle in any eternall point, no, or in ceremonials commanded, because of the course, Deut. 27.26. And suppose they could have fulfilled all externals, yet they could not have eternall life, as the reward thereof: it is not any exteri∣ors only that procures life eternall. And in deed to all externalls, was too heavy an Yoke, as the councill sheweth, Act. 15. 12 It is true, the holy Apostle useth tho phrase (as abovesaid) Law of Works, in diverse places. I have often thought, that the Apostle, in reasoning and disputing with false Teachers, useth their phrase, not that Christ in Moses commanded a Law of works to attain eternall life, ex opere opeato, theIn those days, Apostacy from the saith was great, and Christ ame to re∣vaine this de∣ection, Dan. 9. Teachers before our Lords incarnation invented this phrase (to rupting all holy Doctrine) a Law of wrks, as a Schoole∣terme of their own against the true intent of the Spirit of Christ: They by their false interpretations and expositions made all Moses a Law of works, to themselves; Christ in Moses did not make it so, for
they are reproved for stumbling at Christ, the drift, aime and scope of the Law, though they might be unrebukeable in exteriours. 13. But one would think that speech in Leviticus 18.5. truly under∣stood according to Christs intent, was part of the Law of faith, for that Text is posecuted in Nh. 9 29. but not as a Law of works, for we may suppose that the godly did not in the day of their humiliation confesse their sins, and the sins of their fathers, for not doing the Law of works but for the disobedienceAccording to Exod. 23.20.21, 22. and it is true also they despised Christ in not doing, but casting off all the exteri∣ors Christ com∣manded, and when they did so, they much lesse cared for internals. Exod. 30.12, 13. of faith to the Son of God, our Mediatour that gave to Moses the lively Oracles of faith, and Ezekiel ch. 20.11 handles this Text of Leviticus to the like effect, and that speech of Levit. 18. is among the Gospel Statutes and judgements. 14. In one sense it might be truly called a Law of works, as thus, if an Israelite had touched any unclean thing, he might not come to the Tabernacle in his legal uncleannesse, that he died not by some sudden stroak, as Nadab and Abhu, and so the Priests mast wash also, that they died not, &c. &c. These externals they might do (though they cared not for heart-worship in the faith and Love which is in Christ Je∣sus) and so have their bodily life continued, but life eternal is only promi∣sed to them that look to Christ by faith, as he was typified by Moses rites, and so bodily exercise by doing the outward works of the Law did pro∣fit a little for a bodily life, and for an outward justification in their per∣sons in respect of liberty to come into the Sanctuary, but not for eternal iustification in Gods fight. 15. And in such exteriors, the Apostle was exact, but all his Justifi∣cation by bodily exercise of the Law which he was mistaken in, were most vile to him, when he knew Christ, as he saith, Phil. 3 7, 8, 9. But the things which were vantage unto me, the same I counted losse for Christs sake, yea doubtlesse, I think all things but losse for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have counted all things losse, and do judg al things to be vile, that I may win Christ, and might be found in him, not having mine own justification, which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the justification which is of God (the Father) through saith (in Christ) So 2 Cor. 5.19.2. 16. And therefore if Levi. 18. be understood as some would, yet then God was a consuming fire to all (though exact in externalls) that de∣spised Christ, resting in the most exact bodily exercise: then what life was that in Levit. 18 17. Whereas it is said, Heb. 12. Ye are not come to the firie mountain, but are come to Mount-Sion, &c. If they of the Concision had seen the Son of God (according to the Prophets, Mark 1.1. (as Mediatour) it had been no firie mountain to them to destroy them, but if they saw him not in his Law he would be a consuming fire, and persecuting Saul, would have found him to be so, for all his Law justifications, but he was recei∣ved to mercy being in his unbelief of the Son of God. 18. Mount Sion and Ierusalem in Canaan, was a city of bondage, an Hagar,
and a fierie mountain, after the ending of the Seventy Sevens (Dan. 9.) they not giving diligent heed to the holy Angel Gabiels message, but perversely swerved from it. But Ierusalem was not a city of bondage in Davids and in Salomons times, but it was an holy City, and a faithfull Town, yea, it was so for the most part to be accounted, till the ending of the Seventy Sevens, but not any longer, they doing, cleaving to, and resting in Salems ceremonies, which could not procure justification, Acts 13.38, 39 and, 2 Cor. 3.3 must be understood to this effect. The Letter killeth, but the spirituall discerning Christ gave life, the Letter onely was the ministration of death, all were lively oracles in Christ, as e∣phen witnessed, and lost his life in that cause, and that was the great controversie, after the ending of the Seventy Sevens. 19. Israel after the flesh, and proselited Jews boasted in and trusted to exterior glories, (and so do at this day) as Gods writing in the two Ta∣bles, the Tabernacl and Temple furnished with all dignity of matter and form, and all their appendnces, doubtlesse the outward glory was great in these things of the Priesthood of Levi, but when outward things were onelySee Exod 30. 12.1 Pet. 1.18 noted above. prized, esteemed, and trusted in, and that their hearts were so vailed, that their worships terminated in the outward acti∣on: then God left all in small regard, and shook them all by Babel, and abolished them by Rome, and so all that outward glory was done away, that Christ might be known to be the building in which God delighted to dwell, and to take up his rest for ever, Psal 132. Christ was the sa∣crifice in which God was well pleased. Christ was far more glorious than all by Moses, yea he was all in all, and the glory of all. But we must not think that the ministration, that Christ ordained by Moses was simply the ministration of death and condemnation. Is not the ministration of the Gospel under the new Testament, the ministra∣tion of death and condemnation? Doth it not savour death unto death, to some, as it savours life unto life to others? So surely the Doctrine of life in Christ by Moses is the same after Moses had set down the sum of all the holy Doctrine of his Gospel Law,Deut. 13.11.12, 13, 14. then saith he from Christ, See I have set before thee this day life and good, death and evill: in that I command thee this day to love Ivh thy God, to walk in his wayes, &c Deut. 30.15, 16 &c and in vers 19. it is said, I call heaven and arth to record this day against you, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing, therefore chuse life, that both thou and thy seed may live, that thou mayest love Iehovah thy God, that thou mayest ober his voice, and that thou maist cleave unto him, so he is thy life &c. What is said more in the New Testament, if any man love not Jehovah, the Lord Iesus CHRIST, let him be anathema,1 Co 16.22. &c. and consider these Scriptures as relative to Moses, John 3.35, 36. and the speech of the son of consolation, Acts 11. 23. Acts 28. with Isa. 6. &c. &c. &c. Therefore that speech, 2 Cor. 3 is to batter down the errour of the con∣cision, who mis-understood, mis-interpreted, and so mis-believed the
whole tenour of the Doctrine of Christ by Moses, turning all his Do∣ctrine of faith to be terminated in bodily exercise. Our brethren would be exhorted to study the holy Scripture, the errors of these times are impetuous, but they shall not prevail long, although they be driven on by the principalities and spirituall wickednesses of the pow∣ers of darknesse in all hellish fury. And therefore again, let us know the ministration of Christ by Moses, was the Ministration of Justification to the Faithfull of the old Testament, and the Gospel is not the Ministration of Ju∣stification, to unbelievers and hypocrites in the new Testament, but we are to consider the controversies of those dayes were marvellous, that the Polity Christ gave by Moses should be abulished, and the Apostles teaching of this was the chief cause of all their troubles and sufferings, Gal. 6. Stephen so found. CHAP. XXX. Shewing further, that Israel under Moses law, was under a Covenant of grace. 1. IN generall it is said You have I chosen above all people, though all the earth be mine. Take this speech how you will, and still it was Grace. 2 They were all redeemed or bought from Egypt by the blood of the Passeover. Take this how we will, it was grace, in respect of the Apo∣state families, so us redeemed from Satan, and Satan dragon Cae∣sars, and from Satan-Dragon Popes. It is true, many despised the Lord that redeemed or bought them, and so did we under the new Te∣stament, and still do, wretches that we are, 2 Pet. 2 1. Heb. 10.29. how ready for Apostasie, 1 Tim. 4. &c. But yet this Covenant of grace was not without effect to eternall life to many, and the argument of the Apostle holds good in all generations, Rom. 9 10, 11. As Christ promi∣sed, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, and it is his memoriall to all generations, to all of their faith, whether Jew or Gentile. 3. So by this, if we mark well the processe of the holy story, we may
understand, that the sons of Adam never were, nor are plagued for not doing a Covenant of works, but for despising Christ, his Gospel and Kingdome. That unexpressible plague of the confusion of tongues, 2000 years, came not but for despising Christ, and his Kingdome, and the Jews are cast off for this, and to this day Turks and Papists are de∣stroyed for the same, and the ungodly, and unrighteous in the Refor∣med Churches. 4. They were under a Covenant of grace, as much as any Reformed Church under the new Testament: for all (we may fear) are not elect among the Churches, finis operis did intend them all, it did not exclude any from being under the covenant of grace to outward apprehension, though finis operantis was for the elect, as Moses speech, Dut. 29. ult, would argue, and so it is in all Reformed Churches. No Nation but Israel were the houshold of faith, and had the covenant of promise, and enjoyed God and Christ, Rom. 3 and 9. Ephes 2. and 3. therefore they were under a covenant of grace, if they had not been in that state, not one of them should have been saved, and if they had been under a co∣venant of works for salvation, they needed not to have been a King∣dome of Priests, mark that speech in Epb. 1. We which first trusted in Christ, that is, we of Israel under the old Testament, this is a most evi∣dent proof, that they were under a covenant of grace. 5. Examine well Exod. 19.4 Christ saith to Israel, I have brought you to my self, as the fathers had appointed him, as Exod. 23 21.22. He saith the same Doctrine to us in the new Testament. All things are delivered to me of my Father, Mat. 11. and so it is shewed, Christ made a covenant with them to be their God, and to bring them to the Father to reveal the Father to them;The Apostle prayeth, that we may attain to comprehend the heighth depth, length and breadth of the love of Christ, and of his calling, &c. Ephes. 1. & 3. this is a mercy past evpression, that God should make a covenant with such as we are, this is the radix of all, and therefore it is said, 1. That they were his peculiar treasure. 2. A Kingdome of Priests. 3. And holy Nation. 4. God placed his Tabernacle among them, and 5. called them the Kingdome of God, and the joyfull shout of so just, good, and mercifull a King was among them. Who can but shout with all exultation, if we did but understand our own comfort. These things, and other Scriptures shew, they were under a covenant of grace, if we be, they were, for their spirituall priviledges and promises are now conferred on us, 2 Cor. 6.16. Apot. 21.3. Ephes. 2. and 3.1 Pet. 2. conferred with Exod. 29.45. Levi. 25, 23. and 26.12. Dut. 7.6, 7, 8. now as Israel was Gods peculiar treasure, so the Gentiles called to the faith are, Tit 2.14. this well considered will make the Doctrine of A∣nabaptistrie to be abhorred of us, touching our infants. 6. If reformed churches can make it good that they are under a core∣nant of grace (and we may truly say it, blessed be the name of the Lord) then they were, and we could not be so, but because their privi∣ledges are transacted to the wild olives, and we are graffed into their olive tree, we received from them all our glory, all our spirituall things
for Christ our salvation, and all his holy Doctrine is of and from them. I will collect some brief heads of Doctrine, which were taught, belie∣ved, and professed in the common Weal of Israel. 1. They had the Doctrine of the Trinity and Unity, Deut. 6.4. 2. They had the Doctrine of election and rejection, Psalm 65. Exod. 9.16. and 33.19. 3. They had the Doctrine of the great mysterie of godlinesse. God manifested in the flesh, to be a second Adam, and to be a sin-offering, and to rise from death the third day, Gen. 3.15, and 12 3. Gen. 49. and they went three times a year, according to the Testimony, to Israel, to testifie their faith in this, this was the main. 4. They were taught, that the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, one infinite nature created the world, Psalm 33.6 Prov. 5. They were taught that the Father had committed all power to the Son for governing the church and the world, Psal. 2. and 8. and 110. Gen. 19.24. Exod, 23.20, 21, 22. all expound Gen 3.15. 6. They were taught justification by faith in Christ, Gen 4 and 15 Heb. 11. 7. They were taught Sanctification, Be ye holy, for I am holy, Levit. 19 2. 8. Under Moses Polity they had hope and rest in Christ, Psal. 130. Ephes. 2. Jer. 6.16. and 50.7. Mat. 11.29. Christ complained they had forgotten him their resting place, he was the rest of the Saints ever∣more, Jer. 50 6, 7. the Apostle saith, the Gentiles were without hope, but Israel had hope in Christ, both for remission of sinnes, and eternall glory, Eph. 2.12. Ezra 10.2. 9. The spirituall graces of Circumcision and the Passeover were re∣quired, and so practised, Deut. 10.16. and 30.6. Exod. 12. Heb. 11.28. 1 Sam. 1.7.36. 10. The heavenly inheritance was taught them, Levit, 25.23. 11. They were taught to account themselves strangers and sojourners in this cursed world, Levit. 25 23. and so David taught his generati∣on, 1 Chron. 29 and so believed himself Psal. 39. 12. They had hope in the Resurrection, Job 19. Psal. 49. Exod. 3.6 Mat. 22 32. 13. They had the holy Spirit to lead them in all holy wayes,2 Cor 4. to write the Law in their hearts, to seal to them all holy Doctrine of the word, whether promises, threatnings, commandements, all good examples, &c. One may make a large volume of this Subject. I think this questi∣on may be asked, what one new doctrine is taught in the new Testa∣ment, that the Saints of the old Testament knew not, when grievous cri∣mination of heresie by the Councel, were laid to the Apostles charge, he protesteth he taught no new principles, Acts 14.15, 16, 17. and 26.7. now if the common-Wealth of Israel had all this holy doctrine, they must needs be under a covenant of grace.
CHAP. XXXI. A Prosopopeia on Solomomons fall, by the Temptations of his idolatrous wives to the ruine of his Kingdome and posterity, in granting them the liberty of conscience for the practice of their idolatrous Rites, fra∣med by way of Dialogue between King Solomon, and Tirzana the Queen. TIzana being a Princesse of the house of Moab, and being cal∣led for did enter into the presence of King Solomon, and after some dalliance with her, and after she had fitted his humour, by giving him all the best content she could, she took the op∣portunity, and said, my Lord King Solomon, I have an humble Request to make unto your gracious Majesty, I pray you, say me not nay. K. What is that my sweet Tizana? Q. My most gracious Lord and Soveraign, I have been some years with you, & though you have often spoken to me to be a Proselite to the Reli∣gion of Israels common-weal, yet I cannot bring my heart unto it, you well know that my education was not in the way & manner of Israel, and my affection is not toward it, it is not so pleasing to me, for I cannot forget my fathers house, nor forsake his Religion: In this case I shall blemish my father, and my mother, brethren, and sisters, and people, in case I should apostatise from our ancient Religion, and in my opinion far the better, we have more zeal in ours, and many moe pleasures to give man and woman content, than is in your profession: your Religion is very crosse to mans nature, and is urged with great terrour and strict∣nesse, your Religion reproves thoughts, words, and most mens acti∣ons: no Religion under heaven doth so as yours, and that makes so few to embrace it. Yea many of Israel have formerly been more addicted,
unto ours, and the worships of neighbours Nations than to this of Israel, and they will not follow it but by compulsion of Governors, where∣as religious worships should be freely exercised according to every mans conscience; when if your subjects should be left unto, you well know which way the ride will run, it is a pitifull thing that man of a noble and free spirit should be so tyred with hard injunctions, and heavy burdens, as with bands, cords, and fetters, and it may be, that refor∣mation that your noble Father indeavoured, and your selfe have pro∣secuted, would not and will not be so convenient, as due liberty, which would be a more noble design than rigid reformation. And if Antiquity make things reverend, then our Religion is more ancient, or if not more, yet as equall for Antiquity, for ought I can learne (I am but a poor Historian being a woman) but I am able to prove the Religion of our God Chemosh, to be above four hundred and fifty years old. This I can attest and prove by your own Records, and you had yours but in the wildernesse when ye came out of Egypt. King. Then said King Salomon, what my Tirzana, doth all your speach tend unto? Queen. I humbly crave your Graces favour to finish my speach, I re∣member I have heard my Father and Grand-father speake what plen∣ty of peace, and prosperity our God Chemosh hath given us, nay what victories we have had against our mighty enemies, the Giants called Emims, and as it was your God that conquered the Chanaanites for you, so it was our God Chemosh that conquered the tall, great and terrible Giants, the Emims for us. Yea, which I am loath to utter, our God Chemosh hath given our Fathers power over Israel for twenty years to∣gether: Oh, should not we then have a most devout opinion of our Re∣ligion. But why should I your hand-maid thus be bold to speake to your royall and sacred Majesty, your great favour and respect unto me hath quickned my spirit, and then with an humble deportment of body with her face to the ground, she said, the intent of all my speach is, that it would please my Sovereign Lord the King, to grant my small request, I humbly beseech that I may have leave to build a Chappell on Mount Oliver to worship our famous and reverend Numen, Chemosh the God of my Fathers. King. What is this I heare from you my Dear? Did your speach drive at this? Oh I may not doe this; Jehovah our most holy Lord God whom we worship in his holy Temple is the true everlasting God, and he can command nothing but what is good and perfectly good, so that we need not add any thing, and he forbids nothing but what is evil, which we must not dis-annull; and he is the Sovereign Lord of Hea∣ven and Earth, and it is most requisite that man should subject himselfe to the most high, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and God above all Gods: and therefore all the Children of men must be subject to his Laws, and whosoever harden himselfe against him by disobedi∣ence
shall never prosper, and whereas you talk of strictnesse, &c. you are to know, man by nature is borne a wild asse colt, and there is no cming of corrupt nature but by a strict course of holy Laws, which to a regenerate and godly soul is an easy Yoke, and to which he is willing∣ly subject: yea, man by nature is sometime so refractory that he will not be brought unto God but by affliction, yea, neither Law nor af∣fliction profits till the Lord himselfe deal with the heart, such pervers∣nesse is in man: It is most true, that man is addicted to his own vain heart,Pro. 4. vid. the Margin. and accounts the Law of our God most vile, and is altogether contrary to God, and would run to all licentiousnesse, if there were not holy and just Laws, and good government (Gods ordinance) to keep men within bounds. 2. And whereas you talke that man is of a noble and free Spirit, you are deceived in your apprehensions, he is of a most ignoble Spirit, ready to fall into all vile opinions, and to all sin and wickednesse, and to fol∣low all tentations to evill, as for his freedome of spirit, he is free indeed to all evil as an horse rushing into the battell, and not one spark of that celestiall fire is in him to any good till God put it in him, and maintain it when he hath so infused it. Mans mind, will, and affections, are all corrupt, and in himselfe no healing can be found: How mercifull then was our God, that he from whom we fell would give us a holy Law to be a medicine and healing. Doctrine to restore the soul, as his mercy and goodnesse is unspeakable in giving us his word, for our need (which is better known to God then our selves) called for such blessed Heaven∣ly Revelation as is declared in our most holy and most righteous Law which Moses received of God for us. And we and all men must obey this Law, and be reformed by it if we will have any comfort or pro∣tection in this world or hope in another. 3. Whereas you talke of due liberty, my beloved, Tirzena I would have thee to consider all the reformation we can possibly attaine unto by the carefull industry of my royall authority, and of our Preists and Prophets, and Scholes will not come to that purity and exactnesse, that the Lord our God requires. Many imperfections in omissions, and com∣missions will appeare continually through the lusts of corrupted nature that war in our souls, by reason of the darknesse of the understanding, and the untractablenesse of the will and the affections. And none that have a feeling of the most holy Lord God, and of his truth in the heart, but find this thus. And therefore to give the least liberty to thy opini∣on is such a designe that will provoke to anger our gracious and mighty Lord God, and if I give liberty to thy opinion, why not to the abomi∣nation of Moloch of the Children of Ammon, and to the opinion of Ash∣taroth, the abomination of the Zidonians. And so in the end to root out the holy faith of the Son of God, our great high Preist Melchize∣dek, and then that you desire will prove an evill impetuos, to the downe fall of truth and godlinesse, and hardly ever be reclaimable, yea,
let me inforce this further, that there cannot be any liberty granted in any respect to false worships, and ungodly opinions, such liberty will bring us and our posterity to miserable bondage, as our Fathers felt in the Wildernesse, and in the times of the Judges: And if we that now live, and our posterity doe not keep close to that reformation which is now setled in Israels Common-Weal, Jehovah our God who is a jealous God, will destroy this glorious Temple that we have built to his name, and shake this Kingdome by many greivous calamities: and at last weed us out of this good Land that he hath given to us and to our Fa∣thers, therefore you speak most unworthily, to call our Reformation ri∣gid. And whereas you talke of pleasures, &c. you must know the plea∣sures of sin are but for a time, which wast before we can enjoy them: And all such lusts and pleasures doe but war against our souls, as for the fewnesse of them that follow our God the Lord of Heaven and Earth, it should put you to a stand whether the most doe not goe the broad way to destruction. 4. I will inform you a little more, because you boast of Antiquity in your Opinion and Religion, you are deceived: for our holy faith is as old as the first man and woman that was created, yours is but of late, from a God newly come up, and indeed no true God: Our God crea∣ted the Heaven and the Earth, and from him is our Religion, and He destroyed the World by waters for profaning the name of the Lord by false worship, and it was our God that cursed the Nations with strange Languages, for despising this our holy faith, by which most heavy plague, all the Families of the earth are in the bondage of Divels, fol∣lowing athesme and abominable and lawlesse idolatries: and it was this our God that brought up Israel out of the Land of Egypt, and de∣stroyed Pharaoh and his people with great plagues for despising this our holy Lord God and his people. And your fore. Fathers knew this, and sent for Balaam the Inchanter to curse us in the Wildernesse, and it was our God that saved our Fathers from Balaam and the King of Moab, and as for the other King of Moah by whom our Nation was afflicted, it was for falling to the idols of the Nations, 5. I must warne you of a great errour: whereas you say your Chemosh conquered the Emims for your Ancestors, no such matter, it was our mercifull God that destroyed those Giants and gave you their Land, this our mighty Lord God did, because your Father Lot loved our Father Abraham, and did follow his faith and holy Religion, and he did blesse our Father Abraham, and God blessed him, & for this cause our God gave AR unto the Children of Lot for a possession. And this you may read in our holy stories, Deut. 2.9. And your God is a false God; an idol, but our Jehovah is the Eternall Lord God who made the Heavens and the Earth, and a jealous God, and will be very angry with us if I should grant in his Land any more Temples to be builded then his own, And you cannot be ignorant of this, nor your own kindred, that our Eternall God is not such as your
false Gods, even all our Enemies being Judges, and you have heard of these things by our Preists, and Prophets, and all my Court still have told you these things. Therefore, my Dear, thou art much mistaken in all thy speaches, and thou hast been instructed in an evill manner, I have, as you have heard, spoken to you in an easy and milde frame of Language to persade thee, therefore be advised by me if ever thou hope of comfort in the World to come: Doe as your Father Lot did, and doe as Ruth your faithfull and godly Countrey-woman did, forget thy kindred and thy Fathers House, and serve the Lord our God with a good heart. Queen, Although the King had thus brayed her as wheat with a pestill in a Morter, yet her folly departed not from her. But having this denyall, tears fell from her eyes which bedewed her cheekes, ha∣ving her Handkercher in her hand, with snubs of umphs and imphs, fell at the Kings feet, and further said; Oh, and it please my gracious Lord the King, it is but to build a Chappell for me and my maids, and some of my retainers, which cannot fancy this worship of Israel. I will pro∣mise your Majesty that not one of Israel shall come into our holy places. King, This may not be done, it will be a snare unto my subjects to set up the abomination of Chemosh in Jehovahs Land. I may not doe it. Queen, Oh why doth my gracious Lord call our Religion, the abo∣mination of Chemosh, I assure your Majesty by the faith of a woman that there shall be dore-keepers, that none of Israel shall come to have com∣munion with us in our worships. It is for my self and retinue, and some of mine own Nation as they have occasion to come and see me in their visits. King, I may not, I may not doe it. I pray thee talk no more of this matter. Queen, Ymph, umph, tears: And thus shee is dismissed and departs the presence of the King: But yet another time assaults the King, and sends an honorable personage, her Brother before hand, a notable insinu∣ating crafty instrument, who on a time came to Salomons Court, and having seen and heard an excellent consort of musick, of Instruments of all sorts, as also the voices of singing men and singing woemen, which he admired and praised, and extolled the King, as if all had been of his invention,Kings and Princes when they came to Salomon, would bring their Phisitians and their learned men with them, and they would gather into writing much of Salomons speach of naturall philosophy, &c. also he magnified the King for his excellent endowments in contriving his plots for buildings, and his wisdome in naturall philoso∣phy, and his rare gift in song, and his wonderfull instinct to speake of
the natures, vitures, and effects of Trees, Shrubs, and Herbs, of fowls, beasts, fishes, and creeping things, &c. And that all Princes of the Earth that come to visit your Majesty, and bring their Physicians with them, will carry notes and writings home with them that shall stand all ages and people in great stead for ever. And as for your Religion in worshipping Jehovah in his holy Temple, he is the great God, and above all Gods, and all your performances are glorious. But yet other Nations have much joy, content and comfort, every Nation in serving their own Gods. For they cannot be perswaded to embrace your devo∣tions, as too strickt and rigid: you may not add any thing to what your God commands, nor take away any thing he forbids: But we may add any thing as just occasion calls for, and sometimes take away what was not so fitting, which things are rational to all Nations, for what is it, but may be amended? Yea, I have heard of your Preists, Prophets, and learned men that there will be a great alteration in your Religion after some certaine time, that all this service that you doe shall be en∣ded as if it had never been, for they doe say there shall be another man∣ner of Kingdome, Preists and Temple, and Sacrifices, and Worships. These things considered, is it not an hard thing to peswade your bor∣dering Princes to embrace your Religion which shall have such a great change among your selves, and therefore they may well think it is more rational to hold their own then to be of yours, seeing your own selves say it shall be changd, and therefore they suppose their worships shall continne as long as yours, for if we go to Kittim, Kedar, Chaldea, Ashur, Ammon, Egypt, &c. what Gods they have, they ever had, they change not; and they think greater glory, honor, wealth, prosperity, and victories should not befall them if they should embrace your God, for they all know that Israel hath had heavy pressures of famine, wars, and pestilence under your God, yea, of late years in the reign of the noble and royall King David your Father, and it is not likely that such mighty Nations wise and politick, should be all deceived in their worships and yours onely good and perfect. And so these causes it is that those honorable woemen, that your royall Majesty hath taken into so near society to your selfe, and into your most honorable Court, cannot be drawn to your Religion, and a∣mong the rest my most honored and noble Sister, your sacred Majesties consort, to whom you have manifested much love and respect in an high degree, for which all the Familie of my Father and Mother doe much rejoyce. And although your most excellent Majesty have given her (out of her gracious respect to her) good counsell, and shee is much greived that shee cannot give content to her most Sovereign Lord in changing her judgement in Religion from that shee was educated in: Wherefore if I may be so bold to imlore your graces favour on her bo∣halfe in granting her small request to build her a Chappell on Mount Olivet to satisfie her mind, it is but her fancy: I am sorry, for my part, shee cannot comply with your devotions, shee is but a woeman, and I
hope no hurt will accrew to your selfe or Kingdome, and if I may have leave of your sacred Majesty to say it is but too much stricknesse, for I am well perswaded of your Religion, that you may be saved with your profession, and so I hope we shall as soon also come to the Elisian Feilds of all happinesse as well as you. At this speach of the Queens Brother the King was somewhat moved, and began to be angry, but he fell at the Kings feet and besought him that he might speake two or three words more in my Sisters behalfe, and I hope I may speak freely, that you did covenant with my Sister that shee should use her conscience, and that shee and her attendants of our Nation should have free exer∣cise of their devotions, and therefore let it please your Majesty, give us leave to put you in minde of your promise, and how can they per∣form their devotions unlesse they have a place of assembly, else it had been better for her never to have come to the Land of Israel: But as you have given us cause to admire your speciall love to my Sister: So we humbly pray, let us have no occasion to distrust it: And let me say one thing more, it will marvellously affect our Nation, and it will per∣swade them that you love us, if you please to grant this request to the noble Daughter of our Leige Sovereign Lord the King of Moab my Fa∣ther, and yet one thought more comes into mind which I suppose will be pleasing to your sacred Majestie, that if you perceive any damage or danger is like to issue upon it, you may pull downe every stone of the building and levell it with the ground. King, The King said, trouble me no more with these matters; I will gant no such thing, your speaches are unsavory and full of igno∣rance: I could answer all your fond allegations, but it is not for Kings to dispute with them, that have nothing to doe with us in such cases. Where the word of a King is, there power is, and let that suffice you. This Brother went and told his Sister of all the discourse with the King, and of his denyall, at which report shee fell sick and was very sad, upon which the King gave her a visit and shee wept abundantly, now the King had some relenting in his heart, for the King perceived it was greife and trouble of heart, he spake very kindly and tenderly to her. A man of ingenuity cannot endure, unlesse a Nabal, a Fool, a Churl, to see his near and dear consort to weep, a woman endowed with excellent parts of wit, understanding, grace of speach courteous, loyall, comely, sweet and beautifull, and what may give a man content (I speak simply of man and woman) The King after he had in a most pleasant manner saluted her, departs, and then her spirit was revived. colour began to be in her cheeks, and lightsomnesse in her countenance, Although a woman be as a mans selfe very desirable, yet in case of Re∣ligion, and the worship of the most High, who is a jealous God, and his worship is pure and holy, and will not abide our Tresholds to be set by
his Thresholds. In this case we must deny our selves (as not to be ser∣vants of men, much lesse of woemen) and her that is most deare, of earthly comforts, that lies in the Bosome, and dearer then all other relations what ever, rather then to be a means that the name of Jeho∣vah be profaned by false worships, he that doth not so, the Son of God saith, is not worthy of him. The story of our first Parents must be con∣ferred, when our first Father was perswaded by his Wife with her selfe to break the commandment, it should seem shee perswaded him, for it is said; Because thou hearknest to the voice of thy wife, Gen. 3.17. and ever since woemen are weak to be seduced, but strong, even Satans engine, to seduce the man with her Enchantments (for so they may be very well called) of her eye-lids, lips, tears, &c. The Son of God laid this danger before his people, Exod. 34. And Satan put this in practise by his wicked Prophet, Numb. 24. & 25.1, 2. And Satan thus dealt by the Jannes's and Jambres'es under the New Testament times, who did and doe creep as Serrpents into Houses, to lead captive silly woemen laden with sins and led away with diverse lusts, 2 Tim. 3. The wife shee is still at home with her children and servants, and how insensibly doth shee corrupt them: And if a Woeman be active, shee will corrupt other woemen, and after a little while, men follow their wives, and so cor∣ruptions gangrenate quickly, and spread far: This the Apostl fore∣told, which came to passe afterward, but especially concerning Maho∣met and in the Papacy. Pardon this digression. Queen. About certaine moneths after that the King had called for this honourable and royall Lady, shee prepares her selfe in all costly raiment, cloath of Gold and Silver of curious needle work, with chains of inestimable Jewels about her neck, that the beames of her spankled raiment with the precious gems made radiant beams (the Sun shining thorough the Windowes) upon the wals of the Kings palaces as shee passed, and at last enters the chamber of presence, honoured Virgins at∣tending her, and presents her selfe before the King, with her orient eyes, damaske rosie cheeks, twinkling eye-lids, cherry lips, and all festi∣vity and grace of speach, with comely and pleasant deportment, fell at the Kings feer, the King took her up by the hand, and fals a kissing her, with all loving embracements, and after many pleasant passages, the night drawing on, the King and shee had sweet complacency in the bed of love, the next morning shee retyred her selfe to a close secret Chamber by, and after shee had washed and perfumed her selfe, and had put on other change of raiment very costly, craves leave to doe her humble duty, and take her leave of the King, whom when the King saw, he was taken again with her eye-lids, and closes her fast in his armes. Then shee ponders how shee may inforce her old arrand, and after much and pleasant complement with the King, as soon as shee had perceived shee had intangled him, then shee utters the oracles of the old Serpent, and saith to the King; How doe I admire and wonder
at the great respect and love that my Sovereign Lord doth manifest to me hi hand-maid, that he should afford such his amiable society; I doe perceiv your most ardent and indeared love to me above any of your honorable weo∣men, your kind and fervent desire towards me though most unworthy, hath fired my heart towards your sacred Majesty: I am your Servant and at your Graces command, and so ever will be to perform all loyall and dutifull ob∣servance: I would I were able to expresse the fervency of my heart unto my Sovereign Lord, and seeing it hath pleased the King so royally to manifest him∣selfe, I hope I may present and importune my fomer humble request unto my Lord my gracious Sovereign, for the building of a Chappell for my maids, and my Houshold Servants and Attendants, it shall not be so much for my selfe as for them, whom I humbly confesse are not worthy to come into the confines of Jerusalem your holy City,1 Chr. 8.11. much lesse into the Palaces of Zion, the City of David your Father, your love is so great unto me, which if I should distrust I should most highly offend: For I know you hate Atheisme, and as it is an, abomination unto you it greives my heart that I have no place of devotion to resort unto, when all the Ladies of Israel may resort unto your Temple and I and my maids sit moping at home all amort, as they worship their God so would I serve my God, the God of my Father. And shee gave the King a gentle stroke on the breast, and said, my noble consort, my Sovereign, my oyall Lord, I know I have your heart, I know you love me, and what shall or can be wanting from a loving heart, &c. &c. And the King being ravished with her love, and with such words sweeter then honey, softer then oyl, and all subtle flatteries, and after some discourse the King was captivated with her dalliance and snared with her devilish devices, and her hands were as bands, she perswaded him, shee enticed him, and forced him to yeild, that shee had his license to build a Tem∣ple on Mount Olivet to Chemosh, the Devil, the idol, the abomination of Moab. Now the Queen and her Attendants followed their businesses with diligence, they slacked no time. Masons and Carpenters are sent for to hew Stone, and to square and saw Timber, and so an high place was builded on the Mount of coruption, which did give a most vile affront to CHRISTS holy Templ, for they could over-look all Jerusalem from Mount Olivet. When King Salomon was thus caught by this Lady of Moab, then all the other strange wives might thus prattle, and they plyed their busi∣nesses diligently, and used all their agents, men and woemen, as there ever are in Kings Courts too many time servers and hypocrites for such projects and negotiations. And things went so ill in the State, that not one of his thousand Wives and Concubines would disswade the King, if halfe the World were a Church, a Troop or squadron of a thousand of such creatures (if suffered) would overturn all, these were so pampered with pride, ease, wantonnesse, and fulnesse of bread, that no holy Do∣ctrine could take with them, but rather the Jedidiah the precious
servant of the Lord was taken and snared, and corrupted by their plea∣sing and insinuating incantations. Those thousand wretches could not spend so little, each of them with their Maids and Attendants, as seven hundred or eight hundred pounds per annum, and some of them would consume more (like the Locusts, Apoc. 9. fruges consumere nati) And the charges in Building thir Temples was great. All these expenses might amount unto eight hundred thousand pounds per annum, if not to a million, an excessive charge, which very likely the subjects stumbled at, and after Salomons death craved ease of taxations of Rechoboam. They would not take it ill, to build stronge Cities, and Chariot-Cities, and Store-Cities, &c. that charge was for the profit of the Common-Weal. But to be at such rates, excises, and taxations for the maintenance of such a number of base creatures, the subject was not able to bear, and craved release of such oppressions. Common-Weals should have a diligent inspection that rates and taxations collected for the common profit, be not imployed by men to private interests to make great purchases, to maintain themselves, wives, and children, and flattring Attendants in pride, idlenesse, and luxury. Such coveteousnesse, selfe-love, and loving of pleasures more then lo∣vrs of God, will breed perilous times and undoe all. The Son of God to whom the Father hath committed all authority and power, who is King in Sion and the onely Potentate, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, he knows how, as we have seen, to put fire into Subjects hearts to destroy oppressours. An let Rulers and Governours consider, all the Chariot-cities, enced Cities, and Store cities which Salomon had repaired, for∣tified, and furnished with all provisions and ammunitions in the ten Tribes, and in part of Benjamin, all this fell to Jeroboom in one day.1 King 9. Thi was a punishment to the Kingdome for Salomons transgression in toleration of false Religions and bad opinions. And observe also the story of Gideon; He was a man of no great estimation and authority in the Tribe of Manasseh, or among the thousands of Israel, his was the meanest, yet when the Son of God would advance him to do his work, he made him Generall of Israels Common Weal, and he by the Sword of Christ and his own Sword avenged the quarrell of Gods Covenant against the seed of the Serpent in many exploits, upon which the people were so affected that they would have conferred on him and his posterity, the Government of the State, which he modestly and religi∣ously denyed, but his wicked opinion of will worship in making an E∣phod to worship God by, was the ruine of his house & the cause of much trouble to the whole Common-Weal, Jud. 6.15. & 8.27. & ch. 9. Wherefore let all States be admonished concerning toleration of wicked opinions in pretence of conscience, especially of the papisticall opinions, which draweth to the second death, we must remember the whoredoms of the seven-Mountain City, is a mistery, and Christ hath
said, Mysticall Babylon shall fall and be cast as a mil-stone into the Sea, and what State soever seeks by toleration to uphold it, must sink with it, undoubredly. We have the providence of Christ fresh before our eyes, how he hath resisted all cunning plots and wit of man to bring in Popery, the toleration of Popery is a countermanding of Christs project, for it is said, the Kingdomes of the world shall be our Lord Gods, and his Christs, and he shall reign for ever. Toleration of Popery doth up∣hold the King of Locusts Kingdome, and the Lord JESUS saith, he that gathereth not with me, scattereth. CHRIST saith, come out of her my people, and toleration hinders their coming. The reverend Master Perkins, in his reformed Catholike, declareth the impossibility of re∣conciliation, and which was written of purpose against such intend∣ments, and many others have testified against such State-abomina∣tions. Yea, Christian reformed States and Common-Weals, that have de∣parted from Abaddons Kingdome, should be well advised what treaties they make with the King of Locusts Subjects. But by no means to yeild them, while such aid of men or ammunition, not to receive from them any help,: It is best, that the reformed look to their own Common-Weals, States and polities. Let the holy stories of Asa and Jebosaphats Kingdome with Achabs House be our instruction, as also the holy Scrip∣tures that shew us the mis-carriage of a maziah King of Judoh, 2 Chon. 25. & 18. & 19. and 1 King. 22. confer also Esai. 30. &c. &c. Let all Princes and Common Weals take heed of idolatrous and wicked weomen, there are wealthy, politike, and of high countenance: Such have caused much greif and trouble to the Church of God and the Republick, a common mische if in most places, from Gen. 6. even to this day. But godly gracious woemen that have in them the power of godli∣nesse, to love the word of God in the holy Scriptures of the Prophers and Apostles, and to love the holy publick assemblies of Christ Jesus, and be sober, discreet, temperate, mercifull, meek, humble, chast, and be keepers at home, to train up their dear children in godly wayes, and to have a speciall care that servants doe not corrupt their children (they have been an occasion of much evill in children) also to be carefull in overseeing and guiding the affairs of the house, especially in the hus∣bands absence, &c. Such are a Crown of glory to their husbands, the Common-Weal, Town, and Family. I will transcribe a speach out of Iosephus, pertinent to this conference of Tirzana the Lady of Moab, which will also manifest the wickednesse of these apostating and perilous times, Iosephus Lib. 4. chap. 6. When Moses, the faithfull servant of the Angel of the Covenant, the Son of God, was zealous against the Apostasie of Israel especially of the
Tribe of Simeon for joyning themselves to Baal-Pebor and seperating themselves to that Shame, then Zimri to make a mutiny most audaci∣ously uttered this speach to Moses. Moses, saith Zimri, use thine owne Laws, whereunto by long use thou hast added strength and confirmation, which hadst not thou done, oft times ere this hadst thou suffred punishment, and learnt to thine own misery, that the Hebrews were not to be deluded; for my selfe, thou shalt never tie me to thy tyrannicall decrees, for hitherto hast thou en∣deavoured nought else but under pretext of Law and Religion, to bring us into servitude and subjection, and thy selfe by thy subtle and sinister means to honor and soveraignty, taking from us the pleasures and liberties of our lives (things that belong to free men, and such as appertaine or live not under any mans government.) For this should be worse then an Egyptian thraldome, to punish every man by thy Laws,, according to thine own pleasure, whereas thou thy selfe art more worthy to be punished, in that thou disannullest that thing that is approved by all mens consent, and desirest that thy decrees should be of more force then all the resolutions of all other mortal men whatsoever. But I (as touching that which I doe) in that I suppose it to be wel done, am not affraid to confesse in this Assembly; namely, That I have taken a stranger to wife, thou hearest mine actions, from mine own mouth, as from a free and resolute man, neither doe I desire that they should be hidden, I likewise sacrifice to the Gods contrary to our custome, be∣cause I suppose it to be both just and necessary, that from many I seek the truth, and not (depending as it were upon a tyrany, or living there under) to build my faith upon one onely, for no man shall please me that will have more interest in my actions then my selfe. Dear and beloved Reader this expresseth the uncleane and vile spirit of Satan in these evill dayes.
CHAP. XXXII. Breif considerations about Sheol, Gehenna, and especially about Hades, as it relates to the Article of the Creed he descended into Hell. BEloved Reader, there hath been in some places, not a little stir about the sufferings of our Lord, which doubtlesse were mar∣vellous great, even greater then can well be expressed: But yet unlesse a man will say as some say, that he suffred the ve∣ry Essentiall Torments of Hell, they will account such little better then Heretiques. The very first occasion of his assertion, was as I conceive from the mis-understanding of the holy Article of the Creed, commonly called the Apostles Creed, which speaks thus in the originall Greek, K , in Latine, descendi ad infeos, in English he descendd in∣to Hell: But this Latine and English Translation doe come much short of the large sence and meaning o the originall Greek, I meane the said Translations do not fully expresse the large elegant meaning of the Greek word Hades, as it ought to be understood, and therefore from this barren and bad Translation, sundry erroneous Expositions have been broached by sundry Authors which hath filled most Churches with much trouble. 1. The controversy between Doctor Bilson and Master Broughton was this, Whither the holy soul of our Lord Christ went at his death, hence to Hell or hence to Heaven, Doctor Bilson after much sweat, and labor for his journey to Hell, at last concludes thus in his Sermons, p. 219. we have no warrant in the word of God so to fasten Christs soul unto Hell for the time of his death, but that it might be in paradise be∣fore it descended to Hell. 2. On the other hand there are some learned men (not all) and some Churches (not all) that expound this Article of Christs
suffering the essentiall Torments of Hell in his soul in the Garden, and on the Crosse. Now that we may attaine to a true understanding of the Article, we may do well to consider the Termes Sheol, Gehenna, and Hades. 1. The word Sheol is onely Hebrew, and it hath severall exceptions, of which see Ains. in Gen. 37.35. & in Ps. 16.10. and in sundry other Authors also. 2. As for the terme Gehenna tis a dialect from the Hebrew, and  signifies properly and only the place of Torment, for in all the New Testament it is ever taken in that sence, in Mat. 5. Ma. 9. Luk. 12.5. &c. 3. As for Hades: It is very needfull that light may shine in our pathes to consider well in what sence it is used in the New Testament, and in what sence it must be taken in the Creed. It is noted by Mr. Bro and Mr. Robert Wilmos, and by some others also that Hades hath these three principall significations. 1. It signifies death to the person, or destruction to things. 2. It signifies the grave to the dead body. 3. It signifies the world un-seen, namely the world of souls to the souls that are seperated fron. he body, without distinction of joy or sorrow, that must be gathered from the person and his cause, whether it be good or bad, and therefore Hades is not alwayes used properly, and only for the place of Torment to all departed souls, but it hath two parts, the one is a happy part for all the godly, and the other is a most miserable part for all the wicked that dye in their sins. 1. Hades doth signifie death to the person, or destruction to things, as in Mat. 11.23. Thou Capernaum which art exalted to Heaven shalt be brought downe to Hades, that is to the lowest Earth, this City was destroyed by the Justice of God, because they despised the dayes of the Son of man, and did not regard his blessed visitation, although he was much conversant both in preaching and working miracles among them, so that now there is but a little remainder of it left, as Sir Walter Ra∣leigh excellently shews in P. 347. The words of Christ doé shew the once greatnesse of that City both in temporall and spirituall respects: It was one of the principall Cities of Decapolis, and the metropolis of Galilee, and though some marks of this Cities magnificence were seen in Saint Jeroms time, it being then a reasonable Burge or Towne, yet those that have seen it since (as Brochard, Bradeinbech, and Saliniac) affirm that it consisted but of six poore Fishermens Houses, and thus it hath pleased God by his providence to direct that Histories should shew the sad event of Christs propheticall threatning, and in this sence Sheol is also used in Num. 16.33. for the death and destruction of per∣sons and things. 2. Hades in Mat. 16.18. doth meane 'eath to the person as the scope of the place doth best bear it, and by the Gates of Hades is meant a
cruell and violent death which should be inflicted by the Roman perse∣cuting Emperors, & after them by the Popes & by the Substitutes of each, that should have power to fit in the Gates of Judgement, to condemne to death by greivous tortures, all those that did build their faith on the Rock, Christ, as Peter did, and for saying as he did, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God, on this Rock Christ (faith Christ) I will build my Church, so that the Gates of Hades shall not by any sentence or tor∣ture of death prevaile against them to extinguish them. 1. Hades is used to signifie the grave to the dead bodies, 1 Cor. 15. 55. O death where is thy sting, O Hades where is thy victory, Hades in this place, faith Master Bro. in Exp. Anti. P. 15. Is the holy bodies lodging. 2. In Act. 2.27. Thou wilt not Jeave me or my vitall soul in (Hades) the Grave that it should corrupt (as other mens bodies do in that space of time) before it was raised. 3. In Apoc. 6 8. death sat on a pale Horse, and Hades followed him, now that which follows death must needs be the grave to the body cal∣led Hades, and in that respect Master Bro. in Apoc. 56. calls Hades the gulfe of the grave, and saith he in P. 165. A gulfe of a grave was open∣ed, to shew how the Casas warred and perished miserably three hun∣dred years with their great Armies, and such a Sheol, Grave, or great Buriall is spoke of in Eze. 39.11. and in Es. 14. which places the Se∣venty translate Sheol by Hades, and so Hades hath as wide a mouth as, Sheol, and therefore in Apoc. 6.8. death rides on a pale Horse to hasten the death of persecutors in aboundance, and that Hades the grave follows death, and therefore the Seventy translate Sheol in Pro. 30, 15. by Hades the grave as being one of the three things that saith It is not enough, and in Pro. 27.20 Sheol and destruction are never full, in which place the Seventy have Hades. 3. Hades signifies the world un-seen, or the world of souls to the souls that are seperated from the body, without distinction of joy or sorrow, but as it may be gathered from the qualification of the person and his cause. The Apostle Peter in Act. 2. was to prove the Resurrection of Christ from death to life against the Saduces, he did not dispute of the second death, nor of a journey to Hell (as many understand Hell) nor of suffer∣ing Hell Torments in his soul, as some doe also understand Hell in Act. 2. for if he had so disputed with the Saduces. (which were many in those dayes) he had disputed besides the question, which was about the Resurrection of his dead body, and it may also be a greie unto us that such an Heavenly Article of our Christan faith, as is the immortality of the souls: passing from the dead body to the joys of God, should be so much mis-interpreted as hath been and yet is in some Churches in the aforesaid un-sound sences. The holy rational soul of the Lord Jesus Christ at his death went to
the happy part of Hades, namely to that part of it, that is called Pa∣radise. The rich mans soul at his death went likewise to Hades, but yet it was to that part of it that is called Gehenna, to torments in the lake of fire. 'Abrahams Bosome was in Hades, and the rich man was also in Hades, and there Abraham, and the rich man spake to each other, which sheweth that they were in the same world of souls, though in several distinct lots, and it is evident by Es. 66. that the godly and the wicked knw one the others case, therefore we are not to think, that Hades is low in the earth. It would be ridiculous, that in a Dialogue one should talk with another above his head millions of miles, see Bro. in Rep. 11, 12, 13. All souls ascend to Gods Throne, Eccl 3. and 12 yea even the wicked ascend to Gods Throne, in the proper term of ascending, and have their lot there before the Throne of God, and in the presence of the just, and are tormented in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb, Apoc. 14. these places shew that the place of joy and the place of torment are in sight and some near distance to each other, and that Hades is the generall term of them both. Hence therefore I conclude, that it is the person, and his cause, that must interpret the word Hades, as it respects the departed soul, either for jy or sorrow, either for hea∣ven or hell. I may exemplifie my meaning by this similitude: Traitors go from Westminster to the Tower of London, and so do faithfull State.  men also, but traitors and proditors go to prisons and torments in the Tower: and so also faithfull States men go to the Tower, but they go to the pleasant chambers, and gardens in the Tower: so in like sort all god∣ly souls go to Hades, but they go to the pleasant places of Paradise in Ha∣des, in the unseen world of souls, but the wicked when they die, their souls go to the dark places of torment in Hades, in the unseen world of souls, and in this sense also Hades is also used in heathen authors, and in some Greek Fathers, being rightly alledged as it hath been well observed by Dr. Lighfoot in Acts 2. and by M. Bro who hath also observed, that in no Greek author, nor in al the new Testament, Hades doth onely and properly signifie the place of torment, So in Phi∣lemons Jambiks, two paths are in Hades, one of the righteous, the o∣ther of the wicked. 4. The Reader may please to take notice, that in these interpritations. & explications, I have not run without good company, but learned men and Churches that have suffered much for the truth of the Gospel, have thus thought, taught, and written: P. Martin, and M. Buce, that held the stern of Religion in the dayes of King E. ward the sixth; The first at Oxford, and the other at Cambridge. These two godly men, were as good Divines as the world saw for a 1000 years (as it is testified by Mr. Bro in a Treatise of the Article printed 1599) they brought into our native Countrey the Zurick Confession, which was allowed by King Edward the sixth, and by Queen Elizabeth.
The Confession is in these words. Per inferos intelligimu, non locum supplicis designatum impiis, sed, defun∣cts sideles, quemadmodum per superas dbuc supr stes in vita; proide ani∣ma Christi descondi ad inferos, id est delat est in sinum Abrak, in qua col∣lects furunt omnes d functi fideles: ergo cum latoni secum crucifixo dixit, Hodie ers mecum in Paradiso, promisit ei consortium vita, & beatorum spi∣ritum, Licet enim Dominus descendse dictur, fit tamen, ex more quendi. Confitemur in hus articul animas esse immortales, asque potinus a morte oporealy ansie ad vitam. And the right Reverend Mr. Hen. Bullenger, the godly Tiguine Professor doth record this very Confession on the Article of Christs descent, as it is to be seen in his seventh Sermon, in his first Decade towards the latter end of that Sermon. I acknowledge that I never saw the Zurick Confessi∣on, but as I find it recorded in other mens writings, but that of Reverend Bullenge is translated into English, and printed many years ago. His words translated run thus. By (Hades) Hell, we understand not the place of punishment appoint∣ted for the wicked, but (the place) of the faithfull that are departed, even as also by the higher parts, we understand them that are yet re∣maining alive: wherefore the soul of Christ descended inro hell, that is to say, it was carried into Abrahams bosome, wherein all the faithfull already departed were gathered together; therefore when he said to the thief that was crucified with him, this day shalt thou be with me in Pa∣radise, he promised him the fellowship of life, and of the blessed souls, &c. And prefently after Bullenger calls this article, The article of the souls immortality, in this article (saith he) we confesse that the souls are immor∣tall, and that immediately after death they do passe to life, and this he speaks of all the Saints that have died in the faith of Christ from the beginning of the world. 5. I find that many learned men of our native Countrey have and do wave (as evil) the translation, He descended into hell, and do hold the two former interpretations to be impertinent to the true scope of it, and I believe that more and more will do so daily, unlesse such as be too carelesse in taking the pains of the mind to search into the true knowledge of the things of God, for indeed many Students care for no more, but what they have received by Tradition. 6. There is a Dictionary, that is called Portus Dictionary, and ano∣ther little book a kind of Dictionary, called lementa Graeca, which shew that Hades (among other acceptations) doth signifie heaven as well as hell, and some learned do record, that in the Macedonian Greek dia∣lect, children are taught to pray, Our Father which art in Hades. Also there is another little book of 22 pages, put forth lately in English by a
godly learned man, etituled, Of the Article of our Creed. Christ de∣scended to Hades, or ad inferos. This little Treatise will much help to guide common Readers on this Subject. 7. It is very usefull for the godly Reader, to be well acquainted with the severall phrases of the holy Scripture, and in speciall of the term soul the Reader may see the various acceptations of it, in Ainsworths Tables, after his translation of the five books of Mses. He sheweth that the term soul is taken. 1. For our naturall estate, Gen. 2.7. 2. For person, Gen. 12 5. 3. For life, Gen. 19.17. 4. For mind of will, Oen. 23.8. 5. For Ege, tis, ille, I, thou, he Gen. 17.4 6. For ones self, Deut. 4.9. 7. For a dead body, Levit. 19.28. 8. The word translated descended in the Creed, is of great use to be rightly understood, for in that place it doth not mean a going down, but it means onely a passage from one place to another, as they may ea∣sily observe that have but a little skill in the Greek Concordance to the new Testament, Also it is to be noted that the Pronoun ille, he, spoken of the person, must yet be understood of the Soul in this Article. He, i. e. his soul passed from his body to Hades, to Paradise, to heaven, to God. Again, it is spoken of the person, he rose from the dead the third day, this must be understood of the body. Some Objections answered. Objection 1. He was crucified, dead, and buried, and went to Hades, (to the unseen world) The third day he arose from the dead, and he ascended into heaven. Whence some object, that then Christ ascended twice, which is not likely, say they, that there should be such a Tautlgie in so short an A∣bridgement of the faith. Answer, Is it not great pity that we should be educated in the Articles of our faith, as to make such an ignorant Objection, as this? I grant, that Christ ascended twice, but yet it was in two differing sorts, as it is expressed in two severall Articles of our faith. 1. In his holy rationall soul, onely when he died on the Crosse, and that passed from his body immediately to Hades, or to the unseen world of souls, and in those dayes it was heedfull to professe this Article of the souls immortality, as an Article of the faith, because of the Sadducean Tenent. 2. Forty dayes after his Resurrection, he ascended into heaven, both in soul and body together, as the first fruits of them that sleep, 1 Cor. 15.
30. And thus you see a necessity, that the Articles of our faith, should professe his ascending twice in these two differing sorts. Objection 2. Some do scoffingly object, because we make Christ to blesse God in Psal. 16.10. and in Acts 2.27, because he would not leave his soul in She∣ol, or in Hades. Answer, 1. I have fomerly, shewed, that Nephesh, which we translate soul in Psal. 16. must be understood of his vitall soul, and not of his rati∣onall soul. But suppose it were meant of his rationall soul, yet it is not to be scoffed at, that he should blesse God for not leaving his soul in Hades heaven, till his body saw corruption, Cristopher Carlile in his Descent, shews in page 47 48. That souls in joy have an earnest affection to be united to their dead bodies, that so they may both together partake of the same glory, and Weams in his Portraiture, Pag. 33.34. speaks just to the same effect. Objection 3. Some object, that many Creeds have left out this Article, and thence they conclude that it is but a suppositious Article. Answ. 1. * Is it not strange, that any should be so far blinded as to think that the pen man of the Creed should speak of the crucifying death and buriall of the Lords body, and yet should omit to record the immortall state of his holy and precious soul? when he sent out his Spirit into the hands of his heavenly Father, seing there were so many Sadduces li∣ving in those ancient dayes, that denied the immortality of the ratio∣nall sou? 2. Some reasons may also be rendered why some Creeds might after a while leave it our. 1. when the immortall state of the soul was generally believed and not doubted of it might be left out. 2. When other tongues could not find a fit word that could attain to the large sense and elegancy of the Greek word Hades, then the learned, seeing it might be mis understood, might in wisdome rather choose to leave it out. 3. When the mysterie of iniquity did so increase, that Christendome was darkned by the smoke of the Pit, as hath been touched from Apoc. 9. and that learning was grown so weak, that most did not know whe∣ther the soul of man did ascend, or descend, or whither the godly soul went after death, I say when the holy doctrine was so exceedingly dark∣ned a it was in the 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, and 15 Centuries, and that the Article of descending to hell was so corruptly expounded then also, some
learned of latter times might leave it our, as they did in former times, for the former Reason. These things I thought necessary to advise the Reader of, because not many, though some have written of this Subject, I thought it my duty therefore to adde these Considerations for the benefit of the godly and studious Reader, and I hope that my endeavour will not be in vain in the Lord. CHAP. XXXIII Of the Phrase of Abrahams Bosome. THis Phrase, The Bosome of Abraham, did arise, and was made familiar (as I suppose) by the faithfull Hebrew Rabbins before our Lords dayes, upon this Consideration. 1. The Covenant of God in Christ was made with Abraham, and his Seed, that in his Seed all nations should be blessed, and thereupon such as desired to be partakers of that blessednesse, must be of Abrahams faith, and must testifie their desire by receiving Circumcision, the Seal of that Covenant, and then they were also received into his house, or into his Church, and so they were as it were nourished in Abrahams Bo∣some, where they were nourished by Gods Ordinances, and so Abraham was very hospital to all, but especially to them that were of the houshold of his faith; he received and nourished such, not onely with temporall, but with spiritual food, he taught them the way of God in Christ, and instructed them in the true meaning of his Commandements, Statutes and Laws, all which Abraham observed and kept, and he is commended of God therefore in Gen. 26.5. and long before this, God said of Abra∣ham, I know him, that he will command his sons and his house after him, that they shall keep the way of the Lord, that is, the true Reli∣gion, faith and obedience, prescribed for men to walk in, as in Gen. 18, 19. compared with Acts 18.25, 26. Deut. 8.6. and 10, 12. and therefore all the faithfull of his house might at their death expect to be made par∣takers with him of the heavenly City, which God had prepared for them, and therefore when they died, they might still be said to be in Abrahams Bosome; for all the faithfull, whether they continue alive in
this world, or depart this life in the faith of Abraham, are called Abra∣hams children, and therefore when they die their spirits go to Paradise, to Abrahams Bosome. In like sort, the faithfull being yet abiding here in this valley of tears, are said to sit in heavenly places, and to eat and drink with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdome of God, Mat. 8. and in this respect all the godly, whether living or dying are called Abra∣hams children, cherished as it were in his Bosome, family, and Church, both militant and triumphant. 2. The holy Patriarch Abraham was so highly honoured of God, that he is called the father of the faithfull, and the heir of the world, Rom. 4 12.13, 16. so then his house was the Bosome of the Church, into which he received all that professed the true faith for almost 2000 years, and in this respect, the eternall and blessed estate of the faithfull, might well be called the Bosome of Abraham. 3. That Parable of the rich man in Hades in torments, and of Lazarus Soul that was carried by the Angels into Abrahams Bosome, in Luke 16.19, &c. Was spoken to the unbelieving Jews and Pharisees and Saduces, especially to such as were contemners of Abrahams faith, and cared not for the dayes of the Son of Man, and therefore they were not glad to see his day, as their Father Abraham did and was glad, but instead there∣of they despised and disdained such as were godly Eleazars whose hope and help Christ is, and that he will send his Angels at their death to carrie their souls into the happie part of Hades, to Abrahams Bosome, where note that Lazarus and Eleazar,Faithfull fa∣ctors in far countries, for their Masters need not fear to be called home: so the great Lord and housholder, when the ser∣vonts are cal∣led to give ac∣count of their trading by the Talents they received, we know what the Lrd will say to them that can give a good account, Ma. 25. are but one name, though differ∣ing in Dialect. 3. That Parable of the rich man in Hades in torments, and of Lazarus Soul that was carried by the Angels into Abrahams Bosome, in Luke 16.19, &c. Was spoken to the unbelieving Jews and Pharisees and Saduces, especially to such as were contemners of Abrahams faith, and cared not for the dayes of the Son of Man, and therefore they were not glad to see his day, as their Father Abraham did and was glad, but instead there∣of they despised and disdained such as were godly Eleazars whose hope and help Christ is, and that he will send his Angels at their death to carrie their souls into the happie part of Hades, to Abrahams Bosome, where note that Lazarus and Eleazar,Faithfull fa∣ctors in far countries, for their Masters need not fear to be called home: so the great Lord and housholder, when the ser∣vonts are cal∣led to give ac∣count of their trading by the Talents they received, we know what the Lrd will say to them that can give a good account, Ma. 25. are but one name, though differ∣ing in Dialect. 3. That Parable of the rich man in Hades in torments, and of Lazarus Soul that was carried by the Angels into Abrahams Bosome, in Luke 16.19, &c. Was spoken to the unbelieving Jews and Pharisees and Saduces, especially to such as were contemners of Abrahams faith, and cared not for the dayes of the Son of Man, and therefore they were not glad to see his day, as their Father Abraham did and was glad, but instead there∣of they despised and disdained such as were godly Eleazars whose hope and help Christ is, and that he will send his Angels at their death to carrie their souls into the happie part of Hades, to Abrahams Bosome, where note that Lazarus and Eleazar,Faithfull fa∣ctors in far countries, for their Masters need not fear to be called home: so the great Lord and housholder, when the ser∣vonts are cal∣led to give ac∣count of their trading by the Talents they received, we know what the Lrd will say to them that can give a good account, Ma. 25. are but one name, though differ∣ing in Dialect. 4. Let me yet give the godly Reader, one lift more to the placing of their souls in Abrahams Bosome when they come to die: Remember that the Lord God our heavenly Father. The Lord God our heavenly Father hath but one Familie, part of it is in the heavens, and part of it in the earth, and when any one of his servants have finished their factorage, Phil. 3.20. (their Politeuma) among that part of the Familie on earth, then he sends for them home to the other part of the Familie that is in heaven (all the faithfull for the dayes of the old Testament are so cal∣led) And so the Apostle, Paul finishing his course, he went to receive his Crown in the Kingdome of the Father. So Peter the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1, 2.3, 4. 2 Pet. 1. therefore let us strive for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, that when we think or speak of death, or are near to the approaching to it, we may be without much disturbance in mind or heart, as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, &c. Delight in the stories of the faithfull, that ye may be more transformed. This made the Saints to say, Why should I fear in the evil day, when our iniquities shall compasse us about, and trip up our heels unto death; for God will re∣deem us from the power of the grave, for he shall receive us to himself, to Abrahams Bosome, Psal. 49. Christ, the second Adam, the Lord from hea∣ven, hath destroyed death, and him that had the power of death, he
hath opened the gates of death, and himself hath passed through them, to deliver the children of God from the guilt and bondage of sinne, and from the fear of death, unto which we are subject. Christ our life is our justification, for he hath freed us from the sting of sinne by his preci∣ous death and Sacrifice,The Law the strength of sin, Gen. 2.17. and 3.19. and although the curse of the Law is the strength of sinne, yet he hath fulfilled the Law for us, and so became a most perfect Mediatour for us; For such an high Sacrificer and Mediatour it became us to have, who was holy, harmlesse, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens. Again, death is but an harbenger to bring us to Christ, it is said, that death is ours, its our ser∣vant for our good. Again it is said, that Christ is our life, and there∣fore death must needs be our advantage,2 Cor. 3.12. Phil. 1.21. and therefore we should not be troubled at that which is so advantagious to us, we cannot live holily, righteously, and comfortably, unlesse we live above the fear of death, 1 Cor. 15 34.58. 2 Cor. 5 15. to be well instructed in this point, is a point of great wisdome, Moses prized it at a high rate, when he pray∣ed, Teach us to number our dayes, that we may apply our heartes to wis∣dome, namely to be prepared for death, and Salomon doth exhort us say∣ing, Remember thy Creatour in the dayes of thy youth, before the evil dayes come upon thee, Ezech. 12. This wisdome is to be valued above gold and silver, and the most precious Jewels of the earth, but it is wonderfull how averse our hearts are by nature from the practise of this heavenly wisdome, we commonly put off the thought of our death, untill the Lord bring upon us bruising miseries, and then we begin to think of God and Christ, and of death, as it is said, Destruction and Death say we have heard of the fame of this wisdome with our ears, and when men come to the doores of death, then is this wisdome of some fame with men, then they send for a godly Minister, or for a godly neighbour, whose person it may be they hated in the time of their health, and ab∣horred his teaching with their godly counsels. Death was a terror indeed to Aristote, though a wise and great Philo∣sopher, and to all such Job doth call it the King of terrours, that speech of Bildad in Job 18. doth import, that God is a just God, to whom all souls must ascend to have their judgement, and so in 2 Cor. 5. knowing the terror of the Lord, &c This made that most miserable Cardinal to say, that he had rather lose his part in Paradise, then his part in Paris. But let all the godly be still mindful, that though they depart from their Families hereon earth, yet they shall still continue to be of Gods fami∣ly, they go from brethren and sisters here, to brethren and sisters there, and above all remember the dying, or rather the living words of the Lord Jesus the night before his death, Job. 13.14, 15, 16, and 17, chap∣ters, Oh the ineffable love and care of our blessed Mediatour for his a∣postles, and for all his faithfull servants to the end of the world.
CHAP. XXXIV. Some Propositions and Expostulations con∣cerning the true nature of Christs Suffer∣ings. 1. BEloved Reader, we are yet further pressed, and orthodox Churches are called up as Troopers against us (about the true nature of Christs sufferings) we acknowledge that the very remembrance of them is reverend, and doth joy us, not annoy us. I know we shall not fight but treat: for they may perceive that we have otthodox Churches with us, and as learned Leaders though perhaps not so many: That is not much materiall, for the book of God must lie between them and us, and they and we must search the holy pages, that so by them we both may be composed. 2. It is to be lamented, that the Article of our Lords going to the joyes of God taught in , should be taught people of suffering hell-torments, that when we should be taught to understand Hades of heaven, we have been instructed to understand it of hell, but we hope it will be so no more, to put darknesse for light, and evil for good. 3. But now of latter times some learned seeing the native meaning of the greek in the Article, will neither justifie the translation, nor the ex∣position that is made upon it, and yet still they do labour to make the matter good about hell-torments, and therefore they have endevour∣ed by the Scriptures to fortifie that opinion, which how orthodoxly they have done, it is hoped men may have leave to examine, which if it be denied, then we shall transfer the infallibility of the Pontifician chair (justly decried) to them whom we know will not arrogate any such thing. 4. Are Orthodox Churches so infallible in all things, may not godly learned men utter unsound Doctrines, and much miscarry in matters of sound judgement and application? It is possible they may. There were in times past three godly Divines, none like them now on the earth, yet
they did not speak of God right things, although they thought they spake in the behalf of God. I will transcribe what is spoken of them. 5. Hear now my reasoning, and hearken to the pleading of my lips; will you speak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him? will ye accept his person? will ye contend for God? Is it good he should search you out?Job will tell us that it is not good to defend Gods cause with an error, pretending Re∣ligion. or as one mocketh another, do you so mock with him? He will surely reprove you, if you do secretly respect persons. Shall not his excellency make you afraid, and his dead fall upon you? Your remembrances are like to ashes, and your bodies to bodies of clay. Hold your peace, &c. Job 1.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. They were holy men, and spoke most excellently, and we see by this, that though they exalted Gods holy justice in their applications, yet they spake not righteously, as Christ testifieth for the comfort of his ser∣vants, Job in chap. 42. Thus Job spake to his three friends, and we hope we speak to friends, and we doubt not but they will remember that we ought not to have the faith our glorious Lord Jesus Christ in re∣spect of persons. 6. And we hope our learned will say, as Elihu, What shall we say to him, for we cannot order our speech by reason of darknesse, Job 37. and they will acknowledge they know in part, and prophesie in part, and we hope they wil not be angry, if we judge of what they say, the Apostle would not be angry, but said, Judge ye what I say? 1 Cor. 10. and we hope they will not deny, but that they may know (we will not say, be instructed in) the way of Christ more perfectly. 7. May not godly Ministers now speak things not fitting about the sufferings of our Lord and Saviour, as if any shall say, that he suffer∣red the second death, els we should have suffered it: if any shall say, he suffered Hell torments for the same reason. If any shall say, that the Son of God was not Christ for a time, when he underwent the wrath of God. Also if any shall say, that in his agonie in the garden, or upon the Crosse, he did enter the lists to fight the great combate hand to hand with his angry Father, &c.&c. Are these speeches, if any shall so say, the Dialect of the holy Spirit in his holy Scriptures which he hath conveyed unto us, by his infinite, good, and gracious providence? Again, if some good men shall have these passages, that it was not the violence of his crucifying, that cut off his life, but the wrath and curse of God swallowed up his spirit, and made his heart fail him, and that his soul left the body in that agonie. Thus, if any shall say, then one may inter, that he felt not the love of God his Father, before, he yielded the Spirit, but died in a cloud, but we are taught of God,Gen. 3.15. Psal. 22 the ci∣cle of ii. that when the Seed of the Serpent was so busie in breaking the foot soal, piercing the hands and feet of the * morning Star, that he with an holy peaceable, and quiet spirit, as a sheep dumb before the shearer commit∣ted the cause to him that judgeth righteously, and prayed, Father for∣give them, for thy know not what they do. And it is said in Psal. 16. that he did alwayes behold the Lord his heavenly Father before him,
and that he was still at his right hand, that he could not be so moved, or disturbed in soul as some talk. The world was made to shew principa∣lities and powers, and thrones, and dominions, the contrary that he would rule all his souls affections, in an holy and glorious manner, and by that Justice make a new world, and that he the second Adam had pow∣er over his affections more than ever the first Adam, he had power to trouble himself with grief and sorrow, and to be affected with grief and sufferings from others, and to rejoyce as he saw occasion: he could rule his affections as he did the waves of the sea, so far to go, and no further, such an holy Majesty appeared in all his Sufferings at all times, but espe∣cially in his agonie in the garden, and sufferings on the Crosse. In all which he carried himself beyond the comprehension of men and angels. And this doth more appear, if we consider the sweet, heavenly and calm conference he had with the repenting thief on the Crosse. He that bade us possesse our souls in patience, that so in all afflictions we might enjoy our selves, he much more did enjoy himself by his pa∣tience and obedience, and as David in type saith, I waited patiently for the Lord, and he enclined his ear unto me, and saved him from the pit of tu∣multuous as flictions. So the Lord Jesus was from the fear of death, Heb. 6▪ 5.7. Again he loved his enemies, and did good to them that hated him, and prayed for them, and bade us so to do, and to overcome evil with goodnesse, thus the LORD ruled his affections, and gives us grace for grace so to do, as Stephen, &c. And in that agonie in the garden there was an angel from heaven, strengthening and comforting the humanity, so that he was neither for∣saken (as some understand forsaken) of the Father, nor of the holy Angels, and if God had forsaken him, what Angel durst come to com∣fort him? That we may better understand the term forsaken. The rich man (we know) was forsaken of God, for he was in torments under the second death, and therefore he might not have so much as a drop of wa∣ter to cool his luxurious palate, much lesse might he have an holy Angel from heaven to comfort him: and it is most evident that Christ was not forsaken, for the holy Angel did not come from heaven to the Lord Je∣sus without a commission from the heavenly Father, to whom the huma∣nity prayed, and therefore in the closure of his meritorious sufferings, his heart rejoyced, and his tongue was glad, and being full of faith and comfort he said, Father into thy hands I commend my spirit, and then he sent out his Spirit from his Body. 10. Again, if some shall say, the wrath of God (as some under∣stand wrath) killed Christ. We should be well advised what passeth the doore of our lips; for Christ our holy Mediatour said, I have power to lay down my life,J. 10.17.18. and have power to take it again This commission or com∣mandement, have I received from my Father, also he said, As the Father knoweth me, so know I the Father, and lay down my life for the sheep—therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I may
take it again, Joh 15. As the Father hath loved me, so have I loved you, continue ye in my love If ye keep my commandements, ye shall abide in my love, even as I have kept my Fathers commandements, and abide in his love, John 16. Ye shall be scattered every man to his own, and shall leave me alone, and yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me. These Scriptures and o∣thers are prevalent to make one think and believe that he was not under, the wrath and curse of God in any respect or consideration (as some un∣derstand wrath) not for one minute of an hour, for surely the Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ was a most willing Mediatour and Redeemer, for us to God our Father, he gave himself a voluntary and free will of∣fering to our heavenly Father for us, and therefore no force did sepa∣rate his soul from his body, but he did that act by his own power, as the formality of his Sacrifice. 11. Many Ministers have some expressions about our Lords Sufferings, which many godly, and learned Divines have testified are not warranta∣ble, for what are we dust and ashes to speak of God and our Redeemer, and Mediatour, words not comely, but we all should consider, that a Moses spake nothing of his own mind, nor Christ in the flesh, nor his Apostles from him, but what he taught to Moses and the Prophets. So we should all speak from his holy Scriptures, sound Doctrines, whole∣some Doctrines, plain and pregnant speech, sound and uncondem∣nable. 12. The assertion, that our Lord suffered hell-torments in this life, in his soul (or body) appeareth not true by any Scripture. True modesty would look to Scripture phrases in handling our Redemption. The ill translation of the Article, and the bad interpretation of it, but especi∣ally the mistaking of the Greek , hath filled the Church of Christ with much trouble, and the smoke of the Pit, which hath trou∣bled many mens eyes, hath also been a great occasion thereof, but now the smoke is much vanished, blessed be God. 13. Beloved Reader, we desire to reverence his word by whom the world was made, his word is of sufficient authority with us, and to that we through the strength of Christ will cleave as to our life, & therein is these words, And the Bread that I will give is my flsh, namely, that I will give (in sacrifice) for the life of the world, Joh 6. And this is at large ex∣pounded, Heb. 9 But Christ being come, an high Priest of good things to come, by a greater and more perfect Tabernacle, not made with hands, I mean not of this building, neither by the blood of goats nor calves; but by his own blood he entered once into the holy place, having obtained eternall re∣demption for us. And it is also sald, that without shedding blood is no re∣mission, and this is further amplified: How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your consciences from dead works to serve the living God. And for this cause he is the Mediatour of the new Testament, that by the means of death (this is not the second death) for the Redemption of the transgres∣sions
that were under the first Testament they which were called might receive the promise of the eternall inheritance.Chap. 10. By the which will we are sanctified through the offering the body of IESUS Christ once for al, He. 10. And so he doth most sweetly and confortably speak in verse. 19. 20, 21. and in deed all that Epistle doth open. Ioh. 6. most heavenly. 14 Againe, if Orthodox Churches (yea, the most Orthodox) are so infallible that our faith must be resolved in part into their com∣mentaries, expositions, &c. how cometh it to passe that some do differ in Church discipline from so many reformed Churches, both from Gene∣va, Zurick, Scotland, Low Countries, &c. that they neither scotize it with the Scot, nor Genevate it with the zealous Towne of Geneva, they fall, it may be, under reproof, in not agreeing with, but discording the judgement and practise of the best and reformed and Othodox Churches in discipline. And they had need to shew very good reasons of their so dissenting, or they are to blame, or else some may say, came the word of God out from them, or came it unto them only? yea, and may not others say so too of the best Orthodox Churches, came the word of God out from, or came it unto them only? that men must be judged by them. But the Holy Ghost hath charged us, in his cause, be not the Servants of men, 1. Cor. 7. 15. The Pontificians said, that our fore. Fathers had the word of God from them, and therefore they did by Egyptian Bondage tye our An∣cestors to their Doctrines and Councils, and at last to the Pontifician chaire, and caused all Christs Witnesses to mourne in Sack-cloah that would not obey their constitutions. But the Lord our God hath deli∣vered us from that house of cruell bondage of mysticall Egypt. And Christ saith his Magistrates must not bring his people back againe to E∣gypt, Deut. 17. 16. We are of Japhets posterity: And it is said, God perswade Japheth to dwell in the Tents of Sem. So that we must know Japheth our Father and his faithfull posterity had their faith from Sems Tents, and not from the Tent, of the seaven Mountaine City of King Abaddons Kingdome. And this holy faith was taught to Japheths posterity, by the Sons of Sem, the Prophets and Apostles. The Apostles and Disciples taught this faith from the Scriptures of the Prophets, at the command∣ment of the everlasting God, to the Romans, Corinthians, and Galatheans, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, Thessalonians, and the other Churches of Asia round about from Ierusalem to Illiricum, and also to Dalmatia, Croatia, and doubtlesse to Spaine, Rom. 15. And also to great Brittany, as ancient Histories, and as Master Speeds chronicle declareth. Therefore it is good for us to hearken to the counsells of the Scrip∣tures of God, the surest way is to consult with them. It saith, aske for the old way, Ie. 6. Againe it saith, he that knoweth God heareth the Apostles, 1 Ioh. 4. Againe we are built upon the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himselfe being the cheife corner
Stone, Eph. 2. And againe for perfect resolution, we are referred to the words of the holy Prophets, and commandments of the Apostles of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3. And Iudas Thaddaus speaks the same. And they all were the Sons of Sem. The Scriptures of the Prophets is the faith of the Nations, and it is said often in the Apo∣calips that Christs Witnesses suffered for the word of God, and the Testi∣mony of Jesus, with which orthodox Churches must have no vote gran∣ted to them to stand in competition for authority. 17. The Pontificians so dealt and deal that they will in shew at last yeeld honour to the Scriptures, so that we rest in their Churches expo∣sition and determination, we suppose godly Christians should not be like them in such tergiversations. Beloved Reader do not conceive that we dis-esteem and reject Ortho∣dox Churches, or the writings of their godly Divines, no such matter: But we highly prize them as most gracious mercies of Christ Jesus our Lord, and as they by whom the Temple of God in the Heaven of the Church hath been opened, and the, Ark of his Testimony manifested. And as such by whose voices, teaching and, praying, writings, and mar∣tyrdome, they have made such a thunder in the Pontifician Ayre, that the smoake of the Pit is much vanished, and a tenth part of Abaddons polity is fallen. And the great Angell of the Covenant, the Lord Je∣sus Christ will still send forth godly Teachers, that the whole Barth shall be lightned with his glory, Apot. 18. We may and ought to have them in godly and respectfull remembrance for their works sake, both of them that are departed, and of those that are yet living, though we make them not Lords of our faith. 18. I will yet-speake a little more of that speach which some affirme of Christ that he did combate with his Angry Father, shall the Son of God, faith that treatise, suffer the second death for you? Shall he un∣christ himself, for a time for you? Shal he suffer Hel Torments for you?Treatise of saced divinity published by Mr. John Downame, in the yeare 1619. p. 1. 317. Shall the Son of God enter the lists to fight the great combate hand to hand with his angry Father for you? God the Father to fight with God the Son: Is this good Orthodox Theoligie to be sould or taught in Pulpits, or in Books to the people of God, doubtlesse there is a deep silence of such expressions in the Book of God. And from this time forwards, I hope our godly Teachers, will have the same deep si∣lence, and make no stir, and utter plaine Doctrines and then our inven∣tions will vanish. 1. I pray consider it well, did the humanity of our blessed Saviour and Mediatour, cope or combate with the Divine nature of the God the Father? Alas! the humanity, though holy, yet it was but a finite creature created in time, and what is a finite creature to the infinite creator? The humane nature in a such a case could not abide the least touch of contradiction: But I suppose we must seriously consider that the humanity did evermore from its conception subsist in the Divine
nature of the second person (by way of support) else it could not have borne such sufferings as the holy Scriptures declare from the power of Satan, death, the grave and wicked men, ye, else his oblation of himself had not been meritoriously satisfactory, and therefore it is a strange saying that the second person did combate with the first, for then the whole person of the Mediatour must combate if any combating, my heart, yea, whose heart would not tremble at such speaches as this? 2. Gen. 3.25. doth hold forth a declaration of a combate of enmity between the seed of the woeman (namely her speciall seed Christ) and the seed of the Serpent, but no mention is made of any such combate with God the Father, nor that the second person should combate with himselfe; the humane with the divine nature: Thes Tenentes do jar much from the Divinity that was taught to our first Parents in Gen 3.15. 3 Is it not strange Doctrine to affirme that the Lord Jesus with the helpe of a holy Angell did combate with God, for in his Agony in Luk. 22.43. there was an Angel sent from Heaven to strengthen him. 4 Was it ever heard that a Mediator between two at variance, should fight with the stronger opposite to bring him to agreement? some Teachers in teaching such Doctrines must use some such like strange language. 5. The Lord Jesus did commit his cause to him that judgeth righte∣ously, 1. Pet. 2.23. This argueth (although the Divils instruments did in wrath and rage condemne him for a sinfull malefactor, as all pre∣secutors did the Martyrs yet) that God the Father did not judge him for a sinner, but justify him as one that was every way Innocent, there∣fore the Heavenly Father did not combate with his Son, for he com∣mitted himselfe and his case to him as to a righteous judge. 6. The Martyrs in like sort being Baptised with the Baptisme of Christ in sufferings, committed their case to their Heavenly Father, in Apoc. 6.10. And therefore as Gods essentiall curse, Hell Torments, and the second death, was not on the Martyrs in their sufferings, so neither was it on the true and faithfull. Martyr the Lord Jesus in his suffer∣ings.
CHAP. XXXV. Observations upon that distinction which some make between the locall and penall Hell: which penall Hell some say Christ suffered. 1. SOme say that God can make a mans Hell here in this world, by which speach they must meane (if they meane any thing to he point in dispute) that God can so plague a man in this world that the will not bring him to eternall destruction in Ge∣henna in the world to come: I grant that the eternall Lord can do what he pleaseth both in Heaven, Earth, Sea, and in all deep places, Ps. 135.6. 2. The same eternall Lord can also make a Heaven for his children here in this world, and never bring them to everlasting glory in Hea∣ven, in the World to come: But Teachers, must not bring their own speculations, let them be true seers to shew us the visions of God from his word rightly expounded, even his Revelled will, for nothing else belongs to us and to our children. 3. The holy Scriptures tells us that there is an everlawing blessed estate for all Gods chosen not heare but in the Heavenly paradise, though each blessing is here begun by justification, is freedome from sin, death, Satan; whence ariseth peace and joy in the holy Ghost, the first fruites of the spirit: In like sort there is a place appointed for the Re∣probates, for their everlasting torment not hear, but in Hell, in the world to come, hut yet man) times some of these Reprobates have, as it were the first fruites of Hell torments here, in this world, by an accusing and tormenting conscience, as Kain, Caligula, &c. but not the essentiall Torments of Hell till they come into the very place of Hell it selfe. 4. And yet some have said that locall Hell is but a circumstance, and that our Lord suffered penall Hell, though not in local Hell: In like sort they may as well affirme that the glorious place of Heaven in
the world to come is but a circumstance, and so in this sence all cre∣ated things in respect of God are but circumstances. 5. Is it well done to make this distinction and division of a penal Hell from a local Hell, our old English Saxon word. Hell, will not manage this cause, neither for Plaintiff nor Defendant. It is not Hades unto which our English Saxon word doth not answer but Gehenna, that Ecclesiasticks must cleare about our Lords sufferings for all the Saints do in one kind or other undergoe Hades in this world, and so our Lord did undergoe Hades in two of its significations, namely first in the death of his humanity, and then after that death he was put in Hades the grave, and thirdly the wicked Ecclesia of he Council was a Gate of Hades to him, and so in like sort all wicked Courts are Gates of Hades: to the Godly Martyrs, & therefore such Courts are in Mat. 16. called the Gates of Hades, godly Martyrs must remember when they are going to such Courts that they are going to the Gates of Hades, and yet they must incourage themselves, and one another, with that speach which Christ spake by his Spirit to the Churches in Apoc. 1. Fear not I have the Keyes of Hades and death, and that he shewed in his own Resurrection, and will one day in ours, so then persecuting Tyrants, have not power simply over the bodies of the godly, they could not retain Peters body in Prison, Act. 12. nor the bodies of Paul and Sylas, Act. 16, Christ did not as yet grant leave to their persecutors to turn the Keye to let them into Hades, though afterwards he did, Steven and James were the first Martyrs of the New Testament that were sent to Hades, and Christ Je∣sus was the last great Martyr of the Old Testament whom they sent to Hades, for the old Testament was not disannulled, but by his death. 6. It is a great comfort that persecuting Tyrants can send the godly no further but to Hades, they cannot send them to Gehenna, and if our Ecclesiasticks will Rest hear, we will, with good will, joyne with them both our hands and heart, that Christ Jesus under-went a penall Hades in this world: But I suppose they mean further matter, or else they mean nothing, as indeed their meaning in this distinction wil come to nothing. 7. This then I conceive is the state of the question, Whether there is a penall Gehenna in this world out of locall Gehenna in the world to come: I say that Gods blessed Book doth not shew this, and if any shall yet affirme it, we must be bold to say it is but a dreame, not the Revelation of God, which evidently sheweth that penal Gehenna is in locall Ge∣henna. 8. Let these Scriptures be dilligently marked for the place and punishment of Gehenna, Mat 5.22.29.30. Mat. 23. Mar. 9.43.45.47. Luk. 12.5. And now compare these Scriptures with the case of our Lords sufferings, whether any sparke of the penall fire of Gehenna fell upon his soul or body? or whether that cursed worme did ever gnaw one minute of an houre on his spotlesse soul, as some dread not to affirme.
9. Hence the Reader may see the necessity of a right translation and exposition of the words Hades, Gehenna, &c. the learned keep the tearm Amen in all Translations, and many Greek words are commonly under∣stood, and how full is the English of Latine words, see H. Bro. in L. Fam. 60. 10. Observe that in all the Evangelists, the holy Spirit doth not change phrases (as in other passages he doth) to put Hades for Gehen∣na, or Gehenna for Hades, neither is Hades taken properly and only in all the New Testament, for the cale of Reprobates: But still the per∣son and his cause must judge of the matter where Paradise in Hades is the lot of the godly and Gehenna in Hades is the lot of the wicked. 11. Shall we say we deale worse then Papists about the holy Article of the Creed, they say the Lord went to Hll to Triumph over the Devills and not to suffer: Let all the godly put away this mis-interpretation of that holy Article, first, that Christ went to Hell only to Triumph over the Devils, and secondly, that pore jejune distinction (which doth not honor but dishonor the pen of a godly Scholler) of our Lords suffering Hell Torments in a penall Hell out of the locall Hell. CHAP. XXXVI. Observations on the second Death which some say Christ suffered. 1. THE Lord Jesus did not undergoe wrath as some understand it, of the Essentiall wrath of God, which also they tearme the second death, must not we understand that whatsoever is in God is God touching the holy deity; and therefore as God is love, that is essentiall love, so his wrath is essentiall wrath, and can we say that Gods essentiall love was ever on Christ, and there∣fore he is called his beloved Son or the Son of his love, Joh. 15.10. Act 2 25. yea, and that God loved him to the end as he loved the Brea∣thren, Joh. 4. 2. When he was in that most lad agony, in the Garden, there was an Angel sent from Heaven to strengthen him, which doth evidence that he was not then under the second death, nor under essentiall wrath, for
then it had been impossible for any Angell, or for all the Angels in Hea∣ven to strengthen him or support him. 3. If he had suffered the second death which is indeed the effect of the essentiall wrath of God, he could not have said My God my God, why dost thou leave me, and, O my Father if it be possible let this cup passe, and Father forgive them, and Father into thy hands I com∣mend my Spirit, neither could it be said that he did alwayes behold the Lord at his right hand (as a loving Father) Act. 2. and that he did abide in the love of his Father, Joh. 10. 4. When did the Lord Jesus suffer the second death? was it before he dyed the first death, or after, or did he suffer both deaths together? if you say yea, then give me leave to ask who told you so, did the Apostles at the commandment of the everlasting God? Preach that Doctrine out of the Scriptures of the Prophets for the obedience of faith? shew that Scripture evidence by Scripture rightly expounded, or did he suff the second death after the first? 5. When and where did the Lord of glory suffer the second death? if you prophesy to the going down of the Sun there will be no answer, many Ministers will have the Lord to suffer the second death before the first, or in, and with the first: They must exercise their wit (but there is no Divine Revelation) what to affirme, least their imaginary Do∣ctrine be lost. 6. We must know and that by Divine Revelation, that as there is a first death, so there is a second death, and that the second death must be after the first, or else if we by our wit and learning will affirme the contrary, we shall destroy Gods order, but no accutenesse of wit or learn∣ing shall ever be able to doe that; what! shall mans subtill wit nullifie the order of nature, of first and second, and the order of Divine Revela∣tion which sheweth that the first death is in this world, and the second death in the world to come. The Spirit of Christ said by Iohn, He that overcometh (namely that overcometh the will of Tyrants by suffering the first death for the truth) shall nor be hurt of the second death. Apoc. 2.11. Lo, the second death is after the first, and in another world, and this doth more fully appear by Apoc. 20.14 and by Apoc. 6.7.8. which placles doe shew, first the place of punishment, secondly the punishment it fese, thirdly, the time when, fourthly, the company that shall he there heaped together, first, the place expressed is the lake, secondly, the punishment everlasting paine in fire and brimstone, thirdly, the time is at the last and great day of account when the Books shall be o∣pened, fourthly, the company is the Devill, the Beast, the false Pro∣phet, the fearfull, the un-beleiving, the abominable, and murtherers, and whore-mungers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all lyars, &c. of which second death the Lord Jesus the holy one of God under-went to part. Therefore that Doctrine that saith so must be reprobated with the Reprobates.
7. The primitive Churches were admonished to take heed of run∣ning after Fables, and reformed Churches have as much need to look about themmen, yea, Schollers, yea, Ecclesiasticks are as subject now to fa∣bles and heresies as ever; it hath been observed that Ecclesiasticks have ever been the Founders of fables, errors, and heresies: The Apostle gave warning of this to the Bishops of the Churches, and tells them that of themselves men should arise speaking perverse things to draw Disciples after them, Act. 20. 8. Some have not traversed these pathes as they should, because they have been so long instituted and catechised in the Doctrine of Hell-Torments, and that Christ the holy one of God was a sinner, yea, the vilest of sinners, and when they are by modest arguing put out of their beaten track, they run wild and utter sesquipedalia verba, on their brea∣thren, that have and do desire that they and their Children should walke with God in soundnesse of judgement, and in a godly and sober conversation. 9. Let it be further considered that the first death hath foure parts, first, the death of the soul in sin, secondly the death of the body by sick∣nesse, thirdly, the seperation of the soul from the body, fourthly, the putrifaction of the body: First the death of the soul is thus expressed, dead in Trespasses and Sins, Eph. 2.1.5. and so the Gospell is said to be preached to the dead in Sin, 1. Pet. 4.6. Secondly, the death of the body is effected by fire, water, sicknesse, &c. Thirdly, the body being dead, then the soul departs to the world of souls untill the day of the Resurrection: Fourthly, the putrification of the body is evident by constant experience: The first part of this death, namely the death of the soul in Sin could not betide the Lord Jesus because of his ineffable conception in the sanctified womb: The second part the Lord Jesus under-went when he gave himselfe a Ransome for the many, when he was put to death as a Malefactor on the Tree; Thirdly his seperated soul went from his dead body to the world of souls to the happy part of Hades, to Paradise, to Heaven. The fourth part of this first death the Lord did not undergoe, his body saw no corruption, Act 2. 10. Now as no man may say that Christ was spiritually dead in Tres∣passes and Sins, so neither must they say that he under went the second death, none ever under-went the latter that had not first undergone the former. 11. I will cite two or three godly Authors that expound the second death. First, Mr. Ainsworth speaketh thus on the signification of the word death, in Gen. .17. Finally death is the everlasting perdition of soul and body in Gehenna, from the presence of the Lord, and called the se∣cond death in Apoc. 2. & 20. & 21. Mat. 10.28. Mat. 9. he, saith Hel, but Gehenna is in the Text he citeth, therefore I dare be bold to put Ge∣henna
for it, see his Notes on Ps. 16. and see his communion of Saints, last page. Secondly, Trelcatius saith, that by second death is meant Eternall death. Thirdly, Master Perkins in Gal. 3. speaking of the parts of the second death, saith, the second degree is an absolute seperation from God, but saith he into this second degree of this death Christ entred not, because the Lord saith in the midst of his passion, my God my God, and saith he this absolute seperation could not be without the dissolution of his per∣sonall union, Master Perkins was cautelous of going too far in the point of Carists sufferings, and yet it seems he would have the Lord to suffer a part of the second death, and he makes that part to be in this World, and the other part in the World to come (and that he suffered the first and second death together, or rather some part of the second death be fore the first) is this good Divinity, is this Doctrine Orthodox. 12. Master Perkins also saith in Gal. 3. That whole Christ Man-God, God-man was accursed, is not this another fearfull speach, though with limitation, and some retractation as it were in the same breath, and yet all that he saith, doth not, nor cannot expiate the horror of the position. 13. Master Perkins also saith further on Gal. 3. The second death is a seperation from Gods favor and speciall love, whereby God ceaseth to be their God: This is the second death indeed: But now let any godly man, whether learned or un-learned, bethink himselfe, whether ever this did befall the humanity of the holy one of God. This speach conferred with some other mens, doth infer that Christ was not Christ for a time. 14. It is affirmed by some that Christ bore our deserved curse for our Redemption: But bring this generall position to particulars, and then they make a stand, as first of the spirituall death in sin, secondly, touching the corruption of the body after death, and some are affraid to say that he suffered any part of the second death. 15. It is not mans inventions of Tantundem & Equivalency (as it is urged by some) touching the sufferings of Jesus Christ that will reach and fathom these things: The holy Scriptures are plaine for our in∣struction and consolation, there we may see who hath Redeemed us, and how, and for what, and from what, and unto what: A godly man and diligent searcher into the Scriptures, affirmeth that he hath writ∣ten thus, or to this sence, to a Reverend Divine, though I have former∣ly (saith he) used their expressions that oppose the idem, and affirme that Christ only suffered the Tantidem, because I clearly saw that their way of arguing was sufficient to confute them that affirme that Christ for our Redemption did suffer the essentiall Torments of Hell, yet not∣withstanding (saith he) I do not fully approve of their way of arguing from the Tantundem (as if it were the right way of opening Christs sa∣tisfaction,
because they also run in the vindictive Court way of Justice (which is not the Scripture way) for most of them that are for the Tan∣tundem (not all) do affirme that Christ suffered the vindictive wrath of God in some degree, according to the Court way of vindicative Justice, though yet they doe also deny that Christ suffered Hell Torments. But the way of Christs sufferings for our Redemption that I approve and follow, is this, namely that he suffered as a combater, from his ma∣lignant combater Satan, according to Gods declaration of the combate of enmity, between the seed of the woman, and the seed of the Serpent, for God proclaimed a liberty to the Serpents seed to peirce him in the foot-stooles as a sinfull Malefactor on the Crosse: And therefore hence it followes, that all Christs outward sufferings must be inflicted on him, from the enmity of his proclaimed enemy Satan. And secondly, hence it follows that his internal sufferings were from the sence of his outward, or Christ as he was true man, must be tenderly touched, and deeply affected with his evill usage, and therefore it was Gods will and Christs owne covenant, that all h internall humane passions of Feare, Sorrow, and sadnesse in his vitall and animall soul, should arise from the evill usage of his malignant combater Satan (namely from the evill usage of Satans malicious and envious instruments) And thirdly, this way of Christs sufferings was in Gods wisdome ordained to be for his preistly perfection, or for his consecration, before he could make his death to be a most perfect Sacrifice, and this way I beleive hath more sound foot∣ing from Gods declaration, in Gen. 3.15. then the contrary Court way of vindictive Justice, and I beleive that all other after Scriptures that speake of Christs sufferings are but a commentary on Gods declaration, in Gen. 3.25. And therefore Gen. 3.15. must be the Standard that must rule and order all our interpretations. Thus he. 16. Let men therefore take heed how they force beleife, they know not what, about Hell Torments, and let them not think that what they write and speake, Ex Cathedra, must be beleived of Hearers without double controll or examination, truly it is naturall to Ecclesiasticks to affect supremacy, it is as proper a sin to them by nature, as Tyrany is to magistracy. 17. But the Lord Jesus is come downe to see the buildings of our instructors, and in some things he doth confound their Language, but I hope and pray that he wil also be pleased to send fiery cloven tongues to sit on them, and to touch their lips with a live coale from the Alter to take away all iniquity, that we in our own Language may heare them speake the wonderfull works of God. And I doubt not but in due time, our only Doctor Christ will so in∣forme them that they will say with holy Job, once have I spoken but I will not answer, yea twice, but I will proceed no further, I have utter∣ed that which I understood not, things too wonderfull for me which I knew not.
CHAP. XXXVII. Some Observation on 2. Cor. 5.19, 20, 21. with Gal. 3.13. SECT. 1. He made him to be sin for us which knew no sin, that we might be made the Righteousnesse of God in him. 1. THe Translation must be considered: It had been well if our godly and learned Translators had rended it, he made him to be a Sin-offering for us, for so the GenevaI suppose two millions of Ge∣neva Bihles ave been Prin∣ted, that have conferred 2. Cor. 5.21. to Exod. 29.14. Translation teacheth to render it, and understand it: I think neer a yeare a goe, citing 2. Cor. 5.21. to Exod. 29.14. That phrase, He made him to be sin for us is an Ebraisme; for in the old Testament, the Sin-offering is ordinarily called sin (and no more) but the word Offring is added by our Translators, and by the like Reason it should have been aded in 2. Cor. 5.21. and Master Ainsworth in Ps. 40. sheweth that it is so to be understood where the same Hebraisme is used, but fully ex∣pressed in Heb. 10 Sacrifices for sin, so we have the Translation of the holy Ghost. And if our godly Translators had so Translated, 2. Cor. 5. 21. they had not done amisse, seeing we have such warrant, yea, them∣selves so translate it in Exod. 29.14 &c. The like Ebraisme in Esai. 53.10. when thou shalt make his soul a Trespasse, namely a Trespasse-offering, but the Seventy translate it sin, and then the words must run thus, When thou shalt make his soul sin, that is to say, a Sin-offering, just as it should be in 2. Cor. 5.21. The like Ebraisme is in Dan. 9.24. there the Messias is said by his death to finish Trespasse, and to end sin, that is to say, to finish Trespasse-offering, and to end Sin-offering, these things considered, our Translators had done worthily if they had ren∣dred 2. Cor. 5.21. He made him to be a Sin-offering for us. 2. So Rom. 8.3. Should have been rendred, and by a sacrifie for sinne
condemned in the flesh. It is well it is in the margine, for what sense (ac∣cording to our language) is it to say—by sinne condemned sinne. All tongues have their proper idiomes, and we have been taught in our youths in the Grammar Schools diligently to make it, and so it must be in translati∣on of the more learned tongues. This had been plain for us common readers, and so it might have been read of us and our children from their infancy. If this had been so translated, and had been famillar to all our Ministers in their tender years, there would not have been such collecti∣ons as this. That God made him sin, that is, (say many) God made him a sinner, yea a most vile sinner by imputation in Gods account, and many such orthodox expressions are used. 3. The common tenet, which many Divines (not all) from this Text of 2 Cor. 5.21. is, that as our sinnes are imputed to Christ, so his righteousnesse, (meaning his obedience to the Morall Law) as most say, is imputed to us. But it is very questionable whether we ought so to teach or believe, for then he is as really a sinner, as we are righteous by him, the recipro∣cation calleth for that sense, but we may not so say, for his righteous∣nesse maketh a change in our state and condition, but the reciprocation calls for thoughts of derestation, the ear cannot endure it. 4. Hence it is, that some Ministers in their Rhetoricall amplifications speaking of our sinnes imputed to Christ, say that Christ was the vilest sinner that ever was; that the essentiall curse and plague of God pursu∣ed Christ with Huy and Cry as a sinner, and therefore they may say, (and it may be some have said) go Huy and Cry, as to attach Chistum illum Atheon, Christum illum Dei cultus corruptorem, illum hominem blasphe∣mum, illum Sabbati vinatoem, illum bominem parentibus jus non obsquen∣tem: pursue with Huy & Cry Christum illum homicidum, illum mochum soe∣dum & onicatorem soddum mollem, concabitantem masculinis, illum su∣rem, raptorem, & latronem, illum soenoratorem, conterentem, & pervelln∣tem, illum conviiatorem, detractrem, & misere perjucatum, illum hominem temper aliorum proprietatum varum & upientem. Whose ear doth not tingle? Thus some may please themselves to rowl in blasphemous Rhetorick. And it should be most abominable to have such words as some have in book and Pulpit. 5. To such Doctrine men have brought themselves about imputati∣ons, so to impute (as some teach) our sinnes to, Christ, is to impart,Mr. Anthony worton (de re∣concil) shew∣eth such Do∣ctrine is not orthodox. communicate or make common to him, with us our unconformity to God and his Law: so that he thereby shall be unholy and unjst, both in ha∣bit and quality, inwardly and ourwardly in action, and thus it comes to passe, that we making him a sinner, as them of the Priesthood of Lvi who offered for their own sinnes as for the peoples, but the Holy of Ho∣lies, Christ Jesus our high Priest, at that time of offering up himself, was holy, harmlesse, undfied, separate som sinners, and made higher than the heavens. So his holy Priesthood was infinitely transcende it above the persons and Priesthood of Levi, but some mens Doctrines woul make him like them.
6. This Doctrine of Huy and Cry, for ought we ever yet did see, must be pursued with Huy and Cry out of Schools, studies, books, and Pulpits, But let us a little further examine what this Huy and Cry tends to, with its great noise. When the hour of our blessed Redeemer was near at hand, no Huy and Cry needed, for he set his face to go to Jerusalem, and said to his Disciples, that he went to be delivered to the sons of men, wicked sin∣ners, and that they would crucifie him, Mat. 20. Luke 18. He was sent of the Father, and came of purpose to give his life for his sheep: and when they came to apprehend him, he did not shift nor deny his name, as malefactors do, that are pursued with Huy and Cry, but he asked with a constant mind, whom seek ye? They said, Jesus of Nazareth, then he said, I am he, with which speech there went such an energie, that they fell in a swound to the ground, and there might have lain, unlesse he had given them leave to rise out of their swound: Then again he asked them, whom seek ye? and offered himself willingly. Pilate with his Romans and Jews could not have had power over him, but by dispen∣sation from above, that is, of Christ himself, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, for the Lord Jesus had said to Peter, Thinkest thou, that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of Angels, Mat. 26. Thus far of the idle expression of Huy and Cry, of which there can be no defense. The Phrases, illustrations, and expressions of the holy Scriptures are most seriously transcendent, and so full that that we need not be so ena∣moured with our black pin feathered young birds. SECT. 2. Of the severall Curses spoken of in Deut. 21.23. and in Deut. 27.26. and in Gal. 3.13. 1. THE Apostle in Gal. 3.13. doth not prosecute the eternall curse cited in verse 10. from Deut. 27.26. But he goeth to another Text for another curse, namely to Deut. 21.23. which is not the eter∣nall curse. For who is able to say, the seven sons and Nephews of Saul died out of the Covenant of God in Christ, therefore none can say, they had the essentiall and eternall Curse: yet they underwent the Curse of the Law, in Deut. 21.23. for the evil deeds that Sauls house had done to the Gibeonites, which brought the Curse of famine on the whole Nation. And so the repenting thief had the curse of God inflicted on him by the gods, the Judges of the Nation, according to Deuteronomy 21.23. 2. If the Apostle had not expressed himself further for any other curse,
than Deut. 27. there had not been so much doubt, but seeing he lledg∣eth Deut. 21.23. and doth not dilate on Deut. 27. As Gods es∣sence is love, so Gods essence is hatred and curse. doubtlesse he would not have us to think, that the Son of God our holy Mediatour under∣went that eternall curse that he spake of in verse 10. He knew it was impossible the most Holy One could suffer the eternall and essentiall Curse: for he was not the Holy One of God, as touthing humanity one∣ly, but in respect of the personall Union of the Divine and humand nature, therefore that speech of Mr. Perkins upon Gal. 3.13. must slot be entertained of the people of God. Whole Christ, Man God, God-Man was cursed, this is an evil saying, although we speak it with retracta∣tion, as he doth presently, but his retractation and limitation will not ex∣piate the sin of his former Doctrine. 3. Was it nothing, that the Son of God, the Lord of glory, should so humble himself, as to suffer such shame from the Seed of the Serpent before the Angels of heaven, and men on earth, as Psal. 69. speaketh, Thou hast known my reproach, my shame and my dishonour, mine adversaries are all before thee. Reproach hath broken mine heart, and I am full of heavi∣nesse, and I looked for some to take pity, but there was none, and for com∣forters, but I sound none. Is this nothing, when the Holy of all holinesse gave his body and blood a Sacrifice for sin, through such great shame and Suf∣ferings. 4. What would you have us to say? That our blessed Mediatour un∣derwent the second death, we dare not say so, absit, absit; it is to be de∣tested. Will you have us to say, that we may say, that the Son of God was not Christ for a time, when he suffered such sorrows as you intimate? This also hath no analogie of faith with Divine revelation, but contra∣dicteth, for it is most blasphemous. Belike our Teachers have this theo∣logie from the Philosophers. Due Pless. Truenesse of Christian Religion, page 82. Will you have us to say, that the Godhead of the person of Christ hated and cursed his humanity, as you understand curse, this is as full of trembling to be spoken, as the vilest speech that ever was spoken. 5. What shall we say? Tell us from sound Judgement, in few words, from Divine revelation. These Tenets and others, though from some godly Ministers must not be received but contradicted, and contended against, as not of the faith once given to the Saints, but indeed we may as well span the heavens, and dig the Tehom of the first dayes Creation, and gather the wind into a sack, and measure the earth with inchs, yards, and perches, as to search into these things, and yet we dare affirm the imaginations, and declare the wadings of our own never-seen vi∣sions. 6. The doctrine of imputation (as some teach it) to make the Holy and Just One, a sinner, hath bred all this stir and trouble. 7. Reverend Teachers of salvation, do not think we beseech you, that out of any sinister end and purpose we thus write, but out of conscience. We know we ought not to maintain errour, much lesse foul here sie, nei∣ther
ought we to be silent at other mens errors, but to contest for the truth. The Lord Jesus will witnesse for his poor servants, that we have not written of perverse pravity. As for 2 Cor. 5.21. time I know will wear out some mens interpretations, and sound disquisition will qualifie mens minds for the other: and if this fort of mis-interpetation of 2 Cor. 5. be demolished, other things will more easily yield upon quiet parlie. 8. In doth not rellish well to make Christ a sinner by Gods imputation; for the holy Scriptures snew, that at the instant time of his sufferings, he was not in Gods account a sinner, nor in the Apostles account (though in wicked mens account he was) and therefore Peter chargeth them with a just and heavy crimination, Ye denied the Holy One and the Just, and a∣gain he saith.1 Pet. 3. He suffered for us, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God. He could not have given us manuduction to God the Father, unlesse he himself had been just. And again at the very time when he offered a propitiatory Sacrifice for sin, he was JESUS CHRIST, the righ∣teous; therefore it cannot be thought he was accounted of God a sinner. Christ Jesus our Lord, the holy of holy, stood not in the state and place of a sinner (as some understand sinner) but as of a Mediatour of atonement between God and man for sia. Christ Jesus the Holy One must not be stated of us a sinner, but a Mediateur according to that Law of Mdiation, tran∣sacted between the Father and him,Heb. 10.7, 8, 9. Psal. 40. and 110. Heb. 7.8. and 9. and this Text of 2 Cor. 5.21. doth evince the same, as is most evident. SECT. 3. THerefore to go on with this most blessed Scripture. He was made a a sin offering for us who knew no sin, that we may be made the righteous∣nesse or freedome of God in him. 1. Q. How are we made the righteousnesse or freedome of God? Answ. God the Father doth justifie, doth set free, doth forgive, doth pardon the guilt and punishment of our sins, for his dear sons sake, the sins of all that by faith receive Christ Jesus, and rest on him as the Me∣diatour of our Redemption. This is God the Fathers justification, and plentifull Scriptures are answerable, Christ his perfect sin-offering hath procured this justification, righteousnesse or freedome, mercy, forgive∣ness and atonement from God the Father; therefore it is said, the righteousnesse or freedome of God, which is by the faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all that believe, and this righteousnesse or freedome, is freely bestowed by God the Father, through Christs-Redemption, and through faith in his blood. 2. This is. (as is said) to declare God the Fathers Righteousnesse, or
freedome through the Remission of sins, Rom. 3.25, 26. and David and Abraham are brought in for this justification, righteousnesse, or free∣dome in Rom. 4. and all Rom. 5. duth not adde any new matter to make our justification more compleat, but onely makes most heavenly dedu∣ctions from the Doctrine of justification compleatly laid down in chap. 3.21. to the end of that chapter. 3. The Apostle to the Philippians utters this point most heavenly, and might be found in him, not having mine own righteousnesse or freedome, dicaiosune, which is of the Law (ex opere operato) but that which is through the faith of Christ, even the freedome, (or righteousnesse, di∣caiosune) of God [the Father] through faith, Phil. 3. 4. Beloved Reader, the unbelieving Rabbins of the Jews did think to justifie or free themselves from sinnes, Observe the Pharasaicall righteousnesse Luke 18.  Mark 7. guilt and everlasting purish∣ment, by their (ex opere operato) bodily exercises of Sacrifices and wash∣ings, and contribution Exod. 30.12. &c. compare with Pet. 18. John 6. of silver, &c. in these exteriours they would be exact and unrebukeable, and they thought and taught the worship of God was so terminated. But our Apostle Paul after that Christ had re∣vealed himself unto him, and had revealed the idol and vanity of his Pharasaisme, he would have no other freedome or righteousnesse, but that wrought by Christ, when he sacrificed himself, and gave his flesh and blood to be our bread and drink, life, atonement, washing and re∣demption: For the Apostle had before this written to the Hebrews that it was impossible the blood of bulls and goats, or any Mosaicall sprincklings could cleanse the conscience from the guilt of sin, and this he had testi∣fied long before this to the Jews in their Synagogues, as we may see, Acts 13.38, 39. They did wonder and stumble and pe∣rish, when the Apostle taught this Doctrine, shewing all their bodily ex∣ercise was lost labou: there∣fore this Do∣ctrine they thought ought ought to be per∣secuted to the death: as de∣stroying and making void the Law, Mat. 5.17. and Rom. 3.31. Acts 22.4. & 26.9. be it known to you therefore men and Brethren, that through this Man is preached unto you the forgivenesse of sins, and by him all that believe are justified (freed, or set free) from all things from which ye could not be set free (or freed) by the Law of Moses. This Text doth shew what is our justification, or freedome, even forgivenesse of sins. Reader, study the Scriptures, and be acquainted with the term justfied, that is freed. And so it is translated in Rom. 6 7. Again Gal. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. must be well considered, the false Teachers did perswade the Galathians to be circumcised, not knowing their deceit; for if they thought circumcision was of absolute necessity, they were to sacrifice and do all the rites of Moses, that circumcision did initiate them unto, and so they must deny Christ and his Priesthood for ending all Moses, and so christ could profit nothing, for they were bound to observe the whole Law, that is all that the Priesthood of Levi taught them, and so Christ is of no effect, for if they thought by the Law ceremoniall or morall, ex opere operato, to be justified, Christ would be of no comfort to them; by this Tenent they denied the grace of free justification by Christ, mind also, Gal. 4 9, 10. 5. Let it be considered from this time forward concerning this point of justification, whether it be not better to use the terms and phrases,
setteth free, freeth and freedome; for, seeing our godly, learned, do so translate in some places, we may have Christian liberty so to render and interpret the Noun and the Verb of the Greek in other places, if it may be done with rationall understanding according to the analogie of faith. 6. God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them. The Apostle saith to Philemon, If Onesimus ow∣eth thee ought, compute, count or reckon it to mine account. The word I suppose is the same, a meraphor from debts in books, therefore may it not better be said for clearing doctrine, not counting, not computing, not reckoning their trespasses unto them, in the words, impute, compute, count, or reckon, is not much difference, so the point be cleared to our under∣standing. 7. Our sins are called debts, which we cannot justifie or free our selves from, nor pay or satisfie for, by all the means that we can use, as from our selves, and we are naturally so vile, that we care not to be reconci∣led, and therefore naturally we care not for the word of reconciliation, but are enemies to God, and have a very ill opinion of God, because of love to our sinfull appetites, and because of the soulnesse of offenses, which the conscience doth accuse us of. 8. But our mercifull God, heavenly Father, determined a way from all eternity to reconcile us to himself, by sending his dear son, a second Adam, to take humanity and in humanity to give himself to death for us, a sacrifice offering of a sweet smelling savour, and for this sacrifice of his beloved son, he doth not count, he doth not reckon our debts and tres∣passes to us, but doth pardon them, doth forgive them, doth justifie us, that is, doth free us from the guilt andIn all these speeches, it is not to be un∣derstood tem∣porally, al∣though by the blood of the Covenant, we are comforted in all conditi∣ons Zach 9.11 but chiefly stil to be under stood of eter∣nal freedome, redemption, and salvation, Dan. 9.24. Adoption is the fruit of redem∣ption, Gal. 4. punishment of them, and this he doth to all that by the word of reconciliation, are by the mighty work of the Spirit perlwaded to embrace by faith Christ Jesus, the Me∣diatour sent down from heaven from the Father, to be our Prophet, Priest and King, and they that so receive Christ, and believe in him shall have this dignity, to be called Gods adopted children in Christ, and by this most glorious Grace of adoption in the Sonne of God, beleevers are stated into a most joyfull capacity of being heirs to the inheritance of the Saints in light, for that the spirit of God doth by the same word of reconciliation regenerate them or cause them to be borne again, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, to serve God in their spirits in the Gospel of his Son, and so to be meet persons for that inheritance. This was the sum of the Apostles message in his ambassage to the Gentiles. 9. God the Father doth justifie for Christs sake as the first person, for he is the first cause in order of the persons, the father is the first effici∣ent. 2. The Lord Jesus Christ doth justifie us as the meritorious cause, and so he is the second efficient, this maketh the Apostle often to say, Grace be with you, and peace from God the Father, and from the Lord Je∣sus
Christ, (the son of the Father, 2 John 3.) and the Holy Ghost pro∣ceeding from the Father and the son, doth regenerate us, and qualifie us with the grace of faith, as the condition of applying the said justifi∣cation, and doth seal to our hearts God the Fathers justification from the sons redemption. 10. Dicaiosune is the effect of dicaiontai,Acts 13.39. justification (or setteth free) and freedome, differ as the form and applying of the form to the subject. Dicaioumenoi, &c. is the act of God the Father, upon, or to a believing soul, freeing him from the guilt and punishment of sin for the merit of Christs sacrifice; also dicaiosune, is that freedome, that God the Father bestowed upon the repenting and believing Apostle Paul, Phil. 3. So dicaiosune is the effect of dicaioumenoi and diacontai, the freedome that a godly soul finds in himself, from God that justifieth or setteth free, and the holy Ghost by the word ofThe holy spi∣rit dothregene∣rate by the word John 3. Ephes. 5. Tit. 3. and by this new birth, saith and all other graces are manifested. reconciliation doth work faith, which doth ovidence that soul to be the subject of that freedome, as Gal. 2. and although every godly man hath not (as himself apprehends) that Plerosoria, yet he knows his heart is reconciled to God, to love the Lord and his wayes, and doth rest on the Promises of God in Christ for sal∣vation, and onely by him. 11. This I suppose, may be thus illustrated, a Kings son, that is obe∣dient to all his fathers commands, hath a promise, that for such and such performances he shall obtain his favour for any Traytor that he shall please to intercede for, thereupon he doth by the vertue of his Fathers promise and his performance intercede the Kings dicaiosis, justification of the said Traitor, and the King doth justifie, that is, doth pardon, setteth him free from the guilt of his sin and punishment, provided he will repent and accept the said pardon, and therefore that he may be the subject of the said pardon, he doth repent, believe it, and ac∣cept it, and so comes out of prison, and when he hath this pardon and freedome under seal granted him, he may truly say, here is my dicaiosu∣ne. Justification, freedome and pardon from my guiltinesses and punish∣ment due for them, he will not say, nor cannot say, the personall righteous∣nesse, honesty and obedience of the Kings sonne is reckoned to him (for his righteousnesse) but this is all his righteousnesse, (and it is enough) even pardon and freedome from his offence and the desert of it, and received into favour, this it a compleat attonement and reconciliation, through the Kings sons intercession, the offender is not onely pardoned, but also is restored to his former, yea to a greater honour and favour with the King, and what can he desire more for the comfort of a subject. From all which, the Delinquent, if he have any ingenuity, will shew much love both to the King and his son, and will ever render himself a faithfull and trustie servitour. 12. So then Gods reconciliation hath these two parts, justification,Acts 26.18. Rom. 8.7. Col 1. that is, the freedome from the guilt and punishment of sin, and receiving in∣to favour or adoption to the heavenly inheritance.
13. And thus I think I have made it evident from 2 Cor. 5. that the not counting our sins to us, but freeing us from them, and pardoning them is the justification or freedome of God the Father, that he freely vouchsa∣feth to poor sinners, so verese 19. conferred with v. 21. do open one the other plain and easie for Gods people to understand. Surely, the holy, sweet, blessed Scriptures rightly conferred are like a benevolent constel∣lation. 14. Let Gods people consider what in this translation and explication of 2 Cor. 5. is derogatory to the mediation of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, or derogatory to the comfort of the Saints all their life, or on their death beds for the hope of immortall glory. Much more might be said, but often we darken Gods counsel by our words. When things are plain, some Ministers make them harder, and far more knotty than the Text. 15. We may suppose, if from this time forwards Gods people be ex∣ercised to read the Text of 2 Cor. 5.19, 21. it will not be amisse thus to read it, God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not counting their trespasses to them; for he made him to be a sinne-offer∣ing for us who knew no sinne, that we might be made the righteous∣nesse (or freedome) of God in him. 16. By that time godly, Christians have been accustomed to read 2 Cor. 5.21. a sinne-offering, and rightly understand the terms, justification righ∣teousnesse, setteth free, vnd freedome. And not counting or not recko∣ning, or not imputing our trespasses to us, I say by the time of 80 years moe, the people of God will come to a more clear and perfect judge∣ment in the wonderfull mysterious Doctrine of a sinners justifica∣tion. 17. The tearmes and Phrases of Justice, righteousnesse, and justifi∣cation, are exceeding variously understood, and have been largely hand∣led by diverse learned Authors, to whom I refer the Reader, I will in∣stance one Text, wherein the word Righteousnesse, or Justification, is different from the justification of vindicative Courts, and more like to the justification of voluntary Courts, sometimes are ordained for the tryalls of combaters, in Apoc. 19.8. To her was granted that shee should be arrayed in fine Linnen, cleane and white, for the fine Lin∣nen is the Righteousnesse of the Saints, this Text is often alleadged for the imputation of Christs legall Righteousnesse to sinners, acording to vindictive Courts of Justice, but if the coherence be well looked into, it will appeare to have another sence, which is this: The Beast and his marked made the Church mourne in Sack cloath, Apoc. 11. But when the Beasts polity shall be conquered by the constancy of godly Martyrs and Professors, then the Church shall rejoyce, and white Garments are here given as a sign of that, so then the Garments of fine Linnen, and white was given to signify the Churches joy because of her freedome from the power of those darke and black afflictions that were under the
Beasts polity, and for the better understanding of this, read Hest. 4 3. and 8.15, 16. 2. In this sense also must Apoc. 7.9.13, 14. be expounded, for there the Church had been in great afflictions by the Casars for 300 years, but by Constantines speciall grace and favour, and by the victorious constan∣cy of the godly, the Church had deliverance, and therefore white robes are given to shew their great joy for that deliverance and victory. 3. The Robe of (Tzdek) Righteousnesse in Isa. 61.10. is translated by the 70. the robe of joyfulnesse, according to the true sense and meaning of the context, for in v. 1. Christ is anointed with the spirit of the Lord, for this end, namely to preach good tidings to the meek, to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound, and in v. 2. to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and to comfort all that mourn, and in v. 3. to give them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heavinesse, and in verse 7. he doth promise that everlastng joy shall be upon them, and then in v. 10. the said poore broken hearted Converts do with exultation say thus, I will greatly re∣joice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyfull in my God, for he hath cloa∣thed me with the garments of salvation, he hath covered me with the robe of righteousnesse, but the 70 (according to the context both before and after, translate it, he hath covered me with the robe of joyfulnesse, it is called a robe of righteousnesse in respect of the perrformance of the promise, which was to give the sweet comforts of God. spirit to poore and humbled souls by the preaching of the gospel, and in respect of the sense the said comforts to the converted soul, it may be called the robe of joy∣fullnesse, as the Seventy render it, and we may see an example of this robe of righteousnesse, how it was also a robe of gladnesse and joyfulnesse at the conversion of the prodigal son, in Luk. 15.22, 23, 24, 32. 18. This Translation and explication of 2 Cor. 5.21. and of the other Scriptures cited, will rid us of no small trouble, and I hope it will rid others also of doubtings of the truth of the Doctrine of justificati∣if they wil but with patient study, mind and mark the true scope and meaning of the Scriptures. I do freely acknowledge, that severall Institutions, Common places Catechismes, &c. have been, is, and are a great mercy to the Church of God and shall be while the world standeth: But yet the Lord would have us to try all things, and wisely to hold that which is good. I say also that there are many godly and learned men, some that are departed this life, and some that are yet living that have expounded 2 Cor 5.21. to the same effect as I have done, and I make no question but the generality of our godly Ministers, will in due time be so proselited al∣so, for there is no standing out long against divine reason, where true god∣linesse and true learning doth bare sway: I meane such as will take the paines of the minde to dive into the true sence and scope of the text, and will see it with their owne and not with other mens eyes.
CHAP. XXXVIII. Our Lords genealogic conferred with the times of the Judges and with the King. The first, Adam Seth Enosh Kenan Mahalaleel Jared Henoch Methuselah Lamech. Gen. 8. chap∣ters Noah in his 600 years was the flood and the world 1656 years old. Whose are the Fathers, &c of whom concerning the Flesh Christ came who is God over all, blessed for ever Rom. 9. Sem. Arphaxad. Slah Heber Pelg Regu Serug Nahor Gen. 9.10, and 11 chap∣ters. Terah he died 427 years after the flood the world then 2083 years old, For he in no sort took on him the angels nature, but he took on him the seed of Abraham, Heb. 7. Abraham Isaac Jacob Judah Phares Hezron Aram Amminadab The rest of Gen. & Exod. to the 12 ch. of Job Naasson a Prince of Judah in the wilder∣ness 430 years from the promise, Gen. 12.2, 3. to the com∣ing from Egypt, the world then 2513 years old. It is evident our Lord sprang out of Judak, Heb. 7.14. Naasson begat Salmon Boaz Obeb Jessai David Salomon Exod. Levit Numbers Deut. Ioshua, Iudges, Ruth, 1. and 2 Samel, and Psalms, and 1 Kings to the . chap and 1 Chron. Remember that Jesus Christ, of the seed of Da∣vid was raised from the dead, according to my Gospel, 2 Tim. 2. The incarnation and the Resurrection are the Basis of all, and should be better remembred, and more taught. The Cronology of the Judges and their oppressors The Judges and oppressors mentioned in the book of Judges, all which were contemporary with Salomon, Boaz, Obed; Issi. Iudges. Othoniel 40. Ehud 80. Shamgar 40. Deborah 40. Barak 40. Jael 40. Gideon 40. Abimelech 3. Tholah 23. Iar 22. Iephthh 6. Ibsan 7. Elon 10. Abdon 8. Sampson 20. Eli 40   399 Oppressors. Chusan 8. Eglon 18. Iabin 20. Midian 7. Ammon 18. Philst. 40.   111.   339   450 And after that he ga unto them udges after a sort 450 years, util Samuel the Prophet, Act 13.20.
Kings of Israel, King, of Iudah Ieroboam Nadab Baasa Elab Zmi, Tibni Omi Achab Achaziah brethren Ioram brethren Ihu Iochz loash Ieobam Zachaiah Shalum Menachem Pchaiah Peab Hosea David Salomon Rbom Abiam Asa Iosaphat Ioram Ahaziah Athalah loash Amaziah Ʋzziah Joham Ahz Hezekiah Manasses Amon Jss Jhjakim Iechnias Zedekiah in his 11 yea the city Ierusalem was taken by Nbuchadnez∣zar, & it and the Temple burnt, and that was 427 years from the foundation of it, Babl ty∣rannized full 50 years moe, then the world as 3470 years old. Saint Matthew follows Salmons line, to shew Christs Right to the Kingdome of Israel, for Salmons line failing in Jchonias, who made Slathiel his ir, as next of rih. 1 Kings And some of 2 Chr. 'ro. Ecl. Canticles. Kin. and the rest of Chr & for the kings 'Judah and Israel. Ionah Hosea Ioel ms Esaias Micah Nahum Habbakuk zphanah Jerem. Lam. Daniel Ezekiel Ohadiah Nathan Mattatha Mainan Mlea Eliaim Ionan Ioieph Iudah Symeon Levi Matthat Irim Eliezer Iose E Elmodam Cosam Adi Melchi Nei Salathiel Pedjah Of these Fathers concerning the flesh, Christ came, who is God over all blessd for ever, Amen. Zrobabel, he was made Prince of I∣dah by Cyu. Cyus in the first yeare of his Reign over Ju∣dah, made a Pro∣clamation for the Jewes return from Captivity with Zo∣robabel: from which Proclamation to the doath of our Lord and blessed Savior Jesus Christ, are 70 Sevens, or 409 years, then the world was 3960. years old. The Kingdome of Israel continued 327 years under 19. or 20 Kings, most of them were stained with the sin of Ie∣roboam that caused Israel to sin, their Royall descen changed nine times. The Kingdome of Ashur ended their apostticall Kingdome, and carried the ten Tribes beyond Babel, and so made them Lo-ammi, no people, that is, not Gods people but they were made Gods people by the preaching of the apostles, of the Circumcision, Rom. 9.1 Pet. 2.10. Then they looked on him whom they pirced, the last King of Israel was in the dayes of Hezekiah, King of Iudah, Pro. 28.2. Tibni stood in competition with Omri for the Kingdome of Israel, but he was not sole King, so he is not reckoned, but if he be, then there is 20. Kings.
ZOROBABEL. Abihud Eliakm Azor Sadoc Acbim Eliud Eleaza Matthan Iacob Ioseph the hus∣band of the blessed Virgin Mary. St. Matthew followes these of Zorobabel to shew Christs right to the Kingdome of Israel. Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, Haggai, Zachar. Malachi, Daniels Pro∣phesies, and the stories of the Bear, Leopard, and the fourth Beast, their rising, fall, and af∣flictions of the Saints of them, the high Trinity, &c. all are in the time of the Seventy-sevens; at the ending of which, the World was three thousand nine hundred and sixty yeares old, Rhesa. Joanna Juah Joseph Semi Mattathias Maach Nagge Esly Nahum Amos Mattathias Joseph Janna Melchi Levi Matthat Eli Mary Jesus Christ the second A∣dam. O these from Zrbael did the Lord Jesus Christ take humanity, Luke 3. A little paines in observing the Geneology of Genesis, and this of our Lord will be of great use: you shall find them the Pillars of story both to Geography, Chronolo∣gy, and to all Narrations through the whole Bible. Labour to wade into the depth of our Lords Geneology: there is not more use of the Stars of Heaven, then there is of our Lords Ancestors, who all shine like Stars in the holy Story. Let no man think that his Geneology is condemned as Endlesse, which the Spirit of endlesse Wisdome hath indited in his holy Volume. But let all that hope for life know the Family of whom the Lord of life descended, No Family in the World, nor altogether match it; therefore give glory to it. The first fourteen Fathers of our Lord in Mat. 1. do abridge all the holy History from Gin: 1. to 1 King. 1. The next fourteen do abridge all the Kings and Chronicles, and all the Prophets, except Aggi, Zchary, Malachi, Ezra, Nehemah, Esther, and most of Daniel: whose Chro∣nology doth stop the mouth of the lying Heathen Chronologie. The third fourteen doth abridge the last named Prophets with much of Daniel, & they make a Commentary for the honour of Zorobabels house, for whom our Lord face on a fiery Throne to cast the Chaldeans, Medo persians, Macedonians, and Sleco Lagid into eternall flames; that so Matthews last fourteen might have an heavenly glory to begin the new Testament, for though their persons were base in the fight of the base World, yet in the holy Angels account, they were Kings of Heaven, Dan: 7.18.
Japhets seven Sons and se∣ven Nephews. Gomer Magog Madai Javan Tubal Mesec Thiras Ashcanaz Riphath Togarmah Elishah Thashish Kittim Dodanim Chams Sons and Nephews. Chush Sheba Havilah Sabbatha Regma Sabtecha Sheba Dedan Nimrod Milz∣raivn still transla∣ted E∣gypt. Ludim Anamim Lehabiim Naphtuchim Pathrusim Castuchim Captorim Philistin Put. Cha∣naan. Sidon Heth Iebusi Aemori Gargasi Hivi Arki Sini A vadi Zemari Hamatbi Sems Sons and Nephewes. Elam Ashur Arphaxad, Sela, Heber Lud Ʋz, Gether Aram Chul, Mash Heber Peleg, Regu, Serug, Nahor, Terah Ioktan thirteen Sons. Ioktans thirteen Sons. Elmodad Shalaph Hazahmaneth Ierah Hadoram Ʋzal Diklah Obal Ahimael Sheba Ophir Hanilah Iohab It is thought the East and West Indians come of these of Ioktan, because both of them (as Learned say) speak some Hebrew. And the high God is doubtlesse laying a foundati∣on of comfort for them for their calling to the Gospel. All the Hebrew stories of the old Testa∣ment, go upon the Families of Noahs Sons and Nephewes, and on the latter off-springs of Terah. It is very necessary for us to mark how the Prophets expresse these families by their wars, or by their merchandize, or by their calling to the Gospel, Esa: 11. & 66. Ezk: 27. & 38. &c. All these wicked families despising the Tents of Sem, a King of Iustice and Peace, were cast off by the confusion of Tongues 2000. yea. and were Lo-ruchama and Lo ammi, not piti∣ed, and no people; that is, nor Gods Church, nor people: and did no more hear the Gospel, till the true King of Iustice and Peace turned that curse of Tongues to a blessing, and to gather his Elect from among them, Acts 2. Then all those families were blessed in Christ, as it was foretold to Abraham, Gen. 12.3.
Ter, Gen. 11.26, 27. Haren. Lot Moab-Ruth Of him all the Kings of Judah from Rehoboham. Ammon — Of him all the Kings of Judah from Rehoboham. Milcha Sarai Nahr, of Milcha and Reu∣mah. Uz Kemuel Hazo Iidlaph Tebah Tahash Buz (of him Elibu.) Chesed Pildath Bethuel Laban Sons, Lea Rachal Rebecca Sons, Lea Rachal Gaham Maachah Abraham Of Sarah, Isaac Esau, vide his Geneologie, Gen. 36. Ja∣cob, of him the twelve Patriarks. Of Hagar, Ishmael, of him twelve Dukedomes in the Land of Chush. They drove Chush further into the South. Of Keturah Zimran Sheba Dedan Ashurim Letushim Leummim Iokshan Medan Midian Epha Epher, Abidah Henoch, Eldaah Ishbak Shuach (of him Baldad.) Gen. 12.3. The Apostle opens the blessings in the Epistles to Rome, Corinth, Galatia, E∣phesus, Philippi, Colosse, &c. then us Gentiles were Ruchamah, pitied, and a people, Ammi. All these Families were scattered East, West, North, and South, by the confusion of Tongues, for many Generations, and followed Divels, the Prince of the darknesse of this world, but being blessed in Christ, by the blessing of Tongues, to be of Abrahams faith, they came from East, West, North, and South, to sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdome of Heaven, Matth. 8.11. Luke 14.29 The Posterities of these families shewed the corruption of nature received from pa∣rents, manifesting it by their Idolatries and hatred against Israel, one after another: first by Chams house, then Sems, then Iaphets. And unlesse the Lord Jesus Christ had sent to seek them, they would never have enquired after him, Acts 26.18. Ieremiah and David prayd against these families, Psal. 79. Ier. 10. Ioktans posterity dwelt in places further remote from Chanaan: for seeing they had so many godly Ancestors, whom they despised and cared not for the blessing to Sem, but followed apostate Nimrod, who built Babel, which brought a Babylonian confusion over all the world, even a scattering from Sems Tents: and in this unexpressable Judgment (but godly meditated) Ioktans Sons were cast furthest off from the means of salvation. This should make us have no society in Religion for phrase, nor Apparell, nor Court, with mysticall Babylon: the Issue will be scattering.
The Kings of the Images and Beassts in Dam 2 & 7 and see Mr. Bro. Preface. I. Babel Nebuchadnezar Evil-Mordach Belshazzar When the Golden Head, Babel, was made dust, then the glo∣rious prophesie of the 70 Seavens was brought from Heaven by an Angel, Dan: 9.24. &c. II. Mada and Paas, that is, the Mdes and Persians. Darius and Cyrus that sent the Iewes from Captivity. Artaaxexes he hindred the Temple, Ezra 4.23. Assuerus (Heathen call him Darius Hytaspis) the Husband of Esther, He hindred the Temple, and sought to hav slain the Jewes. Xerxes the Son of Darius Hystaspis, spoken of onely in Dan: 11. Darius-Artaxerxes, a good King, he built the Temple; he as the Jewes think was the Son of ther by Darius Hystaspis, he had two names, Ezr. 6.14. it should be transla∣ted Darius, which is, artaxerxes: so Mr. Bulling. in an Epistle to one of his Decads, Beroaldus, and many good Authors. Darius Nthu: These three are passed over in Nehemiah. Artaxerxes These three are passed over in Nehemiah. Ochus These three are passed over in Nehemiah. Darius the Pean, Neb: 12. whom Alexander over-came. III. The Grecians whole Alexander and his posterity, and the whole power of Greia. IV. The Grecians parted the Kings of the North and South South. North. Ptol. Lagides, Dan: 11.5. Seleucus Nicator. Amiochus Soter, Dan: 11.5. Ptol. Philadelphus, Dan 11.6. Antiochus Thens. Seleuchus Callinicus, Dan: 11.6. Ptol. Eucrgetes, Da: 11.7. Antiochus the Great, Dan: 11.10. Ptol. Philapator, Da: 11.11. Selencus Philopator, Dan: 11.20. Ptol. Epiphanes, Dan: 11.18. Antiochus Epiphanes, Dan: 11.21. All these Kings were hard iron Legs against the Saints; the other Kings after partly Iron, and partly Clay: the Jewes now had some strength to resist, as Zach: 9.13, 14, 15. and 10.6, 7. Ptol. Philometor Ptol. Luhurus Ptol. Anlaetes Clepatra Antiochus Eupator Demetrius Soter, son to Philip. Demeius Nicator his son Antiochus, brother to Nicator Antiochus Gryphus Selencus his son. Antiochus Cyzizenus Antiochus his son. Antiochus Asiaticus. I have not written Antio. Sater, and Selen. Callinicus, of the Posterity of them of the North: they were not Horns of trouble to the Jewes. After all these the Romans ruled
CHAP. XXXIX. The holy Chronicle sundry wayes expressed, and every way agreeing to the same number of years, being from the first promise in Gen. 3.15. till our Lords death, 3960 years. SEe Bro. in Texts of Scripture, From the first promise of Christ to restore life upon death, brought in by the Serpent to the promise of Christ made to Abraham up on the death of Terah, who was the first of our Lords Fathers, that the Serpent drew to idolatry, are years 2083. The said time of 2083 years is secorded by the particular years of the Fathers in Gen. 5. and Gen. 11.   From the second promise made to Abraham at the death of Terah, Gen. 12. to the Lamb or to the Law of the Passco∣ver, Ex. 12 which typifyed Christ the Lamb of God are years 430. From the Lamb to the Temples Foundation, 1 Kings 6. A type of the true Temple, are years 480. From the foundation of the Temple to the burning of it. Ez. 4. or rather to the captivity upon that, are years 427. Thence to the end of the Captivity in Babel when Cyru made a Decree of re-edifying the City and Temple, 2 Chron. 36. are years full 50. Thence untill the Temple of our Lords body arose the third day, are years, 490. The whole Summe is 3960.
Observe that in this page it is said, from the foundation of the Tem∣ple to the burning of it, is 4227 years, but in chap. 44, it is said, from the sin of Israel to the burning of the Temple is 390 years, which is reckoned from Ezekiel 4. now to this 390. adde the 37 of Salomons Reign, and then it is 427. for the foundation of the Temple was laid in the fourth year of Salomon. 2. In the said 44. chapter you will find the number of 518. which is thus cleared. It was from the coming out of Egypt, to the foundation of the Tem∣ple 48 years, which was laid in the fourth year of Salomon, to which adde 37 years for the rest of Salomons Reign, and the year wherein the Ten Tribes made their Division from Judah, and so you have 518, years: and this way doth also still maintain the generall summe of — 3960 years. CHAP. XL. Another expression of the holy Chronicle, which the former Dialogue hath fol∣lowed. FRom the first Promise of Christ (to destroy Sa∣tans works) unto the Flood (the first generall ma∣nifestation of wrath and judgement upon the seed of the Serpent for despising the Promise) are years 1656. From the Plood to the promise made to Abraham of resto∣ring blessednesse in Christ to the Apostate families, in Gen. 10.11. are years 427. From the Promise to Abraham, to the glorious and mighty Redemption of Israel from Egypt, and the giving of the Law, of the Passeover, Gal. 3, are yeas 430.
From the coming from Egypt, to the Foundation of the Temple (a figure that the Son of God would make [not the nature of angels, but] the Seed of Abraham his Temple) are years 480. Thence to the burning of the Temple, That Israel should not glory too much in outward Ceremonies, and there∣fore God did shake them by Babel, are year 427 Thence to the overthrow of Babels Monarcy by Cyrus, and Darius and sending the Jews home from Captivity are years full 50. Thence to he death of the MASSIAS, and ending of all Moses ceremonies, which is that once more, that Christ said he would shake them, to settle that which should remain untill his second most glorious appearance, is 490. The whole summe is 3960. These seven Pillars may well be resembled to those seven that wisdome hewed out, Prov. 9.1. which hath the golden chain of times fastened to them upon which hang the glorious Curtains of needle-work, the embroidered prophesies and stories of the eternall wisdome. In which there is a Table spread and furnished with all varieties of grace to feed the soul in Christ, who is the cluster of Redemption, and ought to find a lodging betwixt all faithfull breasts. CHAP. XLI. A third expression of the holy Chronicle. IT is glorious to meditate, how the Sun in all his journies did constant service to the SON Eternal, in a marvellous distinction of times, and most harmonious manner, in which is seen how his Mediatorian King∣dome was exercised mall ages in mercy to the godly, and in severity to the wicked opposers.
From the miraculous creation, to the miraculous over flowing the world by waters, are years 1656. From that inundation, to the death of Terah, who was first of the Fathers of the holy Line, that corrupted the true sacrifice to flames of idolatry, are years 427. From the death of Terah, and the promise to Abraham made presently upon his death, to the ending of Is∣raels peregrination in the Land of am 430. Thence MOSES was to Israel a Shepherd in the wilder∣nesse, years 40. From Mes death, to the conquest, and Partittion of the Land of anaan by Jesus, a type of JESUS Christ, the Son of God, that hath procured for the people of God, the true Rest, Jos. 14.20. are years 7. Thence by seven Jubilees, the time of the Arks abode in the Tribe of Ephraim, at Shioh, at the ending of which Jubilees, the Ark was captived, but Christ gave them it again: then was the Transmigratirn of the Ark to the Tribe of Judah; those seven Jubilees are years 350 Thence by Seventy Sevens, to the first captivity by Babel Then Christ did to Jerusalem in part, as he did to Shi Ioh, Jer. 2. 490, By Iudahs captivity, and subjection to Babel: then the Land of Israel kept Sabbath seventy years, as Mo∣ses foretold, Levit. 26. 70. Lastly by the most comfortable Prophecy and Promise of Reconciliation by the death of CHRIST, at the end of Seventy Sevens of years, Dan. 9 24. 490. The whole Summe 3960. 7 Iubilees are, 350. 70 Sevens are, 490. 10 Sevens are 70. 70 Sevens are, 490     1400. 28 Iubilees, or 1400 years from the conquest of the Seed of the Serpent by Ioshua to the victory of our Lord Iesus CHRIST over sinne, death, and the grave, and over him that had the power of death, the Devil.
CHAP. XLII. Of the Geometricall Frame of the processe of Times. THE Stones in Salomons Temple were not more curiously fitted for the building then the times of the holy Scriptures are from Moses death; neither is any army more orderly composed then the times revolution by the infinite providence of CHIST. Seaven yeares of conquest and partition of Chanaan. Seaven Jubilees, the Tabernacle of Moses and the Ark of the Cove∣venant, at Shile for Ephraim glory. Seaven Seavensies began with the Transmigration of the Arke of the Covenant, for Judahs glory, Psal 78. Seaven Tenns for Captivity to feel Ieremies Lamentations. And then againe the former measure of Seaven Seavensies to find comfort in servi∣tude, which none but the poor in spirit and mourning will ever find. Vid Mr. Br. in Advert. 72.
CHAP. XLIII. Further Considerations of these 28 Jubilees, that the godly student may delight in the ho∣ly Book of God. THE plainnesse of Gods dealing still calleth us to mind of a first Sabbath, by a like account of Sevens, which also is usuall through the Scriptures, and especially from Moses times. And that cannot be denied: Now that the whole record of the Sunnes ser∣vice for twenty eight Jubilees, unto the Sunnes service prophesied Dan. 9.24. &c. which was spoken by an Angel, to make us shine in Justice, and that it may shine in plainnesse, diligently ponder, and observe. 1. Moses in Levitions chap. 25. telleth that the Jubilee shall be an ho∣ly year, and the old Hebrew Doctors thereupon in the Zoha, (as lear∣ned say) write thus, In the Iubile year, Shecinetha, that is, the Majesty of God having his Tabernacle with us, will be Freedome, Redemption, and Sabbatisme to Israel, by the Angel Gabriels years, the last Iubilee that ever the Jews had in their Land, shall fall out at our Lords death, in which year the Majesty shewed it self upon the Mountain to Peter, Iames and Iohn, with Moses and Elias, and became to us freedome (i. e. justi∣fication) and redemption, and finisher of Mosaicall Sebbaths, consi∣der the proceeding of times herein. 2. Seven years were spent before Israel had conquered and parted the Land. Before the Partition, the Iubilees could not begin, and by Mo∣ses words the next year after was to be the first of fifty for the Iubilee. Thence unto our Lords death are 28. Iubilees, exactly year, 1400. 3. In that we have a long time broken the whole frame of both Testa∣ments, by suffering heathen Olympick toyes to call us from the wisdome which Gabriels healthy and heavenly message had, and offereth to us, we must confesse that God hath been angry with us justly, in giving o∣ver the world unto blindnesse, whereas that Prophecy would have light∣ned all the Scripture. (Of Olympick vanity more below) The 26. Levit. running still in Phrase upon Sevens, in the punish∣ments,
cometh at last to the captivity for ten Sevens of years, and fore∣telleth such a confession of sins, as Daniel maketh, and how God will remember his Covenant, which Gabriel there mentioneth, Moses and the Prophets shall be vilely disjointed through quite; if here we hold not the plain propriety of time. 5. These former parts of time, be no lesse clear in Scripture, than the stars in the Skie, that in the Seventh year the Land was parted thatThat is 42 years. six sevens Israel held it in quietnesse: that Chusan held it the whole Seventh Seven. That in the Iubilee Othoniel turneth them into their possession. The golden Candlesticks with seven branches, bowls 22. (as the Hebrew letters) knops half so many, flowers thrice three, all 42, commended not Bezaleets wisdome more, and obedience to the pre∣script, then we are bound to mark how the holy volumes record, the Hebrew stories, to fall out in times according to their ceremonies Thence the seventh Iubilee reacheth toA kindler  the golden can∣dle-sticks, land an erector, and Rector of the Schools of the Prophets. Samuels happy times. Thence. to the captivity of Babels seventy Sevens. Moses did closely allude un∣to that space. Now the Seventy years of captivity Moses and Ezra com∣pareth with the Sabbath, Levit. 26. 2 Chron. 36. 6. The Prophecy of Dan. 9.24. surmounteth all, easie for memorie and celestiall for Meditation. It had not been so harmonious to have chains of the time hitherto most certainly fixed, if hence we should un clasp the links of it: But we have the chains of times fastening hitherto-more closely than the Finnes of the Leviathan stick one to another, Iob 41. All the works of God have perfection, and so is the time from the Creation to the Redemption, Mr. Bro. ex manus. CHAP. XLIV. A fourth expression of the holy Chronolo∣gie from the Creation to the Redemption. THE golden chain of times are evident, which draw from the apostasy of our first Parents unto our Lords Resurrection which when they are all known do bring unto Christ, and we shall find much comfort and edification, if we often think upon them for they are a greater ornament to the Scriptures, than any chains of the finest gold or of the most rare or polished Jewels to the neck.
The first is from the beginning of time, since Satans fierie tongue did set the wheel of the whole Creation on flame, that nothing but the flood of waters (nor that) could quench it. The second is from the Flood to the death of Terah, Arahams father, the authour of idolatry in Christ his Line, and thereby causing to cease the royall accompting of the Churches annals, by the ages of the Fathers, Gen. 11. Jos. 23. The next beginneth upon his death, with a new promise of CHRIST making Abraham heir of the world, not through the Justification of the Law of Circumcision, but through the justification of faith in the pro∣mise of blessednesse in Christ to the Families Gen. 12. This Chain draweth along to the Lamb, that is the Law of the Passeover, Ex∣od. 12. The fourth chain is from the Lamb to the Temple, the allurement of the Nations unto the worship of him that made the Temples of the hea∣vens,From the lamb to the Temple, 480. Salomons 37. and year of division, all 518. who in fullnesse of time would come to make humane nature his Temple to dwell with the children of men. And further this chain teacheth to Salomons death: his idolatry (as Terah) was worthy to have this chain ended, for which his Kingdome was parted, and Ieroboam did set up calves for God, which doing, is called the sinne of Israel. These summes with the year of the Division of the ten Tribes from Iudah are years 518. The fifth chain is from that apostasie of Israel to the burning of the Temple, that space is 390 years. Iudah now is onely Gods Kingdome. In that time is contained the books of the Kings,Ezek. 4. and 2 Chron, and most of the Prophets, as the table before will shew. Here must be considered Ierusalems ruine by Babel, the flames of the Temple, and the ending of Salomons race and Kingdome, the breaking of the golden candlestick, yea the Ark, the speciall signe of Christs presence (which had the two Tables of the Covenant) was no more, as Ierem. 3. They lost it at Shiloh, but found it again in the woody field of Kiiath Iaharim, Psal. 132. All Moses, curtains Babel carried away for a spoil, and all that Hyram the King and Proselyte procured, and Hyram the artificer made, &c. all these goodly things, left the Temple and shewed Christ his seve∣rity.Christ by Ba∣bel shook his own ceremonies by Moses, and ended them by Rome, that is, the meaning of that speech in Aggei, Yet once more I will shake, ne∣ver to have any setting: yet some in their writings will re-edifie the low Jerusalem, &c. But as Israel had a first and second Temple: so Jerusalem was twice builded by David, Salomon and Nehemiah, and twice razed: now no other Jerusalem, ever shall be, but that which is from heaven, and no materiall Temple ever shall be, for the Lord God of Hosts, even the Lamb, is the Temple in the heavenly Jerusalem. Thus in part he did shake these similitudes of heavenly things: that they might look to the sure mercies and holy things promised in CHRIST unto David, Acts 13.34.
The sixth sheweth the earthly glory of this worlds Monarks, with their abasement and sudden destruction: all this is seen in the golden head, Babels Kingdome, which Christ made as chaffe before the wind. Now the Jews had seen the end of Salomons progeny, the fall of his King∣dome, their hope, the burning of the Temple their glory, and the fall of Babel, the glory of Nations, by Cyrus and Darius, Salomon foresaw all this, and said, all is vanity, Eccl. 1 The seventh is from Cyrus Proclamation of bringing back the people of God from Babels yoke to the eternall freedome the Lord Jesus Christ purchased. This time is the glorious and shining Prophecy of the Seventy Sevens, Dan 9. This chain began with Cyrus, of Sem, and Da∣rius, of Japhet, both which Princes proclaimed the God of heaven, the God of Israel over an hundred and twenty Nations, who gave Israel a liberall subsidie to comfort them in returning to Sion, who by that faith in that joyfull Prophecy left great Babel for Jerusalem yet in her dust, Psal. 102. And this year the faith of Gods elect, stopped the mouth of Lions, &c. And this chain endeth most comfortably by the death of Messias, the Holy of Holy: which endeth all Sacrrifice and offering in the low Jerusalem, and it endeth the peculiar. Prerogative of Israel, and it bringeth the Gentiles into equall covenant, and breaketh down the Partition wall, and blotteth out the hand writing of Ordinances, and maketh the shadows flee away, and with commandement of shewing the Kingdome of heaven to all Nations, &c. &c. Thus the SUNS labours have glorious stories through all ages, till Christ shewed a new world, and a new Ierusalem from heaven by the preaching of the holy disciples, who went forth by the Lords Coman∣dement, and turned the familes of Noe from darknesse to light, from the power of Satan to God, that they might receive forgivenesse of sins, and an inheritance among them which are sanctified by the faith which is in Christ Jesus. From these various expressions of the holy Chronologic, we may see the marks which the holy Spirit aims at in the ages and generations of the Bible. These are the joints to which the holy Chronicle is fastened, fit for Christians to know concerning the Son of God, that was to come into the world, to be a Second Adam, That by these, as a part of the holy revelation of the Spirit of God, we might be made wise unto salvation, through the faith which in is Christ Iesus; For the Testimony of IESUS is the Spirit of Prophecy. It would be wished, that people were somewhat educated in that course of study, of a book called the Consent of Scripture: That study I sup∣pose would more stablish us in sound principles of Christian Doctrine, a∣gainst light and vain errours, and bad opinions, then many books of sa greater volumes: much more might be said, the Lord blesse endeavours, and make our hearts upright with him.
THE books of Chronicles reach from Adams to Babels captivity, and to Cyrus first, thence Daniel reacheth to our Lords death, and the fall of Ierusalem, thence the Apocalyps holdeth on to the fall of the world: the confusion of this narration is a cursed piece of work. Seven times Daniel speaketh of the Chaldeans, seven times of the Medo-Persians, seven times of Javan whole, seven times of Iavan parted. Daniel comforteth the holy Iews, and no other Nation afflicted for Religion by the Kings of the East, and before the incarnation, shewing, that as every one of his predictions shall fall out in their times, and they of Antiochus, in exact foretold number of dayes, so the exact num∣ber of dayes should be most surely kept for our Redemption, and the three years and half for our Lords preaching, when he must begin, even when he began to be thirty, and at the first of those 30. open records of Kittim Italies power, Numb. 24. should shew that the image Dan. 2. was broken in pieces. Now the Holy Ghost in the New Testament keepeth Daniel clear, that the captivity to Babel began with his captivity, that Saint Matthew shew∣eth that Iechonias was begotten a little before the captivity to Babel, at the second captivity he was 18. years old. So where the image is made chaffe, and the tree cut, but not at the root, and the Beasts cast into the fire, Iohn Baptist from matters past doth teach the Iews how they rejecting MESSIAS. Christ shall be used, the ax shall be put to the root of the tree, and the chaffe shall be burnt in fire unquenched. Upon stories past this standeth plain, if Daniels sto∣ries had been yet to come, the grace of the speech had been lost, but Iohn speaking of punishments foretold and felt, pierceth more the wise hearer, that the Iews shall feel what he foretold. So where after the four Beasts are consumed, One like unto the SON of Man, cometh into the world, and again ascendeth our great God and Saviour, naming himself the SON of Man and Rock, Deut. 32. upon which the Iews stood in the boisterous sea, whence the four beasts came forth, teacheth us, that those four Beasts were consumed, speaking to the whole consent of the Jews. So Saint Stephens pleading upon the Angel Gabriels words, and having the Angels face, sheweth, that the whole Nation agreed in time, from the return from captivity, or beginning of the Seventy Sevens, as they could not choose. And whereas the acts of Antiochus the vile, are much in Daniel chap. 7. and 8. and 12. and concluded in chap. 11. with mention of resurre∣ction to glory for his afflicted, the Macchabees company, and of resurre∣ction to shame for Gods enemies, as the Iews in the third of Macchabees,
and in Josephus, note well, and as Chrysostome noted from them, so Saint Paul before all noted the same, speaking of tormented in Antiochus manner, that they would not be delivered, because they looked for the better resurrection, Heb. 11. Moreover while the affliction of the Iews, were in visions that described not their Nation plainly, that they were the tendered of God, and so they were without danger, they were pen∣ned in Chaldee, spread over the East, out when the speeches plainly name the afflicters, and the Iews the afflicted, then they are written in A∣dams tongue, lost, but in Schools, and not spoken in the world. And this sheweth, that the Iews are the onely afflicted in Daniel, and that he hath not one syllable of the Romanes afflicting the Iews before the Birth of our Lord, nor one word to bring them within his pictures. But the Apocalyps plainly distinguisheth them from Daniels King∣domes, a Woman, that is a State settled, and a Beast coming out of the Sea, made of all the four, that are in Daniel. Thus Daniel is a Bridge from the Chronicles to the Apocalyps, and the breaker of this bridge cuteth off all passage from the old Testament to the new, and worketh a Babylonian confusion, missing in the Nations, Countries, or Times. Daniel pictureth East Kingdomes onely, he maketh stories agree to the proportion of a mans image, head, arms and breast, belly and sides, and two legs, our notes would make but one leg, and six times longer than the proportion of a mans body would suffer. Daniel bringeth an Angel to comment upon his Visions, applying them to stories which Greeks ex∣plain. But none can apply our notes to fit stories.
CHAP. XLV. An Advertisement to the Reader, to take heed of embracing the evil tenents of two men especially, that have lately put forth irreligi∣ous opinions about the Chronology of the Book of God, namely Mr. Sarson, and Mr. Parker, they deny the certainty of Chrono∣logie from the first promise, to the death of Christ. 1. AS for Mr. Sarson, let him take heed he be not degenerated into a Sarrason, by bringing upon the holy Bible a Leprosie of Chronologic, that it should be of no greater authority, than Machomer's Alcoran. 2. Mr. Parker saith, there is not truth nor certainty in the holy An∣gel Gabriels Seventy Sevens, when they should begin or end, his words in his book of the Visions, and Prophesies of Daniel page 51 are these. Mr. Broughton and his followers, denying the truth of heathen Chronolo∣gie, constitute the years without ground, D.R. on the other side, (and that worthily), allowing and maintaing the heathen Chronologie, and finding no way how to accommodate those years untoi, affirmeth that no certain time is meant, but an uncertain, and undetermined duration in allusion to the seven∣ty years of the Babylonian captivity, &c. To say, there is not truth nor certainty in the holy Chronologie of the Scriptures. 1. Let us take such heed that they deny not the truth and certainty of other doctrines of faith. 2. It may be truly said, because men have not loved the truth by a diligent search of the holy Bibles Chronologie, they have been given up
to believe the lies of heathen Chronologies, 2 Thes. 2.11. 3. The holy Chronologie of the Book of God is a doctrine of faith, as clear and certain as any other doctrine of faith, and therefore that speech of the holy Apostle beareth supremacie in our hearts: That the holy Book of God doth not onely teach and instruct us of the truth of its Chronologie, but it doth also correct and convince the heathens Chronologie to be most false and abominable doctrines, as some produce them, 2 Tim. 3. 4. It is said, that the holy Scripture is given by inspiration from God, and is able to make (children yea) the man of God wise to salvation through the faith which is in Christ Iesus, and this must be understood of, Scripture Chronologie, as well as of any other doctrine of the holy Bi∣ble, and he that will rightly consider the holy Chronologie, as it is a∣bove expressed by sundry calculations, will say, that the holy Scripture Chronologie teacheth doctrine of faith, which is in Christ IESUS, and (in him) by it wisdome to salvation. 5. It is said, we have a more sure word, (2 Pet. 1. and that was the old Testament) but now heathen Chronologie of the devilish worships of Apollo, the heathens Olympiads are by some made more sure and cer∣tain criptures, than the oracles from heaven. We have more cause to yield to the Locusts that defend their Apolluon, that alledge Fathers and Councils, than to yield to men that authorise the vain Olympiads of A∣pollo of Delphos. Therefore let us that are Christians hearken to the words and commandements of the Apostle of our Lord and saviour. Be∣ware lest any man carry you for a spoil through Phlosophy and vain deceit af∣ter the rudiments of the world, and not after CHRIST,Col. 2. it is the holy scriptures that have ditted up the mouths of Apolluon and his Locusts, by the RR. Jewel, Fulk, Cartwright, Perkins, Calvin, Beza, &c, &c. we doubt not but the holy scripture shall do the same to them that plead for the gamestry of Stanicall, Olympian reckonings. Verily all the scriptures should as well take a check, as the wisdome touching the time of the seventy sevens, be controlled by heathen. We may as well believe the heathen spake true (when the Sun went back) that for Hercules birth the Sun made a longer night, but the word of Christ shews, that he that ruleth the heavens made it, and did shew to all the world, but specially to Israel, that the heavens order was not so stable as Gods covenant in Christ: for then that miracle was to confirm the faith of the church in Christ promised, so the sunne performed ser∣vice to the SON of righteousnesse: surely the motions of the heavens declare the works of God in the harmonious measure of times. Although many men be great Scholars and godly, yet some of them do not consider that the sunne did run his race for the glory of Christ and his word. For it is said, All things were created by him, and for him the second Adam. For Him, for his honour and glory, not for Satans sports and pastimes of the Olympiads.
6. What a grossenesse and crosse is this? because we cannot make the heathens accounts to agree with the holy Scripture-Chronologie, there∣fore we fly upon the word of the living GOD, the Lord of hosts our God, reproaching it, and exclaiming against it, that there is not truth nor certainty in many parts of it, but we should say and do the contrary: and should say, let God and his word be true, and the heathens and their Chronicles, lies, and liars. For there is more to be said. ¶ If that the Angel taught not Daniel certainty of knowledge and un∣derstanding for the Chronologie, he taught him nothing that he knew not. Daniel knew all the rest of the Message, but the time of perfor∣mance. And so we make the holy Angel a deceiver, an evil spirit, a Sa∣tan. And therefore D.R. and Mr. P. and all that follow their course, have sorrily dealt with the Church of Christ Jesus our Lord. 7. Mr. P. saith, that Mr. Bro. and his followers, &c. Let Mr. P. know, that Mr. Bro. and those that use his godly and learned labours do adhere to, and follow the lively oracles of the living God, sent from him by an Angel from heaven, to teach Daniel knowledge and understanding, and to teach all faithfull Christians by him. And therefore we are confident in the Lord, and dare not otherwise say, but that the holy Angel from God stake a true plain, and proper speech, and a most certain chronologie for the beginning and ending of the seventy sevens, and that their beginning was from Daniels prayer, and their ending at the abolishing of sacrifice and offering, and confirmation of the Testament for the Many, by the blood and death of the MESSIAS. It is true, many have objected against the holy Scriptures Chrono∣logie before Mr. P. and Mr. Sarson (which is to be lamented) but we know there are many gracelesse speeches and objections against the very fundamental truths of Christian Religion. But this I think, 1. That it is good that the Scriptures chronologie should be clear and certain,Isa. 5. and can we think that God hath omitted this good for his church? 2. Men should deem, or ought so to do, that the Scripture hath truth and certainty for chronologie, though they see it not, and they that op∣pose it should think and say, they erre not knowing the Scriptures, and they should think that the works of God, the rock are perfect, and that he that began the chronologie for the glory of Christ by the genealogie of his holy ancestours, Gen. 5. and 11. would perfect it. 3. To affirm truth and certainty in Heathen chronologie, and to de∣ny it in the holy Scriptures, is an opinion scelerate and flagitious: we cannot think how great the evil is: and therefore Mr. P. hath done ill in justifying D.R. saying the holy Angel in his heavenly Oration to Da∣niel meant no certain time, whereas the Angel taught him perfect wis∣dome for the chronologie of it, and so professeth that he came to give skill of understanding that very thing. 4. Whereas Mr. P. saith, that Mr. Bro. denying the truth of heathen
chronologie, constituted the year of the seventy Sevens, without grounds Mr. P. in this saying, puts a stumbling block before the blind, and cau∣seth him to go out of the way, and falls into a great offence of untruth, not onely against Mr. Bro. (for thats little) but against the Angel from heaven, who said to Daniel, at the beginning of thy prayer came forth the word, which I am come to tell thee, because thou art greatly beloved, therefore conceive the word, and perceive the clear vision. Which is, seventy Sevens of years are accounted for thy people, and for thy holy City, to finish trespasse (offerings) and to end sin (ofierings) and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring righteousnesse everlasting, and to seal vision and Pro∣phet, and to shew Christ the holy of holy, &c. Thus we see the ground∣work of Mr. Bro. is a Rock as firm and stable as Mount-Sion, (that we might build on Christ the Rock) spoken by an Angel. So the Angel speaking from heaven, makes the begininng of the seventy Sevens to be from Daniels prayer, and their ending to be at the glorious manifestati∣on of MESIAS, i.e. Christ, to be the Holy ef Holy, which was seen in his healthy passion, and glorious Resurrection 5. Let us further consider the speech of the Angel, which I noted be∣fore, and think it worth the noting again, who saith to Dantel, Conceive the word, and peceive the clear vision. By this commandement doubled for more vehement charge, he condemneth the world, that regard not to be instructed in this Doctrine sent from heaven by an Augel unto Da∣niel, and penned for all Nations use. Wherefore We must give better heed unto that speech, lest we wilfulyswerve, for if the word spoken by Angels fall our sure, and every trespasse received just recompence, How shall we escape neglecting so great a charge of our King unto out own salvation? where the vision is so clear, that no doubt can be mo∣ved by any plain heart, that will rest in the clearnesse of the most bright message by the Angel of glory, who coming to teach all the world, was to shine in words, as Stephen by him did in the face, when he spake the Angels words, Acts 6. That Jesus of Nazaret would deftrroy the place, city and Temple, and change the Lawes which Moses gave. To this day the blind Jews stand in this, that the Laws of Moses shall continue for ever. Maymon. Tom. 1. de lege, Perek. 9. Therefore God seeing their dullnesse would have an Angel of light to teach them by this Prophecy 490 years, when from the year of that Message unto Daniel, the Laws of Moses should have their end. And none of the Scribes, when Herod was affrighted, objected disagreement for the time, which thing had been done, if any colour of disagreement could be brought, so none in all the new Testament touched disagreement in the time, Mr. Bro. upon Daniel. 6. Who would think to say the sveenty Sevens are a time not certain, when as the holy Angel divides them into three parts, seven sevens, and sixty two sevens, and one seven, for the seven sevens he shew∣eth the troubles, the dly returned from captivity should under∣go,
before the Temple should be built, and City walled, and Christs should be born towards the latter part of the 62 Sevens, and the last se∣ven, the last half of it our Lord would by his preaching and teaching three years and an half, and by his death, confirm the Covenant. 7. Another weighty reason, though noted other where, That there was great need, that Gods Israel, and all the world should have & know a de∣finitive sentence from God how long Canaan and Jerusalem and Temple should have their Prerogative, and how long sacrificing should be there lawfull and acceptable, and when the partition-wall should be bro∣ken down, and when the Gentiles should be brought into equal Cove∣nant, and this definitive and determinate time is most graciously de∣monstrated to us in the seventy Sevens. It is not mansV. Mr. P. his Epistle prefixed Eulogia, nor his Chrestologia (nay rather) nor his Mateologia, that shall dis-anull the holy Chronologia of the holy Bible. And therefore most cordially we do protest against the unworthy dea∣ling of Mr. Sarson and Mr. P. in the premises, not doubting, but one of them will seriously think of his doings and be humbled (though he saith he is unmoveable, pa. 65) and that hence forward he will ad∣here and subscribe to the propriety of the word (for tropes may not be sought where propriety standeth well enough) and cleave to the lively. Oracles of Iehovah the God of Israel. And what Chronologie can be plainer then those of the holy Scriptures on which we rest and rely? First, on the accounts of the Fathers to the Floud: Secondly, the Fa∣thers ages to the death of Terab, upon whose death the promise to Abra∣bam was given: Thirdly, From that promise to the Law of the Passe∣over, Exod. 12. Fourthly, Thence to the building of the Temple, 1 King. 6. Fishly, Thence to the burning of it which was in the nineteenth of Nebuchadezay: Sixthly, Thence to the ending of the Captivity in Ba∣bel: Seavenshly Thence that sweet Heavenly scripture (the I amp of all the Old Testament, and the Abridgment of the New) the Seavensy Seaveus which began from Danills prayer, and ended at the death of Christ. All these Journeys of the Sun (before largely shewed, now breifly expressed) were created to serve the Son of righteousnesse, and are sure, clear, and certain, and in their holy use have the power and strength of the Almighty. But as for the Olimpiad accounts in this respect,D.R. and Mr. P. &c. would have us fall in∣to the plame of 2 Tim. 4.4. we do not reston them but detest to take up their names into our lips, it was the offering to a strange God, to Divels, to new Gods which came newly up, which the holy Patriaks and Prophets, and Saints of old feared not, nor served. What is this? must we and our children regard the * fabu∣lous toyes, stories and accounts from this man that wan the Stadion this Olympiad, or from that man that wan it in another, or from that man that acted his part bravely as a gladiator this Olympiad, or from him that acted the next Olimpiad, or from this foot race, and this horce∣race, that this man atcheived at this Olympiad, or the foot race and
horse-race, that another man archieved at another: or from the ac∣counts of the Archontes, of Athens, or from the accounts of the building of Rome, or from the accounts of the lying Caldeans (as Daniel ever found them so to be) Must I and our children hearken to these abominations and neglect the word spoken by an Angell from Heaven, no, surely, but let all this cobweb-stuff of Doctrines of Divels, be left to them, to whom it belongs (we are sure not to Christians) this further warning I give to the people of God our Brethren. For it is a shame that our godly learned,Mr. Bro. in Ad∣vertis. pa. 25. or any should contend to teach or to be taught by these Olym piads how to understand an * Angel of light sent by the grace of God to teach all the simple world, into whose lips if grace were not poured to be unnerstood as soone as he spake, Heaven would say Daniel saw no Angell. CHAP. XLVI. That the point of Chronology was a cheife part of the Angells Message to Daniell, for Daniell knew all before the Chronology. 1. HE knbw that Salem,Daniel saith, Seavens; Sea∣vens ore ex∣actly uted for thy people, and for thy ho∣ly City. Sems Tents and people should not al∣wayes have peculiar glory, and that one day, the postericy of Japheth should be perswaded to embrace the faith of Sems Tents, he knew that all Families that apostated, Gen. 11. should be blessed in CHRIST, Gen. 12 and that he would also con∣firme firme the Covenant of his grace for them: The blessednesse promised and the confirming the Covenant are all one. 2. He knew as well as Esaias that the Temple and holy place should not alwayes be regarded, as Stephea cites Esaias and Daniet, Act. 6. & 7.Esai. 6 1. Dan. 9 26.27. that the holy place, Christ would destroy. 3. He knew that Esaias had said, from Moneth to Moneth, and from Sabbathto Sabbath, all flesh shall come to worship before me, saith the Eternal, Esai, 66.23. This sheweth an utter abrogation of Moses, seeing all Nations cannot come every week to Jerusalm, Mr. Br. in the latter end of Ecclesiastes.
4. He knew the Preist hood of Levi, should be changed, from Psal. 110. And he knew, if the Preist hood be changed, of necessity, there must be a change of the Law, and therefore the Law of all manner of Sacrifices of Beasts and Birds, &c. should be abolished, this he knew from Psal. 40. And all faithfull, as Habel thus expected and beleived, and by that their faith they were made heires of the justification that is by faith. And Daniel sheweth the same, that Messias should by his once offering of himselfe make reconciliation for iniquity, and bring an ever∣lasting justification, and so seal and confirme all the visions and premises and prophesres, that himselfe was the end an scope that all aimed at. 5. He knew from Esaias, that Cyrus should send the Jewes home from Captivity, and build City and Temple, read Esai 44, & 45, & 46. & Jer. 30.18. But in what time after the returne from Captivity, Esaias told not. But the holy Angel did shew the time, that within the Sea∣ven Seavens from Daniels prayers, and the returne of the forty nine thousand, Jerusalem should be builded Street and Wall. 6. He knew that HE, the holy seed of the Woman, of Abraham, of David, &c. should destroy Satans works, that by the Seed of the Serpent his foot sole should be bruised, that he should be slaine not for himselfe but for us. 7. He knew that Esaias had prophecied of the acceptable year of the Lord (in the Jubilee) in which should be preached good tidings unto the meek, to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaime liberty to the Captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound, &c. Now Daniel told of the last Jubilee, when all should be performed, Levit. 25. seeing all the promises of God in Christ are yea, and amen, we are bound to marke the Jubilees beginning and ending, and to joyne the last to our LORDS death, for indeed they doe so most exactly fall out. When the Angel had told the Prophet Daniel of the Seavensy Sea∣vens; Then the godly Teachers before the holy Incarnation could say, the Majesty of God dwelling in our Tabernacle will be Redemption, free∣dome (i. e. justification) and Finisher of Sabbaths to Israel in a Iubilee (this speach is worthy of golden Letters) This they might easily ac∣count. For they knew how many Jubilees had been past, and how ma∣ny would be the last yeare of the Seavensy Seavens. The last Jubilee falls out with the last yeare of the Seavensy Seavens. Simeon the just knew this, and he wated for the Mssas, the consolation of Israel, and it was reveiled unto him that he should not see death, till he had seen the MESSIAS of the Lord. Luk. 2. All this glorious meditation of the Jubilees, and this last Jubilee Master P. defaceth, utinam bec illi ne imputetur.Num. 33 56. Deut. 28.66. Esai. 66. Pl. 95. Ezk. 16. 8. He knew from Moses and the Prophets that Christ the King would destroy his own people as with a Floud of Noe, that they should be sha∣ken out of their own Land, and that that Land should not be their Rest, nor an holy Land, nor holy Mountaine, no more then any place under
heaven, after the ending of the Seavensy Seavens, the Jewes shall be converted, they will beleive that City and Temple shal never be resto∣red, and then they will not much regard the Land. Now the holy Lord God sent his Angell from heaven to tell the time of the accomplishment of all these (they are un-utterable) wonder∣full things and glorious mercies, that from the beginning of Daniels prayer, this exactly accounted time should begin,Mr. Bro  Daniel, and end at the shew∣ing of CHRIST to be the most holy Redeemer, in declaring the pow∣er of God in his passion and resurrection, as is foretold in Dan. 9. Because the passion marveilously shewed Christ to be the most Holy when he sanctifyed himselfe, Ioh. 17.17. and the Centurion said doubtlesse he was the Son of God: and his resurrection shewed that he was indeed the Son of Gon. I will add a little to the eighth Section above. If the Jews had known the words of the Prophets, they would not have stoned Stephen, for saying Jesus of Nazaret should destroy the City and the holy Place. Great error hath herein been committed by not marking the force of Noes words pursued by Moses, by Gabriell, by the Lord, and by their full Event, and by the glorious erecting of the Church, tearmed the Jerusalem from Heaven, insted of it. Iulian the Apostate to satisfy our Lords words indeavoured to repaire Jerusalem, but he felt the wrath of Christ for it. So in after ages,Anno 1100. & 1200. the Pontifi∣cality stirred the Princes of the West to war for Low. Jerusalem, but Christ plagued Christendome to this day, for that vanity. Yea, at this day, people study not, nor beleive the words of the Pro∣phets, but as the Jewes are susperstitious, so are many, the superstition of the Jewes is in part expressed by a godly Teacher: And it seems their vanity pleaseth us to write so of them as we doe: Christians now a-dayes are so foolish and erroneous as thinking of going to Jerusalem. (I could name some) But it is better for them to alter their opinions, and if I might give them counsell (to doe as it is reported Jewes doe a∣bout their dead bones) let them give order to some Feoffee to have care of their dead bones, and when they have a sufficient Cargosie to fraight some Vessell to Joppa, and to consigne them to some Reverend Mussel-man, that he by Waggons may transport them to Jerusalem to be in∣terred. Ah, let Teachers consider whether they have not been an occasion to people to stumble at the Law, in teaching and writing about the Iewes repairing of Jerusalem in Chanaan, and of the great businesses that will follow thereupon. Some Teachers have silled the Churches full of mateologie, and fond expectations.
CHAP. XLVII. That Daniell is alleadged in the New Testa∣ment to prove the Messiah to be already come. MR. P. saith in pa. 52. That in no place in the New Testament, this prophecy [of Dan. 9.24, 25, 26, 27.] is used against the Jewes to prove the Messiah already come. Of this assertion, I suppose I may and ought to say (if I say no more) that it is un beseening a man of God, and a Minister of Messiahs Gospell, so to say, For, 1. Stephens speaches to those that disputed with him, and to the Coun∣cll, sheweth that he spake the words and Doctrine of the holy Angel, Act. 6. & 7. and as he had the Angels words, so he had his countenance. This I have noted, and it seems there is necessity to note it often, and to say as the thing is, Stephens contestation is the sum of the Angels message, if Mssias shall destroy the holy Place, and change the Mosaicall customs, then no longer an holy Mountain, then no holy City, then no peculiar people, then no holy Land, all these depend each upon other, but the Lord God doth give us further illustration, For 2. Where ver we read the attribute Christ in the new Testament, we must remember it to be the attribute of Messias from Dan. 9. there given as a proper name of the Son of God, & so used of his Nation in expectation of him, and no place in the old Testament, but Daniel, useth it as a proper name, the Hebrew word is in Greek letters, and that in the mouth of the simplest, as Andrew the fisher man, and the Samaritan womans shewing, that the Samaitns, as well as Jews, knew when Christ should come into the world. Job 1.4, 3. Our Lord teaching to forgive, as God in Christ forgave us, alludeth to this Oration of the holy angel, teaching Peter to forgive seventy times se∣vn times, Mat. 18. 4. The Angel Gabriel saith, that Christ shal make reconciliation for un-righteousnesse. The Epistle to the Hebrews goeth upon this point, that the Son of God the Mssia, the holy of holy by himself, should purge our sin,
should procure remission of sins, and should be the reconciliation for our sins, Rom. 3.1 John 1. and 2. 5. The angel saith, Christ shall bring everlasting justification, the Apo∣stle saith to the Hebrews, Christ by his own blood, entered once into the holy place, the very heavens, and found eternal redemption for us. 6. The angel saith, Messias shall seal vision and prophecy. The visions and propheciess and ceremonies all tended to our redemption by the Son of God. When that was manifested, young men and maids might be said to see the visions and dreams, because they saw the performance of the best part of them. They saw Acts 2 what the first Adam looked for, Gen. 3.15. How Christ the second Adam by death overcame him that had the power of death, to work freedome for them which all their life time with fear were guilty of, or subject to bondage, Heb. 2.5. They saw how the great God of Sem after the flesh perswaded the sons of Iapheth in their own language, as Noes allusion, Iaph and Iapheth told, they saw in whom from Abraham all the families apostared, Gen. 10. & 11. were to look for the blessing, Gen. 12. They saw the last Iubilee gave us an open recovery of our possession of the heavenly Paradise. Luke 23.43. Rom. 15 8. They saw how the Lamb of God had taken away the sins of the world, having a better Tabernacle than Moses made, a sacrifice-hood better than Aharons, a sacrifice better than oxen, goats, & sheep, and birds, & a covenant of greaterforce, larger extent, not onely to the Jew, but also to the Gentile. They knew what Nathan told David of the eternall Throne, and what Daniel dreamed of it, chap. 7. and what Gabriel told Mary, Luke 1.32. This they knew clearly, how all the promises of God in Christ were sealed with yea and Amen. Yea the Lord Iesus Christ hath sealed and confirmed the holy doctrine of the old Testament in the holy Evangelists, and his holy Apostles in their Epistles, and in a wonderfull manner in his Apocalyps, shewing how new enemies under old terms did strive against the doctrine of his heavenly Ierusalem, and the phrases of holy speech are so couched in the Apocalyps from Moses and the prophets that no one article of new doctrine of faith is taught to the churches. 7. The angel saith, Messias shall suffer, but not for himself, so it is said, he once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, 1 Pet. 318. 8. The angel foretold that Messias should confirm the Testament, for ma∣ny, the latter half of the last seven, and the Lord Christ beareth witnesse to his message by the angel, that he was now ready to do that which was foretold and he took the cup, and gave thanks and gave it to them, saying Drink ye all of it, for this is my blood of the new Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins, Mat. 26.28. 9. When Christ the King had suffered & confirmed the covenant, the angel foretelleth, that afterward in the next generation (so Mat. 24, 34.) by loth-some Infidels he would destroy the city and holy place, and his own peo∣ple, with most bitter wars to a final judgement of utter desolations, and Messias foretelling the same again, as he had done by his angel, that when they see Ierusalem besieged by an host, and the abominable infidels stand∣ing in the holy place, Let him that readeth Daniel consider [the whole doctrine of the seventy Sevens] Mat. 24 Mark 13. Luke 19. and 21.
CHAP. XLVIII. Shewing how the holy Evangelists, expresse the Attributes, MESSIAS, or CHRIST. 1. JAcob begat Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was born JE∣SƲS, which is called CHRIST, Mat. 1.6. Chap. 2. When JESƲS was born in Bethlehem of Judea, in the dayes of Herod the King, Behold, there came wise men from the East to Je∣rusalem, saying, 2. Where is HE, that is born King of the Jews, for we have seen His Star in the East, and are come to worship him. 3. When Herod the [usurping] King had heard these things, he was trou∣bled, and all Jerusalem with him. 4. And when he had gathered all the chief Priests and Scribes of the peo∣ple together, he demanded of them where [Messias] Christ should he born. The Magi (from Persi, we may suppose) They asked, Where is the King of the Jews? But Herod the usurper, he demanded of the learned of the Nation, where Messias, i.e. Christ should be born, so this plainly looketh to Dan. 9. where the Lord Iesus is called Nagid, Basus, Messias the King, Mat. 2.1, 2, 3, 4. 3. In the godly, and ravishing society of Messias, Andrew, Simon, Philip, and Nathanael, What joyful heavenly conference have they about Dan 7. and 9. and Gen. 28, saith Andrew to his brother Simon, We have found that Messias, which is by intepretation the Christ, and Philii finds Nathanael, and said unto him, we have found him of whom Moses, in the Law and the Prophets did write. All the Prophets did write of Christ, but none named him Messias, the attribute of a proper name, but Daniel from the Angels message, and the same Angel was sent to Mary, to name him Je∣sus, so both those names were given to the SON of GOD, not by man, but from heaven: so in their blessed and heavenly society these speeches were uttered, and confessed Christ to be the Son of God, to be the Son of man, to be the King of Israel, and the Messias the Holy of Holinesse, and the Ladder of all comfort.
4. And Martha's conference with our Lord is most comfortable and full of faith, shewing what they all expected and believed, I believe thou art the Christ, the Son of God, that should come into the world, to be our life and Resurrection—John 5. 5. Pilates speech to the Jews is of great force. What shall I do then with JESƲS which is called MESSIAS Christ? They all said, Let him be cucified. This looks to Dan. 9. Psal. 22. where it is said, Messias shal suffer, Mat. 27. 6. The questions that were in agitation among the Jews at this time, will brighten this matter; the signes of the times, as our Lord speak∣eth, gave them occasion of moving many questions, when John Elies came teaching and baptizing, the Jews sent Priests and Levites to ask him, Who art thou? and he confssed, and denied not, and plainly confessed, I am not the Messias the Christ. Yea the Jews did so expect the Messias, that all men mused that John was the Messias, & they were hard∣ly driven off from the conceit, they were to taken with him, Luke 3.15. Iohn 1. Therefore this is a strong argument, that Dan. 9.24. &c. must of absolute necessity be believed to be a proper speech and definitive for the time, MESSIAS coming to satisfie the consciences of the faith∣full. And for that also our Lord foretold of false Christs that would a∣rise, as immediately they did, and deceived many, as our Lord said un∣to them, I am come in my Fathers name, and ye receive me not, if another shall come in his own name him ye will receive, John 5. Therefore he said, Search the Scriptures, &c. and very likely Mr. P. if he had then lived, would have been a deceiver, and deceived, and a false Prophet or a false Christ, if he had not believed Daniels Prophesie to be a most clear, exact, and definitive time from Daniels prayer to the death of MES∣SIAS. So Iohn-Elias sent his disciples to Christ to stablish them in that which he their Master had acknowledged. When Iohn being in prison heard of the works of Messias, i. e. Christ, he sent two of his disciples, and said unto him, Art thou he that should come, or shall we look for another? The times did call for all these questions, being but a little before the ending of the seventy sevens. 7. The adjuration of the Priest to the Lord, is very considerable.Mr. P. If he had been of the Councel, he xitld have objected to him, that the seventy se∣vens were end∣ed long before he was bn, The high Priest, and the whole Synedrion could not, nor did challenge the Lord for the time of 70. sevens: so where no doubt or question was, va answer needed, but the high Priest and most of the Jews thought him too base for such a Messias as they expected, and so adjured him to an∣swer to this: I adjure thee by the living God, to tell us, if thou be the Messias the son of the blessed God, and Christ answered affirmatively. 8. Many weighty arguments depend on these things of Dan. 9.24. as 1 Iohn 4. Every spirit which confesseth Iesus to be the Messias [the Holy of Holy] is come in the flesh [to be a son of man, Dan. 7.] is of God, and every spirit that confesseth not Jesus to be the Messias, the Christ is
come in the flesh, [to be a son of man] is not of God, 1 Iohn 5.1. who∣soever believeth, that Iesus is the Messias, is born of God, not simply, or barely, a confession of the attribute Messias, i. e. Christ, but a right ap∣prehension of his person and offices, Rom, 10. his person, that he is the son of man Dan. 7. and the holy of holy, as touching the spirit of holi∣nesse that raised him from the dead. God dwelt in the Messias, who is God blessed for ever: nor onely to confesse this of his person, a Locust from the bottomlesse pit (as Satan) will chirp out this, but to confesse Iesus to be Messias experimentally in our minds and hearts, in his offices as he is Prophet Priest and King,All the three Offices of Christ as he is Pro∣phet, Priest, and King, are in Dan. 9.24 &c. to be Messias, Nagid, Christ the King, that all power is his by donation from the Father to command and rule the Church, to restrain apostasie, and all adverse power, and that he suffered not for himself but for us, who by his precious death hath abo∣lished our sinnes, and wrought reconciliation for iniquity, and hath brought everlasting justification, by his once offering up of himself, and that he hath sealed vision and Prophesie, that we need not expect new revelations: that he made himself manifest to be the holy One of God, by his Resurrection, Ascension, and sitting at the right hand of the Power, in the higstest heavens, and from thence sent gifts to furnish his Church with Offices and officers to teach, and gather the elect out of the world, to open their eyes, to turn them from darknesse to light, from the power of Satan to God, that they might receive forgivenesse of sinnes, and inheritancce among them which are sanctified by the faith which is in him. Christ hath confirmed in his Testament all this holy doctrine for the many, Jew and Gentile, and the Jews for despising the blood of the Covenant have felt to this day the heavy burthen of their own im∣precation, Matth. 27 25. as their Fathers, Num. 14.2. &c. All this the holy Apostle Iohn meant, (and much more unutterable) that the Lord Jesus Messias became such a person to be such a mediatour, and that te∣stimonie in due time, according to the prophesie, 1 Tim. 2.6. And the spirit is peremptory, and saith, whosoever transgresseth, and abideth not in this doctrine of [Messias, which is called] Christ, hath not God: he that continueth in this doctrine of Christ, he hath the Father and the Son, 2 Iohn 9. 9 It will not be uselesse altogether to observe what Tacius Suctonius, & Iosephus speak, that in all the Romane Empire it was divulged in Augu∣stus caesars dayes, that a King should arise in Iudea, that should rule all the world. This is evident by the Persique Magi. They having discer∣ned an unusall Comet in the air, which did argue to them the birth of some noble and famous light, even that Star of Iacob, that shouldNum. 24, id wonderfully expounded in 2 Cor. 10 4.5. un∣wall all the sons of Seth) that was now come into the world) and whi∣ther shotld they direct their journey, and steer their course, but thither the star guided them, and that was to Iudea. It should seem by the good hand of God, that DanielAs the Apo∣ste Paul did in Caesars Court, Phil. 1.13. and 4.22. celebrating the cause of Christ by the an∣gels seventy sevens; at the City Susan, where was the Royall Palace of
the Kings of Persia,Let these godl Authors be con∣sulted with a∣bout those things. Mr. Rollock. Du Plessis. Beroald. Mr. Bro. Mr. wolphius, and many o∣thers. there were some that did expect continually the com∣pleating of the seventy Sevens, of which this celebrious Comet ap∣pearing, gave them an undoubted hint. For we are not to doubt, but the seventy Sevens was a glorious Prophesie to lighten all the East. And the Evangelist Luke ch. 3.1, 2, 3. doth shew, that he bringing in the Em∣perours annals into the Churches stories, and John, Elias Ministery to settle the stories of the times, do make a sweet concent of all these things. But to make things yet more plain, it is said, Luke 19. That the Na∣tion of the Jews did expectThis scripture was spoken but few daies be∣fore our Lords death and re∣surrection. the Kingdome of heaven should immedi∣ately appear, according to the Prophesies of Dan. 2. and 7. and 9. no Prophesy shewed the time as Daniel, and all falls our fit'ly, according to the worlds expectation, especially the Church of God. 1. Mr. P. objecteth, in page 52. If the restauration of the city, Dan. 9.25 is of the materiall Jerusalem after Nebuchadnezzars captivity, it must begin the first of Cyrus from which time seventy weeks of years will fully expire long before the birth of Christ. Answ. It is most true, the seventy Sevens do begin at Cyrus first year of the reign of his monarchy. In this Mr. P. saith true, but to say, they end long before the birth of Christ, is a most manifest untruth, for it is said they end at his confirmation of the Testament for the Ma∣ny, by his sufferings and death in the last Seven. He must be born the Son of man, before he could suffer death to redeem the sons of men. I will stir no more in this, for it is too too bad, and that which hath been said, will I hope, make this assertion to vanish. I am perswaded all the godly Churches in christendome hold MES-SIAS,Yea Papists, vi∣de Cornelius a Lapide; he hath many ex∣cellent passages on Dan. 9. but yet none but what the learn∣ed and godly re∣formed have and had (yea more compleat∣ly) before him. in Gabriels message, to be the Son of God our Redeemer. Scot∣land, Heydelberg, Geneva so doth, and our dear native countrey, by di∣vers learned Expositers, and in our Bible notes (I think above eighty years since) it is said, In this last week of the seventy shall Christ come, and preach and suffer death. And a little after, speaking of Christ confirming the covenant, the note saith, by preaching of the Gospel, he confirmed his promise, first to the Jews, and after to the Gentiles. And that Christ by his death and resurrection, caused sacrifice and oblation to cease. Are not we to mourn and lament, that our ministers should thus deal to take us off from holding to the Messias, the Rock of salva∣tion, as it was taught to Daniel by the holy Angel from heaven. The Angel spake matter of salvation plain, and fortified by Scripture, and it is fortified also by learned Expositions recoived in all Orthodox churches, but by Mr. P. is added much impertinent and false matter. I will briefly recapitulate some things, and let the people of God study the holy Scriptures, and judge. 1. The angel continueth the holy chronicle to the death of Christ,Vide Mr. Bro. Advertis. pag. Mr. P. breaketh it off altogether concerning that.
2. The Angel nameth the Redeemer of the world, Messias; Mr. P. doth utterly deny that, and will have Zisca the Bohemian to be his Mes∣sias. 3. The Angell saith, Messias shall confirm the convenant for many, that is, for the elect of all Nations, both Jews and Gentiles, Mr. P. telleth us of a covenant that Antichrist shall make with his antichristians and their favourites, page 62. and 63. 4. The Angel prescribed for our Lord his preaching three years, and an half, and that is the compasse of the Evangelist Marks Gospel, and of the Evangelist Iohn, as it hath been noted by old and later writers, by four Paschata's, that is, by four Passeovers, which he kept after his Baptisme to his last Supper, which proveth that publick administration of his office to be three years and an half, or the half seven. See Dr. Lightfoots harmony. All this Mr. P. disgraceth. 5. The Angel taught how long Ierusalem should be an holy City for use of sacrifice, and how long Israel onely should be Cods holy people, and peculiar treasure, namely from the time of Daniels prayer, seven∣ty Sevens were exactly accounted for his people, and the holy City. But Mr. P. taketh from the Church (which God hath gathered from the Gen∣tiles) these meditations &c.&c. 6. Some ancient principall Rabbines confesse, that by Messias Christ the Redemer is meant.Mr. Bro. on Dani. Christians that dare put forth books to deny this against the honour of Christian name, should think that here they do not well, and Christians should loath such Treatises, even as the god∣ly converted did their books at Ephesus, and account them, and make them anathema, as the Prophesies of Achab and Zedekias. Much more might be said, of Mr. P. Expositions of Dan 9. (and of all his book) It is said, by the great Raboni, the Lord Christ. We be to the world because of offences, and Mr. P. must, yea he will lay it to heart, yea it is marvell, that the godly Teachers of new England did not que∣stion him for it in some of their Synods: they have not convented a Synod for a greater matter than the agitation which that Book called for, and I hope some godly and more learned men will consider of that book especially about Dan. 9. and by the fire of sound judgement consume it, as hay, stubble, and rotten wood, and Gods day shall declare it, that that work is worthy of no better an end, 1 Col. 3.
CHAP. XLIX. A Conclusion of the point of Chronolo∣gie. 1. IT hath been observed, that the holy Spirit of endlesse wisdome, and foresight hath perfectly made up the holy Chronologie of the old Testament, and that the seventy Sevens doth that, by ending the Chain of Jubilees, and all the ceremonies in the death of Mes∣sias. 2. The first coming of Christ was most needfull to be known for the assured comfort of Jew and Gentile,Little did Mr. P. consider the state of time that the holy spirit did testi∣fie in the Pro∣phets for the coming of Mes∣as, and his sufferings and glory that should follow in his Resurrection, ascension and sending gifts to convert the Nations, 1 Pet. 1.11. by his death to confirm the promi∣ses made to the faithfull, and to be the truth of all the types, which were all sponsorious of a better hope, but of the time of his second coming, there was not that need to know; For it is said, But of the times and seasons brethren, ye have no need that I write unto you: for your selves know perfectly, that the day of the Lord shall come as a thief in the night, 1 Thes. 5. 3. Of the Chronologie of the New Testament, the spirit of Christ hath not disposed an orderly processe of times, neither historically nor prophetically from his death. There is no time cast in the Apocalyps; For God would not begin to accompt the times after the death of Christ, but he must have gone through with it: else it had been a fault in art but that he would not, because of the end of the world, he would con∣ceal, that no man nor angel knoweth it: the Son (in respect of his hu∣manity) is said not to know the time, who yet giveth the Apocalyps to Iohn, but nothing is unknown to his Godhead who is the first and the last. The thousand years are spoken of for the loosing of Satan,Apoc. 20. but the history is not cast by course of time, the thousand years begin (we may best suppose) from the writing of the Apocalyps. 4. But behold the wisdome of God,To teach us in whom we have rest. that most graciously ordered times most exactly, till the death of Christ, in a most pleasant Sabba∣tick * accompt, tres-remarkable from JESUS the son of Nun, to our
IESUS, that saveth us from our sins. Thus he did, that the whole Na∣tion of the Jews should not misse (but by willfull and despitefull swar∣ving) to receive him the true Messias,Heb. 2. & 1. & 6. and 10. to leave all the ceremonies, and to look to him the end and scope of all, and this time was it (often no∣ted, and needfull often to be noted) wherein the Gentiles should begin to be brought to Sms Tents, and thence to learn salvation. 5. When all this was done, there needed no times to teach us ceremo∣nially of Christ to come, for his government and offices are perpetuall, and shall never be abolished, as Levies Priesthood, till he re deliver up the Mediatorian Kingdome to the Father, and till that time we all should joyfully look in watching when the Bridecrome will come. 6. The Gencalogie and Chronologie served to the promised Lands glory,The non-conti∣nuance of gene∣alogies after the apostles times shall be to-ched else. to the people of Israels glory, to the Tabernacles glory, to Ierusalems glory, to the Temples glory, and to Salomons Kingdomes glory, for the glory of all these ended when the Chronologie and Genealogie ended, for all the time of the old Testament, they had that heavenly and glori∣ous use. 2. Blessed be the name of the Lord God for ever and ever, for wis∣dome and strength are his, and he it is that hath altered times, places, and persons, to the glory of the unchangeable Priesthood, and never ending Kingdome of his dear Son our Lord Iesus Christ, to whom be glory and praise everlasting, Amen. CHAP. L. Being a Caveat to beware of such Satanicall spirits that prattle about the expectation of new Apostles and new Revelations. 1. AS is said, for the Chronologie and Genealogie of the the old Testament, that the infallible use of them did cease af∣ter the new Testament was written, so we may say, for the other holy Doctrine of Christ, that we need not to regard, the vanity of wretched men, in expectation of new Apostles, and new
Revelations, but studiously to cleave to what is left and ordained, to us in the holy writings of the Prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles. 2. As our Lord and Saviour said, He that will not hear and believe Moses and the Prophets, will neither hear nor believe, if one should rise from the dead: so truly we may say, he that will not hear and be∣lieve the holy Evangelists, and the holy Apostles writings, who wrote of the doctrine, life, death and resurrection of Christ, is as far from holy faith as ever any Sadducie was; for Christ is risen from the dead, and after his Resurrection gave commandement what his Apostles should preach unto the Nations, and we see what it was they taught by the four Evangelists, by the book of the Acts, by their Epistles, and by the Son of God in his Apocalyps. 3. And that we might not be deceived by the ungodly,1 Cor. 4s to look for new Apostles, mark what the apostle Paul saith plainly, that himself and Earnabas, and other Apostles then living, were the last apostles. 4. Wherefore the apostles, seeing the Churches began to be troubled with false apostles, and with grievous and gangrenating errours and here∣fies, and foretold of worse and more perillous times, that men would not endure sound, and wholesome doctrine, but having sore ears, should after their own lusts get them an heap of Teachers, and should turn their ears from the truth, and should be given unto fables, therefore they gave warning, as is seen in all their writings, and have thus charged us from Christ. That we be mindfull of the words, which were spoken before by the holy Prophets, and of the commandement of us the apo∣stles of the Lord and Saviour, 2 Pet. 3.2: and Iudas Thaddeus saith thus in his Epistle. But beloved, remember the words which were spoken be∣fore of the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ. And the Apostle John saith, He that knoweth God heareth us, he that is not of God beareth nos us, hereby know we the spirit of truth, and the spirit of errour, 1 John 4. 5. The faithfull obeyed this charge and commandement for many years after the apostles, for the apostles had said, what they had taught to the faithfull then living, should be communicated to other faithfull for the instruction of others, for above an 100 years after their dayes, we have not writings of the Ancients, they kept themselves to the holy Scriptures of the Prophets and apostles. 6. And when the Ancients of the Primitive Churches began to write, much about the second Century, and after, it is manifest they adhered to the holy Scriptures, and commended them much to the people, and some of the Ancients did so admire and advance the holy Scriptures, that they adored the sufficiency of them for Doctrine of faith and manners. 7. This is most clear, for it is said, the faithfull martyrs for 300 years suffered for the Word of God, and the Testimony of Jesus, Apoc. 6.9. and so the two witnesses suffered under the Beast of the Pit, King Abaddon, For the keeping of the commandemnts of God; and the saith of JESƲS,
Apoc. 14.12. sofar off they were from expecting new apostles, and new revelations, but hearkened to the apostles directions, Col. 2.18, 19, &c. 8. Doubtlesse, divine revelation in the Prophets and Apostles wri∣tings is a mercy beyond comparison, no tongue is able to expresse the goodnesse of God in this his grace to the Church, so the Saints ever have thought. Psal. 103.7. and 147.2 Tim. 3.15, 16, 17. 9. And let us beware of Satanicall spirits that prattle about the expecta∣tion of new apostles:Apoc. 22.18, 19. and new revelations, for else we shall fall into the curse of the Lord Iesus, who wrote his Apocalyps to the Churches, where his appostles had laid the foundation of the holy faith, and all Churches then, and now we are admonished to hearken to that which: Christ the Lord spake to the Churches. All the apostles, as it is thought, but Iohn, were departed this life when the Apocalyps was written. 10. And let such take heed of illuminations & new light (as they speak) yea to take heed of lying wonders, of visible lights, and sights, and strange audible voices, Iannes and Iambres heardened Pharaohs heart by such. Satanical delusions. And under the new Testament Satan and his instruments, do, and will do so to deceive. Men and women so bewitch∣ed are hardened in pride, stubbornnesse, and curiosity, &c. that the ho∣ly Scriptures are but of mean estimation with such, and prayer and praising of God, and the seals of the covenant, and an able and faith∣full ministery, yea godly magistracy: these inestimable mercies are of no repute with them; and Family exercises are deserted of them as things of bondage, but the godly soul ever hath, and shall find that the cleaving to the Prophets and apostles writings will be a most sure founda∣tion for truth of Doctrine, and for a godly, righteous and temperate life, and of joyfull hope when our eyes are closed in the dust. 11. Without question those that expect new apostles and new revela∣tions. Satan hath new Revelations; for even our first Parents, because they stuck not fast to the revelation of Gods will, but hearkned to new re∣velations, from that counterfeit angel of light Satan, they were deceived, and still Satan doth labour to bewitch mens minds with corrupt and bad opinions, and with vile courses of life. 2 Tim. 3. I. 109. being not con∣tent with the Scriptures of the Prophets and apostles, which are not scaled, but made known to us by Messias coming who hath in them told us all things needfull to be known: Therefore it is said, concerning this very thing, He that is unjust, let him he unjust still, and be that is filthy, let him be filthy still, and he that is righteous, let him be righteous still; and he that is holy let him be holy still, 12. I will conclude this to the godly Reader, with that of the apostle Peter. Ye therefore beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye also being led away with the errour of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastnesse: but grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Sa∣viour Iesus Christ; to him be glory both now and ever Amen.
CHAP. LI. The Exposition of the times mentioned in in the Apocalyps. 1. THere is mention made in chap. 11. of 42. moneths, and 1260. dayes, those shew the rage and cruel persecution of the Beast of the Pit against the two witnesses. 2. In chap. 12. There it is told 1260 dayes, and of a time, times and half a time: which are spoken of the Dragons cruelty in the Caesars. 3. In chap. 13. There is also mention made of 41 moneths, which is to be understood, both of the Tyranny of the Caesars, the sixth head that was wounded to death; and of the Tyranny of the Beast, like a Lamb that healed the wounded head of the Government of the Empire. 4. By these times so variously expressed in divers chapters,Beroald and M. Broughton ancient and later Expositours shew that by them is meant the quality of State, not length of years (namely) that the Church should be afflicted with the af∣flictions of Christ, who was persecuted three years and half by the seed of the old Serpent. 5. The like analogie is from Isa. 49. and 61. Luk. 4. and 2 Cor. 6. As by the acceptable year of the Lord is meant the Iubilee year, in which Messias Christ our Lord was given for a covenant, and laid down his life for our justification, redemption and ending all Moses ceremonies: But now all time of the Gospel to the end of the world is the accepted time, and the day of salvation, and the acceptable year of the Lord. The like force is in 1 Cor. 5. That all in the Church must keep the feast of Christ our Passeover, who was sacrificed for us with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth, to the end of all Ordinances, that is till the Son of man come to deliver up the Mediatorian Kingdome; 1 Cor. 11.26. The time of Tyranny under the Caesars, was three hundred years, yet by Metonomia, meaning the argument of persecution from our Lords time, it is called three years and half: the matter sheweth twice in chap. 11. and twice in chap. 12. and once in chap. 13. that proper time cannot be meant: and the same is to be understood of the persecution
of the Beast of the Pit. They who think to get any certainty from these numbers, deceive themselves and their Readers. The allusion is most heavenly, calling Christ still unto mind. Our Lord preached 42 moneths or 3 years and an half, or dayes 1260, or a time, two times, and an half: so that these numbers in the Apocalyps mean no certain time, but the manners from a like time is meant. The persecuting Pharisees and Sadduces, were revived and continued by the Caesars and Popes. The Caesars Persecution, as is noted, lasted 300 years, and the persecution of the false Lamb lasteth yet, and will, till the Lord cast him and his deceived into the Lake of fire and brimstone. 7. The seven Seals, the seven Trumpets, and the seven phials, are not distinguished in time in the Apocalyps, none of these are, or proper∣ly can be referred to any exact time. 8. I will add a little more in briefe, of the times of the New Testa∣ment, which will give some light to all that may read the Histories of the Church: Mr. Patrick Symson, of the History of the Church, will much help the Reader. The ten Persecutions lasted three hundred yeares by the Infidell Roman Emperours; the sixth head of the Roman Beast: from Nero to Constantine, that time was an age of violence. Thence to Phocas (who murthered his Master the Emperour Man∣ritius) who confirmed the Papacy to Boniface the Third, about the year six hundred and six; and then Mahomet rose about that time, or somewhat after. This time of three hundred yeares was an age of fraudulence by Hereticks: Arius, Pelagius, Donatus, Marcion, Nestorius, &c. they were confronted by Fathers, Athanasius, Hillary, Basil, Nazianzen, Clysostome, Augustine, &c. The times following were also times of violence and fraud in Pope and Turk; Popish superstition still increasing exceedingly. till by the two Witnesses it was resisted, by Waldenses, Wickliff, Hus, Jerom of Prague, and Luther, &c. and Mahometisme greatly prevailed, to the removing of the Candlesticks of the Churches of Asia, as it was threatned against them, Apoc. 2. & 3. and evills in the Churches of the East prevailed by the strength, deceit, and falschood of the Papacy, till that the Turk possessed Constantines Empire and City. The Kingdome of Christ our Lord and Saviour under the new Testa∣ment, was first impugned in the time of the Caesars, and in the grow∣ing on of the mystery of iniquity. Then this Propheticall Office: and at last his Priestly Office was striven against, which was almost despe∣rately corrupted in the height of the mystery of iniquity in the tenth
Century. This last was first contested against by Waldenses, Wickliffe and Luther, &c. Then his Propheticall Office was upheld by the faithfull in cleaving to the Divine Oracles of the holy Scriptures: and at this day this is the greatest contestation. And his Kingly Office hath been but in few places executed; for Christian States do not consider as they should, the benefits thereof that will redound unto them by true Eccle∣siasticall Discipline: and much opposition there hath been and is about it. But as Christian Governours and Teachers have embraced the two former, they will also the other, rejoycing to defend only Christs Or∣dinances, and hate to maintain any thing of the Beasts marks, that they may make good that Scripture of the Apostle of us Gentiles: 1 Tim: 6.13. I give thee charge in the sight of God who quickneth all things, and before Christ Jesus; who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good profession. 14. That thou keep this Commandement without spot. unrebukable, untill the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. 15. which in his times he shall shew who is the blessed and only POTENTATE, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. 16. Who onely hath immortality, dwelling in the light, which no man can approach unto, whom no man hath seen, nor can see, to whom be honor and power everlasting, Amen. CHAP. LII. Of the Attributes or Titles of God Essentially considered. AELohim. Almighties; or Almighty Powers: but in Greek the Apostles do alwaies render it singularly, Theos, God. Aelohah. Omnipotent, or Almighty, Job 12.4. Ael. Puissant, or mighty, Gen. 14 18. Jehovah. Being of himself, and giving being to all things. Elion The most High. Elionin A Plurall. Shaddai. Almighty, or All-sufficient. Gen. 17.1. Adonai. My Staies, my Pillars. Gen. 15.2. Job 28.28.
Ehieth. I am, or I will be: Ex. 3.14. Jah. In notation much like Jehovah. Yzur. The Rock; the seventy translate it Theos, and sometimes Ctistes. Goel. Redeemer. Ghosai Plurall, sig. my Makers. Job 35.10. Abba Father The Power. Matth. 26.64. The Feare. Gen. 31.57. Psal. 76.12. Name. Theos. God. Curios. Lord. Creator. Master. Mal. 1.6. Eph. 6. Eternall God. Gen. 21.33. Sabbaoth. When he warreth against the wicked he is called Jehovah Sab∣baoth. the Lord of Hosts: or when he performeth great intend∣ments for his Church. From these Attributes sundry Ʋses may be gathered. 1. From the Attribute or Title Aeloim. 1. Aelohim is a form plurall, to teach the mystery of the Trinity which is most necessary to be well marked; or else that form were dan∣gerous. I say it were dangerous, if necessity did not require us to be thereby taught the knowledge of the Divine persons. 2. But sometimes it is joyned with a word singular: as in Gen. 1.1. Aelohim He created, because there is but one Godhead; but the plurall form of speaking when it is joyned with a word singular, doth necessa∣rily call upon us to know the mystery of the Trinity in the unity of the Godhead. 3. This plurall Attribute Aelohim, though it be commonly joyned with a word singular (for the reason aforesaid) yet it is sometimes also joyned with a word plurall; as Aelohim, He went: 1 Chron. 17.21. and so Aelohim, They went, 2 Sam. 7.23. and so in Jos. 24.23. He is holy Gods: and in Jer. 10 10. He is living Gods; but in Gen. 20.13. it is also joyned with a word plurall, They Gods caused me to wonder: and in Gen. 35.7. They Gods were revealed to him. The Wisdome of God thought these Expressions to be necessary for our instruction in the mystery of the Trinity, and in the Unity of the God∣head, or else it had been dangerous, for Idolatry, so to declare himselfe to us. 2. Hence we may learn, that though sometimes words of the plurall Number be joyned with the plurall Attribute Aelohim, yet God did no way intend thereby to teach to worship a plurality of Gods, as the igno∣rant
and negligent in the Scriptures are ready to understand it, be∣cause he hath taken good order to cleer it from that errtour by other Scriptures, especially to such as are diligent in the study of the bles∣sed Scriptures: he hath cleered his Attribute Aelohim, from being taken for many Gods; because he hath often put this Attribute into the form singular: as by Eloah in Job 12.4. and sometimes by a shorter form El, The Mighty, in Gen. 14.18. And secondly by joyning it often to a word singular; and thirdly by limiting this plurall Attribute Aelohim onely to three persons, or Existences in the unity of the Godhead: as in Psal. 33. 6. By the word of Jehovah the Heavens were made, and all the Hosts of them by the spirit of his mouth. And saith Ains. in Gen. 1.1, The ancient Hebrew Doctors have left Records of this mystery; Though at this day that Nation doth not un∣derstand it. Come and see (saith Rab. Ben Iochai) The mystery of the word Aelohim: There are three degrees, and every degree by it selfe alone (that is, distinct) And yet notwithstanding (saith he) They are all One, and are not divided one from another: And saith Ains in Numb, 15.25. Rabbi Menhem on these two Phrases [Ʋnto the Lord] and [Before the Lord] saith, from their former ancient Rabbins: This it meant of him and his Judgment Hale, and no Judgment Hale had lesse then three: by which it appeareth, that the mystery of the Trinity in the Godhead was formerly believed by the Jewes, though now they do oppose the same: And the Lord Duplessie in his Truenesse of Religion, page 74.75.76.78. doth prove, that the ancient Hebrew Doctors held the Trinity. But (blessed be God) our New Testament doth tell us most cleerly. 1. That the Father is the Creator. Eph. 3.9. 2. That the Son is the Creator. Eph. 1.8.10. Col. 1 16. 3. That the holy Spirit is the Creator. Gen. 1.2. Psal. 33.6. Psal. 104. 30. And hence it is that Salomon would have young men to make it their care to Remember their Creator in the daies of their health. Eccles. 12.1. 4. Hence we may learn, that God is Almighty for the protection of those that feare him, and that trust in his gracious promises; and he is Almighty to ruinate his Churches Adversaries: Surely there is an Ae∣lohim that judgeth in the Earth. Psal. 58.13. 2. From the Attribute, or Title, Jehovah, we may learn, 1. That Jehovah is the onely true God; for this Attribute signifies one that hath Being of himselfe, and that gives Being to every Crea∣ture, and that can take away their being at his pleasure; and therefore it is an incommunicable Attribute, for none hath being of himself but he alone. 2. There is none that can give being to all other things but he alone. 3. None can take away the Being of all other things, but he
alone. But for the better understanding of the large signification of this Attribute, see Ains. in Psl. 83.19. and in Gen, 2.4. and in Gen 6.3. and in Gen. 15.2. and in Numb. 6.24. and in Levit. 24.16. 2. This Attribute may be a sufficient ground of encouragement to such as the Lord is pleased to call forth to do any difficult service: as for example; when it pleased God to call Moses to go on his Embassage to persecuting Pharoah, he was of himselfe unwilling because of his inabi∣lity of speech: But Christ Jesus said unto him in Exod. 4.11. Who hath made the mouth of man? or who maketh the dumb, or the deaf, or the open eyed, or the blind? have not I Jehovah; therefore go now and I will be with thy mouth, &c. And in like sort Christ shewed himself to be Jehovah, when he said unto his Disciples in Luke 21.15. I will give you a mouth and wisdome which all your adversaries shall not be able to gain say or resist: and hence we may also gather, that that Jehovah which spake unto Moses, was the Son of God, the Angell of Gods pre∣sence: and so Christ must be still understood to be called Jehovah from Exod. 3. to the end of Deuteronomy. 3. After that Moses had been discharged, and by Pharaohs threatning both against him and against Aaron in Exod. 5. then the Lord did still encourage Moses by this Attribute in Exod 6.2. saying unto Moses, I am Jehovah: as if he had said in more words, be not discouraged, but go, for I will now in vers. 8 give a being of performance to that promise which I formerly made to Abraham, that I would give unto him the land of Canaan. 4. This Artribute is for terrour to all persecutors of Gods people; for Christ is Jehovah that gives a being to the performance of all his pro∣mises, and of all his threatnings he told Moses in Exd. 6.6. I am Jeho∣vah, I will bring you out from under the burthen of the Egyptians, and I will redeem you with a stretched out arme, and with great judgments: And thereupon he bad Moses say to Pharaoh in Exod. 7.17. Thus saith Jeho∣vah. In this thou shalt know that I am Jehovah: Behold I smite with the Rod that is in my bad upon the waters which are in the River, and they shall be curned into blood. And in Exod. 8.1. Thus saith Jehovah, Send aay my people, if thou refuse to send them away; behold I will smite thy borders with Frogs, that thou mayest know (as verse 10.) that there is none like Jehovah our God: And in verse 20. Say to Pharaoh, thus saith Jeho∣vh, send away my people, or else I will send conjoyned swames upon thee, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people. And in verse 22. There shall be no (such) conjoyned swarmes in Gashen, that thou mayest know that I am Jehovah. And thus after this sort did Jehovah Christ give a being to his threatnings; and though Jesus Christ did suffer Iannes and Iambres to resist Moses in the execution of his miracles with their counterfeit mi∣racles for a time; yet at last Christ Jesus did not suffer them to courter∣feit all the miracles of Moses, and thereby he made their madness, name∣ly, their mad zeale evident: 2 Tim. 3 8.
5. This Attribute is for instruction to all Gods people to take speciall notice of the powerfull actings of this Jehovah for his people, and against their adversaries: for as it is in Exod. 10.1. lehovah said unto Moses, Go in unto Pharaoh, for I have made his heart heavy, and the heart of his servants, that I may set these my signes in the midst of them; and that thou mayest tell it in the eares of thy son, and of thy sons son, &c, that yee may know that I am Iehovah. The like arguing is in Psal. 78.5.6. &c. and the like is in Exod. 6.6. Say unto the sons of Israel, I am Iehovah: I will bring you out from under the burthens of the Egyptians. And in verse 7. I will take you unto me for a people, and I will be to you a God: and yee shall know that I am Iehovah your God. 6. This Attribute is prefixed and affixed to the ten Commandements, in Exod. 20.2. for the comfort of them that are in Covenant with God, and that keep his Commandements by faith in Christ; and for the ter∣ror of such as transgresse his Commandemants through the want of faith in Christ, for no other obedience is acceptable, but that which is mixed with faith. 7. This Attribute Iehovah is often pressed upon the people of Israel that were in Covenant with God, that they may walk in holinesse as a people in Covenant ought to do: as in Levit, 18. and in Levit, 19. and often elswhere, as a band to tye them to yeild all holy obedince to all Gods Lawes, both to his Ceremoniall and Iudiciall Lawes, as well as to the Decalogue; and therefore obedience to all the Ceremoniall Laws is enforced on this ground: Because I am Iebovah your God: and in Levit. 11.44.45. You shall not make your selves unclean by any ceeping thing that moveth upon the earth; for I am Iehovah that bringeth you up out of the Land of Egypt to be a God unto you, and yee shall be hoy at I am holy: And this duty is also urged on the faithfull dispersed Iewes in the new Testament: 1 Pet. 1.15.16. 3. From the Attribute Elion the most High. 1. We may learn not to be daunted with the big looks of such as do oppose us in a good Cause: and therefore Melchisedek did most perti∣nently use this Title of God in his blessing to Abraham; He called him the most High: namely, over his Enemies the foure Kings, when he returned with Victory over them, Gen. 14.18. And then also Abraham told the King of Sodom in verse 22. That he had lift up his hand unto [Iehovah, Ael, Elion] The Lord God most High, the Possessor of Heaven and Earth, that he would not take any thing that was his. 2. The like instruction we may learn from this Attribute in the form plurall, Elionin, Eccles. 5.7. Mr. Bro. reads it thus: If the oppression of the poor, and robery of Iudgment and Iustice, thou do behold in a Country, marvell not at the matter, for an higher then the high one
doth mark; and there be high above them, namely, Elionin, the high Trinity: as his Marginall Note is. 3. Ieremy in Lam. 3.35.38 doth twice over complain to Elionin a∣gainst the wicked high States of Iudah, whom they felt and should feele in his judgments, to be higher and mightier than they. 4. The Saints of Zorobabels house are called the Saints of the most High, in Dan. 7.18. and they are comforted with this Attribute in Chaldy, against the foure persecuting Empires there expressed, which ended with the parted Greek monarchy: namely, that though they should by their tyraany be deprived of the possession of an Earthly King∣dome, yet they should still be the Saints of (Elionin) the most High, and shall hold a Kingdome for ever, yea for ever and ever. This Chaldy term in the plurall is put for the singular; as Aben Ezra noteth; and we may be sure that it was so spoken to note out of the Tri∣nity of persons in the unity of the Godhead: and in this place it was fit to be plurall, because it hath relation to the distinct vision of the Son and of the Father; and upon the same account Thrones are also plu∣rall, in verse 9. 5. Therefore such as are Saints must pay their Vowes to God most, high, Psal. 50, 14. as Abraham did in Gen. 14.22. and the most High, in Luke 6.35. is called Our Father which is in Heaven, in Matth 5.45. 4. From the Attribute Shaddai, the Almighty or the All-sufficient. 1. Hence we may learn, that it is good for us in all our temptations to rest or stay our Soules upon his promises; for if we be qualified with faith and grace according to his Covenant, as Abraham was, in Gen. 17. 1. we may be sure he will be Ael Shaddai, the Almighty, or All-suffi∣cient to performe his promises, and threatnings, though they seem never so unlikely to naturall reason, as in performing his promise to Abra∣ham, by making Sarahs dead Womb to conceive and bring forth: and in performing his threatnings on the wicked, though in their reason they do often thing themselves compassed about with Rocks of security: yet God saith, that Shod [destruction] shall come from Shaddai [the Almighty] Isa. 13.6. 5. From the Attribute Adonai, which is plurall, and impor∣teth, my Pillars, or stayes. 1. Hence we may learn to rest and depend upon him for the certaine fulfilling of his promises, if we be but rightly qualified according to the
conditions required of us in his Covenant of Grace, Abraham said in Gen. 15.2. Adoni Jehonith, what wilt thou give me seeing I go childless; or seeing I am going out of the world childless, for I have no hope in nature of a child: but yet notwithstanding I do call thee Adonai, the Pillar and stay of my weak saith, in that gracious promise now propounded, in verse 6: Feare not A∣braham, I am thy shield, and thy reward shall be exceeding great: namely, The Messiah shall be born from thy loynes; Abraham replyeth in verse 2. Adonai, Jehonith, what will thou give me, seeing I go childless? And so those sweet promises before given in Gen. 12.3. and Gen. 15.15 of the Messiah, shall be frustrate: but yet I call thee Adonai, Jehonith, as still making thee my pillars and staies, and the giver of being to thy promi∣ses, and therefore I do by my interrogation expect a further answer to stay my faith upon. 2. Job, in chap. 28.28. is thus translated by Bro. Mark. The Feare of Adanai is wisdome, and to eschew evill is understanding. His Marginall Note is this; Adonai is used first in Gen. 15.2. of Abraham: and is plu∣rall for note of Trinity, and signifies, My stayes. 6. From the Attribute Ehieth, I am, or I will be. 1. Hence we may learn to establish our faith in Gods unchangeable promises for the good of his Church, and of his threatnings for the de∣struction of their Enemies. 2. This is also observable, that when his promises are confirmed with his oath, or confirmed by signs, as his promise of Canaan was to Abrah. posterity, then God applies his name Ehieth to it, as in Ex. 3.14. I am that I am, or I will be that I will be: & so in Rev. 1.4. God is called, he that is, and that was, and that will be; in which word the name Ehieth is opened, and also the name Jehovah: and it is applicable to the certainty both of his promi∣ses of support to his faithfull ones under their persecutors; and also to his threatnings of their enemies destruction: and the same Title is gi∣ven to God in Rev. 16.5. chiefly to assure the godly of those times, of the certain destruction of their antichristian adversaries. This Title is also given to Jesus Christ, in Heb. 13.8. Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever: because of the certain effects of his Media∣tors Office. 7. From the Attribute Jah, Breathing, in Exod. 15.2. 1. Hence we may learn, that in Jah we live and move and have our breath and being. 2. Hence we may learn, that Jah doth take away the breath and being
of his Churches enemies when it pleaseth him, and therefore in Exod. 15.2. Israel in their Song of triumph did praise God that had given breath and being to them in the midst of the Red-sea, and that had ta∣ken away the breath and being of Pharoah and all his Host in the Red∣sea. 2. This Attribue do the Saints give, in Revel 19.1.3.46, to Christ their being, for their deliverance or preservation from the prevailing power of Antichrist, saying Halalu-jah. 3. Isa. in chap. 16.4. doth exhort to faith and confidence in this Iah; saying, Trust in the Lord for ever, for in Jah, Jehovah is the Rock of Ages 4. His Title Iah, in Psal 68.4. is there used in that exhortation to praise God for his mercies by his name Iah. 5. This Title Halalu jah is in Psal. 104.35. where the consuming of sinners is mentioned, alluding therein to the destruction of the Sodomites, and of Pharaoh and his Host in the Red-sea, as in Psal, 105.44.45. 6. This title Halalu-jab is also used in Revel. 19. where the destruction of Antechrist is foretold. 8. From the Attribute Tzur the Rock, it is first used in Deut. 32.4.18.30.37. and in 2 Sam. 22. and in 2 Sam. 22.2.32. 1. Hence we may learn, that no Rock is like this Rock; and there∣fore if we have right unto him by the Covenant of grace, we may de∣pend upon him in all straits and temptations for protection and preser∣vation: for this Rock is Christ, as it is expounded in 1 Cor. 10.4. and and so the Rock in Matth. 16.18. is not Peter but Christ; for Peter said in verse 10. Thou art Christ: Christs answer is, Ʋpon this Rock I will build my Church, land the gates of Hades shall not overcome it. Mr. Bro. saith, that the tearm Rock in commendations of a person, must ever be taken for God; and therefore (saith he) He that takes it for Peter, doth make him a God: and saith he, it is used for Christ onely in the usuall name of God. 2. The tearm Rock in Psal. 31.5 is by the seventy translated Ctistes, which is translated the (faithfull, or sure) Creator, in 1 Pet. 4.19. 9. Ghosai, a plurall signifying My Makers. 1 Hence we may learn, that there is a Trinity of persons in the Unity of the Godhead: it is used in lob 35.10. and Psal. 149.1. 2. Hence we may learn, that God hath not onely made us to have a being in his visible Creation, but also that he doth make his Elect to have a being in his invisible Creation, namely to be his people by a spi∣rituall
Creation; as the double reading in Psal. 100.3. doth well ex∣pound the sonse. 10. Goel, Redeemer. This is most usually applied to the second person, because he paid the price of our redemption: But yet redemption is also often attributed to the first person in trinity, as in Isa. 63. because all our actuall liberation is from him. The second person paid the price; But the actuall Attone∣mont by which redemption is compleat, is the act of the first person: and the qualification that belongeth to the persons that are to be redeemed, is the act of the third person: and in this sence all the three persons may be called Redeemers. 11. The other Attributes, the Power, the Feare, &c. are coincident with the former Titles, and with their Exposi∣tions and uses. Conclusion. Seeing Elohim is the mighty Creators, and Iehovah is Being of him∣selfe, and giving being to all other things, and the most High and one∣ly Potentate to maintain and defend his Saints that are in Covenant with him, and seeing he is our All sufficient, four Pillars and stay, al∣waies unchangable, and ever the same, our breath, in whom we live and move and have our being, in whose hand is our breath and all our waies; and seeing he saith, that he is our Father and Redeemer through the e∣verlasting Covenant confirmed in the blood of his deare Son, we may well make all the Trinity in that eternall Covenant, to be our Rock and Refuge for our Redemption, Reconciliation, Justification, Adoption, and Eternall Salvation, Amen.
CHAP. LIII. Of the Attributes of the Divine Nature of the second Person in Trinity. JEhovah, in Gen. 6.3. Rock. Son. The Word. Wisdome. Immanuel. Lord. God Angel Michael. Puissant. Name, Act. 3.14. Alpha and Omega, Beginning and Ending, First and Last. 1. Jehovah is the Attribute of the second person, as in Gen. 6.3. there the Spirit of Jehovah, is in 1 Pet. 3.19. called the Spirit of Christ. 2. Jehovah, in Isa. 6.8.9. is expounded of Christ, in Iohn 12 37.38. 3. In Icr. 23.6. that Christ is called Jehovah our Righteousness, be∣cause he is by God made unto us Righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30. and 31. And saith Bro. in Ecclesistes, the Hebrew Doctors do commonly say from Jer 23. as in Bathra, Sect 1. fol. 75. B. that the Messias is Iehovah our Righteousness. 4. In Gen. 19.24. Jehovah, from Jehovah rained fire and brimstome, &c. hence we may learn, that the second person as Me∣diator doth speak and work from the Father, as Iohn 5.17 to verse 30. The Father must evermore be considered as the first in the order of wor∣king in the Trinity. 5. From Iohn 5.17 &c. we may see the reason why the Title Jehovah is so usually to be understood of Christ, except in those places where the Father is distinguished, as in Gen. 19 24. Psal. 110.1. and some few other places, as in Isa. 26.4. there Jehovah is said to be in Iah [the Father] and our Lord doth thus insinuate the sense of that and such like places,
to Philip, in Iohn 14.10, 11. Believest than not that I am the Father, and the Father in me: so in Exod 23.21. My name is in him, is thus opened in 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ. 2. Hence we may learn that all the attributes that are given unto God essentially, are likewise given to the second and third persons, as well as to the first. 6. Christ is called the Angel that Jacob invocated: The Angel that appeared unto Moses in the Bush, Exod. 3. The Angel of Gods presence Esa. 63. And the Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3 1. Likewise the Titles Jehovah, Aelohim, &c. used by Moses, in Geneses, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deutrenomy, and used by David and all the Prophets: These Titles are applied by the Apostles to Christ, in 1 Cor. 10 and Stephen, called Christ the Angel, in Act. 7.38. 7. The title God is applied to Christ, as in Psal 78.1. Let Aelohim [God] arise, and in v. 19. Thou art ascended on high, is expounded of Christ, in Eph 4 8.9. and the former sentence, Let God arise, is taken from Numb. 10.35. and there it is, Rise up Iehovah: and in these words Moses also hath respect unto the promise, in Exod. 23.20, 21. Behold I send and Angel before thee, &c. Beware of him and hear his voice, &c. for my name is in him: and in Gen. 31.13. he is called the God of Beithl. 8. The title Son is applied to Christ, in Psal. 2 12 Kiss the Son least he be angry; likewise in Prov. 30.4. What is his name, and the name of his Son, if thu canst tell. Likewise God the Father doth call him Son: This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear him, Matth. 3.17. Matth. 17.5. 9. Word, as in 2 Sam. 7.21. For thy words sake; but in 1 Chron. 17.19. repeating the same thing, it is for thy servants sake: So in the new Testament, the second person is called the Word, Iohn 1.1. he as Me∣diator is also so called in relation to the eternall Covenant, which he in his Godhead made with his Father for mans redemption; and that he is called the servant of God, because he assumed our nature in rela∣tion to do the Office of a Mediator, Matth. 12.18. compared with Esa. 42.1. 10 Christ is called the Wisdome of God, first in Pro. 8.1. and second∣ly, he is so called in the new Testament, Luke 11.49. 1 Cor. 1.24. 11. He is called the Father of Eternity, in Esa. 9.6. because he did in his Godhead from Eternity covenant to undertake the Office of a Mediator, by which means he procured the spirit for our Redemption, and so consequently for our Adoption, and thus Christ is called the Father of Eternity: and in this respect he hath taught us to pray unto all the Trinity by this title Our Father, Matth. 6.9. 12. He is called Michael the Arch-angel, by Iudas Thaddae is, v 9. but this very person is called Iehovah, in Zach. 3.2. being cited thence. 13. He is called Gods Fellow, in Zach. 13.7. with Math. 26.31. for
he thought it no robery to be equall with God, Phil. 2.6. 14. He is called God over all blessed for ever, Rom. 9. and the God of Beithell, Gen. 31.13. and the mighty God, Tit. 2.13. 15. He is also called the Lord, in Rom. 10.9. But that place is taken from Deut. 30 10. &c. and there he is called Jehovah; and in 1 Cor. 2 8. he is called the Lord of Glory, and in Jam. 2.1. our glorious Lord Jesus Christ. 16. He is called Name, in Exod. 23.21. My Name is in him, and in Heb. 1.3. he is said to be the expresse Image of Gods person; and in 2 Cor. 4.4. he is called the Image of God, and in Col. 1.15. he is said to be the Image of the invisile God, begotten before all the Creation, for by him were all things created, which are in Heaven and which are in Earth, the visible and the invisible, whether Thrones, or Dominions, or principalities, or powers, all things were created by him and for him, and he is before all things, and by him all things consist: yea, he is called the beginning of the Creation of God, Rev. 3.14. and hence it followes by necessary consequence, that seeing all things were created in the first six daies, both the visible and the invisible Creation, both the earthly and the spirituall Creation, namely, because some of all these kinds were then created, it must needs be, that Adam & Eve were then created (not onely for an earthly Paradise) but for a spirituall and for an hea∣venly Paradise, for he presently lost the possession of the earthly Para∣dise; and therefore seeing some were elected to an heavenly Paradise, Adam and Eve must be belonging to that kind of Creatures that were e∣lected to that place, for there were no other that should be created for that Paradise in the first six daies but Adam and Eve, or else if they were not then created a new for that place in the first six daies, then it will also follow, that God did not finish all the Hosts of Heaven and Earth in the first six daies. But it is affirmed that he did finish all the said Hosts, namely, some of every Host in the first six daies, and therefore it doth necessarily follow, that Adam and Eve were then created as a part of the Host of the spirituall Paradise here, and as a part of the Host of the heavenly Paradise hereafter, by a recreation on the same sixth day in which they were created, and fell. 17. He is called the blessed and onely Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who onely hath immortality, and dwelleth in light that none can approach unto, whom no man hath ever seen, nor can see: To whom be honour and power everlasting, Amen. 1 Tim. 2.15. These, and many other Texts which are cited in the new Testament from the old, do prove the Godhead of Christ by an undeniable consequence, against Turks, Jewes, and Arrians.
CHAP. LIV. Of the Attributes of the humane nature of the second Person. THe Seed of the woman. The seed of Abraham. The seed of David. The root of Jesse. The off-spring of David. The Son of God, the Son of Man. Shiloh. Immanuel. 1. Christ in his humane nature is called the seed of the woman, in Gen. 3.15. Then God said thus to Satan, I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed, he shall break thy head plot, and thou shalt pierce him in the foot soal. This seed of the woman must not be expounded in a not collective sense for Christ and his members, but of Christ onely, because he onely could break the Devils head-plot. 2. God said to Abraham, in Gen. 18. In thy seed Shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed. This word seed is expounded in a collective sense but of the individuall person of the Mediatour, and of his humane nature on∣ly, as it is expounded in Gal. 3.16. 3. It is said in Rom. 1.3. That he was made of the seed of David accor∣ding to the flesh, though it was also united personally to his divine na∣ture: as, in Mat. 9.27 O thou Son of David have mercy on u: let the beams of thy divine nature shew forth its power in thy humane nature, taken from the loins of David,. 4. Christ is called the Root, and the Offspring of David. in Rev. 22.16. as it was prophesied in Isa. 11.10. In that day there shall be a root of Iesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the people, to it shall the hea∣then seek, and his rest shall be glorious. 5. He is called Shiloh, in Gen 49.10. The Sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a law-giver from between his feet untill Shiloh come, and un∣to him shall the gathering of the people be. 6. The titles Son, Son of God, and Son of man, are often applied
to the humane nature of Christ: as for example, 2 Sam 7.14. I will be to him a Father, and he shall be unto me a Son: this word Son is applied to his humane nature in personall union with his Divine, in Heb. 1.5. because he doth there make him above the angels. 7. God called him Son, in Psal. 2.7. Thou art my son, I this day begat thee. Now Christ is called Gods son, in sundry respects. 1. He is Gods son from Eternity by divine generation. 2. At his incarnation, when his humane nature was conceived by the Holy Ghost, in the Virgins womb, and therefore that holy thing was called the Son of God, Luke 1.35. 3. He was called Gods Son in Psal. 2.7. by being begotten into the Me∣diatours office, when he was extrinsecally installed by the visible anoin∣ting of the Holy Ghost, when we was baptised of John at Jordan, Mat. 17. and of this begetting of Christ the Apostle speaks in Acts 13.23. 32, 33. Of this mans seed, (namely of Davids seed, as verse 22.) hath God according to his promise (in Es. 11.1, 2.) raised or begotten, as it is after expounded, unto Israel a Saviour Jesus: and this raising he takes up again in verse 32, 33. We declare unto you glad tidings, how that the promise which was made unto the Fathers, God hath fulfilled unto us their children, in that he hath raised up Jesus (again) as it is also written in the second Psalm, Thou art my son, this day have I begot∣ten thee (The word again is not in the Geneva, nor in Ains. who tran∣slates the verse in Psal. 2.7. and being added, it carries the sense to the Resurrection of Christ, which is not intended in this verse, though it be intended in the next verse) but that which is intended in this verse, in the beginning of the raising up of Christ on the spirituall throne of David, to be a King, Priest, and prophet, by his extrinsecall anointing into the Mediatours office, which was not done till he went to Jordan to be baptised, then the Holy Ghost did anoint him visibly before Johus Auditory, by sitting like the dove upon him, and Christs extrinsecall in∣stallment into the Mediatours office is also proved by Heb. 5.5. from the second Psalm, Christ glorified not himself to be made an high Priest, but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee: hence it is evident, that he called him his son, glorified him with the visible anointing of the holy Ghost at his Baptisme before all Johns auditory: and in this respect he is said to be his son by being begotten extrinsecally into the Mediatours office. 4. He was also begotten from the dead, by the power of God in his Resurrection, and of this begetting or raising up his son, the apostle also speaks in Acts 13.30.31, 34. This two-fold raising of Christ, spo∣ken of in Acts 13. ought to be well marked, because it will then clear the citation of Psalm 2.7. to be alledged onely for the proof of Gods be∣getting his son by his extrinsecall installment into the Mediatours office when he began to be 30 years of age, even as Daniel was not united to the extrinsecall execution of his Kingly office, untill he was extrinsecal∣ly
anointed, and so Christ his raising or begetting into the extrinsecall execution of his Mediatours office, is also spoken of in Deut. 18.15.18. Luke 1.6, 9. Ier. 23.5. Acts 2.30 Acts 22.26. Hence then it follows, that the humane nature, as it was taken into personall union with the divine, is called Gods son, Luke 1.35. and 22. as it was glorified by his extrinsecall anointing to the publick exe∣cution of the Mediatours office, he is also called Gods son: this day have I begotten thee, Psalm 2.7. and in this sense must Paul be understood in Heh. 1.5. Ʋnto which of the angels did he ever say, Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee, by my visible anointing thee into the Media∣atours office: and then God also gave this publick testimony of him. This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased, Mat. 3.17. and this day have I glorified thee, or begotten thee, to be a High Priest, Heb. 5.5. and the reason why all is made subject to man, in Ps. 8. is because God would Tabernacle in our nature, as it is well observed by Mr. Bro. in Melchi∣zedech. 8. The Genealogie of Christs humane nature in Luk. 3.23. is first drawn up to Adam, and then in v. 38. He in his humane nature, and not Adam (as many mistake) is called the Son of God according Luke 1.35. 10. Christs humane nature, namely as it is considered in personall Union, with his Divine nature is called a child borne, and a Son given to the Church of Beleivers, in Es. 9.6, 7. unto us a child is born, unto us a Son is given, the Government shall be upon his shoulders, and his name shall be called wonderfull, councellor, the mighty God, the Fa∣ther of Eternity, the Prince of peace, and of the increase of his govern∣ment and peace, there shall be no end upon the throne of David, and up∣on his Kingdome, to order it and establish it with judgement and Justice, from henceforth even for ever: The zeale of Jehovah of Hostes will per∣forme this. 11. Christ is called the Son of man, in Dan. 7.13. Lo, in the cloudes of Heaven, came one like a Son of Man: Afterward he went to the ancient of Dayes: When our Lord continually tearmeth him∣selfe the Son of man in the foure Evangelists he doth (saith Bro, on this verse) most graciously call us to weigh this Text. 12. He is called the word that was made flesh, and dwelt among us or that did tabernacle in our nature, Joh. 1.14. 13. He is called a man in a Virgin, for thus saith Agu in Prov. 30.19. Three things are too wonderfull for me, yea four that I know not, the way of an eagle in the air, the way of a serpent on a rock, the way of a ship in the middest of the sea, and the way of [Geber] a man in a virgin; for the Hebrew word for virgin, doth alwayes signifie a virgin that never knew man. 14. Christ in his humane nature personally united to his divine, is called Immanuel, in Es. 7.14. Behold, a virgin shall conceive and bear a
son, and shall call his name Immanuel, this doth Matthew shew to be ful∣filled by the birth of Christ, Mat. 1.23. and the Angel said unto Mary, That holy thing that shall be born of thee shall be called the son of God, Luke 1.35. and hence it is said, that in the fullnesse of time, God sent forth his son made of a woman, Gal. 4. 15. The holy Law in the old Testament doth often give terms to God from mans body and afflictions: This (saith Bro.) was so done to prepare the faithfull of those times, to believe the sons incarnation. So in Gen. 18.1, &c. he that appeared unto Abraham (with two an∣gels) is called both a man, verse 2.22. and Jehovah, and Abraham took him for both, (saith Estwick contra Biddle, page 4, 24.) he is called Je∣hovah, verse 1.13, 14, 17, 20, 26, 32. and in verse 33. Jehovah went his way when he left communing with Abraham, but he appeared to Abra∣ham in the figure of a man, he walked and talked, and did eat, &c. this was a praesudium to his future incarnation, and for this and the like appa∣ritions, our Saviour saith, Abraham saw my day (my coming in the flesh) and rejoyced, John 8.56. CHAP. LV. Of the Attributes of the Mediatours Office. ANgel. Servant. Messias, in Greek Christ, or the anointed. Jesus. A Saviour, a Redeemer, a Captain, a King, Priest, and Prophet, Palmoni. Arch-angel. David. Salomon. Bishop. Apostle. High Priest. Advocate. Shepherd.
1. Christ is called an Angel, in relation to his Office of Media∣tourship. 1. The Title angel doth signifie one sent on a message: and so God sent forth his son to be made (man) of a woman, Gal 4 4. but God could not as his supream send him forth, because the second Person thought it no robbery to be equal with God: therefore, in that he was sent forth, it argues that it was done by his voluntary condescention, according to the articles of a mutuall Covenant. 2. Christ is called the angel, or messenger of the covenant which God made with fallen man, long before he came in the flesh, Mal. 3.1. 3. He did often appear to our Fathers in a most excellent shape, even as an angel for their direction in matters of faith, and for their prote∣ction from evill, if they did obey his voice, Exod. 23.20, 21. 4. Hence it is, that Jacob said, the angel which redemed me out of all adversity blesse the lads, Gen 48.16. 5. Christ is called the angel of Jehovah in Exod. 3.2. The angel of Je∣hovah appeared unto Moses in a flame of fire out of the middest of a bram∣ble bush, and this angel in verse 6. calleth himself the God of Abraham, and by this it is evident, that the God which did so often appear unto Abraham was Christ. 6. In all their afflictions he was afflicted, and the angel of his pre∣sence saved them, Es. 63.9. It is said in Hos. 12.3, 4. that Jacob had power with God, and had power over the angel, and prevailed, he wept and prayed unto him, he found him in Bethel, and there he spake with us: but in Gen. 32.34. (from whence this of Hosea is taken) he is called a man; for men that are excellent in form and in qualities, are often called angels, hence it is evident, that it was Christ, that did appear both to Abraham and to Jacob in a most excellent humane shape, fairer than the sons of men, as he is stiled in Psal, 45.2.2. It was Christ wrestled or combated with Ja∣cob, and that suffered himself to be overcome with Jacob for the sake of his gracious promise with Jacob, laid hold on by faith, and because that Jacob did importunately urge that promise in verse 9. for the bles∣sing in this angel of Gods presence was revealed to Iacobs posterity for their protection, in case they did obey his voice, Exodus 23.20, 21.
2. Christ is called a servant in relation to his office of Me∣diatourship. 1. David doth stile him Gods servant, in 1 Chron. 17.19. O Jehovah for thy servants sake, but his prayer was first expressed thus, in 2 Sam. 7.21. for thy words sake, and so John doth stile him John 1.1. 2. After that Christ was pormised to come out of Davids loins, then David proyed unto God in the name of his servant David, sometimes he said, O Jehovah, for thy servants sake (as above) and sometimes for thy Servant Davids sake, in Psal. 1.32.10. and God doth call his son Christ his servant David in Ezek. 34.23. Ezek. 37.24. likewise he doth call his servant Israel, Isa. 49 3. and his sevant Zorobabel, Hag. 2.24. and all this must be understood in relation to his office of Mediatourship, and God calls him his servant by the name of the aforesaid persons, because he was promised to come out of their loins, and so in Zach. 3.8 he is called the branch, my servant. Peter speaks thus to the Jews in Acts 3.26. First unto you hath God raised up his servant Jesus: and in verse 13. the God of our Fathers hath glorified his servant Jesus: so Bro. doth render it in these two verses. 4. God said thus, in Isa. 42 1. Behold my servant, whom I uphold, namely by the unction of my spirit, in the execution of his Mediatours office. 5. God calls him his righteous servant in Isa 53.11. because he did exactly keep himself to the lawes of the combate with his malignant combater Sathan, as it was first declared in Gen 3.15. and then as soon as he had in perfection of obedience finished that combate, he did then make his death to be a most perfect, and a most acceptable sacrifice for the procuring of Gods reconciliation to all believing sinners, and in this respect he is stiled Gods righteous servant, and in the former part of the verse it is said thus, by the knowledge of him, that is to say by faith in him (so Peter Murtyr doth translate and expound this text in Rom. page 392.) Shall my righteous servant justifie many; and so Bullenger ex∣pounds it in his Dcads page 48 and our larger annotations and others. 6. Christ as Mediatour saith thus, in Psalm 40.6. mine ear hast thou boared, according to the badge of most willing and perpetuall Servants, in Exod. 21 6. and Deut. 15.17 but the Seventy put body for ear, and their Translation doth Paul follow, in Hebrews 10.5.10. and thence it follows, that Moses names the ear for the whole body by the figure Synechdoche, because that member doth hearken and attend to the Ma∣sters command, as faithfull servants ought to do. 7. Christ is said in Phil. 2.7. to take on him the form of a Servant. But first he is said to make himselfe of no reputation; namely, he that was in the form of God, verse 6. emptied himselfe, or made himselfe of no reputation, namely, i condescending by his mutuall Covenant to
take our humane nature into the unity of his divine person. And then secondly, he is said to take upon him the form of a Servant; not a hu∣mane nature onely, as most do expound the word Servant, but to do the office of a Servant in combating his envious Combater Satan, according to Gods declaration in Gen. 3.15. or as it is expounded in verse 8. being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himselfe as a Servant, or Com∣bator, and became obedient unto the death, even the death of the Cross; though his Combator Satan hath liberty to try his patience and obedience, by his ignominious and painfull suffering as a Malefactor on the Cross; yet he could not disturb his patience, and therefore he could not pervert him in his obedience, and therefore consequently he could not hinder his death from being made a most perfect and accepta∣ble Sacrifice for the purchasing of Gods reconciliation to all his believing Children: wherefore it followes in verse 9. that God also hath highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name, &c. and to this sence must that prophesie be understood, in Esa. 52.13. &c. Behold my Servant shall deal prudenty (in the execution of his Office of Mediatorship, and especially in his office of combating with his pro∣claimed malignant Combator Satan, and then it followes as it doth in the said place to the Philippians, he shall be exalted and extolled, and be very high. 3. Christ is called a Prince, or Captain, in relation to his Of∣fice of Mediatorship. 1. In Iosh. 5.14, 15. He is called the Prince or Captain; for he ap∣peared to Ioshua in the form of a man, and said unto him as a Captain of the Lords Hosts, Am I now come to destroy the Cananites, according to Gods promise, in Exod. 23 20.22, 23. In like sort he is called the Prince or Captain of our salvation, in Heb. 2.10. because of his undertaking of the office of a Combator, with his proclaimed malignant Combator Satan, for mans redemption from Satans head plot, according to Gods Declaration of the combate, in Gen. 3.15. 2. He is called the Prince of the Army, in Dan. 8.11. Broughton doth render the Text thus: And it (namely the little Horn) became great against the Prince of the Army: and in verse 25. he is called the prince of princes; and in Dan. 10.13. he is called Michael the first of the chiefe princes, and in verse 21. there is none (saith the Angel Gdriel) that strengtheneth himselfe with me in this thing but Michael the prince: And in Dan 12.1. At that time shall stand up Michael the great prince. And why else is he called the great prince, but because he is the prince of princes, and King of Kings, Rev. 1.5. yea the prince of Angels, and therefore he is called the Arch-angel, in Jude verse 9. from this place of
Daniel, and from Exod. 23.20.22. compared together. This Attribute your prince, and Michael, sheweth, that the term An∣gel here must not be understood of a created Angel, but of the Arch∣angel, the Captain of the Lords Host, according to the promise in Ex∣od. 23.20. and he is also called Michael, which signifieth one that thought it not obery to be equall with God. These titles of prince and Captain are here applied to Christ, as he is the King of his Chruch and people: but the like title is given him as he is our high priest and the captain of our salvation in his combate of suffering from Satan, untill he conquered him by his obedience, and in that obedience did make his death a most acceptable Sacrifice of Re∣conciliation. 4. Christ is called the Prince of life, in relation to his Office of Mediatorship. 1. Peter tells the multitude of the Jewes, in Act. 3.14, 15. Yee killed the Prince of life; why else is he called the Prince of life? but because he brake Satans head-plot by his combate of suffering, and by his sacrifice of obedience, even through all the said sufferings, and by that means he redeemed the Elect from the death of sin, which Satan by his cunning head-plot had brought upon them all, and so in this respect he is called the Prince of life, alluding to that Combate and Victory over Satan, in Gen. 3.15. and to that in Psal. 2.2. The Kings of the Earth set themselves, and the Princes do plot together against Jehovah and against his Christ: and the fulfilling of this combate is thus expressed, in Act. 4.27, 28. Of a truth Lord against thy holy child Jesus whom thou annointedst, gathered were both Herod and Pontius Pilate, to do whatsoever thy hand and thy Council had determined before to be done; according as he had declared, it in Gen. 3.15. namely, That the seed of the Woman should combate with his pro∣claimed Enemy Satan and his seed, and that by his obedience to the Lawes of the combate, he should break the Devils head plot for the re∣demption of the Elect, from the death of sin to the life of grace, and so at last to the life of glory: and in this respect lie hath merited the Ti∣tle, Prince of life; and to this effect did Peter speak to the Council of the high Sandim, in Act: 5.31. Him God made high with his right hand, a Prince and a Saviour to give repentance to Israel, and forgivenesse of sins: and in this respect Christ is also stiled the King of Justice and the King of Peace, Esay 7, 2. And the Prince of Peace, in Esay 9.6 and in Ezek 34 23 24. God calls him One Shepheard, And his Servant Da∣vid, And a Prince among them; and so in Ezek. 37.25.
5. Christ is called the King of Israel. 1. Nathaniel makes this confession of his Faith to Christ, in John 1. 49. Rabbi thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel: In this speech Nathaniel had respect to Dan. 9.25. where he is called Messiah, the Prince, or King, as Broughton in his last Edition reads it. 6. He is called the Messias. In Dan. 9.25, 26. He is twice called the Messias which in Greek is Christ, that is Annointed; and so in John 1.41. Andrew found his Bro∣ther Simon and said unto him, We have sound the Messias, and in verse 45. Philip found Nathaniel, and said unto him, We have sound him of whom Moses did write in the Law (Deut. 18.18) and in the Prophets, Esa. 4.2. and in John 4.25. The woman of Samaria said unto him, I know that Messias cometh wich is called christ, or the Annointed: and this Title was given him in relation to his Victory, in breaking Satans head-plot for our redemption, as it was first implied in Gods Declaration of the Combate and Victory, in Genes. 3.15. 7. He is also called the Apostle and high Sacrasicer of our profession, in Heb. 31. And the Shepheard and Bishop of our Soules in 1 Pet. 2.25. and our Advocate, in 1 Iohn 2. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the just, who is the reconciliation for our sins. 8. Christ hath many Titles given him in relation to his Of∣fice of Mediatorship, from Metaphors and Similitudes: 1. My Husband, Hos. 2.7. 2. The morning Star, in the Title of Psal. 22. and in Rev. 2.28. and Rev. 22.16. 3. A Nazaren, Math. 2 23. He was not a Nazarite according to Num. 6. (as some through heedlesnesse do take it) for he both drank Wine and was polluted by the dead, Luke 7.33.34. Luke 8.49.54. Mat 9.25. Luke 7.14. which a Nazarite might not be; but he was a Nazaren, of the Town of Nazareth, which Towns name is derived from Nazar the Branch out of the root of Jesse, in Esa. 11.1. And saith Bro. Nazar in the Thalmud, is the Messias, from Esa. 11.1. and saith he in his Consent 2830. Nazar is a Spring, or Branch, Esa. 11.1. and saith he, the Town Nazareth alludeth unto that in Mat. 2.23. 4. He is called the brightnesse from on high: hath visited us, Luke 1.78.
5. He is called the Bud of the Lord, in Esa. 4.2. Zach. 3.8. Zach. 6.12. 6. The Son of Righteousnesse, Mat. 4.2. 7. A Son and Shield, Psal. 4 12. 8. The way, the truth, and the life, John 14.6. 9. The Door, Job. 10.7. 10. The bread of life that came down from Heaven, John 6.35.48.51. 11. The true Vine, John 15.1.5. 12. The Lamb of God, John. 1.29. 13. The chief corner stone, Eph. 2.10. 1 Pet. 2.6. 14. The head of the body of the Church, Eph. 1.22. Col. 1.18. 15. The head of all principality and power, Col. 2.10. 16. The first fruits of them that sleep, 1 Cor. 15.20.23. 17. The Lion of the Tribe of Iudah, Rev. 5.5. 18. The horn of salvation. Luke 1.69. These and such like Attributes do shew the effects and the operations of Christs Mediatorship sundry waies, both for the comfort of the godly, and also for the terrour of the wicked enemies of his Church and people. CHAP. LVI. Of the Attributes of the holy Spirit. HE is called the Holy Ghost, Act. 28.25. Paul said to his offended Hearers at their departure: Well spake the Holy Ghost by E∣say as the Prophet unto our Fathers, &c. But in Esay he is called Iehovah, Esay 6.8, 9, 10. so also the Title holy Ghost, in Heb. 10.15. is ta∣ken from Ier: 31.33 and there he is called Iehovah, which is an incom∣municable Attribute to any Creature; and hence it is evident, that Iehovah the Father, Iehovah the Son, and Iehovah the holy Ghost, in the unity of the Godhead and in the Trinity of persons, did make the new Covenant for all the Elect: and therefore they will certainly give the gift of faith to all the Elect, that so they may be partakers of all the blessings that are therein contained. 2. The said Holy Ghost is called the Spirit, Iohn 1.32, 33. Mar. 1.10. 3. The Spirit of Aelohim, Gen: 1.1, 2. 4. The spirit of God, Mat: 3.16. Act- 5.3, 4. 5. The holy Spirit, Psal: 51.11. Esa. 63.10. Luke 11.13. 6. The holy Spirit of God, Eph: 4.30.
7. The holy Spirit of promise, Eph: 1.13. 8. The Spirit of the Father, in Iohn 14.16, 17. I will pray the Father (saith Christ) and he will give you another Comforter which is the holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, and so consequently, the Spirit proceeds from the Father, as in Iohn 15.25. 9. The Spirit of the Son, Gal: 4.6. and therefore he proceeds from the Son as well as from the Father: If I depart (said Christ to his Disci∣ples that were so full of sorrow for his departure) I will send the Com∣forter to you, Iohn 16.7. and in Iohn 15.26. I will send the Comforter to you from the Father, for our Covenant and Contract was so from eternity, that in case I did perform the conditions of the Mediators Office, I should have a joynt hand with my Father in the sending of the holy Spirit. 10. He is called the Spirit of his mouth, namely, the Spirit of Ieho∣vah, Father and Son, Psa: 33 6. 11. He is called the Finger of God, in Luke 11.20. by which the hu∣mane nature of Christ did his Miracles. 12. He is called the power of God, Luke 1.35. The Angel said unto Mary, The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the most High shall over-shadow thee, namely, as it did over-shadow the confused Chaos in the Creation, as Mr. rap speaketh. 13. Peter calls the Holy Ghost God, in Act. 53, 4. These and such like blessed Attributes of the third person in Trinity, are sufficient to convince any Iew, Turk, or Arrian, that the holy Spirit is true God: except such as God hath given up to the Spi∣rit of slumber, and to the hardnesse of their own hearts, to perish in their own impenitency.
CHAP. LVII. Of the Attributes of the Holy Ghost, in re∣lation to its opperations and effects in the various manner of his working. 1. AS the Spirit of Aelohim in the beginning, did move upon the face of the waters, to the producing of the visible Creati∣on, Gen: 1.1. so it moved also upon the water of Gods word to Adam, and so to all the elect for the producing of the spirituall Creation, For except a man be born of Water and the Spirit he can∣not enter into the Kingdome of God, Iohn 3.5. And there are three that beare witnesse in the earth, the spirit, and the water, and the blood, and these three agree in one, 1 Iohn 5.8. And so Moses Doctrine is compared to raine, in Deut. 32.1. and so Tit. 3 5. 2. Saith God in Gen. 6.3. My Spirit shall not alwaies strive with man, for that he is but flesh: Hence take notice of the Spirits working or stri∣ving with men that are given to the flesh; it doth often strive along time with such, but if after some time they will not hearken, then God saith, it shall not alwaies strive, but it shall at last give them up to their own hearts lusts to perish in their sins: Noah a a preacher of righ∣teousnesse to the old world for a hundred and twenty yeares, and this long time the Apostle calls the long suffering of God, 1 Pet. 3.19.20. 2 Pet. 2.5. 3. It is said in 1 Pet. 3.18. That Christ was quickned by the Spirit, by which he went and preached to the Spirits that now are in prison, that were disobedient in the daies of Noe: hence two things are obser∣vable. 1. That Christ was called Iehovah, in Gen: 6, 3. 2. That the Sprit by which Naah preached to the disobedient world is here called by Peter, The Spirit of Christ. 4. In Esa. 6.10. They rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit (which did strive with them for their conversion by the preaching of his Pro∣phets).
Therefore was he turned to be their enemy, and he fought against them, as he threatned to do if they did not obey his voice, Exod. 23.21. and he did also fulfill it in Psal. 78.40. &c. and 1 Thes: 5.19. 5. God saith thus to his Elect, I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and yee shall keep my Judgments and do them, Ezek. 36.27. This is the operation of Gods Spirit in the Elect at one time or other while they attend upon him in his Ordinances, for the walking in his Statutes, and the keeping (or doing) of his Judgments; doth imply the obedience of faith to all his statutes in their spirituall sense and meaning, as in Ezek. 11.19, 20. and Ezek. 36.27. and in Rom: 2.26. Yea the Spirit doth by its operations work upon baptized Infants that belong to Gods Election, by vertue of the Covenant, which is the word of promise for their Regeneration and knitting to Christ, if they dye before they come to knowledge by the outward hearing of the word, as Esa. 59 21. 6. It is said in Esa: 11.2. That the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon the root that shall proceed out of the stem of Jesse: and the Pro∣phet doth repeat some heads of those endowments of the Spirit, where∣by the humane nature of the Messias should be furnished: But the said heads are expressed in such large and copious words, that it implies he should be furnished with the whole Spirit, and with all the gifts and graces of that Spirit, and from thence it is said in Reve: 1.4. that he hath the seven Spirits of God; that is to say, the whole Spirit, and all the graces of the Spirit, and this Endowment of his is often repeated, as in Revel: 3 1. Revel: 4.5. and Revel: 5 6. 7. It is said in 1 Cor. 1.4. That there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit. And in verse 8. to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdome, and to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit, &. And in verse 13. by one Spirit we are all baptized into one body. 8. It is said, because yee are sonnes, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his son into your hearts, which hath this operation, it inables you to cry Abba, father, Gal. 4.6. and in this Text the holy Trinity is also ex∣pressed. 9. Sundry operations are ascribed to the Spirit in Rom. 8. 1. in verse 5. They that are after the spirit, do mind the things of the spirit. 2. In verse 6. The wisdome of the spirit is life and peace. 3. In verse 11. If the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, &c. he shall also quicken your mortall bodies by his spirit. 4. In verse 13. If ye mortifie the deeds of the flesh by the spirit, ye shall live. 5. In verse 14. As many as are led by the spirit are the sns of God. 6. In verse 15. Ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby ye cry Abba Father.
7. In verse 16. The same spirit beareth witnesse with our spirit, that we are the children of God. 8. In verse 26. The spirit helpeth our infirmities, for we know not what to pray as we ought, but the spirit it self maketh request for us with fight and groans that cannot be expressed. 9. In verse 27. The spirit maketh request for the Saints according to the will of God, These sundry operations of the Spirit are expressed in this eigth chapter. 10. Sundry operations of the spirit are in Gal. 5. 1. In verse 16. Walk in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flsh. 2. In verse 17. For the Spirit lusteth against the flesh. 3. In verse 18. If ye be led by the spirit, ye are not under the law. 4. In verse 12. The fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentlenesse, goodnesse, saith, meeknesse, temperance, against such there is no law. 5. In verse 25. If we live in the spirit, let us also walk in the spirit. 11. It is said in Ephes. 6.17. The sword of the spirit is the word of God, and in verse 18. Pray in the spirit. 12. Quench not the spirit, 1 Thes. 5.19. 13. The holy Ghost doth renovate our corrupt natures, as in Tit. 3.5. Of his mercy he saved us, and by the washing of the new birth, and the renewing of the holy Ghost. 14. The spirit and the Bride say come, Rev. 22.17. 15. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost, he with you all Amen, 2 Cor. 13.14. Sundry other Attributes are ascribed to the holy Ghost, in relation to its operations and effects, from metaphors and similitudes, as by fire, water, seed, an earnest, and to the oyl of gladnesse, &c. All which, with many more, will be of heavenly use to every godly Christian, that will take delight to meditate in Gods book, as David did both night and day, Psalm I therefore say, as David said, O how love I thy law, it is my meditation all the day, Psal. 119.97. FINIS.
A Table of Chief Heads. Chap. 1. OF the Ʋnity of the Godhead, and Trinity of Persons, also of their properties and works page 1. If the knowledge of God in Trinity had not been the ground of life, God would never have given himself names in the Plural number p. 1. The Spirit of Elohim is sometimes called the Spirit of the Father, and sometimes the Spirit of the Son p. 2 It is good to mark how the Attributes and Titles of God are often in∣terchangeably used the one for the other p. 5 Chap. 2. How Redemption was taught from Gen. 3.15. to the Flood of No∣ah p. 14 Gods purpose was not declared to bring fallen man for life, by there∣mains of any naturall abilities p 23 The place of holy Convocations was wont to be called the presence of God p 36. 298. Chap. 3. How Redemption was taught from the Flood, till the promises to A∣braham, also the seed of Sem is explained p 40 The subduing of ours and of Gods enemies, is a benefit that God hath tied to our constancy in Religion p 42 Chapter 4. How Redemption was taught from the Promise made to Abraham till the Law of the Passeover, and the coming of Israel out of E∣gypt p 52 We may not pray for, nor expect any blessing, either temporal, spi∣rituall,
or eternall, but according to the promise and Covenant of grace in Christ p 61 Covenants go before Seals p 66 The Covenant of grace was not made onely to believing Parents, but also their Infant children p 70 Chap. 5. and Chap 6. How Redemption was taught from the time of the Passeover, till the building of the Temple p 74 How Christ was the end of all Moses Law p 75 76 77 82 83 85 86 It is a point of rare faith to believe that Christ gave the Law p. 84 n. 3 Chap. 6. How Redemption was taught unto David and others p 92 How they of the old Testament understood the Doctrine of Justifica∣tion p 95 n. 5 and p 100 n. 5 p 356 Chap. 7. How Redemption was taught from the foundation of the Temple to the burning of it p 102 Chap. 8. But it is misprintd How the Covenant of grace was taught and opposed in this time, namely from the burning of the Temple, to the end of the Baby∣lonian captivity p 117 Chap. 9: How Redemption and the Covenant of grace was taught and opposed in the time of the Seventy Sevens, as it is expressed in Dan 9.24 p 137 The endevour of some Schollers is by necessary consequence very pro∣phane, by teaching us to confute Daniels propriety of the seventy sevens, by the building of Rome, and by the Mayors of Athens, and by the Satanicall chronicles of the Olympick games p 160 and see more towards the end of the book. Chap. 10. How God by his wise providence did order the severall captivities of his people to build Synagogues for the planting of Religion among the heathen nations, as a preparation to the speedy preaching of the Gospel, by the Apostles and Disciples that were dispersed into those Countries at the death of Stephen p 162
Chap. 11. Giving divers reasons, why there were no more Prophets after Mala∣chi (or after Ezra, for he is holden to be Malachi) to our Lords Incarnation. p 170 The 49000 that returned from Babel were godly, and lft a godly seed after them p 173 174 175 Many of Judah and Israel did continually return after the 49000 were returned p 178 271 Daniel foretold of the falling away of many of the Jews from the faith p 176 The Saints the Jews in the time of the 70 sevens had sundry enemies, before & after the death of Antiochus Epiphanes p 179 but Christ did strengthen the godly Jews against the tyranny of Javan p 179 The Kings of the North were Gog and Magog in Ezek. 38. and Ezek. 39. p 179 129 The Hebrew tongue after the return from Babel, ceased from common use p 180 The Rulers and people of the Jews did not know the meaning of their own Prophets, after that the Prophets, and Ʋrim and Thummim did cease, Acts 13.27. p 181 Chap. 12. Being an answer to the complaint of the Jews for the losse of five things under the second Temple, which they injoyed under Solo∣mons Temple p 183 Fire from heaven to burn their sacrifices, was a testimony of Gods gracious acceptance, of the types of Christs death p 183 If they had had the fire from heaven after the captivity, they should af∣ter some time have been deprived of it by Antiochus Epiphanes, when he took away the daily sacrifice for three years and a half p 184 Ʋrim and Thummim they needed not when John Elias came p 182 184 Though after the captivity they wanted the Ark of the Covenant, yet Christ told them they should have godly Teachers in the place of it, Jer. 3.15, 16. p 184 Chap. 13. How the new Covenant and the way of Redemption was taughe and op∣posed
under the first preaching of the Gospel p 187 How the heavenly Jerusalem began first to be builded in the earthly Jerusalem p 198 Chap. 14. Shewing who they are that have the spirituall blessings of the Cove∣nant of grace; and who the curses 201 The Jews and Romames for their despising of the Kingdome and sa∣crifiohood of Christ were greatly plagued p 202 Chap. 15. Proving that Rome in Gods just judgement is the place that Christ hath given to the power of Sathan for the setting up of the mystery of iniquity p 215 Chap. 16. Proving that the mysterie of iniquity began to get head from Con∣stantines time p 229 Chap. 17. Of the two Witnesses, and of the mark of the Beast, and of the decay of the mysterie of iniquity p 235 Chap. 18. Of the seven Trumpets in Apoc. 8, 9.10, and 11 chapters, in which the Popes rising to his Antichristian Hierarchy is first described, compare with the seven Phials, in chapter 16. under which the Antichristian Hierarchy doth fall & is consumed by degrees p 261 Ʋnlearned Schollers that affected Superiority in the severall Centu∣ries after Constantines time, turned all to ambition and heresie, and polititians to prophanesse. p 262 There shall be persecution from the seed of the Serpent in one place or other, as long as the Church remaineth in this world, notwith∣standing, all that is alledged for Christs glorious personal reign here on earth p 266 None of the Phials is poured on the Turks Tyranicall Kingdome, p 267 Chap. 19. The dead bones in Ezek 47. must not be understood of the Jewes c∣ling after our Times: But onely of their return from Babel, p 27 The calling of the Jewes yet to come shall be in all places of their dis∣persion, 269
The Jewes do hope for the rebuilding of Jerusalem, and do pray daily for their return to Canaan, and many Christians do Judaize with them in teaching their return thither, and to be a glorious Church there again, p 269 Chap. 20. Of the two sticks in Ezek. 37. in confutation of them that say, It is not yet fulfilled, that Ephraim was joyed to Judah in the return, from Babylon, p 271 178 Also some observations on Zach. 2. Zach: 8. Zach: 9, 10, 11. chapters p 271 Chap: 21. Of the Jewes calling: that Zach: 12, 13, & 14. chapters, cannot be applied to the Jewes calling yet to come, as many Ministers d too unadvisedly teach, p 284 Chap: 22. Expounding Zach: 12.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. verses. The subservient Typicall Covenants of works after some time was made such an Idol of Justification by the Jewes, that it made them despise Messias the King, and his justification, p 288 Chap: 23. Expounding Zach: 12.19, 11, 12, 13, 14. with Zach: 14.10.11, &c. p 291 Chap: 24. Gog and Magog, in Ezek: 38. & Ezek: 29. must be taken properly: but God and Magog in Apoc. 20. must be taken in a mysticall sense, p 294 179 Corporation-speeches must be marked for the right accommodation of the true sense of the blessed Scriptures, p 298 Chap. 25. Some Observations on Jeremih 30, 31, 32, 33: chapters, p 299 Chap. 26. That the Covenant of grace made with Israel in Dan. 29. is the same that God made with Israel in Exod, 20, and the one is no more a Co∣venant of works than the other p 301 Chap. 27. Short Collections out of Genesis, Job, and some part of Exodus,
shewing, that the Gospel was taught among the faithfull before Moses wrote the same 304 alias misprinted 296 The Sabbath was a sign of Sanctification to them by the death of Christ p 304 alias 297 296 In Moses and the Prophets holy Convocations are called the presence of God p 298 alias 305 p 36 Chap. 28. Of Divine Tradition p 302 From the Creation till Israels coming from Egypt (or from the pro∣mise of Christ in Gen. 3.15. till the Passeover in Egypt) is 2513 years in which space of time the Church had not the written word, but was taught by Tradition. Chap. 29. Being an answer to them that say, that the polity of Christ given to Moses was not a Covenant of grace p 306 Chap. 30. Shewing that Israel (under Moses Law) were under a covenant of grace p 313 Finis operis intends all that live under the visible Church (as once all the world had a being under the Church in Adams dayes, and under Sem) none are excluded from being under the Covenant of grace to outward apprehension, though finis operantis is for the e∣lect as Moses speech shews in Deuth 29.29. p. 314 Divers brief Arguments to prove the Jews under Moses Law were under a covenant of grace p. 315 Chap. 31. A Prosopopeia of Solomons fall, by granting liberty of conscience to his idolatrous Wives p. 316 Chap. 32. Brief Considerations about Sheol, Gehenna and especially about Ha∣des, as it relates to the Article of the Creed, he descended into hell p 328 Chap. 33. Of the phrase of Abrahams Bosome p 335 Faithful Factors need not fear to be called home from forreign parts, so when the good servants were called to give an account for their trading by the Talents, they feared not p 336
Comforts to the godly against the fear of death, p 336, 337 Chap. 34. Some propositions and expostulations concerning the true nature of Christs sufferings, p 338 Job doth tell us, that it is not good to defend Gods cause with an Er∣ror, pretending Religion, p 339 The second Adam had power over his affections more then ever the first Adam had in his Innocency, for he had power to trouble him∣self with grief and sorrow, which Adam in innocency had not, p 340 Christ in his sufferings was not under Gods vindicative wrath for one minute of an hour, p 840, 341 The assertion, That our Lord suffered Hell torments in this life in his soul or in his body, appeareth not true by any Scripture, p 341 In Heb: 9: 14, 15. Christ offered himself by his eternall Spirit, &c. That by means of death for Redemption, &c. This death cannot be expounded of the second death, because it is compared with the bodi∣ly death of such as do thereby confirm their Testaments, p 341 A just reproof of them that affirm, That Christ in his sufferings did combate hand to hand with his angry Father, p 343 Chap: 35. Observations upon that distinction which some make between a locall and a poenall Hell, which Poenall Hell some say Christ suffered, p. 345 Some say Christ suffered a poenall Hell out of a locall Hell; they say, Locall Hell is but a circumstance: they may as well say, That the glorious place of heaven is but a circumstance, and so in this sense all created things in respect of God are but circumstances, p 345 Our old English Saxon word Hell doth not answer to Hades, but to Ge∣henna Hell, which our Ecclesiasticks must cleer, p 346 Christ underwent a poenall Hades in this world, but not a poenall Gehenna, p 346 Chap: 36. Observations on the second death which some say Christ suffered, p 347
When Christ was in his sad Agony in the Garden, there was an Angel from heaven to strengthen him, which doth evidence, that he was not then under the second death, for if he had, then it had been im∣possible for an Angel, or for all the Angels in heaven to strengthen him, p 348 If Christ had suffered the second death which is indeed the Effect of the Essentiall wrath of God, he could not have said, My God my my God why dost thou leave me: And, Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit, &c. p 348 When did our Lord suffer the second death? was it before his bodily death? We know by divine Revelation, that the second death is af∣ter the first: or else if we by our wit and learning will affirm the contrary, we shall destroy Gods order, p 348 The Doctrine of making Christ a sinner by Gods Imputation, numb: 8. is dangerous, p 349 It is not mans inventions of Tantundem, and Equinalency touching the sufferings of Christ, that will reach and fathom these things, p 350 Chap: 37. Some observations on 2 Cor: 5.19, 20, 21. with Gal: 3.13. p 350 I suppose two millions of Geneva Bibles have been printed that have rightly conferred, 2 Cor: 5.31. to Exod: 29 14. p 350 This assertion, That as our sins are imputed to Christ, so his righte∣ousness of the morall Law is imputed to us: Calls for thoughts of detestation; the care cannot endure it, p 353 So to impute (as some teach our sins to Christ, is to impart, commu∣nicate, or make common to him with us our unconformity to God and his Law, p 353 355 Of the severall distinct courses spoken of in Deut: 21.23. & Deut: 27. 26. with Gal: 3.13. p 354 How the righteousnesse of God the Father doth justifie sinners, p 356, p 357 Chap: 38. Our Lords Genealogie conferred with the times of the Judges, and with the Kings, p 363 Chap: 39. The holy Chronologie sundry waies expressed, and every way agreeing
to the same number of years, Beginning from the first promise, in Gen 3.15. till our Lords death, 3960. years. p 369 Chap: 40. Another way of casting up of the holy Chronicle to the said number of years which the former Dialogue hath followed, 370 Chap: 41. A third expression of the holy Chronicle to the said number of years, p 371 Chap: 42. Of the Genealogie frame of the processe of Times, p 373 Chap: 43. A further consideration of the said twenty eight Jubilees, that the god∣ly student may delight in the holy book of God, p 374 Chap: 44. A fourth expression of the holy Chronologie from the Creation to the Redemption, p 375 Chap 45. An Advertisement to the Reader, to take head of embracing the evill Tenets of two men that have lately put forth irreligious opinions a∣bout the Chronologie of the Book of God. p 380 The holy Chronologie of the Book of God is a Doctrine of Faith clear and certain as any other Doctrine of faith, p 381 The Heathen Chronologie by Olympiades, is by some regarded as more certain than the Scriptures Chronologie, p 381 If the Angel taught not Daniel to understand the certainty of Chrono∣logie, he taught him nothing, p 382. 385 Who would think to say the seventy Sevens are a time not certain: whereas the holy Angel divides them into three parts, 1. Into se∣ven Sevens. 2. Into sixty two Sevens. 3. Into one Seven, p 383 Chap: 46. That the certainty of Chronologie was a chief part of the Angels Mes∣sage to Daniel, for Daniel knew all things else before the Angel came to him, p 385 Some Teachers, in teaching and writing about the Jewes repairing of Jerusalem: and many great businesses that will follow thereon, have filled Churches full of Matrologie and fond expectations, p 387.
Chap: 47. That Daniel is alledged in the New Testament to prove the Messiah to be already come, p 388 Chap: 48. Shewing how the holy Evangelists expresse the Attributes, Messias, or Christ. p 390 All the three Offices of Christ, as he is Prophet, Priest, and King, are in Dan: 9.24. p 392 Mr. P. his false and impertinent assertions, on Dan: 9.24. p 393 Chap. 49. A conclusion of the Point of Chronologie, p 395 The New Testament doth not keep the Chronologie of the times to the end of the world, as many labour in vain to prove out of the Apo∣calyps: Though the Old Testament did exactly keep the Chronolo∣gie of the times, from the first promise to the death of Chris, p 395. 399 Neither is the Geneologie of the Tribes kept after the death of Christ p 396 Chap. 50. Being a Caveat to beware of such satanicall spirits, that prattle about the expectation of new Apostles, and new Revelations, p 396 Chap: 51. An Exposition of the times mentioned in the Apocalyps, p 399 Chap: 52. 1. Of the Attributes, or Titles of God, essentially considered, p 401 2. What is to be learned from the Title Jehovah, p 403 3 What is to be learned from the attribute Elion the most High, p 405 4. What is to be learned from Shaddai the Almighty, p 406 5. What from Adonai, ibid. 6. What from the attribute Ehieth, I am, or I will be, p 407 7. What from the attribute Jah, Breathing, ibid. 8. What from the attribute Tzur, The Rock, p 408 9. What from Goshai, My Makers, p 408 10. What from Goel, The Redeemer, p 409 Chap: 53. Of the Attributes of the Divine Nature of the second Person in Tri∣nity.
How his is said to be begotten before all the Creation, Col: 1.15. p 412 Chap: 54. Of the Attributes of the humane Nature of the second Person, p 413 Chap: 55. Of the Attributes of the Mediators Office, p 416 Crist is called a Servant in relation to his Office of Mediatorship, p 418 Christ is called a Prince, or Captain in relation to his Office of Medi∣atorship, p 419 Christ is called the Prince of Life in relation to his Office of Media∣torship, p 420 Christ is called the King of Israel, and the Messias in relation to his Office of Mediatorship, p 421 Chap. 56. Of the Attributes of the holy Spirit p 422 Chap 57. Of the Attributes of the holy Ghost in relation to its operations and effects in the various manner of his working, p 424 A TABLE of some few Scriptures (among many others) that are Expounded, or Illustrated. GEn: 1.1, 2. page 1 3. 15. p 11 14 22 26 34 42 53 60 61 66 194 302 344 413 418 419 420. 3.22.24. p 23 9.26. p 41 11.2, 3. p 52 60 290 567 17.5. p 70 18, 19. p 335 19.24. p 11 20, 21. p 299 21, 22, 23. p 298 alias 205 305 309 22.18. p 60 26.5. p 302 304, alias 296 298 335 34.14. p 59 47.12. p 304 bis 49.10. p 57 Exod: 3.15. p 60 61 198 19.2.1 p 407 17.15, 16. p 168 19.4. p 314
19.5. p 56 20.24. p 36 23.15. p 89 23.20, 21, 22.23. p 188 311 412 417 419 28.38. p 100 30.12. p 311 Levit: 14 6. p 98 18.5. p 311 Lev: 25.23. p 203 315 26.2. p 89 26.15. p 154 26.23, 24, 25. p 111 Numb: 19.18. p 98 14.2. p 392 24.20. p 168 Deut. 5.2.3. p 302 Deut: 6.4. p 1 28 49. p 66 28.68. p 161 30.6. p 17 32.4.18. p 408 32.21. p 156 61 32.47. p 85 33.26. p 109 Jos: 19.50. p 175 1 Sam. 7.9, 10. p 107 2 Sam: 7.14. p 188 2 Sam: 7.2. p 147 1 King: 11.32. p 286 1 King: 17.1. p 159 2 Chron: 3.17. p 131 2 Chron: 6.18. p 102 106 2 Chron: 11.15. p 108 Neh: 2.10. p 143 Neh: 6.63, 64, 65. p 155 Neh: 9.2. p 155 Job 21.14, 15. p 301 Job 22.17. ib. Psal: 2.2. p 420 Psal: 2.7. p 414 Psal: 2.8, 9. p 194 9, 10. p 155 16.10. p 334 20.1, 2. p 305, alias 298 22.1. p 339 348 40.6, 7. p 81 418 45.3, 4, 5. p 109 51.7. p 98 51.12. p 100 68.18. p 81 69.19, 20. p 355 69.22. p 110 78.1, 2, 3. p 61 102.13, 14. p 149 171 105.8. p 60 105.42. p 60 126.6. p 171 132.10. p 188 137.5, 6. p 149 Prov. 3.3. p 98 9.13. p 108 10.12.23. p 42 30.4. p 188 30.18.19. p 107 102 415 Esay, 2.1, 2, 3.4. p 23 127 2.6, 7, 8. p 108 4 5. p 109 5.19.23 ib. 6.9 10. p 105 6.17. p 164
7.9.14. p 299 300 8.14. p 110 9.2. p 282 9.6. p 188 411 415 26.4, p 410 42.1. p 61 188 418 42.4. p 85 42.6, 7. p 27 45.6.14. p 164 46.11. p 164 48.15. p 164 53.11. p 418 55.1, 2. p 135 61.10. p 361 66.23. p 141 293 Jer: 3.15, 16.18. p 184 271 3.16. p 132 9.26. p 58 22.29. p 134 28, 29. p 159 30.18. p 299 31.23. p 299 31.38.39. p 17 299 36.30. p 130 44.26. p 66 51.50. p 149 174 286 Lam: 1.14. p 159 4.13. p 159 Ezek. 6.9. p 108 9.6. p 159 11.2. p 109 14.14. p 39 16.38. p 108 21.27. p 134 23.8. p 72 28.13. p 299 36.37. p 99 37.11, 12. p 267 37.26.27. p 89 271 37.21. p 281 38.16.21. p 295 299 39.23. p 297 Dan: 7.9, 10. p 143 7.18. p 154 176 7.17. p 222 8.11. p 184 419 8.24, 25. p 177 8.31. p 160 9.23. p 383 9.24. p 90 170 270 383 388 390 391 9.24, 25, 26, 27. p 137 9.26. p 385 9.27. p 136 385 389 10.2, 3, 4. p 148 11.14. p 176 301 11.30, 31, 32. p 301 11.33. p 176 11.35. p 177 12.3. p 176 12.4. p 176 12.10. p 177 Hos: 2.3. p 105 4.14. p 159 4.17. p 110 10.10. p 107 12.3, 4. p 25 417 13.1. p 111 Amos 6.1. p 160 7.10. p 159 9.1. &c. p 270 Zeph. 319. p 66
Hag. 219. p 186 Hag. 2.6 p 376 Zach. 1.12, 13. p 143 21. &c. p 269 26, 7.4 p 281, 286 4.2.11. p 185 8.12, 13. p 224, 282 8.23. p 175, 297 9, 11. p 149 9.13. p 178, 179, 282, 368 10.6, 7. p 368 11.6.10. p 177, 282 11.7.11. p 184 11.10.11. p 173. 178. 283 11.12. p 171 11.15, 16, 17. p 178 12.6. 198. 284, 285 12, 10. p 151, 287, 291 13.7. p 411 13.7, p 411 14, 1, 2, 3, 4. p 161, 288 14.10.11. p 293 14: 12. p 172, 289 14.16: p 289 14: 17, 18. p 294 Mal. 1.11. p 293 211.12. p 159 3, 14, 15, p 177 3.16. p 12 175 4.1 p 175 4▪4 p 180, 182, 282. 301, 309 Mat: 1: 12: p 131 1.23 p 416 2: 1. p 163, 390 3.2. p 142 3, 2 p 98 415 6.9. p 311 5.3, 4, 5. p 101 8.11, p 367 10.34. p 253 11.13, 14 p 181.182 11.23. p 225 12.21. p 85 16.18. p 325 408 16 19. p 222 17.5. p 188 19.13. p 70 21.43. p 57 23.35. p 222 24, 34. p 389 26.26. p 100 26.28, 389 27.25. p 392 28.18. p 11. 28.20. p 196 Mark 8.38 p 252 16.10. p 151 Luke 1.32, 33. p 134. 270. 389 1.35. p 415 1, 51. p 134 1.70. p 26 3.27. p 14 3.28. p 415 9.26. p 252 12.4. p 304 bis 15, 22, 23. p 361 16, 15. p 84 16.19 p 336 17.20. p 153 19.11. p 164, 153. 393 19.27. p 126
19.57. p. 252 20.35, 36, 37. p 59 21.24, p 233 21.36. p 208 22.43. p 344. 347. 23.28, 29, 30. p 161 24.45. p 40 John 1.1, 2. p 2 418 1 12. p 42 1.14. p 6 25 102 1.41. p 338 3 1. p 155 3.36 p 127 4.23, 24. p 157 5.17, p 125 6, 27 p 83 6.63. p 85 8 44. p 68, 155 9.34. p 149 15.26. p 6 18 37 p 194 19.15. p 48 Acts 1.2. p 198 1.14. p 291 1.8 15, p 165 2.1, 2. ib. 2 27. p 334 2.37 p 151 291 2.39. p 71 3.14, 15. p 420 3.21. p 23. 26 3.25. p 60 3.6. p 53 71 4.27, 28. p 420. 5.31. p 23 6.13, 14, 15 p 148. 388 7.38. p 85 7.47. p 110 12.23. p 114. 413 13.27. p 181 13.30.31. p 413 13, 41. p 39 138 68 13.38, 39. p. 67. 357, 359 13.40, 41. p 288 13.48. p 200 15.11. p 85 26.67. p 308 28 20 p 57 28.25. p 422 31.41. p 156 Rom. 3 21. p 27 Rom. 3.25 26. p 61, 357 51. p. 100. 6.7. p 357 7.4. p 101 8.3. p 82 103. p 84 10.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, p 77, 85 10.19. p 156 11, 1, 2, 3. p 291 12.12. p 107 16.17. p 209 16.26. p 305 1 Cor. 1.30. p 410 1 Cor 7.13.14, p 56 4.9. p 97 104. p 400 11.26. p 399 14.11, 12. p 242 15.30. p 333 15 51. p 249 15.34.58. p 337
2 Cor. 1.9. p 268 2 Cor. 5.4. p 249 5.19. p 411 5.21. p 98 ult. 350, 356 6.16. p 89 6.18. p 149 71. p 89 10.45. p 392. Gal. 3.6. p 60 3.7. p 29 155 3.8, p 60, 64, 198 3 13, 14. p 53.354 3.16. p 60, 41 Gal. 44. p 53, 417 4.6. p 423 5.1.2.3. p 357 6.16. p 70 Eph. 1.10. p 38, 107, 222 2.10, 11, 12. p 155, 59, 61 2.12. p 79 2.15. p 90, 141 2.18. p 99 .19.21, 22, p 200 3.6. p 41 3.15. p 38, 107 3.21. p 62 Phil. 1.13. p 392 Phil, 1.21. p 337 Phil. 2.6, 7. p 418 3.2, 3. p 155 3.10. p 214 3.20. p 336 Col. 1.11. p 154 1.15. p 412 1.20. p 107, 149 1.26. p 51 2.14. p 141 2.15. p 27 2.18, 19. p 398 1 Thes. 2.15, 16. p 199 2 19. p 156 5.1, 2, 3 p 152 5.8. p 184 2 Thes. 1.8. p 23 2.6. p 204 2.15. p 305 bis 1 Tim. 2.6. p 308 1 Tim. 4.1, 2, 3. p 178 2 Tim. 2.8. p 85 3.1, 2, 3. p 178, 205, 398 4.4 p Tit. 1.1.2.3. p 22 2.14. p 309 Heb. 1.1. p 153 1.3. p 90 412 1.5. p 415 2.5. p 27 2.15. p 389 2.16. p 53 5.1, 2. p 98 5.6, 7. p 340 6.8. p 288 7.22. p 84 8.6. p 84 9.14, 15. p 341 10.5. p 418 10.15. p 422 10.27. p 156.288 11.1.2. p 208 11.4. p 36, 183 11.9. p 285
11.13. p 59 11.24, 25, 26. p 149 11.26. p 58 11.28. p 75 11.32. p 101, 107 11.33. p 165, 176 11.34. p 163, 165, 176 12.23. p 155 12, 26, 27. p 81, 132, 136, 151 14.6.10. p 288 1 Pet. 1.2, 3, 4, 5. p 308 1 Pet. 1.11. p 395 1.19, 20, 21. p 157 2.9, 10. p 105 2.23. p 344 3.18, 19. p 40, 389 4.4. p 39 2 Pet. 1.4. p 22 3.2. p 397 1 John 3.12. p 155 3.23. p 83 5.11, 12, 13. p 61 5.20, 21. p 156, 194 2 John v. 9. p 43 Apoc. 1.5. p 419 Apoc. 1.9. p 259 2.17. p 185 3.18. p 12 6.9. p 259, 397 6.10. p 344 7, 9, 13, 14. p 361 9.20. p 232 10. Expounded, p 258 10.3. p 257 11. p 399 11.8. p 39 247 11.11. p 20 11.15, 19. p 242, 247 12. p 399 12.10. p 242 12.17. p 259 13. p 399 13.11, 12. p 222 13.16. p 247 14.1. p 290 14.12. p 259 16.13. p 110 18.13. p 232 18.23. p 234, 247 19.8. p 360 19.10. p 304 bis 19.11. p 246 19, 14, 15. p 247, 257 20.2. p 395 20.4, 5. p 252, 259, 299, 395 20.6, 7, 8. p 232, 233, 299 21.1, &c. p 289 21.22. p 376 FINIS.
Errata. PAge 12, line 4. read mark. p 24 l 21. r could not but with admiration say, the eye hath not seen, p 25. l 4. r. viatory, p. 26. l 26. r. viatory, p 26. l 32 r. Gen. 19. p 27. l 36. r wickednesses, p 30. l 20. r. Temple, p 30. l 21. r praise, p 35. l 41. r. were kindled, p 37 l 9. deli (of the) p 52. l 2. dele Annor & adde chap. 4. p 53 l. 9. r. in this manner the p 56 l 16. r. and not to rest, p 60. l 11. r. in verse 16. p 82 l 37. adde, give, p 98. l 24. r. how they expound, p 107. l 36. adde not, p 111, l 30. r. godlesse, p. 115. l 41. r. Lagida, p 139 margin r. is by, p 149. l 33 r. preferred p. 171. l 10. r. considered p 171. l 25. r. Daniel p 179. l 28. & p 209 l 17 r for p 234 l 34. adde, to advance p 310. l 26. r. externall. p 345. l 7. r. the l 8. r. he, p 351, l 15. r. for p 370. l. 2. r. 427 years, p 387. l 21. r. falsifie.
