H617 12226521 56538
A VINDICATION OF THE Ancient Liturgie OF THE Church of England. WHEREIN The Several Pretended REASONS for Altering or Abolishing the same, are Answered and Confuted. By HENRY HAMMOND D. D. Written by himself before his Death. LONDON, Printed for Austin Rice, and are to be fold, at the Crown in Saint Pauls Church-yard, 1660.
A PREFACE TO THE Ensuing Discourse. THat the Liturgie of the Church of England, which was at first as it were written in blood, at the least sealed, and de∣livered down to us by the Martyrdom of most of the com∣pilers of it, should ever since be daily solicited, and call'd to the same Stage and Theatre, to fill up what was behinde of the sufferings of those Fathers, is no strange or new peice of oeconomy in the Church of God. This proposition I shall take liberty briefly to prove by way of introduction to the ensuing discourse, and shall hope that you will acknowledge it with me, if you but consider these severals. First, That there is not a surer evidence and  by which to discern the great excellencie of moderation in that book, and so the apportionatenesse of it, to the end to which it was designed, then the experience of these so contrary fates, which it hath con∣stantly undergone, betwixt the persecutors on both extream parts, the assertors of the Papacy on the one side, and the consistory on the other, the one accusing it of Schisme, the other of Comply∣ance, the one of departure from the Church of Rome, the other of remaining with it, like the poore Greek Church, our fellow Martyr, devoured by the Turk for too much Christian profession, and damn'd by the Pope for too little, it being the dictate of naturall Reason in Aristotle, (whose rules have seldome failed in that kinde, since he observed them) that the middle virtue is most infallibly known by this, that it is accused by either extreame as guilty  the other extreame: that the true liberalitie of minde is by this be exemplified, that it is defamed by the prodigall for passimony, and by the niggard
for prodigality, by which (by the way) that great block of offence, which hath scandalized so many, will be in part removed, and the reproaches so continually heaped upon this book, will to every dis∣cerning Judge of things, passe for as weak an unconcluding argu∣ment of guilt in it, as the scarres of a Military man doth of his co∣wardice, or the , the every Topick of rayling Rhetorick, Mal. 5. of the unchristiannesse of the person on whom they are powred out. Secondly, That ever since the reproaches of men have taken con∣fidence to vent themselves against this book, there hath nothing but ayre and vapour been vomited out against it, objections of little force to conclude any thing, but onely the resolute contuma∣cious, either ignorance, or malice of the objector, which might at large be proved, both by the view of all the charges that for∣mer Pamphlets have produced, all gathered together, and vindi∣cated by Mr. Hooker, and that no one charge of any crime, either against the whole, or any part of it, which this Directory hath of∣fered; which as it might in reason, make such an act of malice more strange, so will it to him that compares this matter with other practises of these times, (whose great engine hath been the calumniari fortiter, the gaining credit by the violence of the cry, when it could not be had by the validity of the proofs, most men being more willing to believe a calumnie, then to examine it) make it but unreasonable to wonder at it; It being an experiment of daily observation, that those which have no crime of which they are ac∣cusable, are therefore not the lesse, but the more vehemently accu∣sed, prosecuted, and dragg'd to execution, that the punishment may prove them guilty, which nothing else could, it being more probable in the judgement of the multitude, (who especially are considered now adayes, as the instruments to act our great designs) that a nocent person should plead not guilty, then an innocent be condemned; which prejudice, as it might be pardon'd from the charitie wherein 'tis grounded, that they who are appointed to punish vilenesses, will not be so likely to commit them, so being ap∣plyed to usurping judges, (whose very judging is one crime, and that no way avowable, but by making use of more injustices) will prove but a peice of Turcisme, which concludes all things honest, that prove successefull, or of the moderne Divinity in the point of Scandall, which makes it a sufficient exception against any indif∣ferent
usage, that it is by some excepted against, a competent cause of anger, that men are angry at it though never so without a cause. Thirdly, That it hath been constantly the portion, and prero∣gative of the best things (as of the best men) to be under the crosse to have their good things of this world , with persecutions. Mar. 10. 30. and so no strange thing that that which is alwayes a dealing with the Crosse, should be sometimes a panting, and gasp∣ing under it; There was never any surer evidence of the cleannesse of a creature amongst the Jews, then that it was permitted to be sacrificed; the Lamb, and the Turtle emblems of innocence, and charity, and the other Christian virtues, were daily slaughter'd and devoured, while the Swine, the , and all the uncleaner creatures, were denyed that favour, placed under a kinde of Ana∣thema, or Excommunication sentence, of such it was not lawfull, no not to eat; and so it must be expected in the anti-type, that all the heat of the Satanicall impression, all the fire of zeal, the sentence to be sacrifized, and devoted, should fall as now it doth, on this Lambe-like, Dove-like creature, of a making not apt to provoke any man to rage, or quarrell, or any thing, but love of commu∣nion, and thanksgiving to God for such an inestinable donative. Fourthly, That a Liturgie being found by the experience of all ancient times, as a necessary hedge, and mound to preserve any profession of Religion, and worship of God in a Nationall Church, it was to be expected that the enemy and his instruments, which can call destruction mercy, embroyling of our old Church the founding of a new (we know who hath told one of the Houses of this Parlia∣ment so, that they have laid a foundation of a Church among us, which if it signifie any thing, imports that there was no Church in this Kingdom before that Session) should also think the destroying of all Liturgy, the onely way of security to Gods worship, the no-form being as fitly accommodated to no-Church, as the no-hedge, no∣wall to the Common, or desert, the no inclosure to the no-planta∣tion. Fifthly, That the eradication of Episcopacy, first Voted, then Acted, by the Ordination of Presbyters by Presbyters without any Bishop, which begun to be practised in this Kingdom, about the end of the last yeer, was in any reason to be accounted prooemicall and preparatory to some farther degree of , or disorder,
and to be attended by the abolltion of the Liturgy in the begin∣ning of this new yeer, (Episcopacy and Liturgie being like the , among the Aegyptians, this Daughter to attend that Mother, as among the Barbarians when their Prince died, some of the noblest were constantly to beare him company out of the World, not to mourn for, but to die with him) A thing that the People of this Kingdom could never have been imagined lowe or servile enough to beare or endure (I am sure within few yeers they that sate at the stern of action conceived so, and therefore were fain by Declaration, to disavow all such intentiōn of vio∣lence) till by such other assayes, and practises, and experiments, they were found to be, satis ad servitutem parati, sufficiently prepa∣red for any thing that was servile, almost uncapable of the benefit or relief of a Jubilee, like the slave in Exodus, that would not go out free, but required to be bored thorow the eare by his Master, to be a slave for ever. Sixtly, That it is one profest act of Gods secret wisdom, to make such trials as this, of mens fidelity, and sence, and acknowledge∣ment of his so long indulged favours, to see who will sincerely mourn for the departing of the glory from Israel, whether there be not some that (with the Captive Trojan Woman in Homer, who wept so passionately at the fall of Patroclu, but made that publick losse the season to prowre out their private grifes) are sensible of those sufferings of the Church onely wherein their interests are involved, and more neerly concerned; whether not some that count the invasion of the Revenues of the Church a Sacriledge, a calamity, and unparal∣lell'd, but think the abolition of the Liturgie unconsiderable, a veniall sin and misery; whether that, wherein Gods glory is joyned with any secular interest of our own, that which makes the separation betwixt Christ and Mammon, may be allowed any expression of our passion or zeal, i. e. in effect, whether we powre out one drop for Christ in all this deluge of tears, or whether like uncompounded selflovers, whose onely centre and principle of motion is ourselves, we have passion to no spectacle but what the looking glasse presents to us, with a , making God the pretnce and apology, for that kindness, which is paid and powered  nto another shrine. For of this there is no doubt, that of ll the changes   designed and offered to authority, there is none for which flesh and blood, passions and interests of men can allow to ree a sufrage, so
regertlesse a consent, as this of the abolition of the Liturgie, (The suggishnesse of ungifted men, the onely thing that is affirmed to be concerned in, or to gaine by it, is perfectly mistaken, as shall a non appear) and were there not a God in Heaven, the care of whose ho∣nour obliged us to endeavour the preservation of it, were not a fu∣ture growth of Atheisme and Prophanenesse the feared consequent of such abolition, and notorious experience ready to avow the just∣nesse of this feare, I have reason to be confident that no Advocate would offer Libell, no Disputer put in exception, against this pre∣sent Directory; I am privy to my own sence, that I should not, I have rather reason to impute it to my selfe, that the want of any such carnall motive to stir me up to this defence, might be the cause that I so long deferr'd to undertake it, and perhaps should have done so longer, if any man else had appear'd in that argu∣ment. And therefore unlesse it be strange for men, when there be so many tempters abroad, to be permitted to temptations, sure Gods yeilding to this act of the importunity of Satan (who hath desired in this new way to explore many) will not be strange neither. Lastly, that our so long abuse of this so continued a mercy, our want of diligence, in assembling our selves together (the too ordinarie fault of too many of the best of us) our generall, scandalous, unex∣cusable disobedience to the commands of our Church, which re∣quires that service to be used constantly in publike every day, the vanity of prurient tongues and itching eares, which are still thirst∣ing news and variety, but above all, the want of ardor and fer∣vency in the performance of this prescribed service, the admitting of all secular company (I meane worldly thoughts) into its pre∣sence, preferring all secular businesse before it, the generall irreve∣rence, and indifference in the celebrations, may well be thought to have incouraged Satan to his expetivit, to the preferring his petition to God, and his importunity at length to have provoked God to deli∣ver up our Liturgy to him, and his ministers, to oppose and maligne, to calumniate and defame, and at last to gaine the countenance of an Ordinance, to condemne and execute it as at this day. The Lord be mercifull to them that have yeilded to be instrumentall to that great destroyer in this businesse. I have thus far laboured to presse home that part of St. Peters ex∣hortation , not to think the calamity strange which hath befallen this Church in this matter, on no other purpose, but to
discharge that duty which we owe to Gods secret providence, of observing the visible worke of it, that discerning our selves to be under his afflicting hand, we may, I. Joyn in the use of all pro∣bable means to remove so sad a pressure, by humbling our selves, and reforming those sins which have fitted us for this captivity, then 2. that we may compassionate and pardon, and blesse, and pray for those whose hands have been used in the execution of this vengeance and reproach upon the land: and Lastly, That we may endeavour, if it be possible, to disabuse and rectifie those, who are capable, by more light, of safer resolutions; To which purpose these following animadversions being design'd in the bowels of compas∣sion to my infatuated Countrey-men, and out of a sincere single desire that our sins may have some end or allay, though our mise∣ries have not, and therefore framed in such a manner, as I concei∣ved, might prove most usefull, by being most proportionable to them, who stood most in need of them, without any oblation pro∣vided for any other shrine, any civility for the more curious Rea∣der) are here offered to thee, to be dealt with as thou desirest to be treated at that last dreadfull tribunall, which sure then will be with acceptation of pardon, and with that Charity (the but just re∣turn to that which mixt this antidote for thee) which will cover a multitude of sins.
CHAP. I. IN the Ordinance prefixt to the Directory (being almost wholly made up of forms of Repeal) there are onely two things worthy of any stay or consideration. 1. The motives upon which the Houses of Parliament have been inclined to think it necessary to abolish the Book of Common-Prayer, and establish the Directory, and those are specified to be three. First the consideration of the manifold inconveniences that have risen by the Book in this Kingdom. 2. The resolution according to their Covenant, to re∣form Religion according to the word of God, and the best reformed Churches. 3. Their having consulted with the Learned, and Pious, and Reverend Divines to that purpose, from whence they conclude it necessary to abolish the Book. To this conclusion inferr'd upon these premises, I shall confidently make this return, 1. That the conclusion is as illogicall as any that any Assembly of wise men have ever acknowledged themselves to be guilty of, no one of the three Motives being severally of strength to bear such a superstructure, and therefore all together being as unfufficient; for if the conclusion were onely of the prudence, or expedience, of taking it away, somewhat might be pretended for that inference from the premises, supposing them true: But when 'tis of necessity (and that twise repeated, and so not casually fallen from them) there must then be somewhat of precept divine in the premises to induce that necessity, or else it will never be induced: for I shall suppose it granted by them with whom I now dispute, that nothing is necessary in the worship of God, but what God hath prescribed, the necessity of precept being the onely one that can have place in this matter, and the necessitas medii, being most improper to be here pleaded. But that there is no such direct precept, so much as pretend∣ed to by those three motives it is clear, and as clear, that all together, do not amount to an interpretative precept. For that a lawfull thing though prest with manifold inconveniences should be removed, is no where commanded the lawfull Magistrate, but left to his prudence to judge whether there be not conveniences on the other side, which may coun∣terballance those inconveniences; much lesse is it commanded the infe∣riour Courts in despight of King and standing Law. For what ever of expedience; and so of prudence might be supposed to interpose, that may be sufficient to incline a Wise Magistrate to make a Law, but not any else, either to surp the power of a Law-maker, or to do any thing contrary to establish'd Laws; there being nothing that can justifie the least disobe∣dience
of Subjects to their Prince, or the Laws of the Kingdom, but that obligation to that one superiour Law of that higher Prince, our Father which is in heaven, which being supposed, 'tis not all the resolutions and Covenants in the world that can make it lawfull for any so to disobey, much lesse necessary, any more, then the saying Corban in the Gospel, ie. pretending a vow will free the Childe from the obligation of honouring or relieving his Father, or then Herod's vow made it lawfull to cut off the head of John the Baptist: and then how far the consultation with those Di∣vines may induce that necessity, will upon the same ground also be mani∣fest to any, especially that shall remember, with what caution that As∣sembly was by the Houses admitted to consult, and with what restraints on them, and professions, that they were call'd onely to be advisers, when they were required, but not to conclude any thing, either by a generall con∣currence, or by that of a Major part, any farther then the reasons which they should offer them, might preuail with them; to which purpose it was so ordered, that if any one man dissented from the rest of their Di∣vines, his opinion and reasons were as much to be represented to the Houses, as that other of the rest of the Assembly. By this I conceive it appears, that I have not quarrell'd causelesly with the Logick of this conclusion, the premises pretending at most but motives of expedience, and so as unable to infer a necessity, as a Topicall ar∣gument is to demonstrate, or a particular to induce an universall. That which I would in charity guesse of this matter, as the cause of this mistake, is my not groundlesse suspicion, that when the Presbyterians had prepa∣red the premises, the Independents framed the conclusion, the former of these joyning at last with the other in a resolution of taking away the Book, but onely on prudentiall considerations; not out of Consci∣ence of the unlawfulnesse, and proportionably setting down those rea∣sons but prudentiall reasons; and the latter though restrained from putting conscience into the premises, yet stealing it secretly into the con∣clusion, and so each deceiving and being deceived by each-other, I am not sure that my conjecture is right in this particular, yet have I a rea∣son to insert it. I Because I find in many places of the Directory certain footsteps of this kind of composition and complyance, and mixture of those so distant sorts of Reformers. 2. Because the Presbyterians which have formerly appeared both in other and in this Kingdom (whose co∣py these present reformers of that party have transcribed) have con∣stantly avowed the lawfulnesse of Liturgy, and so cannot affirm any ne∣cessity of abolishing; witnesse Calvin himself (whom we shall anon have occasion to produce) and the practice of the Church of Geneva, and
neerer to our selves, witnesse those foure classes, which in Q. Elizabeths dayes, had set themselves up in this Kingdom. These had made com∣plaint to the Lord Burleigh against our Liturgy, and entertained hopes of obtaining his favour in that businesse about the yeer 1585. he de∣manded of them, whether they desired the taking away of all Liturgy, they answered, no, he then required them to make a better, such as they would desire to have setled in the stead of this. The first Classis did ac∣cordingly frame a new one, somewhat according to the Geneva form. But this the second Classis disliked, and altered in 600 particulars; that again had the fate to be quarrell'd by the third Classis, and what the third resolved on, by the fourth; and the dissenting of those Brethren, as the Division of tongues at Babel, was a fair means to keep that Tower then from advancing any higher. Nay even for our neighbours of Scot∣land themselves, what ever some of them of late have thought fit to do, since they became Covenanteers, (in animosity perhaps and opposition to that terrible mormo, the Liturgy sent to them from hence) we know that they were Presbyterians formerly, without seeing any necessity of abolishing Liturgy. 'Tis no news to tell you that Mr Knox wrote a Liturgy, wherein there is frequent mention of the dayes of Common Prayer; and among many other particulars, these ensuing, worthy your remark. 1. Plain undis∣guised confessions of such faults, which this age, though as notoriously guilty of as they, will not put into publick forms, or leave upon record against themselves, as, That for the pleasure and defence of the French they P. 102. had violated their Faith, oft breaking the leagues of unity and concord, which their Kings and Governors had contracted with their Neighbours. And again, that Ib. for the maintenance of their friendship, they have not feared to break their solemn∣ed oaths made unto others. To which I might adde, from another Confes∣sion, P. 163. that Whoredome and adultery are but pastimes of the flesh; crafty dealing, deceit and oppression is counted good conquest, &c. but that it would look too like a Satyre against some part of that Nation at this time thus to speci∣fie. 2. Their great sence and acknowledgement of obligations from this Kingdom of England, and not onely prayers for continuance of peace between England and Scotland, but even execrations on all (and so sure on those their successors of this age) which should continue or contri∣bute ought toward the breaking of it, the words are these. Seeing when P, 106. we by our power were altogether unable, &c. thou didst move the hearts of our neighbours (of whom we had deserved no such favour) to take upon them the com∣mon burthen with us, and for our deliverance, not onely to spend the lives of many, but also to hazard the estate and tranquillity of their Realm, Grant unto us that
with such reverence we may remember thy benefits received, that after this in our default, we never enter into hostility against the Nation of England, suffer us never to fall into that ingratitude and detestable unthankefulnesse, that we should seek the destruction and death of those whom thou hast made instruments to deliver us from the tyranny of mercilesse strangers. [the French.] Dissipate thou the counsels of such as deceitfully travail to stir the hearts of either Realm against the other, let their malicious practices be their own confusion, and grant thou of thy mercy, that love, and concord, and tranquillity may continue and encrease among the in∣habitants of this Island, even to the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Thirdly, that some of their forms of words are directly all one with ours, others with some small additions retaining our forms, as in the Prayer for the King, and the Exhortation before the Sacrament, and the adjuration of the Parties to be married will appear. Fourthly, that on their day of Fast (though that be with great care provided and ordered to be the Sunday twice together, quite contrary to the Canons and custome of the Primitive Church, yet) 'tis then appointed, that the Minister with the People shall prostrate themselves, &c. a posture of most humble bodily adoration, made to reproach those who will not so much as recom∣mend or direct any one kind of corporall worship or gesture of humi∣liation in all their Directory. The inlarging to this mention of particu∣lars I acknowledge to be a digression. But the presenting to your know∣ledge or remembrance this Scottish Liturgy is not; By which superadded to the former, and by much more which might from other Churches be added to that, it briefly appears what is or hath been the uniform judgement of the Presbyteriansin this matter, directly contrary to the concluded necessity of abolishing. Which necessity on the other side the Independents have still assert∣ed, and for that and other such differences have avowed their resolu∣tions, to be the like scourges to them as they have been to us, professing (and ad homines, unanswerably proving the reasonablenesse of it) to eform the Geneva reformation (as a first rude and so imperfect draught just creeping out of Popery there, and therefore not supposeable to be compleat at the first assay) as the Presbyterians upon the same pretences have design'd and practiced on our English Reformation. All this I have said against the concluded necessity in case, or on sup∣position that the premises were true, but now I must adde the falsnesse of those also, and then if the necessity will still remain, I must pronounce it a peice of Stoicall fatality, an insuperable unruly necessitie indeed, that will acknowledge no Laws, or bounds, or limits to confine it. And first for the manifold inconveniences, if that phrase denote those
severals which in the Preface to the Directory are suggested, I shall in due place make it appear. 1. That there are no such inconveniencies. 2. That greater then those may easily, and hereafter shall be pro∣duced against their Directory, and consequently that, although true in∣conveniencies were supposed sufficient to infer a necessitie of abolition, yet such onely pretended names of inconveniency, such Chimaera's and Mormo's (especially over-ballanced with reall ones in the other scale) would be abundantly insufficient to do it. But if the manifold inconveni∣ences have a larger prospect to refer to, we shall conclude it very uncha∣ritable not to mention those, which might possible have had the same effect with us as with them, convinced us also to be their Proselytes, and in the meane time very unjust to put so uncertain an equivocall phrase into a law, which we have no Criterion or nomenclature to in∣terpret; but beyond all, very imprudent to mention and lay weight on such slight and such no inconveniencies afterward specified, when others might have been produced better able to beat the envy of the accusation. As for your resolution, if it went no higher then the Covenant, and that but to reform Religion, according to the word of God, and the example of the best reformed Churches, I am sure it cannot oblige, or so much as incline you to take away that Book, there being nothing in it. 1. Contrary to the designe of Reformation. 2. Contrary to the word of God, or 3. Contrary to the example of the best reformed Churches. Not 1. to Reformation, for Reformation is as contrary to abolition of what should be reformed, as cure to killing; and if it be replyed, that the abolition of Liturgy, as unlawfull may be necessary to the reforming of Religion, I shall yeeld to that reply on that supposition, but then withall adde, that Liturgy must first be proved unlawfull, and that testified from divine infallible principles; which because it is not thorow this whole Book so much as pretended, both that and the second suggestion from the word of God must necessarily be disclaimed, and then the example of the best reformed Churches will soon follow, not onely because all other Reformed Churches ordinarily known by that Title, have some kind of Liturgy, and that is as contrary to abolition, as the continuing of ours without any change, but because no reformation, is to be preferr'd before that which cuts off no more then is necessary to be cut off, and which produces the Scripture rule, the sword of the Spirit for all such am∣putations; and therefore the Church of England, as it stands established by Law is avowable against all the Calumniators in the world, to be
the best and most exemplarie reformed; so far, that if I did not guesse of the sense of the Covenant more by the temper then words of the Cove∣nanteers, I should think men, that have Covenanted to reform after the example of the best Reformed Churches, indispensably obliged to conform to the King-Edward, or Queen-Elizabeth-English Reformation, the most regular perfect pattern that Europe yeeldeth. As for the truth of the last affirmation that they have consulted with the Divines called together to that purpose, although I have no reason to doubt of it, yet this I know, that very many of the learned'st there present, were, immediately before their imbarking in that imployment, otherwise minded, and that therefore so sudden an universall change of minds savours either of some strong charm, or strange inconstancy, and I shall make bold to ask this Question of that whole number of Di∣vines, whether I should do them wrong in affirming, that there yet are not ten Divines in that number that think all Liturgy unlawfull, and consequently that it was necessary (not to reform, but) to abolish our Book, which is the stile of the Ordinance. If this challenge of mine may not be answer'd with a plain punctuall subscription of so many to the condemnation of all Liturgy as unlawfull, I am sure this is an Argu∣ment, ad homines, unanswerable. And the ground of my challenge, and of my specifying that number, is the relation we have oft had of the but seven dissenting Brethren, i. e. the but so many of the Independent Party among them, which upon my former ground I now suppose the onely mortall enemies to all Liturgy. But if I am mistaken, and this be the common sense of those Assemblers; then have I reason to adde to my former complaints this other of their so over-cautious expressions, which through this whole Book hath not once intimated either the whole or any part to be unlawfull, but onely quarrel'd the inconveniences, which supose it otherwise to be lawfull. And thus much might suffice of the first observable in the Ordinance, the concluding this abolition to be necessary. But because I would fore∣see and prevent all possible rejoynder, and because I would here inter∣pose some considerations which would otherwise take up a larger place, I shall suppose the Presbyterians may have another notion of the word Necessary, of a lower importance then this under which we have hitherto proceeded against them (though still the Independents, whose judgement is not wont to be despised in the framing of Ordinances, can∣not be imagined to take it in any other) and that is, that it shall signifie onely a Politicall necessity, or that which is necessary, if not to the being, yet to the well being, i. e. to the Peace and presperity of this Kingdom. Now
because there be two parts of every Christian Kingdom, a Seat and a Church, and so two branches of Policy, Civill and Ecclesiasticall, I shall not undertake to be so far Master of their sence, as to pitch upon either as that wherein they affirm this abolition necessary, but say somewhat to both, and to shew that it is not necessary in either sence of Politicall ne∣cessity. And first that the abolition of Liturgy cannot have so much as a be∣nigne influence on the State, much lesse be necessary to the prosperity of it, I shall infer onely by this vulgar aphorisme, that any notable or grand mutation, if from some higher principle it appear not necessarie to be made, will be necessary not to be made, at least not to be made , altogether, but onely by degrees, and prudent dispensings. I shall not any farther enlarge on so plain a theme, then to mention one proportion or resemblance of this truth in the naturall body ob∣served by the Physitians in the cure of an hydropicall patient, who, when the body lyes covered with such a deluge of water, that it proves necessary to make some sluce to let out the burthenous superfluity, do not yet proceed by any loose way of letting out all at once, because the violent effluvium, or powring out of Spirits constantly consequent to that, would certainly destroy the Patient, and endanger him on dry ground, as much, or more, then in the midst of those waters; but the method is a , the making so small a hole in the skin, that shall drain the body by insensible degrees by drawing out a little at once, and never above a pint at a time, though many gallons are designed to passe by this way of evacuation. I shall adde no more to this resem∣blance, but that the totall violent illegall abolition of Liturgy in a set∣led Church, is certainly of this nature, and being superadded to the change of the Government into a Form quite contrary to that which for 1600 yeers hath prevailed in the universall Church of Christ, there setled by the Apostles, may be allow'd the stile of insignis mutatio, a mu∣tation of some considerable importance to a Christian state, which be∣ing admitted altogether without any preparative alleviating steps, will (by the rapid sudden motion at least, if there were nothing else) have a dangerous influence upon the whole body, of which the cunningest di∣viner cannot at this distance foresee the effects, or prevent the emergent mischiefs which succeeding time may discover. If it be said, that this abolition is now necessary to conclude the present War, and that be affirmed to be the Politick necessity here meant, I answer, that if it were able to do that, I should acknowledge it the strongest argument that could be thought on to prove it Politically necessary, this War being so unnecessa∣rily
destructive, and any thing that could rid us of that, so strongly con∣venient, that if Conscience would permit the use of it, I should allow it the title of necessary. But to make short of this, no man can believe that these Armies were raised or continued to subdue the Common-Prayer-Book, for, besides that there was a time when 'twas found necessary for the Houses to declare, that they had no designe to take away that Book, for fear the people should be disobliged by it, and another when the Earl of Essex his Army exprest some kindnesse to it; 'Tis now confest by the Pretenders of both Perswasions, Presbytrians and Independents, one that they do not, the other that they must not take up Arms for Re∣ligion, and so that kind of politicall necessity of abolishing the Book is, and by themselves must be disclaimed also. Now for the second branch of this necessity, that which is in order to Ecclesiasticall or Church-policy, we shall take liberty in this place to con∣sider this matter at large, because it may perhaps save us some pains hereafter, and because their pretending of this necessity of doing what they do, is a tentation, if not a challenge to us to do so, and then we shall leave it to the Reader to judge what grounds may hence be fetcht for this pretended necessity. And this must be done by laying together the se∣verall things that are in our Liturgy, and are purposely left out in the Directory, and so are as it were the Characteristicall note, by which the Directory is by the Assemblers designed to differ from our Liturgie, as so much food from poyson, Christian from Antichristian (if Necessity be pro∣perly taken) or (if improperly for that which is necessary onely to the well being) as a more perfect and more profitable, from that which, if it be so at all, is not either (in their opinion) in so high a degree. Now the severals of our Liturgie which are purposely avoided in this Directory, I have observed to be principally these; Of those that are more extrinsecall, six. 1. The prescribing of Forms, or Liturgie it self. 2. Outward or bodily worship. 3. Ʋniformity in performing Gods service. 4. The Peoples bearing some part in the service. 5. The dividing the Prayers into severall Collects, and not putting them all into one continued Prayer. 6. The Ceremonies of kneeling in the Communion, of Crosse in Baptisme, of Ring in Marriage, &c. Then of those that are intrinsecall, and parts of the Service. 1. The Absolution, in the beginning of the Service next after the Confession, and before the Communion, and in the Visitation of the sick.
2. The Hymnes, the Introite, the Te Deum, &c. 3. The use of the Doxologie or giving glory to God. 4. The Confession of the Faith in the Creeds. 5. The frequent repeating of the Lords Prayer, & the prayers for the King 6. The observations of divers Feasts commemorative, not onely of Christ, but of Saints departed, and assigning Services, Lessons, Epistles, and Gospels, and Collects to them. 7. The reading the Commandments, and the Prayers belonging to that Service. 8. The order of the Offertory. 9. Private Baptisme. 10. Aprescript form of Catechisme. 11. Confirmation. 12. The solemnities of burying the dead. 13. Thanksgiving after Child-birth. 14. Communion of the sick. 15. The Service containing the Communion. 16. The observation of Lent, and the Rogation, and I would adde also of the Ember weeks. This may seem too loose a task, to enlarge on each of these, and yet we are in justice to this Book, and for answer to the pretended Necessity of abolishing it, obliged to do so, as breifly as it may, onely so farre as may serve to give the Reader a view of the lawfullnesse at least, and withall of the usefulnesse of each of these, and consequently of the no appearance of reason why it should be thought necessary to abolish any one of them, much lesse of all the rest for that ones sake. And first for the prescribing of Forms of Prayer, or Liturgy it self, we shall referre it to judgement whether it be necessary in Ecclesiasticall Po∣licy, i. e. strongly conducing to the benefit and edification of a Church to interdict or banish it out of the Kingdome, when we have proposed these few things concerning it. 1. The example of God himself and holy men in the Old Testament, prescribing set Forms of blessing the people to be used daily by Aaron and his Sons, Numb. 6. 23. The Lord blesse thee and keep thee, &c. set Forms for the people to use themselves, Deut. 26. 3. 5. Thou shall say before the Lord, A Syrian, &c. as also at the going out of their Armies, Deut. 20. 3. and of Thanksgiving, Exod. 15. 1. made by Moses, and it seems learnt by-heart by all the people; and in the same words used again by Mirian, v. 21. and so it appears, Isa. 38. 20. that Hezekiah did not onely form a set thanksgiving, but used it all the dayes of his life. And the same Hezekiah, 2. Chron. 29. 30. in his thanksgiving commanded the Levites also to sing praises to God with the words of
David and Asaph, i. e. Forms already prepared to his hand by those sa∣cred Pen-men. 2. The practice of the Jews since Ezra's time constantly using set Forms of Prayer by way of Liturgie; For this I shall produce no other proof then the testimony of a learned Member of their Assembly, Mr. Selden in in his notes on Eutychius, vouching all his affirmation out of the ancient records of the customes of the Jewish Nation from whom, that they may be of authority with you, I shall transcribe these severals, That certain forms of praying, which were to be used by every one daily by Law, or re∣ceived custome, were instituted by Ezra and his house, i. e. his consistory. That the Jews about the end of the Babylonish captivity had their ancient P. 41. manners as well as language so depraved, that without a Master they ei∣ther were not able to pray as they ought, or had not confidence to do so. And P. 42. therefore that for the future, they might not recede either in the matter of their prayers (through corruption) or expression (through ignorance) from that form of piety commanded them by God, this remedy was applyed by the men of the great Synagogue, Ezra & his 120. Collegues, (where by the way is observable one speciall use and benefit of set Forms, not onely to provide for the ignorance, but to be an hedge to true Religion, to keep out all mix∣tures or corruptions out of a Church; To which purpose also the Councels in the Christian Church have designed severall parts which we still retain in our Liturgie, a reall and a valuable benefit, if it were considered.) That P. 43. of this kind there were 18. Prayers or Benedictions, called in the Gemara composed or appointed Prayers. That the three first of these, and the three last respected the glory of God the twelve other intermediate were spent on those prime things that were necessary, either to the whole People, or every particular man, (proportionable to which perhaps it is that our Saviour who accommodated most institutions of his Baptisme and his last Supper, &c. to the customes of the Church, did also designe his prayer, as it is set down in Matthew, though not according to the number of the Jewish prayers, yet to the generall matter & form of them, the three first branches of it, and the conclusion, which may passe for three branches more, referring to the glory of God, and the other intermediate to our private and publick wants.) That these Prayers were to be learnt by every man that the Pray∣ers of the unskilfull might be as perfect as of the most eloquent. That every P. 44. act of praying was begun with, Psal. 51. 15. O Lord open thou our lips & our mouthes shall shew forth thy praise (the very form of words still retain∣ed in St James his Liturgy, and in ours before the Introite) and concluded with Psal. 19. the last verse, Into thy hands, &c. That of these 18 Prayers P. 48. no one was to be omitted, that if any other were added, they were counted of
like free-will offerings, as the other were answerable to the prescribed and were called by that name. That the additions might be made onely in those Prayers which concern their own wants, because those were capable of va∣riation, but not to those that concern'd God. That on Sabbath & Feast-dayes no man might use a voluntary prayer. That about the time of the Jews de∣struction P. 49. Gamliel and his Sanhedrim added a nineteenth Prayer, and af∣ter him others, so that at length the daily service grew to an 100 Prayers. That it is likely that the Pagans come to use their set Forms in their Sa∣crifice P. 50. P. 55. also, (and perhaps the Mahumedans too) by the example of the Jewish Church, for which he there referres the Reader to many Books of the Learned. I conceive the authoritie of this Gentleman hath not been de∣spised by the House of Commons, and the Assemblers (when it hath chanced to agree with their designes or interest) and therefore I have thus farre, as an Argument ad homines, insisted on it. 3. The not onely practice, but precept of Christ in the New Testament, who did not only use himself a set form of words in prayer, three times to∣gether using the same words. Matth. 26. 44. and upon the Crosse in the same manner, praying in the Psalmists words, onely changed into the Sy∣riack dialect, which was then the vulgar: but also commanded the use of those very words of his perfect form, which it seems he meant not onely as a pattern but a form it self (as the Standard weight, is not only the mea∣sure of all weights, but may it self be used) Luke 11. 2. when you pray, say, Our Father, &c. which precept no man can with a good conscience ever obey, that holds all set forms necessary to be cast out of the Church. 4. The practice, not onely of John the Baptist, who taught his disciples to pray, Luke 11. 1. (which occasioned Christs Disciples to demand, and him to give them a form of Prayer) but especially of the Apostles, of which we find intimations, 1. Cor. 14. 26. When you come together every one of you hath a Psalm, which sure referres to some of the Psalms of David or Asaph, used then ordinarily in their devotions, (and that as even now I said, authorized by the example of Christ himself upon the Crosse, who it is thought repeated the whole 22. Psalm, it is certain, the first verse of it, My God, my God, why hast thou for saken me) and so certainly a set form, and that of Prayer too (of which thanksgivings and Praises are a part.) But because every one had his severall Psalm, it is therefore reprehended by the Apostle, as tending to confusion, and by that consequence, S. Pauls judgement is thence deducible for the joyning of all in the same form, as being the onely course tending to edification in the end of that verse, and then sure 'twould be hard, that that which the Apostle conceived the onely course for edifying, should now be necessarie to be turn'd out of the
Church as contrary to edification. Farther yet, 'tis clear by text, that the Apostles when they met together, to holy duties (such are Fasting, Pray∣er, receiving the Sacrament) continued very long time, sometimes a whole day together. This being too much to be alwayes continued in the Church, and unsuteable to every mans businesse, is said to have been the occasion that S. James first made choice of some speciall Prayers most frequently by them used, which was after called his Liturgie, which (or some other in the disguise of that) the Greek Church still use on solemn dayes. This also being of the longest for every dayes use, St Basil is said to have shortned, and that again St Chrisostome; how certain these re∣ports are, I shall not take upon me to affirm, but onely adde, that the Greek Church, who are most likely to know the truth of it by their re∣cords, do retain all these three Liturgies, and would loudly laugh at any man that should make doubt whether St James, St Basil, and St Chryso∣stome, were not the Authours of them. 2. That the judgement of that Church (if they are deceived also, and may not be thought worthy to be heeded by our Assemblers) is yet an argument of great authoritie to any prudent man, if not that these Liturgies were purely the same with those which were written by that Apostle, and those holy men, yet that there were such things as Liturgies of their penning. The like might be added of that short form of St Peters, which alone they say was used in the Roman Church for a great while, till after by some Popes it was aug∣mented, and the same of St Marks Liturgy. I am sure St Augustine speaking of some forms retained in the Church, and still to be found in our Liturgie, particularly that of Sursum corda, Lift up your hearts, &c. faith, that they are verba ab ipsis Apostolorum temporibus petita, words fetcht from the times of the Apostles, which supposes that they did use such Forms. And for that particular mentioned by St Augustine, it is agreeable to the Constitutions of the Apostles, l. 8. c. 16. (which collection if it be not so ancient as it pretends, doth yet imitate Apostolicall antiquity) and so in St James's, and Basils and Chrysostomes Liturgy in the same words with our Book as farre as to the word [bounden] and for many other such particular Forms used by us we find them in Cyril of Jerusalems Ca∣techisme, one of the ancientest Authours we have, and then that it should be necessary for the Church to turn out what the Apostles had thus brought into it, will not easily be made good by our Assemblers. Fifthly, The practice of the Universall Church from that time to this, which is so notorious to any that is conversant in the writings of the Ancient Fathers, and of which so many testimonies are gathered toge∣ther for many mens satisfaction by Cassander, and other writers of the
Liturgica, that 'twere a reproach to the Reader to detain or importune him with testimonies of that nature. To omit the practice of The same Constantine in his palace imita∣ting the orders of the Church, among other things, , rendred Set Prayers, Euseb de vit. Const. l. 4. c. 17. And so it is said of the Nobles a∣bout him, that they used , Prayers that the Em∣peror liked, & were all brought by him, , &c. to pray the same prayers all of thē even in private, c. 18. Constantine, who prescribed a form for his Souldiers (a Copy of which we have in Euseb. de vit. Const. l. 4. c. 20.) I shall one∣ly mention two grand testimonies for set Forms, one in the 23 Canon of the third Councell of Carthage, Quascunque sibipre∣ces aliquis describet noniis utatur, ise priùs oas cum instructi∣oribus fratribus contulerit: No man may use any Prayers which he hath made, unlesse he first consult with other learneder Chri∣stians about thē. And the other more punctuall: Concil: Milev. c. 12. Placuit ut precesquae probatae fuerintin Concilio ab omnibus celebrentur. Nec alia omninò dicātur in Ecclesia, nisi quae à pru∣dentioribus tractantur, vel comprobatae in Synode fuerint, no for∣tè aliquid contra fidem, aut per ignorantiam, aut per minus stu∣dium sit compositum. It was resolv'd on, that the Prayers that were approv'd in the Councell should be used by all, & that no o∣ther should be said in the Church but those that had been weighed by the more prudent, or approv'd in a Synod, lest any thing, either through ignor∣ance or negligence should be dōne against the Faith. Instead of such Citati∣ons (and because whatsoever argument is brought from that Topick of Ecclesiasticall tradition, is now presently defamed with the title of Popish and Antichristian, because forsooth Antichrist was a working early in the Apostles time, and every thing that we have not a mind to in antiquity, must needs be one of those works) I shall rather choose to mention ano∣ther, as a more convincing argument ad homines, and that is, Sixthly, The judgement and practice of the Reformed in other King∣domes, even Calvin himself in severall ample testimonies, one in his Notes upon Psal. 20. 1. another in his Epistle to the Protector. I shall not give my self licence to transcribe these, or multiply more such Testimo∣nies, onely for the honour not onely of Liturgie in generall, but parti∣cularly of our Liturgie, 'twill be worth remembring that Gilbertus a German, many yeers since, in a book of his, propounds our Book of pray∣er Precum fol. 301. 212. for a sample of the Forms of the ancient Church; And for the purity of it, through Reformation, that Crnmer procured the King Edwards Com∣mon-Prayer-Book to be translated into Latin, & sent it to Bucer, & requi∣red his judgement of it, who answer'd, that there was nothing in it, but what was taken out of the word of God, or which was not against it, com∣modē acceptum, being taken in a good sence, some things indeed, saith he, quae nisi quis, &c. unlesse they be interpreted with Candor, may seem not so agree∣able to the word of God, & which unquiet men may wrest ute matter of
contention. As may be seen at large in Bucers Scripta Anglicana. Upon this occasion this Book of King Edwards was again survey'd, and in those particulars, that were Subject to such Cavills, corrected. After which time the quarrels about that Book were generally with the Papists (not so much with the opposite extreame (and therefore John Ould in Queen Maries dayes wrote against them in defence of it, and of the King Ed∣wards Reformation. And Cranmer made a challenge, that if he might be permitted by the Queen to take to him P. Martyr, and foure or five more, they would enter the lists with any Papists living, and defend the Common-Prayer-Book to be perfectly agreeable to the Word of God, and the same in effect which had been for 1500 yeers in the Church of Christ. This for the reputation of the Book. Then for the fruit and be∣nefit that by the use of it redounded to Christians, take an essay by Mr John Hullier, Fellow of Kings Colledge in Cambridge, who was Martyr'd in Queen Maries dayes, Ann. 1557. and being at the stake among many other books that were thrown into the fire to him, it hapned that a Com∣mon-Prayer-Book fell between his hands, which he joyfully receiving opened, and read till the flame and smoke suffered him not to see any more, and then he fell to prayer, holding his hands up to heaven, and the book betwixt his arms next his heart, thanking God for that mercy in sending him it, the relation is Mr Foxes, and from thence the plea au∣thentick, that the tree that bare wholsome fruit, should not be cut down by Acts and Mon. pag. 1818. the law, Deut. 10. 20. even when Warre was to be made on a City, and as Maimon addes, l. de Idol. though it were worshipt for an Idoll, and if that which was then of so dear esteem be now so necessary to be cast our, it is an ill indication of the times into which we are fallen. Seventhly, The reasons on which the very Heathens themselves took up the same practice, which was universall (it seems) through all the world, more Catholick then the Church it self. To this purpose beside those Au∣thors which Mr Selden refers to, I shall onely adde these three testimonies, first of Plato, l. 7. de leg. where he commands, that what ever Prayers or Hymnes the Poets composed to the Gods, they should first shew them to the Priests (as if they were in a manner leprous till then) before they publisht them, let they should ask evil things in stead of good (an infirmity that these dayes are very subject unto) The second in Thucyd. l. 6. p. 434. . Set forms for severall occasions, and a common joynt sending them up to heaven. The third in Alexander ab Alex. l. 4 c. 17. that the Gentiles read their Prayers out of a Book before their Sacrifices, Nè quid praeposterè dicatur, aliquis ex script praeire & ad verbum referre solitus est: That the work might not
be done proposterously. Which two reasons of theirs, the one lest they should stray in the matter of their Prayers, the other lest offend in the manner, may passe for Christian reasons, as seasonable with us, as they were among them. And no necessitie that those reasons should be despised by us neither. Eightly, The irrationall concludings, or shortnesse of discourse of those which are against set forms, especially in two things; the first ob∣served by D. Preston (whose memory is, I hope, not lost among these Assemblers) and made use of in a Printed work of his to the confuting of them. That while they in opposition to set Forms require the Minister to conceive a Prayer for the Congregation, they observe not, that the whole Congregation is by that means as much stinted, and bound to a set Form, to wit, of those words which the Minister conceives, as if he read them out of a book. 2. That the persons with whom we have now to deal, though they will not prescribe any Form of Prayer, yet venture to , Act. 14. 12 prescribe the matter of it in these words, pag. 14. the Minister is to call up∣on the Lord to this effect. Now why the prescription of the matter is not the stinting of the Spirit, as well as the form of words (unlesse the Spirit, like the Heathen Mercury be the God of eloquence, and be thought to deal in the words onely) or why the promise of dabitur in illâ horâ, it shall be given you in that houre, should not be as full a promise for matter, as for expressions; especially when that Text forbids care or provision,  not onely how, but what they should speak, and the promise is pe∣culiarly Matth. 10. 19. for the , it shall be given you what you shall speak; and this is it, that is attributed to the Spirit, v. 20. (from whence if I should conclude, that the holy Ghost taught the Disciples onely the matter of their answer; and they themselves were left to put it in form of words, there is nothing in that Text against that assertion; and that it was so in their penning of the New Testament, many probable Arguments might be produced if it were now seasonable,) and consequently, why the prescribing of one should not be unreasonable in them, that condemne all prescribing of the other, I confesse is one of those things which my charity hath made me willing to impute to the shortnesse of discourse, because I am unwilling to lay any heavier charge upon it. From all which considered, and a great deal more which might be added, from the usefulnesse of known Forms to those, whose under∣standings, are not quick enough to go along with unknown, and if they have no other, are faine ofttimes to return without performing any part of that so necessary duty of prayer in the Church, from the experience of the effects of the contrary doctrine, the many scandalous
passages which have fallen from Ministers in their extemporary Prayers (of which meer pity and humanity, civility and mercy to Enemies, re∣strains us from inserting a large Catalogue) and the no manner of ad∣vantage above that which set Forms may also afford, but onely of sa∣tisfaction to the itching eare, exercise and pleasure to the licentio tongue, and the vanity of the reputation of being able to perform that office so fluently (which yet is no more then the Rabbins allow Achito∣phel, that he had every day three new Forms of prayer) or having a plen∣tifull measure of the Spirit; which is believed to infuse such eloquence, I shall now conclude it impossible that any humane eye should discern  Necessitie, in respect of Ecclesiasticall policy, edifying the Church, why all Liturgie should be destroyed, not wash't nor purg'd with Sope, suc any Reformation would be, but torn and consumed with nitre, for suc is abolition, why it should suffer this Ostracisme, unlesse as Aristides di for being too vertuous) be thus vehemently first declaimed, and then b▪∣nish'd out of the Church. Secondly, for outward bodily worship, 'tis particularly prohibited by the Directory at one time, at the taking of our seats or places when we enter th Assembly, (directly contrary to that of Iidor si quis veniat cùm lectio cele∣bratur P. 10. De div. Offic. 10. adoret tantùm Deum: If any come in when the Lesson is a reading let him onely perform adoration to God, & hearken to what is read) & neve so much as recommended at any time, nor, one would think, permitted i any part of their publick service, like the Persians in Strabo, l. 15. that ne¦ver offer'd any part of the flesh to the Gods in their sacrifices, kept all th to themselves, , supposing the Gods would b content with the souls, which in the blood were powred out and sacri¦ficed to their honour,  they said that the Gods wanted and desired the souls for a sacrifice, b not any thing else; of which people Herodotus, l. 1. hath observed that they had neither Templars nor Altar, and laugh'd at them which built either but went to the top of some hill or other, and there sacrificed, prefe¦ring such naturall Altars before any other. The former of these is th avowed Divinity of these men (and might perhaps have been attende with the latter too, were it not that there be so many Churches alread built conveniently to their hands) in stead of which, our Liturgie hat thought fit not onely to recommend but prescribe bodily worship; fi by directing in the Rubrick what part of service shall be performed kneel¦ing, then by reading the Venite, where all encourage and call up one th others to worship, and fall down, and kneel, &c. to worship i. e. adore, whic peculiarly notes bodily worship, and so surely the falling down, and kneel¦ing
before the Lord. And of this I shall say, that it is 1. an act of obedience to that precept of glorifying God in our bodies, as well as souls. 2. A transcribing of Christs copy, who kneeled, and even prostrated himself in prayer, of many holy men in Scripture, who are affirmed to have done so (and that affirmation written for our example) and even of the Publican, who though standing yet by standing afar off, by not looking up, by striking his breast, did clearly joyn bodily worship to his prayer, of [Lord be mer∣cifull to me a sinner] used at his coming into the Temple, and in that po∣sture thrived better then the Pharisee in his loftier garbe, went away more justified, saith our Saviour, as a vessel at the foot of a hill, will (say the Artists) receive and contain more water, then the same or the like vessell Vide Clav. in Sacr. Bosc. c. 1. on the top of it would be able to do (and he that shall do the like, that shall joyn adoration of God, and nothing but God, to the use of that or the like servent ejaculation at his entrance into Gods house, will sure have Christs approbation of the Publicans behaviour, to justifie him from any charge of superstition in so doing) and besides 3. the most agreeable humble gesture, and so best becoming, and Cum hi motus corporis fi∣eri nisi motu animi praece∣dente non possin, eudem rsus exterùs visibiliter factis ille interior invisibi∣lis augetur. Aug. l. de cu∣ra pr mr. 5. evidencing, and helping the inward performance of that most lowly dutie of Prayer, and consequently that it may be charged with blas∣phemy, as well and as properly, as with superstition, and probably would be so, if the latter were not the more odious of the two: and indeed why kneeling or bowing should be more lyable to that censure, then either mentall or orall prayer, there is no reason imaginable, it being as possible that one may be directed to a false object (and so become Idolatrous, or superstitious in the true notion of those words (as they denote the worship of Idols, or dead men,  or superstites) as the other, and (for the improper notion of Supersti∣tion (the one again as much capable of being an excesse in Religion (the mind or tongue being as likely to enlarge and exceed as the body) or of using a piece of false Religion, as the other, the bodily worship duly per∣formed to God, being the payment of a debt to God (and no doubt ac∣ceptable, when it is paid with a true heart) and no way an argument of want, but a probable evidence of the presence and cooperation of inward devotion, as I remember Nazianzen saith of his Father, Or. 8. , He shewed a great deal in the outside, but kept the greater treasure within in the invisible part. And on the other side, the stiffnesse of the knee, an argument of some eminent defect, if not of true piety, yet of somewhat else, and Christs prediction, John 4. that the time should come that the worshippers should worship God in spirit and truth, (being not set in opposition to bodily worship, but to the ap∣propriating
it to some singular places, Jerusalem or that Mountain) not producible as any apology or excuse for such omission. To these brief inti∣mations I shall need adde no more, when the conclusion that I am to in∣ferre is so moderate, being onely this, that it is not necessary to turn all bowing, or kneeling, or bodily worship out of the Church, (were there any superstition in any one or more gestures, this were too great a severi∣ty, to mulct the Church of all, above the proportion of the most unli∣mited arbitrary Court, whose amercements must alwayes be within the compasse of salvo contenemente, which this will not be, if there be no com∣petency of bodily worship left behind) and that the Liturgie doth better to prescribe it at fit times, then the Directory to omit all mention of it at all times, unlesse by way of dislike and prohibition. Which conclusion will be the more easily evinced against them, by asking them whether in their Family-Parlour-Prayers; or in their private Closet-prayers, they do not approve and practice that gesture; which as I believe in charity they do, so I must from thence infer, that by them the house of God, is the onely place thought fit to be despised. And if it be replyed, that the Di∣rectory forbids not kneeling, but onely commands it not, leaving it free to use or not to use. I answer. 1. That the effect of this liberty is very remarkable among them, and equall to that of a prohibition, no man almost of their perswasion ever kneeling in their Churches. 2. That the never so much as recommending it, is very near a forbidding of it. 3. That bowing or adoration is directly forbidden once (which by the way, is as much the defining of a Ceremony, viz. that of standing or going up∣right, and so as contrary to the Independants perswasions, and to the great clamorous complaint for Liberty in Ceremonies, as any prescripti∣on of kneeling or bowing can be.) 4. That kneeling also is at the recei∣ving of the Sacrament forbidden, by necessity of consequence, sitting be∣ing prescribed, and therefore that that reply or excuse is false also. And so now what speciall advantage this is like to bring in to this Church of ours, to have the bodies of negligent, or prophane, or Factious men left (without any so much as an admonition) to their own inclinations and so what depth of Ecclesiasticall policy there was which made this change so necessary, I desire now may be judged. Thirdly, For uniformity in that Service; (which our Liturgie labours to set up, by prescribing the manner of it, but the Directory hath taken away by leaving all to the chance of mens wills, which can no more be thought likely to concurre in one form, then Democritus's Atomes to have met together into a world of beautifull Creatures, without any hand of providence to dispose them) it hath certainly the approbation of all
wise men, and command of St Paul, 1 Cor. 14. 40. in that grand place, Let all things be done decently, and in order. Of which I conceive the clear importance to be, that all be done in the Church according to custome and appointment. The former implyed in , (custome being the onely rule of decency, and therefore the indecency of wearing long hair, is proved by being against nature, i. e, saith Suidas in the Scripture phrase, , a custome of some continuance in that place, and thereupon St Paul thinks it enough against an Ecclesiasticall usage, and that which might supersede all strife about it, 1 Cor. 11. 16. [we have no such customes, &c.]) and the latter in plain words , according to order or ap∣pointment (for so the words literally import) and then upon these two grounds is uniformitie built, and necessarily results, where all that is done in the Church is ruled by one of these, by custome, or by Law, which being here commanded by St. Paul, is a proof of the more then lawful∣nesse of  prescription of Ceremonies in a Church, and of uniformity therein. And then what necessitie there is or can be that St Pauls com∣mand shall be so neglected, all care of uniformitie so disclaimed, all , constitution, or ordinance, for any Ecclesiasticall matter (unlesse their ordinance against all such constitutions) so solemnly disavowed, it will be hard to imagine, or guesse, unlesse it be on purpose to observe Master Prynnes rule of Conforming the Church to the State, to fill one as full of disorder and , and confusion as the other. I remember a saying of Socrates which Plato and Cicero record from him, Mutatâ Musicâ mu∣tantur & mores: that the change of a kinde of Musick, had a great influ∣ence on mens minds, and had a generall change of manners consequent to it. I conceive uniformitie in Gods service to be parallel to Musick, being it self an outward concord, or harmony of the most different affections; and that that should be not onely changed, but lost, I cannot understand any necessity, unlesse it be that some such like effects may be wrought in Religion also. For the fourth, the Peoples bearing some part in the service (whether by way of response in the Prayers, and hymnes, or by reading every other verse in the Psalm, mentioned in Theodorets story, l. 2. c. 24. where speak∣ing of Flavianus and Diodorus, he saith of them, , &c. They divided the Quire of Singers into two parts, and appointed them to sing the Psalms successively, which custome began by them (who, saith he were admirable men, & labour'd extreamly to stir up all men to Piety, & to that end invented this) , prevaild over the whole world, or by way of mutuall charity, returning a prayer
for the Priest, who began one peculiarly for them; which Innocentius re∣ferres to, in his letter to Aurelius and Augustino, calling the communes & alternas preces, to which he there attributes more force, quàm privatis, then to private, or by way of following the Presbyter in Confession of sins, both at the beginning of the Service, and before the Communion; or in Profes∣sion of Faith in the Creeds, wherein every the meanest Christian is to have his part;) it is certainly designed by the Church, from the example of pure antiquity, to very gainfull uses, to quicken devotion, which the length of continued hearing may have leave to dull and slacken, and to recall those thoughts which may upon the like temptation have diverted to other objects; in a word, to engage every one to be made no idle of unprofitable Spectator of the Service: and as long as there is still need of that help to these so necessary ends, and not the least shew or pretence of objection against it, how necessarie it can be to reject it wholly, and lay all the task upon the Priest, and not require so much as an Amen (which it seems was in fashion in St Pauls time) of the , or Lay person, I leave to the most prejudicate Reader to give sentence for me. As for the Letany, wherein the People are more exercised then in any other part of the Service, it is certainly designed to make it more propor∣tionable to the title bestowed on it by the Ancients of . earnest or intense Prayer, and in Methodius, , earnest Petitions, in the Greek Liturgie, simply , intense or earnest) from Act. 12. 5. Luke 22. 44. This continuall joyning of the people in every passage of it, tending very much both to the improving and evidencing that fervor and intention, which can never be more necessary then throughout that Ser∣vice; of which I shall in passing say these three things, and justifie them against any gain-sayer, that there is not extant any where, 1. a more particular excellent enumeration of all the Christians either private or common wants, as far as is likely to come to the cognisance of a Congre∣gation; nor secondly, a more innocent blamelesse Form, against which there lies no just objection, and most of the unjust ones that have been made, are reproachfull to Scripture it self, from whence the passages ex∣cepted against are fetcht, as that particularly of Praying for Gods mercy upon all men, from 1. Tim. 2. 1. nor thirdly, a more artificiall composure for the raising that zeal, and keeping it up throughout, then this so defamed part of our Liturgie; for which and other excellencies undoubtedly it is, (and not for any Conjuring or Swearing in it) that the Devil hath taken care that it should drink deepest of that bitter cup of Calumnie and Reviling, which it can no way have provoked, but onely as Christ did the reproach of the diseased man, What have I to do with
thee? &c. when he came to exorcize and cast out the Devill that possest him. And for this to be thrown out of the Church, sure there is no other necessity, then there was that there should be Scandal and Heresies in it, onely because the Devil and his Factors would have it so. 5. For the dividing of Prayers into divers Collects or Portions, and not putting all our Petitions into one continued Prayer, these advantages it hath to give it authority, 1. the practice of the Jews, whose Liturgie was dispensed into Lessons, &c. and 18 Collects, or short Prayers. 2. The exam∣ple of Christ prescribing a short Form, and in that, saith St Chrisostome, , teaching us the measure or length due to each Prayer of ours, Hom: de Annf. 965, and setting a mark of Heathenisme, Mat. 6. and of Pharisaisme, Matth. 23. 14. on their long Prayers. 3. The ad∣vice of the Ancients, who tell us St Peters Form, used for a great while in the Roman Church, was a short one, and that Christ and S Paul com∣manded us to make our Prayers, , short and frequent, and with little distances between. And so Epiphanius. Chrysost. . : orat. 6. 24. directs to offer our Petitions, , with all frequencie; and Cassian, de instit. mon. l. 2. 10 from the universall consent of them, Ʋtilius censent breves orationes sed creberrimas fieri: The way that is resolved to be most profitable, is to have short Prayers, but very thick or frequent. And he addes a consideration which prompted them to this reso∣lution: Ut Diaboli insidiantis jacula succinctâ brevitate vitemus: That by that means the Devils darts which he is wont to find and steal his time to shoot in to our breasts, may by the brevitie of our Prayers be prevented. To these many more might be added, but that the no-advantage on the other side above this (save onely the reputation of the labour, and patience of speaking, or hearing so much in a continued course, in one breath as it were) will save us the pains of using more motives to perswade any, that sure it is not necessarie to exchange this pleasant easie course of our Litur∣gie, for the redious toilsome lesse profitable course in the Directory. Sixthly, for the Ceremonies used in the severall Services, much might be said, as particularly for that of kneeling (in opposition to sitting at the Lords Supper designed in the Directory) 1. that it is agreeable to the practise Populus in Ecclesia ∣dendi po∣testatem non habet. Ideo repre∣hendi me∣retur, quia apud Idola celebratur. of all Antiquity, who though they kneeled not because the Canon of the Councell of Nice, obliged all to stand in the Church, between Easter and Whitsuntide, or on the Lords day all the yeer long, (which by the way ab∣solutely excludes sitting, as also doth that saying of Optatus, l. 4. That the People may not sit in the Church: and of Tertullian, l. de Orat: . 12. That 'twas an Heathen custome to sit in the Church, & therefore ought to be re∣prehended;) yet used the Prayer-gesture at receiving, i. e. bowing their bodies
and heads, which the Fathers call adoration: kissing of the hand, is the pro∣prietie of the Latin word, but the ordinary denotation of it, bowing the bo∣dy: the , which is more then the former, the cultus major, among the Learned; For as Herodotus observes of the Eastern Nations, that the manner of equals was to kisse one another at meeting; of inferiours to kisse the hand of the Superiour; but of the Suppliants or Petitioners, that would expresse the greatest humility to bow themselves before him, so was this last of the three continued among the primitive Christians, in their Services of the greatest piety and humility; Climacus, p. 298. , When I receive I worship, or adore; Agreeable to which the great men in the French Churches, who receive it passing or going (a meer Egyptian. Passeover custome) do first make a lowly cringe or curtesie before they take it in their hands. 2. That Christ's Table-gesture at the delivering it, is no Argument for sitting, both because it is not manifest by the Text that he used that, save onely at the Passeover, from which this Supper of the Lord was distinct, and was celebrated by blessing, and breaking, and giving the bread, &c. to which some other gesture might be more proper, and more commodious, and because Christ's gesture in that is no more obligingly ex∣emplary to us, then his doing it after Super was to the Apostles, who yet did it Fasting. Act. 13. 2. and generally took it before the agapae, and as by Plinies Epistle it appears, so early in the morning, that the congregation departed and met again, ad capiendum cibum promiscuum, to take their meals together. As also 3. that the contrary gesture of sitting, as it was, not many yeers since, by a full Synod of Protestants in Poland for∣bidden, if not condemned, because they found it used by the Arrians, as complying with their opinion, who hold our Saviour to be a meer Crea∣ture, so is now profest by some of our late Reformers writings to be a badge and cognisance of their believing in the infallibility of Christ's promise of coming to reign on this Earth again, and take them into a familiar and (a kind of) equall conversation with him, the Doctrine of the Millenaries, once in some credit, but after condemn'd by the Church, and though favoured by some Learned men, both anciently and of late, is not yet sure clear enough to come into our Creed or Liturgy: or to be profest and proclaimed by that gesture, when ever we receive the Sacra∣ment. The evidence or proof of it being primarily that in the Revelation, which by the rest of that Book I am very apt to suspect, may signifie any thing rather then what the letter of the words imports to us at the first view of them. But I shall not enlarge on this, nor the other Ceremonies mention'd, but refer the Reader to the Learned Satisfactory unanswer'd labour of Mr Hooker, on these Subjects, and then ask him when he hath
read him, 1. whether he repent him of that pains. 2. Whether in his con∣science he can think it necessary, or tending to edification, to cast all these causelesly out of this Church, or the whole Liturgie for their sakes. Now for those things that are more intrinsecall to the Liturgie, and parts of the Service; as 1. For the pronouncing of Absolution, which Christ so solemnly instated on the Priest in his Disciples (by three severall acts, first unto Peter as the mouth of the Apostles, Matth. 16. 19. then by way of promise to them altogether, cap. 18. 18. then by way of actuall instating it on them, brea∣thing that power and the Holy Ghost on them together, Joh. 20. 23.) and which is so distinctly named by St James, cap. 5. 15. in the case of sicknesse, , (not as we render they shall be forgiven him, as if it were , and belonged onely to God's act of pardoning, but) imperso∣nally Absolution shall be given him; and so constantly preserved and ex∣ercised in the universall Church in publick and private, and approved as far as our Liturgie uses it) even by those who affirm that power in the Mi∣nister to be onely declarative, that any man conversant either in the Gospel or writings of the Fathers, or modern Authors, or that hath but seen Knox's Scotch Liturgie, and observ'd that part of it, about the receiving of Peni∣tents, would be amazed to see a Directory for the publick worship of God (which is a large phrase, and contains the whole office of the Priest) and in it a title for the visitation of the sick, and yet find never a word about Absolution, no not in case of scruple, doubt, or temptation, pag. 67. or the death-bed it self. This exercise of those Keyes of the Kingdome of Heaven, i. e. of the Church, this pronouncing of Gods pardon, & actuall giving the Pardon and Peace of the Church to all her penitent children, especially that more particular act before the Communion, and on the Bed of sick∣nesse, is, beside the obedience to Christ, so necessary an expression of Chri∣stian charity in every Church to its poore members, and the denying of it, where it is due, so barbarous an inhumanity (which yet I hope no man shall be the worse for, but those that do deny it) that as the turning of Publick censures out of this Church, is a rare example of despight unto Christs command, (there being no Nationall Church from Christs time to this to be found without it, till this of ours for these last three yeers) so the sending of Absolution after it, and the affirming it to be necessary to be done, and appointing all foot-steps of it to be turn'd out of the Service, is a peice of disorder, as contrary to Charity as to Piety, to Reason as Re∣ligion, this being so far from the blame of an exuberancy in our Service, that there is more reason to wish that there were more of this nature, then that that, which we have already, were omitted.
2. For the Hymnes of the Church, it will not be amisse perhaps to give you first the true notion of the word; there being among the Hebrews three sorts of Songs, 1. Mizmor, a concise or short verse, 2. Tehillah, Praise, celebrating or depredicating of God, and 3. Schir, a Canticle, as the word is used in the title of that Song of Songs. And answerable to these three, we have Col. 3. 17. , and , Psalms and Hymnes, and Songs, where the word Hymne is answerable to the second of these, a praising and magnifying of God in and for some of his most remarkable acts of mercy and power. Thus was it the dictate even of nature it self among the heathens, to imploy a great part of their Poetry, i. e. their piety (for so Or∣pheus the first and most famous Writer of Hymnes, was called Theologus Poeta, a Poet that was a Divine also) in framing of Hymns to their gods, though those of Musaeus and Linus, the other two Theologi Poetae are not now to be met with. The like we have still of Homer also, and I remember Galen the famous Physitian, in one of his Books, De usu partium, describing the composure of the Foot, breaks out of a sudden into an excellent ac∣knowledgement, which he calls , a true Hymne in laud of that God which made these curious bodies of men. This duty of naturall Piety, Christianity certainly hath not obstructed, but ele∣vated it to a far higher pitch by superadding that greatest obligation taken from the Redemption of mankinde, to that old one of the Creation. And thus in all Ages of the Church some Hymnes have been constantly retained to be said or sung in the Churches, I mean not, onely the daily lections of the Psalms of David (which yet this Directory doth not men∣tion, but onely commands a more frequent reading of that Book, then of some other parts of Scripture) nor the singing of some of those Psalms in Metre, (which yet this Directory doth not prescribe neither, save onely on dayes of Thankesgiving, or after the Sermon if with convenience it may be done, making it very indifferent, it seems, whether it be kept at all in the Church or no, unlesse on those speciall occasions.) But the alternate reading of the 'Psalmes both by Priest and people (Psalme ab omnibus cele∣brentur, Let the Psalms be said by all, in the Milevit: Counc. Can. 12.) the constant use of some speciall Psalms, as the Introite, and of other more purely Christian Hymnes, either framed by holy men in the Scripture in reference to Christs Incarnation, or by the Church since on purpose to blesse and praise God for his mercies in Christ, which sure deserve a daily celebration from every Christian, as well & as richly as any Victory over Enemies, though it be one of theirs over the King himself, can deserve of them upon any day of Thanksgiving. Of this kind is the Te Deum,  most Divine and admirable Form called anciently, , a triumphant
Song, generally thought to be composed by St Augustine, and St Am∣brose, Telman in Basil, T. 1. p. 795. on the day that St Ambrose baptized St Augustine, and fitted to that purpose with an acknowledgement of the Trinity, in reference to St Au∣gustines conversion from Manichaisme. If this be true, then sure is it one of those, the repeating of which moved St Augustine to so much passion, that he saith in his Confessions, l. 9. Quantum flevi in hymnis & Canticis Ecclesiae tuae, that and the like hymns of the Church fetcht many tears from him. Of which I shall onely say, that to any man that hath but an humble, faithfull, thankfull fervent heart to go along with it, it is as christian a piece of praise and praier, as any humane pen could contribute toward the pub∣lick worship of God, which he that hath had the use of in the Church, and now thinks fit to banish out of it, shews his own former coldnesse and non-proficiencie under that means of grace, and that he never joyned in it with any zeal or earnestnesse, or else his retchlesse ingratitude to the Church which hath allow'd him the benefit of it. The like might be added of those two other in the administration of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the former before the Sacrament begin∣ning with, Lift up your hearts, and ending with the Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts, &c. a form to be found with little variation, both in Saint Jameses, St Basils, and St Chrysostomes Liturgie; the other, after the Sacra∣ment, Glory be to God on high, &c. called anciently Hymnus Angelicus, the Angelicall hymne, from the first part of it which was sung by Angels, and both these such ancient, pure, excellent composures in themselves, and so fitly accommodated to the present businesse, and all that I have named, so far from any appearance of evil, so free from any the least objection of any the most petulant malicious calumniatour (as far as I yet ever heard) so well-becoming a congregation of Saints, who by praising God in the Church, should practice before hand, and fit themselves for the singing of Hallelujahs perpetually in heaven, and in the mean time bear the Angels companie here (who St Chrysostome tels us, sing all the hymnes with us) that 'tis little better then furie, savouring much of the temper of that evil  t. 4. p. 753. l 40. edit. Savil. Sect. 32 Spirit on Saul, that was exercised with Davids Musick, and (therefore may be allowed to have malice to that and the like ever since) to think it necessary to throw this piece of heaven out of the Church. 3. For the Doxoligie so constantly annexed to many parts of our ser∣vice, in these words, (wherein the people either are to begin or answer) Glory be to the Father, &c. It is an ancient piece of very great consideration the former versicle of it being, as 'tis affirmed by good authorities, compo∣sed by the first Councell of Nice, and appointed by them to be used in the Church, as a lesser Creed, or confession of the Trinity and , Consub∣stantiality
of the Son and holy Ghost, with the Father (at which it hath therefore anciently been the custome to stand up, confession of God, being a praising of him (as the word in other languages imports) to which there∣fore that posture is most due) which may well passe for no fable, because 'tis clear, that soon after that time, Flavianus sang it aloud in the Church of Antioch, as appears by l. 3. c. 16. Zozomen, and l. 2. c. 14. Theodoret, (and if we may be∣lieve l. 18. c. 51 Nicephorus, St Chrysostome joynd with him in it;) Of this Philo∣storgius the Arian historiographer tels us, An. 348. Flavianus having gotten a congregation of Monks together, , was the first that began that form of Doxology, others using that other form of , Glory to the Father, by the Son in the holy Ghost: making the Son inferior to the Father, and the holy Ghost to the Son, as Eunomius and Eudoxius did, which it seems Philostorgius himself most approv'd of, (, saith his Epitomator of him) others (not as Gotofred mends his copy, and reads it, , but as the Oxford manuscript) , Glory to the Father, and the Son in the holy Ghost. These two severall forms, & some say a third [in the Son and the holy Ghost] were it seems proposed against Athanasius in the Councel of Antioch, An. Dom. 34, and by men of severall perswa∣sions used in the Church of Antioch, as a character, by which , they exprest their several opinions, saith Zozomen. l. 3. c. 19. & l. 4. 27. & by so doing, , every one applied the Psalm or hymn (to the end of which, as now with us, it was, it seems, then annext) to his opinion. In which narration of Philostorgius, we have no reason to suspect any thing, but the , that Fla∣vianus was the first that sang it, wherein his favor with the Arrians might make him partial, or the truth might be, he was the first that sang it at An∣tioch, for there Athanasius was in a Councel condemn'd, & so still the form might in other places be used more anciently. This first verse being on this occasion brought into the Church as a testimony, and pillar of the Catho∣lick veritie against the Arrians, and annext by ancient custome to the end of the Psalms in the Liturgy, St Jerome, or some body before him, being moved by the noise of the Macedonians (who excepted against that part of it concerning the holy Ghost affirming that the Doctrine of the Divini∣tie of the holy Ghost was novell) is said to have been the Author of adding the other verse or line to the former, in opposition to them, As it was in the beginning, &c. to signifie this to be the ancient Catholick, no new private doctrine or opinion; and yet that it was very neer, if not as anci∣ent as the former may be guest by what Theodoret, l. 2. c. 24. saith of Le∣ontius Bishop of Antioch, that he was wont to say to himself the Arrian
Doxology so softly, that no word could be heard by him that stood next, but , for ever and ever, (the close of the second line) and this saith he, while Flavianus, who opposed him, was a Lay-man. And if this be a time wherein such Forms as these, (which besides giving glory to God, do secure and defend the Catholick Doctrine of the Trini∣ty against all ancient or modern Arrians and Macedonians) are ne∣cessarily to be cast out, as hinderances to growth and edification, sure the designe is onely to plant Heresies in the Church (to which alone that may prove impediment) but nothing else. Having said this, 'twill not be needfull to adde concerning the fourth head, more then onely the acknowledgement of my wonder and astonish∣ment, why the same calamity and tempest that carried away his lesser Creed, should also be able to raise so fierce a Torrent, as to drive and hurry with it three larger Creeds also, especially that not onely of the Nicene Fathers, but of the Apostles themselves; Against the matter of which I have not heard, that the Presbyterians have any objection, and sure the Beads-mans Divinity, that turns the Creed into a Prayer, hath not concluded the use of it to be a restinting of the Spirit. What the effect of this part of Reformation is likely to be, will not be heard to divine, even Barbarisme and Atheisme within a while, the turning God and Christ, and all the Articles of the Creed out of mens brains also, and not (as yet it is) onely out of their hearts; what is the necessitie of doing it, will not so easily be resolved even by him that hath imbibed the Assem∣blers principles, unlesse it be to gratifie the Separatists, who are profest deniers of one Article, that of the Holy Catholick Church, resolving the end and the effect of the Holy Ghosts descent to have been onely to con∣stitute particular Congregations, and none else. As for the great pattern of the Presbyterians, the practice of Geneva, or Scotland, that appears by Knocks Common Prayer Book, to have allowed a set form of Confession of Faith, and designed it for the publick use as the first thing in that Booke of Prayers, though the truth is, the Apostles, or other ancient Creeds being set aside, one of the Geneva forming is fain to supply the place of them, which yet by the setting the severall parts of the Apostles Creed in the margent, both there and in the order of Baptisme, appears rather to be an interpretation of it, and so still the Separatists must be the onely men in the Church fit to be considered, or else apparently there is no such Po∣liticall necessitie of this neither. For the fifth thing, the so frequent repetition of the Lords Prayer, and Prayers for the King in our Service, this account may be briefly given of it. For the former, that in our Common-Prayer Book, there be severall Ser∣vices
for severall occasions, of the Sacraments, &c. for severall dayes, as the Letany, for severall times in the day, not onely Morning and Evening but one part to be said earlier in the morning, and then toward noone a re∣turn to another part, (as the ancient Primitives had three Services in a forenoon, 1. that for the Catechumeni, consisting of Prayers, Psalms, and Readings; then a 2. for the Penitents, such as our Letany; and a 3. for the Fideles, the Faithfull, our Communion Service;) and even that which is assigned to one time so discontinued by Psalms, and Hymnes, and Lessons, that it becomes in a manner two Services, clearly two times of Prayer. Now our Saviour commanding, when you pray, say our Father; we have accordingly so assigned it, to be once repeated in every such part of Ser∣vice, and I remember to have heard one of the gravest and most reverend men of the Assembly, being asked his opinion about the use of the Lords Prayer, to have answer'd to this purpose, God forbid that I should ever be upon my knees in Prayer, and rise up without adding Christs form to my imperfect petitions. And whereas this Directory is so bountifull, as to re∣commend this Praier to be used in the Praiers of the Church, and yet so wary as but to recommend it, it is thereby confest that it is lawfull to re∣tain a set Form, (for that is surely so; and then the often using of a law∣full thing will not make it unlawfull) but withall that Christs com∣mand in point of his Service shall no more oblige to obedience, then the commands of men, for if it did, this would be more then recommended. And now why that which may, say they, commendably (must, say we, necessarily in obedience to Christ) be used in the Prayers of the Church, and being repeated oftner then once, shall be usefull to him who was not come at the first saying, or may be said more attentively by him who had before been too negligent, should be necessary to be used but once, when all mens zeal or understanding of so divine a Forme, or perhaps presence at that part of the Service, shall not necessarily go along with it, I leave to more subtle Diuiners to instruct us. This I am sure of, that God hath made a peculiar promise to importunity in Prayer, to a coming often to him on the same errand, and Luk. 18. 5. by a phrase in the Pa∣rable seems to say, that he that comes oft to God in this manner, will at length force him to shame, if he do not grant his Petition, for that is the meaning of . And from thence the Fathers use a bold phrase in their Liturgies, , I put thee to shame, i. e. im∣portune thee, Basil. in Liturg: and in the Psaltery of the Greek Church, which hath many Prayers mixt with it, , unlesse thy own goodnesse put thee to shame, &c. Now that this will not be subject to the censure of vain repetitions, Mat. 6. 7. which
is the onely exception made against it, if the example of David, Psal. 136. be not sufficient to authorize the repeating any Form often, which is as faultlesse as that was) might largely be evidenced, 1. by the nature of the word , there used, which both Hesychius and Suidas apply to another matter, and explain it by , and , and  long, idle, unseasonable forms, such as Battus used in his , his long-winded Hymns so full of Tautologies, which Munster therefore rendreth  do not multi∣ply words, unprofitably or unseasonably. 2. by the customes of the Hea∣thens which Christ there referres to [, use not, &c. as the Heathens] and which are evident in their writers, espe∣cially their Tragedians; where 'tis plain, that their manner was to sound, or chant for many houres together, some few empty words to the honour of their Gods, such the  in their Bacchanals, from the noise of which they were call'd Evantes; such in Sophocles, , &c. and especially in the Virgins Chorus of Aeschylus's Tragedy, called . Where there are near an hundred verses, made up of meer Tautologies, , and an enumeration of the severall names of the Gods with unsignificant noises added to them, , and within two verses the same again, and much more of the same stile. Two notable examples of this Heathenish custome the Scripture affords us, one, 1. Kings 18. 26. where the Prophets of Baal from morning till noon, cry O Baal, hear us, and it follows, they cryed with a loud voice, and cut themselves.  ac∣cording to their custome or rites (that loud crying the same words so long together was as much a heathenish rite, as the cutting of themselves,) The other of Ephesians Acts 19. 34. who are affirm'd to have cryed with one voice for two houres space, , Great is Diana of the Ephesians, and 3. by the designed end that Christ observes of that hea∣then custome, 1. that they may be heard by that long noise, for which E∣lias scoes them, 1. Kings 18. 27. Cry aloud, perhaps your God is a talk∣ing, or a pursuing, &c. 2. that their Petitions may be more intelligible to their Gods, to which Christ opposes, your heavenly Father knoweth what you have need of, and so needs not your Tautologies to explain them to him. Much more might be said for the explaining of that mistaken place, but that it would seem unnecessary to this matter, the exception be∣ing so causlesse, that the Vindication would passe for an extravagance. Of the Prayers for the King, the account will not be much unlike, S. Paul commands that prayers, & supplications, and intercessions, & thanks∣givings be made for Kings, &c. 1. Tim. 2. 1, 2. where though the mention
of those severall sorts of prayers, signified by those foure words, might be matter of apology, for the making severall addresses to God for Kings in one service, supposing them proportioned to those sorts in that text, yet have we distributed the frequent prayers for him into the severall services, one solemn prayer for him, in the ordinary daily service, (and onely a versicle before as it were prooemiall to it) another in the Letany, ano∣ther after the Commandments) on which though our book hath two forms together, yet both the Rubrick and Custome, gives us authority to interpret, it was not meant that both should be said at once, but either of the two chosen by the Minister,) another before the Communion, where the necessity of the matter, being designed for the Church militant, makes it more then seasonable to descend to our particular Church, and the King the supream of it; just as Herodotus relates the custome of the Persians, l. 1. p. 52. , they pray for all the Persians, particularly for the King. To this practice of ours so grounded in the Apostle, we shall adde, 1. the reward promised (by the Apostles intimation) to such Prayers (if not, as I conceive, by those words, that we may live a peaceable and quiet life, &c. that peaceable and quiet life, of all blessings the greatest, seeming to be a benefit or do∣native promised to the faithfull discharge of that duty, of praying, and supplicating, and interceding, and giving thanks for Kings, yet certainly somewhat else) in that high Declaration made concerning it in the next words, for this is good and acceptable before God our Saviour, whose acceptation is reward sufficient to any action, and yet who never accept but rewards also. 2. The practise of the ancient Christians, set down by Tertull. Sacrificamus pro salute Imperatoris purâ prece: our prayers are Ad S. cap. 2. Apol. cap. 30. sent up a pure sacrifice for the prosperity of the Emperour. And that quo∣ties conveniebant, in another place, at every meeting or service of the Church, & precantes semper pro omnibus Imperatoribus, vitam prolixam, Imperium securum, domum tutam, exercitus fortes, Senatum fidelem, populum probum, Orbem quietum, quaecunque hominis & Caesaris vot sunt: praying alwayes for the Emperours, and begging of God for them, long life, secure Reign, the safety of his house, couragious Armies, a faith∣full Senate, a good people, a quiet world, all those severals, (which would make up more prayers then our book hath assigned) all that either a Man or King they can stand in need of; and so Athengoras and others to the same purpose, especially when they have occasion to justifie the fide∣lity of Christians to their unchristian Emperours, having no surer evidence to give of that, then the frequency of their prayers for them, which they which think necessary to abridge, or supersede, must give us leave by that
indication to judge of somewhat else, by occasion of that topick to observe their other demonstrations of disloyalty to those that are set over them by God; And to any that are not guilty of that crime, nor yet of another, of thinking all length of the publick service unsupportable, I shall referre it to be judged, whether it be necessary, that the King be prayed for in the Church, no oftner then there is a Sermon there. 6. The Communion of Saints, (which if it were no Article in our Creed, ought yet to be laid up, as one of the Christians tasks or du∣ties) consists in that mutuall exchange of charitie and all seasonable ef∣fects of it, between all parts of the Church, that triumphant in heaven, Christ and the Saints there, and this on earth militant; which he that disclaims, by that one act of insolence, casts off one of the noblest priviledges, of which this earth is capable, to be a fellow citizen with the Saints, and a fellow member with Christ himself. The effects of this charity on their parts is, in Christs intercession, and in the Saints suffra∣ges, and dayly prayers to God for us; but on our part thanksgivings and commemorations, which 'tis apparent the Primitive Christians used, ve∣ry early solemnizing the day of Christs resurrection, &c. and rehear∣sing the names of the Saints out of their Diptycks, in time of the offer∣tory before the Sacrament; besides this so solemn a Christian duty, an∣other act of charity there is, which the Church ows to her living sonnes the educating of them in the presence of good examples, and setting a remark of honour on all which have lived Christianly, especially have died in testimony of the truth of that profession; and again, a great part of the New Testament, being story of the lives of Christ and his Apo∣stles, (and the rest but doctrine agreeable to what those lives expressed) it must needs be an excellent compendium of that book, and a most use∣full way of infusing it into the understanding, and preserving it in the memory of the people, to assigne proper portions of Scripture in Lessons, Epistles, and Gospels to every day, every Sunday, every Festivall in the yeare (which are none in our Church, but for the remembrance of Christ, and the Scripture-Saints) to infuse by those degrees all necessary Christian knowledge, and duties into us, the use of which to the igno∣rant is so great, that it may well be feared, that when the Festivals, and solemnities for the birth of Christ, and his other famous passages of life and death, and resurrection and ascension, & mission of the holy Ghost, and the Lessons Gospels (and Collects) and Sermons upon them, be turn'd out of the Church, together with the Creeds also, 'twill not be in the power of weekly Sermons on some head of Religion to keep up the know∣ledge of Christ in mens hearts, a thing it seems observ'd by the Casuists,
who use to make the number of those things that are necessariò credenda; necessary to be believed, no more, then the Festivals of Christ make known to men: and sure by the ancient Fathers whose Preaching was generally on the Gospels for the day; as apears by their Sermons de tempore, and their postils. To all these ends are all these Festivals, and these Services de∣signed by the Church, (and to no other that is capable of any the least brand of novell or superstitious) and till all this antidote shall be demon∣strated to be turned poyson, all these wholesome designes, to be perfectly noxious, till ill or no examples, uncharitablenesse, schismaticall cutting our selves off from being fellow members with the Saints, and even with Christ our head, till ingratitude, ignorance, and Atheisme it self, be cano∣nized for Christian and Saint-like, and the onely things tending to edifi∣cation in a Church, there will hardly appear any so much as politick ne∣cessity to turn these out of it, 7. For the reading of the Commandments, and prayer before, and the responses after each of them, though it be not anciently to be found in the Church, as a part of the Service, (but onely retained in the Catechisme) till King Edwards second Liturgie, (and therefore sure no charge of Po∣pery to be affixt on it) yet seemeth it to me a very profitable part of devo∣tion, being made use of as it ought. The Priest after a premised prayer for grace to love and keep Gods Commandments, is appointed to stand and read every of the Commandments distinctly to the people, as a kind of Moses, bringing them from God to them; These are they to receive in the humblest affection of heart, and posture of body, as means to try and exa∣mine themselves, and to humble themselves in a sense of their severall fail∣ings, and thereupon implore (every one for himself, and for others, even for the whole Kingdome) first Gods mercy for pardon for all that hath been committed against the letter of each Commandment, or what ever Christ, and the Gospel hath set down under any, or reducible to any of those heads. 2. Grace to perform for the time to come, what ever may be ac∣ceptable to Christ in that particular. This being thus distinctly and lei∣surely done to each perticular precept, the heart enlarging to every par∣ticular under that, proves an excellent form of confession of sinnes, and of resolution (and prayer for strength) to forsake them. And let me tell you were Gods pardon thus ervently and often called for by each humble soul in a Kingdome, for every mans personall, and the whole Kingdome Nationall sinnes, the Atheisme speculative and practicall, the impiety, iu∣fidelity, want of love and fear, and worship of God, &c. in the first Com∣mandment, and so throughout all the rest, and the grace of God, to work all the contrary graces in every heart, in the heart of the whole Kingdome,
as humbly and heartily invoked, the benefit would certainly be so great and so illustrious, that none but Satan, who is to be dethroned, and part with his kingdome by that means, would ever deem it necessary to cast out this part of Service, and have nothing at all in exchange for it. 8. For the order of the Offertory, it must first be observed, that in the Primitive Apostolick Church, the Offertory was a considerable part of the action, in the administring and receiving the Sacrament; the manner of it was thus. At their meetings for divine service, every man as he was able brought something along with him, bread, or wine, the fruits of the Season &c. of this, part was used for the Sacrament, the rest kept to furnish a common table for all the brethren (and therefore in Ignatius, , to celebrate the Feast, is to administer that Sacrament, being joyn'd there with the mention of Baptisme) Rich and Poore to eat together, no one taking precedence of other, or challenging a greater part to himself by reason of his bringing more; this is discernable in Saint Pauls words, chiding the Corinthians for their defaults in this matter, 1 Cor. 11. 21. every man, saith he, takes and eats before another his own supper, (i. e,) the Rich that brought more, eats that which he brought; , as if he were at home eating his own private meal, without respect to the nature of those , which were a common meale for all, and so while one is filled to the full, some others have little or nothing to eat, which is the meaning of that which follows, one is hungry, and another is drunk∣en; after the  ceased, and the bringing of the fruits of the season, which were as a kind of first-fruit offering, was out-dated, whether by Canon of the Church, or by contrary custome, this manner was still con∣tinued, that every receiver brought somewhat with him to offer, particu∣larly bread, and wine mixt with water. Justin Mart, Apol. 2. p. 97. sets down the manner of it clearly in his time, , &c. the bread and wine of the brethren, i. e. Communicants is brought to the Priest or Prefect; (not as in the Latine interpreter reads Praefecto fratrum, as if  were to be joyned with , which belongs to ) and he receiving it gives lad and praise unto God, in the name of the Son and the Holy Ghost, and all the people ioyn in the Amen, then do the Deacons distribute that , the bread, over which he hath thus given thanks, and then, saith he, over & above the richer sort and every one as he shall think good contributes, & that which is so raised is left with the Priest, who out of that stock succors the Orphan & Widow, and becomes a common provider for all that are in want. This clearely di∣stinguisheth two parts of the Offertory, one designed for the use of all the Faithfull in the Sacrament, another reserved for the use of the poore, the
former called , Oblations, in the Councell of Laodicea. the other , in that of Gangra, and proportionably, the reposicory for the first called Sacrarium in the fourth Councell of Carthage, Can. 93. (and by Possidonius in the life of S Augustine, Secretarium unde altari necessari inferuntur, where those things are laid, and from whence fetcht, which are necessary to the Altar) the other Gazophylacium or treasury, the first St. Cyprian calls Sacrificia, sacrifices. the second Eleemosynae, Almes, l. de op. & Eleem. parallel to those which we find both together mentioned, Act. 24. 17. I came to bring almes to my Nation and offerings. This saith Ju∣stin Dial. cum Tryph. p. 260. Martyr, is our Christian Sacrifice, which will more appear to him that considers that the feasting of the people, their partaking of the Sacri∣fice, having their  and , was alwaies annexed to sacrifices both among Jews and Heathens, which the Apostle calls partaking of the Al∣tar, and consequently that the Sacrifice, and the feast together, the sacrifice in the offertory, the feast in the eating and drinking there, do compleat and make up the whole businesse of this Sacrament, as farre as the people are concerned in it; and all this blest by the Priest, and God blest and praised by Priest and People, and so the title of Eucharist belongs to it. Thus after Justin: Irenaeus. The Offertory of the Christians is accounted  l L. c. 34. pure sacrifice with God as when St Paul, saith he, mentions the acts of th Philippians liberality, he calls them , an acceptable sacrifi (and so Heb. 3. 16. to do good and to Communicate forget not, such acts  liberality to those that want for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased and presently defines what this Sacrifice was, primitiae earum quae sunt ∣jus creaturarum, the first fruits of God's creatures, So Tertullian, modicas Apol. c. 39. unusquis{que} stipem menstruâ die adponit, every one brings somewhat ever month, just parallel to our Offertory at monthly Communions; Much more might be said of this out of ancient Constitutions and Canons, if't were no for my desire of brevity. Effectually St Cyprian, Locuples & dives es,  De op. & Eleemos. p. 180. dominicam celebrare te credis, & corbonam non respicis, qui in domini∣cum sine sacrificio venis, qui partem de sacrificio quod Pauper obtulit ∣mis? Art thou rich & thinkst thou receivest as thou oughtst, & respecte not the Corban, feedest on the poore mens Sacrifice, and bringst none  self? and St Aug. to the same purpose; and 'tis worth observing that ma Serm. de temp. 215. authorities, which the Papists produce for the externall Sacrifice of the b¦dy of Christ in the Masse, are but the detortion and disguising of thos places which belong to the Offertory of the People, and in the Canon of th Masse that prayer which is used for the offering up of Christ, (laded with so many crosses) plainly betraies it self to have been first instituted by rela∣tion to these gifts and oblations, as appears by the mention of Abels Sa∣crifice,
and Melchizedecks offering (that of Abels the fruit of the Earth, Melchizedecks a present onely of Bread and Wine to Abraham) and the per quem haec omnia semper bonacreas (by whom thou createst all these good things) which belongs evidently to the fruits of the Earth, but is by them now most ridiculously applied to the body of Christ. I have been thus large in shewing the originall of the Offertory, because it hath in all ages been counted a speciall part of divine worship, the third part of the Christian Holocaust, saith Aquinas, 2a, 2ae. q. 85. art. 3. ad 2. the observation of which is yet alive in our Liturgy (I would it had a more chearfull uni∣versall reception in our practice) especially if that be true which Honorius saith, that instead of the antient oblation of Bread and Wine, the offering of money was by consent receiv'd into the Church in memory of the pence in Judas's ail. Now that this offering of Christians to God for pious and charitable uses, designed to them who are his Proxies and Deputy recei∣vers, may be the more liberally and withall more solemnly performed, many portions of Scripture are by the Liturgy designed to be read to stir up and quicken this bounty, and those of three sorts, some belonging to good works in generall, others to alms-deeds, others to oblations, and when it is received and brought to the Priest, he humbly prayes God to accept those alms, and this is it which I call the service of the Offertory, so valued and esteemed among all Antients, but wholly omitted in this Directory (onely a casuall naming of a Collection for the poore by way of a sage caution, that it be so ordered, that no part of the publick worship be there∣by hindred upon what grounds of policy or pretence of necessity, I know not, unlesse out of that great fear let works of charity (which the Apostle calls an acceptable sacrifice, and with which God is well pleased) should passe for any part of the service or worship of God, which after praying to him is an act that hath the greatest remark, and highest character set upon it & when it is thus in the Offertory, is accounted pars cultūs a part of worship, say the School-men. And beside, where it is used, as it ought proves of excellent benefit (when prudent faithfull officers have the dis∣pensing of it) toward the supplying and preventing the wants of all, , the Minister is thereby enabled to be the guardian of all that are in want, saith Justin M. Apol, 2. and sure necessi∣ty hath little or no law or reason in it, when the rejecting of such cu∣stomes as these proves the onely necessary. 9. For private Baptism, that which our Liturgy prescribes is, that all possible care be taken, that all Children that are to be Baptized be brought to Church, and not without great cause and necessity Baptized at home in their houses. And yet when great need shal compel them so to do, then an
order of administring it is prescribed, such as in case the Childe die, it may not be deprived of the Sacrament, and in case it live, it may, as publickly be presented, and with Prayer received into the Church, and pronounced to be baptized already, which is equivalent as if it had been baptized in the publick. The clear confest ground of this practice is the desire of the Church not to be wanting to any the meanest creature, in allowing it that which Christ hath given it right to, and to encourage and satisfie the cha∣ritable desires of Parents, which in danger of instant death require it for them. This ground seems clearly to be acknowledg'd by the Compilers of this Directory pag. 41. where'tis affirmed, that the posterity of the Faithfull born within the Church, have by their birth (not by their li∣ving to the next Lords Day, or till they can be brought to Church) in∣terest in the Covenant and right to the seale of it, which sure is Baptisme) and then what necessitie there is, that they that are acknowledg'd to have right to that seal, should yet not be permitted to have it, (as in case pri∣vate Baptisme be excluded, some of them infallibly shall not) I professe my understanding too short to reach: And as ignorant I must confesse to be also, why, when they come to the Congregation, it should be utterly unlawfull for them to be Baptized in the place where Fonts have hither∣to been placed, i. e. near the doore of the Church, as the Directory appoints; A new scandalous piece it seems of Popery, and Superstition, (which is as dangerous as private Baptisme, and therefore with it together forbidden) and yet very ancient, and farre from any superstitious inent; Baptisme being at first in any convenient pond or river, as the Gospel, and after that Just. Martyr, tells us: and is noted by the word , which is Apol. 2. in fine. literally, to dope over head in the water, and by the word , a swimming or diving place, by which the Fathers expresse the Font. But when Churches were built, then there was an erection also of Bap∣tisteria, at first without, but after within the Churches, and those placed near the , or Porch of the Church, on no other designe undoubtedly, then to signifie the Sacrament there celebrated to be a rite of initiation or entrance into the Church, (as the Chancell or upper part of the Church was assigned unto the other Sacrament to signifie it to be∣long to those onely that were come to some perfection) against which 'tis not possible any thing should be objected of unfitnesse, but that the Mi∣nisters voyce will not in some Churches so easily be heard by the whole Congregation, which if it may not be helpt, by raising his voyce at that time, will not yet infuse any Popery or Superstition into it, the charge that is here so heavily laid on it, (as well as that of unfitnesse) of which if it be guilty, Superstition is become a strange ubiquitary, ready to fly and af∣fix
it self to any thing they will have it, and shall as justly be fastened by me on their negative, or prohibition of Baptisme in that place [it is not to be administred in the places where Fonts, &c.] as upon our positive ap∣pointing it. For sure if a significant rite, or designation of place, &c. with∣out any other guilt, then that it is so, be superstitious; an unsignificant in∣terdiction of it will be as much; and if the positive superstition be to be condemned, the negative must be so also. 10. For the prescript form of Catechisme, it is placed by our Church in our Liturgie, and as fit to be placed there as any directions for Preaching can be in theirs, (which takes up so great a part in their Religion, and consequently in their Directory) the previous instruction of youth being so much more necessary then that, as a foundation is then any part of the superstructure, that being necessary to the end onely, but this over and above necessary to make capable of the other necessary. Of this particular Catechisme I might say somewhat, which would be worthy to be obser∣ved in these times, how much Christian prudence the Church hath shewed in it, in setting down for all to learn, onely those few things which are necessary to the plainest and meanest, for the direction of Christian faith and practice; and if we would all keep our selves within that modera∣tion, and propose no larger Catalogue of credenda to be believed by all then the Apostles Creed, as 'tis explained in our Catechisme, doth pro∣pose, and lay the greater weight upon consideration and performance of the vow of Baptisme, and all the commands of God as they are explained (and so the obligation, to obedience enlarged) by Christ, and then one∣ly adde the explication of the nature and use of the Sacraments, in those most commodious and intelligible expressions (and none other) which are there set down, I should be confident there would be lesse hating and damning one another (which is most ordinary for opinions) more piety and charity, and so true Christianity among Christians and Protestants, then hitherto hath been met with. But seeing, though this be fit to be said, yet 'tis unnecessary in this place, this Catechisme being not put in ballance with any other way of instructing youth in the Directory, but onely sold or cast away for nought, and no money, nothing taken or of∣fered in exchange for it, I am superseded from this, and onely left to won∣der why Catechising of Children in the faith and knowledge of their vowed duty (which I hope is no stinting of their Spirits) should be one of those burthens which 'tis so necessary should be thrown off, and not so much as considered in this Directory. 11. For Confirmation, which (being a thing wherein the Bishop is a party, will, I must expect, be matter of some envy and odium but to name
it, and) being so long and so scandalously neglected in this Kingdome (though the rule have also been severe and carefull in requiring it) will now not so easily be digested, having those vulgar prejudices against it, yet must I most solemnly professe my opinion of it, That it is a most an∣cient Christian custome, tending very much to edification, Which I shall make good by giving you this view of the manner of it. It is this, that eve∣ry Rector of any Parish, or Curate of charge, should by a familiar way of Catechizing instruct the youth of both sexes within his Cure in the prin∣ciples of Religion, so farre, that every one of them before the usuall time of coming to the Lords Supper, should be able to understand the particu∣lars of the vow made in Baptisme for the credenda and facienda yea and fugienda also, what must be believed, what done, and what forsaken; and be able to give an intelligent account of every one of these, which being done, every such Child so prepared, ought to be brought to the Bishop for Confirmation. Wherein the intent is, that every such Child attained to years of understanding shall singly and solemnly before God, the Bishop and the whole Congregation, with his own mouth, and his own consent take upon himself the obligation to that, which his Godfathers and God mothers in Baptisme promised in his name, and before all those reve∣rend witnesses, make a firm, publick, renued promise, that by Gods help he will faithfully endeavour to discharge that obligation in every poi of it, and persevere in it all the dayes of his life. Which resolution and promise so heighrned with all those solemnities, will in any reason hav a mighty impression on the Child, and an influence on his actions fo ever after. And this being thus performed by him, the Bishop shall seve∣rally impose his hands upon every such child (a Ceremony used to th purpose by Christ himself) and blsse, and pray for him, that now that th temptations of sinne, begin more strongly, in respect of his age, to assau him, he may receive grace and strength against all such temptations  assaults, by way of prevention and speciall assistance, without which ob∣tained by prayer from God, he will never be able to do it. This is th summe of Confirmation, and were it rightly observed (and no man ad∣mitted to the Lords Supper, that had not thus taken the Baptisme  from the Sureties into his own name, and no man after that suffered continue in the Church, which brake it wilfully, but turned out of th sacred courts, by the power of the keyes in excommunication) it would cer¦tainly prove, by the blessing of God there begged, a most effectuall mean to keep men, at least within some tearms of Christian civility, from fal¦ling into open enormous sinnes; and that the defaming and casting out this so blamelesse gainfull Order should be necessary or usefull to any p¦licy
save onely to defend the Devil from so great a blow, and to sustain and uphold his Kingdome, I never had yet any temptation or motive to suspect or imagine. Instead of considering any objections of the adversa∣ry, against this peice, whether of Apostolicall or Ecclesiasticall discipline (which I never heard with any colour produced) I shall rather expresse my most passionate wish unto my Friends, those who sincerely wish the good of this Nationall Church, that they will endeavour their utmost to revive these means of regaining the purity and exemplary lives of all its members, when God by restoring our Peace shall open a door for it. 12. For the Sclemnities of Buriall, as they are certainly uselesse to them who are dead, so are they not designed by us but to the benefit of the li∣ving in Lessons and Prayers upon those occasions, as also for the freeing us from the imputation of rudenesse and uncivility (which Christianity teaches no body) to those bodies which shall have their parts in the re∣surrection, and to their memories, which the obligation of kindred, friend∣ship, at least the common band of Christianity, make precious to us; and that it should be necessary, and tend to edification, not to pray such season∣able Prayers, hear, and impresse upon our hearts such seasonable Lessons, (at a time when they are exemplified before our eyes, and our hearts be∣ing softned with mourning, are become more malleable) to perform such laudable Christian Civilities, onely for fear we should (not pray but) be thought to pray to or for them, over whom, or near whose hearse, or by or toward whom we thus pray (which that we do not, our Prayers that then we use, are ready to testifie) is another unreasonable, able to evidence the power of prejudice and faction to any that is not sufficiently convinced of it. 13. For that of thanksgiving after Childbirth, as it may be acknow∣ledged, to be taken up in proportion to, or imitation of Purification a∣mong the Jews, so is it not thereby lyable to any charge of evil; For here∣in is a marvellous mistake among men, to think that because the continu∣ing of circumcision was so forbidden by S. Paul, Gal. 5. 2. therefore it should be unlawfull for any Christian church, to institute any usage which had ever been commanded the Jews. For the reasons which made the re∣taining of circumcision so dangerous, will not be of any force against other customes of the Jews, as 1. that it was prest by the Judaizing Chri∣stians, as necessary to justification, Gal. 5. 4. which is in effect the disclaiming of Christ or of any profit, v. 2. or effect, v. 4. by him, a falling from grace, & renouncing the Gospel. 2. That it was contrary to that liberty or manu∣mission from the Judaicall Law which Christ had purchased, v. 13. to have circumcision imposed as a law of Gods still obligatory, when Christ by his
death hath cancelled it. 3. That some carnall professots, which thought by this means to escape the opposition, and persecution, which then fol∣lowed the doctrine of Christ, and profession of Christianity, did much boast that they put themselves and their Disciples in a course to void the crosse, c. 6. 12. which is the meaning of that, v. 13. that they may glory in your flesh, i. e. in your being circumcised, as that is by Saint Paul opposed to glorying in the Crosse, v. 14. i. e. the persecution that followed profession of the Gospel, as c. 5. 11. he mentions it as the onely reason of his being per∣secuted, that he would not Preach Circumcision: agreeable to which is that of Ignatius in Ep. ad Magnes. , &c. If we till now live according to the Law of the Jews & circumcision of the flesh, we deny that we have received grace, for the divinest Prophets lived accord∣ing to Jesus Christ, and , for doing so were persecuted: which they that desired to avoid, and therefore would be circumcised, or Preach cir∣cumcision, those are the men S. Paul so quarrels with, as those that would not suffer for Christs sake, that were not much in love with that Crosse of his. To which a fourth reason may also be added, that many of the Cere∣monies of the Law did presignifie the future Messias, and the teaching the necessity of such observances as nor yet abolisht, is the professing Christ not to be the Messias. All which notwithstanding, it still remains very possi∣ble, that a rite formerly commanded the Jews, not as significative of the future Messias; but as decent in the worship of God, without any depend∣ing on it for justisication, without any opinion that the Jewish Law obliges us, & without any fear of being persecuted by the Jews, or consequent com∣pliance with them, may now be prescribed by the Christian Church meer∣ly as a humane institution, judging that decent or usefull new, which was so then, & in this case if nothing else can be objected against it, save onely that God once thought fit to prescribe it to his own People, there will be little fear of danger in, or fault to be found with any such usage. For it is an or∣dinary observation which Paulus Fagius in his Notes on the Targum (a most learned Protestant) first suggested to me, that many of the Jewish Ce∣remonies were imitated by Christ himself under the Gospel. I might shew it you in the Apostles, who were answerable to the  the missi or messengers among the Jews, and were by Christ our High-Priest sent a∣broad to all Nations to bring in (that peculium, which of all others he counted most his due, having paid so dear for it) sinners to their Saviour, as they were among the Jews sent by the High-Priest to ferch in the dues to the Temple. So also the imposition of hands, a form of benediction a∣mong the Jews, as ancient as Jacob himself, Gen. 48. 14. In blessing Josephs sonnes, and is often used by Christ to that same purpose. And even the two
Sacraments are of this nature, Baptisme related to the , washings used by them at the initiating or admitting of Proselytes, & Christs taking bread, & giving thanks, &c. after Supper (wherein the other Sacrament was first instituted) was directly the postcoenium, among the Jews, not a peculiar part of the Passeover Feast, but a Ceremony after all Feasts, very usuall among them. So the word , from the Assemblies civill or facred among the Jews, is made use of to signifie the Christian Church, which Christ was to gather together. So the Lords day one day in seven, proportionably to their Sabbath. So , Elders among the Jews are brought by the Apostler to signifie an Order in the Church & , Colleges of many of them together, called by Ignatius,  sacred Societies, , Counsellers & Assi∣stants of the Bishops; & his , in Ep. ad Trall: are parallel to the San∣bedrim or Councell of Elders that were joyned to Moses in his govern∣ment, to facilitate: the burthen to him. The same may be said of the Dea∣cons which were an imitation of the  the Treasurer or Steward a∣mong them, & consequently the place, where the goods which they were to distribute were kept, is parallel to their , the treasury, & so the Bishop also, saith Grotius, is a transcript of the  the head of the Congregation. And the Patriarchs among Christians are taken from the heads of the Tribes among them, called ordinarily by the 72,  and in the Testament  Adde unto these the Christia Censure of Excommunication answerable to their  (whether it were from sacred or onely from civill Assemblies among them it mat∣ters little, for the civill among them may be accommodated to Ecclesia∣sticall among Christians, as in some of the fore-mentioned is acknowled∣ged, and as the word , which signifies primarily any kind of As∣sembly, & is so taken, Matth. 6. 5. is appropriated to a place of divine wor∣ship in other places) and the severall degrees of it in the Christian Church, answerable to their Niddui, Cherem, and Schammatha; And so for Absolution also. All this I have said, and might adde much more to make the demand appear no unreasonable one, that it may be lawfull for the Church to use a custome, which hath some resemblance of some Cere∣mony in sorce anciently among the Jews, viz. that of the Purification of Women in our Churching. Which objection being removed there will re∣main no other, and then that it should be simply unlawfull or unedifing, to take notice of the deliverance of each Woman, or to pay acknowledge∣ment to God for it, and necessary to set up such Schools of ingratitude in the Church, is more then ingenucus nature will suffer any Christian to believe, upon the bare authority of these Assemblers.
14. The Cummunion of the sick, if it be superstition & Popery also, (as sure is implyed by the no mention of it at the visitation of the sick in the Directory) 'tis sure of a very long standing in the Church; the Canons of the Councels about the Lapsi and Excommunicate, that generally take care that they should have the Peace of the Church in extremis (answer∣able to our Absolution at that time) and if with expressions of penitent hearts they desire it; the Sacrament also, are evidences so clear of this cu∣stome, that I shall not need produce any testimonies; those that are moved with the practice of Antiquity being sufficiently furnisht with them; If any may be unsatisfied in this, let him read the famous story of the dying Srapion in Eusebius, l. 6. c. 36. And that it should be necessarie to the edification of that Church, that this viaticum, (as the Fathers call'd it) should be denied every hungring and thirsting traveller at that time when it might yield him most comfort, and our charity most inclines us to allow it him, nay that the Church should be thought to suffer by that in any eminent manner (if it were ill) which is done privately onely to some particular, (and order taken that all publickly should be warned to re∣ceive the Communion frequently in the Church, and so not want it on the bed, or trouble the Minister then for it) and consequently the Church perhaps never hear of it, this is again a new kind of necessity, to be fetcht from some under-ground Fundamentall Laws of I know not whose lay∣ing, that the Christian Church never heard of till these times. 15. As for the Service of the Commination, fitted for the first day of Lent; which by denuntiations against particular sinnes under the Law, (ap∣pointed to be read to, and attested by the people, with an Amen of ac∣knowledgement, that every such offender is by the Law cursed, not of Prayer that he may be so dealt with in Gods justice) is designed to bring men to humiliation & contrition for sin, the speciall duty of that day and the ensuing season, and closeth with most affectionate prayers for such penitents; it is matter of some panick sencelesse fears to some ignorant men (which are very tender and passionate friends to their beloved sins, and dare not subscribe to the condemnation of them) but very usefull to awake even those and all others out of this security, as a Feaver to cure the Lethargick, to kindle a fire about mens ears, that they may see their danger, and make out to the use of all Christian means of repentance and devotion, and laying hold on Christ to avert it; and if such a bug-bear as that of being thought to curse our selves and freind, in the saying Amen to the threatnings (which will be true to all impenitents whether we say or no) be sufficient to exercize such an exorcist, to cast out of the Church such a powerfull means of bringing sinners to repentance,
or if bare prejudice of the Assemblers without either hearing or objecting against it, be enough to make it necessary to be left out of our service, the Devill will never be in danger from his enemies, as long as he may have but the spell of the Directory to put them thus to flight for him. Lastly, for the observation of Lent, &c. if they be consider'd in gene∣rall as Fasts, there will sure be no necessity to renounce them; the Jews had their Fasts as well as Feasts (and those set publick, not onely volun∣tary private Fasts) and not onely that great day of Expiation appointed by God himself, but occasionall ones appointed by men, and yet, when appointed, as constantly observ'd as that other, the Fast of the fourth moneth, of the fifth, of the seventh, and of the tenth moneth. Zach. 8. 19. and under Christianity, though in the time of Christs presence with the Disciples, they fasted not, yet the fasting of Johns Disciples, nay the twice a week of the Pharisees themselves is not (though mentioned yet) reprehended, but implicitely approved by Christ, and of his own saith he, they should not have that immunity long, The dayes should come when the Bridegroome should be taken away (and that is ever since Christs Ascension) and then shall they fast in those dayes. 'Twere ea∣sie to iustifie this through the writings, and by the practice of the whole Church of God till these dayes of  and  let loose, till these dayes of animosities and Epicurisme, have made the usage of Fasts by Pa∣pists, a command to us not to use them, and concluded the abating any thing of our gluttony to be an intrenchment on our Christian Liberty, and both those deceits together quarrell'd all Christian times of fasting out of our practice first, then out of our Kalendar. This being said in generall of fasting, the application of this to these fast of the Church, will be indisputably satisfactory to any, that shall but consider the oc∣casions of each of them, of the Lenten-fast, the known fourty dayes ex∣ample of abstinence in Christ, whereupon saith St. Jerome, Ʋnam qua∣dragesimam Epist. 54. ad Mar∣cella. sec. traditionem Apostolorum, &c. jeunamus: We fast the Lent according to the tradition of the Apostles. And Epiphanius joyns with him to make the Lent fast an Apostolicall tradition, & others of the Ancients concurring for the practice of it, if not so punctuall for the tra∣dition, St, Basil may speak for all in hom. 2. of fasting, that there was no age, nor place, but knew it, and observed it. And then I know no necessity of despising Christs pattern, & Apostolicall practice, unlesse it be the same which obliges to the destroying of Episcopacy (which as it is an imparity opposite to the equality of Presbyters, is clearly deducible from both those Authorities, to which it seems this yeer is resolved to prove fat all;) that so there may be at length as little imitation of Christ among us, as reverence
to Apostles. Then for Rgation week, though the originall or occasion of that cannot be deduced so high, but is by Historians referred to Claud. Mamertus Bishop of Vienn in France, for the averting of some Judge∣ments, which on the observation of many inauspicious accidents and pro∣digies were sadly scared to be approaching, yet will it not be Necessary to turn the Fasts, or the Ltanies, or the Services assigned to it out of the Church, as long as dangers are either present, impendent, or possible, or in∣deed as long as there be sins enough among us to abode us ill, or provoke any wrath of Heaven, any judgements on us; And when all those occa∣sions cease, I am content those Services may be laid aside also, i. e. when we meet all together in Heaven. Next, the Ember weeks are of great An∣tiquity in the Church, called the quatuor tempora in the latin Fathers,  (from whence I conceive in the English Ember) in the Greek, and (beside the first institution of them for quarterly seasons of devotion, pro∣portion'd to each part of the year, as the first fruits of every season, that the whole, and each division of it might be blest by it, and again beside their answerablenesse to those foure times of solemn Fast mention'd a∣mong the Jews, that we Christians may not be inferiour unto them in that duty) an admirable use is assign'd to them in the Church, in imita∣tion of the Apostles, Act. 13. 3. by Fasting and Prayer to prepare for the ordination of Ministers immediately consequent to every such week, that God would send, and furnish worthy Instruments of his glory to serve him in that glorious Office, and till Ministers are acknowledg'd to be generally so good, that either they cannot or need not be better, till those are also grown immortall (as the framers of this Ordinance) and so no use of care for succession. I shall suppose it not over-necessary to pre∣cipitate these out of the Church of Christ, but rather wish that there were in our Liturgie some Service appointed of Lessons and Prayers for this purpose, to be used constantly on the dayes of Fast through those weeks. Thus have I, as briefly as I could; examined all the pretended exube∣rances of our Liturgie, which have required it thus to be more then lan∣ced even to a deliquium animae, to many fainting fits a long while, and at last to its fatall period, if our Assemblers may be allowed of the Jury, and this Ordinance have leave to be the executioner; And as yet to the utmost of our impartiall thoughts can we not discern the least degree of necessity, of any the most moderate signification of the word, to own so tragicall an Exit. The leafs which have been spent in this search, as it may seem unnecessarily, might perhaps have been better employed; Yet will it not be unreasonable to expect a expect a favourable reception of them, when 'tis considered, that by this means a farther labour is spared, there needing
no farther answer to the whole body of the Directory, or any part of it when it shall thus appear, that there was no necessity for the change, nay (which I conceive hath all along been concluded) that the continuance of the Liturgy, unlesse some better offer or bargain were proposed to us, is still in all policy, in all secular or Christian prudence most necessary. And therefore when we have considered the second particular in the Ordinance, and to that annext a view of some severalls in the Preface, the Readers task will be at an end, and his patience freed from the en∣tation of our importunity. The second thing then in the Ordinance is, that all the severals which this Ordinance is set to confront, are Statutes of Edward the sixth, and of Queen Elizabeth, all which are without more ado repealed by this Ordinance; which I mention not as new acts of boldnesse, which now we can be at leasure to declaim or wonder at, but to justifie the calum∣niated Sons of this Church, who were for a long time offered up malici∣ously to the peoples hatred and fury, first as Illegall usurpers, and adders to Law, then as Popishly affected, and the pattern of Queen Elizabeths time vouched to the confirming of this their Charge, and the Erection of her very Picture in some Churches, and solemnization of a day for her annuall remembrance, (by those who will not now allow any Saint, or even Christ himself the like favour) design'd to upbraid those wayes and reprove those thoughts. It seemeth now 'tis a season for these men to tra∣verse the scene, to put off disguises, and professe openly and confidently, what till now they have been carefull to conceal, that their garnishing the Scpulchre of Q. Elizabeth was no argument that they were cordial∣ly of her Religion or meant kindnesse sincerely to the Q. Elizabeths re∣formation. Some seeds we know there were of the present practices trans∣mitted hither from our neighbour Disciplinarians in the dales of Q. Eli∣zabeth, and some high attempts in private zeal in Hacket, and Coppin∣ger, and Arthington, at one time, which when God suffered not to pros∣per, it was the wisdom of others to call phrensie and madnes in those un∣dertakers. And generally that is the difference of fate between wickednes prospering and miscarrying, the one passeth for Piety, the other for Fury. I shall now not affirm, (or judge my Brethren) but meekly ask this que∣stion, and leave every mans own conscience to answer (not me, but) him∣self in it sincerely, and without partiality, whether if he had lived in the dayes of Q. Elizabeth, and had had his present perswasions about him, and the same encouragements and grounds of hope, that he might prosper and go through with his designes, he would not then in the matter of Religion have done just the same, which now he hath given his Vote, and
taken up Arms to do. If he say, out of the uprightnesse of his heart, he would not, I shall then onely ask why it is done now, what ill Planet hath made that poyson now, which was then wholsome food, why Queen Elizabeths Statutes should be now repealed, which were then so lauda∣ble? If any intervenient provocation, or any thing else extrinsecall to the matter it self have made this change now necessary, this will be great injustice in the Actors. Or if the examples of severity in her dayes, (the hanging of Coppin and Thacker, An. 1513. at S. Edmundsbury, for pub∣lishing Browns book, (saith Camden) which (saith Stow p. 1174.) was written against the Common Prayer book) might then restrain those that were contrary minded, I know no reason why the Laws by which that was done, should not still continue to restrain; or at least why Consci∣ence should not be as powerfull as Fear. From all this I shall now take confidence to conclude, that were there not many earlier testimonies to confirm it, this one Ordinance would convince the most seducible mista∣ker of these two sad truths. 1. That the preservation of Laws, so long and so speciously insisted on was but an artifice of designe to gain so much either of authority to their Persons, or of power and force into their hands, as might enable them to subvert and abolish the most wholsome Laws of the Kingdom, and in the mean time to accuse others falsly of that, which it was not their innocence, but their discretion, not their want of will, but of opportunity, that they were not really, and truly, and perfectly guilty of themselves, that so they may most compleatly own and observe the principles by which they move, and transcribe that practice, which hath been constant∣ly used by the Presbyterian, (wheresoever they have appear'd) to pretend their care and zeal to liberty, that by that means they may get into power (like Absalom a passionate friend to justice, when he had an itch to be King; or like Doces in Herodotus. , his ambition of Magistracy made him content to be just) when as soon as they attain, they inclose, and tyrannically make use of to the enthralling and enslaving all others; Even Laws themselves, the onely Bounds and Bulwarks of Liberty, which alone can secure it from servitude on one side, and licentiousnesse on the other, (which very licentiousnesse is the surest way to servitude, the licentiousnesse of one implying the oppression and captivity of some other, and being it self in a just weighing of things the greatest . Epist. ad Polycarp. Ignatio ad∣scripto. slavery as much as the mans own unruly passions are greater ty∣rants then laws, or lawful Princes) are to be levell'd in their Jehu-march, to be accused and found at last the onely guilty things, and the same cala∣mity
designed to involve the pretended Enemies of Laws and the Laws themselves. The second truth that this unhappy Ordinance hath taught us, is that which a while ago had been a Revelation of a Mystery indeed, which would without any other auxiliary have infallibly quencht this flame (which now like another Aetna and Vesuvius is gotten into the bowels of this Kingdome, and is there likely to rage for ever, if it be not asswa∣ged from Heaven, or determin'd through want of matter, by having de∣voured all that is combustible) but now is a pretty vulgar observation, that hath no influence or impression on any man, and therefore I scarce now think it worthy the repeating; and yet to conclude this period fairly, I shall; 'tis onely this, That the framers of this Ordinance, that have so long fought for the defence of the establisht. Protestant Religion, will not have the Peace, unlesse they may be allowed liberty to cast off and repeal every of those Statutes, that of the second and third of Edward the sixth, that of the fifth and sixth of the same King, that of the first of Queen Elzabeth, that of the fifth, that of the eighth of the same Queen, (though not all at once, yet as far as concerns the matter in hand, by which you may be assured, that the fragments of those Statutes which remain yet unabolished, are but reserved for some other opportunity, as ready for a second and third sacrifice, as thus much of them was for this), by which the Protestant Religion stands established in this Kingdome, and in which the whole work of Reformation is consummate. And all this upon no higher pretence of Reason, then onely a Resolution to do so, a not being advised by their Divines to the contrary, and (to coun∣tenance the weaknesse of those two motives) a proostesse scandalous mention, or bare naming of manifold inconveniences, which might as reasonably be made the Excuse of Robbing, and Murthering, and Damning (as far as an Ordinance would reach) all men but themselves, as of abolishing this Litugio, Lord lay not this ix to their Charge.
CHAP. II. THe Preface to the Directory, being the Oratour to perswade all men to be content with this grand and sudden change, to lay down with patience and aequanimity, all their right which they had in the venerable Liturgie of the Church of England, and account themselves richly rewarded, for doing so, by this new framed Directory, begins speciously enough, by seeming to lay down the onely P. 1. reasons, why our Ancestors a hundred years ago, at the first Reformati∣on of Religion, were not onely content, but rejoyced also in the Book of Common-Prdyer, at that time set forth; But these reasons are set down with some partiality, there being some other more weighty grounds of the Reformers framing, and others rejoycing in that Book, then those ne∣gative ones which that preface mentions, viz, the perfect reformation wrought upon the former Liturgie, the perfect conformity of it with, and composure out of the Word of God, the excellent orders prescribed, & bene∣fit to be reaped from the use of that Book, & the no manner of reall objecti∣on, or exception of any weight against it; All which if they had been men∣tioned, as in all justice they ought (especially when you report not your own judgements of it but the judgements of those rejoycers of that age, who have left upon record those reasons of their rejoycing) this Preface had soon been ended, or else proved in that first part, an answer or confu∣tation of all that follows. But 'tis the manner of men now adayes, to con∣ceal all that may not tend to their advantage to be taken notice of, (a practice reproached by honest Cicero, in his books of offices of life, in the story of the Alexandrian ship-man, that went to relieve Rhodes, & out∣going the rest of his follows, sold his Corn at so much more gain, by that infamous artifice though not of lying yet of concealing the mention of the Fleet that was coming after) and to cut off the locks of that Samp∣son whom they mean to bind, pare and circumcise the claws of that crea∣ture they are to combate with; I mean to set out that cause, and those arguments at the weakest, to which they are to give satisfaction. And yet by the way, I must confesse, that even these weak arguments which they have named, are to me of some moment, as first, The redresse of many things, which were vain, erroneous, superstitious, and Idolatrous, which argues that all is not now involv'd under any of those titles, nor conse∣quently to be abolisht, but further reform'd onely. 2. That they which did this, were wise and pious, which they that were, would never take pains to purge that which was all drosse, their wisdome would have
helpt them to discern that it was so, and their piety oblige them to reject it altogether, and not to save one hoof, when all was due to the common slaughter. 3. That many godly and learned men rejoyced much in the Liturgie, which argues that all was not to be detested, unlesse either these men now be somewhat higher then Godly or Learned, of that middle sort of rationals, that Iamblichus out of Aristotle speaks of, betwixt God, and Man, the , or unlesse it be confest that many Godly and Learn∣ed men may be mistaken in a matter of this moment, and then these may be also mistaken at this time. Having therefore made use of that artifice, mention'd some generall slight grounds of mens approving and rejoycing in the new formed Litur∣gie, the Composers of that Preface, I mean speedily to weigh them down, with a heap of contrary sad matter, and then to leave it to the Readers judgement, whether they are not his friends, thus to disabuse him, and his silly good-natur'd ancestors, that were thus slightly flat∣ter'd into a good opinion of an inconvenient, if not mischievous Litur∣gie. Great hast is therefore made, and some arts and preparations used, to work upon the affection more then judgement of the Reader, and this is done by that Rhetoricall pathetick stroke [Howbeit, long and sad expe∣rience hath made it manifest] Words of some consideration and efficacy, P. 2. but that they have one weak part in them, an infirmity that this age is very subject to, that of causlesse and groundlesse calumny. For how long soever, and to murmurers, and passionate lovers of news and change, how irksome and tedious soever the experience of this Liturgie hath been, 'tis notoriously certain that it hath not been sad, save onely again to those evill eyes; but on the other side, a continuall float and tide of joy to all true English men, to see and observe the prosperity and flourishing of this Church, in a perpetuall swelling and growth, ever since the esta∣blishing of that Protestant Liturgie and Religion together among us, till at last (about the time when this vast calamity brake in upon us) it was grown to such an height, as was certainly never heard of (or by Ene∣mies themselves affirmed at any other time to have been) in this King∣dom, or (were it not a little like boasting, to which yet you have constrain'd us, I should adde) in any other part of Europe also for these many hun∣dred yeers. But what is it that this so falsly supposed sad experience hath made ma∣nifest? Why, that the Liturgie used in the Church of England (notwithstand∣ing the pains and Religious intentions of the Compilers of it) hath prov'd an of∣fence, not onely to many of the Godly at home, but also to the Reformed Churches abroad.
In which words we shall not take advantage of the Confession of the Religious intentions of the Compilers of our Liturgie, which signifies the offence here spoken of in their notion of it to be acceptum, non datum, taken when it was not given; nor 2. Oppose those religious intentions to the irre∣ligious mistakes of others, and accusations of those things which were so religiously intended; nor. 3. Compare the reputations of those Per∣sons which compiled that Liturgie, whether in King Edwards (Cranmer, Ridly, P. Martyr) or in Queen Elizabeths dayes (Parker, Grindall, Horn, Whitchead, &c.) with the Members of this Assembly, much lesse the intenti∣ons of them, which in the mouth of Enemies is acknowledged religious, with the intentions of these, which if we may measure by their more visible enterprizes, and the Covenant in which they have associated con∣trary to all Laws of God and men, we shall have temptation to suspect not guilty of over-much Religion; or good purpose to the government of this Kingdom; nor 4. confront the number of those others that are here confest to be pleased and benefited, against those others that are said to be offended, which were argument enough for thatwhich is established, that considering the danger of change, it ought in all reason rather to stand to please one sort, and benefit them still, then to be pull'd down to comply with the other. But we shall confine our selves to that which the objectors principally designed as a first reason for which our Liturgie must be destroyed, because, forsooth, say they, it hath prov'd an ffence, &c. For the through examining of which reason, it will be necessary to en∣quire into these three things: 1. What they mean by offence: 2. What truth there is in the assertion, that the Liturgie hath prov'd so to the Godly at home, and to the Reformed Churches abroad: 3. How far that might be a reason of destroying that which proves an offence. For the first, the word Offence is an equivocall mistaken word, and by that means is many times a title of a charge or accusation, when there is no reall crime under it; For sometimes in our English language especi∣ally, it is taken for that which any body is displeased or angry at, and then if the thing be not ill in it self, that anger is a causelesse anger, which he that is guilty of, must know to be a sin, and humble himself before God for it, and fail into it no more, and then there need no more be said of such offences, but that he that is or hath been angry at the Liturgie, must prove the Liturgie to be really ill, (which if it could be done here, the matter of Offence would never have been charged on it, for that is set to supply the place of a greater accusation) or else confesse himself, or those others so offended, to have sinned by such anger. But then 2. If we may guesse of the meaning of the word by the reason which is brought
to prove the charge [For not to speak, &c.] it is set here to signifie, 1 The burthen of reading all the Prayers; 2. The many unprofitable burthensome Ce∣remonies, which hath occasion'd mischiefby disquieting the Consciences of those that cocld not yeeld to them, and by depriving them of the Ordinances of God, which they may not enjoy without conforming or subscribing to those Ceremonies. To proceed then to the second thing, what truth there is in this Asser∣tion, and view it in the severals of the proof. For the first of these, the burthen of reading the Prayers; if they were enough to prove the Liturgie offensive, all Christian vertues would be in∣volv'd in that charge, because they have all some burthen and difficul∣tie in them, and for this particular, seeing we speak to Christians, we might hope that the Service would not passe for a burthen to the Godly (who are here named) i. e. to minds truly devout, if it were longer then it is: and that it may not do so, I am sure it is very prudently framed with as much variety, and as moderate length of each part, as could be imagined, and sure he that shall compare the practices, will find the burthen and length both to Minister and People to be as great, by obser∣ving the prescriptions in the Directory, in the shortest manner, as this that our Liturgie hath designed. 3. For the many unprofitable burthensome Cere∣monies. Every of those Epithets is a calumny; for 1. They are not many, To the People I am sure, For kneeling and standing which are the onely Ceremonies in the daily Service, will not make up that number (and for the rest, there is but a superaddition of some one in each Service.) As for sitting bare, if reason it self will not prescribe that civility to be paid to God in the House of God, (where without any positive precept, Jacob put off his shooes from off his feet) neither doth our Liturgie prescribe it. 2 They are not unprofitable, but each of them tending to advance the businesse towhich they are annext, kneeling to increase our humility, and joyn the body with the soul in that duty of adoration, standing to elevate and again to joyn with the soul in Confession of God and Thanksgiving, and the rest proportion'd to the businesse in hand; and 3. If not many, not unproffi∣able, then not burthensome also. As for the disquieting the Conscience of many godly Ministers and People, who could not yeeld to the Ceremonies; I answer, that by what hath formerly been said, and the no-objection in this Directorie against any such, it appears that thereis no Ceremonie ap∣pointed in our Liturgie which is improper or impertinent to the action, to which it is annext, much lesse in it selfe unlawfull. And then for mans Con∣sciences to be disquieted, it argues that they have not, in that manner, as they ought, desired information; as for Ministers, we know that all that have been received into that Order, have voluntarily su scribed to them,
and consequently have receded from their own subscription, if they have after refused to conform. And we desire to know what tender respect will be had to the Consciences of those, who shall submit to your Directory, and afterward refuse to conform unto it. I am sure the denuntiations which we have heard of against the dissenting Brethren, about the matter of Jurisdiction and Censures (and now lately concerning the depravers of your Directory) have been none of the mildest, although those are your own fellow-Members, that have assisted you as affectionately in the grand Cause as any, and never made themselves liable to your severi∣tie, by having once conformed to you in those particulars. And so 3. For depriving them of the ordinances of God, &c. if that were the punishment appointed for the obstinate and refractory, 'tis no more then the Laws of the Land appointed for their Portion, and in that sure not without any example in Scripture and Apostolicall practice, who appointed such per∣verse Persons to be avoided, which is a censure as high as any hath been here on such inflicted. What Ordinances they were of which such men were deprived, I conceive is specified by the next words, that sundry good Chri∣stians have been by means thereof kept from the Lords table, which must needs refer to those that would not kneel there, and why that should be so unreasonable, when the very Directory layes the matter so, that none shall receive with them who do not fit, there will be little ground, un∣lesse it be that no posture in the Service of God can be offensive, but one∣ly that of kneeling, which indeed hath had the very ill luck by Socinus, in his Tract De Coenâ Domini, to be turn'd out of the Church as Idolo∣latricall (with whom to affirm the same will be as great a complyance, as kneeling can be with the Papists.) And by these as superstitious at least, I know not for what guilt, except that of too much humility, as being in M. Archer his Divinitie, as before I intimated, a betraying of one of the greatest comforts in the Sacrament, the sitting fellow Kings with Christ in his earthly Kingdom, confessing thereby that some mens hearts are so set on that earthly Kingdom, that the hope of an Heavenly Kingdom, will not yeeld them comfort, unlesse they may have that other in the way to it; and withall telling us, that he and his Compeers are those men. Having survey'd these severalls, and shewed how injustly the charge of Offence is laid on the Lyturgie, and how little 'tis prov'd by these reasons, I shall onely adde, that the proposition pretended to be thus proved by these particulars, is much larger then the proofs can be imagined to extend. For part of the proposition was, that the Litur∣gie was offence to the Reformed Churches abroad, To which the [For] is
immediately annext, as if it introduced some proofe of that also. But 'tis apparent, that the proofes specified inferre not that, for neither the burthen of reading is offence to them, nor are their Consciences disquieted, nor they deprived of Gods ordinances by that means. In which respect 'tis necessary for us to conclude, that the word Offence, as applyed to them nor are their consciences disquieted, nor they deprived of Gods ordinance by that meanes. In which respect 'tis necessary for us to conclude, that the word Offence, as applyed to them, is taken in that other notion, that they are displeased and angry at it. To which we then must answer, that although there is no guilt inferred from the undergoing this fate of being disliked by some, but rather that it is to be deemed an ill indication to be spoken well of by all, yet have we never heard of any Forrreigne Church which hath exprest any such offence; the utmost that can be said, is (and yet not so much as that is here suggested) that some particular men have exprest such dislike; to whom we could easily oppose the judgement of others more eminent among them who have largely exprest their ap∣probation of it. And 'tis observable, that Calvin himselfe, when from Frank fort he had received an odious malitious account of many parti∣culars in our Liturgy (as any will acknowledge that shall compare the report then made, with what he finds) though he were so far transport∣ed as to call them ineptias follies, yet addes the Epithet of tolerabiles, that though such, they were yet tolerable. And therefore In the third place, I may now conclude, that if all that is thus af∣firm'd to prove the Offence in the Liturgie, used in the Church of England were (after all this evidence of the contrary) supposed true, yet is it no argument to infer the justice of the present designe which is not reform∣ing, but abolishing both of that and all other Liturgie. Were the Offence in the length of the Service, that length might be reform'd, and yet Liturgie remain; were there Offence in the Ceremonies, or mischief in the punishing them that have not conformed, those Ceremonies might be left free, that Conformity be not thus prest, and still Liturgie be preserved inviolate. As for the forreign Churches, 1. I shall demand, whether onely some are thus offended, or all. Not all, for some of the wisest in these Churches have commended it; and if some onely, then it seems others are not of∣fended, and why must we be so partiall, as to offend and displease some, that we may escape the offending others? not sure because we more esteme the judgements of the latter, for by the Apostles rule the weaker men are, the more care must be taken, that they be not offended. 2 I shall suppose that their Liturgie, or their having none at all, may possibly of∣fend us, and then demand why they shall not be as much obliged to
change for the satisfying of us, as we of them? I am ashamed to presse this illogicall discourse too far, which sure never foresaw such exami∣nation, being meant onely to give the People a formall specious shew for what is done, a heap of popular Arguments, which have of late gotten away all the custome from Demonstrations, and then, Si populus vult deci∣pi, decipiatur if the tame Creature will thus be taken, any fallacy, or Topicke doth as well for the turn, as if Euclid had demonstrated it. In pursuit of this popular Argument it follows, that by this means, i. e. P. 3.of the Liturgie, divers able and faithfull Ministers were debarred from the exer∣cise of their Ministery, and spoiled of their livelyhood to the undoing of them and their Families. To which I answer. 1. That if this be true, it is very strange that so few of this present Assembly were of that number. For of them I may surely say many, very many in proportion, were not debarred of the exercise of their Ministery, were not despoyled of their livelyhood, &c. And if any one was, which I professe I know not, I beleeve it will be found, that the standing of Liturgie, brought not those inflictions upon him. The conclusion from hence will be, that either these present Assem∣blers concurred not in judgement with those many able and faithful Mini∣sters, (and then why do they now bring their Arguments from them, whose judgement they did not approve and follow?) or else that they were not so valiant, as to appear when fufferings expected them, or else that they had a very happy Rainbowe hanging over their heads to avert from them that common storme. But then secondly, It might be consider∣ed, whether those mentioned penalties have not been legaelly, and by Act of Parliament, inflicted on those who suffered under them, and then whe∣ther that will be ground sufficient to abolish a Law, because by force thereof some men that offended against it have been punished. Thirdly, whether somemen did not choose non conformitie as the more instrumental to the exercise of their Ministry, changing one Parish for the whole dio∣cesse and Preaching oftner in private Families then any other did in the Church, and withall, whether this had not the encouragement of being the more gainfall trade, of bringing in larger Pensions then formerly they had receiv'd Tithes. Fourthly, whether the punishments inflicted on such, have not generally been inferiour to the rignor of the Statute, and not executed on any who have not been very unpeaceable, and then whe∣ther unpeaceable persons would not go neer to fall under some mulcts, what ever the Form of Government, what ever the Church Service were, none having the promise of inheriting , the Land of Canaan, an happy prosperous life in this world, but they whose meeknesse and obedi∣ence to Laws have given them a claim to that priviledge. Fifthly; whe∣ther
the number of those, who by Ordinances have lately been so debarred of the exercise their Ministry, and spoiled of their livelyhood, have not been far greater then all those together, that ever the Liturgie thus offended since the Reformation. Sixthly, whether this Directory, should it be esta∣blisht, would not be so imposed, that they which obey it not, shall be sub∣ject to these or the like penalties. 'Tis added in the next place to raise the cry, and encrease the Odium, P. 3.and to involve the Prelates and the Liturgie in the same calamity, (for otherwise what hath the Prelates labouring, &c. to do with the Liturgie) That the Prelates and their Faction have laboured to raise the estimation of the Liturgie to such an height, as if there were no other worship, or way of worship of God among us, but onely the Service-book, to the great hindrance of the Preach∣ing the Word. To which I answer, 1. That this or any other action of the Prelates, if supposed never so true, and never so extravagant, is wholly extrinsecall and impertinent to the businesse of the Liturgy, and the more impertinent, by how much the more extravagant, such actions being easily coerced, and reduced by and according to the rule, and such unreason∣able enhaunsments separable, without any wound or violence to the Liturgie. Give the Liturgie its due, not its usurped estimation, and we are all agreed. 2. 'Tis here acknowledged that this was but laboured, not affirmed that it was effected, and then this sure is too heavy a doom on the Liturgie, for that their labouring; we do not find that St Paul was stroke dead, like Herod, because the Lycaonians meant and laboured to do sacrifice unto him. Act. 14. 16. But then 3. he that shall consider who they are which make this objection, will sure never be moved by it. For cer∣tainly they that have formerly set the prime of their wits and endea∣vours to vilifie and defame the Liturgie; and now that they think they have power, have absolutely abolisht it, will go neer to be partiall when they are to judge of the due estimation of it; they that declaim at Bishops for advancing it, will they be just and take notice of their own con∣tempts, which enforced the Bishops thus to rescue and vindicate it? I shall not expect it from them, nor, till then, that they will deliver any more then popular shews of truth in this matter. For 4. the Prelates have not raised the book to an higher estimation then the Law hath raised it, that is, that it may be observed so as may most tend to edification, nor do we now desire any greater height of value for it, then you for the Dire∣ctorie, I shall adde, nor so great neither, for we do not exclude all other as unlawfull, as you have done, and then I am confident God will not lay that charge on us, which you do on the Prelates, nor any man that shall consider how different our titles are, though our claims not proportion'd
to them. A peice of modesty and moderation which we challenge you to transcribe from us. 5. All this all this while is a meer Calumny, if by the Service Book is meant the use of the prayers in the Liturgie, for no Prelate ever affirm'd, or is known to have thought, that there is no other way of worship of God, but that among us. But then 6ly, We adde that this way of publick prayer by set Form, the onely one establisht by Law, (and so sure to be esteem'd by us before any other) is also in many respects the most convenient for Publick worship, of which affirmation we shall offer you no other proof or testimony, then what Mr. Calvin, whom before we named, hath given us in his Epistle to the Protector, in these words, Quod ad formulam, &c. As for Forms of Prayers, and Ecclesiasticall Rites, I very much approve, that it be set or certain. From which it may not be lawfull for the Pastors in their Function to depart, that so there may be provision made for the simplicity and unskilfulnesse of some, and that the consent of all the Churches among them∣selves may more certainly appear: and lastly also, that the extravagant levity of some, who affect novelties, may be prevented. So probable was my conjecture, that at first I interposed, that the men that had here imposed upon their fellows so far, as to conclude the abolition of Liturgie necessary, were those that undertook to reform Geneva as well as England, to chastise Calvins estimation of it, as well as that of our Prelates. As for that pompous close, that this hath been to the great hindrance of the P. 3. Preaching of the Word, and to the justling it out as unnecessary, or at est inferiour to the reading of Common-Prayer. I answer, 1. That the Liturgie, or the just estimation of it, is perfectly uncapable of this charge, it being so far from hindring, that it requires the Preaching of the Word, assignes the place where the Sermon shall come in, hath Prayers for a blessing upon it. 2. That if any where Sermons have been neglected, it hath not been through any default either of the length or estimation of the Liturgie, for these two, if Faction and Schisme did not set them at oddes, would very friendly and peaceably dwell together, and each tend much to the proficiencie and gain which might arise from either; Prayers would prepare us to hear as we ought, i. e. to practice also; and Sermons might incite and stir up the languishing devotion, and enliven and animate it with zeal and fervencie in Prayer. And constantly the more we esteemed the Ordinance, and set our selves to the discharge of the dutie of Prayer, the more should we pro∣fit by Sermons which were thus received into an honest heart thus fitted, and made capable of impression by Prayer. These two may therefore live like Abraham and Lot, and why should there be any wrangling or controversie betwixt thy Heards-men and my Heards-men? But seeing it is made a season of complaining, I answer, 3. That it is on the other side most notorious,
that in many places the Sermon hath justled out the Common Prayers, and upon such a provocation, (and onely to prevent the like partiality or oppression) it may be just now to adde, that as long as the Liturgy con∣tinues in its legall possession in this Church, there is no other legall way (as that signifies, commanded by Law) of the publick worship of God among us, and although that voluntary Prayer of the Minister before Sermon, when it is used, is a part of the worship of God, (as all Prayer is) yet is it not prescribed by the Law, nor consequently can it without usurpation cut short or take away any part of that time which is by that assigned to the Liturgie; the free will offerings, though permitted must not supplant the daily prescribed oblations, the Corban must not excuse the not honour∣ing of Parents, the customes which are tolerated must not evacuate or su∣persede the precepts of the Church. As for Sermons, which in this period seem the onely thing that is here opposed to Liturgie; I hope they do not undertake to be as eminent a part of the worship of God among us as Prayer. If they do, I must lesse blame the poore ignorant people, that when they have heard a Sermon or two think they have served God for all that day or week, nor the generality of those seduced ones, who place so great a part of Pietie in hearing, and think so much the more comfortably of themselves from the number of the houres spent in that Exercise, which hath of late been the onely businesse of the Church, (which was by God instil'd the House of Prayer) & the Liturgie at most used but as Musick to entertain the Auditors till the Actors be attired, and the Seats be full, and it be time for the Scene to enter. This if it were true, would avow and justifie that plea in the Gospel [Lord open unto us, for thou hast taught in our streets] i. e. we have heard thee Preach among us. Which sure Christ would not so have defamed with an [I will say unto them, go you cursed &c.] if it had been the prime part of his worship to be such hearers; the consideration of that place will give us a right notion of this businesse, and 'tis this, that hearing of Sermons, or what else ap∣pointed by the Church for our instruction, is a duty of every Christian prescribed in order to practice or good life, to which knowledge is neces∣sarily preparative, and so, like many others, actus imperatus, an act com∣manded by Religion; but so far from being it self an immediate or elicite act of worship precisely or abstractly, as it is hearing, that unlesse that proportionable practice attend it, 'tis but an aggravation and accumulati∣on of our guilts, the blessednesse not belonging to the hearing, but the [and keeping the word of God] & the go you Cursed, to none more then to those, that hear and say, but do not: and for the title of worship of God, whether outward or inward outwardly exprest, orall Prayer certainly, &
adoration of God is the thing to which that most specially belongs, as may appear, Psal. 95. 6. where that of worshipping is attended, with fal∣ling down and kneeling before the Lord our maker. And even your Di∣rectory, though it speak extream high of Preaching the Word, yet doth not it stile it any part of Gods worship, as it doth the reading the word of God in the Congregation, p. 12. because indeed our manner of Preaching is but an humane thing, and the word of man. This I should not here have said, because I would be sure not to discourage any in the attending any Christian duty (and such I acknowledge hearing to be, and heartily exhort all my Fellow-Labourers in their severall Charges, to take heed to Doctrine, to Reproof, to Exhortation, to be as frequent and diligent in it, as the wants of their Charges require of them; and my fellow-Christians also, that they give heed to sound Doctrine, that they require the Law at the Priests mouth, as of a messenger of the Lord of hosts, & again to take heed how they hear) but , or impropriety of speech, that I say no more, that is in this matter discernible in the words of the Directorie, and the consequent dangers which experience hath forced us to observe in them, who place the worship of God especially in hearing, have extorted thus much from us, which may be usefull to give us a due valuation of Sermon and Prayer, the former as a duty of a Christian, the latter a duty too, and an elicite act, a prime speciall part of worship also. And whereas 'is added, that the Liturgie by many is made no better then an Idol, 1. That is a speech of great cunning, but withall of great unchari∣tablenesse: P. 4.cunning, in setting the words so cautiously thus, not an Idoll, but [no better then] (as they, that will rayl, but would not pay for it, whose fear doth moderate the petulancy of their spleen, and covetousnesse keep them from letting any thing fall that the Law may take hold of, are wont to do) and yet withall signifying as odiously as if it had been made an Idoll indeed. Whereas the plain literall sense of the words if it be taken, will be this, that an Idoll is not worse then our Common-Prayer Book is to many, or that it is used by many as ill as an Idol is wont to be used, which is then the most bitter peice of uncharitablenes, if not ground∣ed on certain knowledge, and that impossible to be had by others, as could be imagined. The truth is, this Directory hath now proved that there is a true sense of these words, the Compilers of which have demon∣strated themselves to be those many that have made our Liturgie no bet∣ter then an Idoll, have dealt with it as the good Kings did with the abomi∣nations of the Heathens, brake it in peices, ground it to powder, & thrown the dust of it into the Brook; for abolition is the plain sence for which that is the metaphor. But then a▪ 'Tis possible, the calme meaning of those
odious words is no more then this, that many have given this an estimati∣on higher then it deserves, If any such there be, I desire not to be their ad∣vocate, having to my task onely the vindication of it's just esteem; but yet cannot resist the temptation which prompts me to return to you, that some men ar neer the golden mean as the Assemblers, have said the like of Preaching, though not exprest it in so large a Declamatory figure; and I shall ask; whether you have not possibly given them some occasion to do so (as great perhaps as hath been given you to passe this sentence on on them) at least now confirmed them in so doing, by applying or ap∣propriating to the Preaching of the word (in the Modern notion of it, and as in your Directory it is distinguisht from reading of the Scriptures) the title which St Paul gives to the Gospel of Christ, saying, that it is the Power of God unto Salvation, and one of the greatest and most excellent works of the Ministry of the Gospel, p. 27, which former clause of power of Cod. &c. though it be most truly affirmed by S. Paul of their Preach∣ing the Gospel, and also truly applied or accommodated to that Preach∣ing or interpreting of Scripture, which is the , the due application of the Scripture rule to particular cases, yet is it not true in universum, of all that is now adayes call'd Preaching, much of that kind being , of a mortiferous poysonous savour, not to them that perish, but to the most Christian auditory it meets with; And that the railing of every Pulpit-Rabshakeh, the speaking evil of Dignities, &c. should be stiled the power of God to Salvation, I have little temptation to believe. And whe∣ther the latter clause be true also, I refer you to S. Aug. Ep. 108. ad Hono∣rat. where speaking of damages that come to the people by the absence of the Minister, and consequently of necessaria Ministeria, the speciall use∣full necessary acts of the Ministry, he names the Sacraments, and recei∣ving of Penitents, and giving of comfort to them, but mentions neither Praying nor Preaching in that place, I shall adde no more, but that some have on these, and the like grounds been tempted to say, that you idolize Preaching, because you attribute so much to any the worst kind of that, above what others have conceived to be its due proportion. And yet we hope you think not fit to abolish Preaching on that suggestion, and con∣sequently, that it will be as unjust to abolish Liturgy on the like, though it should be prov'd a true one, this being clearly the fault of Men, end not of Liturgy, as that even now of the Lycaonians and not of Paul, especially when the many, which are affirmed to have thus offended, by Idolizing the Liturgy, are said to be ignorant and superstitious, whose faults, & errors and imprudencies, if they may prove matter sufficient for such a sentence, may also rob us of all the treasures we have, of our Bibles & Souls also. For
thus hath the Gospel been used as a , or charm, and that is but little better then an Idol, and so have some persons been had in admira∣tion, and beleeved as if they were infallible, and so in a manner Idoliz'd also, and that this should be a capitall crime in them that were thus ad∣mired, would be a new peice of severitie, that few of Draco's Laws could parallel. The next charge (which is an appendant proof of this) is that the Peo∣ple pleasing themselves in their presence at that Service, and their Lip-labour P. 4. in bearing a part in it, have thereby hardned themselves in their ignorance, and carelesnesse of saving knowledge and true piety. To this I answer, 1. That 'tis no fault to be so pleased with presence at that service (the congregation of many Saints is to any a pleasing company) and therefore if it were immediate to, and inseparable from the Liturgy, would not be a charge against it, nor in any probability hinder but ad∣vance the desire, and acquisition of saving knowledge and true piety, which is there proposed to all that are present at the Liturgy. But if the phrase signifie being pleased with the bare presence, or the being present, and doing nothing of that they come for, as the lip. labour seems to denote the hard labour of the lip, and not joyning any zeal or intention of the heart, it is but then an uncharitable censure again, if it be not upon certain knowledge, and if it be, 'tis as incident to that order of the Directories pro∣posing, as to the Liturgy, One may please himself with a bare presence at Sermon, and either sleep it out, or think on some worldly matter; one, may say all or most of the Ministers Prayer after him, and sigh and groan at every period and satisfie himself that this is a gallant work of piety, but truly I would be unwilling to be he that should passe this censure on any whose heart I did not know (for sure it is not necessary that any man should leave his heart at home, when his body is present, or employ it on some thing else, when his lips are busied either in our Liturgy or that Di∣rectory prayer) nor, if I did so should I think that the Directories order for worship should be rejected for this fault of others, if there were nothing else to be said against it. As for the Peoples bearing a part in the Service, wch seems to refer to the responses, this hath had an account given of it already Onely in the whole period put together, this seems to be innuated, that the saving knowledge, and true piety, is no where to be had, but in those Sermons, which are not shered in with the Liturgy; which we shall not wonder at them for affirming, who have a long time thus perswaded the people, that all saving knowledge is to be had from them, and their complices, and blasted all others for carnal men, of which many discrimi∣native Characters were formerly given, as kneeling or praying at the time
of entrance into pue or pulpit; but now it seems the use of the Liturgy supplies the place of all, as being incompatible with saving knowledge and true piety. If this be true, that will be a very popular plausible argu∣ment I confesse, and therefore I shall oppose unto, that which I hope will not passe for boast either with God or Angels, that of the Sermons which have been Preacht since the Reformation in this Kingdom, and commended to the Presse and publick view, very few were Preacht by those that excluded the Liturgy out of the Churches, and that since this Directory came into use, and so made a visible discrimination among men there hath been as much saving knowledge, i. e, Orthodox doctrine, and exhortation to repentance, Prayer, Faith, Hope, and Love of God, Self∣deniall, and readinesse to take up the crosse, (duties toward God) and to Allegiance, Justice, Mercy, Peaceablenesse, Meeknesse, Charity even to Enemies, (and the rest of the duties toward man) to be heard in the Ser∣mons of those that retain the Liturgy, and as much obedience to those observable in the lives of those that frequent it, as is to be met with in the espousers of the Directory. If it be not thus, I confesse I shall have lit∣tle hope, that God will suffer such a jewel as the Liturgy is, to continue any longer among us so unprofitably, and yet if men were guilty of this fault also, and the Liturgy of the unhappinesse of having none but such Clients, yet would not this be sufficient authority for any men to abolish it, any more then it will be just to hang him who hath been unfortunate, or to make any mans infelicity his guilt. I beseech God to inflame all our hearts with that zeal, attention, fervency, which is due to that action of of Prayer in our Liturgy, and that cheerfull obedience to all that is taught us out of his Word, and then I am sure this argument or objection against our Liturgy will be answered, if as yet it be not. The next objection is the Papists boast, that our Book is a complyance with them in a great part of the Service, and so that they were not a lit∣tle confirm'd in their Superstition and Idolatry, &c. Where I shall 1. de∣mand, is there any Superstition or Idolatry in that part of the Service wherein we thus comply with them? if so, 'tis more then a complyance with Papists, 'tis in it self a down-right damning sin; and if there be not, but all that is Idolatrous or superstitious in their Service is reform'd in ours, then sure this will be far from confirming them in either of those, if they depend any thing upon our judgements or our cōplyance. 2. 'Tis a lit∣tle unreasonable, that they who will not believe the Papists in any thing else, should believe their boast against us, and think it an accusation suffi∣ciently proved, because they say it; whereas this affirmation of the Pa∣pists, if it be theirs, (and not the Assemblers rather imposed upon them)
is as grosse, though perhaps not as dangerous a falsity, as any one which the Assemblers have condemn'd in them. For 3. The truth is notorious, that our Reformers retain'd not any part of Popish-service, reformed their Breviry and Processionall, and Masse-book, as they did their Doctrine, retained nothing but what the Papists had received from purer Antiquity, and was as clear from the true charge of Popery, as any period in either Prayer or Sermon in the Directory; which argues our complyance with the ancient Church, and not with them; the very thing that Isaac Casaubon so admired in this Church of ours, the care of antiquity and purity, proclaiming every where in his Epistles to all his friends, that there was not any where else in the world the like to be found, nor ever hoped he to see it till he came into this Kingdom. And sure there is no Soloecisme in this, that we being a Reformed Church, should desire to have a Reformed Liturgy, which hath alwayes had such a consent and sympathy with the Church, that it will not be a causlesse fear, lest the a∣bolition of Liturgy as far as God in judgement permits it to extend, (the just punishment of them that have rejected it) be attended with the abo∣lition of the Church in time, and even of Christianity also. As for the confirming of Papists in their superstition by this means, I desire it be considered whether it be a probable accusation, viz. 1. Whe∣ther the rejecting that which the Papists have from antiquity, as well as what they have obtruded on, or superadded to it, be a more likely means to win them to hear us or reform themselves, then our retaining with them what they retain from Antiquity, i. e. whether a servant (much more whe∣ther a brother) that is reprehended as much for his diligence, as for his neglects, for his good and faithfull, as for his ill and false services, be more likely thereby to be enclined to mend his faults, then he that is seasonably and meekly reprov'd for his miscarriages onely? It was good advice in that ancient Epistle to Polycarpus, ascribed to S. Ignatius, , meeknesse is the best means to bring down the most pesti∣lent adversary, & the resemblance by which he expresse it as seasonable, , Fomentations are most proper to allay any ex∣asperation of humours. And 'tis Hippocrates advice, that the Physitian should never go abroad without some , lenitives or mollifying applications about him; It seems there was nothing of so daily approved use as those. And that will avow this method of complying with adversa∣ries, as far as w may, to be a probable & a wise, as wel as a Christiā course to bring them from their superstition, & not to confirm them in it. And a∣nother use there is wherein the Papists themselves confesse this cōpliance was politick, to take all scruple out of the heads & hearts of the people of
England, concerning the lawfulnesse of this Reformation, (This is the o∣pinion of the Papists exprest / in a Book call'd Babel and Jerusalem, or Monarcho-machia Protestantium, subscibed by P. D. M. but conceiv'd to be Patisons; p. 314.) that they might conceive, that the Service and Religion still continued the same, but was translated into English onely, for their hetter edification, and so, saith he,  was indeed very politickly handled. 2. Whether that which drives away all Papists from all kind communion or conversation with us, from all hearing of our Preaching or Doctrine, be more likely to work them over to our side, then that which permits them to come to our Churches with us. For this is noto∣riously known, that as our Liturgy now is, and was framed in Queen E∣lizabeths dayes, the Papists did for ten years together, at the beginning of her Reign, come to Church with us, and so continved, till the Popes ex∣cōmunicating the Queen and our Nation, made it so appear unlawfull for them. And perhaps but appear too, for an account might be given of this businesse, that it is no way unlawfull (by his own principles) to a Pa∣pist, remaining thus to come to our Churches, and be present at our Litur∣gy, and (if that be thought an objection or reproach against us, I shall then adde) not onely to ours, but to that Service which is performed according to the Directory also, the onely difference being, that if both by them were conceiv'd lawfull (as by mistake, I beleeve, in them neither now is) our Liturgy would be more likely to attract them, then the Directory; And this we conceive not such a fault as to offer any excuse for it, (for if S. Paul by being a Jew to the Jew, could hope to gain the Jew, why should not we (without being Papists to the Papists, but onely Christians in those things wherein they are so too) expect to gain the Papist also? For supposing this to be, as you call it a compliance with them, sure 'twere a more probable gaining way, then to denounce enmity to all, whom they ever converst with; I mean to the primitive Liturgies for no other crime, but because they made use of them, Who are best Diviners in this matter, they, or we, experience may perhaps hereafter prove. In the mean, I can∣not imagine but Liturgy and moderation, & charity, may be able to bring in as fair a shole of Proselytes, to convert as many Papists to us, or at least to confirm Protestants, as an Ordinance for Sequestration of all their goods, & Halter, & a Directory will be able to do, yea with an Ordināce for the ordinatiō of Ministers by meer Presbyters too, cal'd in to assist th And whereas 'tis added in that same Section, that the Papists were ve∣ry P. 4. much encouraged in that expectation, when upon the pretended war∣rantablenes of imposing of the former Ceremonies, new ones were daily ob∣truded upon the Church. 1. I demand an occasion of that phrase [pretended
warrantablenesse of imposing of Cerémonies.] May any Ceremonies be im∣posed or no? if they may, then an Act of Parliament may certainly do it, and such was that wch confirm'd our Liturgy, & so the warrantablenesse not pretended; if not, why then do you impose entring the Assembly not irreverently, p. 10. and taking their places without bowing? For that gene∣rall, and that negative is notation of some Ceremony, if it have any sence in it. The phrase [not irreverently] prescribes somé reverence, there being no middle between those two, & consequently the forbidding of the one being a prescription of the other. For I shall ask. Is keeping on the hat ir∣reverence at that time? If it be, then pulling it off, or not keeping it on is a Reverence then required; And if this be avoided by saying, that this is onely there directed, not cōmanded; I reply, that an Ordinance prefixt for the establishing that direction, requiring that what is there directed shall be used, amounts to a prescription. The same may be said of causing the man to take the woman by the right hand in marriage, in the Directory, wch is the prescribing of a Ceremony, as much as if the Ring had been ap∣pointed to be used there also. 2. I answer that we know not of any Cere∣monies wch have been obtruded or forced on any wch the Law hath not cōmanded, (or if there had, this had been nothing to the Liturgy, nor con∣sequently to be fetcht in as a part of a charge against it;) That of bowing at the entrance into the Church, is the most likely to be the Ceremony here spoken of, and yet that is neither a new one (never by any Law or Canon turn'd out at the Reformation, but onely not then imposed under any cō∣mand, and since disused in some places) nor yet was it lately imposed or obtruded on the Church, but on the other side in the Canon of the last so hated Convocation, (which alone could be said to deal with the Church in this matter) it was onely recōmended, and explained, and vindicated from all mistake, and then the practice of using of it left to every mans liberty, with the caution of the Apostle, that they that use it should not condemne thē that use it not, nor they that use it not, judge them that use it. 3. That the warrantablenesse of imposing the former Ceremonies was no means or occasion of obtruding new daily, but rather an hedge to keep off such obtrusion; for when it is resolved by Law, that such Ceremonies shall be used, 'tis the implicite intimation of that Law, that all other uncōmanded are left free, & that, without authority (as the word [daily] supposes the discourse here to mean) no other can be obtruded. For sure 'tis not the quality of Law to steal in illegall pressures, but to keep them out rather, to define and limit our Liberty, not to enthrall us, to set us bounds and rules of life, not to remove all such. But then 4. That it may appear of how many truths this period is composed (every one of them with the help of
one syllable a [not] set before the principall verb, able to become such) I shall adde that the very obtrusion of such Ceremonies, if they had been obtruded, would never have encouraged a rationall Papist to ex∣pect our return to them, but only have signified that we meant by com∣plying with them, as farre as it was lawfull, to leave them without ex∣cuse, if they did not do so too, comply with us in what they might, and restore the Peace and Union of Christendom by that means. This with any moderate Papist would most probably work some good, and for the more fiery Jesuited, I am confident none were ever more mortal∣ly hated by them, then those who were favourers of the Ceremonies now mentioned, and for the truth of what I say, you are obliged to believe that passage in Romes Masterpeece, which you appointed to be set out, wherein the King, and the late Arch-bishop of Canterbury, were by the popish contrivers designed to slaughter  persons wh they despaired to gain to them: but that any of the now Assemblers were so hated, or so feared, or thought so necessary to be taken out of the way, we have not yet heard, but are rather confident that if a petion of Rome, or a Cardinals cap, will keep them longer together to do more such work as this, so reproachfull to the Protestant Religion, they should be so hired, rather then dissolve too speedily. In the next place, 'tis found out by experience, that the Liturgie hath been a great means to make and encrease an idle and unedifying Ministry, which P. 5. contented it self with set forms made to their hands by others without putting forth themselves to exercise the gift of prayer. To this I answer, that those Ministers are not presently proved to be idle and unedifying which have been content to use the Liturgy. I hope there may be other wayes of labour, beside that of extemporary prayer (which can be no longer a la∣bour then while it is a speaking.) For 1. I had thought that these men might have acknowledged preaching and Catechizing, the former at least, to have been the work of a Minister, and that an edifying work, and that sre those men have been exercised in, who have retaind the Litugy also. 2. Study of all kind of Divine learning, of which the haters of Li∣turgie have not gotten the inclosure, may passe with sober men for a la∣bour also, & that which may tend to edification, if it have charity joyned with it, and that may be had too, without hating the Liturgie. But then 3. I conceive that this Directory is no necessary provision against this reproached idlenesse, or unedifyingnesse in any that were former∣ly guilty of them in the dayes of Liturgie. For sure the labour will not be much increased to the Minister, that will observe the Directory, be∣cause either he may pray extempore, which will be no pains, but of his
lungs and sides in the delivery, or else a form being composed by any, ac∣cording to the Directory (which is in effect a Form it self,) he may thenceforth continue as idle as he who useth our form of Liturgie, and he which hath a mind to be idle, may with that use of it, and that you acknowledge, when you interpose that caution P. 8. [that the Ministers become not herely slothfull and negligent] which were wholly an unnecessa∣ry caution, if this Directory made idlenesse impossible; and if a caution will serve turn, the like may be added to our Liturgie also, without abroga∣ting of it. And for the edifying, I desire it may be considered, whether the extravagancies and impertinences, which our experience (as well grounded as that which taught these men this mystery of the idle un∣edifying Ministry) bids us expect from those who neglect set forms, do more tend to the edifying of any then the use of those prayers which are by the piety and judgement of our Reformers composed, and with which the Auditory being acquainted, may with uninterrupted devotion go along and say, Amen. And whereas 'tis added in this place, that our Lord Christ pleaseth to furnish all his Servants whom he calls to that office with the gift of Prayer. I P. 5. desire 1. That it may be shewed what evidence we have from any pro∣mise of Christ in his word, that any such gift shall be perpetually annext by him to the Ministry; I beleeve the places which will be brought to enforce it, will conclude for gifts of Healing, making of psalms, and other the like also, which Ministers do not now a dayes pretend to. 2. I would know also why Christ, if he do so furnish them, may not also be thought to help them to the matter of their prayers (in which yet here the Directory is fain to assist them, and pag. 8. supposes the Minister may have need of such help and furniture,) as well as the form of words, in which the Liturgie makes the supply. 3 I shall not doubt to affirm, that if the gift of prayer signifie an ability of praying in publick without any pre∣meditation, discreetly and reverently, and so as never to offend against ei∣ther of those necessaries, every Minister is not furnisht with this gift, some men of very excellent abilities wanting that sudden promptnesse of elo∣cution, and choice of words for all their conceptions, others being na∣turally modest and bashfull, and not endued with this charisma of bold∣nesse, which is a great part, a speciall ingredient of that which is here called the gift of prayer. And even for those which have the former of these, and are not so happy as to want the latter, that yet they are not sufficiently gifted for prayer in publick, experience hath taught us by the very creditable relations of some, who have faln into so many indiscre∣tis, that we say no worse in that performance 'Tis true that God en∣ableth
men sufficiently in private to expresse their necessities to him, be∣ing able to understand sighs and groans, when words are wanting, and as well content with such Rhetorick in the Closet as any, but this is not peculiar to Ministers, and for any such ability in publick, there will not be the like security, unlesse the language of sighs and groans, without other expressions, be there current also, which appears by some, who are forced to pay that debt to God in that coyn, having through unthrif∣tinesse provided no other; and yet 'twere well also if that were the worst of it, but the truth is, blasphemy is somewhat worse then saying nothing. The last objection is, That the countenance of the Liturgie would be a P. 5. matter of endlesse strife and contention in the Church, and a snare to many godly Ministers, &c. to the end of that page. Where 1. is observable the tem∣per and resolution of these men, of whom such special care is taken, which makes it so necessary for them, not onely to strive and contend, 1. against establisht Law. 2. about forms of Prayer, (which sure is none of the prime Articles of the Creed) but also to strive for ever, which being observed, it seems secondly, That they have a very charitable opinion of us all who are assertors of Liturgy, that we will never strive or contend for it, for other∣wise the strife may be as endlesse upon its taking away. And sure in or∣dinary judging (if they be not sure that none are contentious, but their favourites) we see no reason, why the introduction of a new way of wor∣ship, should not be more matter of strife, and so also a snare to more (if any can be ensnared or scandalized, but they) then the continuance of the old establisht Liturgie. Where, by the way, the snare they speak of seems to signifie that which catches and intraps their estates and not their souls, causeth them to be persecuted, &c. which is a notable paralogisme and fal∣lacy put upon the Scripture use of that phrase, if we took pleasure in ma∣king such discoveries. But then thirdly, We desire experience may be judge, and upon the sentence which that shall give, that it may be con∣sidered, whether upon the ballancing of the Kingdom, it will not be found that a far greater number are now at this time offended at the Directory, and thereby ensnared in their Estates, if they lie within your power, then formerly at any time (I shall adde in all times since the Reformation, put together) ever were by the Liturgie. As for that passage which is added in the close of this Section, that in these latter times God vouchsafeth to his people mere and better means for the discovery of errour and Superstition.] Though this sounds somewhat like his Divinity who makes the power of resisting Kings, to be a truth which God pleas,d to reveal in these latter times, for the turning Antichrist out of the
world, but hid in the primitive times, that Antichrist might come in, yet I shall not now quarrell with it (because 'tis possible it may have another sence, and I would not deny any thing but what is apparently and in∣excusably false) but from thence assume, 1. That I hope God vouch∣safeth these means to them, that use the Liturgie also; For if it must be supposed a in to continue the use of it, 'tis not, I hope, such a wasting sin, as to deprive men of all grace, even of the Charismata, which unsan∣ctified men may be capable of, and of means of knowledge, which is but a common grace, and therefore I must hope that the phrase [his people] is not here meant in a discriminative sence (like the Montanists form of nos spirituales, in opposition to all others, as animales & phychici) to signifie onely those that are for the Directory, for then let them be assured, Gods gifts are not so inclosed, but that Oxord is vouchsafed as plentifull means for the discovery of errur and superstition, as London, and have, among other acts of knowledge, discovered this one by Gods blessing, (which again I shall mention) that there may be as much errour and Superstition, in rejecting of all Lturgie, as in retaining of any, in opposing Ceremonies, as in asserting them, a negative (as I said) touch not, taste not, kneel not, bow not, as well as a positive superstition; as also that there be er∣rours in practice, as well as doctrine,  infidelities against the Com∣mandments, and Sermon of Christ in the Mount, as well as against the Creed it self, and that imposing of Laws on the King and Kingdom by the Sword, abolishing Liturgie, setting up Directories by that serne way of argument, those carnall weapons of miliia or warfare, when they are not onely practised, but asserted for lawfull, are errours, damnable errours al∣so, and such as are very neer the ordinary notion of Superstition, the teaching for doctrine the Commandments of men, I would I might not say of—also. But then 2. all this being supposed of Gods granting better means of knowledge now, then formerly, I shall yet interpose, that sure this is not a truth of an unlimited extent, for there have been Apostles, which had etter means then we, and they that were nearest hm, (and knew their doctrines, and practices, better then it is possible we should) had so also, nay Ʋniversall Councels meeting in the Holy Ghost, and pi∣ously and judiciously debating, had by the priviledge of Prayer, more right to that promise of Christs being in the midst of them, and leading them into all truth, then an illegally congregated Assembly; and all these have been greater favourers of Liturgie then any of equall authority with them have been of your Directory; And 3. if all were supposed and granted which you claim, yet still the means of knowledge now vouch∣safed do not make you infallible, lay not any morall or physicall
you to be faultlesse or errourlesse, and therefore still this may be errour in you as probably, as Liturgie should be Superstition in us. And for gifts of Preaching and Prayer, I answer, if they are and have been truly gifts, others of former times may be the Spirit have had as liberal a portion of them, as we. For sure those daies wherein the spirit was promised to be powred out on all flesh, are not these dayes of ours, or of this age, exclusively to all others; Of this I am confident, that some other ages have had them in such a measure, as was most agreeable to the propa∣gating of the Gospel, and if that were then by forming or using of Litur∣gies, why may it not be so at this time also? Having given you my opinion of these passages, and yeelded to them for quietnesse sake, a limited truth, I must now adde, that if they be argumentative, and so meant as a proof that these Assemblers are like∣ly to be in the right, while they destroy Liturgie, although all the Chri∣stian world before them have asserted it, this will be a grosse peice of in∣solency and untruth together; a taking upon them to be the onely people of God of these latter times, nay to have greater judgement knowledge, gifts, then all the whole Christian world, for all Ages together, including the Apostles and Christ himself, have had. For all these have been produced together with the suffrage of Jews, Heathens, Mahometans also, to main∣tain set Forms; and though it be true, that some of late have found out many Superstitions, that never were discover'd before, one or other al∣most in every psture or motion in Gods Service, yet this sure is by the help of an injustice in applying without all reason that title to those actions, and not by a greater sagacity, in discerning, making many acts of indifferent performance, nay of Piety it self, go defamed and mourn∣ing under the reproach of Superstition, and not bringing any true light into the world, that before was wanting. This one Odium fastned on all Orthodox Ministers in this Kingdom at this time, of being superstitious, and the mistake of the true notion of the word which hath to that end been inued into many, (but is by a Tract lately printed somewhat dis∣covered) hath brought in a shole of Sequestrations of Livings, which have been very necessary and instrumentall, to the maintaining of these pre∣sent distempers. And now at length it proves in more respects then one, that what ever unatiate hydropecall appetices are tempted to take away, is presently involved under that title, a name that hath an universall malignitie in it, makes any thing lawfull prize that is in the company. God will in time display this deceit also. Having mentioned these so many reasons of their abolishing our Litur∣gie, i. e. their so many  against our Church and Church-men, all
if they were true, hang so loose and so separable from Liturgie, that they cannot justifie the abolition of it; At length they shut up their suggestions with [Ʋpon these and many the like weighty considerations, and because of divers particulars contained in the Book, they have resolved to lay aside the Book] P. 6. P. 7. where if the many considerations unmentioned be of no more truth or vali∣dity then these, and so be like weighty considerations, I acknowledge their▪ prudenc in not naming them, and think that no part of the World is like to prove the worse for this their reservednesse, onely by the way a generall charge is nothing in Law, and in generalibus latet dolus, is a legall exception against any thing of that nature. But if they have any other which they conceive to be of any weight, hey are very unjust and very uncharitable to us, thus to ensnare our estates (the fault even now laid upon the Prelates) by requiring our approbation of their Directorie, and conformity of our practice to it, and yet not vouchsafe us that con∣viction, which they are able, to satisfie us of the reasons of their proceed∣ings. But the truth is, we shall not charge this on them neither, being made confident by the weaknesse of the motives produced, that they have not any more effectuall in store. And for the particulars contained in the Book, if there were any infirm parts in it, any thing unjustifiable, (which we conceive their Conscience tels them there is not, having not in this whole Book produced one, and yet their charity to it not so great, as to cover or conceal any store of sins) yet would not this inferre any more then onely farther Reformation of the Book, which is not the designe against which we now argue. And having proceeded to so bloody a sentence upon such ( , in the Gospel phrase) testimonies and accusatious so unsufficient and unproportionable to such a ndenmation, they could not but foresee the opinion that would be had of the action, and the ill and odious conse∣quents that would attend it, which therefore to keep off, is the next endeavour, by professing that which is done, is not from any love of Novelty. And truly 'tis well you tell us so, for otherwise the semblance of that love in this and other actions, might have perswaded us mortals, who see but the outsides, so to judge. And still notwithstanding the affirma∣tion, (which is not of much value in your own cause, unlesse we had more testimonies of the Authors infallibility, then this Preface hath af∣forded us) the consideration of the matter and terms of the change from what and to what, of the no manner of advantage or acquisition by it to recompence all the disadvantages, the great temerity, if not impiety to boot, in separating from this Nationall, and in scorning and defying the practice of the Ʋniversall Church, and the great illegality, that I say
no worse, of your action and the preparatory steps of motion to it, may tempt us to affirm, that it must needs be a love of novelty, even a Platnick love, as the phrase is now adayes, a love of novelty, as novelty, without any other hope for reward, without any other avowed designe in seeking it; for if there be any other which may be own'd, I am confident it hath already appeared by what hath been said, that this is not the way to it. But then 2. Such a profession as this will not sure signifie much, to innovate, and yet to say we love not innovation, to act with a proud high hand in despight of so much at least of God, as is imprinted in the Laws of man, and our lawfull Superiour's, and then to excuse it by saying we love not to do so, will but little alleviate the matter before any equall Judge. 'Tis certain there is something unlovely in the reproach∣full name of sin, how glibly soever the pleasures of it go down, yea and even in the sin it self, it hath the , the two Cups in Homer, more truly then that to which he applies it, its bitter and hatefull, as well as its sweeter lovelier parts, extemplo quodcun{que} malum committitur, ipsi Displi∣cet, and if men may have leave and excuse to commit adultery so long, till they fall in love not onely with the pleasure of it, but the very sin∣fulnesse of it, and the name and reproach also, we shall give them a good large space of Repentance: the short is, the mention of Novelty is an evi∣dence that the Composers Conscience tels them, that what they now do is such, and 'tis not their not loving it (perhaps onely thinking, perhaps onely saying they do not love it) which will much lessen the fault but ra∣ther define it to be an act against Conscience, to be and continue guilty of so huge a novelty, when they professe they love it not. The next envie that they labour to avoid, is the having an intention to disparage the Reformers, of whom they are perswaded, that were they now alive they would joyn with them in this work. This is another , to blanch your actions with contrary intentions, to do that which is most reproachfull to the Reformers, to obliterate, or which is worse, to de∣fame their memory (whom yet at the beginning you called wise and pius) and then say you intended them no disparagement, nay to make▪ them repent and retract after their death (i. e. to put them in a kind of Purgatory) to undertake for them that they have changed their minds, and not onely that they are now content to part with that finally out of the Church, the short temporary losse of which, one of them (Arch-bishop Cranmer in one of his letters publisht by Miles Coverdale) laments, as the severest part of the Persecuters tyranny toward him, viz. that they would not permit him the use of the Common-Prayer Book in the prison; but withall that they are grown zelots too, are content to act most ille∣gally
and seditionsly to cast it out. The judgement of this matter we leave to any ordinary arbitration, 1 Whether it be likely that they would joyn, against Law to take that away, which they compiled, or make all prescribed Forms unlawfull, who did not think any fit in publick, but those which were prescribed. 2. Whether any man can have ground of such perswasion, when they died in the constant exercise of it, and have sent them no message from the dead of their change of minde. 3. Whe∣ther it be not strongly improbable, that they of the first Reformation who in Queen Maris dayes flying and living in Frankfrd, and there meeting with the objections that have been produced by our new re∣formers maintained the Book against them all, would now if they were return'd to us from a longer exile, disclaim all that they had thus maintain'd. 4. Whether it be not an argument of a strong confidence and assurance, (which is the mot dngeous mother of Schisme and Heresie imaginable) of strong  and  judgement, to think that all men would be of their side (as  thought veily that all Lon∣don would rise with him▪ as soon as he appear'd in Chea side) upon no other ground of that perswasion mentiond, but  that they are of it, which is but in effect as the same Hkt did shewing no evidence of his being a Prophet, but onely his confidence, which produced all kinde of direfull Oabes that he was, and hideous imrecations on him∣self, if he were not so. That which is added by way of honour to those Martyrs, that they were excellent instruments to begin the ging and building of his house, may be but an artifice of raising their own reputa∣tion, who have perfected those rude beginnings, or if it be meant in earnest, as kindnesse to them, 'tis but an unsignificant civilitie, to abo∣lish all the records of their Reformation, and then pay them a little praise in exchange for them, Martyr their ashes (as the Papists did Fagius and Bucer) and then lay them down into the earth again, with a dirge or anem, defame the Reformation, and Commend the Reformers; but still to intimate how much wiser and Godlier you are, then all those Martyrs were. Thus farre they have proceeded ad amoliendam invidiam; Now to the positive motives, of setting upon this great work of innovation, and those are, 1. To answer in sme measure the gratious providence of God which at this time calleth upon them for farther Reformation: What they should mean by the gracious providence of God in this place, I confesse I cannot guesse, (if it be not a meer name to adde some credit to the cause) un∣lesse it be the prosperity & good successe of their Arms; which if through∣out this War they had reason to brag or take notice of (as sure they
have) not, but of Gods hand many times visibly shewed against them, in raising the low estate of the King, without visible means, and bring∣ing down their mighty strengths, as the Septuagint makes God pro∣mise to fight against Amalek , by secret hand, by invisible,) yet sure would not that justifie the taking up of those Arms, much lesse be able to consecrate all other sins, that those Arms may enable any to be guilty of. Tis the Turks Divinity, as before I intimated, to pe sentence on the action by the prosperity of the man, to make one killing of a Father villany and sacriledge, because the designe it aim'd at miscarried, and another of the same making an heroick act, that God was pleased with, be∣cause it brought the designer to the Kingdom: And therefore, I beseech you, look no longer on the cause through the deceivable and deceitfull glasses of your conceited victories, but through that one true glasse the word of Christ in the New Testament; and if that call you to this farther reformation, go on in Gods name; But if it be any else that call∣eth you, (as sure somewhat else it is you mean, for if it were Gods word you would ere now have shew'd it us, and here have call'd it Gods word, which is plain and intelligible, not Gods providence, which is of an ambiguous signification) if any extraordinary revelation how∣ever convey'd to you; this you will never be able to approve to any that should doubt your call, and therefore I shall meekly desire you, and in the bowels of Christian compassion to your selves, if not to your bleeding Countrey, once more to examine seriously, what ground you have in Gods word, to satisfie conscience of the lawfulnesse of such at∣tempts, which you have used, to gain strength to work your Reforma∣tion; and this we the rather desire to be shewed by you, because you adde, that having consulted with Gods holy word, you resolve to lay aside the former Liturgie, which cannot signifie that upon command of Gods word particularly speaking to this matter, you have done it, for then all this while, you would sure have shewed us that word, but that the Word of God hath lead you to the whole work in generall, which you have taken in hand, and therefore that is it, which as a light shi∣ning in so dark a place, we require you in the name of God to hold out to us. After this there is a second motive, the satisfaction of your own consci∣ences. This I cannot speak to, because neither I know them, nor the grounds of them, save onely by what is here mentioned, which I am sure is not sufficient to satisfie conscience; (phancy perhaps it may) one∣ly this I shall interpose, that it is possible your own consciences may be erronious, and we are confident they are so, and then you are not
bound to satisfie them, save onely by seeking better information, which one would think might be as feaseable a task as abolishing of Liturgie. Next a third motivels mentioned, that you may satisfie the expectation of other Reformed Churches; To this first I say, that this is not the rule for the reforming of a Nationall Church , and independent. And such I conceive, the last Canon of the Councell of Ephesus, will by conse∣quence conclude this of England to be; and its being so is a sufficient plea, 1. To clear us from all shew of Schisme in Separating from the Roman Church (to which we were not, according to the Ephesine rule, subjsted as a part) though we reformed our selves, when the Pope vehe∣mently required the contrary, and would not himself be reformed; and from the Church universall, of which we still remain a member undi∣vided, 2. To answer this motive of our Assemblers, by telling them that in the reforming such a Church (as this of ours, if not by others, yet by them is acknowledged to be) the care must be, to do what the head and members, of the Church, shall in the fear of God resolve to be fittest, and not what other Churches expect; for if that were the rule, it would be a very fallacious and very puzling one, the expectations of severall Churches being as severall, and the choice of some difficulty, which of them was fittest to be answer'd. But then secondly, what the expectation of other Churches have been in this point, or what the reasons of them, we do not punctually know, onely this we do, that after your solliciting of many (which is another thing, somewhat distant from their expect∣ing) we hear not of any, that have declared their concurrence in opi∣nion with you in this: But on the contrary, that in answer to your Letter directed to the Church of Zeland, the Wallachrian Classis made this return to you, that they did approve set and prescribed forms of pub∣lique Prayer, as profitable and tending to edification, quite contrary to what you before objected of the Offence to the Protestant Churches abroad, and now of their expectation, &c.) and give reasons for that approbation, both from Texts of Scriptures, and the generall practice of the Reformed Church, avouching particularly the forementioned place of Calvin, and conclude it to be a precise singularity in those men who do reject them. And now, I beseech you, speak your knowledge, and instance in the particular, if any Church have in any addresse made to you, or answer to your invitation, signified their expectation that you should abolish Liturgie, or their approbation of your fact, able to counte bal∣lance this censure from the pen of those your friends thus unexpect∣edly falne upon you. Some ingenuity either of making good your asser∣tion
of the Churches, or else of Confession that you cannot, will be in com∣mon equity expected from you. The desires of many of the Godly among your selves (which you mention as a fourth motive for abolition) will signifie little, because how many suffrages soever might be brought for the upholding of Liturgie, those who are against it shall by you be called, the godly, and that number what ever it is, go for a multitude. But then again, Godly they may be, but not wise, (piety gives no infallibility of doctrine to the professor) at least in this point, unlesse you can first prove the Liturgie to be ungodly; nay they that rejoyced in it, were, as you say, godly and learned, and they that made it wise and pious, and therefore sure some respect was due to the wse, as well as godly in the abrogation. And yet it may be added farther, that the way of expressing of the desires of those whom you mean by the Godly, hath been ordinarily by way of Petitions, and those it cannot be dissembled have been oft framed and put into their hands (I say not by whom) even in set prescribed Forms: not thinking it enough to give them a Directory for matter, without stinting their Spirits, by ap∣pointing the words also. This shews that the desires of those many of the Godly, are not of any huge consideration in this businesse, and yet I have not heard to my remembrance of any Petition, yet ever so inso∣lent, as to demand what you have done (in answer it seems to some inarticulate groans or sighs) the abolition of all Liturgie. The last motive is, That you may give some publique testimony of your endeavours for uniformity in divine worship promised in your Solemn League and Covenant. To this the answer will be short, because it hath for the main already been considered. 1. That the Covenant it self is unlaw∣full, which therefore obliges to nothing but Repentance, and restitu∣tion of a stray Subject to his Allegiance to God and the King again. 2. That there is one speciall thing considerable of this Covenant, which will keep it either from obliging or from being any kind of excuse or extenuation of the crimes that this action is guilty of, and that is the voluntary taking of that Covenant on purpose, thus to ensnare your selves in this obligation, to do what should not otherwise be done; We be∣fore told you, that Heods oath would not justifie the beheading of John; and shall now adde, that if some precedaneous hatred to John, made Herod lay this designe before hand, that Herodias's daughter should dance, that upon her dancing he would be vehemently pleas'd, that upon her pleasing of him he would swear to give her any thing she should ask, even to half his Kingdom, and the same compact appoint her to make this Pe∣tition, to take John Baptist's head for her reward, (as 'tis not unlikely
but that as Herodias was of counsell with her Daughter, so Herod might be with Herodias) if the train I say, lay thus, sure Herods oath would take off but little from the crimson dye of his murther, but ra∣ther superadde that sin of deep hypocrisie, of making pietie, and the Re∣ligion of oaths, a servant and instrument to his incest and murthering of a Prophet. And then I shall no farther apply, then by asking this que∣stion, did you not take this Covenant on purpose to lay this obligation upon you, and now pretend that for your Covenants sake, you must needs do it? If you cannot deny this, O then remember Herod. But if you took the Covenant without any such designe, but now ind your selves thus ensnared by it, then rather remember the times to get out of that snare, and not to engage your selves faster in it. 3. I answer, that if by uniformity be meant that among your selves in this King∣dom; the taking away our Liturgie by Ordinance, while it remains establisht by valid Law, is no over-fit means to that end, nothing but a new Act, and an assurance that all would be obedient to that Act, can be proper for that purpose; and I am sure there are some men in the World, whom if such an Act displeased, the obedience would not be ve∣ry uniform; what ever it may seem to be when better Subjects are sup∣posed to be concluded by it. But if it be uniformity with the best reform∣ed Churches (as your Covenant mentions) then 1. That uniformitie in matters of Form or Ceremonie is no way necessary, (Communion betwixt Churches may be preserv'd without it) not near so usefull, as that other among our selves, and therefore the bargain will be none of the most thriving, when that acquisition is paid so dear for, uniformity with strangers purchased with confusion at home, as bad a market, as unequall a barter, as if we should enter upon a Civill War, for no other gain, then to make up a Peace with some Neighbour Prince; which none but a mad Statesman would ever counsell. But then 4. The Covenant for such uniformitie, obliges not to make this Directory, which I shall prove. 1. By the verdict of those themselves which have taken the Covenant, of whom many, I am confident, never conceived themselves thereby obliged to abolish Liturgie, there being no such intelligible sence con∣teined in any branch of the Covenant, any such intention of the imposers aowed at the giving of it. 2. Because we conceive we have made it manifest, that that part of the Covenant which mentions uniformity with other best reformed Churches, doth not oblige to abolish Liturgie, not onely because the generall matter of the Covenant refers unto the Government, and not to the Liturgie, but because this of England, as it now stands establisht by Law, is the best Reformed, both according to
that rule of Scripture, and standard of the purest Ancient Church; For which we have also the testimony of Learned Protestants of other Countreys, preferring it before their own, and shall be ready to justi∣fie the boast by any test or , that shall be resolved on fit to decide this doubt or competition between this of ours, and any that you shall Vote or name to be the best. The like challenge we also make in return to a tait intimation of yours more then once falne from you in this Preface, and in the body of the Directory, p. 40. and 73. viz. that the Church of England hath hi∣therto been guilty of Superstition in her Liturgie. To which we first reply by desiring, that you mention any one particular wherein that ac∣cusation may appear to be true, (and we hereby undertake to main∣tain the contrary against all the learnedst in that Assembly) which if you will not undertake to specifie and prove, you must acknowledge to be guilty of great uncharitablenesse in affirming. I shall not be so uncha∣ritable as to wish that the judgement of the Civill Law may be your doom, and the sentence that belongs to Superstition be the reward of your defamation, I shall not say so much as the Lord reprove, by way of imprecation, but once more repeat, Lord lay it not to your charge. Upon these grounds you proceed, that [having not consulted with flesh and blood, &c.] This sure in St Pauls phrase, Gal. 1. 16. signifies not con∣sulting with men, though Apostolicall; as consulting with them is oppo∣sed to immediate revelation from Heaven; and then sure your Assembly was very spirituall, and very heavenly, for with them you confesse to have consulted; but if you mean by the phrase, in a larger sense, earthly or humane interests, I shall onely ask, whether all the actions which have proceeded from you are so visibly divine, and unmixt with earth, so apparently uninterested, that your own testimony should be sufficient to give credit to this affirmation? Having said this, you proceed to the conclusion, that you resolved to set up the Directory, and in it to hold forth such things as are of divine In∣stitution in every Ordinance, and other things be set forth according to the rules of Christian Prudence; agreeable to the generall rules of the Word of God. And now 'tis a little strange, (but yet that which my temper obliges me to desire may still be my fate, when I fall upon a Controversie with any) that we which have been at such distance all this while, should just now mee at parting, that such contradictory premises, should beget the same conclusion; For there is not a better Rule in the World, nor any which I would rather chuse to be judged by in this matter, then that which is here proposed by you; Onely I desire a little importunately
to be advertised, where it is that the Compilers of our Liturgie have swerved from it. Where you have swerved, we have instanced in ma∣ny particulars in our Answer to the Ordinance, and shall now once for all demand, what rules of prudence oblige you to turn those many se∣verals there mentioned out of the Service of the Church, every one of them tending to edfication directly, over and above the agreeablenesse of each to the generall rules of Scripture; in particular, whether it be agreeable to Christian Prudence to a bolish a Liturgie, which hath been so piously and discrectly framed, by those who have seal'd our Reforma∣tion with their blood, and in stead of it to bring in a voluntary way of serving God in a Nationall Church, where there be many thousand Pa∣rishes, and no such promise of divine inspiration or enthusiasme, but that there may be still some number of those Ministers, who will not be able to speak constantly in the Congregation, so as in the presence of Angels they ought to speak. The experiments that have given us reason thus to fear, and desire prevention of the like, we are again tempted to adde unto this paper, but we delight not to demonstrate them guilty of Blasphemies, who have accused us of Superstition. We desire this fault may be cured by some milder recipe. As for that which in passing you say, that by your Directory Mini∣sters may be directed to keep like soundnesse of Doctrine, this indeed is a pre∣rogative of the Liturgie, (which hath alwayes been used as an hedge to keep out errours, and to retain a common profession of Catholick verities) but cannot belong to your Directory, which hath neither Creed nor Catechism, nor one Article of Religion, or Doctrine asserted in it, but leaves that wholly to the Preacher, whose doctrine that it should be sound at all, or agree with the doctrine of all other Preachers, and so be like sound, here is no provision made. We have thus call'd your Preface also to some triall, and found it of such a composure and temper, 1. So many variations from truth (which one that desires to be civill, must be unjust if he do not call them so) that we cannot with any pleasure give an account of our judgement of them. 2. So many unconcluding premises, Affirmati∣ons, which if they were all supposed true, would never come home to abolition, and among all the heap, so no one truth which is of im∣portance or weight toward that conclusion, that now we conceive we have discharged the task, given the Reader such a view of the inward parts of this spatious fabrick, that he will not wonder, that we are not so passionately taken with the beauty, as to receive at a venture whatsoever is contain'd in it; For supposing there were never an un∣seasonable
Direction in all the Book following, yet the reception of that, being founded in the ablition both of ours, and of all Liturgy, the Christians prudence agreeable to the word of God, which is here commend∣ed to us, obliges us to stop our ears to such slight temptations, and never to yeeld consent, to the but laying aside that form of Service, which we have by establisht Law so long enjoyed, to the great content and benefit of this Nation; though God knows some have not made so holy, others so thankfull an use of it, as it deserved of us, some neg∣lecting it, others slandering, and so many bringing worldly hearts along with them, which though they are great evils, under which this di∣vine Liturgy hath suffered, yet being the infelicities, not the crimes, the crosse, which hath made it like unto our Saviour, in being spit on, evil'd, and crown'd with thorns (for such he cals the cares of this world, the most contumelius part of the suffering) and not at all the guilt (be∣ing wholly accidentall and extrinsecall to it) must never be exchanged, for the certain evils, naturall and intrinsecall to the no-Liturgy, and withall the greater mischiefs which may probably follow this altera∣tion; for all which patience and submission, we have not the least kind of invitation, save onely that of the noise, and importunity of some enemies, which should it be yeelded to, would, I doubt not, be resist∣ed and prest again, with the Petitions of many thousands more, im∣portuning the return and restitution of the Liturgy again; unlesse by this means the Devil should gain an absolute and totall manumission, cast off all his trashes, and presently get rid of both his enemies, Reli∣gion, and Liturgie together. A Postscript by way of Appendix to the two former Chapters. THe truth of all which we have hitherto spoken, if we have not sufficiently evidenced it already, will abundantly appear by one farther testimony, which is authentick and undeniable to them, against whom we speak. And it is, (what the providence of God, and the power of truth hath extorted from them) their own con∣fession, in a book just now come to my hands, called, a Supply of Prayer for the Ships that want Ministers to pray with them, agreeale to the Directory established by Parliament, published by Authority. From which these things
will be worth observing, 1. That the very body of it is a set form of Prayer, and so no Superstition in set forms. 2. That their publishing it by authority, is the prescribing of that form, and so 'tis lawfull to pre∣scribe such forms. 3. That the title, [of Supply of Prayer] proveth that some there are, to whom such supplies are necessary, and so a Directory not sufficient for all. And 4. That [its being agreeable to the Directory] Or as it is, word for word form'd out of it, (the Directory turn'd in∣to a Prayer) sheweth, that out of the Directory a Prayer may easily first be made, and then constantly used, and so the Minister ever after continue as idle without exercising that gift, as under our Liturgy is pretended, and so here under pretence of supplying the ships, all such idle Mariners in the ship of the Church are supplied also, which it seems was foreseen at the writing that preface to the Directory, where they say, P. 8. the Minister may if need be, have from them some help and furniture. 5. That the Preface to this new Work entitled, A reason of this work, containeth many other things, which tend as much to the retracting their former work, as Judas's throwing back the money did to his repentance. As, 1. That there are thousands of Ships belonging to this Kingdom, which have not Ministers with them, to guide them in Prayer, and therefore either use the Common prayer, or no Prayer at all. This shews the nature of that fact of those which without any objection mention'd against any Prayer in that book, which was the onely help for the devotion of many thousands, left them for some moneths, to perfect irreligion and Atheisme, and not praying at all. And besides these ships (which they here confesse) how many Land-companies be there in the same condition? how many thou∣sand families which have no Minister in them? (of which number the House of Commons was alwayes wont to be one, and the House of Lords, since the Bishops were removed from thence) and to deal plainly, how many Ministers will there alwayes be, in England and Wales (for sure your care for the Ʋniversities is not so great as to be likely to work Miracles) which will not have skill, or Power, or gift, (which you please) of conceiving Prayers as they ought to do? and therefore let me impart to you the thoughts of many prudent men (since the news of your Directory, and abolition of our Liturgie) that it would prove a most expedite way to bring in Atheisme; and this it seems, you do al∣ready discern and confesse in the next words, that the no prayer at all, which succeeded the abolishing of the Liturgie, is rather to make them Heathers then Christians, and hath left the Lords day without any mark of pietie or devotion: (a sad and most considerable truth, which some per∣sons ought to lament with a wounded bleeding conscience, the
longest day of their life) and therefore we ae apt to beleeve your charity to be more extensive, then the title of that book enlarges it, and that it hath designed this supply, not onely to those ships, but to all other in the like want of our Liturgie. Your onely blame in this particular hath been, that you would not be so ingenuous, as Judas and some others, that have soon retracted their precipitous action, and confest they did so, and made restitution presently, while you, rather then you will (to rescue men from heathenisme caused by your abolition) restore the Book again, and confesse you have sinned in condemning an innocent Litur∣gie, will appoint some Assembler, to compile a poor, sorry, pitteous form of his own, of which I will appeal to your greatest flatterer, if it be not so low that it cannot come into any tearms of comparison, or com∣petition, with those forms already prescribed in our Book; and so still you justifie your errour, even while you confesse it. Secondly, that 'tis now hoped that 'twill be no grief of heart to full Christians, if the thirsty drink out of cisterns, when themselves drink out of fountains, &c. which is the speciall part of that ground, on which we have first formed, and now labour'd to preserve our Liturgie, on purpose that weak Ministers may not be forced to betray their weaknesse, that they that have not the gift of Prayer (as even in the Apostles time there were divers gifts, and all Ministers had not promise to succeed in all, but one in one, another in anothers gift by the same spirit) may have the help of these common gifts, and standing treasures of Prayer in the Church; and (because there be so many of these kinds to be lookt for in a Church) that those which are able to pray as they ought, without a form, may yet in publick submit to be thus restrain'd, to the use of so excellent a form thus set before them, rather then others should be thus adventur'd to their own temerity, or incur the reproach of being thought not able; and then this providing for the weak, both Minister, and People, will not now, I hope, be charged on the Liturgie, by those, who hope their supply of Prayer will be no grief to others. Thirdly, That these Prayers being enlivened, and sent up by the spirit in him that prayeth, may be lively Prayers, and acceptable to him, who is a Spirit, and accepts of service in spirit and truth. Where 1. it appears by that confession, that as the place that speaks of worshipping in spirit and truth, is not of any force against set praiers, so neither is that either of the Spirits helping our infirmities, belonging as it is here confest most truly, to the zeal, and fervor, and intensenes of devot nfused by the Spirit, (and not to the words wherein the addresse   which if the Spirit may not infuse also in the use of our Liturgy, and assist a Minister and
Congregation in the Church, as well and as effectually as a company of Marmers in a ship, I shall then confesse that the Directory first, and then this Supply, may be allow'd to turn it out of the Church. Lastly, That in truth though Praiers come never so new even from the Spirit, in one that is a guide in Prayer, if the Spirit do not quicken and enliven that Prayer in the hearer that follows him, it is to him but a dead form, and a very carcase of Prayer, which words being really what they say, a truth, a perfect truth, and more soberly spoken then all or any period in the Preface to the Directory, I shall oppose against that whole Act of abolition, as a ground of confutation of the principall part of it, and shall onely adde my desire, that it be considered what Prayers are most likely to be thus quickned and enlivened by the Spirit in the hearer those that he is master of, and understands and knows he may joyn in, or those which depend wholly on the will of the Speaker, which perhaps he understandeth not, and never knows what they are, till they are delivered, nor whether they be fit for him to joyn in; or in plainer words, whether a man be likely to pray, and ask most fervently he knows not what, or that which he knows, and comes on purpose to pray. For sure the quick∣ning and enlivening of the Spirit, is not so perfectly miracle, as to ex∣clude all use of reason or understanding to prepare for a capacity of it, for then there had been no need to have turn'd the Latine Service out of the Church, the Spirit would have quickned those Prayers also, CHAP. III. HAving thus past through the Ordinance and the Preface, and in the view of the Ordinance stated and setled aright the com∣parison betwixt the Liturgie and the Directory, and demon∣strated the no-necessity, but plain unreasonablenesse of the change, and so by the way insisted on most of the defects of the Dire∣ctory, which are the speciall matter of accusation we prosesse to find in it, I shall account it a Superfluous importunity to proceed to a review of the whole body of it, which makes up the bulk of that Book, but instead of insisting on the faults and infirm parts of it (such are, the prohibition of adoration toward any place, p. 10. that is of all adoration, while we have bodies about us for that must be toward some place; the interdict∣ing of all parts of  ochryphal Books, p. 12. which yet the Ancient Church avowed to be read for the directing of manners, though not as
rule of Faith, the frequent motion of the Covenant in the directions for Prayer, once as a speciall mercy of God, p. 17. which is the greatest curse could befall this Kingdome, and a great occasion, if not Authour of all the rest, which are now upon it, then as a means of a strict and religious Ʋnion, p. 21. which is rather an engagement of an irreligious War; then as a precious band that men must pray that it never be broken, p. 21. which is in effect to pray, that they may never repent, but continue in Rebellion for ever. Then as a mercy again, p. 37. as if this Covenant were the grea∣test treasure we ever enjoyed. Then the praying for the Armies by Land and Sea, p. 38. with that addition [for the defence of King & Parliament, and Kingdome] as resolving now to put that cheat upon God himself, which they have used to their Fellow Subjects, that of fighting against the King for the defence of him, (Beloved be not deceived, God is not mock∣ed:) Then affirming that the Fonts were superstitiously placed in time of Popery, & therefore the Child must now be baptized in some other place, p. 40. while yet they shew not any ground of that accusation, nor ever will be able to do. Then that the customs of kneeling & praying by, & towards the dead, is superstitious, p. 73. which literally it were, (Superstitum cul∣tus) if it were praying to them, but now is far enough from that guilt. And lastly, that the Lords day is commanded in the Scripture to be kept holy, p, 85. the sanctification of which we acknowledge to be grounded in the Scripture, and instituted by the Apostles, but not commanded in the Scripture, by any revealed precept. (The first that we meet with to this purpose, is that of Ignatius, Epist. ad Magnes. , Let us therefore Sabbatize no longer; Let every Christian celebrate the Lords day, which saying of an Apostolick writer being added to the mention of the Lords day in the New Testa∣ment is a great argument of the Apostolick institution of that day, which the universall practice of the Church ever since doth sufficiently confirm unto us, and we are content and satisfied with that authority, although it doth not offer to shew us any command in the Scripture for it. And then you may please to observe, that the same Ignatius, within a page before that place, foreciting for the observing of the Lords day, hath a command for Common Prayer, and I conceive for some set Form, I shall give you the words, , Let all meet together to the same, whether action or place in Prayer, Let there be one Common Prayer, one mind, &c. and Cle. Srom. l.  Alex. to the same purpose, the Altar which we have here on Earth, is the company of those that dedicate themselves to Prayers, as having  a common voice, and one mind, which cannot
well be, unlesse there be some common Form by all agreed on.) Instead I say of pressing these or the like frailties upon this work, which will ar∣gue the Composers of it to be men and fallible. I shall rather desire to expresse and evidence my charity (and my endeavour to read it without any prejudice) by adding my opinion, that there be some things said in it (by way of direction for the matter of Prayer, and course of Preach∣ing) which agree with wholsome doctrine, and may tend to edification, and I shall not rob those of that approbation which is due to them, nor conceive our Cause to need such pevish means to sustain it; Being not thereby obliged to quarrel at the Directory absolutely as a Book, but onely as it supplants the Liturgie (which if it had a thousand more ex∣cellencies in it then it hath, it would not be fit to do.) And being willing to give others an example of peaceablenesse, and of a resolution to make no more quarrels then are necessary, and therefore contributing my part of the endeavour to conclude this one assoon as is possible. And the ra∣ther because it is in a matter, which (if without detriment to the Church, and the Souls of men, the Book might be universally received, and so the experiment could be made) would I am confident within ve∣ry few years assoon as the pleasure of the change and the novelty were over, prove it's own largest confutation, confesse it's own wants & faults; and so all but mad men see the errour, and require the restitution of Li∣turgie again. This I speak upon a serious observation and pondering of the tempers of men, and the so mutable habits of their minds, which as they are , easily changed from good to evil, so are they (which is the difference of men from lapst Angels) , easily reduced also to their former state again, when reason comes to them in the cool of the day, when the heat of the kindnesse is past, and a saiety hastning in its stead, or if it prove not so well, yet falling from one change to another, & never coming to stability. How possible this may prove in this particular, I shall now evidence no farther, then by the parallel vehement dislikes, that the Presbyteriall Government hath already met with among other of our reforming Spirits, very liberally exprest in many Pamphlets which we have lately received from London, but in none more fully then in the Epistle to the Book entituled, John Baptist: first charging the Presbyteri∣ant (who formerly exclaimed against Episcpacy for stinking the spirit) that they began to take upon them to establish a Dagon in his throne, in stinking the whole worship of the God of Heaven, &c. and in plain words without micing or dissembling, that they had rather the French King, nay the great Turk should rule over them, then these, The onely use which I would now make of these experiments is this, to admire that
blessed excellent Christian grace of obedience (and contentment with our present lot, whatsoever it be, that brings not any necessity of sinning on us.) I mean, to commend to all in matters of indifference, (or where Scripture hath not given any immediate rule, but left us to obey those who are set over us) that happy choice of submitting, rather then let∣ting loose our appetites, of obeying, then prescribing; A duty, which be∣sides the very great ease it brings withit, hath much of vertue in it, and will be abundant reward to it self here on Earth, and yet have a mighty arrear remaining to be paid to it in Heaven hereafter; which when it is heartily considered, it will be a thing of some difficulty to invent or feign a heavier affliction to the meek & quiet spirit, a more ensuaring peice of treachery to the Christian Soul, (I am sure to his Estate, and tempo∣rall prosperity) then that of contrary irreconciliable commands, which is now the case, and must alwayes be when Ordinances undertake to su∣persede Laws, when the inferior, but over-swaying power, adventures to check the Superiour. Of which subject I have temptation to annex a full tyde of thoughts, would it not prove too much a , and be most sure to be so esteemed by them to whom this addresse is now ten∣dred. The good Lord of Heaven and Earth encline our hearts to keep that Law of his . Ephes. 6. 2. which is a prime Commandment, and that with a promise of secular Peace and a∣bundance annext (if not confined) to it. To conclude therefore, and summe up all in a word, we have disco∣ver'd by this brief survey, the resonablenesse of this act of Gods provi∣dence, in permitting our Liturgy to be thus defamed, though in all rea∣son the Liturgy it self deserve not that fate, the no-inconveniences so much as pretended to arise from our Liturgy, to which the Directory is not much more liable, the no-objection from the Word of God against the whole or any part of it produced, or offered by you, the no-man∣ner of the least or loosest kind of necessity to abolish it, the perfect justifi∣ablenesse, and withall usefulnesse of set Forms above extemporary effusi∣ons, the very many particulars of eminent benefit to the Church, and of authority in it, preserved in our Liturgy, but in the Directory totally o∣mitted, and that in the despight of all Statutes both of K. Edward, and Q. Elizabeth, by which the Reformation of this Church is establisht among us, and I trust shall still continue, notwithstanding the opposition of those who pretended kindnesse, but now run riot against this Reformati∣on; we have shew'd you also the true grounds of our ancestours rejoycing in our Liturgy, instead of the partiall imperfect account given of that businesse by your Preface, the wonderfull prosperity of this Church
under it, contrary to the pretended sad experience, &c. and withall we have made it clear, that all the exceptions here proposed against the Li∣turgy, are perfectly vain and causlesse; as that it hath prov'd an offence, &c. the ordinary crime charg'd on those actions that are liable to no other, and so that offence without a cause; that this offence hath been by the length of the Service, which will onely offend the prophane, and withall, is as observable in your Service; by the many unprofitable bur∣thensome Ceremonies, which have been shewed neither to be many, nor unprofitable, nor burthensome; by the disquieting of Consciences, i. e. one∣ly of the unquiet; by depriving them of the Ordinance, i. e. those who would rather loose the Sacrament, then receive it kneeling, or reverent∣ly; that the offence was extended to the reformed Churches abroad also, and yet for that no one proof offered, nor Church named that was so offended: and if there were, yet still this supposed offensivenesse, no just plea for any thing but Reformation. So also that by means of the Litur∣gy, many were debarred of the exercise of their Ministery, the sugge∣stion for the most part a meer calumny, and that which was true in it, ready to be retorted upon these Reformers: that the Prelates have la∣bour'd to raise the estimation of the Liturgy too high, yet that no higher then you would the value of your Directory, to have it the rule for the manner of publick worship, or if they did, this is the fault of those Pre∣lates, not of the Liturgy; who yet were said but to have labour'd it nei∣ther, not to have effected it; and even that labour or desire of theirs, to have amounted no higher then Calvin's letter to the Protectour would avow; that this hath been to the justling out of Preaching, which is rather a speciall help to it, and prescribes it, and allows it its proper place, but hath oft the ill luck to be turn'd out by Preaching; that it hath been made no better then an Idol, which if it be a fault in the Li∣turgy, is as farre more chargeable on the hearing of Sermons that the people please themselves in their presence, and lip-labour in that service; an uncharitable judging of mens hearts, and a crime to which your Di∣rectory makes men as lyable as the Liturgy; that our Liturgy is a compli∣ance with Papists, and so a means to confirm them in their Idolatry, &c. whereas it complies with them in nothing that is Idolatrous, &c. and by complying with them, where they do with antiquity and truth, it is more apt to convince them of their errors, and by charity to invite, then by de∣fiance; that it makes an idle Ministery; which sure the Directory will not unmake, being as fit for that turn, either by forming and conning the Prayer there delineated, or by depending on present conceptions, as the Liturgie can be; that it hinders the gift of Prayer, which if it signifie
the elocution, or conception of words in Prayer, is not peculiar to the Minister, and for any thing else, hindring it no more then the Directory doth; that the continuance of it would be matter of endlesse strifes &c. which sure 'tis more reasonable to think of an introduction of a new way of Service, then the retaining of the old; that there be many other weighty considerations, and many particulars in the book, on which this condemna∣tion is grounded, and yet not one of these mention'd, but kept to boil in their own breasts, if there be any, or which is more likely, falsely here pre∣tended to inflame the reckoning; that they are not mov'd to this by any love of novelty, and yet do that which is most novell; that they intend not to disparage the Reformers, and yet do that which is most to their dis∣paragement; that they do this to answer Gods providence, which never call'd them to this work, to satisfie their own Conscience, which if Errone∣ous, must not thus be satisfied; to satisfie the expectation of other Churches which expect it not, or if they did, might rather conform to us and satisfie us; and the desires of many of the godly at home, whose pietie is no as∣surance that their desires are reasonable, and yet are not known to have exprest any such desires; that they may give testimony of their endeavours for uniformity, whereas with other Churches, there is no such necessity of conforming in such matters, and within our selves, nothing is so contrary to uniformity, as this endeavour. And lastly, we have learnt from them, a rule by which they pretend to form their Directory, the agreeablenesse to the Word of God, and Christian prudence, and are most confident to justifie our Liturgy by that rule, against all Disputers in the World; And having now over and above all this, a plain confession under their own hands, in their Supply of Prayer, to justifie all that we pretend to, and so being saved the pains of any farther superfluous confutation, we shall leave it to the judgement of any rationall Lay-man in the New Assembly, to judge betwixt us and his fellow Members; whose pretensions are most moderate in this matter, whose most like Chri∣stian, those that are to rescue and preserve, or those which to destroy. Thus in the Councell of Nice, holden before Constantine and He∣lena, in a controversie of great importance, Craton and Zenosius, not onely Lay-men, but Heathens were appointed Judges or Arbi∣tratours, onely on this ground, because Craton a Philosopher would not possesse any worldly goods, and Zenosimus in time of his Con∣sulship, De concil. l. 2. c. 6. never received Present from any, saith Jacobosius: thus al∣so Eutropius a Pagan Philosopher, was chosen umpire between Orign and the Marcionites, it being supposed, that such an one was as fit to understand their severall claims, and judge according to Allegations
and proofs as any; And if we fall or miscry before such an Aristar∣chs, I shall then resolve, that a Covenant may wast a soul, (even drive the man into the field with Nebuchadnezar) deprive it of those  common principles of discourse, (by which, till it be debauched, it is , able in some measure, to judge of truth, proposed and debated before it) and then I shall hope for more candor in the busi∣nesse from an intelligent heathen, then from him. My onely appeal in that case shall be to Heaven, that the host of Angels, may by the Lord of that Host be appointed, to guard and assist that cause, and those Armies whose pretentions in this, and all other particulars, are most righteous, and most acceptable in his sight. Do not erre my beloved Brethren. Now the Lord of all mercies, and God of love and Peace, grant us to be like minded in all things, that we may joyn with one heart, and tongue, to praise him, and worship him, to blesse him, and to magnifie him for ever. FINIS.
