H803E (HORAE CONSECRATAE) 12315733 59395
portrait of Sir James Harrington Vew here his face from the Jngravers mint And in his workes his life and Soule in Print The True Effigies of Sir James Harington Knight and Baronet.
HORAE CONSECRATAE, OR Spiritual Pastime. CONCERNING Divine Meditations Upon the great Mysteries of our Faith and Salvation. Occasional MEDITATIONS and Gratulatory Reflexions upon particular Providences and Deliveran∣ces, vouchsafed to the Author and his Family. ALSO A SCRIPTURE-CATECHISME Dedi∣cated to the Service of his Wife and Children. AND NOW Published, together with other Treatises mentioned in the following Page for Common Use. By Sir JAMES HARRINGTON, Kt. and Baronet. London, Printed for the Author, 1682.
The Contents of the Six Treatises I. Treatise. THe Vision, Exercise, and Triumph of Faith; In which is discove∣red from the Elevated and Holy Mount of Divine Contem∣plation. 1. The shadows of Faith, 2ly. The true Faith and its Object, God in Christ; more particularly: The Lord Jesus Christ in his Incarnation, Life, Death, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, and coming to Judgment, with the Benefits accruing from them, to every true Believer. 3dly, The lost and mise∣rable condition of every man by Nature. 4ly, The Restauration of man by Grace; considered as accomplish'd by Christ, in and by his Priestly, Prophe∣tical and Kingly Offices. 5ly. A Prospect of Eternal Life, considered in the Glorification of the Soul and Body; particularly, as to the Faculties and Af∣fections of the Soul; and as to the Senses and Members of the Body, in the new Heaven and new Earth, during Christs personal Reign upon Earth for a thousand years. 6ly. A Prophetical Vision of Faith, holding forth twelve great works of God, which will shortly begin to appear, and shall be fulfilled in their Respective Seasons; and to be ended in the Translation of the Saints to Heaven: The Compleatment of Scripture Prophesies; the particulars of which Twelve Magnalia Dei, View in the next page; all which is intermixt with Holy Soliloquies, and Divine Ejaculations, applicable and profitable to every true Believer. II. Treatise. A Scripture-Catechisme, contained in an Epistle, sent by the Au∣thour in the Name and Person of the Lord Jesus Christ, to his Wife and Children; wherein, in Scripture-phrases only, is held forth the Doctrine, and Duty of a true Christian; A work of excellent use for private Families, as an Appendix to Catechising. III. Treatise. Divine Meditations upon the Creation, Mans Fall, and Re∣demption by Christ; presented by the Author to his Parents, in the one and twentieth year of his Age. IV. Treatise. A Pillar of Praise, or Occasional Meditations upon many Re∣markable Mercies and Deliverances vouchsafed by the Lord, to the Author and his nearest Relations. V. Treatise. The Lords days Preeminence above all other days held forth in an humble answer to a paper, or Quere given to the Author, by King Charles the First, concerning the Observation of the Lords day and Easter day. VI. Noahs Dove, or an Epistle of peace directed by the Author to his Fatherly affected Brethren, the Presbyterians and Independents, as a probable means for their Agreement and Union.
TWELVE MAGNALIA DEI: Or Heads, of the wonderful Works, and Actings of God on Earth, by the Lord Jesus Christ, during his Mediatorie Kingdome, (not yet Accomplisht;) All which are Treated of, in three Tracts of this Volume. I. THe Raising of the Witnesses, Rev. 11.3. unto the 13th. II. The Victorious Kingdom of Christ, appearing in the Burning of the City of Rome, Rev. 18.8, 9. III. The Total and Final Ruine of the Papacie, and of the Papal Kings of the Earth, her Popish Supporter, Rev. 19.19, 20, 21. IV. The Return to Canan of the Ten Tribes, and the Jews, and their Conversion, Rom. 11.25. to the end. V. The total Overthrow of the Turkish Empire, by the Israelites, and the subduing of all open Enemies of the Saints, by the reformed Nations, Ezek. 38, 39. Chapters. Dan. 2.44, 45. VI. The Binding and Casting of Satan, and his Angels into the Bot∣tomless Pit, the Local Hell, for one thousand years, to begin (as I hum∣bly conceive) about the six thousand year of the world, according to a true Chronology and Account, Rev. 20.1, 2, 3. VII. The Conversion of the whole World, to the profession of Christia∣nity, Psal. 67. to the end, Rev. 11.15. VIII. The Peaceable Kingdome of Christ, to be exercised by his Saints in this World, for one thousand years, (the time of Satans Imprison∣ment,) which will begin (as I humbly conceive) in the year of the World, six thousand and one, being Daniels first Monarchy, Rev. 2.44, 45. Chap. 7.17, 18.26, 27. Rev. 20.4. And the Churches Sabbatisme up∣on this Earth, Heb. 4.9. IX. The Loosing, and the Re-casting Satan and his Angels into Hell, after the destruction of Gog and Magog by Fire, Rev. 20.7, 8, 9, 10. To∣gether with the Consuming and Renewing of the whole Elementary World, at our Lords coming the second time to Judgment by the same Fire, 2 Thes. 2.7, 8, 9. X. Christs coming to Judgment, under which, is comprehended the Change or Resurrection of all the Elect to Glory, 1 Thes. chap. 3. v. 13. to the end; And Christs Remunerative Act of Justice to them in their Reigning with him upon the Renewed Earth a thousand years, Rev. 2.4, 5, 6. XI. The Raising of all the Wicked to Judgment a thousand years after the Elect, Rev. 20.5. and the Sentenceing them and the Wicked Angels, Rev. 20.11. XII. The Translation of all the Elect to Heaven, 2 Cor. 5.1. and the delivering of Christs Mediator Kingdome to his Father, 1 Cor. 15.24.28.
A Synopsis of the General Heads of this Treatise. THe Definition of Faith Page 3 Diverse sorts of Faith, viz Historical 4 Temporary 8 Miraculous. 15 The Means of Faith 21 The Object of Faith, Christ 22 Christ Born of the Virgin Mary 24 Persecuted by Herod ibid. His Agony 27 His Condemnation by Pilate 28 Crucified 30 His Death 33 His Burial 34 His Victory over Hell 35 His Resurrection 36 His Ascension 38 I. Man by Nature miserable, in his Soul, viz. in his Mind in general 41 Understanding 42 Conscience ibid. Will 44 Affections 45 The disorder in them, namely, in Joy, which cannot be in Riches 48 Honours ibid. Pleasures ibid. Wisdom 49 Fear 50 II. Mans misery in body In general 51 In particular, the sinfulness in his Eyes 53 Ears 54 Smell ibid. Taste 55 Touch ibid. Christs Priests Office in general 57 Intercession in particular 60 Satisfaction by both 61
Of Justification 62 Forgiveness of sins 63 Imputative Righteousness 63 The Definition thereof 64 Proofs of our right to Christs Imputative Righteousness by Scripture Demonstrations 65 General Questions and Objections, answered 67 A Dialogue between Christ and the soul 74 The souls particular eompalint Against the mind and understanding 74 Christ answ. 75 Against the Conscience 75 Christ answ. 75 Against hardness of heart 76 Christ answ. 77 Against the memories 78 Christ answ. 79 Against the will 80 Christ answ. 80 Against the affections viz. Love 81 Joy 81 Christ answ. 83 Her general complaint of her Vniversal unworthyness 84 Christ answ. 86 In particular respect of her Sences, Tongue, and Body 88 Christ answ. 89 Of Christs Kingly Office. Christs present Kingly Office, 93. viz. His Government 99 His excellent person 99 His Laws 101 commended from the Author God 102 Antiquity 102 Holiness 103 His Protection 106 particularly from Satan 107 Sin 108 viz. Adams sin 109 Original 110 Actual 112 World 116 from Its 1 Dart-lust 117 2. Riches 118 3. Honours 119 4. Persecution 120 His conduct & encouragement against Coveteousness 123 Sensual pleasures 124 Honour 126 Persecution 128 Death 130 Fear of Death 132 The pain and separation of soul and body 133 Comfort in the Resurrection 135 Christs Kingly Office at the last Judgment 139
Of Eternal life, and Glorified state of Man in general 143 & 149 In particular 1. In Soul The Understanding glorified 148 The Will glorified 149 The Memory glorified 150 The Affecti∣ons in gene∣ral 151 In particular Love glorified 151 Fear glorified 153 Zeal glorified 156 Anger glorified 160 Joy glorified 169 2. In Body In general 164. In special Its Spiritualness 169 Its Swiftness 169 Its Splendor 171 Its Incorruptible∣ness & Immortality 175 3. In the Senses In general 188. In particular The Sight glorified 195 The Hearing glorified 199 The Taste glorified 205 The Smelling glorified 210 Touching glorified 215 Of the Tongue the Organ of several senses 222 Twelve wonderful Actings, or Works of God to be fulfilled 239 Namely 1. The raising of the Witnesses 239 2. The ruine of Rome 239 3. The ruine of the Papacy 240 4. Israels Conversion 240 5. The destruction of the great Turk 241 6. The binding of the Devil for a thousand years 241 7. The Conversion of the World 241 8. The destruction of all Christs enemies 242 9. The Saints peaceable raign for a thousand years 243 10. The destruction of Gog, and Magog, and of the World by fire 243 11. The day of Judgment begun with reward to Saints, ends with judging the wicked 244 12. Christs Mediatory-Kingdom ends, the Saints are tran∣slated to Heaven for ever. 246
Errata. IN the Titles of the Fourth and Fifth Pages, for Death, Read Faith Page 17. Line 25. f. Nebuchadonazzer, Read Nebuchadnezzar p. 26. in the mergine, for James r. Lamentations. p. 27. l. 29. f. thus, r. this, p. 29. l. 6. f. affliction r. affe∣ction. p. 33. l. 34. f. brawl r. crawl p. 39. l. 38. after the word Stephen, add ye. p 40 l. 28. leave out which. p. 42. l. 32. f. Lunary r. Lunacy, and l. 40 f. are r. were p. 48. l. 33. f. pleasure r. play sure. p 49. l. 8. f. Philosophers r. Philosophies. p 53. l. 12. for those excess r. whose excess. p 54. l. 30 f. inordinate r. inordinacie p. 64. l. 30. f. Nature r. Natures p. 66. l 28. f. halt r. half p 85. l. 30 f. Joshua r. Josiah p. 87. l 31. f. be thy r. be to thy. p. 89. l. 4. f. peculiarly r. in part. p. 90. l. 17. f. ex∣hautasting r. exhausting. p. 92. l. 11. f. England r. Israel. p. 105. l. 1. f. of my mind r. of mind p. 116. l. 26. add i, before descends. p 119. l. 33. f acenting . accep∣ting. p. 130. l. 5. f. their r. these l. 40. f meat r. meal p. 134. l. 19 f. nding r. bend∣ing, l. 40. f. yellowed r. Gellied, p. 153. l 19. f. lights r. light, p. 155. l. 15. f. eye r. eyes, p. 157 l. 6. f. preservd r. preserd, p. 159 l. 31. f. a spring r. aspring, p. 161. l. 4. f. but its lip r. but in that life: l. 22 f. Beasts r. Bats: l. 24 f. thought r. thoughts: p. 169 l. 20 f. Locamotion r. Locomotion: l 28 f. Port r. Part: p. 173 l. 12 f. immund r. immur'd: p. 181 l. 9 f. the r. their: p. 189 l. 3 f. substraction r. substratum: l. 8 f. Elixa r. Elixar: p. 193 l. 15 f. so what use r. what use: p. 210 l. 17 f. Naal r. Na∣dab: p. 214 l. 26 f. with r. which: p. 235 l. 30 f. to r. so. p. 249 l. 13 f. I can proceed r. I cannot proceed.
DIVINE MEDITATIONS ON FAITH: OR, The Vision, Exercise and Triumph of FAITH. WHere the Treasure is, there's the Heart, the thoughts, the affections also.Matth. 6.21. A judicious mind is vertuously am∣bitious, only being inamored with that, whose true worth invites most its Contemplation, glaneing over in∣feriour things with a superficial and general surview. The Soul of Man is never un-imployed, though often mis-imployed, resembling in the perpetuity, though not in the quality of its motion, the ever and all-moving Creator; who as he ever was, so was he never idle, as being a most pure act. Is this true? Is the mind of Man never vacant? Art
thou never idle O my Soul? Strive then not to be idely employed; that both in acting, and in acting well, thou maist be more like thy Maker. And let the riches on which thou placest thy love, be Heaven and heavenly things: Where neither Moth nor rust corrupt, nor Thieves break through and steal;Matth. 6.20. so shall such Treasure be, not the Pri∣son, but the Paradise of thy heart. Amongst all those precious Graces heapt up in the bound∣less Store-house of Gods mercy, though each particular is to be admired, yet are there degrees of preheminence. For like as the beautiful Stones set in Aaron's Vestments; the Planets amongst the lesser Stars: So these three Di∣vine Graces, Faith, Hope, and Charity, out-shine the rest, attracting the eye of my Soul, and as much invite my Contemplation, as they necessitate my fruition. These, these are the Fundamental Graces, Superiour to all other, both in respect of the Excellency of their Object, Christ Jesus, and of their Subject wherein they reside, a true Christian. The other, viz. Temperance, Fortitude, &c. being often-times bestowed by God on many natural Men, in whom they shine with a dim Light, never with a Sun-like splendor. They (like the Indians) possessing those Treasures, which Christians know best the right use of: Such Diamonds being then only truly pla∣ced, when set within a foile of Humility. Thus my Soul, through the free Grace of thy Heaven∣ly Father, hast thou exhibited to thy view, and enjoying a Mine of Treasure, a Heaven of Happiness, Riches which exclude not, but command thee to covet. O follow thy Saviours Counsel, be a joyful Man, and industrious Mer∣chant.Matth. 13.44. Part with all thy sinful Lusts, Sell all thy worldly Vanities; purchase this Field, and Trade for these Pearls. Thy affections are the price; which that thou mightest dis∣burse without delay, look more seriously into their worth, so shalt thou at once affect, and possess them. As the optick faculty is both weak, and useless to us, in the Discovery of things that are either too neer, or too far distant, and so out of the command of its Power: so also if we suffer it at once distractedly to wander over se∣veral species (though within the strength of its specula∣tion)
it cannot give a true judgment, or description of any particular. The same Rules bound our understand∣ing, the perspective of our Souls. For look we on God, that Infinite being, further then our limits in his gracious revelation, our sight is cataracted and dimned with igno∣rance. View we him too neer in the attribute of his mercy, we grow presumptuously blind. Or place we ter∣rene vanities in our affections as worthy to be equally ga∣zed on with him, our reason will prove both purblinde, and false-sighted; rendring an untrue and unprofitable dis∣covery to our Souls. The last of these Rules let me first apply; then follow here the objects proposed to my present Meditation, which are the Principal and Evangelical Ver∣tues. Shall I then at once superficially glance over them? No, rather view thou my Soul each grace apart, that so thou mayest better discern the dignity of each particular. And as Faith hath the preheminence amongst them, and the first place in us, at our regeneration; so in thy Con∣templation. Phylosophers are beholding to Aristotle for most of their Definitions; the Christians to the Scripture, as being the truth, and so no error in it; as being the Foundation, and therefore no building without it. Wouldst thou know then O my Soul what Faith is? Search the Scriptures and thou shalt find,Hebr. 11.1. that Faith is the Substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. O perfect fi∣gure, O true Effigies of that Heavenly Grace, drawn even to the Life by that only great Arts-Master, the Spirit of God! Frail Mortals that we are, extraordinary need have we of such exact Descriptions; since like weak-sighted Men, we multiply our object, grasping frequently the sha∣dow in stead of the substance. Thus being often times deceived in our judgments, by the many counterfeits of Faith, Let us upon some Professors thereof (that even falshood may not want a witness) cursorily gaze, as Pas∣sengers use to do, on executed Traytors; learning wis∣dome from others harms, rather pitying their folly, than following their example. The Sun may rise gloriously, and yet suffer an Eclipse, before it mount the Meridian. Good beginnings may
make us expect, cannot assure us of good proceedings. Many run in a race,1 Cor. 9.2. but he which perseveres to the end obtains the prize. Man-kinde doth commonly ascend one degree towards Heaven, where frozen with ignorance and folly, they afar of, with the Owle, wonder at the Light, not caring by their approach to enjoy its heat, or to be enlightned with its brightness; like silly Birds ho∣vering over the Devils blaze,N. B. (that fowler of Souls) or with ignorant Travellers, eying and following that false and wandering Light of Worldly Vanities, until they be plunged in their own destruction.Historical Faith. Ezek. 49.3. Genes. 28.12. Genes. 3.1. Amongst these, give me leave to point out the Historical Believer, who hath waded, and in the deep, in Ezekiel's River; hath ascen∣ded one step of Jacob's Ladder; yea, with the Serpent in Paradise (that Devil incarnate) hath found out the Tree, of whose sweetness he shall never be a happy partaker. O the folly and madness of rational Souls! who having spyed out the good Land of Canaan, choose rather, with the murmuring Israelites,Numb. 13. to wander in the Wilderness of Vanity, the Deserts of Evil, not only Forty Years, but their whole life time, then to go in to possess that fruit∣full Soile, with faithfull Joshuah. Tell me, O Man, why the affection doth as it were loose its appetite, change his Channel, and dissent from that Rule in Heavenly things, which in terrene objects it both allows, and follows. The Covetous Man having begun but to tast of Riches, con∣tinues a Midas, ever after, wishing to touch and feed on nothing but Gold. The Voluptuous Man having had but an Airy view of Pleasure, is enamoured with it, and de∣votes his strength, his time, his life to its service. And the Ambitious Man having once kneeled on the Foot-stool of honor, never rests, until he hath ascended the Throne. On the other side, change we but the Place, Earth for Heaven (although the objects differ much in worth) and our minds change also. The Historical Believer, by his general knowledge and observation of the Principles of Nature and Justice, cannot but confess a God; next, that his Eternal Beeing is only the unexhausted Ocean, from whence all Rich Streams of Graces,Revel. 22.1. and Rivers of Life proceed. The everlasting Mine, and Treasure of Trea∣sures,
which are as infinite in their quantity, as their value. Yet for all this proficiency in the theory of Divinity, he still remains a drone, like a lazie Mathematician, only view∣ing upon his Globe, those magazins of wealth, (the Indies) without endeavouring, or taking pains to enjoy them. He knows that Princes are but Vice-royes, Tenants at will, Commissioners, whose Power lasts not beyond Gods will, or the date of their life; The Almighty only being the Fountaine of Honour, according to that of the Psalmist, Promotion cometh neither from the East, nor West, nor from the South, but God is the Judge, he putteth down one,Psal. 75 6, & 7. and setteth up another. Notwithstanding this knowledge of Gods preheminence, he either like the Barbarians exchan∣ges Gold for Glass, his golden Hours for frail and glassy Titles, terrene and empty favours, which are but the coun∣terfeits of true honour, a row of Characters, by which we should spell out Heavenly things, the substance of these shadowes. All Earthly honours are either mediately, that is, by course of Blood, derived from our Parents to us, or else immediately by the present favour of the Prince, conferred upon Us; the worth of them consisting in the height of Title, Place or Priviledges above others not so dignified. Look then O Glow-worm towards Heaven, and thou wilt soon confess how infinitely all Earthly vanities are over∣matched; they being but rude Patterns, helping us to judge of the Original; degrees to raise, not weights to depress our Meditations; a Mount Nebo to view Mount Sion. Have we on Earth Kings to create us honourable? Behold, their Breath is in their Nostrils; whereas in Hea∣ven, the Lord is King for ever and ever,Psal. 10.16. who hath said and verified it, that though they are Gods,Psal. 82.6. yet they shall die like Men. Further, the World gives to its favourites, large and magnificent Titles, adorning them with splendid Robes, which are (as it were) the Superscription of their Place and Estimation. Pharaoh named Joseph,Genes. 41.45. Zaphnath Paaneah, which signifies Prince. Daniel is named Belteshaz∣zar, according to the name of the Caldeans God.Dan. 1.7. David must be stiled the Kings Son in Law.1 Sam. 18.21. Esth. .15. Mordecai goes out from the presence of the King in Royal Apparel, of blew
and white, and with a great Crown of Gold, and with a Garment of fine Linnen and Purple. We see here how li∣beral Earthly Kings, yea Kings of the Earth, have been in the expression of their favours: and can any conjecture, the eternal God, the only Jehovah, and King of Heaven and Earth, can, or will be wanting to his favourites? No, his Word, which is truth it self, shall be our assurance; Fear not little Flock, for it is your Fathers pleasure to give you the Kingdome.Luk. 12.32. Nor are we only Kings, but dignified above such expressions; the Image of the only true God being renued, and imprinted in us. For through our Lord Jesus Christ's most great and precious promises are given unto us,2 Pet. 1.4. that by them we should be partakers of the Divine Nature. Hath Saul chosen David to be his Son in Law? yea, and he esteemed it an honour worth the hazarding of his life? But behold what love the Father hath given to us, that we should be called the Sons of God.1 Ep. Joh. 3.1. Was Mordecai so publickly honoured by Ahasuerus? God doth far ex∣ceed in his free favours towards his: Witness St. John, say∣ing,Rev. 4.4. I saw round about the Throne four and twenty Seats, and upon the Seats four and twenty Elders sitting, clothed with white Rayment, having on their Heads Crowns of Gold. Come hither O thou loytering Soul, that carest not to ascend the Mount with Abraham, and Isaac, but stayest below with his Servants, and Asses: that choosest rather to stand still, and become a barren, and unmovable Pillar of Salt, with the faithless Wife of Lot, then with no less hast than good speed to travel toward Zoar, a place of safety, with her righteous Husband. The Poets tell us a Fable of one Tantalus, whose hunger-starved Mouth covetously gasped after Golden Apples, which continu∣ally fled from him. I would (O half Believer) thou hadst his hunger, his thirst, then would our Saviours lo∣ving invitation be joyfully obeyed:John 7.37. If any Man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink such living Waters which shall not flie from, but into the longing Soul. Art thou Adam's Son? O here behold a Tree of Life, whose Root is only transplanted from Paradise to Heaven; that so the Fruit might hang down to Earth. Here is now no
prohibition, to restrain thy ambition, but a commission to warrant thy affection: (Take and eat:) O take it, even Christ in his Word, and Sacraments; not carnally as Adam, but spiritually, with the hand of thy Soul, which is a saving and applying faith. Next relish it by Meditation, and digest it by prayer. Then shall thine eyes be enlightned, and thou shalt perceive thy nakedness, that so Christ may cloath thee with his righteousness here, and his glory hereafter. Then shalt thou behold the vanity of earthly pleasures, riches, and honours; confessing that God is all these, yea all in all un∣to thee. That the happiness of Divine knowledge, consists most in fruition. That it is better to acknowledge God to be Immanuel with Isaiah, then Daniel's God with Dari∣us. To imbrace Christ in our armes by faith with Simeon,Esa. 7.14. Dan. 6.26. Luke 2.28. Num. 23.17. Luke 1.47. Mark 5.7. than to see his Star afar of with Balaam. To rejoyce in God our Saviour with the blessed Virgin, then to confess Jesus to be the Son of the most high God, with the Legion of Devils. Then shall that virtual and spiritual Figure of God, which according to our capacity, the holy Spirit hath shadowed out by attributes in his Word, and Works, be ap∣propriated unto us by Faith. That so those glorious rayes of his, to wit, his Holiness, his Justice, his Power, which (before our Souls were Eagle-fighted, our minds illumina∣ted) rather scortcht, than cherished; dazled than enlight∣ned us; meet all in the centre of his mercy, Jesus Christ; and from him as it were by reflection, powerfully work upon us, and comfortably refresh the whole Man; renew∣ing, justifying, and sanctifying thee here, and glorifying thee hereafter. All this while, O my Soul, thou hast been viewing the first draught of Faith, rudely painted after a Landskip fa∣shion, and therefore ever beheld at distance. Now ob∣serve a second model, limb'd out more exactly, having in every part a seeming perfection. O that the Colours would be but as lasting as lively. The defect then of this Pourtraiture is a false ground, manifested and proved by its short continuance. The truth of which, since it cannot aptly, or charitably be demonstrated, or discovered by any extant piece I know, lest I should seem to be my own Judge, or judge my Brother, I will with reverence look into our
Ark, the sacred Scriptures; wherein, as there is the two Tables of the Law for our instruction, so there is a Pot of Manna to encourage and strengthen our obedience. An Aaron's Rod to tell us what we have been, are, and should not be. There I doubt not but to finde some Antiqui∣ties of the infant Age before the Law, or the middle Age under the Law, and some in the old Age of the World, that last measure of time under the Gospel. Which, although dusted by death, survived in those living chara∣cters for instruction, and our purpose. All humane judgments may erre. Neither is there any Seat of Judicature upon Earth,Temporary Faith. no not Peter's Chair, al∣together free from injustice and false opinions. If it be the certain condition of Man to be uncertain in all his ways; Nam humanum est errare, it is his Custome to erre; How can he then which is a stranger at home, make a true discovery abroad? He that stumbles in a known and even path, cannot choose but fall headlong, if he ascend crag∣gy passages. He that is ignorant of earthly things, cannot be spiritually judicious. The best oft-times are deceived by their own hearts. (For the heart of Man is deceitfull above all things, who can know it?) much more by others. Those which in the false Ballance of our understanding have seemed down weight, being placed in the Scales of the Sanctuary, have been found wanting, as may appear in these following examples. Who, although they out-went the prospect of Men in the right way towards Heaven in the outward acts of Faith, yet afterwards either stood still, or wanting Oyl for their Lamps, were benighted and strayed in the broad Paths of prosperity. Cain the first draught of humanity that ever Man drew;Genes. 4.3. the first born to whom hereditarily belonged the blessing, and the dou∣ble portion; the fourth part of the then visible Church, and a sacrificing Priest before God; viz. by his birth, e∣ducation, & offering, proved to be a Member of the Church; a Professor, by his Prayers; (implyed as the inseparable Companions of Sacrifices;) the fruits of that profession are manifest; so that to the superficial view of Man, he seems not only practically Religious, but also to parallel faithful Abel. Yet behold, in process of time, his want
of perseverence, shewes his defect of Sincerity; the mur∣der of his Brother, his former Hypocrisie; and after∣wards concluded of, and punished with the Curse of God; the Hatred of good men, and his self Despai∣ration. Lots Wife was a member of the apparent Church,Gen. 19.1. and as it is probable, forsook her native Country, her Fathers Gods, to be a sojourner, a stranger in a remote Land with Abraham. And no doubt (while she lived in that sinful Sodom) was a frequent Hearer of that Doctrine of Repentance, which her Righteous husband Preached with so unhappy success. Yea, in conclusion, she forsakes Sodom, being not only aided by the presence, but led by the hand of an Angel toward Zoar, that Type of Heaven. But no sooner did the Angel leave her, but her eyes reversion, discover her minds aversion. Which her self would have seconded, had not the Almighty, in Favour to her Husband, and in Mercy to Us, made her an examplary Monument, in a Pillar of Salt. Next, under the Law, behold Saul, not only a Mem∣ber,1 Sam. 10.1. but chosen of God to be the Captain over his Church. A man every way well qualified; first, for his Body, his Proportion was so excellent, that there was none like him amongst all the people. And for his Mind,1 Sam. 10.24. it was endowed (it seem'd) both with Divine and Moral Vertues; witness his joyning in Prophesie;1 Sam. 10 10. 1 Sam. 11.15. his perfor∣mance of many Pious Duties, as his Sacrifices at his Co∣ronation, his asking Counsel of God, and inquiry after Sin;1 Sam. 14.38. 1 Sam. 15.24. 1 Sam. 10.21. 1 Sam. 10.27. 1 Sam. 11.6. 1 Sam. 28.3. confession and humiliation after Samuels Re∣proof; his humility at his Election, his patience and mercy at his Rejection and Defamation; his Fortitude against the general and open Enemies of the Church the Ammonite; his Zeal against the private and se∣cret Enemies of Religion,1 Sam. 28.7. viz. all Witches and Wiz∣zards. Here then is a spring of Piety; a profession, and ex∣pression of Religion; a Gourd, whose glory may not only serve as a Canopy of state to Saul, but as a shade to one of the Prophets. A gourd indeed, and so it fa∣ded. For the eave of his last day ruined that frontis∣piece
of Vertue, which his whole lifes best Actions had raised towards Heaven. For, had he been with the Pro∣phets, and joyn'd with them in Prophesie? His ignorance and wants now send him to enquire of the Devil. Did he Sacrifice before to God? Now behold, the reward of Divination and Witchcraft are in his hand. He whose custom was to ask counsel of God, now seeks after a Witch; and he whose seeming Zeal condemns his Righ∣teous Son, for tasting of an Honey-comb, although ig∣norant of any restraint; now, contrary to his Oath and Covenant made with God, without humiliation and judging of himself, or confession of his fault, willingly and wilfully swallows down the very gall of Sin. His Humility did not more grace him, when he lay buried in the peoples Stuff, than his Pride did debase him, when he presumed to be one of Gods Council. That patience, fortitude, and mercy which abounded, yea, was extended towards others, is now deficient to him∣self: For, he falls all along upon the Earth, becomes sore afraid; no strength is left in him, and yet he refu∣ses to Eat. For, having no conscience towards God, no wonder if his Body wants the charity of Nature: When the Creature abuses the Mercy of the Creator, he must expect to taste of his Justice: And when he ceases to know Himself, he shall be made to know his Punishment. Saul hath forgotten both his God and himself, and therefore justly is he now forgotten, and hears his Fu∣neral censure pronunced by him who never spoke nor wished better to man, To morrow shalt thou be with me.1 Sam. 28.1. Forewarning fore-armes not Sinners; he that doubted of his Choise, though from the mouth of Gods Prophet, credits his refusal and death from the Devils Oracle. Extraordinary Blessings are the free and voluntary gift of God, and not believed of Sinners before enjoyed. But his punishments are the due Burden of sins desert, and therefore are expected before divulged. The Soul being often-times aforehand sensible of that which the Body afterwards endures. None but a false, or tempo∣rary Faith hath a final cessation; but such is this of Saul,
he now beleeves onely that he might dispair. The first degree of a true Faith, being usually, the false ones last step. God lifting up the one from the sense of judge∣ment to the faith and sight of Mercy. Sin dragging the other from the belief of punishment into the gulf of Despairation. Though Saul hath his last day marked out, even the morrow; yet neither the love towards his Sons (whose Lives bore the same date with his) nor care for himself, begets the least endeavour, by delay, or otherwise, to out∣live the fore-going Prophesie (inevitable are the Judge∣ments of God); nay rather, he hastens it, shortning his flight, that he might shorten his life. And, that sin (ac∣cording to its nature) might have a companion, he moves his Armour-bearer to be a traitour to his own Soul by ex∣ample, whom his precept could not force to be a traitour to his Prince. For, he falls upon his Sword, which, in∣stead of Defence, becomes a weapon of Offence. So often-times God deals with the Wicked; who, as in life, themselves are their worst Enemies, so in death they prove their own Executioners. Thus the Sacred Annals, before and since Moses, hath by the Deads example, given most lively arguments to prove this falshood, of the deadness of this seeming life of faith. O admire here the infinite extent of the Mercy of God! who out of the carcase of this Lyon (Sin) this Eater (Death) brings forth both meat and sweetness for his Sampsons, his Nazarites; making the Downfal of the Fathers, the Rises of the Children; their Ignorance our Knowledge; their faults and blindness, apt spectacles to help the weakness of our sight! It now remains, that the holy Records of the faithful and powerful Gospel, as the Eccho of the Old Testament, consort in the like precedents; that by so consonant an Harmony, the dissonant, and unground∣ed judgement of the most hypocritical and temporary Believer, may be convinced, if not converted. The purest Gold hath its Dross; the best Wheat its Tares: Yea, the Moon is then most full of Spots, when least empty of Light. The Church of God in the Pri∣mitive times, in its Infant Age, had many, who although
they were deemed Members of Christ, had not yet put off the Old man, The Old Adam. Many, whose Image and outward Superscription seemed to be our Cesars, yet proved to be false, and unvaluable Coyn, when they came to their test, or exchange. Witness Ananias and Sapphira,Acts 5.1. (a pair doubly united, by Sin and Wedlock) who, before their trial, were esteemed as Members of the True Church, as Beleevers of the Apostles Doctrine, and no doubt baptised in that Faith; the effects of which seemed to lead them on to forsake the world; for, they sold their possessions to works of Charity and Piety, And laid it at the Apostles feet. Who would not here have parallel'd these with sincere Joses, since both par∣ties did the same duty, though not with the same heart; the one acting truly that Christians part, which the other only play'd. Mans natural light is comparatively darkness, and the height of his Knowledge advantageth him only with a larger prospect of his ignorance; he knowing most that confesses to know nothing. The conscience of our want being the perfection of our science. Only thou, O Lord, art the Fountain of Knowledge and Wisdom; thou triest the Heart and the Reins, and seest not as man seeth. Shalt not thou who planted the Ear,Psal. 94.9. hear? Thou that formed the Eye, see? Thou that teachest man Knowledge, know? Thou, O Lord, knowest the thoughts of man. For what end therefore, O Ananias, tends the subtil compact with thy Wife? The strength and ripeness of Sin, hastens the harvest of Judgment, wherefore then this bare notion of Religion?Matth. 24.51. This worst Sin, hath Hells worst Punishment. What serves for, O Sapphira, the impudent defence of this act, which is as lightning be∣fore the thunder-clap of Justice; since the spirit searches all things,1 Cor. 2.10. yea, the secret things of God? He knew thy untruth, thy lie, and therefore at once pronounced and executed the truth of thy Judgement. Behold the feet of them that have buried thy Husband, are at the dore, and shall carry thee out: Whereupon she fell down at the A∣postles feet, and yeilded up the Ghost. Justice depriving those of life (Gods gift) which any way detain mans
gift to God, to wit, their Offerings; or whatsoever else is set apart for an Holy employment. The indulgent Parent fears that the life story of that child, will prove but a compendium, whose Infant years are an Abridgment of Mans stature. The like observa∣tion will be proved true (if doubted) in many preposte∣rously forward Christians, who are like to Childrens Bub∣bles, which, while they last, are but Topographies to the Beholders: Or, like Lightning; which, though it invelop Heaven, hath nought remaining; yea, scarcely time and place to bear witness of its glory. So these hypocritical and temporary Professors, seem a perfect Map of Christianity, the splendor of Religion. Yet at the appointed time they vanish, becoming so much fur∣ther off, by how much nearer they seemed to Heaven. View the experiment of this truth in the Scribes and Pharisees, (from the opinion of whose Righteousness, the Jews drews this Maxim, That if any two on Earth should be glorified in Heaven, the one must be a Scribe, the other a Pharisee.) That their Purity was but a Blaze, this vulgar conceit a Falsehood. Hear and believe the Word, yea, the Word of Truth,Matth. 23.13. concluding these Wise men, Fools; these Guides, Misleaders; these Patrons of the Common-wealth, unnatural Vipers; sealing them up with a seven fold Woe, for manifest an hypocrisie, to eternal Damnation. Our Saviour was many times guarded with troops and multitudes of Disciples, whose momentary affections proffered Him an Earthly Crown. Yet he, which knew all Hearts, knew the unconstancy of theirs, and therefore committed not himself to them. For, had they been as Powerful as Willing, had their affections been as sincere and durable, as they were fervent, yet could not any earthly Monarchy allure him to Reign, who lest his Hea∣venly Throne to Suffer; exchanging a crown of Glory for a Crown of Thornes, that his Humiliation might be be mans Exaltation. O here behold the Unchangeable∣ness of Gods Love, the Vanity and Unsteadfastness of Mans best Resolution. Those Disciples, which even now would have Crowned him, those which traced him
through Sea and Land, and having found him, said, What should we do that we might work the Works of God; yea those, who, as it were filled with a passionate desire of possession,John 6.30. prayed, Lord, evermore give us this Bread; these now, instead of honouring him with a Diadem, deny his Regal descent, saying, Is not this Jesus the son of Joseph. These whose appetites desired evermore to enjoy this Bread of Life,John 6.42. think there is now no living with this Food; as being too hard for their digestion, their tongues testifying their distate, saying, This is an hard saying, who can hear it? To conclude, they that so fast followed him, now as fast depart from him; Witness our Saviours question to his Chosen ones, Will ye also go away?John 6.60. O blessed Saviour, Let my Soul be a follow respondent with Peter, and say, Lord, to whom shall I go?John 6.68. Thou hast the Words of Eternal Life. My Meditations have spent much time in the disco∣very of this out-side of Faith. I should now proceed, did not the hateful example of Apostating Demas stand bran∣ded in Holy-Writ, for my observation and conclusion of this Point. Knowledge is the foundation of Faith, but God only is the Master builder of it. Christians are Priests, imputatively and derivatively from our Saviour, as offering up the Evangelical sacrifices of Prayer, and Praise; but the Ministers of the Gospel, in a more espe∣cial manner. Demas was a Priest, because a Christian; Learned, as being without doubt, a Teacher; Pauls schol∣ler and companion, one whose eyes were daily witnesses of Signes and Miracles; whose ears were frequent audi∣tours of Gods Word: yet this man wanted the witness of the Spirit in his Conscience. Therefore no marvail if his actions were destitute of its power. The Wisdom of this world is Foolishness with God,1 Cor. 1.20. and proves at length so to Man. Demas's worldliness discovers his Folly; and his second choice shews the Hypocrisie of the first. That affection which towards Christ hath an end, had never a beginning. The Love of God is Lasting. And though our weak understanding, through the interposition of some great Afflictions, may conceive it to be extinct; yet,
that eclipse past, this overture of falling out, proves the renewing of Love. He that perseveres to the end, shall endlesly be Beloved. But he that grants God the Major, his youth and strength; and of his full age the Minor, the lesser part of that time, and yet at last doth in fact deny the conclusion, is as little a Christian as a Logician. The Word of God, as it is the great luminary of Di∣vinity; so likewise the Sun of our Souls, which discovers unto us those glittering counterfeits, which the false and weak lights of our depraved understandings, would pre∣sent as blameless. This is that Star which guides all Wise men to Christ. A Pole Star, directing only all Hea∣venly Observers; being either unknown, or else not useful to worldly Stargazers. This Word, as it makes us know our selves, which is the principal of wisdom, so it makes us discern (in some sort) others, which is the Divinity of Knowledge. Which of the Devout Jewes would have thought the Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites, had not the Word of that All-creating Word, Christ Jesus, ana∣tomised their shameful Corruption? Who amongst us would have judged a Miraculous Faith, less than a Sa∣ving; had not the same Verity assured us, That many which have Prophesied, cast out Devils,Matth. 7.22. and done many wonderful Works in his Name, should be excluded Heaven with a Nunquam novi vos; Depart from me ye workers of Iniquity?Miraculous Faith. That a man may be a Conduit-pipe to convey Water of Life to others, and yet prove a vessel of Dishonour, the Religious care of Paul witnesseth, who subjected his body, lest when he had Preached to others,1 Cor. 11.27. be himself should become a Reprobate. But that they, whose Word aided by the power of Faith, was mighty to cast Sathan out of others, should be possessed themselves, is both Lamentable and Wonderful. These indeed have cropt the Leaves of Faith, leaving the Fruit and Root be∣hind: seeking therewith, like Adam, presumptuously to hide their Nakedness, and want both of Application and Justification. Thus these, whilst they think to de∣ceive others, the Devil deceives them. Charity, the most fruitful, lasting, and most eminent
Grace, begins first at home. The affection which we bear to our selves, being the best pattern for direction of our loves towards others. Witness the approbation of our Saviour Christ, whose abridgement of the whole Law being Charity; the Rule of it was, To love our Neighbours as our Selves.Matth. 22.39. From this Expression, or short Paraphrase, who concludes not a primary and most na∣tural Duty, necessarily to be implyed and commanded, [a self-loving] though not a self-love as being the man∣ner, quantity, and just weight of all our external acti∣ons. Of this want, are those guilty, reproved by our Saviour; who (too publickly officious) offer to pull out their neighbours Mote, not being sensible of the Beam in their own Eyes. Also the unhappy Miracle-worker must here plead Guilty, of whom that Jewish saying, falsly applyed to our Lord, may be truly verified, He saved others, himself he cannot save. Gods Power is the chiefest agent in effecting Miracles; an Attribute most necessary to beget Fear, Admiration, and Humiliation. But alas, the Knowledge of Gods Omnipotency, shall rather affright, than comfort us, with∣out the apprehension and self-application of His love to∣wards us, in Him, for whose Name sake he wrought such Signes. Yea, our Fear will prove slavish, and ser∣vile; our Admiration frightful and terrible; our Humi∣liation distracted and desperate, without the sense and feeling, promise, and assurance of his merciful Love. For God is Love,John 4.16. and works by Love. His Love being the only cause of ours to Him, and to others. The truth of this, made Paul account all Faith, though able to remove Mountains,1 Cor. 13.2. nothing without Charity; further intimating, that how glorious soever such outsides might seem, they would prove empty shells, void of the ker∣nel, the substance, and true essence of Faith. Charity being the left hand of Faith, as Faith the right eye of Charity. There needs no other witness of this Faiths insuffici∣ency than Judas Iscariot. Who was elected to be one of the Select Disciples, and dignified with the Highest of Callings, even to be the Apostle of Jesus Christ. One
who, both under the Law and Gospel, had participated of those initiating Sacraments, Circumcision and Bap∣tisme, as also of that which was for Confirmation, the Passeover. Further, he was a Preacher of the Covenant of Grace, by Word as well as by Name, by Deed as well as by Word; as appears by our Saviours large Commis∣sion. He gave them Power,Matth. 10.1. viz. his Twelve Disciples against Vnclean Spirits, to cast them out, and to Heal all manner of Sickness, and all manner of Diseases. The Execution of this, the joynt Confession of the Twelve, and of the Seventy Disciples, doth manifest, saying, Lord, even the Devils are subject unto us through thy Name:Luke 10.17. Loe, here Judas miraculously casting out Devils. Will it not be a wonder, yea, and seem an untruth, that this Saint is become a Devil? No.John 7.6. Such a Faith to have such an End, is but natural; a stinted Faith wants enlargement to continue. Through Faith in His Name we may do Mi∣racles; but through Faith in His Blood,Acts 4.30. we and Judas only can be Saved. The light and fruit of Faith, and all other good Works must shine, not to me, nor to others alone, but to both: Men may be instruments of Heat to others, and yet Cold themselves. Many are made Executio∣ners of Gods Power, which never enjoy his Grace. Ne∣buchadonezzar was his Rod, Cirus his Servant: Nei∣ther his Son. Yea, Miracles and proofs are not wanting in our dayes; there being those (I fear) whose words have powerfully cast Sathan out of others, their own Souls being not delivered from his Tyranny. Stories, the monuments of Art, preserve in black and white, what once was done in Colours, by a Grecian Painter; whose Skill was so much an Ape to Nature, that his lively Draughts deceived the double sences of Birds; causing them to prefer the shaddows of Fruits, be∣fore the fruitful Substance. The Devil in his subject is not less void of Art, although they both differ in their ends; the one Deceiving, but to shew his Skill; the other being Skilful to deceive Birds who have not reason to correct their Sence, nor to discover the Shaddow of Shad∣dows; one is only a Laughfing-stock of that Artists inno∣cent
Craft; But Man, whose incorporeal parts parallel the others Essence, yea, now transcend it, (by how much a positive is better than a depravation) is the stage which Sathans derision tramples on. The least of Scornes, is not the least of Injuries; the height of it, the greatest of Cruelties. Such is his, for it wounds the wounded, seek∣ing to deprive those of Heaven, whom he hath already defrauded of an earthly Paradise. O my Soul, thou art one of this worlds Common∣wealth, to whom this busie Impostor, variously disguised, offers his service. Each mind at first, whiles unhabituated, is in that respect an empty Tablet, on which some por∣traiture must be drawn. A good and a bad Artist, strive for the Employment. Divers excellent beginnings are there Blurd by the one. Divers bad ones amended by the other. The good Models having only this advantage, that once dry, and fixt, they may suffer a Blot, never an utter Defacing. Death lastly brings to light, the work, which challenges the Master, and the Master it. Wouldst thou then know what is Drawn, and whom thou hast Imployed? Let thy following Meditations search out, and observe the Original; which (the shaddowes withdrawn) most opportunely, and in order, meets thy next Contempla∣tion. The pleasingness of Objects, begets a Delight; the delight, an affection; the affection courts an enjoying. Eve, the Mother of Sin, and of Man-kind, before he took that Forbidden, and Sacramental Fruit, or tasted the Bitter-sweet, saw that the Tree was good for Food, and that it was pleasant to the Eyes.Gen. 3.6. The Scripture thereby intimating, that had not the Flesh afforded entertainment to the Temptation, nor the Eyes been windows to let in the superficial beauty of that knowing Fruit, nor the mind brought forth, and nourisht desires so rebelliously ambitious, no powerful assault, nor subtile stratagem of Sathan, could have prevailed, or been sufficient, to enter a Cittadel so perfectly fram'd, and strongly fortified. As the Body, so the Soul hath its several Objects; according to which diversity, it may be capable of a threefold sight; in all which, the cause, medium and instrument of seeing, with its object, is most considerable. In the first, the sight
of sence, there is the Light proceeding from the Sun, occasioning the operation: 2. The fleshly nerves which contein the optick faculties, imployed about all objects, and visible substances. In the second, the sight of Rea∣son, there is the light of Nature: 2. The luminary o in∣strumental receptacle, the mind of Man: 3. The things obvious, which are chiefly, moral Justice, Virtue, and earthly Wisdom. In the third, viz. the spiritual and su∣pernatural sight: There is first, the Light of Grace; . The Eye of Faith, whose object is the only begotten, infinitely Glorious, and mercifull Son of God, Christ Jesus, with all his faithful Promises, numberless Merits, saving and incomprehensible Graces. This then, O my Soul, is that Sight and Light; in comparison of which, all other is but Darkness, or as Torch-lights to the Sun. By this alone, a true Christian shall as much transcend the rational, as the rational the sensual Creature. Doth the momentary splendour of ter∣rene things entice us to affect and prefer them? And shall the everlasting, and perfectly glorious Vision of Heavenly things; even of Him, who gave Beauty, Form, and Beeing to thee, and all things, prove less deserving, less effectual? Was the carnal eyes of my First Parents so over-pleased with the transitory Beauty of an earthly Fruit, that they forgot their Creator, whose Image they bare, and entered the death, threatning the breach of his Commandement, though open to the fury of a double Curse; exchanging the eternity of Happiness, for a mo∣mentary taste? And shall not the Pearless splendour of Heavenly things, animate me to prepare a hand, a heart, to receive, and taste, the Manna of Souls, the Fruit of a Tree of Life, not guarded with a Cherubs Fiery sword, but obvious to all; not rooted in Earth, but sprang from Heaven; being grafted into Humanity, that his Living Fruit might become the saving and eternal nourishment of Man? O Lord, I earnestly cry out with those at Ca∣pernaum, Give me evermore of this Food.John 6.34. Have mercy upon my Infirmities; for, being Adam son, I have a withered hand, a carnal heart;Rom. 8.7. Psal. 51.10. which carnality  enmity with thee. Therefore, Create in me a clean Heart, and
renue a right Spirit within me. Relieving my Spiritual wants with this apprehensive Grace, by which supernatu∣ral gift I may be made able to apply thy saving Promi∣ses▪ with all their dependances. O Adam, I cannot blame thee for the loss of this Grace; since thou deprivest thy Posterity of those Trea∣sures only, which thou was possest of. But in thy Innocen∣cy this thou hadst not, yet wert thou not therefore de∣fective; for thy created purity needed not any imputative righteousness; being of it self sufficient, because accepted. The beauty of thy first Purity was so far from Leprosie, that not the least Stain was then apparent to deface its Candor. Thy Innocency, void of Sin; and therefore required not a Saviour. Thy Soul was the Resemblance of thy Creator; and therefore a pleasing, and most pro∣per object for his All-glorious sight. There was without Wrath; Attonement; without Enmity, Mediation; with∣out Debt, satisfaction; without Jesus, Application is un∣necessary. Infidelity was the first means of Death, Faith is the only instrument of Life. By the one, came our Descent to Hell; through the other, our Ascent to Heaven. That made us Fly from God offended, this makes us Run un∣to Him appeased. Man had his first Spring in the Crea∣tion, his Summer in Paradise (which should ever have continued, had not his meridianal height suffered a de∣clination. So shortning his happiest dayes▪ he changed both Place and Season. As after the Fall, Winter en∣sues, so did his. For, what are our untimely times, but as a Winter quarter; wherein every Tree is Fruitless; we being not seemingly,Ephes. 2.1. but really dead in Sinnes and Trespasses. And if there be any Sap in the Root, or Un∣derstanding,Rom. 1.20. it serves for no other use, nourishment, or comfort, but to leave us without excuse. If any Leaves, as Moral actions, and outward Professions; alas, these may hide from men, our Nakedness, producing a suppo∣sition of Fruitfulness, but cannot deceive God, who shall cause such Leavy Fig-trees to wither. Mat. 21.19.O Saviour Jesus Christ, my Years increase, my Life decreaseth; neither know I how soon thou wilt visite me
by Death, or Judgment, when if only as outwardly glo∣rious thou sendest me, my Portion is with Hypocrites; if defective of Fruit, thy sentence hath already award∣ed me, fit for the Fire. Lord,Mat. 7.19. I am a stem of sinfull Adam, sprung from a barren Root, and therefore a Plant which but Cumbers this Ground. O thou which only art Lord, and Husband-man of Souls,Luk. 13.6. Joh. 13.1. so shine on me by thy favour, mould and manure me with thy Grace, prune me with thy Fatherly chastisements, that the old Man may be rooted up, and the new Man spring up, and grow: that so the Winter of Sin past, a Spring of Faith may ensue, which in thee being only fruitfully perfect, I may with a happy certainty, expect an Autumn of Glory. Whosoever believeth in me hath everlasting life,Joh. 6.47. The means of Faith. are the words of our Saviour: from whose graciousness eve∣ry Soul may receive infinite encouragement to pursue the condition, or instrumental means of so unvaluable a gift. For what is more desired than life? What more abhor∣red than deprivation? Let this offer therefore of Immor∣tality, the height, and accomplishment of Mans happi∣ness, like the streams of Paradise, direct thee (O wan∣dering Soul) unto the Eden of Glory. In the midst where∣of thou shalt finde the Spring of Faith, the Fountain of Life, even God himself: From whom alone, all Graces have their right ebulition, and procession: for God deals to every one the measure of Faith.Rom. 12.3. As in the first Crea∣tion, he gave a Beeing to what was not; so in Mans Re∣generation, his immediate Word wrought the one, his written Word the other. Pulpits are Heavenly Conduits from whence by Earthy Vessels, the Ministers Voices, (as in smaller Pipes) the Waters of Grace are conveyed in∣to every open Ear. Faith comes by hearing,Rom. 10.17. and hearing by the Word of God. The life of the Body is the Soul, the Soul of the Soul is Faith. As the Infant lives not till God hath infused a Soul: so the Christian lives not without his gift of Faith. O thou whose gifts are the effects of thy free Mercy,Ejaculation. not our Merit, and therefore without Repentance or Changeableness, thou being Wisdome it self, and there∣fore Unalterable; Omnipotent, and therefore above all
contradiction, and resistance; give to me this Seal of thy love, this first fruit of thy favour, and my Conversion. O bestow on me the Grace I ask; because thou hast gi∣ven unto me Grace to ask. For thy bounty is not closed up, because thou hast been liberal, like to Man; since thy love is without measure; thou therefore give me, because thou hast given. Thy former favours being but earnests of thy future mercies. The Body of Man, like to the Pool of Bethesda, hath five Porches, or senses, through which all external plea∣sure and delectation enters, as it were to comfort the imprisoned Soul. They being as so many Cranies dim∣ly enlightning her Dungeon, that so their poor and weak expressions might make her ambitious of a perfect liber∣ty. Amongst these, the seeing faculty in comparison of the rest, may be stiled the beautifull Gate, for its Grace, and Ornament; and the Bodies mirrour, wherein with delight it views the perfection of it self, and others. So that indeed, the better half of Mans temporary felici∣ties consists in outward objects. O have these fleshy eyes of ours, such various presentations of pleasure, to delight these Bodies of Clay with! and can we imagine Faith (the eye of the immortal Soul) can be destitute of a sub∣ject worthy its view and contemplation? O no, my Soul. The weakest-sighted Faith enjoys a far better, and more excellent prospect; viz. with Eagles eyes looking abroad upon the glorious Son of Righteousness, and Son of God Jesus Christ.Christ the ob∣ject of Faith & Son of God. The Life of the Body gives the first power, and motion to the Eye, but this Heaven-aspiring sight gives the Soul its first Life: Hear me, saith God, that is, believe in me,Esay. 55.3. and your Soul shall live. The Earthly Sun suffers sometimes an Eclipse; so did ours once for all. An interposition caused the one; the other, not any defect in his own Body or Light, but a condense Darkness; an Orb of Sin, for a time obscured his brightness. Women and Children, whose shallow reach fathome not the depth of Natures works, may with a flying fear hide themselves, not daring to behold the labouring Sun; when a learned Artist by Water, or re∣flection searcheth out the cause and greatness of an E∣clipse.
Worldly and carnal Men may mask their under∣standing with a wilfull ignorance. But do thou, O Lord,Ejaculation. which hides these things from the Wise,Matt. 11.25. and revealest them unto Babes, make me to apprehend the reason, and admire the infiniteness of thy suffering. Earth affords not a neerer Union or Relation than friendship. That mysterial incorporation, and perfect conjunction of Wedlock, is but an inclusive of this; that being more particular, this more general. Society is the happiness of Mans life, this is the height of that Con∣junction, and the perfection of that happiness. He is either most miserable, or undeserving, that hath not had some taste of this reciprocal foelicity: Since vice, and vertue have both their favourites, the one exceeding in number, the other in worth. Thus far hath my Medi∣tations roved on Earth, ascending this height of tempo∣rary delight, that from such a rise, my Soul may take a quick flight to Heaven. The friendship of the World and all things else in it eminent, or praiseworthy, are but dark shadowes of Heavenly things; beames derived from that eternal Light, to give Light to Man. Doth not the Holy Spirit express the exceeding love of the e∣ternal Father to us his Children by the tenderness of Earthly Parents? His infinite and free mercy,Esay. 49.15. by the charity and friendship of the Samaritan stranger? The ardent and unparallel'd affection of our Saviour Jesus Christ, to us his Church,Mark 10.33. by a Matrimonial and espou∣sal love? O all yee that have any illumination of Faith,Canticles. come, and witness with me if there were ever, or can be any love, amity, or affection like unto this, which God hath shewed towards us. Lord, I would fain express thy acts of mercy, the witness of thy love, and object of my Faith, but who is sufficient for these things? or able to express what he cannot sufficiently conceive of? How, or where shall I begin? when Lord my beginning was from thee? Yea, from all beginnings hast thou chosen me, and in time hast thou called me, void of love, desire and freedome of will, or any other congruity, remote, or suf∣ficient to answer thee, calling; being the servant of Sa∣than, and Bond-slave of Sin, and therefore an Aliene
from thee and the common wealth of Israel. One not only sick,Ephes. 2.2. but dead in sins and trespasses, and therefore unable to move towards thee. A natural Man perceiving not the things of God, and therefore ignorant of thee. Thy love alone was the cause of mine,Ephes. 2.1. for herein is love, not that we loved thee, but that thou loved'st us first; Nor fore∣knowledge of my after works or willingness to receive grace,Ephes. 2.2. 1 Joh. 4.10. occasioned this free Election: For not of works, which I had done, but according to thy mercy, didst thou elect, and save me. From thy free and gracious prede∣stination my faith with a devout affection makes haste to behold the Foundation,Titus 3.5. thy dear Son Jesus Christ my Saviour. O wonder, O infinite Love, O admirable friendship! He whose glory and greatness the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain,Christ was born of the Virgin Mary. was inclosed within the Womb of a poor though pure Virgin. God descends in humility from Heaven, that Man might ascend Heaven in Glory; be∣coming like to Man, that Man might be like to him. Not Rome the Metropolis of the World, nor Jerusalem the glory of Judea, must tryumph in the birth, or be made more honourable by the first presence of Emanuel; but Bethlem, the least of the Cities of Juda. Which poor place, either ignorant, or regardless of so high a favour, was not only void of thankfulness, and common courte∣sie; but of neighbourly hospitality. A Stable, a Manger, and brute Beasts being the Palace, the Cradle, the com∣pany, it prepared for the entertainment of the Worlds Saviour. Behold here a mystery of mysteries; He who knows no beginning, now begins to be, that his being in nature might give us a being in grace, in glory. And in his Infancy did our gracious Redeemer begin to suffer; the entrance of his life being but the Prologue of his sor∣row, and the total thereof a continued passion. His innocent Child-hood is, made the subject of trea∣son;Persecuted by Herod. and nought but his slaughter must allay the Tyrants suspition. What needed any, unjustly, or violently to have sought his Death, who willingly came to Dye; on∣ly living the life of Man, that for Man he might be ca∣pable of Death. This Herodian cruelty hath a deeper
dye than Nero's Tyranny. For he destroyed the World only in his wish, but this Man by one act would have made not our Bodies only, but our Souls mortal. O sweet Jesus, thou fleddest into Egypt, not to preserve life, but to die daily; avoiding his merciless Power, that thou mightest declare thy powerfull mercy. Thy Death, by which we live, must not be constrained, least ungrateful Man should esteem it no gift. The strength and policy of Herod are unable to wrest that per-force from thee, which thou purposest freely to give. Infancy must not suffer for Man-hood, since the greater includes the less; but the lesser cannot comprehend the greater. That per∣fection of Age, that made Mans rebellion, and sin more full, more hatefull, must make thy obedience and suffer∣ings more compleat, more acceptable. Not Bethlem, but Jerusalem the center of the World, must be the Theatre of infinite mercy, of merciless cruelty; that thy passion being acted in the place, wherein the Legal Ceremonies were celebrated, the Types and Figure might more clear∣ly point out the substance. All those bloody Sacrifices being abolished by one Sacrifice of blood. After this escape of danger in his Child-hood, and re∣prieved of his life for a time, did not the increase of his years multiply his sorrows? No doubt he suffered, as well as fulfilled the Law for us, during those thirty years he obscured himself. At twelve years of age we finde him disputing in the Temple,Luke 2.46. when surely he wanted not op∣position; that time of his Youth being a gradation, and introduction into a height of suffering, and a private pre∣paration to a publick Office and Ministry. Which he no sooner enters, but he is encountered by Temptations,Mat. 4.1. and those none of the least, they being fortified with the greatest subtilty of Sathan, which over-blown, Man se∣conds the Devil; heaping upon him whatsoever injuries humanity can possible be capable of; beginning with his good Name, which they seek to scandalize, and make approbrious with their blasphemous tongues; reporting him to be a Glutton, a Wine bibber,Mat. 11.19. a friend of Publi∣cans and Sinners. Disparaging his birth, and calling him the Carpenter's Son, affirming his miraculous power to be
the effects of a Satanical confederacy, saying, that he cast out Devils,Mat. 12.24. by Belzebub the Prince of Devils. Poverty to all, is a misery full of miseries, yet not a∣like to all. Circumstances alter much the state of things. He is poor, that is born so; but he is truly poor, that is made so; since the one knows most of his misfortune is from, and by reason of others. When the others woful experience makes him more sensible of his woe. A Mans own censure, more than the judgments of others, makes him more or less unhappy. Deprivation and loss is the extremity of poverty, and most grievous to humanity. But, who can lose what he never had? In nature, want is as it were a part of Mans nature, and therefore less wretched. The first works most upon the body, this last upon the Soul; and therefore far more unsufferable, by how much that purer substance hath a deeper apprehen∣sion of pain, than the more gross and outward senses. O my Soul, is this outward indigency, so full and over∣flowing with sorrow, how infinite bound art thou unto him, who being rich, became poor, that thou through his poverty might be made rich.2 Cor. 8.9. The greater the height, the more miserable is the dejection. The more eminent the state, the more unsupportable the humiliation. O behold,James 1.12. and see if there be any sorrow like unto this sorrow, wherewith the Lord afflicted him in the day of his fierce Wrath. Was he rich in beauty? had he the dew of his youth from the Womb of the Morning?Psal. 110.. Behold, for our sakes he is become as a Root springing out of a dry ground, he hath no form nor comeliness. And could we now view him as he was then,Esay. 43.2. there would be no beauty that we should desire him. What thing so without measure glorious, and unex∣pressible, as the simple, and infinite essence of the God∣head? what Element more vile, and base than Earth, the principal ingredient of our bodily substance? O mi∣racle of love! behold, God is made Man, the Word was made Flesh,John 1.14. and dwelt amongst us: Immortality putting on mortality, that mortality might become immortal. A King of Caesar payes tribute to Caesar, and will be subject to his Subjects. The Master of all, as a Servant
to all, washes the Feet of all his Disciples. Is there any comparison betwixt Heaven and Earth; a Crown of glo∣ry, and a Crown of Thorns? yet how willingly doth this, not to be equal'd love, accept of this unequal change. Such Lord were the honours which the World gave thee. The story, and contemplation of my Saviours suffer∣ings, leads my Soul into a Garden, not fraught with joy,Christs Agony in the Garden. pleasure, and delight, but with grief, sorrow, and pertur∣bation. O who can by a true faith look upon his hum∣bled Saviour, and not be humbled in Spirit? Who can behold the clodded drops of blood falling from his bles∣sed Body, with a drye Eye; not sorrowing for the sin that caus'd this sorrow; not shedding plenty of tears, in ap∣prehension of his love; who shed plenty of blood in the imputation of our sin? If his external parts were thus prest, and opprest with pain, how painfull were the pres∣sures of his Soul, the internal cause of this outward A∣gony? Surely, as the Power was infinite which sustain'd him, so the Passions were infinite which he endured, and are as far above the height of Mans expression, as above the height of Mans sin. In a Garden Adam sinned, and Christ suffered: Sathan in the one deceiving our first Pa∣rents by a Serpent; in the other betraying our blessed Saviour by a Judas. The unsupportable wrath of God, the immense weight of Mans transgression, and the ebbe and flow of his humane will being all expressed in that significant, and passionate Prayer of his. O my Father, if it be possible, let thus Cup pass from me.Mat. 25.39. He had now thrice bowed his blessed Knees to Earth (to whom all knees do bow in Heaven and Earth) when a wicked trayterous crue, under the conduct of a most ungrateful Leader, enter the lists, adding affliction to his affliction; and becoming a party against him, took their parts. Thus merciless, and unthankful is the disposition of ignorant Man; thus free and undeserved is the mercy of God. Lord Jesus, shall my faith lose sight here, for∣saking thee with thy Disciples? No Lord; I will yet fol∣low thee, even to the high Priests Hall, not denying thee with Peter, but confessing thee.
Can any, better or more lively express thy cruel usage there,Esay. 50.6. than thine own spirit doth in the mouth of the Evangelical Prophet Isa? I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that pulled off the hair, I hid not my face from shame, and spitting. Loe, how this Hea∣venly Chronologer, by Divine Inspiration, even as an Eye-witness, describes the several cruelties inflicted on our Saviour. Although the judgments of the Lord are unsearchable,Rom. 11.33. and his wayes past finding out, yet such is his goodness towards his People, that he reveales these his secret decrees before they come, that when they are come, we might, with a more firme assurance, believe them. A Christians Faith hath a double confirmation, as from the uncontrol'd truth of History: so from the Divine testimony, and presage of prophesie. Some hun∣dred years before his passion, our Saviour, by the mouth of the Prophet, told us what he would do. Now behold, in the fulness of time, his own Person, and Act, makes good his own Word;Mat. 26.67. Witness the true Relation of his sufferings. Then did they spit in his face, and buffetted him,John 19.1. and others smote him with the palmes of their hands. Then Pilate took Jesus,Esay. 53.5. and scourged him; thus by his stripes we are healed. I am now in Spirit before the Judgment Seat of Pilate, where I view the Judge of the World arraigned before a Judge of a Province;Christs Con∣demnation by Pilate. and hear at once an unheard of injustice; the most righteous of Men accused, acquitted, condemned. If there be any power, as well as form of godliness; any lively, and applying faith, besides a bare Historical belief in you, let the patient Perusers of these my thoughts (unworthy this subject) read no further, before yee have called with me a private Sessions in your souls. Where a diligent search and enquiry being made after sin, and the whole Man arraigned, and found guilty: Our own consciences (although our Judge) will censure us, and our transgressions, as the occasion of our Saviours sufferings will inform us; that this his arraignment is the reason of our acquittance, his unjust condemnation the cause of our pardon, and salvation. O let not the infi∣nite passions of our Saviour, the privation, and actual of∣fences
of our Souls, which made him obvious to the wrath of his Father, the malice of Men, and Devils, inflicted on his blessed Body, be remembred without a flood of tears, to wash his Feet, without a thunder of groans to pierce his Eares, without an extasie of admiration, a fer∣vency of affliction to meet the liberality of his mercy, the immensity of his love. Though I have somewhat digressed, yet am I not out of the way. They that appear before God in Sion,Psal. 84.6. must pass through the Valley of Baca, making it a Well. My fath hath now again overtaken my Redeemer, hurried to his Execution, by the fury of the Jews; but more swiftly carried by the wonderfull efficacy of his love; which makes him not to fear his torment, but to bear it. Blest Christians! behold your General, your Standard, your Vocation. Whosoever follows Christ, must take up his Cross with Him.Mat. 10.38. What though the Circumcision mock us with our crucified God? He, of his own free will, suffered this only, and by his own Power overcame it, and lives to Judge their lives, who thus contemn his Death. The place assigned for this unparallel'd impiety is Cal∣vary, a place of Sculls. What was the whole World be∣fore this act of mercy, but a Golgatha, a Mansion of dead Men? the Sphear of this Centre, a large Field like that of Ezechiel, Full of dry Bones.Ezek. 37.1. O thou who gavest power to the dead Body of Elisha, to revive a breathless Corps, be mercifull to us dead in sins, and trespasses, admit us to touch thee dead, by faith, that so we may arise here to the first Resurrection of Grace, hereafter to the other of Glory. The second Adam must resemble the first, that the one might gain what the other lost. For as through the first offence many be dead,Rom. 5.15. so much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace hath abounded unto many by the last. As they were alike in the publickness of their Persons, and extent of their actions, so also in many o∣ther respects; that by so lively an assimulation, our faith might have a more firm assurance, and quick apprehen∣sion of the truth of our Redemption and Redeemer.
Adam was a Man, and the workmanship of the blessed Trinity;Christ conceiv∣ed by the Holy Ghost. so was Christ according to his humane nature. He was endowed with a compleat innocency and purity▪ So was our Saviour, although in a far higher degree of perfection; it being requisite that that righteousness, which must justify many, should much exceed that which only was sufficient for the preservation of one. This ex∣celling plenitude, is clearly to be observed from St. Paul's comparisons, about the same subject. Not as the offence, so is the free gift,Rom. 5.16. For the judgment was by one to Con∣demnation, but the free gift is of many offences▪ unto ju∣stification. The salvation of one sinner is a far greater Donative of grace, then the perseverance of a World of Righteous; as may be deducted from that Coelestial Jubile, expressed in the Gospel. There is more joy in Hea∣ven for the repentance of one sinner,Luke 15.7. than over ninety nine just Persons, which need no repentance. We read that Adam was naked when he eat of the forbidden Tree. And do we not finde our Saviour naked upon the accursed Tree? Those impious Souldiers, which in deri∣sion unclothed him in the City, excited by covetousness, again disrobe him in the Field:Christs cruci∣fying. Adam's naked innocen∣cy ushers in his fall, Christ precedes his rise, his victory. O gratious Saviour, thus didst thou suffer thy self to be divested of thy Rayment,Ejaculation. that we might be invested with thy merit; willingly putting off the covering of this body, that thou might'st put on the covering of our Souls; which invisibly did inclose and over-whelm thy whole Man, benighting for a time thy apprehension, and clothing both thee and the whole World with a hide∣ous darkness. Well might the Worlds great eye close it self, as being ashamed to carry light to such impiety. And no marvail, if the Sun of God's favour was not per∣spicuous to the Son of his love, whilst the little World, Man, interposed its dark shaddow of sin betwixt thee, and thy Fathers rayes. Misery is usually the parent of Pitty. That body which in some measure is not sensible of compassion, when o∣thers suffer, hath nought from Christianity, but a name; from Nature, but a Carkass. Yea, so unmanlike is such
a disposition, that it deserves not the society of Dives Dogs. Charity, the most durable and amiable grace of the mind, is commonly moved by pitty; which,Luke 16.21. Musitian-like, produceth that sweetest harmony of Souls. The one would soon freeze, did not the others condoling, melt us both into passion, and action. That Patient is most miserable, yea, doubly afflicted, that, destitute of friends, findes not a hand to relieve, a word to comfort, a tear to bathe, a groan to eccho forth and keep time with his sorrows. But how unsupportable is that grief, which meets with Job's comforters, who instead of balmes, ap∣ply corrasives; of ease, reproach; of consolation, derision?Job 16.2. O blessed Saviour! as thou endurest more pain, so thou foundest less friendship than any other. Those that cry∣ed heretofore Hosanna,Luke 19.38. and would have made thee their King, even now roar out a Crucifie; and will have no other King but Caesar. Those Elect Disciples,Luke 23.21. which here∣tofore accompanied thee in all thy Persecutions, are ei∣ther fled, or dumb for fear. Like as the sense, life, and feeling, is as it were fled and banisht from a stupifyed, and over-burthened member; so did thy God-head, the Pillar of thy strength, (a ready help in time of trouble) seem now to sleep, hide, and separate it self from thy humanity. Witness that loud Ejaculation, O my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?Matt. 27.46. Lastly, the Devil, with all the infernal Spirits, did now tryumph over thee, as their captive; supposing that all our hopes were crucified with thee. Yea, to aggravate thy endurings, his agents, the chief Priests, Scribes, and Elders, at once deride, and tempt thee. Their mocking is expressed in the first part of their Sarcasme;Matt. 28.42. He saved others, Himself he cannot save: Their temptation, in the conclusion; If He be the King of Israel, let him now come down from the Cross, and we will believe in Him; He trusted in God, let him deliver him now, if he will have him, for he said, I am the Son of God. How many dangerous Darts are at once delivered from these blas∣phemous mouths, against the Resolutions of our Saviour, the welfare of our Souls. His humane will (which from the fearfull, and deadly apprehension of the bitterness of
his Cup▪ did in the Garden, rather express an excess of pain, than an unwillingness to suffer: rather declare his Humanity, than contradict his Divinity) might by these Speeches, have been afresh molested and invited to a self-deliverance, even in this entrance of death. Further, they might also thus suggest, that he should not only by such  giversation be freed from the present and un∣supportable torment; rescued from the all conquering Monarchy; but also without controversie be received, and acknowledged the Son of God, the King of Israel. Yea, which is more miraculous, than all the rest, those that even now were impious Traitors, will instantly be∣come obedient Subjects; those that ere while were exe∣crable blasphemers, will presently be changed into righ∣teous converts; those whom John rightly stiled a Gene∣ration of Vipers, our Saviour, a faithless Generation, will in a moment be metamorphosed into believing Christi∣ans. O blessed Redeemer, had not our lives been more dear unto thee, than thine own, these Diabolical charms might have raised up such a self-love, as would have forced a repreeval from death. But thou O Lord search∣est the heart; yea, thou knowest how exceeding full of hypocrisie the minds of these Men were. So that if thou shouldest have descended from the Cross, or sent unto them one from the dead, they would neither have trusted in thee, nor credited the other, since they believed not Moses,Luke 16.31. nor the Prophets. Three hours, measure out this last act of our Saviours sufferings. That mass and full measure of sin, which many thousand of years had treasured up, must not be abolished, or annihilated in an instant. Why was not the infinite sufferings of Man deified, though dated but for one minute, of more rate, price, and estimation, than the offences of Man mortall? yea, surely. Wherefore then this overplus? O it is the overflowing of this Foun∣tain of love. The immense disparity betwixt the offen∣der and satisfier, the Creature and Creator, causeth this disproportion betwixt the debt and satisfaction. Man cannot sin, but finitely, God cannot love but infinitely; Man's actions, to which his sin cleaves, are finite, God's
Attributes (one of which is his love) are infinite.Rom. 11.33. O the depth of the riches, both of the wisdome, and knowledge of God! Lord grant that I being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the bredth, and length, and depth, and height;Ephes. 3.18, 19. and to know the love of Christ, which passeth all understanding, that I may be filled with the fulness of God. The friendship of Man is momentary, fickle, and un∣constant, as wanting measure, perseverance, and a true foundation; But the mercy of God, expressed to Man, his most unworthy Creature, is the very quintessence, compleatment, and perfection of all other loves, being not defective in quantity; for in him doth all fulness dwell; nor in quality, for it is the love of God; nor in stability, for he is Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end; the great Jehovah, who is not changed;James 1.17. With whom is no variableness, nor shaddow of turning. And lastly, the cause of it is his own free grace; the ground of it Jesus Christ. So that the Foundation of God standeth sure, as having this seal:2 Tim 2.19. the Lord know∣eth who are his. The glorious and infinite Attributes of the Almighty, are so many glasses, through which, at di∣stance, the Creature in some sort may perceive the Maje∣sty of the Creator. Amongst which, none is more use∣fully transparent, than that of his love. The mirrour of which mirrour, is the passion of our Saviour. The Cen∣tre of all which is this very point of his death.Of Christs Death. O graci∣ous Lord, was it not enough that thou forsookest the Heaven of Heavens, thy Throne of Glory, to live amongst Worms, on this Dunghill, Earth, the unworthy foot-stool of thy greatness? Nay further, was it not sufficient that thou endurest the stings and persecutions of those Muck∣worms, suffering such insects, (even the corruption of na∣ture) to brawle and tryumph over thee, but that thou would'st also pray, forgive, and dye for thy Persecutors? For a righteous Man perhaps some would suffer,Luke 23.34. but thou dyest for sinners, the just for the unjust. Lord Jesus, let the apprehension of thy wonderfull affection be as delight∣full to the taste of my Soul, as thy last draught of Gall and Vinegar was displeasant to the relish of thy pallate.
As thy sense of my sin, and thy Fathers wrath made thee cry aloud for assistance; so, let the sense of thy mercy, my happiness, make me lift up my voice in thankfulness. Yea, let me conclude my hours each day of my life, with that comfortable, and Swan-like ditty of thine; Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit;Luke 23.46. Death is swallow∣ed up in Victory; O Death where is thy Sting! O Grave where is thy Victory! the Sting of Death is Sin, and the strength of Sin is the Law.1 Cor. 1.54, &c. But thanks be unto God which giveth us the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Finis coronat opus, the last acts of our Saviour are not the least.Christs burial. In the foregoing encounters he was a Comba∣tant: In these following actions, a glorious and peaceful Conquerour. The account cast up, the compleatment concludes the operation, He was buried. O my Soul, should thy faith be so weak-sighted, as to make thy Sa∣viours Death the utmost extent of thy prospects, thou mightest then as one without hope, uncomfortably weep with the Marys, at the Foot of his Cross. But thanks be unto God, thou mayest overlook that fear, being assu∣red that the Grave of thy Champion is not his Prison, but his resting place; the conclusion of the fight, being the beginning of his victory. Upon the Cross, our blessed Saviour accepted the challenge of Death; fulfilling that of the Prophet, O Death I will be thy Death. And here in the Sepulchre beginneth his Tryumph.Hosea 13.14. For, No Man can enter into a strong Mans House, and spoile his goods, except he will first binde the strong Man,Mark 3.27. and then he will spoyle his House. The Grave is the Metropolis of Death, which our General enters, that so the place might both assure us of his Combate, his Victory, and add glory to his Tryumph. Had'st thou (O blessed Saviour) been led into this Cytadel of Death, as his Captive, the Gives of corruption would soon have made thee his bond-slave. But behold the greatness of thy Power, the innocency of thy Person tramples on this last Enemy, that is to be subdued; and makes thy Tombe, his Grave, Death be∣ing swallowed up in Victory. As the Suns Eclipse makes us the more acknowledge
the brightness and benefit of his light, so the clouding of our Saviour by death, teacheth us his Disciples at once, the felicity of his presence, the uncomfortableness of his absence, and the perfection of his Person. The descents of Mans misery are the degrees to Christs victory. As we in this World inherited sin, so he upon Earth merited righteousness. As we in the Grave, are subjects to death, so he in the Sepulchre makes death his subject. And lest Hell should tryumph over us in punishment, he in Person tryumphs over it with Victory. In Person I say.Christs victory over Hell. Although his Body lay still in the Grave, since its local absence, contradicts not his personal presence, the inseparable union of the God-head, with his Body and Soul, even in Death, permitting only a se∣paration in nature; not of natures, a mutation of order, no disunion. If the Devils fear, forced his Prince to sup∣plicate, when our Saviour sojourn'd on Earth, what un∣expressible terrors did then possess them, when the Worlds Great Monarch reigned over Hell? If in his humiliation they doubted his sudden judgment, How did his exal∣tation assure them of their certain execution? Here be∣hold acted, that Vision figuratively, after manifested un∣to St. John, of Sathans imprisonment for a thousand years,Revel. 20.1. although literally it was to be fulfilled many ages after. For who hath the Key of the bottomless Pit of Heaven, and Hell, but he to whom all power is given both in Heaven and Earth? He who openeth, and no Man shutteth. Or when should these Principalities be sub∣dued, if not at this general and most glorious Conquest? Can any imagine this great Victory to be maymed, or imperfect, since he then led Captivity captive, trampling over all those, that resisted either his Power, or our Sal∣vation? So conclude this; what time since his coming doth so evidently demonstrate this truth to be by our Head in part fulfilled, as the after events. I mean the tranquility and delight of the Church amongst themselves, those hundred years immediately succeeding his suffer∣ing. What though the ten Persecutions did exceedingly rage against the Saints, according to the 4th. verse of that 20. of the Revelations? The blood of the Martyrs
is the Seed of the Church. Yea, they did even then reign most gloriously with Christ. As the Kingdome of our Saviour, and the brightness of the Church, shined most perspicuously, when the purity thereof brake forth in their profession and constancy; so the miseries of Christians, and the liberty of Sathan is never more apparent, then when the damnableness, and obscurity of capital Here∣sies Eclipse the visible face of the Church. For in the first, we may truly be said to live, and tryumph even in death: in the last, their supposed freedome is the greatest sla∣very; and their seeming life, but a cursed, and eternal deprivation. Three Days continued, though not compleat, was the proportion of time allotted, to measure out my Saviours last sleep. Had he dyed, and presently revived, unbe∣lieving Man would have tearmed such a Death but a Transe. Yea, the scandalous Rulers would have blasted the wonderfull Miracle of his Resurrection, with an ac∣cusation of self-contradicting, and not performance of his former protestation; Destroy this Temple, and within three Days I will build it up again. Wherefore O my Soul, that thy faith might be confirmed in the sure be∣lief of his dying; The Jews convicted, by the truth of his performance; and his own Power, magnified by the Divinity of the act; he is content to lodge, (as it were) in a second Womb, viz. of Clay; that all things being perfected; the third Day, he might lead his the way, to a birth of Glory. The victorious Soul of my Saviour, after the reliction of his Body, having trampled upon Death, tryumphed over Hell, and took a full possession of Heaven; that his actions, as they were the means, so they might be (as it were) the story, and prophecy of our succeeding. All the Souls of the faithfull, when they part with this hol∣low Clay, in like manner (though through his right) conculcate Death, and Hell, enjoying the new Jerusa∣lem.Of Christs Resurrection. Behold, he now proceeds by the raising of his Body, to assure us, that our Bodies shall be like our Souls, im∣mortal; as our Souls shall be made like unto his most glorious, through the re-creation of his beautifull Image in us.
The object of my Faith hath hitherto been a Night-piece, full fraught with Persecution, and suffering, tears, and strong cries, dying, and burial; but now the all-flourishing Rayes of the Immortal Deity, personally in the Son of Righteousness, at his rising, breaks forth, changing that Darkness into Light. To this may be ap∣plied that of the Psalmist. Mourning may continue for a Night, but joy comes in the Morning. Noah's Ark, the true Figure of a Christians faith, must be drenched in the Waves, and driven by the Wind, a long time, before it shall rest dry, and safe upon the Mountains of Ararat. The humiliation of my Saviour, was his night, wherein the humanity did most manifest it self: So his exaltation, in which his Resurrection hath a part, is his Day, where∣in the brightness and power of his God-head did shew it self most apparently. Adam (the destroyer of Man) first enjoyed a blessing, a Paradise, before he merited a Curse, a Hell. But the Messias (the restorer of Man) must first be made an execration, before he can purchase for us a re-possession. Not long since, I besought all true believers to weep with Christ, who wept not for himself, but for them. But now my Soul breaths forth a more pleasing request, which I prefer not to all, but to those only which are mourners in Sion. That as they have grieved with Him, and for themselves in him, so now they would be filled with his solace, and tryumph in his Victory. That as they have sowed in tears, they may now reap in joy. Every Man was a debtor unto the Almighty, untill Christ our surety paid the mortgage, and redeemed our Souls. He satisfied the debt on the Cross, least we should doubt of the sufficiency of his satisfaction. For, behold here our acquittance, and the Bonds rent, even the Bonds of Death, torne asunder in, and by his Resurrection. Have we not then cause to rejoyce for so great a deli∣verance? The mirth of Moses, Myriam, and the Israe∣lites was expressed in a Song of thanksgiving, when the Egyptians were entombed in the Sea: The joy of Barak and Debora was proclaimed in an Anthem of praise,Judg. 5.1. when Sisera and his Chariots were discomfited: The
Virgins of Israel were not silent, when David overthrew Goliah: And shall we that are delivered from the slavery of a spiritual Pharaoh sin; from the tyranny of a hellish Sysera; a strong Goliah, Sathan, the Prince that ruleth in the Ayr; and over all the Children of disobedience, be empty of gladness, and gratefulness? when all the Creatures land, and praise, our Moses, our Barak, our David, our Jesus, shall not all the People, especially the redeemed of the Lord, say Amen? Let us now walk forth with those of Emmaus, to meet our Saviour, after the Resurrection of his Body; Praying earnestly, that through the Power of his Spirit, he would open the eyes of our faith, that we may believe, confess, and rejoyce in his Resurrection. The infinite affection of this Saviour of ours, is apparent in every action. His love made him depart from glory, when he descended from the bosome of his Father; his love made him con∣ceal his glory, when he maskt it with humanity; and the same love makes him as it were dis-esteem his glory, that he might confirm his Disciples. The Rulers lye, (saying his Disciples came by Night and stole him away) might perchance have been received generally as a truth. Or else the believers might have proved as incredulous as Didimus; Had not his bodily presence Non-plust fal∣shood, and controuled unbelief. Christs Ascen∣tion.Forty Days, the time appointed for his last sojourning on Earth, being now expired; Let my faith, as it hath followed Him from Heaven, so ascend with Him to Hea∣ven. The Angels that questioned the Disciples, with a Why stand yee gazing,Acts 1.11. did not intend the closing of the Souls eye, but the bodies. No act of Christ ever wan∣ted a Witness; the Foundation of Christianity thereby being as it were semented for ever. Whereas all other fabulous Religions, moulder away, as layed with the un∣tempered Morter of Mans devices. The Wise-men, and Sheepwards are Witnesses of his birth; John, and the multitude of his Baptization and Circumcision; Pilate of his Innocency, the Centurion of his Deity, and Cruci∣fixtion, the Souldiers of his Resurrection, and his Disci∣ples of his Ascension.
The affection of Christ towards Man, is like himself, always the same. That free and good will of his, that brought Him down to suffer, lifts Him up to mediate. The unspeakable comfort and truth of which office, since I am both unable, and unworthy to express, I refer my self, and others to the Scripture of God. Rom. 8.33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that justifieth, who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that dyed, yea, rather that is risen again, who is even at the right Hand of God, who also maketh inter∣cession for us. Whilst the glorious Sun is clouded or e∣clipsed▪ Man may with an open and undazled eye behold its luminous Orb; But when free from all interpositions, it shall re-ascend the top of its Meridian. What seeing Organ is there, that can behold it, without being bleard with a review, in sign of weakness; or incombrance with∣in it self, as uncapable of such brightness? The eter∣nally begotten Son of the everlasting Father, our Son of Righteousness, and the only Son of Glory, hath been made manifest to the eye of my faith, whilst vail'd with an unglorified Humanity, he continued his unchangable course, through the darkness of suffering; Cloudiness of Persecution, and Eclipse of Death. But now that he hath remounted his solsticial of Glory, weak faith, thou must with a humble and closed eye, endeavour to ad∣mire (which is thy homage to his Divinity) what, thou canst not conceive of; not being discouraged, as though thou hadst lost all, with his bodily presence. For as we possess light, though the Sun be not visible, his bright∣ness being conveyed unto us in his beames: So thy Sa∣viour, though corporeally absent, he in his glorious rayes, shines forth unto thee, that thou mightest enjoy light, warmth, and comfort. O how am I ravisht with this Vi∣sion! 'Twere the worst of unthankfulness to conceal such unspeakable favours. With David, therefore I must pro∣claim Mans Jubile; Come hither all yee that fear God, and I will tell you what he hath done for our Souls. But I beseech you bring with you Stephens as well as Davids Ear,Acts 7.56. else you may (perhaps as blinde Men) know my happiness, not see it: that is, not to receive and ap∣ply it as your own.
As in the Divine Essence, there is three Persons, each of which is God, yet not three, but one God; so in the Person of Christ, there is a Trinity of offices, each of which is proper to whole Christ; as to be King, Prophet, and Priest, not many of them; the Man-hood being se∣perated from the God-head (as some would.) But in all, Christ being one, the same, and all these▪ O these, are those solacing rayes, (I before spake of) so beneficial to pernicious Man. O suffer not (O Lord) the Bodies middle Region, my Heart, to be cold and uncompact, like that of the Ayr; lest thy beames shine thorough, and not warm me. But purifie it, and create in it such a solidity and soundness by faith, that it may be capable of their virtue; and inflamed with zeal and gratefulness, for, and to the glory of thee the giver. Christ Jesus is the Christians Sanctuary; and these his offices, the three precious, and unexhaustible Fountains, from whence Ezechiel's healing Waters plentifully flow. Ghrist Jesus is our Physician;Ezech. 47.8. and these three are those beautiful Boxes, in which the pure balme of Gilead (which cures all putrified sores) is inclosed. Is here a Physician? Is here a mundifying River? Is here a most approved Balme? O my Soul, thou must also finde out, and that by Faith, a diseased Patient; a deadly wound; a corrupted Cancer; for, The whole have no need of the Physician, but the sick. O my Saviour, is there any Man living so sound,Mat. 9.12. that he hath no need of thee? yea sure, there are some, whose stincking soares, which the Devil, and their own pride have skinned over. Others, whose wounds he hath too deeply searched, pouring into them, instead of comfortable Balsome, the deadly corrasives of desperation. O Lord, the nature of every one of us, at the first is to be Sathans Apothecary: ayding him with ingredients, even from our own corruption, to stupifie our sence of sin, and mortifie our Souls. O thou which art the only skilful and spiritual Cherugion, search with thy spirit, and tent with thy Law, my gangrened and ulcerated Soul, that I may live, though with an issue. For, though the stopping of Bodily issues, often times procure death, yet my death shall stop my issue. The
noblest knowledge of things, is from their causes, not from their effects. Lord make me know the state, and danger of my Disease, from both, but from the first, even my fall in Adam. This self-inspection, is a grace by faith, conveyed to us from the Prophetick office of Christ. And ought,Ezek. 36.31. ac∣cording to my method, there to be handled. But the agreeableness of the Meditation to this place, and the profit which by Gods grace will flow to me in the Medi∣tation, to others in the perusal, makes me insert here this Anatomy of a dead Man, which cannot be too large, since none can enough know himself. In the profundity of a Well, even at mid-day a Man may view the Stars. And in the Sun-shine of prosperity, (if our Souls fathome this our depth of misery) we shall, free from all impe∣diments, more perfectly apprehend our Lucifer, Christ Jesus. God, the universal Creator, being perfection it self, it must needs follow, that the beauty and happiness of the Creature consists in being like to him. It being always remembred, that what in them hath its measure, degree and proportion, in Him is boundless, unexpressable and infinite. If the impression of Gods Image, in his Crea∣tures, as the Kings Image upon their Coine only makes it Royal, and gives it preheminence, and excellence; it must needs be granted, that whatsoever piece of his workmanship hath this glorious stamp, or pourtraiture erazed, or defaced, must needs remain useless, naked, and without honour. To apply this to my own Soul. Is it thus? How mise∣rable then and deformed is the Person of every Man by Adam, with, and in whom we have lost our God,Mans misery by nature. our selves▪ and all our perfections. Hast thou heard O my Soul of that material,1. In his mind. and obscure darkness which the Egyptians felt? On thee there was, and upon all natural Men there is, the like obscurity, Only they differ in this, Man feels it not. That darkness being no more empty of light, than the mind of Man is vacant of the know∣ledge of God, the worship of God, and his own eternal happiness: witness that of the Apostle; The natural
Man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto Him;1 Cor. 2.14▪ neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned; that is, by the light of the Spirit. In Egypts deficiency of light, no doubt it was a part of their torment to mistake one thing for another; so in this sinfull deprivation; such is the vanity of the mind, that it calls good, evil; and evil, good; It takes sweet for bitter, and bitter for sweet▪ Salvation, the contrary to damnation, being in his understanding in the end only, free from its mistake or fruition. Noah was not more drunken with the strength of Wine, than the understandings of wretched Men with the strength of sin;2. In his un∣derstanding. to which the Prophet alludes, saying, They are drunken,Esay. 29.9. but not with Wine; they stagger, but not with strong Drink.Acts 20.9. Neither was Eutichus more dead asleep, when he fell even into Death, then the prodigal Sons, to whom justly God hath given the spirit of slum∣ber,Rom. 10.8. Eyes that they should not see, Eares that they should not hear: Sin, as sleep, deprives Man of the true use of all those sences, which should serve for the use of his Soul. The Man possest in the Gospel, is the miserable, and true Figure of an unregenerate Soul.3. In his Con∣science. Mark 5.2. We finde him pos∣sest with a Devil, and tormented with a Legion of De∣vils. And is not the accusing conscience of a wicked Man, as a thousand Witnesses? We read that he only lived unto himself, avoided society, the Tombes being the fittest mansions for such unsociableness. His actions there, were, to be his own Executioner, and enemy, Night and Day, crying, and cutting himself with stones. O my Soul, proceed but to bring the substance to the shaddow, and thou wilt confess how lively this Satanical lunary acts the tragical part of a depraved conscience. Cain, the first that received, and took away life from Man, affright∣ed with the terrour of his bloody conscience, was forced to fear, and flie the face of Man, his own tongue bel∣lowing out his own misery, in that tormenting Exclama∣tion,Gen. 4.13. My punishment is greater than I can bear. The di∣stempered, and melancholy its of Saul, (which the Holy Ghost calls an evil spirit) we are partly occasioned
without doubt) by the barking fury of his conscience;1 Sam. 18.10. Such Hell of minde, being seldome without a Devil, to add fuell to the flame, and torment to the tormented. Let Judas conclude all, and by the conclusion of his life (who went out and strangled himself) preach to all the conclusion, of that Soul; which spurd with guilt,Matt. 27.5. thinks to flie from its self, and from the uppermost Hell of despair, leaps into the nethermost Hell of pain. Bear∣ing still about him, what he shun'd; even that only im∣mortaliz'd Worm, of insect, sprung from corruption, which then shall gnaw more furiously; Eternity, and de∣spair of remedy, doubling the unmeasurableness of the torture. Should my thoughts now pass from the conscience, some consciences would (at least in their own conceits) account themselves like those of Laodicea, to be rich, and increased with goods, and to have need of nothing, when as they are indeed wretched, and miserable, and poor,Revel. 3.17. and blinde, and naked. Therefore, that we may all know that we are miserable, the better to confess Gods mercy, the more to thirst after his salvation, we must know that there are hardned Pharaohs, aswell, as a despairing Judas. As that Body is most dangerously diseased, whose exter∣nal parts (the vital and animating spirits having, as it were, made a recess) are left insensible, and without feeling. So that Soul is in a deadly (that is, damnable) estate, whose conscience (the quickning power of the holy spirit, being utterly with-drawn) remains speechless, and cauterized. Of this condition were many before the Flood, notwithstanding the preaching of righteous Noah. After the Flood, the Sodomites. Under the Law, Pharaoh, and some of the Israelites in the Wilderness. Under the Gospel, the Scribes and Pharisees; of whom our Saviour observes, that God had blinded their eyes,Matt. 13.14. and hardned their hearts, that they should not see with their eyes, and be converted, that he might heal them. He is no friend that is not an eye, a hand, a tongue unto his friend, to fore-see his peril, and to fore-warn, and assist him in danger. Nor can that conscience be a faithfull inmate to the soul, whose searching sight the sun-shine of the
World hath bleard; whose awakeing touch, custome in sin hath deaded; and whose sharp point and wounding edge, the Devil hath rebated; the delights of the Flesh prooving a Sibyls sop unto this Cerberus, a Dalilah un∣to this Sampson. That part which the Chyrurgion intends to cut off, he first benums. And those Persons whom the Lord deter∣mines to rescind from the visible Body of his Church, he commonly hardens: as were those, spoken of by the A∣postle, whose Consciences were seared as with an hot I∣ron. Lord, let my conscience be, neither like Nabal's heart, dead as a stone within him; Nor yet like Dives tongue tormented in merciless flames. But like Peter's Cock, ne∣ver ceasing to crow, until I weep bitterly. Yea, let it be my Nathan, who am as David, a sinner: my Samuel, who am disobedient as Saul. So shall my conscience be unto me a happy copesmate, one whose words are better unto me as a friend, than her kisses as an enemy. Of all the faculties of the Soul, the will is most de∣pendent;In his will. its act and operation being moved by the de∣termination, or suggestion of the rest; viz. the minde, understanding, and affections. For, before any thing is done by Man, there is a consultation had in the Soul; where, after a disputation pro & con, at length, this thing, or that, is agreed of to be the bonum, which in due sea∣son the will (as the ouls agent) puts in execution. Now there is Gods bonum, such a one as we shall finde in holy Chronology, exprest in the Frontispiece of every good Kings life. Instance in Hezechiah. He did that which was right or good in the sight of the Lord.2 Kings 18.3. And there is Mans bonum also, so called, not because positively, or simply so in it self; but in relation to purblinde Man, who so esteemeth it. Witness that sacred and historical annotation. That when there was no King in Israel, every Man did that which was good in his own eyes.Judges 17.6. In this last Scripture, the truth of my former discourse is obser∣vable, and confirmed: as that a natural Mans will usually attends his judgment; so that the minde, and under∣standing being totally depraved, and corrupted (as before hath been declared) it must consequently, yea, impul∣sively
follow, that the activity of the will keeps the same position. In Adams Sons there is a continued Earth-quake. The debauched faculties of the Soul being as so many pesti∣lent, and tumultuous Ayres within the Bowels of this wretched Microcosme; which, together with the impetu∣ous violence of the will, rends us; belching forth conti∣nually Mans actual sins; which are not only dead in themselves, but also to others, by example. Doth a ountain send forth at the same place sweet Water, and bitter? Can the Fig-Tree bear Olive-berries, or a Vine,Jam. 3.11. Figs? They cannot. Neither can an unsanctified minde be fllowed with a will, free, and full of good resoluti∣ons. Hence therefore, O my Soul! with all ability in thy self, lessen not thy loss, and poverty, lest by such a proud, and presumptuous bragging, thou lose thy gain,Jam. 1.13. and forestall Gods charitable benevolence. Lord, I account my self to have no will, because not a good one. Therefore let thy own will anew beget me, with the word of truth; that I may be a kind of first fruits of thy Creatures: Lord, it is thou which workest in Men, both to will, and to do, of thy good pleasure. Therefore let me rather, in an humble ignorance bury what proud Men say is Mans right; (for love it I can∣not, if mine. Thy perfect justice giving to every one his due) then for the nothing of my merit, to lose the infiniteness of thy mercy. To derogate from my own desert (had I any) is a plausible error, a commendable humility; But to detract or steal from thee, horrible sa∣criledge, and abominable heresie. Let my humility strive to make proud natures something, nothing, rather than to suffer any vain boasting, to arise from such imaginary abilities, worth nothing. So that though both shall as (in themselves they are nothing) end in nothing, yet the company of a vertue shall in thy sight make the one to me something, when the other shall be by thee ad∣judged as full of sin, as it is wanting in worth. Man, in his first Creation,The affections. was like to a strong and beautifull Cyttadell, whose external and carnal part, I may terme (and that not unfitly) a defencible Rampire,
or Earth-work, his sences the Cinque-ports of this forti∣fication, his Soul (an incorporeal part) me-thinks re∣sembles the habitable, and innermost part of the Fort; or to speak more plainly, the Pallace of the Governour, the Court of the Prince; for so indeed it was, even of the King of Kings, before its unhappy and accursed de∣fection. Herein the principal faculties, as so many expert Commanders, did exercise their several offices. The af∣fections also (the subject of my ensuing thoughts) had their places of eminency, and authority. Love being the Leader of the Band, or the Ensign-bearer; and Fear the Sentinel, to prevent sudden surprisals. In this happy or∣der, freedome, and condition, was Man at first; until the Apostate-Angel, Sathan, envying that felicity in o∣thers, which himself had lost, unlocked the sences by the beauty of the forbidden Fruit, and after parly with the Guardians of the Soul, tempted them with the fair pro∣mise of Dii eritis, to be Traytours to their Soveraign▪ that had made them little less than so: For In his own Image created he them. This beautiful structure being become the Cage of unclean Birds;Gen. 1.27. no wonder, if the Holy one of Israel refuse to dwell there. If the glory of Israel departed, when the Ark was taken from amongst them, sure I am, the glory of Man vanishes, when God forsakes him. Histories and Politicians have observed the misery  that Country. I dare not call it a Government,  the Hydra-headed multitude give Laws unto themselves▪ Experienced Souldiers can bear witness, what Floods▪ Tragedies, and Disorder follows the unheading of  Army, and the Regiments. Such Men (for only he th hath been delivered from such calamities, can best judge of them) will confess, that both these are but weak descriptions of the wretchedness of the Soul, deprived  the life of God. Nay, the small remainders of those disorders, and corruptions, which in comparison are but  scars of those great wounds, will inforce the best, dayly with Holy Paul to cry out,Rom. 7.24. O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? This misery of Man, this his civil War, hath been
briefly touched and discovered already in the former fa∣culties of the Soul. It now remains, that I observe,Of the disorder in the affections in particular. and that with brevity, how the affections particularly stand affected. O Love, which weart once the Spirit, the fervour, the marrow of the Soul. Its Embassadour to her Creator,Of Love. lying Ledger in the Court of Heaven, as long as that happy, and mutual amity remained unviolated. How art thou now degenerated? yea, how wretchedly hast thou lost thy happiness, by changing thy object? There is no whit of life, spirit, or freedome in thee now. For thou art dead, and entombed in Earth: nor neerness, or relation to God; no not in the least degree; for the wicked (saith the Apostle) are haters of God. Thou art now so far from being Mans Agent to God, that if God, in the infiniteness of his mercy, would re∣new his peace with Man, he must be his own Agent, and thou his Patient; witness St. John, We love Him, because he first loved us. How comes it to pass,1 Joh. 4.19. that thou hast forsaken the living Fountain, and hewen out unto thy self Cesterns, that will hold no Water?Jerem 2:13. Is Earth to be compared with Heaven; or the Creature with the Crea∣tor, that thou hast forsaken the one, to embrace, and marry the other? The Mole, that of all other Creatures delights to undermine, and root within the Earth, wants the Organ of sight, thereby illustrating this truth; that where a carnal, earthly, or sensual love is, there must needs be a blinde and ignorant understanding. O Lord, is this affection of love, being rightly placed,Contemplation. the Prince of all other our affections? Is it the summe and compendium of thy whole Law? Is it that which gives life to the actions of the Soul?Matt. 22.37. Is it the tryal of our Adoption? That by which faith works? Is it an old Com∣mandement, as being from the beginning; a new Com∣mandement, as being renewed,1 John 2.7. and straitly enforced in the Gospel? Is it the mark of our perfection,John 3.11. and of the truth? O give me sighs, give me words, yea give me those unutterable groans of my Spirit, raised by thy Spirit, wherewith I may daily importune thy Majesty for the
right fixing, and direction of this affection of my Soul: That so my love inflamed by thee, may not henceforth be sub-lunary, but like the Sun, sending forth beams up∣wards towards thee, and rays down-wards amongst my Brethren. Then shall thy will be done by me on Earth, as it is done in Heaven. Of Joy.The ground and occasion of all true joy, is either as∣sured hope, or a present fruition of some extraordinary benefit. Now no natural Man can be said to possess this affection aright, as being deficient in the ground there∣of; Sin making him uncapable to receive any thing as a blessing or benefit either from God, or Man. 'Tis true, wicked Men spend their Days in Wealth,In riches Men cannot joy. heaping up sil∣ver as the dust, and preparing Rayment as the Clay. But observe,Job 21.13. their riches cannot be properly tearmed their goods. These may possess treasures, but shall never enjoy them.Job 27.16. For, The innocent shall divide his Silver, and the just shall put on his Rayment.Job 27.17. It's as certain, that the wicked walk on every side,Nor in honours. when the vilest Men are exalted.Eccles. 10.7. That Servants ride on Horse-back, and Princes walk as Servants upon Earth. But note also, that honour is to them, as the Hebrew word signifies, weight, heavi∣ness, not rejoycing; producing, as the Greek word  imports Fear, which excludes joy: God giving worldly Men preferments, Non ut honoraret, sed ut ono∣raret.Nor in plea∣sures. Have they not pleasures also? Yes verily, if we understand them according to their acception, or Ety∣mology, (that is) things pleasing them. Look upon the description of them in Job, drawn to the life; and we shall view them,Job 21.12. Taking the Tymbrell and Harp, and re∣joycing at the sound of the Organ. This their pleasure (to be bold with that word pleasure, that it may be the more bold with them) is a pleasure, wherein things seem what they are not. The word delight, me-thinks is very signi∣ficant; teaching us that true pleasure, only springs from that true light, and only doth give light, life and joy to the Soul. That so empty are all voluptuaries of these ingredients, that I may say of them, as St. Paul of the wanton Widdows, They that live in pleasure are dead whilst they live.1 Tim. 5.6. Now death excludes joy, therefore it is
impossible that Man so dead, should rejoyce. Lastly, To silence all Objections, and to conclude; the Earthly minded Man is the only melancholy Man.Not in wisdom. The very subject and object of Lamentation. Take the height, and learn the nature of those that blaze like me∣teors, being placed in the highest region of carnal Men; I mean those, that are second Adams in the knowledge of the Metaphysicks, and both Philosophers; Machivels in Policy, and Solomons in the generality of humane Learning, and see what they are. But least it should seem presumption in thee (O my Soul) to censure, or detract from such shining Lamps of the World; Let the King of Israel, who excell'd in wisdome all the Children of the East Country, and all the wisdome of Egypt, for he was wiser then all Men, give up his experimental judgment;1 King. 4.30. proving by an undeniable argument a Majore ad minus, what I formerly layed as my ground, That no natural Man can possess a genuine joy. Hear his own words; I gave my Heart to know wisdome,Eccl. 1.17, 18. and to know madness and folly; I perceived that this also is vexation of spi∣rit: For in much wisdome is much grief, and he that in∣creaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow. O gracious Creator!Contemplation. with what a deluge of misery is wretched Man over-whelmed? In how deep an abyss of sorrow is he plunged? Cannot riches, honours, plea∣sures, wisdome, the content and compleatment of the whole Worlds felicity, excite or beget one true smile of joy in the Soul? Nay, do they not with Man stray from the end of their Creation, administring (instead of sollace) vexation, and infelicity. O who but Man hath ruin'd Man! who but himself is the Thief, and betrayer of himself!Matt. 16.11. what occasioned the parting of this good from the Creature, but the departing of Man from thee his Creator? O thou, In whose presence is fulness of joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for ever more;Psal. 51.12. Restore unto me the joy of thy Salvation, that in thy light I may see light. Then shall those streams of glad∣ness accompany thy many benefits, and continually and plentifully flow into my Soul; when to others they shall be dryed up, as being separated from thee the Foun∣tain.
Be thou my Sun, and let thy blessings, as so many beames proceeding from thee, irradiate and rejoyce my Soul; that so I may see thee in them, and them in thee, and by such a double aspect of thee, be moved to give a double praise unto thee of Glory in thy self, of mercy to my Soul. Fear is now become a continual Palsey of the Soul, an Earth-quake of the Body.Of Fear. The object of it is commonly either some eminent danger, or unresistable force in a Superiour, particularly apprehended, with such a fear, as did the Creatures observe Man, before his own hands cancelled his large Pattent of Dominion. And with the same affection (though much more enlarged, and in a far greater measure, as looking through the perspective of reason) doth natural Man adore and tremble at the feet of his Creator, armed with the thunder of Omnipo∣tency, and breast-plate of Righteousness, crown'd with Majesty and arrayed with Glory. Who can behold the Lord God thus, and live? Let Belshazar's thoughts, Cain's words, and Judas last action express the terrour of those Souls,Dan. 5.6. that thus apprehend God. Look upon the preying Claws of the Lion,Gen. 4.13. the Stubble in the midst of the Furnace,Mat. 27.5. the Malefactor quaking at the Bar of Justice; and in them my Soul view thy fearfull estate by nature. If any Soul (as a sinner) was ever endowed with so perfect an Organ, as it could look abroad upon God, as a Judge, or discover one smile in the face of anger, or mercy in the midst of incensed justice, surely the first and second Adam would have done it; one of which had the strength of nature, the other of grace. But alass! even the Son of God, (when in the place of sinfull Man,Hebr. 5.7. he stood before the Justice of God feared. Witness the Apostle; witness his exclamation, though his astonishment and fear were temporary, the wickeds eter∣nal. His occasioned by a recess of the Divinity, and pa∣ternal comforts, beyond the reach of his present sence; Theirs is a cursed effect of sin, and utter privation of that infused love from God, that begets a love to God; which indeed is the very form of a filial fear. If then the
second Adam, which came from Heaven, having put on our transgressions, conceived that God had forsaken him; No marvail if the first Adam of the Earth, Earthy, toge∣ther with his off-spring, personally, and by nature sinful;1 Cor. 15.47. forsake, and hide themselves from God; flying from him,Gen. 3.8. to whom only they should flie; fearing him as a Judge, whom they should reverence as a Father; perfect love casting out fear. O my God! is there a necessity of fear?Contemplation. must all the Creatures tremble before thee? as being all witnesses ex∣ternally or internally of thy essential, and judicial power.Psal. 2.10. & 114.7. Is the fear of the Lord the beginning of wisdome? and will he with-hold no good thing from him that fears him?Psal. 34.9. O let my Soul bear a comfortable part in this affection. Let my flesh tremble for fear of thee, because thy Crea∣ture; and let my heart be enlarged in love towards thee,Psal. 119.110. because thy Son. Let my manifold sins humble me, as beholding thee a righteous Judge; and let my faith raise me, as apprehending thee a merciful Saviour. Let me work out my salvation with fear and trembling,Phil. 2.12. as con∣sidering my weakness, and mutability; and let me press towards the mark with confidence, and assurance, as be∣lieving thy free election, omnipotency, and immutability. Lord, if thou dost know me by name,Rom. 11.29. if I also have found grace in thy sight, shew me now thy way,Exod. 33.13. how to know and see thee. There is a place by thee, O do unto me, as thou didst unto Moses, set me upon a Rock, even my Rock Christ Jesus; that so my life being hid in him, through the Clists his wounds, I may see thy glory passing by; and hear, and apply this thy loving Proclamation, The Lord, the Lord God, mercifull and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness, and truth,Exod. 34.6. keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquities, transgressions and sins. I have now made a short progress through the Soul, once a Paradice,Of the Body. as being watered every where with grace, even as the Garden of the Lord. But now being like Sodom and Gomorrah, which the Lord destroyed, even a furnace of brimstone, and a vail of tears: It now remains, that I take a general view of the Body, which
is as it were the superficies of Man, the Pallace, the Shell, the Garment of the Soul. That so having observed their union in sin, aswell as in nature, from the joynt, and vo∣luntary acquired curse of imperfection, I may be the more inlarged to magnifie Gods free gift of perfection. As the Lord in the Creation made Man after his own Image, as concerning the Soul, that he might be capable of Divine Visions, and enjoy a communion with him: So also he made Man like himself, as considering the Body, in respect of Dominion, and Majesty; no Crea∣ture being like God, but himself. That according to the present Commandement, one Man might love another as himself: such a similitude of parts, inducing a commu∣nion of hearts, love being the fulfilling of the Law, since the fall. Because there needed not Law when love was perfect; before the fall, the defect of the one necessita∣ting the constitution of the other. Every member of the Body in the state of innocency, being made willing, and ready to perform all good actions, respecting either God or Man, by the quickning and agitating Power of this predominant affection in the Soul. But what have I now to do with the state of Innocency, that am now discour∣sing of Rebellion? Our self-love in Adam hath depraved us of that true love, which (seated in the Soul) moves the Body to act any goodness. Of which miserable loss of ours, that we may be more sensible, it is necessary that as the Souls, so the Bodies defects be particularly medi∣tated on. The curse and judgment of the Body is, that it should be a ready instrument to execute the sinfull commands of the Soul; these two parts constituting, Man, being as it were Master and Servant, Husband and Wife. Yet ob∣serve, as in the happiest unions amongst us, we shall finde, that though the Nobler Sex hath the Superiority and Power of Rule, yet so prevalent is the nature of conju∣gal love, that it sweetly allures the superintendents will to joyn issue in many actions by that which is subjected. So in Man, though the Soul be the Head, the Monarch, yet (by reason of the neer conjunction) the Body often∣times inclines the Soul to be active, according to its dis∣position;
making good that Phylosophical maxime. Mo∣res animi sequuntur temperamentum corporis. By this it appears, that the Body is not only instrumentally, but also in a kind potentially evil, since the Fall; being then chan∣ged in an instant of time, from its beauty to deformity, from its perfect composition (which was equal ad pon∣dus) to an unequal mixture of the Elements and hu∣mours. Hence followed termination of life, millions of Diseases, and Death, the malady of Diseases. Hence the necessity of daily nourishment, and the peccancy and a∣bounding of humours (descryed in the four Complexi∣ons) and those excess, aided by the constant bent of nature to do ill, do cause that aptness, and proclivity of several Men to particular Vices; as the cholerick to malice, blood, and anger; the melancholy to despera∣tion and discontent; the sanguine to lust; the flegma∣tick to sloath and idleness. In this cursed depravation of our erring nature,Of the Eyes sinfulness. the sences (which are the Bodies Pentarchie) have no small proportion. For what is the Eye, the seat of the optick faculties, but an open Win∣dow, apt to give entrance to theevish lusts. A two-leaved Door, prepared by treacherous nature to receive in dead∣ly Enemies? The life of Man would be far calmer, did not these rits let in tempests of pride, and vanity. The presumptuous opening of these, made Eve open her hands to receive, her mouth to taste, the forbidden fruit. For, when the Woman saw, that the Tree was good for food,Gen. 3.6. and that it was pleasant to the Eyes, she took off the fruit thereof, and did eat. Mark here, what assistance this sence gives to the temptation. Had not the Sons of God, made their Eyes Flood-gates,Gen. 6.2. to let in the deceitful beauty of the Daughters of Men, (an Idolatrous union) could not so soon have procured a dis-union from God; which moved the Lord to an effective repentance, chan∣ging the Globe of Earth into an Orb of Water.Gen. 9.22. Ham's mocking, and curse, proceeded from a carnal discovery. Sem and Japhets blessing, from a dutifull and willing blindness. Lastly, Davids heart had never been his con∣cupiscencies Captive,2 Sam. 11.2. had not Bathsheba bathed in his Eyes, aswell as in the Fountain. O thou which illumi∣nates
Mans darkness, and hast the over-sight of my sight, suffer not that sence, which thou hast made to give my Body light, to be the in-let of my Souls obscurity. But if I cannot see, but I must sin, Lord, let me cease to see carnally, and be enabled to see spiritually; that so the one may be swallowed up in the Vision of the other. In the next place, what are the Eares, but the roads of Blasphemy,Of the Eares. the Labyrinths of obscenity, an open pas∣sage to the mind, through which, Traytors, as well as true subjects pass without examination, or controulment. Proud Herod had never been a God in heart, had not he willingly consented to be one in Eare.Acts 12.23. Had not Joash hearkned to the Princes of Judah, when they made obey∣sance unto him, he had never left the house of the Lord, and served Groves and Idols. Had Aaron heard the People,2 Chro 24.17. as the three Children heard Nabuchadnezzar, the one had been as free from Idolatry as the other.Exod. 32.1. Could Pilate have given the like attention to the Jews perswa∣sions,Dan. 3.14. Matt. 27.24. that David gave to Abishai, the Lords anointed had not been crucified.1 Sam. 26.8. To conclude, had Solomons Gal∣lant entertained the Harlots allurements, no further then Joseph his Mistresses enticements,Prov. 7.21. Adultery would not have proved his ruine.Gen. 39.7. Lord, though evil words by reason of the commonness of sence, will perforce enter my Eares, O suffer them not to Inne in my heart,Contemplation. lest they make thy House of Prayer, a Den of Thieves. To proceed, though this sence of Smelling next to be searched into, hath no objects which properly in them∣selves considered,Of the smelling. can be said to be evil, yet hath it (since the Fall) a sinfull property and inordinate, which is al∣ways ready to assist the pride and inward corruption of the heart. As he is as well a Traytor that lets in the Ene∣my, as he that fights for him; So this sence, by an ex∣cessive admission, is often-times guilty of as much evil, as the others, by a depraved and actual commission. The Pride and immoderation contracted, by this sence, is to be gathered out of the judgment pronounced by the Lord in the Prophet Esay, against it, where he threatens thus, That it shall come to pass,Esay 3.24. that in stead of sweet smells, there shall be stink; and in stead of a girdle, a rent.
Lord, since thou hast created this sence for pleasure, Let me not, by a depraved use thereof, gain thy displeasure: But let me by the fragrancy of the Creature, be made sensible of the excelling sweetness of the Creator, that so by joyning Heaven and Earth together, I may enjoy thee here, and hereafter, now, and ever. The taste (which next ensues) was given to Adam in his Innocency, for two respects. First,Of Fasting. for a distinguish∣ment of the Creatures. That as the Eye, so the Pallate in such a rare diversity, might glorifie the Creator. Se∣condly, for pleasure sake, and to prevent loathing. The regulated Appetite being thereby harmlesly incited to perform (and that with a temperate delight) the cha∣ritable act of nourishment. This was the gift, and the use thereof in the state of Innocency, until Adam by tasting too much, so extended, and wracked this sence, that it could never since be well set, or finde a mean. The taste now enticing the appetite, and the appetite a∣gain encouraging to taste, the whole Man is by this means irrecoverably plunged in intemperancy.Ezek. 16.49. Instance in the People of Sodom,Luke 12.16. one of whose capital offences was fulness of bread: In the rich Glutton, whose im∣moderation hatcht by this senses provocation, caused the one to forget their end, the other his brother. O Lord, is this sense thus propense to ill?Luke 16.19: Contemplation. O let my Soul be fed with thy grace, and taste thy sweetness, that so my spi∣ritual appetite being unmeasurably enlarged, it may (like Moses Rod) devour the carnal. Lastly,Of the Truth. that I may conclude with that ubiquitary sence the hand-maid of life, I mean the touch; Know O fallen Man, that this is no less friend, than the rest, to wicked∣ness. Nay, to give it the due, it is not only a constant Conductour of sin in all actions, (wherein the Body is an Agent) but also is a nourisher of sin, until it grow exceeding sinfull. Instance this, in the long-continued, and tall-grown lusts of Holy David.2 Sam. 11.2. For no sooner had Pride, Security, and Idleness lulled asleep the gracefull warders of his Soul, and let in through his wandering Eyes, lust, and beauty; but the will captived by such Potent Enemies, obeys and enjoys. What Sathanisme,
Hypocrisie, Murder, and Impenitency, succeeded his touch; as being hatched and pampered by its sensual fruition; is known to all that are read in the Scriptures. As lust, so covetousness, is much assisted, and hath a secret con∣federacy with this sence. There being in such Midasses a certain con-naturalness betwixt their Fingers, and the Gold; which so forceably moves the affections of the Soul, that a real fulness seems with them a want; their gross Arithmatick consisting only of Addition and Multi∣plication.Contemplation. O mercifull Creator, are my Eyes become skil∣full perspectives, and representative Mirrours to bring sin neer unto my Soul? Are my Eares set wide open to feast lewdness? Doth my Nostrils (Spider-like) suck Poyson from the sweets of thy Creatures? Is my taste the Cook to drunkenness and gluttony? And my touch the bed-fellow and companion of all uncleanness? To conclude all, is my whole Body con-natural with sin; an abettor and open friend to all iniquity; a Load-stone, cleaving rather to the base mettal of sin, than to the pure and tried gold of grace? Clay it is indeed, both in substance, and quality; as being hardned, and not mollified by the rayes of thy mercies, pressing always to its own Element of Earth, though never so often elevated by the motions of thy good Spirit towards Heaven? Lord, what is Man that thou art mindfull of him,Psal. 8.4. or the Son of Man that thou visitest him? Is it not Chaff, and therefore to be blown to and fro with the tempest of thy wrath?Psal. 1.4. Is it not stubble? and therefore apt fuell for that unquenchable Fire; yea, undoubtedly it is this; yea,Luke 3.17. worse, and less then all this; being not only vanity, but lighter than vanity; so vain is every Man. O wretch∣ed Adam that I am, who shall deliver me from this Body of sin,Rom. 7.24. and death? I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Lord, my Soul, guided by a Pillar of Fire (thy spirit) hath now with faint paces passed through a Vale of mi∣sery, a Wilderness of sin, full of temptations, murmur∣ings, and rebellions. It now remains, that having re∣ceived the Law in Mount Sinai, even the sentence of Death, in, and against my self, I now with the same
Moses from Mount Nebo view the Land of Canaan, the Gospel of Peace, that promised possession, of every true Israelite. Lord, let my misery, though not my merit,Luke 10.30. provoke thee to this mercy, as being a Man naked and wounded, and fallen among Thieves; as being a wretch,Ezek. 16.4. whose Navel conveying original corruption, was not cut, neither was my fleshly appetite suppled with the Water of Sanctification in the Day of my Nativity. O pour into my gaping wounds the Oyle of consolation, and the strengthening Wine of thy promises; and binde them up with an humble assurance. O have compassion on me, and say unto me, live. That is, forgive all my offences, that am cast out into the open Fields, to the lothing of my Person. Cloath me also with broadered work. Put a Jewel on my forehead, and a beautifull Crown on my Head, even the righteousness, and merit of thy Son. That so I may be practically enabled to meditate of these next objects of my faith, viz. Satisfaction and in∣tercession, the two parts of my Saviours Priest-hood; which according to order, requireth my succeeding thoughts. No sooner was Man created in the Image of God,Of Christs Priestly office. but he became a Priest unto God, not to offer up for him∣self, or for others, expiating Sacrifices, because sin then was not; for God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good. But his sweet incense,Gen. 1.31. was Prayer, proceeding not from want, but from love, and duty: his Kids were the Calves of his Lips, inflamed with praise, and sparkling with admiration from the Altar of a pure heart, (an un-bloody Sacrifice.) But this Jubile continued not a Year, a Moneth, a Week, I think scarcely a Day. God's first Sabbath of rest (I suppose) was the utmost date of Mans freedome from sin. For no sooner had temptation voluntary leave to enter through the sences, into this holy Temple, but the ambush of sin rushed out of Sathans imposture, as the Grecians from their Horse, and overthrew and polluted the Priest, the Sacrifice, and the Altar. If the Clay works not according to the mind of the Potter, no marvail if he bruise it to powder. And if the Creature honour not the Creator,
'tis Justice in him to destroy it. When the House of God is become a Den of Thieves, the Priest of God an Ido∣later, and servant to sin, and the Altar of God dedica∣ted to Sathan; It must needs follow that the curse of God fore-threatned, shall now be executed, Yee shall surely die.Gen. 2.17. O wretched Man, hath God pronounced that thou shalt die? Be ascertained thou must die, since his un∣changable Decrees are shaddowed out unto us by the Laws of the Medes,Dan. 6.12. and Persians, which alter not. Must Man die? and hath God enacted it? who then can de∣liver us from this Body of Death? Be of good comfort, we have mercy for our Esther; the Son of God for our Mordecay; who hath, without reversing, qualified, and fulfilled the decree of his Father. Who now can lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? it is God that justi∣fies,Rom. 8.33. who is he that condemneth? it is Christ that dyed, yea rather, that is risen again; who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us, being the only Mediator betwixt God and Man.1 Tim. 2.5. All Priests, since the fall, within the Church of God were the Types of our high Priest, Christ Jesus. For no sooner was there a breach made betwixt God and Man; the Creator and the Creature, but mercy pleaded for a reconciliation; and that reconciliation in Justice requi∣red a Mediator, which is the Lord Jesus. A principal part of whose Mediatorship is this his office of the Priest∣hood. Before the Law typified in Melchizedeck; in the Law pre-figured by Aaron and his Sons; and in the Go∣spel really executed and fulfilled by himself. The acts of this his office are chiefly two, as being proportionable to the defect and necessity of Man the offendor; viz. To satisfie, to intercede. Go forth now my Soul, and bid defiance to all thy Enemies. For the Shield of thy faith shall receive all their darts, without any danger to thee; retorting them back, even into the adversaries faces. Appear now with confidence before the judgment Seat of God; bringing with thee to the Bar of Mercy, thy Advocate Christ Jesus: Thither summon Sin, that Tyrant;Rom. 6.23. whom whilst thou weart a Traytor to thy Ma∣ker,
thou didst serve; together with those Homicides, Death, and Hell; Let him bring his Parent with him also, even Sathan his Agent, thy Accuser; yea, let thy own conscience be called as a Witness; Lastly, let the Law be prefer'd as thy Inditement. Against all those, let thy Saviour oppose himself and maugre their objections and accusations plead thy innocency, that so thy righte∣ousness may break forth as the light,Psal. 37.6. and thy judgment as the Noon-day: For, he shall trample thine, and his Enemies under his feet, and destroy them with the two-edged Sword of his Word. Doth Sin challenge a right on thee? Our Saviour an∣swers, That the old Man is crucified with him,Rom. 6.6. that the Body of Sin might be destroyed, that hence-forth thou should'st not serve Sin. Doth Death and Hell cry out, we are thy wages? The Almighty Conquerour replies, O Death where is thy Sting. O Grave where is thy Vi∣ctory? And that thou maist never hereafter fear,1 Cor. 15.55. 'tis added,Rev. 20.14. Death and Hell shall be cast into the Lake of Fire. Doth Sathan accuse thee? behold thy Michael shall chase this malitious Dragon from the judgment Seat; witness that voice of tryumph, that the Accuser of our Brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God, Day and Night. And as for thy conscience,Rev. 12.10. fear not its testimony, since it ceases to accuse, when Sin is not imputed. For, whosoever is born of God, sinneth not.John 5.18. Again, a spotless, and blameless conscience, cannot be a blaming and condemning conscience. But, Christ through the eternal Spirit,Heb. 9.14. hath offered himself without spot to God,Heb. 10.21, 22. that he might purge thy Conscience from dead works: Wherefore, having such an High Priest over the House of God, draw thou neer with a free Heart in full assurance of Faith. Lastly, doth the severe justice of the Law threaten to swallow thee up? strengthen, and com∣fort thy self in Christ,Gala. 3.15. who hath redeemed thee from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for thee: for it is written, cursed is every one that hangeth on a Tree, &c. Yea, let this following immunity (The Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus,Rom. 8.2. having made thee free from the Law of Sin and Death) dismiss thy fears, and silence all thy adversaries.
O my Saviour, who art only the true Melchizedeck, the compleatment of Aaron's Priest-hood,Contemplation. and the end of the Law:Rom. 10.4. How much praise is thy due from me, thy re∣deemed; since to me is thy saying verified, Blessed are those Eyes that see those things that I see. And the Eares that hear those things that I hear.Luke 23.20. Abraham saw thee in Isaac; David saw thee in Solomon; but I see thee in thy self; yea in these, and in all other thy Types. I see thee also, and that with much comfort and confirmation in Heb. 5 6. thy Calling, Exo. 30.30 Vnction, Heb. 9.7. Bloody Sacrifice, Heb. 9.14. Sanctification, Redemption, Heb 9.12. Ascention, Heb. 9.24. and Intercession, which were heretofore mysteriously bound up in the Levitical Priest-hood, are now fulfilled, and to me graciously manifested. Lord Jesus, since of thy free mercy thou hast made my deafness, to hear, and hast given me sight, that was blinde, for the strengthning of my faith; As I have seen thee in thy types, so let me see thee also in that eternal decree of thy Father: So shall salvation appear, Gods act, and not Mans phantasie, viz. Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee; Thou art the Lamb slain,Heb. 1.5. that takes away the sins of the World.Rev. 13.8. Lastly, let me behold the execution thereof, wherein the Lord is both offered to me, and accepted for me. viz. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.Mat. 3.17. O my Soul, what canst thou now more desire; as having the Decree of God for thy Foundation; the merit of God for thy Salvation, and the voice of God for thy acceptation? Who, but an experienced Christi∣an, can express the sweet of these? yet how far short are his expressions of these streams of comforts, which flow through the Priestly Office to every true Believer, from the unexhaustible Fountain of Gods mercy? What spots doth not this wash off? What soares doth not this Jordan heal? Yea, what lameness, and imperfection doth not this Bethesda cure? O the consolation of Christs intercession, in this imper∣fect state of grace!Of Christs Intercession. Is my love weak, and unstable as Wa∣ter? This love O Saviour, is stronger than Death. Is my obedience imperfect?John 3.16. By thy obedience, many are made righteous.Rom. 5.19. Is my zeal defective? (Lord) Thy zeal
of thy House hath eaten thee up. Is my Faith small,John 2.17. and subject to doubting? O Saviour, thou wilt give a bles∣sing, even to a grain of Faith, as of Mustard-Seed.Luke 13.19. And hast promised not to quench the smoaking Flax, nor to break the bruised Reed. Is my Prayer full of weakness,Mat. 12 20. ignorance, and imperfection?Rom. 8.26. Thy Spirit it self maketh request for us, with sighs which cannot be expressed. Yea, thou art entred into the very Heaven of Heavens, to ap∣pear now in the sight of God,Heb. 9.24. Heb. 7.25. ever living there to make Intercession for us. To conclude, Is my inherent righ¦teousness imperfect? And am I a transgressor of the Law? Thy imputative righteousness is perfect, and thou art a fulfiller of the Law.Rom. 10.4. For thou art the end of the Law for righteousness unto every one that believeth. Yea, that all further objections may be answered, that all other de∣fects may appear supplied; behold here a gift, as large as Mans wants, and as full of mercy, as he of sin: Christ Jesus of God is made unto us wisdome, and righteousness,1 Cor. 1.30. and sanctification, and redemption. Our Saviour Jesus Christ is the way, the truth, and the life; that Jacob's Ladder,John 14.6. whose foot (as expressing his humanity) toucheth the Earth; and whose top as respe∣cting his Divinity, reacheth unto Heaven. This three∣fold▪ office may be considered, as the parts of this Hea∣venly ascent. Upon whose first degree, my faith, which is the eye, the hand, and the foot of the Soul, hath be∣gun to ascend. It remains now that I mount the next staff, belonging to his Priestly office, which is satisfacti∣on▪ the inseparable consequent of which is Justification.Of Christs Satisfaction. The parts of which, forgiveness of sins, and imputation of righteousness, do necessarily follow the former. Our mercifull High Priest and Redeemer satisfying by suffer∣ing, that our sins for which he suffered might be for∣given, fulfilling the Law is continually interceding, that his righteousness might be to us imputed. So that to our comfort and confirmation, be it spoken, that, when faith hath gaind footing upon satisfaction, and intercession, it must needs have hand-hold on remission, and imputa∣tion. Can the Lord be less righteous, than Man? Doth not the cancelling of the Bond, succeed the absolving
of the debt? The satisfaction, and releasement of the Prisoner follow the not guilty of the Jury. O the per∣fection of all the ways of God, especially of this his great work towards the Children of Men! wherein mercy and justice do sweetly kiss each other; He being just towards Man, in his fall into Death, that he might be mercifull, in raising him to life. And that he might spare his adop∣ted Sons, he spares not his only begotten Son. O what is Man that thou art mindfull of him, or the Son of Man that thou visitest him?Psal. 8.4. Of Justifica∣tion.To proceed, Justification (by some Divines made an act of Christs Kingly office) is that mercifull, and yet just, sentential act of God the Father, whereby a believer is absolved from sin, and death, and the inherent righte∣ousness of Christ is imputed unto the faithfull applyer, for the attaining of life everlasting; Hereby, waving our debt, and supplying our want, at once, delivering us from guilt, and corruption. Behold, here is an Olive Branch, which faith, the Dove of the Soul, brings home, unto it in the time of Gods vengeance, and in the midst of the great Waters of Sin. Here's a Golden Scepter held forth by the incensed King of Kings, to every faith∣full, and humbled Esther. Now I may say to my Soul, as once the multitude to the blind Man; See, he calls thee. Not in his strong Wind, by which he rents the Mountains of pride;1 King. 19.11. Not in his Earth-quake, by which he shakes secure and presumptuous sinners: No, nor yet in his consuming Fire, with which he devours unexcu∣sable Hypocrites: But in his mercy, even with a still, small voice of compassion and pardon. O my Soul, Thou art not come unto the Mount that burnd with Fire, and that might be touched;Heb. 1.18. nor unto blackness, and darkness, and tempest; nor to hear the voice of those words, which voice they that heard, entreated that the Word should not be spoken to them any more;Verse 19. But thou art come to Mount Sion, and to an innumerable company of Angels, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant,Verse 22. and to the blood of Sprinkling, that speaketh better things than that of A∣bel, and to God the Judge of all, whom thou maist hear with comfort,Verse 24. proclaiming Himself unto thee, as once
before Moses, thus, The Lord, the Lord God, mercifull,Exod. 34.7. and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands,Verse 8. forgiving iniqui∣ty, transgression, and sin. Forgiving sin? O what good news is this unto my Soul!Forgivenesses of Sins. How truly is this called the glad tidings of the Gospel? Tell me, yee which shall hereafter read my thoughts, even from the testimony of your own Souls (For only experience can make you fit Judges in this case;) If there be any joy like to the joy of a justified sinner? Any blessing like that of David? Can I consider into how fearfull an estate sin hath cast me, and unto what punishment Justice hath condemned me, and not from thence proportion out,Psal. 32.1. and acknowledge the great∣ness of this deliverance? Doth not the truth-speaking Word of God, which is neither cruel, nor partial, tell me that I am a sinner? For there is no Man that sinneth not. That I am a debtor? Since we must all pray,1 Ep. Joh. 1.8. for∣give us our debts; That I am a condemned Person? For by the offence of one,Mat. 6.12. judgment came upon all Men to condemnation. That I am a bond-slave to death,Rom. 5.18. and to him that hath the Power of Death, the Devil; all my life time being subject to bondage?Heb. 2.15. Eph. 2.1. Rom. 5.10. Eph. 2.3. That I am a dead Man; For, We are all dead in sins, and trespasses. That I am an enemy to God, and Christ, and lastly by nature a Child of Wrath? And shall I account remission of all my offences, Satisfaction of all my arrearages, Liberty from servitude, Life in stead of death; Nay more, resur∣rection from death, no mercy? Can my powerfull Ene∣my be made my friend, and Father? my irefull Judge, become my Mediator and Saviour, and I not highly fa∣voured, gratiously, yea, wonderfully delivered, O thou which hast wrought all these things for me, work in me an experimental, and sensible knowledge, a continued and enlarged thankfulness. So shall I give to thee the praise,Psal. 32.1. and receive from thee the comfort of that bene∣diction; Blessed is he whose transgressions is forgiven, and whose sin is covered. No sooner had the power and wisdome of God puld off the Visard of the Chaos,Of imputative righteousness. and discovered the form of
Heaven and Earth, but he adorned and clothed them with beautifull Creatures; all his works having not only in their Beeing a naked existence, but a fulness of good∣ness, which is their perfection. If these things (which God made for the use of Man) were exceeding good? Surely Man,Gen. 1.31. whom he made for his own use, and glory; was in his first Creation in Nature, and shall be in this second of Grace, indued with a plenitude of excelling graces. To be, and not to be good, is to be evil; as wanting the Character of the Creator. Who is a most pure Essence, there is no mean betwixt good, and evil: every Soul being either conformed to the Image of God or deformed after the similitude of Sathan. Now to them upon whose fore-heads the Seal of the living God is pla∣ced, is given a two-fold righteousness; the one inherent and imperfect; not (if simply considered) as the work of the Spirit, but as it is accompanied, and mixed with the corruptions of nature. Our best performances, being like unto those strange births which receive their life and beeing from God, their deformities from some defect or vice in nature. But of this in another place. The other is, that infinitely perfect, legal super-erro∣gating,Definition of imputative righteousness. and inherent righteousness of the Son of God, the Lord Jesus Christ, which God the Father beholding his Sons sufferings▪ and fulfilling the Law together with his own promise, and Covenant, which is a due debt in Justice, imputes to them, to whom in his unspeakable mercy he gives faith to receive,Exposition. and apply it. This I call infinitely perfect, as being the righteousness of God, as well as Man, by reason of the communication of proper∣ties, from the union of nature. I call it legal, because the Law was the object, and rule thereof. Super-errogating, because it super-abounds, and is made the sole merrit of Saints. Lastly, I tearm it inherent, as being the actual righteousness and obedience of the Man Christ Jesus. All his sufferings, by reason of the spontaneous and lo∣ving offer of himself, being also the acts of his will, as well as the passions of his nature. O wonder of love! O miracle of mercy! O divine charity! which in the lowest depth of our misery, and swelling height of our
Rebellion, cloth'd not only our Bodies nakedness, but our Souls; as that first hid our outward pollutions from our selves; so this our inward corruptions from God. For ever blessed be thou O Lord,Proofs of our right to Christs imputative righteousness. for that union of thy Spirit and gift of faith, by which I put on, nay more, am made one with Christ. What suggestion of Sathan, or contradiction of depraved nature (granting me a mem∣ber of this Head, a branch of this Vine) can make it difficult to prove, or dares deny my right to possess, this spotless Robe? As the union of Soul and Body, of Head and Members, produceth a sympathizing property, and joynt-propriety to every thing; so my union with Christ, as being the Soul of my Soul, the Head of his Church, entitles me to, and gives me whatsoever is his. And (no doubt) as it is horrible blasphemy to account any part of the Lords humane Body, as sinfull and unclean: So it is unreasonable infidelity, and shamefull impiety to think any true member of his mystical Body can be (as in him) unrighteous and defiled: his perfect, and abounding righ∣teousness, being like to that pretious, and sacred anoint∣ing Oile,Psal. 133.2. which according to the Psalmist was poured on the head of Aaron, and went down to the skirts of his Vesture. This, O this his innocency, and merit,Revel. 6.11. Demonstrations from Scripture. Revel. 12.1. is that white Robe which was given to them that were slain for the Word of God, and the testimony which they held. This is that glorious Sun which clothes the Church, that Woman in travaile. Yea, this is that beautifull wedding garment wherewith Christ our Bridegroom,Mat. 22.11. invests every true in∣vited and elected Guest. The Linen Vestments of the Jewish High Priest were comely enough to minister in at the ordinary and daily Sacrifice. But they were accounted too mean and poor,Exod. 41.28. when he entred into the holy of holiest. The Rayment of Joseph a Prisoner (though good enough perhaps for that place) must be changed,Gen. 41.14. when he is presented before Pharaoh, a King. Yea, the Prodigals Rags may serve him, whilst he serves the Devil,Luke 15.22. and feeds with the Swine of the World, upon the husks of vanity. Every true Christian is a Priest unto God, the Sanctum is the Church
militant, wherein we minister, and that but for a year; Mans whole life being but a revolved year. Again, we are all Stewards to the World, to whom our flesh in na∣ture, our Mistriss, hath plighted her troth; so that if we once became Josephs, in denying her lusts, we must with Joseph undergo slander, affliction, and imprisonment. Lastly, we are naturally Prodigals also. Our portion is the common goods of the minde, of the body, of edu∣cation. The waisters and consumers of this our first pa∣trimony, are the Dallilahs of Sin. Now though we may minister on Earth amongst our brethren, cloth'd in the white Garments of a good report and profession (though whilst we are imprisoned in affliction, or spoyled by sin, and Sathan, the tatter'd Rags of sorrow and lamentation may serve us) yet when we are converted, and ascend afterwards into the Sanctum Sanctorum, the Heaven of Heavens, when we shall appear before the Lord Jesus our King, and return unto God our Heavenly Father, we must be cloth'd with the Golden Garments, the clean Vest∣ments, the best Robes, even that meritorious righteous∣ness of our loving Saviour, which being the Rayment of our elder Brother, may assure us (with Jacob) of a bles∣sing and acceptance here, of Glory hereafter. Away then from (my thoughts) that perfection and merit which some dream of, in renewed nature. That scant sacrilegious and unthankfull opinion, of our Savi∣ours active and passive obedience, such Tenants (as it were) halt, and disgracefully curtaile, the ample and large Garments of our Lord, that so vain pride might patch it up with the old Rags and rotten performances of Mans desert. Lord, thy Word teacheth me, and my own infirmities inforces me, to another, yet better Plea. Can Man be justified in thy sight, or how can he be clean, that is born of a Woman?Job 25.4, 5, 6. Behold, even the Stars are not pure in thy Sight, how much less Man, that is a Worm? We are all thy Creatures, thy servants. The ob∣servance of thy commands is the work we are made and hired for.Luke 17.7. Now could we (as thou know'st we cannot) perfectly obey thy will, (there being no Man that sinneth not,1 King. 8.46. whose best self-righteousnesses are not as filthy rags:)
Would we therefore as our due,Esay 64.6. presume to sit down with thee in thy Kingdome? Lord, let such pride be far from us, and do thou cause us in an humble acknowledg∣ment of our wants, and merit, readily to confess, that we are unprofitable Servants,Luke 17.10. having done that which was our duty to do. Now if of Servants we are made Friends, of Bastards we are Adopted Sons,Luke 15.15. Rom. 8.16, 17. of Bond-slaves we are appointed Heirs, shall we not cry out, that our merit is thy grace, and that thou O Jesus Christ art the Lord our righteousness?Jerem. 33.16. 1 Cor. 1.30. Rom. 10.4. Art made unto us righteous∣ness? And art the end of the Law for righteousness, to every one that believeth? Question not here my Soul,General questi∣ons or objections answered. 1 Quest. why God doth not by his omnipotent, and supreme Power, in one and the same instant Call, justifie, sanctifie, and glorifie his Elect; since as he did not condemn us, so he will not save us with∣out our selves. Saves us without our merits, indeed, not without our work. He hath therefore in his infinite wis∣dome, annexed conditions to his Covenant, and ordain∣ed faith, repentance,John 15.16. and all other good works to be as so many degrees, in our ascent to happiness. That so Earth might be our School, to fit us for Heaven, and the life of grace, which is imperfect glory, might prepare us for the life of glory, which is grace in perfection. Neither be thou too curiously inquisitive,2 Quest. to ask the reason why the Lord God, in this his gracious looking back upon us, doth not again build up that wide breach which Sin hath made in Mans nature; That so accord∣ing to our first beginnings in Adam, we might have con∣tinued that course, enjoying happiness here, and attain∣ing after translation, glory hereafter? Since that the Lord, the great Architector, suffered this specious (yet brittle building) of unstable Man to fall down flat, that upon its foundation he might raise up, to the glory of his grace, a more beautifull edifice, in which admirable structure he uses the same matter, and that it might be stable for ever, he Himself becomes the Head of the Corner. Further, the Builders of this spiritual Temple are Gods Spirit, and Ministers; the cement,Mat. 21.42. faith and all other graces; the Buttresses or Pillars, his Election;
and the tegment or covering, his Providence. In all this, Man as of himself hath no work, other ways grace would be no grace.Rom. 11.6. The perfect work of Redemption (like that of the Creation) being as above the resistance, so with∣out the assistance of the Creature. Again, had Man been only placed in a renued estate, there would have been a possibility of falling, and of plunging Himself into a double curse, whereupon Sathan and evil Men would have taken an occasion to derogate both from the mercy, and power of God, according to those Objections of the Heathen, rehearsed by Moses; That because the Lord would not,Exod. 32.12. Numb. 14.16. Object. or could not save them, he suffered them to be destroyed; But some will say, he might have confirmed them, as he did the Elect Angels; I answer, that if it should have pleased God thus to have bestowed his mercy towards us his Children, yet the Devil and wicked Men (if in these days of our weak∣ness, much more in those of our perfection) would have derogated from Gods grace, that they might have attri∣buted all, or the best part to Mans merit. Lastly, in this our Justification by Christ, mercy counterpoises justice; yea, in these there are, to the eternal praise of our all wise God, an admirable and due proportion. The spirit of God observes it, and shall not we, in whom it is wrought, with unspeakable joy, and thankfulness re∣member? That as by the offence of one, judgment came upon all Men to condemnation:m. 5.18. Even so by the righte∣ousness of one, the free gift came upon all Men unto justification of life. O the miserable necessity of our nature, the bound∣less compassion of God's! Doth Man want holiness, me∣rit and obedience, and will his Lord confer purity, and offer up his own Life for him? will no other security but himself,Necessity of Justification. be accepted for the payment of sin? Surely this will serve, not only to express his love, but to informe our judgments, how impossible it was, (considering Gods holiness, the Laws rigour, and the least imperfection) for Man to be justified before God. This work belongs to the Creator, not to the Creature. If in our first beeing, the glorious Trinity were in an especial manner sole
Agents, much more in this our Eternal well-Beeing; Wherein God the Father imputes and accepts, God the Son becomes Man, obeys, and fulfills, and God the Holy Ghost calls and sanctifies. That Man in the last place, may apply, and put on by faith, this spotless Robe, and Imperial Crown of Righteousness. To whom it may be said, as of Mordecay, Thus shall it be done to him, whom the King of Kings delights to honour. I should now pro∣ceed to observe what streams, and blessed effects flow from this Priestly Fountain, did not the neer and insepa∣rable relation of the Prophetical Office, unto it sweetly invite me to unite them also in my Meditations. I am assured, that every true Christian Soul that hath followed me hitherto in my weak, yet sincere Meditati∣ons, is here together with me ravisht in the apprehension of these infinite Priviledges, and in tasting of these Wa∣ters of Life, which flow from the Throne of God, and of the Lamb. Is any so welcome to the poor indebted Widdow, as mercifull Elisha?2 Kings 4.1. Is any so to be esteemed of rebellious Israel, as interceding Moses?Exod. 32.11. Was there any Speech so pleasing to the Paralitique, as Man thy Sins are forgiven thee? Or any vesture so needfull, and acceptable to those naked Beggars in the Gospel,Luke 5.20. as the Wedding Garment? And is not Christ,Mat. 22.10. who unto us is all these (even the welcome Man, the only Intercessor, the Word, remitting Sins, the Royal Clothing,) our Wish, our Aim, our Crown, our Glory? No doubt but he is. Why go we not then on to possess him? O Lord, we are all like unto those unbelieving Israe∣lites, that are over joyed with the good report of the Land of Canaan, and delighted with the taste of the pleasant Fruit thereof; and yet stand still, even at the border, discouraged. As they cryed out, because of the Sons of , so we of our Gyant-like corruptions; those opposed them, thee us. Thou hast shewed us, and we have read this thy gracious Covenant, and we know thee both willing, and able to perform thy part thereof. But alass, when we descend to the conditions on our part, what have we, or what can we do? Thou requirest faith in us, but behold doubting▪ Repentance, and behold
hardness of heart. O wretched Men that we are, who shall deliver us from this Body of Death?Rom. 7.24. O let all that have such hungry Souls, thank God for our Lord Jesus Christ.Prophetical Office. Who is a Joshua to overcome all these our mighty adversaries, an Angel pointing out a living Fountain, to all thirsty Hagars, even that Spring of grace, his Prophetical Office. Thirsty I say, for none but such taste present, and perfect comfort, and refreshing, from hence. Encouragement indeed all others may have from this Office; which are not yet called to endeavour, and exercise themselves in the means, which beget faith, and repentance, notwithstanding the resist∣ing impossibility of their nature, as beholding the free promise▪ and enabling gift of God in Christ. But the Covenant and the blessing, belongs, and is effectual to those, sensibly and chiefly, That hunger and thirst after righteousness:Mat. 5.6. For they shall be filled. To proceed then; let all Men observe with me two spiritual streams, or works, flowing from this Office. The first is the Divine Revelation of the will of God, (so far as it was necessary for his Church) by the Mouths and Pens of the Prophets, and Apostles, and that through the immediate inspiration, and instinct of the third Person in Trinity, his most Holy Spirit▪ All which issuing from the living Fountain▪ the Lord Jesus, (who is in the midst of his Garden the Church) as so many Rivolets, do make glad the City, and water the Paradise of God. This is that work, that is wought without us, yet with an end to work within us, and upon us; all being, ac∣cording to St. Paul, that Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, upon which the Church is built, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Corner-stone.Ephes. 2.20. O Eternal Beeing, who art as mercifull as great, a Father God,Contemplation. to me thy unworthy Creature, should I in this prospect of my weak faith, carelesly, o silently, pass by so high a favour, so gracious a work of thine as this, towards my Soul: Thou mightest justly take my object, or my sight, or both from me, for such unthankfulness? Is the revelation of secrets the greatest expression of friendship? And to be of the Kings Coun∣cil
the chiefest honours? And shall not I as a Christian, apprehend, apply, and be gratefull, for such avours as these, confer'd by a far greater Person, in a far greater manner, and measure; upon a far unworthier object, than ever they can sample? If the Letters and mandates of Princes are received with so much reverence, preserved with so much care, esteemed, honoured and obeyed: How much more the Words and Scriptures of God, the Prince of Princes? Are Books but the Soul in Print, the Beams of Mans wisdome, what is this but the life of the Soul, the Book of Wisdome, and the Book of Books? Here is the height of Metaphysicks, as revealing what so ever can be known either of God, or Angels. The use and summe of both Phylosophies, in the Creation, and Decalogue. The knowledge of Astronomy in Job. The exactest Geography, and truest Chronology in Genesis, and Chronicles. The mystery of Numbers in the Leviti∣cal Ceremonies, Daniel and the Revelations. The exer∣cise of Rhetorick, throughout the Prophets, especially in Esay; The marrow and art of Logick, in Saint Paul's Epistles, and in all, which is above all, as the Sun a∣mongst the Planets, the whole Body of Divinity. Here are Politicks for the Statist, in Ecclesiastes. Oeconomicks for the House-keeper, in Proverbs. Instruction for the Woman, from Solomon's Mother. And David's Poesie for the Poets. Lastly, here's wisdome for the ancient; for, it maketh wise unto Salvation.2 Tim. 3.15. Here's a beautifull Spouse, and love Canticles for the youthfull and reli∣gious Amorist. And here is Milk from the Sacramental Teas, for the new-born Babe. Yea, what can my heart seek, (Lord) which thou hast not placed in this Book of Life; in this library of my Soul. It remains nw only that I beseech from thee the true use thereof, viz. the knowledge and worship of thee. So shall I be not only a hearer, and Reader, but a doer of thy Word, not de∣ceiving my own Soul. From this work of Gods Spirit i the Word without us, I proceed to that second work of the Spirit, wrought within us, viz. (Sanctification) be∣ing a conformation of our will unto his. O my Soul, here is that thou seekest for. The knowledge of the
greatest happiness, without possibility of fruition, is not the least of torments. And to behold the Crown, Robes, and Priviledges of a Christian, without either visible means to obtain, or a true propriety of weaing them, makes but our misery more miserable, Thou weart even now lifted up, and cast down, exalted with joy, and humbled with sorrow. For looking upward, thou be∣holdest with holy Stephen, Heaven open, and the Lord Jesus Christ standing at the right hand of God. But alass! whilst thou weart ravisht with this Vision, a multitude of thine Enemies, (not much unlike, nor less cruel than his Persecutors) thy original Corruptions) have blind-folded thy eyes, and manacled thy hands, separating for the present, both it from thee, and thee from it. But now be of good comfort, though thou liest dead in sin, and intranc'd in astonishment, the Lord of life is come down unto thee. Who (manger all these Hell-hounds that watch over thee) will give thee part in the first Resur∣rection.2 Kings 4.34. He is thy spiritual Elisha, and the Prince of the Prophets, who will lay his Mouth to thy Mouth, that so thou maist praise and confess him; his Eyes to thy Eyes, that thorough faith thou maist behold him; his Hands upon thy Hands, that in deeds thou mayest obey him; yea, his whole and living Body upon thy dead Body, that so thou maist revive and live in him. Behold there, Him, of whom his own saying concerning John the Baptist, is evidently verified, A Prophet, yea, and more than a Prophet even the God of the Spirits of all Prophets.Numb. 27.16. Who, least thy weak and sinfull nature should fear to approach unto, or lend an Eare unto his Word, hath vailed his glorious Deity, with humanity, therein, being typified by Moses when he covered his shining Face, as well as prophesied of him, saying, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you amongst your Brethren like unto me.Acts 3.22. Like unto Moses indeed, as being a Man, an Israelite, a Prophet, full of Miracles, meek∣ness of the Spirit; yet with this difference of degrees, the one was comparatively, the other perfectly full: the one a Vessel, the other a Fountain: the one the Servant, the other the Son; according to that of the Apostle,
This Man was counted worthy of more glory than Moses,Heb. 3.3. in as much as he who hath builded the House, hath more honour than the House, Moses being faithful as a Servant, but Christ as a Son. Next, whereas (O my Soul) thou objectest the deadness of thy nature, thy sleeping in sin; I confess indeed thou art so. But hearken unto thy Savi∣ours Tryumph, which doth not only pierce, but give thee Eares, Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead,Eph. 5.14. and Christ shall give thee light. The hour being come, and now is,Joh. 5.25. when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live.Object. O but sayest thou I am spiritually dead, how then can I hear? Know poor wretch that thy Saviours Ephata, works as powerfully on the Soul, as upon the Body. Yea, the Apostle, reciting the predi∣ction of Moses, saith not, him may you hear; But him shall yee hear. Even so be it Lord Jesus Christ, that so loving me a Lazarus, thou maist raise me though a La∣zarus, and be unto me a Jesus. Notwithstanding these saving and comfortable promi∣ses, me-thinks I feel my Soul still heavy, and sorrowfull within me,Object. Objecting that these indeed are favourable and sweet expressions; but they are too general, consi∣dering her several defects; grievous soars, and Ulcers. Requiring not only external, and powerfull Baths, and washings, but particular application of Remedies, and Medicines. She confesseth that from these, she is assured of the abilities and sufficiency of her spiritual Physician; but she desires to have experience of his skill, and to ap∣ply his several Medicaments, unto her special infirmities. Is this thy further request, O my Soul? Be strong, and of a good courage. Loe he calls thee;Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Again, I came not to call the righteous,Mat. 9.13. but sinners to re∣pentance. For, The whole need not a Physitian, but the sick.Mat. 9.12. Nay, that thou mightest not have the least doubting, or fear, hearken to the voice of his Prophet, seconded and expounded by himself, and that in a full Auditory; The Spirit of the Lord is upon me,Luke 4.18. because he hath anointed me (there's his calling) to preach the Gospel to the Poor, (there's his Office). He hath sent me to heal the broken-hearted,
to preach deliverance unto the Captives, and re∣covery of sight unto the blinde, to set at liberty them that are bruised; to wit, thee O distressed Patient, with all thy Diseases. Well, thou art now, even by his own most gracious Call, admitted into his presence. Be not ashamed, but with boldness, approach unto his Throne of Grace, unbareing thy soares, and discovering all thy spiritual wants▪ That so▪ the two estates in Adam fallen, and in Christ risen, being compared; all may behold with thee a re∣vival from death, even that first resurrection, spoken of in the Revelations▪ As also the difference, and dispro∣portion that is betwixt a Man in grace, and a Man in sin. And lastly be ravisht in the apprehension of such in∣finite mercy, which administers Plaisters to every soare; and in the conclusion works a general cure, effecting in a good measure, though not in absolute perfection, those two great works of mortification and vivication in us. For the more accurate perception, and meditation of which great works, I presume in all humility of Soul to speak Dialogue-wise unto my Saviour; and according to my weak ability, to describe him answering, in, and according to his Word. That so both my self, and others may the better understand, how excellently, and power∣fully, a true faith (begotten and strengthened by God's Spirit) doth apprehend, and apply the saving and spiri∣tual promises: Doth mortifie our corruptions, silence all objections, and overcome all kinde of temptations; by degrees, perfecting holiness, in the love and fear of God. A DIALOGVE betwixt Christ and the Soul.O Gracious Saviour, and skilfull Physician, seeing thou calledst me, I come, although ashamed to come. I have brought, if not a dead, yet a deadly sick Soul, unto thee.The Souls com∣plaint against the mind and understanding. If illumination be the antecedent of faith, and faith the eye of the Soul, and seeing a symptome of life, in how dangerous an estate am I, who walk in the vanity of my minde, having my understanding darkned, being
(in my own apprehension) alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in me,Eph. 4.17. because of the blindness of my heart. Poor Soul, faint not, nor despair, thou wast once dead, but now thou art alive. I finde no signes of death,Christ. but of life in thee. A Trunck, or senceless Corps, perceives not, nor complains of its misery, as thou dost. Neither art thou hopelesly sick; for in thee (witness these strivings) there is the strength of a renued nature, to co-act with the work of Grace. Take then these receipts out of my Book, and apply them;Joh. 1.9. I am the true light that lighteth every Man that cometh into the World, and am come for Judgment into this World,John 9.39. that they which see not might see; and they which see might be made blinde;1 Cor. 1.30. I am made unto thee wisdome, and will enlighten thy darkness; yea, if thou criest after knowledge,Psal. 18.28. and liftest up thy voice for understanding, thou shalt understand the fear of the Lord, and finde the knowledge of God: For I the Lord give wisdome, and out of my Mouth cometh knowledge,Prov. 2.3. and understanding. Again, faith is the gift of God. O then ask and thou shalt have, seek and thou shalt finde,Eph. 2.8. knock and the treasury of all good and perfect gifts shall be o∣pened, and bestowed upon thee:Mat. 7.7. Jerem. 31.33. Even the holy Spirit whom thy Heavenly Father will give to them that aske Him.Luke 11.13. The voice of my beloved! Thy Mouth is most sweet,Soul. yea, thou art altogether lovely.Cant. 5.16.7.9. The roof of thy Mouth is like the best Wine, that goeth down sweetly, causing the Lips of those that are asleep to speak. But alass Lord,Against the Conscience. how can I be delighted in these thy gracious promises, or take comfort in this cure, as long as the tormenting worm of Conscience, feeds upon my entrails, inditeing bitter things against me;Job 13.26. and making me to possess the sins of my youth; being both my Judge, and Accuser. O my Patient,Christ. I confess this thy pain and grief is un∣supportable, for the Spirit of a Man may sustain his infirmity; But a wounded Spirit, who can bear?Prov. 18.14. Yet for thy comfort, know that there is balme in Gilead, for all wounds; and a Physician there, for all Diseases;Deut. 32.39. And I, even I am he, and there is no other God with me;
I kill, and I make alive; I wound, and I heal; yea, I will restore health unto thee, and will heal thee of thy wounds. And as for this gnawing Worm,Jerem. 30.17. which thou complainest of, know that it as other infects are, generated, of a pu∣tred matter, even thy sin, and corruption. Yea, it is nou∣risht therewith. If then this cause of thy torture, be with∣drawn, the effect will undoubtedly cease; For, I will for∣give thy iniquity, and will remember thy sins no more; making them,Jerem. 31.34. though as red as Scarlet, to be as white as Snow.Esay 1.18. Through my blood thou hast redemption, even the forgivenesses of Sins. If the Blood of Bulls and Goats, and the Ashes of an Heyfer,Colos. 1.14. sprinkling the unclean, Sanctified to the purifying of the flesh; How much more shall my Blood (that through the eternal Spirit offered my self without spot to God) purge thy Conscience from dead works?Heb. 9.13, 14. Soul. Against hard∣ness of heart.O my spiritual healer, as thy Word assures me of thy ableness to cure, so it also informs me of my uncapable∣ness of cure. In the sickness of the Body, so of the Soul, there are some conditions, and estates so vitiated, and overcome with maladies, that they are forsaken of the Physician, and left as desperate▪ and past remedy. In such a condition me-thinks I seem to be, of whose heart (by reason of festred corruption) it may be said, as Job of Leviathan, That it is as firme as a Stone; yea, as hard as a piece of the nether Milstone,Job 41.24. of whom also thine own speech to the Jews may be verified, That my heart is waxed gross, and my eares are dull of hearing, and my eyes are closed, least at any time I should see with my eyes, and hear with my eares, and should understand with my heart,Mat. 13.15. and should be converted, and thou shouldst heal me. Is then (Lord) my heart such a Rock, and the imaginations thereof wholly and continually evil? How can then the pure streams of Repentance,Gen. 8.21. Gen. 6.. flow from thence? (which is the condition on my part in thy Cove∣nant of mercy and pardon) witness thy own words deli∣vered by the Prophet, Repent, and turn your selves from all your transgressions,Ezek. 18.30. so iniquity shall not be your ruine. And that in thy Gospel preached by thy Apostle, Repent yee,Acts 3.19. and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out.
Fear not my redeemed, nor be dismaid, as though any thing was impossible unto God.Christ. What seems difficult be∣cause of thy nature, shall be made easie through my grace. Think not my Word (which is the word of life) shall become the savour of death unto any of mine. Thou complainest that by it, thou hast found thy hard∣ness of heart, which thou sayest excludes repentance, and consequently pardon. O be not deceived, here's no cause of despair, but of hope, and thankfulness: since my Word hath wrought that blessed work upon thee, for which I ordained it. Having not only selected, but prepared thee for my cure. There is a reprobate and sick sort of Men, I confess,Rom. 2.5. Who after their hardness and impenitent Hearts, treasure up unto themselves wrath against the Day of wrath. Such were those Jews, whose insensibleness did sufficiently prove their deadness. But thy Eares are bored, to give my Word entrance. Thy Eyes are opened to behold therein, as in a Mirrour thy spots, and many defects. And thy Heart is agil and wil∣ling to know, and accuse thy self. Therefore thou shalt be converted, and I will heal thee. If there should be impossibilities imposed on thee in my Covenant, how could I then be just? And shall not the Judge of all the World do right? Or if thy work should either precede or assist mine, should not that act of thine (though the least) detract from my free mercy, and make my grace no more grace? O cursed be such Sathan-like pride of dust and ashes, that thus lifts up it self against my om∣nipotency, mercy, and all other my attributes; aspiring even unto my Throne of Glory. O know that those commands proclaimed in the Old Testament by my Pro∣phets, were given as preparatives to the New. What I require of thee, is my due: why I require it of thee, is my mercy; that so running from me as a Judge, thou mightest run to me as a Saviour; Who grants both to Jew and Gentile repentance unto life. Which conversion,[Acts 11.18. since it hath wrought it on thee; receive, and apply, what my mercy out of the same word hath extracted for thee. Are thy thoughts only evil?Ezek. 36.25. I will sprinkle clean Water upon thee, and thou shalt be clean from all thy
filthiness. Is thy Heart a Stone, which cannot relent? I am he that turns the Rockie Heart into a Well,Psal. 114.8. as the Rock in Horeb into standing Water, and the Flint into a Fountain of Waters. Yea, a new Heart also will I give thee,Ezek. 36.26, 27. and a new Spirit will I put within thee; and I will take away thy stony Heart out of thy Flesh, and I will give thee a Heart of Flesh. And I will put my Spi∣rit within thee, and cause thee to walk in my Statutes. For I dwell with him that is of a contrite and humble Spirit,Esay 57.15. to revive him. That so all my Enemies with shame here, and torment hereafter, may be inforced to confess, that it is I, that worketh in thee both to will, and to do,Phil. 2.13. of my good pleasure: quickning those that were dead in sins,Col. 2.13. and trespasses. As also that I am Lord Paramount over all my Creatures, Having mercy on whom I will have mercy,Rom. 9.15. and whom I will, I harden. O my Lord, Thou art my refuge, and strength, a very present help in time of trouble.Soules com∣plaint of its un∣faithful me∣mory. Psal. 46.1. Psal. 119.103. How sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea, sweeter than Honey to my Mouth. O that they were so fixed in my mind, and imprinted in my memory, that they might remain with me for ever. But blessed Saviour, this is my misery, that though for the present, I may rejoyce with David, yet for the fu∣ture, I cannot promise, and say with him, I will not for∣get thy Word. For whereas in my Primitive nature, thou didst indue my Soul with a serviceable and faithfull me∣mory,Psal. 119.16. to be as it were, her treasury, or magazine; from whence, like that wise House-holder in thy Gospel, she might upon all occasions bring forth things new and old.Matth. 13.52. I finde that Cyttadel battered, and possest by my cor∣ruptions. Who have fore-closed and lodged themselves therein. So that the complaint of Jeremy is verified of me, as well as of that People, that have forgotten Thee, Days without number.Jerem. 2.32. O Lord, if the Cistern be broken, where shall the thirsty be refreshed? my barrenness wa∣tered? what doth it avail that my Eares, as Buckets, do continually draw up, and are filled from thee the Foun∣tain of life, with quickning promises, and saving dire∣ctions, if the receptacle and Cistern my memory be faul∣ty, and faithless? As the Body which wants the reten∣tive
faculty, and vomits up its sustenance, giving neither time of Chilefaction to the Stomach, nor of making blood to the Livour, can receive little nourishment; So that Soul which retains not the spiritual Manna (thy Word) in the memory, that there it might be disgested by Meditation, and converted into practice, can never thrive in holiness, and live spiritually. It may be for the present, I may say of thy Word, as Shimei of Solomon's, Thy saying is good, When as soon after,1 Kings 2.38. it will be for∣gotten, and without thy mercy prove to me, as that to him, death and bitterness in the end. Further, this holy retention is not only of excellent and necessary use in thine, but also highly by thee commended, required, and commanded.Luke 11.28. Thine own Mouth pronouncing Him to be rather blessed, that bears thee in his heart, than her that bore thee in her Wombe; a spiritual enjoying, be∣ing far above a corporal. Yea, for this cause, and to help this dangerous defect, didst thou ingrave thy Law upon Tables, and commanded it to be written upon the most perspicuous places of the House.Deut. 6.8, 9. And in the glorious and holy Decalogue it self, thou didst place a Memento, in the midst, and as it were in the front thereof. Further,Exod. 20.8. thy holy Spirit in the Prophet doth brand, and note this privation, as the root and cause of all Rebellions; Be∣cause (saith he) my People have forgotten me,Jerem. 18.15. they have burnt Incense unto vanity. Lastly, which adds to, and most aggravates this my languor; wicked Men are in thy Word thus described and painted out. To be with∣out God in the World,Eph. 2.12. and not to have thee in all their ways, to cast thy Laws behind them, and to forget thee, as I have done. O Lord,Psal. 50.17. Job 8.13. since I have lost this precious gift in the first Adam, let me receive it again in thee, the second, that my Soul being adorned with holy im∣pressions, may become the Temple of thee my Saviour. Strengthen thy self in Me, O dejected Soul,Christ. and in these thy wants, Look unto me,Phil. 2.13. who works in thee both the will and the deed of my good pleasure, and will my self also freely give thee all things. As I am not ignorant of thy defects, so I am not to seek of thy cure.Rom. 8.32. I know there is a double forgetfulness in corrupted nature, the
one of thy sins, to repent, the other of my Word and Laws to practice. But know thou this also, that although for a time my Elect may forget me, yet they shall never be forgotten of me. Can a Woman forget her sucking Child, that she should not have compassion on the Son of her Wombe;Esay 49.13. yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee; for I will remember my Covenant with thee, and will establish unto thee an everlasting Covenant.Ezek. 16.60, 62, 63. And (because I will do thus) thou shalt also remember thy ways and be ashamed, and thou shalt loath thy self, in thy own sight, for all the evil which thou hast committed. And as for the other defect,Ezek. 20.43. be assured, that the Comforter which is the Holy Ghost, whom my Father will send in my name, he shall teach thee all things,John 14.26. and bring all things into thy remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto thee. For, This is the Covenant that I will make with thee, I will put my Law into thy inward parts, and write it in thy Heart,Jerem. 31.33. and will be thy God, and thou shalt be my Ser∣vant. O my Lord, I can never sufficiently admire thy power, thy free Love,Souls Com∣plaint against her will. and the healing vertue of thy sacred and refreshing word; But what sweetness, or relief, what hope of remedy, and recovery, can my diseased Soul receive from it, that wants a will to receive, or apply thy comfortable Plaisters unto my festred sores? Can the knowledge and sight of Meat feed the hungry? Can the beholding of riches satisfie the needy? or the Physi∣cians Medicament cure without application? No Lord, they cannot. How then can thy Holy Word work upon me any gracious effects, that have a wretched will, re∣fractory to hearing, reading, meditation, or any good use thereof? If the mind and understanding be evil, the will, which is their servant, and agent, must needs be so also. And if it hath its work in all evil actions, it must not be left out (nay cannot be idle or wanting) in those that are good. But my will is continually opposite to thine, which is the rule of equity and justice, and therefore can∣not work the works of God. It is true, thou canst not. For as I said before, I work in thee both to will and to do.Christ. Phil. 2.13. But because thou canst
not, wilt thou limit my power also? Cannot I that at first gave thee a will, now at the last give thee a good will? Is it not as easie for me, to bend, move, and change thy nilling will into a willing one, as to enlighten and quick∣en the other dead faculties of thy Soul? Or, is my free grace and love, less benevolent unto it, than unto the rest? No surely. It is not for my honour, nor is it in thy pow∣er, to be primarily and voluntarily assistant in this work. For of my own will I beget my Children,James 1.18. that those that glory may glory in the Lord; humbly confessing, that it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth,1 Cor. 1.31. but of God that sheweth mercy.Rom. 9.16. Mercifull Saviour, I know thou canst cure dangerous, yea desperate diseases. But Lord,Souls com∣plaint against her affections. I fear that I am too far gone, that I have lost and let slip my opportunity, and time of grace, even that Day wherein thou wilt speak, and be spoken to. So that now I may justly expect, that thou wilt swear in thy wrath, that I shall not enter into thy rest. And that this my fear may not seem groundless, be thou pleased to feel the Pulses of my cor∣rupted Soul; and thou shalt finde that they beat not at all; or if they do, their motion is either exorbitant,Against Love. or full of intermissions. Is it not thy command, that I should love thee, love my God with all my heart, with all my soul, with all my minde?Mat. 22.37. For thou wilt love them that love thee. Is it not negative also thus,Deut. 11.1, 13. Love not the World, neither the things that are in the World; For if thou lovest the World,Prov. 8.17. 1 John 2.15. John 3.16. the love of the Father is not in thee. What then Lord will become of me, who have lo∣ved darkness rather than light, and have been a lover of pleasures more than a lover of thee, my God? Further,2 Tim. 3.4. if at any time I be in love, or ravisht with thee, as be∣holding that excellent beauty, which streams forth from all thy glorious attributes, especially thy mercy, how weak, and of what short continuance are these flashes? being like lightning, which gone, make but the night the darker. So that in their so long absence, I have just cause to fear their return; doubting lest thou wilt say of me, as once of the Laodiceans, that because I am neither hot,Rev. 3.16. Against Joy. nor cold, but luke-warm, thou wilt therefore spite me out of thy mouth.
Rom. 4.17.Again, doth not thy Kingdome within us, consist in righteousness, in peace, and in joy of the Holy Ghost? which kinde of joy, for the excellency thereof, thou call∣est thine;John 15.11. as also because of its procession from thee, and from thy spirit; it being that unparallel'd, and un∣conceivable mirth which admits no mixture of sorrow, no higher pitch of solace. This, this was it which so ra∣visht thy holy ones, making them breath forth seraphi∣cally with Habakkuk, I will rejoyce in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my Salvation;Habac. 3.18. with the Spouse we will be glad and rejoyce in thee;Cant. 1.4. with David, in thy presence is fulness of joy;Psal. 16.11. and with Peter, we rejoyce with joy unspeakable and glorious. Now O Lord, in what ranck shall I place my self, who being carnal, and sold under sin, savours not the things that be of God, but those that be of Men;Mat. 16.23. not rejoycing in thee, but in my own vain and sinfull imaginations; proudly boasting and rejoyce∣ing with those reprehended by the Apostle, in those few gifts thou hast indued me with: as though I had not re∣ceived them?1 Cor. 4.7. Further, as thine have many objects of ho∣ly joy within them, so have they many also without them; David preferred Jerusalem above his chiefest joy. And the spiritual prosperity and welfare of the Church,Psal. 137.6. was St. Paul's hope, joy, glory, and Crown of rejoycing. But such O Lord,1 Thes. 2.19. is the natural depravation of my affecti∣ons, that instead of wishing well unto Sion, I am ready (did not thy grace restrain me) to persecute thee with Paul in thy members, and to cry with those wicked, con∣cerning thy Jerusalem, Rase it, rase even to the Foun∣dation thereof:Psal. 137.7. rejoycing on the contrary part with those reproved by Job, and the Apostle, who make Gold their hope, and whose God is their Belly; hungring, and thirst∣ing after momentary honours,Job 31.24. like Balaam, and Haman; taking the Timbrel,Phil. 3.19. and the Harp, and rejoycing at the sound of the Organ. Lastly, as within, and without, so also above themselves,Job 21.12. they have their objects of joy; even thy glory. What else made that royal Prophet so piously nimble? and so chearfull and publick a dancer before thy Ark? what caused the Songs of Moses, My∣riam, and Deborah? yea, what occasioned those joyfull
expressions of thy blessed Mother, of Simeon, Zachary, and Anna? together with those two transcendent and affectionate wishes of St. Paul, and Moses? I say what, but the joyfull magnifying of thy glory, in vouchsafeing thy presence, in destroying thy enemies, in fulfilling thy promises, and in the Salvation and Conversion of thy People? But in me Lord, instead of this lightsomeness, in seeking of thy glory, there is naturally the sinfull po∣pularity of Absolom; yea, the hypocritical zeal of Jehu; the vain-glorious formality of Magus; and the self-seek∣ing pride of Herod. So that (considering these wants, and disorders in my affections) no wonder if I distrust my self, and cry out to thee, with the Publican, Lord have mercy upon me a sinner. Poor Soul, let not these fears, and doubts,Christ. discou∣rage thee, they make thy state the better, not the worse. Ignorance of want, is the more dangerous,Luke 1.53. when stomach∣less and silent; as being thereby disabled both to ask, and to receive relief. Thy many complaints of defects, are the true effects of those graces thou desirest. Neither canst thou mourn, because of no affection, without some affection. But to answer all thy objections; weart thou emptiness it self, am not I he that made Heaven and Earth of nothing? Do I fill all things with my Essence, and cannot I fill thee with my grace? Can I be love it self, (for God is love,1 John 4.8.) and not be both willing and able to impart some rayes thereof to thee my Creature? The fruits of my Spirit is love and joy, which Spirit I give unto all that are mine.Gal. 5.22. What though the Chaos of thy corrupted nature, yields no such fruits;Rom. 8.9. The Para∣dise of God, in which thou art replanted, doth, as being watered with those Rivers of love, which flow from me, the Fountain. Thou therefore loving me,1 John 4.19. because I loved thee first: as I am the only cause of thy love (for I lo∣ved thee freely) so I am the continuer. For,Hosea 14.4. John 15.10. John 13.1. thou shalt abide in my love; yea, I will continue to love thee: for whom I love, I love unto the end. Wherefore fear thou not the Eclipses thereof. Natural Men do not more cer∣tainly expect the one, than all my Saints the other. As their Sun is not extinct, no more is thine: I thus ordain∣ing
it, that in my absence, thou mightest have a longing for my presence, and in my presence mightest lovingly fear my absence; these intermissions preceding the in∣crease, not the dimunishment of affection. And since thou canst cry with David, Restore unto me the joy of thy sal∣vation,Psal. 51.12. doubt not, but thou shalt also confess with him, that my anger endureth but a moment, weeping may en∣dure for a Night, but joy cometh in the Morning. Psal. 30.5.Again, whereas thou objectest, and bewailest, the want of the true spiritual mirth; Be not discouraged, for this thy humble craving, argues that thou art free from pride, and self-conceitedness, which usually so swells the hearts of natural Men, that no place is left for grace. Further, it assures thee of a present possession, for thou could'st never have heartily longed for that, which thou never tasted; nor have hated this false joy, hadst not thou had some experience of the true. Lastly, thou hast an interest in my promise; for I fill the hungry with good things. As I am always filling, so my servants are always hun∣gry. A good Archer is not by thee condemned for some∣times missing his Mark; neither will I reject thee for some miscarriage, since thy affections are bent towards me, and thy constant aime is my glory. To conclude, Longest thou for the joys of Habakkuk, David, and the rest of my Saints? continually petition me to be indued with the same Holy Spirit, which my Father will give to them that aske him;Luke 11.13. and to support thee in thy Prayers? Remember, and rely upon these my promises,John 16.14. Aske and yee shall receive, that your joy may be full. For, I am sent to comfort all that mourn, to give unto them beauty for ashes,Esay 61.3. the oyle of joy for mourn∣ing. The ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with Songs, and everlasting joy, and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flie away.Esay 35.10. Soul.Lord, Kiss me with the kisses of thy Mouth, for thy love is better than Wine. But O diseased Creature that I am,Cant. 1.2. what shall I do? or what will become of me? The uncovering of one malady discovers more; and my in∣firmities, like the Oyl in the Widdows Cruse, multi∣plies upon me: So that in me is verified, the complaint
of thy Prophet, The whole Head is sick, and the whole Heart faint, from the sole of the foot, even unto the head, there is no soundness in it, but wounds, bruses,Esay 1.5. and pu∣trified sores. I had no sooner bewailed my want of love, but my misgoverned hatred torments me. No sooner I accused my self for worldly and exorbitant mirth; but carnal sorrow and servile fear overwhelms me. Whereas those that love thee, hate evil; yea, every false way, with the workers thereof, and that with a perfect hatred.Psal. 97.10.119.104.139.22. My cursed nature, with the fool, hates knowledge. Yea, and him that rebukes, being like to those wicked Israelites,Prov. 1.22. Amo. 5.10. Micah 3.2. the Prophet Micah speaks of. That hate the good, and love the evil. Whereas I should be humbled, and peni∣tently chatter, thus with David, I am troubled,Psal. 38.6. I am bowed down greatly, I go mourning all the day long, neither is there any rest in my Bones, because of my sin. And also be so much affected for thy glory, as to cry out, yea to die with Phineas his Wife,1 Sam. 4.21. because the Ark of God was taken. Or be able to say, that Rivers of Waters have run down my Eyes, because Men keep not thy Laws?Psal. 119.136. My carnal and sinful disposition is ready to make me mourn, and hang down the head with Haman;Esther 6.12. to be sick and heavy with Ahab; yea, to grieve and die with Nabal, and Achitophel, for being crossed in momentary honours,1 Kings 21.4. 1 Sam. 35.27. 2 Sam. 17.23. in covetous desires in my estate, or any other my designs. And whereas the filial fear of God should be continu∣ally in my heart, and before my eyes, (for, Happy is the Man that feareth always) following herein the blessed example of holy David, whose daily Song was,Prov. 28.14. Fear the Lord all yee his Saints; of pious Joshuah, whose tender Heart feared, and trembled at the words of the Law;2 Kings 22.11. and of Religious Nehemiah, who was zealous for the Commandements of the Lord. I have,Nehe. 13.8. with those Col∣lonies of strangers planted in the City of Samaria,2 Kings 27.33, Fear∣ed the Lord, and served my Gods, that is, My pleasures and vain lusts. Or if at any time I have dreaded thee, or been humbled, it hath been either whilst thy Judg∣ments have been threatned with the numerous Ninivites; or, when they have layn sore upon me,Jonas 3.5. with the Phili∣stines; or,1 Sam. 5.12. Exo. 10.17, 0 until they were removed with wicked Pha∣raoh.
Thus (dear Saviour) do all my affections degene∣rate, and erre from that end for which thou hast plac'd them in my Soul. O thou which by thy omnipotency didst convert Water into Wine; work the like miracle in me also. So changing me in quality, relish, and use, that I may both now, and hereafter, be thought worthy to be admitted unto thy Table, O spiritual Bride∣groom. Christ.Raise up thy dejected Spirits, and disconsolate Soul. For such is the goodness of my nature, and the infinite∣ness of my mercy, that these thy grievous maladies, in∣stead of provoking my displeasure, move me unto pity, and convert my justice into compassion. I am the Phy∣sician of the Soul, and come to heal, not the whole, but the sick.Mat. 9.12. I am he that grants Resurrection to the Dead in Sin, as well as to the dead for sin. And am as able to give Manasseth newness of life, as Lazarus a new life. Therefore be not faithless, but believe. Thou complain∣est to me of an evil and degenerated hatred, that is ready upon all occasions to take up armes against God, Good-men, and goodness. Indeed this is dangerous, but not incurable. Was not my Servant Paul a cruel Perse∣cuter before a zealous Martyr? yea, and thousands of the Jews, my Murderers, before my Converts? Be con∣fident then, that my love is also able to swallow up thy hatred, and to perfect this grace of love in thy life, which it hath begun in thy desires. Further, whereas thou art troubled and molested with the frequent inundati∣ons of carnal, and worldly sorrows; Know that the rea∣son therof is the want of depth or scowring of the lower water-course, even that Channel of thy Repentance, which is as it were the drayn of this filthy Lake, and muddy affection.Acts 5.1. To the performance of which duty, that thou maist be enabled, and assured, Know it is I that gives Repentance unto life,Acts 11.18. Ezek. 33.11. 2 Pet. 3.9. not willing the death of a sinner, but rather that he should repent and live. Lastly, Let not thy former slavish fear discourage thee; since all things (even these thy corruptions) through my mercy shall work together for thy good.Rom. 8▪28. My Law having by these terrors prepared thee for my Gospel,
which, seeing by my grace, thou hast received, be assu∣red, that that perfect love which it produces, casteth out fear, and will free thee from all such base affrightments;1 John 4.18. possessing thee of that legitimate fear, which flows from duty, and adoption. In further assurance of which, re∣ceive, and apply this my promise; They (namely thee, and all my faithfull) shall be my People,Jerem. 32.38, 39. and I will be their God, and I will give them one Heart, and one Way, that they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and their Childrens children. O thou my spiritual Elisha! what shall I render unto thee, for this thy great cure wrought upon my Soul?Soul. for this thy miraculous cleansing of my sinfull Leprosie? Are the Talents of Ophir, the fruit of my Body, of my ground, or of my Flocks, a fit Sacrifice for thee? No, Thine is the Earth, and the fulness thereof.Psal. 24.1. I will there∣fore imitate that religious Proselite, Naaman, and give Glory to the Lord God of Israel,2 Kings 5.15. I will offer unto thee thanks-giving, and pay my vows unto thee, O most High. Yea, my understanding which thou hast enlightned,Psal. 50.14. my minde which thou hast instructed, my conscience, which thou hast pacified, my memory which thou hast strength∣ened, my affections which thou hast ordered, and my stony heart which thou hast mollified, and all things else that are within me, shall bless thy Holy Name. Yea,Psal. 103.1. I will invert the speech of thy Servant David, and say who am I, and what is my poor Soul,1 Chro. 29.14. that I should be able to offer unto thee thus willingly? and after this sort (Lord I confess) all things come of thee, and of thine own have I given unto thee, wherefore let what's mine of grace, and thine of merit, be thy only glory. And now since I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord which am but dust and ashes, Let not the Lord be angry,Gen. 1.27. and I will speak yet again. Thou hast been pleased to give unto me light, in darkness, and to make known unto me thy great Salvation; Thou hast filled me with thy goodness, and mercy, and laid up in my heart the infinite treasure of thy promises; But what avails all this (Lord) when as the Thief (Sathan) may break through and steal, the Moth (my inbred corruptions) may de∣vour
and consume these my spiritual riches; there be∣ing no defence nor power in me to resist.The Souls com∣plaint of her sences, tongue and members of her body. For those Cinque ports, and Windows of my Soul, my sences, stand wide open, not only admitting, but inviting my cruel Enemies to enter. Yea, every Member of my bo∣dy is not only assistant, to my adversaries, Sin, the World, and the Devil; but also takes up armes against me, and seeks my destruction. My eyes, which from outward ob∣jects (even thy beautifull works) should be instruments of begetting admiration, praise and worship to thee in my heart, are full of vanity, lust, and adultery. My eares which should only be open to thy Word, are thereto deaf, and receptacles, of oaths, blasphemies, lies, slanders, and all obscenity. And those other sences of tasting, smel∣ling, touching, which thou hast given to be helps in piety, and thanksgiving, through the more ample fruiti∣on of thy Creatures, are become the factors of pride, covetousness, and epicurisme. Further, my Tongue, which should speak of thy praise all the day long,Psal.. 35.28. Psal. 51.14. Psal. 10.7. Psal. 12.3. Psal. 5.9. Psal. 50.19. James▪ 3.6. and sing a∣loud of thy righteousness, hath mischief under it, and speaketh proud things. Is full of flattery, and frames de∣ceit. And is fraught with naughtiness, and lying. Yea, it is a Fire, a World of iniquity, setting on Fire the course of nature, and is set on Fire of Hell. So that, that Member which was once my glory, is now my shame. Lastly, my hands and feet which ought to be Barna∣basses, and Barjonasses, Brethren, and Sons of consola∣tion, in respect of righteousness, and charity, towards my poor Brethren, are rather like Simeon and Levy, Brethren in cruelty, full of iniquity, and ready to shed blood. So that O Lord, having so many wide breaches in this Bulwark of my Soul, through which mine Ene∣mies continually enter, how can I with quiet, and com∣fort of heart, relish, and feed upon thy promises, obey thy Commandements, and cease to grieve thy holy spi∣rit? May I not justly fear the miserable lott of that wretched back-slider in thy Gospel, into whom the un∣clean Spirit which was gone out,Luke 11.24. returned, bringing with him seven other Spirits worse than himself; So that the last estate of that Man was worse than the beginning?
Wherefore, sweet Jesus! since thy Body as well as thy Soul suffered for me, let thy Consolation, Sanctification, and Salvation be extended to both in me also, that be∣ing not particularly, but wholly thine, and at one in my self, and with thee, I may wholly and only praise and serve thee. That sin hath miserably metamorphosed thy Body,Christ. and shamefully deformed, mislead, and corrupted thy Members, is true, (O my well-beloved:) And no marvail; For thou wast shapen in iniquity,Psal. 51.15. and in sin did thy Mo∣ther conceive thee. And, Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Not one. Yet be not thou discouraged,Job 14.4. nor dismaid, for though thou art a Naaman, I will be thy Elisha. Yea, to save such sinners am I come. What though thou beest even white over with Sins Leprosie,1 Tim. 1.15. I am thy High Priest to heal thee, and pronounce thee clean. Have I cured thy Soul, doubt not the cure of thy Body, since all my works are perfect. And if I gave freely, and un∣askt, forgiveness of sins, together with health of Body to many, whilst I walkt upon Earth, shall I not much more give thee spiritually both also? When as I rais'd up Lazarus, I could have left his Soul, still spiritually dead; for I give many health of Body, to whom I deny Salvation. But to whom I grant spiritual life,Mat. 6.33. (as unto thee) I bestow all lesser things, as included in the greater. So that having said unto thee, as once unto the Cripple, Thy Sins are forgiven thee, thou maist be confident that thou art healed of thy spiritual lameness,Mat. 9.2, 6. strengthened to arise from thy couch of Sin, and enabled to walk in the ways of godliness, towards thy heavenly home; as having the Image of holiness imparted upon all thy mem∣bers, and the marrow thereof running throughout all thy bones: The Trees root being quickened, the Body there∣of must needs flourish: And thy Soul being sanctified, all the parts of thy outward Man must needs wax green in an holy conversation, and bring forth fruits unto righ∣teousness.Jam. 3.12. As a Fountain at the same place cannot send forth sweet Water and bitter, no more can the members, and consequently the actions, which as streams proceed from a regenerate Soul, be polluted, and impure. Not∣withstanding
what hath been said, that thou maist be firmly established, and assured of this truth, receive, ap∣ply, and lay up these my gracious and particular pro∣mises. Have thine Eyes been full of Sin, vanity and Idola∣try?Esay 17.7. thou shalt now look to thy Maker, and thine Eyes shall have respect unto the holy one of Israel. Art thou spiritually blinde, and canst make no good use of out∣ward objects?Revel. 3.18. I will anoint thy Eyes with Eye salve, that thou mayst see my goodness. Are thine Eares closed up to my Word? Now shall the Deaf hear the words of my Book,Esay 29.18. and the Eyes of the blinde shall see out of obscu∣rity, and darkness. Yea, thine Eares shall hear a Word behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk thou in it, when thou turnest to the right hand,Esay 30.21. or to the left. Fur∣ther, have thy Nostrils been inlets, and entertainers of vanity? Exhautasting the sweet of my Creatures for the serving of sinfull pride, and voluptuousness? Henceforth thou shalt make them serviceable to thy Soul, not thy sence only, but thy minde also, being by them delight∣fully recreated; imitating herein my beloved Spouse in the Canticles, Who from the natural perfumes of Spices, and sweet Flowers,Cant. 5.13. and the distilling sweetness of fra∣grant Lillies, doth affectionately meditate of, and set forth the excellencies of my Word, and Ordinances, and the mellifluousness of my promises and instructions. Yea, thou thy self also shalt be sweet unto me in thy obedi∣ence, and good works, which are an odour of a sweet smell,Phil. 4.28. a Sacrifice acceptable, and well-pleasing unto God. Next, thou complainest that thy Pallate is naturally the Cook, and factor of Epicurisme, Drunkenness, and Gluttony; be of good chear, for thou shalt now experi∣mentally confess, That Man lives not by Bread only, but by every Word that proceedeth out of the Mouth of God.Mat. 4.4. Neither shalt thou labour any more for the Meat which perisheth,John 6.25. but for that Meat which endureth unto everla∣sting life, which I the Son of Man will give unto thee; for my Flesh is meat indeed, and my Blood is drink in∣deed.John 6.55. But in this spiritual nourishment, remember, that
it is the Spirit that quickeneth, the Flesh profiteth nothing. Hast thou formerly pleased and glutted thy self with dainties, even to my dishonour,John 6.63. and the abuse of my Creatures, Thou shalt now hunger and thirst after righ∣teousness, and be both blessed, and filled:Mat. 5.6. For I am the Bread of Life, he that cometh to me shall never hunger, and he that believeth on me shall never thirst. Yea, thou shalt be able to make a spiritual,John 6.35. as well as a natural use of my Creatures, chearfully, and tastingly, saying with my Espoused Church, that in respect of my delightfull, and all-surpassing graces,Cant. 2.3. I am as the Apple Tree amongst the Trees of the Wood, and that my Fruit is sweet unto thy taste. And with my Servant David, that my words and judgments are sweeter than the Hony,Psal. 119.103. Psal. 19.10. and the Hony Combe. Further, hath thy Touch been a snare unto thee? and administred fuell to thy corruption? Have thy Hands and Feet been slow in my ways, but swift to commit iniqui∣ty? Hath thy Tongue been silent in my praises, and a ready Advocate, and Pleader for Sin? Know, my com∣mand is gone forth, and my gracious Decree is now ef∣ficatious, to strengthen the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees, to make the lame Man leap as an Hart,Esay 35.3, 6. and the tongue of the dumb to Sing, and say, Praise the Lord, call upon his Name,Esay 12.4. declare his doings amongst the Peo∣ple, make mention that his Name is exalted. Now shall thy hands with my Spouse in the Canticles, drop with the pretious and sweet smelling Myrrh of holy and fervent endeavours; shaking off their former sinfull sloath,Cant. 5.5. and drowsiness. Now shall all those Members which thou hast heretofore yielded as Servants to uncleannesse,Rom. 6.19. and to iniquity, be Servants to righteousness unto holiness. For, whilst thou weart in the flesh, The motions of Sin, which were by the Law, did work in thy Members to bring forth fruit unto Death;Rom. 7.5, 6. But now thou art delivered from the Law, that being dead wherein thou weart holden, that thou shouldest serve me in newness of Spirit, and not in the oldness of the Letter, as being a Member of my Body, of my Flesh, and of my Bones. Lastly,Eph. 5.30. Art thou ashamed of the nakedness of thy Body, as being the
Mirrour, yea, the effect of thy Souls wants? Know that thou (in the loynes of thy first Parents) weart not more willing to lose and cast off that robe of righteousness, than I am to restore, and give thee a better. As I then cloath'd thy naked Body, so I will now cloath thy na∣ked Soul. Hast thou been a Prodigal? behold thy Hea∣venly Father (for my sake) doth embrace thee, in the armes of his mercy,Luke 15.22. and covers thee with the best robe of my righteousness. Hast thou been a vagrant, and wan∣derer in the High-ways of sin, and by-paths of iniquity, an Alien to the Common-wealth of England?Mat. 22.9. Loe now thou art an invited Guest unto my Heavenly Pallace, Eternal Feast, and endless Nuptials, being arrayed with the Wedding, and glorious Garment of my Immaculate Holiness. These are those Garments, whose smell is like the smell of Lebanon, and whose sent is Myrrh, Aloes, and Cassia.Cant. 4.11. Whose excelling sweetness doth overcome the stench of thy sins;Psal. 45.8. perfumes thy best actions, and makest thee an acceptable Sacrifice to God. Yea, it makes thy Body like Moses, and Stephen's face, glorious upon Earth. Esay 52.1. Psal. 132.16.Is it not I that gives beautifull Garments to Sion, and that cloath her Priests with Salvation? That councel Men to buy of me white Rayments, that they may be cloathed, and that the shame of their nakedness do not appear?Revel. 3.5, 18. That have promised to Him that overcometh, The same shall be cloathed with white Rayment, That appoint unto them that mourn in Sion,Esay 61.3. to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oyl of joy for mourning, the Gar∣ment of praise for the Spirit of heaviness. Wherefore O my redeemed, be thou no longer solicitous and doubt∣full of thy blessed estate, only believe, and thou shalt see the Salvation and glory of God.John 11.4. Psal. 51.1. O Lord thou hast opened my Lips, therefore my Mouth shall shew forth thy praise.Soul. I will greatly rejoyce in thee O Lord, my Soul shall be joyfull in thee my God; for thou hast cloathed me with the Garments of Salvation, thou hast covered me with the Robe of Righteoousness:Esay 61.10. Even as a Bridegroom decketh himself with Ornaments, and a Bride adorneth her self with Jewels. Therefore
as thou hast freely given me all, so I desire thankfully to enjoy all to thy glory. To which end, assist me with thy grace, that these Eyes which thou hast enlightened, may always devoutly behold, and admire thy works. That these Eares which thou hast opened, may be for ever dutifully attentive to thy words. And that these o∣ther sences which thou hast rightly disposed, and order∣ed, may continually obey thy will, and exalt thy praise? Yea, these my weak hands which thou hast lifted up, my feeble knees which thou hast strengthned, my sliding feet which thou hast kept from falling, shall readily ob∣serve thy precepts, and run in the way of thy Command∣ments, because thou hast enlarged my heart. Finally,Psal. 105.1. Not unto us Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give glory. For of thee, through thee, and to thee,Rom. 11.36. are all things, to whom be glory for ever, and ever, Amen. I have here Dialogue-wise (for the more profitable and particular handling of things) briefly and plainly shewed, how many rare and precious gems are treasured up in this Ark of the Covenant, the Prophetical office of our Saviour, as also how graciously, and comfortably, they are offered to, and received by the hand of faith, to the benefit, and Jubile, of every true Believer. It remains now, that according to my former method, my Meditations pass on unto the last object and foun∣dation of faith, the Kingly office of our Saviour; which is as it were the tegment, and compleatment, of our sal∣vation. For we are therefore reconciled, and justified by our Priest, taught, and sanctified by our Prophet, that we may obey, and be protected, and governed, in this life, by our King, and be for ever glorified with him in the life to come. If Men enter the presence of Earthly Princes with much civil reverence, with what divine worship, honour,Of Christs Kingly Office. adoration, and admiration, O my Soul, oughtest thou to enter the presence of the King of Kings; and medi∣tate upon his wonderfull acts, and office? This is one of those glorious mysteries, which the Holy Angels desire to look into, yea, with which their sublime understand∣ings are, and shall be for ever delighted, busied, and ra∣vished.
How fervent then, should thy thoughts be, yea, in humility how earnestly shouldst thou like Jacob, strive with God by Prayer, to give thee this blessing also; that with the Eye of thy faith (together with those blessed spirits) thou maist prie into this Supream, and perfect Monarchy of the Prince of peace and righteousness. A King is the desire of most Nations; yea, those Bar∣barians which are ignorant of all other rules of life, and civility, do notwithstanding acknowledge the Maxime of a Soveraignty, and (as bound by a Cannon Law of nature) do willingly subject their Necks to this Yoak▪ Is rule and dominion then necessary? so desirable, and profitable in civil societies? So much conducing to the flourishing of a Common-wealth? Surely it is much more requirable, and beneficial for the well-governing and flourishing of the Church. In which as in a Kingdome, there is a mixture of good, and bad; Enemies within, and without; and those the most powerfull, pernicious, and malitious of all others. As also many Laws to be observed, rewards to be conferred, corrections and pu∣nishments to be inflicted. Granted then it must needs be, (for these respects sake) that the Universal Church which is a Body; a spiritual, holy, and glorious Mo∣narchie, must have a glorious, a wise, and omnipotent King, and Protector. Wouldst thou now, O my Soul, see him, and know him? Loe thy Mother, and his Spouse, calls thee, and all other longing Souls, to view his tryumphs, in these words: Goe forth, even with fervent affections, O yee Daughters of Zion, that is, all yee pure and fruitfull ones in the Church of God; and behold, that is, appre∣hend with a lively faith, King Solomon; that is, the Lord Jesus Christ,Cant. 3.11. the true Solomon; with the Crown where∣with his Mother crowned him in the day of his espou∣sals; that is, in his glorious state, wherewith his Father hath invested him; after that by his death, and resur∣rection, he hath redeemed, and married us unto himself in holiness and righteousness. And that thou maist have further knowledge, assurance, and testimony, of this thy King, and Saviour, hear the joyfull Predictions, and un∣erring
demonstrations, of the Prophets. In the life of old Jacob, we have that he spake at his death, these faithfull words, The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Law-giver from between his Feet, until Shilo come,Gen. 49.10. and unto him shall the gathering of the People be.Heb. 7.14. Now it is evident, that our Lord sprang out of Juda. Further, Moses drawing neer to his dissolution, Prophesies, and that from the Mouth of God, That God will raise them up a Prophet like unto him.Deut. 18.18. Now Moses was not only a Prophet, but a King. He was King in Jesurun.Deut. 33.5. In the next place, hearken to the mellodious and foretelling Hymns of the royal Psalmist, David; who knowing that God had sworn with an Oath to him, that of the Fruit of his Loynes, according to the Flesh,Acts 2.30. he would raise up Christ, to set on his Throne; At once beholds his Seed, his Saviour, and becomes the Herald of his King,Psal. 132.11. his Son, thus Proclaiming; I have set my King upon my ho∣ly Hill of Sion. And again, The Lord said unto my Lord,Psal. 2.6. set thou on my right hand,Psal. 110.1. until I make thine Enemies thy Foot-stool. Of him also the Prophet Esay, thus Pro∣phesieth, Vnto us a Childe is born, unto us a Son is gi∣ven, and the Government shall be upon his Shoulders,Esay 9.6. and his Name shall be called Wonderfull, Counseller, the migh∣ty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace; of the increase of his Government, and peace there, shall be no end. Zachary also remarkably points him out, and that not only verbally,Zac. 9.9. but by certain actions of our King; Rejoyce O Daughter of Sion, behold thy King cometh unto thee, he is just, and having Salvation, lowly, and riding upon an Ass, and upon a Colt, the Fole of an Ass. Lastly, lest the testimonies of Men should seem weak, the premulgation of Angels shall conclude, and that undeniably, this holy and comfortable truth: Behold saith the Angel Gabriel to the blessed Virgin,Luke 1.31. Thou shalt conceive in thy Wombe, and bring forth a Son, and shalt call his Name Jesus, he shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest, and the Lord God shall give unto him the Throne of his Father David, And he shall reign over the House of Jacob for ever;Mat. 2.2. And of his Kingdome there shall be no end. Again, as his Birth and Kingdome
over the Jews, yea, over the whole World, was foretold by the Angel,Luke 2.11. so correspondently they were proclaimed by an Angel, and seconded by a multitude of the Hea∣venly Host; saying, unto you is born this day in the City of David, a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord. O my Soul, I have hitherto like John by the finger of the Prophets, pointed out unto thee, thy King, thy Saviour,John 1.36. The Lamb of God which taketh away the Sins of the World. It is expedient, and time now, that with Andrew thou follow him home, and by the eye of thy faith takest a particular view of his excellencies, admi∣nistrations,John 1.39. and government: That thy heart being be∣dewed with those many comforts, benefits, and blessings, which descend therefrom, may with those ravished Jews in the Gospel,Mark 11.9, 10. cry out, Hosanna, blessed is he that cometh in the Name of the Lord; Blessed be the Kingdome of our Father David, that cometh in the Name of the Lord; Hosanna, in the highest. And also sing with that Hea∣venly multitude, Salvation unto our God, which sitteth upon the Throne, and to the Lamb; Blessing, and glory, and wisdome, and thanks-giving, and honour, and power, and might,Reve. 7.10, 12. be unto our God, for ever and ever, Amen. Proceed then O my Soul! and diligently consider, first, how thy King governs amongst his Subjects; Se∣condly, how he rules and reigns over his Enemies; and lastly, how in that great Assize, he shall execute his last Judgment, and translate his Kingdome on Earth to Heaven; there establishing, and fixing, a glorious, and tryumphant Monarchy, even for Eternity. The wisest Heathen (whose choisest flowers of learn∣ing and knowledge were gathered out of our Paradise of God, the Scriptures) stiled their Kings, Pastors of the People. That the Spirit of God useth the like Meta∣phor, and that it might well be, that they stole it from thence, may be supposed from these places amongst o∣thers. The Psalmist glorifying God for the deliverance of his People out of Egypt, concludes thus: Thou leddest thy People like a Flock by the hand of Moses and Aaron.Psal. 77.20. And the same Moses, neer the ending of his life, desires God to appoint his Successor,Numb. 37.17. That the People be not as
Sheep which have no Shepward. Michaiah Prophesying of Ahab's death, and the overthrow of his Army, saith; That in a Vision, he saw all Israel scattered, a Sheep that have no Shepward. And the Lord, by the Prophet Esay,1 Kings 22.17. promising his People a deliverance from their Captivity by the means of Cyrus; even many years before his birth, aith thus of him, He is my Shepward, and shall perform all my pleasure.Esay 44.28. Surely, as there is good cause to commend the Hea∣thens choice and application of this Metaphor: So a∣above all, to admire the infinite wisdome of the Spirit of God, as the Original; who under this similitude com∣prehends and discovers the whole duty of a religious Prince, and Governor; as that like a Shepheard, he is to feed his People, to lead them, to fold, and keep them from straying, and to protect them from those Wolves, and wicked Enemies that seek to destroy them. See all this exprest in that woe pronounc'd, by the Spirit of God against the Shepward of Israel, that do feed only them∣selves. Should not the Shepwards feed the Flock?Ezek. 34.2, 4. The diseased have yee not strengthned, neither have you heal∣ed that that was sick, neither have yee bound up that that was broken, neither have yee brought again, that that was driven away, neither have yee sought that that was lost. But with fierceness and with cruelty have yee ruled them. Seeing then that the Lord himself com∣mends unto us this humble vocation, offering it as a Glass unto Princes, his Vice-roys upon Earth, therein to see their duties; It will neither be unfit, nor unprofitable, to meditate and consider the office and actions of the Lord of Lords, even our Lord Jesus Christ under the same Metaphor. And the rather,1 Peter 2.25. because St. Peter gives us a Precedent; who stiles him the chief Shepward, and Bishop of our Souls; and more especially for these rea∣sons: First, because God the Father so calls him often in Scripture; witness that Prophesie of Ezekiel, saying,Ezek. 34.23. I will set up one Shepward over them, he shall feed them. Secondly, he so names himself, and with abundance of affection, and delight, and prosecutes and applies the si∣militude, saying, I am the good Shepward, and know my
Sheep, and am known of mine. And lastly, whatsoever he in that Chapter,John 10.14. or elsewhere applies to himself, in the office of a Shepward, doth most aptly agree with his Kingly administration. But to make this more cleer, Is it the duty of a King to govern, and direct his People by good Laws? Which though written, yet are as it were his lively, fixt, and continued voice. And is not this ve∣rified of our King, the Shepward of Israel? Who saith, that to Him the Porter openeth, and the Sheep hear his voice;John 10.3. that he calleth his own Sheep by name, and lead∣eth them out. Is it the duty of a King to protect his sub∣jects, to reward them, as well as to restrain, and over∣come their Enemies? And is not this true of our good Shepward, Who giveth his life for his Sheep? being not like the hireling,John. 10.12. who seeing the Wolf coming, flieth, and leaveth the Sheep. Yea, all blessings temporal, and spiri∣tual, abound to them that are admitted into his Fold. For he promises, that if any enter therein, he shall be sa∣ved,John 10.9. and shall go in and out, and finde pasture. Lastly, is it the office of a King to see and judge of the actions of inferiours; to give dignity and honour to the well-meriting, and obedient; and to inflict punishment, and death, upon rebellious offenders? See this also made good by Gods promise unto us, under the rule of our only Shepward, Christ Jesus; Saying, Behold, even I will judge betwixt the fat Cattle,Ezek. 34.20, 25, 26. and the lean; and I will cause the evil Beasts to cease out of the Land. And I will make with them a Covenant of Peace. And I will make them, and the places round about them, a blessing. And I will cause the showers to come down in his season; there shall be showers of blessings. And as concerning the last, and General Judgment, our Saviour speaking of the or∣dering of Persons before his Trybunal; and the parting of his true Subjects, from Rebels, the good from the bad, still alludes to the office of a Shepward; and saith, that he will separate them one from another, as the Shep∣ward divideth the Sheep from the Goats.Mat. 25.32. Having, for the better and more comfortable illustration of our Saviours Kingly Office, thus far traced this similitude; let us now O my Soul, by faith take a nearer and more serious view
of this his glorious function, as it manifests it self in the excellency of his Person; and in the uprightness, and perfection of his Laws; as also in all those gratious ef∣fects which flow from so divine a dispensation. That from them (God assisting in the application) thou maist reap that saving fruit which grace offers, and thou ex∣pectest. As the Basis, and Pillar of Peace, and tranquility,Of Christs Government. in a Common-wealth is good Government, consisting of upright Magistrates, and just Laws: So the defect of ei∣ther ushers-in present ruine, and destruction. This posi∣tion is not only verified in civil estates, but in the spiri∣tual Regiment of the visible Church. Which whilst it was governed by the Spirit of Christ, and was obedient to his injunctions, attained to a Meridional height of quiet and glory; witness the times of Solomon, Heze∣chiah, and Josiah. But on the other side, when that there was no King in Israel, and every Man did what was right in his own Eyes, how was their Land and Church filled with blood-shed, Idolatry, and vanity? witness the Book of the Judges. O let their miseries, make us be∣ware, and let us learn wisdome from their destruction. et their ill-succeeding rebellions, incite, and hasten us to do Homage at his Foot-stool, whom the Lord hath set King upon his holy Hill of Sion.Psal. 2.6. And to kiss him with the kiss of reverence, obedience, and worship: Let us meditate of him all the day long, and let our Mouths be filled with his praises. O how truly are we happy in thee O Lord Jesus! ac∣cording to that of the wise Man,Meditation of the excellency of his Person. Eccles. 10.17. blessed art thou O Land, when thy King is the Son of Nobles. Is there any Nobility like unto thine, will any boast of, or derive his Pedigree with thee, who art the ancient of days? the dew of the Morning? the Morning-star, and in a word, he Fountain of honour? what are the greatest of earth∣ly Princes, but thy Vice-roys? Conduit-Pipes to convey ny favours unto the Children of Men? For,Prov. 8.15. By thee Kings Reign, and Princes Decree justice. And from thee pro∣eds the sentence, which makes poor, and makes rich,1 Sam. 2.7. rings lowe, and lifteth up. For thou art that only be∣gotten
Son of the Father, before all beginnings, who then can declare thy generation, for thy Birth is hid in Eter∣nity? Nor art thou not only glorious in thy Father, but in thy self also? for thou art God of God, equal with God, and therefore art not only a wise, mercifull, just, and holy King over us: But wisdome, mercy, justice, and holiness it self unto us. Witness this, in that thy gratious invita∣tion to thy spiritual Feast, where wisdome hath builded her an House.Prov. 9.1. As also in the former Chapter, I am un∣derstanding, I am strength. Further, thy Spirit, in the Mouth of thy beloved Apostle,1 John 4.8. testifies, that thou our God art love.Jerem. 23.6. And thy Prophet Jeremy foretold to us, that the Name whereby thou shouldst be called, is the Lord our righteousness. As for the last, the Prophet David stiles thee so in many of his Psalmes,Psal. 13.4. singing thus, O yee Saints of his, give thanks at the remembrance of his ho∣liness. To whom the Saints in the Revelation answer, and second with this triple acclamation,Revel. 15.4. Holy, holy, holy Lord God of Sabbath. O my Saviour, my King, my beloved, let me feed a while here amongst these Lillies.Cant. 2.3, 5. Let me sit down under this thy shadow, and let thy fruit be sweet unto my taste! O stay me with Flagons, comfort me with Apples, for I am sick of love? Who is like the Lord our King on all the Earth? Is there any People, or Nation alike happy with us Christians, whose God and King is the Lord? I should now proceed to view and admire that golden Scepter, those his righteous Statutes, by which he go∣verns and directs us his People. But that my Soul possest with a holy fear, lest any thing should nullifie my right unto my Soveraigns protection, stops me with these ob∣jections; As that I am not only the Son of rebellious Adam, but also an Alien to the Common-wealth of Is∣rael; as being not sprung from the loynes of Abraham, nor from any of the Sons of Jacob, but from the unbe∣lieving Gentiles. Lastly, that I am out-lawed by my own actual transgressions; and therefore may rather expect punishment, than any favour, happiness, or priviledge by his Government. As to these, I answer with the Apo∣stle;
The Jews, because the Seed of Abraham are not all Children: But the Children of the promise,Rom. 9.7, 8. are counted for the Seed; Wherefore Abraham is called the Father of the faithfull; Neither is he a Jew which is one out∣wardly, neither is that Circumcision which is outward in the Flesh: But he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the heart, in the Spirit,Rom 2.28, 29. not in the letter: Also he is a light to enlighten the Gentiles, as well as the glory of the People Israel. Again, my being a sinner, is so far from disabling my right to the Lord Jesus, that by the hearty and penitent confession there∣of, I am intitled unto his pardon, and mercy; witness his own Proclamation, He came not to call the righteous,Mat. 9.13. but sinners to repentance: as also that Prophesie of his Office, That he should be a light to them that sit in dark∣ness, and in the shadow of death,Luke 1.79. to guide their erring Feet into the ways of peace? Since then my Lord the King, I have ten parts in thee, and thou art Bone of my Bone, and Flesh of my Flesh. Since thou tookest not on thee the nature of Angels,Eph. 5.30. but the Seed of Abraham,Heb. 2.6. that thou mightest be as a mercifull High Priest, so a true and natural head of thy Body, the Church; that King that shall reign in righteousness,Esay 32.1. Psal. 2.6. and whom God hath set upon his holy Hill of Zion: Let me finde favour in thy sight, and be inrolled as one of thy Servants. Let thy glorious Scepter moderate me, and let me be acknowledged one of thy Subjects. Then shall I sit under my own Vine, and my own Fig-tree, then shall I be truly happy, yea, my Soul shall be filled as with marrow and fatness, for what King is like unto thee in all the Earth? The Walls and Rampiers of a Common-wealth are good Laws, by which, as by a fortified horn-work,Gods Laws commnded. or Cyttadel, the good are preserved, and the enemy hin∣dered, and repulsed. Is this an approved truth? How happy, and how safe then is the Flock of Christ, the Mo∣narchie of the Messias, the Common-wealth of Christians, the spiritual Jerusalem, to whom that promise is made good, as signifying the presence, and righteous govern∣ment of our Emanuel: That the Lord will be unto her
a Wall of Fire round about, and will be the glory in the middest of her.Zac. 2.5. The Statutes of other People are but the weak inventions of Men. But the Ordinances by which we are swayed, are the words of holiness, of wisdome, even of the Lord himself.From God the Author. So that no desirable quality can be wanting, in such Laws, wherein exact justice, and religious policy, kiss each other. So that to us now, made one Church with the believing Jews, may those gracious speeches of Moses be applyed, Surely this great Nation is a wise and understanding People; For what Nation is there so great,Deut. 4▪ 6, 7, 8. that hath statutes, and judgments so righteous, as his Laws, which he hath set before us; or who hath God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is in all things, that we call upon him for? Yea, he lo∣ved his People, all his Saints are in his hand, they sate down at his feet, every one shall receive of his words; For the Lord came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir, unto them he shined forth from Mount Paran, and he came with ten thousand of Saints;Deut. 33.2, 3. from his right hand went a firery Law for them. From their Antiquity.The Heathen gave no small honour to Antiquity, as supposing it had something in it of Divinity; and there∣fore they would willingly forget the Original both of themselves, and of their Laws, that to after Ages they might set upon them the stamp of a Deity. What they affected vainly, we must affirm truly, both of our selves, and Laws: For the proof of the first, we have not only a sure word, viz. that God made Man of the dust of the Earth,Gen. 2.7. after his own Image, and breathed into his No∣strils the breath of life; But also the witness of their own Poets, Aratus. honourably backt by an Apostle. In Him we live,Acts 17.28. move, and have our beeing, for we are his off∣spring. For the other, I will not only say what Laws, but what Learning exprest in characters can be voucht so ancient as the Penteteuch of Moses? Wherein observe not only our Laws of venerable Antiquity, but also most clear, manifest, and undeniable proofs, and demonstra∣tions of their Divine fluence and constitution. As the burning, and quaking of the Mount Sinai, the summons of the Heavenly Trumpet,Exod. 20.18. the visible presence of the
Lord God, like consuming Fire on the top of the Mount▪ But above all, the audible voice of God, pronouncing those ten words, by which we are governed, as contain∣ing his whole will, and our whole duty. Lastly, all these wonders, are not confirmed unto us by the bare witness of Moses only, (although he being Gods Pen-man had been sufficient;) but as then six hundred thousand souls were Auditors, and Spectators, so ever since, that whole Nation, and now the Universal Church do receive, be∣lieve, and reverently obey them; as the undoubted truth of God, and rule of holiness. Now that these happy Laws,From their Holiness. recorded in the whole Book of God, are not only the first, ancientest, (and therefore the foundation, original, and fountain of all other constitutions) but also the best, and holiest, as be∣ing the lively Oracles of prudence, and sanctifie it self, appears first by the matter which is perfect, according to that sweet Psalmist, The Law of the Lord (that is the whole Word of God) is perfect. If perfect,Psal. 19.7. then free from all carnal imperfections. Here's no Political wink∣ing at the least, or at some commodious offences; nor hiding places for any sinner, nor exception and preroga∣tive for Kings and Princes. The wilely head of Man can∣not invent sins, without its precinct, neither can the cri∣tical wits of Atheists, or worldly wretches, blemish it▪ with the least aspersion of injustice, or severity. So that as there is in them no defect, so no redundancy, being profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, for correction, and for instruction in righteousness,2 Tim. 3.16. That the Man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished to all good works. Further, as they are perfect, so are they sure; so that holy Singer, The Testimonies of the Lord are sure,Psal. 19.7. make∣ing wise, the simple. The Ordinances of the World are subject to change, as being the inventions of unconstant Man, and not only in their frame and substance, but al∣so in their number, construction, and execution. So that true experimental wisdome can never be learned from them. But the Laws of God, as flowing from an ever∣lasting, and wise essence, who is without change, or shadow of change, admits of no alteration, mis-interpre∣tation,
sleeping, or repeal. And therefore teaches a Man wisdome,Prov. 23.3. a priori, in the cause of punishment (Sin.) So Solomon; A prudent Man fore-sees the evil, and hides himself. Again, The Commandement is a Lamp▪ and the Law is light,Prov. 6.23. and reproofs of instruction, the way of life. In the last place, let holy David, as he began to prove this truth, so conclude it, even upon his own ex∣perience; Through thy Commandements thou hast made me wiser than my Enemies,Psal. 119.98, 99. for they are ever with me, I have more understanding than all my Teachers, for thy Testimonies are my Meditation. Again, as the Laws of God are sure and perfect, so they are right; as sings the same Prophet, The Statutes of the Lord are right.Psal. 19.8. And can there be a greater ex∣cellency; since the justice of a Law, is the sinnues thereof, they binding but so far forth as they are righteous? Who is there then amongst the Rulers of the Earth,) that in a proper sence dares give this title to their Ordinances? Comparatively indeed, and as parallel'd with others, they may boast of their equity. But none in a superla∣tive height, in the abstract, and truth of perfection, can be said to be just, but the Commandements of God; which by common consent are the best rule, and touch∣stone of all others. To prove the indirectness of humane constitutions, reason it self demonstrates. For Man can∣not be righteous,Job 15.14. that is born of a Woman; much less his actions, his behests, as being also the off-spring of a sick brain, and streams flowing from a most impure Foun∣tain. If we desire examples to confirm this, we need not wander out of Divine History, where we shall read of the cruel edict of a Pharaoh,Exod. 1.22. to drown the innocent males. Of a Nebuchadnezzar, to burn to Ashes religious Idoll-haters.Dan. 3.6. Of a Darius, to devour with Lions the frequent worshippers of God.Dan. 6.7. Matt. 2.16. Of a Herod, even a second Pharaoh, to offer up by death those Lambs, the happy Proto-Mar∣tyrs, and Contemporaries of our Saviour. Should I con∣vert my Meditation into an History, as I could never want examples of Mans unjust Decrees, so never Incke for my teares would supply that defect. O if the bare Relation, move to pitty, and to mourn∣ing?
how great is the sorrow and anxiety of my minde, that oppresses those Souls, which lie under the burden of such a tyranny? surely it is ineffable. From hence, by the rule of contraries, I conclude the exceeding mirth, and happiness of that People, whose Laws are Maximes, and Patterns to all others; whose God and King is the Lord, whose judgments are true, and righteous altoge∣ther. So that if happiness can be separated from joy, then may joy be devorc'd from such a Government. Wherefore as the Prophet extolls the divine quality, the Statutes of the Lord are right, so he omits not to point out unto us the no less gratious effect,Psal. 95.1, 3. they rejoyce the heart. O come therefore, and let us sing unto the Lord, let us make a joyfull noise unto the Rock of our Salvation, for thou Lord art a great God, and a great King above all Gods; thy Throne is for ever,Psal. 45.6. and the Scepter of thy Kingdome is a righteous Scepter. Thus O my Soul, passing by, thou hast taken a view of the beauty of those divine Laws, by which Christians are governed. If the Heathen Ptolomy accounted them the Jewel of his Library, and at their translation into the Greek Tongue, was even ravisht in the observation of their supernatural wisdome, and Majesty: How ought we Christians to be affected, who by more than an Hi∣storical faith, (as I have proved) look upon them as the Statutes enacted, pronounced, and engraven in last∣ing Tables, by God himself, and also confess them. As for antiquity, to be the ancientest, and most venerable; so for their matter, the perfectest, purest, and most righ∣teous of all others. It remains now, that thou glance o∣ver some of their effects, and so proceed. I have obser∣ved already their work upon the understanding. They make wise the simple; as also upon the affections. They rejoyce the heart. I will note only three affections more which they beget in us; Love, fear, and hatred of all wickedness. That they frame in us even an extasie of love, the Psalmist proves by that his Pathetical expres∣sion, O how I love thy Law,Psal. 119.197, 127. I love thy Commandements above Gold, yea, above fine Gold, they are sweeter also than the Hony, or the Hony-Combe. That they create in
us an holy filial fear, appears, in that the holy Spirit makes it a chief motive to stir us up to the hearing of them,Psal. 19.10. Psal. 34.11. Come yee Children, hearken unto me, and I will teach you the fear of the Lord. As also the confession of David, My Flesh trembleth for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments. As fear, so hatred of all wick∣edness, springs out of this Seed-plot of grace; As the offer, and fruition of a most beautifull Wife, is the best remedy to make a Man hate an unclean strumpet, so the discovery of the pure splendor of Gods Law, un∣vailes the nakedness, and pulls off the Visard of Sin. So the same Psalmist, Through thy Precepts I get under∣standing,Psal. 119.104. therefore I hate every false way? Lastly, as these powerfull Statutes of God are thus effectual in the illumination of the understanding, and the inflaming of the affection; So also in the subjecting, and changing the will, making it of a nilling, a willing will. But here forget not (as also in all the rest) that the Law works only these effects in us, as being the Scepter of Christs Government (and linked with the Gospel.) Which con∣sidered, we may confidently aver, that the Prophesie is fulfilled; That the Lord shall rule (by his Law) in the midst of his Enemies,Psal. 110.1, 2, 3 and the People shall be willing in the day of his Power. Thus having viewed by the eye of faith (according to the weak measure of grace given unto me) my gra∣tious Soveraign in his presence Chamber of the Prophets, and also learned out of that Magna Charta, that Royal Statute-Book, Gods Word, not only what is his revealed will, and rule of Government, but also the unparallel'd and excellent properties thereof; I proceed to meditate of, and to be instructed in those three principal actions of our King towards his natural and true subjects, viz. his Protection, and victory over their Enemies; Correcti∣on and Remuneration;Of our Pro∣tection. of which, severally and succinctly. Man once the Lord of Earth, a favourite of Heaven, travelling from the peacefull Jerusalem of Gods grati∣ous instructions, to the accursed Jericho of his own sin∣full lusts, and appetite; and in that way destitute of the All-mighties guide, and protection, fell amongst these
Thieves, the Devil, the Flesh, Sin, the World and Death, who having spoyled him of his greatest treasure, his Gra∣ces; and devested him from all his former honours, lea∣ving him not half dead, but altogether: Left him, did I say? I would to God they were in this so Thief-like; But alass! such is our misery, that our loss concluded not, but began our wretchedness; and our Enemies, Haman-like, slaughtering us not out of gain, but out of envious malice, are so far from leaving us, that they are always vigilant to smother even the least motions of life in us. But blessed be the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath sent his only begotten Son into the Wilderness of this World, clothed with our flesh, and made like unto us, a mercifull High-Priest; who (like that good Sama∣ritan) finding us thus wallowing in our own blood, hath not only restored us to a new life, but poured the Sove∣raign Oyl of his comfortable promises into our wounds. Making us safe all the time of this lifes sickness, under his own royal, and gratious protection; until his next return to our glory, and all our Enemies confusion. Fear not then (O my Soul) the strongest of thy Ene∣mies: No, not that Leviathan, that great Dragon▪A Protection from Sathan. that crooked Serpent, King over all the Children of pride. For, The Seed of the Woman hath broken this Serpents Head: And the Devil shall be cast into Hell.Gen. 3.15. What though he be the Prince that ruleth in the Ayr? for his number, Legions; for his strength, a Principality, a Power, a Lion; and for the depth of Policy and malice, stiled the Ruler of Darkness, and also the accuser of the Bre∣thren; yet know, he is but a Creature, and thy Savi∣ours Vassal. For, By Him were all things created,Colos. 1.16. that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth, visible, or invi∣sible, whether they be Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, or Powers. And he that made him, can make his Sword approach unto him. And though the number of fallen Angels be great, yet the number of the Elect Angels, its likely are far greater, at least, their Power greater, as the issue of that great battel in Heaven, if literally take,Rev. 12.7. il∣lustrates. So that thy eyes being opened by faith, there are more that are with us, than against us.Rev. 5.5. Christ is that
Lion of the Tribe of Judah;1 Cor. 1.24. our Sampson, to destroy that roaring Lion the Devil; the wisdome of the Father, and the light that not only enlightens our darkness,John 1.5. but dis∣sipates, and puts to flight the darkness, and subtilties of Sathan;2 Tim. 2.5. the only Mediator betwixt God and Man; the Son of God,Col. 1.13, 15. the lover, and friend of Men; The Brother of the Brethren. To conclude, he it is (to thy comfort) whom the Father hath set at his own right hand in hea∣venly places,Heb. 2.11, 12, 13. far above all those Principalities, and Pow∣ers,Eph. 1.20, 21. and all might, and dominion: Who hath spoiled these Principalities,Col. 2.15. and Powers, and made a shew of them o∣penly, tryumphing over them, even on his Cross. There∣fore rejoyce yee Heavens, and yee that dwell therein; for now is come salvation, and strength, and the King∣dome of our God,Rev. 12.10, 12. and the Power of his Christ: For, The accuser of our Brethren is cast down, which accused them before God day and night. From Sin.Do I expect thee O my Soul, to be a companion of this Heavenly Quire? Why then do I hear thee utter nothing but mourning, and as it were keep time with sighs? Such a Song admits not of a burthen, I will not bear a part with thee, since in thy tears, (as in a mirror) I see Hanibal ad portas, another Enemy at thy Gates. At thy Gates, did I say? nay entred, and within thee; so that now thy sobs me-thinks are vocal and articulate, groaning out nothing, but such sad captive complaints as these, I am carnal and sold under sin; O wretch that I am,Rom. 7.14, 24, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? O my Soul, though thy fear questions, yet let it not make thee despair of a Deliverer; say, I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord,25. whom he hath sent to be thy Sa∣viour, even in the midst of this fiery Furnace. So that like those Votive Martyrs, though with the Flesh thou o∣beyest, and art invironed with sin, yet with the Minde thou servest the Lord. I am not ignorant, that like to the City of Ai,Josh. 8.9. there are behinde thee ambushes of thy first Parents transgression; before thee, the Armies of thy many actual offences; on both hands of thee, the wages of sins, of commission, and omission; yea, that the In∣fantry of thy in-bred, and original corruptions; have not
only taken, but begun to Fire thy out-works: Yet fear not, stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord,Exod. 14.13. for these spiritual Egyptians, thy Enemies, which thou hast seen in this short day of thy life, and travail, thou shalt see no more for ever; since the Chariot-wheels of their strength shall be taken off, and in conclusion, their selves shall be drowned, and hid in that red Sea of thy Savi∣ours pretious blood. Wherefore, armed with a holy and Jehu-like severity, command,2 Kings 10.25. Josh. 10.22. as Joshua once the five Kings, so these, the heads, and chief of these thy Ene∣mies to be brought forth, and let them be slain with a Christian magnanimity, even with that two-edged Sword which proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord.Revel 19.15. Fear not with Gedeons stripling,Christ ove∣comes Adam sins Judg. 8.2. that Goliah-like trans∣gression of Adam, though as a second Briarius his many Armies of Pride, Blasphemy, Rebellion, Unthankfulness, Discontent, Curiosity; yea, all manner of wickedness seem to threaten Heaven. Neither quit thy ground, though he brandish against thee that curse, that Cherubs flaming Sword, in the day that thou eatest thereof,Gen. 2.17. thou shalt surely die. Let him strike, yea, let the stroke wound thee, and bring thee upon thy knees; yea, let the wound send forth floods of penitent tears, for this thy fall shall be thy rise; this thy humiliation, thy greatest exaltation. This is that Weapon that gives both death, and life. For this thy misery is become the object of that infinite mercy, which not only rescues thee, but sheathes this his mortal Sword in this thy Enemies bowels. Since by Man came death, by Man came also the Resurrection of the dead. For, as in Adam all die,1 Cor. 15.21▪ . even so in Christ shall all be made alive: And lest he should again revive, as Joab did to rebellious Absalom, He again pierces his heart with these three Darts; As by the offence of one,2 Sam. 18.14. judg∣ment came upon all to condemnation;Rom. 5.18. even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all unto justification of life; for as by one Mans disobedience, ma∣ny were made sinners; so by the obedience of one,Verse 19. many shall be made righteous: That as sin reigned unto death, even so might grace reign thorough righteousness unto e∣ternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord.Verse 2.
From Original Corruption.That Cloud is disperst. But behold a greater storm a∣rises: even such a one, as not only shakes, and endan∣gers the Battlements of a Christian conversation, but blowes up the foundation. When an Enemy besieges, he ever is within view; But if he take a Bulwork, he gains possession, and the loss seem irrecoverable. Adams sin imputed, like a furious adversary surrounds, belea∣gures, and shatters the whole Fort of Man. But that O∣riginal corruption, that holy David complains of, as con∣ceived, and born in, by propagation, makes neerer ap∣proaches, and undermines the Mud-walls of our Flesh, taking possession of the Tryangular, and chiefest Cytta∣del; which once yielded, he fills every sconce of the sence, with Armed Lusts, and mounts through every Loop-hole, a murdering piece, which continually roares against Heaven. And as for the Chief Commander, Collonel, and Mustar-master, the understanding, will, and memory, having put out their Eyes, it makes them in the Dungeon of Ignorance, grinde (like Sampson) at the Mill of Lust, and fleshly desires. Thus miserable, and seemingly irrecoverable, is our estate in Nature, whilst our in-bred corruption, that strong Man, keeps the hold. But let us not be discouraged, for the Lord Jesus, who is stronger than he, is come upon him,Luke 11.22. and hath overcome him, taking from him all his Armour wherein he trusted, and dividing his spoyles, being sent by God in the likeness of sinfull Flesh, and for sin,Rom. 8.3. to condemn sin in the Flesh; which Victory He obtained by his Death. For in that he dyed, he dyed unto sin once;Rom. 6.10. so reckon we also our selves, as being bap∣tized into his Death, to be dead indeed unto sin, but a∣live unto God,Rom. 6.3. through Jesus Christ our Lord; Thus be∣ing made free from Sin,Rom. 6.11. we are become the Servants of righteousness;Rom. 6.18. neither hath Sin any more dominion over us, as being not under the Law, (which is the strength of Sin) but under Grace,Rom. 6.14. 1 Cor. 15.56. the moving cause of our Sal∣vation. Further, this total and spiritual Leprosie is in Scrip∣ture tearmed a general pollution of the whole Man.Ezek. 16.6. In which sence, how many sweet and gracious promises,
doth the Old Testament offer to the faith of every true Believer; poynting out unto us (with the Angel) when in a far more despicable, and desperate estate than Ha∣gar's Ismael, a Spring, a Well of living Water.Zacha. 13.1. In that day (which is the day) there shall be a Fountain open∣ed to the House of David, and to the Inhabitants of the Spiritual Jerusalem, for sin, and for uncleanness. And lest with that Cripple in the Gospel, we should be unable to make tryal of the Virtue; nay, because we are with that miserable Infant in the Prophet, Dead in sins,Ezek. 16.6. Eph. 2.1. and trespasses. Therefore he adds, he will say unto us, live, which agrees with his immediate Word, in St. John's Gospel, The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear, shall live. Nay, which is more,John 5.25. he will become our spiritual Physician, and Chyrurgion to heal, to wash, to cleanse, to circumcise, to anoint us; witness this his own promise,Ezek. 36.25. viz. Then will I sprinkle clean Water upon you, and yee shall be clean, from all your filthiness,Verse 26. and from all your Idols will I cleanse you; a new Heart will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you; and I will take the stony Heart out of your Flesh, and I will give you an Heart of Flesh; and I will put my Spirit within you,Verse 27. and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and yee shall keep my judgments, and do them. O thou which art my Joshua, my Jesus, and hast cast out, and destroyed my Cananitish lusts;Ejaculation. leaving only some few tributaries to try my obedience, and to be as pricks in my sides, that I might not sleep to death in security; grant me thy strength of grace, more and more to prevail over them, though they have Chariots of Iron,Judg. 1.19. as being strong corruptions, and inhabit the Valleys, as being ambushed in a deep, and deceitfull heart. Enable me O Lord, either to destroy them, or to make them Hewers of Wood, and Drawers of Water to the House of my God; that is, serviceable to thy spiritual Building, and Temple, which I am. Let Avarice be turned into a coveting of spiritual things; Excess in thy Creatures to a repletion with thy Spirit; Worldly sorrow, which work∣eth death, unto godly sorrow, not to be repented of;
Love of Earth to a love of Heaven. O my gratious Phy∣sitian, what ee have I, or is great enough for this spi∣ritual cure, or rather miracle? a resurrection from the dead; Lord thou hast given me all, therefore I have no∣thing to give. Yet though I cannot give, I will do right, and render as to Caesar, so unto God, what is his. My Soul beares thy impress, thy Image, and is therefore passant in Heaven. Wherefore when thou pleasest, em∣banck it there in glory. From actual Sins.The greater an offence is, the more severe, and weigh∣ty the punishment. This rule of proportion giving both a beeing, and splendor to distributive Justice. Whisper∣ers and murmurers against a State, are not prosecuted with so much rigour, as the openly rebellious; Nor ac∣cording to the judgment of truth it self;Luke 12.47 shall the igno∣rant Servant be beaten with as many stripes as the pre∣sumptuous offender. Blessed Saviour, even in this max∣ime of humane Justice, there is (though in weak and faint shaddowes) a glimpse and representation of thine, (Mans well doing and best of action, being but an im∣perfect imitation of thee, a most pure and universal act) which ballances our faults, and retributes to each, his due weight of punishment. Thus righteously judging, that if causeless anger, be in danger of the judgment, then approbrious, and disgracefull speeches, such as thou fool,Matt. 5.22. being a further degree, and an accursed fruit of the former, shall be in perril of an Hell-fire. So Paul, be∣cause a Persecutor through ignorance, received mercy, when as Julian an Apostate, and wilfull sinner, died a Blasphemer. Lord, I have laid this train, to blow up my self. O let thy conviction in justice, (like a storm be∣fore a calm) forego thy absolution in mercy. Righteous Judge, if that thy mortal sentence hath already attach∣ed me, as Adam's Son, as Adam's Image, yea, I have pleaded guilty; shall not my numberless actual trans∣gressions, meriting that other curse of thy Law, make me therefore as deserving thy double curse, liable to a double punishment? Yes surely, unless miserable wretch, infiniteness, and eternity, will not admit of an addition. If one single act, the breach of one Injunction, that which
the Papists, and others (though erroneously) would have no sin, or at the most a venial sin, that which is mine, not by personal commission (as not then in esse) but as it were by consanguinity, by imputation, from Adam, my root, fountain, and transactor; If this O Lord, as for∣merly it is sufficiently evinced, hath not only arraigned me at the Bar of Justice, but cast me as guilty of high Treason, and worthy of eternal punishment; and not only me, but those without the Pale of the Church (un∣less God be mercifull to them) who have not sinned af∣ter the similitude of Adams transgressions, that is,Rom. 5.14. as some interpret) actually; How ponderous and exces∣sively weighty, shall my judgment appear in Justice scale? How shall her Rods be converted into Scorpions? How shall the same hand, and power that inflicts, in respect of durance, an eternal, yea, in all respects (if we mea∣sure by the Creatures weak apprehension) an infinite suffering, magnify it self in the augmentation of pain, according to our encrease, actuality, and agedness of sin; adding as it were infinite, to infinite, and making me to be unhappily so also, that is capable of it, and able to subsist under its just pressure. O my God, I walk in this my vale of misery, like the Egyptians through the red Sea, before me is thy clou∣ded countenance, and wrathfull indignation, ready to give the watch word to my execution. On the right hand, and the left, stand the towring, and threatning Waves of my sinfull omissions, commissions, and defici∣encies, ready (as the Psalmist speaks to swallow up, and flowe over my Soul; and behind me the pitchy dark∣ness of horrour, and punishment waites to entombe me for ever. O my Saviour, being thus like Abijah,2 Chron. 13, 14. encom∣past with the Ambushes of my Enemies, like fallen Da∣vid, immurde within his triangle of judgments, what shall I do, but imitate them, in their crying, and con∣version unto thee, saying with him, I have sinned,2 Sam. 24.14. I am in a great straight, let me fall into the hands of thee, O Lord, for thy mercies are great. O faith, as thou hast an eye, so thou hast an ear too; wherefore give attention. For thy King named thy Je∣sus,
because he shall save his People from their sins, even he who only on Earth hath power to forgive sins,Matth. 1.21. makes his answer in the mouth of the Psalmist,Matth. 6.6. even to be the eccho of thy submissive Petition: The Lord forgiveth all thine iniquities,Psal. 103.3, 4. and healeth all thy diseases, and re∣deemeth thy life from destruction, and crowneth thee with loving kindness. O miracle of goodness! how experi∣mentally, and thankfully ought I, with that penitent Saint, to publish thy excelling mercy, since I had no soon∣er said,Psal. 32.5. (that is intended) I will confess my transgres∣sion, but thou forgavest me the iniquity of my sin. Come hither, come hither all yee true Israelites, whom the sight of these Philistines, and their armed Troops (ready for the Battel) have made you to tremble,1 Sam. 14.1. and to hide your selves; Behold your Standard-Royal, your Prince, your true Jonathan; for him hath God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince,Acts 5.31. and a Saviour; for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins; who hath trodden the Wine-press of Gods wrath alone, and of the People, there was none with him: And Jonathan-like, with incredible pains hath assaulted the Adversaries, our sins ruining their Fort,Isa. 63.3. viz. the curse of the Law, for the strength of sin is the Law,1 Cor. 15.56. being made a curse for us: where by dying, he hath put to death, all our Ene∣mies, according to that of the Apostle, in whom we have redemption through his blood,Gala. 3.13. even the forgiveness of sins,Ephes. 1.7. Col. 1.20. having made peace through the blood of his Cross, in the likeness of sinfull Flesh, and by sin, condemning sin in the Flesh.Rom. 8.3. Further, he is not only the God of the Valleys, but of the Mountains also; having not only overcome for us our infirmities, but all, even our Mountainous, our scarlet transgressions; witness his promise; though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow. Again, I will be mercifull to their transgressions,Isa. 1.18. and their sins, and their iniquities,Heb. 8.12. will I remember no more. To conclude this point, this his great Victory, as it tryumphs over all sins, so it is not confined to some times, or Persons, as he, so it, being the same in efficacy, yesterday, to day, and for ever,Heb. 13.8. as testifies St. John; If any Man sin, we
have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righ∣teous, he is the propitiation for our sins,1 Ep. Joh 2.1. and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole World. O all powerfull Victor,Contemplation. upon whose thigh is written King of Kings, Lord of Lords; who art gone forth con∣quering, and to conquer: leading captivity captive;Revel. 19.16. Rev. 6.2. and receiving gifts for Men; forgiving all our trespasses, and blotting out the hand-writing of Ordinances,Psal. 68.18. that was a∣gainst us: taking it away, and nailing it to thy Cross; who hast spoyled these Principalities, and Powers,Colos 2.13, 14, 15. and made a shew of them openly, triumphing over them in it. My Soul! thy off-spring like Jephtha's Daughter,Acts 17.28. with the melodious harmony of gratefulness, and praise, runs forth to meet thee, my Father, my Saviour;Judg. 11.34. earnestly de∣siring to be offered up unto thee, as a thanksgiving:Judg. 13.20. and with Manoah's Angel to ascend to thy presence in the flames of pious affections. Did Moses, Miriam,Exod. 15.21. and the rest, with Timbrels, and dances, magnify their delivery, and thy Conquest over the drown'd Egyptians; and shall not my Musick of gratulation be tuned to an higher key? my Song be raised to a loftier pitch; whose numerous Enemies thou hast drentcht, not in a red Sea of Water, but of thy infinitely precious Blood? Did the Virgins of Israel, by their penetrating acclamations (as it were) engrave this glorious Inscription on their Champions forehead, Saul hath slain his thousands,1 Sam. 18.7. David his ten thousands? How ought my ejaculatory Prayers to pierce the Heavens, and meet thy eares, who for my sake, hast slain not thousands, but millions of thousands, yea milli∣ons of millions? Those protections were corporal, these spiritual; those by mediate Instruments, this by thy Self; those were temporary, this eternal. O omnipotent good∣ness! since my finite beeing, cannot extend, nor propor∣tion an acknowledgment requisite to thy infinite merit, accept (as in other duties thou art pleased) my desire, which continually sigheth for an infinite expression. And as thou hast (O thou which art that Stone cut out with∣out hands,Dan. 34.44. that Corner-stone of thy Church) by thy self bruised the Head of the Serpent, that Goliah, Sathan;Pet. 2.4, 6. slain and disbanded all his Troops, my sins; yea,Gen. 3.15. choakt
them in the Sea of thy blood: be further pleased, that their gall being broke (that is their guilt, and bitterness extracted) they may for ever be covered with those crim∣son waves, and be sunk down deep, and intomb'd into that gulf of mercy, that the eye of justice may never view them, nor its power raise them again to my de∣struction. How fitly and consonant to the word of truth is the Church upon Earth,Over the world. called militant; her Children Soul∣diers,Isa. 40.2. their life a warfare, and their spiritual graces the armour of God? Amongst which, how aptly is faith made our Shield,2 Cor. 10.4. Eph. 6.16. and prefer'd before the rest, in the Apostles Discipline? Above all, take the Shield of Faith▪ For whereas the breast-plate, safe guards that part, the Hel∣met secures the Head, the other pieces the inferiour Members, the Shield of Faith is a moving, an ubiquita∣ry defence. Sometime it interposes it self (as you have formerly heard) to save the Head, that is, the under∣standing, and the rest of the Superiour faculties, from the fiery darts, which those spiritual wickednesses in high places throw down upon us.Eph. 6.12. Sometimes it is opposed breast high in defence of the affections, against the deceitfull allurements and assaults of the World; as shortly shall be shewed. And in the conclusion of this spiritual com∣bat, when the Enemy groveling under our Feet, puts forth his mortal sting of death, &c. descends and re∣ceives it, where fixt, it carries it in tryumph, to our spi∣ritual home; so that, O death where is thy sting? O Grave where is thy victory?1 Cor. 15▪55, But of this in its place. The particular Church of Israel in her transmigration into Canaan, is a type of the Church Universal, seeking an Heavenly Canaan, and warring for her spiritual inhe∣ritance. As it was with them, so with us. There is, du∣ring our whole lives peregrination, no intermission of Armes; every true Christian being environed about with implacable, and malicious Enemies; being in respect of malice, as well as local position, in the midst of the World: so that every one of us hath cause to groan out Davids Lamentation, Woe is me, that I sojourn in Mesek, that I dwell in the Tents of Kedar,Psal. 120.5, 6.7. my Soul hath long
dwelt with them that hate peace; I am for peace, but when I speak, they are for War. Further, this our adversary the World, is not only nu∣merous, but politick, and treacherous; not only using o∣pen hostility, and giving forcible assaults, by the power and persecution of wicked Men, but it lays many invi∣sible ambushes of pleasures to entrap us; and by her plenty of riches, and large offers, and mundane honours, causes oft-times defection, and treason, in the leading, and chief commanding faculties of our Souls. This is the civil Christians Dallilah, which lulls him asleep, on the Pillow of security, afterwards degrades him of his strength, and glory, his excrementitious, and formal per∣formances; and then delivers him up to shame, and de∣struction. The Poets Bellona, is but a fiction, a represen∣tation of this Monarchess. They ascribed wisdome and armes to their Goddesses. And are not both these (I mean carnal sensuality and Devilish wisdom) backt and se∣conded with the power and malice of Hell,James 3.15. and wicked great ones, with the glittering Scepter, and bloody Sword, with which she awes her Empires? The Lord knows, and we are not ignorant of this. O let humility be chief mourner, and our pitty write in tears how many of Gods Worthies have either been betrayed by her trea∣chery, or over-prest, and borne down, by her persecu∣ting power. To give life to Meditation, I will add some few au∣thentick examples, that our hearts being awakened with the fearfull thunder of their falls, may watch and pray, lessening, if not wholly preventing the danger.The Worlds 1 Dart. The Lust of Vn∣cleanness. O Solo∣mon, how do I, admiring thy excellencies, want words to measure or express them. O thou which wast the Son of a Prince, as good, as royal, and in truth, as well as in name a Jedidiah, the beloved of God; whose large and divinely inspired wisdome extended far beyond thy Em∣pire, though great; yea,2 Sam. 12.24. beyond the Worlds circumfe∣rence in thy Metaphysical heights, prying into the secret excellencies of spiritual Essences; yea, of God himself, that unbounded and unsquared Circle, without a Centre; who wast a Pillar in the House of God, yea, a most
lively Figure of the Son of God; as in thy knowledge, so in the peace, riches and glorious splendour of thy Kingdome. I might add more, but that this makes thy precipice thy downfall sufficiently, yea, miserably and fearfull: Thee did this Sorceress, this gorgeous Strumpet, the World, fascinate, and cause to drink a deep carouse, even to the Dregs of her poysonous, and sinfull fornica∣tions. Where drunk with Idolatry, and libidinous sen∣suality, thy bright Sun had set in the black Cloud of shame and damnable Apostacy, had not the unchange∣able,2 Sam. 7.14. and free love of the Father of mercies, raised thee from that deadly Lethargy, and made thee to the com∣fort of all Elect ones, even in thy lives declination, shine bright to the whole Church, in thy Ecclesiastes, thy re∣cantation. 2 Dart. Riches.Thus far, by way of experiment, and discovery of the dangerous, and bewitching quality of this our Circes first potion; the second follows. I mean that truly and pro∣perly aurum potabile, with which she not only benums the Souls superiour faculties; but as being the heaviest of mettals, depresses it to the Centre (if Hell be there) without repentance. I will instance but in one example of many; and that no mean one; even a Childe of the Prophets. O unhappy Gehazi, the more unlucky, because once most happy;2 Kings 5.20. who amongst the Sons of lapsed Is∣rael, though free born, were blessed like to thee? A ser∣vant, yea, a fellow Servant, with Kings and Angels: What Eye in that Infancy,2 Kings 3.13. and twi-light of the Church, was glutted with so many Miracles, like thine? What Ear entertained and devoured so many heavenly Ser∣mons?2 Kings 6.17. Nay, what Soul had its Wings stronglier impt by holy Instructions, better advantaged in its rise to take a flight from Earth to Heaven, from holy example, then thine? O unworthy proficient! Thy Master unyoakt him∣self from his Oxen,1 Kings 19.19. for Gods service; and wilt thou for∣sake thy God, and Master, for the yoak of covetousness? Thou didst, O bewitched wretch; and therefore justly did an hereditary, and visible Leprosie, witness thy inhe∣rent and invisible hypocrisie;2 Kings 5.27. a formal Hypocrite, and a white Leaper, being very like and fit concomitants.
Although all Man-kinde consist of one, and the same matter, and constituting parts, yet do not all, yea, few of many, by reason of the defect of Organs, or general grace, attain to a like sublimity of minde and ayriness, of affection. For there be some few, who well▪wing'd with natural abilities, and moral vertues, become Crea∣tures of a middle Region, and delight not with the Ant, and Mole, the covetous, and more sensual sort of Men, formerly spoken of; to dig and delve, and crawle upon the Earth; to live to feed upon her guilded entrailes. These high soaring Larks may seem at the first view to be free from the danger of our Fowler, did not experi∣ence and example shew us them taken in her day-nets, whil'st they stoop at her ever turning and falsely shining Glass of honour. Oh Naman, blessed wast thou in thy Bodies sickness,3 Dart. Honors. 2 Kings .1. because the occasion of thy Souls health. The mercies of the Lord never go single, or alone. Behold Twins: The Prophet undertakes thy Body, the Lord heales both, and makes thy liberality, and valour shine more splen∣dently, as being fixed in the highest Sphear, Religion: Elisha's God, Jehovah,Verse 17. being now preferr'd before thy Kings, thy Nations Idolls; and the dirt of Israel petiti∣oned for, yea, more esteemed, than the Gold of Syria. Yet the Lord hath a few things against thee, and this strumpet the World, hath given thee a blemish at part∣ing: witness the record transcribed from thy mouth, wherein thou coveted'st (which agrravates thy offence) not the conferring, but the continuation of mundane ho∣nours, by a dispensation, to be present at Idolatrous ser∣vice. The Prophet prayed for thee, as respecting thy In∣fancy, and God I doubt not was mercifull unto thee, as ascenting thy affection, giving thee either a better re∣solution, or repentance unto absolution. My Meditations might now lead me through some thousands of years, and both from the word of truth, as also from Ecclesiastical and civil Histories cite, many worshippers of this royal Idol. I might point out two e∣minent and worthy Councellors, Nicodemus,John 3.2. John 19.3. and Joseph of Arimathea, who both were Night-disciples to our Sa∣viour,
for fear of the Jews, and losing their terrene pre∣ferments. As also many other Rulers, and great Men, who the Evangelist taxes to have loved the praise of Men, more than the praise of God.John 12.43. But one tryal, as well as many, is sufficient to prove the virulency of this poyson, of whose enmity and antipathy to salvation the Lords own words shall both conclude and confirm: How can yee believe, which receive honour one from another, and seek not the honour that cometh from God only.John 5.44. Having now laid honour in the dust, the utmost date of her Pattent; I should proceed to speak of our last and general Enemy, Death; but that even in the chaws thereof, the World hath laid a fourth ambush, of blood-thirsty and persecuting Hamans, and unbrotherly Ama∣lekites, to assault every true Christian in his peregrina∣tion to our Heavenly Canaan. Of these therefore next in our Meditation.4▪ Dart. Persecution. Were the Soul of a Christian corporeal, or could force bend her knees, and elevate her hands, with their Bodies to Idolatry; could it determine, and have an end by the Sword, Gibbet, Fire, or chawes of wilde Beasts: or be blasted and defaced by the scanda∣lous reproaches of slanderous tongues: surely the Israel of God had been as Sodom, and Gomorrah; a by-word, a nothing, without succession, upon the Earth. And as once the old World, so it; these Waters had overwhel∣med it,Psal. 124.3, these streames had gone over our Souls. They (even the wicked of the World) had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us. Then the proud Waters had gone over our Souls:Verse 4. But blessed be the Lord,Verse 5. Verse 6. Verse 7. who hath not given us as a prey to their Teeth; The Snare is broken, and we are escaped; escaped did I say? yet (the Lord knows) many not without a fall, without loss, sometimes of their stuble-works; some∣times of some gems, ornaments; and degrees of grace, and spiritual comforts; sometimes of their good name, precious time, and glorious professions. Blessed Peter, as thou wert the first of the Apostles, so the first of Professors, that denyed thy Master. Glorious was thy confession,Mat. 16.16. Mat. 26.74. thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God. Ignominious thy denyal, I know not the Man.
Oh that the apprehension of Death should make thee deny thy life! that thou shouldst more fear a Cross,John 14.6. than value a Crown! Yea, the most Orient of Diadems, that of Martyrdome. But when the Lords back was towards thee, and thy self-love had maskt his beautifull Image in thy heart, I wonder not at thy tergiversation, and counter motion. As these spiritual desertions obscure Christ, so they discover Man. The same back-friend that would have counselled the Master,Mat. 16.12. perswades and ob∣tains in Peter, to save himself. From what, an incarnate Devil? from Death? No, for who so will save his life, shall lose it; and thus to dye, is to live for ever. What then causeth this excentrical motion? Surely self-love which declines that Centre of all things, God, and his glory. This Daughter of the Philistims, our flesh,Judg. 14.15. rather choosing to betray her Spouse, her Sampson, than she, and her Fathers House; this Cottage of Clay, should be destroyed with the Fire of Persecution. Sathan, that Prince of this World, is an exact Tyrant; and therefore hath not only seeming rewards to inveigle some, but racks, and tortures to compell others, to sub∣ject to his thraldome. Such are those several sorts of Persecutions, which for a time have made many of the Lords Worthies to seek quarter. Peter fell not alone, though as most eminent, most eminently. Blessed Saviour, was not this the fury,Expostulation. the Wolf that scattered the Sheep from thee the true Shepward of our Souls? Where were the other ten Apostles,Mat. 26.56. when thou wast condemned and crucified? I finde none, but John, present at thy Passion; and he there, rather as a Brother, and Kinsman, than as a Disciple. For surely had he pro∣fest thee, thou hadst not suffered alone innocently,Isa. 63.3. as it is written of thee. Where were the seventy Disciples, to whose faith, and preaching, thou gavest testimony with so many Miracles?Luke 10.11, 17. Where those many thousands which are said to believe, which they themselves also testified by their acclamations, confessions, and frequent atten∣dance? Were they not all reduc'd to a few, and as it were, metamorphosed into the weakest Sex;Mat. 27.55. a few Wo∣men, yea, and those thine at distance too, they stood
afar off? Sweet Jesus! did the faith fail of these ocu∣lar witnesses, these Champions of thy truth? Yea, after thy glorious ascension in the Apostles age, do we finde a Demas?2 Tim. 4.10. In the Primitive, and in succeeding times, many holy Professors? yea, in this our age, a devout Cranmer, and others? Who for a time shrunk from thee, or rather from the chawes of this Devourer, this opposite to nature, this highest Pin of Sathans wracks, this last and worst Enemy, Death; Disgraces, slanders, loss of goods, yea, all other bodily tortures included, being but the attendants and degrees to this. The Devil often in the Church makes his observation good, that skin for skin,Job 2.4. yea, all that a Man hath, will he give for his life. What need then have we, O Lion of the Tribe of Judah, which have not seen, yet believe, being therefore desti∣tute of the sences testimony, and want that Christian magnanimity, that measure of grace and faith, which those first Combatants enjoyed, to fly unto thy Standard, and to invoke thy assistance, and strength, against these worldly Enemies? Which though invincible by nature, and the flesh, yet shall lye headless, and vanquisht un∣der the Sword of thy Word, and Spirit. Witness these holy Darts drawn out of that sacred Quiver, thy most Holy Word, already thrust through the sides, and heart of this Absalom, this Rebell and Traytor to our Souls; so St. Peter most sweetly, God hath given us exceeding great and precious promises,2 Pet. 1.4. that by these we might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the cor∣ruption that is in the World through lust. Our Enemy, the World, marching against us in four battalions, as hath been formerly shewed; three of which also the Apostle St. John, as God's sentinel for our safety, hath faithfully given us warning of, by this his discovery; that all that is in the World,1 John 2.16. the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the World. It is time for us now, not only to pre∣pare for, but to begin the fight, and that with courage and chearfulness; the Alarum and on-set being given by Gods own Spirit, animating and stirring up the affection of our godly zeal, and anger, thus; Love not the World,
neither the things that are in the World; If any Man love the World, the love of the Father is not in him.1 John 2 15. Know yee not that the friendship with this World is en∣mity with God?James 4.4. whosoever therefore will be a friend of the World, is an enemy of God. Behold also a Banner, even that which we have vowed to fight under, in our Baptisme, even the victorious Cross of Christ trium∣phantly displayed by that great Christian Champion St. Paul; who thus encourages us by this his pious exclama∣tion, and example; God forbid that I should glory,Gala. 6.14. save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the World is crucified unto me, and I unto the World. See also our Leader, the Spirit of God, which if our faith second, will make us trample upon the flesh, and all the volptu∣ous, and carnal desires thereof. For,Gala. 5.18. if we be led of the Spirit, we are not under the Law, (viz. under the curse, irritation, and condemnation thereof) for, they that are in Christ have crucified the Flesh,Gala. 5.24. with the affe∣ctions and lusts. Yea, this our victory and deliverance is assured to us, in that it was a special end of that great and acceptable sacrifice offered to God by our Lord, and great Captain, Jesus Christ. Who as the Apostle witnes∣seth, gave Himself for our sins,Gal. 1.4. that he might deliver us from this present evil World. Hast thou such encourage∣ments O my Soul! On then, and assault the glittering front, the foremost batallion of thy Enemy. Let this Ar∣row, taken out of the Apostles quiver, give him the first encounter. The love of Money is the root of all evil.Against Cove∣tousness. 1 Tim. 6.10. Luke 12.13. 1 Cor. 6.10. Let thy Saviours words be a trusty Scout to prevent am∣bushes; beware of covetousness. Yea, let the victorious Sword of the Spirit give the deadly wound; be not de∣ceived, not thieves, nor covetous, &c. shall inherit the Kingdome of God. Here be not discontented O my Soul, nor stain the glory of thy Christian Victory, by a worldly sadness, as though an ignominious poverty must be the necessary consequent of forsaking the World, and conculcating her trash. No, Christians have riches, which the Men of this World know not of; for they are infinite,Ephe. 3.8. and unsearch∣able. viz. The riches of faith, James 2.5. Of good
works, 1 Tim. 6.18. Of liberality, 2 Cor. 8.2. The true riches of grace, of glory, Luke 10.11. Rom. 9.23. These unvaluable treasures, God who is rich in mercy, and Christ Jesus the Conduit of his mercies gives unto us,Ephe. 2.4. Rom. 10.12. 2 Cor. 8.9. For his mercies sake, Eph. 2.4. Sometimes immediatly by his Spirit, most frequently, me∣diatly by his Ministers. Yet, not without this Spirit. Who as the Apostle speaks, though poor in the esteem of Men, yet make many rich.2 Cor. 6.10. Thanks be to God for these his in∣comparable gifts. Against sen∣sual pleasures.The next Troop of the Worlds Power, that faith pro∣ceeds to encounter with, is led by voluptuousness. These (its true) as it were besiege the Christian Soul, and en∣compass it. And if at any time by her pious force, she break thorow, and discomfit their thickest rancks, even then, by asking quarter, they oft-times obtain victory, crying out unto the zealous and lust-destroying Warriour, as once the Tribe of Judah to David; thou art neer of Kin unto us;2 Sam. 19.13. and as David to Amasa, thou art of my Bone, and of my Flesh; and with the Syrian King, thy Brother Benhadad.1 King. 20.33. Therefore spare us, let us live, be∣hold we are the delight of thine Eyes, the Mistresses of thy Ear, the darlings of thy Pallate, the Paramours of thy touch, the perfumes of thy Nostrils. We are linckt in consanguinity with thy nature, age, complection, and calling. We are thy beloved, thy life, the life of thy life, thy bosome companions. Thus, if they gain by these sy∣rene Songs, but a respit of execution, they shortly pre∣sume to become Counsellors, advising in the words of the Preacher; Rejoyce O young Man in thy youth, and let thy Heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth,Eccl. 11.9. and walk in the ways of thine Heart, and in the sight of thine Eyes. Thus these wicked, and subtile lusts get possession. But doth the faithfull Champion here want courage, strength, or Weapons? No, animated with divine assi∣stance, (the regal Power of Christ) he advances the shield of faith, and makes his Enemies feel the edge of that Sword, which they even now wounded him with; viz. But know thou, for all these things, God will bring thee
to Judgment. Yea, he further adds, inverting the words of the Prophet, should I let go out of my hand,1 King. 20.42. you that God hath appointed to utter destruction; my life should go for your life: for that she, or whosoever else, lives in pleasure, are dead whilst they live; yea,1 Tim. 5.6. in their e∣states, as well as in their Souls. So witnesses the wise Man; He that loveth pleasure shall be a Beggar, and that spiritually, as well as temporally;Prov. 21.17. Luke 8.14. the good Seed being choked therewith. Further, as Israel to Adonibezeh, so the Christian Victor, as it were, cuts off the Fingers, and Toes, the speed and power of his concupiscence; by instancing the multitudes of Gods own People, that were overthrown in the Wilderness, which were for our example, as the Apostle speaks, to the intent,1 Cor. 10.6. that we should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted; by calling to remembrance the recantation, judgment and repentance of wise King Solomon. Who having enjoyed not only a common,Eccles. 2.10. but an experimental and moral use of all the delights of the Sons of Men, yet condemns them all as vile, and nothing worth; vanity of vanities,Eccles. 1.2. all is vanity and vexation of spirit. Lastly,Eccles. 2.11. by fore-see∣ing the evil, and unseparable consequents, and Copes∣mates of inordinate delights,James 5.5. by the Apostle St. James his light, (viz.) wantonness, riotousness, and cruelty. To conclude, every true Christian-Warriour is uncon∣querable; as being intrenched, and fortified within the promises of omnipotency it self. Who thus assures us, that they that walk in the Spirit, shall not fulfill (that is, shall not be overcome by, or yield to,Gala. 5.16.) the lusts of the Flesh. Here some Laodicean, some lack-warm Professor,Object. will perhaps sigh; and with Lot's Wife, be ready to look back towards their pleasures, the Sodom of this World; complaining that Christians (by reason of so rigorous a prohibition) are of all Men most miserable; and (as the World esteems them) a sad stoical and melancholy ge∣neration of Men.Answ. Let such mount their Meditations with holy David, and they shall enjoy with him a Hea∣ven upon Earth. Witness this his testimony, and assu∣rance, applyable and proper to every faithfull Israelite▪
Thou wilt shew me the way of life; in thy presence is ful∣ness of joy;Psal. 16.11. at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore. My Soul here closes up this second tryumph, with a gra∣tulatory Hymn of that blessed Psalmist, How excellent is thy loving kindness O God! therefore the Children of Men put their trust in the shadow of thy Wings;Psal. 36.7. They shall be abundantly satisfyed with the fatness of thy House,Verse 8. thou shalt make them drink of the Rivers of thy pleasures; For with thee is the Fountain of life, in thy light shall we see light.Verse 9. The Worlds third Squadron, viz. Mundane honours, renews and continues the Fight,Against Honor. with which the chief General, Sathan, lays ambushes on the right hand, by glorious Visions and Dreams of Signiories, with large promises of rule and dominion; tempting us, as once our Saviour,Mat. 4.9. All these things will I give thee: and as he did Balaam in the mouth of Balack, I will Promote thee unto very great honour.Numb. 22.17. On the left hand, he assaults us by threatning, as also actual divesting; and degrading us of our hereditary, or acquired titles, and preferments. So he did to Moses. Who as the Apostle witnesses, refu∣sed to be called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter; choosing rather to suffer affliction with the Children of God.Heb. 11.24. So also to Daniel and the Three Children,Dan. 3.6. who were depri∣ved for a time of their Principalities, for their refracto∣riness to Idolatry. In defence against the first assault, the pious Christian marching under Christs royal Standard, victoriously opposes his Shield of faith, with which, and the Sword of the Spirit, he disorders and puts to flight his Enemies; reverberating, and expulsing Sathans tem∣ptations, with the blessed Virgins Antheme; God scat∣tereth the proud in the imaginations of their hearts,Luke 1.51, 52. and pulls down the mighty from their Seates, and exalts them of low degree. With the curse of the holy Prophet Isaiah,Isa. 28.10. Woe to the Crown of Pride. Yea, he concludes the Victory, with that holy Maxime of St. James, God resists the proud.Jam. 4.6. Now, who amongst us shall be able to dwell with everlasting burning? If the Lord condemns, who can justify?Isa. 33.14. In pride, in all these places, the Spirit of God includeth ambition, which essentially differs not,
being connatural, and concomitant with her. As for the temptation on the left hand, the loss of any temporal dignities: The valiant Christian poyses them with the glorious promises of Gods faithfull word, whereby judging of their lightness, he concurs with holy David, that surely Men of low degree are vanity,Psal. 62.10. and Men of high degree are a lye; to be laid in the Ballance, they are altogether lighter than vanity. And therefore re∣turns this or the like counter-buff: Get thee behind me Sathan, for I value not thy threats,Mat. 10.30. since thou boasts of that which is not in thy power. The haires of my Head are numbred, the Lord maketh poor, and maketh rich;1 Sam. 2.7. he bringeth low, and lifteth up. But, say the Lord should suffer thee, as he did in Job, to be the Instrument of my debasement; I will kiss Gods Rod, even in thy hand, and say with that holy Man, The Lord hath given,Job 1.22. and the Lord hath taken; blessed be the Name of the Lord: and with that tryumphing Apostle, In all these things (viz. disgraces, and losses,Rom. 8.37. of what kinde soever) I am more than a Conquerour, through Christ that loved me: For what things were gain to me,Phil. 3.7. those I count loss for Christ; yea doubtless, I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus, my Lord;Verse 8. for whom I will suffer the loss of all things, accounting them but dung, that I may win Christ. The highest favours of Princes, from whom flow Earthly dignities, are but shadowes of true honour. Sha∣dowes; for they weakly express them, and vanish when their Sun is set, or clouded.Psal. 107.40. He that pours contempt up∣on Princes, commands me not to rely upon them;Psal. 146.3. Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the Son of Man, in whom there is no help. (If not in them, much less in their gifts.) For in that very day (in an instant) they,Verse 4. their gifts, and thoughts perish. My happiness is a better hope. My honour is more surely fixt, than by Man,Verse 5. or Devil, to be extirpated, or extinguisht. Can all thy power, O Enemy of Man, frustrate my Election, whereby from Eternity, I am enroll'd a Peer of Heaven? Can all thy policy, or force, dim the splendour, or annihilate that title of being called, and truly adopted the Son of God?
Canst thou disrobe me of my honourable red and white Garments of Justification, and Sanctification, in my Sa∣viour? O Father of lyes, canst thou turn light into dark∣ness,2 Tim. 4.8. and truth into falshood? Deprive me of my Crown, and nullify these glorious and infallible promises? Fear not my little Flock,Luke 12.32. it is your Fathers will to give you a Kingdome. Those that honour me, I will honour. If any Man serve me,1 Sam. 2.30. John 12.26. him will my Father honour: Glory and honour,Rom. 2.10. and peace to every one that worketh good: I am assured, and conclude thou canst not. And there∣fore I trample under foot, thy power, and vilify thine and the Worlds menaces, and offers, as believing in the royal might and truth of my Saviour;Rom. 8.38. That neither life, nor death, nor Angels, Principalities, Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, shall be able to separate me from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus, my Lord. Verse 39.Having thus routed, and discomfitted the Wings and first Squadrons of the Enemy;From Perse∣cutions. we must not rest here; losing both our hopes, and advantage. A Christians whole life we have heard is a continued warfare. To live unto the Lord, and by self-denyal, to overcome former tem∣ptations, is a happy progress towards our Victory. But to persevere to the end, to dye for the Lord, is the con∣clusion, the Crown, the tryumph of the Christian. By how much the Enemy is more powerfull, and terrible; by so much is the service more honourable, and the con∣quest more glorious. This last Phalanx of the Worlds force (Persecutions) are her Janizaries, her Pretorian bands, her last refuge, in whom she puts her chiefest con∣fidence; led and marshalled by Sathans Lieutenant Ge∣neral, described and set forth in the Revelations, by him riding upon a red Horse, destroying the fourth part of the World;Rev. 6.8. who may be also, (as expressing its mortal effects) figuratively called Death, whom Hell it self follows and attends. Well, is this the last and strongest of our worldly ad∣versaries? Yea, have they begun already? or will they shortly, certainly assault us; and notwithstanding our for∣mer Trophies, contend with us for our Palme? For all, that will live godly in Christ Jesus,2 Tim. 3.12. must suffer persecu∣tions;
Let us, like our English Martyrs, with courage, leaping, and rejoycing, run to kiss the Stake, to meet our Opposers, yea, (as the Apostle) our tortures:Heb. 11.35. not accepting deliverance, that we may obtain a better resur∣rection. Are we hated by the World? It is the surest mark of our Election, by God. So the word of truth; Because yee are not of this World,Joh. 15.19. but I have chosen you out of the World, therefore the World hates you. Have we mourning here? It ushers in, yea, accompanies, an un∣utterable, and inseparable joy. Yee shall be sorrowfull, saith our Saviour,John 16.20. but your sorrow shall be turned into joy, and your joy shall no Man take from you. Yea,Verse 22. do we so far suffer for well doing, that we are delivered over to Death, as Malefactors? Remember, we are not without a companion in our sufferings: our blessed Sa∣viour was Crucifyed,John 15.20. and reckoned amongst the Trans∣gressors; Now the Servant is not greater than the Lord; if they have persecuted him, they will also persecute you. To conclude, if we be conformable to Christ, in his Death, we shall also be like him in his Resurrection; we shall have a change, rather than a loss. For, He that loseth his life for his sake, shall finde it,Luke 17.33. (viz.) Immor∣tality, which is only the true life. This is a faithfull say∣ing, If we be dead with him, we shall also live with him:2 Tim. 2.11, 12. If we suffer, we shall also reign with him; if we deny him, he will also deny us. Thus then have I made good my proposition,1 Joh. 5.4. that this is the Victory that overcomes the World, even our Faith. Thanks be unto God, who gives us the Victory, through our Lord Jesus.1 Cor. 15.57. Blessed Saviour, and Soveraign!Contemplation. Now I am assured that thou art a Rock, upon which Man being built by faith, becomes impregnable; so high, that he is far a∣bove Honours battery; so strong, as not to be taken by the assaults of bloody Persecutions; so firm, as not to be betrayed by covetousness, nor undermined by volup∣tuousness. The Siege of Troy, one of the longest we read of, continued but ten years, and then she was bu∣ryed in her ashes; whereas the Christians, lasts a life, an age, and even then ascends a tryumphant Throne of Glory, upon the Necks of his Enemies. Every Christi∣ans
life is a Book of the Battels of the Lord, thou being as well, nay more, the Lord of Hosts, in respect of our spiritual Fights, and Victories, as of our corporal; those Enemies flshly, these spiritual; those weak, and mortal, their Principalities, Powers, immortal; those below, and numerable; these from above, and innumerable. O thy mercy in thy assistance! O thy power in thy resistance! Divine Monarch, as it is thy sole act, and gift, our victo∣ry; so let it be ours, to retribute to thee alone the Glory. The last Enemy that is to be destroyed, is Death, saith the Apostle;Over Death. 1 Cor. 15.26. so in these Meditations. But why a double, death to death? Hath not the Martyrs Sword mortally wounded this Serpent? Yes, but yet he hisses still. And therefore lest he may fright the fearfull, we will add more wounds, that so the weakest Christian may with Moses, take this Serpent into his hand. Yea more (which is the Miracle) it shall become a Staff; an assistant in his Heavenly Journey.Exod. 4.4. As there is a violent, and enforced death, such is Martyrdome; so there is a natural, and timely dissolution. In the one, we dye in, and for the Lord, as hath been shewed; in this other, we dye in, and to the Lord; the one is ordinary, the other is extraordi∣nary; the one common, the other particular; with both these Heads, our Enemy Death playes the Tyrant, and Sin the Executioner. The Sting of Death is Sin. 1 Cor. 15.56'Tis an Observation, that things common, and uni∣versal, are less admired, or feared. But what more ge∣neral, and frequent than Death; what more frightfull, and astonishing? This is the Coloquintida, that imbitters all humane pleasures. So that oft-times the burthen of Man's sweetest Song, is that dolefull complaint of the Children of the Prophet,2 Kings 4.40. Mors in olla, There's Death in the Pot. This is the Water of Marach, which the Chil∣dren of Men murmur to taste of;Exod. 15.23. which will they, nill they, they must drink, and dye. But O my Soul, behold a City of refuge for thee, and all that are Children of the Prophets, the Israel of God: behold thy true Moses hast cast Lignum Vitae into this Spring of Sin, to sweeten thy draught; Thy spiritual Elisha hath cast Meat into
this boyling Pot, (even himself, broken, and grownd by Gods justice) that so he might correct the cursed effects of this wilde Wine, which God created not. For, He is the Bread which cometh down from Heaven,John 6.50. that a Man may eat thereof, and not dye. Wouldst thou have this more illustrated and proved? Hear then thy Champions challenge to this allconquering Enemy, O Death, I will be thy death;Hos. 1.14. Joh. 19.28. John 18.11. Luke 12.50. view also his courage before, and in the conflict, I thirst; The Cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink, it? Again, I have a Baptisme to be baptized with, and how am I streightned, untill it be accomplisht. Farther, con∣cerning the conflict it self, hear the Psalmist in the Per∣son of our Saviour, The sorrows of Death compast me, and the pains of Hell gat hold upon me;Psal. 18.4. I found trouble and sorrow. Lastly, in the conclusion of this truth,Psal. 116.3. that thou mayest know that Christ being raised from the Dead, dyeth no more. Death hath no more dominion over him, that he hath abolished Death,Rom. 6.9. and hath brought life and immortality to light, for thee, and all believers,2 Tim. 1.10. through the Gospel; according to the Apostle. Hear his Conquest, and tryumph, first Proclaimed by St. Paul, Death is swallowed up in victory; O Death where is thy Sting, O Grave where is thy Victory?1 Cor. 15.54. Then published and revealed by himself. I am he that liveth,Rev. 1.18. and was dead; behold I am alive for ever more, Amen; and have the Keys of Hell and Death. Lastly, view his right con∣veighed to thee in that large and royal Pattent of his Word; Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the World,1 Cor. 3.22. or Life, or Death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours, and yee are Christs, and Christ is Gods;Verse 23. Again, God shall wipe away all tears from your Eyes,Rev. 21.4. and there shall be no more Death, neither sorrows, nor crying; neither shall there be any more pain, for the for∣mer things are passed away. Having thus strongly, under the royal Standard of Christ Jesus, entrencht thy self (O my Soul) against this mortal, and heart-torturing adversary; Let thy faith, placed even upon the Platform of sanctified reason, wait for to make a challenge to the stoutest assailants of the
Enemy.From the fear of Death. The van-curriers, of whom is fear, and its con∣comitants. Pompa mortis (saith one well) magis terret, quam mors ipsa. Against these Light-Horsemen, discharge this murdering piece of the Apostles; Forasmuch as the Children are partakers of flesh and blood,Heb. 2.14. Christ also him∣self took part of the same, that through Death, he might destroy him, that had the power of Death; that is, the Devil.Verse 15. And deliver them, who through fear of Death, were all their life time subject unto bondage. Examples of worthies, invisibly conveighs courage, into magnani∣mous mindes: wherefore, if fear renew its force, and re∣assault thee; interpose, as a strong Barracado, the eja∣culation of dying Jacob. O Lord, I wait for thy salva∣tion.Gen. 49.18. The Meditation of patient Job, All the days of my appointed time will I wait,Job 14.14. untill my change come. The fervent supplication of devout Paul, whose desire was to depart,Phil. 1.23. and to be with Christ. The next assaylant and assistant of Death, is grief to part with things of this life. The beauty, goodness, and love of a Wife: The youth, numerousness, and hopeful∣ness of Children; The fidelity, affection, and society of friends; The hundreds, thousands, yea Ingots of treasure, now to be left; together, with all the pleasures, honours, and pomp of the World; being as so many arrowes to pierce thorow, with sorrow, the heart of the natural Man; so many racks to his distracted Soul; yea, so many deaths in Death, if we respect its inforc'd disunion. But the devout Soul, having not only a natural, but a superna∣tural affection, hath, if ever, then the spirit of Heavenly wisdome, and spiritual discerning, concerning things that differ. And therefore willingly, chearfully, and resolutely, with Mary, chooseth the better part; forsaking her earth∣ly Spouse for a Heavenly; the Impes of nature, for the Fruits of Grace; for her works follow her. She volunta∣rily exchanges Earth, for Heaven; even for the City of the ever living God,Heb. 12.22. the new Jerusalem; her Earthly as∣sociates, for the beatifical vision and presence of the glo∣rious Trinity; those many Myriads of Angels, the gene∣ral Assembly of the Church of the first-born,Verse 23. and the spi∣rits of all just Men made perfect. As for the overplus of
her treasure, uninherited, she hath, and doth take order by good works, as by so many Bills of Exchange, for the receipt of them above; herein obeying the precept and counsel of our Saviour, to lay up treasure in Heaven.Mat. 6.20. Lastly, a Sceptre is not a Bar, neither doth the massy weight of a Crown, nor felicity of terrene things, depress the high-soaring affections of this Christian Soul. King David's choice is hers, rather,Psal. 84.10. To be a Door-keeper in the House of God, than to dwell in the Tents of wickedness. Neither is there fear of loss, where it is The Fathers will to give; a Kingdome. For, The Lord God is a Sun,Luke 12.32. and a Shield; the Lord will give grace and glory,Psal. 84.11. no good thing will he with-hold from them that walk uprightly. O Lord of Hosts, blessed is the Man that trusteth in thee.Verse 12. Man being a compositum, a sensible Creature, is na∣turally deeply apprehensive of pain;3dly. From the fear of Death, pain and sepa∣ration. therefore impetu∣ously an abhorror of separation. Hence a third fearfull, and violent assault of Death; so powerfull and preva∣lent, that it hath brought the strongest of Gods Warri∣ours upon their knees, and to a marvailous astonishment. Hence (as some interpret) the reiterated and strong cries, the wonderfull and bloody sweat of our great General, Christ Jesus. But because his apprehension and suffering are mysterious, unconceivable, and extraordinary; see the conflict, and hear the complaint of a dying sick Man, Holy, therefore truly royal, Hezechiah. I shall go,Isa. 38.11. saith he, to the Gates of the Grave, I am deprived of the re∣sidue of my years; I shall behold Man no more, with the Inhabitants of the World;Isa. 38.12. God will cut me off with pining sickness, from Day even to Night, wilt thou make an end of me. I reckoned till Morning, that as a Lion,Isa. 38.13, 14. so will he break all my Bones. Like a Crane or Swallow, so did I chatter, I did mourn as a Dove. I might further instance here the mournfull Lamentation of Job and David, upon the like occasion. But what need I, when every one of us in our healths, can witness, that in our Meditation of our dissolution, we have often felt strong sits of this dead Palsey: I will therefore hast to the Al∣lay, or Antidote them. O my Soul, I confess I have undertaken a hard task,
to perswade against Natures prescription, and sence. For, what more universal, more common, more necessary, and therefore more natural, than the marriage of Soul and Body? What amity more ancient, or more diffu∣sive, than this, betwixt these two friends? Yea, what expresses the glory, and regal Power of the one; what gives an active beeing, and lively existence to the other, but this mutual communion, and effectual union. Nei∣ther wants there negative arguments, to dishearten, and weigh thee down, my Soul, in this thy Eagle-like flight, as being the unwelcome concomitants, fearfull conse∣quents, and direfull defects, of this unwilling separation. Such the darkning of the Sun, Moon, Light and Stars (I mean the Eyes;Eccles. 12.) the obscuring of those that look out of the Windows,Verse 3. viz. the receding of the Soul, by reason of the debility of the optick Nerves, as the holy Ghost elegantly expresses; such the palsyness of our hands, the keepers of our house of Clay; the weakness and binding of the Legges, the strong guard thereof▪ the want of motion in the Teeth,Verse 4. the mills and grinders of our food; such the bringing low of the Daughters of Musick, by deafness in the Eares, and hollowness of voice;Verse 5. such thy many and present fears, equal (if thou beest ancient) unto thy gray haires, white like the blos∣soming Almond-Tree; The losing of the silver Cord (viz.) the evaporating of the natural,Verse 6. and vital Spirits, the dry∣ing up the marrow, and the relaxing of the Nerves, and sinews, the ligaments of the Bones; such the breaking of the golden Bowle, Pitcher, or Wheele, at the Fountain, or Cistern, viz. the rending in two of the heart-string, those last pangs, disabling it to force the blood (extracted from the Liver, as being the Fountain) into the Veins; and to perform its circular motion. But all these are but the associates, and symptomes of Death; the followers, they are far more terrible, and distractive; such are the privation of life: the Pallace of the Soul, being now a dungeon of corruption, the pale hue of the Face, and Body, the breathless Carcass, now, as it were, mourning for her Spouses departure. Such the strange deadness of the late sparkling Eyes, yellowed now like unto a fallen
Star. To conclude the whole Microcosme of the Body, deprived of her created light, and of that Spirit, that moved in her, and informed her, the Soul, becomes no∣thing less than a motionless lump, an obscure, and de∣formed Chaos. These considerations, O my Soul! at the first sight, I confess, render Death a terrible Goliah; before whom, most of the Armies of Israel turn their backs. Yet do not thou fear; for a stone, or two, chosen, and taken out of those running, and pure streams, of Gods Word, from that Rock hewen out without hands, shall from the Sling of every faithfull David, not only pierce his forehead, but also swallow up, terminate, and intombe Death in death. Is thy sick-Bed, through the fury of this adversary, as full of torture, as the hot glowing Gridiron of holy Lawrence? yet such a Metamorphosis will thy high-soaring Contemplations, and the power of faith work in thee, that the full sence, and influx of Heavenly joyes, and raptures, shall make thee senseless of thy pains, and sufferings. Thy feavourish fits being but Eliah's Chariot, thy cold sweats, but thy passage through Jordan, into the Heavenly Canaan. Hast thou not seen a fierce flame in thy Chimny suddenly to damp and recoyle, when the Sun shines full upon it? Did any Conqueror feel, or regard his wounds, when about to ascend his tryumphal Chariot? And can the weak blaze of Deaths consumption, out-vie the shining of Gods face, and not be swallowed up of glory? Can Deaths wounds be felt in the neer apprehension, nay, fruition of Immor∣tality? Surely no. Thou mayest (as being in nature) mourn a day or two with Mary, but when thy Christ approaches thus neer, doubtless thou wilt forget thy grief, and run, not out of thy Doors, but out of thy Body, to meet him, Swan-like, singing with David; As the Hart panteth after the Water-brooks,Psal. 42.1, 2. so panteth my Soul after thee, O God: my Soul thirsteth for God, for the living God, when shall I come and appear before God? Wherefore O my Soul,Of Proofs and comfort in the Rsurrection. or whosoever thou art that readest these Meditations, amidst thy great pangs (as the
Apostle exhorts) Look unto,Heb. 12.2. yea follow the example of Jesus, the Author and finisher of thy Faith; who for the joy that was set before him,Ephes. 2.6. Rev. 3.21. endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the Throne of God. Where also we shall sit together with him and be then perfectly changed into the same Image, from glory to glory.2 Cor. 3.18. Thus reckoning that the sufferings of this present life (even Death it self) are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us. Let us not faint,Rom. 8.18. for though our outward Man perish, yet let our inward Man be renewed Day by Day, being confi∣dent, that our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding weight of Glory.2 Cor. 4.16. Verse 17. Looking (as hath been shewed) not at the things that are seen,Verse 18. but at the things that are not seen: for the things which are seen, are temporal, but the things which are not seen are Eternal. Dread not then O my Darling, this Lion. Is not he faithfull who hath promised, that he will never leave thee,Heb. 13.15. Psal. 48.14. nor forsake thee? That he will be thy guide, even unto Death? Or dost thou doubt his Power, to whom belongs the issues from Death? and at whose voice all, that are in the Graves shall come forth?Psal. 68.20. John 5.28. Behold a Tree of Life, indeed the spiritual Manna, which, do but feed on, by faith, and thou shalt not dye; For, He that eateth this Bread shall live for ever.John 6.58. Was it with blessed Paul, to live, Christ; and to dye, is gain; and shall thy cowardise and recoyling insinuate, and imply a loss? No, let such thoughts (as Impes of Sin) first dye,Phil. 1.21. yea, be annihilated, since every true Believer is assured of a glorious change, and an ineffable reward; Corruption putting on incor∣ruption, and mortality immortality; we dying no more, but being made equal to the Angels:1 Cor. 15.55. Luke 20.36. For, as we have been planted together in the likeness of Christs death, so shall we be also in the likeness of his Resurrection.Rom. 6.5. Did many Worthies under the thunder of the Law, and in the twilight of the Gospel, as the Apostle witnesses, un∣dergo, the exquisitest tortures, not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better Resurrection?Heb. 11.35. And shall we in this open day, and Evangelical Revelation, when
by faith, like Stephen, we behold our Lord Jesus Christ, standing at the right hand of God, ready to receive us, and having as he promised, taken possession, and prepa∣red a place for us, stand back, like Saul?1 Sam. 10.22. And being neer our Coronation, seek still to hide our selves under the rubbish of our Earthly Tabernacles? No, what was humility in him, will be esteemed shamefull, and distrust∣full pusillanimity in us; yea, which is worse, disobedi∣ence to the Almighties summons. Let the wicked hang down their heads, and cry to the Mountains, and Rocks,Luke 23.30. to cover them, but let all of us that have obtained grace, be faithfull, be faithfull unto the death,Rev. 2.10. and he shall give us a Crown of Life; lifting up our heads, because the time of our redemption draws neer;Luke 14.14. even that day of recompence, when the Lord shall say, well done good and faithfull Servant, enter into thy Masters joy.Mat. 25.23. Not it into us, because not enough capable, but we into it, that so we may be, as it were swallowed up in that in∣finite Ocean of Glory. What though the Soul and Body have been unsepa∣rable friends, contemporaries in life; and being, associ∣ates in joy, sympathisers in sorrow; two in nature, one in affection: Do we not read of Jesse, and his Darling David? Of an Eliah, and his beloved Elisha? Of an Hanna, and her long desired Samuel? Of a Mordecai, and his entirely affected Hester? All which cheerfully consented to a disunion, and separation; that so the con∣junction of hearts, might appear inviolable; which seeks not so much the presence, as the happiness of each other. And shall thy Soul O Earth,1 Sam. 16.17. be summoned not to play before a mortal King, as David before Saul,Rev. 15.3. but to sing the Song of the Lamb; even spiritual Hymns, before the Throne of Glory? Not to serve before the Arke,1 Sam. 2.18. Esther 2.15. 2 Kings 2.11. & 21. 2 Cor. 12.2. as Sa∣muel, or to be the Paramour of an Assyrian Monarch, as Esther, but to be ravisht up with Eliah, and Paul, into Paradise? To be the Eternal Spouse of Jesus Christ, and to behold the splendour of God, not vailed,1 Cor. 13.12. and in a type, as under the Law; but face to face, as being changed into the same Image, from glory to glory?2 Cor. 3.18. shall it I say be sent for by Gods Sergeant, and thy Servant
Death, once unprofitable, as Onesimus to Philemon, but now most profitable to thee,Phil. 1.11. and all Saints; and wilt thou delay and be unwilling to part? intreating with the Levites Father-in-Law,Judg. 1.7. for one Day, nay one Moneth, or one Year longer? exile, from thy Heavenly home, thy Crown of Glory? O let such unwise, and such unthrifty, prorogations, be far from thy thoughts, farther from thy practise. Rather let both Soul and Body unanimously sing the Song of Simeon, and sigh out the vote of Paul, crying out. Oh how we desire to be dissolved.Luke 2.29. Phil. 1.23. That thy incompleat ho∣liness (O my Soul) might be perfected, and become com∣pleat glory. That thy faculties being not only unimpri∣soned, but heightned, may approve thee according to thy Saviours promise;Luke 20.36. like, yea, equal unto the Angels in all spiritual excellencies, and Heavenly Prerogatives. Again, how do I desire (O sinfull corrupted and mortal lump of Clay) thy reduction into thy first Atoms, and matter, that so sin which hath possest, and accurst thee, may dye, and be intomb'd with thee, as having no lon∣ger work or nourishment in thee. That Heavens great Chymist, the omnipotent Spirit of God, may cherish, en∣circle and hover over thee, (as once upon the Waters) separating the pure,Gen. 1.2. from the impure: and producing a body spotless, perfect, and immortal, even like unto the glorious Body of thy Saviour. That so being made a proportionable,Phil. 3.21. and capable Pallace for thy Soul, thou mayest enjoy an eternal reunion with it; and both, an everlasting communion with God. To conclude, O Man, Death is a necessary, absolute, and unchangable decree of God. Therefore it is thy wisdome to make it volun∣tary.Heb. 9.27. For, It is appointed unto Men once to dye, saith the Apostle; and then comes the Judgment. Comes the judgment did I say? at the mention of this word judg∣ment, my Soul recoyles again, not daring to peep out of her earthly Cabbin. For she knows, that this general As∣size is an undoubted truth, an Article of her Creed, an∣nexed to that of the Ascention, and Session of our Sa∣viour, at the right hand of his Father; At which we left when we first entred upon the three Offices of our Lord.
And therefore now it fitly, and in order comes, to be the practical object of our faith; as being also the last act of our Saviours Kingly Office, in the Kingdome of Grace. This being his total victory, and destruction of all his corporal, and spiritual Enemies, his Day of Tryumph, reward, and recompence to all his faithfull Saints, and Servants. For there, as my Meditations must cease, be∣cause faith shall be then fruition, so also the Kingdome of Grace and Mediatorship shall determine, according to that of the Apostle, Then cometh the end,1 Cor. 15.24. when he shall have delivered up the Kingdome to God, even the Father; when he shall have put down all Rule, and all Authority, and Power; Then shall the Son also Himself be subject unto Him, that puts all things under Him,Verse 28. that God may be all in all. To proceed then;Christs Kingly Office a the last Judgment. the Christian Soul being about to take her Heavenly flight, upon the apprehension of her particular, together with the General Judgment, starts back, and trembling with a sudden fear, thus revolves, and laments; Alas, why haste I so fast unto the dread∣full Tribunal of a just, and sin-revenging God? Am I not an infinite offendor, indited by Sathan, witnessed against, by conscience, yea, found guilty, and convicted by self-confession? Why flye I then so speedily to hear that sentence of condemnation, Goe yee cursed into ever∣lasting Fire?Mat. 25.41. Is not this that terrible day of the Lord spoken of? A Day of trouble, of distress,Zeph. 1.15. of wastenesse and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess, of Clouds, and thick darkness; The day of Battel,Joel. 2.2. Rev. 6.17. the great Day of Gods wrath? Surely if it be not, it is the parallel, the preludium thereof; for,16. as the Tree falls so it lies. As Death leaves, Judgment findes. Oh,Eccl. 11.3. how am I astonished, when I but think of the horror, and torment of that Hellish Tophet; those everlasting burnings,Isa. 30.33. Isa. 33.14. meri∣ted for me by my sins, roomthy enough for Worlds of sinners. For God hath made it deep, and large, never ceasing in its fiery vengeance for want of fuel; as (some∣times the burnings of Aetna) for the Pile thereof is Fire and much Wood, ever abounding, and continuing in its fury, and rigour of punishing. For the breath of the
Lord doth kindle it.Isaiah 66.24. Mat. 13.42. Jude 6. Dan. 12.2. Mat. 25.41. There's weeping, wailing, and gnash∣ing of Teeth. The Worme that gnaws, the Chain that en∣thrals, the contempt that vilifies, the Fire that torments and burns, is without consumption. All which therefore are infinite, because everlasting; Justice requiring, that our deficient nature, should for our infinite debt, be thus eternally extended. Nor is this Paena sensus, this posi∣tive misery, although endless, easiless, remediless, all. Is there not a far greater; because more spiritual, and in∣trinsical;2 Thes. 1.9. that Paena damni, that death of the Soul; the banishment, separation, and privation, of Gods blessed face; and of all hope of happiness for ever? O the tor∣ture of these premeditations! Lord, if the thoughts of Hell, be a Hell, what will the infliction be? Blest Savi∣our,John 12.27. which once prayedst to be saved from this hour, as being in all things tempted like us (sin only excepted) be my mercifull high Priest,Heb. 4.15. and royal Champion, to de∣liver me in this hour, and from this temptation; yea, let my faith, in this her last act, and motion, be swift∣est, and strongest, because neerest to thee, her Centre. O my Soul! have not I often seen one small Cloud to hide the Sun from our Eyes? and finde I not it true spi∣ritually also? that one dram of sorrow embitters a great measure of joy? A few doubtings, to eclipse, and for a time, obscure the bright beams of true believing? But no wonder, for this is the hour of darkness, therefore the fittest time for the power of darkness to act its part; Corruption, and infidelity are now to bid adieu, and to raise their Siege from the Soul, and therefore give the sharpest assault, and battery to the Bulworks of thy faith. Wherefore let not thy vain fear betray the succours which both faith, and reason offer; but recollect thy self, and consider, Is not thy Saviour and King, the same yesterday, to day, and for ever? Are not his promises, yea, and Amen? Are not his gifts and callings without repentance? Hath he loved thee, and will he not love thee to the end? Hath he begun, and is he not able to perfect? Will he even at the point, and in the height of his tryumph, be overcome, in thee, one of his Members? Hath he made thee, yea, new-made thee? Hath he paid
thy ransome with his precious heart-blood? Yea, with infinite sufferings, preserved thee all thy life past, from many-fold dangers and Enemies, by his gracious provi∣dence? And will he now, to the dishonour of his omni∣potency, deliver up his glory, his prize, to his expiring and almost vanquisht adversary? O far be from thee such weak and groundless imaginations! but because in∣fidelity and temptation, are often-times deaf, and seem to be of proof, even against undeniable arguments, and demonstrations, mount against all thy scruples and ti∣morous unbeliefs; the Canon of Gods word, which will quickly level all impediments, and through the strongest barrocadoes of Sathans suggestions, make way for a safe, a happy passage, and exit, to thy Soul. As an Introducti∣on to which, let these holy Lights, and examples of de∣parting Saints be premeditated of. Such as that speech of dying Jacob; Lord I wait for thy salvation; such the obedience,Numb. 20.28. and chearfull dissolution of those two un∣paralleld Levites, Moses, and Aaron, they went up to the tops of the Mount, Hor, and Nebo, and dyed there;Deut. 34.5. such the cruel and voluntary Martyrdome (though inspired by an extraordinary Spirit) of valiant Sampson;Judg. 16.30. such also the last words of royal David, He hath made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered, and sure,2 Sam. 23.5. for this is all my salvation. The expressions also of Job, Paul, and others, might be instanced; but I will conclude with pious Simeon's devout wish, Lord,Luke 2.29. let thy Servant depart in peace, for mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation. Further to thy establishment, and comfort, in that day when God shall judge the secrets of all Men by Jesus Christ, according to the Gospel;Rom. 2.16. consider what firme assurance thou hast of the favour, and how neer rela∣tion, thou hast to the Person, of thy Judge. For herein as the Apostle speaks, is our love made perfect,1 John 4.17. that we may have boldness in the day of Judgment, because as he is, so are we in this World. Is not the same Lord Jesus Christ, that sole, and universal Tribune,John 5.22. to whom the Father hath committed all Judgment? and to whom all power is given, both in Heaven and in Earth?Mat. 28.18. As be∣ing that Man whom God hath, ordained,Acts 17.31. to judge the
World in righteousness, even the Quick and the Dead? And before whose Judgment Seat all must stand?Rom. 10.42. Is not he, I say, by the witness of his own word, and undeniable truth,Rom. 14.10. so neerly allyed, and endeared to thee, that the strongest tyes of nature are by him figura∣tively taken up to shadow out, rather then to fully ex∣press his indissoluble affection? As that he is thy Ma∣ster;Rom. 6.22. nay, more (O infinite love and humility) thy ser∣vant;Luke 22.27. That he is thy friend; yea, more (O ineffable honour and exaltation) thy brother;mat. 28.10. yea more, if this be not enough,Heb. 2.11. he hath adopted thee his Son, and esteemed thee,John 1.12. and stiled thee his Sister, and Mother. To conclude, lest these foregoing degrees may admit of a division, he vouchsafes thee this high favour,Luke 8.21. to call thee the branch, He the Vine;John 15.1. 1 Cor. 11.3. Cant. 5.1. thee a member, He thy Head; He the Hus∣band, thee the Spouse; that so a union, yea the perfect∣est of unions might be exprest, and that sweetest of Pe∣titions be fulfilled, That all may be one, as thou Father art in me,John 17.21. and I in thee: that they also may be one in us.1 Cor. 6.17. Those that are joyned unto the Lord, being one spi∣rit,Rom. 12.5. and one body in Christ. Tell me then O my Soul, can such a Lord, whose love to thee,Short applica∣tion. made him serve thee, become a cruel In∣quisitor to condemn thee? Will thy friend, thy brother be an Achitophel, a Cain to thee? Is it a thing possible, that thy everlasting Father, instead of the Bread of Life, will give thee to the torments of Hellish Scorpions?Isa. 9.6. No, though Parents may forget the Sons of their Wombe,Isa. 49.15. y will He not forget thee. Is it unnatural for the Root, to suffer the Branches to wither for want of sap? For the Head to deny animation to the Members? yea, cannot there be a true conjunction in Marriage, without the ce∣ment of affection? And wilt thou dare to think, that that Root of Jesse, thy Head, thy Spouse, the God of Order, and Nature, will destroy the Principlse of nature, and with-hold the sap of his Grace, and Mercy; his all-quickening Spirit of Life, and Glory; his Eternal, free, and unchangeable love, from thee a branch, a member, a beloved? No, account it impious Infidelity, to give such a thought, the least entertainment. Rather, if thou
wilt meditate of that day (which indeed is a Christians duty) all being commanded to watch,mat. 24.42. because we know not at what hour our Lord will come; pitch thy thoughts upon the Resurrection, and that happy and blessed as∣sumption of thy Soul and Body reunited to meet thy Judge, and Saviour. The Apostle testifying,1 Thes. 4.17, 18. that we shall be all caught up together in the Clouds, to meet our Lord in the Ayre, and that then we shall be ever with the Lord: For, wheresoever the Carkass is,mat. 24.28. there will the Eagles be gathered together: Wherefore, as the same Apostle ex∣horts, Comfort both thy self, and others with these words. Rely also upon, and apply those golden, and royal de∣clarations of thy Judge.Psal. 37.33. As that he will not condemne thee, when thou art judged: That he that believeth on him, is not condemned, but hath everlasting life;John 3.18. and shall not come into condemnation,John 5.24. & 29. but is passed from death to life. That there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Since God doth justifie thee,Rom. 8.1. & 33. who is he that condemns thee? That we are often times corre∣cted here,1 Cor. 11.32. that we should not be condemned with the World. Further, is it possible that thou shouldest be sa∣luted with so sweet an invitation, and denomination, as Come thou▪ blessed of my Father, and be accursed?mat. 25.34. Canst thou be the Heir, yea the Possessor of a Kingdome, and also the Slave, and Prisoner of Sathan? Will the righ∣teous Judge give to them Torments of Fire, and Brim∣stone, to whom he hath promised a Crown of Glory?2 Tim. 4.8. Art thou commanded to pray for, to long for, to wait for, thy destroyer? No surely, but for him that hath promised to deliver us from the wrath to come.1 Thes. 1.10. To con∣clude, even amongst Men, none that is a Delinquent, must presume to possess the Bench, the Seat of Judica∣ture. But know you not, saith the Apostle,1 Cor. 6.11. that the Saints shall judge the World, yea Angels? Wherefore doubtless they must be just; yea, are acquitted and made innocent both imputatively and inherently in their own Persons. Further, if this be not sufficient, to animate,Of eternal life. and strengthen thy hope, let thy faith make the last Article of the Creed, thy object. Where thou believest ever∣lasting life; to take its beginning, or rather, begin its
perfection immediately after death, and the last Judg∣ment: The time appointed for the full reward, and co∣ronation of the Saints. I know▪ there are many gracious promises of temporal blessings, and those often-times fulfill'd, and confer'd upon the Saints in this life. Some whereof, though few, of many, as being a remunerating act of Christs regal, and judicial Office, I will by the way recite, not impertinently; as being earnests to them of future glory, sensible tokens of Fatherly love, a Pil∣grims Staff for our Faith to lean upon, in our lifes pere∣grination. This maxime being first undoubtedly to be believed, that the same promises made to perfect obe∣dience under the Law, had at the first, a respect, and are now truly applicable to faithfull sincerity, under the Gos∣pel. Such that Magazene of blessings, in the 28. of Deu∣teronomy, where to the largest, and several appetites, every true believing and sincere obeying Christian, (as well as to the sacrificing Jew) a most plentifull feast, and satisfaction is offered.Deut. 28.3. Is thy calling in the City, or i the Field? thou shalt be blessed in them both. Desirest thou riches, and plenty of all the fruits of the Earth, and a numerous posterity, and a blessed use, and enjoying of them?Psal. 12.8. Thou hast a Pattent, a great Seat for these also. Art thou a Man of action, and great employment, for the Church,Deut. 28.4, 11. or the Common wealth? yea, hath thy ver∣tues splendour, a shadow of envious and malitious ad∣versaries? If thou hearkenest unto the voice of the Lord thy God,Deut. 28.6, 7. thou shalt be blessed, when thou comest in, and blessed when thou goest out, and the Lord shall cause them, thine Enemies, that rise up against thee, to be smitten before thy face. Wouldest thou have thy for∣feited Charter, renewed, and all the Creatures, yea, the most honourable, serviceable unto thee? Behold the Lord shall give his Angels charge over thee;Psal. 91.11. yea, they shall pitch their Tents about thee, and the Heaven shall give Rain unto thy Land in due season.Deut. 26.12. Dost thou wish for (to the further glory of God) a long life, and an ho∣nourable place, and esteem amongst Men? The Lord hath promised, that he will set thee on high, that he will make thee the head,Psal. 91.14. and not the taile, and with long life
will satisfie thee.Deut. 28.13. Exod. 20.12. Yea more (which is the compleatment of all) he will shew thee his Salvation. But a long life, if imbittered with sickness, is but a tedious Death. True. But if thou fear the Lord, and depart from evil,Prov. 3.7, & 8. it shall be health to thy Navil, and marrow to thy Bones. Yea, thy light shall break forth, as the Morning, and thy health shall spring forth speedily. Further,Isa. 58.8. dost thou desire wis∣dome, beauty, strength? The righteous have promises of all these, so far forth as they still perfect their happi∣ness. Whose Daughters so fair as Jobs?Job 42.15. Isa. 61.3. Those that mourn in Sion, have assured unto them beauty for ashes. If the Feet of the Saints are beautifull,Rom. 10.15. surely no part else is deficient. But to make all good in few words, hear thy King, by the Prophet Isaiah:Isa. 28.5, & 6. The Lord of Hosts will be for a Crown of glory, and for a Diadem of beauty unto his People, and for a Spirit of Judgment to him that sits in Judgment; and for strength to them that turn the Battel to the Gate. But this World is a Bed of Vipers, a bundle of snares, a stage of dangers. True; yet if thou trust in him,Psal. 91.3, 13. he shall deliver thee from the snare of the Fowler, from the noysome Pestilence. Thou shalt tread upon the Lion and Adder, the young Lion and the Dragon shalt thou trample under feet. O read yee faithfully, and digest this whole Psalme, which I may truly stile the City of David, for strength, and beau∣ty; the fortress, yea Paradise of every true Christian. But the godly have but a few friends. I answer, Compa∣ratively they have but a few Enemies; the whole Crea∣tion (except Sathan, and sinners) being at peace with a reconciled Soul; such as Job speaks of,Job. 5.23. being in League with the very Stones, and Beasts of the Field. And the malice of the malignant, turns all to their good. Yea,Rom. 8.28. more; if a Mans wayes please the Lord, he will make even his Enemies to be at peace with him.Prov. 16.7. But to con∣clude, a good Wife, and good Children, are amongst the chief blessings upon Earth. They are so, and have not the Saints strong and comfortable evidences for them, if the Lord see them good? witness those twine-like Psalmes,Psal. 117.118. the 117. and the 118. which for their excellency and comfort sake, deserve the Readers more full, and
perfect Observation. I will not be further tedious: for the Lord God is a Sun and a Shield, the Lord will give grace and glory,Psal. 84.11, 12. no good thing will he with-hold from them that walk uprightly. O Lord of Hosts, blessed is the Man that trusteth in thee. Having given my Soul, by faith, a taste of some few of those many temporal promises treasured up in the Scripture, being they are to be but as Sallets to provoke my spiritual appetite; I will return to feed upon Eter∣nity. O my Soul! what surer Antidote, against the appre∣hension of the last Judgment,Of eternal life. (whose sting is Eternal Death) than the Meditation, and assured hope of Eter∣nity of life? which is Glory in grain; and the deifying of Humanity. Surely if there be any Spiritual weight that depresseth the Soul, it is Judgment. If there be any Heavenly Magnes that attracts, and quickens it, 'tis Im∣mortality. For, toucht with this, though encircled with corruption, thou shalt continue moving with the Needle, until fixed upon the lines of life, thou constantly ad∣hearing to the true Flower-de-luce, Christ Jesus. Amongst Moses unfeigned Metamorphoses, we finde the Rod chang'd to a Serpent, a devourer of the Magitian delu∣sions. So this hope, a branch of the Tree of Life, spring∣ing from the Root of Jesse, swallows up Death in victo∣ry, in Eternity. What seems, yea is a fearfull truth to all unbelieving Egyptians, becometh a Chimera, a Phan∣tasme to every true Israelite. If any word is expressive, or an Epitome, of God, of Heaven, of Glory, and con∣sequently of all felicity, it is this of Life. I am the way, the truth,John 14.6, 8, 11, 25. and the life. I am the Resurrection, and the Life, saith our Saviour; and he that hath the Son (that is, believes in him) hath life, saith St. John. Since then, God is life,1 John 5.12. he that hath life, hath God; and he that hath God, hath all things; even the conflux of simple, and unmixt happiness. And therefore most wisely, and succinctly, those holy Men, Penners of the Creed (called the Apostles) have coucht, and exprest, the excessive treasures, and immense pleasures, of the Heavenly Pa∣radise, under that one word, life everlasting. Herein O
my Soul! is included, and assured unto thee, the subli∣mest of Heavenly fruitions, (called by the School-men) the beatifical Vision. Which, so far as I am able to ex∣press it, is the Souls full repletion, and apprehension of the excellencies of the Divine Essence; not by the back-parts only, and mediately, as Moses, but primarily, and immediately, in himself. Yea, also the Body, being in the very moment of its resurrection spiritualiz'd,1 Cor. 15.44. 1 John 3.2. (as wit∣nesseth the Apostle) shall there, with open face see, and look upon, the word of life, receiving fulness of plea∣sure, and satisfaction, by those sences which now are un∣profitable, and uncapable of such glorious manifestations. Here, since this last act of our faith, and last Article of our Creed, is so full of comfort, and unspeakable ani∣mation, after the hearty, and humble acknowledgment, of my ignorance, and fervent supplicating the assistance of the only illuminating Spirit, I will more largely and particularly eye this Crown, this unvaluable price, even so far as my faith hath visual beames from Scripture, or consequent demonstration. If the Soul of Man in this state of her nakedness, and deformity, hath been by some Christians (though therein Heretical) deifyed, and by most of the Heathen Magi magnifyed, even to the heighth of created excellencies; surely in her renovation, and perfect reassumption, of that her first Image, and those first created Ornaments, she must needs be more splendid, and more to be admi∣red. But is this beauty of the first Adam, in his innocency, the heighth of a Christians hope? No. As our second Adam, in his divine descent, and generation, infinitely transcends our first Parent in Nature; so he hath prepared a far more excellent weight of glory, for his Children, by Adoption, his Members by Spiritual, mystical, and super∣natural union. Witness his own Oracle, and declarative, rather than necessary Petition;John 17.22. The glory which thou gavest me, I have given them. Blessed Lord, what a word is this? What a communication? my minde is en∣traunced, and my weak Meditations swell, even to an Impossibility of expression. Can I not now know my Soul in her humiliation, in the weakness of a Creature?
How can I then describe and conceive of her in her ex∣altation, in the glory of her Creator? Let this be suffi∣cient for me to believe hence, that that glory with which she shall be filled, according to her Spiritual Nature, is for quality infinitely excellent, because Gods, yet allayed, and fitted to be received for quantity, finite, and limited as in her. Not as divided from the Divine Fountain, but by vertue of Inhabitation, in a gracious, real, and insepa∣rable union, communicated to, and made hers, accord∣ing to our Saviours Prayer, That we all may be one, as the Father is in the Son,John 17.21. and the Son in the Father; that we may be one in them;John 17.26. as also, that the love wherewith the Father hath loved the Son, may be in us, and he in us. Thus then the Souls of the Saints before the Resur∣rection, and both Souls and Bodies after the Resurrecti∣on, according to their several measures of grace here, shall then have their divine plenitudes of Glory; every Vessel being filled, that is, thrown into that Ocean of Life and Glory. Further, as a Wedge of Iron cast into the Forge, is, as it were converted into Fire, and the body, and substance of the Sun, is, as it were hid, and changed into the light, that possesses it: so shall the Soul and Body, as being in God, and God in it, be absorpt, and as it were transmuted into his Glory. Thus much concerning the Souls external glory. The internal, if it be possible, is yet a Sphere in altitude above this, as bringing the Soul neerer, to the assimilation, apprehen∣sion, and fruition of God. The understanding, will, me∣mory, and affections, in the Soul, being as it were Im∣presses (to speak improperly, and according to the un∣derstanding of Men) of the like infinite essentials in God. For then, the understanding faculty, according to its created capacity,Of the under∣standing glori∣fyed. shall be wonderfully elevated, and en∣larged, and be repleat, with a sufficient and compleat knowledge, of all Creatures, yea of God himself. Which shall not then be acquired, and gathered, as now, by a Retrogradation, from the effect to the cause; but then primarily, by immediate Vision, and mutual possession of God, the cause of causes. Be not then disconsolate,
O my Soul! nor set thy Bodily Organs upon the Rack, in the study of the Metaphysicks, Mathematicks, and Physicks; farther than thy special calling requires; mis∣pending thy hours, and neglecting that one thing neces∣sary, The knowledge of God, and thy self. The degrees of learning on Earth, are reversed in Heaven; begin here with God, the beginning of all things, and proceed to be Batchelor of Divinity on Earth, and fear not, but be assured, that thou shalt commence a true Master of Arts, yea, a Doctor of Divinity in Heaven. Then shalt thou know perfectly, and not (as now) by supposition, the essentials, spiritualities, and supreme excellencies, and attributes of God, and Angels. The magnitudes, alti∣tudes, motions, and influences of the Heavenly Planets, and fixed Stars.Tradition of secundary and probable Argu∣ments. There shall be no disputing Coperni∣cans. No ignorant Empedocles, nor Aristotles. The causes of the Aetnaean Fires, the Flux, and reflux of the Seas, the Polaramorousness of the Loadstone, and all other the Magnalia of Nature, shall there be discovered to the Souls eye. For, as a Man placed in the Centre of the Sun, having an Eye or Organ proportionable, must needs see whatsoever it enlightens; so the Soul of every Saint, be∣ing fixed in God, the Centre from whom all operations, as so many lines, or rayes are emitted, must needs know all (being finite, and within his enlarged capability) the whole frame, and work of Nature; perfection of knowledge, being necessary to the perfection of Glory. As the understanding, so the will,The will glo∣rified. shall be replenished with Glory also; being made then co-voluntary with God's, and answering his, in every particular, as the im∣pression doth the Seal, or as the Image in the Glass, the Original; being according to its created, and limitted measure and proportion, perfectly just, and holy; yea, freely and constantly willing good, without the least con∣straint, or necessity. This being no thraldome, but a di∣vine perfection of the will, to will nothing, but what is good. The understanding, which is the Leader, and in∣cliner, as a Spring in a Watch, the internal mover of the will, being not left to it self, and created sufficiency, as in Adam, but by an irrevocable, mercifull, natural, and
therefore necessary consequence, and decree, in Christ, is doubly confirmed; First positively, as being for ever en∣lightened,  and filled with a height of wisdome, truth, and goodness, flowing from the perpetual mystical union,  and co-habitation of Christs Spirit: Secondly, privatively, as being in such a state of perfection, glory, and happi∣ness, as admits not of any temptation, or inclination, to mislead the one, and thereby to defile the other. From this ground also springs the Eternal station in goodness, and consequently in blessedness, of all other the facul∣ties of the Soul. Which like so many Stones in an Arch, are unmoveable, because every Stone is unmoveable; Jesus Christ being the Head-Stone, upon whom the whole Building depending, becomes immutable. O my God! I cannot pass this thought of Eternity without a Selah,Contemplation. a note of admiration, as seasonable; al∣though in respect of the benefit, but a temporary ac∣knowledgment. Behold, how wonderfull is that mercy, which in Christ, hath not deprest, but elevated, not ex∣tinguisht, but inflam'd, not diminished, but encreased Mans excellency. Innocent Adam, being neither in his perfection, nor duration, so happy, as we sinfull Adams by Regeneration. Shall I therefore commend sin? God forbid. I extoll grace, even that Miracle of thy love, O Lord; whose Mercy hath made Mans Sin, Oyle, to en∣flame thy love; which in its own nature, and ours, was Water to quench thy pitty, and drown a World. Let it work one wonder more, and turn my Rock into Springs of Tears, to wash thy Feet in humble Repentance, and Thankfulness; that so my seldome falling here, may be a Preludium of my never falling hereafter, and Glory begun on Earth in Grace, may be in thy Kingdome per∣fect and Eternal. But to proceed, and not to forget that faculty, which makes me to remember,Of the memory glorified. viz. Memory: that Magazine, and Treasury of the Soul; (I wish I could say not of evil also.) Wherein now many things lye confused, and obscured by latter Occurences, unless discovered by ex∣ternal objects and circumstances; or rak'd out by help of discourse. Out of whose Postern, many things are
crowded out by trifles; or fallen, through its rifts, and deficiencies; or else worn out by time, and age; or stollen away by that arch Thief▪ Sathan; this faculty, I say, though now thus decayed, and imperfect, shall in that never-ending day of happiness, be repaired, and made Gods Ark, over which, not Cherubins, but the Almighty shall hover; filling it by means of the Souls di∣vine, and continued Vision of the Glass of the Trinity, with a present sight, and apprehension of (the great glory of God, and in it) all things. I will not call these kindes of actings of the Souls remembrance; for those imperfect ways of its operation, by recollection, and recordation, with other medial helps, shall be then absorpt, in this act of the understanding, as being unnecessary, and only fitted for the state of Corruption; the Apostle teaching us, that we shall then know as we are known, not remem∣ber as we are known. The chief Power of the Memory (the retention) remaining, and becoming by this con∣tinual beatifical Revelation, and Inspection indefatigable and invincible. Yea, in this Ark shall be always kept the Tables of Gods holy will, the Manna, of all his past and present mercies; the Rod ever budding and flourishing, with all his righteous Judgments, and Declarations of his Justice. As the Memory, so each Affection,Of the affecti∣ons glorified. except what ha∣bits, or inmates, sin and corruption have introduc'd, such (as the servility of fear, the dolorous passion of sorrow) shall then have, not their part only, but their full of Glory. Then excesses, though of the right hand, while in this life, prove the Soul a Prisoner, and make both Soul, and Body, suffer; being therefore properly stiled passions; shall in that life, comparatively exceed, but not subjectively; the full, and lasting gale in that Ocean, filling the Sailes, not sinking the bottome. O my love, which art now full of repentings,Of love glo∣rified. and un∣constant, because unsatisfyed, wishing with Alexander, more Worlds to marry thy affections to: which hadst thou beyond Arithmetical progression, thou wouldst still prove a Harlot, and they insufficient. For though a Crea∣ture, thou art fitted only for an infinite object; not to
comprehend it, but to be comprehended of it. Where∣fore nothing finite can be adequal, or proportionable, to thy extension. Hence, even the Worlds darlings, the wicked, have this Monument of their lost happiness, and primitive Creation, remaining; viz. they live and dye seeking and unsatisfyed. But the Elect, as they are rest∣less in their search, with the Spouse in the Canticles, so at length they finde him whom their Soul loves.Cant. 2.9. But as yet, He standeth behind our Wall, he looketh forth at the Window, shewing himself thorow the Lattess. With him they enter into a mutual contract in Baptisme, and re∣ceive continual pledges, and love-tokens by his Spirit. In this life, by reason of seeming absence, clowdings, and intermissions, our loves are violent, yet pleasing pas∣sions. But in the other (that day of our Nuptials) they shall be swallowed up in excelling fruitions. Then shall we affect, and enjoy in one, the all of goodness, and love∣liness. The love which is here different, and divided, according to the diversity of opinions, and objects; shall be in God, one, and concentred in him, we both affect∣ing, and possessing, the eminency of beauty, the height of honours, the Elixar of pleasures, the perfection of wisdome. So that the then glorified sences, the Win∣dows, and ports of the affections, (though inconceivably enlarged) shall then continually receive in, even, to over∣flowing, spiritual, and ravishing object of love and de∣light. For, In his presence is fulness of joy, and at his right hand,Psal. 16.11. pleasures for evermore. Lastly, which ought most to ravish us, neither this, nor any other affection, or faculty of the Soul, shall be limitted, or at their heighth of glory. Not but that in the first entrance, they shall have a present sufficiency, and fulness; for even in Heaven there shall be no Vacuum; but as we have seen a Bladder, filled with Wind, afterward by a second in∣flux, far more extended, yet at all times full. And as our Saviour is said to increase more, and more, in know∣ledge; yet from his conception full, according to his organical reception; so the glorified Saints, like the Angels, on Jacob's Ladder, according to their several degrees, shall mount, and continually encrease and as∣cend
to higher steps of Glory: the influxe of all divine excellencies, incessantly, and at once both enlarging, and filling all their faculties, all their affections. So then de∣sire of more, shall never torture us, because ever full; nor satiety cloy us, because our joyes shall be ever new, and encreasing. The grounds of this Coelestial and Eter∣nal growth of happiness, excellency, and glory, arises both from Gods Word, and Nature. The Prophet tell∣ing us, that those which are wise,Daniel 12.3. shall shine as the bright∣ness of the Firmament. Our Saviour yet higher. The righteous shall shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdome of their Father. Let Solomon expound both;Mat. 13.43. the Path of the Just, is as the shining light, which shineth more, and more, unto the perfect day. They as the Sun,Prov. 4.18: mounting towards their Meridional heighth, God; to whom they shall be perpetually approaching neerer, and more and more like in glory, but never shall, nor can reach, or e∣qualize; he being, and dwelling, in infinite and inac∣cessable lights. Farther, our Saviour teaches us that in Heaven we shall be like the Angels.1 Tim. 6.16. Now the Angels have accidental joyes, in the repentance of sinners;Luke 20.36. Ac∣cidental knowledge, by the Church,Luke 15.10. of the mysteries of our Redemption; and no doubt, if their joyes,Ephes. 3 10. 1 Pet. 1.12. and wisdome have an accidental encrease, through the Crea∣ture, then much more from God the Fountain: This being, I conceive, one meanes, (as respecting them) sub∣ordinate, and co-operating, with Gods high, and eter∣nal decree, for their confirmation, in Christ; it being im∣possible, for that essence, to fall away, that is, continu∣ally intent upon, and replenisht with, new fruitions, and manifestations of Gods glory. This being a blessedness both to Angels, and Men, that the Wings of Cherubins and Seraphins, though, they are without labour, and wearisomness, and with delight, ascending; yet, they can never out-soar the infinite heights of the divine Ma∣jesty, and incomprehensible fulness. If the affection of love, O my Soul,Of the affection of fear glori∣fied. shall be perfect in Heaven, as hath been declared, and perfect love casts out fear, as saith the Apostle,1 John 4.18. what place is then left for the affection of fear in glory? I answer, our divine love,
both now, and then, shall exclude all servile, and slavish fear, but not our filial Espousal, and Reverential fear; which if found in our sinless Mediator, who was heard, in that he feared;Heb. 5.7. Isa. 6.2. and a duty of the glorious Angels, that with this reverential fear, serve and praise him, and exhort all others to do it;Rev. 14.7. then also of glorified Saints,Jerem. 32.39. Psal. 72.5. who if commanded to fear God for ever, and as long as the Sun and Moon endureth, shall doubtless thus fear him everlastingly, and in Heaven, as well as here upon Earth. For as love without this fear would be pre∣sumptuous; so fear without love, would be painfull, and discouraging. But both together, are to the sanctified Soul, as Ballast to a Ship, to keep it steady, and doth grandize, elevate, and enlarge each affection, from the awfull apprehensions, and adoration, of so super-excel∣ling an object, of infinite glory, as is the Trinity in Uni∣ty, Jehovah, God blessed for ever. Further, if this saving grace, and sanctified affection of holy fear,Prov. 9.10. is by Solomon commended to us as the be∣ginning,Eccles. 12.13▪ and end of divine wisdome, in the Saints on Earth,Acts 9.31. shall they be denuded of it, and excluded from it, in Heaven? Is it held forth in Scripture, as the summe and implication of all religious duties, and worship, and the condition, or rather qualification, of those holy ones, that have right to temporal, spiritual, and eternal pro∣mises,Prov. 10.17. Prov. 19.13. Prov. 22.4. in the Word; and shall this grace then cease, when with other graces it is to be Crown'd with Glory? Is this pure affection, the Salt, to preserve from corrupting, not only in the Marriage-state amongst Men, but in the conjugal, and spiritual union, betwixt Christ, and his Spouse, the Church; and shall it not be as lasting as that Union, which is everlasting? I conclude, it shall; though with this difference, according to our differing condi∣tion, not a fear of offending, because we shall be then in a sinless condition;Rev. 21.27. Cant. 5.6. Not such a fear as was in the Spouse in the Canticles, because of sin, and infirmities, nor of Gods hiding his face, and with-drawing his pre∣sence;Rev. 21.4, 5. Mat. 25.21.46. for former things are past away, all things are made new, we are entred into life, and shall be ever with the Lord.1 Thes. 4.17. But this glorified fear, is the most bright re∣flection
in and from us, of Gods glorious Soveraignty, according to that of the Prophet, If I be a Master, where is my fear; a fruit and an effect of Gods ravish∣ing and transporting excellency:Mal. 1.6. and therefore this hea∣venly affection, being so necessary a requisite in our hea∣venly condition, is so far from lessening our perfection in glory, as that without it, it cannot be perfectly glo∣rious. O my Soul, shall thy affections, of love and fear,Soliloquium. be thus glorious in thy Heavenly state; Let them not have a lesser, or lower object than the most high; let not such High-Born Princesses, be enamoured with their Slaves. Vse the World as not abusing it, and as though thou used it not. Neither fear any but him,1 Cor. 7.31. that only can cast both Soul and Body into Hell-fire; Let these two graces,Luke 12.5. be as Jethro to Moses eye in the Wilderness of this World;Numb. 10.31, to admonish, and to keep thee from losing thy way, when thou art turning to the right, or to the left. And like the Lords Pillar of a Cloud by Day,Exod. 13.21. and of Fire by Night, to direct thee, according to his holy will, in thy Journey towards thy Heavenly Canaan. Converse with these two Royal Virgins, continually. So shalt thou have Communion, and fellowship with the Father and the Son, in the Spirit; be partaker of the Divine nature; and be∣gin to enjoy Heaven, here upon Earth. Prepare,1 John 1.3. and so enlarge these Divine Vessels by a pious use,2 Peter 1.4. and conti∣nued Exercise, that they may be the more capacious of Glory. For according to the measures and proportions of graces in this life, shall be their repletion, in the life to come; where, of Apprehensors, the Saints shall be made Comprehensors, according to their several enlargements. For as one Star differs from another in glory,1 Cor. 15.41. so shall it be at the Resurrection of the Just,1 Cor. 13.12. when we shall see God face to face, and know him as we are known,1 John 3 2. and be made like him in Glory. O my God, my Father, are these two sanctified af∣fections of love, and fear, the two Eyes,Ejaculation. the two Armes of the Soul, with which the Saints behold, imbrace, and enjoy thee, in all thy glorious excellencies? Are they the two Centinels, and Guards, by which every true Chri∣stian, discovers, and repells, all sinfull thoughts, looks,
words and actions? Doth that root of all saving Graces, Faith, work by love, in the application of what the Fa∣ther, Son, and Holy Ghost hath done for us? Turning our Hearts of Stone, into Hearts of Flesh, and melting them into teares of Gospel-Repentance? Doth love oile the wheeles of our universal obedience, so that they run swiftly in the pathes of thy Commandements, when thou thus enlargest the heart? And is fillial fear, the whip, in the hand of zeal, the holy Chariteer, to drive and carry us, manger all stops of Sin, Sathan, and the World, to the end of our race? Is this divine love to thee, and thy Saints, the summe, and the fulfilling of thy Law? The more excellent way?Rom. 13.10. 1 Cor. 12.31. 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3, 11, 13. 1 Joh. 4.16. The compleating, continuing, and the greatest grace, as most like unto thee? For God is love, and who so dwelleth in love, dwelleth in God, and God in him? Shall these twin-like graces of love, and fear, not leave the Soul, when it leaves the Body, and accompany both Soul and Body at the Resurrection, to the Marriage-Supper of the Lamb, and to the Marriage-Bed of Glory? yea, shall they be the measures, and com∣pleating of our Glory? O holy Father, who art the essen∣tial love,Isa. 8.13. my fear, and my dread, be thou pleased to sanctify, inlarge, and inflame these my affections, that of sinfull passions in the old Adam, they may be changed, and Heavenized into active and holy graces in me, thy new Creature. Let them, I beseech thee, be effectual, and usefull to all the aforementioned ends. And since it is no sin, but a duty, to be ambitious of, and to covet spiri∣tual things, let them be enlarged and heightned like Heaven, even to the utmost of a created capacity, that I may be, as thou hast promised, thy dwelling place upon Earth; and thou mayest be my inheritance; and my Heaven; in Heaven: Even so, Amen: Lord Jesus come quickly. Of zeal glori∣fied.The sanctified affection of holy zeal, in the glorified Saints, deserves our next Meditation. This to speak pro∣perly, is not a simple grace, but the highest and intense degree of every grace, and holy action; which if so fa∣mous,Exod. 32.19, 26, 27. and resplendent, in the Saints upon Earth, as in Moses, in his exemplary Justice upon the false worship∣pers
of the Golden Calf; In Phineas, his executing judg∣ment upon that Idolatrous and adulterous payre;Numb. 25.7, 8, 10, 11. Zimry and Cosby, in David, who declares, that the zeal of Gods House had eaten him up; In Elijah,Psal. 69.9. when he put to death four hundred of Baals Prophets in one Evening; In Paul,1 King. 18.40. who preserved the glory of God, in the Redemption of his Country-men, the Jews, before his own salvation;Rom. 9.3. and in that highest example of our dear Lord and Saviour, in his purging of his Temple. Then this Heavenly grace shall undoubtedly not only continue,John 2.15, 17. and have then a Beeing in each glorified Saint, but shine forth, and act in them, much more gloriously. Is that only infinite and pure Essence, our Omnipotent God, who is happiness, blessedness, and life it self; so often declared in the Scripture, to be zealous for his name, and glory?Isa. 9.7. & 59.7. And shall not his Saints, his Image, be like him? Is this grace exercised, by glorious Angels; as when one Angel de∣stroyed all the first-born of Egypt in one Night;Exod. 12.23, 29. Another destroyed a hundred fourscore and five thousand Assy∣rians, at the command, and in zeal for the glory of God?2 King. 19.35. Yea,Luke 2.13, 14. did an whole Host of Angels descend from Hea∣ven, and with a holy zeal Celebrate our Lords Nativity, and Man-kindes Redemption, in an holy Hymne? And shall not the glorified Saints, overflow, and express up∣on all occasions, to Gods glory, the like zealous, and inflam'd affections? assuredly they shall. For, though Sin, Sathan, and the wicked World (which by a kinde of spiritual Antiperistasis, made their zeal here burn the hotter) shall be cast out, and banisht thence. Yet the glorified Saints shall not want, nor be without constant objects, and continual occasions, (according to every ones measure, to exercise this grace.) To instance only some successive ones, Gods unparallel'd flaming Justice upon Gog and Magog, and all wicked Men,Rev. 20.9▪ at our Saviours second coming, with ten thousand of his Saints;Jude 14. Christs Crowning, and rewarding every Elect Member in righ∣teousness, according to their works;Math. 16.27. together with all his glorious Administrations, in that his holy, righteous, and personal Reign in the new Heaven, and new Earth, for a thousand years; His powerfull raising of the wicked,Rev. 20.4.
after the thousand years, and curious Inquisition into, and perfect discovery and bringing to Judgment of all their evil thoughts,Rev. 20.5, 12, 13. words, and actions; and his righte∣ous sentence pronounced upon them,Rev. 20.12. and the Apostate Angels;Mat. 25.41. and his translating his Saints from this Paradise of Earth, to the Heaven of Heavens; These objects, and occasions of holy hatred,1 Cor. 6.3, 15, 24. anger and indignation against Sathan, and Gods Enemies, the wicked, of unexpressable love,John 17.24. joy, delight, praise, and glorious tryumphing, the holy Scriptures holds forth, shall be in the state of glory. And can we conceive holy zeal, which is the height, and crown of all these graces, can be absent, or unnecessary? I shall further add, that after our Lords yielding up his Mediatory Kingdome to the Father, all the service and everlasting praises of the Saints in the remembrance of all Gods wonderfull works from the beginning unto E∣ternity, in the Heavens, Earth and Hell shall be height∣ned and winged with this holy zeal. I shall assert this truth▪ and conclude this ravishing Meditation, with point∣ing at, and refering the Reader to the frequent, and zea∣lous hallelujahs, of the crowned Elders, and glorified Saints, in the Visions of Saint John, set forth to us as the types, and lively figures of our Heavenly and glorified condition. Revelations Chapter the 4th. Verse the 8th. And the four Beasts rest not Day and Night,Rev· 4.8. saying, Holy, holy, holy Lord God Almighty, which was and is, and is to come;Rev. 4.10 And the four and twenty Elders fell down be∣fore Him, that sate on the Throne, and worship him that liveth for ever and ever, and cast their Crowns before the Throne,Verse 11. saying, Thou art worthy O Lord to receive Glory, and Honour, and Power; for thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were Created. Like to this, are their zealous Songs and Thanksgivings upon divers occasions,Rev. 5.8. Chapter 5. Verse 8. untill the end of that Chapter;Chap. 7.9. and Chapter 7. Verse 9. unto the end thereof; and Chapter 11. Verse 15. unto the end of that Chapter;Chap. 11.15. and Chapter the 14. Verse the 1. unto the end of the 5. Verse;Chap. 14.1. and Chapter the 15. Verse the third and the fourth,Chap. 15.3, 4. besides many more to the end of that blessed Book, which for brevity sake I omit.
These being sufficient to prove the use and exercise of this Seraphical grace of holy zeal by the Saints in their state of Glory. O my Soul, Is this most Heavenly grace of zeal, so illustrious, and exemplary,Soliloquium. in the Saints that have lived upon Earth? Doth it shine forth with a Heavenly light here, in the actings of holy Angels, of our for ever bles∣sed Saviour, and of our Almighty Father and Creator? Yea, shall this grace out-live thy hope, and thy faith, be the Crown, and compleatment, of thy divine love, and the height, and perfection of all other thy graces, in glory? Endeavour then to follow their famous examples. Rest not in the cold, and middle Region,Acts 18.17. of bare pro∣fession, with the careless Gallioes of the World,2 Tim. 4.10. and fro∣zen Church-professors. The Demasses, of this last, and worst age, but let thy holy zeal upon all occasions for the glory of thy God, and purity of his Worship, and Doctrine, mount up even to the Firie Region, and In his cause be Boanerges, and like Gods Angels,Mark 3.17. and Sera∣phins, a Cole, a flame of Fire. So shalt thou excell and exceed, others in this grace, in thy glorified state;Isa. 6.2. as far as thou hast gone before them in this life:Psal. 104.4. And as thou hast been more gracious here, so thou shalt be more glorious hereafter. The larger thy Vessel, the lar∣ger thy Receipt. Every Vessel shall be full,1 Cor. 15.41. and over∣flow, although much different in their measure. All shall be Stars, although not of the like Magnitude.mat. 16.27. The Saints at the first Resurrection being rewarded according to their works; although not for their works.Ejaculation. O Lord my God; is divine zeal, a holy flame, a Pyramid-like Fire, a Spring towards Heaven, as to its own place? Is my heart my Souls shop, where it forges affections, and this middle Region of my Body, like the middle Regi∣on of the Aire; cold, and naturally void of this thy hea∣venly Fire? Be pleased, I humbly beseech thee,Acts 2 3. to cause the same holy Spirit, that once sate in the likeness of Fiery Tongues, upon the heads of thy Apostles, to rest up∣on, unthaw, and inflame, my frozen heart, and affections; Then shall not its earthly, and sinfull qualities, of cold∣ness, hardness, and ponderousness, chill, resist, or smo∣ther
the fervency, and intensness, of any of thy graces in me: since thy Almighty Power, that produces light∣ning, in the cold middle Region of the Aire, that melts the Rock, and causes the Mountains, Aetna, Vesuvius, and Hecla to breath forth flames of Fire; can, yea will (because thou hast promised it) bring forth and create in me a greater wonder,Ezek. 11.19. even a new heart, and a new spirit; a heart of Flesh, instead of a heart of Stone. Then shall I be not only zealous in all my actings for thee; but frequent, and zealous, in my praises to thee, in this life of Grace, and that of Glory, to Eternity; Amen. Of the af∣fection of holy anger glorified.All affections in this life, as love, fear, zeal, and the rest, (although sanctified) in their heighths, and intensive∣ness, by reason of the weakness of the Organ, and our decayed nature, may put the whole Man to pain, and in that respect, are called Passions; yet it shall cease to be so with us in our glorified condition. Where, whatsoever that flowes from Infirmity, or Imperfection, shall be done away. In the new Jerusalem, there shall be neither sor∣row,Rev. 21.4. nor pain. We shall then be as the Apostle exhorts, not only (when occasions shall be offered) not to be an∣gry without sin;Eph. 4.26. but without passion, or disturbance. Being herein like to God, and the holy Angels, (whose Image shall then be perfectly renewed in us) and who in the Scripture (although I grant it to be meant not properly,Ezek. 13.13. but Anthropopathos) is often declared, to be an∣gry. But as to the Elect Angels, I conceive they may, as truly be said to be angry, (witness that famous opposi∣tion of Balaam) and that action of the Angel,Numb. 22.22. that with his drawn Sword was ready to destroy Jerusalem, for David's Sin) as to rejoyce greatly for the conversion of a sinner.2 Sam. 24.16. Luke 15.10. If then such accidental affections, are testified to be in glorious Angels, why not much rather in glori∣fied Saints? unless by cessation of so eminent a grace (as holy anger) we should irrationally conceive, the Saints less perfect, in this new life, than in the other. Especially, since the sole object of this holy affection, the Sin, Blasphemy, and Rebellion of wicked Souls, and Devils, to the dishonour of God, shall continue, and in that great and long day, or time of their Judgment, be
more universally manifested to their view, than ever, as also afterward in Hell to Eternity. Anger here (though for Gods cause) may possibly inflame the Eyes, distort the Visage of a Saint, but its lipe, as the modest blush of a Virgin, doth add beauty to her Face, so shall this zealous flaming Grace of holy anger, add light to light, and glory to the glory of a Saint, O my Soul,Soliloquium. is holy anger a saving and gracious af∣fection? a part of the glorious Image of God in a Saint? Do the holy and blessed Angels (as the Scriptures wit∣ness) in their zeal to Gods glory, and hatred of Sin, express it in their constant oppositions, and inflictions of Gods Judgments upon wicked Men, and Devils? Yea, is it an Apostolical Precept, and Duty, to be angry, and sin not? Shall this grace have (even in Heaven) continual objects and occasions to exercise it self to Gods glory, and thy own? O write after this Copy, and en∣deavour that this grace may not be seldome, and casu∣ally, but habitually in thee here upon Earth. Let it be one of the Mortifiers, and Crucifiers of thy lusts, as they were the Murderers of thy Saviour. Let it dash out the brains of all these Babell Beasts, against the Stones of holy reproofs,Psal. 137.9. even the accursed issue of thy sinfull thought, words, and actions. Let this God-like passion resist the Devil, in all his subtle and powerfull tempta∣tions, and he shall undoubtedly flye from thee. Yea, let this grace imitate, and second the holy Spirit,John 16.8. in repro∣ving, and convincing the ungodly World of Sin. So shalt thou be preserved from the Commission of all evil, tri∣umph over all thy worldly and spiritual Enemies, and be prepared by thy more full extent, and acting of this grace here, to be of an higher form in the blessed exer∣cise thereof in Glory. O All-mighty Creator,Ejaculation. who hast made my heart the seat of my affections, and plac'd it in the Centre of my Body, that it might affect, and in∣fluence every part alike; Let it not, I humbly beseech thee, be any longer like the middle Region of the Aire, the coldest part of this Micro-cosme, and void of this Heavenly heat of holy anger. But let this sanctified af∣fection, flash forth like thunder, and lightning, and burn
up, and destroy every crude and evil thought, word, and action, as soon as they appear; and purge this Element of my Heart, and Soul, from all the infectious, noxious, and sinfull vapours of vain and sinfull thoughts, that a∣rise from this Earth, this Body of Death, and Sin, that incompasses me about,Rom. 7.24. that they may never come to the maturity of wicked actions; or if they do, they may be as it were Thunder strucken, and torne up by the Roots, and not able to stand before this flaming grace:Heb. 12.29. so shall I be like thee, who art as a flaming Fire, consuming all Iniquity. That so being renewed, and fashioned according to thy Image, in this World, by such holy affections, I may be assured of theirs, and my greater perfection in the World to come, when I shall be made like thee, i thy Image of Glory; Amen. As the light of the Sun to the World, so is the af∣fection of joy to the Soul:Of Joy glo∣rified, &c. when it arises, there is day▪ when it sets, an uncomfortable night. Man in his inno∣cency, enjoyed a polar day, a continued presence thereof; but having lost God its cause, and object, the effect cea∣sed; not that the Soul is disrob'd of the affection, but of the true use of it: hence the distinction of a spiritual, and carnal joy. The first is the true, only found, and beginning afresh to bud, in the renewed Saints and fa∣vourites of God, (for a stranger shall not intermeddle with their joy) but the other is momentary, and illegi∣timate; as being begotten in the Soul, by false objects; and is as it were the Moon-light of the wicked. The ob∣ject then of true joy is God, and that in this considera∣tion, as he is inclusively and exclusively the compleat happiness of the Creature. Whereby it comes to pass that the godly, and reprobate, may both rejoyce in the same things, as Wifes, Children, Honours, Estates, &c. And yet the joy of the one, be holy, and spiritual; of the o∣ther, carnal and wicked. Leaving then the sensual mirth, which is deceivable, sinfull, and temporary, my thoughts pitch upon the Solace of the Elect, which the Scripture stiles the joy of the Holy Ghost, unspeakable, and glori∣ous, the first-fruits,Ezek. 9.3. 1 Pet. 1.8. and earnest of their future happiness. By these glimpse (O ye Saints) of God's may yee judge
of that full light you shall there enjoy. Which if unspeak∣able here, shall surely be there unconceivable. Alas, what can I then think, and meditate of it▪ chiefly negatively thus, that there shall be no cloudings, nor intermissions there, no measure of our joy; for we shall continually behold God, and in him see all the grounds of rejoycing. If here excesses have proved mortal, their exceedings shall make us more immortal; this being an increasing, and reviving, not a surfeiting fulness. The capacity of the affection being gradually and continually augmented according to the plentifull infusion; our joyes multiply∣ing there, even to Eternity. The growth of our graces here, although God be seen of us, through the cleft of the Rock, as to Moses, teaching, discovering, and evin∣cing; a continued and far greater augmentation in glo∣ry hereafter. O blessed and happy estate, which is not diminished by Eternity: but is as unlimitable, as lasting. O happy place wherein all joyes meet their objects in one Centre. There shall we possess, and enjoy, not gut∣tatim, but according to the fulness of each Vessel, God our gracious Father, Christ our mercifull Saviour, the Holy Spirit our everlasting Comforter, the glorious An∣gels, and Arch-Angels, our fellow-Servants, the Holy Pa∣triarchs and Prophets, our Tryumphant Leaders, the pi∣ous Apostles and valiant Martyrs our victorious Champi∣ons; together with the many millions successively of re∣ligious Professors. There shall we meet and rejoyce in the like felicity of all our vertuous Parents, Brothers, Si∣sters, Wifes, Children, Kindred and Friends. There shall we inherit unvaluable and incorruptible riches; Be in∣stall'd in Thrones of unchangeable and incorruptible ho∣nours; and be filled with all unspeakable and Soul-ravish∣ing delights. To conclude, whatsoever things either in conception, or possibility, can affect, or rejoice the glo∣rified Soul, are there; not interchangeably, but contem∣porarily, and continuedly obvious, and present. And on the contrary, all things whatsoever that may lessen, or offend in the least degree this divine extasie, have an impossibility of subsistence in this Eternal Paradise. And that not only in regard of the presence, but of the de∣cree
of God himself. Therefore needs must this joy be ineffably compleat,Rev. 21.4. to which all things concur for its per∣fection. O Divine condition, which shall thus sweetly impe, and restore these mouldring and broken Wings of my Soul. O blissfull Paradise, and Chrystaline Sea, up∣on which these now maimed Feet of my affections,Rev. 4.6. shall walk, or rather evenly slide, free from all rubs, thorns, and sinfull interruptions. O how melodious will the har∣mony of these Strings be, when mounted to the highest Key, not to Ela, but to Eli! Methinks the very Contem∣plation of this life, should so ravish my Soul, and actuate these Wings, these Feet, that they should not only brake Prison, but carry her up in an holy extasie to these glo∣rious Mansions. O that this pious love, and holy joy, fixt to the Fiery Chariot of a true zeal, moulding this Dust, burning up this Chaff, at least letting fall this fleshly Mantle, would make me a second Elias▪ in a spee∣dy ascent, and present fruition of my God. But alass poor Soul, how are thy Wings limed, thy Feet lamed, thy Chariot-wheels clog'd, with Earth, and Sins? O by way of preparation, since certainly Elias shall be parted from Elisha, thy Soul from thy Body, let the sharp beak of the Law, pick and prune thy Wings; the healing Oyl of the Gospel, supple thy Feet; and thy Heavenly Con∣versation of a Christian, disburden thy motion, that when the Whirlwind of Death, shall make a separation, thou mayest cheerfully and swiftly, go up alive unto the Hea∣vens. Of the Body glorified.The Body hath, during these my last Meditations, seemed to sleep in the dust. But since the Body (as hath been shewed) shall have a glorious Resurrection at the last Day; so it must be raised here also, by my weak thoughts, as the fit, and next object of a Christians faith. I believe then,1 Cor. 15.52. that at the shrill sound of the last Trum∣pet, which is no other, than the mighty, and powerfull voice of our Arch-Angel, Christ Jesus, the innumerable Atoms of my Body shall incorporate,Dan. 12.2. and after the re∣union of my Soul, stand up a most glorious substance; mortality putting on immortality;1 Cor. 15.53. and corruption, in∣corruption. This Worm-hill, this mouldering Hutt of
white, and red Sands shall then inherit the name of an eternal mansion, and become not as now a little Cage, a loathsome Dungeon, but the glorious Pallace of the Soul. O surpassing glory of this re-animated Phaenix! So excessively radiant, that the Holy Spirit, (who is e∣loquence and truth it self) pitches upon the most illu∣strious of visible Creatures, the Sun, the light, to be the resemblance of this divine transfiguration. The righ∣teous shall shine like the Sun,Mat. 13.43. in the Kingdome of their Father:Dan. 12.3. They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and they that turn many to righteous∣ness, as the Stars for ever and ever. The Jewish Temple seemes to be a resemblance of this Temple of God; Man glorified; in which the Bo∣dy may be stiled the Sanctum, the Soul, through the in∣habitation of the Holy Spirit, the Sanctum Sanctorum; Oh, if that Earthly Temple transcended others, and Heaven be Heaven, because of the more special manife∣station of Gods glorious presence there, shall not each glorified Saint, be a Heaven of Heavens? It being a ne∣cessary and consequent Truth, that the great God will more declare his excellency in his living members, then in his inanimate works, in his adopted Sons, than in his inferiour Creatures, and Mansions. If an humble heart,Esay 66.2. contrite for Sin, be now Gods dwelling, shall not a sancti∣fied heart purified from Sin, become then his Throne of Majesty. Our Bodies which now Imprison and Eclipse the Soul's lustre, shall then not only be coagile, but like a Chrystaline Lanthorn transparent, and coruscant, not hiding, but by a radiant concomitancy, augmenting the others splendour. For as in the Sun there is the contain∣ing, and the contained, the sphear and the light, yet both conspire, and meet in a heighth of brightness; or as in sounds, strings apart musical, being struck together, produce a harmony; so though the Body, and Soul are two distinct excellencies, yet being united they shall mu∣tually conveigh and reflect their beauty, conducing to and effecting a joynt perfection of Glory. Further, whereas the Creator is now but in part magnified in Man, because of the partial knowledge of our selves, as con∣cerning
the admirable secrets and excellent curiosities of the humanity: Then not only our understanding but our Eyes, and other bodily sences shall coadjute to make each Saint a most exact Anatomist, a most divine Phy∣losopher. O let not then that better covetousness of se∣cular knowledge, make us bankrupts in spirituals; Let not imprudent pursuits after the shadow, make us over∣run the substance. Being confident of this, that a true Christians life, shall not prove then as it is now by the World accounted of, a devourer of time, folly, and mad∣ness, but a Tree of Life in the midst of Eternity. Yea, a Tree of Knowledge, whose fruits shall be fully ripe in Heaven. Perplex not thy self then, vain Sophister, in those scholasticals, and endless labyrinths; I mean those difficult, and so much controverted Questions, whether the Soul be ex traduce, or immediately from God? whe∣ther it be confined to a Throne, or Tota in toto, & tota in qualibet parte? Whether there be three distinct Souls in Man, or only the rational? How the Soul sees, hears, smells, tasts, touches by those sences? Whether we see Intra mittendo, or extra mittendo of the species? Whe∣ther the course of the blood be circular, or direct? whe∣ther odours nourish, or only refresh? with many others of the like stamp. Rather, O wandering Disputant, let thy chief study, be to resolve these questions thus, that in our Saviours sense, thou art born of God; that thou art wholly holy in every part, both of Soul and Body; that he the incomprehensible, three in one, is Soul of thy Soul, and sees, hears, tasts, smells and touches, in thy chast looks, devout attentions, spiritual relishes, faithfull imbracements, and in the sweet savour of a pious con∣versation. That thy holy love, the blood of action, and the life of practise, is circular, and endless, having God to be its Centre, that from him it may receive daily, new Spirits, and new fervour. That thy Prayers, which the learned, call Gods perfume, his incense, do not only revive▪ but by the powerfull attraction of saving grace feed thee to Eternal life. Such thoughts as these O Man, if practical, shall make thee transcend the natural, and become a divine Phylo∣sopher:
These exercises, which are the study of Angels, and the liberal Arts of Heavens Academy, end in the perfection of knowledge. But to proceed, O my Soul, thou now groanest under a Body of Lead, made up of corrupted flesh, and stuft full with noisome humours, either so fat, as it sweats under its own burthen; or so lean, and weak, that it needs wooden supports. In its motion, is so Worm-like, that its contemptible, if com∣pared with the pace of most four-footed Creatures. But in this thy melioration, it shall become thy winged Cha∣riot, and be as swift as thy thoughts can imagine, or thy wish desire, even like lightning (then which it shall be far more sprightfull) passing in an instant from one end of the Heaven to the other, thy whole body shall be then all feet, not moving, as now, but incredibly, swiftly guiding through those immeasurable spaces of the Empy∣rean Heavens. These Locomotive Mussels, if at all useful shall then only serve for the graver measures of Glory: for our Bodies shall, as the Apostle speaks, be made like unto Christs glorious body, not only in its splendour, but in its voluntary motion, and other glorified qualities. Now as he ascended▪ so (said the Angels) shall he des∣cend; not step, by step, but as it is most like, with in∣conceivable celerity; else could not the first Century, have confessed him to be at the right hand of his Father, in the highest Heavens a hundred of years, not being suf∣ficient according to Astronomical discoveries, to have ascended so many millions of miles. Nor could the Saints, after the Judgment past, under the expence of many years, attain those Heavenly Mansions. The glo∣rified Soul being now to re-enter, reassume, and to be reunited to its own body, chearfully takes possession, and findes it raised, filled and prepared by the Almighty Power of the Creator, for its habitation. Not as for∣merly, a Prison, hindring and streightning its faculties, and their enlarged operations, by reason of Organical deficiencies; but made in every part, member, and sence, capacious and proportionate to its utmost activity. Not as formerly a natural, weighty, dull, and earthly body, but a Coelestial, Heavenly and spiritual body. Not as
formerly (occasioned by the curse of sin) corruptible and mortal,Gen. 3.19. but incorruptible and immortal. Not as former∣ly weak, and infirm, especially at Death, pale, noisome, filthy, and dishonourable, but powerfull, and shining with glory, according to the Word of Truth, declared by the Apostle.1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44, It is sowne in Corruption, it is raised in Incorruption, it is sowne in dishonour; it is raised in Glory, it is sowne in weakness, it is raised in Power, it is sowne a natural Body, it is raised a spiritual Body; As we have borne the Image of the Earthly,49, so shall we bare the Image of the Heavenly;50, for Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdome of God, neither doth cor∣ruption inherit incorruption,53, for this corruptible, must put on incorruption,54, and this mortal must put on immorta∣lity; Then shall be brought to pass the saying, that is written,Hos. 13.14. Hosea the thirteenth, Vers. the fourteenth, Death is swallowed up in Victory. From the preceding Scrip∣ture, is evidently proved, that the glorification of our bodies shall principally consist; First, in being raised spi∣ritual, and heavenly bodies; Secondly, in being made shining and glorious; Thirdly, in their being incorrup∣tible, and immortal; of all which more particularly, and first of their spirituality, and heavenliness. Our present bodies, although they are compounded of the four Elements, yet are made up in an unequal mixture, the proportion being much less of Water, than of Earth, and much less of Ayre, than of Water, and of Fire, than of Ayre. Therefore our Bodies have the deno∣mination from Earth, and not from any of the rest, and are called in the foregoing Text,1 Cor. 15.34. Earthly Bodies. And much different in their mixture from the Bodies of Fish∣es, Fowles, Meateors. This also our natural motion de∣clares. For being placed in any one of the three other Elements, and left at liberty, by reason of our Earthly ponderousness, we violently move towards the Centre of the Earth, of which we were form'd, and upon which is our habitation.1 Thes. 4.17. But our state, place, and condition being to be changed, at the resurrection of the just, our bodies (that shall be a live at the Lords second coming) shall be changed.1 Cor. 15.51. Job 19.26, 27. And though the same bodies for matter,
and substance, (as saith holy Job) shall be raised, yet much differing from what they were before, as to their mixture, and qualities. And therefore are said to be rai∣sed Spiritual, and Heavenly Bodies. A further proof whereof the Holy Spirit gives us in that Text, wherein he saith the Lord Jesus Christ shall change our vile Body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious Body,Phil. 3.21. ac∣cording to the working, whereby he is able even to sub∣due all things unto himself. The same witnesses the be∣loved Apostle, in that his blessed gradation, and com∣parison, of our present,1 John 3.2. and future more glorious condi∣tion; Beloved, now we are the Sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be; But we know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. Whence note, this Apostle, or the rest, did not, yea could not, with their then bodily eyes, behold him, as he was then risen from the dead, he vailing his glory in condescention to their present state. A second Heavenly, and Spiritual quality of the Saints glorified Bodies, is a swift and speedy local motion pro∣phesied of (as many interpret that place) in the Prophet Isay, They that wait upon the Lord,Isaiah 40.31. shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with Wings as Eagles, they shall run, and not be weary, and they shall walk and not faint. Which I cannot better manifest to our weak ap∣prehensions, than by comparing it to a flash of lightning; which in an instant, passeth from the East, to West, and from one Port of the vast Canopy of Heaven, to the o∣ther. This quality, also, was manifested to be in our Sa∣viours glorified Body upon Earth, (like to which we shall be raised) by his swift passage from Jeru∣salem,1 Cor. 15.5, 6, 7, 8. (being many score miles) to a Mountain in Galilee, when he was seen of five hundred Brethren at once. And from Jerusalem to the Sea of Tiberius,John 21.1. when he did eat with Peter and the rest, after the great draught of Fishes. And from thence to Jerusalem again,Acts 1.9, 12. at his Ascention from Mount Olivet; And which is also most demonstrable, by his discent from Heaven to the Aire, when he spoke to,Acts 9.5. and was seen of Paul in the way to Damascus; which, without doubt, was a personal, not
a visional appearance; since the Apostle adds, that to his other personal appearances,1 Cor. 15.8. saying, last of all, he was seen of me; which had not it been real, had been but a slender proof of our Saviours Resurrection. To which end,Mat. 22.30. he there vouches it. As our Souls are now like the Angels, yea, Angels in the Flesh, so then, our Bodies, as to this Spiritual quality, shall be raised, like our Souls. That so their future union may be lasting, and compleat, and this Marriage may continue, and be indissolveable. In which respect the Apostle saith, they shall be raised not only spiritual,1 Cor. 15.50. but heavenly bodies, as fitted to dwell in that place;2 Cor. 12.2. which for the matter Philosophers call a Quint-essence, far more refined, than any, or all the four Elements;Psal. 68.33. and which the Scripture calls the Heaven of Heavens,Col. 1.12. and the Inheritance of the Saints in light. O my Soul, shall thy Body at that great change, and resurrection of the just,Soliloquium. be raised, heavenly, and spiritual, like the body of our Lord, be pure as the Essence, of Angels, as speedy, and quick, as to motion, as the light∣ning, and fitted to inhabit Heaven? Have a high value, and esteem of it, and make not this Vessel of honour, by sinning, a Vessel of dishonour, the Members of Christ, the Members of a Harlot; the Image of God and Christ, the Image of Sathan; the Temple of the Holy Ghost, a Stie, yea, a Hell of unclean lusts. But labour as much to be like Christ in holiness, and righteousness, as thou hopest, and desirest, to be like him, in glory. Let thy Members be spiritualized, and heavenized, and made Members of holiness unto righteousness.Col. 3.3, 4. And let thy conversation be in Heaven, where thy habitation shall be. For our life is hid in Christ with God;1 Thes. 4.17. and when he ap∣peares, we shall appear also with him in glory, and be ever with the Lord. Ejaculation.O omnipotent God, and gracious Father, in my Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ; who in the beginning, madest Man after thy own Image, in holiness, and in righteous∣ness of body, and soul, as having from everlasting de∣creed, that thy only begotten Son, the Eternal Word, should be made Flesh,John 1.14. and become Man; And therefore thou saidest, let us make Man in our Image, after our
likeness; (for to thee all things past and future, are as in their present being▪) in thy great goodness, pitty,Gen. 1.26. and with infinite compassions, behold what a sad, and miser∣able change, Sathan, and Sin, have made in thy Image, and Creature. Thou hast made Man upright,Eccles. 7.29. but they have sought out many inventions. Yea, every imagination of the thoughts of Mans heart, are only evil continually.Gen. 6.5. Their hearts are deceitfull above all things,Jer. 17.9. and despe∣rately wicked, who can know them? Their bodies are become so like Sathan, that they may well be called Devils incarnate.Psal. 36.4. Their Heads imagine mischief continu∣ally; their Eyes are altogether set upon vanity; their Eares are soon set open to let in all verbal uncleanness; their Smell is fum'd with pride; their Pallates are fur'd with gluttony, and excess; and their touch is the pander of lust, and lasciviousness; their Mouths, Tongues,Psal. 5.9. and Throats are open Sepulchres; their right hands are full of bribes, iniquity, and oppression; and their Feet walk in the way of sinners,Prov. 6.18. and are swift in running to mis∣chief. In summe, the whole Body is a Cage of unclean lusts, and the wicked Instruments of all ungodliness, and unrighteousness. O mercifull Creator, this is our sinfull condition by nature. But thou hast promised to change these vile bodies, and to make them glorious bodies, like the body of our Lord. O begin, I beseech thee, this change, and new Creation, upon my body here; since they only that are sanctified, and made new Crea∣tures, shall be glorified;Rev. 20.6. They only that are raised and have part in this first Resurrection from sin, shall be rai∣sed, and have part in the second Resurrection, to Glory. Let it appear that I am born again of Water, and the Spirit; and that Christ is already formed in me;John 3.5. and let all those senses and Members,Gal. 4.19. which have been the Members of uncleanness, and to iniquity, unto iniquity, be now the Members, and Servants of righteousnes,Rom. 6.19. unto holiness; so shall my glory begin here in holiness, and righteousness, and be compleated hereafter in the perfecti∣on of Glory, Amen. I proceed next to the second excellency of our Bodies at the Resurrection.Of the glory of our bodies. They shall shine as the brightness of
the Firmament,Dan. 12.3. and as the Stars, for ever and ever. Yea, our blessed Saviour far transcends these expressions of the Angel in Daniel,Mat. 13.43. and saith, The righteous shall shine forth as the Sun, in the Kingdome of their Father. Yea, far higher, yet They shall partake of the Glory of God, (which is far above all created Glory) he declaring,John 17.22. that The glory God hath given him, he had given them. All which is comprehended in the fore-recited Texts. He shall make our vile Bodies like unto his glorious Body.Phil. 3.21. 1 John 3.2. And that when he shall appear, we shall be like him. To this great truth, the Apostle Paul further beares witness, saying,Rom. 8.17, 30. Whom he justifies, them he also glorifies. That those that suffer with Christ, shall also be glorified toge∣ther with him.2 Cor. 4.17. And that our light affliction, which is but for a Moment, worketh for us, a far more exceeding and Eternal weight of Glory.Colos. 3.4. That when Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall we also appear with Him in Glory. Of this excelling, and blessed state of the People of God, (in the darker times of the Church, under the Law) the Psalmist gives testimony, saying, Let the Saints be joyfull in Glory.Psal. 149.5. And of himself in particular, Thou shalt guide me with thy counsel,Psal. 73.24. and after receive me into Glory. I shall conclude the proofs of this most comfortable encouraging, and ravishing Doctrine, with the evidence of blessed Peter,1 Peter 5.4. When the chief Shepward shall appear, ye shall receive a Crown of Glory, that fades not away. The God of all grace hath called us into his Eternal Glory, by Jesus Christ. Our blessed Saviour in his great love to us, and for our encouragement in his service, hath not only from his own Mouth, and by his Spirit in the Mouths of his Ministers, (as hath been shew∣ed) verified this precious truth, and illustrated it, by sen∣sible similitudes; such as the Sun, Stars, and Firmament▪ but became himself (even in his state of humiliation) a Sign, Figure, and example of this glorious shining condition, and change of the Bodies of his Saints, at the Resurrection, in that his wonderfull, and miraculous transfiguration, in the presence of Peter, James, and John, upon the Mount;mat. 17.2, 4. when his Face did shine as the Sun, and his Rayment was white, as the Light. A sight so ra∣vishing,
and delightfull, that it made Peter, although but a Spectator, to forget Wife, and Family, and to look upon this World, as a Dunghill, saying unto our Lord Jesus; Lord, it is good for us to be here, if thou wilt let us make here three Tabernacles, one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias. Consider then, was this glori∣ous change in our Saviour so superlatively delightfull to Peter to behold? What shall it be to us in the fruition? Certainly true is that Word of the Lord,1 Cor. 2.9. Eye hath not seen, Ear hath not heard, neither hath it entred into the heart of Man,Isa. 64.4. the things which God hath prepared for them that love him. Our Souls are now immund, or ra∣ther imprisoned with in a fleshly Wall, or Jaile, of whi∣ted Earth, and like a poor Prisoner, hath only the liber∣ty to peep, and look out at the Cinque-ports, or windows of the sences. Neither is it, or can it now be seen, or truly known by our selves, or others. But then that Image of God, that Angel-like Spirit, that most rich and ine∣stimable Jewel,Acts 20 28. purchased with the infinite precious blood of the Son of God, and valued by him to be more worth than the whole World, shall dwell,Mat. 16.26. and be housed in the body glorified, as in a shining, pure, and transparent Chrystal Cabinet. And shall be seen, and known, by Saints, (our selves, and Angels) as to its forme, to its glorious operations, and perfect beauty. The resplen∣dent body, like a Concave Mathematical Glass, not de∣minishing, but magnifying, and adding to its excellent glory, and brightness. And moves according to its will, from place to place, like an Angel, with incredible swift∣ness. The Soul, acting with a more enlarged, and excel∣lent advantage, as to all its faculties, and operations, by the subserviency, union, and concomitancy of the Mem∣bers, and senses of our glorified bodies, than it could do without them. Of which in their due place (with Gods assistance) I shall treat more particularly. O my Soul, shall thy frail fleshly body,Soliloquium. be shining like the Stars, and the Firmament, in all its brightness; glo∣rious like the Sun, yea, like the brightest Son of Righte∣ousness, and be replenisht with the glory of God?mal. 4.2. Shall it be thy radiant Garment, and super-excelling Orna∣ment?
Thy Chariot of Tryumph? Yea more, the com∣pletion of thy excellency, and Coelestial happiness? O give it now its due honour, and inslave it not to Sathan, and to sinfull lusts. Thou shalt shortly be thine, and the Angels glorious companion. Debase it not so much, as to put it to dig and delve in the Earth,Hab. 2.6. like a blinde Mole. Nor to cloath it self with thick Clay, nor to feed upon white, and yellow dust, which is the Serpents Meat, and curse;Gen. 3.14. which shall, within a short space of time, shine like the Stars and Sun in the Heavens. Yea, suffer it not to be bespotted, and defiled, with uncleanness. Nor to be joyned, or united to an Harlot; which conjoyn'd with thee, shall be a perfect, and glori∣ous Image of God incarnate,1 Cor. 6.16. and for ever the Spouse of Christ,1 Cor. 6.19. and the Habitation and Temple of God the Holy Ghost. What though as yet thou art in a state of humi∣liation, ascend thou with our Lord, into the Mount, into the high Mountain of Divine, and Heavenly Contempla∣tion; being both in Body and Soul raised from above the vanities of this low, and evil World. Let thy con∣verse be with Moses and Elias, the Law, and the Pro∣phets; and by so doing, thou shalt be transformed, and transfigur'd, yea, thy face shall shine, and thou shalt be changed into the Image of God, from glory to glory, by the Spirit of the Lord. O Lord, my God, who art infinite in free grace, and mercy,Ejaculation. in goodness, bounty, and liberality; and hast a∣bundantly manifested thy self to be all this, to me (a poor and miserable sinner) in my Lord, and Saviour, Je∣sus Christ; whom thou hast sent in my nature, to pur∣chase for me, not only salvation, from everlasting death; but such a shining, and glorious state, and condition, of Soul, and Body, with thee, unto Eternity: give me a gratefull heart, and an obedient life, which is the real thankfulness of thy Children. Yea, let the Meditation and application by faith, of this blessed and transcendent change, not only ravish me in Spirit, as Peter was, at the sight of the representation thereof, at our Lords Trans∣figuration; but let me with holy Paul, follow after it, that I may apprehend that,Phil. 3.12. for which, also I am appre∣hended
of Christ Jesus, as counting my self not to have apprehended; and therefore through thy grace,13. Let me forget, those things that are behind, and reach forth to the things that are before, pressing towards the mark, for the price of the high calling of God, in Christ Jesus.Verse 14. Let me so run, not as uncertainly; so fight,1 Cor. 9.26. not as one that beateth the Aire, but keep under this my Body, and bring it into subjection, least by any meanes,27. when I have in∣structed others, I my self should be a cast away. Graci∣ous God in order to this glorious, and new life,Rom. 6.4, 5. grant me to walk in newness of life, that I being planted together with my Saviour, in the likeness of his Death, (as to sin) I may be also raised with, and by him, in the likeness of his Resurrection to Glory;2 Cor. 7.1. and having these precious promises, let me through faith in them, be by thee en∣abled to cleanse my self, from all filthiness of the flesh,Heb. 12.14. Phil. 3.20. Eccles. 8.1. and spirit, perfecting holiness in thy fear; for without holiness, none shall see thy Face. O Lord, let my con∣versation be in Heaven, although my body be on earth. And since thy Word saith,Jam. 3.17. a Mans wisdome makes his Face to shine, give me that true wisdome that is from above. And since thou hast, in infinite mercy, given me this blessed hope, that even my body shall shine, and be glorious, like the Stars, and Sun, after this life;Joh. 5.35. give me grace in this life to be a burning, and shining light, with John the Baptist, and to be harmless, and blameless,Phil. 2.15. a Son of God without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation. Amongst whom, let me shine as a Light in the World, that they seeing my good works, may glorify thee my Heavenly Father, Amen.Matth. 5.16. I proceed now to the third Heavenly excellency of our Bodies glorified, after the Resurrection; viz.Of the incor∣ruption and im∣mortality of our glorified bodies. Their in∣corruptibility and immortality. In order to our more cleer understanding, of this so wonderfull a change, in which, as saith the Apostle, This Corruptible,1 Cor. 15.53. must put on Incorruption; and this mortal, must put on immorta∣lity, I shall from the ground of right reason, and natural Philosophy, humbly offer these considerations: First, that the body of Man is compounded (although unequal∣ly) of the four Elements. And that at Death, which is
the dissolution of the Soul,Eccles. 12 7. and Body. The Spirit re∣turns to him that gave it; and the Body returns to the four Elements, the first Principles of which it was com∣pounded. This is illustrated, and proved from Scripture, which witnesses,Revel. 20.13. that at the Resurrection, The Sea gave up her Dead; that is, that part of the substance of the Bodies that were in it; and Death and Hell (that is, the Earth, or Grave) delivered up the Dead that were in them. Further, this must be granted, as an undeniable maxime, that as none but God, our Almighty Creator, can make something of nothing; so none but he can an∣nihilate any Creature, or any Atom of a Creature, so as to make that something nothing. If this be a certain truth, (as assuredly it is;) and that the Lord hath de∣clared in his Word, that the same Bodies in which the Soul lived here upon Earth, shall again appear, and be raised at the Resurrection, (as inspired Job attests) say∣ing, I know that my Redeemer lives, and that I shall stand at the latter Day upon Earth,Job 19.25. and though after my skin Worms destroy this Body,26, yet in my Flesh, shall I see God.27. Whom I shall see, for my self; and my Eyes shall behold, and not another, though my Reines be con∣sumed within me: Then certainly, at, and after death, that part of our Bodies that is a part of the four Ele∣ments, from a Principle, sympathy, law, and instinct of nature, (the compositum and structure being dissolved, and separated) shall return to that Element, of which it is a part; where it shall be kept, and preserved, by the all-governing Power, and providence of God, as in a Wombe, or Treasury, untill its new birth, at the Resur∣rection. 2 Peter 3.13.In the next place, consider, that when the Lord makes a new Heaven, and a new Earth, according to his pro∣mise;Gen. 7.11. (which I humbly conceive) only extends to this Orbe of Earth, and Water, and to the Regions, and E∣lements of the Aire,Gen. 8.2.19.24. and Fire; these two last, are most frequently in Scripture, called Heaven. That flaming and Aetherial Fire (not Elementary) in which the Lord Jesus shall descend,Job 1.16. and appear, with the ten thousands of glorified Souls,2 Kings 1.10. and Angels, and which shall consume
all the wicked that are then in the World,2 Thes. 1.8. and burn up their works; shall accordingly, as it is the nature, and true effect, and property of Fire,Jude 14. to purge and purify each of the four Elements, from all that dross and corruptible quality, that hath intermixt, and cleaved unto them, by the righteous Judgment, and curse of God for Mans sin. Whence shall proceed that admirable change, as to their qualities, (although not of their substance) deserving the name, in the Scripture promise, of a new Heaven, and of a new Earth; As it is most excellently set forth by Saint Paul in these words;Rom. 8.19, For the earnest expectation of the Creature, wait for the manifestation of the Sons of God. For the Creature was made subject to vanity,20, not willingly, but by reason of him, who hath subjected the same in hope; Because the Creature it self also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption,21, into the glori∣ous liberty of the Children of God. For we know that the whole Creation groaneth,22. and travelleth in pain to∣gether, untill now. The Elements then, are made like un∣to the Heavenly supream Orbes; pure, lucid, and incor∣ruptible. Hence I infer, that these four Elements being thus wonderfully changed in their qualities, and made incorruptible; in which, respectively, the several parts, and ingredients of our Bodies are laid up, and reserved, as being naturally a part of them; There must necessa∣rily follow, the same and the like change, and alteration, in the matter and substance of our Bodies also. Whence it will follow, that although the first change, in the Ele∣ments, is supernatural, and wonderfull; that, in our Bo∣dies will naturally follow, as an effect from that cause. Our great God, as in the first Creation, caused the pro∣duction of all things, out of their first matter, as so many streams from that Fountain; so in this new, and second birth of things, he as a rational, and natural Agent, pro∣duceth this excellent change in the fore-mentioned qua∣lities of our new-raised Bodies, to be a necessary, and certain effect, flowing from the change of the principles, out of which they are compounded. It being more than probable, that the Resurrection of our Bodies, shall im∣mediatly succeed, the making of the new Heaven, and
the new Earth, the Saints habitation; as it was in the first Creation; when the Lord made the Earth, and all the Creatures, first, before he made Man, the Lord, and Possessor of it,Gen. 1.26. and them. The premisses being granted; I thence conclude, that as Mortality, is a necessary effect, and consequent, of cor∣ruption, so the immortality of the Body (to use the A∣postles phrase) is as necessary an effect, and consequent, of incorruption. For that substance that can never more be corrupted, may truly be said to be everlasting, and according to the Apostles expression, immortal: Death signifying, either in sensible, or vegitable Creatures, a putred and evil change, or alteration; as also a de∣basing, diminishing, and deforming separation; as be∣ing the curse, and fruit of Sin, and abhorrent to nature. Having hitherto discoursed of this marvellous change of our Bodies at the Resurrection, and given some natu∣ral reasons thereof, as a Philosopher; I must now as a Christian, ascend higher, and prove this eminent change, to proceed also from a far higher and nobler cause, than meer nature; even from the spiritual, real, and mystical union, of our Persons, through faith, and the Eternal Spirit, as Members to our Head the Lord Jesus, who is God-Man, blessed for ever. As since sin, God hath enacted this to be one of the Statutes of Nature, It is appointed to Men once to dye; And by another Law of Nature, after Death, hath dis∣solved this Microcosme of Soul from Body; Every part of the body (as hath been shewed) returns to its proper Element:John 1.14. so by the Law of Christ, God-Man, the Eter∣nal Word, that was made Flesh, it is decreed and affir∣med,John 6.47. as an indubitable truth, That he that believeth in him hath everlasting life. And though he were dead, yet shall he live.John 11.25. Whosoever liveth and believeth in him, shall never dye.John 11.26. From hence it is most cleer, that in a spiri∣tual sence, the death of the Saints, is no death; they be∣ing so united by faith, that although the Soul be divided from the Body, and each Elementary part of the body, be divided from the other; yet neither Soul nor Body, or any grain,John 14.6. or part thereof, can be separated from our
head the Lord Jesus, in whom (who is eternal life) is our life. Though we are dead in a natural sence,Colos. 3.3. yet we live spiritually in and by his Spirit. In which sence also the whole mystical body of Christ, the universal Church, and every Member thereof, is said to be joyned to the Lord, and is one Spirit;1 Cor. 6.17. as being by the Holy Ghost (the ever-living God, that fills all things, the Spirit of the Fa∣ther, and the Son) as by an unmeasurable,1 Cor. 12.13. and everlast∣ing Ligament, tyed, and united to the Lord Jesus, our head. So that, like as it is said of the Soul, That it is tota, in toto, & tota in qualibet parte: So it may be said, that the for ever blessed Spirit of God the Father and the Son, in and by this ineffable union, and in dwel∣ling, is wholly and spiritually, both before and after death, in our Souls, and in our Bodies, and in every part of them, although never so far (by reason of a na∣tural death) separated one from another. Here note, that although the Scripture declares, that in God all things live, move, and have their being, as he is their Creator, and Preserver, and in whom,Acts 17.28. and by whom they act, and have their subsistance, yet the difference is very great, betwixt that life of the Creatures on Earth, and this life of the Saints, both as to the nature, and durati∣on of it. That flowing from his Almighty power, and goodness, as a Creator; this from his Eternal love, as our Father in Christ; that life, being temporary; this life Eternal; as flowing from the highest Principle, our spi∣ritual, and real union unto God in Christ. For the fur∣ther clearing, and proof of which immortality, as well of our Bodies, as of our Souls, consider the words of our blessed Saviour, As the Father hath life in himself,John 5.26. so hath he given to the Son, to have life in himself.John 14.6, 19. I am the way, the truth, and the life; because I live, yee shall live also. Thou hast given me power over all flesh,John 17.2. that I should give Eternal Life to as many as thou hast given me. My Sheep hear my voice, and I give unto them Eternal Life.Joh. 10.27, 28. To these let us for further testimony add the expressions of the Apostle Paul;Gal. 2.20. The life which I now live in the Flesh, I live by faith in the Son of God. Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me. Our life is hid
with Christ in God.Colos. 3.3, 4. When Christ, which is our life, shall appear, then shall we appear with him in Glory. The first Man was made a living Soul,1 Cor. 15.45, 46. the last Adam was made a quickning Spirit. That was not first which is spirituall, but that which is natural, and afterward that which is spiritual.1 Cor. 12.13. By one Spirit we are Baptized into one Body, whether we be Jew, or Gentile, whether we be bond, or free, and have been all made to drink into one Spirit. He that is joyned unto the Lord,1 Cor. 6.17. is one Spirit. By these bright Scripture-lights is evidently discovered, and mani∣fested to us; that as the head in the natural body, con∣tains the animal spirit, and conveyeth, and gives anima∣tion to all the Members of the Body; so the Lord Christ God-Man in one Person, is the head of his Spiritual, and mystical Body, the Universal Church; and that from him alone, not only that spiritual life consisting in holiness, and righteousness; but also that eternal, and immortal life, in which, both in Soul, and Body, we shall live in him, and with him at the Resurrection for ever, and for ever, is given and communicated into every Member of his body, the Church united to him, in this life, by a true faith, and by the animation and in-dwelling of the Holy Ghost; who is the life and spirit of God the Fa∣ther, and of God the Son. Therefore in these, and other Scriptures, God the Father is sometimes called our life; other-times, Christ and the Holy Ghost is said to be our life; thereby evidencing, that this eternal life of the Saints, hath its immediate rise, and Original from the Trinity in Unity, God blessed for ever. Not by partici∣pation of the Essence of the God-head, but by the real, and spiritual union, of their Persons, as Members of Christs mystical Body, unto the Person of Christ; through faith, and the inhabitation and vivification of the Holy Ghost. The first of which (viz. Faith) shall cease, and be swallowed up (after death) in fruition. But the other shall continue to Eternity. From what I have here offered, although in great weakness, (for who is sufficient for these things?) I hope it is abundantly cleared, that the eternal life of the Saints, and the glorious incorruptability, and immortality of
their Bodies, flowes from a far higher Principle, or cause, than from only meer nature, made new, refined, and in∣corruptable. And that though the Elements through their incorruptability, are become Eviternal, like the Superior Orbes; and are in a natural possibility (if God please) so to continue, without change, or alteration, Everlast∣ingly; yet in all this, they fall far short of the Eternal duration, of the glorified Souls and bodies of the Saints; which have not only a perpetuity, arising from the refi∣ned, and incorruptible nature, but an Eternity, flowing from the spiritual, real, and inseparable union of their Persons through faith, and the Holy Ghost, to the Per∣son of the Lord Jesus Christ God-man, as Members uni∣ted to their Head. In which respect, besides the declared positive, and unchangeable decree, and promises of God, (who cannot lye) as these Scriptures witness amongst many others formerly mentioned, viz.Joh. 3.16. God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever be∣lieveth in him, should not perish, but have eternal life. Who so eateth my Flesh, and drinketh my Blood, hath e∣ternal life, and I will raise him up at the last Day. The Saints I say are placed and fixed in such a blessed and certain state and condition, as living spiritually in God,Joh. 6.54. Joh. 14.19, 20. and God in them, as hath been proved, that it is as pos∣sible for God, who is Eternal Life, to perish and dye,Joh. 17.22, 23. as for any of his Saints to dye or perish,John 6.56. that live by and in his life; according to that unanswerable Argument of our Lord and Saviour.John 6.57. As the living Father hath sent me, and I live by the Father, so he that eateth me, even he shall live by me; Because I live, yee shall live also.John 14.19. To conclude, I humbly conceive that this Eternal Life of the Saints, as to the reason and nature thereof, far transcends the Eternal Life of the glorious Angels, in that as far as is revealed in Scripture, their life was given them by an act of Gods goodness, will and power in their first Creation, and is preserved, continued and confirmed, to the Elect Angels, by an act of his grace. And there∣fore, those of them that kept not their first state,Jude 6. are for∣ever separated from God, (who is life) and swallowed up into Eternal Death; whereas the life, even to the Saints,
proceeding from Gods spiritual inhabitation, and com∣munion, with them, is undeterminable, unchangeable, in∣separable; and is therefore Eternal. O my Soul, shall this thy impure, mortal body, imme∣diately after the making of a new Heaven,Soliloquium. and a new Earth; the refining of the four Elements, of which it was formed, and out of which it shall again be raised, and reassumed, appear at the Resurrection of the just, as having its substance purified, and made incorruptible? Therefore according to the Scripture-phrase, immortal, and everlasting, like as are the bright and superior Orbs? Yea, which is much more wonderfull; shall this incor∣ruptability, everlastingness, and immortality of thy soul, and body, be unchangeable, and eternal, because thy Person is spiritually, and really united, by the indwell∣ing of the Holy Ghost, unto the Person of Christ thy Head, and unto God in Christ, who is Eternal Life? yea lastly, doth this life excell and transcend, as in respect of the cause, and nature of it, the life and being of all o∣ther Creatures, even of the ever blessed Angels, as being built, not only as theirs is, upon the Basis of Gods crea∣ting power, and goodness, which gives a beeing to all things, but is establisht upon his declared promise, and eternal truth; and hath its unalterable duration from our dwelling,1 John 1.3. and living in God, and he in us, and from that inseparable fellowship, we have with the Father, and the Son, in the communion of the Holy Ghost? O my Soul, are these things true? Have they been e∣videnst to thee out of the Scripture of truth? O how oughtest thou in all humility, and enlarged thankfulness, to prostrate thy self at the foot-stool of thy infinite, good, gracious, and mercifull God, and Father, in the Lord Jesus Christ, admiring, and adoring him; First, for the Revelation, and manifestation by his Word, and holy Spirit, of so high, ravishing, and stupendious a mystery, the wonder, and praise of glorified Saints, and Angels, and the miracle of divine love.Psal. 42.7. Next, let, (as the Pro∣phet speaks) one deep, call unto another, and from the sight of the bottomless Pit of Hell, Death, and Sin (out of which eternal love in Christ, free grace, and infinite
mercy, hath taken thee) Call upon, and bless God for this infinite depth of mercy. Yea, exalt and magnify the height and depth, the breadth and length of this love, which passeth knowledge. O my Soul,Ephes. 3.18. Jude 6. the mighty An∣gels leaving their first state, as ambitiously seeking a greater, (as the learned conceive) were cast down for their pride, and discontentedness, from the highest Hea∣ven, into the deepest abyss of Hell. And our first Pa∣rents, for the like ambition,Gen. 3.22, 23, 24. and desire of bettering their condition, were cast out of Paradise. From which ex∣amples, I have reason to think, should Man have had a thought, or design, of, or by himself, to be possest of so glorious a life, prerogative, state, and condition, as our gracious God hath freely given us in Christ; It had been so high, and unwarrantable a sin, and ambition, as would have justly deserved as great a curse and punishment. O from this experience of infinite love,1 John 4.16. (for God is love) pray incessantly in return thereof, not only to be enlar∣ged, and raised to the highest, and greatest love, and thankfulness, that a Creature can be made capable of; But that thou mayest hence-forth have no will, but his, (which shall be thy great wisdome) in all things, sub∣mitting all thou hast, and thy whole Man, solely to his most gracious, and All-wise dispose: whose free gifts, bounty, and unconceivable liberality, are not such, as Creatures bestow on their favourites; but such as becomes the Majesty and immensness of a God, who gives to his Saints, benefits and blessings temporal, spiritual and eternal; not only above their prayers, hopes and expecta∣tions; but as the Apostle expresses,Ephes. 3.20. above what we can either ask or think. O my Soul, shall thy body be incorruptible and im∣mortal? defile it not with lust any more, neither let sin abound, because grace hath abounded.Rom. 6.1. Since thou must know that thy incorruptability and immortality must in a true Scripture and spiritual sence, begin in this life, al∣though they are to be perfected in the next. Therefore our Saviour saith,John 3.36. He that believeth on him hath ever∣lasting life; And the Apostle affirmes,Ephes. 2.6. that we are made to sit together in Christ, in Heavenly places. And Saint
John declares; 1 John 5.12. That he that hath the Son hath life; and he that hath not the Son hath not life. And blessed Paul affirms,Rom. 8.10. If Christ be in us, the Body is dead, because of sin; but the spirit is life, because of righteousness. 1 Cor. 6.19.Again, dost thou live in Christ, and Christ in thee? Art thou even as to thy body, the Habitation and Tem∣ple of the Holy Ghost? and spiritually and inseparably united to God in Christ?Colos. 3.3. and is thy life hid with God in Christ?Rom. 6.14. Dally no more with sin; for there can be no communion betwixt light, and darkness. And know this, although thou canst not dye eternally, yet thy backslidings in wilfull,Cant. 5.6. and presumptuous sinnings, may, through thy Spouse his righteous with-drawing and desertion, cast thee into such a swoon, and transe, that thy life, peace, and Heaven here, may as to thy feeling, be turned into em∣nity, death, yea, and to an Hell upon Earth. Give not that subtil destroyer, Sathan, occasion, or advantage, by spiritual adulteries, and reiterated Rebellions, to sue out a divorse, in the Court of thy Conscience, betwixt thy Spouse and thee. For know this, that although, Whom Christ loves,John 13.1. he loves to the end; And his gifts and call∣ing are without Repentance;Rom. 11.29. and that though thy Hus∣band hath loved thee, with an everlasting love; yet such a suite,Jer. 31.3. will be very troublesome, and chargeable, and may cost thy Spirit many and unexpressible sighs, groans, and lamentations. And may, as it were, break thy bones, or make thy Body a very Sceleton,Psal. 51.8. only fit for a Grave. Psal. 102.3, 5.Lastly, for as much as the Children of God were par∣takers of flesh and blood: Did the Son of God himself likewise take part of the same,Heb. 2.14. that through Death, he might destroy him that had the power of Death,15. viz. the Devil; to deliver them, who through fear of Death, were all their life time subject unto bondage;16. And did not take on him the nature of Angels, but took on him the Seed of Abraham; from which hypostatical union of the two na∣tures, in one Person, and the union of thy Person, to his Person, by the Eternal Spirit, is given unto thee eternal life, in a far higher, and more excellent way, and man∣ner, than to the Elect Angels? Did the Lord of Heaven
and Earth, the Heir of all things, not only marry him∣self to thy nature, but also unto thee? For,Jer. 3.14. I am married unto you, saith the Lord, in the Prophet, and is the ho∣nourable Ordinance of Marriage, therefore called by the Apostle, a great Mystery,Eph. 5.32. because even in Eves forma∣tion, and in its first Institution, it was to be a Type, and lively Figure of this thy spiritual Marriage, and union to the second Adam?Cant. 2.16. Hast thou through infinite mercy re∣ceived assurance hereof, that thou art thy Beloveds, and that thy Beloved is thine? Is the Marriage Day, and Supper appointed, and declared? and in the interim,Rev. 19.7, 9. hast thou an Espousal contract, subscribed to, by thy faith, and by his Spirit? O be exceeding watchfull, and care∣full of offending such a loving Spouse, and glorious Bridegroom, by any sinfull relapses, and backslidings, in∣to any sin, that may move him to jealousie.Prov. 6.34. For as jea∣lousie is the rage of a Man, so the anger and jealousie of thy God, is said to burn like Fire,Cant. 8.4. against such unfaith∣full, and spiritual Adulteresses. O, as thou tenderest the love of thy God, and of thy Spouse, and thy peace of Conscience, and thy Heaven upon Earth, venture not to blot or blur so blessed an as∣surance, and evidence of thy Eternal happiness, union and life in him, by sin, or any presumptuous iniquity, and rebellion. Nor to crust it over by customary sinning, or delay of repentance. But by an holy, chast, and religi∣ous walking. Keep it so fair written and legible, that all other Saints, but principly thy self, at all times, but espe∣cially in the time of trouble, temptation, and hour of death, may read it. Then, though thy Eye-strings are broken, the eye of thy faith shall behold it, and see thy Name written in Heaven,Rev. 21.27. and in the Lambs Book of Life. O blessed Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ,Ejaculation. who art the Resurrection, and the Life,John 11.25. and hast declared in thy Word of Truth, that this my vile Body shall be raised, and made a Heavenly and spiritual Body, like to thine;1 Cor. 15.44, 49. give me to behold this wonderfull change, continually by faith, the eye of my Soul: then shall I not be abashed or dismayed at the baldness and gray-headedness of old
age; at my hollow Eyes, wrinckled Cheeks, blindness, deafness; my toothless Gums, and pale countenance; nor at the Palsiness, lameness and decrepitness of my Hands, Feet, and other Members; as looking upon this weak, diseased, and aged Body, as upon an old and weather-beaten Tent.2 Cor. chap. 1. Knowing, that If the Earthly House of this my Tabernacle were dissolved, I have a building of God, an House not made with Hands, Eternal in the Heavens;Verse 2. Groaning earnestly, and desiring (with the A∣postle Paul) to be cloathed upon, with my House which is from Heaven;Verse 3. with which, if I be cloathed, I shall not be found naked;Verse 4. That this Mortality may be swallowed up of Life. Let me not, O Lord, with the Worldling, who hath his Portion only in this Life,Psal. 17.14. be troubled, at the Knell of every passing Bell, sigh at every striking of the Clock; nor be afraid, or unwilling to number my Days, or to cast up the accompt of my years: but great∣ly rejoyce at the end of every hour, day, and year, as hastning my approach to, and the enjoyment of Eternity: Being most willing to have my Body interred, that after a long time (like the matter of China Vessels) it may be raised, and made lucid, transparent, and a Vessel of honour,2 Tim. 2.21. fit to be made use of, in the Palace of Heaven. Shall my Body be shining, and glorious like the Sun? let it not now O Lord be spotted with sin, and change∣able, and inconstant in its motion, and conversation, like the Moon. Shall it be bright like the Firmament, and Stars?Revel. 12.4. O Lord, let it be a fixt, and not a falling Star; nor cast down to the Earth by the Taile of the old Ser∣pent the Devil; neither let me be a Meteor, and seem to out-shine others in a Religious profession, and in a short time vanish, only leaving behind me an hypocritical, and pestilential stench; like those wandering Stars, to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever.Jude 13. O graci∣ous, and mercifull Redeemer, shall this corruptible put on incorruptibility, and this mortal put on immortality? Let this supernatural change begin here, as it doth in all thy sanctified ones;1 Cor. 6.16. and let even my Body, as well as my Soul, be thy dwelling place, and the Temple of thy holy Spirit;1 Cor. 6.19. in which, let no unclean lust lurk, or wicked
Spirit enter. Make me holiness unto thee, (O Lord) and perfect holiness, in thy fear.Jer. 3.3. 2 Cor. 7.1. Give thy Angels charge o∣ver me, to keep me in all my ways. Let them bear me up in their hands, lest I dash my Foot against a Stone;Psal. 91.11. cause me to tread upon the Lyon, and the Addar;12, the young Lyon, and the Dragon. Yea, let them,13. according to thy promise, be shortly trampled under my Feet. Let sin dye in me, by vertue of thy Death,Rom. 16.20. and let the life and immortality of holiness spring up and flourish in me, by vertue of thy Resurrection. Hast thou O Lord stiled thy Church, thy Dove, thy undefiled one?Cant. 6.9. And declared that she is fair, and that there is no spot in her? And is that which is spoken of thy Church,Cant. 4.7. applyable to every living Member thereof?John 14.6. O thou that art the Eternal truth, make good this thy Word unto thy poor Servant, thy Spouse, although most unworthy to wash the Feet of the Servants of my Lord. And since thou hast promised that all things shall become new;Revel. 21.5. And declared that those that are in thee, are new Creatures; and hast covenan∣ted, to give me a new Heart, and a new Spirit,2 Cor. 5.17. and to take out my Heart of Stone,Ezek. 11.19. and to give me a Heart of Flesh; to pour clean Water upon me, and to make me clean;Ezek. 36.25. 1 John 1.7. and hast testified that thy blood doth cleanse me from all sin; and that by thy righteousness alone I am justified. O let all these true and precious promises be fulfilled in me, and to me.Gal. 2.16. So shall the incorruptibility of my Person, as in respect of sin, usher in, and assure me of the incorruptibility of my Soul, and Body, in glory.1 Cor. 15.31. Let me dye daily with blessed Paul, as to all the evil lusts of the Flesh, that I may not dye Eternally, but live ever∣lastingly in glorified Flesh. O Lord, who art the life, and my life, let my sinfull mortality, even here,John 14.6. put on a spiritual, and heavenly immortality. For thou hast pro∣claim'd it, whil'st thou wert upon Earth, That the Day comes, yea now is,John 5.25. when the Dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear, shall live, even to Eternity; For, He that believeth in thee, hath (already) everlasting life.John 5.24. Let my union and communion with thee through faith, and the in-dwelling of thy holy Spirit,
begin to make my Face to shine here,Exod. 34.20. as did the Face of Moses, and thy Proto-Martyr Stephen; since thou hast declared,Acts 6.15. that a Mans wisdome maketh his Face to shine. Yea,Eccles. 8.1. we are said to shine here also, in a holy conversa∣tion,Mat. 5.16. since thou commandest us, To let our light shine be∣fore Men. And hast held forth in thy Word, that the path of the just,Prov. 4.18. is as the shining light, that shineth more and more, unto the perfect Day; and hast promised in thy Book: That if we let not wickedness dwell in our Tabernacles; our Age shall be cleerer than the Noon-day, and we shall shine forth,Joh 11.14, 17. and be as the Morning. Lord although I now live in the Flesh, yet let me not, I hum∣bly, and with importunity beseech thee, live unto, or af∣ter the Flesh;1 Tim. 5.6. since such are said to be dead, while they live; yea, twice dead, and pluckt up by the Roots. And thou hast justly threatned,Jude 12. that those that live after the Flesh shall dye,Rom. 8.13. and that Eternally; But they that live in, and after the Spirit, shall live, and that for ever and ever. But since after this life, there shall be no Devil to tempt, no World to allure, or persecute; nor Sin to in∣tice, or corrupt: Let me with mortified Paul, desire to depart,Phil. 1.23. and to be with thee, which is far better. Yea, since to live is Christ,Phil. 1.21. and to dye is gain; Let me with perfect Job, all the Dayes of this my appointed time, humbly,Job 14.14. patiently, and believingly wait, until my glori∣ous change come, Amen. Of the sences glorified.Having exercised my faith, and contemplation, upon this ravishing, and pleasing subject, the glorification of the Bodies, and Members of the Saints, in general, and in the Gross; I shall now lastly proceed, beseeching the assistance of his most Holy Spirit,John 1.4.9. who is my light, the light of Men, and he who alone enlighteneth every one that cometh into the World, to speak particularly, though with much brevity, of the glorification of the Five Sences. I shall go so far, as I shall receive light from the Scriptures, and right reason; taking that sober, and lawfull liberty, (that is granted to all those that have me∣ditated upon the like subjects; where some things are more obscure than others, and not so clearly, and fully held forth in Gods Word) humbly to offer, what pro∣bably
and rationally (although not positively) may be the truth, as not repugnant to Scripture, right reason, or the Analogie of Faith. As an Introduction and substraction to what followes, I shall premise; First,Job. 19.25, 26, 27. according to Scripture, as hath been shewed, Job▪ chap. 19.25. That the same Bodies shall be raised, that the Saints lived in here upon Earth; as to their substance. If so, then the same parts, members, and senses, shall then be raised, and have a being also, of which the Body consists, and without which the Body is imperfect, and incompleat, and cannot be truly said to be the same Body. Secondly, that if necessarily, and certainly, they shall then have an existence in the Body, then without doubt, they must be for some most noble use, and end. For this is both a Scriptural and Natural Maxime; That God, and Na∣ture, made nothing in vain. Yea, the Scripture is cleer, and express, as to the glorious employment of some of them, in this Heavenly life; as of our Eyes, and Eares, as shall be shewed hereafter. What reason then is there that we should exclude the exercise of the other? Thirdly, it is cleer and manifest, that the glorified Soul, when a∣gain united to the glorified Body, shall not then act sing∣ly, and by it self, but organically, as now it doth, in, and with the Body, as having its seat and operation, as to the understanding, will, and memorative faculties, in the head, and brain; and as to the concupiscential appetite, and affections in the heart; and as to its external Instrument of expression, and manifesting it self, and mind, to God, Men, and Angels, in praises, or otherwise, it shall be with the Tongue, as is proved by the discourse betwixt our Saviour, and Moses, and Elias;Math. 17.3: and from many places in the Revelations, and other Scriptures. So also the Soul, shall make use of the Feet to walk with,Acts 1.3. although the whole Body, as hath been shewed,Acts 9.4. like the Wheels in Ezekiel's Vision, shall swiftly descend, or ascend,Revel. 4.10.5.11. Ezek. 1.20. accord∣ing to the will, and motion of the Spirit, or Soul within them. I say then, its now most truly, as properly said, that not the Body, but our Souls in our Bodies, see, hear, tast, feel, and smell. Can it be rationally believed, that the body that shall be raised in perfection, shall be de∣prived
of either the being, or use of any one of its sen∣ses? that the Soul should, in respect of the want of them, be less perfect in glory, than it was in its state of misery? yea, be deprived of those actings or senses by its re-union, to the body, which it made use of in glory, before its re-entry into the body? Angels, and therefore Souls, after their manner, have their seeing, hearing, feel∣ing, smelling, and tasting, when they took bodies, and eat with Abraham.Gen. 18.8. Which senses they make use of at o∣ther times also, (for ought we know, or are taught in Gods Word to the contrary; The Scripture-allusion, when it calls the Israelites Manna,Psal. 78.25. Angels food, making more for it, than against it; as also when it saith, that some things, (as wise Observers know) yea many things on Earth,Heb. 9.23. are figures and patterns of things above in the Heavens) from all which, I conclude, that should not the Soul, re-united to the body, have organically the use of all the senses, it would be in that respect, not so perfect in the glorified body, as when it was in the corruptible body; and streightned and deprived of so much of its freedome, excellency, and activity, as it had, and doth without doubt exercise, as to most of the senses in the state of Glory, before its re-union. Fourthly, if at the Resurrection of the just, the glorified Saints shall then enter into the joy of their Lord,Math. 25.21. and into their first de∣gree of Glory, and shall Raign as Kings and Priests, with our Lord Jesus Christ,Rev. 5.10. personally, upon the renewed Earth,Rev. 20.4. 2 Pet. 3.13. which he will then create, according to his pro∣mise: And if it be more than probable, that the old fur∣niture being all consumed, the face, and superficies of the Earth, and Rivers (for there shall be no Sea) shall be beautified,Rev. 21.1. and adorned anew, with such several kinds, of vegetative, and sensitive Creatures, as shall be for the delight, and benefit of the glorified Saints; All which Creatures shall be new made, and produced, as they were in the first Creation, out of the several refined, and incor∣ruptible Elements; that so they may have a possibility, if God please,Rom. 8.20, 21, 22. like them, to be everlasting; and be deli∣vered from the curse, vanity, and bondage of Corruption (that the first Adams sin had, though unwillingly sub∣jected
them to) into the glorious liberty of the Children of God, by the second Adam, the Lord Jesus Christ, the restorer of all things, lost by the first, unto their primi∣tive, though far better condition: And if so; shall the great glory, goodness, wisdome, and other excellencies of Christ declared, and held forth, in the sweet-smelling Aire, and in the odoriferous, and most rare perfumes, breathed forth (as being an Elixa compared with what they were) from Spice, and fruit-bearing Trees, Plants, and Flowers, be clouded, and as it were lost, for want of the sense of smelling, to conveigh them to the under∣standing, that so it, and the whole Man, may therefore, and in these his wondrous works, praise, adore, admire, and worship God? especially, since at this time, this so greatly heightned, and meliorated Book of Nature shall be a glorious, if not (the Scriptures being now fulfilled) the only Book of God. Again,Mark 14.25. shall the new Wine spo∣ken of by our blessed Saviour, in the Kingdome of God, and the promise of eating and drinking with him at his Table in his Kingdome; The Tree of Life, the sweet Springs, Chrystal Rivers, and Waters of Life,Luke 22.30. Rev. 22.1, 2. or living Waters, (for so Springs are called) spoken of and allu∣ded to, in the 22. of the Revelations, and in many other Scriptures (wherein I exclude not high and mysterious Allegories also to be held forth;) I say, shall these be in vain, and signify nothing? Shall also all those most mel∣lifluous Roots, Fruits, and Plants, that in this blessed, and new-birth of things, shall be delivered from corrup∣tion; and therefore shall not as now they do, defile the body, and turn into putrifaction, nor leave, after all the Concoctions of Nature, a remainder of stinking dregs, which since Sin, Nature, by an instinct of self-preservation is forced to expulse and exonerate it self off; shall they I say want this pleasing and distinguishing sense of tast∣ing, to glorify all the attributes and wonderfull name of God, in the use, benefit and enjoyment of them? If the delight and use of this, and all other of the senses now, is not only lawfull, but commanded; and the Saints may, and do greatly glorify God in the fruition of them; And these deligh are only in a Scripture-sence become
sinfull, and sensual, to the wicked, whose sin, and mix∣ture of corruption, adulterates, defiles, and turns the use and exercise of the senses, upon their several objects, or subjects into sin; shall they not be much more usefull, and necessary to the Saints glorified, in their sinless con∣dition; when the whole Soul, Body, Members, and Sen∣ses, shall all co-operate in their several functions and of∣fices, to Gods great glory, and their own? Further, it is not improbable, that although the Root, Fountain, Con∣firmation, and Eternity of the Saints life, flowes prima∣rily, from their spiritual union and communion with God in Christ; yet as a medium, or a secondary, and natural means (for our God is Natura Naturans) this way as it was,Genes. 1.29. and should have been made use of in Paradise, may be still continued to nourish, delight, and be subservient (as the Rain is to the Plants, although the Earth is their great Mother) to Eternal Life in the Saints. And such no doubt, was the Tree of Life (not excluding it to be of a Sacramental nature also) to our first Parents, before their Fall. All which is evident, from the reason God gives, of their speedy exclusion, from their continuance, or return into Paradise to eat thereof,Gen. 3.22, 24. Lest they should eat thereof, and live for ever. Now that Paradise was a Figure, and Pattern, none I conceive will deny this of the Saints, unto which the Lord Jesus was sent to re∣store us. Although this is much better and higher, as to the degrees of our happiness, and condition; by how much the second Adam, and publick head of the Saints, is much higher, and more excellent than the first Adam, or common Head, and Root of Man-kind. Fifthly, if no use of the sense of gust, or tasting; or that in this our glorified state, in the new Heaven, and the new Earth; there shall be no eating, or drinking; For I presume not to give here any judgment, as to the exercise of these two senses of tasting, and smelling, in the highest degree of the Saints Glory, in the Heaven of Heavens, when the Mediatory Kingdome of Christ, shall have an end, and shall be delivered up to God the Father,1 Cor. 15.24, 28. that God may be All in All, I having much less light from Scripture, or reason, probably to know, or guess what shall be the ex∣ercise
and object of these senses in those super-excelling, and glorious Regions, than in this new Earth, which is to be renewed and restored to us, by our Lord Jesus the second Adam: I say, if the Saints glorified shall not eat, nor drink in that new Heaven and Earth, what shall be∣come of, or what use shall be made of most of the inter∣nal Members, or parts of the Body? Of which, as to their most excellent frame, great number, and use, skilfull Anatomists, have written large Volumes, to the glory of the wisdome, power, and work of God, in them. Shall the glorified Bodies be like an empty Trunck, void of a stomack, liver, guts, bowels, bladder, and the rest? If so, as it is contrary to the Scripture, which saith, The same Bodies shall be raised; which includes all the internal, as well as the external parts of the Body; so what use shall be made of these, of the Teeth, and the rest; if there be no eating, or drinking, nor employment of them, as a natural and secondary means, still ordained of God, for the nourishment and continuation of a healthfull and e∣qual temperament, called by Philosophers Temperamen∣tum ad pondus aequale, and as for the everlasting Well-being of the Body? Sixthly, It is a Maxime in nature, and made good by experience, that all animate and com∣pounded Creatures on Earth, are nourished and preser∣ved in their being, by feeding upon such things as are compounded of the like Elements, of the which they partake. And is it not more than probable, that the Saints glorified bodies, the time they continue on the renewed Earth, shall as by a natural and middle way, be delighted, nourisht, preserved and continued, as to their Bodies, by drinking the simple and refined Water, and juices of the Vine, and other the then incorruptible fruits (as before in Paradise?) And by eating the super-excelling fruits, Plants,Gen. verse 29. compared with Gen. 9. & 3. and Roots (the subject of our Fathers nourish∣ment before Noah's Flood) being a mixture and com∣position, even of the same repurged matter and Elements of which our new-raised and glorified bodies consist, may therefore both in reason and nature, (God according to his former Method, so ordaining it) be most proper and subservient to the end afore-mentioned? Which end be∣ing
finisht, these compounded substances being in the bo∣dy, as in a limbeck separated, may by insensible trans∣piration, or otherways, revert each part of them again, to its proper Element, and by a circulation (as now) without annihilation, continue and preserve the being of the whole new Heaven, and new Earth, without the least diminution. But it may be objected, that our bles∣sed Saviour declares, in his answer to the Sadduces, that the glorified Saints, shall at the Resurrection, be as, and equal to the Angels;Math. 22.30. but the Angels neither eat nor drink. To which objection,Luke 20.36. I give this double answer, that first, he saith not we shall be like, but as, and equal to the Angel: And besides, it is unknown to us, (as I said be∣fore) how their life and being is continued and preser∣ved. We know they live, and believe they shall live ever, and that they are spiritual substances; but what their formes are, whether they can be circumscrib'd, as our Bodies are, or only defined to be in such or such a place, this is discoursed of, but not ascertained. The curious learned, yea, some possibly too curious, have in their writings affirmed, that they have conversed, seen, and spoken with Angels. That they have bodies, although so spiritual, and like the light, that they cannot be seen, but when they please themselves; and that they have a nourishment, conducing to their being, of an etherial na∣ture, connatural and agreeable to their spiritual substan∣ces. From all which, I infer, that unless our Saviours ex∣pression, that we shall be like the Angels; or any other Scripture, had excluded the Angels from eating, or drink∣ing, or receiving any nourishment, by which in their man∣ner their substances are refreshed and continued, (for nothing but God subsists of it self, and from its self) the Angels may be nourished as aforesaid. And as for seeing, hearing, and touching, the Scripture testifie the Angels exercise them all; although in a more excellent manner than we do. That expression of our Saviour [yee shall be like the Angels] excludes not, nor proves any thing against the eating, or drinking of the glorified Saints, during their abode in the new Heaven, and the new Earth. My second answer is, that this speech
of our blessed Lord, is a proper, full, and positive answer, to the question of the Sadduces, whose Wife should the Woman be that had seven Husbands, at the Resurrection? That since the Saints then shall neither marry, nor be gi∣ven in marriage, but shall in that respect be like the An∣gels, that their invincible Argument (as they conceived it) was void, and proved nothing, against the Doctrine of the Resurrection. Therefore it is to be limited, and restrained, and not to be extended, as to exclude the eating, and drinking of the glorified Saints: which was not at all in the question. For if so, it may be brought as well to prove, that they shall in all things else be like the Angels: which I humbly conceive, no Man will, or hath asserted; since, in many things (were it proper to be treated of upon this subject) I could shew a manifold difference betwixt the Angels, and the glorified Saints. This being sufficient, and a clear and full answer to that objection, I shall now proceed to speak more particularly, although very succinctly, as having in the six foregoing reasons, or preliminaries, spoken more than I intended, and given sufficient satisfaction to my self, and I hope to others, both from Scripture, and reason, as to this Subject. First, as to the sight, or sense of Seeing; the Eye,Of the sence of seeing glo∣rified. (al∣though by Oculists, Naturalists, and Anatomists, it is now placed in the first rank of the bodies parts, or members, as a subject wherein the most excellent, and wonderfull wisdome of God is greatly manifested, and that not on∣ly, as in respect of its curious fabrick, but admirable way, and manner of conveighing, and representing objects, to the Soul, whether Extra, or intra mittendo, or by both, is not my work now to dispute, or determine; yet then it shall, as to its optick use, and faculty, be much more wonderfully bettered, heighthned, and enlarged; and that, first, as to its objects. Now, the best Eye, cannot immediately behold the Sun shining in its brightness, any time, with fixedness, without twinckling, trouble, and danger of blindness;Ezek. 1.28. Dan. 8.17, 18. and as though it was asham'd of its weakness, is presently vailed with a tear. Now a Daniel, an Ezekiel, cannot look upon, or behold an Angel, with∣out
astonishment,Dan. 8.9. and falling to the ground upon their faces, as being not able to behold their created glory. But after the Resurrection, we shall with these Eyes (as Job speaks) not only behold the glorified Saints, that shine as the Sun, and are as so many millions of Suns; but the glorious Angels, and our Redeemer the Lord Je∣sus Christ,Malach. 4.2. Revel. 22.4. the brightest Sun of righteousness; and shall see God, as he is; yea, we shall see him face to face, and live. This is that everlasting and glorious beatifical Visi∣on of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the for ever blessed Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, so much spoken of by the ancient Fathers; in which, as in a most bright cleer mirror, the Saints shall behold (their Eyes being herein assistants to their Souls) all things God is pleased to reveal, and so far as a created nature is capable of past, and present, and to come. As also the natures, virtues, and qualities of all the Creatures; not as now, by their effects, but in their cause, Idea, and truth: yea, the high,1 Cor. 2.10. and deep things of God. The second excellency of this glorified sense of sight, as to its strength, in respect of objects, that are far di∣stant, is, That whereas now our Eyes, without the help of Perspective-Glasses, cannot discern, or clearly distin∣guish, and inform us of the things upon Earth, some few miles off, and are much inferiour to Eagles, and Vultures; of whom Naturalists report, That when by high flying, they are so lessened, as not to be discerned by our Eyes, yet they can behold a little quarry upon the ground, and their prey, although many miles distant from them: and that now, through the imbecility, and weakness of our sight, in a clear day, we judge the skie to be of an azure colour; whereas truly, it hath no colour, but is only so represented; being only by a vaster distance, and the inter∣mediate Aire, enlightened by the Sun; and that distance, beyond the extent of our weak Eyes, upon the level of the Earth, seems to be dark or black: But hereafter at the Resurrection, the Eye being the Instrument and Or∣gan, through, and by which, the Soul beholds all things, shall be so strengthened, that it shall thereby behold, things very far distant. Else it should lose by union
with the body, that excellency of sight, it had as a Spirit before it re-entred into the Body; It being clear, and e∣vident that the Angels and Spirits excell all other living Creatures, as to the activity and extent of seeing; That evil spirit the Devil, being able to behold,Math. 4.8. and represent to our blessed Saviour, from the top of a high Mountain, all the Kingdomes of the World (that is of that Hemis∣phere,Genes. 21.17. and semi-circle of the Earth) and the glory of them (a most vast view and prospect;) so also the An∣gel of God called unto Hagar,Genes. 22.11. and afterwards to Abra∣ham, out of Heaven. A third admirable excellency of the Eye glorified, is the wonderfull life and beauty of it. Now, it is the chief Ornament, and grace of the Face, in Men, or Women; but then it shall super-excell, what it is now, as much as the Eye of a living Man transcends the Eye of one that is dead. Which life, splendor, and beauty, doth not only proceed from the glorification of the Eye, as apart, and member of the glorified body, but from those spirit-full and sparkling rayes, sent forth from the within glorious Souls: which like the Sun-beams shining through, and upon the purest Chrystal; shall cause the Eye to shine with a most delightfull, and unexpressible radiancy and splendor; much like to that wonderfull and visional appearance of our Head, and sample, the Lord Jesus, to Saint John, of whom it is written,Revel. 1.14. That his Eyes were as a Flame of Fire. O my Soul, shall thy sence of seeing,Soliloquium. attain to such a height of perfection, as to be able not only to behold glorified Saints, and Angels, but the much more resplen∣dent face of thy glorious Saviour, yea, of God himself; shall it be so greatly fortified, as to surveigh like the An∣gels, things remotely distant; shall thy eyes be so beauti∣full, and radiant, as to shine and sparkle like the Stars of the first magnitude; O resolve and endeavour by the assistance of Gods free grace, not to vassalage and de∣base them, by beholding Earthly vanities; much less to make use, and imploy them, as the Pandors of Sathan, and the Dung-ports of sinfull lusts, and lasciviousness; like the Men of this World, Whose Eyes are full of Adul∣tery,
and uncleanness. But let them, according to the end, for which they were created, be wholly employed, in beholding and admiring the glory of God, in his won∣derfull works, held forth in the bright-shining Stars, and Planets, and in the splendor of the Moon, and Sun. Let them be also helpfull Instruments, to conveigh unto thee continual matter of praise, and admiration, as to the wisdome of thy Creator, in the consideration and medi∣tation, not only as to the excellent, and universal frame of Heaven and Earth, but as to the great variety and beauty of each particular Creature; so shall this their Heavenly and holy exercise prepare thee and them for a greater measure of perfect Glory. Ejaculation.O blessed Spouse, and dear Saviour, who hast said to thy Church, and to each true Member thereof; Behold, thou art fair my love,Cant. 1.15. behold thou art fair, thou hast Doves eyes; as holding forth by that meek spleenless, and loyal Bird, the sweetness, revengelesness, and purity of thy Saints; Be graciously pleased, I beseech thee, to Create in me a clean heart,Psal. 51.10. and renew a right spirit with∣in me, that my Eyes may be Dove-like, chast, and faith∣full to thee, my spiritual husband; remembring thy Word, that whosoever looks upon a Woman, to lust after her, hath committed Adultery with her already in his heart;Math. 5.28. O give unto me therefore such a measure of grace, as thou gavest to thy Servant Job, to make a Covenant with my Eyes,Job 31.1. why then should I think upon a Maid? Shall I in my Flesh see God,Job 19.26, 27. whom I shall see for my self, shall these mine Eyes behold thee my Redeemer, and not a∣nother? O make me now carefull and watchfull, not to defile them, with any vain, or impure objects; But since I cannot now immediately behold thee, let me mediat∣ly contemplate, and view thee, and all thy excellencies, and attributes, in the Glass, and mirror of thy Creatures; for by thee all things were made;John 1.3. and without thee, was not any thing made,Colos. 1.17. that was made, and by thee all things consists. So shall my Eyes by this help, and per∣spective of nature, look into Heaven, and be in a kind, and degree, glorified; and inable my mind to behold thee, so vastly distant from me. Yea, they shall be the
two Wings of my Soul, and carry it with happy Paul, into the third Heaven,2 Cor. 12.2. and behold thee there in thine un∣utterable, and inconceivable glory. Lord shall my Eyes at the Resurrection, be so lovely, beautifull, and radiant, suffer them not now I pray thee, to be purblinded by un∣lawfull, or unsatiable lust; nor to be put out by bribes, which make blind the Eyes of the wise; nor bleared,Deut. 16.19. nor deformed by excess, or drunkenness. For,Prov. 23.29, 30. Who hath red∣ness of Eyes? They that tarry long at the Wine; they that go to seek mixt Wine. Let them not be blood-shotten with malice, nor stormy with pride, and ambition, nor squinting after the things of this vain World; not fiery with passion, and sinfull anger; nor dull, and heavy, through sloth, idleness, and an evil melancholy; nor winking through subtilty, and deceit. But let my Eyes,Prov. 6.13. O Lord, be enlightened by thee, and be chast, and lo∣ving like the Dove. Yea,Ezra. 9.8. let me through Justice scatter away all evil with my Eyes, and shut them from seeing evil. Let my Eyes through faith, wait upon thee,Prov. 26.8. even as the Eyes of Servants look unto the hand of their Ma∣sters,Isai. 33.15. Psal. 123.2. and as the Eyes of a Maiden unto the hand of her Mistris; yea, give me pure Eyes like thee, who canst not behold iniquity; so shall not my Eyes betray my Soul, but watch over it; not poison it, but enliven it; be beau∣tifull in thy Eyes, and in the Eyes of thy Saints, and shine here with holiness and purity, hereafter in Glory, Amen. As the Eyes are the Espials,Of the sense of hearing glo∣rified. so the Eares are the Intel∣ligencers of the Soul; by which it receives a general in∣formation of all things, and are very usefull in this mi∣serable life, wherein sin, ignorance, and all manner of troubles abound; for its reproof, instruction, and conso∣lation. But this is not only their use, together with that grace, and Ornament, they add to the Head, they being in the rank of the principal Members of the Body; For they are not only the common receipt of all vocal sounds, and so of great profit, and emolument to the Soul; But they are the curious ports, inlets, and artifice of nature, to conveigh unto the Soul, all other sounds; whether they be such as are pleasant, and musical, for the delight thereof; or of such noises as are of use▪ to premonish, and
give warning; or of such sounds also, which are wonder∣full, terrible, harsh, and unpleasant, and ought to raise a holy fear, reverence, and admiration in the Soul; to wit of God, the cause and Creator of them: Such as are the out cries, and skreeking of Creatures, rational, or unrati∣onal; the hideous bellowings, and terrible roarings of wilde Beasts; the hissing of Serpents, the Cataracts of Wa∣ters, the raging of Seas; the blustering of Winds, and Tempests; and the Worlds astonishing and affrighting noise, of all kinds of Artillery, Earth-quakes, and Thun∣der; besides many other sounds of like nature. Having observed and declared the principal uses and exercise of the sense of Hearing in this life, I shall with the greater clearness hold forth, and distinguish of the much differ∣ing use, and far more excellent exercise thereof, after the Resurrection in the glorified body, upon the renew∣ed Earth. Now our sight is far more quick, and extensive, than our hearing, as is demonstrable, in our beholding the flame of the Powder, and the flash of lightning, some time before we can hear the report of the Cannon, or the clap of Thunder, although the light in both is con∣temporary with the sound. Now, we cannot hear the Voices and Hymns of Angels, by reason of their spiri∣tualness, and the groseness, and earthliness of our sense; unless they in condescention to our weakness, as they did to the Shepwards,Luke 2.13. at the birth of our Saviour, imitate a humane voice; But then I humbly conceive, that sense shall be so strengthened, heightned, and spiritualiz'd, that it shall be as perfect, and quick, as the sight; and by it we shall both hear, and understand the Angels hea∣venly Language; that we may joyn in one consort with them, in the praising of God; And in holy Alleluja's, as the Apostle John seems to imply,Revel. 19.6. in his Visions; I heard (saith he) as it were the voice of a great Multitude, and as the voice of many Waters, and as the voice of many Thunders, saying Alleluja, for the Lord God Omnipo∣tent raigneth;Revel. 5.11. And again, I heard the voice of many Angels round about the Throne, and the Beasts, and the Elders, and the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands, saying with
a loud voice, worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdome, and strength, and ho∣nour, and glory, and blessing. The like conunct praises and acclamations of glorified Saints; and Angels,Revel. 7.9, 10, 11, 12. we may read also in the Revelations, Chapter the 7. Verse the 9, 10, 11, 12. which for brevity sake I omit. Now, this sense administers terror, as well as pleasure to the Soul, as hath been shewed by tremendous sounds. Yea Adam, after his fall, for fear,Genes. 3.8. hid himself amongst the Trees of the Garden, when he heard the voice of God. And the Children of Israel said,Exod. 20.19. let not God speak with us, lest we dye; and holy Paul, and John could not hear the voice of our Lord Jesus Christ without fall∣ing to the ground, and astonishment.Acts 9.4, 5. But in the new Earth,Rev. 1.17, 18. (where there shall be no more curse) there shall be no sounds that are harsh, and affrighting,Revel. 21.1. but such as shall be exceeding ravishing, and delightfull,Revel. 22 3. and as Mu∣sick to the Soul; even such unspeakable words, as bles∣sed Paul heard, when he was caught up into Paradise.2 Cor. 12.4. Then shall we, being placed in glory, at the right hand of our righteous King, and Saviour, hear with boldness, and without fear, or astonishment, that most joyfull sen∣tence, Come yee blessed of my Father,Mat. 25.34. inherit the King∣dome prepared for you, from the foundation of the World. Then shall we hear that great voice of God, the Father,Revel. 21.3, 5. who sits upon the Throne, saying, Behold I make all things new, the Tabernacle of God is with Men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his People, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God. Then shall these words which are faithfull and true be fulfil∣led, God shall wipe away all teares from their Eyes;Rev. 21.4, and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying; neither shall there be any more pain, for the former things are passed away; I am Alpha, and Omega, the beginning and the end; I will give unto him that is athirst,6, of the Fountain of the Water of Life freely; he that overcometh,7. shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my Son. To conclude, I shall not say any thing as to the Mu∣sick of the Sphears, as esteeming them to be only ground∣less
dreams, and phantasies of Heathens, and Phyloso∣phers. I humbly conceive, that as far as the glorious Hea∣vens and Angels transcend, and excells the nw Earth, and the Inhabitants thereof; so far shall the ravishing, and musical voices, and sounds, in this glorified state of the Saints, excell all the pleasures and delights of this kind, in this our low and corruptible condition. O my Soul, shall the sense of Hearing in the next life, be as comprehensive and perfect,Soliloquium. in its kinde, as the sense of Sight? Shall it be made capable, not only of Hearing, and that with understanding also, the Musick of Heaven, the all-ravishing Hymns, the mellifluous speech and voices of Angels, the Language of Glory; as also to hear him,Rev. 1.10, 1, Hebr. 12.23. Rev. 19.16. Revel. 15.3. Jerem. 10.7. John 1.1. whose voice is as a Trumpet, and as the noise of many Waters; of him who is the Judge of Hea∣ven and Earth, the King of Kings, the King of Saints, and the King of Nations; the Eternal Word, the Lord Jesus Christ, God-Man, blessed for ever? Yea, shalt thou then O my Soul, by the assistance of this glorified sense, hear, not as now the dreadfull, and killing, but the all delighting, reviving, exalting, and transporting voice of the ever glorious Trinity, even of the Eternal God, Him∣self? O let not this so excellent, and usefull a sense, be deboist so much, as to be the Gate, or in-let of vain, and unprofitable discourses; of wanton and lascivious words; or of any kind of false, slanderous, or evil speeches; all which are as so many Traytors to thee, and Enemies unto thy God, and Soveraign. Nor let thy Eares be ur∣feited, and excessively glutted, with any kind of earthly Musick, or with the pleasing sounds, or voices of any of thy fellow-Creatures; which although lawfull, delight∣full, and refreshing to the natural and animal Spirits, as being neer a Kin to them, yet by the subtilty of Sathan, the World, and thy Flesh, do frequently become snares, and an undiscernable, flattering, and therefore the more dangerous Enemy, and means to pollute thee with sin, or to introduce some kind of fleshly lust, or other. But be∣gin (even now) O my Soul, to exercise every sense, and member, upon such objects, and in such employments and actings, as come neerest to those of Angels, and glo∣rified
Saints. This is, to make this Earth a Paradise, and to have, even whilst thou art in this World, (as the Apo∣stle exhorts) thy conversation in Heaven. To this end, let thy delight be with holy David, in the converse of the excellent ones upon Earth, yea, watch dayly at the Gates of Wisdome, and wait at the Posts of her Doors;Prov. 8.34. yea, with attention hang upon the Lips of her Teachers. Be much in the exercises of the Church Tryumphant, in praising God, in the Assemblies of his Saints; in Psalms,Psal. 111.1. and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, singing with grace,Ephes. 5.19. and making Melody in your heart. So shalt thou, O my Soul, by a sanctified, spiritual, and internal sense, hee fre∣quently, even in this thy state of humiliation, the coun∣sels, and instructions of blessed Angels, the voice of God▪ and of his holy Spirit, viz. thy Father, and Comforter behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk thou in it;Isay 30.21. And the loving expressions, and invitations of thy most sweet and gracious Spouse, and Saviour;Cant. 2.9. who standing behind the Wall of thy Flesh, and looking forth at the Windowes of several Providences, and shewing himself through the Lattess of thy intervening, and impeding weakness, and infirmity, will often speak unto thee, say∣ing, Arise up my love, my fair one, and come away; For loe the Winter is past, of thy doubts, fears, sufferings,Cant. 2.10. and temptations; The rain of thy teares, and mourning is over, and gone; The Flowers of my saving gifts,11, which evidence the Spring of my Grace, appears on the Earth,12, of thy renewed nature. The time of the singing of Birds, the earnest, and witness of my Spirit, and of thy consci∣ence, assuring thee of my love, and salvation, is come;13. and the voice of me the true Turtle, is heard in the Land, even in thy Soul, my Habitation; The Figg-Tree putteth forth her green Figges, and the Vines with the tender Grapes, give a good smell, viz. thou art fruitfull in all holy, and good works; Now therefore arise my love, my fair one, and come away; and inherit the King∣dome prepared for thee before the Foundation of the World.Math. 25.34. O my gracious Lord, and Saviour,Ejaculation. who when thou wert upon Earth, in the zeal of thy Spirit, cryed out un∣to
thy Auditors,math. 11.15. He that hath Eares to hear, let him hear; and didst declare and expound the Words of thy Pro∣phet;Ezek. 12.2. That there should be many that hear, but under∣stand not, intimating to us, thereby, that there is a spi∣ritual, and internal sense of hearing, that many want that have the bodily sence, and Organ; O thou which openedst the heart of Lidia,Acts 16.14. as well as her Eares, when she gave attention to Paul's preaching, and said to the deaf Man in the Gospel,mark 7.34. Ephtata, and his Eares were o∣pened, give me an understanding Eare, as well as thou hast given me an Ear of Flesh, that I may both hear, and understand, know, and obey thy will, declared unto me by the Ministers of thy Word. Yea, let my Eares be al∣ways open, to receive, entertain, and retain the holy in∣structions, consolations, reproofes, and encouragement of any of thy faithfull Servants, and my fellow-members, and Brethren. But let them through thy grace be turned away, sealed up, and guarded against the Syrene Songs of all Sin, and Sinners; And if by force, or surprie, oaths, curing, lying, slandering▪ blasphemies, vain, lasci∣vious, or any other evil speeches, enter, let my heart and Tongue, hate, scourge, and execute thy Law, upon them, by a zealous and holy reproof, (if the Speakers be not Dogs or Swine) giving them a pass, and sending th packing.math. 7.6. O blessed Lord, let not the delightfull sounds of Musick, nor the natural, or artificial pleasing voices of any Creature, be thy rival, steal away in the least my time, or heart from thee. Nor let me with the Whore of Babylon, and her Imitators, carnally, legally, and only outwardly, give thee an unwarrantable, and un-Gospel-like Ear, and service, without my understanding, and without my heart. But give me to joyn with, and delight to hear the Musick of the lower Heaven, the Songs, Psalmes, and praisings of thee in the Congregations of the Saints. That being trained up to have a Childs place in this blessed Chore upon Earth, I may be fitted and pre∣ferred to have a Man's place, in the glorious Quire of Saints and Angels in Heaven. O Lord, let me I beseech thee, not only externally, but internally, hear thy voice, for it is sweet,Cant. 2.14. that my Soul may be inwardly acquainted
with the Dialect of Heaven; so shall my Soul speak and answer thee, in the same Angel-like Language, in men∣tal, and Ejaculatory Prayers, and praises here, (a service not only required, but most acceptable to thee) and with Ear, and Heart, hereafter, hear thee, and return unto thee in Soul, and Body, praises, and glorify thee Eter∣nally in the Heavens, Amen. Having in the six foregoing preliminaries,Of the sense of Tasting glo∣rified. in all hu∣mility, declared my Opinion, answered the chief objecti∣ons, and given the reason and ground thereof, both from Scripture, and the light of Nature; As also shewed the necessary, happy, and spiritual use and end of the Saints exercise, of all the Five Senses; as tending much more to the glory of God, and the increase of their innocent, and spiritual delight, compleat happiness and blessedness, both in Soul, and Body, in that their glorified state: I shall not need to add much more, as concerning the sense of Tasting, which undoubtedly shall, as well, as that of Seeing, and Hearing, be much meliorated, and height∣ned in this life of Glory: It being cleerly evident, and agreeable to right reason, that as the objects and sub∣jects, upon which this Sense shall be frequently exercised, (be they things potable, as Waters, Juices, and Liquors; or things edible, as Roots, Flowers, Plants, Hearbs, and Fruits) shall much excell, not only in their powers, ver∣tues, and beauty, but also in their juice and relish, the choicest of that kind, now in being, as hath been for∣merly evinced, and illustrated, by reason of their new birth and incorruptible nature: so shall our senses, and particularly this of the Taste, be wonderfully enlarged and raised, and proportionably fitted, and enabled ac∣curately, to distinguish and discern of the different, and innumerable excellencies, as to their taste (by which, e∣ven now, a skilfull Naturalist can give a right judgment, as to their vertues) of such a multitude of simples, and individuals, that so, by the exquisitness of this sense, our Souls and Bodies may not only be made the more happy and blessed, but delighted in the use of Gods good Crea∣tures, as the medium and conveighance of nourishment, ordained of God (as formerly in Mans innocency) to be
usefull, and subservient, although not absolutely neces∣sary to our glorious and Eternal Life; (we having a far more virtual, and higher Root of Life, for our life is hid in Christ with God):Colos. 3.3. And also that by the testimony of this sense, both Soul and Body may be the more enlar∣ged, and lifted up in the praises, admiration, and adora∣tion of the wisdome, power, mercy, and goodness of our God, the Creator, giver, and free restorer of such ma∣nifold, and wonderfull blessings, in and by his Eternal∣ly, begotten, and only beloved Son, our Head, and Spouse, the Lord Jesus Christ. As for the killing or eating of the Flesh of any of the sensible Creatures, (I humbly con∣ceive) and that upon good grounds, there shall not then be any such use of them; they being now made incor∣ruptible, and in their nature as everlasting, as the Ele∣ments, out of which they are taken; and so shall conti∣nue, by vertue of this new Creation, so long as it plea∣seth God. The food of the Saints, in this new Earth, being only a lightning, and exonerating the fruit-bear∣ing vegitives, that so they may be continually bringing forth new harvests to the glory of their Creator, not a bringing in bondage, or unto destruction any of the Crea∣tures, now delivered and admitted to enjoy the glorious liberty of the Children of God.Rom. 8.21. This blessed state being as it were Paradise revived, a new Creation, and restau∣ration of all things, in this new Heaven, and new Earth, (by the obedience, merit, and righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ, the second Adam, although much more transcending) of what was lost by the fall, sin, and dis∣obedience of the first Adam. That last Paradise, being intended in the Eternal wisdome, and decree of God (as I humbly conceive, and seems to me now to be clearly manifested) to be but the Type,John 1.3. Colos. 15 16.17.18. Heb. 1.2. 1 Cor. 15.23. Revel. 3.4. shaddow, and figure of this; all things being made by, and for him, who is the Heir of all things, the Head, and Spouse of his Church, the first-fruits of them that sleep; the beginning, and the first-born from the dead, and the first-born of every Creature, and the beginning of the Creation of God. I shall now conclude this subject, with this monition to all true Christians, not to suppose or dream here of the
Poets Elysian Field, or of a Turkish Paradise, in this glo∣rious state; nor to be so sinfully carnal, as to imagine that the sinless Souls, and Bodies of the new raised, and glo∣rified Saints, either shall, or can abuse this Sense, by any excess, and make it instrumental, as now, to sensuality, gluttony, and drunkenness; nor on the other extream, let no Christian be so unbelievingly spiritual, as contrary to Scripture, (that affirms the same Bodies shall be raised) to deny what it asserts, as an object of our faith: nor so absurd, and irrational, (as the Papists in their Doctrine of Transubstantiation) to deny to our Bodies raised, the properties, parts, and senses, of which a true Body sub∣sists, thereby to destroy the true nature, and essence of the Body; all that are truly Saints, being practically and experimentally assured, that if in this life, wherein we are incompast about with a Body of Sin, and Death, this sense, and the rest, may be, and is spiritually made use of, by us, in the enjoyment of Gods good Creatures, to his great praise, and admiration; then, much more, will they be beneficial, and He, be honoured in them, by us, in that our sinless condition, and life of Glory. O my Soul, shall thy sense of Tasting,Soliloquium. be not only re∣tained, but exceedingly perfected, greatly enlarged, and elevated, at thy Bodies Resurrection, and glorious living with thy Head, the Lord Jesus Christ, upon the renewed Earth? Shalt thou eat, and drink, as our Saviour did thrice after his Resurrection, probably to shew,Luke 24.30, 43. Joh. 21.12, 13. not only that his Body was truly raised, and that his stay upon Earth, was a figure, and pattern of his Saints first degree of Glory, here, after their Resurrection, as his, was his first degree of glory, and exaltation, after his: but also, that they should accidentally, and at pleasure, as he did, although not out of a positive, and natural necessity, eat, drink, and make use of the Creatures? Shall thy body, not only have a kinde of secondary nourishment, (as our first Parents had in Paradise) conveighed unto it, with a far more exceeding, and extraordinary delight that they had, because of the excelling transcendency of the sub∣jects, and their much more sanctified, and spiritualiz'd condition; But shall the Taste also administer to thee,
continually much delight and knowledge from the unex∣pressible sweetness, and wonderfull variety of innumera∣ble Vegitives, as to their admirable natures and qualities, to thy great content and ravishment, and thy Creators glory? O do not therefore now vitiate, and pollute it, with gluttony, or drunkenness; nor make it a slavish Hand∣maid,Prov. 23.19. to any fleshly and inordinate appetite: Be wise, and guide thy heart in the way; be not amongst Wine-bibers,20, amongst riotous eaters of flesh, for the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty.21, Who hath woe, who hath sorrow,29, who hath contentions, who hath bab∣ling,30, who hath wounds without cause, who hath redness of the Eyes? They that tarry long at the Wine, they that go to seek mixt Wine.31, Look not thou upon the Wine when it is red, when it giveth its colour in the Cup, when it moveth it self aright, at the last it biteth like a Serpent,32. and stingeth like an Adder; Thine Eyes shall behold strange Women, and thy Heart shall utter per∣verse things;Prov. 23.33, yea, thou shalt be as he that lyeth down in the midst of the Sea,34, or as he that lyeth upon the top of a Mast;35, They have striken me, shalt thou say, and I was not sick; they have beaten me, and I felt it not; when I shall awake, I will seek it yet again. O my Soul, in that new life thou shalt only eat and drink (as the Apostle exhorts) to the glory of God, and more for pleasure and delight (and that as to spiritual ends) than for necessi∣ty;Prov. 23.2. but in this sinfull life, if thou be given to appetite, put a Knife to thy throat, and watch over thy gust, eat∣ing and drinking more for necessity, than for pleasure, as one that eats to live, not lives to eat; not making (like those wicked ones reproved by the Apostle Paul) thy Belly thy God; But like thy for ever glorious and bles∣sed Saviour,Phil. 3.19. John 2.9. at all seasonable Feastings, do thou turn Water into Wine, that is, be a holy and Christian Phy∣losopher or Chymist, extracting Life and Spirits out of every thing, thou eatest or drinkest, as tasting in the va∣rious gusts, sweetness and vertues of the Creature, the super-excelling sweetness, wisdome and goodness of thy God, the bountifull giver, and the wonderfull Creator; Do not with the Swinish and dropsical Drunkard, turn
Wine into Water; but in thy Non-age so train up this Childish sense, in all holy temperance and sobriety, that it may be prepared and fitted for its sublimer exercise, in thy Man-hood of Glory. O my Lord and Saviour, who art both our example,Ejaculation. and our Law-giver, and therefore hast commanded us not to labour for the Meat that perisheth,John 6.27. but for that Meat which endureth unto everlasting life; and doth ex∣hort, and precaution us, to take heed to our selves, that our hearts be not over-charged with surfeiting,Luke 21.34. and drunkenness, lest that Day (either of Death, or Judg∣ment) come upon us unawares; and hast also declared, by thy Apostle, that Meats are for the Belly, and the Belly is for Meats, but God shall destroy them both;1 Cor. 6.16. and therefore didst exhort and teach us, how to purify, and spiritualize our fleshly gust, and appetite by faith; offer∣ing thy self to be drunk and eaten by us, when thou saidest, My Blood is Drink indeed,John 6.54, 55. my Flesh is Meat in∣deed; affording to us such an excellent nourishment, that who so by faith spiritually eateth thy Flesh, and drink∣eth thy Blood, shall not dye, but live to Eternity: Yea, further thou holdest forth to us,John 6.58. that thou art that Bread that camest down from Heaven, (of which the Manna in the Wilderness was but a Type) which whosoever eateth (by faith) that is, by believing in thee, shall not dye, but live for ever; as also that thou art that Water of Life, of which whosoever drinketh, shall thirst no more:John 4.13, 14. O Lord, I cry unto thee with the Emauites, Lord, ever give unto me to eat of this Bread, and to drink of this living Spring; then shall I be so fully satisfied, that I shall never hunger or thirst more after any of the things of this World; The lusts of the Flesh, the lusts of the Eyes,1 John 2.16. or the pride of life: yea Lord, I shall not only have e∣nough for my self, but such plenty, as there-with to feast others also, as being enabled to say with thy beloved Apostle, That which was from the beginning,1 John 1.1. which we have head, which we have seen with our Eyes, which we have looked upon, (yea that which we have tasted) and our hands have handled, of the Word of Life, de∣clare we unto you, that yee may have fellowship with us,3,
(and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and his Son, even with thee O Lord Jesus Christ:) Lord give unto thy Servant an internal taste, as well as thou hast given me an external sense; that I may with holy David, both taste,Psal. 34.8. and see, how good the Lord is; and binde the one Apprentice to the other, making it serviceable to my Soul, and unto thee; Then shall I enjoy a double relish, and sweetness, in every drop of drink, and bit of meat, as being a love-token from thee, and an earnest of Eter∣nal Life, and nourishment in thee; so shall my Earthly Pallate, at no time injure, deceive, or pollute, my spiri∣tual sense; as Noah's, and Lot's did, by ignorance sur∣prise,Gen. 9.20, 21. Gen. 19.33. and the sweetness of the Grape; but be kept in or∣der, and in obedience; sharpning, not blunting the edge of my Meditation, and Charity, as the full Meats of Nabal and Dives did;1 Sam. 25.36. Luke 16.19. watering, and enlivening, not drown∣ing my piety, and obedience, as it is probable, Wine, and strong Drink did Nabal and Abihu. O Lord, it is true, that the Beasts of the Field,Numb. 3.4. partake, and have the use of this sense, as well as Man; O that they might not one Day, shame, and rise up in Judgment against the Epcu∣risme of many Men! Doth nature moderate the Horse, and the Oxen, as to their eating, and drinking? O let the addition of thy grace, so order and sanctify my taste and appetite, that in their sweetness I may admire thy delectableness, mercy, wisdome, and goodness; so shall this sense begin my glory here, and be perfected in glory, hereafter, Amen. Whether odours, and sweet smells, nourish, is a great question amongst the learned Naturalists;Of the sense of Smelling glo∣rified. but that they do greatly preserve, refresh, and delight nature, is denyed by none; because sense and experience cannot be con∣tradicted, or deceived. For my part, since it is most clear, and evident, that noxious, and poisonous scents, vapours, and pestilential Aire, (the effects of Comets, and Earth∣quakes) as also minerable, and sulphurious breaths, and damps in Mines, and Cole-pits, and in the Caverns of the Hill Vesuvius, of Dragons, and Serpents, yea of long immured, and unaired Prisoners, have infected, suffoca∣ted, and suddenly killed Persons, in the perfectest de∣gree
of health: I conclude, that if venomous and malig∣nant smells, and spirations, have demonstrably, and un∣deniably, a secret and virulent Power, to destroy life and nature; Then assuredly, by the rule of contraries, and according to right reason, (not to spend time in the vouching of instances, as of that Maid that was preserved in health, strength, and life, many Moneths, (without taking any other nourishment) by the constant smelling of a Rose; and in Moses, Eliahs, and our Saviour,Exod. 34.28. 1 King. 19.8. Math. 4.2. living 40. Days without any visible Meat, or Drink; which al∣though miraculous, because extraordinary, and above the customary course of nature; yet not so totally miraculous, as to exclude Gods making use of the Aire, or same o∣ther invisible means of nourishment, for the preservation and comfort of their natures; such, as I am assured was then partially, if not totally, their smelling, and in-breath∣ing of the sweet and wholsome Element of Aire: I say again, then assuredly, by the rule of contraries, and ac∣cording to right reason, redolent, fragrant, cordial, and spiritual odours, scents, aires, and smells, do not only re∣fresh, and exhilerate, but fortifie, preserve, and nourish our life, and beings; although subtilly, and invisibly, as being thin, and airy, and therefore more agreeable, and suitable to feed, strengthen and increase our natural, and animal Spirits, the innate life of our Bodies, and the me∣dium, and conjugal Bonds, and Ligaments, with which our Souls, (whilst these Spirits continue) are as it were bound and married, to our flesh) as seeming to be in love with them, because of their likeness, and of a spiritual nature, like it self; This secret and mysterious acting of nature, and yet so necessary, as without the vehiculum of all scents, a sweet aire, our bodily life, cannot long continue, I conceive, hath occasioned these doubts, and disputes, which I have the longer insisted upon, to manifest what a usefull, and necessary Organ, this sense of Smelling is, of life to the Body, as well as delight to the Soul, in this state; and therefore rationally must continue, and have an exercise, and a Beeing in our glorified Bodies here∣after. From what hath been said, of the sense of Tasting,
and of this of Smelling, in order to our nourishment, and as a Medium ordained of God, as it was in Paradise, for the more delightfull, and necessary continuance of life; I infer, that it is probable, that this sense of Smelling, shall not only continue, but have the same use, and exercise, although in a far more excellent way, and manner, after the Resurrection of our Bodies, in Glory. Secondly, I argue the probability thereof, from the ma∣ny most excellent objects, and subjects of this sense in the new Heaven, and new Earth; the blessed habitation of all the new-raised Saints; such as the four refined, and then made incorruptible Elements, of Fire, Aire, Water, and Earth; together with the most odoriferous Plants, Herbs, Flowers, Fruits, and sweet-smelling, and Spice-bearing Trees; the beautifull furniture, constant, and na∣tural perfume of this new Creation, whose most excel∣lent end, Gods wisdome, and glory, and use, the Saints delight, health, and nourishment, would be lost, and to little purpose, should this sense of Smelling not then have a beeing, and be exercised by us. The Levitical and Ceremonial Oyntments, Perfumes, and Incense, commanded by God, to be made, used, and offered,Exod. 37.29. Psal. 141.2. Cant. 4.12, 13, 14. under the Law, as principal Sacrifices, and as Fi∣gures of saving Grace, and Prayer, and Types of our blessed Saviours most pleasing and acceptable Merits, and Mediation, shew, of what high esteem, odours, spice, and perfumes, had then, even in Religious Services; If so, it is most likely, they shall have the honour, to have a beeing, and to be a special Ornament of this new Earth, and of civil use, for the delight and benefit of the Saints. If such Creatures, as the curse for sin, hath made noxious, and destructive to Mankinde, shall after their Purification by Heavenly Fire, have still a beeing, or a re-existence, such as the Elements, yea, ravenous, and devouring Beasts, as the Prophet seems to insinuate in those expressions, (wherein I exclude not a spiritual sense also) that the Wolfe shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lye down with the Kid, and the Calfe and the young Lion, and the fatling together; And the Cow and the Bear shall feed, and their young
ones shall lye down together: The Lyon shall eat straw like the Oxe: how much more shall the harmless Crea∣tures, aforementioned, which under our innocency, were innocent, comforts, and allayes in our misery, have then a beeing, and by the goodness of God, be made conco∣mitants, and sweet increasers of our happiness. From all which, I infer, that more than probably, these Creatures shall have a beeing in this new Creation; and conse∣quently the necessary existence, and exercise of the sense of Smelling, in this our glorified condition. O my Soul, shall the sense of Smelling,Soliloquium. be not only continued, at the Resurrection of thy Body, but most excellently rarified, perfected, and glorified? Shall it be then as now, though in a far more inexpressible manner, not only refreshing, and delightfull, but probably an additional, accidental, and invisible delighter, preserver, and nourisher of the life of the Compositum; thy glori∣fied Soul and Body? O let it not now be vitiated, and corrupted by sin, and made the usherer in of lust, curio∣sity, and pride; let not thy treasures be exhausted, nor thy charity be impoverisht, sinfully to please this sense, by any too costly excess, in the perfuming of thy body, house, meats, or garments; after the vain and profuse fashion, use, and custome of the prodigious, and prodi∣gal great ones of this World; That by the Devilish witchcraft, and accursed sorcery of Sin, (a true Circes) are transformed into Beasts and Swine; and who with the venemous Spider, suck and gather a sinfull poison out of the choicest Flowers, and sweetest Creatures, a∣busing them to wantonness, uncleanness, and voluptu∣ousness. But let this so pleasing and usefull sense, even now, in the enjoyment of all the excelling sweets of na∣ture, not only delight, refresh, and cherish thy outward Man; thy natural and animal Spirits; but let it be a curious, and heavenly Limbeck, to draw forth, raise up, and extract, out of the fragrant Redolencies of the nume∣rous kinds of sweets, such a Coelestial Spirit, as may per∣fume thy whole Man, with the Divine ravishing contem∣plation of the infinite Power, and Wisdome of thy Crea∣tor, manifested in the multiplicity, variety, and unex∣pressible
excellencies of smells, and odours; as also of his wonderfull mercy, love, and goodness, in making them, and communicating them to thee, for thy use, and bene∣fit; that as in a clear mirrour, and by this blessed medi∣um, thou mayest behold, and enjoy him, who is essenti∣ally sweetness: and by whom through faith, in the Lord Jesus Christ, (which grace, as a spiritual, internal, and common sense, and Architype of all thy Bodily senses) beholds, hears, tasts, smells, imbraces, and possesses him: thou mayest, I say, in God alone be delighted, refresht, and nourisht unto Life Eternal. O infinite, holy, ever glorious, and Eternal Spirit, who art the power,Ejaculation. Genes. 1.2. Rom. 1.4. Psal. 103.10. 2 Corin. 6.6. 1 Pet. 4.14. Joh. 16.14, 15. Gal. 4.6. Joh. 15 20. Rom 8.9. 1 Joh. 5.7. and love; the goodness, holiness, and sweetness of the Eternal Father, and the Son, as pro∣ceeding from all Eternity, from them; and who art co-equal, co-eternal, and co-essential with them, in the uni∣ty of one Divine Essence, and God-head; who art the Comforter, Counseller, Preserver, and Sanctifier of all the Elect, and Children of God; give me a new heart, and a new spirit, and make me a new Creature, according as the Father hath promised,Isa. 11.2. Joh. 16.7. John 10.13. Rom. 15.16. 1 Pet. 1.5. Jud. 24. Ezek. 11.19.18.31. in the new Covenant of grace; so shall not only my Soul, with all the faculties, and affections thereof, but my Body also, with all its Members, and Senses, be meliorated, renewed, and san∣ctified; and this rare, wonderfull, and curious sense of Smelling; with the sinfulness of pride, voluptuousness, excess, curiosity, and vanity, hath made not only unpro∣fitable and destructive to me, but of ill savour, offensive, and dishonorable to thee; become, like the laborious Bee, a gatherer of sweetness, out of every object thereof. Of which various mixtures, my Soul shall compound, and make up an holy Incense (in resemblance of that under the Law, prefiguring this) of love, as in return for thy goodness of admiration, in the acknowledgment of thy wisdome of adoration, as declaring thy Omnipotency of praise, and thanksgiving, as glorifying thee, for these thy manifold gifts, and blessings; and be not only Adam∣iz'd, and like him, as in Paradise before the Fall, but Angeliz'd; yea, like my Lord and Saviour, who from eve∣ry object, Creature, and occasion, observed, and raised,
matter of honour, and glory to God his Father, and mine: yea, by such an holy exercise of this Sense, my Soul, as well as my Body, shall be refresht, delighted, and nou∣risht, in its Eternity of Life, begun here, and to be made perfect, together with this sense, at the first Resurrection of the Just in Glory. I need not prove,Of the Sense of Touching glo∣rified. that the Sense of Feeling shall con∣tinue, and have existence in the Saints glorified state, since to deny it, is tanto-mount, as to affirm that their Bodies shall not have a beeing; or which is equally ab∣surd, that they shall in this new life, be sick of a dead Palsie: This Sense being now, and so without doubt, shall be then one of the clearest signes, and demonstrations of the life of the Body; and hath in one respect, a singular preheminency, and difference, above the rest of the Sen∣ses. For, whereas every other Sense hath its proper Seat, and Organ; This may be truly said, to be like the Soul, and to Organize, and reside in every part and member of a living and perfect Body. Neither is this Sense less necessary to motion, than to life; insomuch, as that when a Body is totally deprived thereof, it is insensible, and moves not, and is accompted no better than a dead Trunk, and inanimate Corps. I shall add further, that this Sense, as it is now, (so certainly it shall be then) the Souls chief Instrument, and Inquisitor to discern by, and give Judgment, with much pleasure and delight, of those four principal Elementary qualities, that are re∣spectively inherent to, and in all created things, and bo∣dies, that consist of matter, and are made up, and com∣pounded of the four Elements; as to heat, or coldness; driness, or moisture; or of those remoter qualities, and adjuncts; soft or hard, smooth or rough, arising from them: So that, as the Soul united to the new-raised Body, with∣out Eyes, and the Sense of Sigh, may truly be said to be imperfect, and blind, as to all visible objects; so, should the Body want this Sense of Feeling, the Soul may as truly be said, to be incompleat, and ignorantly dark, as to its knowledge, and understanding, as to all Tangible subjects. From what hath been said, I assert, that the Saints at
the Resurrection, shall in their glorified Bodies, have both the continuance, and exercise of this Sense of Feeling, and that in an incomparable perfection, as to what it is now. I will not positively affirm, that spiritual substan∣ces, as Angels, may be subjects of this glorified Sense, that shall be spiritualiz'd with our Bodies; which though now a Natural Body,1 Cor. 15.44. shall then according to the Word of Truth, be raised a spiritual Body: If so, is it not pro∣bable, that as now, to our natural Bodies, natural things are touchable,Luke 24.39. so to our spiritual bodies, spiritual sub∣stances, as Angels, may be Tangible: Our Saviours ex∣pression to his Apostles, not at all contraducing, or exclu∣ding this inquiry, or inference, he affirming only, that a spirit hath not flesh, and bones, as he had: not denying that a spiritual glorified body, may touch and feel a spiritual Beeing, and Essence: But should this not be, I am assured, we shall both touch, and imbrace him, and be imbrac'd by him (I speak this according to the Scrip∣ture-phrase, with all due and humble reverence) who is far above all Creatures, and Angels, our Head, our Spouse, our Saviour, the most glorious Lord Jesus Christ, God-man, in one Person; as also Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; the Holy Patriarchs, Kings, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, and glorified Saints; as also our formerly neer and dear Relations; which then shall be known of us, in that perfection of knowledge, and in this our exalta∣tion; that so their salvation may add such an accidental joy to the augmentation of our blessedness, as the Holy Angels are said, by our Saviour, to have now super-added to their happiness, at the conversion of a sinner. To these, I shall annex and subjoyn other more inferi∣our subjects of this glorified Sense; the then refined and well-tempered Aire and Elements; the delightfull con∣tact of Fowles, Birds, and Beasts, now willingly subject and obedient to Man; the super-excelling, and numerous Trees, Fruits, and Plants; the Arbors of soft and sweet-smelling Roses, the banks of Lillies, the beds of Violets, the Carpets of all manner of rarest Herbs and Flowers; with which this new Heaven, and new Earth, this renew∣ed Paradise, shall be (even to perpetuity) plentifully
garnisht, and adorned with, to the great glory of God, the Creator, of Christ the Restorer, and of the Holy Ghost the Efficient, and to the unexpressible pleasure, and delightfull use, and benefit of the Elect and glorified Saints. As the blessed Canticles, that Song of Songs, hath been, and is reproacht, and abused by wanton A∣morists; and a learned Man was declared an Heretick, for holding there was an Antipodes, or a new World be∣fore its discovery; so may possibly these my weak noti∣ons, and contemplations, (although of a Divine subject) because not heretofore searcht into by others, that I know of; and therefore if the Lord in his providence shall or∣der them to come to a publick view, I only recommend them to the devout perusal, and judgment of holy, hum∣ble, regenerate, and practical Christians; who although in the Body, do by divine Meditation, as it were live out of the Body, and have been so far changed into the Image of Christ, and taught, and renewed by his holy Spirit, that they have brought their Bodies, and Senses unto such a spiritual frame, and exercise, as is declared, and exhorted to, in the foregoing discourse; These will rightly judge of this personal Raign of Christ, with his Saints upon Earth; and how uncharitably, and unjustly, and I may add ignorantly, many (in other respects, learned, religious, and to be honoured) have ignomini∣ously, and falsely branded this Doctrine, as though it was New, Epicureal, and Sensual; whereas the truth is, it is Vide Doctor Homes, Resur∣rection Reveal∣ed; and many others on this Subject. a most antient and Primative Doctrine, and no∣thing else, but the declaration and affirmation of that glorious condition of Christ, and his Saints; that he him∣self, the Holy Scriptures, and Prophets, indited, and in∣spired by his Holy Spirit, have throughout witnessed to, and promised, as by the Scriptures quoted in the Margin,Rev. 21.1, 5. 2 Pet. 3.13. Isay. 65.17. Acts 1.6. Acts 3.21. Math. 17.11. besides many others, is sufficiently proved. That he, the second Adam, should come to renew, and restore all things, in this lower Creation, (freed from the curse of sin) to as good, yea, a far better condition, than they had before the Fall; When God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good. Now,Gen. 1.31. did not God make this so excellent a work, for his Glory? and
for his Creature [Man] to enjoy, and to serve, praise, and glorify him, in the fruition thereof; and in the admira∣tion of him in this its excellency, and goodness? But did any of Man-kinde, but only two, Adam and Eve, enjoy the Earth, and the Creatures thereof, in their Primitive, and created excellencies, and that but for a Day, or two? How then shall God have his end, the Glory of his Power, wisdome, and goodness; and Man, the enjoy∣ment of all his liberality and bounty; and be Trumpets and witnesses of his excellencies in the Creatures? How shall Gods promise be fulfilled, Of making a new Hea∣ven,Isay. 65 17. 2 Pet. 3.13. Acts 3.21. and a new Earth; and restoring all things by his Son, the Heir of all things. If Man, I mean all the Elect, in his Soul, Body, and Senses, shall not be renewed, and live personally with Christ, at this Renovation of all things,Revel. 20.4. for a thousand years, according to the Scriptures, to enjoy what God hath made, and Christ hath purcha∣sed for them: and to admire, adore, and glorify him in the Primitive end, use, and enjoyment of them; These then that deny this, and in a fervent (I forbear to say ignorant hast, because every Age hath its measure of light) would seat the raised Saints in the highest Hea∣vens, before their time, and before Gods promises, and great designs be fulfilled; what do they else, in the de∣clining of this great truth, but force themselves upon false, and Allegorical expositions of cleer, and literal Scriptures, making ineffectual his promise? yea, do they not affirm, contrary to that undeniable maxime, that God made these Heavens, and this Earth, and all the wonderfull Creatures, and admirable Ornaments there∣of, in vain; as not known, nor made use of by them, for whom at first he created it, and again renewed it? I might here add many more Arguments, for the defence of this truth, but I shall at this time, no further digress, but return to my former Method of Meditation, upon this glorified Sense of Feeling: Referring the Reader to those most excellent Treatises of Dr. Homes, Mr. Archer, and many others upon this Subject. Soliloquium.O my Soul, shall this Sense be not only continued, but exercised upon such excellent subjects, in Glory: shall
it with thy Body be spiritualiz'd, and as to its sensability, incomparably exceed, what it is now: O be carefull not to effeminate, or pollute it; disdaining to vassalage it to pride, covetousness, lust, or vanity: But, as it more than all the other Senses, declares and manifests thy living in the body; So let it, by an innocent, sober, chast, and holy acting, testify Christs living in thee. The Lord Jesus hath taken off all legal impositions,Colos. 2.21. such as Touch not, taste not; but not his Gospel, and Spiritual restrain∣ing. Therefore abuse not, nor make use of this Christi∣an liberty, which he hath purchased for thee, to fulfill the Lusts of the Flesh; For, if thou livest after the Flesh,Rom. 8.13. thou shalt dye; but if through the Spirit, thou mortifiest the deeds of the Flesh, thou shalt live. Take heed of covetousness, which hath not only its seat in the Eye, but in the Hand; desire not with Mydas (in the Poet) that every thing thou touchest, may become Gold; but remember the issue, and moral of the Fable, his starving and perishing in his enjoyments. Neither imbrace thou the bosome of a strange Woman,Prov. 5.20. Prov. 6.29. Prov. 5.5. Prov. 23.27. for he that toucheth her shall not be innocent; for her ways draw neer to death, and her steps take hold of Hell; she being compared by the spirit of God to a deep Ditch, and to a narrow Pit, out of which very few get out, and are delivered. For although as in the Poet, Ixion-like, in the height of thy lustfull pleasure, thou thinkest to infold in thy Armes, a Juno, a Goddess: The conclusion will be, but the grasp∣ing of an Airy Cloud; nay, which is far worse, a Pesti∣lential vapour, an inflam'd and killing Granado. O my Soul, since whilst thou art in this vain World, and in this sinfull body, thou art incompast about, with Legions of evil spirits, with innumerable snares, and with secret, and subtile temptations; which (with those in the Pro∣phet) call good evil, and evil good;Isai. 5.20. which put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter; which call light, darkness, and darkness, light; abusing lawfull things, and turning them out of their right Channel, by excess, that so they may overflow, and drown the Earth again, with a far more dangerous Flood, than that of Water, (which de∣stroyed only a temporal Life) even a deluge of sin, and
of flaming Fire,2 Thes. 1.8. 2 Pet. 3.7, 12. (long since foretold, the cause of that Fire, and without true repentance of Eternal Death) watch thou therefore, and pray, lest thou fall into tem∣ptation, and this sence be adulterated by thy pride, ex∣cess, and luxury, and made instrumental, to cause those good Creatures, the soft Silks of Persia, the warm Furs of Muscovia, the fine Wools of Britan, and Segovia, gi∣ven thee by God, to cover thy sinfull nakedness, to be∣come a covering of sin, and a Banner of pride, and va∣nity. Take heed also, that this sense be not bewitched, and overcome through voluptuousness, and corrupt thee by an excessive, idle, and inordinate use, of the Down-beds of England, of the hot Springs of Bathe, of the fresh, but wanton Aire of Hide-Park, of the cool Baths, and Aqua∣ducts of Italy; Remember that antient, but true Pro∣verb, Latet anguis in Herba; made good, literally, and vitiously, in the Egyptian Cleopatra, whose lusts, even her unclean, and immoderate indulging of this sense, procured her Soul and Bodies destruction. O my Soul, let this sense fulfill the end, for which it was made, and become (as before hath been observed) thy Instrument, and diligent Investigator to inquire into the wonders, and bounty of God, in the Elements, other natural things, and in all thy enjoyments; That in the pleasing, and sober exercise, of this sense, both thy body may be de∣lighted, and thou maist be assisted, and instructed there∣from, to glorify thy great and good God, in all his mer∣cies, and attributes, and in all thy liberal fruitions; so shalt thou be like the blessed Angels, who by their spi∣ritual sense, beholding and apprehending God in all his works; are thereby inlarged, and unwearied in his prai∣ses; and be also a Companion with them, hereafter, in their Heavenly Hallelujahs, and Coelestial Glory. O Lord, my God and Saviour, who hath said in thy Word;Ejaculation. John 17.17. Revel. 21.5. which Word is truth; Behold, I make all things new; fulfill that promisary Word, I beseech thee in me; renew both my Soul and Body, that this sense of senses, this universal sense, that possesses every part and mem∣ber, may not seem to be alive, and yet not alive, as be∣ing
by nature, and from my birth, taken with, and un∣der a dead Palsie of Sin; and in danger to be made past feeling, through customary offending, and the frequent stroaks, and sharp launcings of thy Judgments; the gnaw∣ings, and bitings of Conscience, and of my dangerous condition. Is there no Balme in Gilead?Jerem 8.22. Is there no Physician there? Lord Jesus, thou alone art my Physici∣an, thou hast undertaken my Cure, thou hast begun it, and wilt certainly perfect it; For thou art the Author,Hebr. 12.2. and finisher of my Faith; a God of perfection, and im∣mutable,Rom. 11.29. therefore thy Gifts and Calling are without Re∣pentance. O be thou graciously pleased, to wash both Soul, and Body, in that Fountain,Zach. 13.1. opened in the House of David, for Sin, and for Vncleanness, even in thy own most precious, healing and purifying blood: For thy blood, O Lord Jesus Christ, cleanseth from all sin,1 John 1.7. and iniquity, and that not only from the guilt, as to Gods divine justice: But from the filth of sin, this my body of death, and corrupt Lusts: so shall I have a pure, tender, and feeling Conscience, to avoid, and eschew all evil; and the like Sense of Feeling in my Body, shall be so sanctified, and regulated by it, that neither costly pride, nor penurious covetousness, lustfull, and itching concu∣piscence, wastfull voluptuousness, nor deceivable vanity, shall vitiate, corrupt, or disorder it. O my Lord, since thou hast made a firme Covenant with me, in Baptisme, even an everlasting Covenant, the sure mercies of David,Jerem. 50.5. 2 Sam. 23.5. Isay. 55.3. and hast contracted thy self to me in the Communion of thy Body, and Blood, I will now presume to say, as thy Spirit hath taught me, My Beloved is mine,Cant. 2.16. Cant. 1.2. Cant. 2.4. and I am his▪ Kiss me with the kisses of thy Mouth, for thy love is better than Wine. Bring me into thy Banquetting-house, and let thy Banner over me, be love: Stay me with Flag∣gons, comfort me with Apples, for I am sick of love; let thy left Hand be under my Head, and let thy right hand imbrace me. Now I have found thee,Cant. .4. whom my Soul lo∣veth, I will hold thee, and will not let thee go; O set me as a Seal upon thy Heart, as a Seal upon thy Arme;Cant. 8.6. so my love, in thy strength, is as strong as death; Many Waters, (through thy grace) shall not,7. nor can quench
my love; neither can the Floods of Tentations, Tribulati∣ons, and Persecutions for thy sake, drown it. O let me be in thy Eyes,10. as one that hath found favour; so shall this Sense, my Touch, be spiritualiz'd, by thee here, and glorified with thee hereafter; and be the Hand-maid, and assistant to my Soul, to distinguish and discover unto her, thy bounty and goodness, and all other thy excellencies, in thy wonderfull works in nature; and cease to be, as in its unregenerate state,Gal. 5.10. a Pander to lust, and Sathan: For the works of the Flesh, are Adultery, Fornication, Vncleanness,Rev. 22.15. Lasciviousness; and without the new Jeru∣salem, are Dogs, and Whoremongers. Lord do thou touch me with the Finger of thy sanctifying Spirit, and let me lay hold, and imbrace thee in the Armes of Faith, and love; and then this bodily sense shall be so metamorpho∣sed, by such a union, and communion with thee, that it shall be a real augmentation of my happiness and delight, in this life, and through thy free grace, who proportion∣ably rewards thy Saints, receive from thee, by the holy exercise of it here, at the Resurrection, an answerable increase of Glory, Amen. Of the Tongue Glorified.Having through Gods gracious assistance, (although in much weakness) meditated and discoursed of the glori∣fication of the Five Senses; I shall conclude, with the blessed, and excellent use, and exercise of the Tongue; (under which I comprehend the voice, and articulate speech) at our Resurrection in Glory; which although not numbered amongst the Senses, yet is not inferiour, but transcends them all; as being the Souls Orator, and Interpreter, to the glory of God, of what is seen, heard, tasted, smelt, or touched by us; And therefore it is sty∣led by David, His Glory;Psal. 30.12. Psal. 108.1. as being that sweet, and most melodious Instrument, that utters, and declares the won∣derous works of God, to his great praise, and honour, which is the principal end of our Creation, Redemption, and Glorification. To this member I annex, as necessary assistants; the Aire, Lips, Teeth, Throat, and Lungs. And as to the Speech, Language, or Dialect, solely to be used, by all the Saints, at the Resurrection. I humbly conceive, it shall be the Primitive Hebrew Tongue; as
being certainly, the Original Language of Adam, in the Creation; and before his Fall, when he gave names to the Creatures, according to their natures, and in which God spake unto him; and therefore is to be restored to us, by Christ, the second Adam. The rise of all other Lan∣guages, being a curse, punishment, and an effect of sin, in their Original, and the confusion at the building, of the Tower of Babel. Besides, this Tongue had the great and special honour, to be the Language of the Holy Ghost, in the old Testament, and in St. Matthew's Gospel, and of our blessed Saviour, the Eternal Word of God; and of the blessed Angels, in all their several missions, and appearances throughout the Book of God. So that in fine, this Tongue hath the priviledge and prerogative of all other Languages, and may be called the Language of the glorious Trinity; Holy Angels, and inspired Saints, and Prophets, yea, the Language of Heaven. I proceed next to the Persons, with whom the Saints shall speak, and frequently converse in this new life, on the renewed Earth, (O let it be contemplated by us, with a ravish∣ing, and admiring reverence, and thankfulness). Since it shall be with the most glorious Trinity in Unity, God blessed for ever, with the King of Kings,Rev. 19.16. the Lord of Lords; The Mediator, Spouse, and Head of his Mysti∣cal Body the Church, now perfect and compleat, redeem∣ed, and raised in their Bodies also, to Glory: If now the Apostle witnesses,1 John 1.3. We have fellowship with the Father and the Son, How much more then, when We shall Raign with Christ personally, as Kings,Rev. 5.10. Rev. 20.6. and Priests upon Earth. Further, in this Heavenly Jerusalem, this City of the living God,Heb. 12. We shall have communion with an in∣numerable Company of Angels,22, and with the general As∣sembly, and Church of the first-born,23. even with all the Elect, from Adam, unto the last Convert: yea, then shall that great truth, in the Psalmist, be fulfilled in this Re∣stauration, by the Lord Jesus Christ;Psal. 7.5. when the Saints shall be Crowned with Glory, and Honour, and made with, and under him their Head,6, to have dominion over the works of his hands. Then shall all things be put un∣der their Feet; all Sheep, and Oxen, yea,7. and the Beasts
of the Field, the Fowles of the Aire, and the Fish of the Sea,8. and whatsoever passeth through the Paths of the Seas. I come now, to the use and exercise, of this glorious, and glorified Member, the Tongue, speech, and voice; which I humbly conceive shall be then, Musical, and Lau∣datory, and also precatory, as, and with respect to God, and Christ. Secondly discursive, declarative, and com∣municative, as in respect of Angels, and their fellow-Saints; as also gubernative, and mandatory, as, and in respect of all inferiour Creatures. As to the first, that the chiefest duty, and highest ser∣vice of the Saints, in this new life, shall be the Loqual, Musical, and melodious singing, praising and worshipping of God, and Christ, is in many Figurative Visions pro∣ved, and held forth, in the Revelation; as Chapter the Fourth, from Verse the 8th. unto the end of the 11th. Verse; and Chapter the 5th. from Verse the 8th. until the end of the 14th. Verse; and Chapter the 7th. from Verse 9th. unto the end of the 12th. Verse; and Chap∣ter 11th. from Verse 15th. unto the end of the 18th. Verse; and Chapter 14th. from Verse the 2d. unto the end of the 3d. Verse; and Chapter the 15th. from Vers. the 2d. unto the end of the 4th. Verse; and Chapter 19th. Verse the 1. unto the end of the 8th. Verse; I am not ignorant, that the places above cited, do most of them respect the providential actings of God, and Christ, in the Church Militant, before the Resurrection of the just; and the Churches returns of praises, and worship for them; yet as I think, none will deny the truth I as∣sert, so none but will confess, these to be Types, and Patterns of what is done now in Heaven, by the Church tryumphant, and shall be done, by the Saints after the Resurrection, to Eternity; which I prove from Revela∣tions, Chapter 21. Verse the 22. which speaks directly of the time I write of, even of the glorified state of the Saints, upon the new Earth, under the type of the holy City, or new Jerusalem; And I saw no Temple therein, for the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, are the Temple of it; and Chapter the 22. Verse the 3d. And
there shall be no more curse, but the Throne of God, and the Lamb shall be in it; and his Servants shall serve him. To these, I will only add the expressions of the Psalmist; In God we boast all the day long, and praise thy Name for ever;Psal. 44.8. Psal. 115.18. we will bless the Lord from this time forth, and for ever more. And that of the Apostle, By Him (meaning the Lord Jesus Christ) let us offer the Sacrifice of praise to God continually; that is,Heb. 13.15. the fruit of our Lips, giving thanks to his Name. As to the second particular, that the Saints after the Resurrection, shall converse, and have communion with the blessed Angels, and with the rest of their fellow-members, that Scripture before-cited out of the Hebrews Chapter 12. Verse 22, & 23. doth sufficiently evidence; for if we have communion with them, in this our mili∣tant condition, (as is there asserted by the Apostle) how much more shall we have our Conversation with them, in this state of Glory. If the glorious Angels are now our Guardians, and were often visible, present, and discoursed, with Abraham, Jacob, Lot, Joshua, Gideon,Genes. 18.1, 2. Genes. 19.1, 2. Gen. 32.1, 2. Joshua 5.13. Judg. 6.12. Judg. 13.13. 2 Sam. 24.17. 2 King. 6.17, 18. 1 King 19.5, 7 Dan. 9.21. Luke 1.28. Luke 2.9. Revel. 1.7. Mark 12.25. Revel. 21.22. Manoah, David, Eliah, Elisha, Daniel, the Shepwards, the blessed Virgin, John, and others of the Saints on Eearth, shall they not be much more intimate, and con∣versant, when glorified together with them? shall we be as the Angels, and not with the Angels? shall we have a fellowship with the infinite and incomprehensible Tri∣nity? shall God and the Lamb be our Temple, in this period of our raigning with Christ upon Earth, as hath been before proved; and shall any think us then below the society of the Elect Angels? or that the Angels de∣light not to be present with them, with, and in whom, the God, and Head of Angels, dwells, and inhabits? Did not Angels declare most of the holy mysteries to the Pro∣phets, and to Saint John, and when through infirmity,Revel. 19 10. & the 22. chap. verse 9. he fell down twice to worship them, did they not both times say, See thou do it not, I am of thy Brethren the Prophets, that have the Testimony of Jesus, worship God? As for the communion of Saints, both here, and here∣after, it is one of the Articles of our Faith, and asserted in many places of the Scripture; As that,matth. 28.28. where the Kar∣kass
is,Math. 28.28. Luke 13.28. there shall the Eagles be gathered together. That at this time, the wicked shall see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdome of God, That we shall be taken up in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Aire.1 Thes. 4.17. And that then we shall be ever with the Lord: as also throughout the Book of the Revelations: especially in the two last Chapters, where this time, and state, is prophetically, and evincingly set forth, and de∣clared; That the Angels, and Saints exercise, is, and shall be then laudatory, and precatory; a melodious sing∣ing and continual praising, adoring, admiring and wor∣shipping of God; I think none doubts; and I have al∣ready sufficiently proved. And as to the blessed matter, and subject of their discourse, and communication, one with another; I humbly conceive, it will chiefly respect, and inspect, as to time, (in imitation of our God) things that are past, present, and things that are to come, so far as are promised, and shall be revealed to them. And as to the most excellent matter of their discourse, I hum∣bly conceive it will be, to keep in remembrance, declare and communicate to, and with one another, in lesser, or greater Assemblies, the glorious, fearfull, and wonderful Name of the Lord our God; that is, his infinite, and incomprehensible Attributes, by which he is made known to his Creatures; for every Attribute is God in the ab∣stract, as his Omnipotency, wisdome, holiness, justice, love, mercy, truth, goodness, life, glory, eternity, and the rest; As they have been, are, and shall be declared, in his works of Creation, then fully understood, and re∣vealed to us; as to the causes, and effects, nature, vertues, influences, and uses of all things, that God hath made, and that have a Beeing in Heaven, or in Earth: to the glory of our God their Creator. Which is to me a strong reason, and a great help to interpret many Scriptures; as setting forth the great wisdome, and justice of God, in appointing a certain time for his Saints, for whom he made the Earth, and wherein they have so greatly suf∣fered, and been persecuted for his sake, and to whom, he hath redeemed, and restored it; shall with their Head the Lord Jesus, in this new Heaven, and new Earth, be∣fore
their second, and ultimate Glory, in the highest Hea∣vens, possess, and enjoy, know, and understand this his lower Creation, in its Primitive excellency; That so they may sing to his praise, and speak thereof one to another, to the exalting God's Name, and Glory, as being the Chief end, for which he Created it and them. The second Chief Head of the Saints exercise of speech, one with another, will be concerning the won∣derfull providences of God, especially in respect of his Church, from the beginning of the World; a History never to be blotted out, obliterated, or forgotten, by his Saints; but to be frequently remembred, and mentioned to the glory of his power, wisdome, love, and faithful∣ness, and of the rest of his Attributes. A third and principal subject, will be that which now, and ever shall be, the wonder of Heaven, and Earth, the admiration of Saints, and Angels, that Miracle of Divine love, the Redemption of Man-kinde, by the Lord Jesus, God-Man in one Person: In which, above all other his works, the Lord hath been pleased to draw neer, and to manifest himself in all his glorious Attributes, both to Saints and Angels. This is that mystery of mysteries, of which the Apostle witnesses, That without controversie,1 Tim. 3.16. great is the mystery of Godliness; God manifested in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, Preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the World,Ephes. 3.18. received up into Glory: This is that bredth and length, that depth and height, the knowledge of the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge, even the fulness of God, and the riches of his Glory. But I must return where I left off,19. lest I be swallowed up in this Ocean of Divine love,Ephes. 3.16. which both now and then shall far transcend, not only the expressions, but the Conceptions of Saints and Angels. The fourth Subject, about which the Saints Tongues shall be exercised, respects their several employments, and activities, under their glorious Head, and King, in this transcendent Kingdom and Universal Empire, which by way of allusion, I may terme their Callings or degrees of Office under him, and in Relation to one another;
For, if the Holy Scriptures hold forth, that in the highest Heavens, there is the most excellent Order, and Govern∣ment evidenced, by the gradual denominations, and ti∣tles, given unto those Aetherial subjects: as Arch-Angels, and Angels,Jude 9. 1 Thes. 4.16 Revel. 5.11. Philip. 1.16. Colos. 1.16. 1 Pet. 3.22. Ezek. 10.1, 3, 20. Isay. 6.2, 6. Principalities, and Powers, Thrones, and Dominions, Cherubins, and Seraphins; All which have their several Offices, Imployments, and Governments, according to the appointment, and establishment of our great and all-wise God, in those vast Regions, and innu∣merable starrified Orbes; yea, if in Paradise, (had our first Parents not fallen) as they, so also their Progeny▪ should have dressed the Garden,Gen. 2.15. 1 Cor. 15.41. and not have been idle▪ so also, it is more than probable, that as the Saints, ac∣cording to the Scriptures, should have (like the Stars) different degrees of Glory, so shall they have different actings, Offices, and Imployments; for the performance of which, the Tongue, and speech, above other parts, and Members of the Body; as being the Souls Image, and Interpreter, will have the greatest share, and honour. As for their Offices, he who is truly the Fountain of ho∣nour, our Lord, and Emperor, the Lord Jesus, saith, that the Saints shall be all Kings;Revel. 5.10. Luke 12.32. Luke 22.29. Luke 19.19. yet with a difference, as to the extent of their Governments; For some shall rule over five, others over ten Cities, in this Empire of Glory. Now their several and respective Functions, and atchiev∣ments in their Governments, none will suppose, can be performed, without the use of the Tongue, and speech. If all things in the Church Militant, must be done with decency, and in order, much more admirable shall be the unparallel'd order of this Church Tryumphant; The re∣gulation, directory, and carrying on of which, I conceive shall not be as now, by the use and help of any kind of Books, or Canons; but by verbal Orders, and Acts flow∣ing continually from their Souls, now as full of Light, as Life; That gracious promise, and prophesie, being then to be compleated, and fulfilled; They shall be all taught of God.Isay. 54.13. Let none mistake me, as though I here hold forth, that Saints shall have any Dominion, or Rule over their Brethren; No, I mean, and intend no such thing; For all here are Kings, and free, and shall be
subject to none, but God, and Christ, their Head. But this I conceive, that this Church Tryumphant, being that glorious, and mystical Body, whereof only Christ is the Head,1 Cor. 12.12. to vers. 27. it is (as the Apostle elegantly) concerning the Church Militant, like the natural Body, compounded, and made up of many Members; every one of which hath a different degree of honour, grace, and glory, and are design'd for several uses, and actions; which without any servitude, or disrespect, from each other of their Members, they do, and chearfully execute, in order to the good, benefit, and happiness of the whole; accord∣ing as they are continually influenced, and directed,1 Tim. 6.15. Revel. 19.16. by their Head, the Lord Jesus, who is the only Potentate, The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. I come now to the third, and last particular, the gu∣bernative, and mandatory acting of the Tongue, and voice, of glorified Saints upon the new Earth, as in re∣spect of all animate, and inferiour Creatures; as Fowles of the Aire, Beasts of the Earth, and creeping things: some of all which kindes, as being intelligible, although not rationable; are now subjected to, and obedient to the voice of Man, even to the command of wicked Men: As first, for instance, are not Faulcons, Lanners, Goss∣hawkes, and all kinde of ravenous Fowles, brought, and taught to obey the Rulers call, and voice of the Faulk∣ner? And as for other Fowles, how wonderfull is the sub∣jection, and observance of the Cormorants, and the coy Ducks, as to the Instructions, and designes of their Ma∣sters. And as for harmless, lesser, and singing Birds; how speedy and trusty Conveighers of Letters are the Pige∣ons, called Carriors in the Eastern Countreys, to the Mer∣chants? How do Parrots, and other Birds speak and sing, as they are taught, and when they are commanded so to do by their Teachers? Next, how are all sorts of wild and devouring Beasts made Tame, and obedient to their Keepers; as the Lyon, Bear, Tyger, Wolf; especially the Elephants, and Rhino∣ceroses, so much used, and imployed in Warres, and for service by the Eastern Nations? As also those less wild, the Horse, Mule, Ass, the Camels, Dromedary; and Dogs
of all sorts; Baboons, Apes, & Monkies: of which last, a cre∣dible Writer reports, that he knew a Monky to have so well learnt, and obeyed the rules of his Tutor, that he would not only play a Game at Chess, but often give a Check-Mate to a good Gamester. As to creeping things; although Naturalists report, ma∣ny strange things concerning their love, and subjection to Man; and dayly experience shews us, with what awe and fear they are possest, when they but hear a hu∣mane voice: yet for brevity sake, I will only observe, what is written concerning the Adder, that it hath such a dreadfull apprehension of the force, and power of In∣cantation; that to avoid the Inchanters voice, she will stop one of her Eares with the end of her Taile, and the other by laying it close to the Earth, which as to the actions, although not to the precise manner of doing, the Holy Scriptures witness, That the Adder stoppeth her Ear from hearing the voice of the Charmer,Psal. 58.5. charm he never so wisely. If then there remains, and appears such manifest signs, and testimonies of Mans dominion, and of the inferiour Creatures obedience, and subjection to him, even after the Fall, Gods curse, the Creatures rebellion, and the vacating of Mans commission: How perfectly intire, and absolute, shall this Dominion be, and the Creatures sub∣jection and obedience, when the glorified Saints in the right of Christ, the Lord, and Heir of all things, their Head,Heb. 1.2. Rom. 8.17. shall be as co-heirs with him, restored to this their Primitive right, and prerogative? which promise and act of Christ, could not be fulfilled, or performed to us, in this particular, (although no small privilege of the Saints) unless before their second, and last degree of Glory, They raign with him upon the renewed Earth,Revel. 20.4. a thousand years; according to the Scripture; which Earth, (it is more than probable) shall be furnished as before, with several kinds of Creatures; to the end, that they may be in subjection to, and under the dominion of the Saints, who shall be all Kings: now a King, and subjects, are relatives, so that no subjects,Revel. 20.6. no King. If it be a truth, that they shall not raign over one another, it is as clear a truth, they
shall raign over all terrene animals, and inferiour Crea∣tures. But it may be objected, how shall the Creature, ac∣cording to that assertion of the Apostle, Be delivered from Bondage, they now are under,Rom. 8.21. and enjoy the liberty of the Sons of God, if they be under this subjection? I answer; as it is no diminution of our liberty, that we shall then be in subjection to God, in Christ, because his Service is our perfect freedome; so it shall be no im∣peachment, or contradiction, to the liberty in that Scrip∣ture intended, to be restored to the Creatures; For no other liberty, it is clear, is there meant to be given then, but what they had before; their unwilling subjection to bondage, by reason of Gods curse, for Mans sin, and it, being one of the principal ends of their Creation, to de∣light, serve, and obey Man, Gods Vice-gerent upon Earth, their service therein, according to the Primitive Ordi∣nance of God, (as may be observed also, in the unwea∣ried motions of the Sun, and Planets) shall be their joy, honour, and freedome, not their bondage: This govern∣ment having no need, or occasion, to make any such harsh, laborious, oppressive, or slautering use of any Creature, as now: all the Saints vocal commands, being then, by the wonderfull wisdome, and providence of God, so or∣dered, and made agreeable to the nature, and will of the Creatures, and that by a certain kinde of instinct, as that their subjection, and obedience, shall be as natural, pleasing, and acceptable to them, as it is to the Fire and Air, to ascend; they being as ambitious and ready to o∣bey, as the Saints to rule, govern, and command them; since all their Orders, and verbal Injunctions, shall tend to the great glory of God, ours and their Creator, and of Christ our Redeemer. As to the particular actings▪ and subject matter of the Saints verbal Statutes, and Injunctions in this their Do∣minion and Government of the Creatures, I shall not fur∣ther inlarge, (as conducing nothing to the subject I am now upon) although the Holy Prophets▪ in mysterious Figures, and expressions, hold forth some light and dis∣covery thereof. Only I desire it may be observed, That
before Mans Fall, the several genusses, or kindes, of all terrene Creatures, were in possession of, and enjoyed Pa∣radise with Adam: else, how could they be brought by the Lord to Adam, to see what he would call them? And whatsoever Adam called every living Creature,Gen. 2.19, 20. that was the name thereof. From which I note, the great use of the Tongue, and speech of Man in that blessed Gar∣den; the certain and cleer Figure of our restored and Paradisical Earth? as also that the Creatures were not brought by God to Adam only, and barely, to receive their Names; but that Adam should particularly, and un∣derstandingly view them; that so he might take seriously notice of the variety of their kindes, the wonderfulness of their formes, and shapes; and Phylosophically inspect, (as being the wisest of all Earthly Beeings) their re∣spective qualities, and natures; that so he might not only give them significant, and proper names, (a Prerogative and Character, declaring him Lord and King over them) but as a Priest unto God,Revel. 20.6. to both which Offices the Saints are to be restored) he might from the dayly contempla∣tion of them, praise, admire, and adore; as the Saints also shall do, the great and only most high God, who hath made them, and us, and all things for his own Glory. From this my weak, and short inquiry, and induction, of a few particulars▪ it is made clear and evident how ex∣cellent a Member the Tongue is; and also how great and manifold, the use and exercise thereof, will be in this our glorified condition. I shall now therefore, ac∣cording to my former Method, conclude this subject, and this Treatise, with a few Meditations. Soliloquium.O my Soul, shall thy Tongue, voice, and speech, have such an excellent, and glorious employment, in the state of glory, as to be thy Representee Embassadour, and Pro∣lucutor to God, Saints, Angels, and Creatures? shall it be the most loud, sweet, and full-sounding Organ, and In∣strument of the worship, and high praises of the Trinity in Unity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, God blessed for ever? shall it be a vocal Trumpet, in the ravishing, and most melodious Chore of Millions of Millions of glori∣fied
Saints and Angels, to sound forth, and speak of, to one another, the wonderfull works, and providences of God, past, present, and to come, divulged in the large Mapps of our Creation, Redemption, and Glorification, to his continual, and everlasting praise, and glory? Shall it be a principal Engine, and Actor, as to that Office, and Government, thou shalt be placed in, amongst thy fellow Saints, in this glorious and universal Empire of the Lord Jesus, raigning Personally as King, and Mediator, in this his Mediatory Kingdome, upon the renewed Earth? Yea lastly, shall it be the Expressor, of all thy Orders, and Commands, in the Execution of thy restored Dominion, over the terrene, and inferiour Creatures? O with holy David, (that now glorified Saint,Psal. 141 3.) Set a watch over thy Lips, that thou offend not with thy Tongue; and remember that authentick Declaration of thy Judge, Lord, and Saviour, By thy words thou shalt be justified,Matth. 12.37. and by thy words thou shalt be condemned;Matth. 12.36. and that of every idle word, thou shalt give an accompt, at the Day of Judgment; Because,matth. 12.34. out of the abundance of wick∣edness that is within the Heart, the Mouth speaketh.James 3.2▪ If any Man (saith St. James) offend not in word, the same is a perfect Man, and able also to bridle the whole Body.3, Behold (saith the same Apostle) we put Bits into the Hor∣ses mouths, that they may obey us, and we turn about their whole Body; Behold also the Ships,4, which though they  so great, and are driven of fierce Winds, yet are they twined about, with a very small Helme, whether so ever the Governor listeth;5, Even so the Tongue is a little mem∣ber, and boasteth great things; Behold how great a matter a little Fire kindleth; And the Tongue is a Fire,6, a World of iniquity; so is the Tongue amongst our Members, that it defileth the whole Body, and setteth on Fire the course of nature; And it is set on Fire of Hell:7, For every kind of Beasts, and of Birds, and of Serpents, and the things in the Sea is tamed,8, and hath been tamed of Man∣kinde; But the Tongue can no Man tame, it is an unruly evil, full of deadly poyson; Therewith bless we God,9, even the Father; and therewith curse we Men, which are made after the similitude of God:10, shall out of the same
Mouth proceed blessing, and cursing? O my Soul, these things ought not so to be; Doth a Fountain send forth at the same place,11, sweet, and bitter? Can the Figg-Tree (O my Soul) bear Olive-Berries;12. either a Vine Figgs? so can no Fountain both yield salt Water, and fresh. There∣fore,James 1.26. If any Man seem to be religious, and bridleth not his Tongue, but deceiveth his own Heart, this Mans Re∣ligion is vain.Titus 3.2. Speak evil of no Man: Let no corrupt communication proceed out of thy Mouth, but that which is good,Ephes. 4.29. to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace to the Hearers; Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting,Ephes. 5.4. which are not convenient; but rather giving of thanks;1 Cor. 15.33. Since evil Communications corrupt good Man∣ners. O my Soul, is cursing, swearing, vain, wanton, and e∣vil-speaking, the Rant▪ and Garb of the wicked; y▪ the Language of Hell? And is holy, and a religious dis∣course and communication, the Character, and Dialt of Saints upon Earth? and praises, and thanksgiving, the exercise of the Spirits of just Men made perfect, and of the glorious Angels? Yea, the Language of Heaven? O let not thy Tongue learn, or speak, the Language of Ashdod,Nehe. 13.24. but of Canaan; not the blasphemous roaring of the Devils, and the damned; but the sweet Anthem of the Saints, and Angels. Yea, begin thy Heaven upon Earth, and be warbling and tuning this blessed and use∣full Instrument, thy Tongue, to Psalmes, Hymns, and spiritual Songs,Ephes. 5.19. Psal. 14.7. Psal. 103.1, 2, 3, 4, singing and making melody in thy Heart to the Lord; For it is good to sing praises to our God▪ For it is pleasant, and praise is comely. O bless the Lord▪ O my Soul, and forget not all his benefits, who forgiveth all thine iniquities, and healeth all thy diseases; who redeemeth thy life from destruction,5. who crowneth the with loving kindness, and tender mercies; who satisfyeth thy Mouth with good things, so that thy Youth is renew∣ed like the Eagles. O my Soul, shall thy Tongue in the next glorious Life, be thy Chronologer, and Orator to Gods praise, before; and to thy fellow Saints, of Gods works, and providences, past, present, and to come? O be exercising, and conning over thy Lesson, in this Life:
And inue it here, to what it shall do hereafter. Say to my friends, relations, and fellow Christians; Come and hear all yee that fear God, and I will declare what he hath done for my Soul. Yea,Psal. 66.16. let thy Tongue be thy glo∣ry, and as the Tongue of a ready Writer.Psal. 108.1. Let thy Mouth speak of wisdome; and the Meditation of thy Heart,Psal. 45.2. of understanding: Remember the Days of old,Psal. 49.3. meditate of all Gods works, muse on the works of his Hands,Psal. 143.5. speak of the might of his terrible acts,Psal. 145.5, 6, 7. and declare his great∣ness; Abundantly utter the memory of his great good∣ness, and sing of his righteousness, whilst thou livest;Psal. 146.2. raise the Lord, yea, sing praises unto thy God, whilst thou hast any Beeing. O my Soul, shall the Saints in this glorious Empire of Christ in the new Heaven, and new Earth, be all Kings; and yet as one tar differs from a∣nother in glory, so they there shall have different degrees of gifts, and graces, offices, and imployments; every Ves∣sel being full of grace, and glory, although of different measures, and capacities; not ruling, or lording it over one another; and yet of necessary and excellent use, by reason of their various and different gifts, manifestations and employments, to add an encrease of happiness, bles∣sedness, and glory to each other; a pattern, and resem∣blance of which joynt Kingship, under one Head, and King, the Lord Jesus, (as was mentioned before) is seen  the natural Body, and in the militant, and mystical body of Christ; The Saints glorified, being like so ma∣ny precious Stones, (which although of different bigness, and value, yet being judiciously set, by a skilfull ) to radiate one upon other, that they add luster each  other, and without any diminution, to the worth of any individual Stone, serve necessarily, to the greater and fuller perfection of the Jewel? Will it be thus O my Soul, and will thy Tongue be then a principal Actor, in this thy most honourable stati∣on, and vocation?Acts 13.36. Serve thy God with David in thy Ge∣neration, not hiding any Talent God hath given thee, with the slothfull Servant in the Earth.matth. 25.25. Set not thy Candle under a Bushel, but upon a Table,Mark 4.21. that it may enlighten the whole House, thy Family, thy Friends, thy fellow-Members;
yea all (except Dogs, or Swine) that thou con∣versest with;Math. 7.6. speaking unto them, as the Saints no doubt shall do,1 Cor. 14.3. to one another in Glory, to edification, exhor∣tation, and comfort; declaring to them, (to the praise, and glory of God) thy experiences, thy consolations, and Divine manifestations. And for as much as thou art zealous of spiritual gifts;1 Cor. 14.12. seek, that thou maist excell, to the edifying of the Church; that spiritual Body of Christ, whereof thou art a living Member. And since God, as the Apostle excellently observes,1 Cor. 12.28, 31. hath set some in the Church; First Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly Teach∣ers; after that Miracles, then gifts of healing, helps, Go∣vernments, diversities of Tongues; Covet thou earnestly the best gifts;1 Cor. 12.4, For there are diversity of gifts, but the same spirit; But the manifestation of the Spirit, is  to every Man to profit withall;7, To one is given by the Spirit,8, the Word of Wisdome; to another, the Word of Knowledge, by the same Spirit; to another Faith, by  same Spirit;9, to another the gift of Healing, by the same Spirit;10, to another working of Miracles; to another Pro∣phesie; to another discerning of Spirits; to another, divers kinds of Tongues; to another, the interpretation of Tongues;11, but all worketh that one, and the self same Spirit, dividing to every Man severally, as he will; For,  the Body is one,12, and hath many Members, and all the Members of that one Body, being many, are one Body;  also is Christ. If they were all one Member, where we the Body?19, The Eye cannot say to the Hand, I have  need of thee;21, again; the Head unto the Feet, I have  need of you; Now we are the Body of Christ, and Members in particular.27. Therefore O my Soul, since  Tongue, as to all divine, and spiritual gifts, is now th principal Agent, and Expressor: And shall be then,  as a Member of Christ, mystical Body, in this his glori∣ous Kingdome, thou shalt be plac'd in thy Function, and respective administration, be not spiritually idle, but it, and exercise thy Tongue continually, in declaring to o∣thers, according as it shall be revealed to thee, by the Holy Spirit, the Magnalia Dei, the wonderfull ways, and works of God.matth. 10.8. Freely thou hast received, freely give.
O my Soul, shalt thou then be as one of Christs Vice∣royes, over all inferiour Creatures; shall thy Dictates, Or∣ders, and Commands, be received and obeyed by them, as the voice of God? O let not then thy speech, now, to them be mixt with oaths, and cursings, according to the wot, and fashion of the wicked of the Earth; whose behaviours towards the poor Brutes, are more like to Devils, than Men, or Christians. Yea, let thy employ∣ment of them, and rule over them, be gentle, milde, and moderate; not cruel, or oppressive, since the good Man with the Scripture) is mercifull towards his Beast:Prov. 1.10. And  tenderness of thy God towards them exprest as  of the reasons of his commanding a seventh Days , That thy Beast may rest as well as thee, teaches,Exod. 23.12. what respect, and considerate pitty, and compassion he expects from thee towards them, as being fellowCrea∣tures, suffering what servitude they undergo, for thy sin; and from which they shall be freed and delivered in thy glorious liberty. But instead of speaking evil of,Rom. 8.21. or to the inferiour Creatures, do thou now, as thou shalt do, in the World to come; with thy Heart, and Tongue, praise and glorifie thy God, after the Example of holy David, Psal. 148. throughout, in, and for them, ad∣miring his love, and goodness to thee, to them, as also  unexpressible, yea unconceivable power, and wisdome declared in their various formes, wonderfull strength,  qualities, excellent virtues, and uses; as being  great end of theirs, and thy Creation; as the Lord clares to Job, when he bids him behold Behemoth,Read Job chap. 38. chap. 39. chap. the 40. Cant. 4. throughout. and iathan, and leaves upon Record, for our Instruction, and Imitation, so large a description of them, and of others of his Creatures. This holy exercise, both of mind and voice, in the contemplation of the Creatures, was without doubt a chief employment of Adam in his inno∣cency. Let it be thine then in thy return, and travailing to this second Paradise; that what is begun by thee here in grace, may be perfected there in Glory. O glorious God, and mercifull Father; O infinite,Ejaculation. lo∣ing, and gracious Saviour, and Redeemer; O holy and Eternal Spirit, my Sanctifier, three infinitely glorious Per∣sons;
One Omnipotent, onely wise, and Eternal God, Blessed, blessed▪ blessed, from everlasting to everlasting▪ who hath so highly honoured, and dignified me▪ a  Worm▪Psal. 22.6. Ephes. 2.4, 5, 6. and no Man; As to love me freely in thy Eternally begotten, and only beloved Son▪ the Lord Jesus▪ God-Man; and in him▪ from before all beginnings, to e∣lect me,1 Pet. 1, 2. Ephes. 2.10. unto Eternal Life, and Salvation; Creating  unto immortality and glory, by giving me an immorta Soul▪ and a Body that shall assuredly be raised to life▪ and glory, by thy Almighty Power, and by the virtue of the Resurrection of my Head,. Ephes. 2.1, 4, 5. and Saviour, who hast mira∣culously raised me from a sinfull death, unto a spiritual life, in my effectual Calling, through Adoption, the San∣ctification,Rom. 1.6. Rom. 8.15. Rom. 15.16. Rom. 8.9. Rom. 3.24, 25, 26. Jerem. 13.6. ▪ John 6.54. Luke 14.14. Psal. 116.12.108.1, 2. and Inhabitation of thy holy Spirit, as  freely justified me, in thy Son, the Lord my righteousness▪ and by this blessed and inseparable union to ▪ in thy Son▪ by the Holy Ghost, given me assurance  Life, and Glory, which shall indubitably beg  my Soul, at my dissolution, and be compleat at the union of Soul and Body a the Resurrection of the ▪ What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits▪ O God my heart is fixed, I will sing, and give praise,  with my glory. Awake my Heart, awake my Tongue▪  self will awake early and joyn with the Arch-Angels▪ and Angels, and the Church Tryumphant in Heaven and with the Holy Catholick Church upon Earth, in  Heavenly exercise of praise, and thanksgiving. O Lord▪ whose only prerogative it is, to search the heart; knowest that these are the desires,Jerem. 17.10. and petitions of  Soul▪ yet with holy Paul I cry out, that to will is present with me, (through thy grace) but how to perform▪ know not.Rom. 7.▪ Blessed Saviour, give me of thy fulness so so to receive grace,John .6. for grace. Yea be pleased to add  to grace, since thou alone workest in us both the will and the deed; and the Heaven aspiring▪ piercing  of praise,Phil. 2.13. ariseth only from thy Divine Fire of Know∣ledge, and holy affections. Eternal Father, let not this noble Instrument of thy Glory, my Tongue▪ be tuned to the vain and wanton Layes of the World, and Sin▪ lest thereby being crackt, unstrung, and made untunable
for thy service here, it, and my whole Body, with volup∣tuous Dive, be cast  useless into the Fire of Hell, where a drop of cold Water will not be  to cool a flaming lascivious Tongue▪ But let me▪ O Lord,Luke 16.14. be continually chaing the Magnlia Dei, and be sing∣ing those Evangelical▪ and prophetical Songs of the four Beasts, and four and twenty Elders, (the figure and re∣presentative of thy holy Church) saying▪ and singing, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was▪ and is,Rev. 4.8, 11. and is to come; Thou art worthy O Lord, to receive Glo∣ry, and Honour, and Power, for  Created all things▪ and for thy pleasure, they are, and were Created. Thou O blessed Saviour art worthy, to take the Book of the Providential Decrees, and actings of the Father, as concerning thy Chuch, and to open the Seal,Revel. .8, and to discover the meaning thereof; for th wast slain, and hast redeemed us, to God, by thy blood, out of every Kin∣dred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation▪10, And hast made  unto our God, Kings, and Priests, and we shall  the Earth; Worthy  O Lamb,12, hat was , to receive power, and riches, and wisdome, and strength, and honour, and glory, and blessing. Blessing,13. nour, glory, and power, be unto (thee▪ O Father) That  upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb, for eer and ever. Great and marvailous are thy works,Rev. 15.3. Lord God All∣mighty, just, and , are thy ways, O King of Saints;4. who shall not fear thee O Lord▪ and glorify thy Name,Twelve won∣derfull actings or works of God to be fulfilled. for thou only  holy▪ For all Nations shall come and worship before thee, for thy Judgments are made manifest, and thy , in the raising thy Witnesses,Revel. 11, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. thy Magistra∣cy, and Ministry, and pouring forth thy wrath upon the Beast, the Man of Sin, that Western Anti-christ▪ the Pope,1. The raising of the witnes∣ses. and upon that Mystery of Iniquity, Babylon the great, the Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth,Rev. 11.11, 13. Rev. 13.1, 2. Rev. 17.5. which is also spiritually called , and Egypt, and li∣terally Rome, the Throne, and Seat of the Beast, and two-horned Beast, the false Prophet,2. The ruine of Rome. which is come now into remembrance, before thee O God;Revel. 11.8. Revel. 1.10. to give unto her the Cup, of the Wine, of the fierceness of thy wrath:
she saith now in her heart,Revel. 13.11. Revel. 19.20. Revel. 16.19. Revel. 1.. I sit i Queen, and am no Widdow, and shall see no sorrow, therefore shall her Plagues  in ow Diy, Death, and Mourning, and Fa∣mine▪ and she shall be utterly  with Fire, for strong are thou  God that Judgeth her▪ And the Bea, the Pope that was,3. The ruine of the Papacy. and is not, that is the Eight Head, and is of the Seventh, shall go into Perdition, and be taken, and with him the false Prophet,Revel. 17.11. the Roman Church, and Hierarchy,Rev. 13.12, 13. that wrought Miracles before him, with which he deceived them that had received the mark of the Beast, and them that worshipped his Image; These both, shall be cast alive into a Lake of Fire,Revel. 19.20. burning with Brimstone▪ First in this life, by a direfull excommunication by all the Churches of Christ▪ and after this life,  the Fiery Lake of Hell. O Almighty Saviour, who  King of Kings,Revel. 19.16. and Lord of Lords▪ shall my Tongue  my glorified condition, (as hath been shewed) sing thy praises, declare, and perpetuate the memory of these thy wonderfull actings, after thou hast done them▪ O  me now before thou doest them, (as beholding  very neer, through the Perspective of thy Word, by the Eye of my Faith) Sing that new Song of praises, before thy Throne, concerning thy great and marvellous proi∣dences,Revel. 14.1, 2, 3, 4. with the hundred forty and four thousand, thy Virgins, and redeemed ones, that stand with thee, o Mount Sion, (the Figure of thy Church) and tryum∣phingly declare with the Angel, that the Hour of thy Judgment is come;Revel. 14.7.8. and that Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great City, because she made all Nations drink of the Wine of the wrath of her Fornication. Let me also, as by the same prospect of Faith, behold∣ing the Call,Read Rom 9. Verse 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. and Conversion of thy antient People Israel, and scattered Jewes, to be at hand; and the total de∣struction of Gog,4. Israels Con∣version. and Magog, (the blasphemous Mahume∣tan Turk) by their Sword, and in their Land▪ and bless, and praise thy Name,Read Rom. 11. v. 25. to v. 33. for it is wonderfull, fearfull, and glo∣rious. Read Ezekiel chap. 37. unto chap. the 40.O my Lord, hast thou also declared and promised by thy Holy Apostle John, that thou wilt shortly Lay hold on the Dragon, that old Serpent, which is the Devil, and
Sathan, and bind him for a thousand years;5ly. The De∣struction of the great Turk. 6ly. The bind∣ing of the De∣vil for 1000. Years. Casting him into the bottomless Pit, and shutting him up, and setting a Seal upon him, that he should deceive the Nations no more, untill the thousand years shall be fulfilled? And that then all the ends of the World shall remember, and turn unto thee O Lord,Rev. 20.23. 7ly. The Con∣version of the World. and all the Kindreds of the Nati∣ons shall worship before thee? And the Kingdomes of this World shall become the Kingdomes of Thee, our Lord,Psal. 22.27. Rev. 11.15. Joel 2.28, 29. Isay 54.13. Isay 32.15, 16, 17, 18. Isay 44.3. Psal. 72▪ 11, 17. Psal. 82.8. Psal. 86.9. Isay 60.3. Isay 2.2. Jerem. 27.7. Dan. 7.14. Hag. 2.7. Isay. 2.4. Psal. 29.11. Psal. 27.11. Psal. 72.3, 7. Isay. 9.7. Isay. 65.20, 22. Isay 54.13. Isay 66.12. Jerem. 31.12, 13, 14. Isay. 2.18, 60, 17, 20. and of thy Christ, and He shall raign for ever? Lord, shall I we see such a blessed, and happy age, as this, when, as a natural, and rational effect of Sathans binding, and thy casting him, and all his Legions of Devils, into the local Hell, and of thy plentuous pouring forth of the gifts, and graces of thy Spirit, according to the Prophets, the whole World shall be converted to Christianity, all Wars and Contentions shall cease, Swords shall be turned into Plow-shares, and Speares into Pruning-hooks, and the Nations shall learn Warre no more; And long life, and peace, and plenty, shall Crown this Orbe; when all Ido∣latry, Ignorance, open profaneness, and wickedness shall be laid aside; and purity, light, and unity in life and do∣ctrine, worship, and discipline, shall shine forth through∣out the Earth, even above the Primitive times, when sa∣ving knowledge, and a Salomonial wisdome, shall co∣ver the Earth, even as the Waters cover the Seas? Shall I, I say, behold all this, by faith, through the gracious il∣lumination of thy blessed Spirit, in thy Word of Truth? And shall I not cry out with holy David,Read for fur∣ther proof of this peaceable Kingdome of Christ. Isay. cap. 60.65. from the begin∣ning to the end. Lord open thou my Lips, and my Mouth shall shew forth thy praise? yea often glorify thee, in singing the 96. Psalme, which be∣ing a clear Prophesie of this time, thy Spirit indited to that purpose, as also the 97. the 98. the 99. and the 100. Psalmes. O Lord, hast thou foretold,Zeph. 3.9. Zach. 14.9. Isay. 11.6. Zach. 12.8. Psal. 51.15. and promised by thy Pro∣phet Daniel, That Judgment shall be given unto the Saints of the most High, and that the Saints shall possess the Kingdome?Read these Psalms, being a clear Prophesie, of the victorious and peaceable Kingdome of Christ. That then Righteousness shall be the Girdle of thy Loynes, and faithfulness the Girdle of thy Reines? That thou wilt give us Judges as at the first, and Coun∣sellers as at the beginning, and that thou wilt make our
Exactors righteousness?8ly. The De∣struction of all Christs enemies under his victo∣rious Kingdom. That the Judgment shall fit, and the Kingdome, and Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdome under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the People, of the Saints of the most High, whose Kingdome is an everlasting Kingdome,Dan. 7.22. Isay. 11.5. Isay 1.26. Isay. 60.17. Dan. 7.26, 27. and all Dominions shall serve Him? Yea, is this that fift, and universal Monarchie, and victorious Kingdome, which is by thy Almighty Power, and Spirit, to be acted and carryed on by thy Saints, when as it is witnessed by the Prophets, and thy Servant David, Thou shalt break thy Enemies with a Rod of Iron, and shalt dash them in pieces,Psal. 2.9. like a Potters Vessel, when the Lord at thy right hand,Psal. 110.5, shall strike through Kings, in the Day of his wrath, and shalt Judge amongst the Heathen,6. and shall fill the places with the dead Bodies, and wound the Heads over many Countries? When thou shalt put a two-edged Sword into the Hand of thy Saints, to execute vengeance upon the Heathen,Psal. 149.6, and punishment upon the People,7, to bind their Kings with Chains, and their Nobles with Fetters of Iron,8, to execute the Judg∣ment written; this honour have all the Saints? Yea, is this thy victorious Kingdome and Government,9. wherein righteousness, peace, holiness, and purity, shall be so greatly exercised, and exalted, by, and under thy Saints upon Earth, confirmed by thee, in a Vision, to thy A∣postle John; who declares, that after Sathan was bound by thee,Rev. 20.4. a thousand years, He saw Thrones, and they (to wit) thy Saints) sate upon them, and Judgment was given unto them? The Prodromus to which Sessions, he saw, Revelations the 19. from Verse the 11. unto the end of that Chapter? Revel. 19. Verse 11. to the end.And shall not both my Tongue, and Heart, in the cer∣tain belief, that these wonderfull prophetical promises shall, yea, are now, at the point, to be made good unto thy Church, and to be fulfilled; praise, and glorifie thee, in the joyfull expectation thereof; in those words, which thy own Spirit Indicted on this subject, and for this pur∣pose; O clap your Hands all yee People, shout unto God with the voice of Tryumph,Psal. 47.1, for the Lord most High is terrible,2, he is a great King over all the Earth, He shall subdue the People under us,3, and the Nations under our
Feet; he shall choose our Inheritance for us, the excel∣lency of Jacob, whom he loved;4, For God is the King of all the Earth, sing yee praises with understanding;7, God raigneth over the Heathen,8, God sitteth upon the Throne of his Holiness; The Princes of the People are gathered together, even the People of the God of Abraham;9. for the Shields of the Earth belongeth unto God, he is great∣ly exalted. O blessed Saviour, who art that great Prophet,Deut. 18.15, 18, 19. Revel. 22.6. Revel. 20.1, 2, 3. Heb. 4.9. pro∣mised by Moses; yea, the Lord God of the Prophets; Hast thou foretold to us by them, that after the binding and sealing up Sathan, and all the Powers of Darkness, in Hell, the bottomless Pit; thy Saints, thy Church shall enjoy a Sabatisme, a thousand years of rest, and peace,9ly. The Saints peaceable raign for 1000 years. upon this Earth; which I humbly expect, when their six thousand years of trouble, labour, and persecution shall be expired, typified, and prefigured (as I in all humility conceive) in the Arks resting the 17. Day of the 7. Month, as a Type of this rest in the six Days Creation,Gen. 2.1, 2, 3. Exod. 20.8, 9, 10, 11. and thy seventh Days rest; and in thy appointing us a laborious Week, and six Days of Work, and every seventh Day to be a Sabbath, a Day of rest to us, and the Creatures; And in the seventh Years rest to the Field, and release to Servants; the righteousness, and holiness, peace, plen∣ty, and happiness: of which their raign, and Kingdome, I but lately mentioned, and evidenced, by a few Scrip∣tures of many, that clearly hold it forth to us? O let my Heart, and Tongue, in the assured faith of thy accom∣plishing this great work, sing with joy the seventy-second Psalme; The lively Prophesie of this thy peaceable Kingdome, under thy Saints upon Earth, under the Type of Solomon; concluding with the Holy Psalmist,Psal. 72.18, 19, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who only doth wonderous works; And blessed be his glorious Name for ever;Gen. 18.25. Heb. 9.28. 1 Thes. 1.8. And let the whole Earth be filled with his Glory, Amen. O Lord, the Judge of all the Earth, hast thou promi∣sed to come unto us the second time, without Sin,10ly. The De∣struction of Gog and Magog, and the VVorld by Fire, at Christs second coming. unto Salvation; but in flaming Fire, to take vengeance of all that know thee not? Hereby destroying them and Hy∣pocrites, together with the Apostatizing Nations, called
Gog, and Magog, as Sprung from a Scythian Root, sedu∣ced from the true Faith,Revel. 20.7, 8, 9, 10. by the deceits of Sathan, at his loosing for a season; The number of whom is as the Sand of the Sea, and by him gathered together, to in∣compass the Camp of thy Saints,Rev 20.4, 5. compared with Luke 14.14. 1 Cor. 15.23. 1 Thes. 4.16. and the holy City, thy true Church, made up of Gentiles, and Israelites. Hast thou then promised a Resurrection of the Just, even of all thine Elect ones, and Martyrs; and that They shall be Priests of God,Rev. 20.6. and of thee O Christ, and that they shall raign with thee a thousand years? For thou hast made us unto our God Kings and Priests,Rev. 5.10. and we shall raign upon Earth:Isai. 65.17. 2 Pet. 3.13. 1 Cor. 15.23. 1 Thes 4.16. Rev. 20.5. Even in that new Heaven, and new Earth, which thou wilt create, shall our Salvation be then perfected, and compleated, in that first Resurrection, the Redemp∣tion of our Bodies, now sowen in Corruption, but then raised in Incorruption;1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44. sowen in dishonour, but raised in Glory; sowen in weakness, but raised in Power; sowen a natural Body,Phil. 3.21. 1 Joh. 3.2. but raised a spiritual Body, and glori∣ous, like unto thee O Lord. Vid. my Chro∣nology of the Age of this World, taken out of the Scripture. which will shortly be published. Dan. 12.13.For ever blessed Redeemer; shall I according to Scripture-Chronology (probably) about twelve hundred and thirteen years hence, with holy Daniel, stand in the Lot, at the end of the Days, and in my glorified Body, with the many myriades of Angels, and glorious Saints upon the renewed Earth, behold, and enjoy thee perso∣nally a thousand years? shall my Tongue then declare thy Acts, and the wonders of thy love, mercy, and truth, and praise thee with them, for this thy great salvation; as being in a sure possession of Glory? O let my Heart, and Tongue, now praise thee in faith, and assurance thereof;Heb. 11.1. Since Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. Yea, let me with thy Prophet and Apostle,2 Tim. 1.10. Hos. 13.14. 1 Cor. 15.54, 55, 56, 57. Tryumph over that last Enemy, Death; and singing, say, O Death where is thy Sting, O Grave where is thy Victory? The Sting of Death is Sin, and the strength of Sin is the Law,11ly. The Day of Judgment beginning with the rewarding the Saints: And ending with the Judging the wicked, and Devils. Death is swallowed up in Victory. Thanks be to God, which giveth us the Victory, through thee our Lord Jesus Christ. O thou whose Name is called the Word of God, who art the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; the only
Potentate, to whom all Judgment is committed by the Father,Rev. 19.13, 16. 1 Tim. 6.15. John 5.22. Acts 10.42. 2 Cor. 5.10. and who art ordained of God to be the Judge of the quick and of the dead; we must therefore all appear before thy Judgment Seat: when thy righteousness shall shine forth as the Light, and thy Judgment as the Noon-Day; in giving to every one according to their works:Psal. 37.6. And to all thine Elect, called thy Sheep,Mat. 16.27. at thy right hand,Mat. 25.33. Isai. 53.11. Rom. 3.26. (who are freely justified by thy righteousness) ac∣cording to the goodness of their thoughts, words, and deeds; which, (and not any of their sins as being fully satisfied for,Isai. 44.22. Acts 3.19. Rom. 4.25. 1 Cor. 15.3. and blotted out by thy Death and Merits) shall then be remembred, as being the fruits of thy own Grace; That so thy Saints may be gradually rewarded, according to their works, not for their works,Rom. 5.17. Rom. 12.6. Rom. 2.6. Revel. 2 23. Rom. 2.7, 10. Mat. 25.34. Revel. 20.4. both in the new Earth, and highest Heavens, with Eternal Life and Glory; And inherit the Kingdome prepared for them before the Foundation of the World. After which act of thy remunerative Justice, and thy Raign upon the renew∣ed Earth, with thy Saints a thousand years, thou wilt I believe, raise and Judge all the wicked,Mat. 25.33. Revel. 20.5. 1 Cor. 6.3. called the Goats, at thy left hand, and the Apostate Angels, accord∣ing as thou hast declared in thy Word of Truth; when, every ungodly one shall be sentenced, and punished,Revel. 20.12. pro∣portionable, and according to the evil of their thoughts, words, and actions; then being all made manifest,Luke 12.2. who with the Devils, their Tempters and Tormenters, shall by thy mighty Angels be cast into the Lake of Fire;mat. 25 41. Rev. 20.14, 15. the Locall Hell, unto Eternity. This is the second Death. O my King, my Judge, my Spouse,Luk. 21.26, 28. mat. 25.30. shall this dread∣full time of Judgment, fearfull indeed to the wicked, but a most joyfull Day to the Godly, certainly come upon the World, according to thy Word? Shall there be a long tract of time measured out, in the acting, and manifesting thy Judgments, and magnifying the glory of thy remunerative, and vindicative Justice, to the World, as well as there hath been a long space, of pro∣claiming, and holding forth the Golden Scepter of thy free Grace, and incomprehensible love, and mercy, to the Sons of Men? Is this truth one of the Articles of the Christian Faith, and as certain to us, as the Day of our
death, according to that unrepealable Statute, It is ap∣pointed to Men once to dye,Heb. 9.27. and afterwards comes the Judgment? Shall the Crowns, dignities, and rewards, conferred upon thy Saints, be one chief subject of praise, and fill the Mouths of Men, and Angels, with continual Hallelujahs unto God; not only whilst they rest upon the renewed Earth, but also in the highest Heavens, after the end of this long Day, and the pouring out of thy wrath, and execution of thy righteous Judgments upon wicked Men, and Devils; when thy glorious justice in both the parts thereof shall be finished, and compleated, according to that Prophesie of the Psalmist▪ then per∣fectly fulfilled,Psal. 58.11. Verily there is a reward for the righteous. Verily he is a God that judgeth in the Earth? O let both my Heart and Tongue, now inure themselves to this Subject,Rom. 1.17. since I live by faith, and not by sense, and sing with the Elect ones in the Revelations, that prophe∣tical Song,Revel. 19.1, calculated for this time, saying, Hallelujah, Salvation, and Glory, and Honour, and Power, unto the Lord our God,2, for true and righteous are his Judgments; Praise our God all yee his Servants, and yee that fear him,5, both small, and great; Hallelujah, for the Lord reigneth;6, Let us be glad, and rejoyce, and give honour to him, for the Marriage of the Lamb is come, and hi Wife hath made her self ready;7, And to her was granted, that she should be arrayed in fine Linnen,8, clean, and white, for the fine Linnen is the righteousness of Saints▪ Blessed are they that are called to the Marriage Supper of the Lamb.9. 12ly. The end of Christs Me∣diatory King∣dome, and the translation of the Saints▪ to Heaven, there to be for ever. O King of Saints, and King of Nations, our Almighty Saviour, and Conquerer; who hast fulfilled the Law, sa∣tisfied Divine Justice, overcome the World, Crucified Sin, spoiled Principalities, and Powers; and wilt at the Resurrection of the Just, and the Redemption of our Bodies,Revel. 15.3. Rom. 8.4. Rom. 5 9. John 16.33. Rom 6.6. Colos. 2.15. Luke 14.14. Rom 8.23. 1 Cor. 15.26. Psal. 68.18. destroy our last Enemy Death, and after the Judging and Hellifying, of wicked Men, and Devils, wilt in Tryumph ascend on high, with thy Elect, and lead Captivity Captive, that the Glory which thy Fa∣ther gave thee, may be given them, that they may be with thee where thou art, and may behold the Glory
which he hath given thee,Joh. 17.22, 24. and possess an inheritance in∣corruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in Heaven for us,1 Pet. 1.4. where we shall be ever with thee our Lord, and see God face to face,1 Thes. 4.17. 1 Cor. 13.12. and in thee the perfections of all Creatures, as in their first cause: And know thee (according to our measure) as we are known by thee; Blessed Mediator, this is that time, when,1 Cor. 15.24. all rule, all authority, and power, being put down, and un∣der thee in the Kingdome of thy Saints; and under thee in thy personal, and glorious raign upon Earth: All Enemies, even Death it self being destroyed,1 Cor. 15.24, 25, 26. and put under thy Feet; thou shalt deliver up the Kingdome (so far as it is Mediatory, personal, and singly acted,1 Cor. 15.28. and managed by thee, in thy humane appearance, and Man-hood) to God, even the Father; That so thou the Son (as being also as Man,mat. 1.18. Luke 1.32. the Son of God) might be subject, as to thy present kinde of administration, unto him, that put all things under thee,1 Cor. 15.28. that God may be all in all; And the whole Universe and Creation, both in Heaven, and Earth, especially thy spiritual Body, thy Church, may be immediately governed, and influenced by him, who is three in one, God-blessed for ever; To which mystical Body, thy Spouse, and Church, as also to Angels, thou still remainest Head, and Lord for ever:Ephes. 1.20, 21, 22, 23. Colos. 1.10. which being now perfectly, and inherently, sanctified, and graciously admitted,Ephe. 2.18, 22. through the glorious inhabita∣tion, and communion of thy most holy, and eternal Spi∣rit, to an immediate fellowship, real,1 John 1.3. 1 Cor. 6.17. 1 Cor. 12.13. and spiritual union (although not essential) with the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, one God blessed for ever,Joh. 11.25, 26. John 8.12. Colos. 3.3. Rom. 5.17. John 6.57. Joh. 14.19. shall live eternally in the life of God; and in whole, and in part, as respecting every individual Member, and Vessel, be always full; yet always increasing, in knowledge, grace, and glory, as Eying, and enjoying, continually, the Divine Nature, and cast into an Ocean, of infiniteness unto Eternity. This is the Generation of them that seek thee,Psal. 24.6. that seek thy face, O God of Jacob. Therefore let both my Heart and Tongue, even now, O Lord prepare, and begin to praise thee, as from Pisgath, with beholding Canaan;Numb. 23.14. and by faith, the eye of my Soul, from the raised hill of
holy Contemplation,2 Cor. 12.2. viewing this Saint Paul's third Hea∣ven; the Throne of God, and of his glory; and the many, yea innumerable shining, and starrified Mansions, in thy Fathers house, (the places prepared by thee for thy Saints) as also their Kingdome, and State of endless glory, happiness, and blessedness: In the ravishing Me∣ditation of these things, their translation, and thy second most glorious and tryumphant Assention, O let me sing and rejoyce, in the words of thy Prophet David, foretel∣ling both thy Ascentions;Psal. 47.5, 6, God is gone up with a shout, the Lord with a sound of a Trumpet; sing praises to God, sing praises; sing praises to our King, sing praises. Lift up your Heads O yee Gates,Psal. 24.7. and be yee lift up yee ever∣lasting Doors, and the King of Glory shall come in. Who is this King of Glory?8, the Lord, strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in Battel. Lift up your Heads, O ye Gates; even lift them up ye everlasting Doors,9, and the King of Glory shall come in.10. Who is this King of Glory? the Lord of Hosts, He is the King of Glory. Selah. I have now by Divine assistance, according to my weak-sightedness,1 Cor. 13.9, 12. (for all Men here know but in part, and as in a Glass darkly, and imperfectly) taken a view of the Land of Promise, the Inheritance of the Saints, in light,Colos. 1.12. and presented to the Lord, and to his Spouse the Church, what discoveries he hath in great mercy given me, as concerning Eternal Life, that last and great Ar∣ticle of the Christian faith, begun visibly, in the Saints glorified condition, in the new Heaven, and new Earth, and continued unto Eternity in the Heaven of Heavens. Wherein concluding with the glorification, and blessed use, and exercise of our Tongues, in that happy state, I thought it proper, both as to the general subject, I have been upon, (as being the Vision, exercise, and Tryumph of Faith); and as to the subject matter, both lauditory to God, and declarative to one another, about which our Tongues shall, in our renewed life, be imployed; to declare in this life, with all humility and thankfulness of Heart, and Tongue, (to both which, my Pen is but the Secretary) in the Ejaculatory part of that Medita∣tion; what by faith I behold, and am assured from the
Word of Truth shall come to pass here, and be injoyed by me, and all Gods Elect, in the life to come; and shall be there a blessed Subject, of our praises to all Eternity. In which Song of 12. parts, or Jacobs Laddar of 12. Staves, whose foot stands upon Earth, and top reaches to Heaven, we may by faith ascend, beginning here up∣on Earth in this present Year of our Lord 1666. by twelve successive Steps, wonderfull, and most signal peri∣ods, (noted afore in the Margint) to the last, and highest ascent, the Glorification of the Saints in the Heavens. Being now come to Hercules Pillars, the Ne-plus ultra, of Faith; beyond which, all sacred Scripture (the light of Faith) is silent: I can proceed, nor walk any further, in these Contemplations, lest walking without a Light, I fall into the Darkness of Error: It being alike sinfull curiosity, and presumption, to inquire what God will do after this silence, When time shall be no longer;Revel. 10.6. as to ask what he did before time was, and before this World was Created. Wherefore I shall here conclude these my imperfect Meditations; and with all humility, and reverence, return all Honour, Glory, and Praise, to thee, O glorious Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Tri∣nity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, one God blessed for ever, for thy most gracious assistance, by the light of thy Word, and Spirit, in this great Work, a subject too weighty for Angels, how much more for me, a sim∣ple, sinfull, and weak Worm. Lord, I acknowledge that whatsoever is good, right, and true, in this Trea∣tise, is of, and from thee, who art Goodness, Light,Psal. 25.8. John 14.6. and Truth, and to thee alone belongs the praise; and that whatsoever therein is Hay or Stuble, is mine,1 Cor. 3.12. who hum∣bly takes shame therefore, and Petitions for thy free pardon, in my Lord Christ Jesus, beseeching thee, that in the assurance of thy love, and mercy in him, and in the faith, light, and assurance of thy glorious Truths, herein declared out of thy Word, I may with Holy Job, all the Days of my appointed time,Job 14.14. wait until my Change come. And with zealous Paul,Phil. 1.23. desire to depart and to be with Christ, that so my faith and hope may
be swallowed up in the possession of thee; and Vision, may be changed into fruition. Thy Spirit, and thy Bride say come; And let him that heareth, say come; Thou O Lord that testifieth these things,Rev. 22.17. sayest, Surely I come quickly;20, Amen. Even so come Lord Jesus. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with us all. Amen.21. Soli Deo Gloria. An Advertisement by the Author to the Reader. FOr the more cleer, and fuller proof of the Twelve great things, mentioned in the Conclusion of this Work, I refer the Reader to my Treatise almost ready to be published; Entitled An humble Exposition of most of the Scripture-Prophesies, concerning Twelve great Pe∣riods to be fulfilled to the Church; beginning to be ma∣nifested in the Year 1666. and concluding with the end of our Lords Mediatory Kingdome, and the Translation of the Saints, to the highest Heavens. FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE, Of the Things contained in the TREATISE Intitulated, MEDITATIONS ON FAITH. A. THe Affections, lose their appetite, if ye do but change the object, viz. Spiritual for Temporal Page. 4 Christs Agony as described, should much act upon our spirits Page. 27 The use and abuse of the Affections Page. 45, 46 All Arts and Sciences are in the Scripture, as Metaphysick, Phylosophie, Astronomy, Chronologie, Rhetorick, &c. Page. 71 Christs answer to the soul, complaining of her Affections Page. 81 The Antiquity of the Scriptures Page. 102 Of the Affections glorified Page. 151 Of holy Anger glorified Page. 160 A Soliloquium upon it Page. 161 An Ejaculation upon it Page. 161 A caution against blotting Assurance Page. 185 B. The Body of man like the pool of Bethesda, with its five Porches Page. 22
The curse and judgement of the Body Page. 52 The Souls complaint against the Body, with Christs an∣swer Page. 88, 89. &c. Of the Body glorified Page. 164 Of the spirituality, and swiftness of our Bodies, at the Resurrection Page. 169 A soliloquium and ejaculation on those two qualities of the Body Page. 170 The glorious shining of the Body, at the Resurrection Page. 171 A soliloquium on that shining of the Body Page. 173 Item, an ejaculation upon it Page. 174 Of the Immortality of the Body glorified Page. 175 C. The Certain condition of man, is to be uncertain Page. 8 A man may be a Conduit-pipe to others, and be a Vessel of dishonour himself Page. 15, 17 Of Christs Death and Burial Page. 33, 34 His victory over Hell Page. 35 His Resurrection Page. 36 His Ascension Page. 38 Man in respect of Conscience, is as one possessed Page. 42 A Contemplation on love Page. 47 A Contemplation on the insatisfaction in Riches, Honours, Pleasures, Wisdom Page. 49 A Contemplation on fear Page. 51 A Contemplation on the sinfulness of the Eyes, Ears, No∣strils, Taste and Touch Page. 56 Of Christs Priestly Office Page. 57 The occasion of Christs Priest-hood Page. 58 A Contemplation upon Christs Priest-hood Page. 60 Of Christs satisfaction Page. 61 Christs answer to the poor soul, complaining of his Con∣science Page. 75 The souls general Complaint answered by Christ Page. 85, 86 The souls Complaint against her Senses, Tongue, and Mem∣bers of her body; and Christs answer to it Page. 88, 89 A meditation on the excellency of Christs person Page. 99 Against Coveteousness Page. 123
An Ejaculation upon the glorious Change of the body at the Resurrection Page. 185 D. Demas described Page. 14 A Dialogue between Christ, and the poor complaining soul in many particulars, which Christ answers and satis∣fies Page. 74 Our victory by Christ, over Death Page. 130 Our victory over the fear of Death Page. 132 Our victory over the pain, and separation by Death Page. 133 All things fall short of the Duration of glorified Bodies and Souls; and the high principle thereof Page. 180, 181 A soliloquium upon that Duration Page. 182 The Destruction of Christs enemies Page. 242 E. An Ejaculation for Grace Page. 21 An Ejaculation on Christs sufferings Page. 30 The sinfulness of the Eyes Page. 53 The sinfulness of the Ears, with a contemplation on them Page. 54 Of Eternal life Page. 146 The destruction of Christs Enemies Page. 242 F. The Fundamental graces Page. 2 The definition of Faith Page. 3 The means of Faith Page. 21 Christ the Son of God, the object of Faith Page. 22 The palsie of Fear Page. 50 A contemplation on Fear Page. 51 Of Forgiveness of sins Page. 63 Our victory over the Fear of Death Page. 132, 133 The affection of Fear glorified Page. 153 G. Of the understanding Glorified Page. 148 Of the will Glorified Page. 149
A contemplation upon them both Page. 150 Of the Memory Glorified Page. 150 Of the Affections Glorified Page. 151 Of Love Glorified Page. 151 Of Fear Glorified Page. 153 A soliloquium on Love and Fear Glorified Page. 155 Item an Ejaculation upon them Page. 155 Of Anger Glorified Page. 160 Of Joy Glorified Page. 162 Of the Body Glorified Page. 164 Of the Senses Glorified Page. 188 The destruction of Gog and Magog, and the World by fire at Christs second coming Page. 243 H. Honour distinguished and defined Page. 5 Many good qualities spoyled by Hypocrisie, exemplyfied in Saul Page. 9 Hypocrisie deciphered to the life Page. 13 Historical faith Page. 4 A short History of the life of Christ Page. 24, 25 A senceless Hard-heart most dangerous Page. 43, 44 Christs answer to the complaint of a hard Heart Page. 76 Honour, one of the worlds Darts to wound souls Page. 119 Of the sense of Hearing glorified Page. 199 An ejaculation upon the glorification of the sense of Hearing Page. 203 I. Judas described Page. 16 Infidelity, the first means of Death Page. 20 Joy distinguished and described Page. 48 No true Joy in riches Page. 48 No true Joy in honours Page. 48 No true Joy in pleasures Page. 48 No true Joy in humane wisdom Page. 49 The consolation in Christs Intercession Page. 60 Of Justification Page. 62 The necessity of It Page. 68
Of Imputative righteousness Page. 62 The Definition and Exposition of it Page. 64 Christs answer to the Soul, complaining against Joy Page. 81, 82 Christs Kingly-Office at the last Judgment Page. 139 A short Application of Comfort, against fear of the last Judgment Page. 142 Of Joy glorified Page. 162 The Conversion of Israel Page. 240 The day of Judgment, beginning with the rewarding of the Saints, and ending with the judging of the wic∣ked Page. 244 K. The happiness of Divine Knowledg, consists mostly in Fruition Page. 7 Of Christs Kingly-Office now Page. 93 Kings called Pastours, and the Application of it Page. 96, 97 Of Christs Kingly-office at the last Judgement Page. 139 Of Christ Victorious Kingdom Page. 242 The end of Christs Mediatory Kingdom Page. 246 L. Mans natural Light, is comparatively darkness Page. 12 A lawful and useful Love of Self Page. 16 Gods Love infinitely excels mans Page. 33 The commendation and corruption of Love Page. 47 Christs answer to the souls complaint against Love 1 The commendation of Gods Laws Page. 101 Lust, one of the Worlds darts, to wound souls Page. 117 Of Life Eternal Page. 146 Of the affection of Love glorified Page. 151 A watch to be set on the Lips Page. 233 M. Miraculous faith Page. 15 Mans Misery by Nature Page. 41 His Mind dark, as with Egytian darkness Page. 41 The earthly-minded Man, the only Melancholy man Page. 49 Christs answer to the poor Souls complaint, against its un∣faithful
Memory Page. 78, 79 Of the Memory glorified Page. 150 The end of Christs Mediatory Kingdom Page. 246 N. All Natural Mysteries, and the Knowledge of them shall be discovered, and hightened at the Resurrection Page. 149 O. An Objection [that God might have confirmed man, as he did the fallen Angels] answered Page. 68 The weak Believers Objections answered Page. 73 The souls Objection, it cannot hear, because dead, an∣swered by Christ Page. 73 The souls Objection [that the expressions of Comfort in Scripture, are too general] answered by Christ Page. 73 An Objection [that professors being forbidden sen∣sual pleasures, are of all men most miserable] an∣swered Page. 125 P. Poverty distinguished and deciphered Page. 26 Of Christs Priestly-Office Page. 57 Of his Prophetical-Office Page. 70 All Revelations flows thence Page. 70 A Contemplation upon it Page. 70 Our Protection by Christ Page. 106 Persecution one of the worlds Darts, to wound profession of Religion Page. 120 An Expostulation touching Persecution Page. 121 Against sensual Pleasures Page. 124 The forbidding sensual Pleasures, doth not (as the Laodi∣cean thinks) make Professors of all men most misera∣ble Page. 125 An Antidote against Persecution Page. 128 The ruine of the Papacy Page. 240 Q. General Questions answered, 1. Why God doth not in the
same instant call, justifie, sanctifie, and glorifie his E∣lect? 2. Why God doth not build up that wide breach, which sin hath made in mans Nature Page. 67 R. Imputative Righteousness, defined and expounded Page. 64 Proofs of our right in Christs Imputative Righteousness Page. 65 Riches is one of the worlds Darts, to wound souls Page. 118 Proofs and comfort in the Resurrection Page. 135 Of the Ruine of Rome Page. 239 S. The Soul is never unimployed Page. 1 The sinful use of Smelling Page. 54 Of Christs Satisfaction Page. 61 The Souls complaint against the Senses, answered by Christ Page. 88, 89 The commendation of the Scriptures, from the Authour, An∣tiquity, and Holiness thereof Page. 101, 102, & 103 Christs protection of us from Satan Page. 107 His protection of us from Sin Page. 108, 109, 110, 111, 112 Against Sensual pleasures Page. 124 A Soliloquium on the affections of love, & fear, glorified Page. 155 Of the Senses glorified Page. 188 Of the sense of Seeing glorified Page. 195 A soliloquium upon that Sense Page. 197 An ejaculation upon that Sense Page. 198 Of the sense of Smelling glorified Page. 210 A soliloquium upon that sense of Smelling glorified Page. 213 An ejaculation upon the sense of Smelling, glorified Page. 214 T. Temporary faith Page. 8 The sinfulness of the Taste Page. 55 The sinfulness of the Touch Page. 55 The souls complaint against the Tongue, and Christs answer to it Page. 88, 89 Of the sense of Tasting glorified Page. 205 A soliloquium upon the glorified sense of Tasting Page. 207 An ejaculation upon it Page. 209 Of the sense of Touching glorified Page. 215 n inference whether spiritual bodies (as Angels) may not be Tangible, by spiritual humane glorified bodies at the Resurrection Page. 215, 216
A soliloquium upon the Touch, glorified Page. 218 An ejaculation upon the Touch glorified Page. 220, 237 Of the Tongue glorified Page. 222 A soliloquium upon the Tongue, glorified Page. 232 Against cursing, swearing, and wicked, or vain Talking Page. 234 The destruction of the great Turk Page. 241 The binding of the Devil, for a Thousand years Page. 241 The Saints peaceable Reign, for a Thousand years Page. 243 The Translation of the Saints to Heaven Page. 246 U. Christs answer to the poor soul, complaining of his Under∣standing Page. 7 A Contemplation upon our Victory by Christ, over Ho∣nours, Covetousness, Voluptuousness, & persecution Page. 129 Of the Understanding glorified Page. 148 Of Christs Victorious Kingdom Page. 242 W. The excellency of the Word Page. 1 The great dependance of the Will on other faculties Page. 4 Against free-Will Page. 45 The souls complaint against the Will, answered by Christ Page. 8 Christs victory over the World Page. 11 The Worlds darts by which it wounds souls Page. 11 Of the Will glorified Page. 14 A Watch to be set upon the Lips Page. 238 Twelve Wonderful Works of God to be fulfilled Page. 239 Of the raising of the Witnesses Page. 23 X.   Y. The binding of the Devil for a thousand Years Page. 241 The Saints peaceable reign, for a thousand Years Page. 43 Z. Of Zeal glorified Page. 15 Zeal not a simple grace, but the intense degree of every grac Page. 156 A soliloquium on glorified Zeal Page. 159 An ejaculation and commendation of glorified Zeal Page. 159 FINIS
—Place this before the Scripture-Catechisme at Folio 259 THE EPISTLE TO HIS Entirely beloved Wife, and Twelve dear Chil∣dren, and to their Childrens Children, until the second coming of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. MOst affectionately indeared Wife, and Children, one with me by Nature, and by Grace; who therefore may challenge and lay claim to my especial care, love, and respects, besides the discharge of my duty to God, who hath placed you under my circum∣spection, and government, and commands my con∣stt, utmost, and unwearied endeavours, in order to your Eter∣nal Salvation. What my continued pains, and frequent watch∣ing over you, have been, whilst I was present with you, your selves, and the rest of my Family will witness, as to Weekly Ca∣techizing, Morning and Evening expounding the Holy Scriptures, and praying with you, besides my constant Repetition of Sermons, preparation, and particular examination of you, on the Lord's Day, and Monthly Sacraments; and often remembrance of you,  to your Daily exercise of private Prayers, reading of the Scri∣ptures, and the Works of God's faithful Ministers. O let not my above Twenty Years labours be in vain, to any one of you; ay, which is far worse, be a great aggrevation, both of your sin, and punishment, should ye offend, and rebel against so much light, and means, and neglect so great salvation. But most dear∣ly beloved; I believe, and hope, better things of you, and things that accompany Salvation, although I thus speak; And there∣fore during my above Seven Tears Exile, and separation from you, I have not ceased, to put you in remembrance of your duty to God, and to stir you up by Letters, to the continuance in well doing, since you shall reap Glory, and Eternal Life, if you faint not, but persevere and continue therein constant to the end: Witness, that large Epistle, sent unto you, dated from Antwerp, January the first, 1665. Wherein from the Mouth of our most blessed Saviour, (as being in a manner all his words) you are
exhorted to, and instructed in, what things you are to believe, and to practise; what you are to imbrace; and what to eschew, as to grace and vertue, and as to vice and error: which I earnestly desire you, yea charge you, as a Husband, and a Father, to read often over, or at least once a Quarter. Which were it not all Scripture, and through the grace and mercy of God skimmed, and digested for your edification; I should not by this recom∣mendation have presumed to put so high a value upon it. Since which time▪ having by God's gracious assistance, finished this Treatise of Faith, (being destitute of Worldly gifts to bestow up on you) That in discharge of my duty to God, and to you, I may still continue and express my conjugal, and paternal af∣fection, respectively to the Souls of you all. I have directed and dedicated it to you, and yours; desiring, and requiring your fre∣quent, and serious perusal of it, as being for the subject matter, the most sublime, and holding forth the glorious knowledge of the only Infinite, and most high God; and the wonderful and high Mysteries of Man's Salvation, as they are manifested in the face of the Lord Jesus Christ; who is here lively represented, both to the eye, and to the exercise of your faith, begining with the promise to Adam, and Man's fall and misery, and proceeding to his Incarna∣tion, Life, Death, and Passion, Resurrection, and Assension, and the exercise of his Three-fold Office, as Priest, and the Prophet, and King, with all benefits from them, with his Kingdom, considered in its several degrees, and administrations, first as it was legal, and spiri∣tual, under the Law; Secondly, purely spiritual under the Gospel; Thirdly, as it shall be victorious over Sathan, and Worldly enemies, in this latter Age of the World; Fourthly, peaceable, holy and righteous during the Sabbatisms, the Saints Reign a thousand years upon Earth; Fifthly, glorious, after the Resurrection of the Elect, and their Reign with Christ personally, a Thousand Years upon the renewed Earth; Sixthly, Judicial, begining at Christ's second coming, under which the Saints are rewarded, and all the wicked raised, judged, condem∣ned, and cast into the Local Hell, together with the evil Angels, Se∣venthly, Eternally glorious, when Christ's Mediatory Kingdom being expired, & delivered up to the Father, that God may be all in all, the Saints shall be translated into the highest Heavens; that they may there Reign, & live with God and Christ, the Head of the Saints, and Angels, for ever, and for ever. As the subject matter hath a prehe∣minence, as being a discourse of things most excellent above others, the knowledge, beliefe, and saving application thereof to your souls is of all exercises the most excellent, profitable, and delightful, since without faith, and the true knowledge of God in Christ, there is no light, joy, peace, rest, happiness to your souls here, nor in the life to
come salvation. And to have revealed to you the great misteries, and secret counsel of God, together with their wonderful products to the end of the World, and Scripture-manifestation, which are bid from the ungodly, but discovered by the light of his Word, in the Prophets, in, and by his spirit (to those that fear him) is of all spe∣culative knowledge to Christians the most pleasant, useful, and en∣couraging, as being through an assured hope, that Helmet of Salva∣tion, which will carry you victoriously through all difficulties, and op∣position; to triumph in endless glory; together with what I have re sum'd up, as the substance and body of this Treatise, I have lso intermixt methodically, many Soliloquies, and Ejaculatory Pe∣tions, as necessary to conclude several principal heads in these Me∣ditations, which I earnestly desire you to make a frequent, and sin∣re use, and application of, praying you to make them yours, as well as mine; and beseech the Lord that they may have a like ef∣fect upon you, as to your spiritual food and edification, as the irst and second concoction hath in the stomack as to a good and perfect digestion, and turning the Meat into a fit Chile to be san∣fied and made good blood and spirits; besides an after chew∣ng of the Cud, by remeditation and practice in a Gospel and spi∣ritual signification, will much difference and distinguish you that  clean Christians, from those that are unclean: who for want of the heat of Divine affections, devour but not digest holy things. To include, I desire my great suffering condition, abounding with sorrows, hopes, and fears, and all kinds of Tentations, discomforts and distractions; my above Twenty removes to several Residen∣ces, and more than seven years Exile, and separation from my ooks, dearest Friends, and Relations, my ignorance, infirmities, and sinfulness, as being the greatest of sinners, the least of Saints,  excuse, and apologize for me to any of my Brethren of the hurches of Christ, that shall with you read these Contemplations  to any defects, or errors therein, as being one of the lowest rms in the School of Christ, and therefore ready in all humility to submit any thing herein contained to the Judgement of the Saints that are learned or judicious; and to give, or receive light, or satisfaction to, or from any that differ from me in Opinion. Which I cannot but expect, because of the diversity, and rarity of a great part of this subject, which may be a reason, that plowing with no man's Heifer, in some things I may walk alone, yet left not in the dark and without (as seems to me) a clear light of holy Scripture; hoping that this Essay of mine, as to those great future mysteries, and periods of the Churches state, may give some new light, through the free condescention of God's spirit, to me his poor Exile in Pat∣os, as to the understanding of many Scripture Prophesies (in my
Judgment, much mistaken by former Expositors, both ancient and modern; and that though my weak light be but as a rush Candle, yet it may be an occasion of the inflaming and lighting up of great and shining Tapers, both in this generation and in the Age to come. Most loving, gracious and faithful Consort, and hopeful Chil∣dren, whom I greatly long after in the bowels of Jesus Christ, And for whom, in the words of the Apostle Paul, I frequently pray, that your love may abond yet more and more in knowledge, and in all Judgment, that ye may approve things that are excellent, that ye may be sincere, and without offence, until the day of Christ; Be∣ing filled with the Fruits of Righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God. Phil. 1.8, 9, 10, 11. For this cause I bow my Knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole Family in Heaven and Earth is named; That he would grant you according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by his spirit, in the inner Man, that Christ may dwell in your hearts, by faith, that ye be∣ing rooted, and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and heigth; and to know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fulness of God: Ephes. 3.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Having the Eyes of your understanding enlightened, that ye may know what is the hope of his Calling, and what the Riches of the glory of his Inheritance in the Saints; and what is the exceeding greatness of his power to us wards, who believe ac∣cording to the working of his mighty Power: Ephes. 1.18, 19. That you all with open Face beholding, as in a Glass, the glory of the Lord, may be changed into the same Image, from glory to glory, even as by the spirit of the Lord: 2 Cor. 3.18. Finally, my dear Brethren, Sisters, and Fellow members in Christ, (for all other Relation, and Denomination▪ shall shortly be laid aside.) Farewell, be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace; And the God of peace and love shall be with you. 2 Cor. 13.11. Amen. Yours in all sincere and tender affection, as doubly Obliged by Nature and by Grace. W. W. This 29th. of June, 1666.
Sweetnese of Forme, & Feature, Heeres Combinde, Yet much below, the Beautie, of her minde. The True Effigies of the Lady Katherine Harington Wife to Sir James Harington and Baronet.
AN EPISTLE TO THE ELECT LADY,3 Joh. 1. And her Children; My true Yoke-fellow,2 Cor. 6.14. and Dearly beloved Children,1 Pet. 1.14. Whom I love in the Truth.3 Joh. 1. The Salutation  Exhortation of the Father to his Wife and Children.HEar ye the Instruction of a Father, and attend to know understanding;pro. 4.1. for∣get it not, neither decline from the words of my Mouth. The Praise and Commendation of the Lord Jesus Christ, under the Name and Title of Wisdome, as being the Wisdome of God. Mat. 6.33.First seek the King∣dome of God, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you. pro. 4.7.Wisdome is the principal thing, the one thing needful; and with all your gettings, get understanding:Luk. 10.42. forsake her not, and she shall preserve you;pro. 4.6, Love her, and she shall keep you; Exalt her, and she shall promote you; she shall bring you to honour when you do embrace her;8, she shall give to your Head an Ornament of grace;9, a Crown of Glory shall she deliver un∣to you;10, and the Years of your Life shall be
many: When you go, your steps shall not be straitned;12. and when you run, you shall not stumble.13. Take fast hold of Instruction; let her not go, keep her, for she is your life. Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ;Act. 16.31. who is the power of God,1 Cor. 1.24. and the wisdome of God. God, who at sundry times,Heb. 1.1. and in divers manners spake in times past to the Fathers by the Prophets, hath in these last Days spoken unto us by his Son,2. who he hath appointed Heir of all things; by whom also he made the Worlds. There∣fore ye ought to give the more earnest heed to the things that ye have heard,The danger of neglecting to hear and obey the voice and Counsel of Christ. Heb. 2.1. lest at any time ye should let them slip. For if the word spoken by Angels was stedfast,2, and every trans∣gression, and disobedience received a just re∣compence of reward; How shall you escape, if you neglect so great salvation?3. If he that despised Moses Law, dyed without mercy un∣der two or three witnesses;Heb. 10.28. Heb. 12.25. See that ye refuse not him that speaketh; for if they escaped not, who refused him that spake on Earth; much more shall not ye escape, if ye turn away from him that speaketh from Heaven. An Exhortation of the Father to his Wife and Chil∣dren, to hearken to the word and coun∣sel of Christ.Hear ye therefore the word which the Lord Jesus speaketh unto you;Jer. 10.1. (who spake by the Prophets) and is the Lord God of the Holy Prophets;Heb. 1.1. Rev. 22.6. since all Scripture is given by Inspiration of God;2 Tim. 3.16. even from him who is the Eternal Word of God;Rev. 19.13. and is profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instru∣ction in Righteousness, that the Man of God may be perfect,2 Tim. 3.17. throughly furnished, unto all good works. Counsel is mine, and found wisdome; I am understanding,Prov. 8.14, I have strength: I love them that love me;17. and those that seek me early, shall finde me.
A SCRIPTVRE-CATECHISME. Here begins the speech of the Lord Jesus Christ, as speaking in his own Person, to those to whom this Epistle  directed: and  applicable to all other Christians. Joh. 1.14.I am the only begotten Son of the Father; the brightness of his glory, the express Image of his Person,Heb. 1.3. upholding all things by the Word of my Power. I was by him as one brought up with him;Prov. 8.30, and I was daily his delight; re∣joycing always before him; rejoycing in the habitable parts of his Earth,31, and my delights were with the Sons of Men. Blessed is the Man that heareth me,34, waiting daily at my Gates, waiting at the Posts of my Doors: For who so findeth me, findeth life, and shall ob∣tain favour of the Lord.35, But he that sinneth against me,36. sinneth against his own Soul; all that hate me,The danger of rejecting Christ. love death. But (if) ye set at naught my counsel,prov. 1.25. I also will laugh at your Calamity,26 I will mock when your fear cometh; when your fear comes as Desolations,27 and your destruction comes as a whirl-wind, Then shall ye call upon me,28 but I will not answer; for that you hated knowledge,29 and did not choose the fear of the Lord; Therefore shall you eat of the fruit of your own way,31 and be filled with your own devices:33. But who so hearkneth to me, shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet from fear of evil. The Confession of faith, commonly called the Apostles Creed, held forth  Christ in Scrip∣ture Expressions. Joh. 14.1.Believe in God, believe also in me; I and the Father am one;Joh. 10.30. There are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost,1 Joh. 5.7. and these three are one. For though there be many that are called Gods,1 Cor. 8.5, & 6. verse. whether in Heaven, or in Earth; The Lord your God is one Lord,1. The Doctrine of the Trinity. Mark 12.29. and to you there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things; who Created the Heaven,Gen. 1.1. and the Earth. And one Lord Jesus Christ,1 Joh. 4.14. the Saviour of the World, by whom are all things;Eph 4.4. and you by him. And one Spirit,1 pet. 1.2. the Holy Ghost, by whom you are sanctified.2. Article, that Jesus Christ is the eternal Son of God, and our Lord. Joh. 14.6. Rev. 19.13. 1 Joh. 1.4.I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life;
the Word of God; that in the beginning was with God; and was God, the life and light of Men;3. Article, as to the Incarnation of the Lord Jesus Christ, who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary. Joh. 12.36. Joh. 1.14. mat. 1.20. Gal. 4.4. mat. 1.23.18.25. & 1. ver. Ro 1.3. Heb. 2.16 while ye have light, believe in the light; in me the Eternal Word, that was made flesh, and dwelt amongst you; was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and made of a Woman, born of the Virgin Mary, of the Seed of Abra∣ham, and of the Seed of David. The beloved, and only begotten Son of the Father,mat. 3.17. full of grace and truth. This is the work of God,Joh. 1.14. that ye believe on me, whom he hath sent;4. Article, con∣cerning Christ's Condemnation by Pontius Pilate, his Crucifixion, Death, and Burial, and all other sufferings in Soul and Body. Joh. 6.29. that was delivered to Pontius Pilate,mat. 27.2. the Governor of Judea, who gave Sen∣tence,Luke 23.24. scourged me, and delivered me to be Crucified; who, that I might sanctifie you with my own Blood,mat. 27.26. Suffered without the Gate;Heb. 13.12. being obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross;phil. 3.8. dyed for your sins, was buried,1 Cor. 15.3, 4. and rose again the third Day, ac∣cording to the Scriptures,Rom. 4.25. for your Justi∣fication.Zac. 12.10. O look upon me whom you have pierced, and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow,Lam. 1.12. wherewith the Lord hath afflicted me in the Day of his fierce anger;Mat. 26.38. whose Soul being in an Agony in the Garden,Luke 22.43. was exceeding sorrowful,Mat. 27.46. even unto death, so that my sweat was as it were great drops of blood;Isa. 53.10. And I cryed out upon the Cross, my God,2 Cor. 5.21. my God, why hast thou forsaken me? my Soul being then made an offering for sin,Isa. 53.6. yea sin for you;Psal. 16.10. and upon me the Lord laid the iniquities of you all. Yet did he not leave my Soul in Hell, nor suffer his holy one to see corruption.5. Article, as to Christ's Resurre∣ction. Joh. 1.12. Luke 24.34. Joh. 20.17. Psal. 68.18. Col. 2.15.To as many of you as receive me, and be∣lieve on my name, I will give power to become the Sons of God.6. Article, Of Christs Ascention. For I the Lord am risen in∣deed; And am ascended unto my Father, and to your Father, and to my God and your God, and have led Captivity Captive, spoyled Prin∣cipalities and Powers, and made a shew of them openly, tryumphing over them; am re∣ceived into Heaven;Mark 16.19. Act. 1.9. mat. 28.18. and sit at the right hand of God, (having all power given me in Hea∣ven,
and in Earth) where I ever live to make intercession for you,Heb. 7.25. Rev. 1.7. Act. 1.11. Heb. 9.28. Act. 10.42. Joh. 5.22. Eph. 1.22, 23. until I come in the Clouds, in the same manner as I was taken up from you into Heaven, the second time with∣out sin unto salvation;7. Article, Of Christ's coming to Judgment. as being ordained of God to be the Judge of the quick and dead. For my Father judgeth no Man, but hath com∣mitted all judgment unto the Son.8. Article, Con∣cerning the Holy Ghost, is proved in the 1st. Article, concerning the Tri∣nity. I am the head over all things, to the Church, which is my Body (the fulness of him that filleth all in all.) The House and Church of the living God; The Pillar and ground of the truth. As your Body is one,1 Tim. 3.15. 1 Cor. 12.12, 13. and hath many Members, and all the Members of that one Body being many,9. Article, Con∣cerning the Catho∣lick Church and Communion of Saints. are one Body, so also is Christ. There∣fore by one spirit be ye baptized into one bo∣dy,1 Cor. 10.16, and be made to drink into one spirit; the Cup of blessing which you bless, is it not the Communion of my blood? And the Bread which you break,17. is it not the Communion of my Body? For you being many are one Bread, and one Body; Wherefore let there be no schisme in the Body,1 Cor. 12.25. but let each of you as Members, have the same care one for another, to the increase of the body, unto the edifying it self in love.Eph. 4.16. 10. Article, Con∣cerning forgiveness of sins.Be it known unto you, that through me is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins;Act. 13.38, and by me you that believe,39. and are justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses.Act. 5.31. For God hath exalted me with his right hand to be a Prince and a Saviour,Eph. 1.7. Col. 1.14. for to give repentance unto Israel, and forgiveness of sins, and redemption through my blood, according to the riches of his grace. I am the Resurrection and the Life, he that believeth in me,11. Article, Con∣cerning the Resur∣rection of the body. Joh. 11.25, though he were dead, yet shall he live. And who so ever liveth and be∣lieveth in me shall never dye;26. For the hour cometh,Joh. 5.28, in the which, all that are in the Graves shall hear my voice; and shall come forth; they that have done good,29. unto the Resur∣rection of Life, and they that have done evil, unto the Resurrection of Damnation.
12. Article, Con∣cerning life ever∣lasting. Joh. 10.27.If you then will be my Sheep, hear my voice, and I will know you;28 and you shall follow me; and I will give unto you eternal life, and you shall never perish, neither shall any Man pluck you out of my hand; My Father which gave you unto me,29 is greater than all, and no Man is able to pluck you out of my Fathers hand; For God so loved the World, that he gave me his only begotten Son,Joh. 3.16. that who so ever of you believes in me, should not perish, but have everlasting life. The Preface to the Decalogue, or Ten Commande∣ments. Joh. 14.23.If ye love me, ye will keep my words; Faith without works is dead; (therefore) follow peace with all Men,Ja. 2.20. and holiness, without which no Man shall see God.Heb. 12.14. And be ye doers of the Word,Jam. 1.22. and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves.Mar. 10.19. Ye know the Commandments. 1. Commandment.I am the Lord thy God, thou shalt have no other Gods before me.Exod. 20.2, 3. 2. Commandment. 42. Thou shalt not make unto thee any gra∣ven Image, or any likeness of any thing that is in Heaven above, or that is in the Earth be∣neath, or that is in the Water under the Earth, thou shalt not bow down thy self to them,5 nor serve them, &c. 3. Commandment. 73. Thou shalt not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, &c. 4. Commandment. 84. Remember the Sabbath Day, to keep it holy; six Days shalt thou labour, and do all thy work,9 but the seventh Day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God.10 5. Commandment. 125. Honour thy Father and thy Mother, &c. 6. Commandment. 136. Thou shalt not kill. 7. Commandment. 147. Thou shalt not commit Adultery. 8. Commandment. 158. Thou shalt not steal. 9. Commandment. 169. Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy Neighbour. 10. Commandment.10. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbours House,17. &c. The Conclusion of the Ten Com∣mandments.This is the great Commandment, That you love the Lord your God with all your heart,mar. 12.29. and with all your soul,30 with all your mind, and with all your strength;Note, that the pro∣mises and reasons annexed to some of the Commandments are omitted for bre∣vity sake. 31. and your Neighbour as your self.
mat. 7.1.Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that Men should do to you, do ye even so to them; for this is the Law and the Prophets. The Exhortation of the Lord Jesus to the use of Gospel-Ordinances. viz. mar. 16.16.He that believeth, and is Baptized, shall be saved: but he that believeth not, shall be dam∣ned.Joh. 3.3. Verily, verily I say unto you, except you be born again of Water and the Spirit, you cannot enter into the Kingdome of God:1. To Baptisme. 5 For that which is born of the flesh,6. is flesh; and that which is born of the spirit, is spirit. 2. To the Lord's Supper. Joh. 6.54.Whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed;55 He that eat∣eth my flesh,56 and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me, and I in him; As the living Father hath sent me,57 and I live by the Father, so he that eateth me, even he shall live by me; I am the Bread of Life that came down from Hea∣ven,35. & 58. not as the Fathers did eat, and are dead; He that eateth this Bread, shall live for ever; What though I am ascended where I was be∣fore?62 63. It is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profiteth nothing; the words that I speak unto you are spirit, and they are life. I (the Lord Jesus) took Bread and blessed it, and gave it to my Disciples,mat. 26.26. and said, Take, eat,27. this is my body; And I took the Cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink▪ ye all of it;28. For this is my blood of the new Testament, which is shed for many, for the remission of sins. This do in remembrance of me; For as often as ye eat this Bread,Luke 22.19. and drink this Cup▪ you shew my Death,1 Cor. 11.26. till I come. 3ly. To the read∣ing of the Scrip∣tures. Deut. 11.18.19,Lay up my word in your heart, and in your soul; And you shall teach them your Children, speaking of them when you sit in your house, and when you walk by the way; when you lye down, and when you rise up; And you shall write them upon the Door-posts of your houses,20, and upon your Gates;21. That your days may be prolonged, and the days of your Children in the Land, as the dayes of Heaven upon Earth.
Blessed are ye that read and hear my words;Rev. 1.3. my Sheep hear my voice;Joh. 10.27. Yea, blessed are they that hear my word,Luke 11.28. and keep it. 4ly. To the hear∣ing of the Word of God preached.Let every one of you be swift to hear, slow to wrath;Ja. 1.19. If any of you hear my voice, and open the door,Rev. 3.20. I will come in to him, and will sup with him,Luke 8.8.22 and he with me. Wherefore he that hath Eares to hear, let him hear. My Mo∣ther and Brethren are ye that hear the Word of God,13. and do it. Be ye that good ground, who with honest and good hearts, having heard my word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience. 5ly. To the Me∣ditations of the Word of God, and of his works.Let not the Book of my Law, my Word, de∣part out of your mouth;Jos. 1.8. but you shall medi∣tate therein day and night, that you may ob∣serve to do according to all that is written therein; for then shall you make your way pro∣sperous, then shall you have good success. Me∣ditate also of all my works.Psal. 77.12. 6ly. To Prayer in publick and pri∣vate. Eph. 5.17.Pray without ceasing; And when you pray, say, Our Father which art in Heaven, &c. Also after this manner pray ye;Luke 11.2. Ask and it shall be given you,mat. 6.9. seek and ye shall finde, Knock and it shall be opened unto you;mat. 7.7. Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my Name (according to his will) he will give it unto you.Joh. 15.16. 1 Joh. 5.14. Therefore be careful for nothing:phil. 4.6. but in every thing by Prayer, and Supplication, with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto God. But ask in faith, nothing wavering. And when you pray,Jam. 1.6. mat. 6.6. enter into your Closet; and when you have shut your Door, pray to the Father which is in secret, and your Father who seeth in se∣cret, shall reward you openly. 7ly. To Obedi∣ence to Church-Go∣vernors and Dis∣cipline. Heb. 13.17.Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves; for they watch for your souls, as they that must give an account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you. Mat. 18.15:Moreover, if your Brother shall trespass a∣gainst any of you, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone; if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy Brother; But if he
will not hear thee,16. then take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established. And if he shall neglect to hear them,17. tell it unto the Church; but if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen Man, and a Publican.18. Verily I say unto you, whatsoever my (Church) shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever they shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. I gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists,Eph. 4.11, 12. and some Pastors and Tea∣chers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry,1 Tim. 5.17. 1 Tim. 3.13. for the edifying of my Body. Let the Elders that Rule well be coun∣ted worthy of your double honour, especially they that labour in word and doctrine. Also, they that have used the Office of a Deacon well, purchase to themselves a good degree, and great boldness in the faith, which is in me. The Exhortation of the Lord Jesus to Gospel-saving Graces. viz.Repent ye, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out:Act. 3.19· Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep;Jam. 4.9. humble your selves in my sight, and I will lift you up.Job 25.4. Can Man be justified with God,1. To Repentance. Psal. 51.5. Eph. 2.3. Gen. 6.5. Rom. 7.1. Isa. 1.6. or how can he be clean that is born of a Woman? Behold, you were shapen in iniquity, and in sin did your Mother conceive you. By nature you are the Children of wrath. And the Imaginations of your heart are only evil continually in you, that is, in your flesh dwel∣leth no good thing. From the sole of the foot, even to the head, there is no soundness in you, but wounds, and bruises, and putrified sores. Ye have sinned and done wickedly,Dan. 9.5. and have rebelled, even by departing from my precepts. Your iniquities are increased over your heads,Ezra. 9.6. and your trespasses are grown up to the Hea∣vens.Rom. 3.13. And the poyson of the Asps is under your Lips. Wash you, and make you clean, put a∣way the evil of your doings from before mine Eyes;Isa. 1.16, 17, cease to do evil, learn to do well: Come now, let us reason together, though your sins be as Scarlet,18. they shall be as white as Snow;
though they be red as Crimson,Pro. 28.13. they shall be as Wool.1 Joh. 1.9. Confess and forsake your sins, and you shall finde mercy. For I am faithful and just to forgive you your sins.7. And my blood shall cleanse you from all sins.1 Joh. 1.7. Come unto me all ye that labour and are heavy laden,Mat. 11.28. and I will give you rest.Joh. 6.37. And you that come to me, I will by no means cast out. But if ye will still do wickedly,1 Sam. 12.25. ye shall be consumed. And I will rain snares;Psal. 11.6. an horrible tempest. And I will break the hairy Scalp of you that go on in iniquity.Psal 68.21. Psal. 50.22. Now consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you.Deut. 30.15. See, I have set before you life, and good, and death, and evil; therefore choose life, that ye may live. 2. To Faith.He that hath received my Testimony, hath set to his Seal,Joh. 3.33. that God is true; The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand.35, He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life;36. and he that believeth not the Son, shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on him.1 Cor. 1.30. I am made unto you of God, wisdome, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption:2 Cor. 5.21. And to be sin for you, that knew no sin; that you might be made the righteousness of God in me.Rom. 10.4. I am the end of the Law for righteousness, to every one of you that believeth. And was made a curse for you, that the blessing of Abraham might come to you,Gal 3.13, 14. and that ye might receive the promise of the spirit, through faith in me; which grace comes by hearing,Rom. 10.17. and hearing of the Word of God;Eph. 2.8. and is the gift of God. Col. 1.23.Be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel,3. To Hope. 27. which ye have heard; for I in you am the hope of Glory. But put on this hope for an Helmet;1 Thes. 5.8. Heb. 6.9. and let it be as an Anchor of your Souls both sure and stedfast; rejoycing therein▪ firmly to the end.Heb. 3.6. 1 Joh. 3.3. And let every one of you, that hath this hope in him, purifie himself, even as I am pure. 1 Pet. 4:8. 1 Cor. 16:14.Above all things have servent charity, for charity will cover the multitude of sins;4. To Charity. yea,
let all your things be done with charity,1 Cor. 13.1. with∣out which, though you speak with the tongues of Men and Angels, you are become as sound∣ing brass,2. or a tinkling Cimbal. And though you have the gift of Prophesie, and under∣stand all misteries, and all knowledge; And though you have all faith,3. so that you could remove Mountains, and have no charity, you are nothing. And though you bestow all your goods to feed the poor, and though you give your Bodies to be burned, and have not cha∣rity, it profiteth nothing. Charity suffereth long,4. and is kinde, charity envieth not; Cha∣rity vaunteth not its self; Is not puffed up; doth not behave it self unseemly,5. seeketh not her own; Is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil;6. Rejoiceth not in iniquitie, but rejoiceth in the truth.7. Beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things; Charitie never faileth.8, Wherefore above all things,Col. 3.14. put on charitie, which is the bond of perfectness.1 Tim. 1.5. The end of the Commandement. The royal Law.Rom. 13.10. And the fulfilling of the Law. If ye therefore fulfill this royal Law,Jam. 2.8. accord∣ing to the Scripture; Thou shalt love thy Neighbour as thy self;Mat. 5.44. ye do well: Yea, I say unto you, love your enemies, bless them that curse you, and pray for them that despitefully use you, and persecute you; That you may be the Children of your Father which is in Heaven,45. for he maketh his Sun to rise on the evil, and the good, and sendeth Rain on the just, and on the unjust. 5. To holy cou∣rage or fortitude. Eph. 6.11. And put on the whole Armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil.12. Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might.Mat. 10.28. And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but rather fear him which is able to destroy both bodie, and soul, in Hell. Whosoever doth not bear my Cross,Mar. 10.21. and come after me, cannot be my Disciple.29. Verily I say unto you, whosoever of you shall leave House, or Bre∣thren, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife,
or Children, or Lands, for my sake, and the Gospel, shall receive an hundred fold, now in this time, Houses, and Brethren, and Sisters, and Mother,30. and Children, and Lands, with persecutions; and in the World to come ever∣lasting life. 6. To Christian-Temperance. 1 Cor. 9.25. Every Man that striveth for the masterie is temperate in all things;26. now they do it to obtain a corruptible Crown, but you an incor∣ruptible.27. Therefore so run, not as uncertainly; so fight, not as those that beat the Aire: but keep under your Bodies, and bring them into subjection.2 Pet. 1.6. And add to your knowledge tem∣perance. For the fruits of my Spirit is love, joy,Gal. 5.22. peace, long-suffering, gentleness, good∣ness,23. faith, meekness, temperance, against such there is no Law. 2 Pet. 1.6.Add to your temperance, patience; And in your patience possess your Souls;7. To Holy Pa∣tience. Luke 21.19. and bring forth fruit with patience. And let patience have her perfect work,Luke 8.15. that ye may be perfect and intire,Jam. 1.4, wanting nothing. Being followers of those,Heb. 6.12. who through faith and patience in∣herit the promises.Jam. .. Ye have heard of the pa∣tience of Job.Jam. .10. Also take for an example your Brethren the Prophets,Heb. 12.1. of suffering affliction and of patience. And run with patience the race which is set before you. 8. To Divine-Wisdome. Mat. 16.16.Be ye wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves.Col. 1.9. And filled with the knowledge of my will, in all wisdome and spiritual understand∣ing.10. That ye may walk worthy of me unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God. See that ye walk circumspectlie,Eph. 5.11. not as fools, but as wise,16. redeeming the time, because the days are evil,17. understanding what the will of the Lord is.Rom. 16.19. Being wise unto that which is good, but simple concerning evil.1 Cor. 3▪19. For the wisdome of the World is foolishness with God; and 'tis earthlie,Jam. .15. sensual, and devillish. But the wisdome that is from above,17. is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easie to be intreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without par∣tiality,
and without hypocrisie. Wherefore if any of you lack wisdome,Jam. 1.5. let him ask of God which giveth to all Men liberally, and upbraid∣eth not, and it shall be given you; but let him ask in faith,6. nothing wavering. Put on humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one another,9. To Christian umility. Col. 3.12. and forgiving one another;13. if any Man hath a quarrel against any, even as I have forgiven you, so do ye▪ For before honour is humility.Prov. 15.33. And he that humbleth himself shall be exalted. What doth the Lord require of you,Luke 14.11. but to do justly, and love mercy,Mic. 6.8. and to walk humbly with your God.Jam. 4.6. For God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to the humble. Yea, I will hear the de∣sire of the humble.Psal. 10.17. And although I inhabit E∣ternity,Job 22.29. I will dwell with him that is of a contrite and humble spirit.Isa. 57.15. Wherefore learn of me,Mat. 11.29. for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall finde rest unto your Souls. Blessed are you that are poor in spirit, for yours is the Kingdom of Heaven.10. The Exhor∣tion of the Lord  to several  graces com∣nly called the atitudes. Mat. 5.3. That mourn, for you shall be comforted.4 That are meek, for you shall inherit the Earth.5 6 That hunger and thirst after righteousness, for you shall be filled. Blessed are you that are merciful, for you shall obtain mercy.7 That are pure in heart, for you shall see God.8 That are peace-makers, for you shall be called the Children of God.9 Blessed are you that are persecuted for righ∣teousness sake;10 for yours is the Kingdome of Heaven. Blessed are you when Men shall revile you,11 and shall say all manner of evil against you falsly for my sake. Rejoice and be exceed∣ing glad,12. for great is your reward in Heaven; for so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you. Heb. 13.4.Marriage is honourable in all, and the Bed undefiled;11. To Religious astity. but Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge: Wherefore flee Fornication, every sin that a Man doth,1 Cor. 6.18. is without the bo∣dy; But he that committeth Fornication, fin∣neth against his own body; Know you not that your bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost,19,
which is in you, which you have of God, an you are not your own? For you are boug with a price;20▪ Therefore glorifie God in yo bodies and spirits, which are Gods. Also,  you not my Members?1 Cor. 6.15. Will you then take  Members, and make them the Members of  Harlot?16 God forbid. What? know you  that he that is joyned to an Harlot is  body?17 For two (saith he) shall be one Flesh▪ But he that is joyned unto me, is one spirit▪ This is the will of God,1 Thes. 4.3. even your sanctification; that you should abstain from fornication▪ And that every one of you should know  to possess his Vessel in sanctification,4▪ an honour;5. not in the lust of concupiscence, as the Gentiles which know not God. Ye  heard that it was said by them of old  Thou shalt not commit Adultery:Mat. 5.27, 2. But I say  to you, whosoever looketh on a Woman to  after her, hath committed Adultery with  already in his heart.Prov. 6.29. And whosoever toucheth another Man's Wife, shall not be innocent▪ Whoredome,Hos. 4.11. and Wine, and new Wine tak away the heart,Prov. 6.26. and by means of a  Woman▪ a Man is brought to a piece of bre and the Adulteress will hunt for the prec life.Prov. 23.27. An Whore is a deep ditch, and a stra Woman is a narrow Pit. Her House inclin unto death,Prov. 2.18. and her path unto the dead. L not your heart incline to her ways,Prov. 7.25. go not stray in her paths, for she hath cast down  wounded;26 yea, many strong Men have be slain by her,27 her House is the way to Hell, ging down to the Chambers of death.  that go unto her return again,Prov. 3.19. neither tak they hold of the path of life. Know this therefore,Eph. 5.5. that no Whoremonger, nor unclean Per∣son, nor covetous Man, who is an Idolater, hath any Inheritance in the Kingdome of God. 12. To Christian Justice, and Righ∣teousness. Psal. 106.3.Blessed are ye that keep Judgment, and tha do righteousness at all times.Psal. 4.5. Offer to God th sacrifices of righteousness,Psal 11.7. and put your trus in the Lord; For the righteous Lord loveth righteousness, his countenance doth behold the
upright.Isa. 32.17. The work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect thereof quietness and as∣surance for ever. He that followeth after righ∣teousness and mercy,Prov. 21.21. findeth life, righteous∣ness,Rom. 6.13. and honour. Therefore yield your selves unto God, as those that are alive from the dead, and your members as Instruments of righteousness unto God.1 Joh. 3.7. For he that doth righ∣teousness,10▪ is righteous, even as I am righteous; but whosoever doth not righteousness, is not of God; And shall utterly perish in their own corruptions,2 Pet. 2.12. and receive the reward of unrigh∣teousness,13. and shall not inherit the Kingdome of God.1 Cor. 6.9. But the righteous shall shine forth as the Sun,Mat. 13.43. in the Kingdome of my Father; And they that turn many to righteousness, as the Stars for ever and ever.Dan. 12.3. . To Gospel-rity, upright∣ and truth. Mat. 5.48.Be ye perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven,Prov. 10.9. is perfect. For he that walketh up∣rightly,Pro 28.18. walketh surely, and shall be saved. For the righteous Lord loveth righteousness, his countenance doth behold the upright.Psal. 11.7. Fear the Lord,Jeh. 24.14. and serve him in sincerity, and in truth.Pro. 11.3. For the integrity of the upright shall guid them.Psal. 97.11. Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart. But the hope of the hypocrite shall perish.Job 8.13. Remove from you the way of lying;Psal 119.29. and let every one speak truth to his Neighbour.Eph. 4.25. For I am the Lord God of truth.Psal. 31.5. 4ly. To Holy kfulness and  of God. Eph. 5.20.Give thanks for all things to God the Fa∣ther in my name;Psal. 50.23. For he that offereth praise glorifieth me.Heb. 13.15. By me therefore offer the sacri∣fice of praise continually, that is the fruit of your lips.1 Tim. 4.4. For every Creature of God is good, and nothing is to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving.Psal. 147.10. Praise ye therefore the Lord, for it is good; to sing praises to your God, for it is pleasant, and praise is comely. . The Exhortation  the Lord Jesus  Divine affecti∣s. viz. Joh. 15.11.These things have I spoken to you, that my joy might remain in you,Joh. 16.20. and that your joy might be full. Verily, verily I say unto you, that ye shall weep and lament,22 but the World shall rejoyce,1. To Holy Joy and delight. but your sorrow shall be turned
into Joy, and your Joy no Man taketh from you.Rom. 14.17. For the Kingdome of God is not mea and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost;Gal. 5.22, Yea, the fruit of my Spirit is love, joy, and peace; long-suffering, gentleness,23. goodness; faith, meekness, tempe∣rance, against such there is no Law. The joy of the Lord is your strength.Neh. 8.10. Therefore rejoyce in the Lord ye righteous,Psal. 33.1. for praise is comely for the upright;Phil. 4.4. Rejoyce in the Lord always, again I say rejoyce. Psal. 37.4.Delight your selves also in the Lord, and let his Commandements be your delights, and he shall give you the desires of your heart.& 119.143. Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing.Rom. 15.13. 2. To filial fear of God. Ia. 8.13,Sanctifie the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be your dream, and he shall be unto you for a Sanctuary.14. Be ye in the fear of the Lord all the day long.Pro. 23.17. For it is the beginning of knowledge,Pro. 1.7. a Foun∣tain of life,Prov. 10 27. Prov. 22.4. to depart from the snares of death▪ Yea, by the fear of the Lord are riches, and honour,Phil. 2.12. and life. Work out therefore your own salvation with fear and trembling, per∣fecting holiness in the fear of God.2 Cor. 78 1. Ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear.Rom. 8.15. Isa. 8.12. Therefore fear not their fear,1 Joh. 4.18. Rom. 8.15. for per∣fect love casteth out such fear; But ye have received the spirit of Adoption, whereby ye cry Abba Father. Phil. 4.18.It is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing;3. To holy zeal and anger. Tit. 2.14. for I gave my self for you, that I might redeem you from all iniquity, and purifie unto my self a peculiar People zealous of good works.Psal. 69.9: Let therefore after my ex∣ample and David's,Joh. 2.17. the zeal of my House eat you up,Psal. 119.139. and consume you. And be like Phine∣as,Num. 25.17. who was zealous for his God. Be angry for sin (as Jacob's anger was kindled against Ra∣chel) but sin not.Eph. 4.26. Gen. 30.2. Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath; For whoso is angry with his Brother without a cause,Mat. 5.22. shall be in danger of Judgment.
4. To holy hatred. Psal. 97.10. Psal. 139.21, 22. Pro. 8.36.Ye that love the Lord hate evil; yea, they hate those that hate me with a perfect hatred. All that hate me love death.Note, the Exhortation to godly love and sorrow are to be found in the foregoing Exhortations to repentance and charity. The Preface to the Dehortations of the Lord Jesus from several prin∣ipal Vices. Gal. 5.16,Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the Flesh;17, For the Flesh lusteth a∣gainst the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh; and these are contrary the one to the other; so that ye cannot do the things that ye would.18, But if ye be led by the Spirit, ye are not under the Law. Now the works of the Flesh are manifest,19, which are these, Adultery, Fornication,20, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Ido∣latry,21. Witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulation, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, mur∣thers, drunkenness, revellings, and such like; of the which, I tell you before, as I have also told in time past, that they which do such things shall not inherit the Kingdome of God. The Dehortations rst from unbelief. Heb. 3.12.Take heed Brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God.Mat. 16.16. He that believeth not shall be damned. Therefore ye ought to give the more earnest heed to the things that ye have heard,Heb. 2.1. lest at any time ye should let them slip; For if the word spoken by Angels was stedfast,2. and every transgression and disobedi∣ence received a just recompence of reward▪ How shall ye escape,3. if you neglect so great Salvation? which at the first began to be spo∣ken by (Me) the Lord, and was confirmed un∣to you,4. by them that heard (Me); God also bearing them witness, both with signes and wonders, and with divers miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own will. Luke 12.46.Take heed that your portion be not among the Unbelievers in the Lake,2. From Atheisme, he first branch f unbelief. that burneth with Fire and Brimstone.Psal 14.1. Nor say with the Fool in your heart, there is no God: and the Lord will not do good,Zeph. 1.12. neither will he do evil.
3. From Polu∣theims, or having more Gods than one, the 2d. Br. unbelief. Exod. 22.20.He that sacrificeth, (or gives worship) unto any God, save unto the Lord only; he shall be utterly destroyed.Exod. 20.3. You shall have no other Gods before me. 4. From Idola∣try, the 3d. Br. of unbelief. Lev. 26.1.Ye shall make you no Idols, nor graven I∣mages, neither shall you set up any Image of them in your Land, to bow down unto it; For I am the Lord your God. 5. From Blas∣phemy, the 4. Br. of unbelief. Lev. 24.16.He that blasphemeth the Name of the Lord, shall surely be put to death; all the Congrega∣tion shall stone him. 6. From Pro∣phaneness, the 5. B. Lev. 18.21.Thou shalt not prophane the Name of thy God, I am the Lord. 7. From Sacri∣ledge, the 6. Br. Prov. 22.25.It is a snare to the Man, which devoureth that which is holy; and after vowes to make inquiry. 8. From hypo∣crisie, the 7. Br. Job 13.16.An Hypocrite shall not come before God; His hope shall perish. The Congregation of the Hypocrites shall be desolate.Job 8.13. Job 15.34. Job 27.8. For what is the hope of an Hypocrite, though he hath gained, when God taketh away his Soul. 9. From Sabbath-breaking, the 8.Bra. Isa. 58.13.If you turn away your Feet from the Sab∣bath, from doing your pleasure on my Holy Day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord honourable, and shall honour him, not doing your own ways, nor finding your own pleasure, nor speaking your own words; Then shall you delight your selves in the Lord;14. and I will give you to ride upon the high places of the Earth, and feed you with the he∣ritage of Jacob my Servant, for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.Lev. 19.13. Ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanctuary; I am the Lord. I conceive that in all things (some) are su∣perstitious;10. From Super∣stition, the 9th. Br. of unbelief. Act. 17.22. Joh. 15.14. therefore ye are my friends, if ye do what I command you.Deut. 4.2. Ye shall not add unto the word that I command you, neither shall ye diminish ought from it; that ye may keep the Commandements of the Lord your God,Psal. 119.104. which I command you. But shall with my Servant David hate every false way. 11. From Luke∣warmness, the 10th. Branch. Rev. 3.15,I know there are many, that are neither cold nor hot,16 and I will spue them out of my mouth.
12. From hard-heartedness, the 11. Branch. Pro. 28.13,He that covereth his sins, shall not prosper; but whoso confesseth, and forsaketh them, shall have mercy.14. Happy is the Man that fear∣eth always, but he that hardneth his heart shall fall into mischief. Num. 15.30.The Soul that doth ought presumptuously, the same reproacheth the Lord;13. From pre∣sumptuous sinning, the 12. Branch. and that soul shall be cut off from his People. As also the Man that will do presumptuously,Deut. 17.12. and will not hearken to the Priest, that standeth to mini∣ster before the Lord your God; or unto the Judge; even that Man shall die. Wherefore, pray with my Servant David, Lord keep back thy Servants from presumptu∣ous sins,Psal. 19.13. let them not have dominion over us, so shall you be innocent from the great Trans∣gression. 14. From sinful swearing, the 13. Branch. Exo. 20.7.Thou shalt not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his Name in vain. Let your communication be Yea, yea; Nay, nay;Mat. 5.37. for whatsoever is more than these, com∣eth of evil. 15. From Incor∣rigibleness, the 14. Branch. A Preface to the dehortation against despair. Prov. 29.10.He that being often reproved, hardneth his Neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy. Isa. 50.10.Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of his Servant, that walketh in darkness, and hath no light? let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. When ye are troubled on every side,2 Cor. 4.8. be not distressed; when ye are perplex∣ed,Joh. 20.27. be ye not in despair. Be not faithless, but believing. 16. From despair, the last Branch. Gen. 4.13.Say not with despairing Cain, my iniquitie is greater than that it may be forgiven; Nor go not with him out of the preference of the Lord.16. Rom. 14.15. Destroy not your Souls, which I died for;1 Sam. 31.4. With hopeless Saul, who took a Sword, and fell upon it. Nor do as Judas, who went and hanged himself.Mat. 27.5. A Debortation from Vncharitable∣ness. 1 Joh. 3.10.Whosoever doth not righteousness, is not of God; neither is he, that loves not his brother; He that loves not his Brother,14. abideth in death.
Whosoever hates his Brother,15. is a murtherer; and ye know, that no murtherer hath eternal life abiding in him. 1. General branch of uncharitableness as to the Souls of others. Pro. 16.29,Be ye not like the violent Man, who inticeth his Neighbour, and leadeth him into the way that is not good;30. who shutteth his eyes to de∣vise froward things, moving his lips, he bring∣eth evil to pass.1. By tempting to sin. Gen. 39.7. Nor like to Potiphar's wife; nor to the strange Woman that flattereth with her lips;Prov. 7.5. nor to them who say, Come with us, let us lay wait for blood;Prov. 1.11. let us lurk privily for the innocent without cause;1. cast in thy lot amongst us,14. let us all have one Purse. 2. By evil ex∣ample. 1 Kin. 15.16.Imitate not Jeroboam, who did sin, and who made Israel to sin. 3. By not re∣proving. Lev. 19.17.You shall not hate your Brethren in your heart; you shall in any wife reprove them, and not suffer sin upon them. 4. By flattering. Job 17.5.He that speaketh flattery to his friends, e∣ven the eyes of his Children shall fail.Pro. 26.28. And a flattering mouth, worketh ruine. 5. By not in∣structing. Ezek. 34.2,Wo to the Sheppards of Israel, that do feed themselves; Should not the Sheppards feed the Flock?3. Ye eat the fat, and ye cloath you with the Wool; ye kill them that are fed, but ye feed not the Flock. 6. By persecu∣ting for conscience. Psal. 10.2.The wicked in his pride do persecute the poor: but they shall be taken in the devises that they have imagined.Rev. 13.10. He that leadeth into Captivity, shall go into Captivity; He that killeth with the Sword, must be killed with the Sword.Rev. 16.6. For they have shed the blood of the Saints and Prophets, and God will give them blood to drink, for they are worthy. 2. General branch of uncharitableness as to the Persons of others.At the hand of Man, at the hand of every Man's Brother will I require the life of Man;Gen. 9.5. whoso sheddeth Man's blood, by Man shall his blood be shed;6. For in the Image of God made I Man.1. By murder. And blood defileth the Land. And the Land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein,Num. 35.33. but by the blood of him that shed it.30. Therefore whoso killeth any Person, the Murderer shall be put to death. Ye shall take no satisfaction,31. for the life of a Murderer
which is guilty of death; But he shall be sure∣ly put to death. If a Man cause a blemish in his Neighbour; As he hath done,2. By mayming. Lev. 24.19. so shall it be done unto him; breach for breach, eye for eye, tooth for tooth: As he hath caused a blemish in a Man,20. so shall it be done unto him again. 3. By unjust Im∣prisonment. Jer 37.15.Be ye not like unto unjust Zedekiah, who put Jeremiah into Prison,Jer. 51.11. for speaking to him in the Name of the Lord. Not like cruel Herod, who bound John in Prison,Ma 6.17.27. and beheaded him for Herodias sake, left you partake of their pu∣nishments.Act. 12.23. Jam 2.25.If a Brother or Sister be naked, and desti∣tute of daily food,4. By not Re∣lieving. and one of you say, Depart in peace,26. be you warmed and filled; Not∣withstanding you give them not those things that are needful to the Body,Mat. 25.31. What doth it profit? When I sit upon the Throne of my Glory, I shall say unto such on my left hand, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting Fire,41, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Verily I say unto you,45. inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these (my poor Saints) ye did it not to me. 3. General Bran. of uncharitableness as to the Estates of others. Hab 2.6.Woe to him that increaseth that which is not his:Mal. 3.5. I will be a swift witness, saith the Lord, against those that oppress the hireling in his wages, the Widdow and the Fatherless, and that turn aside the stranger from his right;1. By Oppression. He that doth wrong,Col. 3.25. shall receive from the wrong that he hath done; And with me there is no respect of Persons. 2. By stealing. Zac. 5.2.Behold a flying Roll, the length thereof is twenty Cubits, and the breadth thereof ten Cubits.3, This is the curse that goeth forth over the face of the whole Earth: for every one that stealeth shall be cut off, according to it;4. And it shall enter into the House of the Thief, and it shall remain in the midest of his House, and shall consume it with the Timber thereof,Eph. 4.28. and the Stones thereof. Therefore let him that stole steal no more, but rather let him labour, working with his hands the thing
which is good, that he may have to give to him that needeth.3. By defrauding. 1 Thes. 4.6. Let no Man go beyond and defraud his Brother in any matter, be∣cause that the Lord is the avenger of all such. 4. By contenti∣ousness. 1 Cor. 6.5.I speak to the shame of (many;) is it so that there is not a wise Man amongst you? No not one that shall be able to Judge between his Brethren;6. But Brother goeth to Law with Bro∣ther, and that before the Unbelievers; Is any one will sue you at the Law,Mat. 5.40. and take away thy Coat, let him have thy Cloak also. 5. By Usury or Extortion. Pro. 28.8.He that by Usury and unjust gain increaseth his substance, he shall gather it for him that will pitty the poor.Mat. 23.25. Woe unto such, who like the Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, make clean the out-side of the Cup, and of the Plat∣ter; but within they are full of Extortion and excess;Luke 3.13. Therefore exact no more than is ap∣pointed you. 6. By depopulation. Isa. 5.8.Woe unto them that joyn House to House, and lay Field to Field, till there be no place, that they may be placed alone in the middest of the Earth.9 Of a truth, many Houses shall be desolate, even great and fair without In∣habitant;10. Yea, ten Acres of Vineyard shall yield one Bath, and the Seed of an Omer shall yield one Epha. 7. By false wit∣nessing. Luke 3.14.Do violence to no Man, neither accuse any falsly;Pro. 19.5. for a false witness shall not be unpu∣nished. A false witness shall perish. Behold, if a witness be a false witness,Pro. 21.28. and hath testi∣fied falsly against his Brother,Deut. 19.18. then shall ye do unto him, as he had thought to have done unto his Brother. 8. By cursing, or evil Imprecations. Rom. 12.14.Bless, and curse not. (Those) That delight in cursing,Psal. 109.17, so let it come unto them; As they delight not in blessing, so let it be far from them;18. As they have cloathed themselves with cursing, as with a Garment, so let it come into their bowels like Water, and like Oyle into their bones. 4. General Era. of uncharitableness as to the good name of others. Pro. 10.18.He that uttereth slander is a Fool; I will tear those in pieces,Psal. 50.22. and there shall be none to
deliver them,0. that sit and speak against their Brother, and slander their own Mothers Son: Yea,1. By slandering, and back-bitting, & tale-bearing. Psal. 64.7. I will shoot at them with an Arrow, sud∣dainly they shall be wounded; they shall make their own Tongues to fall upon themselves,3 who whet their Tongues like a Sword,Psal. 64.3. and bend their Bow to shoot their Arrowes: even bitter words,4 that they may shoot in secret at the perfect. Thou shalt not go up and down as a Tale-bearer among thy People. Neither shalt thou raise a false report,Lev. 19.16. Exo. 23.1. nor put thy hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous wit∣ness. A Dehoratation from Intemperance. Isa. 5.11.Woe unto them that rise up early in the Morning, that they may follow strong Drink, that continue until Night,1. From Drunk∣enness. till Wine inflame them. Woe unto them that are mighty to drink Wine,22. and Men of strength to mingle strong Drink. Woe unto him that giveth his Neighbour drink,Hab. 2.15. that puttest thy Bottle to him, and makest him drunken also, that thou mayest look on their nakedness. Who hath woe?Pro. 23.29. Who hath sorrow? Who hath contenti∣ons? Who hath babling? Who hath wounds without cause? Who hath redness of Eyes? They that tarry long at the Wine,30. they that go to seek mixt Wine.2. From Gluttony. Pro. 23.21. The Drunkard and Glutton shall come to poverty, and drowsiness shall cloth a Man with ragges.2 Pet. 1.6. Add therefore to your knowledge, temperance; A fruit of the Spirit;Gal. 5.23. against such there is no Law: Be there∣fore sober and vigilant,3. From Insorbriety. 1 Pet. 5.8. because your Adver∣sary the Devil walketh about as a Roaring Li∣on,1 Thes. 5.7. seeking whom he may devour. They that be drunken,8. be drunken in the Night; but you that are of the Day,Phil. 4 5. be sober: Let your mode∣ration be known to all Men, for I am at hand. And use this World as not abusing of it;1 Cor. 7.31. for the fashion of this World passeth away. A Dehortation from sinful fear. Isay. 51.7.Hearken unto me ye that know righteous∣ness, the People in whose heart is my Law. Fear ye not the reproach of Men, neither be ye afraid of their revilings.8. For the Moth shall eat them up like a Garment, and the Worm
shall eat them like Wool; Sanctifie the Lord of Hosts himself,Isa. 8.13. and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread;12. neither fear you their fear,Rev. 22.8. nor be afraid. (For) the fearful and unbelieving shall have their portion in the Lake which burneth with Fire and Brimstone, which is the second Death. A Dehortation from Ignorance, Pro. 1.7.The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge, but Fools despise wisdome and understanding;1. Affected. 22. How long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity? And the Scorners delight in their scorning?Pro. 2.3. and Fools hate knowledge? Cry after knowledge, and lift up your voice for understanding;4, Seek her as Silver, and search for her as for hid treasures.9. Then shall ye understand righteousness, and judgment, and equity; yea, every good path. Lev. 5.17.If a Soul sin, and commit any of those things that are forbidden to be done by the Com∣mandements of the Lord,2. Natural though he wist it not; yet is he guilty, and shall bear his iniqui∣ty.3. Wilful. 2 Pet. 3.5. How much more shall they be guilty, that are willingly ignorant? In flaming Fire (there∣fore) will I take vengeance on them that know not God,2 Thes. 1.8. and that obey not my Gospel. A Dehoratation from Injustice. Deu. 27.9.Cursed be he that perverteth the Judgment of the stranger, Fatherless and Widdow; wherefore keep ye far from a false matter;Exo. 23.7. and the innocent and righteous slay not;1. In Majestrates. for I will not justifie the wicked.Lev. 19.15. Ye shall do no unrighteousness in Judgment, ye shall not re∣spect the Person of the poor, nor honour the Person of the mighty; But in righteousness shall you Judge your Neighbour. 2. In private Per∣sons.Woe unto him that buildeth his House by unrighteousness,Jer. 22.13. and his Chambers by wrong, that useth his Neighbours service without wa∣ges, and giveth him not for his work. 3. By not giving Obedience justly due to Superiors. 2 Sam. 23.3.He that ruleth over Men must be just; Thou shalt not revile the Judge,Lev. 22.28. nor curse the Ruler of People. Submit therefore your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake;1 Pet. 2.13. whether it be to the King as Supream,1. As Majestrates. or unto Governors,14. as unto them that are sent by him,
for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well;15. For so is the will of God, that with well-doing, you may put to silence the ignorance of foolish Men;16. As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of mali∣ciousness, but as the Servants of God. Honor all Men,17. love the Brotherhood. Fear God, honour the King. For whosoever resisteth the Power,Rom. 13.2. resisteth the Ordinance of God; and they that resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation. Render therefore to all, their dues; Tribute to whom Tribute is due,7. Custome to whom Custome; Fear to whom Fear, Ho∣nour to whom Honour. Owe no Man any thing,8. but to love one another, for he that lo∣veth another hath fulfilled the Law.2. As Ministers of the Gospel. Heb. 13.7. Remem∣ber them that have the Rule over you, that have spoken to you the Word of God, whose faith follow, considering the end of their con∣versation.Luke 10.16. He that heareth them, heareth me; and he that despiseth them, despiseth me; and he that despiseth me, despiseth him that sent me. Whatsoever City they enter, and they receive them not;10. I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable in that day for Sodom,12. than for that City. 3. As Natural Parents. Prov. 1 8.Hear the Instruction of your Father, and for∣sake not the Law of your Mother;9. For they shall be an Ornament of Grace unto your Heads, and Chains about your Necks;Pro. 30.17. But the Eye that mocketh at his Father, and despiseth to obey his Mother, the Ravens of the Valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it. A general Dehortation from fleshly uncleanness. Exod. 22.19.Whosoever lyeth with a beast, shall be surely put to death. 1. From Buggery. Lev. 20.13.If a Man lie with Man-kinde, as he lyeth with a Woman,2. From Sodomy. both of them have committed an abomination; they shall surely be put to Death; their blood shall be upon them∣selves. Deu. 23.17.There shall be no Whore of the Daughters of Israel,3. From Whoredom. nor a Sodomite of the Sons of Is∣rael.2 Pet. 2.6. God turned the Cities of Sodom and
Gomorra into ashes, condemning them with an over-throw, making them an ensample unto those, that after should live ungodly. 4. From Incest. Lev. 18. read from v. 1. to v. 19.None of you shall approach to any that is near of Kin to him, to uncover their naked∣ness; I am the Lord; after the doings of the Land of Egypt, and after the doings of the Land of Canaan, shall ye not do. 5. From Poligamy. 1 Cor. 7.2.Let every Man have his own Wife, and e∣very Woman have her own Husband. If a Woman,Rom. 7.3. whilest her Husband lives, marries a∣nother Man, she shall be called, (that is, she is an Adulteress) the like is true of a Man, if he marry another Woman, whilest his Wife li∣veth;Luk. 16.18. For whosoever puts away his Wife, and marries another,6. From Adultery. commits Adultery: Whore∣mongers and Adulterers God will Judge.Heb. 13.3. Lev. 18.20.Thou shall not lie carnally with thy Neigh∣bours Wife, to defile thy self with her. The Adulterer and Adulteress shall surely be put to death.Lev. 20.10. 1 Cor. 6.9. Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters,10. nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with Man-kind, shall inherit the Kingdome of God. 7. From Fornica∣tion. Col. 3.5.Mortifie your Members which are upon the Earth, fornication, uncleanness, inordinate af∣fection,6. evil concupiscence; For which things sake, the wrath of God cometh on the Chil∣dren of disobedience:1 Cor. 10.8. And commit not For∣nication, as some of the Israelites committed, and fell in one Day three and twenty thou∣sand.Rev. 22.15. Without (the new Jerusalem) are Whoremongers,Rev. 21.8. who shall have their part in the Lake which burneth with Fire, which is the second Death. A Dehortation from Lascivious∣ness. Mat. 15.19. Pro. 16.26. Psal. 119.113. Jer. 4.14. Pro. 24.9. Psal. 139 2. Heb. 4.12.Out of the heart proceeds evil thoughts, which are an abomination to the Lord. Where∣fore hate all vain thoughts, Let them not lodg within you,1. In wanton Thoughts. for the thought of foolishness is sin. I understand your thoughts afar off; and am a discerner of the thoughts and intents of your hearts. 2. In wanton Words. Eph. 4.29.Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouths, but that which is good to
the use of edifying, that it may minister grace to the hearers.Eph. 5.3. But fornication, and all unclean∣ness, let it not be once named amongst you, as becometh Saints;4. Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not con∣venient: but rather giving of thanks. For be∣cause of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the Children of disobedience.6. 7. Be not therefore partakers with them.Mat. 12.36. I say unto you, every idle word that Men shall speak, they shall give account thereof at the Day of Judg∣ment; For by thy words thou shalt be justi∣fied,37. and by thy words thou shalt be con∣demned. 3. In wanton looks. Mat. 5.28.Whosoever looketh upon a Woman to lust after her, hath committed Adultery with her already in his heart.Job 31.1. Wherefore with holy Job, make a Covenant with thine Eyes, that thou think not upon a Maid, (to lust after her;Luk. 11.34.) For when thy Eye is evil, thy Body also is full of darkness.Job 11.26. The Eyes of the wicked shall faile; But chiefly them that walk after the Flesh in the lust of uncleanness;2 Pet. 2.10. Having Eyes full of Adultery,14, and that cannot cease from sin,9, and are reserved to the Day of Judgment to be punished,17. and to whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever. 4. In wanton tions. Rom. 13.12.The Night is far spent, the Day is at hand, therefore cast ye off the works of Darkness, and put on the Armour of Light, walking ho∣nestly,13. as in the Day; not in rioting and drunk∣enness, not in Chambering and wantonness; But put ye on me the Lord Jesus Christ,14. and make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof;Rom. 8.13. For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye, through the Spirit, do mortifie the deeds of the body, ye shall live. A Dehortation from lying. Act. 5.3.Let not Sathan, who is a lyar from the be∣ginning,Joh. 8.44. and the Father of lyes, fill your hearts to sin against the Holy Ghost,1. By denying the Truth. Joh. 14.17. who is the Spi∣rit of truth,Act. 5.5, 10. that ye be not strucken with sudden Death, as was Ananias and Saphira. Ye shall not lye one unto another; but every one speak
the truth with his Neighbour; For ye are Members one of another.Eph. 4.25. For I will destroy them that speak leasing;Psal. 5.6. Psal. 63.11. and the mouth that speaketh lies shall be stopped. 2. By breach of Covenant to God. Isay. 24.4.The Earth mourneth and fadeth away, the World languisheth and fadeth away, the haugh∣ty People of the Earth do languish, the Earth also is defiled under the Inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the Laws,5. chan∣ged the Ordinance, broken the everlasting Covenant.Heb. 12.14. Col. 2.11, 12, 13. Heb. 10.29. I am the Mediator of the new Covenant, sealed unto you in my Sacraments of Baptisme and my Supper. Tread not then under foot the Son of God; nor count the blood of my Covenant wherewith ye are san∣ctified, an unholy thing; nor do despight unto my Spirit of grace.30, 31. For vengeance is mine, I will recompence; yea, I will judge my peo∣ple; It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. 2. Of Vows to God. Eccl. 5.4.When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it; for he hath no pleasure in fools. Pay that which thou hast vowed;Deu. 23.21. The Lord thy God will surely require it of thee, and it would be sin in thee. 3. Of Promises and Covenants to Men. 23.That which is gone out of thy Lips, thou shalt keep and perform to God, and to Men, lest thou be excluded my holy Hill,Psal. 15.14. and suf∣fer alike Judgement with King Zedekiah; for shall he escape that doth such things? Or shal he break the Covenant,Eze. 17.15. and be delivered. Surely where the King dwelleth that made him King,16. whose Oath he despised, and whos Covenant he break, even with him in the midest of Babilon shall he die. A Dehortation from Covetousness. Deu. 5.21.Thou shalt not desire thy Neighbours Wife▪ neither shalt thou covet thy Neighbours House▪ his Field,1. In the heart. or his Man servant, or his Maid-ser∣vant, his Oxe, or his Ass, or any thing that i thy Neighbours.Hab. 2.9. Woe unto him that covered an evil covetousness to his House, that he ma set his Nest on high, that he may be delivere from the power of evil.Pro. 28.20. He that maketh ha to be rich,2. In Action. shall not be innocent. No covetou
Man,Eph. 5.5. (who is an Idolater) hath any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ,Luke 12.15. Jer. 22.13. and of God. Take heed, and beware of Covetousness. For woe unto him that buildeth his House by unrighte∣ousness,1 Kings 21.19. and his Chambers by wrong. Beware of Ahab's sin, and his punishment. 2ly. From world∣lyness and carking ares. Mat. 6.24.No Man can serve two Masters, for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and Mammon. There∣fore I say unto you,25. take no thought for your Life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, nor yet for your body what ye shall put on; Is not the life more than meat? and the body than rayment?32. For after all these things the Gentiles seek; for your Heavenly Father know∣eth, that ye have need of all these things. Wherefore having food and rayment,Heb. 13.5. be there∣with content; for I have said I will never leave thee nor forsake thee.1 Tim. 6.9. They that will be rich, fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown Men in destruction and perdition;10. for the love of money is the root of all evil; which while some coveted after, they have erred from the faith; and pierced themselves through with many sorrows.1 Joh. 2.15. Wherefore love not the World, nor the things that are in the World; if any Man love the World, the love of the Father is not in him. 3ly. From Nigard∣ness. Pro. 11.14.There is that scattereth, and yet increaseth; and there is that with-holdeth more than is meet, and yet tendeth to poverty. The libe∣ral Soul shall be made fat;15. and he that wa∣tereth shall be watered also himself.Eccl. 6.1. There is an evil which I have seen under the Sun, and it is common among Men; A Man to whom God hath given riches, wealth and honour, so that he wanted nothing for his Soul of all that he desireth;2. yet God giveth him not power to eat thereof, but a stranger eateth it; this is va∣nity, and it is an evil disease. A Dehortation rom Idleness. 1 Cor. 7.20.Let every Man abide in the same Calling in which he was called.Mat. 20.6. Let none stand idle all
the Day;1. By having no Calling, or by neg∣lecting a Caliing. Pro. 19.15. For an idle Soul shall suffer hunger; And by much sloathfulness the building de∣cayeth,Eccl. 10.18. and through idleness of the hands the House droppeth through.Ezek. 16.49. Behold, this was the iniquity of Sodom, abundance of idleness. A∣void ye therefore their sin,Gen. 19.15. lest ye be consu∣med,24. as was that City; upon which the Lord rained Brimstone and Fire from the Lord out of Heaven. 2. Idleness in private Persons. Pro. 22.29.Seest thou a Man diligent in his business, he shall stand before Kings; he shall not stand be∣fore mean Men:Pro. 23.21. But drowsiness shall cloath a Man with rags.Rom. 12.11.8. Wherefore be not sloathful in business, as private Persons. 3. Idleness in publick Persons. Rom. 12.8.Let him that Ruleth do it with diligence; lest when I come and reckon with you,Mat. 25.19. the sloathful and unprofitable Servant be cast into utter Darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth.30. The Dehortation of the Lord Jesus from sinful Pas∣sions. Eph. 4.26.Be ye angry, but sin not; let not the Sun go down upon your wrath. Like Simeon and Levy,Gen. 49.5. Instruments of Cruelty are in their habi∣tations;6. for in their anger they slew a Man, and in their self-will they digged down a wall. Cursed be their anger,7. for it was fierce; and their wrath, for it was cruel. I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel. Therefore be not hasty in Spirit to be angry;Eccl. 7.9: for anger resteth in the bosome of fools. 2. From causless Anger. Mat. 5.29.Whosoever is angry with his Brother with∣out a cause, shall be in danger of the Judg∣ment. A Dehortation from sinful hatred. Gal. 5.20.One of the works of the Flesh is hatred; therefore thou shalt not hate thy Brother in thy heart.1. Of Persons. Lev. 19.17. Psal. 34.21. They that hate the righteous shall be desolate.1 Joh. 2.9. He that faith he is in the Light, and hateth his Brother, is in darkness even until now.1 Joh 3.5. Whosoever hateth his Brother is a Mur∣derer, and ye know, that no Murderer hath E∣ternal Life abiding in him.2. Of good things. Mic. 3.2. Woe to them that hate good, and love evil. All they that hate me,Pro. 8.36. love death. A Dehortation from Malice. 1 Pet. 2.1.Use not your liberty for a Cloke of malici∣ousness:16. But let all bitterness, and wrath, and
anger, and clamour, and evil-speaking, be put a∣way from you;Eph. 4.31. with all malice; and be ye kinde one to another, tender-hearted, forgi∣ving one to another, even as God, for my sake, hath forgiven you. A Dehortation from strife and contention. Pro. 17.14.The beginning of strife, is, as when one let∣teth out Water; therefore leave off contention before it be medled with.Rom. 13.13. Walk honestly, as in the Day,Phil. 2.3. not in strife, and envying. Let no∣thing be done through strife; For where strife and envying is,Jam. 3.16. there is confusion, and every evil work. A Dehortation from Envy. Jam. 4.5. The Spirit that is in you lusteth to envy, which slayeth the silly one, and is the rotten∣ness of the bones.Job 5.2. Charity suffereth long, en∣vyeth not.Pro. 14.30 Wherefore, laying aside all malice, and all guile,1 Cor. 13.4. and hypocrisies, and envies, and evil speaking;1 Pet. 2.1. 2. as new born babes, desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby. A Dehortation from Revenge. Rom. 12.19.Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath; for it is written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay it, saith the Lord.20. Therefore, if thine Enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink; for in so doing, thou shalt heap Coals of Fire on his head.21. Be not over-come of evil, but overcome evil with good. A Dehortation from Pride. Pro. 8.13.Pride and arrogancy, and the evil way, and the froward mouth, do I hate. Only by pride cometh contention,Pro. 13.10. and where it cometh, there cometh shame.1. Branch from piritual Pride. Pro. 11.2. But with the lowly is wisdom. Wherefore let him that standeth,Rom. 11.20. take heed lest he fall.1 Cor. 10.12. Be not high-minded, but fear. For, who maketh thee to differ from another? And, what hast thou, that thou hast not re∣ceived? Now, if thou didst receive it, why dost thou glory,1 Cor. 4.7. as though thou hadst not re∣ceived it? 2. Branch from Worldly Pride. Jer. 9.13.Thus saith the Lord, let not the wise Man glory in his wisdome; neither let the mighty Man glory in his might; let not the rich Man glory in his riches:14. But let him that glorieth, glory in this, that he understandeth and know∣eth
me, that I am the Lord that exercise lo∣ving kindness, Judgment and righteousness in the Earth. For in these things I delight, saith the Lord.2 Pet. 2.4. Jude 6. Isa. 14.12. Gen. 3.6. Psal. 10.4. Pride cast the Angels out of Hea∣ven. Your first Parents out of Paradice; and the wicked World into Hell. For the wicked, through the pride of his countenance, will not seek after God. 3. Branch from Ambition.Behold, that which I have built, I will break down;Jer. 45.4. and that which I have planted, will I pluck up.5. And seekest thou great things for thy self?Joh. 4.44. seek them not. For, behold I will bring evil upon all flesh. How can ye believe, who receive honour one of another,1 Cor. 10.17. and seek not the honour which comes from God only. He that glorieth,18. let him glory in the Lord; for not he that commendeth himself is approved, but whom the Lord commendeth.Mat. 11.29. Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall finde rest to your Souls.Mat. 18.4. Whosoever shall humble himself, as a little Child, the same is greatest in the Kingdome of Heaven. Whoso∣ever exalts himself,Mat. 23.12. shall be abased; and he that shall humble himself, shall be exalted. (Be ye not ambitious like Absalon,2 Sam. 18.9.14. and Adonijah, least ye partake of their Judgments and vio∣lent deaths.1 King. 2.25.) A Dehortation from Ingratitude. Eph. 5.20. Psal. 147.1.Give thanks always for all things unto God, and the Father in my Name; For it is good to sing praise unto our God;1. Towards God. for it is pleasant, and praise is comely.2 Cor. 32.25. Be ye not therefore guilty of the great sin of ingratitude, with Hezekiah,Luke 17.17. and the nine Lepers, who rendered not again according to the benefits done unto them.18. 2. Towards Men. 2 Tim. 3.1.In these last times, Men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blaspheamers,2. disobedient to Parents, unthank∣ful, unholy, without natural affection, despi∣sers of those that are good.3. Traytors, from such turn away.4. Whoso rewardeth evil for good,Pro. 17.13. evil shall not depart from his House; Example in King Joash, who remembred not the kindness which Jehojada,2 Cro. 24.22. the Father of
Zacharias had done unto him, but slew his Son.25. Therefore his Servants conspired against him, for the blood of the Son of Jehojada the Priest, and slew him on his Bed. A Dehortation from sensuality, or oluptuousness.Whoso loveth pleasure shall be a poor man; he that loveth Wine and Oyl shall not be rich.Pro. 21.17. Woe unto the Land whose Princes eat in the morning;Eccl. 10.16. 17. But blessed is the Land whose Princes eat in due season; for strength, and not for drunkenness,Luk. 6.25. Woe unto you that are full; for ye shall hunger. Woe unto you that laugh now; for ye shall mourn and weep,Jam. 5.1. For your mise∣ries that shall come upon you. Your riches are corrupted,2. and your Garments are Moth-eaten; your Gold and Silver is cankered,3. and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh,5. as it were Fire: ye have li∣ved in pleasure on the Earth,8.9▪ and been wanton; ye have nourished your hearts, as in a Day of slaughter,2 Pet. 2▪13. Behold the Judge standeth before the Door; and my coming draweth nigh, when all such shall receive the reward of un∣righteousness;1 Tim. 5.6. As they that count it pleasue, to riot in the Day time,13. and living in pleasure, are dead whilst they are alive.Jude 12. Spots they are, and blemishes, sporting themselves with their own deceivings, while they feast with you, feeding themselves without fear; Clouds they are without Water,13. Trees, whose fruit wither∣eth; without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by thee roots. Raging Waves of the Sea, foam∣ing our their own shame, wandring Stars, to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever.17. Beloved, remember the words which were spoken before of my Apostle, who told you there should be mockers in these last times,18. who should walk after their own ungodly lusts:19. These be they who separate themselves,2 Tim. 3.4. sen∣sual, having not the Spirit. Lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God.2 Pet. 3.3. These are those scof∣fers in these last days, walking after their own lust; and saying, Where is the promise of his coming?4. For, since the Fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the begin∣ning
of the Creation.1 Cor. 15.32. Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die.Mat. 24.38. For as in the Days that were before the Flood, they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marri∣age; and knew not until the Flood came, and took them all away;39, so shall also my coming be.42. Watch therefore, and pray, lest ye fall into temptation;Mat. 26.41. For you know not what hour your Lord doth come.Mat. 24.44. Therefore be you ready,Mat. 24.48. for in such an hour as ye think not, the Son of Man cometh.49. But if with that evil Ser∣vant, you shall say in your hearts, my Lord de∣ferreth his coming,50. and shall smite your fellow-Servants, and eat and drink with the drunken, I will come in an hour which you are not a∣ware of,51. and cut you asunder, and appoint you your portion with the Hypocrites; there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth.Eccles. 1.1. Solomon the Preacher, the Son of David King of Is∣rael,Eccles. 2.9. was great, and increased more than all that were before him in Jerusalem,10. who kept not from his Eyes whatsoever they desired, and with-held not his Heart from any joy; For his Heart rejoyced in all his Labours,11. whose wis∣dome also remained with him; when he look∣ed on all the works that his Hands had wrought, and the Labour he had laboured to do (as is before at large enumerated by him) makes this acknowledgment:Eccles. 1.2. Behold, All is Vanity, and Vanity of Vanities, and Vexation of Spi∣rit, and there was no profit under the Sun. Therefore love not the World,1 Joh. 2.15. nor the things of the World;16. For all that is in the World, the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life, is not of the Father, but i of the World. And the World passeth away, and the Lusts therefore;17. but he that doth the will of God, abideth for ever. A Dehortation from Inconstancy. Gal. 6.8.Be ye not weary of well-doing; for in due season you shall reap, if ye faint not. He that soweth to the Flesh,9. shall of the Flesh rea Corruption. But he that soweth to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting. Are there any so foolish,Gal. 3.3. as to begin in the Spi∣rit,
and to think to be made perfect in the Flesh? 1. Branch of In∣constancy, Back-sliding.If any Man have run well; let none hinder you,Gal. 5.7. that you should nor obey the truth. Re∣member Lot's Wife.Luk. 17.32. No Man having put his Hand to the Plough,Luk. 9.62. and looking back, is fit for the Kingdome of God;Heb. 10.38. If any Man draw back, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him. But ye are not of them that draw back,39. unto Perdition; but of them that believe, unto the saving of the Soul.Pro 14.14. The back-slider shall be filled with his own ways; but a good Man shall be satisfied from himself.Jer. 3.22. Let back-sliding▪ Children return, and I will heal their back-slidings,Hos. 14.4. and will love them freely. 2. Branch is A∣postacy. Mat. 12.43.When the unclean Spirit is gone out of a Man, he walketh through dry places, seeking rest,44. and findeth none. Then he faith, I will return unto my House, from whence I came out; and when he is come, he findeth it empty, swept,45. and garnished: Then goeth he, and ta∣keth with himself, seven other Spirits, more wicked than himself, and they enter in, and dwell there: And the last state of that Man, is worse than the first.2 Pet. 2.20. For if, after Men have escaped the pollutions of the World, through the knowledge of (Me) the Lord and Saviour, they are again intangled therein, and over∣come, the latter end is worse with them than the beginning:21. For it had been better for them, not to have known the way of righte∣ousness, then after they have known it, to turn from the holy Commandements delivered unto them:22. But it is happened unto them, ac∣cording to the true Proverb; The Dog is turned to his own Vomit again; And the Sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the Mire.Joh. 15.5. I am the Vine, ye are the Brances, he that abideth in Me, and I in him, bringeth forth much fruit; for without me ye can do nothing.6. If a Man abide not in me, he is cast out, as a Branch, and is withered, and Men gather them, and they are cast into the Fire, and they are burned. As the Father
hath loved me,9. so have I loved you; continue you in my love.Joh. 8.31. If ye continue in my Word, then are ye my Disciples indeed. And ye shall know the truth,32. and the truth shall make you free.Jam. 1.25. Whoso looketh into the perfect Law of Liberty, and continueth therein, he being not a forgetful Hearer, but a doer of the work, this Man shall be blessed in his deed. I am the Lord,Jer. 17.13. the hope of Israel; all that forsake Me, shall be ashamed, and they that depart from Me, shall be written in the Earth, because they have forsaken me, the Lord, the Fountain of living Waters.Mat. 10, 22. But he that endureth unto the end, shall be saved. 3. Branch of In∣constancy, is the sin against the ho∣ly Ghost. 1 John .16.If any Man see his Brother sin a sin, which is not unto Death, he shall ask, and I will give him life, for them that sin not unto Death. There is a sin unto Death; I do not say, that he shall pray for it.Heb▪ 6.4. For it is impossible for those, who were once enlightned, and have tasted of the Heavenly Gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good Word of God,5. and the Powers of the World to come;6. If they shall fall away, to renew them again unto Repentance, seeing they crucifie unto themselves (Me) the Son of God afresh, and put Me to an open shame. For the Earth which drinketh in the Rain,7. which cometh often upon it, and bringeth forth Herbs meet for them, by whom it is dressed, receiveth blessing from God; But that which beareth Thorns and Briars,8. is rejected, and is nigh unto Cursing, whose end is to be burned.Heb. 10.26. If then ye sin wilfully, after that ye have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for Sin; but a certain fearful looking for of Judgment,27. and Fiery indignation, which shall devour the Adversaries.28. He that despised Moses Law, died without mercy, under two or three wit∣nesses;29. Of how much soarer punishment sup∣pose ye, shall be thought worthy, who hath trod∣den under foot (Me) the Son of God, and hath counted the blood of the Covenant where∣with
he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and hath done despight unto my spirit of grace?Mat. 12.31. Where∣fore I say unto you, that all manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men; But the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto Men.32. And whosoever speak∣eth a word against (Me) the Son of Man, it shall be forgiven him; but whosoever sinneth against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this World, nor in the World to come.Heb. 6.9. But beloved, I am perswaded bet∣ter things of you, and things that accompany Salvation, though I thus speak. Pray therefore that you may be kept back from presumptuous sins,Psal. 19.13. and that they may not have dominion over you: So shall you be innocent from the great transgression. Pro. 3.1.My Children, forget not my Law, but let your hearts keep my Commandements;The Preface to the Counsels of the Lord Jesus. For length of Days,2. and long life, and peace shall they add unto you.Rom. 12.11. Be not slothfull in busi∣ness,1. As to Diligence  our Calling. but fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord. Gen. 5.24. Gen. 6.9. Heb. 11.27. Eph. 5.8. Phil. 3.16. 1 Joh. 1.3 2 Pet. 1.3. 1 Cor. 6.7.As Enoch and Noah walked with God; and Moses seeing him who is invisible;2. To Holy walk∣g with God. So walk you as Children of the Light, and by the same Rule, since your fellowship is with the Father and the Son. And you are made partakers of the Divine nature, and being joyned unto me, are one Spirit. Pro. 4.20.My Children, attend to my words, incline your Eares unto my sayings;21. let them not de∣part from your Eyes, keep them in the midest of your hearts. 1 Joh. 2.4.These things write I unto you, that ye sin not;3. Against Sin. and that your joy may be full: And if any of you sin,1 Joh. 1.4. I am your Advocate with the Father,1 Joh. 2.1.2. and the Propitiation for your sins. Whosoever is born of God, doth not commit sin,1 Joh. 3.9. for his Seed remaineth in him. Have re∣spect therefore to all my Commandements,Psal. 119.6. And keep your selves from your Iniquity.Psal. 18.23. Re∣pent and turn from all your transgressions,2 Cor. 10.7. with a godly sorrow not to be repented of;Ezek. 18.30. Psal. 119.136. So iniquity shall not be your ruine. Yea, let Ri∣vers
of Waters run down your Eyes, because Men keep not my Law. Counsel against Temptation. Luk. 21.36.Watch and pray always, lest you run into temptation;Mat. 26.41. through (Me) that strengthens you, you shall be able to do all things;Phil. 4.13. And be more than Conquerors; and saved from your Enemies,Rom. 8.37. Luk. 1.71. and from the hand of all that hate you. Counsel against evil Company. Eph. 5.11.Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness,Pro. 4.24. nor go in the way of evil Men; but rather reprove them.To set God al∣ways before us. Psal. 16.8. Set me always be∣fore you;1 Thes. 5.10. And whether you sleep or wake, be together with me.1 Tim. 6.12. Lay hold on Eternal Life, since the things that are seen,And to have an Eye to Eternity. are temporal; but the things that are not seen,2 Cor. 4.28. are eternal. For you know,2 Cor. 5.1. that if your Earthly House of this Tabernacle was dissolved, you have a building of God, an House not made with Hands, Eternal in the Heavens. Counsel as to the watching our hearts. Psal. 119.113.Hate evil thoughts, and let not vain thoughts lod within you.Jer. 4.14. Keep your heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of life;Pro. 4.23. Yea, out of your hearts proceed evil thoughts,Mat. 15.19. Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts,Rom. 11.20. False-witness, Blasphemies. Be not high-minded, but fear. For God resisteth the proud,Jam 4.6. but giveth grace to the humble. Be an∣gry,Eph. 4.26. but sin not; Let not the Sun go down up on your wrath.Heb. 13.5. Let your Conversation be with∣out Covetousness, and be content with such things as ye have; For I have said I will ne∣ver leave thee,1 Pet. 3.4. nor forsake thee. A meek and quiet Spirit is in the sight of God, of much Price. As to the keep∣ing of a good Con∣science. Act. 24.16.Exercise your selves to have always a con∣science void of offence, towards God, and to∣wards Men.1 Tim 4.2. Speak not lies in Hypocrisie, not have your understandings darkned,Eph. 4.18. nor your Consciences feared with an hot Iron. Happy are you,Rom. 14.22. if you condemn not your selves in those things which you allow; since he that doubteth is condemned:23. For, whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. Have your Hearts sprink∣led from an evil Conscience;Heb. 10.2. And follow after
the things which make for peace,Rom. 14.19. and things wherewith one may edifie one another.Not to offend a Brothers Consci∣ence. 20. It is good neither to eat Flesh, nor to drink Wine, nor any thing whereby your Brother stumbleth,21. or is offended, or is made weak. Counsel as to the wel∣rdering of our Tongues. Tit. 3.2.Speak evil of no Man. Take heed to your ways,Psal. 39.1. that you offend not with your Tongues. Isa. 59.7.Let not wasting and destruction be in your Paths,Counsel as to the right using of our states, Gifts, and Talents. Luk. 15.13. nor wast your substance among Harlots. Wherefore do ye spend Money, for that which is not Bread?Isa. 55.2. And set your Eyes upon that which is not?Pro. 23.5. If riches increase, set not your Hearts on them; For riches certainly make themselves Wings, and flie away, as an Eagle towards Heaven.Eccles. 1.2. Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity.Pro. 3.9. Therefore honour the Lord with your substance, and with the first-fruits of your in∣crease.Eccl. 11.1. Cast your Bread upon the Waters; for after many Days you shall finde it.2. Give a por∣tion to seven, and also to eight. He that hath pitty on the poor,Pro. 19.17. lendeth unto the Lord; And that which ye have given, will he repay you a∣gain.Luk. 16.9. Make to your selves friends of the Mam∣mon of unrighteousness; that when ye faile, they may receive you into everlasting habita∣tions.Luk. 11.41. Give Almes of those things you have, and lend,Luk. 6.35. looking for nothing again. Say not to your Neighbour, Go, and come again to mor∣row I will give,Pro. 3.28. when you have it by you. Nor shut your hands from your poor Brethren;Deut. 15.7. Lest,Mat. 25.41. I say unto you, Depart from me ye cur∣sed, into everlasting Fire, prepared for the De∣vil and his Angels; For I was an hungry, and ye gave me no Meat;42. I was thirsty, and ye gave me no Drink. I was a stranger, and ye took me not in;43. Sick, and in Prison, and ye Visited me not.45. For inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these my poor Members, ye did it not to me. Counsel as to the well-improving of our time. Eph. 5.15.16.See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise, Redeeming the time: Eat not the Bread of Idleness,Pro. 31.27. for the idle Soul shall suffer hunger:Pro. 19.15. And through idleness of the hands,Eccl. 10.18. the House droppeth through.
Counsel against sinful and unpro∣fitable Discourses. 1 Tim. 6.20.Shun prophane and vain babling, for they will increase to more ungodliness;Eph. 4.29. And let no corrupt communication come out of your Mouths, but that which is good, to the use of edifying, that it may minister Grace to the hearers.Mat. 12.37. For by your words you shall be justi∣fied, and by your words you shall be condem∣ned;36. And of every idle word that you shall speak, you shall give an account thereof at the Day of Judgment. Counsel against prophane swearing. Mat. 5.34.Swear not at all; But let your Communi∣cation be yea, yea; nay, nay; for whatsoever is more than these,37, cometh of evil. Let your light so shine before Men, that they may see your good works,16. and glorifie your Father which is in Heaven. Counsel against sluggishness. Pro. 20.13.Love not sleep, lest you come to poverty. Counsel to watch over & reprove our Neighbours, and pa∣tiently to receive rproofs. Lev. 19.17.You shall not hate your Brother in your heart; you shall in any wise rebuke your Neigh∣bour,Psal. 141.5. and not suffer sin upon him. Let the righteous reprove you; for it shall be an excel∣lent Oyl that shall not break your heads. Gal. 6.10.As you have opportunity, do good to all Men;Counsel to Charity. especially to them who are of the hous∣hold of faith. Counsel concern∣ing your Tables. Luk. 21.34.Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be over-charged with surfeiting, and drunkenness.1 Cor. 10.31. Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever you do, do all to the glory of God.Eph. 5.20. Give thanks alwayes for all things;1 Tim. 4.4. for every Creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving. Concerning your Callings. 1 Cor. 7.20.Let every one of you abide with God in the same Calling wherein he was called; Be∣ing not slothfull in business,24. serving the Lord. For he that is slothfull in his work,Rom. 12.11. Pro. 18.9. is Brother to him that is a great waster. Go not beyond, and defraud your Brother in any matter;1 Thes. 4.6. for I am the avenger of all such;Col. 3.9. neither lie one unto another. Counsel concern∣ing your Relations. Eph. 6.1.Children, obey your Parents in the Lord, for this is right.2. Honour your Father and Mother,
which is the first Commandement with pro∣mise.1. Of Children towards their Pa∣rents. 3. That it may be well with you, and you may live long on the Earth. Parents provoke not your Children to wrath,2. Of Parents to their Children. but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. Husbands drink Waters out of your own Ci∣stern;3. Of Husbands to their Wives. Pro. 5 15.18.20. Eph. 5.25. Rejoyce with the Wise of your Youth. Embrace not the bosome of a stranger. Love your Wives; as I also loved my Church, and gave my self for it.28. So ought you to love your Wives, even as your own Bodies. He that loveth his Wife,31.33. loveth himself, for they two are one Flesh. Dwelling with them according to knowledge,1 Pet 3.7. and honouring them as the wea∣ker Vessels, and as being Heirs together of the grace of Life. 4. Of Wives to their Husbands. 1 Pet 3▪ 3.Wives, let your adorning be not that which is outward, but that of the hidden Man of the heart.Eph· 5.22. 23. See that you reverence your Husbands, submitting your selves unto them, as unto the Lord,24. and as to your head; For as my Church is subject unto Me, as its Head; so be you to your own Husbands, in every thing. Love your Husbands,Tit. 2.4. 5. 1 Pet. 3.4. love your Children; be discreet, chast, and keepers at home, And of a quiet and meek Spirit. 5. Of Servants. Eph. 6.5.Servants, be obedient to them that are your Masters, according to the Flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of your hearts, as unto Me;Tit. 2.9.10. Eph. 6.6. not answering again, nor purloyning, but shewing all good fidelity. Not with Eye-service, as Men-pleasers; but as my Servants, doing the will of God from the heart; with good-will,7. doing service as to Me, not to Men. Know∣ing that whatsoever any good thing any of you doth,8. the same shall ye receive of Me, whe∣ther ye be bond or free. 6. Of Masters. Eph. 6.9.Masters, do the same things unto your Ser∣vants, forbearing threatning, knowing that your Master is in Heaven, neither is there respect of Persons with him. Col. 4.5.Walk in wisdome towards them that are without; And let your speech be always with
grace seasoned with Salt, that you may know how to answer every Man;6. That if any Man obey not the Word, they may without the Word be won by your Conversation; And that they of the contrary part may be ashamed,Tit. 2.8. as having no evil thing to say of you.Psal. 101.2 Behave your selves wisely in a perfect way. Keep your Mouths as with a Bridle,Psal. 31.1. while the wicked are before you.Mat. 7.6. Cast not your Pearl before Swine; nor give that which is holy unto Dogs, lest they trample them under their Feet, and turn again, and rent you. Follow not a Multitude to do evil; If Sinners entice you,Exod. 23.2. Pro. 1.10. consent you not; walk you not in the way with them;15. Refrain your Feet from their Path.Rom. 14.13. Judge not one another, nor put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in your Brothers way.Luk. 17.1. It is impossible, but that offences will come, but woe unto them through whom they come. Counsel as to your Carriage to∣wards those within. 1 Pet. 3.8.Be ye all of one minde, having compassion one of another; love as Brethren, be pittiful, be courteous;9. not rendering evil for evil, nor rayling for rayling; but contrariwise blessing. Counsel as to the Observation of God's mercies, works, and provi∣dences. Psal. 77.11.Remember my works and wonders of old, and forget not all my benefits;12. Meditate also, and talk of my doings,Psal. 103.2. who hath forgiven your iniquities, and healed all your Diseases, and redeemed your lives from destruction; who crowneth you with loving kindness,3. and tender mercies;4. who satisfieth your Mouths with good things, so that your Youth is re∣newed like the Eagles:5. who hath heard your supplications,Psal. 6.9. and received your Prayers. Counsel to at∣tend your answer, and return of Prayer. Isa. 21.8.Stand continually on your Watch-Tower, and hearken what I the Lord (that heareth Prayer) will say unto you.Psal. 85.8. You shall call upon Me,Psal. 91.15. and I will answer; Yea, before you call, I will answer.Isa. 65.24. Heb. 12.5.My Children, despise not my chastning, nor faint when you are rebuked of Me;Counsel as to our behaviour under afflictions and per∣secutions. For whom I love,6. I chasten, and scourge every Son whom I receive. If you endure chastning, I deal with you as with Sons;7. For, what Son is he whom the Father chastneth not?8. But if ye be with.
out Chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye Bastards,10. and not Sons. Your Fa∣thers chasten you after their own pleasure, but I for your profit, that you may be parta∣kers of my Holiness.11. No chastning for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous; Ne∣vertheless, afterwards it yieldeth the peaceable fruits of righteousness, unto them that are ex∣ercifed thereby.2 Tim. 3.12. All that will live godly in me, shall suffer persecution.2 Cor. 1.5. But as my sufferings abound in you, so your Consolations abound by Me.1 Pet. 4.14. For the Spirit of Glory, and of God, resteth upon you.2 Cor. 4.17. And your light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for you a far more exceeding and Eternal weight of Glory.2 Tim. 2.12. For, if you suffer with me, you shall also Raign with Me. Lift up therefore the Hands that hang down,Heb. 12.12. and feeble Knees, and make streight Paths for your Feet.4. Ye have not resisted unto blood, striving against Sin. Wherefore consider me the Captain of your Salvation,Heb. 2.10 that was made perfect by sufferings, and that endured such contradiction of sinners against my self,Heb. 12.3. lest you be weary and faint in your minds;Mat. 10.24. For the Disciple is not above his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord. Gal. 5.1.Stand fast therefore in that liberty, in which I have made you free;Counsel as to the right use of our Christian Liberty. 13. only use not your li∣berty for an occasion to the Flesh, nor to the offence of your weak Brother;Rom. 14 21. but by love serve one another: All things are lawful to you, but all things are not convenient.1 Cor. 6.12. Against the abu∣sing of grace. Rom. 6.1.Continue not in sin, that Grace may abound; Nor do evil,Rom. 3.8. that good may come, whose dam∣nation is just; neither turn my Grace into La∣sciviousness.Jude 4. To the Duties of prayer, self-denyal, bearing the Cross, and perseverance. 1 Pet. 4.7. Mat. 16.24. Mat. 10.22.Watch unto Prayer; Deny your selves, and take up your Cross, and follow Me. He that endureth unto the end shall be saved. Counsel to our growing in Grace. 2 Pet. 1.10.Give diligence to make your Calling and Election sure. Add to your Faith, Vertue; to Vertue,5. Knowledge; to Knowledge, Tempe∣rance;6. to Temperance, Patience; and to Pa∣tience,7. Godliness; and to Godliness, Brotherly
kindness; and to Brotherly kindness, Charity. For if you do these things,10. ye shall never fall; For so an entrance shall be ministred unto you abundantly into my everlasting Kingdom.11. The Preface to the Antidotes. 1 Joh. 4.1.Beloved, believe not every Spirit; but try the Spirits, whether they be of God; because many false Prophets are gone out into the World.1 Tim. 4.1. And my Spirit speaketh expresly, that in these latter times, some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils.2. Speaking lies in hypocri∣sie, having their Consciences seared with an hot Iron.3. Forbidding to marry; and com∣manding to abstain from Meats, which God hath created to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe, and know the truth. For every Creature of God is good,4. and no∣thing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving.2 Thes. 2.3. Let no Man therefore deceive you by any means, neither by Spirit, nor by Word,2. nor by Letter; For that wicked one is now revealed,8. whom I the Lord have bgan to consume with the Spirit of my Mouth, and will destroy with the brightness of my coming. E∣ven him,9. whose coming hath been after the working of Sathan, with all Power, and Signs, and lying Wonders.10. And with all deceivable∣ness of unrighteousness in them that perish; because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved.11. And for this cause, God hath sent them strong Delusions, that they should believe a lie;12. That they all might be Damned, who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. This is that Spirit of Anti-Christ,1 Joh 4.3. whereof you have heard, that it should come, and even now already it is in the World. 2 Thes. 2.3.That Son of Perdition, who opposeth, and exalteth himself, above all that is called God, or that is worshipped.4. So that he, as God, sit∣teth in the Temple of God, (the Christian Church) shewing himself that he is God. Antidotes given by the Lord Jesus against several He∣resies and Errors.The Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them;Luk. 22.25. and they that exercise Authority
upon them are called Benefactors;26. But ye shall not be so; But he that is greatest among you, let him be as the Younger; and he that is Chief, as he that doth serve.Mat. 23.8. Be not ye therefore cal∣led abbi, for one is your Master, even Christ, and all ye are Brethren:1. Against the Popes Supremacy. 9. And call no man your Father upon Earth, for one is your Father which is in Heaven:1 Pet. 5.3. Nor be ye called Masters, nor be ye as Lords over Gods Heritage; For one is your Master,Mat. 23.10. even Christ: But he that is grea∣test amongst you, shall be your Servant; And he that Exalteth himself,11.12. shall be Abased; and he that shall humble himself, shall be Exal∣ted. 2. Against the Popes Infallibility. Luk. 18.19. Eccles. 5.7.None is Good save one, that is God: There is not a Just man upon Earth that doth Good, and sinneth not.20. Therefore, if ye say that ye have not sinned,1 John 1.10. you make God a Lyar, and his Word is not in you.Jam 3.1. Be not therefore many Masters, knowing ye shall receive the greater Condemnation.2. For in many things ye offend all.Act. 15.39. The Contention was sharp betwixt Paul and Barnabas,Act. 13 9. that they parted asunder; And John fell down to Worship before the Feet of the Angel.Rev. 22.8. 9. 1 Cor. 13.9. Ye know in part, and Porphesie in part; Even Fer who was first, and whom I called Ceph,Mat. 10.2. by Interpretation, a Stone; and who seemed to be a Pillar,Joh. 1.42. walked not Uprightly according to the Truth of the Gospel;Gal. 2▪9.14. Mat. 14.30. And be∣fore the Cock mowed twice, denied Me thrice: How much more Fallible is his pretended Suc∣cessor? 3. Against the pes Power to for∣ve Sins. Mark 2.7. 2 Thes. 2.3.Why also doth this Man of sin both speak and act Blasphemies? Who can forgive sins but God only?Exod. 34.6. It is I the Lord, the Lord God, for∣giving Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin, that have Power on Earth to forgive sins;Mark 2.1▪ And in Me ye have Redemption through my Blood, even Forgiveness of sins.Col. 1.13. 4. Again the opes Power,  from  owes, and . Mat. 5.33.Again, ye have heard, that it hath been said to them of Old time, Thou shalt not For∣swear thy self; thou shalt performe unto the Lord thine Oathes; And that if a man Vow a Vow unto the Lord, or Swear an Oath, to bind
his Soul with a Bond, He shall not break his Word; he shall do according to all that proceed∣eth out of his mouth:2 Tim 3.1. But in these last dayes, the Beast that ascendeth out of the Bottomeless Pit,Rev. 11.7. is a Truce-breaker; and with perfidious Zedikiah,2 Tim. 3.3. Ezek 17 16. a Dispiser of Oaths, and a Breaker of Covenants;Mat. 5.19. Whosoever therefore shall break one of the least of these my Commandments, and shall teach men so, He shall be called the least in the Kingdome of Heaven. 5. Against the Popes power, to add to the Scriptures; or to bind Consci∣ence by his Canons, and Decretals. Pro. 30.5.Every Word of God is pure; and the Law of the Lord is perfect,Psal. 19.7. that the Man of God may be perfect, throughly Furnished unto all good Works,2 Tim. 3.17. Add thou not unto his Words, lest he reprove thee,Pro. 30.6. and thou be found a Lyar. For, neither Peter, nor Paul, much less the Pope, nor the False Prophet,Rev. 16.13. the Roman Church) that other Beast coming out of the Earth, that hath Two Hornes like a Lambe;Rev. 13.11. but speaks like the Dragon, (the Devil) hath any Dominion over your Faith;2 Cor. 1.24. But are Helpers of your Joy; For by Faith you stand: For though they, or an Angel from Heaven,Gal. 1 8. preach any other Gos∣pel than that which my Apostles have preach∣ed unto you,Deut. 12.32. let him be accursed: Whatsoever things I command, observe to do them; you shall not add nor diminish from them:Rev. 21.18. For if any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the Plagues that are written in this Book;19. And if any man shall take away from the Words of the Book of this Prophesie, God shall take away his part out of the Book of Life.Mark 7.7. In Vain therefore do they worship Me, who teach for Doctrines the Commandments of men,Mat. 15.8. drawing neer unto Me with their mouths, and Honouring Me with their Lips,Mark 7.9. but their Hearts is Farr from Me: Ful-well they reject the Commandments of God, that they may keep their own Traditions. Let no man there∣fore Judge you in meat or drink,Col. 2.16. or in respect of an Holy-day;21. for you are dead with Me from the Rudiments of the World: Neither be you subject to Ordinances,23. such as these; Touch not, Taste not, Handle not; which things in∣deed
have a shew of Wisdome in Will-worship, and Humility, and neglecting of the body, not in any Honour to the satisfying of the Flesh; For the Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink,Rom. 14.17. but Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost.Eph. 2.20. And ye are built upon the Foundation of the Prophets and A∣postles, I my self being the Cheif corner Stone. 6. Against the es power, to nnonize Saints,  to Excommuni∣e any from be∣ng Saints. Joh. 6.44.No man can come unto Me, except the Fa∣ther which hath sent Me draw him; and I will raise him up at the last day;37. All that the Fa∣ther giveth Me, shall come unto Me, and him that cometh to Me, I will in no wise cast out; My Father which gave them Me is greater than all,Joh. 10.29. and no man is able to pluck them out of my Fathers hand.Zac. 11.17. VVoe then to the Idol Shepheards that leaveth the Flock, and hath the Instru∣ments of a Foolish Shepheard,15. in whom, now is fulfilled what I foretold by my Prophet;16. For I will raise up a Shepheard in the Land, which shall not visit those that be cut off; neither shall seek the young One, nor heal that which is bro∣ken, nor Feed that that standeth still; but he shall eat the flesh of the Fat, and tear their Claws in pieces: The Sword shall be upon his Arme,17. and upon his right Eye; his Arme shall be dried up, and his right Eye shall be utterly darkened.Luk. 10.20. VVherefore rejoyce, because your Names are written in Heaven;Mat. 10.28. And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the Soul; But rather fear Mee, who am able to destroy both Soul and Body in Hell: The Foundation of God standeth sure;2 Tim. 2.19. having this Seal, the Lord knoweth who are his (It is I only) that giveth to him that overcometh,Rev. 2 17. to eate of the hidden Manna; and a white Stone, and in the Stone a new Name written, which no man knoweth, saving he that receiveth it. But (this) Diotrepsi,Joh. 3.9. who loveth to have the Prehe∣minence amongst them, receiveth Me not; nei∣ther doeth he receive the Brethren,10. and forbid∣eth them that would, and casteth them (by his own power) out of the Church. But he shall
proceed no further,2 Tim. 3.9. for (his) folly shall be ma∣nifest to all Men. 7. Against the Popes Power to ex∣ercise the Civill Sword against those that will not re∣eive his Doctrine. 1 Tim. 3.2.A Bishop then must be blameless, not given to Wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre, but patient,3. not a Brawler, not covetous. Even when Peter drew his Sword,Mat. 26.51. (in a far better quarrel, then his pretended Successor fights for);52. I said unto him, put up again thy Sword into his place, for all they that (thus without Commission from Me) take the Sword, shall perish with the Sword.Rev. 13.10. He that leadeth into Captivity, must go into Captivity; and he that (thus) killeth with the Sword, must be killed with the Sword.Rev. 16.5.6. For I am righteous, who have judged thus. That they that have shed the blood of the Saints and Prophets, shall have given them blood to drink, for they are wor∣thy.Mat. 24.48. This is that evil Servant, which hath said in his heart, my Lord delayeth his coming; and doth begin to smite his fellow-servants,49, and to eat and drink with the drunken; I the Lord of this Servant,50. will come in a Day, when he looketh not for me, and in an Hour that he is not aware of;51. and will cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with Hypocrites, there shall be wailing and gnashing of Teeth. Antidotes given by the Lord Jesus against several He∣resies and Errors of the Apostate ∣ane Church. Rom. 6.10.I am he that died unto sin once: And by my own blood entred in once into the holy place,Heb. 9.12. having obtained Eternal Redemption for you;Heb. 7.27. who need not Daily, as those High Priests, to offer up Sacrifice for my own sins, and then for the Peoples: For this I did once, when I offered up my self.Ezek 24.6. Woe to the bloody City, that is filthy and polluted; Mistery Ba∣bylon the great,Zep. 3.1 the Mother of Harlots, and abo∣minations of the Earth;Rev. 17.5. That saith to the wood of my (Cross) awake;1. Against the Idolatry of the Mass. to the dumb Stone (and wafer Cake) it shall teach. Behold, it is laid over with Gold and Silver,Hab. 2.19. and there is no breath at all in the midst of it.Luk. 22.19. For although I took Bread,Mat. 26.28. saying, This is my Body; and the Cup, and said, This is my Blood; Do this in remembrance of me: And my Flesh is Meat in∣deed,
and my Blood is Drink indeed;Joh. 6.55. I ex∣plained my self,62. and added, Doth this offend you? What, and if ye shall see the Son of Man ascended up,63. where he was before? It is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profiteth nothing; the words that I speak unto you are spirit, and they are life.Heb. 10.11. Every Priest therefore, of that A∣postate Church, which daily minister, and offer up often-times the same Sacrifices, which can never take away sins:12. But after I had offered one Sacrifice for sins, for ever, I sat down at the right hand of God;1 Joh. 2·2. I am the Propitiation for your sins. 2. Against the false Doctrine of Purgatory. Heb. 1.3. I by my self have purged your sins; and by one Offering, have perfected for ever, those that are sanctified.Heb. 10.12.14. Heb. 10.16.17, Yea, this is the Covenant that I have made with you; your sins and iniquities will I remember no more. Now, where remis∣sion of these is,18. there is no more offering for sin: Much-less is there need of a Purgatory-Fire, to purge the Souls of any redeemed ones. Enoch was translated,Heb. 11.5. that he should not see Death;2 King. 2.11. Luk. 16.22. Elijah went up by a Whirl-wind into Heaven; Lazarus the Beggar died, and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosome; The Thief dying,Luk. 23.43. was that Day with Me in Paradice.Rev. 14.13. And blessed are they that dye in the Lord, that they may rest from their La∣bours,Psal. 9.17. and their works follow them; But the wicked shall be turned into Hell. Where is then to be found in God's Word, this third place, for the tormenting and purifying of the Saints. 3. Against the Praying to, and worship of the Saints. Psal. 65.1.I am he that heareth Prayer; unto me shall all flesh come,2. unto me shall the Vow be per∣formed.Psal. 62.5. Wait you therefore only upon God, for your Expectation is from him. You shall worship the Lord your God,1 Sam. 12.24. and him only shall you serve.Mat. 4.10. Then not Saints and Angels (as doth the Romane Whore) The Woman arrayed in Purple and Scarlet colour,Rev. 17.16. and decked with Gold and precious Stones,4. and Pearl, having a Golden Cup in her hand, full of abominations and filthiness of her Fornica∣tion.
Eccl. 9.5.Further, consider the Dead know not any thing, neither have they any more reward; for the memory of them is forgotten:6. Also, their love, and their hatred, and their envy is now perished; neither have they any more a portion, for ever in any thing done under the Sun.Isa. 63.16. Doubtless God is your Father, though Abraham be ignorant of you, and Israel ac∣knowledge you not: Unto whom you have boldness,2. Of Angels. Eph. 3 12. and access with confidence, by the faith of Me. Let no Man therefore beguile you of your reward,Col. 2.18. in Voluntary Humility, and worshipping of Angels, intruding into those things, which he hath not seen, vainly puft up by his fleshly mind.Rev. 19.10. An Angel, when John fell at his feet to worship him, said; See thou do it not; I am thy fellow-servant, and of thy Brethren, that have the testimony of Jesus, worship God.Judg. 13.16. And an Angel said to Manoath, if thou wilt offer a burnt-offering, thou must offer it unto the Lord.Joh. 14.6. I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life; no Man cometh unto the Father,1 Tim. 2.5. but by Me, that one Mediator betwixt God and Men. 4. Against the worshipping of Pi∣ctures and Images. Mar. 10.19.You know the Commandements, Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven Image, or any likeness of any thing,Exo. 20.4. that is in Heaven above, or that is in the Earth beneath, or that is in the Water under the Earth. Thou shalt not bow down to them,5. nor serve them; For I the Lord, thy God, am a jealous God; Visit∣ing the iniquity of the Fathers upon the Chil∣dren, unto the third and fourth Generation of them that hate Me;6. And shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love Me, and keep my Commandements. Why then doth the Beast,Rev. 13.1. that rose up out of the Sea, having seven Heads, and ten Horns; and upon his Horns, ten Crowns; and upon his Heads, the Names of Blasphemy;Rev. 14.9. And those that worship him, and his Image, and receive his Mark in their Forehead, or in their Hand, Reject the commandments of God,Mat. 7.9. that they may keep their own Traditions? Blasphemously leaving
out of their Decalogue, in some of their Books, this Commandement?Joh. 3 19. As hating the Light, because their deeds are evil.Isa. 40.18. To whom will ye liken God? Or what likeness will ye com∣pare with him?Isa. 42.8. I am the Lord, that is my Name, and my Glory will I not give to a∣nother, nor my praise to graven Images. They shall be turned back,17. they shall be greatly a∣shamed,Act. 17.25. that trust in graven Images. God is not worshipped with Mens hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he giveth to all, life,Isa. 46.6. and breath, and all things. They lavish Gold out of the Bag, and weigh Silver in the Ballance, and hire a Goldsmith, and he ma∣keth it a God.Exod. 32▪ 4, 5, 6. Judg. 17.3. 4, 12, 13. 2 King. 12. 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. Rom. 1.21, 22, 23. Did not the Israelites thus worship God in the Golden Calf at Horeb, In Mica's Teraphim and Images, and in Jero∣boam's Calves in Dan and Bethel? Yea, did not the Heathens formerly, and do not the Pagans now, profess, that they worship not their Idols, as believing them to be Gods? But they worship their Gods in those Idol-Repre∣sentations. Wherefore, confounded be all they that serve graven Images,Psal. 97.7. that boast them∣selves of Idols. Worship him all ye Gods. 5. Against the false Doctrine of freedome from Ori∣ginal Sin. Job 15.14.What is Man, that he should be clean; and he that is born of a Woman, that he should be righteous?Job 14.4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Not one. Behold, you were shapen in iniquity,Psal. 51.5. and in sin did your Mothers conceive you.Gen. 6.5. And every Imagination of your Heart is evil, and evil continually: Yea, by Nature you are all the Children of wrath,Eph. 2.3. Eph. 2.1. and dead in trespasses and sins. Who can say, I have made my Heart clean?Pro. 20.9. I am pure from my sin?Eccl. 7.20. There is not a just Man upon Earth, that doth good,Job 2.3. and sinneth not. If my Ser∣vant Job abhorred himself,Job 42.6. and repented in Dust and Ashes; And David professeth, that in my sight,Psal. 143.2. no Man living shall be justified; And Daniel confessed,Dan: 9.8. to him belonged con∣fusion of face, because he had sinned against Me;Act. 9.15. And Paul, my chosen Vessel, cried out, O wretched Man that I am,Rom. 17.24. who shall deliver
me from the body of this Death? In me, that is,Rom. 7.18. in my Flesh, there dwelleth no good thing; And my beloved John declares,1 Joh. 1.8. if ye say you have no sin, ye deceive your selves, and the truth is not in you; Yea, my self commanded my Apostles, and all my Saints, to acknowledg, that when they have done all those things that are commanded them,Luk. 17.10. say, Ye are unprofitable Servants; We have done that which was our duty to do.Dan. 7.8. Then how dares that little Horn, that hath a Mouth, speaking great things, and makes War with the Saints,21. and for a time prevailes against them, with his Abetters, pre∣sume to assert and teach these damnable Do∣ctrines? That all Children after Baptism, have no Original Sin. And that in, and by nature, Man hath a free-will, and is able, and may with some help of grace, keep and fulfill the whole Law; And not only that some of them merit salvation, and justifie themselves by their good works, before God; but do super-erro∣gate, and merit salvation for others also. 1 Cor. 1.31.Wherefore, let him that glorieth, glory in the Lord;6. Against the false Doctrine con∣cerning free-will. For it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth;Rom. 9.16. but of God that sheweth mercy.Rom. 7.18. To will, is present with me, saith my Servant Paul; But how to performe that which is good,Eph. 2.8. I finde not; For it is God that worketh in you, both to will and to do, of his good pleasure.Rom. 6.23. Joh. .25 And your faith is the gift of God; and so is Eternal Life. The Dead shall hear the Voice of Me, the Son of God, and they that hear, shall live. For you hath God quickned,Col. 2.15. together with me, being dead in sins and trespasses.7. Against the false Doctrine of Justification by Works. Isa 64.6. Wherefore say with my Prophet Isaiah, we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness are as filthy rags. In the Lord have I righteousness and strength.Isa. 44.24. In the Lord shall all the Seed of Israel be ju∣stified,25. Rom. 3.20. and shall glory. Therefore by the deeds of the Law, there shall no flesh be justified; For by the Law,21. is the knowledge of sin. But now the Righteousness of God without the
Law is manifested, being witnessed by the Law, and the Prophets.22. Even the righteousness of God, which is by faith of me unto all, and upon all them that believe; For there is no difference,23. for all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God.2 Cor. 5.21. For, I which knew no sin, was made sin for you, that you might be made the righteousness of God, which is in me;Rom. 10.4. Who am the end of the Law for righte∣ousness, to every one that believes; And am made of God,1 Cor. 1.30. to you wisdome, and righteous∣ness, and sanctification, and redemption. The Preface of the Lord Jesus to his Antidotes, a∣gainst several other Heresies and Errors of the last times. 2 Tim 3.1.This know also, that in these last days, pe∣rilous times shall come; for Men shall be lovers of themselves,2. covetous, boasters, proud, blas∣phemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankful, unholy; without natural affection, truce-break∣ers,3. false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good;4. Traytors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures, more than lovers of God;5. having a forme of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof; from such turn away.6. For of this sort, are they which creep into Houses, and lead Captive silly Women, laden with sins, led away with divers lusts; ever learning,7. and never able to come to the know∣ledge of the truth. Now as Jannes and Jam∣bres with-stood Moses,8. so do these also resist the truth, Men of corrupt mindes, reprobate as concerning the faith;9. But they shall pro∣ceed no further; for their folly shall be mani∣fest to all Men, as theirs was. Antidotes, first against Atheisme. Psal. 14.1.The Fool hath said in his heart, there is no God, they are corrupt, they have done abomi∣nable works, there is none that doth good. Therefore the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven,Rom. 1.18. against all ungodliness, and unrighte∣ousness of Men; who hold the truth in unrigh∣teousness;19. Because, that which may be known of God, is manifest in them, For God hath shewed it unto them;20. For the invisible things of him, from the Creation of the World, are cleerly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his Eternal Power and
God-head; so that they are without excuse. 2. Against the Heresie of . Joh. 17.25.O righteous Father, the World hath not known Thee,Joh. 14.6. but I have known Thee. No Man cometh to the Father but by Me. No man hath seen God at any time;Joh. 1.18. the only begotten Son, who is in the bosome of the Father, he hath declared him.Joh: 14.9. He that hath seen Me, hath seen the Father;Joh. 10.30. For I and the Father am one Believe also my works, that ye may know and believe,38. that the Father is in Me, and I in him. For in the beginning was I the Word,Joh. 1.1. and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. All things were made by Me,3. and without Me was not any thing made, that was made. In me was life,4. and the life was the light of Men.Joh. 1.14. I the Word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst you, and ye beheld my glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth.Col. 1.15. I am the image of the invi∣sible God. By me were all things created, that are in Heaven,16. and that are in Earth, visible and invisible; whether they be Thrones, or Do∣minions,17. or Principalities, or Powers; All things were created by Me, and for Me; I am before all things, and by me all things consist. 3. Against the Heresie of denying the Holy Ghost to be God. 1 Joh. 5.7.There are three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these three are one. Mat. 28.18.I spake unto my Apostles, and true Mini∣sters,19. saying, Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. What high blasphemers then are they, that deny the Holy Ghost to be God?Gen. 1.2. The Spirit of God moved upon the Waters; And by the Word of the Lord were the Heavens made,Psal. 33.6. and all the Host of them, by the Spirit of his Mouth.Joh. 15.26. The Spirit of Truth, which proceedeth from the Father, He shall testifie of Me. For he shall not speak of himself,Joh. 16.13. but whatsoever he shall hear,14. that shall he speak; He shall glo∣rifie Me, for he shall receive of mine, and shall shew it unto you.Act. 5.3. Peter said unto Ananias, In that thou hast lied to the Holy Ghost, thou
hast not lied unto Men,4. but unto God. Where∣fore I say unto you,Mat. 12.31. all manner of sin and blas∣phemy shall be forgiven unto Men, But the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto Men.2 Cor. 13.14. The Grace of me, the Lord Jesus Christ,Joh. 16.17. and the love of God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost,Joh 7.20. the Com∣forter,Rom. 15.16. Preserver and Sanctifier, be with you all. 4. Against the Heresie of Commu∣nity of Women. 1 Thes. 4.3.This is the will of God, even your Sanctifi∣cation, that you should abstain from Fornica∣tion;4. and that every one of you should know how to possess his Vessel in Sanctification, and Honour;5. Not in the lust of Concupiscence, as the Gentiles, that know not God: Wherefore to avoid Fornication,1 Cor. 7.2. let every Man have his own Wife, and every Woman her own Hus∣band. Mat. 19.4.Have you not read, that he that made Man in the beginning,5. Against Poli∣gamy. made them Male and Fe∣male?Mal. 2.14. I the Lord will bear witness against them, that deal treacherously with the Wife of their Youth; Is she not thy Companion, and the Wife of thy Covenant? And did not I make one?15. yet had I the residue of the Spirit. And wherefore one, that I might seek a godly Seed. Therefore take heed to your spirit; and let none deal treacherously against the Wife of his Youth.2 Mal. 16. For I the Lord God of Israel hate putting away.Mat. 9.9. Therefore I say unto you, whosoever shall put away his Wife, except it be for Fornication, and shall marry another, committeth Adultery; and whosoever marrieth her that is put away, committeth Adultery. The Husband is the Head of the Wife (not of Wives) as I am the Head of the Church.Eph. 5.23. Let every one therefore,3. in particular, so love his Wife, even as himself; And the Wife (not the Wives) see that she reverence her Hus∣band. 6. Against the forsaking and ca∣sting off Gospel-Ordinances. 1 Thes. 5.19.Despise not Prophesyings; quench not the Spirit.Luk. 10.16. He that heareth you, (that are my true Ministers) heareth Me; and he that despiseth you, despiseth Me; and he that despiseth Me,
despiseth him that sent Me.Joh. 8.17. He that is of God heareth God's words.Joh. 10.3. My Sheep hear my voice; He that knoweth God,1 Joh. 4.6. heareth my Ministers; but he that is not of God, heareth them not. And as oft as you eat the Bread,1 Cor. 11.24. and Drink of the Cup in my Sacraments,25. ye do it in remem∣brance of Me,26. and shew my Death, until I come. Pray without ceasing.1 Thes. 5.17. Psal. 14.4. The workers of iniquity call not upon the Lord. 7. Against those who lay aside, and make useless the Moral Law. Mat. 5.17.Think not that I am come to destroy the Law, or the Prophets, I am not come to destroy but to fulfill;18. For verily I say unto you, till Heaven and Earth pass, one jot, or one title shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled.19. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least Commandements, and shall teach Men so, he shall be called the least in the King∣dome of Heaven: But whosoever shall do, and teach them the same, shall be called great in the Kingdome of Heaven. 8. Against those who cast off, and despise Civil Go∣vernment. Mat. 22.21.Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's; and unto God, the things that are Gods. Let every Soul be subject unto the higher Powers;Rom. 13.1. For there is no Power, but of God; The Pow∣ers that be,2. are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resisteth the Power, resisteth the Or∣dinance of God. And they that resist, shall re∣ceive to themselves Damnation.3. For Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil; Wilt thou then not be afraid of the Power? Do that which is good, and thou shalt have praise of the same.4. For he is the Minister of God to thee for good; but if thou do that which is evil, be afraid, for he beareth not the Sword in vain;for he is the Minister of God, a Revenger, to execute wrath upon him that doth evil.5. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but for Conscience sake. For this cause pay you Tribute also,6. for they are Gods Ministers, attending continually upon this very thing.7. Render therefore to all their dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due; Cu∣stome, to whom Custome; Fear, to whom Fear; Honour, to whom Honour.
9. Against those who prefer a Light within them before, besides, and against the Scriptures. 1 Joh. 5.19.The whole World lies in wickedness. And this is the Condemnation,Joh. 3.19. that Light is come into the World, and that Men love darkness rather than Light, because their deeds are e∣vil.Rom. 3.9. Jewes and Gentiles are all under sin, as it is written;10.11. There is none righteous, no not one; There is none that understandeth; There is none that seeketh after God.Luk· 11.35 Take heed there∣fore, that the Light which is in you, be not darkness.Mat. 6.23▪ If the Light that is in you, be darkness, how great is that darkness? 10. Against En∣thusiasmes. 1 Joh. 4.1.Beloved, believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether they are of God; Because ma∣ny false Prophets are gone out into the World. If any Man shall say unto you,Mat. 24.23. Loe here is Christ, or there, believe it not; For there shall arise false Christs,24. and false Prophets, and shall shew great signes,25. and wonders; insomuch, that if it were possible, they should deceive the very Elect:2 Cor▪ 11.13. Behold, I have told you before, such are false Apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ; And no marvel,14. for Sathan himself is transformed into an Angel of Light;15. Therefore it is no great thing, if his Ministers also be transformed, as the Ministers of Righteousness, whose end shall be according to their works. To the Law, and to the Testimony;Isa. 8 20. If they speak not accord∣ing to this Word, it is because there is no light in them. 11. Against An∣ti-Scripturists. 2 Pet. 1.19.This is that sure Word of Prophesie, where∣unto you do well, that ye take heed, as unto a Light that shineth in a dark place, until the Day dawn, and the Day-Star arise in your Hearts;2 Tim. 3.16. Knowing this first, that all Scripture is given by Inspiration of God;2 Pet. 1.20. And that no Prophesie of the Scripture is of any private in∣terpretation; For the Prophesies came not in old time, by the will of Man; But holy Men of God spake,21. as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. 12. Against those who deny Infants Baptisme, and the Lords Day to be a Christian Sabbath. Mat. 10.13.When I was upon Earth, they brought young Children unto Me, that I should touch them, and my Disciples (like some in these last days)
rebuked those that brought them;14. But when I saw it, I was much displeased, and said unto them, suffer little Children to come unto Me, and forbid them not, For of such is the King∣dome of God.15. Verily, I say unto you, whoso∣ever shall not receive the Kingdom of God, as a little Child, he shall not enter therein. And I took them up in my Armes,16. and put my Hands upon them, and blessed them. Baptism is now the only way for little Children to come to the Lord Christ.Act. 2.3. The Promise is made to you, and to your Children, and to all that are afar of, even as many as the Lord your God shall call.1 Cor. 7.14. The unbelieving Husband is Sancti∣fied by the (believing) Wife, and the unbe∣lieving Wife is Sanctified by the believing Hus∣band, or else were your Children unclean, but now they are holy.Act. 16.15.1.33. The Examples of the A∣postles Baptizing whole Families, are of great force: And the History of their practice, and of the first Churches planted by them,1 Cor. 1.16. is to be believed with an Historical faith,Act. 1.3. Luk. 24.15. Joh. 20.19.26. Act. 2.1. 1 Cor. 16.2. Act. 20.7. Rev. 1.10. and looked upon with much reverence, by all true Christi∣ans, both in this point, and in the change of the Jewish Sabbath, to the Lord's Day; As holding forth without doubt an Apostolical Institution. 13. Against those who deny propriety of Goods and E∣states. Num. 26.52.The Lord spake to Moses, saying, The Land shall be divided for an Inheritance, according to the number of Names;53. to many thou shalt give more Inheritance,54. and to few thou shalt give the less inheritance.Exod. 10.15.17. Thou shalt not steal. Thou shalt not covet thy Neighbours Oxe, nor his Ass, nor any thing that is thy Neighbours. Give to him that asketh;Mat. 5.43. and from him that would borrow of thee, turn not thou away. For the poor you have always with you.Mat. 26.11. I charge you that are Rich in this World,1 Tim. 6.17. that you trust not in uncertain Riches, but in the living God; who gives you all things richly to enjoy;18. that you do good, that you be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate.Act. 4.34. (When) as many as were pos∣sessed of Lands, or Houses, sold them, and
brought the price of the things which were sold,35. and laid them down at the Apostles Feet, (in that most sad time of Persecution) and distri∣bution was made unto every Man, according as he had need;Act. 5.3. (Even then) Peter said unto Ananias, why hath Sathan filled thy heart, to lye to the Holy Ghost, and to keep back part of the price of the Land? Whilst it remained, Was it not thy own?4. And after it was sold, Was it not in thine own Power?1 Cor. 10.14. Let no Man therefore seek his own, but every one anothers wealth:2 Thes. 3.11. For there are some that walk disor∣derly,12. working not at all, but are busie-bodies; Now them that are such, I command that with quietness they work, and eat their own Bread; that they may have to give to him that need∣eth.Eph. 4.28. 14. Against Re∣tization. Rev. 18.4.Come out of Babylon my People; but count not the blood of the Covenant,Heb. 10.29. by which ye were sanctified, an unholy thing. If ye have been once born again of Water and the Spirit,Joh. 3.4. Can a Man be so again born the second time? The Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the coun∣sel of God (as being not Baptized of John) against themselves.Luk. 7.30. Heb. 3.12.Take heed lest there be in any of you an e∣vil heart of unbelief, in departing from the holy Ordinance of God,Mat. 28.19. Seeing you have been Baptized into the Name of the Father, and of the Son,Gal. 3 2. and of the Holy Ghost. This only would I know of such; Received you the spi∣rit, and your Convertion, by, and under the first Baptisme,3. or your second? Having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect in the Flesh?Gal. 5.19, 20, 21, 22. Now the works of the Flesh, are hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, envyings; but the fruit of the Spirit, is love, joy,Gal. 5.15. peace. If ye bite and devour one ano∣ther; take heed that you be not consumed one of another: And that it be not truly said of you,1 Joh. .1. by my Saints, They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would, no doubt, have continued with us; But they went out, that they might
be made manifest, that they were not all of us. But continue you in the things that ye have learned, and have been assured of, knowing of whom ye have learned them; For evil Men, and Seducers,2 Tim. 3.13. shall wax worse and worse, de∣ceiving, and being deceived. 15. Against Schism, and uncharitable Separation from the Church. Heb. 10.24.Consider one another, to provoke to love, and to good works, not forsaking the assem∣bling of your selves together, as the manner of some is;25. But exhorting one another, and so much the more, as ye see the Day approaching; Endeavouring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace.Eph. 4.3. 4. For there is one Body, and one Spirit, even as you are called in one hope of your Calling.5. One Lord, one Faith, one Baptisme;6. one God, and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all.1 Cor. 12.27. Since then you are the Body of Christ, and Members in particular,25▪ let there be no Schisme in the Body.1 Cor. 11.18. Now I hear that there be divi∣sions amongst those that call themselves Chri∣stians;19. For there must be Heresies also among you, that those that are approved, may be ma∣nifest among you;Jude 17. which were spoken before of my Apostles,18. that there should be mockers in the last time, who should walk after their own ungodly lusts.19. These be they, who sepa∣rate themselves, sensual, having not the spirit. Now,1 Cor. 1.10. by my Name, I desire you, that you all speak the same thing, and that there be no Divisions amongst you, but that you be per∣fectly joyned together in the same mind, and in the same judgment;1 Cor. 3.4 If you say then, I am of Paul▪1 Cor. 1.12. and I of Apollo, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ,13. Are ye not carnal? Is Christ divi∣ded?1 Cor. 3.5. Who then is Paul? And who is Apollo? but Ministers, by whom ye believed, Even as the Lord gave to every Man.6. If then such an one, as was Paul, plants; or as Apollo was, watereth; It is God that giveth the increase. Therefore let no Man glory in Men;11. But do you mark them,Rom. 16.17. which cause Divisions and of∣fences, contrary to the Doctrine you have learn∣ed,18. and avoid them; For they that are such,
serve not Me, but their own Belly; and by good words, and fair Speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple. Phil. 4.8.Finally, whatsoever things are true, what∣soever things are honest,The Conclusion of the Speech of the Lord Jesus. whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatso∣ever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any Virtue, and if there be any praise,9. think on these things; And those things which ye have both known and received,Joh. 16.27. and heard, and seen in me, do; And the Father himself that loveth you,Phil. 4 8. the God of Peace shall be with you. Holy Father, (who hearest me always) This is Life Eternal,The Prayer of the Lord Jesus for ll his Elect. Joh. 17.11. Joh. 11.42. Joh. 17.3. to know Thee the only true God, and Me whom thou hast sent; Keep through thy own Name,Joh. 17.11. those that thou hast given Me, that they may be one, as we are one; That they all may be one,21. as thou Father art in Me, and I in Thee, that they also may be one in us.22. And the glory which thou gavest Me, I have given them, that they may be one, even as we are one;23. I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one; And that the World may know that thou hast sent Me; and hast loved them, as thou hast loved Me.24. Father, I will that they also, whom thou hast given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my Glory, which Thou hast given me; I have given to them the words which Thou gavest me;8. and they have received them, and have known surely that I came out from Thee, and they have believ∣ed that Thou didst send me.9. I pray for them, I pray not for the World; but for those that thou hast given me;10. For they are Thine; and all mine are thine, and thine are mine; and I am glorified in them.15.13.17. I pray that thou wouldest keep them from the evil of the World, and that my joy may be fulfilled in them; Sanctifie them with thy truth, thy word is truth.
The Fathers con∣cluding Exhorta∣tion and Prayer for his Wife and Children. 2 Cor. 13.11.Finally, Beloved Wife of my Youth, and dear Children; Farewel, be perfect, be of good comfort,Mal. 2.14. be of one mind, live in peace and the God of peace and love shall be with you.Eph. 5.1. Eph. 3.14. For this cause I bow my Knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole Family in Heaven and Earth is named;15, That he would give you according to the riches of his glory to be strengthned with might by his spirit in the inner man;16. 17. That Christ may live in your hearts by faith; that ye being rooted and grounded in love,18. may be able to compre∣hend with all Saints what is the breadth,19. and length, and depth, and heighth, and to know the love of Christ which passeth know∣ledge, that ye might be filled with the ful∣ness of God. The God of Peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus that great Shepheard of the Sheep,Heb 13.20. through the blood of the everlasting Covenant make you perfect in every good work to do his will,21. working in you that which is most pleasing in his sight through Jesus Christ. Now to him that is able to do exceeding abun∣dantly above all that we ask or think,Eph. 3.20. ac∣cording to the power that worketh in us to him be glory in the Church by Jesus Christ, throughout all Ages, World without end. The Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ,21. and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all, Amen.
A Post-script of the Father to his Wife and Children, concerning the fore∣going Epistle, with some further Exhor∣tations to the practice thereof. MY dearest heart, and intirely affect∣ed Children, the good and salva∣tion of whose Souls I pray for, and labour for, as for my own; I have I trust (by the direction of the holy Spirit) chosen in this manner to write unto you, as hoping that what is delivered to you in the Person, and words of our Lord and be∣loved Saviour. For such is every word in the Epistle (except some words not sub∣stantial necessary for connexion, explanation and application requisit in a subject of such various matter) You will with the more re∣verence and affection, delight and obedi∣ence, attend to, and receive; For although all the words therein, were not uttered by his own mouth upon Earth, yet were they all indited by his holy Spirit, who spake by the Prophets and Apostles, and is the Lord God of the holy Prophets.Heb. 1.1. So that if ye will not hear and obey him herein,Rev. 22.6. speaking to you, by himself, and by them; Neither will you be perswaded,Luk. 16.31. though one arose and spake to you from Hell, and from the dead; Ye know after what manner I have been with you,Act. 20.18. at all seasons; And how I have kept nothing back that was profitable unto you,20. but have shewed you, and have taught you both in private,21. and more pub∣liquely; Testifying unto you, and exhorting you to repentance towards God,24. and faith to our Lord Jesus Christ.22. And now behold
I am as one bound a Prisoner, and a banish∣ed man, separated from you; not knowing what things shall further befall me: But none of these things move or grieve me; nei∣ther count I my life dear unto my self, so that I might finish my course with joy. For I am perswaded and assured that neither Tribulation,Rom. 8.35. or Distress, Persecution, or Fa∣mine, nakedness or peril, or Sword, Death, or Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers,38, nor things present, nor things to come;39. nor height, nor depth, nor any other Creature shall be able to separate me from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus my Lord,1 Jo. 4.19. or cause to cease my love to him; As therefore loving him, because he hath loved me first.2 Tim. 4.8. Yea, I am further assured, that when I have finished my course, a Crown of righteousness is laid up for me, which my Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that Day, and not to me only, but unto all those that love his appearing. And now my dearly beloved ones, I know not, God he only knows, whether we shall see the Face of one another any more: Wherefore, that li∣ving or dead, I may discharge my duty as a Husband, and as a Father, I take you to re∣cord this Day, that I am pure from the blood of you all; For I have not shunned to declare unto you the counsel of God▪ Take heed therefore to your Souls, which God hath purchased with his own blood, for I know that after my departure, grie∣vous Wolves and Enemies, such as the migh∣ty Powers of Darkness, the numerous tem∣pting, and malicious men of the World, and that out of your own selves, which there∣fore are the most dangerous of adversaries, will arise strong, innumerable and impetu∣ous Lusts, all endeavouring to draw you from the Faith, and to destroy your most precious Souls; Therefore watch, and re∣member that by the space of these many years, I have not ceased to warn every one
of you Night and Day with tears.Phil. 4.1. There∣fore my dearly beloved, and longed for, my Joy and Crown, stand fast in the Lord my dearly beloved.3. And I intreat thee also true Yoke-fellow, help, counsel, and encou∣rage our Children in the way of godliness and righteousness,1 Tim. 4.8. which is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that now is,13. and of that which is to come; Hide not thy talent, nor neglect the gifts that are in thee, until I come again unto you. Give attendance to reading,14. to exhortation, me∣ditate upon these things that I have writ∣ten, and give thy self wholly to them,15. that thy profiting may appear to all. Be an ex∣ample to our Children in Word,1 Tim. 4.12. in Conver∣sation, in Chastity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Pu∣rity: For in doing this,16. thou shalt both save thy Self and Family, now solely under thy charge; and as to the care of whose Soul, thou must shortly be accountable at God's Tribunal. 2 Cor. 6.11.O ye that are my precious Jewels, my chief and only riches upon Earth, my mouth is open to you,12. my heart is enlarged, ye are not straitned in me, be ye not therefore straitned in your own bowels; Now for a recompence in the same,13. I speak unto you as unto my Children, be ye also enlarged. And now dear and beloved Christians, for this is the highest,2 Cor. 5.16. and shall be my conclu∣ding Title, and sweetest compellation, as therein not knowing you after the Flesh; I commend you unto God, and to the Word of his Grace,Act. 20.32. which is able to build up, and to give you an Inheritance among all them that are sanctified;Eph. 1.16. Ceasing not to give thanks for you, making mention of you in my Prayers;17. That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, The Father of glory may give unto you the spirit of wisdome and revela∣tion, in the knowledge of him: The Eyes
of your understanding being enlightned,18. that ye may know what is the hope of his calling;19. And what the riches of the glory of his Inheritance in the Saints; And what is the exceeding greatness of his Power to us-ward that believe. Your most affectionate Husband and Father, J. H. From Antwerpe, the First of January, 1665.
A Directory Letter (Mutatis Mutandis) sent by the Author to every one of his Twelve Children, prefixt to the Manuscript of the following Epistle, now Printed for the use and benefit of other Christian Families. Dear Daughter Mary, I Commend unto your serious and often Reading and Medita∣tion this following Epistle, a Work which cost me much la∣bour, study, and time in the Collection, yet performed with much delight and chearfulness, as moved to write it to all my Relations, by the good Spirit of the Lord, as the best means I could use to counsel stir up, and advise them, with Mary, to choose the better part, which shall never be taken from them. Wherefore loving Daughter, let me lay this Paternal Charge upon you, as I shall do upon the rest of your Brothers and Si∣sters, for whom I am preparing Transcripts out of the Original, written by my own hand: That you read it over at least once a Quarter, as long as you live, as being not mine, but the Epistle of our most dear Lord and Saviour presented to you only by my hands, his most unworthy Instrument. The subject matter there∣of being his most sacred Word, who is the Lord God of all the holy Prophets, the Pen-men hereof, And the great Prophet of his Church; whose Word, whosoever will not hear and obey, are threatned to be destroyed. My design herein, I hope, through the grace and mighty power of the most holy Spirit of Christ, will be prosperous, and effectual, as being not only a Letter of advice and counsel from an earthly Father, whom I am confident you love, and will obey in the Lord; But the Epistle, and most pow∣erful Exhortations of your heavenly Father, yea, the love-letter of your Head and Spouse the Lord Jesus Christ, who hath mar∣ried you unto himself in holiness and everlasting righteousness. Dear Daughter, the holy Scriptures being the Foundation of all saving knowledge, and true Religion, I have by the direction and assistance of the Lord, skim'd off for you the Cream thereof,
and given you a few proofs of many, holding forth, as from his own mouth; First, The excellency of his Person: Secondly, The Fundamental Articles of the Christian faith, and belief in the words of the holy Scripture only: Thirdly, what things are to be practised by you, held forth in God's holy Law: Fourthly, what evil things are to be eschewed, either respecting Doctrine, or manners, wherein you have the Lord Jesus Christ's encourage∣ment and exhortation, to the attaining of all saving graces, and virtues, and his Dehortation from all errors in Doctrine, (espe∣cially those that are sowen, and profest in these worst of times) and from all sins and vices in practice: Fifthly, You have herein many of his Holy Counsels, directing how to walk holily, righte∣ously, circumspectly, and unblameably in your life and conversa∣tion, together with the holy means and Ordinances ordained by him, for the obtaining and strengthning his graces in you, which is concluded with his Prayer and mine to our Heavenly Father for a blessing. O let not then, much beloved Child, This Letter (should you neglect the counsel given you therein) after my de∣cease, bear witness against you: But let it be a Record and lasting Legacy read and practised by you, and your Childrens Children; which is the fervent Prayer of your Most affectioned Father J. H. Antwerpe this first of January, 1665.
An INDEX of the CONTENTS of this EPISTLE, And of the Scripture-Catechisme (materially) contained in it. THe Salutation and Exhortation of the Father, to his Wife and Children. Page 259. The Praise and Commendation of the Lord Jesus Christ, under the Name and Title of Wisdome, as being, and that essentially the Wisdome of God. Eadem. The danger of neglecting to hear and obey the Voice and Coun∣sel of Christ. P. 260. B. An Exhortation of the Father to his Wife and Children, to hear∣ken to the Word and Counsel of Christ. Ead. C. The Speech of the Lord Jesus Christ, as speaking in his own Per∣son, to those to whom this Epistle is directed, and is applicable to all other Christians. P. 261. A. The Danger of Rejecting Christ. Ead. B. The Confession of Faith, commonly called the Apostles Creed, held forth by Christ in Scripture Expressions.Ead. C. 1. Article, The Doctrine of the Trinity. Eadem. 2. Article, That Jesus Christ is the Eternal Son of God, and our Lord. 3. Article, As to the Incarnation of the Lord Jesus Christ, who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary. P. 262. A 4. Article, Concerning Christ's Condemnation by Pontius Pilate, his Crucifixion, Death, and Burial, and all other Sufferings in Soul and Body. Eadem. 5. Article, Of Christ's Resurrection. 6. Article, Of Christ's Ascention. 7. Article, Of Christ's coming to Judgment. 8. Art. Concerning the Holy Ghost, is proved in the first Article, concern∣ing the Trinity. Pag. 263. 9. Article, Concerning the Catholick Church, and the Commu∣nion of Saints. Ead. C. 10. Article, Concerning forgiveness of Sins. 11. Article, Con∣cerning the Resurrection of the Body. Ead. 12. Article, Concerning Life everlasting.P. 264. A.
Ead. C. The Preface to the Decalogue or Ten Commandments. Ead. B. & C. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Commandments. The Conclusion of the Ten Commandments. Note, That the Promises, &c. are omitted for brevity. 265 A The Exhortation of the Lord Jesus, to the use of Gospel-Or∣dinances. Viz. 1. To Baptism. 2. To the Lord's Supper. Ead. C Page 266 A B C 3. To the reading of the Scriptures. 4. To the hearing of the Word of God preached. 5. To Meditation of the Word of God, and of his works. 6. To Prayer in publick and private. 7. To Obedience to Church-Governors and Discipline. P 267 B C The Exhortation of the Lord Jesus to Gospel-saving Graces, Viz. 1. To Repentance. 2. To Faith. P 268 C Page 270 A B C 3. To Hope. 4. To Charity. 5. To holy Courage or Forti∣tude. 6. To Christian Temperance. 7. To holy Patience. 8. To Divine Wisdome. Page 271 A B Ead. C 9. To Christian Humility. 10. The Exhortation of the Lord Jesus to several saving Graces, commonly called the Beatitudes. 11. To Religious Chastity. P 272 C P 273 A 12. To Christian Justice and Righteousness. 13. To Gospel sincerity, uprightness and truth. P. Ead. C. 14. To godly thankfulness, and praising of God. Ead. C. & P. 274 The Exhortation of the Lord Jesus to Divine affections, Viz. 1. To holy joy and delight. 2. To filial fear of God. 3. To holy zeal and anger. 4. To holy hatred. P 275 A The Preface to the Dehortations of the Lord Jesus from seve∣ral principal vices. Ead. 275 276 The Dehortation. 1. From Vnbelief. 2. From Atheisme. 3. From Polutheisme. 4. From Idolatry. 5. From Blasphemy. 6. From Prophaness. 7. From Sacriledge. 8. From Hypocri∣sie. 9. From Sabbath-breaking. 10. From Superstition. 11. From Lukewarmness. Page 277 A B 12. From hard-heartedness. 13. From presumptuous sinning. 14. From sinful swearing. 15. From incorrigibleness. A Pre∣face to the Dehortation against despair. 16. From Despair. A Dehortation from Vncharitableness. P 278 A B 1. General Branch of Vncharitableness, as to the Souls of o∣thers. 1. By tempting. 2. By evil example. Ead. B 3. By not reproving. 4. By Flattering. 5. By not Instruct∣ing. 6. By persecuting for Conscience. Ead. C P 279 A 2d. General Branch of Vncharitableness, as to the Persons of others. 1. By Murder. 2. By Maiming. 3. By unjust Impri∣sonment. 4. By not relieving. Ead. B P 180 A 3d. General Branch of Vncharitableness, as to the estates of others. 1. By oppression. 2. By stealing. 3. By defrauding.
4. By contentiousness. 5. By usury or extortion. Ead. A. B 6. By Depopulation. 7. By false witnessing. 8. By cursing, or evil Imprecations. 4. General Branch of Vncharitableness, as to the good name of others: 1. By slandering and back-biting and tale-bearing. Ead. C A Dehortation from Intemperance. 1. From Drunkenness. 2. From Gluttony. 3. Fom Insobriety. P 281 B C A Dehortation from sinful fear. A Dehortation from Ignorance. 1. Affected. 2. Natural. 3. Wil∣ful. P 282 A B A Dehortation from Injustice. 1 In Magistrates. 2 In private Persons. 3 By not giving obedience justly due to Superiors. 1 As Magistrates. 2 As Ministers of the Gospel. 3 As natural Pa∣rents. Ead. C. A General Dehortation from fleshly uncleanness. 1 From Bug∣gery. 2 From Sodomy. 3 From Whoredome. 4 From Incest. 5 From Polygamy. 6 From Adultery. 7 From Fornication. P 283 C P 284 A B A Dehortation from Lasciviousness. 1 In wanton thoughts. 2 In wanton words. 3 In wanton looks. 4 In wanton actions. Ead. C. P 285 C A Dehortation from Lying. 1 By denying the truth. 2 By breach of Covenant to God. 2 Of vows to God. 3 Of promises and Covenants to Men. Ead. B C and P 286 A Dehortation from Covetousness. 1 In the heart. 2 In action. 3 From worldliness, and carking cares. 4. From Nigardliness. P 286 C P 287 A A Dehortation from Idleness. 1 By having no Calling, or by neglecting a Calling. P 287 C & 288 A 2. Idleness in private Persons. 3 Idleness in publick Persons. Ead. B. The Dehortation of the Lord Jesus from sinful passions. 1. From rash anger. 2 From causless anger. Ead. C. Ead. C A Dehortation from sinful hatred. 1 Of Persons. 2 Of good things. Eadem C A Dehortation from Malice. Ead. C A Dehortation from strife and contention. P 289 A A Dehortation from envy. A Dehortation from revenge. Ead. C A Dehortation from Pride. 1 Branch from spiritual Pride. 2 Branch from Worldly pride. 3 Branch from Ambition. Ead. C Ead. C & P 290 A Dehortation from Ingratitude. 1 Towards God. 2 Towards Men. Ead. C. A Dehortation from sensuality or voluptuousness. P 291 A A Dehortation from inconstancy. 1 Branch, back-sliding. 2 Branch, Apostacy. 3 Branch, is the sin against the holy Ghost. P 292 C P 294 B The Preface to the Counsels of the Lord Jesus. 1 To diligence in our Calling. 2 To holy walking with God. 3 Against sin. P 295 B
P 296 A Counsel against Temptation. Ead. B Counsel against evil company. To set God always before Vs, and to have an eye to Eternity. Ead. B C Counsel to watch over our hearts. As to the keeping of a good Conscience, not to offend a Brothers conscience. P 297 A Counsel, as to the well ordering of our tongues, and as to the right using of our estates, gifts and talents. Ead. C Counsel, as to the well improving of our time. P 290 A Ead. C Counsel against sinful and unprofitable discourses. Against prophane swearing. Counsel against sluggishness. Ead. C Counsel to watch over, and reprove our Neighbour; and pati∣ently to receive reproofs. Counsel to charity. Counsel concerning your Tables. Concern∣ing your callings. Ead. C & 299 A Counsel concerning your Relations. 1. Of Children to their Parents.2 Of Parents to their children. 3 Of Husbands to their Wives. 4 Of Wives. 5 Of Servants. 6 Of Masters. Ead. C Counsel concerning our carriage towards those without. P 300 Counsel as to the observation of God's mercies, works and pro∣vidences. Ead. C Counsel to attend the answer and return of Prayer. Ead. C Counsel, as to our behaviour under afflictions and persecu∣tions. P 301 C ACounsel, as to the right use of our Christian liberty against the abusing of grace. Ead. B C Counsel as to the duties of Prayer, self denial, bearing the cross and perseverance. Counsel to our growing in grace. P 302 A The Preface to the Antidotes. Ead. C & P 305 A Ead. B Antidotes given by the Lord Jesus against several Heresies and Errors. 1 Against the Pope's Supremacy. 2 Against the Pope's Infallibility. Ead. C 3 Against the Pope's Power to forgive sins. 4 Against the Pope's Power to absolve from oaths, vows, and promises. P 304 A 5 Against the Pope's Power to add to the Scriptures, or to bend conscience by his Cannons and Decretals. P 305 A Against the Pope's Power to canonize Saints, or to excommu∣nicate any from being Saints. P 306 A Against the Pope's Power to exercise the civil Sword against those that will not receive his Doctrines. Eadem C Antidotes given by the Lord Jesus Christ against several he∣resies and errors of the Apostate Roman Church. & 307 A Ead. C 1 Against the Idolatry of the Mass. 2 Against the false Doctrine of Purgatory. Ead. C & 308 A 3 Against the praying to and worship, 1 Of Saints. 2 Of Angels.
4 Against the worshping of Pictures and Images. Eadem C. 5 Against the false Doctrine of freedome from Original sin. P. 309 C. 6 Against their false Doctrine concerning Free will. P. 310 C. 7 Against their false Doctrine of Justification by works. Eadem C. The Preface of the Lord Jesus to his Antidotes against seve∣ral other Heresies and Errors of the last times. P. 111 B· Antidotes, 1. Against Atheisme. Eadem C. 2 Against the Heresie of Arianisme. P. 312 A. 3. Against the Heresie of denying the Holy Ghost to be God. Eadem C. 4. Against the Heresie of community of Women. 113 B. C. 5. Against Poligamy. 6. Against the forsaking and casting off of Gospel — Ordi∣nances. Eadem C. 7. Against those who lay aside and make useless the Moral Law. & p 314 A 8. Against those who cast off and despise civil Government. Eadem B. 9. Against those who prefer a light within them before, besides, and against the Scriptures. P. 315 A. 10. Against Enthusiasmes. Eadem B. 11. Against Anti-scripturists. Eadem C. 12. Against those who deny Infant Baptisme; and the Lord's Day to be the Christian Sabbath. Eadem C. & p 316 A 13. Against those who deny propriety of Goods and Estates. Eadem C 14. Against Rebaptization. P. 317 B· 15. Against Schisme and uncharitable separation from the Church. The conclusion of the speech of the Lord Jesus. The Prayer of the Lord Jesus for all his Elect. P. 318 A. P. 55. B. The Fathers concluding Exhortation and Prayer for his Wife and Children. P. 56 A. A Post-script of the Father to his Wife and Children, concern∣ing the foregoing Epistle, with some further Exhortations to the practice thereof. Eadem C. & P. 57, 58, & 59.
ERRATA Of the Printer. FOlio 265, Line 27, (Add) And brake it. Folio 269, Line 28, (Add) Do good to them that hate you. Fol. 276, in the Margent, for, Polutheims, put Polutheismes. For Cap. Proverbs the 22, put Chap. the 20. Fol. 279. Line 31. for from, put for. Fol. 282, Line 21, put (Thy) after of. Fol. 293, Line 38, for Brances, put Branches. Fol. 294, Line 42, Add (He) after shall. Fol. 297. Mar. for Mat. the 5, make it the 25. Fol. 203. Line 22, Add after was. (So) Marg. for Mathew, Mark. Fol. 305. Line 40. for Diotrop∣ses, put Diotrephes. Fol. 306. Line 31, for after Sacrifice, add (First) Fol. 313. Marg. for Joh. the 17. put the 7.
An Humble ANSWER to a PAPER or QVERY, Given to the Author, by King CHARLES the First, at Hombey; concerning the Observations of Easter-Day A. D. 1647. By the KING. I desire to be resolved of this Question, Why the new Reformers discharge the keeping of Easter? The Reason for this Query is, I Conceive the Celebration of this Feast was Instituted by the same Authority which changed the Jewish Sab∣both into the Lord's Day, or Sunday: for it will not be found in Scripture where Saturday is discharged to be kept or turned into the Sunday, wherefore it must be the Churches Authority that changed the one, and instituted the other. Therefore my Opinion is, that those who will not keep this Feast, may as well return to the Observation of Saturday, and refuse the Weekly Sunday. When any Body can shew me, that herein I am in an error, I shall not be ashamed to confess and mend it: till when you know my mind. C. R.
My Answer to his Majesties Query. May it please your Majesty, I Cannot but from the blessed example of our Saviour, (who was in his Age a new Reformer of old Errors, Viz. the false glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees, Math. 5.20.) but ac∣count all such Reformers in our times, blessed also; But for the keeping of Easter, although I know not any Ordinance of Parliament discharging it, yet with submission to better judg∣ments, I in all dutifulness conceive, That your Majesties reason upon which your Query is built, hath a great mistake even in the foundation of it, you being pleased to lay this for a ground, That the change of the Sabboth; and the Institution of Easter are by one and the same equal Authority and Ecclesiastical Decree, which with your Majesties favour, I cannot yield to, for I hum∣bly conceive that the change of the Jewish Sabboth (the com∣memoration of the Work of the Creation) unto the Lords day, the remembrance of that great Work, (the Work of Redemp∣tion finished upon this Day of the Lord's Resurrection) was by no less than by Divine Authority, because the keeping of one Day in Seven as a Sabboth to God, was not only sanctified and set apart, by God's own example in the Creation, Gen. 2. Ver. 2 and accordingly observed by the Israelites many Weeks before the Law was given, Exod. 16.23. But is One of the Ten Com∣mandments delivered by God's own mouth in Mount Sinay, written by his own Finger in Tables of Stone, commanded by himself to be put into the Ark of the Covenant; which Deca∣logue or Ten Commandments are also by our blessed Saviour in his Sermon upon the Mount declared to be the rule of his Peo∣ples moral obedience, unto the end of the World, Math. 5.17. and in the following part of that Sermon, wherein he vindicates the Law from the corrupt Glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees; he instances only in moral duties, and moral Laws. From all which Divines generally infer that the Decalogue is to continue in force unto the Worlds end; and therefore it seems most ap∣parent that no Authority▪ that is inferiour to that which appoint∣ed the Seventh Day from the Creation to be the Sabboth, could abrogate that Day, and appoint an other Day to be used instead of it, because neither the Law of Nature, nor the Holy Scrip∣ture,
doth any where give the least intimation, that any humane Power may change any of the Commandments of God, and in∣deed so many absurdities would follow upon such an assertion, as I am confident your Majesty will not own it. It remains there∣fore that the change of the Day must be the work of Christ himself, or of his Apostles, who were divinely inspired, Acts 15. 21. And to prove that it was so, Viz. That the Lords Day by Divine Institution now succeeds in the room of the Jewish Sab∣both, I shall use no other Arguments than these which I finde in rned Bishop Andrews his Speech in the Star-Chamber, at the sure of Mr. Traske, who expresly saith, that it hath ever been the Churches Doctrine, That Christ made an end of all Sabboths, by his Sabboth in the grave; and that presently the Lords Day came in the place of it. And that according to Austin's judg∣ment, the Lord's Day is declared to be the Christian Sabboth, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, which the said Bishop not only saith, but proveth by these Arguments. 1. Because he then began the new World, Heb. 1.2. By whom e made the Worlds: The first World which ended with his rial: The second World or new Creation which began with his Resurrection. 2. Because all the four Evangelists say Christ rose,Vna Sab∣ttorum, that is the first Day of the Week. 3. The Apostles kept their holy Meetings on that Day to Preach, and Pray, and Celebrate the Lord's Supper, Acts 20.7. 4. The Day is called the Lord's Day, not only in the Apostles times, but by the Apostle John himself, Rev. 1.10. And he fur∣ther adds, that this Epithite (Dominicum) in the Scripture is only applyed to these two, The Lord's Day, and the Lord's Sup∣per, To shew that they are both to be taken alike in Scripture. 5. He saith we have not only example, but express precept for it, 1 Cor. 16.2. That upon the first Day of the Week which was the Day of their Assembly, then Collections or Oblations would be made. 6. And lastly, He affirms that in all Ages of the Church this Day was observed. To this I may add our Saviour's rest upon that Day from his Works, Heb. 4.10. His often visiting the A∣postles during the Forty Days, after his Resurrection, upon that Day speaking of the things appertaining to the Kingdom of God, Acts 1.3. Now what more material thing was there to be declared to them than this, The change of the Sabboth, and the appointing a set time for his Worship; he accordingly appearing thrice on the first Day of the Week, (besides his being seen of the Women) to teach and instruct his Disciples. First to the
two Disciples that went to Emmaus, Luke 24.15, &c. to the Apostles when Thomas was absent, John 20.19. And the third time when Thomas was present, John 20.26. As also observe, that those wonderful and extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost were poured out according to his promise upon the Apostles and Church (then) met together, Acts 2.1. The Day of Penticost being the Morrow after the Seventh Sabboth, to be accounted from the Day of the Sheaf-Offering, Lev. 23.15. By all which, he seems to have honoured and set apart that Day above others, for his service. Lastly, this being a principal Institution, might probably be one of those Decrees ordained by the Apostles (as well as that concerning the Sacrament, 1 Cor. 11.34.) delivered by Paul to the Churches in all the Cities, through which he pas∣sed, Acts 16.4. But for the Observation of Easter to be an Annual Festival to Christians, I find not any thing in the Holy Scriptures: And your Majesty is pleased to place it only upon the Churches Authority. And although I will not contend about the Churches Power in the Institution of such things as are sim∣ply indifferent, yet I suppose I may boldly assert, that such things as are only Instituted by Ecclesiastical Authority, having no foot∣step in the Scripture, may by Ecclesiastical Authority be laid a∣side. Your Majesties most Loyal Subject, and Humble Servant, H. J.
AN EPISTLE DEDICATORY, To the the truly Noble Paire, and my most Religious Parents. MOst Honoured and best beloved Parents, Three Sabbaths of Years (the third part of Mans life) is already Cyphered in my Youths Ac∣compts, and who knows how soon the Divine number of our dayes, after my times last ad∣dition, may conclude the Numeration of my life, thus; Haec summa totalis: Wherefore, lest Death should proclaime me Bankrupt before I had paid the due Debt of gratefulness, which I owe you, next to my Heavenly Father, for my Life, Education, and Preservation; I here presume to present you with this disordered and weak Meditations; the Fruits of some few hours destinated for the Lord's dayes Preparation, as a testimonial of my thank∣fulness for those your numberless Merits, which are as far be∣yond requital, as expression; Let them (I beseech you) obtain a favorable Acceptance, a patient Perusal, and a Fatherly Censure, glorifying God, who with his Grace hath assisted my Weakness, and shall supply the deficiency of all our Meditations, with the fruition of himself; till which Imperfection of Happiness, I rest, Yours in the Lord, and in all filial Obedience, J. H.
To the Worthy AUTHOR OF THIS Divine Meditation, The Unworthy Peruser wisheth all Health and Happiness. ON Worthy Sir, and live to view, The like done by your Heire to you. There's one will bless, With Int'rests, this your gratefulness, Sweetning your Budd, Both to your own, and Parents good, Blessing the feet, which I suppose, Would highly grace a full-blown Rose. Oft have I seen those Budds that prove Worm-eaten by that Canker Love; Spending their prime, Of wit in Sonnets, or such Rhime, As leaves behind, The Savour of a tainted mind. Magre their Witts, I tell you true, I enjoy none but such as you; Not that I know your Birth and Blood Springs high, but that I see a good, That sets you off Beyond the bitter reach or scoffe, Of those loose Tongues, Which blast it in their drunken Songs, Think no work lovely, sweet, or witty, That is not tun'd to Cupids Ditty.
On Lovely Sir (I speak the truth, From Him you think on in your Youth) Hee'l not forget, This Labour, or Essay, but set, A mark of note, Vpon those Hours which you devote, Vnto his Service, and will Pay Richly, at All-Saints Holy-Day: Mean while he pawns his Word to be A Friend unto your hopes, and he That never Rights, The meanest of his Favourites, Will raise your Stock, And prove your Sun, your Shield, your Rock, Perfume your Name, and make't as dear As his, that dyed the Hopeful Peire. Long may the Noble Paire, to whom You own your Breath, next God become Sutors for you, That labour to repay the due, You owe to them, From whom you Sprang a hopeful stemm; To which you have the Heart, and Hand Of him, that rests, Yours to Command, W. Mewes.
MEDITATIONS UPON THE CREATION, MANS Fall, and Redemption BY CHRIST, Presented to his Parents in the XXI. Year of his Age. Anno Dom. 1627. London, Printed in the Year, 1669.
Prayer and Meditation are Twins, therefore A Preparative Prayer. O Almighty God, and most gracious Father, from thy goodness I acknowledge all good gifts do proceed, therefore I humbly, and earnestly do beseech thee, to illuminate my Soul by thy Spirit, that my Vnderstanding, being raised above all Earthly Co∣gitations, may through thy merciful assistance, so medi∣tate of thee, and thy wonderful Works, that contem∣ng all Worldly Vanities, my delight may only con∣sist in beholding of thy Majesty: The Consideration of it being best able, both to humble my proud Heart, and create in it a love, and fear to all thy Precepts, that so I beginning (although in weakness) to live the life of grace here, I may (through thy favour in Christ) live the Life of Glory with thee hereafter. Amen.
DIVINE MEDITATIONS OF GOD'S Majesty IN THE CREATION. ALL sublunary things tend, and press towards their Centre: The Sea-man's Needle always points North and South, Nature thereby (as it were) Lecturing our Souls to behold and move towards none but thee O God, our North-Star, our Centre; Lord, I confess, it had been a vain presumption in Mortality (being defiled with sin) to have once con∣ceived a thought of thy Holiness, had not thy mercy in Jesus Christ, revealed unto us in thy word and pro∣mises, not only to give us leave, but commanded us to know thee, that conceiving of thee aright, we might love thee with all our hearts, fear thee in all our actions, and serve thee with our best endeavours. Why madest thou Man with his Face erected towards the Heavens, when Beasts walk groveling upon the Ground, un∣less thou hast ordained that all Eyes contemning Earth as tram∣led
under Feet, should stand open towards the Skies, that our Souls through those Casements might behold the Starry out-side of the irmament, though but a dark reflexion of thy brightness, and might view in the Sus splendour a petty Embleme to lead us to the Infiniteness of thy Glory, and beautifulness of that new Jerusalem, in which thou crownest the Inhabitants with a perpe∣tual Day of Happiness. These Objects (O Lord) damme up the Muth of Wickdness, being sufficient though dumb Witnesses, to condemn the wilful ignorance of Senceless Atheists: Who be∣hold much Art in a costly Fabrick, and applaud not the skill of the Architector. Who sees exquisitness in any work, and is not forc'd to acknowledge the Work-mans perfection; and what Eyes can be so purblinded with folly and perverseness, as not to spell out in each Leaf of Natures Book thy Divinity? Open thou my Lips (O Lord) and my Mouth shall shew forth thy Praise. Of the Creation. THe beginning of all Created Substances was nothing, who but thou O Lord,Gen. 1.1. Infinite in Power, of no Materials could frame so vast a Chaos?Verse 2. Before each particulars composure, darkness, as a Canopy, covered the confused Lump of intermixed Bodies, when by thy Word (O Father of Light) was light created,Verse 3. the happy Morning to so great a Night;Verse 6. the huge Concave of the Firma∣ment being the purest extraction of that gross heap is made to Circle the Earth,Verse 7. separating the Waters above from those below by thy Command.Verse 9. Where was the naked Earth visible, when the Waters covered the Face thereof, untill thy will gave them both name, and bounds? How rude an object were the Towring Hill, and humble Valleys,Vers. 11. & 12. then destitute of thy Livery, their Ornament, until Grass, Herbs, and fruit-bearing Trees clothed them by thy Ordinance. When the Heavens wanted their Ornament, the Times and Seasons their Order,Gen. 1.16. and distinguishments, thou madest two great Lights▪ the Sun to Rule by Day, the Moon and Stars to Rule by Night;Psal 136.8. For thy Mercy endureth for ever. Were the waste Places of the deep inhabited, or the Regions of the Aire fath∣med,Gen. 1.26. before thy Power made the Seas bring forth all manner of Fowles, and Fish, even that Leviathan, whose Scales are his Pride, shut up together as with a close Seal, which by his neesing a Light doth shine,Job 41.15. and his Eyes are like the Eye-lids of the Morning, upon Earth there is none his like, who is made without fear? Did not thy Wisdome O God fill the Desarts with wilde Beasts, the Earth with creeping things?Job 40. Who made Behemoth, which moveth his Tayl like a Cedar? His Bones are as strong Pieces of Brass, his
es are like Barres of Iron, he is the chief of thy ways (O God) thou that madest him, canst make thy Sword approach unto him. What shall I say? Who can express thee, which art far beyond expression? I will conclude with the conclusion of thy Works, the ation of Man; In his Body rightly termed a little World, as ing a mixture of the four Elements, who can  e symmetry and proportion of each Member, and comlinss of ch part▪ so urious a structure, being only a i manon   Tenant as the Soul; in whose praise (which speak thy pise) I will only say two words, calling it according to thy Word, thy ge; What is Man that thou art mindful of him?Psal. 8.4. or the Son of an, that thou visitest him? Thou hast made him little lower an the Angels, and hast Crowd him with glory and honour; ou madest him to have dominion over the works of thy hands, ou hast put all things under his Feet: Therefore bless the Lod (O my Soul) all that is within mless his holy name;Psal. 103.12. bless the ord in all his works, in all places of his Dominion; bless the Lord O my Soul. Of Man's Fall, and of God's Mercy and Goodness in our Redemption. THe Object of misery, is mercy: Diseases if known, and felt,  often obtain remedies; when insensible maladies make Men glect the opportunity of recovery. Man's worst Disease is sin, iginally rooted in us in Adam, nourisht and made fruitful by our  actual transgressions; the feeling and knowledge of whi, st first make us witnesses and publishers of our dangers and  before God's mercy can be the prospect of our wretchedness,  goodness our healing. Wherefore (O my Soul) let thy follow∣ Meditations, triply divide themselves; First, behold what thou  in thy fall, with the fearful adjuncts thereof, that a true hu∣ation may make thee plyable to receive the happy impression  God's Seal. Secondly, what thou art through the mercy of  in Jesus Christ,Revel. 7. that thy heart being fraught with thankful∣ss, may praise him both in word and action. Thirdly, what  shalt be▪ The consideration of which may make thee perse∣ and press towards the mark, only Desiring to be dissolved,  to be with Christ. The judgments best evidence (to conclude the praise or dif∣ise of things) is by contraries;Mans misery by his Fall. therefore the view of our crea∣d happiness will most aptly confirm, and discover the infinite supportableness of our loss; which a particular demonstration will better illustrate, than a general surview. The principal parts
in the composure of Man, is a Soul and Body; of which the Soul as first in degree,The Souls Created Hap∣piness. so in our Discourse: The Heathens esteem'd the derivation of their Pedigree from famous Ancestors, their chiefest honour; some even coveting to line out their Originals from the shameful Adulteries of their imaginary Gods: but let us in looking back to our Souls Original, glorifie our Creator▪ one not  not fictitious, as theirs; but the God of Gods, the Lord of Lords.Psal. 136.2. Thus the Soul in its Creation hath its beginning from God▪ For in him we live, and move, and have our Beeing: Nay, Paul further adds,Acts 17.28. that we are his Off-spring. What Creature can be capable of more Honour, more Glory? The Soul is God's off-spring, not in respect of its substance, but its qualities, even so far forth as it was then adorned by him with Divine gifts; and there∣fore called his Image,The Divine Gifts of the Soul. in respect of the whole Man; but especially of the Soul, created of a spiritual and immortal Essence (as St. Augustine divinely glosses) consisting and endued with three su∣pream faculties; the Memory, Imagination, and Will: that these, yet but one Soul, might symbolize the Trinity in Unity. The Memory could not then be over-burthened, but like a constant good Soyle naturally received all Seeds of goodness, and returned them with a plentiful encrease. The Phantasie and intellect was as apprehensive, as the Memory trusty; like a mirrour as it were b reflection, discovering to the Souls sight, the highest of reveald mysteries; being then a fit perspective, to appropriate and distin∣guish all far distant and supream Contemplations: The will w constant like the Sun, in a course of goodness, and as a shadow followed the substance of vertue, bowing with Mordecai to  but God. Thus in respect of himself, was Man the Image of  Creator; behold him so in his domination over the Creatures, God saying, Let them have dominion over the Fish of the Sea, and  the Foul of the Aire,Gen. 1.26. and over the Cattel, and over all the Earth. As if he should say, He is my Likeness, my Vicegetent, you infe∣riour Creatures, obey him; but let him love, fear, and look only towards me. O inestimable favour, O unvaluable priviledge! and yet behold, not valued, neglected of Man; all Earthly object quickly satiate the sight, but who can sufficiently behold thee O Lord? Thus have we glanced over the Compendium of the Souls Happiness; a brief indeed, For who can express it at large? Rare objects are most attractive. The Eye of my weak Meditations hath so long gazed on this now Eclipsed Sun, that it hath almost forgot the Sphear wherein it is fixt, (the Body) then a Chrysta∣line Lanthorn fit for such a Lamp,Of the Body in the Creation. now a Prison of a twilighted Soul. Here needs not much illustration; we may guess at Hercules Stature by his Foot, but easily of his Foot by the rest of his Body.
God's works are all full of perfection, the whole Creation had not one lame part. In the Souls eminence, view the Bodies excellence: Man was Gods Image, not the Soul only; the Body was not God's Image in respect of its Forme (since he is invisible, incomprehen∣sble, and cannot be by us defined) but as it is the inferiour part of Man, and inseparable Companion of the rational Soul▪ so it also enjoyed a right in the same Attributes, and Priviledges, the ul then giving a Majesty to the Face, and being made more plendent, by the fellowship and harmonious marriage with the dy; the Body being necessarily most obvious to be imployed  all terrene and inferiour actions, as the other in Heavenly Conmplations. Thus with comfort have we gazed upon Man, glo∣ous in his Creation, as the Sun ascending from Earth; 2ly. (As  object to move a religious gratefulness) shining in his Meridian of Happiness; Let us now in the third place (with shame and con∣sion of Face, and hearty humiliation of Soul) behold him sitting  darkness, quenching his Light in the Ocean of sin, and misery.Of Mans Fall. Which declining subject, that we may more clearly perceive, Let  first consider the causes of our loss; 2ly. The fall, or act it self; dly. The fearful effects of so cursed a breach. Almighty God ving Created the great World, and lastly, Man as an Epitome  the whole, Plants a Garden,Gen. 2.8. therein placing him both to be a esser, and Surveyor of those rarities; that with pleasure each ce might view in their Nature, the Wisdome; in their Forme,  Power of his Creator: The merciful Lord makes him, and ves him a Free-holder in this Eden, this Heaven upon Earth, ly reserves to himself this small Royalty, the two Trees, the one  Life, the other of good and evil, in the midst of the Garden:  we may see it included in that first and general deed of gift elivered to Adam; And the Lord God commanded the Man,Gen. 2.16. ying, Of every Tree of the Garden thou mayst freely eat: But of he Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it;17.  in the Day that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely dye. O all command, O easie Yoke, O the free and infinite mercy of hee, O Almighty Creator! What? hast thou made Man, and  the World for Man, and yet for all this, tyest him to no more vitude, than the obedience of one sence, Thou shalt not eat? O retched Adam, Why didst thou entertain such a cursed credu∣lity? believing rather thy Slave, than thy Lord; an inferiour Crea∣ure, before thy Creator; the Father of Lies, before the Truth it self. Was thy free judgment thus soon captivated? (Lord leave not us weaklings to our selves, but magnifie thy power in our im∣becility:) Surely, unhappy Man, had not ambition and infidelity Eclipsed the apprehensive brightness of thy understanding,Jude 1.6. thou
mightest have made thy Ring-leaders fall, a mirrour to view thine own in. O blindness! the more blame-worthy, the less to be pittied,  self didst both willingly, wilfully, and speedily occasion  thy gracious God imprisoned all thy sences within his  command, all Judgments would have condemned thy un∣grateful disobedience; how much more blameable art thou that mightest have viewed it, toucht it, and delighted thy self with the fragrancy of that pleasant Fruit eternally without offence, and ye still desirest more, even to tast thy Death. O bitter sweet! sweet in thy deceitful expectation, bitter in thy accursed fruition. O behold now what knowledge thou hast obtained! thou knowest now the good thou hadst, and hast lost; the evil thou didst want, and now enjoyest: Momentary was thy imaginary pleasure, cer∣tain, and eternal thy procured curse: O the Childishness of Man's perfectest age!The fearful effects of Mans Fall. which sold the little World, himself, the great World about himself, for such a knowledge which made him know good, not more, but less, by knowing evil: All things that are good in themselves, in their first enjoying, gain from us most estimation; but Man, here blest with the fruition of all happiness, which joyntly met in him as in its Centre, undervalues it even in the first possession; exchanging pleasure for pain, knowledge for ignorance, Paradice for Hell, and Life for Death. But what nee is there of my weak descriptions, in delineating the lamentable  of Man's fall? Since, if every Christian would but deal faithfully with himself, and retire into his own Soul, viewing it in th state of Unregeneration, he might in that too lively Picture of dd Adam, learn the chief point of wisdome, to know himself. I appeal to the witness of thy Conscience, O Christian Reader, whither thou findest not naturally the Supream faculties of thy Soul, the Enemies of God, and goodness, the bond-slaves, and willing Vassals of sin and Sathan; the parts of thy Body, the Mem∣bers of wickedness, and ready Instruments of ill. Is not thy me∣mory a magazine of evil, unhospitable to goodness? Thy imagi∣nation and intellect, like the Northern Seas frozen with ignorance, to whom the Sun of wisdome gives so dim a Light, that thy highest knowledge, is to know thou knowest nothing. Is not wick∣edness the Centre of thy will, towards which it moves with a na∣tural swiftness, all holy motions being contrary to its course? Lastly, do not generally the parts of the whole Man, which did before by their concordance, and harmonious obedience, so sweetly express the due praise of the most glorious Creator, now rebelli∣ously jar, with a hideous and cursed confusion? But what need these questions? I would to God every Mans unhappy experience did not affirm, and ascertain this truth: as there is none free from
Death, so none from sin, the cause of Death: we all alike come into this World, all suck in corruption with their first breath; no sooner have our Souls a Beeing, but they are in a deep Consumpti∣on; so that our life is but a continued dying, a Prologue of Death, according to that of Job 1.21. Naked came we into this World: naked of goodness, as well as Clothes, and naked shall we return again, except thou cloath us to Christ: our beginnings, our foun∣dations are laid with untempered morter, Can then our after∣works be unlike the Original? We must all say with David, In in hath my Mother conceived me, and I was shapen in iniquity.Psal. 51.5.  the Root evil, and can the Fruit be good? Is the Fountain bit∣er, and can the streams be sweet? Do Men gather Grapes of Thornes, or Figges of Thistles? Hath Adam fallen,Mat. 6.16. and was ac∣cursed, and shall his Off-spring stand, and be justified? No, as∣suredly There is none good, no not one, we are all wrapt up in the same condemnation: O wretched Man that I am,Rom. 7.24. who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death? I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Let us now, having waded in the gulph of  miseries, from that depth, behold the height of Gods mercy. y mercies O Lord are great, and reach unto the Heavens,Psal 57.10. and y truth unto the Clouds. Thou hast delivered my Soul from ell, my Body from Death, thy Mercies are above all thy Works, onderful are they, Who can express them? This World is a Monarchy, the great Emperor thereof is God, no admits of no Equal, nor Partners in his Government: Kings, rinces, and all things else, are either Subjects, or Subject to m; nay more, his Creatures, For by Him were all things Created hich are in Heaven, and which are in Earth, things visible,Col. 1.16. and invisible. Crimes of the highest nature, are only accounted Trea∣ons in terrene States, but the least breach of those general Sta∣tes, enacted by the Earths great Law-giver, is not only Capital,  infinitely punishable: had Man offended either his Superiors,  Angels, or his equals, as Man; it had been possible to have re∣conciled the one by submission, the other by satisfaction: but ha∣ving trasgressed the Commandement of God, no created, and nite substance can repair his ruines; for infinite is his Justice, in∣nite our sins, and consequently infinite our punishment. Thus wretched and miserable are we in our selves, by reason of our all; and thus destitute of redress from others, by reason of the reatness of our fault, and unrecoverableness of our loss: and stly, O Lord, do we deserve to be so, since wittingly, willingly, and wilfully we made our selves so.
Of Man's Redemption by Christ. GOD is both infinitely just, and infinitely merciful: as his Mercy hinders not the Execution of his Justice, so his Justice bounds not the extent of his Mercy. Man is here infinitely indebted to God, and utterly unable to pay. God's Justice requires payment, his Mercy places his Son as principal in the Bond, who fully satis∣fies his Justice, and repeales the Judgment pronounced against our Souls and Bodies. O gracious Father, in this thy Son, our Savi∣our, the Lord Jesus Christ. Thy love is infinite, like thy self, boundless as thy Divinity, and so ineffable, that the Tongues of Men and Angels are not able to express it. Mercy implor'd, hath its first motion or inducement from the suppliant; but thy mercy first beheld us, when we had no power to view thee, be∣ing blinded by Sathan; thy goodness raised us, when we were dead and buried in sin, and thy free love only procured thee to move in compassion towards us, who were moved through trans∣gression, contrary to thee: unvaluable and extraordinary gifts are assured (although silent expressions) of a fixed and ardent affe∣ction: But who O Lord is able to value thy gift, to declare, much less apprehend thy love? Friendship is reciprocal, for a friend can no sooner exhibit any reality of benevolence, but, as it were, by reflection, he is presently apprehensive of the like from the re∣ceiver▪ though not in quantity, as being perhaps less able, yet in quality, as being not less loving. But O merciful Creator, thy love met with hatred, the very object of thy favour was thy Ene∣my, whom thou didst not reconcile with a gift, as fearing his power or ability to resist thee, since he was thy Creature, thy Pri∣soner, thy just sentence of Condemnation waiting but the watch∣word of thy will to execute him! O unexhausted Fountain of wisdome, there was no weakness or deficiency in thee, which (Man destroyed) might any whit disable or diminish thy work∣manship in a second Creation, since all thy works keep time with thy Word! What caused thee then, O powerful Maker, to give Life, where Death was due; Heaven, where Hell was deserved; Pleasure and Joy, where Pain and Torment was incurred! Why didst thou give mercy and forgiveness to Man, and denyedst it to Angels; honouring the Humanity with a Personal Union, which in Adam was a Traytor by Rebellion? Lastly, Why gavest thou thy only begotten Son to Death, that we might be thy Adopted Sons in Life.Eph. 2.4. Lord, my Soul shall answer with St. Paul; God, who is rich in Mercy, for his great Love wherewith he loved Vs, even when we were dead in Sin, hath quickened Vs together in
Christ, by Grace we are saved.The Mercies of God the Son in our Redem∣ption. O only begotten Son of the Fa∣ther, the Word by which all things were made; O light of the World, God equal with the Father in Majesty, why from such a height of Glory, didst thou descend to this Vale of Misery,John 1.3. for∣saking Heaven for Earth, making thy Foot-stool thy Throne, be∣ing included in the Virgins Womb, though the vast Universe can∣not comprehend thee? Lord, thy own Spirit can best express the reason of this thy wonderful humiliation. Jesus Christ came into this World to save Sinners. Behold, here God made Man; Lord,Mark 10.45. how low is the Foundation of thy Mercy laid? although the height reach above the Clouds, gracious Saviour, who doth not in this Mirrour of thy Love, perceive the powerfulness of thy Divi∣nity, as being the first and self-mover in this work of compassion? thy mercy having its first motion from thy self, according to that, thy own protestation made unto thy Children,Hosea 14.4. I will love them freely. But O my Soul, now thou hast viewed this beautiful Gate of the Temple with admiration, reverence, and affection, proceed, for the birth of thy Saviour, is but the beginning of his mercies. All Princes are but Vice-Royes, God only is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: Yet who amongst them is not welcomed into his Kingdome, with joyful Acclamations, and royal Solemnities? But loe here, not only the King of Israel, but the great Emperor of Heaven and Earth, born in Bethelem, the least of the Cities of Judah; a City, and yet affords no place, but a Stable, to lodge and entertain the Worlds Monarch; Heaven must point him out by a Star, Angels must preach him, before any of his own acknow∣ledge him; and then Shepheards are his Heralds to Proclaim him. The sequel, and after-story of his Life, is no less reproachfully miserable, than this Prologue of his birth. Poverty clothes Him with obscurity and affliction 30. Years; in which space, his very Infancy is not free from Persecution by Herod: witness those Inno∣cents of Bethelem, who suffered for him, who came to dye for them; he flying into Aegypt, from the wrath of Man, that he might undergo the anger of God, preserving himself not from pain, but for pain. O Lord, had thy Loves Foundation been laid in Earth, the hatred and ungratefulness of Man, might have ruined thy pro∣ceedings, and induc'd thee to have retrograded from thy purpo∣sed design; but behold the Root of thy Mercy was in thy Self, which brought forth the fruits of thy sufferings, thy love being natural, therefore immutable; none of thy grievous pressures were obscured from thy view, for thy praescience beheld, as present, all fore-past actions, and future events; so that thou wert not igno∣rantly, or contrary to thy will, overtaken by them; no necessity did enforce thee to undergo so difficult a Task, since constraint is
only prevalent in a finite nature; but thou art infinite, compre∣hending all things, circumscribed by nothing. Lord Jesus, let me admire, since I cannot express this thy love, and make me to love thee again in some measure, that thus hast loved me without measure. Here whilest my Soul, full of wonder, desires to stay and meditate, thy goodness leads me still forwards, and as it were reproves my lingring thus. O Man, bound not thy thoughts pro∣gress with the first mercies of thy Saviour; to wit, that Light shined in Darkness.John 1.5. The Word became Flesh; yea, that the life of all things received life, and the Son of God became the Son of Man: behold, more misteries of love not regarded, the Creator rejected of his Creature;John 1.11. He came unto his own, and his own re∣ceived him not. He who ordained Holes for the Foxes, Nests for the Birds of the Aire;Mat. 8.20. he who measured the Earth as with a span, and clothes the Heavens as with a Garment; he who is a self-mo∣ving Sphear, whose Centre is every where, whose circumference is no where; He, even the Saviour and Creator of Man, hath not amongst Men whereon to rest his Head. O admirable and uncon∣ceivable humiliation, of greater force, because not enforced; free∣ly, not reciprocally undertaken▪ being therefore of infinite merit before God, and worthy of Man's eternal acknowledgment; what could Man suffer, which the Son of Man did not undergo? nay, what anger, torment, punishment, or affliction, could an infinitely inraged Deity inflict, which God made, Man did not endure? for behold, no sooner doth this Son of Righteousness, whose light is in himself,Luke 2.32. arise to be a light unto the Gentiles, dissipating the mists of Superstition and Ignorance, the morning of the Gospel succeeding the Evening of Idolatry, no sooner did he appear to the glory of his People Israel, dispersing those Clouds of Cere∣monies, which Vail'd the mercy Seat, but that present Genera∣tion, prefering Darkness before Light, interposed unbelief to E∣clipse his splendour: witness John 3.19. And this is the Condem∣nation, that Light is come into the World, and Men loved Dark∣ness rather than Light. Also, they retorted the beames of his Priestly Office,Luke 5.21. saying, None but God hath Power to forgive Sins. They shuned the Light of his Gospel-Prophesie and Teaching; witness that loving Lamentation, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets,Luke 13.34. and stonest them that are sent unto thee; how often would I have gathered thy Children together, as a Hen her Brood under her Wings, but ye would not! Lastly, they denyed and rejected his Dominion, with that abnegation, We have no King but Caesar.Joh. 19 15. Lord, were the Children of Israel so severely punished,Num. 16.47. 2 Mach. Chap. 3. for repining against Aaron, though but a igure of Thee? Was Heliodorus so suddenly and fearfully tormented for
resisting the High Priest? And doest thou, who thus revengedst, and defendest thy substitutes, whilest thou wert in Heaven, as being the summe of all Figures, the substance of all shadows, and an E∣ternal High-Priest, according to the Order of Melchizedeck:Heb. 5.10. I say, dost thou now, being on Earth, neerer to their reproaches, and yet not further off from thy power, pass over their iniquities, suffering thy self to be crucified by them, whom thy Justice should have crucified, to be sacrificed by the wrath of them, whom thy anger (hadst thou come to destroy,Luk. 9.56. not to save) should have sa∣crificed? Was Noah, Lot, Moses, Elisha, all Prophets, all Types of Thee,2 Pet. 2.5, 6, 7. by thee aided and made victorious over their unbeliev∣ing and insulting adversaries, and why dost not thou, O Lord, of all Prophets, being now thine own Orator, and yet despised,Numb. 16.32. de∣molish Corazin, or Bethsaida, with other Cities of Judea,2 King. 21.24. either by Water or Fire? O Lord, thou art still the same God: then thy Justice was manifested, but now thy mercy is magnified, as ap∣pears by that Deploration over Jerusalem,Luke 13.34. where the Floods of Waters are now converted to an Inundation of Teares, the Fire and Brimstone to love-burning, and pittying sighes: though some murmuring, ask, From whence hast thou this Authority? others blaspheming, make thee a Sabbath-breaker,Luke 20.2. John 9.16. Luke 11.15. Mat. 11.9. and esteem thee as a Conjurer, a Glutton, a Wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and Sinners; yet hast thou not now a devouring Gulf for such Repi∣ners, Teeth of wilde Beasts for such calumniating Blasphemers, unless we behold that one alone bottomless Gulf of thy mercy most extended, and most deep, even to Man in the depth of his misery▪ Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.Luke 23.34. O Christ, Did fear dead thy revenge due to those Sinners against their own Souls? No, fear is a duty of the Creature ruled by thee, not over-ruling thee; Passion is incident to inferiours, and there∣fore below thee, which hast no Superior: Did want of ability smo∣ther thy anger? No, thy Power is not extinguished, no less than nfinite, although in thy humiliation clouded, during thy pleasure. Lord, why did those many Legions of Heavenly Souldiers suffer thy Enemies to carry thee, their General, away Captive? those Bonds, which could not resist Sampson's force, fetter the Armes of thee the Almighty, who gave him strength; those Nailes fasten thee to the Cross, who wert as able to deliver thy self, as thou wert willing to suffer. O Saviour, my thankful Soul, by way of confession, replies thus, The unmeasurableness of thy love pati∣ently swallowed up all these contumelies and reproaches; for love instead of revenge, thou forgavest thine Enemies; instead of call∣ing for power to destroy Man, thou proclamedst his Salvation; cry∣ing out, It is finished: the Angels,John 19.30. when thou wert attached by
Judas, although within thy Call, must only be admiring Witnesses of thy Patience, not Executors of those Traytors. Lastly, thy Mercy only manacled thy hands, and nailed thee to thy Cross, making Thee a Transgressor, by the bearing of our Sins, that we might become righteous, through the Imputation of thy Me∣rits,1 Pet. 2.24. according to that of Peter, Who his own Self bare our Sins in his Body on the Tree, that we being dead to Sin, should live in Righteousness, by whose Stripes we are healed. These things, gracious Saviour, yea infinitely more, hast thou done for us; which since we cannot apprehend, let us with reverence admire, rejoycing that we have view'd thee in thy Birth, to be our Kinsman, in thy Life our Example, in thy Death our Saviour, after Death our Resurrection, and Glory, Lord, what art thou not unto us? a Balme for our Wounds, a Laver for our Souls, a Sacrifice for our Sins, and the Life of our Death. What hast thou not suffered for us? Wert thou not humbled in thy Birth, persecuted all thy Life, and though innocent, adjudged to Death, that our Nature might be exalted, our Life enlarged, our Guilt acquitted? Wert thou not scourged, disrobed, Crowned with Thorns, lifted upon the Cross, derided, athirst, forsaken, and slain, that we might be delivered from the Judgments of thy Father, clothed with thy Righteousness, Crowned with thy Glory, lifted up into Heaven, freed from the mocks of Sathan, satisfied with the sweet draughts of thy Love, received of thee for ever, to Live Eternally? What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits towards me?Psal. 116.12. I will take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon his Name, saying, Glory be to God in the Highest,Luk. 2:14. Peace on Earth, good Will to∣wards Men: Praise, and Honour, and Glory, and Power be unto Him that sitteth on the Throne,Rev. 5.13. and unto the Lamb for evermore. Soli Deo Gloria.
A Concluding Prayer. O Eternal, Infinite, and Everlasting God, by whom all things were Created, that are made, and in whom we Live, Move, and have our Beeing; I, thy poor Creature, humbly beseech Thee to deal graciously with me, thy Servant, pardoning all my Offences, and passing by all the errors, wants, and imperfections, committed in these my feeble Me∣ditations. O Lord, I praise Thee for thy favourable assistance of my weakness, ever confessing thy geat Goodness in my Creation, the Pride, Incredulity, and Weakness of my Nature, in Man's Fall, and thy Infinite Mercy in my Redemption. O let the one rejoyce me, the other humble me, and the last make me obediently thankful in the observant performance of all thy Commands; that so I may glorifie Thee, which is the end of my Beeing, repent, and believe in Thee, who art the Resurrection of my Fall, and live with Thee Eternally which is the Compleatment of my Salvation, and fulfilling of my Hope, which is fixt in Jesus Christ: To whom with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all possible Praise, Obedience, and Thanksgiving, now and for ever. Amen.
Vpon several temporal Mer∣cies, Provi∣dences, and Deliverances Graciously Vouchsafed, By the Lord, (Infinite in Goodness) To the most unworthy Author; And to many also of his neer Relations. E¦BEN¦EZER HETHERTO hath GOD helped me. 1 Sa. 7.12. Bethel; the House of God, Gen. 28.19. A Pillar of PRAISE Erected by An English JACOB unto the onely Infinite, Eternal, and Almighty JEHO∣VAH, in all Sincerity, Humility, Reverence and filial fear. Hallelujah. Eternal FATHER, Glorious SON, and Holy GHOST, Three Persons, but One GOD, in Essence, who the HOST Of Heaven and Earth did'st make, and art Goodness, Power, Justice, Truth, Love, Wisdome, Holiness; To Thee, with JACOB, — SAMUEL, A PILLAR I — ERECT, to tell All Future AGES, to thy PRAISE, Thy MERCIES to Me all my DAYES: Their's, like their Faith, was of firm Stone, Mine, weak, like Me, a PAPER One. O let thy Strength made Perfect be, In my Great — IMBECILITY. Two Mites, Goats Hair, from Hearts most free, Are JEWELS, in Thy TREASURY: LORD, had I Men, and Angels Tongues, That KEY would be below the SONGS, Of THANKS-GIVING, I owe to THEE, For what in CHRIST thou did'st for MEE; From which Eternal Love, forth Springs The Temporal Mercies, which these Hymns Commemorate. O let Free — GRACE Be Adamantine, and my — BASE, And IRON-HEART, to THEE attract Seal'd by Thy SACRAMENTAL Act, So shall my Person, and these Sheets, Which I prostrate at THY blest FEET, Received be, as being PERFVM'D By thy sweet SPIRIT, and only Tun'd Unto thy Praise; and thy Great NAME, Be blest by ALL that read the same; Who shall, by Favours shew'd to MEE, Be mov'd to Love, and Trust in THEE. Accept dear Lord in Goodness what's here Thine, And in Thy MERCY Pardon what is Mine. Yea, Let this Humble Work, a future BASIS be, For SAINTS to raise Colums of Glory unto Thee.
—Place this afore Occasional Meditations, at Folio 347 AN EXHORTATORY EPISTLE TO THE Nobility, and Gentry of Great Britain. Right Honorable, NOble and generous Spirits of this famous Island: Whose Persons I truly love and honour, both as Christians, and of the same Nation with me; as also for your excellent wits, parts, and gifts; who equallize Tully and Virgil in Eloquence and Poetry; Witness your many Romances, Come∣dies, Tragedies, and amorous Works, now extant. O consider all you that are thus rarely accomplisht, both by Art and Nature, that you must shortly give an account of these deposited Ta∣lents; and of your mis-spent time, and stewardships, at the neer approaching Sessions, and Goal-delivery of your Souls, out of the Prison of your Bodies; and at the great Assize, the dread∣ful Day of Judgment, to our great God, and to the Lord Jesus the Judge of the quick, and the dead; Who hath made all things for his Glory, and the wicked for the Day of his Wrath. O will you not then blush for shame, and be confounded at what you now pride your selves in; when Sathan, your Maecenas, shall then be your Accuser, and produce as evidence against you, I∣tem, so many precious Hours lost, such high strains, and Veines of Witrun wast, such excellent Language defiled, and abused; and such, and such, a happy Muse ravisht, and debaucht: in the compiling, and publishing so many false, and unhallowed Legi∣ons, to stir up, and inflame your own Lusts, and the sleeping passions, and corruptions of the Youth of both Sexes, in these Nations; So many Stage-Playes, the Scoffers of goodness, and holiness of conversation; the Consumers of useful time, and of
the innate Virtue, Modesty, and Estates of all kindes of Persons; as also so many Frothy, and Airy amorous Verses, Ditties, and Songs, the Nurses and Panders of all manner of loosness, and uncleanness, in all sorts of People. Had these precious Stones, and Gems, these sparkling Dia∣dems (I mean your choice Indowments) been set in Aaron's Brest-plate, or been offered up as a gift to God, who gave you them; to be for the Ornament and praise of his Church, his Temple: How brightly would they have shin'd, as in their pro∣per Sphear, for which he created them; Whereas they are now by their fall, from their Heavenly Orbe, to this vile Earth, of sin and vanity; become like so many sliding Stars, which whilst they pass through the darkned Aire of corrupted, and deceived Observers, give forth a false Light, and suddenly are extinct, leaving behind them nothing but a corrupting Belly, and a Hell∣ish, and sulphurious stink, to the view, and in the Nostrils of all Divine Astronomers. Is it your highest honour to be stiled Christians? have you at your Installment in Baptisme, vowed, and promis'd, to resist the Devil, the World, and the Flesh? And will you by your wanton Poems, and vain Sonnets, offer Sacrifices to Sathan, the God of this World, and to his Idol, the World, and blot, and blur your sacred and glorious Title, and dishonour, and prophane that ho∣ly Name by which you are called? Hath the Lord Jehovah, your gracious God, and Almighty Saviour, who was the first great O∣rator, and Poet that wrote upon Earth; given you an unparal∣lel'd Example, by the Pen of Moses, in the whole Book of Deu∣teronomy, the very Marrow of Divine Eloquence, Deut. chap. 1. vers. 3. and in that Elixar of Poesie, that Song of the Lord's own composing; Deut. 32. to the end of the 43. vers? Hath his choicest Saints, lest you sublime patterns of Heavenly Poesie, Witness the Songs of Moses, and Meriam, Exod. 15. unto the 22. vers. and Psal. 90. Of Deborath, and Barak. Jud. 5. to the end; Of King David, 2 Sam. 22. from Vers. 2. to the end: Besides his Book of Psalms, upon divers subjects, witness also the 11. Psalmes of Asaph, beginning with the 73. Psal. and ending with the 82. Psal? The Psalmes of Heman, and Ethan, the Ez∣rahites, Psal. 88. and 89. The Canticles, or Song of Songs, written by King Solomon, besides One Thousand and Five other Songs; 1 Kings 4.32. The Songs written by the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 5.1. and Chap. 26.1. the Song of Habakkuk, Chap. 3. to the end; And in the New Testament, the Song of the blessed Virgin; and of Simeon, and the many Angelical, and Heavenly Hymnes, wherewith the mysterious Book of the Revelations, is gloriously imbroidered?
Besides these excellent Presidents, and Examples, the sacred Scriptures are full of Precepts, enjoyning and commanding this thankfull, chearfull, and singing temper, to be in all his Saints, in these words, and the like; Whosoever offereth praise, glorifi∣eth me; Psal. 50.23. O come let us sing unto the Lord, let us make a joyful noise to the Rock of our Salvation, Psal. 95.1. The like, Psal. 96.1. & 98.1. Praise the Lord, for it is good to sing praises unto our God, for it is pleasant, and praise is comely, Psal. 147.1. In the New Testament we are command∣ed to rejoice ever-more. 1 Thes. 51.6. and to sing with Grace in our hearts, Psalmes, and Hymnes, and Spiritual Songs, Col. 3.16. In which holy exercise▪ our blessed Saviour hath given us his Example after his last Supper, Math. 26.30. And that bles∣sed Poet, and singer of Israel, that Man after God's own heart, King David; Who upon divers gracious providences, deliver∣ances and mercies, as well private, as publick, penned many Psalmes; As,Psal. 3. upon the occasion of his flight from his Son Ab∣solon, the slanderous words,Psal. 7. and treacherous actings of Cush the Benjamite, the Psalm of thanksgiving before mentioned for his many deliverances from Saul, and all his Enemies;Psal: 18. And at the Dedication of his House.Psal. 30. To these I shall add the Psalm pen∣ned by him, when he changed his behaviour before Abimelech, alias, Achish, King of Gath; His Song of loves, or commenda∣tion of Solomon's Queen, the Egyptian;Psal. 34. The Tipe of the Gen∣tile Church; his penitential Psalm,Psal. 45. when Nathan had been with him, after he had gone into Bathsheba,Psal. 51. his Poem concern∣ing Doeg's false accusation of Abimelech the High Priest, his Psalm upon the Ziphims, discovery of him to Saul;Psal. 52. Psal. 54. Psal. 56. Psal. 57. Psal. 142. Psal. 59. Psal. 60. Psal. 63. Psal. 72. Psal. 92. another when the Philistims took him in Gath; Also his two thankful Memorials of his deliverance from Saul in the Cave; and ano∣ther for his preservation, when Saul sent, and they watched his House to kill him; A third upon his Victory over Aram, Naha∣raim, Aram, Zobath, and against the Edomites; A fourth concern∣ing his abode in the Wilderness of Judah; to these may yet further be observed, the Song written for his Son Solomon, and his Psalm for the Sabbath Day. To these Scripture examples, which are indeed the very sa∣cred Rhetorick and Poesie of the Eternal God the Holy Ghost; lest you should think it too high presumption to write after so rare a Copy; Let me remember you of, and set before you also, s so many laudable, and excellent Patterns, a few of the many famous Works of our own Country-men; such as the divine, and eloquent Contemplations, and occasional Meditations of Doctor Hall, Spencer's Fairy Queen; Deveout Hrberts sweet guards,
and honest Wither's Poems; which are as so many eminent Pi∣ramides, of white and black Marble, whose tops point towards Heaven as glorifying God, as their chief aime, and end; and whose substance, and Basis, shall as their living Monuments, stand fixt and undemolish upon Earth, to their perpetual honour; and as eaching Pillars, to Posterity for ever. Here possibly some of you may object, that you are to seek of subjects to imploy our parts, and gift upon, to the glory of God, and the good and Instruction of your Brethren. To whom I answer; View, and contemplate the wonderful Works of our Almighty and most wise Creator, in the vast Ca∣nony of the Heavens, and the large Globe of the Earth, and Seas; and you shall finde matter enough, for all the Tongues, Pens, and gifts of Men, and Angels; Be not like the bruit Beasts that remain sensual, and dumb in the midst of wonders. Are you professedly Christians, and shall that great and glorious sub∣ject, the admirable and stupendious work of your Redemption, by the Lord Jesus Christ, God-Man, the Saviour anointed, the Mysterious work of the Incomprehensible Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; the Eternal God blessed for ever, a work a∣bove all expressions and conceptions; yea, above the praises of holy Saints, made perfect, and glorious Angels; wherein is held forth, (if ever you hope to be saved from Hell, and endless tor∣ments) your free, and eternal Election, by God the Father, to everlasting Life,1 Pet. 1.2. Rom. 15.16. Rom. 5.1, 9. 1 Pet. 1.3. Col. 1.6, 8.  27 Rom. 3.. Rom. .32. Rom. 5.18. Rom. 8.4. 1 Cor. 1.30. Rom. 5.10. Joh. 1.1.25.14. Heb. 1.23. and Glory; your effectual calling, and sanctifi∣cation by the holy Spirit, your free Justification by the alone righteousness of Christ, and ravishing lively hope of a never end∣ing happy, and blessed state, in the highest Heavens: The bles∣sed fruit, and effect of the infinite▪ and free love of God, of the unvaluable Righteousness, Merit, Death, Passion, Satisfaction, and continued Mediation of Christ our Lord; that Person who is God, in our Nature, the eternal begotten and beloved Son of the Father, the brightness of his glory, and the express Image of his Person; I say, shall this Miracle of divine love, this wonder of wonders, these your chief, and greatest concerns, together with its most beautiful attendants, Faith, Hope, Love, and the rest of the holy Image of God in you be slighted, forgotten, and not thought worthy to be the subject of your choicest Ora∣tory and Poetry, and of the best of your gifts, wit, and parts; (O Jewish Ingratitude) shall a Heavenly Host of Angels, (much less concern'd than you) begin, give, and leave you a pattern, in that short,Luk. 2.14. but full Anthem, at our Saviour's Birth; Glory be to God on High; on Earth, peace; good will towards Men? And will you be still wickedly, yea brutishly unthankful, and not
follow their holy example; shall not the French Druids, and our own British Bards, stand up in Judgment against you, at the last Day? But possible some of you will say, you are as yet but Babes in Christ, and your Muse cannot as yet mount so high, as these sub∣lime Misteries: to whom I answer; Is not the large Mapp of God's great, constant, and marvellous providences, actings, and deliverances, towards his Church in all Ages, even from the be∣ginning of the World, until this Day, spread before your Eyes in the sacred Scriptures of truth, and in Ecclesiastical, and other Histories? Yea, in your own Nation, in this our Age of wonders? All which, in honour, and gratitude to God, and the edification, and encouragement of his Church, calls for from you, in Imita∣tion of God's Saints in former times, (as hath been afore decla∣red) many Triumphant Arches, Pillars, and Monuments of praise; both in Prose, and Verse; never to be worn out by time, or thrown down by the Malice, and slanders of traducing Persons. But probably, some of you, may be Politicians, and time-ser∣vers, and therefore (although convins't of your duty) think it neither prudent, nor safe to discover either your Religion, Judg∣ment, or affection. To such, that like Naman, to the Prophet Elisha, say, God be merciful to me in this; I cannot say, go in peace; but this I will say, that Ingratitude includes all other sins against God, and Man; (Si ingratum, dixeris Omnia dixeris;) Wherefore that all such may convince, and Judge themselves, notwithstanding all these Excuses, and subter fuges; Let me ask them this question; Have you from your birth, until now, re∣ceived no mercies, nor blessings from God to your Souls, to your Bodies, or to your Relations? No recovery from spiritual or bo∣dily Diseases, nor deliverances from spiritual and corporal ene∣mies, and dangers? no blessings, temporal, spiritual, and eternal; no gracious, and extraordinary providences to you, or yours? If then you cannot deny, but must acknowledge to have received from the Lord, many favours of this Nature, O may I not say of the most of the English Nobility and Gentry, as once our Saviour of the Ten Leapers, Were there not Ten cleansed, where are the Nine? Only One returning to give thanks. Wherefore lest your unthankfulness, mud and stop up the stream of God's mercy to you, and the Nation for the future; and since it is God's commands, the practise of God's Saints, and your duty, as Crea∣tures, and Christians, to be Praisefull; Yea, lest your Talents be taken from you, and given to others, and you receive that most terrible Sentence, declared by our Lord at his return, to the unprofitable Servant, that hid his Talent in a Napkin; Bind him
Hand and Foot,Mat. 22.13. and cast him into everlasting Fire. O let that fearful Declaration, like a Thunder-clap, rouse, and awaken you out of your sleepy sloathfulness;Rom. 13.12. the Night is far spent, the Day is at hand, even of your Judgment, and mine; Wherefore walk as Children of the Light,Eph. 5.8.16. and Husband that Inch of your Life, which is behind, redeeming the time, because the Days you live in, are evil. Stir up the Grace that is in you, meditate of, and contemplate the ineffable excellencies, and attributes of our In∣comprehensible God, as they are manifested in his glorious act∣ings, and the fore-mentioned particulars; Pen, Publish, Print, to this, and future Generations, his wonderful works and praises: So shall you be Angelical Heralds of his Glory; Grandize, and Ennobilize your Nobility, dignifie, and hononourably perpetuate your Gentility: And not like most of the preceding Peers, and Gentry of this Nation, (which is worth your observation) have like them your Names written in the Dust, and buried in obli∣vion: O joyn then with Angels, and Ark-Angels, and all the Triumphant, and glorified Saints in Heaven; in spiritual, and divine Hallelujahs here, and you shall certainly sing your part with them, in the blessed Chore of Glory, to Eternity. Right honourable, and renowned Gentlemen; as I have pre∣sum'd to present and direct this weak Piece to your view, so what I have above written in Zeal to God's glory, and unfeigned love to your Souls, shall be my Apology to the following subject: As that my end therein is primarily the glory of God, whose praises is my duty, as well as his command, to exalt in my own Soul, and others, as hath been declared, and to perpetuate, as much as in me lies, to my Posterity, and to all future Genera∣tions, what great, and free love, mercy, and goodness, he hath shewed to me, and mine; herein endeavouring to imitate the Holy example of that Royal Psalmist King David, who hath thus in Verse exprest both his resolution and practise; Come un∣to me all ye that fear God,Psal. 66.17. and I will tell you, what he hath done for my Soul: (I say for my Soul) as may appear in some degree, in the alluzions, and applications in several temporal mercies, and personal deliverances, commemorated in this Book; I acknowledging to Angels, and Men, that God's Fatherly love in Christ, and care of my poor Soul, in supporting, preserving, and delivering it from Sin, Sathan, and the World; my mighty Adversaries, and from innumerable spiritual evils, and tempta∣tions; Do as far transcend (to the glory of his free grace be it spoken) my temporal and corporal deliverances, and mercies, as the Heaven is above the Earth, and my unvaluable Soul, is more precious, than this poor Hut of Earth, I sojourn in.
Here possibly, some great Men, or rare Wits, who (Eagle-like) soar far above my mean parts and gifts, may uncharitably sen∣sure, and object, (to say no more) What doth this poor Man's Personal, or spiritual mercies, and deliverances, concern us? To such, I answer; Are you Christians, and fellow-members of Christ's Body, and will you not weep with those that weep, and rejoice with those that rejoice? As God commands you?Rom. 12.15. Can you be living Members,1 Cor. 12. Vers. 18. until 28. although in the highest rank in this spiritual Bo∣dy, and not sympathize, and be affected with the grief, or weal, of the lowest Christians, its Feet? O take heed, lest such pride, and insensibleness, declare you to be no living Member of one Church; However, I am assured, all those that fear God, now, and in Ages to come, shall read with delight, rejoice, and praise God with me, for his gracious providences and merciful deli∣verances, recorded in this following Treatise; Which I although cloathed in a plain and low stile, in the Opinion, it may be of some carping Momusses, and over-curious Criticks, whom no∣thing will please, but what's their own, or what is like (Sphynkes Ridles) to be understood by a few; Or that is not imbroidered with humane strains of Wit, and Eloquence, or bumbasted, and imbossed with affected praises, and needless Epithites. For my part, I have not endeavoured to humour such; nor to drown matter in words, but without affectation, vaunting, or racking in Prose, or in Verse, I have desired to keep to my own Genu∣ine, and natural Dialect; And to be understood, rather than to be so obscure, as to need a Comment; What you finde is good herein, it flowes (although through my Leaden Pipe) from the Spirit of the Lord, the unexhaustible Fountain of Grace, and goodness; what is incongruous or evil, it is the sinful slime, and filth, which naturally cleaves to every humane Aquaeduct, (except the Holy Scripture) (Nam Humanum est Errare) which being in voluntary is pardoned by the Lord, I doubt not of yours; unless, I should be so uncharitable, as to think you disdain to imitate so Divine a Pattern. To conclude, my Lords, and Gentlemen, I confess I was hearti∣ly grieved for my own, and your great ingratitude, (when up∣on a diligent inquiry, I could finde few, or none, (Monuments, or Returns) of this Nature; although I am assured, all of you are vastly indebted to our great and gracious God, for number∣less, spiritual, and temporal blessings, mercies, and deliverances; and which is worse, many of you have great Incomes given you by him, and to this end, of wit, parts, and gifts, with which you might, and ought, to make to him a just, and thankful repay∣ment; especially, since our liberal Heavenly Father, expects from
you, but his own Coin, lent you to improve, to his glory, and but a sincere, praiseful and declared acknowledgments for real, and unvaluable benefits. This serious and sad consideration of my own, and your sin∣full Omissions, stirred me up speedily (lest I should dye ungrate∣full) to Pen, and publish this Work, not only in discharge of my duty to the only great and glorious God, my loving, and merciful Father; But as an humble Essay, and Copy, for you to write by; which, if but any one of you follow, I shall rejoyce much, because such an one, hath received great good thereby, and the Lord by him, much glory; But if none, I shall weep in secret, for your Ingratitude: And have much joy, and peace, in that herein, I have done my duty to God, and to you; But I hope better things of you: In which charitable expectation, I subscribe my self, my Lords and Gentlemen, Your most humble Servant In the Lord, J. H.
OCCASIONAL MEDITATIONS. ARGUMENT. Vpon the Lord's most gracious Sustentation of Me, when I was Born a Moneth before my full time. Soliloquium, or Discourse. EVery extraordinary acting of Nature, is not only to be admired, but to be observed by us; wherefore, was I so over-hasty to be Born, which the wisest of the Heathen, accounted the bginning of their mi∣sery? Was I weary of my Eight Moneths Prison, and ambitious of a freer Place, and Air? Or was my heart more hot than others, and therefore soon∣er needed the refreshing fanning of my Lungs? Or was the Womb weary of such a sinful burden? or rather, did my loving Mother's affectionate longing to see, and enjoy me, occasion this Aborti∣on? was it weakness in her, or too early strength in me, that re∣laxt or brake in Pieces the silver Bonds of the Womb? was I by the care of the Nurse wrapt in the Skin of a Lamb, (as in a se∣cond Womb) to preserve, and renue my heat, and life? were some, or all these the natural causes of my unexpected Birth, and pre∣servation; yet it becomes me, as a Christian, to look far higher,
even to him, who is the cause of causes, the beeing of Beeings, Natura Naturans; God blessed for ever; whose Eternal Will and Decree was the first cause, the others, but secondary; Yea, he was the Midwife that brought me forth, thus sooner, into this World of sin, and misery; In sense of which my sad condition (as by a natural instinct (with all other Infants) the first thing I did, then, was to weep, and cry; How much more cause have I now, and that experimentally, with humble Paul, to cry out, O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from this bo∣dy of Death; and to sigh out this my Prayer, and spiritual Hymn unto the Lord? The NEW BIRTH. Ejaculation or Hymn upon the foregoing Subject. O Blest Creator, let my first Birth (be, A Figure of my second Birth to thee;) Sooner than many others: 'Twas thy grace, That fir'd my heart, during my youthful race, And caus'd me, seek, the free refreshing Gales Of thy blest Spirit, to cool, and fill the Sailes, Of its desires; That from the noisome Wombe, And dark some Jaile of Sin, I might become, A free-born Son to thee, and change my place, This Earth, for Heaven; the Birth of Sin, for Grace. 'Twas thy free-love, which did desire to see, (Blest Parent!) thy own Image, born in Me. That pour'd clean Water on me, washt away My Natures Blood, and stench, and didst allay, Ezek. 16.6.My shivering doubts, and feares by putting on, Thy Lambs warm Skin, the Imputation 1 Cor. 1.30.Of thy Sons righteousness, that from that heat, A life of grace might spring, and be compleat. Lord, since thou mightest have made my Grave in Wombe, Or by miscarrying, clo'd me in my Tombe; Or made my life, through sin, a living Death, A treasury of wrath. Let my new Birth, And life, bring forth to thee, the thankful fruit Of holiness; So shall I Retribute, Thy own in my poor Mite; and to thy praise, Live thankfulness, sincerely all my Days. Amen.
ARGUMENT. The REMEMBRANCER. A Psalm for the Lord's Day: Being my thankful acknow∣ledgment of the Lord's many Mercies to me, in my Forma∣tion, and Beeing. LOrd, who giv'st in mercy great, A seventh Day to meditate On thy works of Creation, Give me grace to think upon, Thy great goodness unto me, Who didst bring, From a nothing, Me, a something for to be. Next, that me thou hast not made, As frail Flowers, which quickly fade; Nor a Toad, a Dog, a Swine, Or a Creature Serpentine; But a Beeing rational, Fit to see, And to know thee, Great Creator of us all. That I was no Innocent, Organ-less Deficient; Nor a Monster from my Birth, Void of shape, a shame to Earth: Thus, and worser, had I been, But thy love, Was far above Such, thy just reward of sin. Thou art he, that gav'st me light, In a Land made free from night, Of dark Antichristian Mists, Pagans, and Mahometists; Where poor Infants with their breath, Sucking are, Infectious Air, Live a Life far worse than Death.
Here thou didst unto me give, In thy life, new life to live; Where so many love the Night, And with Owles, do hate the Light; Yea, like Fish in Jordan's streams, Swim with ease, Into dead Seas, Sleep, and perish, in false Dreams; Wherefore, Lord, upon thy Day, I will praise thy Name for aye; Till thy second Sabbath (blest) Gives to me Eternal Rest, Where from World, Sin, Sathan, free; I shall ring, And sweetly sing, Hallelujah's, out to thee. ARGUMENT. Vpon God's gracious deliverance of me, from the Infection of the Plague, when being a Childe, I was present in my Nurses Hand, at the Bed-side of one that was sick, and dyed thereof: whereby many of that Town were infected, and dyed. Soliloquium, or Discourse. CHaritable Visits to our Neighbours, many times prove un∣charitable to our selves; such proved this, of my self, Nurse, and others, to the sick Bed of the Vicar of the Town; by which the Inhabitants were infected, and ma∣ny of his Parishioners followed him, not only to, but into the Grave; whereof many were Children, Plants of my Age, and standing: Cruel Death, as an Enemy to time, and Man-kinde (Saturn-like) delighting to devour tender Babes, as well as aged Men, which his enmity, our good God converts to our good; that so being fore-warn'd, we might be fore-arm'd, and alwayes prepared to encounter him; as being both the most certain, and the uncertain Adversay. O my Soul, hath Death often by sickness, and danger, shaken
thy Glass, and lest Summons and Suppenaes at thy Door; and hath the great Numberer of thy Sands, and Days, from time to time, sent thee Repreeves, with King Phillip's Motto, written on the back-side of them; Mortalis es▪ Is more than three Quar∣ters of thy Years of Life, posted away, in Childhood, Youth, Man-hood, sin, and vanity; O let the small remainder with So∣lomon be thy Ecclesiastes, to preach this his experimental truth, to thy Children, and all following Generations. Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity and vexation of Spirit; that so thou despising all things under the Sun, mayst soar aloft, and enjoy that only chief good, that is above the Sun; thy God, in Christ, blessed for ever: to whom in a thankful remembrance of this great signal, and primitive mercy and deliverance, I humbly present this following Ejaculation, and thanks-giving. The ANTIDOTE. Ejaculation or Hymn upon the former Subject. FI lazie Soul! shall the Idolaters give, Vnto dead Marbles, praise? and wilt thou live Vnthankful? Shall God's Instrument, thy Tongue, Be tun'd to folly, not unto his Song? When in thy Youth, an ignorant charity, Led thee into Death's ambush; He stood bie, Could else, one, and the same, infectious breath, Presere thy Life, which brought to others Death? O in this mercy, greater mercies see, Death swallowing others, swallow'd up of thee! Lord, since in dangers, thou new life didst give, Let Souls anew, as well as Bodies live; That fill'd with praise, faith, hope, and fervent love; Heart, Tongue, may bless thee here, my Soul above. Amen. ARGUMENT. Vpon a dangerous fall from a Horse, when I was a Childe, whereby I received three hurts, one in the Head, another in the Arme, and a third in the Leg, and upon God's mercy in my recovery thereof.
Soliloquium, or Discourse. SInful falls are a just cause of falls under Judgments, my first fall in Adam (could my Childhood have pleaded innocency as to all other) deserved not only this, but that which is infinitely worse; a remediless fall into Hell. The indul∣gency of my Parents in satisfying my childish desires, and my too early venturousness, together with the much mettle and ill qua∣lities of my Horse, were the external occasion of this my sad disaster; which left me not only on the ground, and cruelly hurt, but for a time senseless; and only fit to be carried in a Coach unto my Fathers House, whose loving care prepared not only one, to set my dislocated Bones; but applyed Balsomes unto my wounds, by which means, through God's mercy, I obtained health, strength, and a perfect recovery. YOVTHS EMBLEME. Ejaculation or Hymn upon the former Subject. O Gracious God, and Father; let my sense, Be spiritualiz'd, and from each Providence, As Bees from Flowers, suck sweetness; then I shall Praise thee for greater mercies, by this Fall; Which was from thee, a milde Correction, For Adam's, and my own Transgression: For hadst thou judg'd severely, I had fell, Not only from my Horse, but into Hell. O Lord, me thinks, by this sad fall, and fate, Thou mind'st me of my Vnregenerate State, When I indulg'd my will, and rid upon A wanton Steed, my loose affection, Which gave me many falls, wounded my Head, My Reason-Faculties; yea, left me Dead, And hurt in Arm, and Leg, senceless, and mad, Vnfit to act, or walk upright. Thus sad Was that my Youthful State, when from above, Thou didst in thy Caroche, of Faith, and Love, (Dear Father) draw me home, and for my good, Balsom'd, and heal'd my wounds, with thy Sons Blood. O let those parts, which thou hast doubly cur'd, Be doubly thankful, and hence-forth impour'd,
To contemplate, walk in, and act thy will, Since real praise is, thy Word, to fulfill. Amen. ARGUMENT. Vpon God's gracious preserving of me from any harm, by Eight several Falls, from my Horse. Soliloquium, or Discourse. MY whole Life, O Lord, hath been a Circle, a Map, fill'd full with thy loving and extraordinary Providences; which should I at any time forget, I might justly de∣serve to be forgotten of thee. In these eight merciful deliverances, I bear witness, and seal to that great, and comfor∣table truth, the constant, and powerful Ministration of thy glori∣ous Angels, for the preservation of thy Children; according to those comfortable promises,Heb. 1.14. That thy Angels are ministring Spi∣rits, for the good of thy Elect; And that they shall hold them up in their hands, lest they should dash their Feet against a stone.Psal. 91.11, 12. Who else but they, (as thy blessed Instruments) did put under their Hands, and aleviate such, and so many down-falls, that they broke not into many pieces (such a Venice Glass as my frail Body) nor dislocated in the least, any of the many wheels of so curious a Watch? That is so soon, and easily put into disorder, as appears in the frequent, and sad disasters of others; that by such overthrows, have lost their lives, or the use of their Limbs. O Lord, great and special mercies, call for from me, great and singular praises; which after the example of the Man after thy own heart, I humbly offer to thee, in this Psalm, and thankful memorial of these thy many Preservations. The OCTONARY. Ejaculation or Hymn upon the former Subject. DEar Lord, our Sins, according to thy Curse, Have burthened Earth, and Creatures; yea, far worse. Our God, no wonder then, thy Subjects pay, Vengeance on them, that do thee disobey; And that the Horse, so oft, his Rider throwes, For to regain his Freedome, from such Foes;
Trampling them under Feet, that he might see That which is burthensome to him, Earth, thee. Eight times (O Lord) have I thus humbled, lain Prostrate; As oft, Thou hast me rais'd again, (In goodness) safe, and sound; O let these falls, Be, both from Sin, and Mercy, blessed calls, Remembrancers; The one, these dangers brought, And by the other, my Salvation's wrought; Blest Love, and Wisdome, that thus throwes me down To raise me up again, unto a Crown! Lord, let this close be the Eccho of that sound; Where Sin exceeds, thy Grace much more abounds. Amen. ARGUMENT. Vpon God's merciful Preservation of me from any Harm, when being a Childe, and alone in my Fathers Coach; the Horses running down a steep Hill, the Boot flew open, by a jolt in the way, and I was cast out of the Coach upon the Ground; and taken up without any the least hurt, or maim. Soliloquium, or Discourse. O Lord God, who hast been a gracious Father to me in my Childhood, as well as now, in my elder Years; How great cause have I to trust in thee continually; and to celebrate thy praise to future Generations? O that Men would praise the Lord for his goodness,Psal. 107.8. and for his wonderful works to the Children of Men. Although violent motions are not perpetual, yet are they very often hurtful, and destructive, as is evidenst, by the sad effects of Earth-quakes, Whirl-winds, and Hurricanes, Thunders, and Lightning;Psal. 148.8. yet all these, yea, Fire, and Hail, Snow, and Vapour, stormy Wind fulfilling (O Lord) thy Word, shall praise thee, and declare thy gracious Presence with thy Children;Exod. 14 21. as once in the Red Sea,Dan. 3.25.27. the Fiery Furnace, and now with me the greatest of Sinners, the least of Saints; yea, unworthy to be called thy Son; else, when I was cast violently out of a Coach, by a Jolt that forc'd open the Boot,Luk 15.21. the swifter and violent motions of
the hinder Wheels, had taken advantage of the much slower, and heavy motion of my falling Body, and run over, and broken my Bones, or pitcht me upon my Head, to the destruction of my sense, or life, as hath often happened by such accidents: But if an evil spirit was in the Horses, as once in the Gadarine Swine, which is frequently the occult cause, of such sudden and usual frenzies of Beasts: (although taken notice of, or observed, by few Persons) yet I am assured, O Lord, thy good Angels and providence was present to preserve me, from any hurt in so emi∣nent a danger: Wherefore with thankful David, all my Bones shall praise thee; yea,Psal. 35.10. those Bones which thou hast kept from breaking, shall rejoyce; yea, I will further record this thy great goodness, in this following Hymn, to all future Ages. The HURRICANE. Ejaculation or Hymn on the former Subject. THy Mercy Lord, is a continued Act, As well as is thy self; witness this Fact, Of Love, which doth succeed the four Last mention'd Blessings, ush'ring many more. O let my constant Praises, imitate Thee, in thy Daily goodness, that Ingrate, I may not prove; yea, let this Providence, Make me more thankful, as reminding hence, Thy higher favours; for my Soul hath bin, Shut up, and hurred in a Coach of Sin; My Flesh full-oft, in which my sinful Will, As Charrioteer, hath drove me down the Hill, Of Worldly Pleasures; on swift moving Wheels, Of raging Passions; (Steeds, whose Mouth neer feeles, Religious Bit;) Pride, Lust; This Chariot mov'd, With feerless speed; Till Grace, in thy Belov'd, Cans'd thee, as oft, to scotch it, on Some Stone; some blest affliction: By which, thrown out, cast down, upon the Ground; Thy Childe hath lain, as in a spiritual swound: From which thou still hast raised me, by the Arme, Of Mercy, and Me sav'd from lustful harme. O, let me run no more, in Sins career, But draw me to Thee, by thy Love, and Fear;
Nor suffer me, for to run down the Hill Again, of Earths delights; but let thy will Be mine; so shall my changed Soul aspire Heaven (like Elijah) in a Coach of Fire, True holy Zeal; letting my Garment fall, Of Sin, that thou mayest be my All in All. Amen. ARGVMENT. Vpon God's gracious preserving, and preventing me from falling, Horse and Man into a deep Pit, when I was riding in the Night (the Moon only shining) to a Horse-Race: when being upon the brink of it, I was stopt suddenly, by the Call of my Friend, that accompanied Me. Soliloquium, or Discourse. DAy unto Day, and Night unto Night, teacheth knowledge; Thy Mercies,Psal. 19.2. O Lord, are renewed to me every Morning, and thy Providences are circular, and without an end; therefore let nulla Dies be sine linea; no Day pass with∣out my thankful remembrance, and recording of thy many great, and undeserved mercies. Worldly, yea, too often sinful Pleasure, is the Dallilah, and flattering Mistriss of our Youth, so that slavishly, and unweariedly we court it Day and Night; else I would not have lost my sleep, nor travelled all Night, only to see such a transitory delight, as a Horse Race; where usually our precious time, our wisdom, and our Moneys, run faster away from us, than our Horses. The night of Ignorance, and the Moon-shine of Unsanctified Reason, is of all times most dangerous, to Youthful Travellers; who when they dream that they are galloping on the palfrey of Pleasure, towards Paradice, are, before they so much as think of it, upon the edge, yea, often fall head-long, into that bottom∣less Pit of Hell. Gen. 2.18.Lord, thy Word saith, It is not good for a Man to be alone, yet Experience teaches me also, that Companions in sinful Va∣nities are great Incendiaries; Thy merciful Providence, Lord, at this time mad'st my Companion in Vanity, the Instrument of
this great Deliverance; and also made thy Word good; for had not my friend, whose Elder Years and Experience gave him knowledge of the way, and danger, even in that instant of time, cried out, and stopt my career, I had unrecoverably fallen, both Horse and Man, into a deep and horrible Pit, even into Death. Wherefore, dear Lord, let me hence-forth never be alone, but let a truly enlightned Conscience, which is my best and intimate Friend, be alwayes present with me, especially in the Night of Temptation, to fore-warn me from falling into the dangerous Pit of Sin; which to all thine, is the Figure, as well as the de∣server, of the bottomless Gulph of Hell. Amen. The PIT. Ejaculation or Hymn on the former Subject. LOrd, in this Night-peece, there is drawn to Life, The Day-peece of our Youth, wherein most rife, It is for Vs, to travel in the Night Of Ignorance; and by the Moon-shine light, Of our unhallowed reason; After Sin, And Pleasures, till we fall,Psal. 143.7. are taken in Their Gulph, and snares;Rev. 9.1. how oft in Holy Writ Is Death, Hell, and Affliction call'd a Pit?Psal. 40.3. Yea, every Sin; especially a Whore, Which Man, and Beast, Soul, Body, doth devour;Isa. 24.17, 18. What cause have I, that in my Youthful Days, Have scap't these dangers,Pro. 23.27. for to render praise To Thee, Preserver of Body, and Soul, From Death, Hell, trouble, and from Sins controul?Isa. 30.21. Thou, went the Voice, behind me, that cryed stay, Avoid each sinful Pit; This is the way, Conscience thou also gav'st me, to fore-warn Me (as a trusty Friend) of every harm; Wherefore I offer Soul, and Body both, A living Sacrifice to thee; by Oath, Covenanting for to serve Thee, whil'st I live, That doest new Life, from Sin, and danger give.
ARGUMENT. Vpon God's merciful deliverance of me in Three great dan∣gers of Drowning, twice upon the River of Thames, and a third time in Rutland, when being a fishing alone, I slipt from off a Tree into a River. Soliloquium, or Discourse. O Incomprehensible Creator, and loving Father! how de∣lightfully ravishing, and comfortably supporting, is the Meditation, and experimental knowledge of thy gracious Omnipresence to thy Children! whereas the thought and belief of it, to the wicked, thy Enemies, is most terrible; for to all such,Heb. 12.29. our God is a consuming Fire. O Lord, thou art not only the God of the Mountains, and of the Vallies of the Earth,1 King. 20.28. but of the Rivers also; and hast been mercifully present to deliver,2 Cor. 11.26. and preserve me, as thou didst thy Servant David, and Paul, in Perils of Land, and in Perils of Water,Psal. 124.4. else had I sunk down into the deep Waters; Yea, the Floods had gone over my Head, and Soul, as well as in these three dangers, they fearfully washt my Body and Cloaths. In the two distresses upon the Thames, when the Water-men were all at a non-plus, thy only powerful providence, preserv'd, steer'd, and rowed me into safety; In the third, when my own Feet slipt and betrayed me, and the Tree I held by, broke, and fail'd me, thy Hand alone saved, and drew me out of a watry, muddy, and perilsome Pit. If every lesser mercy (O Lord) calls for a tribute of praise, how much more such as these, which are thy so suddain and op∣portune reprieves from Death; since it is a truth, although spo∣ken by the Father of lies,Job 2.4. Skin for skin, and all that a Man hath, will he give for his life. Wherefore since our lives preservation is the greatest corporal mercy, open thou my Lips O Lord, and my Mouth shall shew forth, in these Lines, yea sing forth, thy praise;Psal. 51.15. for three so great deliverances, in this following Psalm of Thanksgiving.
The TEMPEST. Ejaculation or Hymn on the former Subject. NOt humane Courage, Wisdome did direct, To use, or build, Boats, Ships; The Architect, Of these our floating Chariots, was the Lord, Who fram'd the Earth & Heavens; he by his word, To Noah first i'th Ark, a Pattern drew,Gen. 6.14, 15, 16. Vnparallel'd; that we might it renew, In little, which is now so often done, That in one, first, bold Drake, durst (like the Sun) Incircle Earth, and Seas; live and lie, Within an Intch of Death, and yet not die. Vpon a spawn of one of these, I plow'd The back of Themasies; when loe aloud, The Wind beats up a charge, on Sins old Jar, Retwixt these Elements; Renews the War: I interpos'd by chance, these Combitants, As strangers often fall into made Rants; By which rash act, the force, and strokes I bore, Of both; Magre two seconds, arm'd with Oares; Who spent, and wearied, gave up to the Wind, My wooden Fort; who entring us, to bind, And drive along;Thames jealous grew, Of such bold Seasures, claim'd us, as her dew; And enters with a troop of Waves, our Hull; Erects her watry Streamers, fills us full With churlish Billowes; ordering us to lie, In her deep muddy Dungeon, till we die. The Wind inrag'd with this affront, us tore From out her Bands, and drove us to the shore; Thereby declaring the third Elements right, To us her Subjects, as it were in spight Thus far, I take a Poet's liberty, To shaddow forth my danger. Now unty, O Lord, my Sailes, the affections of my Soul, That fill'd with thy free spirit, without controle, Of an unthankful calme, I may lanch forth, Into thy Sea of Mercy. praise thy worth; O Lord, my Soul ibarkt in Flesh, sailes in Continually a Sea of Lust, and Sin;
On which the Prince of th' Aire, that evil spright, Blowes, raiseth fearful Stormes by Day, by Night; Filling the Sailes of my Affections With evil Aires raising my Passions Like swelling Billowes; sometimes watry Waves Of Worldly sorrow, fills me; then the braves Of Earthly joyes, o're lades me, till a Train Led by mad Anger, casts them out again. Next in the Whirl pool of sad doubts and fears, My Bark is whirl'd about▪ neer drown'd with tears; But if a calme succeeds these stormes, then he Sends forth his Sirens (Women-like) to me, His Tritons errne Pleasures, and Delights; That harkning to their Songs and Charms, I might In such security▪ run foule upon The shelves of Lust▪ call'd Love, Presumption, And Prides high Rocks; or if I take not care, Be swallowed up in the Gulph of Despair. Lord, is it th experimentally, With my poor Soul▪ are all these dangers nie, Incumbent  me? during such sad stormes, Mat. 8.24, 25, 26, 27.Sleep not, dear Saviour; in me, command Calmes: Be thou my Pilot, Let thy Spirit Gales Joh. 3.8.Fill constantly all my affections Sailes; 1 Pet. 5.9.Let Faith, my main most hope, my Anchor be, Heb. 6.19.And all my Passions quieted by thee: So sall I scape all shelves, all Syrens charmes, All Rocks and Gulphs, as imbrac'd in thy Armes, Till that my ark brought in my Soul on shore, May praise thee both, for mercies evermore. Amen. The ANGLER. O Lord, thy third and great deliverance Of me from Drowning, (not the Lady chance, The wicked's Goddess) for my Tribute calls, Of Pise, deservedly, since such sad falls Have Coffin'd Men in Water, mud, and Death; Whereas, , thou gavest me a new breath; Even then, when Angling Tree, Hands, Feet betraid, And cast me in a watry Pit; no Aid Being neer, and I alone; then did thy Hand Double my strength and drew me out to Land.
Blest be thy Name for this, and what thou didst So often for my Soul; when that amidst Hr Angling after Worldly pleasures, she Did fall from her false Confidences Tree, Into the deep and filthy Pits of sin, And Vanity; a state neer perishing! Yea, when unto this dangerous fall, My Hands, Feet, Members, did contribute all; Then didst thou Lord appear to me, alone, And helpless▪ Renew'd grace, and heard'st my moane; Gave to my hand of Faith, thy hand of Love,Gal. 5.6. In Christ, to draw and lift me out above Such dangers, That with the wise Merchant,Mat. 13.45, 46. I May fish for gems, and the best Pearl buy. Lord, since in thee, both soul and body live, Accept these double Praises, which they give. Amen. ARGUMENT. Vpon a great Snow, and God's gracious deliverance of Me, and my Servant from being smothered, and lost, when many others perished therein, in our Travel, and return Home. Soliloquium, or Discourse. PRaise the Lord; Fire and Hail, Snow and Vapour,Psal. 148.7, 8. stormy Wind, fulfilling his word: what means this second deluge of Snow? burying our Iland (as it were) in an Alablaster Sepulchre; Why are the shewers of mercy descending in Earths refreshing Veins, through the cold of the middle Region of the Air? or rather, of our evil hearts, frozen and turned into Snow, into a Judgment; the Earth seeming to do Pennance for our sins and uncleanness. Is our Land become a Romanist, and Prelatick, that she Cloaths her self with, and so much delights in Surplices, and white Vestures? or hath the Sun (as in Heze∣kiah's time) reverted ten degrees, whereby our Northern tem∣perate Zone, is become a frozen Polar clime?2 King 20.10. Hath any Venetian Artist, that can make Glass malliable, in a few Hours christal∣liz'd the fluid Rivers, and hardned soft Snow, to bear without
sinking, the pulsation and burthens of Horse and Man? or are the Clouds turn'd Levellers, as having covered ditches and hedg∣es, the distinction of every Man's propriety; and turned the sur∣face of our Lands, into a Salisbury Plain; a Berry, as well for Sheep, as Rabbets? Whence was that faith and courage that spi∣rited me, upon the providential call of my necessary return home,Mat. 14.19. (like as Peter's walking upon the Water) to amble over; yea, gallop upon the hollow Snow, not fearing Pit, Ditch, or danger? whence all these Wonders, and above all, my Preserva∣tion; when so many perished, and were smothered, not in Beds of Feathers, (as by Tyrants some have been,) but in Beds of Snow? Are they not from thee, O Lord, the great Creator, and prime Agent in all the works, and admirable Prodigies of na∣ture; the only Saviour and Preserver of Man, and Beast, and of me,Psal. 36.6. thy most unworthy Servant? Who therefore desires Grace from thee, to exalt thee, and to perpetuate thy Praises in my own heart, and in the hearts of others, to all succeeding Gene∣rations, that shall read this Memorial, and sing this Song of Thanksgiving. The SNOWIE LANDSKIP. Ejaculation or Hymn upon the former Subject. LOrd, let my Souls Eyes open be, As well as Lips, to praise▪ That in each mercy, I may see Thy Presence all my Days. Thou wast my Guide, o're snowie Plains, Where was no track, nor way; Thou mad'st the sugarfied Rain, As solid as the Clay; On which I travell'd many Miles, In safety, without fear; O're Hedge, and Ditch, o're Gates, and Stiles, For thou wast with me there. Although I past o're many a Pit, Fill'd and smooth'd o're with Snow, Thou would'st not let me fall in it, Rom. 6 23.Though sin deserves a woe.
Yea, many perishing that Day, Were buried above Ground, Loosing their Lines, as well as way, Being choaked, smother'd, drown'd. Through all these dangers, thou me led, Secure unto my place, With goodness, as with Manna fed,Exod. 16.35. Thy Monument of Grace. O Lord, this World's a Ball of Snow, In Hand it melts away; Full of deep Pits, which overthrow, All those that go astray: Cover'd they are, also from sight, By Sathan, and Men's guile; With Snow (that is, pretence of right) White Devils most beguile.)1 Cor. 11.14. Wherefore, O Lord, let not my Eye, Be dazled with such light, But be enabled to espie, Their Pits, and works of Night. Let not my Soul, now travelling home, Venture without a Guide, Thy spirit and Word; nor walk (where none, Of thine have gone) aside. Nor let me ride o're Hedge and Ditch; I mean, the sacred Bound Of righteous Laws; which Devilish Itch, Whole Nations doth confound. Lord, let these Prayers, and Praises be, Accepted in thy Son; So shall my Soul, and Body see Thy great Salvation. Amen.
ARGUMENT. Vpon the Lord's Deliverance of Me, from a Company of Robbers, when I and my Servant having a great Charge of Money▪ was Way-laid by them, at my return home in the Forrest of Rockingum, about the Moneth of May. Soliloquium, or Discourse. IN the space of time, in which the Sun had almost twice mea∣sured the vast Concave of Heaven, and taken an exact and curious surveigh of both the Hemispheres of Sea, and Land; I poor slow Worm and Pilgrim, had only paced about thirty Miles towards my home; Rackt with my Journey, roasted with heat, and flowr'd over with sweat and dust; when on the sud∣dain, my way led me into a most pleasant plain, a second Tem∣ple or Arcadia, for delight and pleasure; to guard which, from the hot Invasion of the Sun, or the suddain irruption of Storms; stood round in Rank, and deep Filles, Armies of sturdy Oakes, over-lookt by their tall Chieftains, bauld-headed with Age; yea, some of them possibly free Britains, before the Conquest, and never since subdued, nor subjected; instead of the harsh and War-like sounds of Drums and Trumpets, there were elevated in their Armes (as being Dwarfs) several sets of Nature's Mu∣sitians, cloathed with coloured Liveries, of several sorts of Fea∣thers, after the America fashion; whose diversity, and sweetness of Notes, and Songs, warbled forth through living Cornets, and intrals; as much excells that of dead Sheeps Guts, as the ani∣mate, the inanimate; and Nature doth Ar, her Ape and imita∣trix: As for the Plain it self, which I may well call Nature's great Oval Table, because there she Daily teasted her Guests, and off-spring; it was most beautifully spread, as it were with a green Carpet of unshorn Velvet, imbroidred with many coloured and Gold like Flowers; For it was now about the Moneth of May the gladsome and concluding time of her anniversary Feast, in remembrance of her Creation; the Beasts we call wild, as though they had been metamorphized Acteons, and had still re∣tained his reason, seem'd tame, and civiliz'd, feeding upon her Varieties, cookt and prepared for them there, without intempe∣rance, or gluttony: But O, how short, and temporary are all Earthly delights, and refreshments! for no sooner was I cheared,
contented, and revived, (after about ten Hours travel with this new Scene of things, pleasant change, and sweet prospect) but the carreering of four Horse-men, issuing out of several quarters of the Woods, alarm'd me to prepare for an on-set, and to a∣light, with my Servant; that drawing our Swords, and cocking our Pistols, and backt by our Horses, we might not be surpriz'd, but secure our selves, and a considerable sum of Money: This our prepared vigilancy (as I conjecture) being at a neer distance, perceived by our adversaries, they stopt; united, and wheeled about, retreating into the Woods again; thereby encouraging us to remount, and to return that Night with safety home. But the true cause of this great deliverance, as being from thee, O Lord, is only known to thee; who struck the Sodomites and Syrians with an intellectual, rather than with an organical blindness, that thou mightest preserve safe, thy Lot, and Elisha;Gen. 19.11. and caused the numerous Army besieging Samaria,2 King. 6.18. for the sake of a few there; and to make thy Word good,2 King. 7.6, 7. and thy Power known, to be abused, and deceived also, by their other Sence of Hearing, and to fly, when none pursued them. How, and by what means, these Robbers were diverted, I know not: but this I know, that it is my duty, O Lord, greatly to praise thee, for this preservation, and to commemorate it to Posterity for ever; which, accept I beseech thee in this my poor Sacrifice of Thanks-giving, and never-dying Record, dedicated to thy Glory. Amen. The RESCVE. Ejaculation or Hymn on the former Subject. MY Life, from first to last, O Lord's, A Pilgrimage, a Journing tow'rds My home; few, evil, are my Dayes;Gen. 47.9. As wrackt with sickness, scortcht with Raies, Of Earthly and Coelestial Suns; Wearied with care, dusted, undone With slanders; sweating all my race, Vnder sad troubles and disgrace. Amidst these travels, thou didst please, Good God, to give to me some ease;
An interval, wherein I did A sweet refreshing take, and rid, As on a Plain, adorn'd with store Of Flowry blessings, green all o're With mercies; then I Brutes did see, Grown tame and civiliz'd by Thee; Yea there, encompast with thy Armes, I was from Sun, and other harmes, Secur'd; then did I often hear Musick, beyond that of the Spheres, Without, within me: But alas, This lasted not; for soon I was Assailed by a Troop of slie, Eccles. 6.12.And Hellish Thieves, powers in high Places; spiritual wickedness, Skilfully arm'd, none weaponless; One Fiend, as I remember well, Had Darts of Lust, inflam'd from Hell; Another, Bow and Arrowes on, Feather'd with Pride, Ambition: A third was arm'd Cappee, point Ve, With a Coat-Male of Avarice; The last, with Sword, and Lance; (excess Of Pleasures;) and Voluptuousness. O Lord, I bless thee, who didst then, And since, counsel, even when, I knew not how for to defend My Soul, and Treasures, from these Fiends, Thou didst advise me to dismount, From my own strength, and to account, Jam. 4.6.Humility, the surest Ground, On which to stand, and to confound These Robbers; yea, thou did'st prepare, And cockt my heart, full-charg'd with prayer, Eph. 6.17.Thou help'st me to draw out thy Sword, The Devil-daunting written Word; They thus repulst, fled, gave me space, For to proceed on tow'rds my Place Of rest, and peace; That Tower wherein, No fear of Sathan, World or Sin; The Soul and Body both, which thou, Didst, and dost still preserve, shall bow, Vnto thy Praise Eternally, Rom 8.37.And Triumph in thy Victory. Amen.
ARGUMENT. Vpon God's good Providence over me, and his Preservati∣on of me, from the Vices of the times, when I was left by my Parents to my liberty, and alone in the Cities of West∣minster and London, young, and about Seventeen Years of Age. Soliloquium, or Discourse. O How early, even in the Spring of my Youth, did sin and vanity bud, flower, and bring forth clusters of Sodom, and Apples of Gomorah! no sooner was I mounted for Lon∣don, (about the year 1625.) but a Troop of Lusts were on Horse-back also, ready to attend me thither; Viz. Pride, in a dis∣guise and Garment of neatness; Lust, in a light riding suit of love, and amorousness; Lying, in a divers coloured Coat of Com∣plement and good language; and Idleness, in a wide-made Suit, slasht, and open-sleeved of recreation; upon which, was a tra∣velling Cloak of friendly Visits: seventy miles as to my labour, seem'd but a short stage; but as to my longing desires, five hun∣dred; until I got a fight of the Southern constellation of the Eng∣lish Geminy, Peter and Paul's Churches, and the united Cities of London and Westminster; where I was no sooner setled, but I found my self unsetled through the multitude of temptations, and incitations to sin and vanity. Being almost suffocated with ill scent of pride and vanity, I rode out for Recreation, to a Park neer it, to find out sweeter Air, but there me thought the Proverb was verified, The World runs upon Wheels; which raised up Clouds of dust, as though the Earth against Nature would take place of the Element of Air: There I saw many Inchanters of both Sexes, raise their familiars, and command and charm them within multi∣plied circles of Coaches: wherefore I returned from thence, to walk as I conceived, in a more private and reserved Paradice, called therefore the Springs Garden; but that I was so crowded and shouldred, with the Gallants of both Sexes, which, as so
many moving Groves, fill'd up, and replanted the Walks, that the whole Garden, was (me thought) changed into a wild Wood, and Wilderness; wherefore to avoid this throng, through some solitary Meddowes and winding Paths, I sought in the Centre of the Wood, for some place of privacy; and found some little Her∣mitages, where I hoped to have discoursed with some sober or de∣vout Persons; but found them to be Chapels of ease, dedicated to Bacchus, Ceres, and Venus; which made me think of the truth and reason of that Sentence, (Sine Cerere & Bacho, friget Ve∣nus.) The Lord's Day being come, I thought to spend that Day better, than the Days of the Weeks past, and therefore Visited the Church of Peter's Westminster: which, to say no more in its commendation, (according to Relations) I found to be in some things, like St. Peter's Church in Rome. This (being I was a Protestant, and in a Protestant City) did raise my admiration, but not my devotion. After this, having heard extolled the wit and language of our English Poets, and that their Playes, (a fit name for such Airy Poems) were much Visited, and by the Youth of our Nation, preferred above the best of Sermons; As also that they were acted to the life, in the publick Theatres; I wet thither, and was both an Auditor, and Spectator; where I heard wi and language abused. Being told of the Noble Buildings of both Exchanges, and of the great concourse to them of Coaches, and Persons of the best Quality; I expected better things there, but found in that place an Exchange; but as for the Company, the like, or the same. The Shop-keepers and their Feminines, being like the Company of Players, I saw lately; that know how to act all parts currantly and sedantly, especially those of lying, equivo∣cation, dissimulation, and over-reaching, when they meet with Country Ignoramuses. After some time, I adventured, at the instance of some of my acquaintance, not therein my friends, to go into a Tavern; I stopt, and thought the fair structure, rich Sign-bush and Bason, had some resemblance to the Roman Tryumphant Arches; But my admiration was soon chang'd into a detestation; for the roar∣ing and singing, bawling and swearing of their Tenants at will, the knocking of Pots, the scraping of Fidlers, the gaping of Tap∣sters at the Bar (not of truth and Justice, but too often of the contrary) made me think it to be a Bedlam, a place full of mad∣men, or the House of Circes, where by mixt intoxicating, and a∣dulterated Liquors, rational Men are changed into Swine, Dogs, Goats, and Lyons; yea, into all kind of Beasts, and bruitishness. My mind tasting no good, nor finding any satisfaction in these
things, I thought to entertain it with more private (and as most think (although therein deceived) harmless delights, and recre∣ations; such as Complemental Visits of fair and vertuous La∣dies, Balls, and mixt Dancings; yea, I assaid by chast and mo∣dest Rules or Bonds, to bind Cupid; as I vainly held forth in an Herogliphical Order: But for, and after all these carnal plea∣sures, my heart was, and is sad; yea, I found my soul empty of that Rest and happiness I sought after; and being seasonably, and graciously taught by the same spirit of wisdome, that in∣structed Solomon, I sealed, and that experimentally with him, to that truth of God▪ Vanity of Vanities,Eccl. 1.14. all is vanity and vex∣ation of Spirit.the 12.& 8. And though I saw an end of all perfection in Earthly things,Psal. 119.96. (with holy David) yet the Law and Word of God is exceeding broad, which caus'd me diligently to attend upon some living Oracles of God in those times; Seraphical Holesworth, devout Taylor, pious Gouge, eloquent Shute, with others; by whose holy wooings, and love-tokens, my first love to my Spouse (begun about a year before in the Country,) was now renewed, increased, and confirmed; and these great temptations of the World, and my Enemy, Sathan, prevented, and overcome;Mat. 3.16, 17. who thus, a while after my first Conversion, assaulted me as he did my Saviour, as soon as he entred upon his Office;Mat. 4.8, 9. deceitfully shewing to me, in these Cities, as in a time, and contracted Map, the Vanities of all the World, and the empty glory thereof; insinuating to me, the enjoying of them, would I fall down, and worship him; that is, yield to his temptations, and enslave my self to him, by the wicked possessing of all these sinful Lusts, and delights: But blessed be the Lord,Psal. 124.7. who hath broaken the Snare, and I am escaped. For which great deliverance and ma∣nifold mercies, accept O Lord, in my dear Mediator's hand, my multiplied praises, both here, and in this following Psalm of Thanksgiving.
The METROPOLIS. Ejaculation or Hymn on the former Subject. LOrd, thy Word is Verity, Psal. 119.142.Child hood, Youth are Vanity, ccl. 11.10.Else had not such Troops of Vice Waited on me in Disguise. Blest be that Power, which from thee, osh. 9.3, 4, 5.6.Made them Gibeonites to me; So that they shall hence-forth be, Verse 21.17. Psal. 51.17.Hart-hewers, Water-drawers, In my Sacrifice to Thee. When in Courts, I saw Men rise, On Prides Wings, by Flatteries, View'd, dear God, their Luxury, Sinful Lusts, and Gluttony, Through thy help, I left that place, As a School of Vice, not Grace; A Quag-mire, where the rich of't, Lose Estates spent at Court-rates, When Poor Beggars mount aloft. When Sins Parks, Vicinity Had almost impailed Me, And those Heards of Women spies, Had neer filtcht away my Eyes, Then thou shewest me, Lord, that time, Was not mine to lose, but thine; And that those that spend a Day, On such sights, and vain delights, Do but with white Devils play.
In the Garden, call'd the Spring, Where the Flowers, and Fruit are sin; In which Bound, by Day and Night, Devils walk like Angels bright. Where young Adams,Gen. 3.6. by their suit Eat again forbidden Fruit. There thou call'st me Lord, to thee, From those Groves, Of wanton Loves, Promist better things to Me. Thence, to Theatres I went, Where vain Wits their Poems vent; Heard and saw such Ribaldry, As defiles both Eare and Eye; For Man's mind inclin'd to ill,Gen. 6.5. Runs not up, but down the Hill: There thy spirit to me told, He's asleep that comes to seek, In a Cole-pit, veins of Gold. To Exchanges, Old and New, I repair'd, as worth my View; There my Eares were deft with Cries, Lackt you Sir, what will you buy: Pride and Conscience in that place, I saw sold; all things, but Grace. Lord, thou kept'st my wit, and purse, From deceits, And lying Cheats, And their Females, which were worse. Then to Taverns I went in, Which I found the sinks of sin; There the Devil's Revels be, Lust, and Drinking, Gluttonie; Swearing, Dancing, Carding, Dice, Cheating, and all other Vice. On their Doors, Lord set a Cross, To keep me, All that love thee, From Souls, Bodies, Plague, and loss.
Last I thought of a reserve, How to please, and yet preserve Me from all unchast delights, By a choice of vertuous wights, Who agreed a modest lls, Oft to meet by mutual calls, By mixt Dancing, will not quall, Sathan's wiles, Who Vs beguiles, Give an Inch, He'l take an ll. Blessed Lord, that mdest me see Sin, and dangers misery; And that all things here below, Are but Ciphers in a row; That a Father was to me, When my Parents left me free, In my Youth, and in a place, Where all Vice Hath its rise, And true vertues in disgrace. Yet, where Sathan hath his Thrones, Rev. 2.13.Thou hadst Churches, precious Ones, Vnto which thou leddest thy Youth, Psal 22.22.And declared to me thy truth; Cant. 7.12.There thou gavest to me thy love, Cant. 5.Kist me, call'd me Spouse, and Dove, Cant. 6.9·And imbrac't me in thy Armes, Made me tast, Cant. 2.6.Thy delicates, Cant. 5.1.And deliver'd me from harmes. Cant. 5.1.Is thy love, Lord set upon, Psal. 68.13.Such an Aethiopian? Jerem. 13.23.Did'st thou take me from the Pts, Cleanse me from my Leopard's spots? Let me a chast comfort be, Now, and ever, unto thee, Till I be, by Angels led, My first rise, To Paradise, Then to Heaven, thy Marriage ed.
ARGUMENT. Vpon God's godness, and gracious Providence to me, in his choice, and gift of a rich, beautiful, fruitful, and which is above all, faithful and religious Wife. Soliloquium, or Discourse. HAving expended above the third part of my life, in a single condition, both God and Nature taught me,Gen. 2.18. that it was not good for Man to be alone, no not in innocency▪ much less in a state of corruption and temptation; Wherefore after many motions, interviews, and disappointments, the good and all-wise ordering Providence of my most gracious God and Father, chose for, and gave to me, as a fit, loving, and helpful consort, and yoke fellow, The eldest Daughter, and Co-heir of a worthy Person that was a Knight, Alderman, and Lord-Major of London; a Wife, not only fruitful in Children, but in many o∣ther blessings: As being a builder up of my Family, by a large Portion; One of Natures best Pieces for beauty, and proportion;Psal. 128.. The Psalmists Olive and Vine, for fruitfulness; And which is a∣bove all, and the rarest perfection of that Sex; a Person chast, faithful and religious: For favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain,Pro. 31.30. but a Woman that feareth the Lord, she shall be praised. Of whom, as far as my Observation reaches at this Day, I can truly say with Solomon; Many Daugters have done virtuously, but she hath excelled them all.Pro. 31.29. An eminent Witness of this her Vertue, was her publick spirit, care, and love to me, and her fa∣mily, In her voluntary sale, and parting with her Jointure, and own Land, yielding a considerable Revenue, and an unparallel'd House and Seat, for the payment of Debts, and making provi∣sion for our Children; yea, which is much more to her perpetual honour, she was, blessed be God, to be his great and chiefest Instrument, for the restoring part of the estate to the Heir, and for the maintenance of the Family, to which, during my above Eight Years separation, she remains to be under God, a most careful Supportress. Which great blessing, O Lord, continue to me, and the Family, in giving her health, and long life,Psal. 128.2, 6. that she may eat the labour of her hands, and see her Childrens Children, and peace upon Israel: And as my thankful, and perpetual ac∣knowledgment, and remembrance of such a plenitude of bles∣sings,
Accept this my humble Hymn of Praise, in the hand of my dear Saviour, in whom thou hast given me these, and all o∣ther Mercies. Amen. The Good WIFE. Ejaculation or Hymn upon the former Subject. O Lord, that out of Man, the Woman made; And in blest Marriage, her, to him repaid; Gen. 2.21.22, 23, 24.Making two, one a new; That he, and she, Might be, one Cabinet of Chastity; A choice Elixar of Society, And fruitful Seed plot of Posterity. I bless thy Name, that dost me dignifie, Not only to declare, and testifie, Thy gracious wisdome, in this mysterie Of Wedlock; But me, Tenant made in Fee, To these rich blessings, by thy choice, and lone Of all these Mercies, Treasur'd up in one; When in this Worlds couzening Lottery, Where for one Prize, a hundred Blanks do lie, My self I ventur'd; Thou O Lord draw'st out, For me a Ring of Gold, set all about With precious Stones; One was a Diamond, Of Chastity; next it, in the same round, Saphires of Faith and Hope, with the Onyx Stone Of Sun-like Charity, divinely shone: A fift, was a fair Rubie of sweet modesty, Joyn'd with a Jasper of Fidelity; An Emrauld next was set of Constancy, With a rich Topaz of true Prudency; Sweet Ametists of Loves, (which loyal are,) Incircled this Ring, and Jewel rare: And for to give a splendor, to each Eye, All those were fill'd with much Humility. With this thou didst me Wed; givest me to wear, Till now, neer Six and Thirty Year. (Blest be thy Grace!) no Hearts dividing far, Disturbing Vs, by a Domestick War:
She is, O Lord, that blessed Vine, by which, Thou dost o're-spread my House, and it inrich,Psal. 128.3. With Sixteen hopeful Branches; unto whom, Drie Breasts, thou gavest not, nor miscarrying Womb; Yea, thou allaidst to her, the curse of Sin,Hos. 9.14. Gen. 3.16. The pains of births, and breeding she was in; And which, doth much exceed all Earthly wealth,1 Tim. 2.15. Thou gavest Vs both, a great degree of health; Pelican-like, (thy Instrument of good) Did feed her young ones, thrice, with her own Blood When others lessen portions, through expence, She made hers greater, by her Providence; And was thy help, during my happy fae, To more than double our Patern Estate: And when thou mouldrest it to nought, her pains, Was thy blest means, for to restore again, A part of what was lost, that she might be, Mother and Father to her Family. To Vs, from Parents, Lord, descends our Land,Prov. 19.14. Prov. 18.22. But prudent Wives, are gifts from thy own Hand: What's wanting here, to her perfection, View in her Picture, drawn by Solomon;Prov. 31.10. to the end of that Chap. Lord, hast thou multiplied thy loves; And thus, By doubling Vnits, caus'd an Overplus Of blessings; Let me not divide by Sin, Thy Mercies, nor substract them in And by Ingratitude; Let my sum be, Addition of Praises unto Thee, And pious fruits; so shall my Tongue, and Life, Be one, like Soul and Body, Man and Wife; A living Sacrifice of Thankfulness, A free-will Offering, till I thee possess; And in that Vnion, there most clearly see, Of holy Marriage, the great Mystery.Ephes. 5.32. Amen.
ARGUMENT. Vpon the great, and Holy Mystery held forth to Vs, by God, in Marriage. Soliloquium, or Discourse. MArriage is honourable amongst all Men, and the Bed un∣defiled▪ but Whoremongers and Adulterers, God will Judge; Wherefore, Wives submit your selves unto your own Husbands, as unto the Lord; For the Husband is the Head of the Wife, as Christ is the Head of the Church; Therefore, as the Church is subject unto Christ, so let Wives be unto their own Husbands, in every thing; Husbands love your Wives, even as Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself for it; so ought Men to love their Wives, as their own Bodies; For no Man ever hated his own Flesh, but nourisheth and che∣risheth it, even as the Lord the Church; For we are Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones; For this cause, shall a Man leave his Father and Mother, and be joyned unto his Wife, and they two shall be one Flesh. This is a great mystery; but I speak of Christ, and his Church; Nevertheless, let every one of you in particular, so love his Wife, even as himself; and let the Wife see that she reverence her Husband. Thus far the Apostle, Eph. chap. 5. vers. 22, 23, 24, 25, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. From whose words, especially his conclusion, (This is a great mystery) I infer, that Marriage (although not in a strict and Po∣pish sence) yet, as to a larger meaning, and construction of the Word, may be called a Sacrament, as holding forth by outward and visible signes, and things, spiritual mysteries, and instructi∣ons: Of this nature in Scripture, and many instances, as the Ark, Rain-bow, Red Sea, Rock, Manna, and other such like. Is it so, O my Soul? And hath the Lord so extraordinarily, and abundantly blessed this Ordinance, and condition unto thee; as thou hast declared in thy foregoing Memorial, and thankful Ac∣knowledgment? Let, upon this occasion, thy Meditation be fur∣ther stirred up, and inlarged; and from this great temporal blessing and mystery, behold, declare, and point out, the far greater and excelling blessings, which are, and shall be enjoyed by thee, and the Church, the Spouse of Christ, by our spiritual Marriage, and Union unto Him. As Marriage in the Institution, and in the particular Applica∣tion,
is the Holy Ordinance of God, and the blessed effect of his gracious Providence, and Eternal Decree: All Marriages (according to the Proverb) being made in Heaven, so is that great Architype thereof, the Marriage of the Church, and in it,Gen. 2.22. of every true believer unto Christ. The Father bringing every one of us to him, as he did Eve to Adam.Joh. 6▪ 44. For none comes to me, but whom the Father draws, saith our Saviour Christ; yea,Rom. 8.28, 29, 30. our Election, effectual Calling, and Regeneration, together with our Union by Faith, and spiritual Espousal to Christ our Heaven∣ly Husband▪ is of, and from the Eternal Decree, Love and Electi∣on of God our Father. As the Woman was of the Man, and not the Man of the Wo∣man; and the Woman was Created for the Man,1 Cor. 11.8, 9. and not the Man for the Woman; so was the Church typified by Eve, taken out of the side of the second Adam, the Lord Jesus Christ, that she might be made (as being his Rib, Beloved, and neer to his heart) Flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone; his only Spouse, and one with him, (as the Apostle Paul asserts) Eph. the 5. ver. 30. This was effectually done, when being asleep in Death, up∣on the Cross; the Beeing, and Redemption of his Church, arose, and sprung forth of his side, in a Flood of infinite, precious,Joh. 19.34. and Cordial Blood, and Water. To conclude, this our spiritual Union and Marriage, is by the Apostle called a great Mystery,Eph. 5.32. as being the blessed effect of the free grace of God, who is assentially love; and therefore it is as to the heighth and depth, length and breadth thereof, Incom∣prehensible, and passing all understanding.Eph. 3.18, 19. Col. 2.9, 10, 11, 12, 13 14, 15. Verses. Act. 11.26. Jer. 3.24. Dan. 9.14. By vertue of this E∣spousal in Baptisme, we (as Wives amongst us) change our names into his; and instead of Adamites, are called Christians; And on our part, promise to forsake Father, and Mother, and all things else for him; and to honour, love, and obey him. On the other part, the Lord Jesus Christ thus betroth'd to us, in holiness, and everlasting righteousness, becomes thereby our Lord, Law-giver, and Spouse; our Pattern, Protector, and Saviour, as in the Type, Husbands amongst us, are, or ought to be unto their Wives; and as they, so he endowes us here, not only with all temporal bles∣ings, (so far as shall be for our good;Tim. 4.8. For Godliness hath the promises of this Life, and of that Life which is to come;) But with the rich dowry of all the saving Graces of his holy Spirit, Cloathing us with the white Robes of his perfect and immaculat righteousness; As being made of God, unto us, righteousness,1 Cor. 1.30. wisdom, sanctification, and redemption; Yea, the Lord our righ∣teousness: And as for hereafter,Jer. 23.6. he gives us the earnest and assu∣rance of being Co-heirs with him, of Eternal Life, and Glory.Joh. 10.28. Amen.
EPITHELAMIVM. Ejaculation or Hymn upon the former Subject. BReath not this Aire, Men of unchast desires, No Fewels here, for your unhallow'd Fires. Heb. 8.5.Lord, I adore thy wisdome, and thy love, That shadow'st, in blest Wedlock, things above; Eph. 5.30, 31, 32.Teaching Vs; that, this Vnions Mystical, And sets forth, thine with Vs; Before the Fall, Gen. 2.21, 22, 23.A crooked Kib thou streightnest, gav'st it Life, Mad'st it a Virgin pure, first Adam's Wife; That she, of thy dear Spouse, the Type might be, Once crookt by sin, but now made streight in Thee: Eph. 5 26, 27.Yea, in the chast delights of Marriage-Bed, Her union thou holdst forth, with thee, her Head; Gen. 2.21, 22, 23. 1 Cor. 6.15.10. chap. 12.12, 13. Cant. 7.12. 1 Joh 4.19. Cant. 1.2. Joh. 6.63. Cant. 2.6.In which, thou giv'st to her thy loves, that she, Be'ng first belov'd, might flame in love to Thee; Kissing her with the kisses of thy Mouth, Quickned with sp'rit and life, thy sacred Truth; Thou also her incirclest in the Armes Of thy protection; And her frees from harmes. For why, thy right hand-power doth her o're-spread, And left hand-care supports her graceful head; Her sp'rit'al senses, ear, tast, smell, touch, sight, Thou satisfi'st with ravishing delight; Her piercing eye of Faith, sees and applies, Cant 4.9. Heb. 11.27. Psal. 119.24.103.Thy excellency hid from Worldly eyes; Her eares be'ng fill'd with Musick of thy Voice, Doth in thy Word and promises rejoyce; Thou altogether lovely art, unto Cant. 5.16. Cant. 2.2. Cant. 5.1.Her inward touch, whence mutual love doth flow; She tasts thy Spice, Myrrh, Hony, Milk and Wine, Of Hope, Joy, Peace, Delight; all sweets Divine; Cant. 1.12, 14.Thy Spicknard, Camphire, fills her smelling sence, Psal. 25 8.Also thy Cassida, Aloes, Frankinsence, And fragrant Oyntments. All which, well express Cant. 3.6.Thy love, truth, mercy, wisdome, holiness; Thy power and goodness,Cant. 1.3. grace, and righteousness, Sweet Oders, which her cherish and refresh. In fine, thy Nuptial-Bed is covered o're, Cant. 3.10.And pav'd with love, and fill'd with Graces store;
Here, in her, thou shed'st incorrupted Seed,2 Pet. 1 23. Tit. 3.4, 5, 6. Jam. 1.18. Joh 5.1. Gal. 4.19. Rom. 8.20. 2 Cor. 3.10 Eccl. 15.10. 2 Pet. 1.4. Joh. 1.12.13. 1 Cor. 6.15, 16, 17. chap. 12.12, 13. Eph. 5 30, 31. Begets in her a Christ-like forme indeed; Whence follows, that, which joyes both Heaven and Earth, Divine Conception, and thy Saints new-birth; So that one Christ, one Sp'rit, one flesh, and bone, One Body, is thy Church; thus 'twas made one: Hence, as of Faith, and mutual love, the effects; Thou rul'st, and in her dwell'st, and her protects; Cloaths her with Golden Robes, thy righteousness; Mak'st her within glorious, through holiness; Giv'st her the promises of this World's life, And of that life to come; and as thy Wife,Psal. 45.11. 1 Joh. 4.12, 15, 16. Psal. 84.11. Psal 45 1, 3. 1 Cor. 1.30. Zac. 10.20, 21. Rom. 6.19.22. 2 Tim. 4.8. 2 Pet. 1 3. 1 Pet. 5.4. Revel. 2.20. Revel. 3 21. Cant. 2.16. Revel. 5.10▪ Revel. 20.6. Mat 13.43. 1 Cor. 15.24. Crown'st her with Glory, sets her on thy Throne, With thee on Earth, as thy beloved One; Next, to thy Fathers Kingdome, her translates, To live with God; Thy Churches highest State. Another Hymn upon the same blessed Subject, being Meditations upon my Marriage-Day. The TYPE. BLest Miracle of Love! whose sacred Rights, Restores to Man his own, and re-unites, Natures Division! Two Bodies were combin'd In Adam once; Loe here two Souls I find, Knit in a purer union; How doth the smile of one, Attend the others joy? her sighs, my groane? If absence parts us, like as though one breath Did fan two hearts, both seem to suffer Death. If distance Clouds our view, the strength of Love, Doth make our thoughts, as well as Bodies move, In visits to each other: So, though two parts We seem to be, we still are one in Heart.
The Anti Type, or Application. MY Love, my Spouse, my Sav'our! Can the Fires Sprung from weak Natures notions, and desires, Produce such Sympathies? O let thy flame, Spir'd by a purer spirit, effect the same, In my unworthy Soul: The Loves of all, Compar'd with that of thine, the Original Are but as shades, to substances; the Ray, Vnto its Globe of light, as Night to Day. Lord, in my Baptisme review, how I There plighted troth to thee, and did denie, All other loves save thine; nor was this Act My single deed alone, but a compact: John 4.19.For why? so free's thy grace, Man so accurst, That none can love, except thou lov'st them first. Thou art my Head, O Christ, can I then be A living Member, and not part of thee? The Heavens high distance doth not dim the Eye Of Souls, nor can it lessen, or untie Thy Spirits union: now, nought wants but this, To be unbod'ed where my Saviour is. O let me be uncloath'd then; And by Angels led, To thee, my Spouse; To Heaven, my Nuptial-Bed. Amen. ARGUMENT. Vpon God's all wise, and gracious Providence, in ordering of Affairs, for the preserving and continuing love, and peace betwixt me, and my own Father, and Father-in-Law; in danger to have been interrupted, by reason of some dif∣ferences, arising from a dispute, in point of my Right, as to the one; and from an act of love towards my Family, as to the other.
Soliloquium, or Discourse. AS false Ground, under the Foundation of a Building; a crack in a Master-beam of an House, and a breach in a Wall of a City, is very dangerous and destructive. So are distances, differences, and divisions in Families, and betwixt neer Relations: This truth, O Heavenly Father, thou gavest me (even in my blooming Manhood) to know, and to ob∣viate, when as from two very neer Relations, my own Father, and Father-in-Law, upon two different accounts, I had deeply suffered, both as to profit, and affection; (and that for the de∣fence of what I conceived to be my right, and for well doing) Hadst not thou (O Lord) been to me a Father, Judge, and Friend, to preserve love, and to order and reconcile us, as to the things in difference. O Lord, thou hast tried me at all times, in all places, by all Persons, that I poor Creature might prove, and have a full, and sweet experience of thee also, as to thy gracious Immutability, Omnipresence, and All-sufficiency in all things concerning me:2 Cor. 1.10. For thou hast, thou doest, and I trust wilt deliver me, in, and from the evil of all Temptations, and according to thy faithful Word and promise, cause all things to work together for my good.Rom. 8.28. To thee therefore, O infinite wisdome and goodness, do I offer up the Calves of my Lips, and the praises of my Soul, for these thy merciful, preventing, restraining, and commenting pro∣vidences, in this, and the following Psalm, as a living Sacrifice. Amen. The VMPHIRE. Ejaculation or Hymn upon the former Subject. SAthan, the first divider of himself, And Man from God, is still a forward Else,Gen. 3. To ruine all things by Division, As doth the Jesuit, Pope, his Eldest Son: Yea, to this truth of Christ he sets his hand, Kingdomes, within divided, cannot stand. Of these, his Wyles, thou warnest me, O Lord,Mat. 12.25. And taught me how to cement a discord,
'Twixt me and neer Relations, by love, 1 Cor. 13.7·Which beareth all things, rather than remove, Or break domestick Bonds; since such a rent, Of Friends, widens in time, growes permanent; Yea, as a broken Bone well set, doth grow Far stronger than it was before; Ev'n so, Through thy wise ordering and providence, These breaches made to me a better fence; Rom. 8.28.Working together for my future good, According to thy Word (now understood) In that, Instead of losing what was got, Thou chang'd my part, gav'st me a better lot. Lord, since Parental loves thus ebb and flow, Give me thy love, which doth for ever grow: Let not my Crimes make mortal my sins wounds, Rom. 5.20.Since their increase, makes Grace much more abound. O bring me to that place of rest and ease, Of Charity, and Everlasting Peace; Where Devils, World, Sin, cannot divide me, From Parents, Fellow-Members, nor from Thee. Amen. ARGUMENT. Vpon God's most gracious Answer of our Prayers, in gi∣ving Rain after a great Draught, threatning a Famine in Three Summers successively, Viz. In the Years, 1637. 1638, 1639. Soliloquium, or Discourse. O Lord, as sin is the substance, so affection and judgment, is the dark shaddow that alwayes attends and accom¦panies it, as the effect doth the cause. This truth was verified to this Nation of England, in the Years 1637, 1638, & 1639. When according to thy Word, a fruitful Land, was turned into barrenness,Psal. 107.34. for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. As the first Rebellion of Adam brought a curse upon the whole lower Creation,Gen. 3.27. so this wicked off-spring, by sin, often invert the
order, and harmony of the Elements, and makes malignant the influence of the higher Orbes, causing those Coelestial Planets, which were Created for blessings to Man-kinde, to be Executors of thy righteous Judgments. Of this, these Three Years Prodigies, are clear and sufficient witnesses, when as that only Magazin of light, and heat, to the Universe, (thy glorious Sun) which chears and delights Man and Beast, and gives in our Northern Regions, in the Spring, as it were new life to Vegatives; was made by thee, for England's iniqui∣ties, a terrible Curse, as occasioning deadly Diseases, Feavers, and Murrains upon Men and Beasts, through its constant and ex∣cessive heat; and like a Globe, and Furnace of Fire, withered, and burnt up all Grass and Vegitives; especially our Grain, the staff of life, destroying by this Heavenly Fire, our Earthly bles∣sings. As thy Sun, so thy watering Pots, the Clouds, which like swel∣ling Pappes, used to distil streams of fruitful Rains, according to thy Ordinance; were now vanisht, or rather banisht to the An∣tipodes; or if any appeared, they were but dry breasts, and true symptomes of the barren Womb of England; yea, thou madest the Heavens contrary to their Nature, to become as Brass,Deut. 28.23. and the Earth as Iron; that the one might be as the Hammer, the other the Anvil, whereon to forge thy many Darts, and sharp Ar∣rowes of insuing Plagues. As thy Rod of Justice, O Lord, hath three Cords, or Lashes, which thou callest thy three sore or greatest Judgments;Ezek. 14.21. Viz. War, Pestilence, and Famine; whereof this last is the greatest, as being usually the dregs, and the effect of the two former; So thy mercy also hath a three-fold time, or Plea, (as in the Gospel;) Lord let the Fig-Tree alone this third Year also,Luk. 13.7, 8, 9. to try it, whether or no it will bring forth Fruit, before thou cuttest it down. Lord, as England's sin called for, and deserved this greatest Judgment, (Famine) so thy mercy did, during these three Years, successively threatning this grievous Plague, give her three years warning, and space of Repentance; Yea, did offer thy Peoples Prayers unto thee, by the hand of our Mediator, for a reprieve, and obtained it; and which is much more wonderful, a pardon, and dismission of so justly deserved, and so long impending a Judgment; for which great condiscention, I will bless thee as long as I have a beeing. And that the Generations to come may praise thee also, I have in all humility and thankfulness, return∣ed and recorded in this, and the following Meeters, thy never to be forgotten Goodness, and Mercy.
The LAMENTATION. Ejaculation or Hymn upon the former Subject. BRight Eye of Heaven! how doth thine Ire, .From a smooth Brow, dart forth thy Fire? No Tropicks bound, thy torred Zone, Since Britains know no temperate one; Why doth those living rayes, which grace Thy Tellus brow, now scorch her Face? No Saturn thou; yet the same heats, Which gave thy off-spring life, retreates Them into Death, and makes them have Within themselves a wither'd Grave. See, how black Clouds of dust arise, To blear thy Beames, because the Skies Have none. In Sack-cloath, see, thy Queen, Sits; having laid aside her green. Her Spring-paint gone, wrinkles appeares, And shews her Ag'd, five thousand Years. Art thou not jealous for to see, Thy love lye nak't forc Company? Or art thou Spanioliz'd, and would, Through these new Inlets, spie out Gold? Doth Hell keep Jubill, and desires, Thee to shine there with lightsome Fires? See Troopes of Blades, whose strength did keep, Whole Cities, Townships scarce dare peep, Or shew in Field; yea, in these feares, Some not offending, lose their Eares: Whole Rivers scarce thy thirst doth bound, Whilst Springs, their heads, hide under ground. Tell me, is Phaeton in place, Or Daphne? hath thy Twelve Moneths Race, Fir'd thy Axtell? for didst thou fear, Our Springs hive would out-brave thy Sphear? But whence this brightning, (hark) my moan Is answer'd by a Thunders groan; Wrath, through that Planet burns, Earth, Skies, .Men's barren Hearts, assimuliz's.
The Application, and Petition. DRead Lord! I tremble, and now see, The cause of this Catastrophie. Leaves had the Figg-Tree, were prun'd, Yet fruitless Vines; yea, like untun'd Instruments, whose Notes do jar, And only Briefs, and Minnums are, Of goodness; full of stops, which lie, And discord makes, not harmony▪ Were the Microcosmes, on which, Thy love hath shin'd with a most rich Influx; yet we thy Graces dew Dry up, and lose both fruit, and hue. Lord, let thy show'rs on both Worlds fall, So shall thy Sun not scortch, but all Things fructuate: On us rain blood, No evil Omen this, but good;1 Joh. 1.7. On that, unbowel Clouds of Rain, So shall both Spring grow green again. Yea, once more Blood, and Water,1 Joh. 5.8. shall Witness on Earth thy Peace to all; Rivers shall flow then in each Place,John 7.38. And to both, prove the streames of Grace. Blest Sp'rit, upon these Waters move,Gen. 1.2. That both may yield Thee fruit, praise, love: And those dry Chaps, that want a Tongue, Shall sing a close unto this Song. Amen. A thanksgiving for Rain, after the forementioned great Drought, Anno 1637, 1638, 1639. ARGUMENT. The God that heareth Prayer, heard ours; And pitty seems to weep in showers.Psal. 65.2.
The Shewer of Mercy. Soul. A Dialogue be∣tween the Soul and Mercy.MErcy! If peace, 'twixt Heaven, and Vs, Tell me! why roars his Cannon thus? Why do I hear, where e're I come The Warlike Wings strike up their Drum? Seest thou that Row, so vastly bent, As if the Centers point it meant, To split through us; that by one Doom, The World might fall into its Tomb, Or Chaos; May be, through Earths heart, Nature two counter-poles, World dart, Because (as some think) she's decay'd, Her Poles worn out, or over-way'd; No drooping Soul, that thunders noise, Mercies An∣swer.Is Justice murmur, 'cause my voice, Prevailes with God. The other sound Musters up Troops of blessings round The Orb. As for the threatning Bow, It's my Triumphant Arch; no woe Portending, since he means no harm, Who turns the Bowes horns from his Arm. Witness those orient streaks, which are Gen. 9.12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. vers.The Ensigns of Earths Peace, not War. Since then the string is in thy power, Dart up by force of love, a shewer Of praise; then by that Jacob's scale, Let thy Soul mount with a fresh gale; Take Heaven by force, no danger fear, 'Tis freedome to be Captiv'd there. Earths Jubily. TEll me, my Soul, when did the Skies, So become Morning to all Eyes? Were ever teares, so timely shed As these, which strangely raise the Dead? Gen. 7.11.Mercy now puts on Justice Gown, And smiles, under the old Worlds frown: Dame Earth grown frolick, now attires Her front with liquid Pearls, and desires To feast the Creatures; by her lie, Clear mirrons for to dress her by.
Young Hairs, she busheth forth, to hide Her baldness; and like Autumes Bride, Hath over her, by Spike-men born, A Canopie of swelling Corn. The Springs invited; but she grown Feavereth, to Southern Climes was gone For health; yet presents her Queen, By Proxie, with a suit of green; With which Earth spreads her lap, and sets Thereon, her fruits and delicates: The feasts prepar'd; then in each place, Let us before we eat, say Grace. The Thanksgiving. GOod God, such a new World as this, Deserves, a second Genesis, To preach thy power, and love, which thrice,This Drought was continued three Summers, and was every Summer reliev∣ed with Rain. Hath made our health a Paradice; O give us innocency too, So place and blessing shall anew, Through Christ by right of re-intaile, Be ours, and ours, till Issue faile. Lord, make all Heads, Fountains; all Eyes, Limbicks; distilling like the Skies, Through heat of love, a weeping Rain; Let hearts, like Earth, grow soft again; So shall such mutual Harmony, Shew grace, as sin works sympathy. And to thee Lord, this truth return, That Mercy melts, though Justice burn; Witness Earth, Heaven, my Heart, Eyes, Pen; May they thus ever melt, Amen. ARGUMENT. Vpon God's merciful restoring me to health, and graciously supporting and comforting me, in a fearful Agony, and Apprehension of Death; by reason of a dangerous Cough, which caused me to spit Blood.
Soliloquium, or Discourse. AS Pride, War, and Contention, are the ungrateful Off∣spring of Peace and Plenty; so are sickness, and afflicti∣on, the succeeding and unhappy Daughters of health and prosperity. This is not only my Observation, but Expe∣riment; As having the fresh Spring of my Youth, after an Hal∣cion calme, and time of health; on a suddain turned almost, into an Autumn, or Fall, of that leavy beauty, and greenness which my Body (which is but a Tree inverted) was adorned with; and that by an unexpected and dangerous Spout, or Cattar of Rhumetick Rain, seconded with a fearful Hurricane, or Thun∣der-storm of a rending Cough; which had not God been very gracious, had undoubtedly ink both the Pilot and Vessel, my Soul and Body, I pumping out through the Lungs, much Water and Blood. But with the Marriners in Jonah's Ship, or rather with Jonah in the Whales Belly, I cryed, and prayed unto my God, even in this Agony, and preluge of Death, his Serjeant, wherein, Pompa mortis, magis erret, quam mors ipsa; As an ad∣dition to these my inward fears, and terrors arising from my dangerous condition, was the apprehension of my Arch Enemy and Accuser, Sathan, preparing, and ready to prefer at the Bar of Divine Justice, a long Role and Inditement of my great of∣fences, attested too by my own Conscience, (which is more than a thousand witnesses) as also the legal and just punishment of them; Hell, Eternal Death and Torment; I say again, with all humble and reiterated thankfulness, I then petitioned my Almigh∣ty Saviour, who delivered me out of the Belly of this Whale, and gave me a reprieve from Death; stood by me, as he did by Paul in the storm,Act 27.24. and bad me be of good comfort, since Sathan the Accuser of the Saints was cast out, and overcome in his Vi∣ctory;Rev 12.10. Hes. 2.14, 15. Col. 1.20.2.14. Heb. 7.25. Chap. 10.22. Rom. 5.17, 18. 2 Cor. 5.21. his Indictment and Role of my Sins, conceal'd and nail∣ed upon his Cross: That my Conscience was both cleansed, and pacified, through the washing of his all purifying blood; And that Divine Justice was satisfied to the uttermost, by his active, and passive obedience and sufferings, he being made sin for me, that I might be made the righteousness of God in him; Yea, that he was made unto me of God,1 Cor. 1.30. Col. 3.3. righteousness, and sanctifi∣cation, wisdom, and redemption; That my life was hid in him with God:Joh. 10.28. Col. 3.4. And that he had given unto me Eternal Life: And that when he shall appear, I shall appear also with him in Glory. Blessed Saviour, with these Cordials thou didst, thou dost re∣vive
and rejoyce my Soul; and in great mercy didst answer my Prayer, and restored both my mind and body, to perfect health. For which, I bless thy name, and record thy praise here, and in this following Hymn. The REPRIEVE. Ejaculation or Hymn.Sing this to the Tune of the 100. Psalm. LOrd, how uncertain, full of change, Is our lives state! now well, anon Deaths Image; as though man (O strange!) Was Natures true Camelion. Our Youth and Beauty, like a Flower,Isa. 28.1. Withers, as soon as lookt upon; Much like the Gourd of Jonah's Bower, An one Day liv'd Hephemeron.Jonah 4.6, 7. Sin is the Nimrod, and the first Tyrant, that did both Worlds subject;Gen. 3.17. To Floods, Stormes, Earth-quakes,Gen. 6.5, 6, 7. and accurst Mutations, (Wars) that Royal Theft.) My Microcosme a witness oft, Was, and is still of this sad truth, Shaken, and under Water brought, With coughs & rheums, even from my Youth. The effect of this Earth-quake, at last, Like others, (which presage no good,Mat. 24.7.) Was to make Chasmes, and Waters cast Out of my entrails; ting'd with blood. At which agast, I trembling fell Into a clammy and cold sweat; Was wrackt with thoughts of Death and Hell, Of Sin, and God's dread Judgment Seat.
Then my Physitian, Lord, thou wast; Luk. 5 31.Stopt by opening a Vain 1 Joh. 1.7.Of thy own Blood; and my Soul cast Into that Bath, which cur'd my pain. Thus Gallen, Esculapius, Thou far excel'st; mad'st me all whole, And by o're-coming Death for us, 1 Cor. 15.26, 54, 55, 56.Cur'd both my Body, and my Soul. Joh. 10.28. Joh. 11.25, 26.Thou gavest to both new life, that I Being freed from fear of shame, and death, Might live in thee, and never die; And praise thee, whil'st I have my breath. Thou art, Lord, my Catholicon, A certain Cure of each Disease, 1 Cor. 10.4The only Rock I rest upon; My Joy, my Cordial, and my Peace. Amen. ARGUMENT. Vpon God's Fatherly, and manifold goodness, in delivering me from Death, and giving me a merciful recovery out of five several dangerous sickness. Viz. From a deadly Surfeit in my Childhood, from an inclination to a Consum∣ption, for many Years in my Youth; And in my elder days from a painful Cough and Plurisie: From two dangerous Agues; And from many other like Disasters. Soliloquium, or Discourse. THe tremendious curse, for Man's sin, and rebellion against God his Creator,Gen. 2.17. is Death, temporal and Eternal. The Quarter-Master and Harbinger of Death, is sickness, who prepares as soon as we were born, (for even then we be∣gin to die) matter, or food, (corrupt humors, and innumerable
diseases) for this all devouring Monster; together, with unre∣movable quarters, until according to the Proverb, He hath eaten us out of House and home; So that this our dying Life, is but a living Death. Lord, as all have sinned in Adam, so all in him are dead; witness that thy just Statute, and Sentence,Rom 5.12, 17. It is ap∣pointed unto all Men once to dye:Heb. 9.27. To which Law (as acknow∣ledging my self a sinful Son of Adam) I humbly submit, and have these five times entertained Deaths fore-runners, or Van∣guard. The first of his Messengers, was a short, yet dangerous Surfeit, in the time of my Childhood; out of which, by thy blessing upon the means, used by a friendly Physitian, I was spee∣dily recovered. The second, was a continued defluxion of Rheum, which caused a constant Cough, and inclined me for many years (in the entrance of my Manhood) unto a Consumption. By this correction, Heavenly Father, thou didst most wisely bridle, order, and allay the strong and indomitable Lusts of my Youth; that beholding daily, Death, thy Sergeant, at the Door, I might fear to act wickedness, and submit to thy Discipline: This friend of Death (which thy mercy and wisdome made in a sence, a friend, unto me) by thy special providence, and ordering me to use fit means, was, after many years space, and at a time, and in a place, where that Disease was always before dangerously afflictive, dis∣charged also, and I wonderfully, and perfectly recovered. The third assailant, was a deadly Plurisie, the consequent and usual effect of a long and violent Cough, which by a terrible pain, and stitch, made my breathing (the necessary Servant and Bellowes of Life) painful; which after divers Moneths suffering, and fruit∣less use of many remedies, Thou, O Lord,Psal. 65 2. that hearest and an∣swerest Prayer, heard mine; and by thy blessing upon a Plaister laid to my Stomack, and a Purge, didst in one Night and a Day free me from all pains, Coughs and Distempers, to the admira∣tion of my self, and Relations. The fourth Allie, and Spie of Death, was a violent Ague, whose eight Hours hot fits might well deserve the Name of a Feaver; This ceaz'd upon me at Homby, where thy providence, O Lord, by this thy Attachment, freed me from a worse, because illegal detainure; These fiery Fits, (the very shaddows of Hell) at a certain Hour every other Day, for some Weeks, like a well-ordered Regiment, made their assaults; and as so many Roman Rams, or whole Cannon, bat∣tered all my Rampires of Earth, the out-works of Nature, pre∣paring, and making a breach for their General (Death) to enter at. But even then also, O most gracious God, and Father,Jer. 8.22. the only expert Physitian, that curest both Body and Soul, Thou freely, without any Fee, (for alas, I had nothing of merit to give
thee) Visited me, and didst attend to my cry, and pittied my many sighs, and groans; walking with me in this Fiery Furnace; so that although I was often burning,Dan. 3.25. Exod. 31.2. like Moses Bush, yet I was not consumed: Yea, thou mad'st these Brats of sin, and death, instead of Destroyers, my Refiners: Diseases and afflictions be∣ing not punishments to thine, and beginnings of Hell, as to the wicked; But like the Purges, Vomits, and Blood-lettings of a skilful, and loving Father, and Physician, for prevention; and for the cure, not for the destruction of thy Children, and Patients; according to thy Word, this shall be the fruit, to take away their Sin. Praised be thy Name, O Lord, that in much loving kindness and faithfulness,Isay 27.9. Psal. 119.75. hath alwayes afflicted me; and didst then also, after a few Weeks, give me a perfect recovery, by thy blessing, upon the Medicine of a poor Widdow, even after that the ut∣most endeavours of a skilful Doctor proved uneffectual. The fifth, and last dangerous encounter, was with another Pur∣sivant of Death, a second painful and perilsome Ague. From this Ague, also, after three very accute fits, thou gavest me a hap∣py and healthful recovery. Lord, what shall I render unto thee for these five most gracious recoveries, and as it were new lives; And for thy deliverance from many other lesser Distempers? Yea, what have I to return unto thee, since all I am is thine, and all my most spiritual Sacrifices are lame, weak, and sickly? Lord, although such were forbidden under the Law,Deut. 15.21. yet under thy Gospel we have a great High Priest, which takes away the ini∣quity,Exod. 28.38. and infirmity of our holy things; in whom thou hast de∣clared (even from Heaven) that thou art well pleased with us; And who is that compassionate Physician,Mat. 3.17. Mat. 9.12. that came not to heal the whole, but the sick? Blessed Saviour, heal now the infirmi∣ties of my Soul, as thou hast done these of my Body; That ac∣cording to thy promise, the dumb may sing, and the lame may skip,Isa. 35.6. as the Lamb; Yea, open thou my Lips, and my Mouth shall shew forth thy praise;Psal. 8.4. O Lord God, what is Man, that thou visistest him, or the Son of Man, that thou regardest him? That as a Father, and Nurse, thou shouldest watch over us, from Morn∣ing to Night, and from Night to Morning; That the left hand of thy gracious providence, should be alwayes under my head, and that the right hand of thy unchangeable and fervent love,Cant. 2.6. should continually imbrace me; That thou shouldest lead me to Heaven, by the Gates of Hell. That thou shouldest wound me, that thou mightest heal me. Humble me, that thou mightest ex∣alt me. That thou shouldest exercise me with sickness, to teach me how to overcome Death, The height and summ total of all
sicknesses. O for ever blessed be thy Name, that gives me not only believingly, but practically, and feelingly,Rom. 5.8. to seal the truth of that cordial Word, that saith, That tribulation brings forth pa∣tience; and patience, experience; and experience, hope; which makes us not ashamed: Wherefore my heart, which thou hast en∣larged; my lips, which thou hast opened; and my life, which thou hast thus often renewed, (through Grace) doth praise thee this Day, for these, and all others thy great Mercies; and de∣sires to perpetuate my thankful acknowledgment in this, and the following Memorial to all Generations. Amen. The BETHESDA. Ejaculation or Hymn on the former Subject. TRue, is that Axiome, since the Curse, (Best things corrupted, become worse, Than others, which are less refin'd.) By Man, and Angels fall, we find, This truth confirm'd; yea, our best meat, Putrified, are Diseases Seats. Hence came my Surfeit, by that food, That pleas'd my tast; was sweet, and good.Meditation upon my Surfet. This tempted me to an Excess, That alwayes brings forth Putridess, Which Nature striving to cast out, By Vomit, made me sick throughout. This first assault, Thou Lord withstood, Of Death, thus withering my Bud Of Childhood; And by Friends advice, Purg'd out my sickness, and its rice; Restoring health to me, and joy To Parents; grieved by my annoy. All sins a surfeit, and abuse Of what is good; through our misuse,
A Lust, rebelling to Excess, And yet a want of Holiness; Lord, Vomit, Purge me, and supplie Thy Grace; so shall I live, not die. Meditation upon my incli∣nation to a Con∣sumption.Man's Life, from Birth, doth hasten on Towards Death, by a Consumption Of moisture Radical; like Lights, We wast this Oyl by burning bright; But Rheums, and Coughs accession, Addes Wings to Dissolution. Such was my state for many Years, Which ballanc't me 'twixt hopes and feares, Vntil in Mercy thou though'st good, To bles the means, drie up this Flood Of Mall-concocted humors; So, That it no more my Earth o're-flow. O Lord, the streames, that drown'd my Soul, Are wicked Lusts; let Grace controle This Deluge, lest it more and more Consume thy radicating store; That Body, Soul, restor'd again, May be it'h full of Grace, not wain. As Art, by Succors, Forcers, mount Meditation upon my Plu∣risie.Waters, upon a like accompt, Rheum pumping Coughs, raise it, and Aire, Above, out of their place. Hence are, Those stiches, pains, and Plurisies, Which us indanger, and Disease. Such was the cause, such the effect, Of my third sickness; whose Aspect Prefigur'd, and made way for Death, The Night be∣fore my Cure, was a Night of Thunder and Lightning.By Stitches, Coughs, shortness of breath; Yea, all one Night, to add to pain, Thunders did roar, and Lightnings flame. When thus upon thy wrack, I lay, Lord, thou didst turn my Night to Day; And answered from thy glorious Throne, My prayers, teares, my sighs and groans;
And blst weak means, refresht my Soul, And on a suddain made me whole. A wonder next a Miracle, Was this my quick recovery, Which merits, Lord, a Pyramid; A Trophy, that cannot be hid, Of praise: That Saints, in after Days, May bless, love, trust in thee alwayes. Lord, frothy Distillations, Lustful Inflammations, Shorten still thy Spirits breath, Threatning to me a worser Death; By pricks of Conscience, and Heart grief, O give unto my Soul relief. Dry up, O Lord, these Springs of sin, That do obstruct thy breathings in My sickly Soul; Let Conscience be Freed from its pains, as cleans'd by thee; So shall my Soul and Body live,1 Joh. 1.7. And to Thee living praises give. The Bodies Earth-quake, Agues are,Meditation upon his two Agues. Shaking us like a pent-up Aire; Then breaking forth, through our Earths pores, It casts out Flames, and Waters store; Imbalming us with sweat, as't were To fit us for our Sepulchre. Such was my two last Sicknesses, Deaths prelude, and a long recess Of Health, which no Court-Pagentry Could flatter, for to stay with me; Nor yet my Office, which transfer I did to God's Commissioner. An all-controling Ague, (which Like the Familiar of a Witch) Did haunt me, at set-hours each Day At first, till Mercy did allay: And to each other, chang'd my fit, Lest I should be burnt up by it.
Here sometimes I, as frozen lay, Shaking for cold, as Seamen say Those do, neer the North pole; Anon, Burnt up, as one i'th torrid Zone, For eight Hours space; at whose retreat, I almost drowned was with sweat. Thus alternative, cold, and heat, Predominant were, in the same seat And subject; So the Scriptures tell, Sinners tormented are in Hell; Mat. 8.12.Where weeping, wailing, gnashing Teeth, Shew cold, and heat, and easless grief. Out of this Aguish, Hell, in which I twice was cast, some Years betwixt; I cryed with David, Jonah; Then Psal. 34.6. Jonah 2.2.Thou savest me, as thou did'st them: Wherefore, as they, so I will bless Thee in my Heart, Tongue, Life, and Verse. O Lord, I have (since Life) began, Been sick of a Quotidian, Which sometime doth me greatly shake, With faithless fears, which makes me quake; Anon, mad Anger boyles my blood, Breaths out ill humors, like a Flood. O purge out quite this Malady, And passions tune to Harmony. So shall such holy temp'rament Give health to both, with sweet content; And fear, thus sp'rit'aliz'd shall bring; Phil. 2.12.No trembling, but what's good, 'gainst sin: Psal. 69.9.Yea, Anger sanctified, shall still Burn up, and cast out what is ill.
ARGUMENT. Vpon my sight of a dead Corps, and the Contemplation, that Death is the Compleatment of all Diseases; and therefore will be (the Lord knows how soon) notwith∣standing those my former Recoveries, my last, and in∣curable Sickness; but not my Conquerer, since Death is swallowed up in Victory.1 Cor. 15.5, 4. Soliloquium, or Discourse. WHat a lively Moniter is this dead Carkass! the Daily News of Mortality hath not moved me so much, as the fight of this one Trophy of Death. Reports deli∣ver things by whole sayle; and from others, when the Eye, more feelingly, gathers a truth from many particulars, as being its own Judge, Witness, and Informer, The common sounds of Death, Posts through our Eares, without any stop; whereas the Spectacle thereof, by a self-application, Innes even in our Hearts. The distressed Soul, being fled, unbodied, unhoused; and the battered Citadel surrendered into the Enemies posses∣sion; Loe, how the Successors of sin do Patrizare, trampling up∣on these mud Walls, and demolishing this Mansion of Clay; The Luminaries of the Body, which used to shine with a living brightness, like the Gelly of a sliding Meteor, ly now intombed in darkness; And that ruddy hue, which gave the name of flesh, to this whited Earth, hath either changed its colour, or its place: Every particular Member hath now left off its motion, and rests manacled in a long, and a breathless sleep; Yea, the whole Body is made ready for its Burial, lies imbalmed in a cold sweat. It's better to be in the House of Mourning, than of Mirth;Eccl .2. to be humble, than secure: whil'st my Eye amazedly wanders over these dead Limbs, methinks, in them I view the true Anatomy of my own fate; and read in pale Characters, that immutable Decree, It is appointed to all Men once to dye. O Lord,Heb. 9.27. since this is thy will, and the Law of Nature; give me grace to seek out my Enemy, rather than suffer my Enemy to seek out me; that so my preparation, may lessen both my fear and danger. Since the suddain assault of ambushments, annoy more, than the open force of pitched Battails; and the unexpectedness of death's approach, terrifies, and hurts more, than his merciless Dart:
Wherefore let me dye Daily,1 Cor. 15.31. with Saint Paul, that when I cease to dye, I may begin to live; rather than dye but once, and ever, with the rich Glutton in the Gospel.Luk. 16 22, 23. The light of the Body is the Eye, and the Eye of the Soul is Faith; the one of these I must lose, the other I may lose. O Lord, which only givest light in darkness, grant that when I cease to see Vanity, I may begin to view thee; not through a fleshly perspective, as now, but spi∣ritually, in a far more excellent manner; And when my Soul is divested of these Rags of Flesh, and freed from her dull, and sleeping Earth, shall appear naked in thy Presence; Cloath her with the Robes of beauty, and glory, as having already given her a new Name,Rev. 2.17. the Wedding Garment, the best Robe; that so when Death shall be swallowed up in Victory, and the number∣less automes of my dust,Mat. 22.11, 12. through thy power, new-molded into a Body,Luk. 15.22. my Soul may make a re-entry; from which incorruptible and inseparable Union of Parts,1 Cor. 15.54. may proceed, an Eternal per∣fection of Immortality, and Glory. Amen. The TRYVMPH. A Corolary Poem on the former Subject. OVt-face me not, Grim Death, as though thy hate Ingraved in this dead Corps, could make my fate Vnhappy; bright Mettals, ag'd with rust, Are polisht best, by fretting them with dust. And the Refiner, melts with Fire, his Ore, To make it purer than it was before. What, though a poisonous Wasp thou art, as Eved 1 Cor. 15.54.Of putrid matter; Death by Christ, is dead? Or if that Natures Lyon, still thou be, Judg 14.8.A Sampson's Lyon (sure) thou art to me. Tryumph not then, so proudly o're this dust, As though it was not laid up here in trust; Nor vainly think that this sad Chaos can, Make me believe no Life, because no Man; Bodies are but the Souls Seat, which in case She leaves, we live still, though we change the place. The naked Grain, which from the Seeds-Man's hand, Falls to be buried i'th furrow'd Land,
Corrupts, then Springs in a new forme. So we, Once Mortal, put on Immortality;1 Cor. 15.53. Thou being but God's Chinick, to reverse Man to his first Materials; that his Herse May be a Phoenix Nest; from whence shall rise, When our Sun shines, a Bird of Paradize. The CIRCLE. Another Corolary Poem of Mortality. TEll me, fond Man, what Joy thou hast In Courting Pleasures, or to tast These Earthly vain delights; since all, Add but degrees unto thy fall. No sooner Nature hath begun, and done Her work in thee; but it's undone. Ripe Years no sooner calls thee Man, But Age makes thee a Babe again. Thus Circular, is Mans course, our Birth, Derived from Dust, returns to Earth; Being only Statutes made of Clay, Once to be viewed, then thrown away; Experimental Figures, wherein Features Are drawn, thereby to Limn out rarer Creatures. ARGUMENT. Vpon God's merciful Preservation of Me, and my Family in health; in a time of a General Sickness, and Mor∣tality; which broke forth under the Vsurpation of Oliver Cromwell. Soliloquium, or Discourse. NAtions, in the Holy Scriptures, are compared to Seas, which have their Calmes, and Stormes; their Ebbes and Flow∣ings:Psal. 93.3, 4. So these have their Peace and War, health and sickness, in a continual Vicissitude. O that these chan∣ges would prepare us for our last, great, certain, and yet uncer∣tain Change.
England! and I in England, bear witness to all this; as having seen, and experimented its truth: particularly that of health, and sickness; when of a suddain, (as in the Dream of Pharaoh's Kine) our flourishing health was devoured,Gen. 41.12, 3, 4. Psal. 93.1, 2. Deut. 32 39. Psal. 68.20. Psal. 148.23.8.11, 12. by lean and mace∣rating Diseases. Wherefore, let us humbly acknowledge, that the Lord alone Raigns in Heaven, and in Earth; that he wounds and heals; he bringeth down to the Grave, and raiseth up; and that, to God the Lord, belongs the Issues of Death. O Almighty Saviour, thou art not only stiled in Scripture, The Lord, and Ge∣neral of animate,Exod. 9.8. but also of animate Hosts; As of the Stars, Hail,Exo. 12.29, 30. Snow and of Diseases; which last sort of thy Militia, during his Rule, (that ambitiously called himself our Protector) I saw quarered under thy Sergeant, Major Death's Colours, for many Moneths, in the Towns and Houses round about my Habi∣tation. During all which time, thou O Lord, didst most graci∣ously give to me, and my whole Family, a Protection from these troublesome and unwelcome Guests; Blessing us all with a hap∣py and un-interrupted health. O most liberal and bountiful God and Father; singular favours, (such as this) calls for from me; singular praises and acknowledgments; since not any goodness in us, above our Neighbours, caused this distinguishing mercy: For we were, and are sinful beyond others; but thy free Grace, who delightest to do good,Exod. 34.6, 7. as being full of Bowels of pitty and com∣passion, and shews Mercy to whom thou wilt shew mercy. Where∣fore,Exod. 33.19 O Lord, since thou art not like to ill-natur'd Man, but gi∣vest without grudging;Jam. 1.5. yea, hast promised more to them, to whom thou hast already given much; Add I beseech thee this Grace,Mark 4.25. that I may exceed others in real thankfulness, as thou hast made me to precede many others, in this, and the like fa∣vours. In testimony of which great and special Mercy to me, and mine, in our preservation; I humbly present to thee this Cordial acknowledgment in this, and the following Psalm of Praise. Amen. The PROTECTION. Ejaculation or Hymn upon the former Subject. WHen Sin becomes Vniversal, No wonder Epedemical Diseases answer Justice call, Making each House an Hospital: Such was unhappy England's fate, When a Vsurper Rul'd our State.
Then Lord, unto my Family, Thou wast a healthful Sanctu'ry;Esay 8.14. Thy Mercies great Indulgency, Freed us from this Mortality: Made Vs to Goshen-like, when fear,Exod. 8, 22. Chap. 9.26. Sickness, and Death, Triumphant elswhere. Sad was these times, whon Corn and Grass, Like to their owners, withered was, For want of help to Inn, (alas) And tend them; yea, to such a pass, Were many Housholds brought before It ceast, three parts were sick, or more. Good God! how free's thy Grace? how great Thy Love? how sinful, uncompleat Am I? the Subject, Stage, and Seat Of Favours, which I here repeat With Praise, since thou protection grants To worst of Sinners, least of Saints. Feavers, O Lord, of Luxury, Tumors of Pride, and Vanity, Dropsies of swelling Gluttony, Agues of sad Apostacy, Most Families do now infect, Make Sick; O do thou mine protect. And let not an Egyptian Night Of Error, now Eclipse the Light Of Goshen;Exod. 10.23. but let thy might Preserve their Families upright; So shall our Houses Churches be,Colos. 4.15. And give all Glory unto Thee. Amen. ARGUMENT. Vpon God's gracious Preservation of my Horses, and other Cattle from dying, in the time of a great Murrain, under Oliver Cromwell's Government, when many of my Neigh∣bours were very much damnified.
Soliloquium, or Discourse. AS Achan's sin, let Israel blood; So Saul's guilt of blood, made Israel fast perforce,Josh. 7.1, 5. 2 Sam. 21.1. 2 Sam. 4▪ 1, 15. in three Years of Famine. David's pride in Numeration, concludes in Israel's hu∣miliation, and Pestilential substraction: And the High presumption of the Princes of the Philistines,1 Sam. 5.1, 3, 5. in the captivating God's Ark, ends in the shame and reproach, Plague and destru∣ction of the People of their principal Cities, Ekron, and Ashdod: to all which Examples▪ the Poet bears witness, Delirent Reges, plectuntur Achivi. As Israel suffered for Korah, Dathan's, and Abiram's Rebellion; So England was punished with several Judgments (as I humbly conceive) for Cromwel's unfaithfulness,Numb. 16.1.31, 32, 46, 47, 48, 49. and ambition; witness the great and strange Plague amongst Horses, and other Cattle; and which was very remarkable, it raged most amongst his Troops, the Pillars of his Pride. Not, but that in all these Inflictions, the Peoples Sins was the principal cause, and the Princes offence, as it were,2 Sam. 24, 1. the shooing-horn, to pull them on them; as the Holy Spirit witnesses, as to Israels Plague. The anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he moved David against them, saying, go and number Israel, and Judah. That is, he permited Sathan to stand up against Israel, and to provoke David to num∣ber Israel; as it is clearly held forth, in the first of the Chro∣nicles, Chapter the 21. Vers. 1. But to return, This Plague, or Murrain was so contagious, that it cleaved unto the very Walls, Planks, and Mangers of Stables: insomuch, that the fresh and untainted Horses, brought and pla∣ced in them, to supply the former loss, were presently infected, and dyed; alike Mortality was also amongst other Cattle: So that it is hard to say, whether the dying groans of Beasts and Horses, or the Cryes of the Husband-men, and Carriers, and those whose livelyhood was swept away by this Beasom of destruction, was the greater. O most gracious God, who in the midst of these general Losses, and Complaints, preserved my Stock untoucht, and intire; not for my righteousness sake, which is as filthy Rags, but for thy mercy sake: Accept I beseech thee this my thankful acknowledgment, of thy singular goodness, and Fatherly providence amongst the rest of thy mercies,Isa. 5.1. Deut. 31. 19, 21, 22. Exod. 15.1. Jud. 5.12. 2 Sa. 22.1. which according to thy own example, and thy Saints, my duty, and thy command; I desire to record, and declare to my Childrens Children, and to all future Generations; that when through the Redemption of my Saviour Jesus Christ,
thou shalt translate me to praise thee in the Heavenly Chore of glorious Saints and Angels;Psal. 28.7. Psal. 33.3. Cat. 1.1. Rev. 9.9. Rev. 14.3. 1 King. 4.32. Eph. 5.19. Colos. 3.16. They and thy People in succeeding Ages, may continue to praise, and bless thy Name here upon Earth, and be incouraged by thy manifold favours to me (thy poor Servant) to fear, love, and trust in thee for ever. Lord, since thy Glory, and the good of my own Soul, and others, is my only end in this Work; Let it receive a blessing from thee. Amen. The SHAMBLES. A Corolary Poem on the former Subject. WHence is it, that the stately Stalls for Horse, Of Noble Men are empty; And perforce, The Grooms do idly wait, bewaile the fate Of their dead Steeds; who seem to lie in state, Like some in our proud Age? yea, Gentry fear, No course at Brackly will be run this Year, For want of raceing Barbes; And that their Hounds, Will surfeit with much Horse-flesh; be unsound For want of Exercise; and Troopers cry Old pay will not suffice new Horse to buy. Why? are our Fields Vntill'd? why doth our Grain, Now sow it self, before brought home again, For want of Teames to Inn it? And the Road, Through Carriers loss of Horse, so thinly's troad? Yea, Dairy-men, and Graziers, throw up Ground, Because their Sheep and Cattle die unsound? Our Oracle, God's Word, gives answer, Thus, All Plagues are fruits of sin; And the first curse,Gen. 3.39. Gen. 3.17. Gen. 3.1. Which like the Jewish Leprosie infects, All that is ours, (though Creatures innocent) As be'ng on Vs, in part, a Punishment. Thus Rulers, righteously do confiscate, Not only Rebels Lives, but their Estate; And Princes use, for faults in the Non-age, Of a beloved Son, to whip his Page. O let our sinless Brutes, sad dying moanes, Stir up in Vs Offenders, hearty groanes For all our sins, their Plague: so shall this loss, To Vs become a blessing, not a Cross.
Lord, though my fault did greatly contribute Vnto this common harm, yet at thy suite, This Judgment thou on others laid; Let fall; Sparing my goods, who was a principal; Preserving unto Admiration, My Stock, in this so great Contagion. Lord, as thy Mercy here was singular, So let my praise, the common pitch, as far Transcend; That so thy favours magnitude May not bring forth, make great, ingratitude In Me: Who, for thy Preservation, Offer my self for an Oblation. Amen. ARGUMENT. Vpon God's gracious Providence, in the seasonable quench∣ing, and preserving, Eleven times, four of my Houses, (then in my possession) from being burnt down, and de∣stroyed; And that without my suffering of any consider∣able loss. Soliloquium, or Discourse. OF all inanimated Instruments of God's curse for sin, none have been so violent, irresistable, and destructive to Man, as the four Elements;Numb. 16.31.32, 33. because of all sublunary things, they possess the largest extent; and therefore have the greatest power, and influence: Witness the Earths tremendious swallowing up the Tents, and Families of rebellious Korah, Da∣than, and Abiram; and the destructive and ruinating Antiochian Earth-quakes;Gen. 7.20.21, 22, 23. Numb. 25.9. The Universal Deluge in Noah's time by Water; The great Mortality and destruction of the Israelites in the Wil∣derness; and our late dreadful Pestilences in London, proceed∣ing from the corruption of the Aire; and the fearful and unpa∣rallel'd Visitation of Sodom and Gomorrah,Gen. 19.24, 25. by Elementary Fire. Of which four Fundamental Simples, and sole Ingredients of our lower Creation; None is so terrible, so tormenting, so swift, and so indomitable, as the Element of Fire: and therefore not only the unsupportable pains of Hell, are held forth to us in
Scripture, by Fire;Isa. 30.33. But flaming Fire is already irrevocably or∣dained by the Lord (as the blessed Apostle Peter witnesseth)to bring up the rear, and to be the last,2 Pet. 3.7, 10. and the most desolating Judgment upon this wicked World; The sad, yet lively figures of this last Fiery Destruction, are the Burnings of Houses, Towns, and Cities, particularly that of the great, famous, and ancient City of London, in the Year 1666. Against which City, those Ignation Fires, marcht with such a large and fearful front, that they destroyed, and laid in Ashes, in three Days, the glory, la∣bours, and expences of two thousand seven hundred of Years. O gracious God! hath Fire been so raging, unmerciful, and desolating to many thousands of Houses and Palaces, in London and England? hath it now, and heretofore, impoverisht, and un∣done many thousands of Persons, and good Christians? what cause have I (a sinner, above others) to record and acknowledge thy great and continued mercies; for no less than Eleven times quenching the Fires begun in Four of my Houses, (lately in my possession) and for preserving our Goods from any considerable Damage? O let thy Goodness and Mercy, that was virtually Water, to allay, and put out these judicial and terrene Fires, kindled by my sin; as well as though the malice of Enemies, and careles∣ness of Servants, be as Oyle, to cause the Flames of my Love and thankfulness, so to mount aloft, that they may be heard, and seen afar off; even of all that serve, and trust in thee in these three Nations; That they in the consideration of these, and of others thy marvellous loving kindness to me, declared in this my poor work, may praise thee with me also; Yea, let this holy and Heavenly Fire, consume and burn up whatsoever is not thy goods, and furniture in me; and destroy every Image of Jealousie,1 Cor. 3.16. any Lust that Sathan hath set up in thy Temple, my Body; or upon thy Altar, my heart; so shall my whole Man (like thy House con∣secrated by Solomon) be replenisht with thy brightness and glory:2 Chro. 5.13, 14. yea, being thus filled with the Holy Ghost, my Life and Soul shall shine like holy Stephens Face, thy Proto-Martyr,Act. 6.15. and Confes∣sor here, and both Soul and Body hereafter to Eternity, shall be made like unto my Saviour's glorious Body: For we know that when Christ, who is our life, shall appear,Phil. 3.21. Col. 3.4. we shall also appear with him in Glory. Amen.
The EXTINGVISHER. Ejaculation or Hymn upon the former Subject. HOw blest, and Heaven-like, was Man's State in Paradice; When nakedness, with goodness cloth'd, was of a greater price By far, than Cloth of Gold, imbost with Diamonds, Rubies, great orient Pearles, and other precious Stones! There was no need, nor pompous use of Houses fair, To live, lodge, Banquet in, or fence from Wind, cold Aire, Or Summers heat; Grass ever green, imbrodered With various colour'd Flowers, was his sweet Bed; The Earth, his Table was, spread with variety Of gustful Plants and Herbs; yea every fruitful Tree, As Servitors, present his Smell, Eye, Hands, and Tast With all kinds of the varest Fruits, and delicates: Above the rest, was that, Nature-preserving Tree, Of Life, giv'n him to feed on to Eternity. By Day, his large previllion, was the Azure Skie, Glorious like Heaven, through the Sun's light; his Canopie, Also by Night it was, though chang'd, and altred clean, As being spangled o're with Stars, like a new Scene. O wretched Man, who by thy own rebelliousness, Hast forfeited this Patent of true blessedness; And art most justly out-law'd, and by sin cast out, Of this, thy first condition; And be-set about With miseries: hence is it, that each Element, Of which thou art compounded, is revengeful bent Against thee; that the glorious Sun, whose Heavenly Fire, Was made to warm, and cherish thee, is through God's Ire, By its refracted Beams, thy great Tormentor: Hence The Aire is full of Thunders, Tempest; and with cold condenst, Powers forth, the down-Snow, and canded Hail, with Rains, Like Floods. Witness the Indian Spouts, and Hurricanes; The Seas, and Rivers, now have leave to pass their bounds, And make that Sea again, or Lakes that was drie ground. Hence is it that our Mother Earth, out of whose Wombe, So many kindes spring forth, unnaturally becomes Their Tombe, before their time; And with a trembling Jaw, Devours her Off-spring; swallowes up in her vast Maw Whole Townes; yea, Towring Cities, and the swelling Streames, Of Rivers deep, making proud Mountains, humble Plains.
Hence is it, that wild Beasts rebel 'gainst Man, their Soveraign Lord; Nimrods oppress, and Brothers fall by Brothers Sword. These fearful fruits of Sin, and of first Adam's Fall, Was the ground Plot, Impulsive cause, Original, Of Houses, Towns, and Cities; Then necessity, Was Man's Surveyor, But now Pride, and Luxury; Which changed hath our Fathers Caves, Tents, Cottages, To Castles, Towers, like Babel, stately Pallaces, And costly Buildings; Four such, Lord, for my rich lot, Thou gavest me once; built, furnisht to my hand, what not? Nay more, that love, and mercy, might thy bounty match, Eleven times thy good providence, kept only watch, And blest the meanes, to quench those Flames, that had begun To Ceize House, Goods, upon sins Execution: Yea once, the side pience of a Garret, was on Fire, put out, Without the knowledg, help of any Person (wonderful throughout!) In all these Fires, our Damages was very small, When Neighbours lost fair Dwellings, Houshold-Stuff, and all Their precious things. Wherefore let this thy goodness be, By me, O Lord, Recorded to Posterity. That what's deficient here, to celebrate thy praise, May be supplyed by them in time, and length of Days. Dear God, to give, preserve from harm, Four pleasant Seats, Was thy great act of love, and care; made more compleat, In giving, gracing me poor sinful Hut of Clay, To be thy Temple, and thy dwelling Night, and Day:1 Cor. 3.16. But wretched Man I am, and mad, that in return,2 Cor. 6.16. Have oft essai'd thine; yea my one House to burn, By Flames of Lusts, which from the middle story, my vil'd heart, Flamed through my Eyes Balcons, and fill the highest part,Rom. 7.24. My mind with smokie darkness; so that Flakes of Fire, Indangered thence, my Neighbours House, yet hath not thy just Ire, Good God, left me, thus foolishly by my own act, To be burnt down: but in remembrance of my firm contract To thy dear Son, my Spouse, thou didst bind up, restrain, Sathan, that unclean Sp'rit, the Wind that blew that Flame; Yea, pour'd by th' hand of faith, thereon my Saviour's blood, Which dampt those Fires; repair'd, and made thy Structure good. Lord, am I a Bankrupt, unable to repay, My Debt of Gratitude, for favours every Day; Deliverances from many Dangers Temporal; What shall I render for these Mercies spiritual? Lord, I am wholly thine, by right of Creation, And thy Son's purchase, constant preservation;
Wherefore accept thy own, my all: Let it suffice, Since Soul and Body is thy living Sacrifice. Amen. ARGUMENT. Vpon God's gracious preserving of me from being Burnt in my Lodgings in Summerset House. Soliloquium, or Discourse. DAy unto Day uttereth Speech, and Night unto Night sheweth knowledge,Psal. 19.2. as to the constant, gracious, and wonderful Providences of the Lord, for the preservation of his People. Amongst whom, (to the praise and glory of his free grace, be it spoken) I have had a large share, witness the foregoing Re∣cords, and this deliverance, when in the conclusion of some Hours spent alone in Fasting and Prayers, and I ready to arise from my Knees, and to change my Cushion for my Bed at Ten a Clock at Night, I heard a great crack, as of a Pistol, issuing from behind the Hangings, and corner of the Chamber, within two Yards of me; at which suddain noise, I arose up, and pul∣led back the Hangings, saw a Barrel full of small-Cole, all of a flame, occasioned by the innocent carelesness, and thrift of my Fire-maker, who had cast back some live small Coales, into the Tub; the breaking of whose burnt Hoops, gave me this timely Alarm: which had it been delayed but a few Minutes, I, and my Servant had been a Bed, and asleep, and lockt up in my Bed-Chamber, within that Dining-Room; And the Hangings that hung over the Barrel, certainly Fired; together with that Room, and that whole stately Structure. O Lord, whilst we are faithfully imployed in thy service, and worship; we are assuredly under thy Almighty Protection; who hast promised to those that make thee their Refuge;Psal. 91.10, 11, 12. That there shall no evil befall them, nor any Plague come neer their dwel∣lings; That thy Angels shall take charge of them, to keep them in all their ways, that they shall bear them up in their hands, lest they dash their Foot against a Stone. O how sweet, how comfortable, how incouraging to thy People, is the most firm be∣lief of the constant presence,Heb. 1.14. watchful, and powerful assistance
of thy glorious Angels, whom thou hast made Ministring Spirits for the good of thy Elect; As thy Servant at this time found by experience! Such gracious Providences as this, being most probably timed, acted, and discovered by an Angel, as the lay∣ing of the Train, and kindling of the Fire, and inflaming of the Barrel, might possibly be, the malicious contrivance of a wicked Spirit; Who, as the Scriptures witness, are as constantly Instru∣ments of evil, to Man-kinde (although the wicked World are ignorant thereof) as the others are of all good, to thy Children. Lord, probably it was the Devils will and design, that the Barrel should not have flamed forth so soon, by a quarter of an Hour, and then without any noise; that so, the Chamber being empty, and we a Bed, and asleep; and the Hangings on Fire, we might have been first certainly smothered, and afterwards burnt. (A Roman-like Obsequie.) But thy All-wise providence suffered him (as thou didst his Guy Faulkes) to bring his Plot to an ac∣complishment, and then ordered thy Angel thus strangely and opportunely, to discover to thy greater glory, his disappointment, and thy Servants wonderful Salvation, and serious Observation of this thy most Fatherly love, care, and watchfulness over me, thy poor Child and Creature. Blessed God, and Father, how hast thou, through our Adoption in Christ, meliorated our condition, so that our greatest Enemies, in all their malicious actings against us, are now made but Carriers, to convey thy love-tokens unto us; yea, all our troubles and dangers, are so many choice and faith-strengthning experiences of thy Power, Goodness, and mercy; so that now, instead of fearing of them, we can rejoyce and triumph in, and over them; And give to our selves, and o∣thers, a satisfying reason why thou sufferest Devils, and Diaboli∣cal Men thus to act, rage, and persecute thy Saints; when thou couldest in a moment cast them all into Hell. Why thou leadest us into various Temptations, afflicts us with Diseases, sufferest us to be Daily incompast about with troubles, and dangers; when in an instant thou couldest renew, and make again this Earth our Paradice; Is it not, O Lord, (as well as to exercise and bright∣en our Graces, and to purge out our sins) that in and by these Trials thou mightest also have a frequent, and fit occasion to ma∣nifest thy self unto us, (in the face of our Lord Jesus Christ) in all thy glorious Attributes, of Power, and Wisdome, Justice, and Faithfulness, Love, Mercy and Goodness? Thus O Lord, this great danger of Burning, was to me the Mother of a far greater mercy, thy wonderful preservation; and shall now, and for ever be the subject of my praise, and thanks-giving: which I humbly present to thy most gracious Majesty, in this Memorial, and the follow∣ing Poem. Amen.
The DELIVERANCE. A Corolary Poem on the former Subject. O Lord, how aptly doth thy sacred Word compare, Eccl. 1.7.3. Chap. 2.23. Chap. 1.3, 10. Chap 4 4. Gen. 3.10. Heb. 9.27.Men unto Travellers, whose toilsome Journeys are Begun, even from the Womb; whence natures pass they have, And make some short, some longer steps, unto the Grave, Our common home; fulfilling thy Decree most just, For sin; That Earthly Bodies shall return to Dust? But is this all's held forth, by this comparison? No, our Life and Way, like theirs, is tiresome; O're Hills, through Vailes; now high, then low; through passages That cragged, Woody are, untrode, where Ambushes Of sundry mischiefs, troubles, (Thief-like) us engage: Such hath my course been, Lord, throughout my Pilgrimage. Instance amongst the rest of my Lifes Narrative, This following danger, and thy loves preservative. Who would have thought dead small Coals, laid some yards from fire, Vnused for five Hours space, should as it were conspire, Behind my Hangings, without sight, or scent of fume, Or crackling, me, and a great Pallace to consume? Or that my harmless Maid should ignorantly lay, A train o're Night, to burn us all before next Day; By her too careless thrift, in casting back some Coales, Inkindled, when she made my Fire? Who could controle, But thou O Lord, this dreadful fate of causes set, Within few Minutes, to produce a sad effect? Thou forcest the dead Barrels Hoops, i'th nick of time, To sound Alarm, and discover this design; Else had I quickly slept in Death, been smothered, Consum'd (as on a Roman Pile) upon my Bed. At which great noise, which did direct my Eyes and Hand, I rose▪ with-drew the Vaile, and cast the flaming brand Into my Chimny-Fire; converting prayer to praise, And vowes of gratefulness, unto thee all my Dayes; Which here I pay, adding this Application, That when one of the Sex, first in transgression, Gen. 3.12.Inflam'd, by some wanton Insects, the Gun-Powder of Lust, 1 Tim. 2.14.Barrel'd up in my Heart (like that kindling dust,) I'th Night, (the Sun-set of thy Grace) which Coles did lie Smothering sometimes, behind the graceful Tapistry
Of my Christian profession; yea, when that Fire, With noise, and Hell-assisting fury, did conspire, To burn, and break the Hoops and Bonds of Chastity, That so the Dining Room, on Fire, (my Body) suddainly My surpriz'd Soul (its Guest) might sleeping, burn, and lie; With all her goods, thy grace, in this Catastrophie: Then didst thou fright my Conscience, by guilts Thunder-clap, And raised me up with holy speed, for to draw back The hangings of hypocrisie; And to cast in The renew'd Fire of Zeal, (this Hell-like) Fire of Sin, And to pour on the Waters of repenting teares, With Daily Prayers, and Fasting, which this Devil fears, Casts out. O Lord, thy temporal deliverances Of Body, have been great; but thy Indulgences,Mat. 17.21. And Mercies to my Soul, exceeds as far, As doth the Heaven, the Earth, the light of Sun, a Star; For by the one, thou hast spun out the slender thread Of my expiring life; but by the other, thou instead Of Death Eternal, the reward and fruit of sin,Rom 6.21, 23. Rom. 6.22, 23. Col. 1.27. Hast giv'n me Glory, everlasting Life in Him, Who is my hope. O that I had the thankful Tongue, Of Men, and Angels, that I might inrich this Song Of praise, for thy redoubled favours, and free love, Which are beyond expression; yea, which soar above My weak conceptions: Lord, accept this Widdowes Mite, Because I offer all I have; for it's thy right. To me, for sin, belongs confusion, shame of Face; But to thee, O Lord, forgiveness, mercy, through free grace.Dan. 9.8, 9. Amen. ARGUMENT. Vpon God's most gracious and wonderful Providence, in preventing, and delivering me, from being Slain, and from committing of Man-slaughter, in my Lodgings, in Sommerset-House, about the Year, 1647.
Soliloquium, or Discourse. HE that dwelleth in the secret of the most High, shall abide under the shaddow of the Almighty.Psal. 91.2. Gracious God, I humbly and thankfully acknowledge, that thou hast per∣formed to me this thy promise, although I come far short of fulfilling the condition:Mat. 25.24. Rom. 8.32. Ja. 1.5. Psal. 23 3. Ezek. 20.9. For thou art no hard Master, (as the sloathful Servant slandered thee) but the most liberal and boun∣tiful Lord; whose grace is free, who gives without upbraiding, and who savest us temporally, spiritually, and eternally, for thy own Name sake; Even when there is but a step betwixt Us and Death. This truth was both verified and manifested, when I and my Servant, in my Lodgings in Somerset House, were suddainly a∣wakened out of our sweet, and quiet Nights sleep, about break of Day, on a Summers Morning, by a great noise upon my Stairs head, seconded by the most forcible breaking open of my Dining Room Door, though defended by two great olts, and a strong Spring-Lock: which first assault gave us only time to step out of our Beds, in our Shirts, to my Chamber-Door, with our naked Swords, and wound-up, and ready-prim'd Pistols, charged with Bullets; against which Door, without any Parly, another assault was made, by a kind of a Roman battering Ram, which  out, and cast into the Flore, three strong Staples, the security of my Lock and Bolts; The Door wide open, a Person unknown to me, with others following him with drawn Swords, would have entred the Chamber, not once answering my loud de and, of what they came for: Whereupon they pressing upon me even to the point of my Sword, I verily believed they intended to murder me, and the rather, because not long before, reports were spread abroad, of a design of massacring in one Night, all the then Parliament Men in their Beds. Wherefore in self-defence, I presented my Pistol, and struck Fire against the Brest of the Leading-man without effect, which failure in all likelihood might have encouraged, and provoked him and his associates, to have rusht in upon us naked Men, and to have hew'd us in pieces▪ but certainly there was more with us, than was against us; else had not a valiant tryed Officer, with some Files of Souldiers; for such I understood them to be afterwards, at the sight only of two Men in their Shirts been struck with such a pannick fear, that they suddainly and with great speed ran back through the Di∣ning-Room, not stopping in their flight, nor recollecting their spi∣rits▪ until they came to the bottom of my Stairs. To which Stairs
top, I in my Shirt with the like speed pursued them; where, up∣on a second demand of their intentions, and who they were the Officer told me, he was sent by Order from Major General Skip∣pon, to search a House in Somerset-House Yard, and to appre∣hend two dangerous and disaffected Persons, which before they could attach, were slipt out of their Beds, into the Cellar of that private House, which by reason of the height of that great House, above that Lean too; had a Cellar under the Cellar belonging to my Lodgings; from whence forcing up a board of the Flore they crept up into my Cellar, and from thence to my Stare-case, under which they hid themselves; and after our parly, were there found, and taken. These Persons, he told me, he and his Soul∣diers pursued through the same Hole, into my Cellar▪ and Lodg∣ings, supposing all to be but one, and the same House; where∣upon, I telling him my Name, and rectifying the mistake, The Officer came up to the Stair-head, and craved pardon for his rash and dangerous Error; I returning to my Bed▪ and he with his Prisoners, the same way that he came; (my Door into the House, Court, or Quadrangle, being all this time fast lockt, and bolted) as we left it, at our going to bed. O Lord, how did this ignorant, and innocent mistake, by thy all wise permission and ordering, involve me into a double dan∣ger, that thou mightest redouble Mercies! had these Souldiers  more knowing in their actings▪ I had been more ignorant of thine; yea, if I had not been in so great danger, I had not been so graciously delivered; Thus to the answering, and satisfying of all murmurings and objections against thy Government of the World, thou dost exalt and justifie thy Holiness, Power, Wisdom, and Righteousness, in bringing forth Light out of Darkness, and that not only out of things casually evil, as here, but out of what is morally evil, as in Adam's fall; which thy Omnipotency could have impeded, did not the conjunction and greater shining forth (in the midest of this black oile) of thy Wisdome, Justice, Mercy, and all other thy Attributes, through the darkness and contrariety of Providences, and opposition of Sin and Sathan, make more for thy Glory, the Chiet, Just, and Soveraign end of all thy Works; Who, but thou O Lord, who art the God of Na∣ture, canst change, and unnaturalize Nature; So that hungry Ly∣ons shall not devour thy Daniel;Dan. 6 22. Dan 4 27. Jon 2 10. Exo. 14.21, 22. Fire shall not burn thy Three Children; A Whale shall not smother, and concoct thy Jonah, nor the fluid Sea flow over, and drown thy Israel! Who, but thou O Lord, at this time didst forbid a Sulphur Stone to spit forth Fire, at the collition and motion of the wheel of my Pistol, or extinguisht its sparks with Gun-Powder; that thou mightest
preserve my Hand from the guilt, my Conscience from the trou∣ble, my Heart from the grief, and my good Name from the re∣proach of Man-slaughter! Who but thou O Lord did cause Man with naked Swords to recoil, and valiant Souldiers to turn their backs, and to flie from two naked Men; provoking them, and in part disarmed; that so Friends might not act as Enemies, nor pour forth the blood, and destroy the lives of one another! Who was it, but thou Almighty Saviour, that gave a right understand∣ing betwixt us, and turned our feares and dangers into a Happy deliverance, and thanksgivings! Which then and now accept O Lord; who at this time didst mercifully prevent my friends, at other times, didst powerfully restrain my Enemies from taking a∣way my life; And as thy goodness hath been continued, so let my praise be perpetuated in this Memorial to future Generations, even till time shall be no more. Amen. The INVISIBLE GVARD. A Corolary Poem upon the former Subject. MAn's Life is wholly unsecure; Vpon him dangers do attend, Job 5.7.As Shades on Substances; As sure As Sparks flie up; from Foes, from Friends, Asleep, awake, early, and late, In Sickness, Health; In every State. Instance, Loyal Mephibosheth, 2 Sam. 16.3, 4. 2 Sam. 4.5, 6. 2 Sam. 3.27. 2 Kin. 8.15. 2 Sa. 20.9, 10. 2 Sa. 13.28, 29. Judg. 4.21.By slandring Ziba spoil'd; the ends, Murders, of sleeping Ishboseth, And Abner, by their seeming Friends, Of sick Benhadad, Amasa, Of healthful Ammon, Sisera. This Axiom, oft hath been prov'd true, In and by me; Witness this Role, Full fraught with dangers, old and new; And this, which Mercy did controle;
Else had I Kill'd, or Killed bin; Or both, without malicious sin. That Leaders, should, by Day-light take, A Palace for a Tenement, That Friends, like Enemies, should break Ope Doors, not shewing their intent; Assault, as Foes; no words exchange, But Swords and Pistols was most strange. But this, most wonderful of all, A Fire-stone struck, no sparks confer; Or if it did, should vainly fall Into a Bed of Gun-Powder, As upon Snow; that Powder drie, Should be more merciful, than I. That Souldiers, and their Officer, That fear'd not thundring Cannons Crack, Should flie from naked Men, as 'twere Afrighted, with one Pistols knack; That this should end, without all harme, Was only God's restraining Arme. O Lord, though danger, is sins Lot, By thy Decree,Esth. 1.19. Chap. 3.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Chap. 7.10. like Persian Law Reversless; yet this Haman's Plot, 'Gainst Isr'el, thou dost over-awe, And by assisting Providence, Vs safe-guard gives, in thy defence. Wherefore, (Purin-like) Feasts of Praise, I will keep Daily unto Thee,Esth. 9.26. Who hast been gracious all my Days, In Peerless Mercies, unto me; That all things work (as saith thy Word) Good unto thine, I here Record.Rom. 8.28. Amen.
ARGUMENT. Vpon God's gracious preserving Me from the Infection, of the loathsome and dangerous Disease of the small Pox, Four times; and of my Wife, Six times, when some Persons, in the Houses in which we lived in, were sick of it. Soliloquium, or Discourse. AS Sin is the Distemper of the Soul, so is Sickness of the Body; both Maladies ending in Death, the one Tempo∣ral, the other Eternal: As every Sickness is the sad ef∣fect of Sin, so every Disease Herogliphical and Sumeto∣mical, of some Sin or other, discovering, as well as punishing it. So the Tun-bellied Dropsie, is both the figure, and scourge of Drunkenness; The inflaming Feaver, of Fiery anger, and passi∣ons; The noisome French-Disease, of filthy Lust; and the fulsome Face ingraving and marring, small Pox, of Pride. O how doth our righteous God humble, affright and punish the proud, wanton, and beautiful Persons of our times, by this Tyrant: Who, as the Lord's Bayliff, having seiz'd their whole Bodies upon Execution, for the Debt of Sin; and baffled, and fool'd their expected Rescuers, their deified Physicians, binds his Prisoners Hand and Foot unto their Beds; Regards not their groans, sighs, and teares that falls from their late amorous, and lascivious Eyes; which he seales up with a scab, singing off, (as Peasants do their Swine) even unto baldness, their curiously cur∣led, powdered, and abused Hair; swells up, and greatens their Heads, and Faces, beyond all proportion, even unto monstrous∣ness; Cloaths their Idoliz'd, and beautiful Faces, and Bodies, in∣stead of Silk, and Tissues; of curious paints, promates, and cost∣ly washes; at first▪ with Job-like Boiles, and Ulcerated Carbun∣cles; afterwards, with a loathsome, ugly, and stinking tempo∣rary Leprosie; and when that shakes off, he brands, and stigma∣tizes them, with most dis-figuring Marks; that so all may know, that looks on them, under whose Tyranny they have been? As for their smiling and inticing Lips, their false Tongues, and E∣pycurian Throats, the Instruments of Voice; by all which, they used to quaver, and warble forth wanton Aires, and deluding words; He commands to silence, and binds them by the strict,
and sore Bonds of outward and inward Tumors, and Imposthu∣mations; to be dumb, and quiet, scarcely permitting them so much liberty, as to send relief, and nourishment, to their almost-starved, and languishing Mother-Nature. O Lord! hast thou no less than four times delivered my self, and six times my second-self, my dear Wife, from this painful, dan∣gerous, loathsome, unsatiable, and dis-figuring Malady, even when it seized upon others of our Family? Hast thou fore-told, and fore-threatned, (as I humbly conceive) this destructive Di∣sease, by thy Prophet Isaiah, as thy most just Judgment for pride, Chap. 3. Vers. 7. held forth in these words, The Lord shall smite with a Scab, the Crown of the Head, of the Daughters of Zion; and the Lord will discover their secret parts? yea, hast thou set down, and ennumerated the many Instruments of Israel's pride, and ours; Vers. 18, 19 20, 21, 22, 23. A Scripture worthy to be seriously read, and considered, by the proud Gallants of both Sexes, in our times. Concluding thus, Vers. 24. And it shall come to pass, that instead of a sweet smell, there shall be a stink; and instead of a Girdle, a Rent; and instead of well-set Hair, baldness; and instead of a Stomacher, a girding of Sack-cloth; and burning, instead of beauty: Judgments, that seemes to me, to be the very lively Characters of the small Pox. O let me, to whom thou mayest say, as once my Saviour did,Joh. 8.7. to the Scribes and Pharisees; If thou beest without sin, throw the first Stone, at the proud Offenders of these times; (After my humble and penitent acknowledgment of my manifold of∣fences, of this kind) Bless and praise thy Name, for these thy so often reiterated Mercies, and Deliverances. O Lord, thy many favours have so indebted me, that I am a Bankrupt, and unable to repay;Deut. 15.17. Wherefore I humbly beseech thee, to seize upon all that I am, and have, to thy use and ser∣vice; yea, nail my Ear to the Door of thy House, that I may be thy Servant for ever; so shall I still be a great gainer: for thy service is perfect freedom; And I had rather, with King David, be a Door-keeper in thy House, than to dwell in the Tents of Wickedness, or to sit upon the Thrones of the KINGS of the Earth.Psal. 34.10. Gracious God, and Father, let me not here forget, that when thou didst thus frequently preserve us from the Infection of this Disease; thou didst then at several times deliver from Death, and dis-figuring Eleven of our Children▪ even when some of them were in great danger thereof, by this Malady. Lord, are my Children living Images, and legible transcripts, of my self; yea, self-multiplyed? Then surely their Reprieves
from Death and danger, is mine, and so to be acknowledged by me: Wherefore, in all Gratitude, I offer them up to Thee, as living Sacrifices of Praise; Humbly intreating, that my Sons and Daughters may be thine here, in all fillial Obedience; and that thou wilt please to be mine, my Wife and Childrens Portion in this thy Kingdom of Grace; and our Eternal Inheritance, in thy Kingdom of Glory. Amen. The HOVSE of CORRECTION. A Corolary Poem on the former Subject. COme hither, proud white Clay, and sadly view, Pride plum'd of all her Feathers, in her new; Denuded of her Silks, and Sattins (Webs of Worms) Imbroideries, Tissues, and her rich Perfumes; Her precious Jewels, Pearles, (Her Lovers pawnes;) Her o're-fine Hollands, Cambricks, Cobweb-lawnes; Her Flanders Lace; all which poor Tenants wrack; She carrying Farmes, yea, Mannors on her back. This is that Day, that fearful Malady, Isa. 3.18.In, and by which, the sinful Bravery, Of Zion's Daughters, shall be tain away, As saith the Lord; Their Ornaments most gay, Tinklings about their Feet; their Cawles, round Tires, Much like the Moon; their Chaines, Bracelets, Attires, Vers. 19,Call'd Mufflers; Bonnets, Adornments of Legs; 20,Their Head-bands, Tablets, and those other dregs 21,Of Pride; their Ear-Rings, and Nose-Jewels, Rings; 22,Their divers sorts of Clothing, Mantles, Crisping-Pins; Wimples, fine Linnen, Glasses, Hoods, and Vailes, 23.And whatsoever fills Prides swelling Sayles. Dan. 4.30, 31, 32, 33, 34. Act. 12.23. Luk▪ 2.1. 1 King. 9.30. Mar. 6.17, 18, 19 Jud. 16.5, 18. Act. 25.23.Tell me ye vaunting Nebuchadnezars, Proud Herods, and ambitious Caesars; Ye painted Jesabels, Herodiases, False Delilahs, and unchast Bernices Of our worst times: What will you trembling say, When Sergeant Pox arrests you? And that Day Confines you to your Chambers, binds you fast Vnto your sickly Beds, long time; then cast
You into Burnings, like to Hell; next, spots Your Body, like a Toad, confounds, besots Your mind, and senses, makes you speechless lie, Extending Tongue, and Throat, to strangling nie; Shuts up your Eyes with Scabs, denies your sight, As clowding quite its Medium, the Light; Next, he scalds-off your Absalon-like Hair,2 Sam. 14.26 That hath so oft been wanton with the Aire; And nobler Creatures, swells your Head, and Face, Big, like your mindes, and the Gigantick race; Covers your Face with a corrupted Mud, Which eats out your Complexion, all that's good; And least it should a Resurrection have, He buries it in Pits, as in a Grave; Yea, your whole Body, he scurffs o're with Scabs, To teach you, Pride shall cloth'd be with such Rags; Lord, hast thou me preserv'd unto this Day, And my Consort, from this deform'd Hidra Of pain, and evils, this Complication, Of Maladies; (to Admiration,) Yea, when thou Four, and Six times visited Mine, and her dwelling freely ransomed, Eleven Children from dis-figuring; Although the fruit of theirs, and of my sin, Who have been, and still am, most apt to be Guilty, and sick of Pride, Idolatrie; As to all Gifts, and Graces, Children, Wife, House, Land, and other good things of this Life; Which are thy Tallents, put into my Hand,Mat. 25.14, 15, 19. To use, and to repay, at thy Command; Not mine, who now can nothing call my own, But sin, and its wages, Hell, Death, Corruption;Rom. 6.23. O Lord, accept my thankful heart, thy Gift; Which I return, with Eyes, and Hands up lift, For thy Protections Ten-fold Antidote, 'Gainst these infections, ne're to be forgot; Wherefore, let my whole Man, my Life, my Pen, Thy Praises Register for aie, Amen.
ARGUMENT. Vpon God's gracious Preservation of Me, and my Wife, from Poysoning, or any Distemper, after we had drank off a Tankard of Beer, at the bottom of which▪ we found dead, a great venemous Spider. Soliloquium, or Discourse. 2 King. 4.40.AS in my former Recovery from a Surfeit of Meat; There was Mors in Olla, Death in the Dish; so here also, Death lay in ambush in the Cup. For no sooner was Nature plentifully refresht, but that at the sight of a great vene∣mous Spider, which lay dead at the bottom of the Por, we had reason to fear, that our Refresher would prove our Destroyer, and our Drink, our Poison. At the discovery of this Enemy, we were both afrighted, and the more, (which may seem extraordinary, and strange,) because it was dead, whereas usually living, not dead Adversaries are hurtful. Whither this black and ugly Creature, was as full of Malice, as Poison, and therefore burst her self in the Beer, in a kind of Revenge; For, or as the effect of her drowning, I know not; nor had we time to be Coroners; since our present danger did not admit of any delay, as to the seeking for, and taking an Antidote:Wid. 17.12. Our fear (as is usual) not neglecting, or betraying such means, and succors, as reason offered; Viz. The taking a good draught of the Oyle of Olives, which by the blessing of our gra∣cious God, drown'd both our fear and danger; we both remain∣ing without the least Distemper, in perfect health. O Lord, how true is that Proverb, Latet Anguis in Herba; (that poysonous Asps, lie covered in Cleopatra's Basket of Fruit, and Flowers) and that in a spiritual sense, as well as corporal. When hath my Soul been more in danger of the sting and ve∣nome of sin? than in prosperity, and in the sweet enjoyments of the lawful, and necessary delights, and refreshments of this life; Such as Meat, Drink, and Cloathing, Wife, Children, Relations, great Offices, and Preferments, Riches, Friends, and Recreations; Honors, stately Houses, and great Revenues; In, and under all which,1 Cor. 1.24, 30. sin, and deadly corruptions lurk, and lie hid. Wherefore blessed Lord, and Saviour, who art the power and wisdome of
the Father, and art by him made unto me Wisdom; Teach me, that in the use and enjoying of all these thy temporal blessings, I may neither be superstitiously abstemious, nor presumptuously secure; that so, whensoever I shall discover the venomous Spider of Sin, lie in the bosome of any Earthly delights, or refreshments; I may instantly resort to my Antidote, the Oyle Olive of thy Grace, called in thy Word, the Oyle of Gladness,Psal. 45.7. the Anoint∣ing; So should sin break, and cast out its Poison,1 Joh. 2.27. in any vicious temptation it shall be corrected, and repelled, and at the worst be but as a dead Spider, a mortified Lust. Blessed and praised be thou O Lord,Mat. 9.12. who only art the all-cu∣ring Physician, and hast given to me thy sick Patient: (For thou comes to heal such) Antidotes both for Body and Soul, against both kinds of poisons; for both which experimental Receipts, and merciful Recoveries, and Deliverances; I praise thy Name, with my whole Man, and here declare thy gracious goodness to me, and my dear Yoke-fellow,Psal. 66.16. in this, and other thy Preserva∣tions, to all that fear thee, in, and to all Ages. Amen. The PRESERVATIVE. A Thankful Poem upon the same Subject. AS Sathan is the Father of all Sin,Joh. 8.44. Gen. 3.17. Gen. 4.7. Gen▪ 3.5. So Sin the Mother is, of dangers; and of death; Both which he acts, as he did first begin, Vnder the specious shew of good on Earth; Which, though he hates, yet under that disguise, This Jugling Cheator, ushers in his Lies: Thus his deluded Agents, falsly stile, To save more than is meet, a virtuous thrift,Pro. 11.24. And to be prodigal in things most vile, A gentle spending, and a liberal Gift; Heresie, they call new Light, Idolatry, A Medium of Worship, and true Piety.
Pride, neatness, Swine-like, drunkenness, And beastly Gluttony, good fellowship; Deceit, Trades mystery, Voluptuousness, Christian Refreshment; Ruining suertiship, A friendly Office; murderous Duelling, True Valour; Justice, right determining. Lust, and Lasciviousness, his Factors name; Love-Courting Amorousness, Affection; Hell's Patches, Beauties spots; Painting, no stain; But a good Art, to help Complection▪ Legends of Lies, a pious fraud, base Guile, Good Language, and a Complemental Stile. As moral Crimes, so often poenal, ill Dangers, and mischiefs, (like the Crocodile) Lie cover'd under sensual Pleasures still, As under Water; till they Vs begile, And ceize upon; Thus Tomaris rich Tent, Was Cyrus Sepulchre, and Monument. Judg. 5.25.And Jael's Lordly Dish of cooling Drink, Judg. 4.21.Lull'd Sisera into a deadly sleep; 2 Sa. 13 28, 29. Esth 7.9, 18Thus Ammon, Haman, when they least did think Of danger; Death, did their own Funerals keep, And the Whores Vassailes,Rev. 17.4. drink her filthy Wine, Out of her Golden Cup of Jus Divine. Sweet Lord, thus also, in the lawful Tast Of thy good Creature, in a silver Cup, I, and my dearest, might have drunk our last, Had'st thou not seasoned our poisonousSup; 2 Kin. 4.40, 41.Elisha-like, cast out by thy Command, Act. 2.3, 4.Its Venome, as the Viper from Paul's hand. In both, fulfilling what thou promised, Mar. 16.18At thy Ascention, as of Faith, a sigue, That such of thine should not be poisoned, Nor hurt by Serpents, or by deadly Wine; Blest be thy Name, who by one act of Love, Cant. 5.2.Both strengthened Faith, and thus preserv'd thy Dove. Sin, Lord, of all things here's most venomous, As swell'd and badg'd with deadly poisonous Lusts.
Lies in my Heart, not dead, (but vigorous) As was that Spider, ready for to burst;Exod. 25.6. Exod. 30.25. Psal. 45.7. O let thy Grace, by Oyle prefigured, Preserve my Soul, (as that) my Body did. So shall I live, here blest, with sprit'all health, And cast out from the bottome of my heart, All spider-like vil'd thoughts, dead, which by stealth, Creep in, and poison would, my better part; Yea, ever live to praise thee, in that place, Where sin shall be no more, nor want of Grace. Amen. ARGUMENT. Vpon God's merciful preservation of some of our Family, from being kill'd, or hurt by a Fowling-Piece, full la∣den; and unawares discharg'd, by an unskilful Person, carelesly medling with the Cock thereof; in the Room, wherein they were diversly Imployed. Soliloquium, or Discourse. NO Person, time, place, or Company upon Earth, is free from danger; not Julius Caesar, who was stab'd, and slain, in the Senate-House of Rome; although a Person as for∣tunate, as great; in a time of Peace, and in a Place, that was the richest, and strongest Piece of the Worlds head; there∣fore called the Capitol; and in the mid'st of an Assembly of the justest, gravest, wisest, greatest, richest, and valiantest Men of the whole Earth. But it may be Objected, that although civil Persons, times, places, and Senates, may be unsecure; yet Ecclesiastical are not so, and therefore they, their times of Worship, and Assemblies, are at the least, by the papal Cannon-Laws, stiled and made spi∣ritual, and priviledged; their Synods and Counsels, sacred; and their Churches, and Monasteries, Sanctuaries; not only for them∣selves, but for the most flagitious Persons, such as Traitors, and Murderers.
I answer, that as I deny that De Jure, they have any such se∣curity, or priviledge; so De Facto, they, and others have found it otherwise, to their cost; instance in the three (Cerberus-like) Heads of the Roman Catholick Church;Simson's Church Histo. page 394. as they falsly, and non∣sensically call it, Gregory the XII. Benedict the XIII. and John the XXIV. all Three Elected, and acknowledged Popes at one time; and deposed by the Council of Constance, called by the Emperor Sigismund, who there chose Martin the V. Pope, in their Room; which Election is the present Foundation of all the succeeding Popes, and their actings; which if the Papists, and their Champions the Jesuits, deny to be legal, where will they finde a Pope, Papacy, and Succession ever since Peter, or since John the XXIV. yea, all actings by, and since Pope Martin the V. are illegal, and therefore Null? If they affirm it legal, then they confess their Church had three Heads, or Popes at once; that the Emperor of Germany hath a right to call together, when he pleases, a General Council: that such a General Counsel hath a right to Depose Pope, or Popes. And lastly, that he, and they did lawfully then Elect their Pope, without his Concave of Car∣dinals. But leaving them this Bone to pick, I proceed in my Me∣ditations, and instance, together with this, as a clear proof, and Example, (besides many others like (as to the Popes) the sad fate of others, Jewes, and Pagans, slain in their holy places; as of Senacherib,2 King. 19 37. 2 King. 11.20. 1 King. 2.29, 30, 34. slain by his Sons in the Temple of Niscoch his God; Of Queen Athaliath, attached in the Temple, and after∣wards slain; Of Joab slain by Benajath, at the Horns of the Al∣tar. I might here add many more, but I conceive these are suf∣ficient to prove my assertion, and to answer the Popish objection; That no Ecclesiastical Persons, holy times, or places, are free, and priviledged from danger. If it be lawful (that is fit) according to the Proverb, to com∣pare small things with great; This truth and observation, that all Persons, times, places, and Companies, are subject to danger, was verified to our Family; where Persons of the better rank, and Servants being together in the Kitchin, upon several employ∣ments, a Fowling-piece laden with great shot, Bullets, or Slugs; was involuntarily discharged, without the hurt of any Person; it's deadly burden, being by the great force of the Powder, buried, as in a Grave, in a large Hole in the Wall; That it might be a Daily remembrancer of God's gracious providence, and our de∣liverance, and excite continually our thankfulness. Psal. 6.43.Lord, thy Word likens Mens Mouthes, to Bowes or Quivers of Arrowes, which many times unwarily, and unadvisedly shoot sharp Arrowes, even bitter words: In the same sence, they may also
be compared to Guns, out of which Gun-powder-wits, shoot forth piercing jeeres, floutes and slanders; to the blowing up, and fi∣ring the good Names and passions of themselves, and those they converse with; O be thou therefore pleased to shield me in, and deliver me from such Company; Yea, set a watch upon my Lips, that I offend not with my Tongue, so shall I not shoot at,Psal. 141.3. or be shot at by others; And joyn that Mercy, with this other to my Family, in my Thanksgiving; For which I praise thee, as shall my Childrens Children, when they shall read this; and the rest of thy most gracious providences, and merciful deliverances to me, and mine. Amen. PROVIDENCE. A Poem upon the same Subject. ALl Actings here, are ordered from above, Although they seem excentrical to move; Like Watches Wheels, turn'd by a Spring unseen; In this Worlds Play, Dame Fortune hath no scean; The Down of Snow, and the white Candid Balls Of Hail, do not irregularly fall; Sparrowes and Haires do not upon Earth light,Mat. 10.29, 30. Without Divine appointment, and fore-sight; No second cause prefer'd, nor happy chance,Esth. 2.16, 17. Did Esther, to the Persian Throne advance; Not Michal's wit, nor Planets good Aspect,1 Sam. 19.13. Did David from the Sword of Saul protect; But the Almighties presence, which doth Eye, And Govern all things, (this is Destinie.) Thus was a piece order'd, to wound the Wall, When carelesly discharg'd, missing them all, Within that Room; unto the wonder, joy, Of our whole Family, freed from annoy. All kindes of Death are fearful, most of all, That which is suddain, since by it doth fall, Souls, with Mens Bodies, oft into a Tomb, From whence there is no Resurrection: How great was then this Mercy, Lord, that spar'd, Some unconverted, others unprepar'd
For Death, leaving to Vs, within that Room, Deep Characters of thy protection? Vnto thy praise, let's raise Pyramidies; And Print them here, and in our memories; And since thy presence only doth protect, Let it produce in Vs this blest effect; That we may alwayes fear to sin, so shall we be, Free from this double Death, and Cas'alty, Dreading no dangers, fate, or destiny, Because before prepar'd to live, or die. Amen. ARGUMENT. Being a thankful remembrance and acknowledgment of the Lord's great goodness and bounty, in giving Me by one, and my only Wife, Sixteen Children. Soliloquium, or Discourse. MArriage is honorable amongst all Men, and the Bed un∣defiled; not only to the Jewish, but Gentile Nations. Insomuch that some Common-Wealths have allotted great rewards, priviledges, and immunities, to the Pa∣rents, (that in lawful Wedlock) have had many Children; Yea, the Holy Ghost records it (no doubt) to the honor of Jaier, the Gileadite,Judg. 10.4. Judg. 8.30. that he had thirty Sons, to whom he gave thirty Ci∣ties; and of Gideon, that he had three-score and ten Sons. The poorest Man that hath a numerous Issue, is therein more serviceable, and a greater Benefactor to the Church and State, than the noblest, and richest Subjects, that have few or none; To whom the Scriptures gives this name of diminution,Isa 56.3. that they are barren, and dry Trees in the Vineyard of the Church, and Common-wealth;Hos. 9 14. The consideration of which sad, and unfruit∣ful condition,1 Sam. 1.7, 10. caused the Melancholy of Hanna, the passionate speech of Rachel,Gen. 30.1. Give me Children, or else I dye; and the dis∣contented reply,Gen. 15.1, 2. (to say no worse) of faithful Abraham, to the Lords most gracious offer, and promise, I will be thy Shield, and thy exceeding great reward; Lord, what wilt thou give me, since I go Childless?
On the other side, the happiness,Gen. 15.5. Gen. 22.17. Gen. 46.8. Vnto Vers. 28. Ruth 4.11. and blessedness of fruitful∣ness, is held forth in God's after-promise to Abraham; that he should be the Father of many Nations, and that his Seed should be as the Sand of the Sea-shore, and the Stars of Heaven; In his blessing upon Jacob, in giving him Twelve Sons, the Roots and Basis of that great and National Church, and of his only people, the Twelve Tribes of Israel. This blessing, as the greatest and richest of temporal good things, is set in the front of the Psal∣mist's Song of praise; that our Sons may be as plants grown up in their Youth, and our Daughters may be as Corner-stones,Psal▪ 14.12. po∣lished after the similitude of a Palace; Yea, it is held forth, not only as a blessing too, but as a discovering Character (many times) of a godly Man; Thy Wife shall be as a fruitful Vine, by the sides of thine House; Thy Children like Olive-plants, round a∣bout thy Table: Behold,Psal. 128.3, 4. that thus shall the Man be blessed that feareth the Lord. O most gracious, and liberal God, and Father; are a nume∣rous Issue, and many hopeful Children a great blessing? yea, the richest of all outward temporal gifts, as hath been here noted, and is observed in the following Poem; How great hath been thy goodness unto me, and how many are my Obligations to thee? that hast given me by one Wife, Sixteen Olive-branches▪ and them circumstantiated, with divers remarkable favours. Many have had Children, but much to their grief, as mourn∣fully falling out of a living Coffin of Flesh, into a dead one of Earth; or expiring, not long after; Whereas, all mine (except four) are in great mercy continued to me in life and health, un∣to this Day: And as for the four deceased, two of them being Daughters, they departed hence, about the age of four years; (a time of much innocency:) The other two being a Son, and a Daughter, and both gracious Children, slept in the Lord, after they had attained unto years of discretion; and therefore I have good reason in Charity, to hope they are all with God in Glory. Divers Persons have Children, but they, through their Parents error, or neglect, involuntarily, or voluntarily (which st is most to be lamented) have departed hence, unsealed, unbaptized; But the Lord hath greatly favoured me, in giving me the ho∣nour, to offer all but one (born when I was absent in the Wars) to him in Baptism, with fervent prayer and thanksgiving. Many have Children, but they are either redundant or defective in their Members, or Senses, or otherwise deformed; But the Lord graciously gave unto me, mine, perfect and well-favour'd; Others have Issue, but they are all of one Sex; But the Lord benefici∣ally, almost equally divided my number, giving me Seven Sons, and Nine Daughters.
Several Persons have a large Progeny, but they prove to be pricks in their Eyes, and thorns to their sides, by their wicked lives, and disobedience; (but the good Lord, blessed be his Name) hath given me to see some Characters of saving Grace ingraved by his blessed Spirit, in the major part of mine; and some good hopes of the rest, in God's good time. O Lord, hast thou inricht me with the best Earthly Treasures? sixteen Sons, and Daughters; and multiplied that number of Mercies, as to the ma∣ny blessings, Temporal, Spiritual, Eternal, conferred upon the greater part of them already; and upon the rest, in that thy Sealed Covenant of Baptisme,Gen. 17.7. and in thy faithful promise, made to me, as well as to Abraham; since thou hast given me to be∣lieve, and to plead it here before thee; I will be thy God, and the God of thy Seed:Psal. 116.12. What shall I render unto thee, O Lord, for all these thy benefits? Since I, and my Children, are but like seventeen Cyphers,Act. 2.27. Act. 3.14. Rev. 7.4. Psal. 87.5, 6. which signify nothing, unless thou place with, and before us, that only blest Unite, thy Holy One, the Lord Jesus, in, and by whom we shall be accounted of a great value with thee; and be numbred amongst thy Saints: O let me, and my Childrens Children, obey and glorifie thee, until time be swallowed up in Eternity; that what is wanting now, as to our thankfulness, may be in some measure, (although never enough, for thy mercies are unmeasurable) be supplyed in the length of years, and by so many, and in, and by their multiplyed Genera∣tions; for whose sakes, as well as for this present Age, I humbly Register here, both thy blessings, and my perpetual praises. Amen. The BEE-HIVE. A thankfull Poem on the same Subject. HAst thou, O gracious God, so highly honor'd me, As to co-work, and be thy humble Instrument, To bring forth Souls, array'd with Immortality, Mat. 16.26. worth than this whole world, with its rich orna∣ments, Gen. 1.26, 27. being living Images of Thee, by right, Col. 1.12.Of Christ, in posse, to be glorious Saints in Light? Hast thou by me, O Lord, as thy blest second cause, , that for their rare excelling frame, Cor. 3.18.Are  worlds; and through obedience to thy Lawes, And Faith; shall be like thee, and truly fear thy Name?
Hast thou me given sixteen Tongues,Rev. 2.17. and sixteen pair Of Hands and Feet, to praise, serve thee; for thine they are?Act. 11.26. And shall my Muse be silent? All these Tongues be dmb, As to thy praise? No Lord, through thy assisting grace, I, and my swarm of Children,Isay 8.18. shall become A holy Quire, a little Church, thy dwelling Place;Col. 4.15. The Trumpets of that Goodness, which gives me to see Sixteen fair Branches from one blessed Tree.Psal. 90.1. Lord, did thy Abraham esteem one Isaac more Than all his Earthly wealth? Are a Posterity,Gen 15.2. The living Monuments of Parents, a rich Ore? Our lively Pourtraictures, in whom we never die; Pillars of Families, and the Foundations, And Builders up of Churches, Cities, Nations. The strength of Kingdomes, Riches of a State; The honour, and defence of their weak aged Sires, As ready for to meet the Enemies in the Gate,Psal. 127.4, 5. A gift only from thee; the fruit of chast desires,Psal. 11.3, 6. Natures prime Flowers for beauty; and which long endure, Our choicest Houshold-stuff, and richest Furniture.Psal. 127.3. O let me, as my prop'est act of Gratitude, As living Sacrifices, offer them to thee, And to thy Service; since such servitude, Their freedome is, (as once I did in Baptisme,) Lord, hear my fervent Prayer, and answer give,Joh. 8.36. 2 Cor. 4.16. Eph. 4.23. Rom. 6.4. Granting them all, in thee, a renew'd life to live. Amen. ARGUMENT. Vpon the Lord's most bountiful goodness in giving me an Estate of Inheritance, of about Three Thousand, Three Hundred Pounds a Year; and upon his wise and righte∣ous Providence since, in his Re-assumption,Job 1.21. and taking it from me: Naked come I out of my Mothers Womb, and naked shall I return thither▪ The Lord hath given, and the Lord hath taken; blessed be the name of the Lord.
Soliloquium, or Discourse. HOw wonderful, various, and mysterious, are the actings of God in this World; so that no Man knoweth love, or ha∣tred, by all that is before them: All things come alike to all:Eccl▪ 9.1, 2. There is one event to the righteous, and to the wicked; Let no Man therefore rashly Judge himself, or his Bro∣ther,Mat. 7 1, 2. as to these mundain, and subsolary Dispensations; lest he be judged of the Lord, and possibly before he dies; in another give Judgment upon himself.Job 43.7, 8. This was the great sin of Job's Religious Friends,Psal. 35.11, 16. and David's wicked Enemies, in their change and low condition; who censured the one for his hypocrisie, and the other as a Rebel, and a Traytor. Wherefore, as private per∣sons Judge not before the time;1 Sam. 22.8. when the Lord hath promised that the righteousness of all his people, shall shine forth as the light,1 Cor. 4, 5. Psal. 37.6. and their Judgment as the Noon-day. Man's state in this World, is much like the Moon, to Day in the full, glorious and lightsome; to Morrow in the Wane, dark, and scarcely visible:1 Tim. 6.17. The Holy Spirit styling all our good things here,Prov. 2.3, 5. uncertain Riches, and compares them to an Eagle that hath Wings, and suddainly flies away; Of this truth, the Lord (to his praise be it spoken) (for,Job .1. shall I receive good, and not evil from the Lord?) hath made me an eminent Example; when he ordered my light to be blown out by one breath; And I, and my numerous Family,Psal. 119.75. to be lest to starving, and darkness; And all this, not in hatred, but in his wonderful love; which I shall here declare, to all the people of God, (from experience, which is the truest demonstration) and to the carnal World, to whom this is a great mystery; My gracious God, since this my suffering condition, having, instead of my Earthly possessions, given me himself, (the everlasting fulness of all things) to be my unvalu∣able Inheritance; The knowledge, and assurance of which ine∣stimable gift, of being his, and he mine; And of the Concomi∣tants, and fruits thereof; Eternal Life, and Glory (notwithstand∣ing my early Convertion) I would (had it been purchaseable) have given a World for,Mat. 16.26. in my prosperity; For, what shall a Man gain, though he possess the whole World, if he lose his Soul? yea, what shall a Man give in Exchange for his Soul? And as to the present Cloud over me, the World beholds only the dark, not the light-side thereof; Viz. The wonderful providences, and preservations, confer'd and accumilated, both upon me, and mine, during my above Eight Years restraint, and separation; which is the Lord give me leave, and life, I shall in all humble
thankfulness to God's glory, and his Churches good,1 Sam. 24.7, 8. Dan. 6.23. Dan. 3.27. 1 King. 17.6. more at large declare; He having preserved me often, as he did David, Daniel, and the Three Children in the Cave, Lyons Den, and Fiery Furnace; and provided for me, and mine, as strangely as he did for Eliath, when fed with Flesh by the Beaks of wilde and Flesh-devouring Ravens. Eternal Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Three glorious Persons, One Omnipotent, and Incomprehensible God, and Beeing; my God in Covenant, my gracious Father, in thy only begotten, and beloved Son, the Lord Jesus Christ, my alone Redeemer;Joh. 4.8. The only Fountain of love, and goodness; for thou art love, and a God of tender mercies: Who didst not only give me a large paternal Estate, but when that was all taken from me, for five Years, in the late Wars, didst in that time of my want, and ne∣cessity, relieve me and my numerous Family by the gift of a good Revenue, (the Legacy of my Wies Father) who did not only after the end of the late troubles, in the Year 1646. Restore to me my confiscated Estate; but greatly increased it, giving to me four good Houses, most pleasant Seats; which I built, and planted not, (as thou didst once to Israel;) together with a re∣venue, of about Three Thousand Three Hundered Pounds a Year, Lands of Inheritance. And now Lord,Deut. 19.1. which is a favour above all the rest, thou hast been pleased to exchange my earth∣ly possession, for an Eternal Inheritance, purchast for me, by the infinitely precious blood of thy own Son, the Lord Jesus Christ; And made sure unto me, by thy deed, and new Covenant of Grace; Witnessed, Sealed, and delivered to me, by the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Truth. Thus Lord hast thou made my loss, my gain, and converted my earthly poverty, into the riches of Heaven; made me to thy people, and to after Ages, a Monu∣ment of thy mercy, and a witness of thy faithfulness; in pre∣serving me, when thou leadest me through the Fire,Isa. 43.2. and through the Water, and deliverest me in Six, and Seven troubles; Yea, whatsoever thou didst so largely promise to thine,Job 5.9. Psal. 91. throughout. Psal. 126.13. in the Ninety first Psalm, by thy Prophet, thou hast graciously fulfilled to me. Wherefore, I will take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon thy Name, O Lord; and pay my Vowes unto Thee, in the mid'st of the Congregation of thy People: Yea, by this Paper-Herald, I will proclaim and transmit to posterity, the many great, and un∣parallel'd favours, to me, and mine; that so the future Genera∣tions, of those that love, and fear thee, may trust in thee, and praise, and serve thee also, until time shall be no more. Amen.
The ROYAL EXCHANGE. A Corolary Poem upon the former Subject. WHen the Almighty Power, the Eternal Light, The Abyss of Wisdome, living Spring Of Life, and Goodness, out of Nothing's Night, Brought forth the Seeds of every thing, Gen. . throughout.All Creatures were Created good: no change, From their first Law, did then produce, Any defect, in all this lower Range, Of Works, prepared for Man's Vse; Till Man, their Lord, by Deviation Gen. 3.17.From God's blest Rule, brought, through his Curse, A Change, upon this Worlds Creation; Yea, Death, of all things the worst: Hence is it, that the once pure Elements, Corrupt, imperfect are; yea, fight With one another; not at all content, With Natures bounds, and their first right. Yea, limping Age, succeeds our frolick Youth; And poverty, a prosp'rous State; Disgrace, high honours; and disasters, doth Dog our delights; now love, then hate Affects Vs; This Day we speak high, The next, we cause have for to mourn; Now we are well, to Morrow sick, and die; Like Seas, our Calmes, fore-go a storm. Psal. 148.6.Thus living Creatures, and Inanimate, Prove, and obey God's just Decree; That Man that was unstedfast, and ingrate, Might plagu'd be, with Inconstancy, Of theirs, and of his own Condition; And as in a cleer Mirror see, (In order unto his Conversion) Eccl. 1.14.Their Emptiness, and Vanity. These are Gods Hieroglyphicks, in which we, By a conjunct Experience, May read all Creatures Mutability, If fixt not in the Eternal Ens.
Blest be our great Mathematician, That from this low'r circumference, Drawes all these lines, and makes them meet again, Fixt in our Centre, God Immense. Lord, to my self, and others, thou hast me, Order'd to be, a Map of Change; One of these teaching Figures, never free, From some removes, (These last more strange Then all forepast:) As from the second place, Of honour in three Nations State; To be the Object of this Worlds disgrace, Of obliquy, and highest hate. That after Twenty Years, hard service done, (Vpon my Countreys call) wherein I lost Five Thousand Pounds; yet askt no boon, Nor wages, whil'st I sate therein, Should now a Prisoner be for life; and dead, As to the World, to Children, Wife, From Saints, and publick Worship, separated: (My food, and comfort, joy, and life.) That after divers Thousand Pounds a Year Possession, in a Moments time, I should deprived be of all, and fear, A starving both of me, and mine; That of four noble houses, and sweet Seats, In the prime places of this Ile; I should no Hive have for my swarmes receit, But live abroad, as an Exile. Dear Lord, am I Elisha-like, beset, With Troops of troubles? doth the World,2 King. 6.14, 15, 16, 17. Like to his Servants, crie, He's lost? a Net Of Misery, is on him hurl'd. Lord, open thou their Eyes, and they shall see, That more is with me, than against; That Changes, have Exchanges, sent from Thee; By which, my State is much advanst. Instead of Mundane honors buble, thou Hast me Adopted for thy Son;Rom. 8.15. And granted me to know it, and to bow Both Knee, and Heart, for what is done;
Impris'nment for life, and long restraint, Thou hast converted, made to be, A freedome; much inlarg'd▪ of which I vaunt, Gal. 5.1.As now, enjoying more of Thee. For Thousands loss of Pounds, and annual Rents, And Houses like to Paradise; Mar. 10.30.Thou hast a Hundred-fold, (freed from events,) Giv'n me; and life, that never dies; 2 Cor. 4.1, 17.An House, not made with Hands, which is above, 2 Cor. 5.1, 2. 2 Tim. 4.7, 8.Eternal, built by Thee: yea more, A Crown, a Kingdome, where there's no removes; Assur'd,Luke 12.32. reserv'd for me in store. Psal. 113.5.O! who is like to thee? who but a God, Can gifts confer, so rich as these? Who would not service do to thee, whose Rod Is dipt in Hony, and whose fees, Are, for our weakness sake, set forth, compar'd, To Empires, pretious Diadems, But do as far exceed, Terrene rewards, As Monarchs do, our common Men? Let Worldly Princes, then, set a great rate, Vpon their Crowns, and Signories; Wallow in pleasures; I'le not change my State, Nor Prison, for their Royalties; Mar. 10.30.Much less my future hopes, and sure intaile, On me O Lord, through thy free grace, Of an Eternal Kingdome, not to faile, In Heaven, at th'end of my short Race. Vntil which blessed Hour, for which I wait, The Dayes of my appointed time, Job 14.14.With Job, my Prison, I will dedicate Vnto thy Service, as a place Divine; To sing thy praises in, for this Exchange Of Earth, for Heaven; So shall I be, On Earth, in Heaven; until I change My Place, but not my Company. Amen. Soli Deo Gloria.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE. Containing the Subject Matter of the foregoing Treatise, to direct the Reader by the Folio, to finde readily any of the distinct Meditations, and Poems, set forth therein. Occasional Meditations. Corolary Poems upon each immediatly fore∣going Subject. (A) Abortion. COncerning the Authors Recovery from the danger of an Abortion, and un∣timely Birth. The New Birth. (B) Breaches. Burning. Concerning God's gracious prevention of Breaches betwixt him and his own Fa∣ther, and betwixt him and his Father-in-Law. The Vmphire. Vpon God's preservation of him▪ and his Servant from being Burnt in their Lodgings in Sommerset-House. The Deliverance. (C) Coach. Cough. Children. Concerning his preservation from any harm, when being alone in a Coach, he was violently cast out by the Jolt of the Coach-whel upon a Stone. The Huricane. Vpon his Recovery from a dangerous Cough, and an Apprehension of Death. The Reprieve. Vpon God's great Goodness and Boun∣ty, in giving him Sixteen Children by one and his only Wife. The Bee-Hive.
(D) Drowning Drought. Dead Corps. Cncerning this Deliverance Three se∣veral times from Drowning. The Tempest. The Angler. Vpon a great Drought, and the Answer of Prayer in the Removal thereof, Three Tea successively (viz.) in the Teares 1637, 1638, 1639. The Lamentation. The Application and Petition. The Shower of Mercy. Vpon his sight of a dead Corps. Earth's Jubilee. The Thanksgiving. The Tryumph. The Circle. (E) Evils of Diseases. Viz. Surfeit, Consumption, Coughs, Plurisie, Agues, &c. Vpon his Recovery from a Surfeit; from a Consumption, from a Cough, from a Plurisie, and from Two dangerous A∣gues, and other Diseases. The Bethesda. (F) Fire. Vpon God's preservation of his Houses Eleven times when a Fire, from being burnt or much dammaged. The Extinguisher. (G) Gift. Gain. Vpon God's  goodness in giving him an Estate of above 3000. Pounds a Year, and upon his Mercy in ordering the loss thereof to his much greater gain. The Royal Exchange. (H) Horse. Concerning his Recovery from several Hurts received by a Fall from his Horse in his Youth. Youths Embleme. Concerning his Preservation from any harm by Eight other several Falls from his Horse▪ The Octonary. (I) Infection. Vpon God's gracious Preservation of his Horses and Stock from Infection, in Years of a great Rot and Murrane. The Shambles.
(K) Killing. Vpon GOD's Preserving him from Killing, or being Kill'd, in his Lodgings in Sommerset-House, through a mistake. The Invisible Guard. (L) Life. Vpon God's gracious Preservation of him, and his Families Life and Health, in Years of great Sickness and Mortality. The Protection. (M) Marriage. Mistery. Concerning the great and holy Mistery held forth in God's Ordinance of Mar∣riage. Epithelamium. (N) Noctious Disease of the small Pox. Vpon God's gracious deliverance of Him and his Wife Ten times from the Danger and Infection of that noctious Disease the small Pox, when it broke out in their respective Families. The House of Cor∣rection. (O) Oversight. Vpon God's gracious preserving many Persons of his Family from being hurt, or kill'd by the careless oversight of a Servant discharging a Gun laden with Bullets in the Room. Providence. (P) Plague. from the Infection of the Plague. The Antidote. (Q) Quarry-Pit. Concerning his being preserved from falling Horse and Man into a deep Quar∣ry-Pit in the Night. The Pitt. (R) Robbers. Concerning his deliverance from Rob∣bers, when Way-laid by them. The Rescue. (S) Spider. Vpon God's preservation of Him and his Wife from poisoning by a great Spi∣der found at the bottom of their Cup. The Preservative.
(T) Travel. Concerning his deliverance in his Tra∣vel and Return to his House from being Smothered, as others then were in a great Snow. The Snowy Land-Skip. (V) Vices. Concerning God's gracious preservation of Him from the Vices of the Times, when left young, without an Over-seer in the City of London. The Metropolis. (W) Wife. Concerning God's gracious providence and goodness to Him, in the gift of a good Wife. The good Wife.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE. Of the Significant Titles prefixt to the several Poems, with their respective Folioes, for the more ready finding, and turning to any of them. (A) THe Antidote. The Angler· (B) The Bethesda. (C) The Circle. The House of Correction. (D) The Deliverance. (E) The Epithelamium. The Extinguisher. The Royal Exchange. (F)   (G) The Invisible Guard. (H) The Hurricane. The Bee-Hive. (I) Earths Jubilee. (K)   (L) The Snowy Landskip. The Lamentation. (M) The Metropolis. (N) The New-Birth. (O) The Octonary. (P) The Pit. The Petition. The Protection. The Preservative. The Providence. (Q)   (R) The Remembrancer. The Rescue. The Reprieve. (S) The Shower of Mercy. The Shambles. (T) The Tempest. The Tipe and Anti-Tipe. The Thanksgiving. The Triumph. (V) The Vmphire. (W) The good Wife. (X)   (Y) Youths Emblem.
The ERRATAES of the Press, which the Courteous Reader is desired to amend. PAge 357. Line 26 for went, wert. p. 361. l. 23. f. in, into. p. 364. l. 11. f. Temple, Tempe. p. 366. Mar. f. Eclet. Ephes. p. 368. l. 4. f. Meadoes, Meanders. l. 26. f (and subjects of) fit subjects for. p. 369. l. 30. f. time, true. p. 372. l. 7. f. by, but. l. 35. f. comfort, consort. p. 373. l. 28. f. be, by. p. 374. l. 33. f. fild, foild. p. 376. l. 26. f. and, Ar. p. 379. l. 6. f. twas, twins. p. 381. l. 24. f. commenting, Cementing. p. 382. l. 22. f. draugt, drought. l. 25. f. Affection, Affliction. l. 33. f. this, his. p. 364. l. 33. f. (for) or. l. 34. f. Hive, Huwe.. p. 386. l. 5. f. wings, winds. l. 11. f. World, would. l. 31. f. morning, mourning. p. 387. l 6. f. feaversh, feaverish. l. 16. f. Health, Heath. p. 388. l. 16. f. preluge, prelude. p. 390. l. 23. f. disasters. distempers. p. 399. l. 3 f. Chinicke, Chimicke. p. 403. Mar. f. Gen. Lamon. p. 406. l. 4. f. varest, rarest. l. 31. f. downe, downie. p. 410. Ma. f. Ecletias. 1.7.3.1.3.7.8. f. Genes. 10: Genes. 19. p. 411. l. 28. leave out O. p. 416. l. 30. f. shakes, shales. p. 419. l. 5. f. your, you. p. 424. Mar. f. Psal. 6.43. Psal. 64.3. p. 427. Mar. f. Gen 15.7. Gen. 15.5. f. Gen. 22. p. Gen. 22.17. f. Gen. 46. Gen. 16.. p. 430. Mar. f. Job 43. Job. 42. p. 432. l. 14. f thinges, Changes.
NOAH'S Dove; OR, AN EPISTLE OF PEACE, Directed to his Intirely affected Brethren, The PRESBYTERIAN, AND CONGREGATIONAL—MEN, As a Probable means for their Agreement and Union. IMPRIMAT. Joseph Carill. LONDON, Printed for T. W. for Ed. Husband, Printer for the House of Commons. 1645.
NOAH'S Dove; OR, AN EPISTLE OF PEACE Directed to his Entirely affected Brethren, the Presbiterians, and Congregational-men, as a probable means for their Agreement and Union. Sincerely Beloved, I Have read of Two Children contending in the Womb of their Mother, the one beloved,Gen. 25.22. the other hated,Mal. 1.3. but ye are both Jacob's, both the Israel of God, O far be it from such Brethren to rend and lacerate their Mothers bowels,Gen. 45.24. or to fall out in the way. Are we not one Body,Eph. 4.6. and have we not all one spirit, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism,Rom. 12.1. one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all.1 Cor. 13.4. I be∣seech
you by the mercies of God,Gal. 5.22. by the excellent effects of charity, by the fruits of the spirit, by the examples and com∣mands of the Lord Jesus,mat. 11.29. Joh. 13.34, 35. and the Character of his Disciples, be meek and lowly, and love one another; So shall the Plots of Rome, and Hell be prevented, and all Sectaries shut their Mouths. Why should it be spoken to our shame, that there is not a wise Man amongst us?1 Cor. 6.5, No, not one that is able to judge between his brethren.6. But Brother asperses and declaims against Brother,7. and that before the Antichristians. Now therefore there is utterly a fault amongst you; Know ye not that Revilers shall not inherit the Kingdom of God?10. But some will answer, that they have received a new light; O be cautious, that novelty E∣clipse not truth, since the last Days foretold and forewarn'd of by our Saviour,mat. 24.12. are at hand, wherein iniquity abounds, and the love of many waxes cold; hence Father against Son, and Son a∣gainst Father, betraying one another, and hating one another; hence the Judgments of Famine and Pestilence; Nation rising up against Nation. So that the whole World seems to be on Fire before its time;Vers. 7.10. These Days, not I, but the Lord Jesus the great Prophet of his Church, dictates and points out to be the time when many false Christs and Prophets (or Teachers of Christianity) shall arise;Vers. 11. & 24. who by their applause or excellency of parts, and external holiness, by which they shall shew forth, as it were, signs and wonders, and gather a Multitude of Disciples, Declaring that in such a Meeting,Vers. 26. & 24. be it in Woods or Deserts, or in secret Chambers, the true way of Christ is to be found, de∣ceiving as it were, if possible, the very Elect. Our Lord teach∣ing us from hence, how neer a similitude, these new Doctrines shall have to truth and true holiness. But be they as Paul, or Cephas in the Church, or as Angels from Heaven, believe them not;Verse 27. Gal. 1.. 2 Cor. 11.13. for as the Lightning comes out of the East, and shines e∣ven to the West, so shall also the glorious coming of the Son of Man be; that is, (as I humbly conceive) that his Gospel, which at first broke out like Lightning in the East, shall in this last Age upon the ruines, and through the Clouds of spiritual Babylon dart it self, and shine gloriously in our Western Churches, even to the Indies; that the other parallel Prophesie may be fulfilled by the subjecting and uniting Kingdomes of the Earth, unto the Kingdome of the Lord,Rev. 11.15. and of his Christ. Eph. 4.14.Let us not then be carried about with every mind of Doctrine, but hold fast the Gospel delivered to us by Christ and his A∣postles in the Unity of his Spirit,Eph. 4.3. and the bond of peace, since
other Foundation can no Man lay,1 Cor. 3.11. it being a sin so much as to doubt, much more to defend, that the Fundamentals of our Re∣ligion,Rom. 14.23. some of which are mentioned by the Author to the He∣brews, and received by the Churches in all Ages,Heb. 6.1. are not to bind, as de futuro, as having a possibility upon new notions, to be null'd or chang'd, which is to make God a lyar, to under∣mine his Church, and to pull down the Pillars thereof; For if the Foundations be destroyed, What shall? Nay,Psal. 12.3. what can the righteous do? Wherefore my humble suit unto our Master-buil∣ders, is, to keep the Foundation unmoveable, not permitting a Resurrection to ancient Hereticks before the time, that so what∣soever Men build thereon, whether it be Gold or Stubble,1 Cor. 3.12. may be brought to the Test in this Fiery Tryal. Stand fast therefore Brethren in that liberty wherein Christ hath made us free,Gal. 5.1.13. not making your liberty a Cloak for malici∣ousness, not for an occasion to the Flesh, but by love serve one another; judging thus of one another, that he that loves his brother, abides in the light; but he that hates his brother, what∣soever he may boast of new discoveries, walks in darkness,1 Joh. 2.9.1. and knows not whether he goes. Because that darkness hath blinded his eyes, and that whatsoever seems to be religious, and yet bridles not his Tongue, he deceives his own heart,Jam. 1.16. and his Re∣ligion is vain. But that I may not only perswade, but offer my Mite, I shall in all humility propose a medium; which if found a∣greeable to the Word of God, may through the blessing of the Almighty make up the breach, and reconcile your greatest difference. I conceive you both agree in these particulars, That all shall be Members,1 Cor. 14.34. and have right to vote in your Churches (from which Votes▪2 Tim. 2.11. Women are excepted) shall not only be free from just scandal, that is prophaness, and the impenitent pra∣ctice of any known Sin,1 Cor. 5.11. but be indowed with a sufficiency of knowledge;2 Cor. 6.14, 17 to which end (since your accord in the prin∣ciples of Religion) I hope there will be speedily set forth and establisht, one short Catechisme for Information and Examination. Next, in condescention to the impediments, I hear it is mutually resolved, that the Government of their respective Members, reconciling of inferiour differen∣ces, and ordering their Conversations, even as far as Or¦dination,
and the Censure of Excommunication, respect being had in Appeals to the Advice and Results of the Classes and Provincial Synods, and saving to the Presby∣terians, their right be ordered by their particular Congre∣gations. Eph. 2.21.Thus far we are knit together in one spiritual building and Temple of God. The great difference, if I understand it, is, the Tegument and Covering, which is indeed the Or∣nament, coupling and strength of the whole Aedifice: as where shall rest (as to us) under the same Scepter, the determina∣tive and concluding Power, the end of Appeals, the regula∣tion of that unlimited Plea, and over-much extended liberty of Conscience,Joh: 17.21. that so we may be one, as Christ and his Fa∣ther are one; this, some of you fix in a general Assembly, others limit to a particular Congregation; The first pleads not only Scripture analogically, but prudence for preserving union, and preventing of Tumults; as also antiquity, from the parallel in general Counsels and Parliaments, affirming that the other way, hath no Grounds in Scripture, since Churches were necessarily independant, no State being then Christian, that this way (by reason that our corrupt Nature hath no check) is destructive to the Unity of Religion: Since, according to the number of the Congregations will their Opinions, as also pernicious to Common-wealths; there being no Fewds so bloody and irreconcileable, as those that break out about points of Faith; instance in the Warres be∣tween Turke and Persian, Papists and Protestants in the Lu∣theran Contestations and Arian Persecutions. Lastly, They conclude an inconsistency in this way with Relations and Callings, disaffection and departure from Bed, Board, Families, and Imployments, being experimental con∣sequences of Religious differences. On the other side, the contracting party affirm, that a general Assembly differs but in Name from a Conclave of Cardinals, or Prelatical Synod, that every Member of the Church is free, and ought not in matters of Faith, to con∣clude himself by Proxy, that no Church hath power over a∣nother, or brethren (since the Apostles,) have dominion o∣ver the Consciences of their brethren, that their platform of Church Government ought to be, and is Jure Divino, that
the Evangelical Scripture sets forth theirs, and no other. Now dear Brethren, give me your pardon and leave with Moses,Exod. 2.13. to step in betwixt your Combatings with his Abra∣ham's words, Why do ye contend, being ye are Brethren?Gen. 13▪ 8▪ it may be God giving a blessing, and each of you in his hand, I shall in my Preposition be a Medium to unite you, (only despise not my endeavours) since the Lord hides many things from the wise and prudent,Mat. 11.25. and reveales them to Babes. But to proceed, I observe neither of you arrogate to your selves an infallibility, but piously seek an Orthodox and prudential way of Government, for the attaining and preserving GOD's truth; blessed are your endeavours; yea they shall be blessed. Wherefore I ask the Presbite∣rians, Why do ye extol and lift up a general Assembly a∣bove the rest of the Flock of Christ? To the Independents, I say, Why do ye prefer the Judgment of one particular Congregation, before the joynt Votes of all refined Chri∣stian Churches of the Kingdome? surely the first will yield to me, that where most of God's People are, in their judg∣ment, there is the greatest measure of his Spirit; and to such Assemblies principally, and to their Votes, are made all those gracious promises (I need not quote the places) concerning Christ's Spirit and Presence; I mean to such a Multitude, not of Men only, but of purged and visible Believers. The other, I presume, both from Grounds of Scripture, and Reason, will grant, that could the Votes of all the re∣puted and received Members of Christ, of their several Churches, be joyntly taken, and in one place, they must be accepted, and are but as the Vote of one great Congre∣gation; which though it hath an increase of Ministers and Elders, yet according to a true definition, for Essence, is a Church, and that more eminently, though not more truly, than the particular Congregations, of whom it consists, e∣ven as an Assembly made up of many Families,Col. 4.15. called by the Apostles, Churches of God;Rom. 16.5. is more excellent than its subdivisions. But that I may make good by Scripture, this incorpora∣ing
of Churches conjuncture and union of Votes, I shall re∣member you of these Three Chief Proofs, and Lights of Church Government, both for Doctrine and manners. The first shewes the Primitive and Apostolique way of ending Controversies in Doctrine, by the summoning that great As∣sembly of the Members of the Churches of Jerusalem and Judea▪ of which Churches read Acts 11.1. and Gallat. 1.22. Therefore called a Multitude, Acts 15.12. In which the Apostles (although indued with an infallible Spirit) and the Elders of the Churches did not only Vote, and Decree matters (though that in many cases wherein the People consents, such Votes may be, and are necessary, expedi∣ent and lawful) but the whole Church, Verse 22. which compared with Acts 2. Verse 41. wherein Three Thou∣sand are said to be converted; and with Acts 4. Verse 4. wherein Five Thousand were by One Sermon converted, clearly demonstrates, that this Assembly was composed of many Congregations, as further appeares from the Apostles Teaching and Preaching in every House, Acts 5.42. How else could Eight Thousand Men, besides Women and Chil∣dren, be taught and edified. The like is proved from the Election and choice of the Seven Deacons, by the Vote of the Multitude, Acts 6.5. where the Apostles, and Elders also were present, yea those whom the Holy Ghost Acts 2.47. calls a Church in a Na∣tionall respect,Compare Rom. 16.16. with the Postscript of that Epistle. he calls Churches, Acts 9.31. in a Con∣gregational consideration. And lastly, in Corinth there more than probably appeares to be many Congregations, else whence or where were these discentions and divisions? some saying, I am of Paul; others, I am of Apollo, of Cephas, 1 Cor. 1.12. All the Members of which were commanded to meet in one Assembly for the Excommunication of the incestuous Persons, 1 Cor. 5.4. Where note, they were to meet, to whom the Epistle was directed, and who are ad∣monished to mourn: But the Epistle and Exhortation was directed to the whole Church of Corinth, and not to the Elders only; Ergo, the whole Congregation, when they shall desire it, have a right to a Vote and censure. Having thus fully proved by Scripture, that in Cities and Provinces, and consequently in Kingdomes, the Mem∣bers of particular Congregations may, and were by com∣mand
to meet for the deciding of any great difference, yea, the Apostles, though of an infallible Spirit, did not contradict, but gave both approbation and institution to that liberty.Act. 1.15.23. I shall with humblest submission offer this fol∣lowing preposition,Act. 21.22. as a right and fit Medium of reconcili∣ation. That in all great Schismes and Heresies, over-spread∣ing whole Churches, if the breach cannot be made up by advice, argument, and subordinate Discipline, either Congre∣gational or Presbyterian, an Appeal be made to a general Assembly, who after the stating, disputing, and voting such Points in difference, together with the merit of the offence (the Recusant Church or Churches, notwithstanding conti∣nuing unsatisfied) that then the Assembly adjourn that Ses∣sions for Three Moneths; in which time, the Assembly, Mem∣bers of each Congregation to be ordered after Fasting and Prayer, to state the Question, and declare their Arguments, and Judgment of the General Assembly to their particular Churches, and so accordingly at that Meeting receive and bring up each Churches Vote and Sentence, with the num∣ber (because of the disproportion of Parishes) summ'd up of those that affirm, and those that discent, that so at the next Session the Question may be decided and concluded by the major Vote, both of Churches and Members; which Scripture-way will not only by a Religious Policy from time to time discover the temper, pulse, and inclination of the whole Kingdome, and consequently administer a great help and direction to Government, but will give full satisfaction to all, (unless to obstinate Hereticks) as being the Judg∣ment and Vote (even by the Pole) of all the visible and undividual Christians of the Kingdome politically united, as in one Congregation; yea the disobedient will be left with∣out excuse, and justly lyable to their Sentence of Excom∣munication. But put the Question, a considerable number of Church∣es in the Kingdome give in their Vote, with a new opinion hazarding a rent and division in the Nation? I Answer, that upon so sad an occasion, our Church (in imitation of the ancient calling of General Counsels, upon the over-flowing of Heresie) ought to desire the Judgment and assistance, and that by additional Votes (if it may be) of all the reformed Churches in the World,
which comes neerest to the Judgment of the holy Catholick Church, the Body of Christ, to which he hath promised his presence and spirit of truth to the end; and therefore must,Mat. 28.20. as to each particular State or Church, though not infallibly, yet prudentially, end and conclude by obedience, either active or passive, the discenting Churches, whom the civil Magistrate, after the Churches Excommunication, is to order by Banishment or lesser punishment, according as their Doctrines shall be more or less prejudicial to the State wherein they live:2 Cor. 15. v. 12, 13, 14. Which, since they suffer as evil doers, is (as to that Common-wealth) a civil and necessary act of preservative Justice, not an inforcing of Conscience or Persecution.Mat. 18.17. Thus fervently beseeching the blessing of the All-wise God, upon my poor endeavours, trusting that in the Bow∣els of love and charity, I have in sincerity and plainness declared unto you the mind of Christ in all humility, I conclude, The unworthiest of all the Servants of the Lord Jesus, J. H. FINIS.
