I896 16157460 104925
DIEV ET · MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms BY THE Lord Deputy AND COUNCIL. ARRAN, WHEREAS the Commissioners and Chief Gover∣nors of His Majesties Revenue (being the persons and Officers duly Authorized by themselves, Sub∣stitutes, Agents or servants for the Receiving, Col∣lecting and answearing the Duty arising by Hearths▪ Firing places, Stoves and publick Ovens and Kilns) have desired that all due care may be taken, that no Certificates be unduly granted by the Iusti∣ces of the Peace, unto such persons who by the Acts for setling the said Duty on His Majesty are unca∣pable thereof; And wheras in the first Act for set∣ling the said Revenue, there is a Proviso contained, That in case any two Iustices of the Peace, shall in writing under their hands, yearly certifie their beleif that the House wherein any person doth inhabit within such Country wherein they are Iustices of Peace, is not of greater Value than eight shillings per Annum upon the full improved Rent; and that neither the person so inhabiting, nor any other using the same Mesuage hath, useth, or occupieth any Lands, or Tenements of their own, or others of the yearly value of eight shillings per Annum, nor hath any Lands, Tenements. Goods or Chatles, of the value of four pounds in their own possession, or in the possession of any other in Trust for them, then in such case upon such Certificate made to the Iustices of the Peace of such County, at any of their Quarter Sessions to be held for the same County, & allowed by them, for which Certificate and allowance no Fees shall be payed, the person on whose behalf such Certificate is made, shall not be returned by the Constables, or
other persons to be assistant to them as aforesaid, and the said house is thereby for that year discharged of, and from all Duties by this Act imposed, any thing there∣to contained to the contrary notwithstanding. Which said last Proviso by the ad∣ditional Act for the better ordering and Collecting the Revenue arising by Hearth∣mony is declared shall be construed, to extend only to such Widows as shall pro∣duce such certificates as are therein mentioned, and as to all other persons what∣soever, the said Clause is thereby absolutely repealed. And forasmuch as it is Enacted by the said Additional Act, that it shall and may be lawful for the Lord Lieutenant, Lord Deputy, or other chief Governor, or Governors, and Council of this Kingdom, for the time being, from time to time, to appoint such persons, as they shall think fit, to do, execute and perform all, and every the matters and things which by the said former Act, or the said last Act are to be done, Executed or performed by any Iustice of the Peace, or Clerks of the peace of this Kingdom, and from and after such appointment all other persons not thereby appointed shall be and are thereby discharged from doing, executeing, and performing any mat∣ter or thing relating unto the premises, any thing in the said former Act, or the said last Act, to the contrary notwithstanding. And whereas we have thought fit hereby to nominate, and appoint the several persons in and for the several Counties herein after mentioned, being all Iustices of the peace, that is to say, in and for the County of Catherlagh, Sr. Thomas Butler, Baronet, Sr. John Devillier Kt. Henry Barkeley, Marmaduke Taylor, and Wm; Creiehly, Esqs for the County of Dublin, Sr. Thomas Newcomen, Kt. Sr. Robert Reading, Bar. Sr. Walter Plunket, and Sr. Thomas Worsop, Kts. Dr. Patrick Grattan, Richard Forster, & Robert Mouldsworth, Esqs for the County of Kildare, Robert Fitzgerald, Henry Brenne, Thomas Hewetson, Francis Leigh, and Maurice Keating Esqs for the County of Kilkeny, Richard Coote Esq Sr. Henry Panson∣by, Bartholomew Fowke, Harvy Mortis, George Bishop and Bryan Manser, Esqs for the Kings County Sr. Francis Blundel, and Sr. Laurence Parsons Baronets, John Baldwin, Samuel Rowle, and Richard Barry, Esqs for the County of Longford, Sr. Thomas Newcomn, Baronet, Sr. John Edgeworth, & Sr. John Parker Kts; Wm; Kenedy, & Nicholas Dow∣dall, Esqs for the County of Lowth, Sr. James Graham, Sr. Wm; Tichborne and Sr. Thomas Fortescue Kt; and Nehemiah Donnelan Esq for the County of Meath, Doctor Ro∣bert Gorges, James Stopford, Arthur Dillon, Thomas Loftus, George Peppard, Charles Mere∣dith and Stafford Lightburne Esqs for the Queens County, Walter Warenford; Thomas Piggot of Disert John Weaver, and Peryam Poell, Esqs for the County of Westmeath, Sr. Henry Peirce Baronet, Wm; Hancocke, George Peyton, James Liegh, Robert Cooke Edward Terrelí and Edward Barry Esqs for the County of Wexford, Sr. Nicholas Loftus Kt. Patrick Lambert, Christian Bor, and Francis Harvy, Esqs for the Country of Wick∣low, Henry Temple, Roger West, Robert Hasses, Phillip Packenham, John Stockton and Hum∣phry Baggey, Esqs for the County of Clare, Sr. Samuel Foxen, Benjamin Lucas, Doagh o Bryan, Samuel Burton Henry Jvers, Symon Purdon, and Henry Leigh Esqs for the Coun∣ty of Corke Sr. Richard Aldsworth and Sr. Boyle Maynard Kts; John St. Leger, Red∣mand Bary Richard Hull, Anthony Stoell, Bartholomew Purdon, Richard Travers, Richard Townsend, John Grove, Richard Beer, Bryan Wade, Wm; Supple and James Manser, Esqs for the County of Kerry, Sr. Thomas Crosby, Baronet Sr. Francis Brewster Kt. Thomas Brown, Richard Chute, Anthony Raymond, Edward Denny, and Frederick Mullin; Esqs for the County of Lymercik Sr. Wm: King, Sr. George Ingoldsby, and Sr. Samuel Foxen, Kts; Drury Wrey and Richard Maguire, Esqs for the County of Tippe∣rary Sr. Robert Cole, Solomon Camby, Charles Blunt, Francis Legg, Simon Finch, Nicholas Southcoate, the Mayor of Clonmel for the time being, the Mayor of Cashel for the time being Bartholomew Fowks, John Harrison, Isaac Walkden, Thomas Fullwar, Charles Alliock and Oliver Latham Esqs or the county of Waterford, Beverly Usher, Henry Nichols, Andrew Lynn;, James Mutlow, Nicholas Osborn, Tho. Fitzgerald, John Power, Leo: Gorstellow; William Bradley, John Dalton, Tho. Osborn; Wiliam Hibbart and Robert Cooke Esqs for the County of Gallaway Tho; Caulfeild Esq Sr. Henry Waddington Sr. George S. George, and Sr, John Parker Kt. Charles Holcroft, John Eyre, Tho. Cuff and, Edward Eyre Esqs for the county of Leytrim Sr. Wm. Gore, James King Henry Croston & Bryan Cuningham Esqs for the county of Mayo, Sr. Henry Bingham, and Sr. Arthur Gor Bar. Owen Vaghan. Robert Miller and Thomas Brent Esqs for the county of Ros∣comon Sr. Robert King Bar. Arthur S. George, Robert Sands and Edmond Donellan Esqs for the county of Sligo Tho; Griffith, Edward Cooper, Charles Collis Phyllip Ormsby and Roger Smyth Esqs for the county of Antrym Sr. Robert Colvill, Wm Leisly of Prospect, Richard Dobb of Castledobb. Michael Harison, Hercules Davys, Francis Stafford and Robert Thelwe Esqs for the county of Ardmagh Sr: Toby Poinze, Sr. George Atkinson, Edward Richardson and Arthur Bromlow Esqs for the county of Cavan Samuel Townly, Humphery Parrett & Thomas Newbury Esqs for the county of Donnegall Sr. Albert Cuningham, Francis Cary, Henry Vaughan, William Dutton Geo. Brooks John Nisbet, John Farwood and Grey Bingley Esqs for the county of Down Sr George Rawdon Sr. Robert Ward James Lesly Wm. Brett Tho. Smith & John Farrar Esqs for the County of Fermanagh Sr, Gerald Irwyn, Sr. John Hume John Curry James Summerwel James Curry Charles Belfoure & Lancelot Lowther Esqs for the County of Londonderry John Gage of Moygillegan Geo; Phillips John Wilison and Raphel Whistler Esqs For the County
of Monaghan, Wm. Barton, Nicholas Owens, and Mathew Anktill Esqs for the County of Tyrone John Chichester and Henry Mervin Esqs the Provost of Dungannon and Strabane for the time being, William Moore and Mathew Combe Esqs To be the persons for granting of Certificates to poor Widows, according to the true purpose and intent of the said last mentioned Act, which We do hereby authorize them or any two or more of them, and no other person, or persons whatsoever within the said respective Counties to give accordingly, and further for the County of the City of Dublin, We appoint the Mayor, and Recorder of the said City for the time being, Sir Joshua Allen, and Alderman Enoch Reader, or any two of them, for the County of the City of Kilkenny the Mayor, or Recorder thereof for the time being, for the County of the Town of Drogheda the Mayor, or Recorder of the Town of Drogheda for the time being; for the County of the City of Cork, the Mayor or Recorder of the said City for the time being. for the County of the City of Lymrick the Mayor, or Recorder of the said City for the time being, for the County of the City of Waterford the Mayor, or Recorder of the said City for the time being, for the County of the Town of Galway, the Mayor, or Recorder of the said Town for the time being, for the county of the town of Carrickfergus the Mayor or Recorder of the said town for the time be∣ing, & We require all the aforesaid persons to be very circumspert & careful in the granting of these Certificates which are to be allowed publickly at the Quarter-Sessions unto none but such as are fitly qualified and not unto women who are not Widows, nor to one and the same widow for several houses, nor to widows for the houses of their Sons, or their Brothers, or Relations though the same were heretofore done; And We do hereby further declare that Francis Earl of Long∣ford, Lemuel Kingdon, William Dickinson, William Strong, and Robert Bridges, Esqs and such other person and persons as We upon the humble Suit of them, or anly three or more of them shall from time to time nominate, and appoint are and shall be the only Commissioners. Officers and persons whom We have, and shalbe think fit to authorize and appoint to do, execute and perform all and every td matters and things other then granting of such Certificates which by the say former Act, or the said last Act are to be done, executed and performed by a Iustices of the Peace, or clerkes of the Peace of this Kingdom; And We do here∣by further declare that all and every the powers in and by the said Acts, or either of them given to any Iustices of the Peace or Clerks of the Peace, other than such as are herein appointed to the purposes aforesaid, shall be, and are hereby Ua∣cated; And We do hereby strictly charge and command all and every Iustice, & Iustices of the Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailyffs, Constables, Headborougs Clerkes of the Peace and all other Officers whatsoever within every county, Borrough, Town, or corporation, Barony, Parish. or Place, and all other his Majesties Officers and Ministers. and all other Subjects whatsoever, that they and every of them shall from time to time or aiding and assisting to the said Commissioners, and Cheif Governors of his Majesties Revenue, and to their Collectors, Surveyors, and other Officers which are or shall be appointed by them, or any three or more of them as aforesaid, upon pain of Our displasure, and such pains and Imprisonments as by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm can or may be inflicted upon them for their negligence, or contempt, in that behalf, as they will answear the contrary at their utmost peril. And We do hereby fur∣ther Publish & Declare that all duties or moneys arising or growing due or pay∣able to His Maiesty by, for or upon Hearths, Firing-places, stoves and publick Ovens and Kilns upon the tenth of this instant January for the year preceding is to be accounted and paid to the Commissioners and Cheif Governors of  Majesties Revenue afore-named, or to such as they shall authorize thereun and to no other person or persons whatsoever, of which all persons concerned are to take notice, and to pay the same accordingly. Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin the 15th day of January 1682. Mich, Armach, C. Lanesborough. Char. Feilding: R: Reynell. Franc, Dublin, Anth, Midensis, John Keatinge, Tho: Newcomen. Barrymore. VVm: Kildare. H. Hene. Ardglase. Ca. Dilon: John Davys, God Save the King. Dublin Printed by Benjamin Tooke, and John Crooke, Printers to the Kings Most Excellent Majestie, and are to be Sold by Mary Crook, and Andrew Crook, at His Majesties Printing-House 1682.
