J849 11862111 50032
The CASE of several of their Majesties Loyal Subjects very much Oppressed, contrary to the Laws of this Land (as they are advised) humbly represented to the Honourable the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in Parliament Assembled. 1. BY Act of Parliament in the Year 1663. 400. Hackney Coachmen were Licensed to Ply in and about the Cities of London and Westminster during that Parliament, and untill the first Sessions of the next Parliament and no longer, except continued. 2. The said Parliament being Dissolved, and another called and Dissolved, and nothing done in that Affair, the Act expired. 3. We the number of 100. Ancient Coachmen, who have served Persons of Honour, and Gentlemen of Quality, all of us Loyal Subjects, and many of us sufferers for our Loyalty and Affections to King Charles the First, of ever Blessed Memory, presented our Petition to the then next Parliament, praying, for the Reasons following, to be Added to the 400. formerly Licensed. Reasons; 1. That the Buildings and the Inhabitants were so much increased, that there was more occasion for 500. than for 400. when the Act was made. 2. That we being Ancient Coachmen bred up only to that Imploy, and had no other way to get Bread for our selves and poor Families. 3. That we supposing that after the expiration of the aforesaid Act of Parliament, the same liberty might extend to us that all other Coachmen had, did lay out all our little Substance in buy∣ing Coach, Horses, and other Conveniencies for our Calling, and accordingly followed our Cal∣ling until about May 1683. We were by an Act of Common Council prohibited from letting our Coaches to Hire in the City and Liberties of London, and had several of our Coaches seized and carried to the Green-Yard, and forced to redeem them with Fines, some 20 s. others 40 s. and some 50 s. and some have paid 5 l. in ten days time: Others have been sold by them both Coach and Horses, according to the will and pleasure of those Arbitrary Law-makers, some of our Persons imprisoned, and then Fined as they were pleased. 4. And by the exercise of this Cruelty upon us, the Coachmen pretended to be Licensed by the Common Councel, did joyn together, and appoint 27. of their Number to meet, and hold Consults for raising of Money amongst themselves to suppress and ruine us in our Callings in the City and Liberty of Westminster also, and did with Money hire Men and keep us from our imploy untill we did make our Agrievances known by our humble Petition to his most Gracious Maje∣sty King Charles the 2d. of ever Blessed Memory; and the better to effect their design to ruine us, they have raised several great sums of Money. That after the death of his Majesty King Charles the 2d. the said 400. endeavouring still to suppress and destroy us the 100. Obtained a Grant from his late Majesty King James the 2 d. to be executed by five Commissioners (most of whom were known Papists) to whom they ad∣vanced 1000 l. per annum. more, and over and above what the Act of Parliament allowed; and constituted 16. Undertakers or chief Managers to prosecute us, obtained a Proclamation to be issued forth for us within Ten days time to put off our Coaches, Horses, and Trade, to the utter ruin of many of us, not being suffered to follow our Callings, and being indebted to several Tradesmen that came presently upon us for their Money. That several of the 400. are Vintners, Inkeepers, and several other Trades and Employments, some have Estates, others have sold, forfeited, and lost their right to the same, so that it is verily believed that not one half that had the first Right by Act of Parliament, have any just Title to the same at this time; So that their Quallifications are humbly submitted to this Honourable House to Enquire into and Determine as they shall think fit, the 100. being truly Qualified ac∣cording to the intent and meaning of the late Act of Parliament, as by their several Certificates at large appears. And lastly, we the Oppressed have, to our ruins, stood several Suits with the said 400. and in all the said Suits cast them (unless in one Case since the time of the Popish Commission Mr. Powis the Attorney-General granted a Noli Prose{que}) but now our small Subsistance being spent, and they having a great stock of Money, we must suffer under their Prosecution, unless prevented by the Goodness of this Parliament, Who have the Absolute power of settling this Affair. Wherefore we most humbly beseech Your Honours to take the Premises into Your Serious Consideration, That when our Petition shall be presented unto You, You will please to Vouchsafe us Relief according as Your Wisdom shall seem meete; And we and all the rest, as in Duty bound, shall ever Pray, &c. Thomas Johnson, John Paine, Edward Battes, Will. Atkins, Nicholas Mash.
