J961 11839685 49793
CHRISTUS DEI, OR, A THEOLOGICALL DISCOURSE, WHEREIN Is Proved, that Regall or Monarchicall Power is not of Humane, but of Divine Right, and that GOD is the sole Efficient Cause thereof, and not the People. Also, That every Monarch is above the whole Common-wealth, and is not onely Major Singulis, but Major Universis. Written In Answer to a late Printed Pamphlet intituled, Observations upon some of His Majesties late Answers and Expresses. 1 Pet. 2. 13. Subjecti estote omni humanae creaturae propter Dominum, sive Regi quasi Praecellenti. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man, for the Lord's sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme. OXFORD, Printed by H. Hall. An. Dom. M. DC. XLII.
CHRISTUS DEI, OR, A Theologicall Discourse, wherein is proved, that Regall Power is not of Hu∣mane, but of Divine Right, and that GOD onely is the Efficient cause thereof, and not the People. Preface. THere is a Booke come forth of late, barely intituled, Observations upon some of His Majesties late Answers and Expresses, without any name of the Author or place where it was Printed. Wherein the Ob∣server (soe I must call him not knowing him by any o∣ther name) aimes cheifly and directly to prove; that the hereditary, Regall, and Monarchicall Power of our now present dread Soveraigne King Charles, is infe∣riour and subject to the Power of the now present Par∣liament.
Which to evince he undertakes to lay downe the O∣riginall foundation of all Regall Power whatsoever, ac∣cording to the efficient and finall causes thereof. And having made the finall cause to be the safety of the people, together with their Civill or Politicall hap∣pinesse; he also makes the efficient cause to be, not God, but onely the people, and the instrumentall cause of conveying and deriving this Regall Power to be, not any divine law, nor nothing else (amongst Christians) but the meere humane pactions and Agreements of the Politique Body of the people. And then arguing by a rule in nature; that quicquid efficit tale est magts tale, he issueth out this just inference (as he calleth it) that though the King be singulis major, yet he is universis mi∣nor, and therefore inferiour and subject in Power to the Parliament. Having perused this discourse, and finding it to be most injurious to Regall Power or Monarchie, contra∣ry to the true Principles of State and Divinitie, or Or∣thodox Christian Doctrine: I thought I might doe my King and Country good service, to confute these de∣sperate and more then dangerous Positions, by decla∣ring and proving the true Originall foundation, accord∣ing to the finall and efficient causes of Regall or Monar∣chicall Power: which (with Gods good helpe) I hope to do perspicuously in the few ensuing Paragraphes. §. 1 Of the Primary Finall cause; as also of the Efficient cause of all Civill Societies or Republiques. Because whatsoever is done, is done for some end or purpose, without which it should not have beene done, nor had a being: therefore it is the constant Do∣ctrine
of all Philosophers, that the End is the cheif and Principall of all causes: and therefore, for methods sake I will begin with it. now to find out the Primarie end of all Civill Societies or Commonwealthes, we, that are Christians, must reflect attentively upon those words of the Holy Ghost. Prov. 16: 4. universa propter semet∣ipsum operatus est Dominus. By which we are ascertaind, that God Almighty created not only all other Crea∣tures, but all mankind also, as for their Primarie end, for himselfe, and his owne Praise and Glorie. And as for man in particular, God created him to his owne image and likenesse, endowing him with an un∣derstanding and a will, that he might know how to ho∣nour and love his Creator, and by such love and honour might finally become happy in the fruition of his eter∣nall, unspeakable and inestimable Glory in Heaven: for means whereto, first God dictated certaine divine Pre∣cepts and Principles unto man, and imprinted them with his very Creation upon his naturall reason (for which cause they are called divine naturall Lawes writ∣ten in every mans heart, saith Saint Paul Rom. 2. 15.) That every man might be equally Capable to know them, and equally obliged to obey them. Secondly God infused into him Faith, Hope, and Charity, and o∣ther supernaturall Virtues, all tending to this Conduce∣ment, that man following them as his guides, might, through his obedience to God, attaine to his owne Sal∣vation. Thirdly to bind man more strongly to his Sub∣jection, and to make it appeare more illustriously unto him, that therein principally consisted his Welfare, as the very End and Center, for and to which he was cre∣ated, He gave him an expresse divine Law, not to eate
of the tree in the midst of Paradise upon paine of death. Fourthly, by Revelation he instructed him in many particular sacred formes and Rites of exterior divine worship, as sacrifice and others; for though we read not any where in holy Writ, that Adam offered Sacrifice, no more then wee do of Isaac; yet wee read there that Cain and Abell did, and that Abraham and Iacob did. But it cannot be imagined that Cain and Abell were the first Inventors of this most, religious and di∣vine worship, (noe more then that Isaac did neglect it) but that by Paternall Tradition and example they re∣ceived it from Adam. All which duely considered; it will appeare evidently, that the primary end for which all men are created, is to serve, honour, love, obey, & worship God. From whence it followes; that this being mans highest and principal∣lest Concern, it ought also to be his highest and princi∣pallest care to attend to it. But most certaine it is, that men, living divided and scattered over the face of the world without the instruction and assistance one of ano∣ther, cannot possibly performe this for every particular mans behoofe, as is requisite. And therfore from this fi∣nall cause arose primarily a necessity amongst men to unite and combine themselves into civill Societies and Common-wealths. This end could not be prefixed by men; but men were created for this end by God. And therfore this is the Primary, spirituall, supernaturall, and divine finall cause of all Republiques, to which every other end must be but secondary, subordinate, and sub∣servient. And from hence it followeth further, that since on the one side no naturall agent can by it's naturall power
compasse the attaining of a Supernaturall end; and on the other side Civill Societies ought not to be instituted in vaine: we mustneeds conclude, that the Primary effi∣cient Cause of all Common-wealths is only God. §. 2. Of the Secondary finall Cause, and also the onely Efficient Cause of all Civill Societies and Republiques. Every Creature in the World strives to preserve its owne kind. Wee see what paines and Care Beasts and Birds take to reare their Younglings. Trees and Plants beare fruites and seeds to produce the like when they are perished. Yea, the inanimate Creatures (according to their predominant Element and mixture) strive eve∣ry one to obtaine and enioy their Center. And all this not only for their owne particular, but also for the har∣monious Accommodation and preservation of the Vni∣verse, the great and most excellent worke of nature, wherin shee doth nothing in vaine. But in vaine had man been, if he also had not been provided of necessary meanes towards the Preservation of his kind. For which cause God said it was not good for man to be a∣lone: and therfore gave him a Woman to be his Hel∣per, that so by meanes of generation he might propa∣gate his ofspring to the worlds end. This Preservation then of mankind is the maine na∣turall and secondary end of man. And to this end God gave him his blessing to increase and multiply from whence ariseth, that of necessity there must be at least private families. But man and Woman finding (by woefull experience) most true what God said to Adam and Eve; that Hee should eate his bread in the sweat of
his browes, that shee should bring forth her children in paine, found also presently, that every private family is not sufficient of it selfe to maintaine this worke of Pre∣servation, without the helpe of one another. For first, to say nothing of womens deliveries in child-birth, which cannot possibly alwaies and every where be performed requisitely by themselves and their families, without the helpe of some other, or others: and yet even upon this the Preservation of mankind holds a most neces∣sary and principall dependance. I will only speake of mans part, who with the sweat of his browes, with ex∣treame toile and labour must provide food and cloa∣thing, and all other necessary supports and sustentations for his family. But to doe this, he must of necessity (I speake not of barbarous inhumane people) have some certaine place of aboad; and in this he must have some peculiar right, some propriety of possession, by virtue wherof he may reape the fruites of the earth, and main∣taine his Cattel. And how shall every private family be able to doe this with Securitie? will not every one strive for the best possession? will not the shepheards of Abraham and Lot, and of Isaac and Gerara fall to con∣tention for water & pastures, and such like other neces∣sary elbow roome? And in these uncivill and unsocia∣ble quarrels, must not all private families be made like to the fishes of the sea. Hab. 11, 13. 14. where the stron∣ger must devoure the weaker. Secondly God endowed man in his Creation with an understanding and a will. This understanding is of that infinite capacitie, that it hath for it's Adaequate Object omne ens as it is verum. And man therefore is in perpetuall and restlesse search of knowledge, to per∣fect
his understanding by experience and learning. The will also hath for her adaequate Object omne ens as it is bonum? And man therefore is in perpetuall pursuite of Reciprocall love to perfect his will by friendship and Justice. Over and above these God gave to man the facultie of speech, to be the Reciprocall conveyance of learning and friendship. So as for this verie reason Arisiotle said excellently well, that man is by nature a sociable Creature, for neither learning, nor friendship, nor justice (in which consists essentially mans Civill or Politicall happinesse) nor safety or securitie (which is the only preservative of mans verie being) can possibly be acquired and maintained in the division of men in their private families. And therefore for this verie end it was naturally necessary for men to unite and associate themselves into Civill Societies and Com∣munities, that soe they might preserve their Kind. From the learning, Experience and Industrie of the understanding proceed all Arts, Tillage, Manufactures, Trade and Traffique, which bring in Gaine, and that brings plentie from the freindship and justice of the will proceed Peace and Securitie: in which secure peace and plenty consisteth Perfect salus populi. now since this cannot be had in divided private Families, and without this there can be no preservation of mankind, it followes, that Civill Societies or Commonwealthes are naturally necessary. Whose naturall finall cause is truely and only (in the manner as I have explicated) Salus Populi. Now furthermore, seeing that a Commonwealth is not the designe of Art and Invention of particular men, nor of any positive law of theirs, but proceeds from the
Common necessity of all mankind, intimated unto them by the law of nature, of which God is the sole cause and Author; it followeth, that the officient cause of all Re∣publiques is onely God. §. 3 Of the Finall and Efficient cause of Civill Power in a Com∣mon wealth. As for the finall cause there is little or no difficultie; for seing that the finall cause of every thing must needs be that, which that thing necessarily referres unto, as to it's end for which it is done or hath it's being: it is ma∣nifest, that since Civill societies have for their naturall and secondary finall cause Salus Populi; the power also which must not be ad destructionem, but ad adisicationem, to maintaine those Civill Societies, can have no other finall cause, but that whereunto they direct and are di∣rected, which is Salus Populi. The materiall cause in which this power originall, re∣sides and inheres; as the forme to make up a compleat Body of a Common-wealth, is the People. And so the Observer saith verie well in this kind of cause; power is originally inhaerent in the People, most cer∣taine then it is; that even at the very first uniting them∣selves into a Civill Societie, there is an inhaerent power in the People to governe themselves, and by such go∣vernment to preserve themselves in safetie. For this is the onely necessary naturall end for which they met (as I have shewen before) that they might be able and powerfull to secure themselves, and preserve their kind. But this meeting would have beene in vaine, and this
preservation wholly made frustrate, if there were not this Power inhaerent in them. If in the naturall Body of man there were not an In∣teriour Directive Governing Power to guide every par∣ticular member in the operative use of it's function, and to contrive those operations to the mutuall good of one another, and the conservation of the whole man; that Body could not possibly but suddainly perish. For if the teeth will not chew, nor the throat swallow, nor the hands reach, nor the feete stirr, nor the eyes look out, when nature requires her necessary food, she and they & all must sterve. So in a Politicall Body; if all members should doe but what they list, and should not be com∣pelled by some absolute Power to contribute their strengthes and endeavours to the preservation of one a∣nother, and the whole Communitie, it would be but Regnum in se divisum, that of necessity must fall to de∣solation, as the Holy Ghost confirmes also elsewhere, saying, Proverb. 11. 14. Ubi non est Gubernator dissipabitur Populus. The maine difficulty is: who is the efficient cause of this Power. Wherein, not to be tedious to my Reader, but to yeild him the satisfaction of his expectation in a breife and Resolute Answere, I present unto him this Decretorie Assertion. This Power is not a Humane but a divine Right; and God only is the Immediate effi∣cient cause thereof. This I prove by five Arguments. Arg. 1. There is a rule in nature (to use the observers owne words) Quod dat esse dat consequentia ad esse. But the esse of a Republique cannot have a simpliciter esse with∣out the esse of this power. Therefore he that is the Ef∣ficient cause of the Republique, is also the Efficient
cause of this power. But (as I have prov'd before §. 2. n. 5.) God is the sole efficient cause of all Republiques, therfore he is also the sole efficient cause of this power. Arg. 2. The Primarie finall cause of Civill Societies (as I haue prov'd §. 1.) is divine worship; which man could not prefix to himselfe as his end, but he was cre∣ated by God for and to that end, and only God prefixed that end to man. Therefore this is a divine end which cannot be atcheived without a divine Power (as I have alsoe proved in the same. §. n. 4.) only God then is the immediate Efficient cause of this Power. And from thence it proceeds, that Kings, acknow∣ledging themselves to have received this divine Power Principally for this Primary end, their Oathes at their Coronation are (as the Observer very grutchingly granteth) more precise in the care of Canonicall Pri∣viledges, and of Bishops and Clergie-men, then of the Commonalty▪ and not from the reason which he gives. viz. because they were penned by Popish Bishops. For whether the Bishops were Popish or Protestant, surely they are not to be blamed ex hoc capite, but most highly to be reverenced, that according to their profession & dutie they put Kings in mind, in the first place, of di∣vine Worship, and their owne and their peoples eternall salvation depending thereupon. And I cannot under∣stand why the Observer should give that reason, but on∣ly to seduce the vulgar into a base and profane miscon∣ceiving and vilifying of the Royall Power of Kings, and their sacred Oathes. For, Popish, without all doubt in his Dictionary signifieth superstitious at least, if not Idolatrous. But, if it be superstition for a man to be more precise in the care of divine worship, and his
soules everlasting salvation, then of any other his rem∣porall end or affaire (see §. 1. n. 3.) in vayne then have all Christians hitherto beleeved that they were in a true Religion. Let the Observer consider what censure he deserves for thus finding fault with Kings Oathes, and whether hee gives not just cause of suspicion, that he is rather an Athiest then a Christian. It is well known to all Christians, that Quaerite primùm Regnum Dei & ju∣stitiam ejus is no invention of Popish Bishops, but our Blessed Saviours owne Doctrine and Rule, not only to Bishops, but to all Kings and People whatsoever, as the! Principall, to which as an Accessorium followes, & haec∣omnia adjicientur vobis: Mat. 6. 33. Arg. 3. When private families first joyned them∣selves into a Common Body of societie, before any Condictum, Paction, or Agreement amongst themselves, to enact positive Lawes for their government, there was an inherent power in them to enact: such Lawes. For who can make a Law without a power? But this power, not being the effect, but the most necessary cause of all humane pactions or positive Lawes, cannot have it's o∣rigen from man, but only from God. Ergo God is the sole Efficient cause of this power. Arg. 4. When men first associated themselves into a Commonwealth, they were all of equall Right and Power, so that none (I speake of severall families still as before) could challenge superioritie the one over the other. For, this divine naturall power, viz. Se defen∣dere, et vim vi repellere, was inherent in every one of them, and obliging them. The power then which ac∣crewed to the aggregation of the whole societie, was not made but brought, as being no other then what was in all and every particular Member of that society
before. But that is a divine power and the immediate effect of God. Ergo. And indeed in the due managing or excercising of this divine naturall law of se defenden∣do, and vim vi repellendo consists totallie the security and Salus Populi, and the power of the Commonwealth to maintaine it. Arg. 5. God Almighty is so solely the Legislator and Author of his owne Lawes, without the concur∣rence or consent of any other Counsell, (quis enim con∣siliarius ejus fuit, aut quis prior dedit ei? Rom. 11. 33.) That they have their establishment onely in and by his owne will. So that noe power whatsoever of his Creatures, can by any contraition against him, invalid or annull those Laws. But non occides is a divine naturall Law and precept expressed in the decalogue. Therefore no Pacti∣ons or agreements of men can give this power of put∣ting a man to death, no more then Cain could kill Abel. But on, the other side it is manifest, that Republiques have a lawfull power of putting men to death, without which they could not preserve their owne safety. Ther∣fore they have it from God. And how soone God gave this power to men I know not, nor cannot find, untill af∣ter the floud; when Genes. 9. 6. we read this expresse po∣sitive divine law and precept given to the Civill magi∣strate. Quicunque effuderit humanum sanguinem, fundetur sanguis illius. §. 4. Of the Efficient cause of Regall Power. The Finall Cause of Regall Power must of necessity be the same that is of the Commonwealth, because the King is the administrator of the power of the Com∣monwealth,
to the same end no doubt, for which it was first ordained: of which having spoken largely before, I have no need to say any thing here. The maine question is, who is the Efficient Cause of Regall or Monarchicall power? Which the Obser∣ver boldly averres to be, not God, but the people. And upon this false ground hee vents all those swarmes of false Inferences throughout his whole discourse. But before I lay downe the true Resolution of this question, I must desire my Reader to marke with good heed the great difference that is betweene the power it selfe of a Commonwealth, and the Authority to admi∣nister that power: for the people may be the Efficient Cause of this second, though not of the first. As for example, the Aldermen of London may elect, nomi∣nate, and constitute such or such a man to be their Lord Major to administer the power that belongs to the Corporation of that City: and herein they may be the Efficient Cause of his Authority to administer the power of the City, but not of his power; because that is the guift of the King by his Charter, of which His Majesty therefore is the onely efficient cause, and not the Aldermen, nor all the people of that Corporation whatsoever? I have proved all along in the precedent §. that the Civill power of a Commonwealth, is not a Hu∣mane, but Divine power, of which, not the people, but God onely is the Efficient Cause. It is true indeed, that it is in the voluntary election of the people to authorize one, or few, or more with the administration of this power. And as long as this Authority is still Elective in the people, they may by consent of the major part
alter their forme of Gubernation into Democraticall Oligarchicall, Aristocraticall, or Monarchicall, as they please. And herein the Observer saith truly, that God is no more the Authour of Regall, then of Aristo∣craticall power: for whether this power be in many, or in one, it is still the same divine power of the Common∣wealth, though diversly administred, of which God onely is the Efficient Cause. But when the people have once resigned up all their Authority into the hands of one, and his heires for ever, so that now it is not any longer elective in them, but hereditary in Him: then not onely the power, but the Authority also to ad∣minister that power is solely inherent in Him and His heires, unalterably and irrevocably for ever. This then is my first Assertion. The Efficient Cause of Regall or Monarchicall power, is not the people, but onely God. I speake in this Assertion, not of conditio∣nall Princes, but only of absolute Kings, and Monarchs. My first proofe then is. When the people create a King, they elect his Person, and authorize him with the admi∣nistration of that absolute power which is inherent in the whole Commonwealth to governe it selfe: other∣wise hee is no absolute King, of whom onely I speake, and so doth the Observer also. But this power (as I have proved) is not an Humane, but a Divine Power, of which God onely is the Efficient Cause. Therefore God onely, and not the people is the Efficient Cause of Regall Power. My second Proofe, God saith expresly, Prov. 8. 15. Per me Reges régnant, &c. Then their Dominion or Po∣wer by which they Reigne is immediately from God. Christ saith to Pilate, Ioh. 19, 11. Non haberes potesta∣tem,
&c. nisi tibi datum esset desuper. Then this Power is not from below from men; but from above, from God. Saint Paul saith, Rom. 13. 1. Omnu anima potesta∣tibus sublimioribus subdita sit: non est enim potestas nisi à Deo. And, qui resistit Potestati, Dei Ordinationi resistit. And, non sine causa gladium portat. For what cause? Dei enim minister est, vindex in iram &c. Then Regall Po∣wer is Divine Power and the Ordinance of God, wherein the King is not the Peoples, but Gods minister, as being invested and annointed interiorly in his Person by him with a Divine Power; of which the Exterior Unction is a sacred, Ceremonious, Commonefactive and solemne Testimonie. And for this cause, Cyrus though a Heathen King is called by God himselfe. Isay. 45. 1. Christus mens, Gods owne annointed. The holy King Josaphat saith to those whom he had constituted Judge. 2. Paralip. 19. 6. Non hominis exercetis judicium sed Domini. Then it is not a Humane Power, but a divine Power by which the King doth judge & rule his people. From hence I inferie two Corollaries. The first. That there is a twofold trust in the King. The one of his power. The other of the Administrati∣on of his power. The first is Gods trust unto him to ex∣ercise his divine judgments. The second is the peo∣ples, to administer it Propter salutem populi. But if he swerve herein, seeing that the power is Divine & resid∣ing and inhering only in him, and not in the people, he is not liable to the people, but only to God. The second Corollarie. As God is the sole effici∣ent cause of Regall power; so the instrumentall cause which conveies this power, is the Divine naturall Law obliging men to unite themselves into Civill societies.
For God gives a power to men to governe themselves by obliging them to unite themselves. And conse∣quently the election of the people (with all the obser∣vers pactions & agreements) is but Causa sine qua non, by way of approximation, that this divine power may re∣side in those few, or more, or one rather then in any o∣ther. As in my former example. . 3. The efficient cause of the Lord Majors Power is only the King. The instru∣mentall cause by which this power is derived unto him, is the Charter of the Citie, granted to them at pleasure, more strictly, or more largely by the King. And the Al∣dermens election of this or that particular man, is but the approximation, that the Kings power may reside in him to governe the Cittie, rather then in any other. My second Assertion. Every absolute King (inve∣sted and annointed with a divine power by God himself to exercise his judgements, through the election of the people to be sole administrator thereof) is in power super totam Rempublicam, Superiour absolutely over the whole Commonwealth. And therefore is not only Major singulis, but Major Universis, and super omnes simul. This Assertion is evident out of the former. For, the power that was inherent in the whole Commonwealth to exercise Gods judgements and to governe and pre∣serve it selfe, was a Divine power, not only super singulos, but super omnes simul, and therefore Major Universis. But this power is now totally and absolutly inherent in the King only. Ergo he is super totam Rempublicam: and Major Vniversis, In Confirmation of this Argument, I argue thus. Ei∣ther the whole power of the Commonwealth is in one, or no. if no: then he is no absolute King or Monarch,
contrary to our supposition. But if he be a Monarch I aske againe; if there be a power in the Commonwealth, which is not in him, is it subordinate to his power, or no? if it be subordinate, then his power is above that power, and so super totam Rempublicam, and Major Vni∣versis. If it be not, then there are simul & semel two su∣preame Civill powers in a Commonwealth, two su∣preame contrary masters at once to be obeyed, one and the same individuall Kingdome and Gubernation, and yet divided against it selfe, which are most absurd and impossible. From hence it is evident that His Majesty sayed most truly and most learnedly, that the administration of the whole power of the Commonwealth being committed in trust absolutely and irrevocably to him and his heires for ever, it is impossible that a power above that trust should be committed to others. This the Observer in effect plainly confesseth. But relapsing into his wonted Paroxismes of strong malice against Regal Power, he labours (by his most false erro∣neous Principal Rex est minor Vniversis) and tires himself in vaine to answer it. And because the strength of all his long tedious and farraginous discourse depends wholly upon these two false grounds, viz. that the peo∣ple is the Efficient cause of Regal power. And that Rex est minor Vniversis; and I have manifestly confuted them both, I presume I have also sufficiently confuted all the rest: and therefore conclude in those sacred words. Data est a Domino Potestas Regibus, & Virtus ab Altissimo. Power is given to Kings of the Lord, and Soveraignty from the Highest. Sapient. 6. 3. FINIS.
