L204 8959596 42107
A NEW VOYAGE INTO THE NORTHERN COUNTRIES Being a Discription of the Manners, Customs, Superstition, Buildings, and Habits of the Norwegians, La∣ponians, Kilops, Borandians, Sibe∣rians, Samojedes, Zemblans and Islanders. With Reflexions upon an Error in our Geographers about the scitua∣tion and Extent of Greenland and Nova Zembla. LONDON Printed for John Starkey, at the Miter in Fleetstreet near Temple-Bar. 1674.
THE TABLE. CHAP. I. THe Authors embarking at Copenha∣gen in a Vessel belonging to the King of Denmarks Northern Company, and his Arrival at Christiana in Norway. CHAP. II. Particulars of the Country about Christiana; with the Manners and Customes of the Pe∣santry in Norway. CHAP. III. Their way of fetching the Elks; the redicu∣lous opinion of the Virtue of their Claw; the power and authority of the Norwegi∣an Nobles. CHAP. IV. The Authors reimbarking at Christiania; his
arrival at Berghen, with some particulars of that Town. CHAP. V. The Authors reinbarking at Berghen, and his arrival at Dronthem. CHAP. VI. The Authors departure from Dronthem to to take a view of the Silver and Copper Mines belonging to the King of Dane∣mark. CHAP. VII. Particulars of the Silver and Copper Mines in Norway. CHAP. VIII. The entertainment the Author received from a Norwegian Peasant in his return from the Mines. CHAP. IX. The Authors reimbarkment at Dronthem, The Mariners buying a Wind, and the dan∣ger of sayling in those Northern Seas. CHAP. X. The Authors great danger in a Storm. CAAP. XI. The Authors arrival at Varanger in the Da∣nish Laponia. CHAP. XII. The Manners, Customes, Superstition and Habit of the Danish Laplanders.
CHAP. XIII. The Authors departure from Varanger to∣wards Mourmanskoimore. CHAP. XIV. His travelling with Elks, with some particu∣lars of that Beast. CHAP. XV. The Authors Arrival at Mourmanskoimore with some particulars of that Country. CHAP. XVI. The Authors Voyage into the Country of the Killopes, with their manner of Living. CHAP. XVII. The Authors Arrival in the Muscovian Lap∣land. Their Trade, Customes, and Man∣ners. CHAP. XVIII. The Authors Arrival at Kola, the scituation of the Town, with the manner of their buildings and other particulars. CHAP. XIX. The Authors departure from Kola, in his return to Varanger, with the Funeral Formalities of the Muscovian Laplan∣ders. CHAP. XX. The work and imployment of the Laponian Women, with other particulars of that Country.
CHAP. XXI. The Authors meeting a Laplander going a hunting. CHAP. XXII. The Authors return to Varanger, the dexterity of the Laponians in throwing their Darts shooting with their Bows and other particulars. CHAP. XXIII. The Authors sailing out of the Sea of Va∣ranger, the continuation of thisi Voyage, with other particulars. CHAP. XXIV. The meeting of the Danish Ships which came out of Danemark with the Author and had been separated by Storm, with an account of their adventures. CHAP. XXV. The Danes resolution to Trade to Boranday and the Authors accompanying them. CHAP. XXVI. The Stature, Habit, buildings. and man∣ner of Living of the Borandians, with other particulars. CHAP. XXVII. The entertainment the Danes gave the Bo∣randians on Board, and the Authors Voy∣age into Boranday.
CHAP. XXVIII. The success of the Authors Voyage into Bo∣randay, and other particulars of that Country. CHAP. XXIX. The Author meets a Borandine Lord return∣ing from hunting, with a description of their Clothes. CHAP. XXX. The Authors departure from Vitzora, to∣wards Potzora, and his traffick there. CHAP. XXXI. The Authors departure from Potzora, to go into Siberia, his meeting with five persons of quality sent thither into exile by the grand Czar, their miseries and his arri∣val at Papinogorod. CHAP. XXXII. The Governors reception of the Danish Mer∣chants amongst whom was the Author. CHAP. XXXIII. The Danes, and the Authors trassick in Pa∣pinogorod, the scituation of the Town? with the Habit, and Customs of the Sy∣berians, and Muscovites. CHAP. XXXIV. The Authors departure from Papinogorod, towards his Ship, his passage thorow Sa∣mojespia, with their Manners, Customes and Vestments.
CHAP. XXXV. The Author departs from Boranday to go to Zembla, where he saw a Company of Zemblanes worshiping the Sun, and two others worshiping a wooden Idol, they called Fetitot. CHAP. XXXVI. Of a disease called the Scurvy with which the Author and most of the Danes in his Company were sick. CHAP. XXXVII. Their Fishing for the Sea-Horse, with the relation how two of their Sea men were struck over board with one of their Tails. CHAP. XXXVIII. The boldness of the Bears upon the Mountains of Voygat, with the taking of certain Foul called Pingoines, CHAP. XXXIX. Of a Zemblane which had like to have been surprized by the Danes, of another and his wife taken in their Canoe, with a de∣scription of their Boat. CHAP. XL. The taking of another Zemblan and his wife, their Habits, Arms, and manner of li∣ving.
DHAP. XLI. Their departure from Zembla back again to Danemark, their Arrival in Greenland the whale Fishing, and the way they make their Oyl. CHAP. XLII. Their departure from Greenland, three Suns appear to them at Sea, with the relation how by the Violence of a Storm they were driven upon the Coast of Island. CHAP. XLIII. Their Arrival at Kirkebar,, their journy to Hecla, the danger the Author incurred there, the marvellous effects of two Foun∣tvins which spring out of that Mountain, with other particulars. CHAP. XLIV. The Habitations, Manners, Superstitions of the Islanders, with other particulars. CHAP. XLV. Their departure from Cape Hori, their Ar∣rival at Copenhagen, the present of the Horns of two Sea-Horses, which were ta∣ken for Unicorns. CHAP. XLVI. The Error about the Unicorn and the virtue of its Horn.
CHAP. XLVII. The Authors reflexions upon an Errour i our Geographers in the scituation and ex∣tent of Greenland and Zembla, with Observations upon such as have writ abou Voygat and the Samojedes. FINIS.
THE VOYAGE OF Monsieur MARTINIERE INTO THE Northern COƲNTRIES. CHAP. I. The Author imbarking at Co∣penhagen in a Vessel belong∣ing to the King of Den∣marks Northern-Compa∣ny, and of his arrival at Christiania in Norway. IN the year 1647. Iredrich the third of that name, King of Denmark, out of the care of his Subjects, and advance∣ment of their Trade, Erected two Com∣panies in Copenhagen (the Metropolis
of his Kingdom) one of them for Islande, the other for the North: which last, ha∣ving observ'd the advantage of their Traffick into Norway, prevailed with those who were concerned in their Pa∣tent, about the end of February 1653. to represent to his Majesty the profits would probably accrue if they carried their Trade up further than as yet they had done; and that they should return doubtless with several Commodities which at present they wanted. The King having received their Peti∣tion, was pleased Graciously to consent, and the Company thereupon immedi∣ately caused three Ships to be Equip'd in order to that Voyage. Being at Copenhagen at that time, and understanding his Majesty had com∣manded those who were to make that Voyage, should take the stricktest and most exact account of all the Coasts and Places they came at, and report them with all possible curiosity, that thereby the Voyage might be every way beneficial, I was incouraged to address my self to a Friend of mine who had a principal interest in that affair, and to desire his Mediation to the Company,
that I might be received, and go as Chi∣rurgion to one of those Ships. Being provided with all things necessary, within six days we Embark'd, and with a fair South-East wind set Sail, Coasting by the Shoar as far as Katgat (by the French call'd Trou de chat) which is a Streight dividing the German Ocean from the Baltick Sea; a place very dangerous to pass in respect of the Rocks, and con∣taining in length fourty Leagues from Elsenore to Scagerhort. When we were put off of Maestrand (which is a small Port about thirty Leagues from Copenhagen) we were sur∣prized with a fierce Wind from the North, and driven ten Leagues back again, which forc'd us to make for a Harbour, and re∣tire under the Shore to Schllot, where we lay at Shelter under the Castle, though it appeared to us but an old uninhabitable heap of stones, abandon'd for several years, and considerable for nothing but the Eminence of the Neighbouring Pro∣montories. Having lyen there at Anchor two days compleat, the third before Sun-rise by the benefit of an Easterly Wind, we weighed again to prosecute our Voyage.
We had not Sail'd above four hours before we were interrupted by a North-North-East Wind which drove us from the Coast of Gottenburg, upon the Shore of Jutland, upon which there being mul∣titude of Sands, we were forc'd to sound every moment: Sailing in this manner, a sudden Gust of Wind carried us into a place where we found but three fathoms and a half Water, where we had undoubt∣edly struck, had not the dexterity of our Pilot turned our Ship, and by the advan∣tage of a favourable Blast, carried us in half an hours time into another place where we sounded fifteen Fathoms and upward, which obliged us to keep the Sea with a side Wind as well as we were able, least otherwise we should have been forc'd back as before. We had not gain'd above two Leagues from the place where we had like to have struck, before we fell into a turn of Wa∣ters, which in spight of the Wind stopt our Vessel on sudden, as if we had cast Anchor, which constpained us to furle all our Sails but the Mizen, and gave us twelve hours imployment to disingage our selves, which notwithstanding we could not have been able to have done,
had not the Wind Veer'd to the South-South-West, and given us opportunity to make use of the rest of our Sails, and steer along the Coasts of Bahu. Having Sailed in this manner some Days and Nights at our Ease, we disco∣vered about eight in the Morning, the Promentories of Christiansand, a little Town famous for the convenience of its Port, from whence the next Night we arrived at Christiania. CHAP. II. Particulars of the Country about Christi∣ania, the Manners and Customs of the Pesantry in Norway. BEing entred into the Port of Christi∣ania, we immediately went a Shore, in order to the delivering of Letters we had to two Merchants which were resi∣dent there, and Members of the Compa∣ny, who understanding by them that our design was for advancing our Trade into the North, and by the King of Denmarks consent, received us very kindly, and treated us magnificently.
One of those Merchants finding I was a stranger, recommended by one of the chief of the Company, to show me as much of the Country as was possible at that time, commanded one of his Ser∣vants, who spoke French, to accompany me two or three Leagues into the Coun∣try, and accordingly being each of us mounted on Horse-back, early the next Morning we marched together to Wisby, a great Village some three Leagues from Christiania built betwixt two Mountains, the houses of Wood, without any Iron Work or Windows, the light coming in a top at a kind of a Lanthorn made of turf and sods of Earth. The Peasants of Norway are plain hearted, hospitable, given much to Fish∣ing, their principal Commerce being in Herrings, Mulletts, Codds, Stock-sish, and other sorts both Salt and Dry; they are generally Slaves to the Gentry. The Women are most of them hand∣some, but frickand; they love Strangers, are good Houswives, Spin all their own Cloth, and look to their Cattel, of which they have great quantity, as in France; They have great store of Game, as Elks, Staggs, Roe-Bucks, Wild-Goats, Boars,
Dear, Rabbets, Hares, all kind of Fowl, besides Otters, Beaver, Lynxes, and wild Catts of several Colours. Norway is a Mountainous Country for the most part, uncapable of Corn so much as for Bread, though they have of it good store, but Transported from other Countries by means of their Navigation; however the scarcity of Arrable is abun∣dantly recompenced in the plenty of their Pasture, and multitude of Woods. CHAP. III. Their way of Hunting the Elkes. The Ridiculous Opinion af the Virtue of their Claw, the Power and Authority of the Norwegian Nobless. IN our return from Wisby to Christi∣ania, we were met by a Gentleman and his two Servants going a Hunting with their Dogs at their Heels. The Gentleman knowing the person who was with me, ask'd him if we would divert our selves, and see the Hunting of an Elke, which we accepted, and marching with him about a quarter of a League,
we met one of the Gentlemans Hunts∣men with ten or twelve Country-fellows which conducted us about three quarters of a League further into a great Wood, so thick, we were forced to leave our Horses with one of his Servants, and go in on foot. The Game being prepared the day be∣fore by his Servants, we had not pass'd two Pistol shot into the Wood, when we saw a large Elke running before us and fall down on a sudden without any noise of a Gun, nor indeed shot; the strange∣ness of the sight, caused me to inquire of my Guid what might be the reason, and he told me it was a sort of Falling-sick∣ness peculiar to that kind of Beast, from whence among them it had its denomi∣nation, Elend, (as they call them) being as miserable with us. This Creature was about the bigness of a large Horse, bo∣died like a Stagg, but broader, its Leggs longer, his foot large and cloven, his head large, and Velvet; Were it not for this Distemper it would be no easie mat∣ter to take them, which I perceived by this Gentleman, who when he had kill'd this in its Fit, undertook another, and ran it two full hours without any effect,
nor had he ever taken it, had it not fallen down with the same Disease as the former, after it had slain three of his Dogs with its fore feet; which put the poor Gentleman into such a fume, he would Hunt no more that day. He sent for a little Chariot to a Farm-house he had about half a League off, to carry home his Elke to his own house, which was built all antique, as the rest of that Coun∣try are, to which he would needs have us bear him Company, and entertained us handsomely when we came there. The Gentleman understanding by my Camerade I was a Stranger, recommended by several of the Norway Company at Co∣penhagen, obliged him to give me (as a Testimony of his Friendship) the two hinder feet of the Elke he kill'd last, and to let me know it was a Soveraign reme∣dy against the Falling-sickness, which which when he delivered I could not but smile, and desir'd him to let the Gentle∣man know I wondered much the Foot having the virtue he mentioned, the poor Elkes could not cure themselves, seeing they had them always about them. The Gentleman reflecting upon what I said, fell a laughing himself, and told me I had
reason, he told me he had try'd it many times upon People in that Distemper, but without any benefit; and ingeniously confess'd he look'd upon that virtue, but as pretended, and a meer popular Error. The next morning early, having broken our Fast with the Gentleman, we gave him thanks for our Entertainment, and taking our leaves we arriv'd at Christiania. Having in the precedent Chapter spo∣ken of the Manners of the Peasants, I shall in this, give the Gentry this Cha∣racter, They are Wise, Wary, and yet Brave; they possess all the great Offices of that Kingdom, are Soveraign in their particular Territories, Tyrants to their Tenants, good Soldiers both by Land and by Sea, and addicted to Travel.
CHAP. IV. The Authors going on Board again at Christiania; his arrival at Bergen in Norway, with some particulars of that Town. HAving stayed four or five days at Christiania, we took our leaves of our two Merchants of the Northern Company, who confirmed our Orders, and wish'd us a good Voyage. Being re∣imbarqued we weighed Anchor, got out of the Port, and pursued our Journey by the favour of a North-East Wind, which which continued as far as Stafanger, where we were taken with so great a Calm, that (not able to advance) we were ob∣liged (to entertain our selves, and pass away the time) to betake our selves to Fishing. The Coast of Norway abound∣ing so plentifully with Fish of all sorts, w took them in such Multitudes, as made us keep Lent, though at another time of the year. The Calm having continued us in that place five entire days, on the sixth at Night, we were befriended with a fresh
Gale from South-East, which in no long time carried us to Bergen whither we were to go, and discharge our selves of such Merchandize as was designed to that place. Being entred into the Harbour (which is one of the best in Europe) and being come to an Anchor, while they were un∣lading. I took a view of Town, which is abont the bigness of Abeville, part of it built high upon the Rocks, and part of it on the Shore. Tis now considerable principally for its Trade, though ancient∣ly an Arch-Bishoprick, but since the Re∣formation in those parts, that is abolish∣ed, and the Bishops Palace is given to three Hans Towns, Hamborough, Lubech, and Bremen, as a Store-house for their goods, and several priviledges confirm'd to them by the King of Denmark. This Magazine or Store-house is called the Cloister, and the Factors which inha∣bit it Monks, though they are not tyed to any habit, nor observe any Laws but celibacy, which when they are not able to keep, or are otherwise inclined to marry, they are obliged to quit and be∣take themselves to some other, but yet with power reserv'd to Trade and Corre∣spond
with their Brethren as they think good. Their chief Traffick is in Her∣rings, Mullets, God, and Stoco-fish, which is round and dry, and sold in great quantities in Muscovie, Swede, Poland, Danemark, Germany, Holland, and other Countries, CHAP. V. The Authors reimbarking at Bergen, and his arrival at Dronthem. AS soon as they had unladen the goods consign'd to that place, I went a∣board, and in half an hours time the Wind being come about gently to the South∣west, our Master Weigh'd, and making what Sail was convenient, we cruised to∣wards the Coast of Dronthem, where half our Lading was to be delivered to the Super-intendant of the Silver and Cop∣per Mines, to make provision of Beer and Bread for the use of the Miners. We had not passed above half the way, before the Wind increased so fast upon us, that in fifteen or sixteen hours we came up with the Store, but in an instant it
abated, and we found our selves be∣calm'd. There being nothing more tedious to the Sea-men then a Calm, not knowing how to imploy themselves, they fell again to their old recreation of Fishing, and took such quantitie of a sort they call Klipen-fish, they were constrained to Salt great part of them, which stood us in good stead afterwards. This Fish is a kind of Mullet, but big∣ger then that they take in New-found Land, which by reason it keeps close un∣der the Rocks, is by the Germans called Klippe-fish, as much as to say in that Lan∣guage, Fish of the Rocks. Having been becalm'd for some days, a West South-west Wind arose, which assisted very well for our gaining of Dron∣them, where we arrived about three days after.
CHAP. VI. The Authors departure from Dronthem to take a view of the Silver and Copper-Mines, which belong to the King of Den∣mark. AS soon as we were landed, we went to deliver our Letters to the Inten∣dant General of the Mines, and made it our request he would order our Grain to be received as soon as was possible; but he told us his Officers were all at the Mines, for some of whom he must send on purpose before it could be received, which when I understood, I entreated our Master I might be permitted to go along with the Messenger, and he granted my desire. The next Morning betimes the Messen∣ger and I were both of us on Horse-back, and rode together as far as Steckby, a great Town about six Leagues from Dronthem, where we judg'd it best to take up, as well because Night was coming on (though but three a Clock) as that we were to pass a great Wood full of Woolfs and Bears, and Lynxes, which
being very fierce, made our Travel in the Night more dangerous then ordinary. The next Morning by Sun-rising we left Steckby, pursuing our journey to the Mines. About Night we arrived at the forges, where according to the custom of the Country, we were entertained with Tobacco, Strong-waters, and Beer, with all which we were forced to debauch. I found there a Commis, who having waited upon a Norway Gentleman in France, spake good French. I told him how my Curiosity had invited me to see the Mines, I desir'd his favour to assist me in seeing them, which he promised me next day, and af∣ter two hours smart drinking we went to bed.
CHAP. VII. Particulars of the Silver and Copper Mines in Norway. THE next Morning by break of day the Messenger with whom I came, departed with a Commis for Drontham, having left me in charge with one of the Master Miners, who being to follow the day after, was to bring me along with him. As soon I was up, I went out to find out my Commis which spake French, who had provided a good break-fast as well for himself and me, as for the Master Miner my Governour; and whilst we were at it, the Commis desired the said Master that he would carry me down into the Mines, and let me see them work. When we had broke our fast, we passed about fifty paces from the Forges, which are built upon an high Mountain near the mouth of the Mine; upon the Edge of it is an Engine called a Crane, which is turn'd by two men by the help of two Wheels, one going into one, the other into the other, and turning them about, they drew up great peices from the Mine,
sometimes in Ore, sometimes in Earth, as they do your Square-stone and Pot-Earth at Paris. The Master Miner and I put our selves into a Tub of Wood, hoop'd about with Iron, and Ropes fastned to them, in which we were let down into the Mine, above fifty fathom deep. Being come down I could not imagine my self any where but in Hell, there be∣ing nothing to be seen but dark dismal Holes, great Fires, and the Miners like so many Devils, clad all of them in black Leather, with a hood of the same stuff over their heads, in fashion of what our Priests wear in Winter, it was cut sharp towards the bottom, and the other broad end fastned over their Nose (to preserve them against fumes) and an apron of the same. Their work in these Mines is several, some cutting and chizelling the Ore, others probing with their instruments, as well to find out the Copper Veins, as to discover the Water, which sometimes ly∣ing hid in the ground, upon the least pas∣sage, breake out with so violent an Erup∣tion as would drown them all, were they not exceedingly careful.
The Master Miner who accompanied me down, perceiving I was affrighted, and surprized with a strange chilness be∣sides, rung the Bell to give notice above to draw us up again which they did in almost as little time as we went down, and then return'd to the Forges, where we found my French Interpreter atten∣ding us at Dinner. After Dinner the Commis caused three Horses to be sadled for himself, the Master Miner, and me, to go see the Silver Mines, about two Leagues beyond, where being arriv'd, we alighted at the Inten∣dants house, who received us very kind∣ly, presenting each of us with a good glass of strong Waters, he having drank first a brimmer to bid us welcome, and after that he treated us with Tobacco and Beer. Having treated us in this manner, he conducted us to the Forges which are about a quarter of a League from his house, much of the same nature with the Copper Forges, with several people at work, some separating, some washing, some melting, others refining, and others coining for the service of his Majesty.
From the Forges we passed to the Mine, which is in a Mountain over against them, into which I went down with the Master, as I did into the Copper Mines. I found no difference betwixt them, the holes, fires and habits, with the manner and time of working being exactly the same; that is to say, in the Spring and Fall they work three hours in the fore∣noon, and three in the afternoon, in summer four before dinner, and four after; the rest they rejoyce, dancing to their Ho-boys Violins, and other Instruments, as it was my fortune to see them the first night I came to the Copper Forges; du∣ring the Winter quarter they work not at all, but are paid as when they work, at the rate of five shillings a day. Having seen all the Silver Mines, we return'd to the Intendants lodging, where we supp'd and lay. The next Morning having broke our fast, we took leave of our Intendant, and mounting on Horse∣back, we dined at the Copper Mines, from whence, having taken leave of my Com∣mis which spoke French, the Master Mi∣ner and I departed in our journey to Dron∣them.
CHAP. VIII. The Entertainment the Author received of a Northwegian Peasant, in his return from the Mines to Dronthem. WE had not trsvelled above two Leagues and a half, before we were overtaken by the Night, and forc'd to take our selves to the house of a Coun∣try-man of the Master Miners acquain∣tance, which was not far off, who to speak truth, received us very handsomly, considering his condition, giving us for a Supper a brace of Pheasants: and a hun∣ted hare which he had killed after an hours chase, (which is free in that Coun∣try to all People) besides Beer, To∣bacco, and Strong-waters when we came in. After Supper we fell a smoaking again like Dragons, and drank Strong-waters for a better or a worse, and continued our Frolick till it was well near Mor∣ning. The poor Peasant seeing the Master Miner had made himself drunk to do him an honour, was so transported with the
kindness, he thought he could do no less then be as drunk as his Guest, to which purpose having sufficiently soaked it, a pallat was laid in the middle of the room, they laid upon it, and I laid my self by them in expectation of day. The Sun was up, and the Master Miner and his Bed-fellow in a most profound sleep. My design being to be at Dronthem that Night, I caused the Horses and break-fast to be got rea∣dy, and then with much ado wak'd them; we sat down, fed as heartily as we could, and then taking leave of our Host; we got on Horse-back, and managed the business so well, we got to Dronthem before Night.
CHAP. IX. The Author goes on Board again at Dron∣them. The Mariners constrained to buy a Wind, and the danger of Sailing in the Northern Sea. TWo days after, having unladen what was there to be delivered, and re∣ceived what provisions the Intendant Ge∣neral had Orders to procure us, the Wind being favourable, we went on Board, and some few hours after, set Sail in order to our Voyage. For some days togethep we Sailed very happily, till we came under the Arctick Circle, where we were suddenly becalm'd, not far from the Coasts. Being informed that the People which inhabit about the said Circle, as well as they which live about the Coasts of Fin∣land, are for the most part Sorcerers, and dispose of the Wind as they please, we caused our Sloop to be prepared, and some of our Sea-men went on Shore to the next Village they could meet with, to purchase one for us. They inquired for the best Necromancer the Town did
afford; and having addressed themselves to him, they told him whither they were bound, and desired him to furnish them with a Wind would carry them to Mour∣manskoimore. He told them he could not, and that his power extended no fur∣ther then the Promontories of Rouxella; which place being a considerable distance, and not far from the North-Cape, they thought good to take him along into their Ship, and make their bargain with him there. To which end they made bold with a small Fisher-boat they found there, and putting him and three of his Camerades into it, they convey'd them a board, where we bargained with him for a pound of Tobacco, and ten Crowns in Silver, for which they fastned to a corner of our fore-mast Sail, a piece of Linnen Cloth about a foot long, and four fingers broad, in which having tyed three knots, they told us that would do, and then entred into their Skip to re∣turn. They were no sooner out of the Vessel, but our Master untyed the first knot in the Ragg, and immediately we had a West South-west Wind, the pleasantest in the World, which darried us and the
Ships of our Company, thirty Leagues beyond Maelstroom before we had occasi∣on to unty another. This Maelstroom is the greatest Whirl∣pool in all the Norwegian Sea, in which ma∣ny Ships perish by coming too near it be∣fore they are aware; for which reason such as know the danger, and are better ac∣quainted with the Rode, stand off eight or ten Leagues higher into the Sea, to avoid a great number of Rocks, and other tur∣nings of water which lye out six or feaven leagues from the Shore. The wind vering and coming about to the North, our Master open'd the second knot, and it became favourable again as sar as the Mountains of Rouxilla, where we had no fooner doubled the point, but our Compass varied on a suddain, and the Needle went back above six points, which made us conjecture there were Loadstones in those Mountains, whether there were or not, this I am sure, had not our Pilot been expert, we had mistaken our way. Supposing the rest of our Ships in the same condition, our Pilat laid by his Compass, and hanging out a flag upon his Mizen, he gave a signal to the others to follow him, that place being very well
known to him, in respect he had made se∣veral voyages thither with the Dutch, who sail only by their Sea-Chart when they come in that place. Two whole days and nights we conti∣nued in this perplexity, after which being got at some distance from the Mountains, our Needle return'd to its Center, which gave us to understand we were not far from the Cape, but the wind beginning to slacken, our Master unty'd the third knot, which was the last he had. CHAP. X. Their great danger in a Storm. THe last knot being unty'd, it was not lon before there arose a North North-West wind, so furious and violent it seemed to us as if the whole Heavens were falling down upon our heads, and God by a just vengeance intended our ex∣termination for the sin we had committed in giving car to those Sorcerers; for not being able to keep up our sayls, we were forc'd to abandon our selves to the mercy of the waves, which hurry'd us with so ve∣hement an agitation, we expected no∣thing
but to broken in pieces and drown∣ed. Being not above 12. Leagues from the shore, and with much labour scarce able to keep the Sea, yet we could not imagine the power of the storm could have driven us thither in spight of our teeth, but we reckon'd without our Host, for the third day about noon there arose so fierce and suddain a storm, as blowed us among the Rocks, and dash'd us presently upon one of them, about thirty Leagues upward of the Cape, and four from the Shore. The whole Ship fetch'd a great skriek, and eve∣ry man fell to his prayers, believing that day would be the last of our lives. The truth is, I nor none of the rest were ever more in danger, all expecting when our Vessel should split. But by extraordinary providence the greatness and sorce of the waves disingaged us, and threw us near a Pistol-Shot off of the Rock, without any considerable prejudice more than a small hole in the Keel, which took a lit∣tle water, and some few boards loosn'd and splinter'd, which kept us close to our Pump, and gave us constant imployment. The fourth day the Storm being abated and the sky cleer, not seeing the rest of our
Company, we were much troubled, be∣lieving them cast away, however that hin∣dred us not from following our voyage, the wind being in some measure favoura∣ble to it. Finding our Ship leak, and our labour in pumping great and continual, it was thought best to make for some convenient Harbour, where we might Caulk, and re∣fit, but the North Sea being full of Rocks all along upon the Coasts, and their Crceks and Ports by that means inaccessible, we were constrain'd to keep out two days lon∣ger at Sea, before we could put in securi∣ty. But the fourth in the morning we were got upon the Coasts of Werdhus a Castle the Danes have built, in which they have a Garrison and a Commiss. to re∣ceive all Duties from such as pass or repass from Archangel in the White Sea, which Officer permitted us very civilly to pass without sending aboard us, knowing us to be Danes by our flag, and the salute we gave him when we passed by the Castle, and entred into the Sea of Varanger, where we came to an Anchor, about half a League from the Town.
CHAP. XI. The Authors arrival at Varanger in that Laponia which is under the Dominion of the King of Denmark. AS soon as we were entred we put our Shallop into the Sea, but there be∣ing none in our whole Crew that had any knowledge of the place (which appeared very savage and horrid) seven of us beside the Master, well Arm'd, ventured a little way up, to see if we could find any place more commodious, or any Inhabitants that could give us their assistance. Having passed about half a League, we came into a Town well Inhabited, with a good Harbour the Town was called Varan∣ger; the people were amazed to see us come in in that equipage, staring and gaping up∣on us with admiration. Our Master knowing they spake the lan∣guage of the north, which he understood very well, demanded civily if they would permit him to bring our Vessel into the Harbour and repair it. Being informed we were Merchants and our business fishing for Wall-Rus (which is Sea-Horse with us) they offered both their
Port and assistance which we accepted, and having viewed the Port, we returned to our Vessel, and weighing immediately, we put in, and fell a lightning, discharg∣ing our selves of our Ballast (which was Sand) with some chests of Tobacco, and certain Balls of Linnen cloth, which we carryed to Barter with the Natives when occasion was offered. When we had unladen, we took our Cloth and Tobacco and put them into a Caban near the shore, which our Master and the Commissioners for the Merchants caused to be made fast and secured.
CHAP. XII. Of the manners Customs superstitions and Habits of the Danish Laplanders. TO create a good intelligence with these people, which as I said before were Laponians, we made them a present of some pieces of Tobacco in the Rol, which they received with as much joy as if they had been wedges of Gold, and to requite us they requiteus with such things as they had, which indeed was a sort of dryed Fish they eat in stead of Bread; the flesh of Elks (which is an animal to b found only in Laponia, Boranday, Samojespi & Siberia) Bears and other Wild-Beast; which we had never seen before. They gave us likewise a certain fresh Fish boil'd up without salt, which they dipped some of them in the oyl of another Fish, others in a sharp liquor they used instead of their drink. But none of us approving their Ragous, we were glad to betake our selves to the provisions we had brought with us which was honest Bisket and salt Beef, which we presented them; but they no
sooner put them in their mouths, but they spit them out again, with as much abo∣mination as we had done theirs, however in complasancy they drank of our bear and strong waters, but not with the gust and delight they swill down their own, which they make of fair water, Juniper-Berries, and another berry like lintels, (whose name I have forgot) of which sort they have very great plenty, growing as the Ju∣niper does) among the leaves of a plant like our Fearn but thicker and higher, and what I could never find in any Herba∣list. They have a kind of strong water too which they distil with a Limbeck of Copper in balnio Mariae, putting in a cer∣tain grain which gives it the same strength and intoxication as ours, and their ordi∣nary drink is not for that inferiour to our wine. These Laplanders (though they are Lu∣therans by prfession, and have their Priests to instruct them) yet they are strangely de∣luded by the Devil, being most of them Witches, and so superstitious, if they meet any Creature they fancy unfortunate, they will run back to their Cabanes and not come out again all that day. If when they are fishing, they throw their Nets, and
draw up but one Fish, they look upon it as a dangerous Omen, home they go, and no more fishing for that day. The Men and Women are low, but strong set, and active, their face broad, flat nos'd, and tawny, but not so much as others more North, their eyes are little like Hogs eyes, their eye-brows large and reaching almost to their Temples; they are heavy and stupid, without any civility, very lascivious especially the women, pro∣stituting themselves to all commers, as often as they can do it with security from their husbands. Their habit is various, sometimes of a coarse sort of cloth, but generally of Elks skin with the hair on the out-side, their stockings of the same, their shoos of a fish skin with the scaleson, like slippers with∣out hinder quarter or Ears. Their heads are dressed like the Norwegiens, their hair in two plats, one hanging upon one shoul∣der, the other upon the other, a Hood or Coife of coarse Canvas over it, which is all the linnen they wear; others a piece of fur a little broader than ones hand, which they tie behind their heads, ala Egiptien∣ne. The mens clothes are all of Elks-skin,
dressed with the hair outwards; the chief of them is a Wast-coat made short, to the middle of their Thighs; with a pair of Bree∣chees of the same, their Stockings are all one, with a sort of Boots made of the skins of Fish, so cleverly that though they seem clumsy and great, the seams are not easily to be found. Many of them there are who wear no Boots, but Shooes like the women; upon their heads they have a kind of round Cap, like our Seamen, made of Elks-skins with the hair upon it, lined at the edges with a piece of a Fox skin, sometimes white and sometimes grey. Their houses are much at the same rate with the inhabitants of Christiania, having no other light but what comes in at top. They have no Beds to ly upon at night, no more than the rest of their neighbours, the Moscovian Laplanders, Borandians, Sa∣moiedes, Siberians, Zemblians, Islanders, and other people of the North; they display themselves fairly in the middle of the room upon Bear-skins, where they ly higgledy piggledy, Master, Mistress, Children, men and Maid-servants alltogether without any scruple, and when they rise in the mor∣ning, they return the skins to their old pla∣ces very orderly.
Every house has belonging to it a great black Cat, of which they make great ac∣compt, talking and discoursing to it as it were a rational Creature. They do no∣thing but they first communicate with their Cat, as believing she assists them high∣ly in all their enterprizes. Every night they go out of their Cabanes to consult their dear puss; nor can they expect a blessing upon their sports either Hunt∣ing, Fishing, Fouling, &c. unless their good Angel goes along with them, which though I have seen many of them, and all have the figure of a Cat, yet by the dreadfulness of their looks, I did and do still think they can be nothing but De∣vils.
CHAP. XIII. The Authors departure from Varanger to∣wards Mourmanskoimore. HAving unladen our Vessel the next day after our arrival at Varanger, the people of the Town were very helpful to us in the turning and refitting of it, for the Master finding it in a much worse conditi∣on than he imagined, he desired the inha∣bitants to find him out wood that might be proper to repair it, which they did up∣on a Mountain not far off, and brought it to him when they had done. The Commiss. for the Merchants percieving it would take up some time before our ship could be fitted, thought it convenient to pass higher into the Coun∣try, and see if they had any thing there, to barter for his Commodities: with this design he made choice of me and two o∣thers to bear him Company, and the next morning (the 12 of March) we took our Tobacco and linnen cloth to traffique, our biscuit and salt meat for our provant, and with three of the Natives (as well to car∣ry our provision as to conduct us) we ad∣vanced
thorough Woods, Mountains val∣lies, &c. till about four a clock in the e∣vening, at which time we described two great and fierce white Bears m king to∣wards us, which gave us no little appre∣hension. Our Convoy percieving our fright, ad∣vised us not to be troubled, telling us if they should make at us, we had no more to do but to stand to our Arms and they would be gon; and for experiment sake we fell to fitting our flint, and priming our pan, which they no sooner percieved but (either affrighted with the flashing of pan or the smell of the power) away they ran, and we heard of them no more, about an hour after coming down a Moun∣tain, we discovered about a dozen houses at a good distance from one another, and a little farther two herds of creatures like Stags, which our Guides told us were Elks. Being got to that Town, they brought us to a Cabane where we repos'd our selves being much tyred by the length and trou∣blesomness of our journey, and the weight of the Luggage we brought along with us. The first thing we did, we presented our Landlord with a piece of Tobacco, which
pleas'd him exceedingly, and he told us he had not had such a present in nine Months before, and to recompence our kindness, he gave us some of his Aqua-vitae, a piece of fresh Elks flesh, and dryed Fish, which we distributed to our guides, and feasted them, whil'st we made shift with our own provisions; after which we laid our selves down upon certain large white Bear skins and went to sleep according to the mode of that Country. CHAP. XIV. How we were drawn by the Elks in Lapo∣nia and some particulars of that Beast. HAving got up the next morning we desired to know of our Host if he had nothing to truck against our cloth and Tobacco: he told us he had skins, both Wolf, Fox, White Squirrel, &c. and his Neighbours had more which he believed they would willingly Barter. We desired to see them and they brought them out to us and with them four suits made of Elk-skin to keep us from the cold, of which
they gave us some for our Tobacco, and some for our Cloth. There being no more traffique to be had there, we intreated our Landlord to fur∣nish us with Elks to carry us farther into the Country, which we no sooner pro∣pos'd, but stepping out of the door, he took his Horn, and blew for the Elks, which came to him forthwith, to the number of fourteen or fifteen. He took six of them harnessed them, and then put them into six Sledges, made in the fashion of a Gon∣dela, supported by six little Rafters, fast∣ned to a piece of wood about two foot longer than the Sledge; we put our Com∣modities into one of them, and having paid in Tobacco two of our Guides, and dis∣missed them, we retained the third (who had been in the other Laponia under the Government of the Duke of Muscovie, and understood their Language well, as also the Country and Language of the Killopes) to conduct us as a Guide. Having placed our selves every man in his Sledge in the Lapland habits which we had bought of the Natives, we were each of us covered with a Bear-skin, having, them fastned us to with a large thong of Elk-Leather to our Charriot, they gave us two
glasses of Aqua vitae a piece, and then put a short Battoon (with an Iron-pike at the end of it) into every ones hand, to ease our selves, and prevent being turned over at every stone or stump of a Tree we came at. When we were just ready to depart, our Landlord to whom the Elks did belong, mumbled out certain words into the ears of every one of them, telling them as (we supposed) whither they were to carry us, upon which they gave such a spring, we thought we had had so many Divels in our Sledges, and at that rate they carried us over Mountains and Valleys out of all bea∣ten Roads, till about seaven a clock at night, at which time they brought us to a large Country-Village scituate among the Mountains near a great Lake, and then stopped at the fourth ho use we came to, stamping all of them with one of their feet as it were to give notice of their arrival. The Master of the house taking the alarm came forth with his servants to unty us. One of them brought a Juniper Can of strong waters, out of which he gave each of us a litttle cup (made of the wood) full, to drink, and refresh our selves before we alighted, understanding by our Guid we
were in no little disorder, as being not ac∣customed to so swift and violent a con∣veyance. These Creatures both Male and Female have their horns something loftier then a stag, more crooked, shaggy, and not so many little horns, they are of the same co∣lour with a Stag, their Slot cloven, and as large as a good Ox. They feed altoge∣ther upon Moss, which is very plentifull all over the Country. The females are milked as our Cowes, of which the Inha∣bitants make very good Butter and Cheese. They fasten these Elks to two poles tyed fast to the Sledges with thongs of Elks-skin, not unlike our harness for our Coa∣ches, with which they draw them with incredible swiftness, carrying them direct∣ly to the places appointed, without any trouble to govern or guide them.
CHAP. XV. The Authors arrival at Mourmanskoi∣more, with some particulars of that Country. BEing alighted from our Carriages, we went into the House which we found like the rest of that Country, very little, low, and covered with the bark of Trees, having no light but what came in at the top of the house as in Norway. These Laplanders have their habits some∣thing longer than those from whence we came, they are made likewise, of the skins of Elks, with the hair outwards; the wo∣men are in the same dress, their hair breid∣ed as the other, with a round Bonnet upon their head, of the same skin with the rest of their clothes. We gave the Master as soon as we came in a piece of Tobacco in the Roll about the length of two fingers, which he re∣cieved very kindly we gave every one of his Neighbours another, for our better security, as percieving them more savage than any we had seen; after which we supped upon the provisions we brought with us,
and our Guide upon his dry'd Fish, and Elk flesh baked without salt. Inquiring of him how many Leagues we had come that day, he told us about thirty, and that we were in the Country of Mourmanskoi∣more, in which the Inhabitants speaking another Language than they did in Varan∣ger, we could not understand them a word. After we had supped, we laid our selves down fairly upon their bears kins, accord∣ing to their mode, and went to sleep, ha∣ving before trucked our clothes for theirs, which were something longer, and a hun∣dred Squirrels skins (which they had ready by them) for some of our Tobacco.
CHAP. XVI. The Authors Voyage into the Country of the Killoppes, and their manner of li∣ving. THE next day being the 14. of May, we desired our Interpreter to ac∣quaint our Host that we would have him provide us Sledges to go up farther into the Country, which he did, and the Neigh∣bours came to help us; bringing their Aqua-Vitae along with them, to drink with us before we departed. They put six Elks into six Sledges, into one of which we put our goods, and mounted the rest our selves, after which they covered and fastned us as before, and having whisper'd their directions into the Ears of their Elks, away they went with a vengeance; hurrying us along almost full speed till two in the afternoon before we came near any House, and about three they brought us to a little Village of some eight houses, built upon a high Mountain near a great Wood, where they stopp'd on a suddain, and made us believe we were
at our journies end, but no body coming to us, we were forced to bait our Elks up∣on the Moss, (which was there in good store) our selves upon our salt meat and biscuit, and our Interpreter upon his Fish, making bold now and then with a Bottle of Strong-waters our last Land∣lord had given us. Having rested a Matter of an hour, our Guide (who understood to make an Elk march as well as the best of them) had much ado to perswade ours any farther; that being the place (as it seem'd) to which they were directed, which put the poor man upon a great many odd Ce∣remonies, going five or six times alone in∣to the wood, and then back again, still whispering into their Ears at his return, and all would scarce do, at length they were good natur'd, and went on, but not with that speed and alacrity they came thi∣ther. We asked him how it came to pass we found no body in that Village, and he told us in those parts it was no wonder; that we were now in the Country of the Kil∣lopes, which are a sort of Laplanders less civiliz'd than any of the rest, changing their quarters very often, to avoid the
Company of strangers, and living wholly upon hunting without any Communicati∣on with other people. Following our journey, we went down a high Mountain about nine at night, and percieved four Kiloppes returning from hunting in four Sledges drawn with Elks like ours, but as soon as they saw us they made another way, at the bottom of the Mountain we entred into a great Wood, and being got about the middle, we, heard strange yellings and Cries, but saw no∣thing. Being out of the Wood, descending a∣nother Mountain, we percieved a Village to which our Cattel carried us, and took up our Lodgings as they pleased them∣selves, where being refreshed with our own provisions, we went to sleep as be∣fore.
CHAP. XVII. The Authors arrival in the Muscovian Lapland, their Trade, Manners and Customs. AS soon as we had shaked our ears next Morning, we inquired of our In∣terpreter how many Leagues we had mar∣ched the day before, and he told us at least forty (which are about a hundred and six∣ty such as are betwixt Paris and Lyons) e∣very one of their Leagues being more than a German League, which make four times as much as a League about Paris, and are between six and seaven miles of ours, a Horsman very well mounted not being able to ride above five of them in a day; and he told us moreover we were then in a part of Laponia which was under the Czar of Muscovy. As we were drinking with the Inhabi∣tants, and smoaking of Tobacco, we cau∣s'd him to ask if they had no Commodities to barter, and they replying they had Furs, we desir'd to see them, and they fetched them imediately. There were White,
Black, and Grey Foxes and some Sables, but not so well colored as are taken in Borenday, Samoiessia, and Syberia. The Commodity fitting us well, we ex∣changed our Tobacco for them and pleas'd them no less, having concluded our bargain and all things mutually delivered, we fell a drinking helter skelter together in which debauch we found they were not so savage as some others we had seen, though very rude in their conversation, commit∣ing such things in our Company, as Ci∣vility will not suffer me to mention. It growing late, and we desirous to pass on in respect we had certain Rolls of To∣bacco, and some cloth remaining, we caus'd him to desire our Host to furnish us with Sledges, and he having provided as many as we had occasion for, we got in and de∣parted about noon, and ran on till about six at night thorow very dangerous, and a man would have thought un∣passable places, without seeing either Horse or Man, about half an hour after, going up an high Mountain, upon a little turning we percieved two Cabanes under the Rocks, which our Guide told us were the retreat of two Killoppes, who as soon as they saw us ran away with their Wives
and Children. Three hours longer we marched before we discovered another, but then on the side of a little Hill we saw a fair Village built upon the Banck of a River, at which we arriv'd about eleven at night: and there our Elks were our Quarter-Masters, and dispos'd of us in the middle of the Town where we were well enough received, our Land∣lord causing a good Fire to be made in the middle of the Room, bringing us for our supper, a proportion of Strong∣water, dry'd Fish, and a piece of salted Elk, which was something wonderful to us, in respect the Inhabitants all the way we had pass'd thither, had not used any Salt, and there it was plentiful. He gave us Milk likewise and salt Butter very good, and doubtless it would have been much better had we had any Bread to have eat with it; but our store was spent that very Morning, and we should have been put to it, had we not had the good fortune to light there, our Inter∣preter must have made shift with dry Fish alone, not being able to endure any Salt, having supp'd, we betook our selves to our Bears-skins as usually.
CHAP. XVIII. The Authors arrival at Kola, the scitua∣tion of the Town, the manner of their buildings and other particulars. THe next day being the sixteenth of May, there being no more Traffick in that Town, we pass'd the River which was about the bredth of the Seine. Being wafted over to a little Village on the other side of the Water, we went to the best house we could find, to see if they could furnish us with Sledges to Kola, and being supplyed by them, we arrived there about noon. It is a small Town, or large Country Village built among the Mountains, near a small River distant about ten Leagues from the North-Sea. On the East side there are great Forrests, on the West, the Country of Mourm anskoimore, and on the South very high Mountains. Their hou∣ses are built very low, for the most part of Wood covered over very beautifully with Fishes bones, and at top a kind of an open Lanthorn to let in the Light,
the whole Town consisting but of one Street. The Inhabitants are generally (like most of the Muscovites) Morose, diffident, and so extravagantly jealous, they shut up their Wives from the sight and conversa∣tion of all Strangers. Our Landlord took all our cloth off our hands and gave us in lieu two Lynxes skins, spotted with Black and White like Leopards, three do∣sen of White Fox, half a dosen of Vie∣tefras, which we called Gloutons, and is a Creature not unlike a Badger, but with a longer and ruffer Fur, of a reddish black, with a tayl like a Foxes, besides some few Ermins. Having some few Ells of Linnen cloth remaining, more than he had Commodi∣ties to truck for, he bargained with us, to furnish us with Provisions for our journey back, and Sledges to the Town where we pass'd the River, and in the mean time he treated us well according to the manner of that Country. After supper we betook our selves to our Bears skins, and took our quarters upon the Ground.
CHAP. XIX. The Author leaves Kola in Order to his re∣turn to Varanger; the pleasant Funeral formalities among the Muscovian Lap∣landers. THe next morning (having told him we would be gon very early, our Host had prepared our Provisions accor∣ding to contract, which was bisket, a sort of spice bread, Elks Flesh baked with salt, with a barrel of Aqua-vitae, and our goods being made up, there came two of his Neighbours (hearing we had Tobacco left) to inquire if we would barter for any more skins; having told them we would, and they fetching them to us, they prov'd a dozen of Frmines, two dozen of White Fx, and four Lynxes, but not altoge∣ther so fair as what we had from our Landlord. The bargain being made, they delive∣red our kins, and we our Tobacco, reser∣ving only five Rolls both for our own use, and to discharge our expences in our return  Varanger, as being a Commodity more ne∣cessary in that Country for Travellers, than
Money, the Laplanders prizing an Inch of Tobacco more than a Crown in Silver; upon which consideration the Kings of Denmark Sweden, and the great Duke of Muscovy have laid great imposts upon it in those parts, and established their Offi∣ces upon the Frontiers to collect them. Our Trade being finished, we were ob∣liged to debauch in Strong-waters with our Merchants till two a clock after din∣ner, at which time we desired our Host our Sledges might be got ready to recon∣vey us to Varanger, which he willingly granted, and having dispos'd our goods into one of them, and our selves into the rest, after a Styrrup Cup of Aqua-vitae, we took our leaves, and our Elks carried us (as if they also had had their dose) with more expedition (in my judgment) than any before, in so much as about sea∣ven we were got to the Village on the banck of the great River I mentioned be∣fore, which we passed, and repair'd to our old quarters, where we were very kindly received by our Landlord, in hopes (as we conceived) he should have a good lunchen of Tobacco to accommodate us again for our return. He gave us at first dash a good dish of strong waters, and
then ask'd us if he should provide us with Sledges, we told him not that night, for being weary we desired to repose till next morning, there being never another Town within any reasonable distance. Our Landlord having given us a large dram of the Bottle, he ask'd us if we would go along with him and see the Fu∣neral solemnities for a Neighbour of his, who had dyed four hours before, which in curiosity we readily accepted. Being entred into the House, we saw the Corps taken up by half a dozen of his principal Friends upon a large Bears skin, and laid upon a wooden Beer, the Corps was wrapped in linnen, with the Face uncovered, and both its hands: in one of them they had put a Purse with a certain sum of mony in it, to pay for his admissi∣on into Paradise; in the other it held a Pastport or Ticket sign'd by a Priest which was to be delivered to Saint Peter, to certify the honesty of the man, and how proper he was to be received, by his side they had laid a barrel of strong wa∣ters, with a proportion of Dri'd Fish and Elk-flesh, for his repast by the way, in respect his journy was like to be long, after which they lighted several roots of
Firr-trees like so many Torches, and then fell a houling and crying with so many strange postures and gesticulations, one would have sworn they had been mad. All being ready, they took several turns about the Corps in Procession, demand∣ing the reason of his Death; whither his Wife was not kind. Whether he wanted any thing; whether he was hungry, or a dry; whether he had had any disaster in his sports; whether his clothes were out of repair, still squaling and limping with several distortions of their bodies, and all the while a Priest standing by, sprinkling the Corps with Holy-water, and the Mourners doing the same. I should have told that Saint Nicholas being in great Veneration among them as well as the Muscovites, (are both Nicolai∣tans in their Opinions) they had plac'd an Image of him by the side of the Corps in∣stead of a Crucifix. This Saint Nicholas is not the Bishop in the French Kalender whose Festival we keep, but one of the seaven Deacons men∣tioned in the Acts of the Apostles; they had carv'd him in the habit of a Pilgrim, his hood hanging loose behind his head: a long loose Gown with a large Gyrdle a∣bout
his Waste, and his Staff in his hand. CHAP. XX. The work and imployment of those Lapo∣nian women, with other particulars of that place. TYr'd with the noise, and weary of the whole Ceremony, we withdrew to our Lodging, where we found our Landlady at Liberty, having forsaken the Hole where her Husband had dispos'd her at our arrival. As soon as she saw us, supposing her good Man was among us, she was retire∣ing to her Kennel; But our Guide and Interpreter letting her know he was safe at the Funeral, and not like to come home yet, she pluck'd up a good heart, and ad∣ventured to stay. The first thing she did she star'd round about her, and then fixing her eyes on each of us by turns (as she had been picking a Mate) she considered us all for some time, and as it seem'd not thinking a miss of us, she civilly sate down, mumping, and bride∣ling,
making many signs of her approba∣tion and friendship, and in heat of blood as a great Complement shewed us her work which was a Cap or Bonnet she was im∣broidering with Tynsel, one thread upon another very handsomly. The imployment of those soeminine Laplanders, is nothing generally but ma∣king clothes for themselves, their hus∣bands and Children, all of them embroi∣der'd with Tynsel at the bottom, which being softer then ordinary, they draw with their Teeth as fine and as long as any of our Wyer-drawers, and all with the prettyest grace imaginable; they are most of them handsome; well shap'd and ac∣ceptable enough were their nofes not a little Camus'd too much. The jealousie of their husbands is terrible to them, and they dread the effects of their fury, other∣wise they are good natured, and would prostitute upon occasion without any great scruple: upon which consideration the wary husbands desire them to retire, when any strangers come near. While our Host was bed about the obsequie, of his Neighbour, and doing him his last honour, we drew out our pro∣visions, and presented our Landlady, the
good woman received them kindly, tasted them and liked them very well, especially the spic'd-Cake, she took two good soups of our Srong-water, and exit, being in a bodily fear her husband should surprise her in our Company, which would have cost her a cudgelling if she had escaped with her brains. He returned at length, and we were ob∣liged to take a Pipe, and another Dram with him; after which we went to Sup∣pet, and he gave us of his delicats, Elks Flesh and Salt butter, which we eat with Bread, only our Guide having no fancy to any thing with Salt, contented himself with his dry'd Fish and a lunchen of Bears Flesh our Landlord gave him, and he broil'd it upon the Coles. All the Houses in this Town are like the rest of that Country built of Wood, and covered with sods of Earth, but ador∣ned both without and within with the bones of Fishes, very curiously dis∣pos'd. After supper we went to our lodging, which as formerly was upon Bear-skin spread upon the floor, where having dis∣play'd our selves, we fell asleep, and pass'd the night in as much ease and security as any in our lives.
CHAP. XXI. The Author in his return met a Muscovite Laplander going a hunting. THE eighteenth of May very early in the morning, our Host having pro∣vided us Sledges, and our Merchandise be∣ing put into one, we took up the rest our selves, and departed; our Elks carrying us with no less swiftness, then those our Host had furnished us last from Kola, so that in about two hours time, we were advanced above six Leagues. Passing between two Hills, into a Val∣ley, we saw a Laplander going a hunting, He made towards us, sliding along upon the Snow as fast as we without sinking in the least. His Pattins were made of the Bark of a Tree, about seven foot and a half long, bending almost to a Semi-Cir∣cle, but four fingers broad, flat at the bottom, and a hallow place where he put his Foot and tyed his Shooes to it, his Ha∣bit was Elks skin drest with the hair on. His Cap, Mittans, Jump, Breeches, and Boots all bordered with Tyncel, and ty'd about the wast with a Gyrdle of the same
In one hand his Bow, in the other his Dart, with his Quiver of Arrows at his back, and his beloved Catt at his heels. CHAP. XXII. The Authors return to Varanger; the dexte∣rity of the Laplanders in throwing their Darts, shooting with their Bows, and o∣ther particulars. OUr Laponian Huntsman having kept with us about half a League, he left us at the foot of a Hill, we marching one way, and he another, by the expedition we made, we arrived at Varanger about nine at night, having taken the same way, and met the same conveniences we found as we went, without any injury or acci∣dent whatever. The Laplanders (though very poor; Brutish and for the most part Sorcerers) are very faithful notwithstanding, not at all given to nimming or stealing which is the principle of their virtues; they are dextrous in throwing their Darts, they will hit a Crown piece thirty Paces off, and stick a man thorow and thorow, with
such strength and activity do they fling them, and with their Bow they will hit any Beast in what part soever they please. They have no great Maw to the Wars, nor natural affection to the other World, insomuch as when the Kings of Denmark, Sweden, or the great Duke of Muscovy want men, and make their Levies in these Countries they betake themselves to the Woods, believing the wild Beasts less in∣human then mankind to it self. They have Foul, as Geese, Hens, Ducks, and others, which they feed not with Juniper Corn, but with another Grain of which they make their Beer, but of no∣thing more plenty than Fish. The most part of the Wild-Beasts in Lapouia are white, as Woolfs, Foxes, Hares, and others, even their Crowes are white, to as high a degree as our Swans without any black about them but their Beak and their Feet. The Fish which they dry to serve them instead of Bread are large and of the length of betwixt two and three French Eeles, without any Bones besides that of the Back, which the Physicians call Spi∣na dorsi, the marrow of which they call Raff, and is well tasted, substantial and thick.
The Fish they boyl, and eat by it self, are of all other sorts; the dishes and Ves∣sels they use are of Copper or Wood, and and though they hate salt, and use none of it at all, yet they boyl all their meat in Sea-water, and it goes down very well. Their Dogs are small, the biggest not above a foot long, and a span high, their hair the length of a Finger, of a darkish Red, shagged and staring like Brissels, their Ears are exactly like a Woolfs, their head and muzzel like a Bats, which they hunt like Cats, and eat them when they have done, upon which account, they are in high esteem among the Laplanders, though they be ill-favoured, dull, and their Tayls curling like a Pig. They have a kind of wild-Foul among them of a Pearl-colour'd grey, about the bigness of a Goshawk; their eyes red and sparkling, their head like a Cat, their beak like an Eagle, their Feet and Talons like the same, with which they seize and secure their prey, both Hares and other Game.
CHAP. XXIII. The Authorr sayling out of the Sea of Va∣ranger, the continuation of his Voyage and other particulars. THe day we arrived at Varanger our Master began to caulk, and the next had finished, and our Ship being once a∣gain in good order, he caus'd our goods to be be put on Board. While we staid, we treated the Inhabitants with Strong-Wa∣ters and Tobacco, lest they should obstruct our departure, and hinder our Wind; but they were so far from that, that about five days after being the 26. of May (as if in recompence of our kindness) there arose so pleasant and convenient a Wind to carry us out of that Sea, we took the advantage, weighed, and were under Sail about seaven at night. The wind increasing, to avoid the Rocks in the middle of the passage into the main Ocean, we came to Anchor near the Shore over against the Isle of Wardbus, from whence the Commiss of the Castle perceiving us, and knowing who we were, came with his Shallop on Board us, and
having treated him well and civily, af∣ter some hours he took his leave and de∣parted. The next day being the 27. the Sun ap∣pearing with his rays about one a Clock in the night, we weighed again, standing directly for the main Sea, which by the assistance of a fresh Gale, we might pro∣bably gain, steering N. N. E. with full Sail, and as much pleasure as we could wish. We had not Sailed three times four and twenty hours, before the night for∣sook us quite, the Sun continuing always in our sight either behind, before, or on one side of us. The last of May we discovered the Mountains called Spite Bergen, but being obstructed with a North wind which blew very hard, not able to keep the Sea, we were forced to leave them to the N. N. E. and steer our course E. S. E. to make the shore if we could, and secure our selves there. For three days and nights we were in no little danger, much incommoded by the Ice, which being broken and sepera∣ted by the agitation of the Tempest, came upon us in great pieces, dashing with that
violence against the Poup and sides of our Ship, we looked every moment to have been broken in pieces. The fourth of June, at due East, we descryed high Mountains, and directed our course to them, to put our selves if possible under the protection of a certain Promontory which we discovered. But the wind blowing hard again at the North we were glad to steer towards the Coasts of Boranday which we reached in few hours, and put into a Bay which we found there, very convenient to shelter us against the winds, and furnishing us with twelve or thirteen fathom water. We were at Anchor no sooner, but we saw two Ships within Musquet-shot from us, and we perceived them to be ours, which had left us in the storm on the o∣therside the North-Cape, and we suppo∣sed had been cast away: we were very glad we were mistaken, and gave them the sig∣nal of our arrival by shooting off three Guns, and hanging out our great Flag upon our Poup. To express the joy they also conceived at the news of our welfare, they belie∣ving us drown'd in the tempest that part∣ed us, they not only re-saulted us with
their Cannon, but hung out all their Flags and decorations, and we the like, desiring on both sides to put out our Shallops and come on board one another, but the wind was too high, and we were forced to stay till it abated, which it did about four and twenty hours after. CHAP. XXIV. The meeting of the Danish Ships which came out of Denmark with the Author, their separation by Storm, and an account of their adventures. THE great desire our friends in those two Ships had to know whether that Tempest had carried us when we were parted, caused them each of them to put out their Long-Boat to come aboard us, which they did with great satisfaction on all sides: they gave us over for lost, as we had done them, and concluded we should never have met again. They gave us a relation how they were driven by the Wind upon the Coasts of Ju∣horsky not far from an Island, but not be∣ing able to come to an Anchor by reason
of the Rocks which they discovered in their sounding coming once within two Fathom and a half water, they were for∣ced sodainly to vere, and (by the favour of an E. N. E. wind) to keep the Sea as well as they could, which they performed with no little trouble, till at length after three days contentions with the Seas and the weather they came into the Bay where we found them, under the Promontories of Boranday, about eight or nine Leagues from an Island called Kildomovia. We gave them on our side an account of the dangers we had run, how we were forced into the Sea of Varanger, and driven to an Anchor before the Town, to refit our Vessel, and put it into a condition to Sail having scaped sinking so narrowly: we told them likewise our transaction in the Danish, Swedish, and Muscovite Lap∣land, the trade we had had, and all our other adventures.
CHAP. XXV. The resolution the Danes took to Trade in Boranday, and the Authors going along with them. THE story of our success made them take up a resolution to go thither, and see if they could find any that would traffick with them. In order to this we held a Counsel, in which it was unanimously conluded that one of our Masters, one Commiss, two sub-Commisses or Factors who understood the Northern and Russian Languages, with twenty Seamen and my self, all well Arm'd and provided for several days, should un∣dertake the design. All things being decreed, and every thing ready they furnished us with two Shallops to put us on Shore, which being done, we got on the top of a little hill to see if we could discover any houses. Find∣ing none, we marched towards a moun∣tain about half a League off from the top of which we discovered some two or three flight-shot from us about 5 or 6 persons among the Bushes coming towards us, but
as soon as they perceived us away they ran in such halt we quickly lost the sight of them. However we followed their track so well observing which way they pointed their flight, that about two hours after going down the Mountain, we saw in a Vally some few houses, and making to∣wards them we found thirty or forty per∣sons armed with Arrows and Darts, rea∣dy to receive and sight us upon occasion, supposing by the greatness of our Troop, we were come to do them some injury, upon which we stopped our Career, and called a Counsel whether we had best go back or advance, seeing the Inbabitans were bold and couragious and we in no necessity to provoke them. One of the Sub-commisses offered him∣self to go towards them alone, to let them know we were Friends and Merchants, de∣siring nothing but Trade with them, if if they had any thing convenient for us, or we for them. The Proposition being generally appro∣ved, he advanced towards the Natives with two Rowls of Tobacco, and a little Barrel of Aqua vitae.
Being got within distance of hearing, and being heard, one of them called out to him in the Moscovian Language to know what we were, & what was our design, our Envoy told him we were Merchants, Friends, and that our desire was to have their Friendship, and be admitted to Trade with them, if they liked our Commo∣dities. Being satisfied with the Answer, he satisfied the rest, and made a sign to us to come on, and we did as they desired.
CHAP. XXVI. The Statue, Habit, Buildings, and Man∣ner of living of the Barandians, with other particulars. WHen we came near them, I was amazed to find them much less than the Laponians, their Eyes of the same bigness, deepness, and colour, that which we call the White, being of a Reddish Yealow, their Face flat and broad, their Head exceeding large, their Noses Camus, their Complexion as swarthy as possible, and their Legs like so many Mill-posts. The Cloaths were first a pair of Breeches as straight as could be made, then a a Wastcoat or Jump which came down to their Knees, their Stockins and Caps of white Bears skin with the Hair outward, and their Shooes of the Bark of Trees. Their Houses are all built and covered with Fish Bones, very low their fashion Oval, without any light but what comes in at the door, which is not much unlike the mouth of an Oven.
These people live wholly by Fishing and Hunting, they cat all their meat with∣out any thing of Salt; their dry Fish serves them for Bread, their Drink is fair Water, in which they Infuse their Juniper-berries, which gives it a sharpish but plea∣sant Tincture, especially if drank in a Cup of the same Wood. The Women are as ill-favoured as the Men, their Habits and Recreati∣on the same, going in the same man∣ner with their Husbands a Fishing and Hunting. In short they have no Reli∣gion, and little more Humanity than Beasts. We swapt with them all the Tobacco and Strong Waters we had carryed with us for our Provision, for Woolf, Foxes, and some few Ermine Skins they delivered to us. Having more skins thy were wil∣ling to barter, we desired them to go a∣long to our Ships, and they should have what they pleased, which they accepted, and having fetched what they had, they all of them marched along to the Sea side; they were no sooner in sight of our Vessel, but they admired it exceedingly. We gave the sign to have Boats sent us, and immediately each of our Ships sent two:
the Commiss. I, and the Sub-Commiss. (who ventured to the malone and gave us the opportunity of being acquainted with them) went all three of us into one of them, taking him that invited our Sub-Commiss. to a Treaty, and another Boran∣die with us who spoke the Muscovian Language very well, all the rest remained on Shore. CHAP. XXVII. The entertainment the Danes gave them on Board, and the Authors voyage into Bo∣randay. BEing come a Board, our Master be∣ing acquainted with the story of our adventures, and how savage and bruitish the Borandians were, to sweeten and ca∣jole them, that they might be serviceable to us, he gave each of them a peice of Tobacco about the length of a finger, and a Cup of strong waters, which they took extream kindly, and having some skins fell to barterring immediately. We ask'd them whither if we went higher up into the Country, we might expect any traffick
they reply'd yes we might, but all their Commodities would be nothing but Furs, and we telling them we desired no more, they assured us we should find e∣nough of that nature which would be ex∣changed for our Tobacco and Strong-wa∣ter, and that if we would satisfy them for their pains, they would conduct us as far as Siberia: we agreed to give each of them two Rolls of Tobacco, and four pints of Strong-water, to conduct us back∣ward and forward, promising something supernumerary, if by their means our jour∣ney turned to any considerable account; in short all things were agreed, only they pressed that we should pay for the Sledges and Elks we used by the way out of our own purses besides, which being but rea∣sonable the Master consented. The bargain being made, and a cup of wine given to each of them to confirm it, we put them again into our Shallop, and set them a Shore, they had ingaged to pre∣pare things withal speed for our journey, and they were as good as their word: for no sooner were they on land, but away they ran about their business, and in eight hours time returned with Sledges, Elks and every thing convenient for our jour∣ney.
Whilst we were in this manner treating those on Board, the other Ships caused strong Water and Tobacco to be sent on Shore to barter with those which remain∣ed, expecting the return of their Came∣rades, not being to be perswaded them∣selves into our Shallops, for fear they should never come back again: which ob∣liged all our Masters by way of insinuati∣on to cause certain small Barrels of Aqua-Vitae to be carried to them and drank out among them: which they received so thankfully, as in token of their gratitude, they desired our Company to go along with them, and take such entertain∣ment as their Houses and conditions would afford, but this Offer was made on∣lie by signes, for no body understood their Language. Our two Borandiras being come back with Sledges and as many Elks, we ask'd why they brought no more, and their answer was, there were no more to be gotten. Observing them larger then in Laponia, we inquired if they were strong∣er, and were told they were. That the Laponia Elk could draw but one man, and these would draw two, and accordingly each of the Sledges were made to carry
two: which being reported to our Ma∣sters, it was in Counsel resolv'd that our Commiss. the two Sub-Commissioners, (that spake Russ very well) my self, and a Sea man out of each Ship should go along with these two Borandians and Trade. Upon this designe they loaded one of the Elks with Tobacco, Strong water, Sil∣ver and some Gold, in all to a considera∣ble value. I was placed with the Com∣miss. one of us at one end, the other at the other, with our Faces upon one ano∣ther, one of the Sub's was placed in the same manner with one of the Borandians, the other with the other, two of our Sea∣men together, and the third being alone, had the rest of the Room filled up with Barrels of Strong-water, and Tobacco, and in this posture we set out. These Elks carryed us with as much (if not more speed) then those in Lapland, so that for eight hours together we were hur∣ried over Mountains, thorow Fields, and Vallies without seeing either Person or House; at length coming near a great wood of Firr-Trees, we could perceive five or six about an hundred Paces from us, near one of which we baited our Elks upon the Moss, and refreshed our selves
with Biscuit and salt meat, and our Bo∣randians with dryed Fish dipped in Oyl, which was provided on purpose for them, they not enduring our Bread or Salt. Our Drink was out of a Spring hard by, after which we took a dram of the bottle and away to our Sledges again, continuing our course three hours longer, and then at the bottom of a great Mountain we could perceive several Houses hard by one another, where it was design'd we should repose that night. When we were got to them, we found them so little we were forc'd to divide and quarter in two several Cabanes, which we did very contentedly, whilst our Guids unharnessed our Elks and turn'd them to Grass.
CHAP. XXVIII. The consequence of the Authors voyage into Boranday, and some particulars of the Natives. HAving repos'd for six or seaven hours upon Pallats of Bears-skins, which our Landlord had spread upon the ground for our entertainment, we got up and in∣quired if they had nothing to truck, upon which they produced several Woolf-skins, white Foxes, two dozen of Ermins, about three hundred Squirrels, and seaven pair of Sables. They would not meddle with our Tobacco, as not being so sweet tooth'd and well bred as their Country∣men upon the coast, living only upon hunting. In Summer their diet is fresh meat boyl'd or broyl'd upon the Coals. In Winter nothing but dry meat, which they provide in the Summer by drying it in the Sun upon a Wheel or on the top of their Houses, which are built very low, cover∣ed over with branches of trees and Turfs of Earth, without any light but what comes in at the door, which as aforesaid is like the mouth of an Oven.
These Borandines (as our Guides told us) change their Quarters as often as the Killopes, they live brutishly without any Religion, and are more stupid then any we met with, They are as ill-shaped as their Neighbours. Their Shoos are of the Bark of a Tree, their Stockings, Breeches, Capps and Coats (which come down be∣neath the Calf of their Leggs, and girt about with a Girdle about four fingers broad) are all of white Bears-skin with the hair outward. The Women are not dis∣cernable from the Men but by their Hair, which is braided and hangs down upon their Shoulders. They are as nimble and skilful at hunting as their Husbands. Their Arms are only a pointed Stick of a certain hard-wood which pierces any thing, a wooden Bow, the String made of the Rinde of a Tree, a Quiver of Arrowes at their Backs, and a Stone that cuts like a Rasour at their Gyrdle. Our Trade being finished, our Guides having provided our Sledges, and each of us taken a good draught of Strong-water, we mounted and away running on nine or ten hours together before we saw man or house, at length we perceived three or four Houses, and our Guides perswa∣ded
our Elks to make to them, where though we found no body, we made bold to repose our selves, and refresh our Cattel, whose Diet was nothing but Moss, and at that place they kept a plentiful Table. We eat and drank such as we had, and were as merry as Beggars, when we had done (after three hours relax) we mount∣ed again, and continued our Voyage as industriously as we could. CHAP. XXIX. The Author meets a Borandine-Lord with two of his Servants coming from Hunt∣ing, with a description of their Clothes. AFter fifteen hours travel (without other intermission then once to feed our Elkrs and repose our selves) having seen neither House nor Man in all that time, we perceived three Hunts-men be∣fore us, and made up to them; one of them was habited a la Muscovite in a long Robe down to his Heels, with a Girdle about his Wast four fingers broad of Woolfs skin the hair outward, it was as white as Snow, and at the point as black as Jett;
he had a Bonn et round (like a Seamans) of Black Fox, his Breeches and Stockings of Elks-skin, and his Shoos of Fish-skin, like the Inhabitants in Varanger. The other had the Vests of the same fashion of White Bears, the hair outward, and their Shoos of Fish skin: they had each of them a dozen of Bears-skins, Woolfs-skins, White Fox, some Ermins, and very fair Sable, as I have seen; He that was in the White Woolfs-skin, carryed nothing but a dozen of White Crowes, and seaven Sables hang∣ing at his Girdle. Being got up with them, one of our Guides stopped on a suddain to speak with the chief of them, and presently alight∣ing from his Sledge, put him in his place with one of our Sub-Commissioners, at which my Commiss. and I were very much surprised. In this manner he went along with us above an hour and we could see never a House; at length from the top of an high Mountain we could see the Sea on our left hand, and at the bot∣tom several Houses, standing near one ano∣ther like a small Town. Our Elks carri∣ed us to them directly, and we alighted to repose in the House of that Lord whom our Guide put into his place; we knew
him to be a person of more than ordina∣ry authority, by the officiousness of the Inhabitants, who ran immediately to our assistance, and helped us out of our Sled∣ges with all the readiness imaginable. The Towns name was Vizzora. The Lord swopt with us for our Tobac∣co and Strong-waters, and gave us in lieu all the skins he had got except his Bears-skins which we would not meddle with, and his Sables which he durst not part with, they being prohibited by the great Duke of Muscovy (whom they call the Czar) who preserves them for himself, no body daring to sell any of them in all his Dominions, but by license from himself, or his Commissioners (resident in all pla∣ces where he has Magazines) under great corporal penalties, so that if they sell any at any time, 'tis with great caution and privacy, and they who buy them are ob∣liged to keep it close, for if the Commiss. or Governor of those places where all Merchandize is searched, do find any Sa∣bles which have not been sold by the Duke himself, his Officers, or his Licence, not only they but all the goods that Merchant hath are confiscate without redempti∣on.
The Borandine Lord, having dispatched his own business, and trucked all he had him∣self, knowing we had a mind to more, he sent two of his Servants quite thorow the Town to give notice that if they desired to part with what skins they had, if they carryed them to us, we would give them Tobacco and Strong-water for them, and that their Master had dealt with us for all he had. Being glad of the opportunity, they repaired all of them with their Furs, and we bought what we thought fit. Having no less than fifteen hundred skins of all sorts, we inquired of our Landlord if he could not provide us a Boat to send one of our Seamen with our Trade to our Ships; he told us he could, and caused one to be got ready, it was in the fashion of a Gondelo, broad in the middle, and pointed at both ends, all of wood, without either Iron-work or nail, in the midst it had a Mast of Firr with a great four square sail (fastned to it) of Lin∣nen made of the Rinde of a Tree, and Tynseld very handsomly: the Cordage was made of the Rinde of Trees also, there were two Anchors belonged to it, made of a heavy kind of wood which car∣ried it presently to the bottom, and Cables
of the same with their Cordage. Having appointed us two men to go a long with our Sea-Man, and seeing them ready to depart, he carryed us a side, and shew'd us thirty pair of Sables, which we bought of him for ready mony, at a pret∣ty good rate, and were not at all sorry for it; had not we had the luck to have borrowed his Boat, and he seen it immedi∣ately to be dispatched to our Vessels where he knew no Searcher could come, we could not have tempted him to part with them, as knowing very well if he were discovered he should not only be ob∣noxious to corporal punishment, but he and his generation sent Slaves into Sibe∣ria, where they might remain long enough before they returned. Our Scaman and his two Borandine Camerades being departed, our Commiss. and the two Sub-Commisses. fell in a drink∣ing with him and our Guides. I and the two other Seamen took that opportunity and went to view the Town. We admired it exceedingly being scituate betwixt two Mountains about a league high either of them. The Houses were built of Fish-bones very artificially, the Roofs of the same, but stopped in some places with Moss, and co∣vered
with Flags of Earth, so close no wind could come in but at the doors (which are like the mouth of a Furnace) and a top the House where there is a hole or window left for light to come in. We saw several of their Women and Children at work, some of them making of Netts (of the Rinde of Trees) for their Fishing, others Sails for their Boats, of a kind of a sine Mat, others Axes, Swords, pointed Darts, and Arrows of the Bones of Fish∣es. Others making of Clothes of Bears-skin sowed together with thread made of the Rinde of Trees, with needles of the small bones of Fish, they were all of them ugly, little, flat nos'd, and swarthy as Devils.
CHAP. XXX. The Authors departure from Vitzora to go to Potzora, and his Traffick there. BEing returned to our Company, our Commiss. and Sub-Commiss. upon Consultation resolved to send back one of our Guides with the Sledges and Elks, and to take the convenience of the water to pass to Potzora, which was accordingly performed. Our Landlord and two of his Servants in complement went along with us, and Coasting along the Shore by the favour of a Westerly wind, in fifteen hours we made Potzora, which is a small Town upon a little Sea called by that name; we repaired immediately to the Castle to pay our respects to the Gover∣nor, who in truth is no more than a Factor or Agent for the great Czar; all the Governors belonging to that Duke being no other in those parts. There be∣ing few of the nobility in Muscovy, which in my judgment is the reason they are so rude and unpollished, a thing inconsistent with the education of the nobles.
The Governor was a Muscovite, his ha∣bit cloth betwixt a Violet colour and a Red, he treated us indifferent well, with Hydromets of an excellent sort (not much unlike our Spanish wine) strong waters and spice-bread. Having the charge of the Czars Magazines of Sables we ask'd him if he would deal with us for any, he told us he would, and demanding what we would buy, we replyed all he had, if we might have them at reasonable Rates; whereupon he carryed us to his Ware-House, and shew'd us five Zimmers (which are fifty pair) of which two Zimmers were the best I ever saw, being naturally black as Jet, for which parcel we paid him 500 Ducates, which amount to three thou∣sand French Livers, and for the other four hundred Ducates, which was as much as eight hundred French-Crowns. Having paid him for what we had, and seen them marked with the Grand Dukes Seal, he would needs give us a treat, to which purpose he dispatched two Shallops to get fresh-Fish, he killed a young Elk, and with some Foul his Servants had got abroad, he made us a magnificent Feast, both of Flesh, Fish, and Muscovian Biscuit. We sat eight hours compleat at the Table,
and by that time the fumes of the Hydro∣met and Strong-Waters we had drank being got up into our Heads, we were glad to draw off to our Bears-skins which were all the beds we could get. Having slept six or seven hours, we got up, drank a Cup of Strong-Waters, and then went into the Town with a little Of∣ficer the Governor sent along with us, who carried us where we found two thou∣sand Squirrel-Skins, four dozen of Ermins, five hundred Fox-skins (the most of them as white as Snow, and the rest black) six-Woolfs-skins, two hundred Martins, of a kind of an Ash-coloured-Grey, which cost us (all of them) four hundred Ducates in Copper Mony (which troubled us to carry about) after which we returned to the Catle with our Merchandise, and packed them up in bails of Mats made of the Rinde of a Tree. Having packed up our goods in this manner, we concluded to send one of our Sub-Commisses with them to our Ships, to which end we intreated our Host the Go∣vernor to accommodate us with a Boat to convey them, which he readily granted, and two hours after our Officer departed with three Borandines the Governor lent
us, he having first ingaged they should de∣liver them safe in our Ships, and that pay∣ing him ten Ducats, and giving the men that carried them some small proportion of Tobacco, he would satisfie the rest at their return. Our Sub-Commiss. and his Camrades being gone, we fell a drinking pell-mell with our brace of Governors, and the Governor of Vitzora took of his Cups so liberally, I could scarce imagine where he disposed them. This debauch continued full four hours and then we went to our rest.
CHAP. XXXI. The Authors departure from Potzora to go into Siberia his meeting with five persons sent thither into exile by the grand Duke, the miseries they endured, and his arrival at Papinogorod. AS soon as we were up in the morning, our Commiss. intreated the Gover∣nor of Potzora to furnish us with Sledges for our passage into Siberia: He provided us seven, one for our Commiss. one for our Sub-Commiss. one for me, two for our two Marriners, one for our Guide and the other for our Tobacco, Strong-waters, and the provisions he gave us for our journey, but our mony the Commiss. took along with himself. Our Elks being harnessed, and put in∣to the Sledges, he caused another to be got ready for another Guide he sent along with us to the place where we were to change our Elks, and deliver his; for all which we contracted to give him four Ducates, but before we parted, each of usdrank five or six cups of Strong-waters to take our leaves, and having given the
Governor of Potzora and Vitzora thanks for their Civilities, we departed follow∣ing the River thorow very dangerous pla∣ces, without keeping any beaten Road four hours together without the sight of any living Creature but four white Bears the vastest that ever were seen, which (as soon as they discovered us) ran away as hard as they could; about two hours af∣ter, before we were aware, we were got to seven or eight houses, but no body to be found in them, the inhabitants being all of them gon a hunting. We alighted from our Sledges, and went in to refresh, and in the mean time five or six Men and Women with their Children returned from the Chase (which had been for tunate that day. They brought along with them six Bears-skins, four Woolfs, se∣uen white Foxes, a couple of Ermins, and eight Sables. They were much surprised to find us in their Quarters and had beta∣ken them to their heels, had not the Guide lent us by the Governor of Potzora over∣taken and assured them we were friends and Merchants passing to Papinogorod, and that we would be their Chapmen for all the skins they had, upon his perswasion they came back, but gaping and staring
in the greatest admiration in the World' both in respect of our habits (which were strange to them) our shape and our lan∣guage, of which they understood not one word no more than we did of theirs; how∣ever by the help of our Interpreter we made a shift to barter with them, and they furnished us with Elks to carry us to the Mouth of Papinogorod River. Being got out of the River of Potzora about two hours, and following that which carried us to Papinogorod, we de∣scri'd coming out of a great Wood five men clad in Bears skin after the fashion of Muscovia, each of them with a Gun up∣on his Shoulder, his Bags by his side, and a short Sword in his hand like one of our Huntsmen, making toward us, we caused our Sledges to stop, and our Guide to in∣quire what people they were. One of them discerning we were strangers, saluted us in Dutch, gave us the time of the day, and wished himself at as much liberty as we. Our Commiss. (who was born in the lower Saxony) hearing him speak Dutch, demanded his Country, to which the person replied, and our Commiss. find∣ing him of his aquaintance, alighted from his Sledge, took him in his Arms, and
having embraced, desired the occasion of his being there. The person replyed he was banished thither by the great Duke for hunting of Sables, which is a punish∣ment as ordinary in that Country, as send∣ing to the Gallies in France, some being banished for ten years, some for six, others for three, more or less according to the quality of their offence, and after their time is expired, they have their li∣berty and are free. Their acquaintance, and my own curi∣osity fetched me also out of my Sledge, and no sooner had I set foot upon the ground, but another of them came and embraced me, and then in the French Tongue with a sigh, asked me from whence I came, and whither I designed. I was much surprised, not knowing him in the least by reason of his habit, his great beard, his bald pate, and the lean∣ness of his body, being nothing but skin and bone; he perceived I was at a loss, and told me he was a Gentleman of Lorain Colonel of a Regiment of Horse for the Duke of Muscovy, had seen and treated me often at his house in Stockholm, and had endeavoured to have perswaded me along with him to Mosco. The fair equipage in
which I had seen him, the respect every body shewed him for his estate, his com∣mand in the Army, and the bravery of his person, considered with the pittiful con∣dition he was then in, forced tears from my eyes in spight of my teeth: I embra∣ced him again, and desiring to know the reason of his disgrace, he told me it was for a suspicion the great Duke had concei∣ved of his fidelity, and for that reason had banished him into Siberia. He told me he had, and was yet to run thorow in∣expressible dangers and miseriers (inevita∣ble to men in his condition) not only of hunger, and severity of the weather, but in perpetual Hunting exposed to the capacity of Wild-Beasts, which for want of food did many times attack those which Hunted them, for which reason they carried those Arms, to defend them∣selves; and that besides all these miseries if they did not take their appointed num∣ber of Sables, whether it was negligence or not, they were never examined, but were sure of so many lashes upon their bare Flesh with certain Girdles made of a thick and tuff skin, which were in tollera∣ble to bear. Our Commiss. his friend told him the same, and the rest (speaking all of
them good French & Dutch) confirmed it to be true; one of them had been a grand Commiss. to the great Duke, another a Lievtenant General of all them persons of quality, who after a sad relation of their sorrows, assured us unanimously that if it pleased God they outlived the time of their sentence, and were once again at liberty, they would never conti∣nue in any Country under the power of the Grand Duke. To comfort them a∣gainst their calamities, we took out our Provisions, sate down altogether upon the ground, and treated them as we could. We told them how glad we would be if we could be any ways instrumental to their inlargment; for which they gave us thanks, but told us it was impossible, in respect they were known to all the Go∣vernors in those parts thorow which of necessity we must pass, and that if they were taken with us they should be sure to die by the most exquisite tortures, and we unavoidably loose our lives into the bar∣gain. This they remonstrated vvith so much frankness and ingenuity, it redou∣bled the grief vve had already conceived finding our selves unable to relieve them in so miserable an exigence. Having staid
and conversed with them full four hours, we thought it time to take our leaves, and having presented each of them with half a pound of Tobacco, after they had drank well of our Strong-Waters, and eaten of the Biscuit and spiced Bread we brought from Potzora, and some of our salt meat, we bad them farewell, beseeching God Almighty to give them power to over∣come all they were to encounter, and ho∣ping to see them again in their former splendor and condition, we mounted our Sledges, and posted three full hours be∣fore we discovered a House; at length we perceived five or six, to them we went, and in them we found about a dozen per∣sons, we asked if they had any. Furs they would part with, they told us yes, and having shewen us several we bought them, partly for ready mony and part for Strong Waters, of which those people are very licquorish. We followed our journey by the dire∣ction of the River, observing Cabbins on both sides of it, in some of them few, in others several People, of all of them we bought what we could get, sometimes for Money, sometimes for Strong-water, only their Sables they would not be tem∣pted
to sell, apprehending they should be found out by the Governour of Papinogo∣rod (whither we were going) who fails not to search all Commodities that enter or pass out of the Town, least any of those Sables should be conveyed away by Stealth. We passed the Mountains which part Boranday from Siberia, they are very un∣pleasant and troublesom by reason of the wildness of the Country, uninhabitable both for the sterility of the Soil, Snows which are perpetually upon them, and the vast quantity of Bears and White Wolfs which gave us no little fear during our Travels in those parts, expecting to be set upon by them every moment, but we perceived they were no less fearful of us, flying us upon all encounters, some this, some that way, and all in great Consternation, which we attributed much to the glittering of our Arms, by which we conceived they took us rather for Hunts-men then Merchants. After much labour to our Elks, and tediousness to our selves, after twelve hours fatigue we descended the Moun∣tains, and came into a Village belonging to Siberia, whose Inhabitants were all clad
in Bears-skin, the hair on the outside, but some linnen about them, and plated Boots, which made us believe them of better quality then their Neighbours which we had left. And indeed they re∣ceived us more civilly enquiring who we were, whence we came, and whither we were bound. We Eat and Drank with them of such as we had, and they produced what their Town would afford, which was Bears-flesh and Wolves Salted, with a sort of Spice-bread, and aqua vitae: What Skins they had we bought with ready Money all but their Sables: and then having a desire to rest our selve; for some time, we entered into one of their houses (made after the Laponian fashion) and lay down upon Bears-skin about five or six hours, and then getting up again, we drank our Mornings draught together in aqua vitae, mounted our Sledges, and away for Papinogorod, where in about twenty hours time we arrived, having baited once or twice by the way to give our Cattel their necessary repast upon the Moss.
CHAP. XXXII. The Reception of the Danes at Papinogo∣rod by the Governor, and the Authors among the rest. THE Governor of Papinogorod hear∣ing of our arrival, sent for us to the Castle, to understand what we were, from whence we came, and what was our busi∣ness. Upon his Summons we went to wait upon him, and after usual Salutati∣ons (our Sub-Commiss. speaking the Muscovian Language very well) we gave him satisfaction in every thing he desi∣red. When he understood we were Danish Merchants come thither only to buy Furs, he treated us very civilly, and in Testi∣mony of his great respect for us, and that he looked upon us as Friends, he sent in∣to his Wife to come forth and salute us, which immediately she did, bringing along with her (according to the custome of the Muscovits) a Bottle of Strong-wa∣ter in one hand, a silver Cup in the other, and her Maid at her heels, with a piece of spic'd Bread upon a Trencher. The way
of her saluting us was by bowing of her Head, and then undoing the wrist-band of her Smock on the right Arm, she let it un∣fold, and slide down upon the ground, which our Commiss. (knowing the mode) very readily, and much like a Gentleman took up and kissed, and after him our Sub-Commiss. and my self, then holding up her right Arm She folded it up again with her left, and when 'twas done calling for her Cup and her Bottle, She began a Nog∣gen to each of us, and then presented her Spice-Bread. She kept still standing at the end of the Table by her Husband, where after She had entertained us for some time, She returned to her Quarters, and we fell a drinking with the Governor, at length it grew late, and we were laid upon as good Beds as that Country will afford.
CHAP. XXXIII. The Danes and the Authors Traffick in Pa∣pinogorod, the scituation of the Town, with the habits and manners of the Sibe∣berians and Muscovites. SIx or seaven hours we repos'd in the Governors house before we arose, and he no sooner heard us stirring, but up he got and came to us to our Chamber, with a bottle of Aqua-Vitae after him, which one of his servants brought in his hand. He himself took a Brimmer, and saw it go round, after which he asked us if we would buy what skins he had, which our Commiss. promised if they were liked, and desired to see them; being brought to us, we quickly struck a bargain, and paid him his mony. When he had sold all his own, he sent for some of the Towns-men he knew were provided, and told them they might deal with us, and he would give them permission; upon which Com∣plement we thought our selves obliged to the tother bottle. Whilst our Commiss▪ and Sub-Com∣miss. were imployed in driving their bar∣gain,
I took the opportunity to walk out into the Town. Its scituation is pleasant enough, thoughin a little Moorish-Plain environed with very high Mountains; just by the Town there runs a fair River, ex∣cellently well provided with Fish. The Houses are but ill built, low, of Wood and Earth cram'd in betwixt the Rafters. 'Tis pav'd with nothing but pieces of Wood fitted as well as they can, and lying as close as they can make them. The persons of the best quality in that place, have their Breeches and Stockings, and a long Robe down to their anckles with their Sleeves very straight, all of Cloth, but one of one colour, and ano∣ther of another. Upon their Legs they have thin Leather-Boots, some Blew, some Red, some Yellow, with Iron Plates at the Heel and the Toe, after the mode of the Polander. Upon their Heads they had Cloth-Caps fac'd some with black Fox, others with Squirrel, some with Ermins, and some Sables, according to their Fancy or Estate. The women were very handsome, fair and plump, their Hair a kind of yellow∣ish brown, their fashion extream well for Muscovites. As their Husbands, so
their Robes come down to their anckles, for the most part of Red, Violet colour, or Blew, made like our Juste-au-Corps, lin'd with white Fox, or Sables, their Sleeves are large and hang down, being fastned to their Robes, the length of their Smock-Sleeves is incredible, five Ells of a very fine Cotton Linnen is nothing for one of them; upon their Heads they wear a kind of an Oval-Cap, their Hair breid∣ed, and tyed up at the ends with Rib∣bonds which they let hang down upon their Shoulders. Their Shooes are made of a Russian Wood, about their wasts they wear a Girdle of Pearl of no incon∣siderable bigness. The Natives of Siberia, are not much different from the Samojedes, Borandines, and other Northern people, either in their manners, habit, or manner of living. All the Muscovites are Nicolaitans in matter of Religion, they are grave, strong, swift, dexterous at their Bow, not at all contentious, their Laws being founded upon pure Equity. They are severe pu∣nishers of Treachery, Prevarication, Thie∣very, and Murder, and yet they are ve∣ry ignorant, techy, drunken, clownish, and jealous, to that point, they make their
Wives run and skud away into their Chambers upon the sight of a stranger, where they are to continue Prisoners till they give the word of Command in short their Slavery is such, they dare not testify the least friendship or civility for a stranger; nor do think their Husbands are kind, if they be not every day about their bones with agood Cudgel or Girdle. CHAP. XXXIV. The Authors departure from Papinogorod towards the Ships, his passage thorow Samoijesia, with their manners, Customs, Vestments, &c. HAving bought what we could (which was a great quantity of Woolfs-skins white Fox, black Fox, Lynxes, Sables, Ermins,, and Squirrels) with the other we bought at Potzora, we filled one of our Sledges, and had a good many to spare. Having store of Tobacco and about 5000. Ducates remaining, our Commiss. and Sub-Commiss. were willing to dispose of them for more Furs, and therefore resolv'd to return to our Ships thorow Samoijesia.
To that end they bought of our Host the Governor of Papinogorod, as much strong water and other provisions as would last us for twelve days. Our bargain being struck, both for provisions and Elks, and the mony paid, we were forced to have another debauch with him of ten hours long, after which we slept eight more: and then, our Sledges being ready, our goods and provisions packed up, and put into one of them, we got in our selves, and taking leave of the Governour we departed. About eighteen hours we were upon the march, buying skins as we passed as far as the Riphean Mountains, which in our entrance into Samoijesia, we crossed in six hours more. Samoijefia is a desert Country, full of Juniper, Pine-Trees, and Firr; it abounds in Moss, in Snow, Woolfs, Bears, Foxes, all white, which we met every moment, and they gave us no little apprehension. At the bottom of the Mountain call'd Stolpohen (from whence the River Borza∣gane springs) we saw eight or nine Houses and made towards them, both to rest our selves, and refresh our Elks, with the Inhabitants of which we fell immediate∣ly
a trucking our strong-water for their Woolf, Fox, (white and black) Beaver, and Otter-skins, beside which they had two Limmers of Sables which they would not be drawn to part with by all the peswasi∣ons and protestations our Boran dine Guide could make, that they need not fear; that we were Merchants passing to our Ships, and would not go by any place where there was danger of being searched. But nothing would do, they would not hearken till we made them drunk, and then they parted with them freely, the vapours of the strong-water having more effect upon them than all our Borandins Rhetorick. For that night we made a shift with one of their Cabanes, and lay higglede-pigglede with the Wife, Husband Barns, Servants, Cattel and all. Five or six hours after, I awaked at the noise the Master made to get up his Family, and as soon as they were up, they went all out of Doors. I had a Curiosity to see what they did, and watching them a while, I saw them clap themselves down upon their knees, on the other side of the House, holding up their hands, and make several signes of adoration to the Sun, which they believe to be God.
The Samoides are thicker and shorter, then either the Laponians or Borandines. Their Head is larger, their Face broader, their Nose bigger and flatter, they have little or no hair, and are of a duskish and earthy Complexion. Their Vestments for the men, are a Round Bonnet frizled as it was made of Lambskins, their Bree∣ches and long Robe of white Bears-skin which reaches below their knees, they are tyed under the Belly with a Girdle four fingers broad, their Stockings and Shooes of the same Leather, with the Hair out∣wards, and under their Shooes a kind of a Pattin made of the Bark of a Tree in the sashion of a Gondelo, which went all along under their feet, and serv'd to car∣ry them with strange swiftness over the Snow, which on those Mountains lies ve∣ry thick; In stead of a Cloak, they have a black skin, with the four feet hanging to it, by-which they carry it more fre∣quently upon the left Shoulder than the right; and upon their Cloak they carry their Quiver. The women in this Country are more ill-favour'd than the men. They are very laborious, take great pains to learn their Children to Hunt, upon which they live
altogether, and upon nothing else. Their Habit is like the Mens, only their Robe something longer, and no Cloak upon their Shoulders; they have the same co∣ver for their heads, they have only one tuft of hair twisted and tyed at the bot∣tom with a Ribbond (made of the Rind of a Tree) which hangs down upon their backs: they go a hunting Arm'd with their Bow and Arrowes like the Men, and are every way as dexterous. CHAP. XXXIV. The Author departs from Boranday to go to go to Nova Zembla, where he saw a Troop of them worshiping the Sun, and two others paying their devotions to a wooden Idol they call Tetizot, HAving passed thorow Samojesia, and being returned into the Country of Boranday towards our Ships that expect∣ed with impatience, we got on Board as soon as we could, and two hours after we set Sail for Nova Zembla. In twenty hours time we arrived at a place where we saw about thirty persons with their Quivers at their Backs, upon their Kneeson
the shoar worshiping the Sun. Our Masters and Commissioners call'd a Counsel to consider which way we were to accost these people whom we looked upon as more Savage and unciviliz'd than any we had met. The result was we should set out three of our Shallops with ten men a peice in them, well Arm'd in case of opposition, among which I was commanded to make one; we coasted along the Shore till we came within half a quarter of a League of them, when the Natives (till then upon their Knees) leaped up upon their Feet, made a great Cry, and having shot all their Arrowes against us, fled away like hunted Deer, but they shot too far off to do us any harm Being got on Shore as we could, we made with all speed towards the place whether we supposed they were ran, with intentions if possible to have seiz'd upon some of them, but we were disappoint∣ed of our designe, they having got out of our sight, and we not able to guess which way they were gone, however we marched towards the Mountains, found them all covered with Snow, and having passed them, advanced into the Plains; upon the Stump of Trees newly cut down
we saw several Images of Men Carv'd ve∣very coarsly, and before one of them near a League from us we could perceive two of those Savages upon their Knees, (their Bows and Arrowes laid by them) paying their devotions. When they discovered us, they rose up in a fright whip'd up their Arms and away in the same hast and apprehension as they had done whom we had surprised on the Shore in their adora∣tion of the Sun. We made what speed we could after them, to have taken them if possible, but they were too nimble and got into a wood of Firs before we could come near them. returning to our Ships, we saw at a great distance two more at their Idolatry, wor∣shiping another Statue of the same called by the Natives Tetizt, into which the Di∣vel enters and delivers our his Oracles, as our Master of the Ship told us.
CHAP. XXXV. Of the Disease called the Scurvy, with which the Author and most part of the Danes in that Voiage were surprised. I Had not been on board above seaven or eight hours before I was surprized with a violent pain in my head, and a disposition to Vomit, which continued three or four hours, after which I was ta∣ken with a soarness in my throat which hindred my swallowing, I had a great swelling in my Amants, accompanied with an Ebullition of my blood, and a strong itching all over my Body, my Gums were inflamed, and bled very much, my Teeth so loose I expected they would fall out every moment, nor could I endure to eat any thing that was hard. My Body became very weak, and Feavorish, my breath short, with a very ill Savour, be∣sides a great drought, for the cure of which I frequently drank Oxierat. Fifteen hours after finding my distemper continue and considering it proceeded in part from a great cold I had upon me, & my eating of salt meats, which had irritated my petui∣tary
glandule, & envenum'd it in such sort that the Rheume infected my other hu∣mours, I resolved instead of Oxierat, to drink Aqua-Vitae mingled with fair water, I made also a Syrrop of Liquorish, of which I took the quantity of a spoonful every hour, gargling often sometimes with Aqua-Vitae, sometimes with Vinegar to refreshmy Gums, and rubbed my teeth with hony of Roses. Most of our Ships Crew being troubled with the same di∣stemper, used the same remedy, and it was so effectual to us all not one of us mis∣carried. Those of the other Ships were not ex∣empt, they had the same disease as well as we, in so much the Chyrurgions of their several Ships were put to it to cure them; the method they took was by Phlebotomy and purging, but that made them rather worse than better, in so much that in one of their Vessels there dyed two Seamen, in the other three, and a Sub-Commiss. and all in six days time; doubt∣less more of them had followed had not, they followed my Counsel, which was to leave their bleeding and purging (which in that distemper are mortal) and betake to my remedy. I remember in the year 1670.
in the Winter the violence of the cold put many people in Paris into the same distem∣per, the Physitians took it for a kind of a Plague, and thinking by bleeding and Purgation to recover their Patients, sent many of them to the Grave. When I was in Algier, several people were troubled with the Scurvy, those that were infected had their Amants swell'd as if they had had a piece of Flesh in their Mouths, and all the Symptoms I have mentioned before, engendred as before∣said by a sharp defluction that vitiated the rest of the humors but especially the blood, in the same manner almost as it is in the French Pox, there being a sort of it so like; among the Indians they have the same name, and are called Pieans. For which reason I took the same way of cu∣ring the Scurvy as they do the Pox, as is to be seen in my History of the State of the Kingdom of Algier, Couque, Titican, &c. as also in my Treatise De lue Venerea.
CHAP. XXXVI. Our Fishing for the Sea Horse, with the re∣lation how two of our Mariners were drowned by the motion of one of their Tails. HAving continued fifteen or sixteen days at Anchor upon the Coasts of Zembla for the convenience of our sick, all of them being recovered except some few, the weather coming fair, our Ma∣sters resolved to weigh and stand off to∣wards Voygat in order to our Fishing for the Sea-Horse: accordingly we put about three Leagues to Sea, cruising up and down the Coasts at that distance, and sending out our Shallops with their hooks and Hatchets, and eight men in each of them to see what they could catch. Three days we were before we saw any thing, at length we saw two great Fishes (one of them with a Horn of a conside∣rable length) which our Fishermen put themselves into a posture to take, and be∣ing got within a stones cast of them, they threw out their Hooks, some on one side, some on the other with long lines fastned
to them for the purpose and then came back again with all speed to our Ships. Being got on Board our Ships, and per∣ceiving the Fish swimming above water (which is a signe it was spent) by little and little they drag'd it towards the Ves∣sel, which it suffered without reluctance, the loss of blood having rendred it weak, and then falling to with our Axes, we cut of its head which we kept, but threw the body into the Sea, as being unfit ei∣ther for Victual or Oyl. Our fishing for the Sea-Horse is only for its teeth, which is usefull as Ivory for all kind of curiosity, and sells much dearer in respect of its whiteness (which is far better of the two) and lasts longer before it turns red. The Horn of this Sea-horse, was full ten foot long, very heavy, wreathed like a Snail and as big as the biggest part of a mans Arm, tapering from the head to the point which was as sharp as a nee∣dle. One of our Shallops coming too near the other Fish before they threw out their Irons, finding her self struck she gave such a frisk with her Tail, that hitting the Boat, it turned it over, and before their Camrades could possibly relieve them, two
of them were drowned, which troubled us much; how ever the Fish was taken and lost her head, as that we took had done before. I went to see it three or four hours after, found it had no Horn, but the want of that was well recompenced in her Teeth, which were much the fairer of the two. Four days and nights we were cruising up and down after we had taken these two before we met with any more; and just as we were removing to some other place, we discovered four of the same sort, in appearance much bigger than those we had taken. Upon which we slackned our Sail, let down our Shallops, with our Iron-mongers, and such other people as were necessary for that imploy∣ment, and in a short time they had catch∣ed three of the four: the other escaping, that our Fishermen brought on board our Ship had no Horn, nor indeed the other two. Ten or twelve hours after we saw five more, we put down our people with their Irons, their Hooks and their Hatchets, and what else was necessary for the purpose to try what they could do in our Shallops, especially with one of them which we had observed to have a horn:
but in spight of all the diligence could be used we could take but two; three of them got off, and that with the Horn was one of them. Some three hours after we perceived three more, of which our Officers catched one, whose Head was so big each of its great teeth weighed near thirty pounds. Two days after we discerned seaven or eight of them, and one with a Horn, we set out all our Shallops immediate∣ly, and were so fortunate in the enter∣prize, we took five of them, and that with the Horn was one of the number: it was brought to our Ship, but the Horn was neither so heavy, so big, nor so long as the other. Having kept our station five days after, and discovered nothing, a N. N. W. Wind rising on a suddain, we took the opportunity and made all the Sail we could to Voygat, hoping to pass it by the benifit of that if it were pos∣sible, but being got about five and twenty Leagues into that Sea, we durst venture no farther by reason of the Mountains of Ice which stopped up the passage into the Tartarian Sea, into which if by this passage an entrance could be found
it would shorten the Voyage to the East Indies three parts in four, which is im∣ported by the Name, Voygat in their lan∣guage signifying shorter cut. CHAP. XXXVII. The boldness of the Bears upon the Moun∣tains of Voygat. The taking of seve∣ral Birds which the Danes call Pin∣goins. WE had not been above five or six hours at Anchor, before one of our Sea men being on Shore about his ne∣cessary occasions, a great Bear came be∣hind him, and patting him with his foot strook him clear over; without doubt he had been devoured, had not we spyed it by accident, and shooting at it from on Board, killed it dead upon the place, and rescued the poor Mariner from the great∣est fright he was ever in in his Life. Not long after there came to one of our ships two Bears which attempted to have got in we cut off the paws of one of them with our Hatchets as it was clambring up the sides of it, and the other we shot. Being
all staring, and imployed about the exe∣cution of them two; a Sea man from be∣hind us cryed out as if he had been mad, and not without reason, for three more having come swimming towards our Ship one of them had got up, and boarded us, but snatching up our Oars, Poles, and what other engines we had ready, we belaboured him so about the head, we quickly laid him asleep, and killed the o∣ther with our Guns. we thought then we were safe, and should be troubled with them no more, but we reckoned without our Host: for four or five hours after we were alarm'd by eight or ten more ad∣vancing upon the Ice, and (when that failed) throwing themselves into the Sea, and swiming towards our Ships, which made us stand to our Arms, and when we saw them within distance, we fir'd so suc∣cesfully upon them, scarce one of them escaped. These Creatures coming down from the Mountains in such great numbers (as if they looked upon our being there as an Invasion, and were got together on pur∣pose to repell us) gave us some apprehensi∣on, and was partly the cause we weighed Anchor, and returned from whence we came.
Having Sailed above twelve hours to disingage our selves from that streight with the favour of an Easterly wind, and yet with great difficulty by reason of the ice, we came to a Anchor under a plea∣sant Island, all delicatly green by the verdure of the Moss, the Fir-Trees, and the Juniper. Some of our Sea-men going a Shore, saw a sort of foul which could scarce fly for their fat, giving us an ac∣count of it at their return, I was com∣manded out (with forty more taken out of all our Ships) to go on shore and try what we could catch of them, and indeed in no long time partly with our Guns, and partly with our Cudgels, we brought a∣bout threescore of them along with us when we returned. These Birds (which our Masters told us were called Pingoins) are no higher than Swans, but much thicker; they are as white as they, their neck as long as Gooses, their head bigger, with a red sparkling Eye a bout the breadth of a shilling, the beak is yellowish and sharp, the feet broad and firm like a Gooses. They have a kind of a purse about a foot long which begins under their beaks, and conti∣nues all along their necks to the very
breast where it inlarges to such a de∣gree it will hold a full Pottle. In this it is (when their bellies are full) they lay up their Cud, to have it ready again when their Stomacks require. Before we could eat them we were forced to skin them, it being extream∣ly hard, and the Feathers not to be pulled out of it but with very great difficulty. The Flesh is good, has the same tast with a wild-Duck, is very fat, and made us very good Chear. CHAP. XXXVIII. Of a Zemblian which had like to have been taken by us; of another and his Wife taken in their Canoe, with their man∣ner of building. HAving continued at Anchor two days and nights near this I∣sland where we took our Pingoins, the wind coming favourably about to the E. S. E. we weighed, and stood to the N. N. W. and a while after (having cleered our selves of the strait) the wind changing we were obliged to change,
with it, and steer our course upon the Coasts E. N. E. towards the height of the Cape, where in thirty hours time we arrived near the place in which we saw the Zemblans adoring the Sun. His Majesty of Denmark, having gi∣ven it in Charge to our Masters and Commiss. if they found any people in Zembla, they should endeavour to take some of them, that by them he might gain information what was done in that Country, we came to Anchor in that place, and sent out our Shallops to dis∣cover, to this purpose thirty men were commanded on shore in four Shallops, and in one of them my self. We had scarce left our Ships, but we descryed about half a League from the Shore a Zemblane in a Canoe, who percei∣ving us make toward him rowed with might and main to clear himself of us, and having gained the Shore, he whip'd his Canoe upon his Shoulder, clapped his Bow and Arrowes in it, and taking his Dart in the other hand, away he ran (like the Philosopher) with his whole estate at his Back. We got to shore as soon as we could, and followed him up∣on the Spur up a little Hill we observed
him to climb, but being nimbler than we, we could not possibly reach him; we re∣turned to our Shallops as wise as we went, much troubled he had given us the Slip; as we were rowing towards our Ships, we descry'd two Zemblans a good way at Sea, rowing like mad towards the Rocks and the Promontories to hide themselves from us, as soon as they perceived us. We no sooner discovered them, but we made after them with all speed, and though they used all the strength and Art they were able to have got to a Rock, we reached them before they came there, and having taken them, they made the most horrid and dismal yell, I ever heard in my life. We brought them to our Vessel, and drew them up with Ropes in their Canoe, which was made in the fashion of a Gondelo, fifteen or sixteen foot long, and two foot and a half broad made of fish-Ribs very artificially, covered without with Fish-skins sowed together, which made the whole Canoe from one end to the other not unlike a purse, in which the two Zemblans were inclosed to the wast, in such sort that not a drop of wa∣ter could get into it, and they might ex∣pose themselves in the greatest Storm
without any danger in the world. We perceived they were Man and Woman, made all the Caresses, and signes of ami∣ty to them we could think of to tempt them to shew us their habitations, but unable to prevail any thing upon them, we took provisions for ten or twelve days, and about thirty of us went a shore, well Arm'd, and divided into two parties, we marched about an hundred paces from one another, till at length getting under the Rocks, we hid our selves in the holes, clapping Sentinels upon the Trees to discover if any Savages were to be seen that we might take some of them, and be car∣ried to their Houses. CHAP. XXXIX. The taking of another Zemblane and his Wife, their Habits, Arms, and man∣ner of living. IT was not much less than eight and fourty hours we were thus upon the watch, when one of our Sentinels gave notice he discovered two of the Zemblans coming down a little Hill towards the
Sea. We disposed our selves immediately with what advantage we could, six of us remain'd in the Cave where we were, five and my self removed farther off into another, and in a quarter of an hours time they passed betwixt our Ambuscades without perceiving any thing of us; one of our party gave the Signal by firing of a Gun, as well to give the other the alarm, as to stop the Zemblans and make them look about them, it succeeded as we de∣sired, and Whilst they were in a maze we leapt both parties from our Ambushment, encompassed them so they could not escape and took them. Their Vestments were of the skins of Pingoins with the Feathers upon them. They consisted of very strait Breeches which reached no lower than the knees, a Wastcoat of the same, the sleeves reach∣ing no farther than the Elbows, the rest of their Arm being naked; Their Wast∣coats were cut with a Peak, before and behind like a Tail, their Caps upon their Heads were like Sugar-Loav's, their Boots were of the skin of a Sea-Calf, of a red∣dish brown colour, the hair outward. Though they were both habited alike, we could discern one was a Man and the
other a Woman. The Man was about twenty years old, a broad Face like those we had taken before, of a swarthy brown, his nose big and flat, his eyes little and drawn towards his Temples without ei∣ther Beard or Hair, his Quiver was full of Arrowes at his Back with a hatchet of Fish-Bones, which he carried upon his Shoulder with one hand, and his dart in the other. The woman was about twenty years old, her hair in two breids hanging down upon her Shoulders, she had blew streaks all along her Chin, and three or four up∣on her forehead, on her ears and under her Nose holes had been made, and blew stones hanged in them in little Rings made of the smal bones of Fish. Those in her Ears were as big as Filbeards those in her nose were like Pease, and to defend her jew∣els she carried a Dart in her hand. We used all the Artifice we could to have prevailed with them to show us their quarters, but nothing would do, and we were forced to carry them on Board, where we put them to the other two we had taken in the Canoe: we could perceive they knew one another presently, though their habit was different, the first we
took not being clad in Feathers, but in the skins of Sea-Calfs, with the hair out∣ward, their Wastcoats being made of two skins sowed together, with their Tails hanging down one before, and another behind as low as their Thighs, and their Drawers were very strait. The eldest was about fifty years old, with a round Chest-nut coloured Beard, but no hair on his head. His Lady was about thirty, her Ears and nose pierced (like other persons of her quality) and laden with blew stones her Hair was platted in two Locks hang∣ing upon her Shoulders, with blew streaks upon her Chin and her Forehead, in short there was never a Barrel better Herring, one as rich and ill favoured as the other, both little trubs like the Samojedes, Lap∣landers, Borandians, and Siberians, their voice was shrill and squeaking their breath stunk abominably, which we imputed to their Diet, eating their meat without Salt, or else dabbling their Fish in the Oyl of another sort of Fish. They drank no∣thing but water, we could never get them to touch a piece of bread, to eat a bit of our salt meat, or salt Fish, nor swal∣low one drop of Beer. We tempted them a little with our strong water,
but the smell of Toboccco they abhor'd. All their work was wrought with thread made of Fish-skin, their needles with which they sowed, of the small bones of Fish, the end of their Darts and generally all their tools of their bigger bones, The wood of their Darts and their Bowes were very heavy, of a kind of a red Brown, but their Arrowes were much lighter, of a Whiter Wood, and they shot them with great dexterity. To make the women compleat they both of them wadled like Ducks. CHAP. XL. Our departure from Zembla in Order to our return. Our arrival in Greenland, the Whale-Fishing, and the way they make Oyl of them. THe year being far spent, and the lat∣ter end of August already come, the days began to shorten, and we had half an hour night, besides the cold increasing upon us, it was judged best (having a
fair N. N. E. Wind) to weigh Anchor and stand to the S. W. we had not sail'd many hours before the wind came about S. S. E. which forced us to our former Northern course, to gain the Coasts if we could, which we did, and by the favour of that wind sailed by them as far as Green∣land, where being catched with a W. S. W. wind, we were obliged to cast Anchor again near a great number of French and Dutch Vessels which lay near the shore a fishing for Whale, which Fishing is much after the rate of the Sea-Horse. Having struck it with their Irons, they draw it gently towards the Shore, and when it is dead, cut it all into Mamocks, for the fat, which they melt in great Kettles to draw out the Oyl, not far from certain Cabanes which the Fishermen build for that purpose upon the Coast. This happened very luckily for our Zemblians, their Stomachs were almost lost for want of oyl, for two days together they had had none to dip their Fish in, because it grew scarce in the Ship, and we were forc'd to abate their allowance of oyl with the Fish we gave them to eat. I saw them order one of their Whales, and stood by till they had done. They
drew out of her as much Whale-bone as weighed three hundred and fifty pound weight, which they reserved for the Tay∣lers for Busks and bodies for the Ladies. CHAP. XLI. The Authors departure from Greenland, three Suns appear to him at Sea; by a violent Tempest the Ships are driven upon the Coast of Island. HAving continued two days upon the Coast of Greenland, a N. E. wind arising, we weighed Anchor in persuit of our journy, keeping half Sea over, and steering W. S. W. All the first day the wind was favourable, and held so till a∣bout five next morning, at which time turning quite contrary to E. S. E. we descern'd three Suns in the Firmament one above another, so clear and conspicuous, we could not tell which was the right, and more towards the South we found the sky begin to thicken, and lower, upon which our Master told the Pilot we were in dan∣ger of a Storm; in that apprehension we took down most of our Sails, and gave
our Companions a Gun as a signal they should do the same, after which we fell to prayers, expecting submissively the pleasure of God. Not many hours passed before we were overtaken by a strong S. S: E. Wind, a violent Rain, and such dreadful claps of Thunder, we thought the World had been at an end. The Sea on the other swell'd and raged exceedingly, so as we were able to keep up none but our Mizain Sail, our Sail yard was very low, and two of our Sea men were forced to keep our long Boats on Board by the Ropes they had fastned to them on purpose; and indeed we had much ado to manage our Ship. Having been tossed in this manner all that day and night, without any abate∣ment in the Wind, our Master command∣ed up one of the Seamen to the Scuttle, to see if he could discover any land, that we might know where we were. Our Sea∣man after he had looked about him some time cryed out to us that he discovered W. N. W. of us a great fire, which our Master concluded must needs be Hecla, a Moun∣tain in Island, and though we had no busi∣  yet the Wind continuing , and the So barter∣ing
our Ships, and obstructing our Sail∣ing, we resolved to make thither, and see what shelter we could find; according∣ly steering our course that way, we arri∣ved upon the Coasts in not many hours, and all that Night (lying under that Mountain) we heard most dismal and strange noises like the shooting of great Guns, we saw great Fires and flames rising out of it in abundance. The multitude of Rocks we found up∣on that shore, and the fierceness of the Sea, made us afraid to come too near; but by the skill and diligence of our Pilot we came to an Anchor under Cape Hori with∣out any inconvenience. One of the ships of our Company whose Pilot was not al∣together so dexterous or experienced as ours, within a small distance of us ran his Stem against a Rock, brake a piece of it off, and the whole Vessel was in no lit∣tle danger of dashing to pieces, the third came off well, and had no more harm than we.
CHAP. XLII. The Authors going on shoar, his arrival at Kirkebar; his Voyage to Hecla, the danger he ran there; the marvellous ef∣fects of two Fountains which spring out of that Hill, and other particulars. HAving put on Shore with our Master, our Commiss. and others to the number of fifteen (part out of our Vessel, and part out of the rest) we advanced to Hori, (which is a Town about a League and an half from the Sea) and from thence to Kirkebar (a little Town or a great Vil∣lage which you will, in that Island) we found in Kirkebar a Commiss. and seven or eight Danish Merchants, who were ama∣zed to see us there. They told us they were very glad to see us, and that the day before they had had such an Earth-quake they thought the whole Island would have sunk into the Sea. They treated us with good wine, good bread, and good fresh meat. They have great plenty of Cattel in that Island, which (by reason of the sweetness of the Pasture ground with which it abounds) the Inhabitants are
forced to feed by measure, least they should otherwise burst themselves, which would certainly happen if they suffered them to eat what they would, as in other Countries they do. Our Master, our Commiss. and some others desiring to see farther, and intima∣ting it to the Commiss. of Kirkebar, he caused Horses to be got ready for them. I told them I had a mind to be of the party and they received me into their number; eight of us took Horse (leaving the rest who were not so curious) and departed in the Company of two of the Commiss. of Kirkebars Servants, and two Islanders (sent along as Guides) with a Horse-load of Provisions. Two days together we travelled over Mountains, craggy, and unfrequented ways towards Hecla. Being arrived within a League and half of it, we found the ground all covered with ashes and Pumice Stones, over which we were forced to march to the bottom of the Mountain. The sky being serene, and no flames to bee seen from the Mountain, we took a resolution to go up to the top of it, but our Guides (to divert us) gave us to un∣derstand that if we passed any farther, we
should run a great hazard of sinking into holes the Fire had made, from whence there would be no possibility to recover us upon which the whole company being dis∣couraged, changed their minds and were returning as they came, but I told them if they would have patience, and stay till I came back, I would venture alone, and give them an account; they promised they would, and one of the Merchants we found at Kirkebar (who in curiosity had come with us) undertook to bear me Company. We presently alighted, giving our Horses to our Guides (who staid with the Gentlemen) and marched over the ashes and Pumices (mid leg deep) towards the top, where we saw a great quantity of Birds flying up and down as black as pitch, and they were Crowes and Vultures which build there. Being got about half a League up the Hill, we found it begin to tremble under our feet, and heard a strange crashing and rumbling within, which argued a hollow∣ness, and gave us no little fear of sinking into it; at the same time round about us, on this side, and on that we perceived great chincks, out of which flames and
sparkles came forth, and noisome, and stinking of burned Brimstone, which frighted us so, we were glad to get back again as fast as we could for fear of being swallowed. Being got about thirty pa∣ces back, a cloud of Ashes brake sodain∣ly out of the Mountain (so big and thick it obscured the Sun) and fell upon us in such manner, we could not see one ano∣ther, and that which frighted us the most vvas to see every moment nevv gusts of Fire and Ashes break out fresh and fall up∣on us like hail, vvith a continued noise and rumbling under us, vvhich made us try out most rufully as if all the infernal uries had designed to overvvhelm us, expecting every moment vvhen the Earth should open and svvallovv us, to prevent vvhich vve made use of our heels, and ran dovvn again as fast as our legs could carry us, to avoid the danger into vvhich our cu∣riosity had brought us. Our fear added such vvings to our feet, and gave us such agility of body, that in a quarter of an hour vve had not only got the Mountain, but recovered our friends vvho attended us, and could not forbear laughing to see the pickle vve vvere in, our fear & the ashes together having rendred us
as black as if we had been plung'd in a Bar∣rel of inck. But their laughter was quickly over, when they saw us fall down at their feet as if we had been dead, our spirits and our speech failing us; to recover us they rubbed our Temples, pulled us by the Noses, and gave us Vinegar to smell to. After sometime being come to our selves we took each of us a Cup of Sack, which recovered our sences, and then we depart∣ed, coasting along about a hundred paces from the Mountain, towards two Foun∣tains, one of them so hot it perpetually boyled, the other so cold it turned every thing put into it into stone. We saw a Pumice stone about the big∣ness of a Hogshead, which had been thrown from that Mountain a little before, whilst we were admiring how it should be possi∣ble, one of our Guides told us he had seen much greater, and among the rest one which ten men were not able to move he told us moreover besides the Fire, Flames, Cinders, and Ashes we had seen, it throwes out sometimes scalding hot wa∣ter, sometimes flames, sometimes Fire, and sometimes nothing but stones, After the expence of three full howers,
we arrived at the Fountains (which are not distant from one another above thirty paces) and coming first to the Cold I put in a switch I had in my hand, and having pulled it out again, was much surprized to see the end which had touched the bot∣tome metamorphosed into Iron, and full as heavy. From thence we went to the hot spring, in which (at about ten paces distance) we saw a multitude of Foul as big as Dydoppers (most of them red) play∣ing and skipping together upon the sur∣face, with which we were much pleased, and stopped for some time for fear of interrupt∣ing them, but when at length we appro∣ched, they all disappeared, and then re∣tiring again, they began to show them∣selves as before; which it seems is their way when no body disturbs them, but as soon as any thing comes near them, down they go all of them to the bottom of the Fountain, which by the report of our Guides is little less than sixty fathom deep. From these Fountains we pointed to∣wards the Sea, and being come within half a League of it, we could hear a cer∣tain noise as it were bemoaning and la∣menting some disaster, which our Guides
would fain have perswaded me (as they had done other people) were the Com∣plaints of the damned whom the Divel tor∣ments, refreshing them sometimes Civil∣ly upon the Ice in that place, after they had dry roasted in the flames of Hecla. We all concurred in a curiosity to see that Ice (there being none besides there about all the Island) we no sooner came near it, but I perceived the imaginary yells and Lamentations of the damned, proceded from that Ice and nothing else by the agi∣tation of the wind and the water, and a perpetual concussion one piece against ano∣ther, or all of them against the Rocks. These Ices (if we may take the word of our Guides) do constantly come about the latter end of June, and disappear the fifteenth of September, which was within two days after we were there. Foom thence we departed in our return to Kirkebar, where we arrived three days after, and from thence to our Ships, in which we found the Governor of the Island accompanied with the Bishop of Scalhoult who were come to see them up∣on the news of our arrival, and that we had been at Zembla.
CHAP. XLIII. The habitation, manner of living and su∣perstition of the Islanders, with other particularities. FOr the most part the Islanders have their habitations in holes cut in the Rocks, but some of them have their Ca∣banes, as they have in Laponia, some made of the bones of Fishes, some of wood, covered over with Turffs of earth, their Cattel and themselves being Chamber-Fellowes, and under one Roof: The men are very homely, the women little better, swarthy most of them as the Norwegians are, their Coats are generally Canvas, but some of them, are in Sea-Calfs-skin with the hair outward. Their manner of living (like the rest of the Northern Countries) is very na∣tural; their lodging is upon dryed hearbs with skins thrown over them, and one bed of that kind serves the whole Fami∣ly. Their whole imployment is Fishing. They are very slovenly, rude, bruitish, and most of them Sorcerers, worshiping
the Divel (which they call Kobalde) who appears to them often in humane shape: they have another Idol of wood, cut most hideously with a Knife, which they show but sldome for scar it should be stolen or demolished by certain Lutheran Priests which are there to instruct them in the doctrine of Christianity, and endeavor to rescue them from the slavery of Satan. They have most of them Trolles (as they call them) which are certain familiars at∣tending and serving them faithfully, giving them notice of any accident or distemper impending; when they sleep these Fami∣liars awake them to go a Fishing if the weather be fair, and if they go at any time without incouragement from them, they may swear all the time and catch as much Fish. They are so exquisite in the art of Ma∣gick, they will shew such strangers as are curious what is done in their houses in their own Countries; they will inform them Whether their Fathers, Mothers, Relations, or Friends (which they desire to be assured of) be living or dead. They sell Winds also to any body will buy them to go whither they please.
The Commiss. of Kirkebar (and others beside him) told me very gravely (as he had meant I should have believed him) that those who are a Fishing at the Foot of Mount Hecla upon a day in which there happens a Battail in any part of Europe, do constantly see the Divels coming and go∣ing into that Mountain with mens souls upon their backs, like Bees fetching and carrying Honey upon their Thighs. If it falls out any of their friends are dead, and they are concerned to know what is become of them, applying themselves to these Sorcerers, the defunct presently ap∣pears very melancholly and out of humour assures them for certain he is dead, and with the Divel (who he must confess is none of the best Masters) desires them not to trouble themselves any more for him, for he is setled in Hecla, and till they come, to him can injoy them no more. The Fields in Island (though fair & full of pasturage) cannot produce wheat or any other grain proper for bread, in respect of the extream coldness of the place, by the means of a sharp North-East wind with which they are perpetually infested.
CHAP. XLIV. The Authors departure with the rest of the Danes from Cape Hori. Their arrival at Copenhagen and the present made by the Northern Company of two Sea-Horses Horns, which were accepted for Unicorns. THree days after we were arrived from our journy to Hecla to our Ships which was the 22th of September, a N: wind blowing favourable for us, we weigh∣ed Anchor and departed, steering our Course S. S. E. Having sail'd for some days indifferently well, on a suddain we were surprised with a smart Gale from the N. N. W. which drove us upon the Coast of Norway, where (knowing the Pro∣montories of Talso, which is a little Town upon an eminence with a very strong Ca∣stle, about four Leagues from the Sea) we were overjoyed, as hoping ere long our Voyage would be at end. But we recko∣ned without our Host, for we had not been twelve hours upon the Coast, but the wind changed with the Moon, and forc'd us again to Sea, to avoid the Rocks, and
the danger of being driven back, nor in∣deed could all the care and pains we could take prevent our running back above forty Leagues; after the Storm was over, we happened to be calmed which retard∣ed us for some time; in the interim we perceived to the S. S. W. of us a great Seilon which affrighted our Seamen very much, and obliged them with all speed to slscken their Sails, and bring them to the Masts, least otherwise it should break up∣on us, but it came not within two Leagues of us, at which distance we discerned it to fall. These Seilons are a kind of black thick Clouds in the fashion of Pillars, which are many times visible at Sea, and if at any time they fall upon a Ship, it destroys it by the abundance of water wherewith it fils it, and sinks it down right to the bottom, if it breaks perpen∣dicularly over it. The Calm being gone, we were beholding to a N. E. wind, which in ten days time finished our Voy∣age, and brought us into Copen Hagen Road, where after we had saluted the Castle, we came to an Anchor, and put∣ting out our long-Boats, got on shore as soon as we could. We had scarce got into the Town, be∣fore
his Majesty (having notice that we had brought three or four Zemblanes along with us) commanded us to Court, be∣ing impatient to see them. We obeyed his command, and attended with them; as soon as he saw them he fell into great admiration, both of their habit, and shape of their bodies. He gave order to the Governor of the Castle to take them into his Care, to see they wanted nothing that was necessary, and that they be taught the Language of his Country as well and conveniently as was possible; af∣ter which (having made us give him a rela∣tion of the several Countries we had seen and of the manners and customes of the people) we were permitted to take our leaves, and to wait upon the Masters of the Company to give them an accompt of our negotiations, with which they were very well satisfied, and caused our ships to be brought to Christian Haven (where their Store Houses are) to be unladen there. One of the Principals of the Compa∣ny was ordered by the rest in all their Names to present his Majesty with the two Sea-Horses Horns which we brought home with us, which his Majesty received
as a most inestimable present, supposing they had been Unicorns Horns, of the vir∣tues of which so many Authors had writ∣ten. He ordered them presently to be laid up among the best of his Rarities, pro∣mised the Company to do them what be∣nifit he could, and presented the bearer with a Chain of Gold with his Picture hanging at it, and forgave him his Customes besides. CHAP. XLV. Vulgar Error about the Ʋnicorn and the vir∣tue of its Horn. BEing upon the Subject of the Ʋnicorn, whose Horn is so precious for the great Virtues which are attributed to it, I shall say 'tis a very difficult thing to know what Creature the right Unicorn is, there being several Animals the Greeks call Monoceros, and the Latines Ʋni-Cornis; as among four footed Beasts, several Asses wild Oxen, and the Bull in Florida. Among Serpents, there is the horned Aspic and the red Salamander. Among Fish the Pirassocpi, the Sea-Elephant, the
Sea-Horse, the Caspile, and Ʋtelef. There are likewise of them among the Fouls, and among infects that kind of Beetle (which is frequent in Flanders, England and Pi∣cardy) called the flying Ʋnicorn, besides other Creatures of different species which are found in great numbers in the Indies. Some will have this Ʋnicorn to be a Land Creature, some a Water, and some an Amphibium, as living in both. Pliny saies that the Ʋnicorn is exactly like an Ox spotted with white, only the foot is firm and round as a Horses. Munster will have it like a three-year-old-Colt, of a Weesel colour, the head like a Stag, the legs slender, and feet clo∣ven, with his Horn in the middle of his Forehead, about two cubits in length. Marcus Paulus the Venetian affirms it to be like an Elephant, of the same shape and colour, only a little less, and the Tail like an Oxes; the head like a Pigs, but so weighty it hangs always towards the ground. Philostratus describes it in the head like a Dragon, with a Horn (but of no great bigness) in the midst of it, wreathed like a Snail, it has a beard on its Chin: a long neck, feet like a Lion, the rest of
its body like a Stag, and the skin like a Serpent. Hesiodorus represents it so swift, it is not possible to be taken by all the Art the Huntsman can use. Lewis Paradis reports, that when any of themare taken, they feed them with Peas, Lintels and Beans. That they are as tall as Irish-Greyhounds, but not so slenderly made their hair of the colour of a Beaver very smooth, the neck thin, the legs and feet and tail like a Hind, the head short and lean, the mouth like a Calf, the eyes large, the ears small and betwixt them a Horn very slick, of a dark brown colour without, and about a foot in length. Thevetus; maintains the Ʋnicorn to be as big as an Ox at six Months old, with legs and feet like an Ass, ear'd like a Rein Deer, and bears its Horn upon the top of its head. Lewis de Barthene will have it like a Bay-Horse, only the feet cloven, and a Horn in the middle of his forehead. Volnesius affirms the Rhinoceros to be the right Ʋnicorn, Garcius the Camphur, and John Corbichon the Egliceron Albertus saies the true Ʋnicorns Horn is a hand and a half broad at the bottome,
and ten foot long. Lewis Barthenus will have it three fathom. Munster three Cubits. Marcus Paulus two, Lewis Paradis a foot and half. Nicholas the Venetian a a foot, and Cardan but three fingers long. Pliny represents the Horn black: So∣linus purple: Paradis of the colour of Rhubarb newly broken: Albertus of a Stags colour, and others are as obstinate that 'tis whiter then Ivory. When I consider the discrepancy in the opinions of all Authors about this Ʋni∣corus horn, some describing it one way, and some another, I am perswaded my self they have treated of it either out of Envy, or emulation to make themselves admir'd, and the learned Baccius confirms that perswasion, asserting that such Au∣thors are not to be credited, as knowing nothing of that Creature but by hear-say, no body having ever seen it, any more than a Phenix. As to the virtue of this Ʋnicorns horn suppose it as is reported, and those they would put upon us were right, I am as∣sured it has no more than in the Horn of a stag, Goat, or a piece of Ivory, which is many times used to stop the spitting of blood, Emrades, and loosness, which
they cure by a restringent virtue (or rather a convenient malignity) that restringen∣cy caused by the Earthiness of their sub∣stance) stopping and choking up the pas∣sage in the Veins and Arteries, becomes rather a poison than a Cordial, like the stone of a certain Counsellors Clerk made up of Sulfure and Vitriol, which cast into twenty Buckets of River water gave it a tincture and quality proper as he pretend∣ed for all kinds of diseases; as many Moun∣tebanks do now with their powders of precious stones, Pearls, and Gold, which they cry up for great Antidores, whereas all experienced Physitians do know they are but cheats and if they give ease at any time 'tis more by the virtue of the thing in which it is given, than any propriety of its own; and the reason they give is be∣cause nothing that is incapable of recei∣ving nourishment, can be capable of gi∣ving it, as pearl, pretious stones, and Gold; which if indued with any nutri∣tive faculty, rich men would never die of hunger as long as they lasted, nor any Famine happen to them, as it did in the Siege of Jerusalem forty years after the death of our Saviour, as Josephus affirms in his History of the Jews, quite contra∣ry
to the sentiment of Gabriel de Castagne and others of his Cabal, who maintain that Gold taken in wardly is one of the greatest antidotes in the world, though in truth it is poison rather, as may be prov'd by the smell and steam of it, which so fre∣quently kills the Miners as they are at work. And as a further evidence that the horn of an Ʋnicorn has no virtue in it, and there∣fore is no Cordial, it has neither tast nor smell more than a bone, and by conse∣quence no more virtue. CHAP. XLVI. The Authors reflections upon an Error in our Geographers in the placing of Greenland and Zembla, with Observations upon such as have writ about Voygat, and the Samojedes. AT my return from those Northern Countries, there having fallen into my hands several Geografical Charts, of sundry eminent and much celebrated Au∣thors, I was amazed to see how as it were unanimously) they were mistaken in the
position of Zembla, which they place much nearer the North Pole, than really it is, and N. E. of Laponia though in∣deed it is more inclining to the North. They divide it likewise by the Sea from Greenland, and put it at above twelve hundred Leagues distance from it, when as indeed those two Countries are conti∣guous, the Coasts of Greenland butting upon the Coasts of Zembla, so as did not the great quantity of Snow, and the violence of the Cold render those borders uninhabitable, the passage would be very easie by Land from Greenland to Zembla, and from Zembla (passing the Patenostres Mountains) to enter into Samosespia; from thence into Tartary, or Muscovy as one pleas'd. I was amazed likewise to see they had describ'd the Strait called Voygat not above ten French Leagues in length wheras it con∣tains above five & thirty Dutch Leagues, which is six times as much; again they would perswade us that thorow that strait our Ships might pass into the great Tar∣tarian Ocean, which is a a mistake, though they indeed do affirm that in the time of Prince Maurice of Nassau a Dutch Vessel passed that way into that Ocean, but it
is a manifest errour, that strait being bounded (as I said before) by the Patenostres Mountains, the least of which is above halfe a League high, and the tops of them▪ covered with perpetual Snow which never dissloves. And of this I can give a positive Testimony having been my self in that strait, under those Mountains in the dog-days (which is the hottest time in the year) and found it very cold, the winter continuing all the year in those parts, as the Summer does about the Magellan Straits near the Antartick Pole. As the Countries remote towards the South, are called incognitae: so the Coun∣tries in the same distance, might have the same appellation; yet though to us they are unknown at present, I do not question but if we had occasion to go farther, we should discover Countries well peopled and inhabited, which we might call new Worlds, according to the example of Christopher Columbus, Magellan, and others who have called their discoveries by that Title, following therein sentiments of De∣mocritus Epienrus and Metrodorus, who maintain there are several Worlds, con∣trary to the Doctrine of Hermes Trisme∣gistus
and Plato, who affirm there is but one which God created according to his own pleasure, of which no man can give an account, either of its end, beginning, height, depth, or middle: though our Geographers tell us other things in their Planisphers, proposing the Artick Pole for the Top, the Antartick for the bottom, and the Equator for the mid∣dle. To which Strabo dissents, asserting the middle of the World to be the Moun∣tains Parnassus in Greece. Berosus, the Mountain Arrarat in Armenia, and several others will have it Jerusalem. I would fain know of our Geographers where they place the old Zembla; I am of opinion if they had been in the new, they would confess there was no other. That New Holland, West-Friezeland, and Cape d'Hyver are in the Straits of Voygat, and not on the other side in the great Tartarean Ocean as they have placed them. And he (that in his relation of the State of Muscovy speaks of the Samojedes) if he had been among them, and had any con∣versation there, would not have describ'd them eaters of strangers, and that the Grand Duke sent his Criminals thither, to be devoured by them which is utterly false;
Though their Bodies are ill favoured, and their wit dull, though they have no knowledge of God, nor fear of torment in the other World; (believing their souls and bodies die together) though they seem the miserablest people of the Earth, living in Summer upon Bears, Woolfs, Foxes, Crowes, Eagles, and other wild Creatures which they hunt first and then eat in their Cabanes broild upon the Coals, and subsist in the Winter upon nothing but Fish dried in the Sun in the Summer time, unless by accident they kill some of those Bears, who (having nothing left by the Snow in the fields) come home to their Cabanes to devour them. Notwithstanding all these inconveniencies, they are naturally hospi∣table, receiving strangers like themselves, without doing them any injury; for, though they appear cruel and barbarous, they are honest and sincere, which is very much considering they are Neighbours to the worst people in the world, which are the Tartars, and Tingorses, with whom they have as great traffick and conversa∣tion on that side, as they have with the Si∣berians, Borandines, and Laplanders on the other. FINIS.
