O516 E1900_2 99861411 170536
A MISCELLANY OF SUNDRY Essayes, Paradoxes, AND Problematicall Discourses, Letters and Characters; Together with Politicall Deductions from the HISTORY of the Earl of Essex, Executed under Queen ELIZABETH. By FRANCIS OSBORN Esquire. LONDON, Printed by John Grismond, 1659. 8. 9.
To my Vertuous, no lesse then in all things else deserving Neece, Mrs. Elizabeth Draper. Deare Neece, IT is on all hands confest, that some things here may be thought as unsuitable to my Years, as your Education (not yet removed from a vertuous Mo∣ther,) By those are not acquain∣ted with the externall Impulse which makes their Publication to the world unavoidably Ne∣cessary, in reference to the pre∣venting a false Impression; no lesse Then that more Inward of naturall affection to you (not knowing but this may be my
last opportunity) to do right to Gratitude. So as if any expres∣sion here should be of force to make you blush, it would by augmenting your Beauty prove a Good Effect of a cause at the worst but respectively Evil; and only in reference to such a Su∣perlative goodness as you are in∣dowed withall: whose appre∣hension of Ill results rather from Admonition and Prudence, then Experience or Consent. Faults al∣ready become in many ripe for punishment, being not yet arri∣ved within the Circle of your thoughts. Wherefore (since the worst can be found in these pa-Pers, if candidly taken, does not
come short of some of the best are daily made vendible,) I desire you to vail your Judge∣ment with Charity; known in remoter Relations so extensive as to cover more Levity, then I hope is extant here: Orif blee∣red by Interest, I should mi∣stake no lesse in its own desert, then the acceptance of the VVorld, it can not disparage your Name long; which no doubt will sodainly be changed, and you left free, either to own or reject what is here presented: unlesse God for the punish∣ment of the present Age will make men unwilling, because unworthy to approch so much
virtue, and other excellencies as are naturall in you; the repetition of which would not onely call up the bloud into your face, but confound mine, were I guilty of half the infidelity in your Sex that ignorance, folly and malice hath voted to my share: who am so zealous through the mediation of your perfections in the vin∣dication of women, that I am not onely ready to become a Con∣vert, but a Martyr, rather then appeare any thing but, Dear Neece, Your Servant FRANCIS OSBORN.
A generall account of what is con∣tained in the Book ensuing. THe Preface. An Essay on such as condemn all they under∣stand not a reason for. p. 1. An Essay upon Prov. 8. chap. v. 30. Give me neither poverty nor riches: p. 9. A Contemplation of Adam's Fall. p. 22. Sundry Conjecturall Paradoxes concerning Rea∣son, Learning, &c. p. 55. A Character of Honour. p. 119. Valour and Cowardice. p. 125. A Letter writ to disswade Mr. — from a Duell. p. 134. A Letter to Mr. — in hope to disswade him from going a Colonel under Count Mansfield p. 141. A Letter to Mr. W. P. concerning dependences upon great men. p. 153. — Another to the same person. p. 157. A Copy of Verses to---who had translated Virgil into English. p. 162. A Letter perswading---to marry. p. 163. Verses upon sundry occasions. p. 169. A Letter to two S sters, the one black, the other faire p. 171.
With Verses. p. 172. A Letter to--- After the death of his Lady. An Epitaph on— p. 173. The Authours own Epitaph. p. 175. A Letter to disswade --- from marrying a rich, but ugly and deform'd— p. 176. With Verses to the same effect. p. 180. A Letter in reference to a Coy Lady. p. 182. The Petition. p. 186. A Character on a deboshed Souldier. p. 187. A Letter to Dr. C. H. Chap. to W. E. of Pem. p. 191. With Verses. p. 194. On a Cook. p. 195. A Character of an Host. p. 197. With Verses. p. 200. Deductions from the History of the Earl of Essex. p. 201. Essay on Court-factions. p. 240. Essay, that the condition of men in power is to be guided by their servants. p. 253.
THE AUTHOUR TO THE READER. REaders in the generality do not study (especially in reference to contemporaries) what may benefit themselves, but blemish the pre∣sent Authours repute. So as the Pillars of Fame and Protection, that led our Fathers through the dark Wilderness of Igno∣rance, into the glorious Land of the Li∣ving
(where they still inhabit, though under no more authentick Charter then that of Prescription, being in all other evidences of worth matched, if not ex∣ceeded by younger men:) are clouded through reproches, and forced to corre∣spond for the Integrity of every Line by Truths most capitall enemies, Hypocrisie, Superstition and solly: And before such partiall and weak Tribunalls as are subar∣ned no lesse then guided by Interest, and an awfull reverence towards the most de∣formed Antiquity; from whence the Pen (accounted by Caesar a decent Com∣panion for the Scepter) is now become the Bubble of the Rabble: Forgetting that though it may be so in the manage∣ment of Fools, yet that no vertuous acts can be registred, or Learning maintain∣ed but through her mediation: Nor is the progress of conjecturall propositions to be obstructed, but rather indulged in refe∣rence to the credit of a Nation. The first Idea often owning the glory of the whole design; manifest in Germany, that may not unpossibly stand more obliged
for her rare Inventions to the Liberty she gives, and an Indulgence the In∣habitants have for any Novelty, though too weak to extend probabi∣lity beyond the fantaste of the first projector; Then any naturall fertili∣ty inherent in the place, appeares in the perfection they receive from poli∣ter Regions; Being themselves so farre from casting Dirt or Ink in the face of the party, that in the least case of likelihood they do all lend assistance: contrary to the baser practice of England, where if a Spirit be found so prevalent in Reason as to be proof against any reply, it is usuall for the opposers of Knowledge to im∣petrate their revenge from some weak administrator of the power of Igno∣rance. Sir Walter Raleigh was the first (as I have heard) that ventured to tack about, and sail aloof from the beaten track of the Schools: who upon the discovery of so apparent an error as a Torrid Zone, intended to pro∣ceed
in an inquisition after more so∣lid Truths: Till the mediation of some whose Livelihood lay in ham∣mering shrines for this superannuated study, possessed Queen Elizabeth, that such Doctrine was against God no lesse then her Fathers Honour, whose Faith (if he owed any) was grounded upon School-Divinity. Whereupon she chid him: who was (by his own confession) ever after branded with the title of an Atheist, though a known assertor of God and providence. A like censure fell to the share of venerable Bacon, till over-balanced by a greater weight of glory from Strangers: Nor could desert and the name of the English Jewel, given Selden beyond Sea, free him from a like imputation at home. Where∣fore Br. Ca. Di. Ho. Ha. Hi. St. Ta. and a number more that have Imbel∣lished this doting Age with new no∣tions, may apprehend comfort from this contemplation, that Fame is no
lesse eternall then Detraction is Mortall. Though it may be thought strange why any farthaer prosecution of truth should be persocuted amongst men not yet fully resolved what it is: when nothing redounded more to the Protestants honour, then the free passage they have alwayes given to Books of controversies, whereas the reading of them is a mortall Sinne in Rome, and at best, liable to the Inquisition: not to be imputed to any thing but the invincible Reason we have on our side, So well managed by Mr. Chillingsworth, as the slu∣ent mouthes of the Jesuites were stopped till his death, and some time after. There being nothing but Mathematicall demonstrations able to drive them from the ambiguous interpretations they put both upon Scripture and Fathers, behind which the Papacy hath for many Centuries played at Bo-peep with State and Church. And yet how this poor man was abused at his death, is more for
the Nations credit to conceal, then publish. Neither is this frenzy capa∣ble of any reall Reformation, since those pretend to a power of garbleing things brought to the Presse, are not all of one and the same Judgement: and from whose divisions new Books run the fortune of the middle-aged man in the Fable, that became bald; by an endeavour to gratifie the hu∣mours of persons inconsiderable for weight or number. I know censures do not all fall within the Circuit of one Meridian, yet am as certain, that no Dispute can be maintained, but where half, if not the most curi∣ous part, is supported by Conjecture. And that our best Physicall Conclusi∣ons have been deduced out of meere mistakes: which the World (though never so long-lived) is not likely to want, and therefore improbably pro∣claimed at her farthest extent of Knowledge: which if true, few would give, or increase the stipends of Arts; it being incongruous to expect new
Honour from those confesse them∣selves not able to augment their own, and so farre dissident of an ability to match the ancients, as they take the indeavour not only for impossible, but a high if not a damnable presumption: Wherefore it suites University-Inte∣rest to indulge such as bring fresh noti∣ons to their Mill, though smutted with some errors: It being usuall for wages to cease, and an Ingine to be neglected, upon the first discovery that the work is finished: Not to be denyed to follow an opposing what is already arrived to a generall accep∣tance. Especially in an Age when God and the Magistrate lies blasphe∣med on every Stall. Nor is the kna∣very of obscure Stationers a small Remora to desert: that in envy to those of their own Trade, and to debauch the esteem of Books, do in∣courage, if not hire, foul-mouthed Ballad-makers to rufsle, doggs-eare, and contaminate by base Language and spurious censures the choysest
leaves. Yet the Blasphemers against the Spirit of Knowledge become ven∣dible in reference to their names they pretend in their Title-page to confute, sometime the Trade of Al. Ro. who used to skirmish (though only ar∣med with a blunt quill, and a duller Reason) the Worthies of our Nation by Troops. Nor is it probable any farther attempt upon our English af∣faires should be purchased cheaper then at the Writer's prejudice: Since so honest an endeavour as the proving, It was the Father that eat the sower Grapes, and not the Son, whose teeth were set an edge, is by some so farre perverted. Now in reference to this, or any thing else may relate to me, If my Years and Infirmities that stand ready at the gate to hurry me out of this World, nor the many lines I have drawn suitable to the ge∣nerall phantasies, with a protestation ne∣ver to trespasse again upon Love or History, cannot shroud me from the pelting of Tongues, Let me humbly
implore this favour of both Sexes, that such as do it, would imitate the candor of a Carnaval, wherein (though all Italy appear but one in∣tire Bedlam) nothing is throwne, but what savours more of Musk then Malice. But if I am born to be asper∣sed, I could wish it might be with such Ink as may at least beautifie the Writer, and not contaminate us both: it being an injury, though farre be∣low the sufferer's revenge, to be pinched between the nasty finger and thumb of a brawny Ignorance. Which heightens greatly the obligation to him that for my sake undertook so unworthy an Antagonist: Whose want of a true knowledge of me hath led him into as great an excesse in re∣ference to my Commendations, As the like defect may not unpossibly have exposed me to a censure of un∣gratitude, or made me (as verily I believe I am) too sparing in his: A fault I promise to amend upon the least intimation of an occasion.
Now being compel'd to own what followes, or to venture having it layd at my door with all the Imper∣fections so many Adulterated Tran∣scriptions have Deformed it with; I thought it lesse Dishonourable to trespass upon Gravity (a Defect in Nature, or at best but a Ceremony resulting from the Morosity of Age) then to offer violence to Prudence, (the most signall advantage deduci∣ble from Time:) By denying my hand to the emendation of a subreptiti∣ous Copy, which I verily believe my Youth (though foolish enough) was not in probability likely to have been guilty of; yet must have had my abilities now measured by it. For the sufficiency of which I shall not corre∣spond, having been led through Ne∣cessity and others perswasions, rather then my own, to think that though they are out of Fashion with me, they may become decent for others to fol∣low, or avoid. Being in every respect else à meere Patient, and no other∣wayes
active then at the request, and for satisfying the Stationer, to whose care I leave you, without any other Complement, Then that the losse will not be great to the buyer, nor the shame much to me, should they prove waste paper, as I ever till now esteemed them. And in answer to those shall think some expressions here too seri∣ous to face such stuffe as comes.  they may be pleased to know I  first intend to insert some oti which discretion hath since thought inconvenient.
THE PREFACE. THE PROEM. IF, contrary to the Mode of such as lose their Thoughts in the open Aire where they were conceived; I have, with more Diligence, regestred Mine; it was out of no Opinion they deserve a longer life, but to prevent Idleness, with a Concourse of some more Tedious, if not Sinful: which in the Vacancy of Imployment, are apt to intrude themselves, under pretence of a more ancient and Fa∣miliar Acquaintance. Nor can I yet find Cause, to repent of the paynes,
Since it hath confirm'd me, in this Truth; That the World is not the worse, nor My self much better, for Age and Continuance. From whence I have learned, (though I confess, none more apt to Forget) Not to Com∣plain of Governours, for their Op∣pression, or upbraid Youth, with its Vices: Since in the best Times, Ty∣ranny hath been moderated, rather through Fear, then Goodness. As the most seemingly-Holy, do, at the highest, but palliate, not Divest heir Humane Infirmity. And from hence, we may be taught with St. Peter, Not to call anything Polluted or Defiled: All Men, at long-running, meeting with the same Market, either in refe∣rence to their own Depraved Will, or Performance. Wherefore, I should Conclude, (considering My own, and Others visible Lapses) That Sanctity lies more in Repentance, then Inno∣cency. Which is the Chief Advan∣tage,
if not all the Difference disoer∣nable, between Those we terme Wick∣ed, and the Just. Now if any One (a Thing I have forneerly been very chary of) shall read These Papers, un∣der the Notion of Approbation; He can no more make Me Proud, then such as Dispraise them, Angry: (It being the guise of All, to applaud Those of Their own Opinion:) Of which there is none more Mine, then that every Thing is of a Mixed Na∣ture, carrying a Face like That in a pleated Picture, suitable to the Situ∣ation and Light the Beholder stands in, or is guided by. And in reference to one-over-Se∣vere, I may have this to say, That not a few, now Wiser then us both, have pleased Themselves, as much, in Drawing Anticks, with a Coal, upon a Wall, as Others do in their endea∣vours, to match Apelles. All I seek, is to sind Imployment for a Spirit that
would Break the Vessel, had it no∣thing to Work upon, but it Self. Nor is it less true, That I might justly be blamed for Some things here, Had more Time been employed about them, then God in his Mercy, or to punish my Former Negligence, hath afforded me Liberty to spare. Who can be accountable to Posterity, for no∣thing in this kind: being from my Birth, uncapable to receive the Rich Talent of Learning, look'd upon, as The onely Key of Knowledge: which if obtayned, had been Little Ad∣vantage, since I want a Memory, wherein to Hoord up what I had stollen. And so the Acquired Groat, might not unpossibly have spoiled, and adulterated the more Natural Shil∣ling. Wherefore, if a Chymistry might be found, able to Extract any thing useful towards the Conduct of Man, out of such Ordinary Simples as These, They were highly to be e∣steemed;
And in likelyhood, more suteable to every Tast, as Fresh-ga∣thered from the Tree of Experience, then those Sophisticated by the Schools, or of a Narrower interest, then That, of The whole Society of Man. And, if any draw benefit from These, they are most likely to be Friends: It being onely the property of Love, to look upon that with De∣light, which cannot be discovered to another without Shame. And to such I could be content, to leave them, as the Idea of a Mind was no less Cordially imploy'd, in advancing the Good of Others, then of my Patience, in re∣ceiving Injuries from the same hands. This is not said to wound Providence, under the Shadow of Fortune. Since I have hitherto not onely been blest, be∣yond my Desert, but Expectation. And have seen my unnatural Oppres∣sours perish, and languish, through as
Miraculous means, as I have been Preserved. And by which, I am brought to the Contemplation of higher, and more permanent Plea∣sures, then the poor and despicable Consideration of Profit is able to reach. Nor could any contrary En∣deavour of mine, hide this from the Eyes of the World, to whose Judge∣ment, I was for a long time not so Impudent, or Imprudent, as to pre∣sent more of my Self, then I must needs; Because, Experience still finds Her in the Arms of Curiosity, and Prejudice. Into whose Den, though I have been of late cast, (by what Hand of Fate I know not, and so as it were Blindfold;) yet I have come off with more Favour, from before this Tyrannical Tribunal, then divers known of far greater Desert. Nor should I but for a through Essay of my own Fortune, and the Readers Candor, venture such Stuff as is
likely to Follow. Which though pro∣duced long since, I am not able to Bet∣ter now. And if Capable of Accep∣tance, the World is not likely to want it. But it is contrary to my own Aph∣isme, to debosh what I present, by saying it was writ before I was Twen∣ty: From whense would result, such an easie Inference, That surely, I am no Wiser now, (which I wish heartily I were able to confute) else I should Mend, or Conceal them. Nor can I think it Wisdom, or Convenience, to say, They were produced in a shorter space, then Nature requires in the production of Rarities; Though not seldome Casual; (As I observed in a Flint, presented to King Charles, that bore the perfect Figure of a Man.) It boing the Custom of some Heads, to afford the greater Reason, the less they are pumped. Such as is Clearest, running com∣monly
quickest, and most Fluent; whereas, the Deeper requires Strain∣ing, and so becomes Heavyer, and of a lesse sprightful Tast. I will not say, Mine is of that Temper, to avoyd Prejudice. Nothing being held in esteeme, is easily come by. Wherefore, having found so many condemned, upon the Evidence they bring against Themselves in Print, I have laboured to conceal my Name; esteeming it more Pleasant (if not more Naturall) to beget then father. But finding it, as impossible to hide, as it is unsutable to my pre∣sent Condition to be idle, and no lesse then unbecoming Civility, to neg∣lect the Importunity of such Friends, as desire a Publication of this Piece, (which being a mixture of all things, may not improbably, like the huge Dishes now in fashion, feast the Ap∣petites of some one, or other) I shall once again venture into the Presse, (as
too many do) more out of Confidence then Wit. Yet, let my Defects be what they will, I have ever considered it as a Flatulent Impertinency, to Court the Reader; or think to raise a Party, in the behalf of any thing, weares not the indubitable Character of Reason and Truth. Against which, Ignorance and Hypocrisie have maintained so long and unnaturall a Rebellion, as Security is no other way attainable, but by Silence, or Complyance. The continuall Wrast∣lings against a Rationall Evidence, having brought the World into so multilated, and unsteady a Creede, as in many Places, she is observed to halt, between the uneasie wayes of Hope and Feare. The Contemplati∣on of which, doth so stagger such as delight in Painting their Opinions upon Paper, that they know not what side to take, out of a Dread to fall un∣der the Notion of Traytors or Ma∣lignants,
Atheists or Fools. And a∣mongst others, this may passe for a Cause, why these (formerly looked upon as wast) Sheets, have received this Resurrection out of the Dust; It being in ill Times, safer to appear wanton, then serious. Or like Brutus, a Foole, then a Censor. Of what is in me, I make as good use as I can, but hate to borrow any thing; being more willing to appear, with all my Defects about me, then Glorious, and Splendid, through the Spoiles of o∣thers. Under the same Odium, (in my Conceit,) lyes a Supercilious Gravity; by which I should interrupt all Commerce with those of my own Coat; And expose my Selfe to the Judgement of some more wise, who cannot but see through that un∣naturall Vayle, the poorness of the Trash is carried under it: There be∣ing, really, no nakedness, but in re∣lation to others, since all have the Pa∣tience
to look upon their own Imper∣fections, without blushing. Which the oftner it is done, the better may be learned, How to prize others, and value our Selves. There appearing, no way readier, to demonstrate to a Man his particular weakness, then by admitting him full leave to try his strength. Wherefore, so long as no body saw me, I was not capable of blame, If wanting the Engines of Learning, I endeavoured, to shake the Pillars of the Schooles. For though the Attempt, is not very likely, to af∣ford any Benefit to others; yet, I cannot but remain, the stronger for it, and the more agile My Selfe: As such do, that swing; though the Beame stirrs not, at which they tugge, It be∣ing natural to honest Labour, still to be followed, by Wisdom or Reward. For, though the Generality of Readers, are scandalized at all is not mouldy through Age, or guilded with Novel∣ty;
yet, I remember, to have heard from Sir William Cornewallis, (e∣steemed none of the meanest Witts, in his Time) That Mountaign's Es∣say's, was the likelyest Book, to advance Wisdom: because, The Authours own Experiences, is the Chiefest Ar∣gument in it. For as St. Augustine saith, of Short and Holy Ejaculati∣ons; That they pierce Heaven as soon, if not quicker, then more Te∣dious Prayers: So, I have reaped greater Benefit, from concise and Casuall Meditations, on severall Topicks, then long and voluminous Treatises, relating meerly to one and the same thing: Many Scholars be∣ing of so vast an Extension, in the prosecution of any, (though but a see∣ming) Errour, as they will leave no Argument unurged, be it never so weake. Forgetting, That a Triumph is easier obtained, then a Victory so Discreetly moderated, as may give
no occasion, to think it either Tedious, or over-severe. It being a work, im∣pertinently superstuous, to give two Blowes, where one may suffice. This is the Cause, That only such are estee∣med, that bring the strongest Rea∣sons, and commit the smallest waste upon the Readers Time, or the Ad∣versaries Repute. Nor are any to be Commended, as Civill, or Wise, that prosecute a Contrary Practise: Too frequent amongst us, where the Abuse of the Person, is Clinched, and Ri∣veted so close, with the Confutati∣on, as unquestioned Charity is not seldom lost, in the vindication of a more Dubious Truth. And from hence, I have taken occasion, to Cal∣culate the Meridian, of such Hot Heads, as can suffer no Opinions but Their own, to stand quietly by them. Forgetting, There is as much varie∣ty, in the Dissemblances of Mens Mindes, as Experience and Com∣merce
do observe, in their Bodies. Which may conclude it, as great Folly, to condemn one of a contrary Judgement, as to Implead another, because his Nose is shorter, or lon∣ger, then Theirs. Nor is it in the Reach of any thing but Restraint, to make People unanimous. No lesse, a∣gainst the Freedom of Nature, then it is sutable to Custom, and Experi∣ence, to finde the Contrary in Practice, where all are left to their Own Ele∣ction. As manifest in WiseGreece & Rome, as in those Nations, esteemed both by Them & Us more Barbarous. Nor can it but be reckoned amongst the Causes of the Catholicks Unity, That every one, may addresse their Prayers, to what Saint they please. --- Now to vindicate my Selfe from their Folly, Esteeme the Foulest of their Writings a fit Copy for the World, whose Heads ake like Jupiters, till delivered of those Palla's: though so
Flat and Deformed, as if conceived in their Thumbs. I may safely say, That heretofore, (However it is with me now, grown perhaps through Custom more Impu∣dent) I was not ambitious to ap∣peare in publick: Since some of my Acquaintance can attest, That divers pieces, of late published, were long agoe as Compleate, as ever I have been able to make them since. The First Cause of their projection, being rather, for the intent to While my Selfe, then Busie others. Nor shall I prosecute this Trade, longer then it continues acceptable to the Genera∣lity, and Beneficiall to the Stationer. Whose Operation, hath been more Ef∣fectuall, in this Midwifrey, then any Delight I can take, in finding my Selfe rated, according to the Value of every Judgement: commonly Fore∣stalled by Opinion, a farre neerer Friend to things of this Nature, then the Highest Desert.
At the Foot of whose Tribunall, I should never have fallen, but to re∣deem the World out of a Common Errour, by shewing, Men are not so unhappy in the Absence of Learn∣ing, as Scholars pretend. — Whose First Question is, What University you are of? And their Last, if an∣swered, None: For then, they consi∣der the Party as irrationall, and be∣low Conversation. Forgetting, That though Books may produce a few rough Materialls; it is only in the power of Experience, and Naturall Parts to Build up and Burnish a Per∣fect Man.
ESSAY On such as Condemn All they understand not a Reason for. THeir Presumption is no lesse uncivill, then Prodigious, That having nothing else to warrant them, but a Pettish and So∣litary Opinion of their own, will un∣dertake, to arraigne, the Truth of all they cannot apprehend, or is not quite arrived within the Perfect Cognizance of their Reason. And by this Impudence, do not only, pro∣claim themselves Judges of the pre∣sent
understandings; but present, the scanty measure of their own, as an unquestionable Standard, for all may succeed. Forgetting, to what base Offices they have put such Conceits, and Results to, upon a more serious Consideration; which at their first Conception, they esteemed Authen∣tick, and not misbecoming the Cabi∣net of a Prince. And if thus Capa∣ble of Deceit from Themselves; What Security are they able to give for the Spurious Censures they passe upon Others, that one day they shall not be taken off from Wisdom's File, and some more True and Honourable placed in their room, to the Eternall Insamy of such, as are scandalized at any thing, former∣ly, a Stranger in the Schools? Nor is this Humor the Continent of a lesse Malignity, then what hath been Ca∣pable heretofore, (Nor is it lesse busie now) to obstruct, and Discou∣rage
all farther prosecution after Knowledg, by branding Reason with an Imputation of Atheism: and Han∣ging what they understand not, un∣der the Notion of Witchcraft; as Foster, a Country-Parson, did the Weapon-Salve: Against which, he Conjured up not onely the Fathers, Schoolmen, &c. but (so far as his Weak Talent could extend) did sub∣orne Philosophy to attest against Her Self. Nor had this mad Duel be∣tween Him, and Dr. LLoyde, (who being both of no great Strength did weaken the Nations repute abroad) been parted, but That Authority (to vindicate the usual cure of the Kings Evil from being an Operation of the Divel) did step in betwixt Them. The First, gaining the Opinion of as High an Impudence, for Beginning; as the Other, did of Folly, for main∣taining so impertinent a Quarrel. It was the Custom of King James,
(and no question, of no small Im∣provement to his Understanding) to Discourse during Meals, with the Chaplain that said Grace, (or Other Divines) Concerning some point of Controversie in Philosophy. And fal∣ling one Day upon Atheism, He did by undenyable Arguments main∣tain, No Man could be found so Irra∣tional, as to deny a First Cause: (which could be no other then that Power we call God.) And Therefore, no such thing in Nature, as an Atheist. What his Judgement was of Witchcraft, you may, in part, find by His Treatise on that Subject, and Charge he gave the Judges, to be Circumspect in Condemning those, Committed by Ignorant Justices, for Diabolical Compacts. Nor had he Concluded his Advice in a Nar∣rower Circle, (as I have heard) Then the Denyal of any such operations, but out of Reason of State: and to
gratifie the Church, which hath in no Age, thought fit to explode out of the Common-peoples minds, An Apprehension of Witchcraft. The greatest Miracles, now extant, ma∣king their Apparitions, in the Dark Corners of this clouded Imagination. Into whose Cause I shall not pre∣sume further to peep; as esteeming it more Dangerous then Terrible. Yet, for the better Vindication of such Innocents, as are daily obser∣ved, to pass out of this Back-gate of Injustice, to another World, (Whose Posterns are the Ignorance of Judges, and Folly of our Lawes) I will here relate a Story of my own Knowledge, which if too Weak to refel this Common Errour, cannot be divested of Strength enough, to perswade more Discretion, and Charity, then is ordinarily imployed, in the Tryal of such poor Creatures, That are first made mad, as Solomon saith, through
Poverty, and Affliction; and After Hanged, for being no better advised, then to Confess what they never did, or any Flesh and Blood was ever able to do. Sir Humphry Winch, (none of the least Honest, and Conscientious Iti∣nerant Judges of his Time,) was, in the Northern Circuit presented with this Evidence, against Three Silly Women, That they had out of propense Malice, not onely bewitched divers Cattle, and Children to Death: But the principal Cause of their Commitment, arose from the Son of a Gentleman, that was supposed to have layn divers Moneths under their Fascination; who at certain Times, would Contract his whole Body, within the Compass of a Joyn'd-stool, and write in Hebrew, and Greek Characters, though not knownto be skilled in those tongues; That a Spirit came then into
him, sent by these poor Wretches, by which he was so Tormented, as he did, in his Fits, foame at the Mouth. Nor was there a greater, and more probable Evidence wanting; For, that Night the Judges entred the Town, One of the Witches, did pri∣vately desire the Jaylour, to bring Her into a room by her Self, where without any Compulsion, (a thing not omitted by our Witch Finders) She told Him, she used a Familiar, together with the Rest; And that they had joyned to bewitch the said Boy; but did humbly beseech Him, her Fellows might not know it, nor she be returned to the same lodging, for fear, They should torment Her: And within few Hours dyed. Now upon the Keepers Evidence, and o∣thers of like Nature, the Two were found guilty, and Condemned to be Hang'd. But under this Pro∣viso, That in Case they continued
obstinate in the Denyal of the Fact, The Sheriff should remand them back, where they were to live, till the Progress, which was to be North∣ward, that Summer. The King be∣ing gratified by nothing more, then an Opportunity to shew his Dexterity in Discovering an Imposture, (at which, I must confess Him, The Promptest Man Living) upon his Ar∣rival convented The Boy. Where, before Him, (possibly daunted at his Presence, or Terrified by his Words) he began to faulter, so as The King discover'd a Fallacy. And did for a further Confirmation, send him to Lambeth; where the Ser∣vants of George Abbot, did in a few Weeks, discover the Whole Deceit. And He was sent back to his Maje∣sty, before the end of the Progress. Where upon a Small Entreaty, He would repeat all his Tricks often∣times in a Day. Nor did He do and
suffer all this, for a more Serious Cause, Then to prevent a present Whipping, and avoyd going to School. Amongst other Prancks, he lived in an Orchard a Week, upon Apples onely. I shall make no Paraphrase, nor pursue the Argument further, to a∣voyd Prolixity, no less, then Offence. The Doctrine of such &c. Being a Diana, out of Which, no small Profit is made, and Credit purcha∣sed, in reference to Opinions, other∣wise Ridiculous, and Untenable. Give me neither Poverty nor Riches, Prov. 8. 30. From this Wise Kings Prayer, we may Learn the Danger that resides, in these two Gulphs, Poverty and Riches. The Latter, alluring no less to Pride, then the First tempts, if not Compels towards Atheism, and
Infidelity. Both gathering Strength and Aggravation, from the Com∣plexion, and Education of the pati∣ent; So as if Abundance proves the Lot of a Mean Birth; and Want, the Companion of one bred in Plenty and Eminency; it elevates the First, as far above the Sphaere of Moderation, as it dejects the Other, below the Centre of Patience. Pride despising Gods power, no less then Poverty distrusts it. For as a perfect and Harmonious Joy comes neerest to that pleasure and Content, assured us in Heaven: So Anxiety and Discon∣tent are a representation of Hell. Melancholly being the worst of Hu∣mours, because the Devils; (if he may be thought, to participate of any) who apprehends all ill about Him, and cannot but despair of bet∣ter. Wherefore Poverty must be allowed the most dangerouus Conditi∣on, because infested with all those
prodigious Effects, this Diabolicall Passion is lyable to produce. Which are, in a manner, all we do in this World, either Punish, or Admire: Sin being a Result of Want; from whence it becomes so far more Ille∣gal, then Unnatural, as S. Paul owns the Law, for the most Manifest Ori∣ginal, and exactest measure of his prevarioations. I know Abundance hath been by Good men, prized below Want, when offered to be made the Wages of Iniquity; though None besides Our Saviour, was ever found, able to grapple with the Enemy of Mankind being Hungry and in Want, as He was in the Wilderness. Which re∣mains none of the Weakest Effects, left us, of his Divinity: And rather inserted, as a Mark of his own Pow∣er, then an Example for our Immi∣tation. Yet such Monastical persons, as endeavour to come neerest to it,
have enough to Satisfie, though pos∣sibly, not to pamper Nature. The Name of Voluntary Hope of Merit, and the Worldly Respect it brings, bearing most of the Charges belong∣ing to it. Nor have they Wives and Children, which looked through, do like Opticks, multiply the Bulk of Want. When Others (not wilfully) Sick of this Loathsom Plague, as if it were Infectious, are not onely Forsaken of All, but exposed to the Tyranny of Every Hand desires to oppress them. Law it Self, (a Friend to all else) being so heavy an Enemy to the poor Beggar, as it seeks to Dis∣charge the Common wealth of Them, with no less industry, then the Phi∣sitian, doth the Body of man, from Humours putrid and noxious to its Health. I know Some make a Trade of Want; and by it, are able to live, not one'y Idly, but in an Unbridled
Luxury; Whereas, Those here meant, Consume their Bodies, by La∣bour, or which is more Painful, in the Study of the Mind; yet cannot obtain so much, as to purchase bread sufficient, to stop the Mouths of their Family, from Barking at Heaven, and tearing God under the Vail of Fortune, for pouring upon others, with∣out Limitation, what is denyed to them in the Meanest Proportion. Indeed the Ancient Stoicks, no less, then the more Modern Divines have, and do still continue their endeavours, to vindicate this unequal Distribution from the Tincture of Partiality; but have in my mind, left it more Am∣biguous. Onely our Saviour in his Answer penned for Dives, seems (no less then in other Places of his Gospel) to assign Heaven, meerly for an Inheritance, to such, as Want here; and Hell for Those that abound: As he that marks the Words, can∣not
but imagine, Nor dare I apply the Figure of Hyperbole, to any Say∣ing of His. Which exactly weigh∣ed, is but a Salvo for a Mistake, An Indefinite Number or Quantity, suit∣ing better the Mouth of an Ignorant Man, then the Immense Knowledg of our Blessed Redeemer. Wherefore (under the Correction of a more per∣fect Light) I think the Simile of a Camel, (or Cable) and the Eye of a Needle justly and Mathematically proportioned, to the Salvation of a Rich man, who is uncapable of it, without a more Miraculous Extensi∣on of the Mercy of our Maker, then is by Himself best known to Suffice such, as in this World, have not en∣joy'd so much Plenty. And, That an Observation of the Law is not Enough, seems to ap∣pear, by Christs bidding Him that had Done it, To Sell All that he Had, &c. as the thing most acceptable to God.
Wherefore I could wish, That this Tithing the Minth and Cummin of Others Errours and Opinions, were not so nicely performed, and Chari∣ty with her Concomitance Probity (the Whole performance of the Com∣mandements) so quite neglected. Which no doubt, is the great Occa∣sion of so much Indigence, as may be observed now; and so Contrary to That in Christs Time, as it rather hinders, then Facilitates, the Wayes to Heaven: So as it appears, That the Devil himself had never expe∣rimented so much power in any Per∣son, as was able to resist the Temp∣tation of Misery and Want, till he met with Job. Which gave him the boldness to wager (as it were) with God, That in case, he removed the Hedge, his Love had placed a∣bout him, He would Curse him to his Face. Wherefore, it cannot be estee∣med,
a slight provocation was the Greatest, Mans Enemy could invent. Had he onely touched his Health, the Means of Recovery might have remayned: But his Livelyhood being lost, nothing continued, but Lean Patience; far too weak wholly to ward this Blow, though it may dis∣semble the taking it, or Cover the Wound for a Season. It is no less Wholesome then De∣cent, to travel on Foot, with a Horse in thy Hand; but to the Destitute of a like ease, Tedious. Wherefore Seneca may make Demonstration of Wit, and prescribe Rules, for the more quiet enduring of Penury, but deserves the less Credit, because writ at a time, when himself had oc∣casion to use more Moderation, then Patience; Which makes me believe, his Mind (together with the rest of the Puritanical Stoicks) was far a∣verse from their Doctrine; since a
decent Frugality out of the Society of a more Sordid Covetousness, could not have accumulated so immense a Treasure, as Tacitus reports, was found about Him. Yet Concludes his Documents, with a Peremptory Advise, rather to Die, then abide in so little Ease, as this, and far less in∣tollerable Earthly Inconveniences are observed to bring with them. Which indeed were more to the purpose, Could Christianity make use of this his last Receipt: Who is prescribed by her Institutes, to Tide it out, although the Stream of its Inconveniences runs never so strong against the Nature of Man. So as if God had set any lower precipice, as the Bottom of the Leap, then Eternal Damnation, I think none so pusilla∣nimous, as would not rather once take it, then to remain still under the Weight, of so heavy and unsoci∣able a Calamity, that produceth all
things Hurtful or Hateful to Nature, For when God mans-out his Hosts, the Poor are found in the Forlorne Hope; and Famine takes up her Head-Quarters under Their Roof. Nor doth the Pestilence find a more Convenient place, to hatch her Ma∣lignities in, then the Bosom of the Indigent. And when the Sword is so Noble, as to spare him, it is not so much out of Mercy as Contempt. He being in this onely Happy, That his Condition is not in a capacity to become worse, no more then in any great probability of Amendment; Since in a general Felicity, he only is unhappy. Because Want renders her Owners uncapable of Trust, By creating Suspicion, before any Fault is Committed: For where Necessity abounds, there Theft and Deccit are supposed, as an Infallible Conse∣quence. When a Felony, or Murther is committed, the next Poor Houses
are ordinarily searched. Where the lesse is found of their own, the greater Suspicion is conceived of what be∣longs to others. And so Loathsom is a Beggar esteemed; as he that is so Charitable as to make him Drink, is yet, thus uncivil towards Him, as to shut the Door, and wash the Cup after Him: as if it were impossible for a Person in want, either to be True or Wholsom. Being shunned of the Herd, as one struck by the seve∣rest arrow of his Makers vengeance; and left nothing to accompany him, but Misery. -- Yet none may possibly apprehend him so wretched, as He thinks Himself. Being for the most part, deprived not only of Terrestri∣all, but Future Comforts. For if Con∣scious of Ill, (as what meanes hath he of living by, or doing any thing else but Evill?) through Death (the only way to lead him out of his transitory Misery) he apprehends one
prepared for him that is Eternall. The Indigent person like the flying Fish, being not only persecuted in his Own Element, by those more Mighty; But upon leaving it, falls into their terrible Clawes, to whom is assigned the Dominion of the Ayr. This Crosse having wrought so strongly with some Complexions, as to purge away all Belief of Provi∣dence, and revive that Old damnable Opinion, of a Double Nature in God. Now though our Blessed Saviour is not found above twice, to sustain his Followers a miraculous way, and that in the Desart, where Nature failed; yet, by making the Rich to divide with the Poore, he supplyed that Defect, this uneven-Distribution oc∣casions in the World. And, that no small stress of Christian Wisdom lay in it, may seem to appear, in the se∣verer Punishment inflicted by S. Peter (in many places styled the Prince of
The Apostles) upon Ananias and Sap∣phira, then ever was observed to at∣tend such, as whipped, stoned, and persecuted Christ; not onely in his own person, but that of his Follow∣ers. Wherefore, if those thus set upon, do daily fall into Heterodox Opini∣ons, or are, not seldom observed, To hang up their Sheild of Faith, in the Temple of Despair; and Con∣vert the Study of unrewarded Vertue, into the more Thriving Opportuni∣ties, Deceit affords: they ought to receive pitty from us, because lyable to the like Lapses our Selves, who through Excess are found to rob the Poor, more then Necessity dares do the Rich, out of Feare of the Iron∣teeth of the Law; in all Nations farre more severe, then those of Christ. Who, by not reproving his Disciples for Taking the Eares of Corn, gives the Hungry Belly a Larger Charter, in the enjoyment of Earthly Bles∣sings,
then the Tyranny of Power is willing to subscribe; it being no small Augmentation of the Needy's Misery, and one of the greatest tor∣ments in Hell, to see All Plenty about Him, and want within. To Conclude, all further Discourse, on this Tragicall Calamity, I shall say, (but not peremptorily) If Sampson found Mercy that destroyed Him∣selfe, for the Gratification of his Re∣venge; what reason is there, in de∣nying it to These, upon the Greater Provocation of want? A Contemplation on Adams Fall. SUch as think Gods first Injun∣ction Trivial, in prohibiting Adam, to eat of the Forbidden Fruit, and the Temptation to break
this Commandement, easie to be a∣voided, Do not Consider, that Man in his Innocency, had no use of any Externall thing, but Meat: nor other Capacity of improving his In∣tellects, save in Knowledge. A Desire, so diffused throughout the whole Masse of Humanity, that such as are too weak to apprehend Reason of State, will pry into the Causes of their Land Lords-Actions; or, that failing, raise Tumults, amongst Themselves, by a too neare inspecti∣on, and Revelation of the Newes of each others Miscarriages. And this being the most universall Humour now, may render it more probable to Have been the same did accom∣pany Man at the First: Nature re∣maining Depraved, not Eradicated. Wherefore this Prohibition, was placed, according to Prudence, upon that Side, our Parents were weakest on; and so, more fit to receive a
Caution. For, had God forbidden them Theft, or Murther, they could not have apprehended his Meaning: Nothing but Will corrupted by Pas∣sion, being able to bring forth, such uncooth Sins into Action, which ha∣ving once fallen, within the Com∣passe of Experience, They, by Conse∣quence, came within the Notion of Knowledge, nothing being yet pre∣sented to their Imaginations, but what was already arrived within the Circuit of their Senses. The First Man appearing to me, no better fur∣nished with Knowledge, then an In∣fant in his Primitive Innocency; but That, his Organs being made Per∣fect, he was Capable to apprehend all things, with the same Dexterity, his Senses were able to feed his Fancy: In which they might take so much Pleasure, (since Nothing is more Tastfull to Humanity, then Understanding) That to make, this
Spring of Knowledge more fluent, he swallowed the Apple, the Fountain of his Infelicity; which instead of gratifying his Tast and Desire, de∣praved both. If he gave Names to the Creatures, suitable to the Sinfull Use, was after to be made of them, He did not only Prophesie Their fu∣ture misery, but His own: And if foreseen, why did he not prevent it? Wherefore the Fault must ly, either upon his Ignorance, or Will. For till his Fall, he seemes, to have as little need, of the Elephant's Docility, or the Oxes Industry, as it is improba∣ble, but that They were both made for Imployment: which had been quite lost, together with all the Trades, the Blessing [of Encrease and Multiply] is sustained by; had not Adam fallen from his Originall Integrity. This makes me wonder, to finde Eve willing, or at leasure, to Chat and Gossip it with the Serpent;
the most remote in Symmetry, from her own glorious Form, if not in Nature, from her Temper and Com∣plexion; Especially, having so much the more Excellent and adapted Companion, as her Husband neere her to Converse with. Which might give Credit to their Opinion, That the Fall was long after the Trans∣gression: but that the Impossibility of her Conceiving a Contaminated Issue, whilest pure in Themselves of∣fers more then a probable Confuta∣tion. It not being likely, they should Forget, for any Considerable time, to neglect one of their principall Er∣rands, which lay, in performing the Blessing, of Diffusing his Like: The most Rationall Cause such can pro∣duce, as attribute their Prevaricati∣on, to an Excesse in Concupiscence; through which, the Tree growing in the midst of the Garden, became Contaminated. But to Bury this
Conjecture, (no lesse, then the Opi∣nion of Josephus, That the Ser∣pent had, together with all Creatures else, before the Fall, an Articulate voyce) in the more certain Relati∣on of Moses; (though in nothing more Concise, and Abstruse, then a∣bout the Beginning; not unpossi∣bly, That he might preserve Truth, at the least prejudice to Tradition, in the Preservation of which, the People of God, were extreame, if not Superstitiously Tender.) I shall mo∣destly propose, That if the Serpent, was really active, in the seducing of Man: (as may seem to appear, by the Curse layd upon him no lesse Diffusive, in reference to this World, then Ours, it reaching the whole Spe∣cies; observed at this Day, to (rawle upon the Ground) Whether we may not inferre, That this-now-Despica∣ble-Creature, was the First that went about to infringe the Ordinance of
God: Since those that make the Ser∣pent, only Instrumentall, to the De∣vils Activity, Borrow it, from Con∣jecture, not Reason, which was never observ'd to punish the Sword; but the Hand that did manage it to De∣struction. Wherefore, if it was the Devils Sin, nothing but the Serpents Consent in making it selfe Instru∣mentall, could procure a Punishment: No more then to the Winds that through his incitation, destroyed the Children of Job. Which put to∣gether, may crowd a roome for this Conjecture, That the Devill posses∣sed the Serpent with Envy First, at so glorious a Creature as Man was: And After, gained its Consent, to be Instrumentall in our Destruction, and so a Cooperator with Satan, and a Fellow in his Sin. For if it be thought unpossible, the Serpent should do so ungratefull a Service, to Humane Nature, upon its own Instigation, it
appears as unreasonable, why it should bear all the Penalty; The Divel having augmented, if not Be∣gun, his Rebellion, against his Maker, by seeking to destroy, this his Han∣dy-Work. These seeming Contradictions, together with the Appellation of an Evening and a Morning before the Luminaries (the onely Dividers of Time) were made, might tempt Philo the Jew, to dress in the Life of Moses, The Story of the Creation in an Allegory, or Fable: Who stan∣ding Neerest those Times, and in a Better Light, may be thought by such as love to be Sceptical, most probable. But since the Ancient and Apostolical Church (To whose Creed, so far, as my Darker Infidelity, will give me leave, I shall submit my Judgement in all Humility) hath Ac∣commodated it to Another Sense, I think it, as far from Prudence, as
Christianity, to oppose, or in the least, Contradict it. Though Apt to Consent, That the Lapsed-Angels might entertain more Commerce upon Earth, be∣fore the Promise of our Saviour, and whilst Man stood upon his own Legs; then after God had taken him into his Protection; as not thinking it meet to trust such Frailty, with so Potent an Enemy. Wherefore he confined the Devil into Holes and obscure places, out of which upon his own Instigation, or Imitation of the Prophets of the Lord, he gave his ambiguous Oracles, till by the brigh∣ter Apparition of the Star of Jacob, they were struck as irrecoverably Dumb, as they were Blind before: Averred by Plutarch in his Morals, in the Genius, or Ghost of Socrates. And he that would find a Reason, Why our First Parents were Asha∣med of their Nakedness, must not
seek it, in the Nature they Convey∣ed to us, where Bashfulness is a Re∣sult of Custom, but from the Contem∣plation of some creature then in sight really, or seemingly more beautiful then Themselves: There being no Occasion for shame, but in respect of a more Transcendent Perfection. It remaining indubitable, That Chil∣dren with us, and Men and Women a∣mongst the Indians, (not to be de∣nyed the Exactest Followers of the primitive Dictates of pure Nature,) are no more Sensible of Shame, in relation to those Parts Adam and Eve are said to have Covered, then the Europeans express, when found Bare-Faced. Blushing being a silent Confession of a Fault; not to be found, amongst The Works of God: Nor any where, till the Law had stamped the Figures of Reward and Punishment, upon such Humane Acti∣ons, as do Advance, or Depress the
general Felicity. Custom being so exact a Disposer of the Convenien∣cy, if not Consent of Mankind, as to make Divers Wives in Turkey, lye quietly, under one and the same Covering. So as it requires more then an Ordinary Intelligence, to di∣stinguish, between the Free Govern∣ment of Nature, and the Imperious Tyranny, if I may not call it Anar∣chy (for it is not in all places alike) of Education. But lest I should ap∣pear rather a Disciple of Plato, then Moses, I shall pass by the Rabbys no less then the Modern Philosophers, that Consume more time, in Hunt∣ing after the Original of the Disease, then the Means to Cure it, Not to be found but in Jesus Christ. Yet, as I said before, Since no Heart is empty of the Humour of Curiosity, The Beggar being as attentive in his Station, to an Improvment of Know∣ledge, as the Prince; It is not unlike∣ly,
to have been the Primary and Centrical Sin; from whence The Lines of All Humane Vanities are drawn, and to which they are Fast∣ned. For if our Latter Artists think it no ill Argument, to prove the Ba∣sis of the Earth Magnetical, because the Loadstone is in all Clymates found: Why may it not be Con∣cluded from as great a Diffusion, That A too Dilated Desire of Inspe∣ction into things was Original Sin? Since not onely Observable in Solo∣mon himself; but in the picture of the Fool he draws, who ran after Variety: Which is onely New Knowledge of a Strange Woman. And if I am not deluded by those More Learned, One Word in the Original is taken for Both. But to Proceed: When Eve saw the Fruit, she did covet; And Concupiscence is enough, Now to Condemn us, though nor then. The Text placing the Trans∣gression
in Eating, not Desiring: That remayning impossible to be prevented, All things till Contamina∣ted by Sin, being in so high a Degree of Perfection, as they did enforce a Coveting in all did Behold them: It appearing, too low a Sacrament of Duty in Man the Supreme Vice-Ge∣rent of The Almighty, To have for a Testimony of Obedience, onely ab∣stained from What was in it self but meerly Indifferently Good. It is not likely, He covered his Nakedness, with Leaves of the same Tree, from whence he gathered his Destruction: As those imagine, who suppose the Indian Fig to be the Forbidden Fruit: For how should he Dare to Touch that a Second time, had Wounded him, at First, quite through Himself, and his Posterity? Though Confess'd, a perfect Repre∣sentation of Guilt. One Root being so Diffusive, as by a Gum that distills
from the Boughs, to dilate it Self into the Vast Shade of a Desart, suffi∣cient to cover an Host of Men. Nor is Curiosity, and a Lickorish Desire of enjoying That we never Tryed, (though known to be the cloud, in which all the Storms im∣pending Life are engendred,) yet Cured in us. Who by Retail, drop into the same Errour, we Consider in Him, as the Highest and most Impertinent Folly. The Apple of a Wandring Eye, not be∣ing Seldom found able to Over-ballance the Wisdom of Solomon, and the Piety of David. Wherefore it is time to give-o∣ver upbraiding those Names of Adam and Eve: All things we never saw, or Knew, being Empty sounds, and Impertinent Appellations. Not sel∣dom Loaden out of Ignorance in the Contents of their Story, (as a number of other Dead Voyces are,)
with insignificant Praise or Blame. Especially, since Moses, and the Pro∣phets are not heard to Condemn them; As Conscious to Themselves, they either would, or could not but have done the Like. Yet we may Safely say, That between the Sus∣pension of the Promise and The Fall, (which might possibly Answer the time, Christ remained on the Cross) Adam endured greater Agonies, then e're was matched, but by God and Man: Who onely, knew the Way to untread the Maze, in which Man had lost Himself, and All that should Succeed; If so Wicked as to harbour a desire of dilating himself, and brin∣ging an Off-spring into a like Dilem∣ma, in which, he saw nothing for the Present, but Horrour, joyned with a Fearful Expectation of Worse to come. Not having so much, as the Weak Twig of Hope to sustain him from falling into Despair.
Which could not spring but from the Root of an Experience, arising from a Former Experimented Mercy: The Garden having not yet produ∣ced any Fruit so Lateward. There being as little Marks of Forgiveness, as there was a Dismal Example of Justice, stamped upon the Disobedi∣ent Angels. Whose condition was yet, so far better, then Mans, as an already Determined Judgement is more tollerable, then One that re. mayns still Arbitrary, at the Will of an Omnipotent power; And in this miserable anxiety, God saves Adam, whom, nothing else was so merci∣ful, as to kill. Now I can do no less, Then pre∣dicate here, a more charitable Opini∣on, then Theirs That Conclude the Greatest proportion of men Lie under the Kingdom of Satan: By which, the Promise of Redemption comes to be Restrained, and so the Truth of
its performance Obstructed. It being no where observable, in the Digni∣ty of Reason, That a Superlative pow∣er, should go less, or Beneath its Word in relation to Good. It excee∣ding the Reach of the most Riged Distinction, or Strictest Interpretati∣on, to find a Parity, or Equal propor∣tion between the Head and the Heel: If any were discoverable, between crushing and biting. This makes me Tremble at their Presumption, who Carry Breath in their Nostrils, yet, are not affraid to Affirm That all things so Dear to our Maker, as to be capable of a Future Happiness, are not to be found out of the Pale of Christendom, This, or That Church, or rather Chappel. No Single Profession extant, carrying a great∣er Proportion, with the whole World then a peculiar Parish, doth to a Pro∣vince. As if the Fountains of Gods mercy were not as ingenious, and his
seven Spirits as Diffusive as those of Nilus; by which the Want not the Neglect of Rain is supplied in Egypt. Nor can it be imagined with any Salvo, to the Dignity, Pitty, Wisdom, Omnipotency, and the Promise of God First made, and therefore likely to be most inviolably kept, (he not be∣ing as man, that he should repent) For, That the Earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, the Fulness thereof, cannot be True, if Hell swallow up the major part. And that Christ his Son should be found, at the last Assi∣zes, with a smaller Trayn (let their Glory be never so Great) then his, shall march in the head of those mi∣serable Souls, cloathed with the Wrath of God. Can any in Prudence, if in Equity, think That the Malice of his Enemy should be more Disfu∣sive in relation to particulars, then the mercy of our Blessed Saviour? who did not like the Divel Fall for
our Destruction, but Rise for our Ju∣stification. There now lives not a greater Infidel, then S. Thomas was: yet the Apostles do not excommuni∣cate him, nor Christ reject him, but cure him through a palpable manife∣station of those wounds, the Greatest part of the World have not nor ever had any Knowledge of: Nor those most Reserved, any Inspection into; but what they make through so smal a Faith, as doth not answer the Pro∣portion, of a grayn of mustard-seed; Else they would remove those mountains that shadow Truth. And if so single an Attestation as mine, might be allowed the boldness to appear, against such a Cloud of wit∣nesses, as have found the Turk and Pope guilty in person, of the Title of Anti-Christ, I should reverse the Sentence; and pronounce it rather against That Order of Men, or Discipline, that put the Forgiveness of
God under a Bushel, (which according to his Dignity and Promise, ought to Diffuse it self over all the Nations of the World) rendring by this means, the inexhaustible Treasure of Mercy, like the Philosophers stone: (of which some have made the Gospel of Jesus Christ but an Allegory) onely attain∣able by a People, thus Scituated, In∣structed and qualified: Whereas None that Call upon the Name of God (a custom appears by Genesis not to have begun till after Adam) are exempted out of the primitive Grant. The Fault of the Angels, if compared with that of Man, will not be found, upon a true Survey, much Different. The First endeavouring to Equal their Maker in his Power; the Latter in his Wisdom. It is harder to find a Reason for the Angels Sin against God, then their Malice to Man: It being usual for Malefactours to hate their Judge,
and after Sentence, to endeavour the Hindrance of its Execution, and to bring Others, (at least those they know he Favours) into a like Con∣demnation; Having Themselves no better Condition, to Hope for, nor Worse to Fear. Like the Wicked of this World, which seek that Ease a∣mongst Company, they are not able to find Alone. Wherefore the pre∣venting Satans further Triumph, may not improbably be numbred amongst the Causes why God shewed Mercy to Men; in the Salvation of whom, had he been so sparing as some imagine, His Justice would appear more prevalent, then his Mercy. And so run out into such a Dishonorable Extreme, as cannot be matched in the Practise of the Greatest Tyrants that ever were: Which are not found to make a Temporal Punishment to extend to a Major part, much less one Eternal.
What ever the Text may seem to import to our Dull Capacities, There was no Likelyhood That Adam would have in this Condition (if he rightly understood Himself) Eat of the Tree of Life: But rather have swallowed Poyson, (had that Place afforded it.) Who by Catching at the shadow of Divinity, lost the Re∣al Substance of Humanity; at the suggestion of the Devil: who seeing God forme a Governour, out of the Dust, the most Despicable part of his Government, yet a more Honourable beginning then His, (Any thing be∣ing better then Nothing) he might look upon it, with Disdain, as un∣worthy the sentence of Goodness. Nei∣ther might this Humour of Pride be provoked, if he be admitted so much Inspection into Future Success, as to see the Creature he despised, should not onely inherit the Glory he was fallen from, but Exceed the An∣gels
that Continued in Integrity. Thus the Serpent growing Fruitfull in Presumption, endeavours to fru∣strate his Makers Intention, by la∣bouring to Deface his Image in Man. But Omnipotency struck Light, out of Darknesse, by making the Prince of it, Instrumental to the Pro∣duction of his Son. And these Joyful Tydings, That the seed of the Woman should prevail against the gates of Hel, God brings Himself as a Token that he meant to performe it in his own Person. Neither is it to be passed without Notice, That, he saith, The seed of the Woman onely. For by that, might be prefigured the mira∣culous Conception of our Blessed sa∣viour without a Man; Noless, Then the Perversness of Depraved Nature. For though Adam had thus offen∣ded and felt an Effect of the Punish∣ment in his present Apprehension,
yet he was not able to Lay hold on the Weak Vertues of Repentance and Acknowledgement; the Lawfull Daughters of Hope, with whom, yet he had no Acquaintance, much less Interest, before The Promise of Christ. But instead of these Tokens of Grace, he wanted not the Impu∣dence, to lay the Fault on God; as if the Woman had been made and gi∣ven him, for his Destruction. And in this Eves sin was Lesse, and her Manners more; For though She would not take it to herself, but Cast it on the Serpent, yet She doth not upbraid God, with the Making of it. Now by Gods mild Answer in this no less then in his Colloquie held with Cain, after the murther of his Brother, we may find, He is not An∣gry according to the mode of men, or as some represent him with Thunder continually in his Hand. As if our
Prevarications and Miseries had Cre∣ated passions in our Maker, and taught him to be Angry, or Merci∣full. Since if ever he had been Ca∣pable of Fury, it had Now appeared, when he found Malice, Ingratitude, Folly, and Pride laid all in the way, to interrupt his Work, which his Justice must have ruined, had it not been quenched by Love: A Vertue taken out of the Hidden Fountain of his Goodnesse; which till then, he was not pleased to reveal. And Here his passing-by all No∣tice, of the Devils operation, in A∣dams Transgression may Colour their Opinion That think Sin did Then, and Now doth proceed from Our selves.
Conjecturall QUERES, OR Problematicall Paradoxes Concerning Reason, Speech, Learning, Experiments, and other Philosophical Matters. BY FRANCIS OSBORN Esquire. LONDON, Printed by J. Grismond, 1659.
To his very worthy Friend, Mr. Ro. VVo. of Linc. Coll. in Oxon. SIR, DID I own the Wisdome and Wealth of Seneca, as truly as I do the highest Affe∣ction he pretends to in his Epistles: This had contained Matter no lesse su∣table to the Greatnesse of your Judge∣ment, then the Obligation I must ever acknowledge I owe to your Goodnesse. But since I am restrained from the First by Birth, as I am from the Lat∣ter by Fortune, You may yet be wooed
to a more charitable acceptance upon this Consideration, That though the Present be small, it was not filched from Epicurus, or any other Magazin of Knowledge, then what lyes inclu∣ded within my own Invention. Which proves This I send you, as absolutely mine, as ever it was Theirs (if any such be) that may have Disco∣vered it before I was born. For being acquitted by my Conscience of all Theft in this kinde, I take the Re∣citements of others Opinions, as relating to no greater a Shame in me, then those are Obnoxious to, who en∣riched us with Guns and Printing, be∣cause some maintain they were used in China many Thousand Yeares before. The ranconter being no lesse Happy then his that stumbled on it at first. I confess I have been so basely abu∣sed by Books, as that I entertain none but upon high Commendations. And those rather New then Old, however
the world is pleased to look a squint up∣on them, as lesse-deserving, though some have appeared of late to Admi∣ration, and so farre Transcendent as I feare our Period is neere. Ignorance and Barbarisme, being commonly the last subdued before a generall De∣struction. Knowledge hath been ever taken for an infallible Portent of Ruine found, So busie a Companion, as she leaves nething unpryed into, in Heaven or Earth towards the Heights and Depth's of which she is not continually rolcing her Con∣jectures and casting her Darts; tena∣ble through no Opinions long, but what she remaines feuer'd to with the strong Chaynes of the Mathema∣ticks I Study no lesse Naturall then Necessary. The imployment of Chil∣dren, in their exactest Innocency, be∣ing to make Howses and raise Pyes of Dirt. So as if this inclination were
encouraged, and supported through the Direction of discreete Teachers, These Buds might come in Future to yeeld (without tormenting and subduing their Spirits) more wholesom Fruite, then the crueller Culture of the Schoole was ever found yet able to produce. But I hold it no Prudence here to give a Second blow, by which the Ido∣laters of Former Customes may be tempted to a like Severity in case I should mistake; as 'tis very possible I may. The Land-skip I endeavour to draw being darkned through Igno∣rance, Superstition, and what is more dreadful, a thick and obscure Cloud of different Judgements so long em∣braced for the Goddesse of Truth, as none can prosecute the Contrary, though never so farre off, under hope of a milder penalty, then to be sent away Naked, and Wounded, which can∣not but be thought an uncivil kind of
Justice, and unsuteable to the Primi∣tive and richer ages of the world: Where then as few were denyed to search as we sinde now able to deter∣mine. Every Sect of Philosophers domineering in his Station. Yet rather then betray Naturall Reason into their hands who desire to cut off all farther Traffick with the Land of Knowledge, I shall leave these Paradoxes, Problems, Queres, Conjectures, or what you please to call them, wholly to your Disposure. Being resolved neither to be dejected, nor elated through their Destruction or Preservation. Onely I am consi∣dent if they can passe with the smallest degree of Your Approbation, it may prove a safe Conduct in Justice a∣gainst the severest Censures of others, No lesse then a perpetuall testimony that I am Your faithful Friend and Servant.
Conjecturall Paradoxes CONCERNING Reason, Speech, Learning, Experiments, &c. MOst Philosophy lies clouded by Disputes, and the Magi∣steriall Determinations of the Schooles, from whence it hath till of late, been thought Presump∣tion to appeal; Though Manifest Errours do appear in what they have already judged: And many as ma∣teriall things passed by under Si∣lence or Restraint, that cannot be de∣nyed as fit to be known. Nor are any so likely to discover new Truths
as such as march by themselves, and out of the beaten Track of others. Curious Ideas being like Precious Stones, sooner stumbled upon, and found in places least looked for, then Started by the Direction of any that went before; who have left onely Discouragement, or at least but a Ne∣gative or such a perplexed Know∣ledge, as renders their Understan∣ding that rest in it more Offuscated and Gloomy then the most stupid Ig∣norance it self. Which together affords me cause enough to think our rare Inventions and pregnant wits stifle their own Naturall Fertility through a too long and frequent Commerce with Books; Not seldom of a contrary Complexion and Style to the Rea∣ders: yet forced out of Custome to be conversant in them. By which he is brought to Stammer and become so Diffident of himself (such Learn∣ning
lying in Memory the most pe∣dantical part of Knowledge) as he dares not deliver his own Opinion out of Reverence to Antiquity or any Authors else, but in the same words he finds it written. The doting up∣on Forraign Authority keeping us still at a stand: like the Body of Jo∣abs Brother, beyond which the Israe∣lites would not pass out of a vain reverenceto their General. And thus all further Prosecution of Knowledge and Conquest over Igno∣rance is obstructed, and Schollars ty∣ed to Cultivate and confine their Travels within the Circuit of a bar∣ren Wilderness, stocked with insigni∣ficant Termes and such crabbed Allu∣sions and improbable Conclusions, that have no better Plea for their Autho∣rity then the exorbitant veneration which Tradition rather then Merit, hath awarded Antiquity above the equal, if not better Judgements found
in our Age. Nor is there hope of a∣ny further or more happy progress till these rotten Carcasses be removed out of the way, or covered from their Eyes that want not Hearts and abi∣lities to jogge on better without them. The First Man could have at the Beginning but this Advantage of a Child, that his Organs were immedi∣ately fitted and prepared to receive no less then retain Knowledg. Which in an Infant are Obstructed through Want of Room, or too great a Re∣dundancy of Phlegm or Moisture. For if Adam was furnished with more, it must be Supernatural, and so far above humane apprehension, as it is to imagine how he should Know his Goods, or the use of what he ne∣ver had seen or tryed, unlesse we conceive he brought an Inventory or Herball into the world with him. Wherefore, according to humane
understanding, Reason like Fire was at the beginning but a Spark, till through a confluence of all Events happenable to Man it, received Aug∣mentation, as the other did from the Supplement of Matter; And having once caught Paper did illuminate the World. Now though so much Knowledge is not unlikely to be found in the Creature, as that with the same Ad∣vantages to increase it, they might become more intelligent then still to remain Slaves: Yet I find room for a Quere, Whether this Defect (if capable of that Title) doth not proceed rather from the Want of Speech, then perception? Or Whether Humanity that arrogates so high, as to proclaim it self Lord over all may not be found in some Persons and Places (as it might not impossibly have been in the Rest) little more Rationall, had it no great∣er
stock of Experiments, to traffick with, then every respective indivi∣duall is able to glean up of himself? Our advantages proceeding from Commerce, whose Wheel once set a work did quickly manifest on which Side Gain or Losse lay, the Primi∣tive Knowledge of Good and Evill, and before whose door Sin was first found. And this Inspection into things at the beginning dim and modest, be∣came by handing from one genera∣tion to another, so huge a Mountain in their estimation who presumed to have made a full and exact Sur∣vey of the Land of Knowledge; That with the Gyants of old, they did not onely rant it over mens Persons and Consciences, by proportioning what extent of Worship befitted the Gods, but erected their Pillars upon the borders of Philosophy under such an Imperious Injunction, as none, till of
late have ventured to discover any thing beyond them; Though found in other Descriptions and Relations very False, by multiplying such poor Advantages as Man hath acquired, and depressing greater which do na∣turally belong to the Creature, who is inspired with the same breath, in∣habits the same Earth, is more Healthfull and Strong; Onely he seems to come short in Reason. The Originall of which I shall make my further endeavour to discover. And if it prove in the abstract more ad∣ventitious then Naturall, and lesse be∣neficiall, then the Senses, upon whose ruines she hath built her foundation, I hope it may hold forth an Use of Humility unto us, if not move pitty towards the Creature, who the Apo∣stle justly saith groans for its Deli∣verance. It is on all hands confessed with∣out the least whisper of Contradi∣ction,
That, Luxurious, idle and vi∣tious Nations are most pregnant and happy in the richest Endowments of the Mind. And, That it is ordinary with diverse in Extasies, Feavers, acute Diseases, and during the storms of Love, Fear, &c. to have their In∣ventions soare higher then in a more entire Health they have been found after able to reach. From whence it is deducible, that Reason (for ought we know) may be but the Effect of those Corporeall infirmities from which without Question it re∣ceives Augmentation. Since Wisdom is not found frequently mingled with Strength and Beauty. The richest endowments unsophisticated Nature appears to own in all things living besides; Whereas some, if not the generality of men outwardly Crook∣ed and Deformed utter Inventions most neatly composed. The Losse and Defect in one externall Sense or Part
making a treble Compensation in the Mind. Contrary to Beasts, amongst whom those of the exactest Features are most usefull and Docile. Nor is it probable but such Vari∣ety of Food separated from the blood by Fire, and compounded with Sugar, Spices, Salt, Sawces, Per∣fumes, with all sorts of Viands rela∣ting to the High Tast, which eaten are convertible into our own Bodies, should alter and adde to the Facul∣ties of the Mind, and fill us in the Day with some of those Rationall Raptures we apprehend from the vapours they raise so palpably du∣ring Sleep: Not to be denyed the Effects of a Distempered Brain, and strangers to such Creatures and Per∣sons as are of more Naturall Dyets, or make their Repast on Herbs and lesse sophisticated meats through which Flegme is increased, so known a Retarder of understanding as to
protract the maturity of Children, till by a Dryer Aliment and unnatu∣rall Heat they are exposed to (espe∣cially their Heads) it is consumed, A concurrent cause of this rationall Advantaze we pretend to have over Beasts That wanting the use of Fire are necessarily more replenished with Fluid Humours, and so by Con∣sequence Lesse Wise, though far more Agill, Healthful and strong. Where∣as those to whom we allow the lar∣gest proportion of Understanding, are Weak, Meager, and still under some Course of Physick, which may passe for another Cause of Knowledge; The Operations of the Mind being most prevalent in Decrepit Bodyes. The same is incident to Wine, that doth not seldom inspire a Clown with Civility, a Coward with Valour, the most sordidly Covetous with Li∣berality; And (what is most condu∣cible to the Assertion in hand) a Fool
with a larger proport on of Wit then he had, though unable to reduce it into a Habit, by reason of some Ob∣struction or Leakage in his Organs. From whence it is as apparent That Fancy and Conceit may be gratisied at the prejudice of the Senses, no lesse then by the usuall practise of Students, Poets, and Accomptants that use all endeavours to exclude and stifle the Ideas both of their Eyes and Eares, whose Diversions they can by no means admit with∣out hazarding the happy Successe of all they are in labour to bring a∣bout. Whereas Beasts, by reason of their continuall Fears find leasure to be attentive to nothing but sense. Like a Town Besieged wherein all other A ts cease, but what may contribute to Releif and Preservation, because Hearing and Smelling are their chiefest out-Guards, and with∣out which they cannot in safety ga∣ther
their Food. Nor doth their Care extend beyond this for want of that Spur of Necessity (formed through the Mediation of their own Arts and Nature) with which Men are pricked on to New Inventi∣ons. Being at better Leisure & more Security. Able (standing in little awe but of their own Species) to consume those Spirits in internall Contemplations, through which both themselves and their Fellow-Crea∣tures are rendred more miserable then by Nature, without this im∣provement (of what they call Wis∣dom) they needed to have been; Whilst the other Animalls are for∣ced to dissipate them amongst their Senses onely to purchase Food and Safety. Yet the Knowledge so much boasted of, is no more Ours, then Honey is the Bees, before picked up out of the Lesse-erring Practises of the more innocent Creatures, from
whence they have deduced their best principles to the very Arts u∣sed by themselves in the Preserva∣tion or Destruction of their own Kind. And these hoarded up in Memory, the Magazin of By-past E∣vents, though possibly at first no more retentive in man's Head then Beasts, till by the Fumes of the for∣mer mentioned Excesse, Ours be∣come so Oyly like a Pot-lid, and apt for Receipt, as nothing worthy observation could escape without leaving an Impression behind it. And in this mould with the help of Fire, and a continuall Refining through Time, the purest Reason, so much relyed on by Statists and Politicians came at first to be Cast. And that this is not obtruded upon Belief under a single Testi∣mony, it may be found the Opinion of the French Nation, where they have not a more Apposite expressi∣on
for a Fool, then, that, His Head is ill made. No weak argument of an universall Belief, That Midwives skill doth highly conduce to an ad∣vancement or depression of Wisdom in a Child. And from hence I have been led to this wish, That the like office might be performed on the behalf of a young Ape (of the King∣dom of Congo, of which some years since I saw one in England, that bare a Symmetry if not throughout like to, yet very little differing from a Childs) whose Skull being kept from a too sudden closing by Heat, Swathing, and the rest of the Liga∣tions used by Nurses to Infants might not unpossibly acquire rea∣son, which once attained, The Im∣pediments to Speech, (whose princi∣pall Cunning lyes in a musicall Di∣vision or mincing a continued sound into articulate Notes) would be no sooner discovered then removed:
We enjoying many things under the Favour and endeavours of Rea∣son, far more difficult and remote from the Confines of Nature, then the Coynage of Languages rendred apparent through the multitude of them met with in the world. And this once acquired, though by chance and not altogether consonant to the exact pattern of Nature, Custom, assi∣sted by Imagination might render diffusive for the Future. As I believe not onely many of our new-purcha∣sed Qualities but diverse of those mans curiosity hath imprinted upon his Own Kind or Others, are already become Manifest in a Succession of Doggs whelped without Tayles. To which mutilation (at first no question purely humane or meerly acciden∣tall) Nature hath been so indulgent already, as insteed of an unsightly Bob, to forme a sharp comely Bone like the Scut of a Deer.
Now since we are able to adde to, or Diminish from Natures work, both in reference to Body and Mind, it cannot appear improbable That many Alterations (perhaps greater then we are able to imagine, or rea∣dy to believe) have had their Flux and Reflux often repeated or chan∣ged since the Beginning. Which may render it no improbable Opinion, (but as true as formerly it hath been common) That Apes were of the seed of Cham, or else the by-blowes of some wild stock of Humanity: the Characters of whose kind remaining no lesse manifest in their Bodies, then Affections to Women: of which there are so many living Witnesses, as it were superfluous to endeavour to prove it. Onely this may be ad∣ded as a further Testimony: That my Self have seen two Monkies that for many years did not fail to have duly a Lunary Purgation.
Nor is this any rare Discovery, but cited as a Report by the Lord Mountayne in his Essayes, No lesse then we find it the usuall practise of the Almighty in the Scriptures, To 'Punish a Sin in the Succession of a 'Family, as he did some with short Life, others with Leprosie, &c. The Recitall of which I will fully omit, it being my Taske rather to Propose then Determine. And if any understand what is said here in a more positive Sense, They abuse themselves no lesse then wrong me; Who have no Stronger Assertions to justifie this, Then my Weak Conjecture, which is, That if God layd the Deprivation of Reason upon these Monsters (For other they cannot appear to be, bea∣ring a shape and owning Gestures as various from the rest of Ani∣mals, as their Conceptions are re∣mote from the Prudence of a man)
for any peculiar Offence, or that humane Lust did cause it, by casting Seed into an irrationall and improper Soyle, There lyes no Cure for this Be∣stiality, if not in Heat. Cold being a heavy Enemy to Activity of the mind though a try'd Friend to Strength, and a Continuer of Perfe∣ction. As Heat on the contrary melts and refines the Spirits into a more Rationall Temper. The first of which is exemplified in Sheep and Kine, which though usefull, cannot be excluded the Catalogue of the most Simple: For exposing their new fallen Young to the injury of the weather, their Pores become sealed up so close as the Grosse and Flegmatick strangle the Purer Spirits onely capable of that Vivacity and Cunning found in those Creatures forced to use Stratagems in the gay∣ning of their Food, whose Whelps are housed in Dennes and Thickets.
Nor are the Foggy Humours in those Creatures rarifi'd by Sweat, most proper to the Heads of Men, That in Horses being rather squeezed out by Labour, then distilled gently by Drops, through which Nature ob∣tains an opportunity to pick and Choose, who uncompelled will part with nothing but what is Bad or Superfluous. Now if the Head be capable of moulding into one Figure more apt for the production of reason, then another (as it is on the side of com∣mon experience confessed) then can as little doubt be made but that it must needs have been litt upon in a far lesse revolution of Time then the World hath already passed over, if certain of her own Chronologie, which some have extended many Thousand of Yeares beyond what by Faith we are obliged to believe. And Wisdom once attained could
never be lost; Since (as it is repor∣ted of the Elixar) she receives Aug∣mentation and Improvement from every Event. And because our greater Security and Variety of Food hath suffocated and abated so much of our Sense as it is in no proportion able to find imployment for our Fancie, (against whose Nature it is to be Idle) as That more entire may do in the Creature; Man is conti∣nually ruminating of what is Past, or Attentive on what is Present, and by Comparing of these, is in some Mediocrity taught to determine of the Future. Having Wisdome or Folly objected to him, according as the Conjecture doth quadrate with Truth, and the Concurrence of a Happy Successe. Whereas the rest of Animals not being able to estate their Young, and such as succeed in their dear-bought Experiences, (if not for want of memory the mint of
Knowledge, yet out of an Incapacity for Discourse, and Disability to em∣ploy such Arts as are only proper to Societies limited by Lawes) become stunted in their Knowledge; and without Improvement, not owning a larger Stock then the Brevity of a Turbulent Life is able to accumu∣late, for want of Words, which coyned into Questions and Answers, are only able to Barter our own, and purchase the Wisdom belonging to Others. Now if any think people were born Wise at the First, (I mean in relation to the understanding now currant) they cannot but alter their Opinion upon Contemplation of the vast Improvement one Age makes of what went before, and how many New and more usefull Arts are now as it were daily invented. And as the want of Words is a to∣tall Eclipse, of any nearer dawne or
further progresse in the Creature to∣wards Reason; so we finde the Con∣fusion of Languages no small Remora to the enlargement of Mans: The which (as is observable in some Plagues else) though immediately poured on us by God for Sin, have their radicall Cause yet extant in Nature it selfe: So a Variety in Di∣alects may by such probabilities as these seem to be occasioned, Speech being but an Appellation of Things of which Providence hath bestowed many in one place, denyed to Others, a Diversity of Languages must needs attend as a necessary Consequence. Made yet more various and lesse in∣telligible from Moysture and Drowth; Through whose Mediocrity or Ex∣cesse, Sound is rendered either Liquid or Mute proportionate to the Con∣traction or Extension of their Organs who do, or may hereafter inhabit the place. That cannot but naturally
own the Causes of such Ef∣fects. Some Pumping their Words out of their Throats, others Lower. As I knew a tall Scotchman allow'd a Pension from King James, That could frame a Voice at the Mouth of his Lungs, seeming to be remote from the Eares of the nearest By∣stander. A Fallacy no lesse likely to be in practice with the Priests of A∣pollo then the Originall of many mi∣raculous Narrations of Old. And through this variety of Tone and Pronunciation it often comes to passe, That an Englishman is not able readily to converse with a Stranger in one and the same Latine. From whence we may modestly observe that Nature had the Confu∣sion of Tongues în Potentia before God reduced it into an Actuall Plague. Who did not then create it anew, no more then he did the Rain- Bow. But did only accommo∣date
this Punishment to his present purpose. Now though the Multiplicity of Idioms may in some part Cloud our Knowledge from the Experiences to be gain'd by Strangers, yet the Time usually spent, and the Hardship indured at Schoole to dissipate these Mediums, & to learn to see through them, may not unpossibly be hea∣vier and more tedious then the Curse it selfe. It being likelier to have been the voyce of Custome then Reason that Fonted a bare Knowledge in Tongues with the Title of Learning. In the prosecution of which the Spirits of Children are blunted, and Wit ex∣changed for Insignificant Termes, and a Stupid Ignorance of all things else, under the Tyrannicall Regi∣ment of an Ignorant Pedagogue. Who if good for any thing, that Art must needes go so averse to the
grayne of his Understanding, as he cannot but be a meere Empericke in it. Apparent in the most, because seldom undertaken, but as a Last Reserve, and after more easie and thriving Professions have been try∣ed. Where if the Salary prove not more necessary to his Fortune, then so unmanly an Erudition doth to the miserable Child, 'tis easie to guesse who drove the Bargain. And this Plague past some to bayle them∣selves out of the Deserts of Want, and the Sonnes of others lesse nee∣dy to attain an insight into such Tongues, as our Ancestors Folly, not Reason, prompted them to, preferre before Experience the Dialect of the World, and with which you may travaile further and in more Securi∣ty then with all the Learning in Europe. The Child now in his most Docile age to Study men, and Softest Tem∣per
to take the Impression of Pati∣ence and Complyance, is by a Learned Tutor and Brazen-fac'd Impudence gayned in the Schooles swept and garnished to receive a Seaven-fold more Wilfull and Indomitable Igno∣rance in relation to what is Conve∣nient and becomming a Citizen of the World. A false Opinion of what he Hath not covering from his Ap∣prehension such Defects as really he hath. Such as make Learning a full Im∣ployment have their Judgement so over-awed by Antiquity, that like Players they dare present nothing in publick but what their Poets have left them written. And if any Ex∣ception can be made against that generall Rule, which Concludes A too long Continuance at the University no great Advancer of parts, it will be found amongst such as passed under the Notion of Raschalls and Liber∣tine.
It being obvious to Proof (if I were willing to register those Glo∣rious Names under such a Monstrous Head) That none have graced Lear∣ning more then some the University hath exploded. Invention being an Art of too noble a nature, to be lear∣ned under a Prentiship, or the great Restraint of the Schools. That spoil and dead the fresh and piquant Tast of later and New Wits by putting them into Old Formes, patched up with Sentences, which doth unavoyd∣ably make a Rent in the Authors style. It being impossible for one to write or behave himself suitable to the gusto of all, or of the Major part that hath not spent his time in a more universall Commerce then the guize of an Academy is able to afford. And if any doubt of this Truth, shew the Infidel a meer-Schol∣lar in the Company of Ladies; Or (that failing to Convert him,) A
managing his Horse, or Estate after the old Idolater his Father or Uncle is dead, Who thought no other Calves deserv'd to be Worshipfull that had not learn'd to bleat after the Mode of Dan or Bethel. The ancient and indeed most Naturall Tryall for Land in this Na∣tion (since Strength and Valour mea∣sures out the Livelyhood and Place of Abode to every Creature) was by Combate: At this Day reduced into the Art of Fencing, whose ex∣actest Professors are not seldom con∣founded and beaten out of their Play by an active Country-man, that owns no more Cunning then a Robust arm, and a quick Eye is able to informe a Cudgell withall, easily found in eve∣ry Wood: Because managed con∣trary to a premised Method; The pra∣ctise of the Science, (far easier call'd Noble then prov'd so) had onely ac∣quainted the Fencer with, who be∣comes
further to seek, and is put in a greater Disarray through this more Naturall, but lesse Methodicall way, then another possibly might have been, that deals his Blowes by a lesse Artificiall Direction. The Faculties of Soul and Body being ob∣served at long running to receive seldom amendment, often Detri∣ment from the Restrictions of Art: unlesse in things like Painting meerly Delusive, or Grafting, and Planting wholly Laborious. These being Imbellishers, if not Resto∣rers of Nature, whereas the Liberall Sciences (as the Schools call them) Labour to Confine Experience with∣in Generall Rules, though found to be as Diffusive and Numberlesse as the Accidents and Events depen∣ding upon Motion. And through whose mediation alone Reason is capable of a further Improvement. As Mans refusing no Nourishment
hath already been owned (and I doubt not but under the Favour of some seeming probability at least) for an Advancer of that Wisdom, we transcend the rest of Gods Creatures in. So I presume it may as rational∣ly be proposed for an Occasion of long Life: Since through so vari∣ous a Change of Meates the severall Humours of our Bodies are in a con∣tinuall Vicissitude so stimulated and held in such an equall Contest, as neither Heat nor Cold, Drowth nor Moysture are suffered to exceed that just Proportion Nature hath assig∣ned to maintain all things in Being: Few Creatures attaining to so long a Continuance as Elephants, Horses, &c. most Domesticall with Men, which by reason of the great Variety of Herbs they feed on in Summer, and their Dry Dyet in Winter (Noted by That Honourable Restorer of Philoso∣phy for a great Prolonger of Life)
do not seldom reach the most or∣dinary Ages of Men. And amongst Birds, those of Prey, Parrats and Geese; the First feeding on all sorts of Flesh, nor will they refuse Fish upon occasion; As the Second of every thing eatable by us; The Third up∣on what is held venemous to Human Nature, besides Grasse and Corne. Whereas Doves, Sparrowe, &c. are of short Continuance; To which I shall onely adde, in Favour of my former Assertion, That the Fowles first mentioned come short in un∣derstanding of nothing that hath Wings. I heard it First affirmed by a French Student in Physick, and known it verified by my own Experience in relation to many That all Fowle may be eaten, (if not for Delight) in a Siege, or time of Necessity, without Danger. Opinion rather then Nature having caused a Disgust generally
arising against some (of Them∣selves) Delicate Meats, as my Self can attest for Young-Bald-Bazzards, Sparrow-Hawkes, Owles, &c. Toge∣ther with a Number of Things more an effeminate Nicenesse hath exploded our Tables. Yet in the mean time Mushromes, Frogs, Whelkes, Snayles, &c. have crawled into the Dishes of Princes, and are daily eaten in their Courts for Dain∣ties, which amongst other Viands not in use amongst our Ancestours are not unlikely to Occasion other Vapours then their more Unsophi∣sticated Food did Alembecke the Heads of such orderly Persons withall, whose Dreames if not Wa∣king Imaginations must needs differ from ours. As I can instance from a repeated Experiment ofmy own, Who encouraged through the for∣mer mentioned French man's Con∣fidence, did eat at Supper a consi∣derable
Quantity of the Green-wood∣spite with the Long-Tongue. After which I found my Sleep taken up with uncouth and (as I then appre∣hended) no Impertinent Fancies, the Cause I made a Second Experi∣ment, with the like Successe. From whence may be deduced, That if our Nourishment or any Outward or Inward Application or Disgestion may be of force to inspire Sleep with va∣rious Dreams, which remembred waking seem not unworthy our own most serious Meditations no lesse then the Attention of others more Wise. Man alone that hath exten∣ded his Food over all things eatable cannot but participate of every Ef∣fect they are either in grosse or re∣spectively lyable unto, and so Ca∣pable of a more Diffusive Know∣ledge then the Creatures, not able to disgest that Variety Custome hath rendred the Stomackes of Men fami∣liar
withall. Theirs being com∣monly of One Temper and without Mixture. Ours Hot and Cold, Dry and Moyst, bordering upon the next Confines of Poyson; And not sel∣dom a Composition of all Contrarie∣ties together. Now if our Bodies (as Doctor Browne no lesse wittily then truly saith) are in a small revolu∣tion of Time licked from our Tren∣chers, why may not what we Eat, work as effectually upon our Spirits as Flesh, and as well waking as a∣sleep? Upon the first view of Cornelius Agrippa's Vanity of Sciences, I did ap∣plaud his Diligence, in becomming so versed in every Profession, no lesse then his resolute Detection of their Abuses: By which he con∣firms me in the Opinion, That what we esteem Wisdom, is of no more Signall Advantage (as I have often said) then what is deduceable out of
the Weaknesse of others. Yet upon Inspection into the Bottom of his Reprehensions, I find the World is held up and kept in plight meerly by Cheating: So as those Trades he hath reduced under a Numeration are not only Guilty, but Himselfe and all such as make it their Pastime if not their business to be Scepticall in what is generally lookt upon as Certain; and to fish for more pro∣bable Truths in the Depths of Na∣ture. Where nothing is found pure without Mixture, (if we may not with Reverence say Sophistication) to her very Products of Life and Death. Since the one would be as farre to seek of any Content in the Absence of Hope, as the Other of Bitternesse out of the Presence of Feare. Now since the Mother of All Things useth such slights to flatter her Children into the Act of Generation, for her own sake of Continuance, and for the
same hath represented Death in the most odious Aspect, to Terrifie us out of the Desire of the Grave, (which though opposite to her pre∣sent Intention, cannot but be as ne∣cessary to a Future, and that which Religion teacheth, is only Capable to make us in the least measure Happy) How should her Creature Man produce more usefull, or ga∣ther more Lasting Fruit then Those of Sodom, that vanish upon the offer of Fruition, since the most beneficial Calling or Imployment is uncapable of affording a more Honourable Sa∣lary, then Industry can worm out of the Wants of Others? From whence we may safely affirm, That Sin is the chiefest Task-master, Since the most are busied about what is De∣structive, Superfluous, or uncertain. And to remove this from vulgar Understandings, the best and readiest Chapman for all Things adultera∣ted
in reference to Honour, Profit, and Universall Good and Tranquillity, the Preservation of which hath dimi∣nished much of the Naturall Stock belonging to Particulars. Such rant∣ing Termes as Agrippa mentions, are stuffed into all Sciences. Through which the most Familiar Things are rendred unintelligible without a Lexicon. And in no other respect usefull, then like Gawdy Shells, and Glistering Stones to adorn the Foun∣tains of Learning towards the Gra∣tification of their Eyes, who led by the Ocean of Books that daily issue out, come to visit them like the Heads of Nilus. Though such Caw∣ting cannot but be Destructive to nearer Relations, by which every Profession is furnished with an Op∣portunity of Deceit, to the end of the Chapter of Trade. The Conti∣nuance of which renders the Buyer oftentimes further to seek in the
Knowledge of the Name, then the Thing. An inconvenience so visible and Epidemicall, as it could never have come under my Pen, had it continued within the Circle of Men obnoxious to the like Fault, and not fallen so heavy upon Chil∣dren, whose misery no lesse then Losse of Time I have not yet forgot; indur'd and spent upon Formes little Different from those of a Gally, to no more Thriving an Intention in reference to the Publick, Then Apo∣thecaries paynt and adorn their Shops which is to delude the Igno∣rant, and hide from Inspection such Arts as lye more in Parade then Substance. The Occasion not onely of a greater Expence of Yeares in this Lymbo, to the losse of the more usefull vision of Experience, but a smaller proficiency in Learning, such being held so long viewing the Su∣perscription, as small leasure (if a∣ny
desire) is left to consider the Contents. Nor doth the universality of this Abuse render it more tolera∣ble then the Multitude, as well as variety of Company can the Paynes of Hell. Learning running in this Course so contrary to what She professes, which is to render Reason more playn, That She brings, like Eve a Totter'd Apron to cover it. Though Chalk-Stones may ap∣pear of too weak and soft a Tem∣per to perfect a Fabrick, yet they become usefull and necessary to mark and delineate the First Grounds for the Greatest and most exact Designes: So Idea's the Em∣bryo's of Knowledge, are not sel∣dom found in Heads apter for Con∣ception, then Production. It being a labour proper and peculiar to Ju∣piter alone to be at once delivered of so exact a Minerva, & so strongly arm'd as may be proof against De∣traction & Emendation.
Yet rambling Wits ought (in my poor Judgement) to be indulged, because by Crumbling their Con∣jectures on all Subjects, they have in every Age further inriched the World, then Solider understandings are known to have done. Which may appear upon Tryall fitter for Nourses then Mothers, whom in a short Time they teach their Chil∣dren to forget, and Call that by their own Names, never cost them more paynes then to Educate and (loath suteably to the Apprehensions of Men. A Truth so manifest, That if all the Arts (not to mention the Altars) were forced to refund what hath been primitively borrowed from the Poets, They would (if not be Naked) want many of their rich∣est Ornaments. And if we call to Account who first did embellish our Language, we shall not finde them amongst the Greatest Clarks, but
such as were more Conversant with Men then Books. For though the First like Flegmatick Cattle, hang∣ing their Noses still over their Tables, may appear more plomp and voluminous, yet such as with the Eagle Survay the World, cannot but be more Active and Exem∣plary. Nature holds out proof against all Constraint. For if violated in one sense, it is still for a Gratification of some other Passion or Affection, at the present more prevalent. Coneys, Ferrets, &c. do not seldom devoure their young, but 'tis alwayes for want of Water or Meat. Nor are Women (out of Feare and Shame of what Law hath rather forged then found in the Records of Nature) lesse cruel to their Children, when squeezed between the Bark of Reproach, and the dreadfull Tree of Destruction, they make them away.
For though Nature hath placed Mother and Child in a relation next in blood; She hath removed them many Degrees off in that of Affe∣ction, ever most prevalent in refe∣rence to Themselves; Especially when all hope determines as it doth here. To conclude, Selfe-Murther (as we call it, though reckoned amongst the highest results of Valour) being still to avoyd a present, or put to si∣lence all expectation of Future Mi∣sery, esteemed worse then Death, may no more then the rest be con∣trary to the award of this universall Mistresse, whose highest intention is Well-being, no more then it is a∣gainst Reason Of two Evills to make choyce of the Least. No Element is found lyable to a more generall Diminution then it is subject to an universal Excesse. Ma∣nifest in the Sea, that receives not
any Augmentation from the great∣est Confluence of Land-Floods. The Reason is, That her Commings-in are Mathematically adjousted to her Layings-out. All possible A∣batements in one place being reem∣burs'd in another, by a continuall Bartering and Exchange. From whence through a Naturall Chimi∣stry so much is Commuted or Cal∣cin'd as onely makes good the Prin∣cipall Stock without incroachment upon Superfluity or Want. Such as seek further after their own Originall, or are in Quest of a remoter Cause then God, prosecure a no lesse impertinent Study, and from whence no more certain Solu∣tion can be expected then Conje∣cture is able to return their Cu∣riosity, who endeavour to find out what Mutations may succeed after Death hath determined their Spe∣culation shall cease. It being equal∣ly
impossible to discover our first Production, as for a Child, without Direction, to know the Midwife that brought him into the World, or the precise part of it whereon he was born. Wherefore out of the power of any thing but Omnisciency to extend a Pedigree beyond the Line of ordinary Generation. That related by Moses pointing more to Obedience, and an exact Observation of the Sabbath (not till long after the Creation indulged through any reveal'd Practice) then the fomen∣ting of Understanding not impro∣perly alleadged for the Discoverer if not the Occasion of Infelicity; Man remaining in a more entire Tran∣quillity under a Calm Ignorance then such a turbulent and indeterminable Knowledge. Which like the Aprons it first produced, is patched up with so many Leaves of Contrary Operati∣ons, Ends, and Applications, that
under presence of a Covering for our Shame, it doth daily reveal more Mischief, and is by reason of a Sub∣tilty learn'd from the Serpent, able to Conceal greater Malice, Sin and Wickednesse (The Originall of Infe∣licity) then Naked-mankind had e∣ver been Capable of without it. So as no thanks remaines due to it, but what may result from the Abbrevi∣ation of Life. It being an undeny∣able Truth, That the production of every Child, is if not an Advancer of the Monarchy of Reason in its own Person, the doubted Subject of o∣thers Deceit, and Oppression. Hu∣mane Wisdom being of little larger Extent, then what it is able to pur∣chase and find room for through an Incroachment and Advantage made and taken of others Folly and De∣fects. And from this the Whole World comes to be so universally Inhabited, Every Family seeking rest
by Evasion. It being as Naturall for Strife to abound where Want is as for Strength to prevail. Where∣fore Sin must needs be an Effect if not of Eating, of Excesse: Through which man out of Love, for Himself, came to Robbe others, And to ob∣viate the Differences, could not but arise from Inequality in Strength, Appetites, and Desires, Government was instituted. Towards whose Fa∣vour all Lawes both Civill and Di∣vine are either taught, or do natu∣rally incline. Yet if any in Curiosity desire to make scrutiny into their own Originall, I cannot but with So∣lomon send them to the Insects for their further Satisfaction, and per∣swade them to be more studious af∣ter the Causes of such Animalls as the Sun doth yearly Create or rege∣nerate. And to enquire whether matter may not be so prepared and adapted by us as it shall be Capable
of Animation through a propensity to that regular and even proportion of Weight and Measure, naturally required by the First Agents of Life. Nor can any Cause of Discourage∣ment be well apprehended in the Prosecution of Life's Originall, through a more curious Inspection into the Production of Insects, which once perfectly survey'd and found out, cannot but open a Window to∣wards the prospect of Our own begin∣ning. Since he that hath discovered the Spring by which a small Watch is Inlived, not to be denyed the neater workmanship, cannot in rea∣son be farre to seek what causeth and continues the Operations of a Church-Clock; Their Motions being one and the same, no lesse then their Engines, though bound up in a smaller Volume, and supported by more Leggs and Feet. Nor are there found above one or two con∣siderable
Obstructions lying in the way of this endeavour. And those no further binding then a Commis∣sion received from Custome hath power to oblige. Of which the First is an Implicite and blinde adhering to the Votes and Presidents derived to us from Antiqulty, not considering, There may not unpos∣sibly lye as vast a World of Truth beyond this rotten Barre, as Expe∣rience hath shewn us of Land and Nations, which never fell within the Compasse of the Old Maps or these Writers Cognizance. And as this renders the further Indeavour after knowledge, a Lost-Labour in the Conceit of Dunses; So our Torrify'd. Brayn'd Zealots, through as great a Mistake in Scripture apprehend it as Damnable. Yet the Reason of the First; no lesse then the Consciences of the Latter might receive Satis∣faction from Dr. Hackwells Apology,
were they capable of it. To which may be added, That since many Words and Actions recited of the Patriarchs, do in all Judgements de∣viate from the exacter Lines of Morality (The Principall, if not the only End of their Manifestation) What Caution can be given, or As∣surance taken for their Infallibility in Philosophy? the inculcation of which was never intended, But what is found said in Relation to it, rather accommodated to the vulgar Opinion, then any Imperative Truth. From whence may be gathered, That Joshua's Bidding the Sun stand still, is no more Argument for the Motion of it, Then Jacob's deluding his Brother may be pleaded in the Justification of Mine. Wherefore He that out of a venerable Esteeme of the Sacred Text, gives Credit to a Prolongation of the Day, and so a full performance of all the Ends and
Purposes for which the request was made, it matters not in relation to Faith, whether it resulted from the Sun's or the Earth's Motion. Joshua being the Generall of an Army not a professed Philosopher. So no lesse uncapable of a Mistake in the Mathe∣maticks then Elijah was in the Cal∣culation of Gods Servants whom he summed up in his peculiar Person, till his Arithmetick was better regu∣lated by the Essence of Number, &c. Nor did our Saviour discountenance this Opinion, when He according to the usuall Mode of the Place, Did lift up his Eyes towards Heaven, Though he did know, and Teach us That the Father was not onely re∣sident in Himself, but together with all Things In and Under the Earth. As for Other Rubbs lying in the Way of a further Inquisition after Knowledge (all being readier to cast Reproach and Inke in the Face of a
Projectour, then to assist for the pre∣sent, or help in the Future, unlesse after Death) To Improve to the best Advantage what perhaps he has not strength alone to produce. I look upon them in Some as a Design to guard their Callings from Inspection: And in Others as an Obstinate Igno∣rance engendred out of Shame to Confess Themselves no lesse then their Teachers, to have for so many Ages, been Promoters of, and satis∣fied With what now doth plainly appeare to be meere Figments, &c. Fancy is the Mould and Pencill that shapes the Forme, and casts the Colour upon Man and Beast, accor∣ding to the Pattern presented to it by the Senses. Though it may be look'd upon in the Schooles, under an inferiour Notion, where the Cu∣stom is, to be most Fruitfull in Termes when they are most Barren
of Understanding, Tying Knot upon Knot, when she findes her Nailes too short, for the unravelling of the First. Especially upon hir Endea∣vours to enlarge The Excellencies of Man (whom in a high Rant she styles a Little World) above his Fellow-Creatures. And to make this good, places in one part of his Head, a re∣ceptacle for Memory, and others for Invention, Reason, &c. Besides a Number of Mansions more, Scitua∣ted in the Heart for Vertues, Passi∣ons, and Affections. Though upon a strict Scrutiny the same Goods may be found in the Beast, and farre more useful, and lesse Contamina∣ted through a Greasie-Diet, and Ex∣orbitant Pursuite after Pleasure, by which Men become worse then Beasts, gratifying their Tast at the Prejudice of all the rest of the Senses, the Naturall Guardes of Safety, yet manifest amongst the
more temperate Indians, reported (Like our English Crowes) to Smell Gunpowder at a great Distance, gayning nothing by the Change but an Imperfect Reason, which with That Inchanted Horne blown by the Satyre, doth terrifie more then Con∣firme or resolve, such as own and make use of it. Yet we passe over in the Creature, greater and more certain Advantages, without Notice or under Contempt. Forgetting, That if we allow them Fancy, which like a Looking-Glasse doth not only retaine the Outward Figures Sense presents us with, But doth reverbe∣rate those Censures upon it, as are observed to perplex or quiet the Passions in both, What huge Ad∣vantage is left Man to boast of, more, Then that it may be Better Scituated, or is of a Greater Circum∣ference in Us then Them? Growing like the Chrystalline Humour in the
Eyes quicker from a Variation of Objects. And hence cannot be de∣nyed to result all the Wisdom dis∣cernable in both, with which by rea∣son of Discourse, We are able to make the Lowder Noyse, though They are not found Quite silent, and no lesse ready then able in case of Danger, to advice one the other, as e∣very Fowler can upon his Knowledg attest. Yet the whole Extent of both our Capacities lyes in no larger a Circle, then that of Others Follies. Onely in Things not yet fallen within the Compasse of Experience and in relation to Prognostication, or Prediction, the Creature hath the Preheminence, out of a more accu∣rate Vivacity in Sense. The World labours of a Double Quartane, wherein the Number of Good Dayes (if any be) are far ex∣ceeded by The Bad. The Serenity of the Spring being overvoted
through the Scortching Heat in Summer, and the Cold in Winter. Besides the interruptions met with arising from her own private Di∣stempers. The same dismall Fatality attends Youth and Age. In which Sicknesse and other Calamities suit∣able to both Seasons causeth in all not onely a Necessity, but in some a Desire to put themselves upon The Tryall of Death, And return again into the Lapp of that Earth to and from whence all Things do in a Certain Vicissitude Go, and Come; Which may authorize a Beliefe That all things were not Created for their Own sakes, but the meer Inter∣est of Nature, which abhors to be Idle, or to leave any in an Impreg∣nant Condition. And from hence may arise another Conjecture; That The Moon no lesse then the Stars may be as well replenished with In∣habitants as the Earth, and subject
to the same Changes, in relation to What it produceth Though Stable and so long permanent it Self, as God in his Eternall Decree hath de∣termined they shall remain, Being subject to no Dissolution, but from the Force of that Command did at first establish them, together with all things extant. Among which, though some are observed to Wear out and perish, they are as it were but The Externall Ornaments and Hous∣hold-stuffe which within a short Re∣volution of Time do receive a fresh Renovation from the Sun, The high∣est and most splendid result of God's Beauty our Mortall Eyes (unsuppor∣ted by Faith) are able to Discern. Which may afford Cause of Pitty for some of the Heathen that made It the Object of Their Worship, who finding it the Cause of such visible Resurrections presumed it might be the Originall of all Things. Imagi∣ning
the Power of Continuance and Preservation equall to that of Crea∣tion, not being able to see higher, for want of the light of The Word of God. It may be no Improbable Para∣dox, That where the Earths magne∣ticall Effects cease, There some o∣ther no lesse Active power begins to operate with a like Motion an∣other way. Which granted, it can be no Prodigious Conjecture That such Birds as are observed to Inne or Board in this Clyme onely for some certain months, maintain a like Temporary Commerce with other Planets, as they are found to do a∣mongst us, according to the respe∣ctive Advantages Nature hath taught them to make of Times and Seasons. And that their Passage is without much Difficulty may be as∣serted from the Punctuall Dayes they keep yearly to Come and Go in.
Not possibly to be observed were they obnoxious to any Obstruction from Wind and Weather, or the least other Contingency lying in their Rode: Which the revolution of a shorter Space then Men are found to live could not chuse but discover. And that the Place they come from relates to the Earth admits the most probable Tryall from us, which be∣ing an Iland may best observe whe∣ther they do appear first by the Sea∣side or in the Midland: and if the latter (as I have heard it often affir∣med the Cuckow is universally seen the Second of Aprill) The Asserti∣on may be allowed, in reason, the Sentence of Probability, if not of an unquestionable Truth, That Wood∣cocks are some Years in great plenty by the Shore in Norfolk cannotbe denyed. But yet it is as manifest, That at the same time their Ap∣pearance is as numerous in the most
In Land Counties. Nor is it Ne∣cessary that they should all descend in a Line. Though Thousands of Feldefers and Thrushes have been seen within the Compasse of a mile and none round about. Nor doth Wearisomnesse appear about any but such as come off from the sea; (which may not unpossibly have mistaken their Way) or any Signes of a New Resurrection, their Plu∣mage being Smooth, and Bodies plump; So that I my Self have seen both Swallowes and Hobbys build and tred upon their first Appearance, as if they had no other businesse in this World then to Ly-in; and pro∣duce their Young, as Fishes are noted to change their Coast upon the like Arrand, &c, I Believe it possible for Birds not of the same Kinde and Plume to En∣gender with Success and to an huge Imbellishing of Nature, and as great
an Improvement of her store. And this was by some Acquaintance of mine put under Experiment before these Wars, that had Large Cages of Wyer wherein were put together onely Hens of some sorts, and Cocks of another. How it did answer Ex∣pectation I know not, yet am Con∣fident it might succeed, especially in reference to those nourished through a like Sustenance, since my Self saw an Hawke owned the Plume and shape between a Hobby and a Tassel-Gentle. Nor is it con∣trary to the grain of Probability to endeavour a Breed betwixt Hares and Coneys, an Ordinary Cat and a Civet; The Head of which species is by the resemblance of the muscles no lesse then all signes and gestures of the Lyon. And between whom there remains lesse Difference in proportion then an Irish-Grey. Houxd compared with a Lap-Dog. Animals
no lesse then Plants receiving noto∣rious Changes from the Climates out of which they were at first trans∣ported, proving for the most part Largest towards the Sun. Nor is it doubted but a Dog-Fox and an Or∣dinary Bitch will generate. As I heard the Last Marquesse of Hamble∣ton's Father verifie he saw in Scot∣land. Nor did those Huge and strang-Headed Deer sent for Pre∣sents to King James, fail to Cohabit with Ours and have young. Now he that would observe the Assinity in the Food and Bignesse of Beasts and Birds, and put none but them toge∣ther, I doubt not but in the Ab∣sence of their own kind they might easily be drawn to joyn. One Day ruminating upon Pride, and the dismall Effects it draws up∣on Mankind, I had all the Postures and Evidences brought in against those arraigned for this Diabolicall
Passion acted before me by a Tur∣key-Cock. Who stood priding himselfe no lesse in the Sun and prosperities of the Spring then Nebuchadnezzar did on the Battle∣ments of his Palace. From whence I began to Conclude it Naturall, and so not radically E∣vill, No more then Anger or Love. Therefore under the Notion of an Enquiry into the Advantages God hath given us above Others; A perfect Knowledge of our own good Parts is so far remote from Pride that it is rather a Spur to Vertue, And so onely Depraved not In∣vented by the Divell, Who with all his Chimistry is not able to Convert the seed, of a Naturall Effect into the Root of Evill; Though he hath perverted This, as Many things else into Ma∣lignity against God. The least of whose Beauty is sufficient to
advance our Thoughts above our selves, in which Case, It is rather a Rapture, then a sin.
Characters & Letters, &c. A Character of Honour. Honour is one of the grand Impostures of the Earth; through whose false Splen∣dour, unadvised Ambition is, as it were, Trepan'd out of its Life, Li∣berty, &c. No Folly transcending theirs, esteeme themselves onely Happy in a vaine Title, or Syllable; at the beginning pronounced by the Prince, and after reverberated by the Meager, empty, and hollow Eccho, of the insignificant Rabble; no lesse ready, upon the Change of
Fortune, to Murther, then Father, all Markes of Desert; to those very Particular ones, their own Indul∣gence had informed. Opinion being for the most part printed in such blind Ink, as it hardly remaines legi∣ble, to the Second Generation. The Merit of the first Proprietor becom∣ming mortify'd by Oblivion, or quite dissipated, and lost in the Wilder Fields of a no lesse Nume∣rous, then Vitious Posterity. So re∣mote from improving any Talents left them by their Ancestours, as like the improvident Usurer in the Go∣spel, they do not only expose them to Rust, and Cankers, but waste the Estate, with all other glorious En∣dowments in which they were wrapped. The Promoter of their Family, be∣comming by this meanes, an Occa∣sion of the Ruine of it. It lying in the Nature, no lesse then the Custom
of Honour, to put as unreasonable an Excize on the Vices, as the Vertues of its Owners. I never thought it Prudence, or Discretion, to articulate over-severely on the worst of Modes I have had the Good, or Ill Fortune to be Born and Bred under; yet it seemes to Crosse the Grayn of Wis∣dom, if not of Candid Charity, to arraign as guilty of Absurdity, all we finde in ordinary Practise abroad, though on the other side the Pale of Christianity. And for a particular instance; That, used amongst the Turks: where no Title but what be∣longs to the Emperour, is made He∣reditary. Honour being hardly managable within the Compasse of Decency, by any are not perfect in the Steps that lead to it. Splendid Epithets, where there resides no reall Ability in the Party to deserve them, Cheating the Beholders, by an Expectation of
more Vertue, and the Possessour with lesse, then his Parasites (a Vermine Capitall Fortunes are infested with∣all) may have possibly insinuated into his formerly suborned imagina∣tion. But to descend to a more ex∣act Definition of Honour: It is a meere Ray or Beame darted from the Favour of a Prince, who in one body contains the Abstract of all Delated Dignities. And the Reward of every Desert is either Reall, or by him supposed, in the Nature or Actions of those he thinks fit to ad∣vance: Amongst which none are more glorious, then they in Turky; where Worth is alwayes found the Antecedent to every Reward. Those in Christendom, that relate wholly to the Passions, and Affections of the Donor, not appearing. so Naturall, but further remote from the purer and unsophisticated Elements of Ma∣jesty, then what is found inherent in
the Party. The true Cause of Ad∣vancement amongst us, being, com∣monly so triviall, and foule, as for Shame, they forbore to recite it in their Patent. From whence, some may Conclude, those Disparities amongst Men proceeded at first, like Hills and Dales, from the Deluge of Pride, So long, a Succession of Go∣vernment, hath powred upon the Face of the Earth. Courts by such Canting Termes advancing their par∣ticular interest; which would be abated, were the Devourers, in an equall Parallel with those they feed on. The Rabble, for want of a more elated Prudence, imagining their Go∣vernours to proceed, like the Gyants of old, from some Diviner Extracti∣on then their Own. Not wise enough to apprehend, That Honour hath no advantage, really, in it Selfe, but what it is able to deduce from the Lower Condition, and basencsse of
Others. All Titles, to Those relating to God Himself, as they were absent, before the Creation; So Reason informs us, they could not be Present now, were there no Crea∣tures, endued with so much under∣standing, as to be able to pronounce them. The most relucent Honour being Offuscated, and blinded in the Shades of Solitude. Wherefore, if it had a Name, it wanted an Owner, till something was made willing to promote it. No Age, ever repre∣sented it more Naked to the World, then This we live in. Whereas the Jewes do in Italy, by the Ancient Roman Coynes, So, the Grave Visa∣ges of 25 Bishops have been struck off, and put upon many Thousand Presbyterians; whereupon the Image, and Superscription of the Primitive Church, is quite defaced, and Obli∣terated, through the Impresse they are exchanged for: which ownes no
worth, but from the Gravity of the First. Being it self, of no greater Antiquity, then John Calvin, who did not but with some Difficulty as Boyes do Giggs, whip this Younger Go∣vernment out of a Word, taught for many Ages to signifie Episcopacy onely; making it currant in Geneva. Now, if it be no lesse frequent in the Practise of Men, then in the Dialect of the Scriptures, to rob God of his Honour; why should any, but meerly Mortall, place Stability in it? Especially, since the Trash these Earthly Tumours swell withall, is by the Basest of, &c. render'd so per∣spicuous. Valour and Cowardice. I Should much wonder how Valour and Cowardice, both strangers, if not Contrary to the Practice of
undistracted Nature, could passe so long without the Errata, in the Place-Book of virtue and vice: But that I finde it, The Design of Policy, to advance, or abate the Credit of all things found Useful or Destru∣ctive to her own, or the Generall uti∣lity: And, where she can bring in the least Colour for it to paint, what is necessary to Commerce, with the gratefull Approbation of Religion; And to render the Contrary in the Dark Sense, and Black Characters of Hell. Allowing all Supports as De∣cent and quadrating with the Beauty of Holiness, though Above or A∣gainst the Lights of Reason, if found, any way requisite, to sustain Go∣vernment. Of such force is Custom, that it is able, through the Assi∣stance of Credulity, to stifle, and trample upon the Senses them∣selves. Now, though it may be no Indis∣cretion
in a Patient, to suffer himself for his Recovery, to be deluded by his Physitian; yet out of a Panique Fear, or effeminate Nicety, to swal∣low more Drugs, and in greater Quantities then is unavoydably ne∣cessary, may appear a Madnesse, ari∣sing from the more Dreadfull, then Dangerous Phantasmes mustered up by the Fumes of a formerly-subor∣ned Melancholy; rather then the Substantiall Dictates af an unsophisti∣cated Judgement, which a Wise man may retain, and feast himself with, though for Manners sake, and to a∣voyd the Danger, no lesse then Shame, impending Singularity, he may seem to own the most universall Opinion. Now to shew, how Policy, no less then Religion, imposeth upon frail Humanity, in both the Fore-menti∣oned Particulars (Though to the ap∣prehension of Sense, absolutely repug∣nant
one to the other) they are sci∣tuated as near Damnation, that ap∣pear Overdaring in the prosecution of private Revenge; as such who out of Remissenesse, and Fear, betray The Cause of their Country; in De∣fence of which, is placed, under all Professions extant, the Highest step of our Duty to God and our Neighbour. Which cannot be denyed to stand further remote in Nature, then what really Concerns Our selves: found recorded in Job, by the Divell; a far Ancienter Philosopher then the so∣much-venerated Aristotle. From whence we may Conclude, That Resolution and Dread instituted by Nature at first, for the Vindication and safety of every respective Indi∣viduall, are since Tyranny and Pro∣priety have forced us into Commu∣nalties, reduced by Common Consent of Law, and Conveniency into a Pub∣liaue stock, for the Preservation of
All. So as we are suffered, to own no more in reference to our selves, then Prudence is able to filtch out of the Treasury of the State: and that upon no slighter a Penalty, then Law doth inflict; Which found too dim-sighted to penetrate further, then Externall Evidence can reach; Religion, whose Results (and those no weak ones) lye in Conscience, supplyes the place of a Diviner-Guard; Brandishing like the Angell in Paradise, the flaming sword of Hell: Which operates more or less, upon the Affections, proportionall to the Tincture, received from Educa∣tion. Not seldom Proof (as we find in Hereticks) against the Dictates of Reason her Self; Nothing being har∣der to be lost, or Convinced of Fals∣hood then Opinions sucked in with the Nourses Milk. And this may raise an Use of Caution, in relation to what we call Pusillanimity, and Va∣lour.
Which in a Naturall and pri∣mitive sense, signifie onely Evasi∣on. And where that will not serve in order to our own Preservation, a vigorous and stout Resistance to the losse of Life it Self, as is manifest in every Creature, in the absence of hope; and therefore impossible to be found Wanting, in the pure and unsuborned Nature of Man. And so in the primitive Construction unca∣pable of any Forreigner Interpreta∣tion, then what is deduceable from our own judgement, without refe∣rence to Fame, or Reward. Termes unintelligible, during the Originall Felicity: And before the Thirst af∣ter Generation had swelled the World, into such an Ocean of Inhabi∣tants, as could not be Kept within the Compass of Moderation, but by Mounds and Bancks; in the making of which all things are imployed that own the power to Terrifie or Flatter
the Rabble into Obedience, without bearing any Nicer Respect, to single Individualls, then through Evading, or Over-ruling the Law, Power or Prudence is able to purchase to them∣selves, by Mastering, Flattering, or Contemning publick Fame. After which, it may be sometimes less po∣licy to run, then not to be too gree∣dy, to give it welcom when it courts us: Opinion being a Bird oftner catcht by Chance, then Endeavour. Nor shall any one that carryes her on his First, ever want Envy, or Scratching by Others. And he that hath but the Patience, to attend Good or bad Re∣port to the end of the race, shall ob∣serve them like Cocks to change their Oddes: one unlucky Blow being able to depresse more, and draw a greater Concourse of Abettors to the Other side, then Twenty as strong and probable endeavours, without Successe can possibly advance. Or,
if this fail, the Gamesters together with what they strove for, will by the hand of Time, be laid in Oblivi∣on. Whereas the reall Wounds, and sensible Inconveniencies accruing ftom a too Serious Attention, and exact Observance of the Various Cadences of the Trumpet of Fame, subject to be put out of Tune, by the Change of every Blast, do not onely exceed the Cure of the Chie∣rurgeon, but all endeavours to that of Wisdom it Self. Nor hath Policy any cheaper Trash to load the oppo∣site Scale withall, then Honour and Titles; which like Horse-Bells, onely affect the Eare, as Diamonds do the Eyes; encreasing, rather then les∣sening the Burthen of Life: which, with its Concomitance Envy, Dan∣ger, and Jealousie signifies nothing, proportionable at least, to what the Purchase requires; Seldom enjoy'd of the Owner long, without Contro∣versie;
unlesse by dying in Possession he cuts off all contrary Claims. Wherefore such as have the Dexte∣rity, to passe their Dayes, at the least Expence of Trouble and Conve∣niency, may be truely said, to hus∣band Discretion best. Nor are they likely to be misled, in such a vast number of Fooles and Madmen, as are daily observ'd, to Sacrifice their own Ease and Content to promote the Ambition and Small Plots of Others: Grounding their Hopes upon those, that have no Assurance Themselves. But this runs so con∣trary to the grain of Practice, as it may not unpossibly, set such Teeth on Edge, as are able through Detra∣ction, or Power, to blast the Authour of this Advice.
A Letter writ to disswade Mr. — from a Duell. Sir, I Shall, at this time, conceal, what I apprehend of your Quarrell, and the Circumstances that did at first produce it: Lest I should fall into a Physitians indiscretion, who com∣ming to one labouring of a Fever, did consume the time, In telling the Patient, The Causes of his Di∣stemper were Drink and Evill Com∣pany: which though possibly true, could not but carry the Figure of a Meager Impertinency, before the par∣ty had his Cure; since no place is now Left for prevention. And as Physick is opposed to the Defects incident to bad Dyet, and Disorder: So Counsell hath been observed, to Moderate, and palliate, though not Cure those of Indiscretion; arising
for the most part from an Inexperi∣ence in the exact knowledge of our own Fame, no lesse then that of O∣thers; And where it may be, or is Sci∣tuated, with the smallest prejudice to Conscience, or giving the least in∣terruption to the Prospect of Self∣preservation, the First Result in the Intention of Nature, and left as of greatest Intendment, to the Care of Prudence. From whence I have been taught, that it is possible, for Physick to be welcome, though Di∣stastefull; but that Counsell seldom meets any more favourable Constru∣ction then Scorn, from the Receiver; & an Opinion of Presumption in Him that Ventures to give it; especially, if it meets not with a candid Nature: Which hoping to find in You, I shall so much transgresse the voyce of Discretion, as to suffer my Self in Love to become an Arbitrator, be∣tween the Honour and prudence of a
Friend, so far, as to maintain, That Such as animate you to a Formall Revenge, do out of Forgetfulnesse, or Want of Religion, forbear to Cal∣culate the Danger, no lesse then Impiety, that for ever Cleaves to such hands, as are found once polluted in Blood: And, That those violate the Dictates of Piety and Discretion, (by Wisdome esteemed the most Considerable part of Manhood) that Contradict it. For to use their own canting, (no where to be found in the Dialect of Antiquity) He hath given you an Affront; and such an one, as may not decently be passed∣by, without a Formall Satisfaction; which is but the single and wild O∣pinion of some under-graduates in the Arts of Living. Yet, admit it a Debt, due in the Court of Honour, may it not as well be discharged by your Friend or Servant, as Your self? Parties lesse agitated by In∣terest
and Passion, and therefore the likelyer, to deal a Revenge so even∣ly, as He shall have as little cause to bragge as You to repent. A thing you can never promise your Self, if con∣trary to the Injunctions of God and the Examples of the most prudent people you proportion out your Sa∣tisfaction in the Field. Where you cannot but deliver into the Custody of Blind Fortune, not onely your Life but Estate: As justly belon∣ging to posterity, as ever your Ance∣stours made it yours. Which by this Mad-Knight-Errantry you hazard to Undo. I am sure all Wise minds will quadrate with this. And if the Fools of the present Age, pretend to any Discoveries of Wayes to Ho∣nour, New and Untrod, by the An∣cients, Let'um follow them, to the furthest Extent of their Lives or Lunacy. Whilest you hearken, to the Graver Advice of reason. Which
may informe you, He hath offer'd an Abuse already, and will you hazard upon equall Terms the receiving a Greater? Indeed if a Requitall had been endeavoured at the Instant it might have rendred you more ex∣cusable before God and Man: But that opportunity omitted; it were more Wrong to your Charity, then Vindication of Valour, in cold Blood to call back Revenge: As if a Worse Christian upon Meditation, then when irritated by Fury and Passion. Nei∣ther is Honour to be purchased, in Single and self-perswading Com∣bates, because no Marks of them appear in Antiquity; where many are found Dead, but not one, to my remembrance, upon so impertinent a Quarrell, as Words. Yet we may conclude from the foul Expressions in Oratours, That the Mouthes of the Gentry were then none of the Cleanest. He that Consults former
Histories, may find, That some have gained more repute from a Retreat, then others could obtain by a Won-Field. And what is a Retreat, I pray you, but a Fine Word for Running away? Fiercenesse being proper to Beasts, whereas a Neat Evasion be∣longs peculiarly to Men. Of which, I shall instance this, as now fresh in my Memory. A Gentleman lying, like you, under the repute of an In∣jury, did meet his Enemy, and shot him with a Pistoll stopped full of Dung, whereupon he cryed He was slayn, which set him further back in the Opinion of the World, then his former Vapouring had advanced him, when the Excrement the Dagge was loaden with, appeared to the Senses of the Standers-by. And for this, the Wit of it's Deviser was highly commended. Another return'd this Answer, with a like Successe, to a Younger Brothers Challenge;
That if he could prove his Losse as great as His, should he Kill or be Killed, he would gladly accept it; Otherwise he did not think it rea∣son, to venture his Life, against one did want Necessaries, and so might seek Death, no lesse out of Discon∣tent, then Gallantry: which Him∣self, that wanted nothing, had no cause to do. All that remaines is but your Pardon for this Boldnesse, which I most seriously Desire. Re∣maining in the mean time, no lesse Your Faithfull Friend, Then, Sir, Your, &c.
A Letter to Mr. — in hope to disswade Him from going a Co∣lonel under Count Mansfield. SIR, I Cannot but own it, for a high Presumption, to offer such sud∣dain and crude Conceptions in a Businesse where I presume, you have employed, not only your Owne, but the most Serious Advice of Your Friends. To the Abilities and Dig∣nity of whom, though I am forced to give place, I may not justly be accounted behind them in Affection to your Selfe, or Affaires. Where∣fore having received so great an encouragement from your Com∣mands, no lesse then a Stimulation from my particular Desire to Serve you, I shall according to my small Experience, and the meaner Abilities
I have found in me, to employ it to the best Labour, to inform You, These Corrupt times have rendred many things Necessary to the Ger∣man Warres, are no wayes suteable to your Complexion, or Fortune, which your Generall, being a Stran∣ger, cannot in probability, advance, without Offending his own, and sin∣ning against an Article of Policy, and Nature. Nor shall you, though loa∣den with the Highest Merit, render your Return more gratefull to Your Naturall Prince: King James ha∣ving alwayes numbered Souldiers amongst those, he esteemes the worst of Men, and most formidable to His Person. The Expedition being by Him rather Connived at, then Ap∣proved, out of Hope, by this meanes, to facilitate the two Treaties of a Match with Spain, and the Restituti∣on of the Pallatinate: which ob∣tained, (according to the Mode of
Pusillanimous Princes) all endeavours will be used to discharge the State of You and Your Companions, as a Society most superfluous during Peace; the only Thing Our King doth study to promote: To whose Eares a Drum is more terrible then Thunder, and the Report of a Canon then the voyce of God Him∣selfe. Which, (if Our Church-Men may be credited) doth at this Day cry for vengeance, against the Cru∣elty, exercised upon Christians; especially from England, by an una∣nimous Consent chosen the Head of the Protestant League, till his Maje∣sty had forfeited that Honour to the brisker Assistance given by the French. Now, can you think he should indulge valour as a vertue in another, when nothing is more ma∣nifest, then that he labours to ex∣punge all Marks, or Occasions for it in Himselfe, or any about Him so
farre, as to Answer my Lo. — when he came from the Warres, and desired to Kisse his Hand, That he feared he would bite it, and there∣fore bad he should be muffled? Nor is it our Kings mode alone, (that never made use of Souldiers unlesse to slight them) But that of Spaigne; under whom the most deserving have dyed in Disgrace, if not by Poyson. And amongst the Catalogue of Those stand written with great Characters in the Kalender of Fame, few or none, are registred for Saints, or Happy. It being past Controversie, That, no Warre can be called Just, beares not a reall Tincture of Defen∣sative. And whosoever hath, or shall have enterprized the Contra∣ry, though his Name be never so richly enamelled on the Ring of Fortune, and Himself placed at the Top of her Wheele, yet he is but the Scourge of God: and doth for the
most part, fall, when he thinks him∣selfe most capable of standing. Like Charles the 5th, that was by the Duke of Saxony, (a Family of his own raysing) beaten over the Alps, by Torch-light, and himself like the Sword of Goliah, wound up into a High Contempt of this World, and layd in a Monastery. The Sins and Oversights of Gods Children are se∣verely punished. But it is as true, That nothing costs dearer, then the Bloud of his Saints. As may appear by such Horse-Leaches, as have been applyed to his Church; from whence a double quantity hath been drawn, by some unexpected meanes. But if these Reasons savour too much of Theology, Consider how unpossi∣ble it is to do any thing, without the Love of the Common Souldier a∣broad, and how unsafe He must needes be at home that enjoyes it; There being nothing more usuall
with Princes, then to be jealous of their Liberators. Manifest in Byron; who, after he had set the Crown upon Henry the fourths head, lost his own, out of a no more pious reason, then that upon a Contrary provoca∣tion, he might have removed it to another. And to shew of what vile esteeme Souldiers are in the dayes of Peace; I will not say (though I have heard it) that the Judges, af∣ter the Irish Warres, were given it in Charge: yet can assure you, they hanged Souldiers for Faults, which, Others (thought of more use in Peace) did scape, or obtained pardon for. If so unhappy, as to receive a Wound in your Person or Credit, it remains Yours, without the least Diminution. If Honour, Custome shares it between your Country, and He that Commands in Chiefe. Who, being a Forreyner, is not unlikely to rob you of your due; or by im∣ploying
you on Desperate Service, to Conclude Fame and your Life to∣gether. I know, your Resolution is too well lyned by Philosophy against the Storms of Danger, to admit a Parly with any Force but that of Reason: wherefore I forbear to Paynt them, lest I should seem to scare you with Feares, are for many yeares, left to be terrible to my Selfe. Who have long since thought it Ridiculous, to Court Sleep by Opiums, and protract Death by Cordialls; which is but the Head of the same Species, being both the effect of an unavoydable Lassitude. Yet though Life is im∣posed upon Mortalls without, if not against their Consent, it cannot be denyed the strongest Result of the Highest Wisdom, to Situate Your Selfe so, as it may consume at the most ease, and with the least Pertur∣bation; which is not to be expected from such a Flaring and intempe∣rate
a Course, as that of a Souldier: that can make choyce of no Friend nor Enemy, but what the State as∣signes Him; or proportion his Pitty or Justice, to his own Morality, but their Ambition and Jealousie, that Command in Chief. To whom in all things you are bound to obey, though contrary to the Grayn of Prudence it self. That arbitrary Go∣vernment you so much complain of at home, being the best you can in Reason, expect to finde, in an Army abroad; Where, the Stresse of Dis∣cipline lies more upon the Admini∣stration of Severity, then Justice. Such as are reported to list them∣selves under the Black Prince of Darkn sse, draw Articles before they Consigne their Bloud; And have a Circle enchanted, with a Power to protect them: whereas a Souldier hath nothing to plead for, against actuall obedience, but the narrow
Circumference of Protection, that lies in the will of a Generall. To whom, the Vertue and Valour of his Officers is no lesse formidable, in re∣lation to his particular Jealousies, then the Vices and Cowardice, of his meaner Souldiers, are thought per∣nicious to Successe in the Field. Wherefore no Prince deserves such Honourable Attendance as those, that Head their Armies themselves. Ge∣neralissimo's like Stepfathers, carry∣ing no other Naturall affection, but for the Advancement of their own Glory. So as they esteem, all inferi∣our Merit, as an Intrusion upon Theirs: It being ordinary with Custom, to award Fame to such as have least deserved it; and asperse with Infamy, those of more Glorious Merit. I confesse Necessity cannot onely abate the Edge of these Reasons; but turne their Poynts against the Urger. Yet,
since it is not impossible, but that the Electour may have miscarried in his Allegeance towards the Emperour, it cannot be indiscreet or impertinent to mind you, of the Hazard and small reward they commonly are capable of, that render themselves Arbitrators of a Forreign Difference; I do comply with you, in all the Pitty, Prayers, and Contributions can be of∣fered for the Restitution of the Ver∣tuous Lady Elizabeth: yet shall re∣serve my Person to bestow upon the Preservation of my Country, in the quarrell of which, I can onely justi∣fie, the spilling of my own Blood, or that of others. The universall imployment of a Souldier, not being yet legally made out to me, by any In∣junction either Morall, or Divine. The Practice of the Switzers in re∣lation to Forreign Quarrells, appea∣ring as remote from Christian Cha∣rity, as Natural Prudence. It cannot
be denyed, but That Souldiers are necessary, during the Distracted times of Invasion: So it is as true, That few Callings are looked upon with more Disdain, when a Nation enjoyes an absolute Tranquillity. Wherefore it can be no Act of Di∣scretion, to inrole your self, under a Profession, onely in esteem, during the Worser Ages, and not the Best. Wherein maims are considered ra∣ther as marks of an inconsiderate and brutish Valour, then a temperate and advised Prudence. Were You thrown upon it, by the Iron Hornes of an unavoydable Compulsion, or flattered into it, out of a more then probable Assurance of an Honourable Advantage; Something might be objected to the Prayers of Your Friends, and contrary Desires of your Enemies: who may not unpos∣sibly tempt you, into this uncertain Hope, out of a Design, to rob you of all you really enjoy.
Consider your Education, how much a Stranger it hath been, to the incommodious Treatment the Field doth afford: Out of whose Verge, it is more decent and safe, still to preserve your Selfe, then, at any time to retire, though upon the highest Provocation; of whose le∣gitimacy, your Enemies from whom you part, will be the Arbitrators, and not your Friends, to whom you re∣turn. Warre being a turbulent and destructive Calling, with more Credit and Safety alwayes neglected, then at any time for saken. He that never fought, receiving a fairer Encomium from Charity, then a Captain that hath deserted his Poste. Nor doth a Colonel stand for more, then a single Wheele, in the Frame of an Army, where the Generall remaines Heir to all Desert.—The rest is lost.
A Letter to Mr. W. P. THe continuance of your Ac∣quaintance is the highest Pinnacle of my Ambition. And from whence I am not onely tempted, but do willingly submit to the lowest of your Commands. In the pursuance of which, I came on purpose, to meet you at B.—loaden with the strongest Advice, so weak a judgement is able to man-out. But I find, Your own Wisdom hath gi∣ven me the Opportunity, to spare my English; By discovering to you, without the help of a Prospective, or the dearer prejudice of a Tryall, what I found verified through many Yeares Experience, viz. That Ho∣nourable Persons, like too great Fires, may warm and comfort such as are Content only to serve them at a Di∣stance: But blast the Parts, and con∣sume
the Fortunes of those are found to attend them in any neerer relati∣ons. Who gayn, for the most part like the Birds that follow the Croco∣dile, no richer Reward, then the Re∣versions of their Teeth. It being usu∣all with these Monsters in Nature, to esteem none capable of Desert, but such, as Fortune, or Basenesse hath made necessary to their Vices, or Power. The First of which, is as much below the Breeding, as the O∣ther, is the Candour of a Gentleman: To whom, it is incongruous, to leave the Honour he was born to, at the foot of that Ladder, he hopes to as∣cend by, to a greater. Neither, have they that are instrumentall to their Rapine, a more noble imployment, then those Beasts reported of in the Indies: who hunt the prey for the Lyons, and after by his strength they are subdued, must rest satisfied with what the Covetousnesse of their Ma∣ster
shall leave undevour'd. For my Selfe, as none can, with Affection, look upon the Gulph, hath swallowed up his Felicity: So I re∣main in so high a Feud with Great∣nesse, as, if I did not find [Lord] in my Daily Prayers, I should not name it (in relation to Servant) without Detestation. The which Lord, had I served as I ought, The other would have been no more known to me, then Leopards, Wolves, and Tygers, seldom, if ever, seen by us, but in Grates and Pictures. Yet how mani∣fest soever this Truth is, I am not so foolish my Selfe, or think Others so Wise, as to esteem any Precept, or Example strong enough to restrain the unsupported Ignorance of Young men from falling into this Trap; bayted with more Ease, though far lesse Assurance, then Law, Physick, &c. For this Course often neglected, ni which Hundreds perish for One
that thrives; who is yet found to be more imperious then the Master himself. Since the powerful Word of God assisted by the Rhetorick of Di∣vines, is not of Efficacy sufficient to keep them from following Pride, Lust, and Drunkenness, though Hell be assigned for the Conclusion. But, if yo udesire a more full, and ele∣gant prosecution of this Theame, I refer you to Lucian: Having al∣ready exceeded my First intention, which was only to Kisse your Hands, and in fewer words, to assure you that I am Sir, Your Servant.
Another to the Same. Sir, HAd you not assur'd me you were not well, I should easily have guessed it my Self; from the Commendation your Letter gave to mine. Which cannot but be rather the effect of a Fever, then your Judge∣ment. To which, though I am so highly obliged for the present, as to gain a more honourable esteem in your Fancy, then, without the like Mediation, I could possibly have attained: Yet I do not onely abhor this, but all Advantages else, That own the least semblance of a Preju∣dice to you. So as I could not have been thus Romantique, but that the last Line, prov'd a Cordiall to the First; By expunging all fear of Fu∣ture Danger, in respect of your
Health. And for Prudence, I find it by the Elegancy of your Style, and the Solidity of Matter, so far rather increased, then diminished, as I am confident your opinion is, by this time, alter'd in reference to my Desert: Though I am willing to flat∣ter my Self, That your Love conti∣nues. But whether the Horse fol∣lows the Chariot, or the Chariot the Horse, Persons of Parts are found to make so great a Descent, which submit themselves to this Course of Servitude, That they wa∣ken the Admiration of Lookers-on, much more, then the Apprehensions of those, that, like me, have, so ap∣parently, suffered in their particular Interests: It being impossible to imagine a greater Lunacy, Then to cast away Time, Freedom, and For∣tune after such, as so little regard it, That they esteem it Reward suffici∣ent for the most of their Servants,
If they have an Opportunity to ob∣serve the Basenesse of their Natures, For what is gotten by them, be∣longs rather to their own Impu∣dence, or Importunity; then the Bounty, or Goodnesse of their Masters: Since he that remains Defective, in one of these Two Court-Vertues, shall be compell'd to make a Third of pure Necessity. Let a man con∣sume A Prentiship with a Citizen: At the end of the Time, It is his own Fault, if he be not able to Live. But when a Trades-man (Like one of his Majesties Antique Statues) is taken out of a base Cellar or Vault, (no Prodigy in our Dayes) and set up at Court; It is his least care to provide for his Servants, unlesse ne∣cessary to his Vices, or the Infirmi∣ties that proceed from them. Such being able to Ride him where they please; either, over their Fellows, or Strangers, by way of Terrour, or
Disdain: Or Curvet, and prance with his Complements, in token of Respect. They resembling, for the most part, Oranges, that yeild nothing but up∣on squeezing. I confesse, the De∣pendance on a Monster of this kind, may be of excellent use for Prote∣ction, in these Fat all Times, where Innocency is found too weak for De∣ceit: Could it be obtain'd without a greater Losse. But as in a Contract with the Divell, the First thing par∣ted with, is Hope of Future Felicity: So a Secretary must quit his Free∣dom, or Imployment; being tyed to so strict an Attendance, as his Lord is no more able to spare him, then his own Brains, or Thumbs. By which, the Slavery becomes so great, as it can receive no Compensation from Profit. Wherefore such as are wi∣sest, retain onely The Acquaintance of Great men: whom I have obser∣ved to thrive better then their Me∣niall
Servants. It being usuall with them, to bestow benefits on those that least deserve. And to him, they have injured by denying a just Reward, it is their mode, to become an Enemy. As I have found most certainly true, who am Sir, Your Servant. POSTSCRIPT. I Have sent you this to serve as a Black-Patch, or Foyle; to set out the Beauty of your Virgil. And therein you may observe the strength of Affection: which for your sake is able to raise in me the En∣thusiasmes of a Poet; from whose In∣spiration, this Oracle is pronounced.
THis Work is finish'd so, as no Supply Can be expected from Posterity. Nor could thy Authour's Laurell match thy Btyes, Hadst thou appear'd with him, in Caesar's dayes. Yet, he that this Translation dares to slight, Must not admire to see a Moore wash'd white, And chan'gd to English-Beauty: losing none Of what was Hers; But adding of his owne. If that our Northern Paint be not so good, 'Tis not thy Fault: whose Pencil understood No lesse then any Roman's. And this shall Struggle for Fame with the Originall: And waste more Bloud, & Inck, then in the strife Between those States who first gave Homer Life, Which will be Justice. For he did undo By writing then, what Wit entayl'd thee to. Like to an Elder-Brother that is Curst In all things else: yet priz'd for comming First. But to Conclude the wishes of my Heart, Oh that my Prayse could equall thy Desert,
A Letter perswading —.— to marry. THough your Contexture makes me confident, you will not hazard the Dansing Couranios with Apes in Hell: yet it is none of the least Modern Mira∣cles, why you stay so long unmarri∣ed. As if you had an Antidote to repell Age, and were proof against the Weapons of Time; or had a Re∣ceipt to recover his Locks worn off, by such, as neglect to lay hold on the present Occasion: which you would never do, had you seriously consider'd the present Condition of your Mother; (whose youth is said, so blasphemous is Tradition, rather to have exceeded, then come short of your present Beauty:) How a few Yeares hath changed Alaba∣ster into Wainscot, and ruffled her Neck like a walking Buskin: So that
such, as would once have crossed Seas, but for an apparition of her, cannot but now think it Ominous, to meet her Fasting. If you resolve upon none, till you pattern the Character your Fancy presented me, (when I had last the Honour to kisse your Hands, and heard the Scorn wherewith you received the Offer of—I must be bold to tell you, I took it rather as a Copy of your Countenance, then any thought could take its Originall from the Discretion I ever own'd you Lady of) you may as well expect a New Creation. Since, so much perfecti∣on, as your Language did then paynt, is not to be found out of a Romance; or the short Entertain∣ment, during a Lovers Passion; which once, throughly cured, by Fruition, is not found rarely to re∣coyle into as great, a Contrary Ex∣treame. I confess, Wise, Constant,
and Compleate Servants may be had; but few such Husbands, whose mindes are no lesse altered by Mar∣riage, then Drunken Men are by Sleep: but become like them, wea∣ry and sick, of what they formerly took delight in; upon the Appre∣hension, That he which yokes himself to a Woman, forfeits his Prudence, no lesse, then She doth hazard her Re∣pute, who incircles a Man in her Arms before Enchanted by the Priest, through Custome and Shame made farre more necessary to you, then Men. Wherefore finding that Time is uncessantly nibling at youth, and Beauty the baite of your Trap: And that it is unlikely with no stronger Engines, To catch one that is Wise: Be nimble, and lay hold on this that is Rich. Who is confess'd none of the Seven Wise Masters; and therefore with more Ease to be Governed. The Felici∣ties
of Marriage, perishing in the Conflict arising between Man and Wife, Of equall Spirits and under∣standing. It being impossible there should want Contests, where both lay claym to a Capacity fit onely to be obeyed. Which, if you have him, will by all, be conceded on your side. So that, instead of be∣ing a Ward, (a Tenure every Married Woman holds from the Award of her Maker) you shall be Guardian of the Person and Estate of your Husband. Now, in relation to other things, upon the Score of which you may reckon stronger Felicities; They will be found, after enjoyment, to vanish into Cyphers. Learning be∣comming as unsociable for Ladies, as Half-witted Men are Wilfull and Jealous; Rocks that the softness of his Head gives sufficient caution for, So that, under this Conjuncti∣on, you may, without interruption,
follow what Inclinations you please. Wherefore, if you resolve to marry, no Husband is more proper; whose Folly you may Exchange for Wis∣dom, when you please. And to re∣nounce it quite, were, besides bu∣rying your Talent in the Ground, and robbing of the World, which you ought to leave as Rich as you found it: You should fall into the Condition of an old Mayd, then which nothing is more Despicable: who is acceptable in no Company. Not daring to come amongst Wo∣men, for fear of declaring more Knowledge then she can, with refe∣rence to Honesty own: Or approach Men out of the danger of Con∣tempt. The Morall of Andromeda, is a History of your present Conditi∣on. Where, the Barren Rock She was tyde too, is Virginity. The Monster that came to devour her, Time. And he reported to deliver
her, some witty-Spark, that per∣swaded her, to take a Rich---&c. to her Husband, might warrant the Accesse of one more acceptable. Oh, let Him have this Honour Faire La∣dy, who is Madam, Your Servant.
On a Looking-Glasse. DEar Glasse, tell me, by what Art, Thou bean'st Her Image without break- When the same doe's crack my Heart, (ing? Just as I am now a speaking. On another which she said did Flatter. BLame not your Glasse, that doth her Duty. Nor can it Flatter so much Beauty. But for the rest, in Policy, It shewes them Fairer then they be. Since if they saw their Faces true, This, would be broke; and envy'd you. Another. DEar Glasse, joyn with her Eyes; and both (concurre To Note more worth in me, and less in Her, A Song. THe Graces are, by Custom, bound Once in an Age, All to be sound In One creature: There to shew
All the Beauties they do owe, And now having fix'd on Thee Be not Proud: Since, you may see, Time allowes them not to stay, But to meet, and go away. Yet though whilst these Guests be here, You do rate their Lodging dear: If you suffer me to take it, I'le not break, when they forsake it. The terms, of Fair and Good, do not express Thy Worth, no more, then theirs, call Princes fine, When deck'd in Diamonds, like the Stars they shine: Nay, I'le maintain Their folly to be less; Since such a Sight hath oft before been seen: Whilst he that would inform a shape like thine, Prometheus-like must filtch from things Divine. On a Picture. THough this be drawn exactly forth, It doth no more retain her Worth, Then the Shadow of a Rose Can the Scent of one that growes. Another. BEtween This, & her Mind, there is that odds, As is in Mans frail-workmanship and Gods.
A Letter to two Sisters the one Black the other Fair. Ladyes, IT is Design, and, I hope, no Pre∣sumption in me, to joyn you in one: That, besides the opportu∣nity of presenting the highest of my Respects, I might comprize in a single Letter, the totall Summe of all the perfection extant in Wo∣man-Kind. Black and White, being the unquestioned Originall, of that infinite Variety of Beauty, (the mint of Nature) through which is main∣tained her Necessary Commerce of Generation. And, in this equall Distribution, Fortune hath shewn no small Ingenuity, (who is more Wan∣ton, and Inexorable, then Blind or Carelesse) in assigning, that of least Duration, the Fewest Years. For if you did not Wither alike, Art and
Opinion (the Limmers and Carvers of all Excellency,) would have tempted, if not Constrained every one, to serve, and adore that Sister onely, whose beauty had survived. By which, sweet Variety had been lost; and Perfection reduced into one Monarchy, Which, now, martch in your Two glorious Regiments. To both which, I remain an Equall Captive. Being, Ladyes, &c. BEauty is writ in severall Characters; (All? None but are skil'd in some: Who finds out Which votes them mad, do say, that this man errs Because his choice is Black, or Low, or Tall; Nature would have all pleas'd: And such as fall On Ordinary Features, are less learn'd: The Indian Beauties are as plain discern'd By those do know their Figure, as the White. Nor can Expression render it so right, As may force others to approve the Text. Reason with Tast, & Love, should not be vext.
A Letter to —— After the Death of his Lady. SIR, I Know, I need not minde you, That all Sublunary things are Transitory: Dansing like the Atomes (the ancient Philosophers imagined the World not onely to be made of, but stuffed withall) be∣tween one Condition, and another. Life seeming to be lent, to keep Death in Imployment. And Gene∣ration, to serve onely for the pro∣duction of Bodies; that the Fatall Sisters might not weave in vain, or want Creatures to vayl with their Garments of Mortality. But it is time to give over, at least, to turn down a Leafe; and refer the Inculcation of this Morality, till some fitter time; For fear of falling into their Indiscretion, are found to wake a
Sick Friend, by an Impertinent In∣quisition after his Condition, or the unseasonable Administration of a Direction which way to dispose of his Body. Since none can Calcu∣late his Ease better, then the Pati∣ent: Sorrow it selfe not being desti∣tute of its Voluptuousnesse. Which, hoping you will not, too farre ex∣ceed: Give me leave, to Conclude That Manners exacted this; and Discretion no more but to assure you, I am, &c.
AN EPITAPH. STone, so long as thou dost last, Let the Reader know thou hast The Drosse of Her, once own'd a Mind Contayn'd the worth of Woman-kind. But no more: Who speaks her Glory, Must have for every Dust a Story. The Authours EPITAPH upon Himselfe. I Envy not such Graves as take up room, Meerely with Jet & Porphyry; since a Tomb Adds no Desert: Wisdom, thou thing divine: Convert my humble Soul into thy Shrine. And then this Body though it want a Store, Shall dignifie all places where 'tis throwne.
A Letter to disswade—from Marrying a Rich, but ugly and deformed, &c. VVHen I heard at first, you went a Wooing to—I thought it a Trick put upon you by Enemies: but finding it Secon∣ded, And seeing the fearfull Exam∣ples of Those, who out of Discontent, and a Desire to Change their present Condition, are found to Cast away Themselves; I begin to take your Danger to Heart. And do here, in the Sincerity of Affection, offer my Hand, to stay the Tying of that Knot, with which you go about to strangle your future Felicity. For, though I confesse the Party may not unpossibly be very Rich, yet it is as likely, The Things required to Dead the Apprehension of such A Loath∣some Companion, will prove So
Chargeable, as in a short time, Her Gold will be spent, and nothing left, but The Foul Beast that brought it. Yet suppose you finde so much, as may beare the Expence of Mad Company, Whores and Drink, (Wick∣ed Cordialls, though Generally used, to Correct such Poyson) Can you Divest Humanity so farre, as to make Her Partner in a Bed, is able to render you so much an Enemy to Womankind, as to exchange it for Sodomy? if not Bestiality it self? For though you may not be punished by Law, The Act will be severely Condemned, and esteemed Brutish, by all the Rationall part of the World; It not lying in the Gender or Kind, but Forme, to render a Creature Monstrous and Abominable to the Nature of Commerce. —I am so Cha∣ritable, (yet in Confidence of O∣thers Vertue, rather then Her owne) as to believe She is a Virgin, in refe∣rence
to Man: Who in that Action, might with more Justice, be punish∣ed for a Deflowrer of Himselfe, then Her. Wherefore you will have no more reason, to Brag of this Privi∣ledge, Then He, that First Descen∣ded into Hell. Of whose Superlative Uglinesse (though her Body be so composed, As the Divell need not alter the Best of her Features, to make her resemble the Foulest of his Fiends; yet) it may be Num∣bered amongst the Questions, least Capable of Decision; Whether, That, or Her Mind, be most Crooked? And to cover this, (yet none of the worst of her Imperfections,) She is supported, like Tyranny, by Steele. From whence, her Breath is become so Noysome, as no Venomous thing can live, in her Presence: Nor any Person sick of the Mother, mis∣carry. Now what Effects her Em∣braces will work upon your Selfe,
may be guess'd, by Groomes: — who in a small time, come to Out∣stink the very Beasts they are Con∣versant with.--And what is said, is so farre, from Hyperbolicall, As, it resembles Truth more then she does a Woman. Yet all this, is but a slen∣der Security, to warrant Posterity up∣on, should such a Monster Confute Philosophy, in producing her Like, For; If Money be so prevalent, as to make you sell your Liberty; why may it not Hire another, to become so much a Slave, as to do your Drud∣gery? Who, cannot be, upon seri∣ous thoughts, thus Singular; As, to preferre, The absolute Possession of a Dung-Boat, before, The having a Partner in a Tall Ship. But if so fond of Wealth, as to break through these Considerations: Teach Her to Cover her Face, and not Salute your Friends. Or, if she must be
Kiss'd, (The Strongest Comple∣ment was ever used) Let her Dis∣robe Her—not possible to be more Noysome, then her Mouth. If Prose be not Tart enough, to weane you, from so Childish a Resolution; For the Feare of Poetry desist: which may make you the Subject of a Comedy. And Guesse by these Verses of a Friend, what Enemies may say. CAn you but think, the Antient Blindness Great, When Men made Gods, of that which we make Or wonder those by Nile, could offer Fat (Meat? And goodly Oxen, to an ugly Cat? Yet you (no lesse advised) to a Witch Will sell your Fate, in hope for to be Rich. Who like the Idolls, in a Pagan Feast, Carries a Monkeys Face, upon her Breast, Shadow'd with Shoulders: under which, doth stay A Bonnet crouching, like a Hill at Sea. Nor may her Bosome fayle of a Device, To hatch an Egge into a Cockatrice. Or turn Men Atheists, who believe no Elves Can now be found, but what we make our Selves.
Were She in India, where they serve the Devill, Not out of Hope of Good, but Feare of Evill, They would adore Her: Lest her Sun-like Nose Should Burn, and Smoke Tobacco, as it growes. Or, lest the Venom of her loathsom Breath, Might blow some soule Contagion ore the Earth. Or, That the Spaniards, by her malice taught, Might learn more Cruelty, then ere they thought. Yet amongst all the People, worst misted, None ever took a Fiend into his Bed. Which proves, that Nature doth abhor your Deed In offering to a Demon, Human Seed. And what will be your Issue, joyn'd with Her, None can resolve you, but a Conjurer. For while She is in Labour, You may heare The Good-wives skreak: and some Physitian sweare It is a Child. And that he findes in writ, Such Births; Before, the Priest dares Christen it. Now if this cannot Move you, May your Taske, Be to beget a Compleate Anti-Mask.
A Letter in Refe∣rence to a Coy LADY. THough I confesse, The Lady you recommended, may prove a Pleasure to Others, are at Leasure wholly to intend Making Love: (No Hare being better provided of Mu∣ces and Shifts to put off Followers then She) yet, so Dull a Soul as mine, in the Apprehension of the Difference, between One Individuall Beauty, and Another, is still ready, with the Màyor of London to Lose all the Pleasure of Hunting, in the Insignificant (though
perhaps to Others Eares pleasant) Cry of the Hounds. Catching of Larkes and Sparrowes lesse Charge∣able and Troublesome, being more Acceptable and gratefull to some Complexions, then Hawking at the Heron. The latter being too full of Splendour, Noyse, Delayes, and Im∣pertinent Complements for a Person, that like me, is not born with the Patience To run after A Flying Beauty; Or spend time in Beating for that, another will Find to y Hand, for a Smaller Summe, then may Compense, The tearing my Repute, or Burthening my Con∣science with Vaine and Fallacious Oathes and Covenants. In the Administration of which, She is as Punctuall, as the Calydonian Commissioners. Yet I cannot deny, but That, She is richly Worth the Purchase, of ny that Own the Knack of such
Amorous Zelots, as have The Pati∣ence, to continue still Whining, where they Know, through the Conscious∣nesse of their own Unworthinesse, That they are not Likely to be Heard. Making a Sincere profession of Love and Respect, when Their Chiefest Intent is onely to plunder, What I fear, This Lady, is to Seek of, already; or else fouly bely'd. None Keeping Their Avenues more strictly Barred, then Such as have been Robb'd already in this Kind. Wherefore having Cast up by my Self the whole Value of the Adventure; I finde it no more then I can truck for, neerer home, and with greater Ease, and Conveni∣ency to my Self. Yet, before I break out into an Open Rebellion against so Soveraign and Absolute a Beauty, I will Present her with This inclosed Petition. To which, If she gives not a Satisfactory
and Full Answer, I am resolved to break off all further Addresse. And to proclaim Her a Tyrant. And her Subjects absolved from their Oathes and Obedience. So, as for the Future it may be lawfull for them, to inrole Themselves under the Red and White Colours of any O∣ther Mistresse they esteem more Debonaire.
The Petition. I Pray Dispatch my Suit, or else Deny it; For if I spend more Time, I dearly Buy it: If you distrust my Truth, I do protest, By That which binds Men most, I Love you best. — It is not our of Fear, That I should Tell. You never heard me Brag, when I did well. Or is't t'engage Me more, that you delay it? None better knows the Grant, nor how to pay it. Is it the Sin you fear Which None can Guesse? Cutting off Oathes, and Time, you make it Lesse. Nay'tis no Fault in you, to lessen Mine. Better once Drunk, then still to thirst for wine. — Hath Nature made a ot below your Zne? My Love would cover it, and count it None. Have you a Servant, that you think, is true? I have a Mistresse too: And yet, Love you. I you can adde to these Objections more, Pay Me for what is past, and I'le give o're.
A Character on a deboshed Souldier. HE carries no Signe of Repu∣tation but in his Mouth; and that he suffers to run over, with tedious Stories of his own Va∣lour: to justifie which, he hath wished his Damnation so often, as it is now sure; rendring him uncapa∣ble of any other Peace of Conscience, but what he findes in Drink, or the operation of no Diviner Spirit, then that incites to Lust and Revenge; his Religion being so farre of his owne making, as he imagines God, like his
Old Host, best pleased, by the Lar∣gest Reckonings. With his Tongue he desires Warres, but is in Heart at peace with All, but his Maker. He had rather be thought behind-hand for Money, then Word: and will sooner, satisfie an Enemy, then a Friend, being readier to requite, what he receives in Anger, then Love; Injuries, then Good Turns. Rendring himself a Slave to Mar∣tiall and arbitrary Justice for a small Salary, under the improbable pre∣tence of Freeing Others. Nor dares this Gladiatour, that rants so high in Taverns, and on the Ale-bench, op∣pose any thing but Patience, to the highest Affront, a Superiour Officer is pleased to put upon him. Though no Papist, he abhorres the Church. And like some of our Reformists, carries no more Marks of a Prote∣stant, then what is legible in Perjury, &c. yet brags more of his Whoring
and Drinking, then any Catholick doth of his Good Works. Who is thus farre Happy, that though he wants Faith to make him a True Saint, he ownes not so much Hypo∣crisie, as to appear so. And there∣fore more capable of Repentance, then those that Plunder and Mur∣ther others, under a secret Pretence, of Honouring that God, he openly prophanes. He brags much of his Scarres, which truly examined, prove rather the Effects of Intem∣perance, then Marks of Valour: his Face bearing the Hideous Impresse of Pots and Glasses, received not in the Fields of Mars, but the easier-entred Sconces of Bacchus. Whose Dis∣course, though it travell'd still be∣twixt one besieged place, or Leaguer, to another, yet it was alwayes Tedious. And if you altered the Subject, his understanding appeared proof against all Sense.
After whom followed this E∣pitaph. At the Saracens Head Tom powr'd in Ale and (Wine, Untill his Face did represent the Signe.
To Dr. Ch. Chaplain to W. E. of Pem. SIR, WHilest it pleased you to Communicate with me, in a Stile suitable to the frailty of my un∣derstanding, I took infinite content in the Converse; but since you have cloathed your Letters in the Thun∣dering and Glorious Ornaments of Learning, I am not able to cope with you: Wherefore let me im∣plore your favour so far as to lay these advantages by, and not render your Love terrible to me, who did never question your Power, but own you in the highest sublimity the world hath (being prompted by so much desert) advanced you to. And on such terms I may enjoy your Acquain∣tance, whereas otherwayes I shall be
forced to take sanctuary in a perpe∣tuall silence. Lest I should lose that little Reason I have, in seeking to Comprehend the infinitness of yours. And to avoyd any mis-infor∣mation of the Quarrell at --- be∣tween my Lo --- and the E. of C --- It was teally thus. The K --- having though against his will, prevailed with my L. to go into the West, by reason of his Interest in those parts, with the other Councellors of State, in hope to facilitate the payment of the five Subsidies vo∣ted, but not given by Parliament, and now Christened a Royall ne; The Commissioners being by the fire, A dispute arose between the two former Lords, whether it was possible for one had never been upon the place, to speak and un∣derstand French perfectly. The L --- of --- who you know never set foot out of England, maintained
the Affirmative with so much ea∣gerness, that the other who had not onely more Reason on his side, but the approbation of the Company, said my L. --- best Argument was noyse; a speech my L. replied was undecent for an Ea. of Complements. And upon this, The other returned the Lie. To which my L -- made him such a Manuall Answer, as the L. C. being penned up in his clothes, fell down, whereupon they were parted, and reconciled; shame, & the title of his Majest. gravest Privy Councellors facilitating the Composition. It is already arrived at the Spanish Am∣bassadors, who according to his face∣tious mode, put it upon the score of our English Valour; which the Gra∣vest relations cannot make them to forget. I am still haunted for ver∣ses from our French Coriot, who is resolved to print his Book in Eng∣lish: Those I made are these.
WHat dost thou mean my friend, in this bad time, To write of Vertue, when tis thought a Crime Not to be Vitious? such a Book would sell, Could prove all Damn'd, did offer to do well: Or find that Pimping is a lawfull trade, Because that Sarah brought her Lord a Maid; Or vindicate what Origen hath cast, (last; That Court and Hell shall meet in Heaven at Or prove that Incest is a Veniall Sin, Because that Lot defil'd his neerest Kin. O could'st thou maintain this, then thou should'st be Rais'd to high place for thy Divinity. Then lose no time, let Goodnesse take her chance, Whil'st you comply with Sin and Ignorance.
On a Cook. A Cook is a Baud to the Mouth. That Kills his own Stomack, to quicken his Master's. Who Lives like a Bear by licking his Fingers. Before a Feast, he in his White sleevs, and Apron resembles the Ephod of a Priest; and seems to be preparing rather a Sacrifice, then a Supper. In which, the Grand-Sallat may justly be thought to personate an Idoll. His office is a representation of hell: where all sorts of Creatures are tor∣mented in Flames, to satisfie the de∣praved and Various Nature of the Tastes of men. Whose Pleasures, and highest Contentments, are no otherwayes to be compleated, but at the prejudice of their Fellow Ani∣malls:
Over which, Reason, not Strength, hath purchased them the Soveraignty, So much abused in this world, as may render the worst of punishments, just, in the next. His profession somthing quadrates with Heraldry: Varying no lesse in Sawces, then they do in Colours, Bendes, Fesses and metalls; And are as much puz'led about marshalling the Dishes, and calculating the pre∣cedency, at the Table, of a Wood-Coek, or Wigeon; a Gull, or Gosling, as, the other are, in placing Lords, and Ladyes. But this, and all the rest of his Learning, and Industry, concludes as I do, in an Excrement: which I wish in his — &c. And so, leave him to Blaspheme in the Kitchin: or Cooling his Tongue in the Cellar.
A Character of an Host. AN Host is one who Thrives with Drinking, and growes Rich by Entertainments. He is of vast Acquaintance, but can num∣ber Few Friends: besides Those resulting from Travaile, or Ne∣cessity. His Conversation is alike to All men, that he may gain the more Money. Being, equally Ho∣spitable, to every Religion he can save by. Giving his Guest the best Content or'e Night, out of hope to please himself in the mor∣ning. The Government of his house is Tyrannicall, all Taxes being Arbitrary, at the will of
his Wife, who sits Regent in the Kitchin. Yet every one that en∣ters, takes his Chamber, for the time he stayes, as his own, With no lesse assurance, then Don Quixot did the whole Mansion, for an Enchanted Castle. He ventures, that reason he hath, in all Com∣panyes. And in Defiance of any Drink the weary Travelour plea∣seth to call for, which if said to be mingled, or adulterate, He calls the Name of God, and the person of the Drawer to attest the Con∣trary. The Signe is the Scheme, by which, you may take the A∣scendent of his Understanding. And his Half-peck, the Measure of his Conscience; of which his Osteler is Chancellour, and keeps the Key: Making no more of Cheating a Strangers Horse, then his Mistresse doth in Over-reaching both. If her Husband be grown into his
perfect Symmetry, his Belly bears the exact proportion, of the big∣gest Jugg. And his Face of That, in the First Edition of Frier Ba∣con's Works. He suits his Discourse, as Fidlers do their songs, to the Eares of the Hearers: choosing rather to offend Truth, then his Company. And, in case, any ride double, he proclaims them Man and Wife: as far more willing to foment Bawdery, then foule two pair of sheets. He is seldome far out of the way, though Drunk or Hang'd: The First, being as neer the Road of his Profession, as the Latter is of that of his Desert.
YOuth, wit, and Beauty, like a painted Sign May stay a Stranger: but 'tis sprightfull wine, And decent welcom makes him 'light and Dine; For who will pass his time in such a place, Where nought appeares, of moment, but a Face?
Deductions from the History of the Earl of Essex, who was executed for Treason, under the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; with a modest Answer to Sir Henry Wotton. THe Love of a People, may be observed, of no lesse dange∣rous a consequence for a Subject to trust to, then their hatred proves to such Princes as are so un∣wary as to neglect it. For after that Sir Robert Cecil had prevailed so farre upon his own Brother, the Earl of Exceter (most else refusing the imployment, out of Love or feare) as to proclaim Essex Traitor: He appeared, deserted by all, but
some few unfortunate Gentlemen, whose Lives out of Gratitude, or Want, depended wholly on his. Nor is the Affection of a Prince, lesse permanent, then their Anger deadly. And in the first of these the Queen was unconstant, in the lat∣ter inexorable. Wherefore, if du∣ring so long a reign, no great quan∣tity of Blood was spilt, it rather re∣sulted from her Subjects Innocency, then any propensity to forgiveness, in∣herent in her Nature. Nothing com∣ming so hardly from her, as a par∣don; I mean of such faults, as con∣cerned her self. And in this she shew∣ed a rare prudence, in becoming a∣ble to raise a prositable use out of a Naturall defect, for (born of that sex, allowed by all as the weakest in Judgement) she lay more obnoxi∣ous to a Censure of insufficiency, then that of Tyranny: the stern∣nesse of whose looks, hath in all a∣ges
scared away contempt, the inse∣perable Companion of a cheap and effeminate Nature. So as neither Leicester, Hatton, nor any other Minion, could ever ex∣tract so much favour from her, as might serve their Lands or Heires, from refunding what their Fathers had mis-spent: Her favours keep∣ing no Servant company, beyond the Land of the Living. The most apparent reason why the Lady Eli∣zabeth Hatton cast her selfe into the contaminated arms of Atturny Cook Nor could her disposition to severl∣ty be in any thing more manifest, then the extraordinary meanes u∣sed but to defer the execution of the Earl of Southampton, who had besides pity, the enemies of Essex to plead for him: yet she continu∣ed inflexible towards mercy, till the same hand that led her into the temptation, did like the Divels,
shew her the glory she was fallen from already, in her Subjects opini∣on, by quenching his, and their ene∣mies malice with the Blood of their Darling. Nor was this hard-extra∣cted Mercy unsuitable to the emer∣gency of the present occasion, for (as I have been often told) not one∣ly those that did in the peoples opi∣nion, contribute to the murther (as many called it) of the Earle: But the Queen herself, was exposed to some publique affronts. The spe∣ctators she passed through in every town, (especially in London) be∣comming far thinner and muter then formerly they were. Some Princes love not that Child is in order to succeed them: but all abominate a stranger lyes un∣der that notion; the cause that she, contrary to the well-being of the Subject, no lesse then the priviledge of Parliament, Committed Pigot and
Wentworth, for moving to know the Man, and beheaded Essex, but for making a smal demonstration of of∣fering himself: Though the later Ro∣man Tyrants took that little securi∣ty they did enjoy, from a quite con∣trary course. But this was at a time when the blood Royall lay extinct, and the possession of the crown fell to his share had the Keenest Sword and strongest head-piece: In which case the most probable way to se∣cure the Prince, was the declaring his Successour, who to preserve his own dignity, was likely to take re∣venge on any should assassinate him in the throne before, a thing very ordinary in those depraved times; not so in England, where during her Reign, there were no lesse then fourteen titles, good and bad, which by her Silence were all kept quiet. For till she made a publique declaration, none had a just cause to
complain. And in case any endea∣voured to have succeeded by force, she had a fair choice out of the rest to make opposition, none being free from some considerable defect or other. The Parliament remain∣ing wholly at her devotion, and no Ill-willers to Essex; The Commons being as fearfull of the Regiment of a Stranger, as the Peerage were jea∣lous of the house of Harford, or any else deducible out of their own Bo∣dy. Fortune appearing then in all particulars so strong on Essex side, as she seemed rather unable, then un∣willing to bear out the charge of his folly, who put her upon such Im∣pertinent errands, as the Dutch youth do fooles on the second of Aprill: Through which she became so far tired, as she was forced at last to return him a Block and a Hatchet. This unconstant Deity, being in the number of such giddy Auxilia∣ries,
as none can be sure what side she will take, and therefore not to be trusted by a wise man. The most steady if not signall events, having been brought about without any o∣ther mediation of hers, but what is unpossible to be avoided; in which sense she is rather capable of the title of Providence, then Luck. For∣tune resembling a cane, which no wise man, but in an unavoidable ne∣cessity will hazard the weight of his whole rest upon. Wherefore the Earl of Essex, if he had not been be∣fated with a strong Opinion of suc∣cess in all his actions, (though built on the weakest foundation) would never have referred his life & future well-being to the sole arbitration of Chance, and the unconstant guidance of a Womans Affection: which being onely skin-deep, could not but in a Court, furnish a person of far lesse magnitude then a Soveraign power
with choice enough: Especially af∣ter his enemies, for their own secu∣rity, had so far Indulged his, as to furnish him with an Army paid by the Queen, and chosen by himself. Nor were the greatest families then in Rebellion in Ireland, (rendred by the most probable reports) lesse o∣bedient to him then his respective Officers: And if these advantages had been too little to have set the Crown upon his head, after the de∣cease of his Mistrisse, he might have had any men, or mony from the most Catholick King; who would have advanced his designes, or any naturall English Subjects else, that had but opposed the Scot∣tish Succession. Which was for∣merly projected by Leicester, and the onely visible occasion he mana∣ged the English force in the Ne∣therlands with so little care, and worse successe, who immediately
began to prosper upon his remove. But Essex had Religion and Fidelity, inherent in his Nature, Humours known so Incompatible with Ambi∣tion, as it was no lesse unsafe for him to court a Crown, then it did after prove Incongruous and mis-becom∣ming, for his more frigid Son to make Love, and Importune Ladies. Nor is this a conjecture of my own, but what I have often heard aver∣red by the friends of Sir Charles Danvers, whose youngest Sister married my eldest Brother. And that the Honesty of Essex (never de∣nied to exceed his Discretion) might for the present moderate his Ambi∣tion: But how he would have be∣haved himself in the company of an absolute power, may be safer now disputed by us, then at that time ex∣perimented by the Queen. Successe in those that wear it, expunging like Aqua Fortis all former marks of
Allegiance or Probity. For though his first thoughts might be of no larger extent, then to remove Cecil, and other declared enemies, under the notion of evil Counsellers, that powred into her Eares such tales as were disadvantagious to the true Religion, and Policy of the State: Yet that point gained, he could not from a lower Station then a Throne, have satisfied so many, wiser men then himself, whose clearer insight into the advantages he was then in pos∣session of, had tempted to be adven∣turers with him. So as all the favour could have accrued to his Mistris from a more happy success then be∣fell the Earl, exceeded not the Complement of continuing her in his lap, (a place not likely to sute long with her Age, or his occasi∣ons.) Queen Elizabeths Reign, ha∣ving been too reserved, quietly to have indured from an Administrator
(she remaining yet in being) so pro∣fuse an expence of honour and Riches, as was expedient to be thrown to such a needy party, as had already Imbarqued themselves in his service, whose fidelity and strength (the Nurslings of hope, re∣ward and preferment) was requisite to maintain him on the Stage. For though possibly, his desires might terminate in a removall of his Ene∣mies; They had no honester design then to raise themselves, without much reference had to the meanes. From whence it is easie to contem∣plate the prodigious Disparities in Rebellion; which though begun upon never so just, moderate, or Re∣ligious pretences, necessity, ambition, and Humane frailty will interject so many new and unexpected preten∣ces, and events, as it rarely con∣cludes, without the ruine of it self, or the Commonwealth; which once
suffered to grow intemperate and run over, it doth like a Pot consume its own fat, and loseth its former strength and Glory, by raising the drosse and dregs of her Subjects, uppermost. One cause of his presumption was, The fond Opinion he had, that she would not rob her eyes of the great delight she took in his Person. A fantasticall over-weening of himself, and womans Affection, to whom, no single mans perfections was ever yet found continually Gratefull. Now such as wonder, how she durst bring him to the Scaffold, for fear of her own Honour, are not throughly studied in the boldnesse of Princes (whose faces are conti∣nually steeled with the varnish of a grosse Flattery, put upon their worst Actions) no more then the com∣punctions of Dying Men, who desire rather to clear themselves towards
God, and the world, then imperti∣nently to accuse others: Besides, a hope of Pardon, not to be cut off but with his Head, was a sufficient Rea∣son to restrain him from breaking out into any intemperate ranting a∣gainst his Prince: As Biron of France, did not long after, most Imprudent∣ly fall into, in reference to his King, Henry the Fourth, Dying in the opi∣nion of the generality, rather like a mad man, then a Christian. Yet had Essex unloaded his bosome of all it did contain, it might possibly not have swelled to so great a bulk, as did then appear in the Opinion of the most: or that it may after be blown up to by flatulent Posterity (sel∣dom endued with so even a fortune, as to have truth and falshood weighed to it in an equall Ballance) manisest in a number of Relations extant at home, and abroad. The Bloud she inherited, no lesse then her Father's
humour, having procured her no good opinion from the Church, ac∣cording to whose Dialect the gene∣rality did heretofore, out of Igno∣rance, or reverence, tune their belief. Had he been true to his first Prin∣ciples, moulded by some more dex∣terous heads then his own, which was to spin out his time, together with the Irish war, till a certain report of the Queen's sickness, or death had come to him, from such an unquestioned number of his own Confidents, as were able to have assured belief; It might in reason have presented him with his wish, or at worst so much power, as would have made him arbitrator of the next suc∣cession. But hast, proceeding from a Naturall Impatience to live out of England, and the contrary advice re∣ceived from some neer about him (suborned to destroy him) rendered
all addle: By perswading his return without an Army, upon a false report raised of her Majesties Death, the time assigned, wherein to shew himself. And to this end, the Warres in Ireland were prolonged, with no weaker endeavours, then Montjoy used after to conclude them, Owner of no other project but the reducing of that Province unto obedience: Essex presuming so farre upon the peoples affections, that he thought the sound of his coming able to raise an Army whereever he came. Essex, if he had been master of parts strong enough to have mount∣ed him into the Saddle of Soveraign∣ty, might have found by the beat∣ing of the Parliament (a true pulse of the Nation) That there was no probability to raise any advantagi∣ous distemper for him, during the life of the Queen: The people ap∣prehending
little other cause of dis∣content, but what might arise from the thought, that their present feli∣city depended only on the continu∣ance of an Old Lady; After whom, they expected more dismall dayes, then their Love could ever have imagined from the Government of Essex. Wherefore to lay the Sceane of any thing carried but the vizard of a Rebellion in London (at that time abounding with riches and felicity) was an act savouring of so great Im∣prudence, as I wonder his enemies should bring him to it, or his Friends suffer him to prosecute: As I have often told some at that time neer about him, who made me no other answer, but that he perished be∣tween his own presumption, and others Infidelity. His security might have been more, and losse lesse, had he gone into Wales, when he passed
through London, where he had great love both by Inheritance from his Father (a good Landlord) and his own purchase, alwayes of a liberall Nature. Nor did he fail to wear a Leek on St. David's day, but be∣sides, would upon all occasions vin∣dicate the Wetch Inhabitants, and own them for his Countrymen, as Queen Elizabeth usually was wont, upon the first of March. And by this the Earl grew so popular amongst these people (especially such as had little to lose,) that without all que∣stion, so many would have appeared in his favour, as might have procu∣red him audience from her Majesty, and not improbably the removall of his enemies, under that notion ha∣ted by the generality, no lesse then those linked to him, under a more strict friendship. Or if this had been too hard a task, their strength and meanes was not likely to want
power, to land him again in Ireland, from whence he had been drawn by his own folly, and the wisdom of his maligners; where not onely the English, but the natives (to those in actuall Rebellion) were his reported servants. The Catholiques, till they were better Cajoled by the Scotish Kings Confidents, not obstructing his Designes. And how secure he would have been, in that Province, may be guessed by Tyrone, the Capi∣tall Rebell, who notwithstanding more impartial indeavours then the Lord Lieutenant Essex had used, did obtain his Pardòn, in a manner mau∣gre the English forces. Essex was too honest to have re∣moved every Impediment lying in the way to Soveraignty, nothing but death being able to gagg a per∣son robb'd of a Crown. Yet her Successour met with no opposition, though bred in an ayre ever Pestife∣rous
to this Nation; which wisely considered, might have tempted a people to have disputed his en∣trance, till caution given. But the Riches and felicities injoyed, during the incomparable Reign of Queen Elizabeth, hung yet like holy dayes at their fingers ends, by which they were become so effeminate, and un∣advised, as to choose rather to fall into an Incurable Consumption, then hazard a little the shaking by a few fits of a Fever; which if chosen, might not unlikely have proved as wholesome Physick for King James as England; Who wanting a Legall pretext, had nothing left him in safety strong enough to refell the Brazen-faced Impudence of his Countrymens Importunity. But the last Scene of Princes, like the Cata∣strophe of a Play, is so hudled up, and every one so intent upon his own particular Interest, (being muf∣fled
by hope or fear) as that is left meerly to the disposition of For∣tune, which ought onely to be in∣trusted with Prudence her self. Nor did the readiness of the Scots to Arm, (in hope of so much plunder, as this Nation might afford, shrou∣ded under the specious pretence of Henry the 7s. eldest daughter) por∣tend less in the ears of the unresol∣ved, then a possibility of Conquest, the most ungratefull sound to the formerly free People of England. Neither did these conjectures re∣ceive small aggravation from those formerly suborned, to promote the entrance of the Stuarts, who if Essex had remained true to his principles, might have been saluted on the borders, by an Army strong enough to have moderated the Scots condi∣tions, or advanced his own. Though it was the universall Opinion, that Essex's Ambition, did like the great
Earl of Warwick's, terminate in a desire to bring in James on his own score. It is not probable the Earle car∣ried any evill meaning towards the Common-wealth, because neither his enemies, nor friends are found to mention any endeavour in him to call in a Forreigner: Wherefore if the Crown was his Mistresse, he used the most decent way of wooing her, which was onely through the Me∣diation of her native Subjects. Yet I doubt whether he had justly calculated the weight of this Cir∣cumstance, That Conscience is as dangerous in an Usurper, as Cruelty, and excesse is deadly, and undecent, in him doth Legally succeed. I have heard it, though looked upon by me as a Paradox, that Essex would have vindicated the English freedom, by reviving such ancient Priviledges as had been pretermit∣ted,
during the Tyrannicall reigns of the two last Henries; And no wayes indulged by Queen Eliza∣beth, which not extending all her time beyond a few particulars, was then less discernable. No act of hers being registred so contrary to the grain of her own people, as the death of this man; the Queen of Scots being looked upon as a Ca∣tholick, which in the generall dia∣lect of England at that time, signifi∣ed no less then a sworn enemy to God and the Prince, (so zealous, if I may not say surious, are all changes) that it was passed over, without any apprehension of honour, or pitty, as justified by the cruell Massacre com∣mitted not long before upon the French Hugenots, at the instigation of that Kings Mother. An Act through which the Integrity of Prin∣ces was much ahated. But whether his nation by reason of her divers
titles, and disparity in estates, was ca∣pable of that absolute freedom, hath since been fancied by some, I leave to the Arbitration of greater Poli∣titians. Onely this I am confident of, that no fair capitulation could have disobliged King James, who lay under too many doubts, and strong desires, to have refused so peaceable an entry as he found, upon any law∣full limitations; manifest in the ad∣vice given to his Son; Wherein are more Popular rules, then himself was ever observed to follow. By the vast quantity of teares let fall from the Multitude upon his Grave, may be noted, how far ea∣sier it is to find pitty, then prote∣ction, Though his friends if united, would have proved the major part. Who for want of a good head-piece to follow, this universall affection, like floting Atomes, made onely a world
of Calamity for himself and his par∣ty. But this blow past recalling, set the peoples teeth so much an edge, as all the Queen did after, was thought bitter, and her Government too peevish and effeminate for so warlike a Nation: Nor did she de∣cline lesse in the opinion of the Court it self, no counsel daring after to appear, but what was sutable to the Cecilian gusto. Here may be noted, with what Circumspection Princes ought to play their Game, since Counsellors, their Card-holders, are not seldom Cheaters, and intend more particular Interests then their Masters: As ap∣peared in the remove of Essex, a man thought farre more necessary to the Queen's Service, and Eng∣lands safety, then such as purchased his ruine. The banding of two factions, being the most probable way to keep, this already superannu∣ated
Princes from falling into con∣tempt. For such Commands, as under both parties would have been readily obeyed, were after one had got the absolute disposure of af∣fairs, wholly neglected. Essex's re∣turn (which no question would have been indeavoured, upon the least discontent of her Majesty) appearing of so dismall a consequence to his enemies, as nothing might procure it, was thought safe, or what did ob∣struct it, dangerous. Nor was it pos∣sible for this planet, so neer its de∣clension, to Influence another party: None daring to run the Hazard of an unavoydable future Ruine upon the contemplation of a year or two's power; which was more then her age, and present weaknesse did in any probability promise. This proves, it had been the Queen's better policy, to have con∣ceded the Life of the Earle to the
teares, and vowes of the people, through which their Love had not onely been preserved intire, but (what was next considerable) so great a restraint put upon the con∣trary Cabal, as might contain them within the compasse of Obedience; out of fear she should have let loose this Lyon, who to that end she might have kept in the Tower, his death not being probable, as her Subjects stood affected, to have countervalued the advantage of his Life. And this oversight was the more inexcusable, because the Ancestours of the Earl's chiefest enemies had by the same arts ren∣dred her ungratefull to the People of England, in a like case of severity towards the Duke of Norfolk. Nor did she apprehend till it was too late, the wound given her own Power, through the mediation of the Hangman in the death of Essex;
Not being able ever after, to mo∣derate the Insolency of those, that now did not stick to slight her, and story openly in her ears the necessi∣ty she lay under, to declare the Scotch King her Successor, lest the Parl. should be (for their own safety) compelled to do it themselves; which had not been omitted, but (as I have been told) to endear King James more to some particular families, of which the most noble for birth, found af∣terwards little cause to applaud their Designe. Neither were other reports wanting, which being usuall at the Death of all Princes, I shall here wilfully omit, as quite unsatis∣fied of their truth. Nor had I said this, but that there hath been from the beginning of the uncivill wars (wherein none were masters of what they had) diverse imperfect Copies of my own hand left in the custody of one did print some of them, un∣der
a namelesse Author, though very false, And might have done this, if not timely prevented. Nor did this blow terminate on∣ly in the ruine of the Earls friends, but extended to the disadvantage of his Maligners themselves, apparent in Sir Walter Raleigh, who wanting Strength, though not Wit to be the treasurers Corrivall, Perished because not thought to own humility enough to be his Servant: it being more safe at Court to have many Enemies of equall power, then one false ambi∣tious friend, that hath attained to the absolutenesse of Command. The agi∣tations and tempests, arising from considerable factions in the houses of Princes, (resembling some winds at sea, by which men are driven though by contrary means, to one and the same end) would of necessi∣ty have miscarried, or perished, had any single party prevailed. The one
still thinking it honourable to pre∣serve and advance what the other esteems safe to suppresse and destroy. And this Raleigh was often heard to say, he did not apprehend, Before his Genius had dictated it to him, as he came in a Boat from the executi∣on of the Earl of Essex, which was done at the Tower. Nor could the wisest of his endeavours free him from the dire effects of this Portent, or to name it more properly, a ne∣cessary cause of such events, as did after befall him. The Death of Essex like a Me∣lancholy cloud, did shade the pro∣spect of her peoples affection, from being so discernable at the shutting of her dayes, as it was during the Dawning and Meridian of her reign. Yet if Essex had been try'd by a Peerage of Angels, they would have passed a like sentence upon him, or exposed Monarchy to contempt.
Wherefore Prudence cannot lay the fault at the door of her Justice, but the ill-management of her Mercy, as not knowing how to imploy it, to∣wards the best advantage of her fu∣ture Affairs. But after an Impartiall Reflection made, in reference to pri∣vate persons averseness towards any apprehension of defect, we may pos∣sibly learn to wonder, why she made no better provision against contempt, till that hower a meer stranger to this Princess, who had all her sails conti∣nually fill'd with flattery or success. Now to vindicate her Majesty from the obvious aspersion I have so often heard her prudence upbraided withall, (for neglecting the Italian mode quite, in the removall of Ma∣ry the Scottish Queen, and Dowager of France, so much the more unde∣cent, as the hand of a Hangman is less honourable then that of a Physi∣tian.) I may say, That since those,
who for their own sakes as well as their Soveraigns, thought it not safe to be left undone, wanted the skil or spirit to do it a clandestine way, i was more discretion then folly to refuse e∣jecting one so uncouth herself; such a lesson being easier learned then forgot∣ten, & might have been afterward pra∣ctised to her personall disadvantage. And if reports on all hands were not mistaken, little thanks is due to those who made the Nation accessary through this solemn Try all to the Death of her mother they meant next to set up. Nor can an undoub∣ted desire in the Scots to have her removed, the better to facilitate the Succession of their King (who did more indulge his Patience then Honour, in passing unrevenged those houses, sprinkled by her blood) justi∣fie their discretions, that could not but know all Obligation was more likely to be lost in the shame, then
found in any gratefull acknowledg∣ment of such actions as these. And if their Posterity taste of the like Ju∣stice, they may sacrifice repentance to such nets, as themselves spread to insnare this Queen first, and then Essex; the fault of the last being in reference to the Innocent driving on the designe, as far below such severity, as the majesty of the other was a∣bove it. Nothing commends the good∣ness of Queen Elizabeths reign more, then that she and her Subjects should have one and the same Mi∣nion, as happened in Essex: where∣as the hatred of the people, proved after an undoubted consequence of her Successor's Love, remaining no less confident of the choyce of the one, than diffident of the others. The Queen wanting no medium to nterpose between her and their fu∣ry: from whence grew a confidence,
that she would not countenance an unworthy man. Neither was it a small advancement to this general complyance, that the people ap∣peared not at the cost to raise him. It being the custom of this thrifty Prince, to let her Favorites taste, not surfet, on the wealth of the Na∣tion, conveying her Largesses by Spoons, not Buckets: The names of Monopolies, and extrajudiciall Taxes, not being intelligible to experience all her days. Neither were her ears stopped against her peoples complaints, ever thought by her just, and so fit to receive a present redresse; the cause her Parliaments were no further inquisitive then she was pleased to informe them. Had her Successor retained the like Moderation, the power of our Representative had never fallen un∣der the malleation of so extensive a dispute, which hath raised mens
minds up to so impetuous a Billow, as it is questioneble, whether that which supported her power, may not through a contrary application utterly ruine those may succeed. Queen Elizabeth being not onely fortunate in her conduct at home, but able to diffuse peace and plenty over such Neighbour-Nations, as she was advised by true Reason of State, to maintain in strength and good plight. Not suitable to the late practise of a Prince, that first brake with Spain, then France, and after was hardly restrained from kindling a fire in the Netherlands, which lyes in a manner in the bo∣som of England. Now I should conclude here, but that I find Sir Henry Wotton (late Provost of Eaton, and a long time before Ambassadour with the most Illustrious State of Venice) hath published a Manuscript amongst his
friends, and may since be made more generall; where he offers to compare the Duke of Buckingham with the Earl of Essex; much to the disadvantage of the latter, who lay∣ing this action by, did never own the doing any thing so ungratefull, as might make him fear the Anger, or beg the favour of a Parliament, much less owe his Life to the disso∣lution of one already called. He is not charged with many deeds of Improbity, unless Women be cast up∣on his account, not in Justice to be done, the other standing by. The awe he bare to the Religion then Professed was discernable by his Death, which in the Opinion of ma∣ny, reached something below the Garb of a Souldier; so busie are Cri∣ticks (that like Flyes spare nothing savours of Fame or Infamy) to the Grave it self. That he was thought no instru∣ment
of Tyranny or Oppression, ap∣pears manifest, in the Monument of Love, remains still undemolished in the hearts of most Englishmen: whereas the Duke retains the gene∣rall tincture of, &c. Nor can his well-known bounty to Friends and Servants expunge it, because drai∣ned from the people, or taken out of the publique Treasure, if not from the generall safety of the Nation. Whereas Essex obliged his Confi∣dents out of his own store, or by o∣ther so innocent wayes, as the Subject had no just cause to be scandalized at it. The Earles Naturall parts were as good as the Dukes, his Learning and Birth higher, the one being of an honourable, the other at best but of a Gentile extraction. Nor can so in∣considerate an Action, that in charity rather deserves the title of a Riot then of a Treason, come up to so
great an Ingratitude and Indignity to the Nation, as Buckinghams procee∣dings at Rochell, calculated after the French account, the summe of which I leave for more voluminous Pens to cast up; onely I shall assume the boldness to say, That the Duke shewed no less folly in accumulating so great a hatred of the people, then Essex did in mis-applying their Love. And if his shadows were left exact to posterity, he was not be∣hind him in handsomness, the sole and primary cause of Villers ad∣vancement. Onely in this Essex came short, in having a Mistresse would be attentive to Reason, from whence soever it came, whether through the Organs of Friendship or Malice. Whereas the Dukes fortune depended on two Princes, That in reference to their own weakness or his strength, remained deaf to all complaints else, but what were pre∣sented
through his own mediation, or those of his Creatures, with which he was ever made first acquainted, under no slighter a penalty then his displeasure, so much more heavier then the Kings, as his memory was better, and Interest more. Concerning their Deaths, I can attest, the Dukes did occasion no less joy, then the other did sorrow, not matched by the saddest acci∣dent did happen in Queen Eliza∣beths reign; No not if her Death be cast in, though deplorable enough, as I have often been informed by those did approve the Sentence, but not the so suddain execution of it. Nor was the Hangman reported to be willingly hired to do it, whereas Felton seemed to be Inspired by some Daemon, if not the Genius of our Nation. This had not been said, but in vindication of that, I never found
cause yet to question the truth of, and to unwarp their judgements (if any such be) that may be drawn a∣side, by the goodness of Sir Henry Woottons parts, in knowing mens o∣pinions, much contaminated by his too over-zealous celebration of this Man, as may be easily found in the Records of Parliament, to which I refer the Reader, together with what I have in this behalf written.
Some Advantages may be deduceable from Court-Factions. IT may be thought I hope no less impertinent, then what went be∣fore, if according to my rambling Method, I shall drop some conje∣ctures in reference to a benefit may redound to the Subject from Court-factions: All which in conclusion will reach the Prince, who cannot be safe and happy, if his people live miserably; Not likely to be avoyd∣ed, where preferments depend whol∣ly upon the mediation of a single and uncontroulable party. In which case the oppressed have no power for the present to appeal to. The cause our later Parliaments have been peste∣red with Clamours and Complaints, seldom, if ever heard of in the Gol∣den
dayes of Queen Elizabeth. And from whose root sprung those bran∣ches of misery, by which the greatest felicity any nation ever injoyed, is become over-shadowed, so that the detection of corruption in Officers, and the gratification of the malice of some, and Ambition of others, in their expulsions and Punishments, gave them at last the boldness to question the integrity of the Crown. Divers persons of equall autho∣rity, though both wicked, do in experience produced more justice then a greater probity in a single Indivi∣duall, hath been (at least in these depraved ages) heard to pronounce: For though Bribery cannot be de∣nyed a deflourer of equity; yet re∣maining more palpable in referencd to detection, it may not happily be of so bad a consequence, as the ef∣fects of the more uneasily detected propensities, found to follow the
inclinations of love, fear, or hope: as it is easily deduced from the pra∣ctise usual in private families, where a great advantage accrues to the first Delator, and prejudice to the party accused; It not lying in the strength of vertue, if in any agility of defence, to keep a person immaculate from the blurs of Calumny, for want of proof, or an indifferent ear, which su∣perlative powers cannot be at leasure to afford. Nor is the advantage to be drawn from two equall Cabals, better discerned, then by compa∣ring the tempers of King James his Parliaments with those holden un∣der the Queen; for the first, being wholly led by a single and passionate affection to one Minion, lived to see: never a tolerable Minister relating to the Crown, or any in Authority so resolute, as not to prefer the Fa∣vorites Command before his Ma∣sters, as esteeming the frown of the
last more deadly. Now the huge rate set upon places of Judicature, taught Judges to sell their votes, and people to complain: Who by devouring of Instruments, came at last so well ac∣quainted with their own strength, as not to spare the principall, and first cause. One Concession ever crouding room for a greater, if not a more un∣reasonable demand. Whereas such instruments of State as Queen Eli¦beth had use of, being strained through the double and contrary In∣terests of a divided party, no vertue was excluded, or vice admitted, any way beneficiall, or of prejudice to Prince or people; contrary to the cu∣stom of later times, wherein the most probable designs were pinched and miscarried, through the smal∣nesse of their parts were imployed to keep them on foot. No more solid Reason appearing in the advance∣ment of the most, but Mony or fa∣vour;
As no question will be found instanced in a prodigious number of examples, when time shall have pur∣chased impunity, for the manifesta∣tion of truth; not so likely to have proved the result of a divided Court, where the creatures of one were the enemies of an other, no lesse power∣full; and so they both became ly∣able to accusation, or capable of de∣fence. And from the sparkles of this clashing, not onely persons and actions, but the Queens Coun∣cils came to be refined from the rust and Cankers, that after grew through the corruption of forraign coyn, no less currant at Court all my time, then pieces of two and twen∣ty shillings, Jacobuses themselves. Now though Monarchy may (whe∣ther out of perfection or defect I shall not here dispute) make use of this Recipe, it seems dangerous, if not mortall, in reference to a freer
Government, where the least siding is a step towards Tyranny: the weakest part being as apt to call, as a potent neighbour may be to come and assist, upon so advantagious an errand. All disparities or contentions, but meerly rationall and in reference to an uni∣versall welfare, tending to popularity and disunion, wherefore above all things to be avoyded. Nor is any neer dependance upon a forreign Prince, more mighty then them∣selves, compatible with Liberty: Which renders lending of vast Summs little less dangerous then borrowing. And through which the Catholique King may one day attain Genoa; it being naturall to all Credi∣tors to favour their designs that owe them mony, in hope of Payment; and so become Traitors to the gene∣rality, out of the desire of a parti∣cular reimbursement. Such folly lyes in many Citizens, as they pre∣ferre
destruction in grosse, before the hazard of their private Interests. But when Power is Monopolized in a single person, Faction can be no more spared, then an eye or an ear. Kings for the generality, out of Ig∣norance in the world, if not for want of wit, or too much Flattery, being unable to value what they give or receive; or whether they gratisie or depresse vertue or vice, especially if they have no other information, but what is deduced from a Minion, whose judgement is no less clouded through Pride, then his is by affecti∣on, and a supposition of worth and a∣bilities not really present; Such Servants owning contrary interests to their Masters, who by bearing the charges of those follies they daily commit, do not seldom prove Banckrupts themselves of all ought to be esteemed dear in Soveraignty. Nor are those single Trustees of
the Royall assent, found by practise so impartiall in the distribution of rewards and punishments, but that they diminish by the first, no less their Princes Love, then they aug∣ment in the latter the peoples hatred; which an even debate would so far Moderate, as to give such satisfacti∣on as might preserve the generality in obedience, by nothing so soon for∣seited, as a continued succession of cruell punishments, and unjust Cen∣sures. I remember after Felton had given the fatall blow to George Duke of Buckingham, one Savil, a lusty fellow, formerly burnt in the Shoulder for a Rogue (finding how acceptable the news was, where ever it came) gave out, he was the man that did it: And that though an ho∣nourable persons brother, he wanted mony to convey him away; upon which he was apprehended, and though not worth a groat, fined a
considerable sum in the Star-Cham∣ber, to which, the wisdom, equity and justice of that Court, added (because they wanted power to hang him) this Corporall punishment, viz. That he should be whipped from the Fleet where he lay prisoner, to the Pilory in Westminster-palace-yard, there to be for two hours nailed, & after to lose one ear, have his nose slit, and then to be branded in the forehead; all which, as long as the bowels of hu∣manity would give me leave, I looked upon: Nor was this more then half his punishment, as much being to be done to him in Cheapside, but that (as I heard) the King more charitable then his Judges, did par∣don it; Though his perpetuall re∣sidence in Bridewell was not remit∣ted, till for another thing (some thought unlikely to be done under such a restraint) he was hanged at Tiburn. I had not touched upon
this, as relating to a time which none can remember without being agitated by envy, or grief: but to acquaint posterity, with the opinion of a Lord, looked upon as the wisest for counsell, (however he might have failed in reference to execution) in his time: Who at dinner that day with some of the promoters of the fore-mentioned Sentence, said, that though he hoped it would never be executed, yet it grieved him, a president of that high nature should remain upon record, no less to the dishonour of their Mercy, then the Justice of his Majesty, upon whose scoreit might not unpossibly one day lye heavy: Nor did it scape the no∣tice of the next Parl. as any may find, can procure a sight of a book written by Regall autority, wherein the Subject was prohibited so much as to name a Parliament, &c. But the conclusion of the fore-mentio∣ned
prudent Lord, was to prove, that of all punishments death was soonest forgotten; whereas Whipping and Pilory were alwayes remembred: from whence Governours may ob∣serve, That the greatest Cruelty is exercised by Subjects have had their foundations laid in pitty. Nor can this digression be thought imperti∣nent, by those shall consider, that such exorbitant and unnaturall repe∣titions of Punishments, were stran∣gers during the domination of two equall factions. Through the per∣cussion of which, like Flint and Steel, all things came to light, which these pleas might advance, or Eclipse the glory of the Prince. Nor should I prosecute this Epi∣demicall mischief of Favorites, at this time common with France and Spain, but to answer such as plead for it: Whom I have heard so impudent, as to alledge the example
of our blessed Saviour; and no lesse foolish in citing the autori∣ty due to the Prudence of Italy, where no Pope lives without a Nephew: Forgetting the whole management of the Church was not left to Saint John; nor the wise Conclave swayed by his Holinesse Kindred, who being in∣circled on all sides with enemies, and destitute by reason of his elective honour, of any heredi∣tary friendship, cannot in Reason provide better for his safety, a∣gainst the dangers have for ma∣ny Ages waited upon the Table and Cup of the Pope, then by raising a person to so high a dig∣nity about him, as may tran∣scend any preferments likely to be offered by an enemy. The cause he that is stiled his Nephew, values his preservation equally with his owne. And he that shall
yet seek further satisfaction, may finde it in the unhappy manage∣ment of such Princes affairs, as have suffered themselves to be ingrossed by Minions, taken onely upon the bare recommendations of their private Affections.
It is the condition of those in Power to be guided by Servants. THey say of the Whale that she is steered in her course through the guidance of a far smaller Fish, and a lesser then that is reported to alter the Naturall gale of a Ship; looked upon as wonders in the deep, though few things are more usuall and Familiar upon Land. All our State-Leviathans being so far guided by their Servants, Wives, Mistresses or Favorites, that in a true sense there is no Monarchy, all things for the most part succeeding according to the perswasions of o∣thers, if not contrary to the will of the Prince: A Mischief not to be quite obviated, but at the perill of falling into Obstinacy, (as great if
not a more prejudiciall extream) nor hath any King under my expe∣rience, been able to drive on his Affayres, without grating upon one of these excesses. So as a Nation like that of Egypt, is not seldome gover∣ned by a Stranger or a Jew. There being no such thing in an unlimited sense, as an Absolute Government, or if possible to be found, it must be in that as improperly stiled Free. Which proves there is no reall Li∣berty, or Power totally Arbitrary, in the nature of Things. For though the Incomparable Prudence of the State of Venice, hath compounded for most of the errours committed by the Senators of Carthage; And Queen-Elizabeth shunned the great∣est Rocks of Tyranny (though as free from compulsion, as ever any Prince stood;) yet the Jurisdicti∣on of either was as remote from be∣ing purely or totally Absolute, as
the condition of their Subjects is uncapable of the name of Freedom. They being both too inestimable Jewels to be intrusted with passion, single, and without any mediation from Counsell or Law. I confess the Grand Signior can strangle whom he please; but it is seldom done at his own suit, no more then any desert is gratified: I my self have known many, so far Strangers to what was convenient, as they would scarce concede or deny any thing, out of the presence of their Secretary. And this proceeded not seldom from a distrust there was no cause for: Manifest in the Earl of Somerset, who though himself ow∣ner of a competent sufficiency, was so Inchanted with an opinion of Sir Thomas Overburies parts, that he preferred him from a Servant to such an intimate friendship, as he could think nothing well-educated
for imployment in his Office, that had not passed his Correction, nor secret safe laid up, but in his Bosom: which swelled him to such a Mon∣strosity in pride, that I have heard (not being my self then neer the English Court) how he offered to rant at his Servants, and did once beat the Coach-man; for putting his Commands under an inferiour ex∣postulation to his Masters. And through this intolerable arrogance in him, and remissness in the Earl, the sparks first flew, that kindled the ruine of them both: friend∣ship being no more able to main∣tain its interest against a feminine Affection, then so great a Pride was to confine it self within the tedder of Moderation. The Minions of my time (an epidemicall mischief over all the great Nations of Christendom where Monarchy swayes) did, du∣ring that Fortune, so far transcend
their Patrons felicity, as they could gratifie all the rest of their Passions (quite exempt from fear or danger) being screened from both by the person of their Prince, whom in rea∣son they ought to defend; It having been often averred in my experi∣ence, that all the Kings I have known, were found to do more for their Favorites, then they could be tempted to have done for them∣selves. Which may serve for a proof of this Assertion, that the greatest are not Free, but led intri∣umph by the Affections of others, through the mediation of their own, by which means Women come to Govern, and Children to dispose of Common-wealths. And thus the hand of Providence, though steady in it self, doth out of a desire to appear various (and so more beau∣tifull) not onely remove the great men, but the paunes so occultly,
in this huge Chesse-board of the world, as they seem to our giddy apprehensions, to be dandled in the Lap of a contingent Successe. Though good or bad Luck are meerly Imaginary, like the Ar∣ticke and Antarticke Poles, on which the world, as on the two ends of an Axletree, are feigned to depend. Wherefore the ap∣parent Reason why great men are ruled by more obscure fools, is want of Judgement or Suffi∣ciency. The hidden Justice of God upon the Nation in generall, or persons in particular, who are naturally unworthy through dis∣obedience, or have rendred them∣selves so, by a Male-administra∣tion of Affairs: The cause their Power is shared with meaner Peo∣ple, first sought to in all Suits in∣cident to their Places. And this Custom hath brought into such
credit amongst men, as forgetting how much it savours of weakness, they labour to make it Necessa∣ry in the Court of Heaven. As if God were more Importuned, or less affected by our immediate Addresses, then when we offer'd our Prayers through the interces∣sion of the blessed Virgin, or some other Saint: Consonant to a Me∣morable Answer to a Catholick, made by King James, That the Ruler of all things was not subject to dote like him. Yet wise men Govern in their own persons, as Ioseph is said to rule Egypt; for had not his Servants used to afford more obe∣dience then advice, so dishonest an action in outward appearance, could never have passed without expostulation, as the putting the Cup in Benjamins Sack. To end this Discourse, nothing plausible
ought to be referred to a Servant's dispatch, nor that whichis less Po∣pular done by a Master; since he that is used to rake in dirt must im∣ploy an Instrument, lest the filth should stick too apparently on his fingers. Thus Princes juggle by Confederacy, whilest meaner men rule in their own persons. FINIS.
