P62 13165492 98231
Oeconomica Sacra: OR A Paraenetical Discourse OF MARRIAGE: Together with some PARTICULAR REMARKS ON THE Marriage OF ISAAC and REBECCA. Faelices ter & amplius, Quos irrupta tenet copula; nec ullis Divulsus quaerimoniis Supraema citius solvit amor die. Horace. LONDON, Printed for John Salusbury, at the Atlas in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange, 1685.
TO THE Right Honourable JAMES Earl of Salisbury, VISCOUNT CRANEBƲRN, Baron Caecill of Essenden. May it please your Lordship; THe Doctrine of Vita∣lity and Vegetation, as it is the Act of an
Om∣nipotent God, so 'tis a stu∣pendious  Mystery to Man: And as the Divine Institu∣tion, and Legitimacy in prosecuting the Succession of natural Causes, and pro∣pagation of Corporeal Be∣ings, was a clear Indicati∣on of Divine goodness, and a publick Manifesto to in∣dulge Mankind in Conju∣gal embraces; as Antece∣dents to those wise and honourable purposes, for which Marriage was or∣dained; so the Pravity and Corruption of the humane Nature, is visible in those notorious deviations
from the Primitive Sanction: And the eager pursuite of  unlawful and destructive pleasures doth wholly in∣vert the appointed Deco∣rum; and this violence of appetite continuing, the mind is dealt withall, and prepared to an Assent, and reason proselyted to the di∣ctates of passion. The fatal effects of For∣nication and Adulteries, are too plainly apparent in de∣stroying bodily health; the ruine of Families and King∣doms, the debauching the generality of Mankind, the Production of a miserable and obscure Progeny, the Atarchy and Confusion in Government, the loss of
Property in the World, the want of Education and Pro∣tection of Parents, the A∣bolition of Religion and Devotion; and in short, the Destruction of the Creati∣on: all which are sufficient Punishments in themselves. Did I say Punishments? I must only call them Suffe∣rings, Proaemial to Eternal Torments. How will the wiser Hea∣then condemn such bea∣stial and irrational Practi∣ces! they valued themselves highly, in hopes of their Elysium, and Life to come, and disdained the Commis∣sion of
any thing incon∣gruous  to such expectati∣ons. The Holy Resolution of Seneca stands upon re∣cord; Faciam omnia tanquam Deus videret: And hence the Philosopher so much preferred his contemplative,Aristotle. before his practick felicity; and the Poet Claudian tells us, That Nature, meaning the God of Nature, assigns happiness to all men. —Natura Beatis, Omnibus esse dedit, si quis cognoverit uti. Now who can be so foolish, and act Antipodes to his
own Reason; as to de∣generate  into Sensuality and uncleanness, which inevita∣bly pulls on Everlasting Misery? Whereas nothing can more advance the hu∣mane Nature to its primi∣tive Dignity and Happi∣ness, than Obedience to the Supream Law-giver; and nothing can gratifie the Senses of a thinking man, but what is licenc't by the bounty of Heaven. God having thus admi∣rably consulted the good of Mankind, who would not accept of such Graci∣ous Invitations, when Con∣jugal Enjoyments are
not only lawful, but indulged,  and man made an Instru∣ment to propagate Posteri∣ty, and conferr a Religious Education to his Children, preserve Honour and Hone∣sty, Peace, and Concord, good Government and de∣corum in the World, and all those Placentia's and Contents of Marriage, are but praelibations of celestial Joys hereafter. And your Lordships ear∣ly condescension to the Ma∣trimonial Obligation, hath encouraged this Dedication; that as your Honour is a Noble Advocate for Marri∣age, so I have great hopes to presume, that your
Lord∣ship  will protect this piece against the licentious hu∣mour of a depraved Age; when Marriage is decry'd, as a restraint upon Liberty, and the beaten path of our wiser Ancestors utterly ex∣ploded. Your Honour's Most Humble, and Faithfully Devoted Servant, J. P. E Museo meo Londini, dieMaii, 25. 1685.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. THe French first intro∣duced the solemnity of a Preface, and others as well as they have abused it to a great deal of Vanity; and out of pretended modesty have large∣ly decry'd their own Works, and
the Imperfection of their pieces: Yet after all, to publish them to the World, is no better than to adventure upon a Crime, a∣gainst open Conviction and Ac∣knowledgment. I would not be here miscon∣strued, but submit to the favou∣rable censure of the Judicious; and shall have as low a re∣spect for my own Works as any man. And as this Treatise was oc∣casioned by my accidental read∣ing the twenty fourth Chapter of Genesis, and composed for my private Recreation at vacant hours (but by the importunity of some Friends now made
pub∣lick) so 'tis recommended to  your vacant time and leisure to peruse it; and if it give you but a small diversion, and a little benefit, consider, that even that time which was bestowed on reading of it, might have been worse spent.
ERRATA. PAge 64. line 19. for Imperial read Empyrean.
OF Marriage. IT is a Maxim in Nature to af∣fect Happiness and Society,Naturae semper in meliorem tendit. and to aim at Improvement and Be∣nefit; this was at first declared by the God of Nature, It is not good for man to be alone; and hath since been practised by mankind as the sine quâ non, without which the Species could not be preserved; because the all-wise God having invested the hu∣mane Nature with a Potentia, and Organical helps for generation; and also given those respective Produ∣ctions an inherent faculty of life and vegetation, he was not further pleas∣ed to propagate mankind by Crea∣tion, as he did the Angels, but e∣ven in the perfecting their first
Spe∣cies; he was not pleased to Create,  but form the Woman ex materia praeexistente, of the Rib of Adam; which also implies, that as there was an Identity of Materia prima, for constituting Organical Bodies, so there is also an innate and na∣tural affection and sympathy reci∣procal: Now it pleased God to tye these two pieces of Nature toge∣ther, by the sacred bonds and Sa∣cramental Ordinance of Matrimony, whereby God did not only supply Adam with a meet help for Propa∣gation, but also superadded the Comfort and enjoyment of Society, the Woman resembling the Man in nature, shape, body and mind, and there being nothing wanting to Adam for the Consummation of his Happiness but a Wife, he was made Lord over the Creatures, Heir of of the World, and seated in Para∣dise; and God providing him a fit Companion, hath abundantly sup∣plyed what he wanted; and man ever since retains such Principles and Inclinations suitable to the In∣stitution of Nature, which
by Phi∣losophers is styled, previous Dispo∣sitions or Aptitudes in matter to attain and seek after; which brings us to discourse of Marriage, which God Instituted for his own Glory, the good of Mankind, and benefit of Posterity. Marriage being the subject of which we are to treat, we will first consider it in its Institution, and se∣condly in its Effects. And, First, Its Appointment is Divine.A priori. After God had said, It is not good for man to be alone; it follows, Let us make a meet help for him;. for man is by nature a sociable Creature, and desirous of Company, as a learned Commentator on the place tells us. An individual makes no Society,Nec jucun∣dum indi∣viduo, nec utile speciei. Piscator in loc. Tanquam alter ipse specie & formâ con∣veniens. Rivet in loc. nei∣ther is serviceable to its Species; therefore God gave man a Wife, as another self, of the same Speci∣es and Figure with himself; than which nothing could be so meet an help, both for Society and Propa∣gation of Issue, which was abso∣lutely necessary for the preserva∣tion of Mankind. And in the second Chapter of Genesis we have an ac∣count of the Womans formation,
that she was formed of the Rib of Adam, and presented to him, and thereupon she becomes aliquid ipsius, something of him, if not alter idem, another same, which the School∣men declare for; that she being formed out of a Rib, there was both Flesh and Nerves, which makes her an alter ipse: And she being after the similitude of man, he might the more affect and ap∣prove of her; for humane Nature is taken with similes, and we are pleased with the reflex of our selves, and like Narcissus even dote upon identical dilations: the sacred Phrase runs thus,Deus crea∣vit homi∣nem marem & faemi∣nam. Vulg. lat. Matrimoni∣um humano generi im∣mortalita∣tem tribuit. Nevisanus. God created man male and female. There being then an inden∣tity of constituted matter, that the love of Society and Conjugal affe∣ctions might be homogenial and re∣ciprocal: Whereas if God had gi∣ven him a Friend only, the Socie∣ty had been deficient, neither could the Species be preserved without a Genus: but the Ordination of God, and current of Nature have made them individually one, God pre∣sented her to
man as a second self.  Nature and Religion, Law and Po∣licy strictly oblige them to this sa∣cred Oeconomy: This was visible in Adam's Apprehension and Appro∣bation of it, as we read 23, and 24. verses; This is now bone of my bone,Gen. 2.23, 24. and flesh of my flesh: And in the 24. verse we have the consequents of this no∣ble and sacred Institution; Therefore shall a man leave Father and Mother, and cleave to his Wife, and they two shall be one flesh: That is not,Non loqui∣tur de car∣nis libidi∣ne, sed af∣fectû con∣jugali. Pau∣lus Fagius, in loc. as one observes, spoken of fleshly Lusting, but out of Conjugal Affections and Love to his Wife, who resembles the two branches in Ezekiels hand; enclosed in one bark, and closing to∣gether make but one flesh, as being a Society of the most endeared Ami∣ty and Friendship.Matrimonii symbolum. Ezek. 24.26. Micah 7.5. Prov. 5.19. Solomon speaks thus, Be thou ravisht always in her Love: in the Original it is, Erre thou alwayes in her love; velut extra sis ut rerum aliarum obliviscare; which sig∣nifies a very earnest affection, and a respect immeasurable: And our Blessed Saviour himself, when he lived on earth, was pleased to
ho∣nour Marriage with his personal  attendance; and to put the greater accent and honour on so sacred a Solemnity, was further pleased, to the admiration of all Spectators, to work his first Miracle thereat, by turning Water into Wine; which tacitly implies that Marriage brings honour and perfection to the hu∣mane nature,Faelix ne∣cessitas quae ad meliora tendit. which was shaddow∣ed out by the melioration of wa∣ter, and was a clear signification and approbation of those lawful delights and entertainments, which were suitable and proper to the oc∣casion: this Nuptial tye is Recorded in Heaven, Solemnized on Earth, and Confirmed by the mutual gages of two united individuals. This Love is the Harmony,Nil habet natura me∣lius quam ut possis, neque praestantius quam ut ve∣lis servare plures. Ci∣cero. the Complexi∣on, Genius, and very Soul of Nature; this true Friendship is the Zodiack wherein the Sun of Truth, Con∣stancy and hearty Affections, inter∣changeably compleat the whole cir∣cle of motion and influence; and is the Guardian and tutelar Angel of Society, to which Quarles alludes in his description of Conjugal Love.
They were so one, that none could justly say, Which of them rul'd, or whether did obey; He rul'd, because she would obey, yet she In so obeying rul'd as well as he. And as it was instituted for Gods glory, and preservation of Man∣kind, so to preserve inviolate the Laws of God, by avoiding and pre∣venting Fornication,Exod. 10.14. Mark 10.19. Heb. 13.3. which is for∣bidden by God in several places of Scripture. We can still describe and repre∣sent the primitive rectitude of hu∣mane Nature, though the fall hath maimed our perfection, and impair∣ed those glorious Ideas we had at first, and disposed us to sin, and de∣viations: At first the action of sense was appointed to touch the affecti∣on, and so present it primarily to the Understanding, by whose con∣duct the Passions were subordinate and subject to its inclinations,
and as its Deputies in the administrati∣on  of such Duties and Performan∣ces, for the Benefit, Service and Happiness of the humane Nature; which Understanding in the Soul is called an Intellectual Lamp, which God placed for the admirable go∣vernment of his Creature; and the School-men call it Lumen Naturae, the Light of Nature, which St. Chrysostome calls ,St. Chrys. 13 Orat. and tells us, that 'tis a radical and fun∣damental knowledge planted in the being of Man, budding and blos∣soming in his first Principles, flou∣rishing and bringing forth fruit, spreading it self into all the fair and goodly branches of Morality, under whose shaddow the Soul takes great delight: And tells us further, that it grows spontaneously, shines out chearfully and pleasantly; 'tis so visible, that the infant age of the World could spell it out, and read it without a Teacher before Moses was born, or Aaron wore his Golden Bells; before there was a Prophet or Judge in Israel; and so the learned Grotius describes it: The Law of Nature (sayes
he) is a  streaming out of glorious Light,Jus Natu∣rale, est dictatum, rectae Rati∣onis indi∣cans, actui alicui, ex ejus conve∣nientia & disconveni∣entia cum ipsa Naturae Rationali, inesse mor∣talem turpi∣tudinem aut necessitatem moralem, & consequenter ab authore naturae ipso Deo, talem actum aut vetari, aut praecipi. Grotius de jure Natu. powerfully discovering such a de∣formity in some evil, as that an intellectual Eye must needs abhor it; and such a commanding Beauty in some good, as that a rational being must needs be enamoured with it, and so plainly shewing that God stampt and sealed the one with his Command, and branded the other with his dislike; to which Plutarch very excellently alludes, . This Royal Law of Nature, sayes he, was never shut up in a paper Prison, was never confined and limited to any out∣ward surface, but was bravely si∣tuated in the Center of a rational being, alwayes keeping the Soul Company, for its protection and direction; ruling all its Subjects (all obedient actions) with a Golden Scepter, and crushing to pieces its Enemies, that's all rebellious and evil actions. And Plato tells us, that this Law is founded in Nature, for the maintaining, ennobling, and the per∣fecting of Nature. But Tully draws a most lively portraicture of the
Law of Nature:Est qui∣dem vera lex recta ratio, na∣turae con∣gruens, dif∣fusa in om∣nes, con∣stans, sem∣piterna, quae vocem ad officium ju∣bendo, ve∣tando, fraude de∣terreat, quae tamen pro∣bos, neque frustra ju bet aut ve∣tut, nec improbos ju∣bendo, aut vetando mo∣vet; Hinc legi nec pro∣pagari jas est, neque derogari ex hac aliquid licet, neque tota abrogari potest; nec vero aut per Senatum, aut per populum solvi hac lege possimus; neque est quaerendus explanator, aut interpres ejus alius, non erat alia Roma, alia Athenis, alia nunc, alia posthac, sed & omnes gentes omni tempore una Lex & sempiterna, & immutabilis continebit, unusque erit quasi com∣munis Magister & Legislator omnium Deus, ille legis hujus inventor, disceptator, lator, cui qui non parebit, ipse se fugiet, & naturam hominis aspernabitur. The Law of Rea∣son, sayes he, is a beautiful Law, a Law of a pure Complexion and Natural colour, of a vast Extent and diffusion; its colour and beau∣ty cannot fade, it encourages men in Obedience with a smile, it chides them and frowns them out of wick∣edness; good men hear the whis∣perings of its pleasant voice, and observe the least glance of its love∣ly eye; but wicked men sometimes will not hear it when it comes to them in Thunder, nor take the least notice of it, though it flash out in Lightning; none must enlarge nor diminish this Law, neither can the malice of men totally deface its Beauty, neither Prince nor People, Angels nor
Men can absolve you from it; this Law never paints its face, nor change its colour; it does not put on one aspect at Athens, and another at Rome, but looks up∣on all Nations and Persons with an impartial eye; it shines upon all Ages, and Times, and Conditions with a perpetual Light; there is but one Law-giver, he contrived and commanded it, and none can be exempted from it, unless he be banisht from his own Essence, and excommunicated from humane na∣ture. And St. Austin in his Con∣fessions: Thy Law, sayes he,Tua lex, tua lex scripta est in cordibus nostris, quam non ulla un∣quam delet iniquitas. is written in our hearts, which no Iniquity can blot out. And the wi∣ser Heathen braved it out in ad∣mirable expressions; That Beauty and Goodness was a sufficient re∣ward and compensation, that the very turpitude of evil actions is Pu∣nishment enough in it self: And what an high pitch of greatness did Pla∣to attain to, when he calls Laws that were made by man, to pre∣serve Justice, and Punish Vice, but Hominum infirmiorum commenta, a re∣membrance for weak men, to keep them virtuous. And Seneca divine∣ly
exprest himself;Licet sci∣rem Deum ignosciturum & homines ignoraturos, attamen peccare nol∣lem ob pec∣cati turpi∣tudinem. Sen. Vir bonus reveretur seipsum. If I were sure, sayes he, that God would certain∣ly pardon me, and men could ne∣ver know of it, yet I would scorn to sin for its foulness and disho∣nesty. And what Christian can keep pace herein, endeavouring after such original rectitude? and when he gave the world that golden Apo∣thegm, That a good man has a ve∣neration for himself; what strong emulations had he to climb after Original Purity, and advance Na∣ture to her primitive Dignity! how did he aim after the Image of his Maker, to preserve that Species of Goodness implanted in him, as knowing that sins and immorali∣ties were the degenerations of hu∣mane Nature, and would debase him into a Devil. Now man being a free and vo∣luntary Creature, hath a freedome and liberty to prosecute his own happiness, and having tasted that forbidden fruit, how has he as it were poysoned himself and posterity! And how hath
that glo∣rious Picture of his Maker lost its  gloss and beauty, and the oriency of its colours! Horresco referens! We tremble to relate how that sweet harmony of his faculties, and subordination of them to each other, is broken; how every mo∣tion of the inferior power has disobeyed that government and di∣rection which the superior did ad∣minister! how hath man basely exchanged reasonable and well or∣dered Passions for sensual and beast∣ly!Tanta est vis volup∣tatum ut & ignoranti∣um protelet in occasio∣nem, & con∣scientiam corrumpat in dissimu∣lationem. Tertul. what crookedness and dissen∣tion is there fighting against his reason! what Solecisms in his man∣ners! what impostures to obliterate reason and original truth! and the Understanding being cast out, Passion hath usurped the Chair, which judges of things, not according to natural truth, but according to the Impressions of Fancy, Pleasure, and the dictates of corrupt Na∣ture. And this Corruption of Nature is particularly seen in Incontinen∣cy: God of his great goodness hath given us a lawful and honourable use of those innate desires, and propen∣sities
of nature in mutual enjoyments, ad conversationem speciei, for Gene∣ration sake, but not to satisfie those vile affections of Lust, as the Apo∣stle speaks; and forsaking the guid∣ance of reason, they dishonoured their bodies amongst themselves, as St. Jude tells; which is styled by the Philosopher,Aristotle. Morbid desires; and the Apostle tells us, that he who commits fornication sins against his own Body.Morbus est affectus con∣tra natu∣ram corpori incidens. As Fernelius observes of diseases, that they are affections of body contrary to Nature; so are Adulteries and Fornications. The Poet represented Agamemne, Os oc∣culusque Jovi par, in his features like Jupiter, in valour like Mars, in Wisdom a very Apollo himself: But when angry and passionate, trans∣form'd into a Lyon, a Tyger, a Devil. So man was created after the Divine Image, and should pre∣serve the sacred obligations of Mar∣riage Inviolable: but by Fornicati∣ons and Adulteries metamorphos'd into a Beast, a Devil; and though the Commission of Sin at first plea∣ses corrupt Nature, yet the
viola∣tion  of the Divine Law, and our guilty Consciences, will affright and torture us. The Poet tells us, Principium dulce est, sed finis amoris amarus, Laeta venire Venus, tristis abire solet. This vultures and gnaws the af∣flicted heart, this brings destructi∣on to Soul and Body; whence proceeds such Ghonorreahs and In∣flamations of Liver, and brings a suddain Catastrophe to life it self.Suetonius in∣vit. ejus. It ruined Alexander the Great, O∣tho the Emperour, Pope Sextus the fourth: Qui dissessit tabidus voluptate, as the Historian tells us. And as Turtullian observes, the Body quick∣ly fails the Mind, the Mind the De∣sire, the Desire the Satisfaction, and all the man. And how hath Gods Judgments pursued the Adul∣teror!Suetonius. Julius Caesar was stabb'd in the Senate-house, as a just reward of his Incontinence: And how re∣markable was Gods judgment upon the Levites Wife,Judg. 19.20, 21. that plaid the A∣dulteress! and we have an account
how she was cut and divided into twelve pieces, and sent into all the Coasts of Israel. And it would be too tedious to relate, what mise∣ry and destruction it brought to An∣thony and Cleopatra, Augustus Caesar, Mary of Aragon, Rodolphus of Lom∣bardy, and others: And one wittily expresses it,Non est è terris mollis ad astra via. the passage to Heaven is all the way up-hill, and the un∣clean Adulterer with his rotten lungs cannot climb it up. Sampsons strength was enervated by a Wo∣man: And Solomons Wisdom nigh extinguished in the fire of Lust. What a blot and dishonour was it to Amnon, and how was his Sin ag∣gravated in the case of Thamar! Neither does it terminate in per∣sonal destruction, but affects Fami∣lies, nay Kingdoms and Empires: what misery did David bring on himself and family by Adultery with Bathsheba! and how terrible the Divine Judgment against him! The Sword shall not depart from thine house,2 Sam. 11.10, 11, 12. because thou hast despised the Lord, and taken the Wife of Ʋriah
the Hittite: and it must needs prick him  to the Heart, when Nathan so pa∣thetically expostulates the case, and summs up Gods great goodness to him, after he had killed Ʋriah,Ver. 7, 8, 9. and done evil in the sight of the Lord: And we find that Idleness was a great step to this Sin. David walking on the top of his House, saw that Beau∣tiful Woman: The soul wanting the Salutiferous food of business, preys upon evils; as the Poet tells us of Aegistus his Adultery, Quaeritur Aegistus quomodo sit factus Adulter, In promptu causa est, Desidiosus erat. It was Idleness administred the occasion of his Sin. We would therefore more espe∣cially recommend Imployment and Business, as a great preservative against those Sins: they preserve the mind against those sensual sol∣licitations and Syren Inchantments, and fortifie the soul against those fatal Poysons that kill us in our de∣lights, and so preserve it invulnera∣ble from the Arrows
of a Lais or  Cleopatra; obstruct those peccata in deliciis which otherwise might storm and conquer our best resolutions; and like a Coat of Male which pre∣serves the body, so business pre∣serves the mind from those fatal In∣chantations;Homines ni hil agendo malè agere discunt. but if we give up our selves to Idleness, a hundred to one but some evil attacks us. As a match takes fire, so Lust overtakes Idle∣ness: hence the Poets represent all Shepheards lascivious and effemi∣nate, because generally Idle per∣sons: so Theophrastus defines it, Otiosi animi affectus. And Seneca is in the right when he tells us,Juventâ gignitur, Luxû nu∣tritur, feriis alitur otio∣que inter lae∣ta fortunae bona. Youth begets it, riot maintains it, Idleness nourishes and continues it. How lustful and effiminate was Al∣cibiades, Sardanapalus, Nero and o∣thers! Whereupon St. Hierom ob∣serves, That wherever Security and Idleness prevails, there wanton∣ness and lust reigns. Ʋbicunque securitas, ibi libido domi∣natur.And that it affects Kingdoms and States, we find it in the case of Sodom. God rained down Fire and Brimstone from Heaven, and
destroyed the Sodomites, as Pererius notes on the Place;Ex eo quod relatione ad Deum sub nomine Te∣tragram∣maton di∣cuntur, val∣de male, & peccatores significatur eo contra jus naturae valde pec∣câsse. Pere. in Locum. Giving them∣selves over to Fornication, and go∣ing after strange flesh, they sinned against the light of Nature: where∣fore the Passion and Indignation of Lactantius is commendable, when he sayes, That no Indignation against this Sin of Sodom is enough: and as their punishment was by fire, so it was suitable to the Nature of their Sin, and burning Lusts, as Gregory expresseth it. There was Lusting without measure, and excess of riot;Sulphure significatus & punitus fuit peccato∣rum foetor, igne libidi∣nis ardor. Greg. in locum. and as their Sins were of a crying and aggravating Nature, so the execution of their punishment was by Fire, which is accounted most afflictive to Sense, and a suitable punishment for the greatest offen∣ders. And this fire was a miracu∣lous fire; the Text says, The Lord rained Fire and Brimstone, from the Lord: Pererius renders it, E Nostris, it came not from the Strength of na∣tural causes, but immediately from God himself. God wrought a mira∣cle to punish those Sodomites, and to put a difference between the
or∣dinary Generation of fire and Sul∣phur,  produced from natural causes,His verbis significatur quod praeter naturalem, rerum cur∣sum miracu∣lum opera∣tus est, pu∣niendo ini∣quos ad dif∣ferentiam enim natu∣ralium cau∣sarum natu∣rali ordine occurrenti∣um, ad ge∣nerandum sulphur & ignem, ad∣junctum est illud, A Je∣hova. it is superadded in the Text, in terminis, è Jehovah, from the Lord; and this is the sence of the best In∣terpreters, as Tostatus, Calvin, Mus∣culus, Paraeus and Rivet. And what but the Adultery of Pa∣ris with Hellena, occasioned the Tro∣jan War, the Ruin of that famous Kingdom, the Death of Paris, and Hellena, and King Priamas himself! And Sextus Tarquinius for the Rape of Lucretia, (for which she slew her self,) was both expelled his King∣dom, and slain by the Sabines; and the Romans very properly Solemni∣zed their Funeral Rites at the Gate of the Temple of Venus, to let the World know, that Lust and Incon∣tinence was an Hastener and Harbin∣ger of Death. Epiphanius relates sad Stories of the Impurities of the Gnosticks, and Clemens Alexandrinus of the Carpocratians: therefore let us all remember that Poetical Ad∣monition; Corpus, opes, animam, famam, vim, lumina, Scortum
Debilitat, perdit, necat, aufert, eripit, orbat. And let us seriously consider the Royal Observation of the Wisest King:Prov. 7.25, and 26.— She hath cast down many wound∣ed; yea, many strong men have been slain by her: Her house is the way to Hell, going down to the Chambers of Death. We will only just touch at the manner of the Nuptial Celebra∣tion, and so proceed to consider the Effects of Marriage. The Anci∣ents Solemnized those Sacred Obli∣gations with such Care, that God himself might be an apparent Wit∣ness of that holy Covenant; and se∣veral Nations have observed several sorts of Ceremonies; and we may suppose them wisely and judiciously instituted, as the Representatives of that great Mystery. The Hebrews had first their Betrothings, then their Conjugal Rites: There was a distance of time between their Es∣pousals, and the Consummation; which is observable from the Answer of Rebecca's Mother unto Abraham's Servant, that she might
remain  with her at least ten dayes after the Espousals: Several Friends as∣sisted at this Ceremony; and they had an Epithalamium, or Nuptial Song sung by some particular Friends, styled, the Children of the Bride-Chamber:Mat. 9.15. And that this Hy∣meneal Song was no other than a Form of Blessing pronounced on the new Married Couple, is thus descri∣bed by Genebrand: The Chief of those Companions taketh a Cup, and Blesseth it, saying; Blessed be the Lord our God, which created Man after his own Image, and hath thereby prepared to himself an everlasting Build∣ing: Blessed be thou, O Lord our God, who hast created Joy and Gladness, the Bridegroom and the Bride, Charity and brotherly Love, Rejoycing and Pleasure, Peace and Society: I beseech thee, O Lord, let there be suddenly heard in the Cityes of Judah, and Streets of Jeru∣salem, the voice of Joy and Gladness, the voice of the Bridegroom and the Bride; the voice of Exultation in the Bride-Chamber is sweeter than any Feast, and Children sweeter than the sweetness of a Song. And he drinks to
the Married Couple;—From which our vulgar Custom of wishing them Joy and Happiness proceeds.—They kept their Marriage Feast seven dayes;Judg. 14.10. and 11.— which space of time they ob∣served for mourning, whence came that Jewish Proverb, Septem ad Con∣vivium, septem ad Luctum: And there was a Wedding Ring given to the Bride, with this Inscription, Ma∣zal Tob, which the Hebrews call the Planet Jupiter, according to Munster, which they thought of great Effica∣cy and Vertue for Generation. And the Subjection and Modesty of Women in those days is observable: When the Wife was first presented to her Husband, she covered her self with a Vail: Thus did Rebecca, when she espyed Isaac coming to∣wards her, she took a Vail,Gen. 24.65. and co∣vered her self. Now as the Hebrews pray'd unto God, so other Nations had their particular Auspicious Dei∣ties, and forms of Invocations; as, at Athens, Hymeneus; and at Rome, Thalassius; that the Marriage might be happy and fortunate: And they adorned one Finger of the left Hand
with a Ring, as a Symbol of their great Love to their Husbands; and they were wont to be carryed into their Husbands Houses, to intimate, that they lost their sollicited Virgi∣nity not voluntarily. We will not trouble you with the several Cu∣stoms which were accommodated to Magnificence and Splendour of the Nuptials, the Sports of Gladi∣ators, and Preparations of Pastime for the People, which Theophrastus calls, the Delightful Product of Riches: And for our modern Customs herein, and modes of Celebration, we pass them over, to hasten to the Effects of Marriage. A posteriori.Secondly, We come to consider the Effects of Marriage: And we are not about Ʋmbraticam Causam, need∣less things; but our design is to bla∣zon the Sacred and Noble Effects of Marriage.Finis dat amabilita∣tem mediis. 'Tis the End and good Consequence of things that gives the greater Lustre and Loveliness to the Causes.—Man being a con∣gregable Creature, by reason of his Speech, the Communative Organ of
Society, as Cicero tells us;—Man delights in the Company of his own Species,Pares cum paribus sa∣cilime con∣gregantur. Cicero. and the Similitude of their Natures hath constituted a continu∣ed Alliance amongst themselves. And Tostatus tells us, That that was the Original of Civil Communication, for the mutual Preservation of Man∣kind: The happy Effects of it were seen in the several Families and Asso∣ciations of the first Age:—The first Oeconomies and Institutions for the Government of Mankind, was the blessed Effects of Marriage.— Here the admirable wisdom of Divine Pro∣vidence shined out, and here the Ce∣lestial Proclamation took place; Glo∣ry to God on High, on Earth Peace, good Will towards Men: For, no sooner was Man created for God's Glory, but a meet help assigned him; and the next thing in Nature after Ge∣neration follows Preservation, Sub∣ordination, and Government, as a Pattern to Succeeding Ages, for the Government of God's Church and People in the World. Now Self-love being an inseperable Pro∣perty to all Beings,Amor sui. we must needs delight in the Preservation
of our  own Essence, for the Unity we find in our selves: And when in Nature, or Habit, we find the Similitude and Character of our selves, the Beams and Powers of our Wills and Affe∣ctions do extend and dilate them∣selves upon those Objects respective∣ly. Now a Representation is made, 1. In Substance; as the Husband and Wife are One Flesh, and Chil∣dren the Branches of their Parents. 2. In Accidents, or Qualities; as one Man is like to another, either in the Dimensions of Body, Iden∣tity of Physiognomy, or mental En∣dowments;—all which prompts Nature to mutual Exercises of Love and Courtesie. And this natural Civility and Providence extends to other Creatures as well as Man: Eli∣an reports of the Affection of Ele∣phants to their Young: That the Pelican, if the Naturallists may be credited, when her young Ones have been bitten, feeds them with her own Blood, for their Recovery, (which a Portugal Prince made Em∣blematical to express his Love to his Subjects;) and other Creatures ob∣serve
this Affection, according to Elian: Nay, the most cruel of Beasts, the Tyger, if Statius be not mista∣ken: —Sic aspera Tigris Foetibus abreptis Scythico deserta sub Antro Accubat, & lepidi lambit vestigia lecti.Lib. 10. Nay, what Regiment this affecti∣on does obtain upon the whole Classes of vegetable nature, is pleasant to observe: in the Vine and Elm how great a sympathy! the Olive and the Mirtle embrace each other. What a story is related of two Palm trees in Italy by Jovianus Pontanus, in his Poems! Naturalists allow them Male and Female, and that they will not grow out of each others sight. The Poet Claudian describes the Passion of Vegetables, thus, Vivunt in venerem frondes, omnisque vicissim, Foelix arbor amat, nutat & mutua Palma; Faedera, populco suspirat populus ictu.
But in Mankind how much great∣er is this affection, and who can un∣dertake to describe the extent of Conjugal Love! Man admires her as his meet help; she was built in Pa∣radise: Nature hath given her pu∣rer Elements in her Composition, and sweetned her Countenance be∣yond the Sternness of a Male Aspect, and hath intrusted her with the Conception, Production and Educa∣tion of Posterity. And God gave the honour of our Redemption to the Seed of the Woman; man is more obsequious to that Sex than his own. For a virtuous and wise Woman is like the Ambassador of a Prince, held as a Person sacred: man admires her for that secret sweetness that indulge and gratifie all his senses at once in his Conversation with her; and is sensible of the frui∣tion of so excellent a Creature without himself, and of the honour he receives by help of Propagati∣on and parity of natural Union: she is the high Chamberlain
of his Soul, Privado of his Senses, and with the  charms of her figure,In totâ re∣rerum natu∣râ nihil for∣mâ divini∣us, nihil augustius, nihil praeti∣osius cujus vires hinc facile intel∣liguntur. Socrates. feature and relation, can perswade him into more than all the intermitted retho∣rick of a Masculine friend. Ab talem uxorem qui praestentissima forma, Nil mortale refert.— But it would be too tedious to re∣late the Examples of Conjugal af∣fection; we pass over the Love of Abraham and Isaac to their Wives;Ezek. 24.16. of Ezekiel, whose Wife was called the delight of his Eyes; the Vulgar Latin is, Desiderium Oculorum tuorum. Augustus Caesar died in the kisses of his Wife Livia. Conjugii nostri mea mor, vive & vale. We pass over the affections of Theodosius and Placilla his Queen, of Seneca and Paulina, Mansolus and Artemesia: and it is re∣ported of one that ordered to be writ on his Tomb, That he had li∣ved with his Dear Wife forty three years eight months, and never fell out. What a blessed Amnestia does this noble Constitution settle a∣mongst men! And
the Conversati∣on  of a good Wife sweetens Life, and banishes vexation; to whom we may tell our discontents, and have them lessened, and our joyes, and have them multiplyed: and he that hath a good Wise, hath two selves, and possesses all his faculties double. Homer brings in Paris kissing Hellena after ten years Marriage, protesting as much affection as if but newly conjoyned. Like the Old man in Ausonius, Ʋxor vivamus quod vivimus, & moriamur Servantes nomen sumpsimus in thalamo; Nec ferat ulla dies ut commutemur in aevo Quin tibi sum Juvenis tuque puella mihi. Dear Wife let's live in love, and dye together, As heretofore we have in all good will; Let no day change or alter our affections, But let's be young to one another still.
Much like the saying of Solomon, And rejoice with the Wife of thy Youth,Prov. 5.19. let her be as the loving Hind, and the pleasant Roe; let her Breasts satisfie thee at all times, and be thou ravished alwayes with her Love. Here is a mag∣netick and charming quality, a powerful and occult motive; and though he rule his Wife as head, yet she again commands his Heart; no happiness like it, placens Ʋxor, a sweet Wife. Omnis Amor magnus, sed aperto in conjuga major: No Love so strong as this Conju∣gal Love, they being but one flesh are unanimous, and Gerion-like,Amicitiae symbolum. Coalescere in Ʋnum, and have but one Heart in two Bodies. Corporibus geminis Spiritus unus erat. And so continue in mutual Love, affection and endearments to each other; according as the Poet per∣sonates a Loving Husband:
Propertius. Lib. 2.Et me ab amore tuo deducet nulla senectus, Sive ego Tythonus sive ego Nestor ero. No age shall part my Love from thee, sweet Wife, Thô I live Nestors, or Tythonus life. And so è diverso, the Woman al∣so hath a great sense of these con∣jugal obligations; she admires her Husband as her Head and Protector, and under God a Melior Natura, an Auspicious Genius, and Tute∣lar Angel, concern'd for her happi∣ness, and consulting all the honou∣rable methods for her Preservati∣on and Comfort: And the Care, Diligence and Industry of a good Husband, for the Preservation and Happiness of her, and hers, recom∣mends him the more to her Love and most endeared affections. She cannot but adore the Divine good∣ness, that when her Parents are dead, and her Friends fail her, that she hath a second Self,
who is un∣happy if she be miserable; and under  God her happiness in this World depends immediately on the Indu∣stry, Sobriety, Diligence and Pro∣vidence of her Husband. Man and Wife should resemble the Cheru∣bims in the Temple, which looked on each other; so they should love and admire each other, and meet half way in the joint Prosecution of both their good. The Apostle exhorts Husbands to love their Wives as Christ loved the Church:Eph. 5.25. Col. 3.18. And Wives to submit themselves to their Husbands, as it is fit in the Lord, and win them by their sweet Conver∣sation. And the Wise man,1 Pet. 3.1. in his description of a loving and industri∣ous Wife; says, She will do him good▪ and not evil all her dayes; And goes on descanting on the particu∣lar parts of her good housewifery: And in the 28 verse, Pronounces his blessing on her;Prov. 31.10. Her Children arise up and call her blessed, her Hus∣band also, and he praiseth her. We also have read of the constancy of a Ruth, of Sarah and Rebecka's fide∣lity to their Husbands; and in the Roman
Government, the Bride used  to salute her Husband: Ʋbi tu Cai∣us,Plutarch. ego semper Caia. It was an excellent Character the Holy Ghost gives of Abigal, that she was a Woman of an excellent Understanding, in Pacifying David, and saving her house. Phile and Zenobia were exceeding Lovers of their Husbands; and what Lamps of Female Glory were the Corne∣lia's, Panthia's, Porcia's, and others! and how great an Admiration had that Persian Lady for her Husband, when at Cyrus his Wedding, she was asked, How she lik'd the Bride∣groom; I know not, said she, for I saw none there, but mine own Husband. And Plutarch relates of the Love and Wisdom of the Cel∣tick Women, that when their Hus∣bands were involved in a Civil War, by the endeavours and Solicitati∣on of their Wives, a Peace was made, and for their Honour and Reward they were admitted to the Council. And it was one of the Articles made with Hannibal, That if the Carthainians had
any contro∣versie with the Celtians, it should  be decided by the Celtian Women; and we find a passage in Euripides to this effect, Optima viri possessio uxor benevola, Mittigans iram, & avertens animum ejus à tristitia. Mans best possession is a loving Wife, She tempers anger and diverts all strife. And as in this Conjugal affecti∣on, there is such an egress and expansion of the Heart and Spirits to the object loved, and a Love and respect of that extent, that an Ovid can't teach it, nor Solomon describe, nor Apelles paint it; so an high care and solicitation for the well-being and preservation of each other:Res est sol∣liciti plena timoris a∣mor. Ovids E∣pist. as the Poet well de∣scribes the jealousie of Penelope for the safety of Ʋlisses, In te fingebam violentes Troias ituros,Ovids E∣pist. Nomine in Hectureo, pallida semper eram.
How oft my dear Ʋlisses did I see In my sad thoughts proud Trojans rush on thee, And when great Hectors but touch'd mine ears, My cheeks drew paleness from my paler fears. And as absence is tedious and unpleasant, so their departure each from other afflictive and uneasie: When Thais took her leave of Phae∣dria, —Egone quid velim, Noctes diesque ames me, me desideres, Me somnies, me expectes, me cogites, Me speres, me te oblectes, mecum tota sis, Meus sac postremo animus, quando ego sum tuus. Doest ask, my Dear, what service I will have, To love me day and night is all I crave;
To dream on me, to expect, to think on me, Depend and hope, still covet me to see; Delight thy self in me, be wholly mine, For know, my Love, that I am wholly thine. But we must shake off this plea∣sant Argument, for there's no end of it. In short, how have Philoso∣phers, Historians and Poets cele∣brated this Alliance, this Conjugal Oeconomy; this Divine constituti∣on! Dies deficeret & Nox; we will only give you the rapture of Boae∣thius. O Faelix hominum genus! Si vestros ammos Amor Quo Caelo regitur, regat. Now two being become one by this Mysterious Conjunction, they reciprocally love and mutually af∣fect each other, and jointly promote the happiness of both: the man is obliged to love his Wife, as Gro∣tius
sayes,Dilectione sincera, castâ & perpetuâ, & exemplo sanctae vitae uxoribus praebeat. Spontaneâ nempè vo∣luntate, ag∣noscentes ordinatio∣nem Dei qui id etiam an te peccatum constituit. with a chaste and constant love, and set their Wives the ex∣ample of a Religious Life: And the Woman to love, reverence and submit to her Husband, freely and chearfully acknowledging the Ordi∣nance of God from the beginning, as Zanchius directs. And as the Ma∣trimonial honour is to be preser∣ved inviolable, so the Holy Ghost is pleased to represent the mysti∣cal Union between Christ and his Church, by the semblance and Ana∣logy of Marriage.Quo specta∣re videtur, sequens com∣paratio, de Christo ec∣clesiamsuam sanctifican∣te. Estius in loc. Aristotle Pol. Now this Love and Affection be∣ing proper to Mankind, is called Amor cognitionis. Leon Hebreus calls it Rational love, whereby all the Affections and Actions are confor∣med to the Object; and this Love the Philosopher styles, Debitum Na∣turae, a Debt we owe to Nature, and the neglect thereof a trespass against Nature; because God is Love it self; he made the World out of Love, and wonderfully illu∣strated this Love in redeeming of it; and the Emanations of it are visible in his Divine
Providence,  and in his care and protection of every individual, and particle of the Creation. Si rerum quaeris fuerit quis finis & ortus, Desine, nam causa est unica solus Amor. Doest ask the reason moved God above To make the world, the only cause was Love. And here we might enter into a vast and Philosophical Field of discourse,Amor est voluntatis affectus. Forma est vitalis ul∣gorex ipso bono ema∣nans par I∣deas. Plato. Pulchritu∣do est perfe∣ctio compo∣siti, & con∣gruente or∣dine, men∣surá & ra∣tione parti∣um consur∣gens. and give you the Defini∣tion, division and object of Love; according to Leon Hebreus, a volun∣tary affection and desire to enjoy that which was good: Omne pul∣chrum est amabile; and the more fair the object, the more desirable. Pla∣to defines Beauty, a resulting from effased good. Others call it a perfection of the whole compositi∣on; and this Comeliness is called Grace, which joyned with Beau∣ty is like the Shinings that come
from a Glorious and Divine Sun; than which admirable Beauty, says Socrates, there is nothing so maje∣stical, nothing so sacred, divine and Lovely, and nothing can charm mankind so much. When Xerxes de∣stroyed all the Temples of the Graeci∣an Deities, he caused the Picture of Diana, in Integrum servari, to be spared for its Beauty and Maje∣sty:Naturae gaudentis opus. But how much more charming is natural Beauty, which Plato calls the Quintessence and Triumph of Nature. Carneades calls it, Still Rethorick, that perswades without Speech; 'tis a Kingdom without a Militia;Gratior est pulchro, ve∣niens è cor∣pore virtus. Vir. Aene∣ads. which made Diogenes call Beautiful Women Queens, because all were willing to obey their Com∣mands: and the Poet describes Di∣do's astonishment when she first be∣held Aeneas, Obstupuit primo aspectu Sydonia Dido. So the Woman of Samaria was transported with the Beauty of Christ;Origen. he was Fairer than the Sons
of men. Joseph's comeliness conci∣liated  his Favour in the Aegypti∣an Court:Lib. de pul. Jes. & Mar. How much doth P. Mo∣rales admire the Beauty and Lustre of the Virgin Mary! Anthony ad∣mired Cleopatra, and Theseus was charmed with Hellena. And though the Mind is not occasioned by the Body, yet Philosophy tells us it follows the temperament of it; and where the external Qualities are so beautiful, we may guess at the Judgment, concluding that the love∣ly dispositions of the Soul quick∣neth and animates the outward Graces; and there being so strong a love between the Body and Soul, we may from thence presume of a similitude in the Qualities of the Soul, with those lovely impressions of nature we find in the Body. Now Leon Hebreus divides Love into three parts, Natural, Sen∣sible, and Rational: Natural Love is seen in the Elements, Sun, Moon and Stars, in Mettals and Stones; gravia tendunt deorsum; Fire upwards, and in Vegetables, as be∣fore. Sensible Love in brute Beasts, for
the preservation of the Speci∣es;  and Rational, which was hand∣led before, as proper to Mankind; but then only respecting Philan∣thropy, the love of men to their own Species; whereas the affecti∣ons of men are likewise dilated on things as well as persons. We ad∣mire Virtue, Wisdom, Eloquence, Profit, Wealth, Honour, Beauty, Friendship, Charity, and other things, Arts and Sciences; but we only name them, each head would take up a copious discourse by it self. And pleading Peccavi for this pleasant digression, we return to prosecute the remaining Effects of Marriage: And the next is Chil∣dren. When he sees those fine and ela∣borate pieces of himself, whom God hath graciously given him, how does he adore the Divine Goodness that made him a Father, and Instrument to preserve by a continued Suc∣cession Gods Church in the World! and how is he obliged to give down to his Off-spring those Precepts and Institutes for Gods glory, their good
and advantage, he received  from his Ancestors! Children are the blessing of their Parents, and a good Parent a blessing to his Chil∣dren. When God blessed our first Parents, 'twas thus: Be fruitful,Gen. 1.28. Signifiat secundita∣tem omnem∣que favo∣rem, & co∣piam, & quae Deus illis omnia laeta, & pausta pre∣catus fuit. Paulus Fa∣gius, in Locum. Gen. 22.17. and multiply, and replenish the earth; which Blessing, as a learned man tells us, signifies all Fruitfulness, Favour and Plenty; and that God would heap on them all Joys and Prosperity: so that the blessing of Children and all other Enjoy∣ments, are annext to Marriage. So when God blessed Abraham; In blessing I will bless thee, and in mul∣tiplying I will multiply thy seed as the Stars in Heaven, and as the sand on the Sea-shore, and thy seed shall pos∣sess the Gate of his Enemies: The words are an Hebraism, verbalia addita verbis; which signifies Gods earnest resolutions to Bless Abra∣ham, and his Seed after him: The Hebrews observed a Conveniency be∣tween the forms of expression and the thing exprest: So when Christ said,Luke 22. Cordis & Oris oratio∣nem notat. With desire I have de∣sired; Aquinas noteth on the place, that the Heart and Tongue both
Prayed: And David expresseth the goodness of God to the Seed of Abraham;Psal. 105.6, 8, 9, 10, 11. O ye seed of Abraham his Servant, and ye seed of Jacob his Chosen, he hath remembred his Cove∣nant for ever; the word which he com∣manded to a Thousand Generations; which Covenant he made unto Abra∣ham, and his Oath unto Isaac, and confirmed the same unto Jacob for a Law, and to Israel for an everlasting Covenant, saying, Ʋnto thee will I give the land of Canaan, the lot of your Inheritance. And when God blessed Jacob, I will pour my Spirit on thy seed,Isa. 44.3. and my blessing on thine Off-spring. Now as these are the Promises and Blessings of God on the one hand, so 'tis the Parents Duty on the other to express their Obligations and Thankfulness in the Education and Care of their Children;Prov 20.3. like Solomon's Just man, who walketh in his Integrity, and his Children are blessed after him. How does he consult all wayes and me∣thods to make his
Children tru∣ly happy! By Integrity we may  understand that faithfulness a Fa∣ther oweth to his Children, in giving them a religious and sober Education: Nurture is as necessa∣ry for Children as Nourishment, which if Parents neglect, they are Peremtores potius quam parentes,Qûo semel est imbuta recens ser∣vabit odo∣rem testa diu. Prov. 22.6. ra∣ther Paricides than Parents: but the good Father takes Solomon's Advice, and trains up his Child in the way he should goe; and with that wise Spartan Prince, when he was asked what he should teach his Children, made Answer,Agesilaus. Xenoph. Those things that they should make use of when they became men: For Youth is like soft Wax,Tanquam abrasa ta∣bula. takes any Im∣pression; therefore it ought to be season'd with Religion and Learn∣ing; as the Spring is the fittest seed-time for Grain and Planting, so Youth is the most convenient sea∣son to scatter the Seeds of Know∣ledge upon the ground of the mind. And this Integrity also takes in the good Example of the Parent, for good Examples are very pre∣valent with Children. It is record∣ed
for the honour of Joshua,Magis in∣tuentur quod fecit Jupiter quam quid docuit Plato. that he took care of his Children, and 'twas his good resolution, That he and his House would serve the Lord: Lycurgus commanded all his Citizens to dine publickly, where their Children heard no idle Speech∣es, but grave discourse about the Go∣vernment of the Common-wealth. The good Parent is an utter Ene∣my to evil Customs, he well knows what arguments are brought from thence to support ill actions; for Custome (as the Lord Verulam calls it) is the dumb Idol of the world,Idolum Theatri. the great Mart of Error, wherein Men unthriftily take up on trust, and at last break by too much re∣lying on the bankrupt security of a Fashion; the Ignis fatuus and blaze men play about, as Flies about a Candle, 'till they burn their wings: He will therefore be sure to give his Children a good Example, and abolish bad Customes. Virgil brings in Aeneas advising his Son Asca∣nius; Lib. 12.Disce puer virtutem ex me, verosque labores.
Virtue and Patience learn of me, my Son. So Homer represents Hector Pray∣ing for his Son; Let it be said, here's a good Son indeed, That did his noble Father far exceed. And if Heathens profest this sort of Piety, how much more should Christian Parents bring up their Children in the Admonition, and Fear of the Lord! How much was it to the honour and glory of Abraham, when God gives this Testimony of him! For I know him,Gen. 18.19 that he will command his Children, and his Houshold after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, and do ju∣stice and Judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he hath spoken of him. Which was, that in him should all the Fami∣lies of the Earth be blessed; As if God should argue, How shall I ful∣fill my promise to Abraham, unless Abraham instruct his
Children? and  what Parent will Wilfully ob∣struct his own and Childrens hap∣piness?1 Kings 2.2, 3. So David charged Solomon: Be thou strong therefore, and shew thy self a man: And keep the charge of the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, to keep his Statutes, his Judge∣ments, and his Testimonies, as it is written in the Law of Moses: and that he might the rather embrace his charge, he adds the reason, that thou maist prosper in all thou doest,Majori sol∣licitudine me parturi∣ebat Spiritu quam pepe∣rat carne, parturiebat carne ut in hanc tempo∣ralem na∣scerer corde ut in aeter∣nam lucem re nascerer. Aug. Lib. 2. confes. ch. 3. and whithersoever thou turn∣est thy self: And St. Austin reports of his Mother Monica, that she ceased not do her endeavours eve∣ry way, that he might be truly religious, and as well Gods Child by Grace as hers by Nature. This is that Domestick care that is in∣cumbent on all Parents, to teach their Children their Duty to God himself, to Honour their Parents, to reverence their Superiours, be courteous to their Equals, and that in all their Actions, they should have Oculi in Metam, and so be recti in curiâ: the Wise-man also
tells us, what Instructions he re∣ceived  from his Parents:Prov. 4. To study Wisdom and to shun the path of the Wicked; and further tells us, that whoso loveth Wisdom rejoyceth his Father;chap. 29. and this Wisdom is the fear of the Lord, as we find after∣wards: The fear of the Lord,Prov. 9.10. that is Wisdom, and the Knowledge of the Holy is Ʋnderstanding. The good Parent well considers Religion as most essential to his Childrens Happiness; that in the end of their days, when all other things fail, then God may be the strength of their Heart, and their Portion for ever. That Antistes Sacrorum, the Re∣verend Dr. Ʋsher, used prayer in his Family four times a day, and on Frydays Cathechized them; as remembring that charge, which God commanded the old Israelites, These Words which I command thee this day, shall be in thine Heart.Deut. 6.6, 7. And thou shalt teach them diligently to thy Children, and thou shalt talk of of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest
by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up. And next after Religion his care is manifest, to learn them Arts and Sciences, knowing that Ignorance brings Idleness, Idleness brings ill Company, which the De∣vil useth as an Engine to Dethrone men from the safe and honourable seat of Virtue to the precipice of ruine and destruction, and so enchanting their Understanding, their Misery attends them incognito; whereas good and wise Associates are our second Genius to good∣ness;Phil. de Co∣mines. Ab. 34. or as another expresseth it, 'Tis an Indication of a good and virtuous disposition, to choose learned and virtuous Companions: which made Alexander so highly esteem Aristotle, Themistocles his Anaxagoras, and Scipio his Canutius. And he recommends virtue to them, as the complement of a happy life, and only Immortal thing that be∣longs to Mortality, and represents it to them with such Beauty and Majesty, that it must needs conci∣liate Love and Veneration; and be∣ing a Charm so powerful, the
af∣fected Soul admires it, as the La∣dy  and Queen of an Intellectual Beauty. He well knows that Nature has, as it were, of purpose left many things for Art and Industry to fi∣nish and make up; and as 'tis Arts duty to imitate Nature, so 'tis its dignity to perfect it: Nature gives in the Oar, but Industry refines it into Silver. God hath bestowed on his Children the Light of Na∣ture, and the Understanding of a Reasonable Being, and though by Original Sin this Light be eclipsed, this Understanding and Reason wi∣ther'd, there is the more need of supernatural accomplishments. Arts and Sciences polish and improve Nature, and confer a great help and furtherance thereunto, and cure the diseases of our Minds: as it was said of Demosthenes, that Na∣ture brought forth one Demosthenes, and Learning another, his Intelle∣ctuals were so improved by his stu∣dies. He recommends therefore to his Children the study of the Scriptures and practical Divinity, commends the devotion of a
Nu∣ma,  the Justice of an Aristides, the good Laws of a Solon, the Pru∣dence of a Cato, the Courage of a Scipio, the Moderation of a Fabius, and the publick Spirit of a Cice∣ro; and commends Learning, that is the only thing to enrich their minds with such precious furniture, that Alexander profess'd he had ra∣ther excell in Wisdom than Pow∣er, and as that which promotes the civil end of our Life: Ʋt in honore cum dignitate vivamus; and that a man without Understand∣ing is like the Beasts that perish: therefore he is highly sollicitous to instruct his Children, with the Emanations of Divine Wisdom, the Ideas of Morality, the Simples of Science, the Flowers of Retho∣rick, Reason and Philosophy, and to build them up into the Gallan∣try and Perfection of men. How does he set before them, that Learning was the Glory of Scipia Affricanus, Charles the Great, Ti∣tus Vespatian, Charles the fifth, and our late King James! and how much Historians, Poets and
Philo∣sophers  have celebrated the Glories of the Learned; and by this stir up the genius of his own Children to an Emulation of their virtues. And we read of great Personages that taught their Children them∣selves: Augustus Caesar read Cicero and Virgil to his Children, and of a Grecian Emperour, that taught his Daughter himself: and Bishop Jew∣el cites her in his Apology, as Au∣thor of a Church History: so Paulus Aemilius instructed his Children in the Latin and Greek Tongues: And Sir Tho. Moor when Lord Chan∣cellour taught his three Daughters, and Buchanal relates of the admi∣rable Learning of Sir Anthony Cooks Children, instructed by their Fa∣ther. And as these things are incumbent on Parents, so 'tis the Childrens happiness to have such Watches over them: having touched at the Just mans Integrity, the Wise man adds this, His Children are bles∣sed after him. 'Tis indeed a great blessing to Children, to
have Wise and Religious Parents; and when  they sit at the feet of such Ga∣maliels, they enjoy that Happi∣ness the Queen of Sheba pronoun∣ced on Solomon's Servants,1 Kings 10.8. Hap∣py are thy Men, happy are these thy Servants, that stand continually before thee, and hear thy Wisdom. And as a grateful acknowledge∣ment of their Obligations, they ought to give their Parents all Du∣ty, Honour and Reverence. 'Tis the Apostles exhortation, Honour thy Father and thy Mother, this is the first commandment with Promise: And whats that? That thy days may be long in the Land. And this promise were sufficient if all duty were su∣perseded. And the wise man ex∣horts us, Honour thy Father that be∣gat thee, and despise not thy Mother when old: And indeed the Book of Proverbs is full of ghostly advice to Children; and 'tis but common gratitude, to be thankful to them who gave them being, and by In∣struction in Religion and Learning they give them also well-being; with what ardent affection and am∣bition
ought they to answer the  expectations of their Parents, con∣sonant to the Apostles exhortati∣on;Col. 3.20. Children obey your Parents in all things, for this is well pleasing to God. But we will pass on to prosecute our further discourse; only let us hear Plato's opinion about the Go∣vernment of Youth: In the Foun∣dation of Youth, says he, well ordered and taught, consists the flourishing of a Common-wealth. And indeed he is altogether in the right; for the Education and Go∣vernment of Youth, is like the pre∣paring and polishing Stones and Utensils for some magnificent Fa∣brick: And here we could wish eve∣ry Family a little Seminary of Religion and Learning, for the service of Church and State; as our Universities are for the accom∣plishment of Persons for Sacred and Civil Offices: And we find Plu∣tarch of the same Judgment; and tells us, that Education and Learn∣ing reform the Life and Manners, and afford the best advice for the Government of a Common-wealth:
And we thence inferr, that a re∣formed Life and Manners, not only produce an Excellent Oeco∣nomy and Institution of Govern∣ment, but are the most serviceable and adventitious helps to preserve the Unity and Beauty of such ad∣ministrations, and infallibly annex Happiness and Prosperity to such a People. And if good Government and Discipline were observed in Fa∣milies, how much would it con∣duce to publick advantage? As in an Army, what glorious encounters are they sit for, when the Gene∣ral understands his Interest and Station, and all his Souldiers per∣fectly understand their Posts, all expert and acute in Military un∣dertakings. So in a State, when all are sit to rule, and all willing to obey their Prince;Imperatoris faelicitas in subditorum faelicitate consistat. Grotius. Lips. Polit. whose hap∣piness consists in the happiness of his People, as Grotius tells us; and Lipsius calls it, Verum & legitimum Imperium: A true and lawful Em∣pire so governed. Now when the People are taught to be
religious,  Religion must needs flourish; and when they are instructed in Arts and Sciences, Trades and Com∣merce, it must needs conduce to their happiness, profit, honour and greatness. We all know, that those States thrived best, that were most addict∣ed to the service of their Gods: Rome saw her best dayes when Re∣ligion flourisht there under a Nu∣ma, Augustus, Titus, Constantine, Theodosius, and others: And Bodin gives us the reasons of it;Ab câ enim subditorum fides in Principes obedientia erga Ma∣jestratus pietas in Parentes, charitas in singulos, & justititia in omnes pen∣det de Re∣bus. Lib. 7. From hence, says he, they became Loyal to their Prince, Obedient to the Magistrate, Dutiful to Parents, Charitable to all, with an equal distribution of Justice: and by these administrations they exceeded other Nations, as Martial sets them out. Terrarum Dea, gentiumque Roma, Cui par est nihil, & nihil secundum. Rome of all Nations is the Lady Queen, To which the like, or second, is not seen.
Hac enim sola Roma∣na gens to∣tam terra∣rum orbem subgit. Bodin.They exceeding other Nations in Piety, as one observes; by this they conquered all the world be∣sides. And St. Chrysostome tells us, that Princes without learning and the fear of God, manage but lame∣ly their greatest Affairs, and are blind in discretion and knowledge: The Piety of an Agesilaus, brought him both Honour and Success; the Devotion of a Numa and a Fabius, made them formidable and glorious: And we have read of a Law of one of our Danish Kings, that at the Assizes the Bishop was obliged to accompany the Judge, that the one might countenance Gods Law, and the other Mans; in Imitation of Jehosaphat, who sent the Levites with his Princes,2 Chron. 17.6. to teach in the Cities of Judah. We pass over the Piety of Charles the great, who used to set his Crown on the Bible; of Edward the Sixth, and Queen Elizabeth, who when the Bible was present∣ed to her by the Citizens of Lon∣don, kiss'd it, and laid
it to her  Breasts: and the Examples of Prin∣ces are of great force to promote Devotion in the People. Regis ad Exemplum, was a saying of old, and all Ages have confirmed it. Now when Religion is settled, it produces peace and a general hap∣piness, which produceth peaceable Society, the Improvement of Arts and Sciences, Trade and Com∣merce, and on these depend the happiness of a State. We pass over the sad effects of War and Hostility, of Rapine and Blood∣shed, and all those Evertores horri∣fici, those Devastations which suc∣ceed it. How are Temples and An∣tiquities razed to the ground, and Religion spuriated into Heresie and Schism; all which cease, by reason the cause is taken away, and the State preserved from Forreign In∣vasions and Civil Dissensions. Here we may see how things are chained and linkt together, and how naturally effects flow from their causes; and how Family-go∣vernment,
where the Father go∣verns his Children, and they again obey their Parents, bears so strict an Analogy and semblance between a Prince and his People; and Fa∣mily-government, a little Model and pattern of National Discipline, which was erected first from Pa∣ternal Administrations: For 'till Nimrod's time, who Erected the first Monarchy National, Noah and his Generations, as Paraeus tells us,Par fami∣lias . Paraeus in Gen. did rule gently by their Families. But in Process of time the World growing exceeding Populous, thô the several Families of the Earth did, and doe retain their Oeco∣nomy, and first Prescriptions for their particular Order and Deco∣rum; they are since Politically uni∣ted, and a whole Land or Nati∣on under an Uniformity of Go∣vernment, and as it were so ma∣ny thousands of Families incorpo∣rated into one Body, for a com∣mon Strength and Preservation. Here the Sagacity of Man under the Divine Conduct is very visi∣ble,Vis unita ftim. Lord Ba∣con's Es∣ssays. all Estates
subscribe to Unity, as the Mother and Foundation of Concord and Preservation; and by this Polity, not only Sacred and Civil Rights are preserved, but settled and confirmed; and Nimrod was the first Prosecutor hereof, and changed the Paternal Govern∣ment into National Monarchy; and the Genius of his aspiring Nature instructed him in this principle of Policy; which very word is de∣rived from the Greek , to Sell, whence , a City, and metony∣mically taken to signifie Commerce and Trade in a Society of men, which did ensue, and was in the greatest measure augmented by Na∣tional Government. Now this Nimrod in Scripture is styled a mighty Hunter:Viribus ro∣stis, & dis∣cretus. To∣status in loc. And Tostatus speaks of him, being strong in Bo∣dy, and Discreet in mind, by the Engine of his Wit, and Art of Gratification, and by heaping good turns on Injured Persons, did en∣gage a multitude to his Party,Ʋnde do∣minandi Occasionem naius, reg∣nm obtulit. Muscul. in loc. by whose assistance he pursued men as a Hunter does Beasts: where∣upon, sayes Musculus, he obtain∣ed a Kingdom by
his Valour and  Victory, the rude and barbarous People being reduced to Civil Go∣vernment;Musculus, St. Chryso∣stome, Cornelius a Lapide, Mercer and Rivet in Locum. which Conquest by most Commentators is ascribed to the Vigour of his Body, and Virtue of his Mind; surpassing others by his Humanity and Benignity, he got together a Party, whereby he subdued his Opposites, and settled his Government. But since it hath been the ge∣neral Policy of succeeding Ages, by Marriage and Affinity to perpe∣tuate that in their Families, which he only obtained by Craft and Sub∣tilty; witness the Royal Families of the World ever since, a So∣veraignty and Superiority having been generally successive;Moses, Joshua, Samuel, &c. (except only when it pleased God to in∣spire and adapt some particular men for the Government of his People in the Primitive times.) And thus Marriage hath not only Intailed Soveraignty on their Po∣sterity, but also settled the com∣mon Peace, Trade and Commerce of one
Nation and State with a∣nother; hath promoted Alliances  of common preservations, against the Enemies of Gods Church; and whereby several Countreys have enjoyed the Commodities and Ma∣nufactures of each other, for a mu∣tual good and advantage. Solomon Married Pharaoh's Daughter, and settled a Trade and Commerce with the Aegyptians. What recon∣ciled the Chaldeans to Cyrus but Marriage? what reconciled the Sa∣bines to the Romans? Marriage; they were Enemies and Friends both in one days time,Salubrem providenti∣am. Se∣neca. which Seneca styles an healing Providence. What reconciled Pompey and Caesar after so much Fighting and Blood-shed, but Marriage? Which way did Alexander reconcile and allye Asia to Europe, but by Marriage? And our Politick Henry the Seventh Marrying the Lady Elizabeth, Heir of the House of York, ingrafted the white Rose on the Red, and so put a Period to those Civil Dissentions which had caused so much Blood-shed; and by Marry∣ing of his two Daughters, entitu∣led his Heirs to the French Inte∣rest
and Crown of Scotland: And in short, the Soveraign Houses of Christendome being a Kin to each other by Marriage, the Peace of Christendome and other parts have been preserved thereby;Firmissi∣mum Imperii munimen∣tum, Taci∣tus an. and Ta∣citus calls it the most strong Pre∣servative of Empire. And if these Obligations were but duly observed by Nations and Families, what Halcion dayes would be found on Earth! this Contract of Mankind should be like that Gol∣den Chain which reaches from Earth to Heaven, preserving the mutual coherence of the Elements, where∣by all things are reciprocally ty∣ed together, and make this lower World like the Imperial Heavens; where all the motions of the com∣prehending Orbs, the several Con∣sttions, the various position of the Stars and Planets produce a ravishing Chorus, and an Harmo∣ny truly beautiful: And what peace and quiet too, as the Emanations of this sacred Friendship, would be established! and what a series of
Hacentia's, and pleasing Conten∣tations  slow from it! 'twould lead us up to the via Lactea, and ush∣er us with Musick to the presence of Divinity. Having spoken something of the Illustrious Effects of Marriage, we proceed to inquire what method we are to take to render it blessed, propitious and satisfactory, which brings us to peruse the Prayer of Eliezer, for constituting a Family; in which Government was first e∣rected, and if still preserved, is the best means to preserve Nati∣onal Discipline, which was deri∣ved from it. GEN. 24. v. 12. And he said, O Lord God of my Master Abraham, I pray thee send me good speed this day, and shew kindness unto my Ma∣ster Abraham. THe words contain a pathetical Prayer of Eliezer,
Abraham's Servant, for a good Wife for his  Masters Son, I pray thee, &c. The Context and preceding Verses give us an account of Abrahams directi∣on, and Eliezer's entrance on this design; here we find Abraham's Ser∣vant begining with his Supplication to the Lord God of his Master Abraham, for success in this under∣taking. The Explication being so obvious, we only take notice of four particulars. 1. His Solemn Address to God for success. 2. His Prayer is strengthened by this Expression, O Lord God of my Master Abraham. 3. The Object and Design of his Prayer, to have good success this Day. 4. That particular kindness God would vouchsafe unto Abraham, in the concession and gratification of his request, And shew kindness unto my Master Abraham. And First of the First of these, viz. 1. His Solemn Address to God for Success; this is
Eliezer's me∣thod, and as the best way and means to accomplish his desires, is to address himself to God, who is the Author and giver of every good thing: He, and He only can give success to our Undertakings, or blast and disappoint our most re∣solved Designs and Intentions: Prayer is a Duty which keeps the trade of Religion a going, and 'tis our happiness that God puts it into our hearts to Pray; which is no other than a religious Speech, directed to God after a due sort, concerning things appertaining to his glory and our good; and it is the Key of Heaven, and Conduit of Mercy, a Perfume and sweet Sa∣vour in Gods Nostrils, and the Mes∣senger of the Soul to the Throne of Grace. Damascen tells,De Orth. Fid. lib. that in Prayer the Will is filled with desire, and the desires flame and blaze upwards to God; and though Prayer is an act of the Will, yet it hath its con∣ception in the Heart, and is ser∣viceable to the Soul, like the ani∣mal Spirits to the Body.
It is, and hath been the Method  and Usage of Gods Servants in all Ages, to Pray to God on all occa∣sions.Gen. 13.4. Thus Abraham for Ishmael, and when he removed his Family to Bethel and Beersheba, he built an Altar, and Called on the Name of the Lord: And David after he had settled the Ark, returned to bless his House, that is, to Pray for his People: so good Nehemiah, First I Prayed unto the Lord, and then I spake unto the King: And 'tis the Apostles Exhortation, In all things, by Prayer and Supplication, let your requests be made known unto God. 2. His Prayer is strengthened by this Expression, O Lord God of my Master Abraham: 'Tis very Empha∣tical, and gives us to understand Gods great affections to his emi∣nent Servants, and the seed of the Faithful: And this place more par∣ticularly refers to Gods promise to Abraham concerning Isaac,Gen. 19.17. and 'tis very probable this was a great Topick with Eliezer, Isaac being the Son of the Promise; and such forms of Invocation
were very com∣mon in those times: in Abraham's charge to his Servant,Verse 7. he encoura∣ges him in his undertaking, by re∣counting Gods Promises to his Seed. And we find often times in Gods appearance to his Servants, he is pleased to express himself as re∣membring his Promises: when he appeared to Isaac,Gen. 26.24 I am the God of thy Father, fear not; and Jacob when afraid of Esau, strengthened himself by this Invocation,Gen. 32.9. O Lord God of my father Abraham, and God of my fa∣ther Isaac, the Lord which said unto me, I will deal well with thee. So Moses fear∣ing the Aegyptians would not believe him,Exo. 4.5. but God to confirm his Faith and the Israelites, was pleased to work Miracles; That they may believe (says God) that the God of their Fa∣thers, the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, hath appeared unto thee. 3. The Object and Design of his Prayer, To have Good speed this day:Fac ut se mihi ossert quod peto. Zenochius in Locum. Good speed is an indefinite wish, and refers to several Objects; but here particularly signifies, suc∣cess in choosing a good Wife for his Masters Son; and some render
it, That he might obtain what he asked; others, That what he desired might be prosperous and successeful.Prosperum fac mihi occursum. Vatablus in Locum. Both which are Synominous; and 'tis very aptly and significantly rendred, Good speed; because the choosing and enjoying a good Wife is so essential a part of a mans happiness: this prompted Abraham to that wonderful care in seeking out a good Wife for his Son;Verse 3. and nothing could be more satisfactory to Isaac, than the enjoyment of this blessing: Jacobs seven years seemed but a few dayes, for the Love he bare unto Rachel. And all Ages of the World have subscribed to this Doctrine. 4. That particular Kindness God would vouchsafe unto Abraham;Fac miseri∣cordiam sig∣nificat non alio jure fre∣tum hoc au∣dire, nisi qua Deus gratiam su∣am Abramae pollitius fue∣rat. and shew Kindness unto my Master Abraham. We are here to enquire what kindness the accomplishment hereof would be unto Abraham. And nothing can please better, and be more acceptable to a Father, than to see his Son happy in a good Wife: A noter on the place well expresseth himself.
And a Father that hath taken so much care and pains in the edu∣cation and bringing up of his Son, who is so dear to him; and to whom he hath given so good an Example, when his Son is well married, and his Father sees him prosecuting those admirable Instru∣ctions he received from him; and with the help of a good Wife, how does he esteem himself hap∣py in his Sons happiness; whose Wisdom and conduct may render even his Posterity happy! To which the Wise man alludes,Pro. 24.23. The Father of the Righteous shall greatly rejoice, and he that begetteth a wise Child, shall have joy of him. Having spoken something by way of Explication, we pass on to the Observations, and each con∣cluded with a short Inference. Prayer is a great and Indispensa∣ble Duty.Observ. 1. A Tribute we owe in recogniti∣on of the Divine Soveraignty; 'tis
the Just Prerogative God may ex∣pect  from his Creatures: The other parts and pieces of the Creation pursue the design of their beings; the Sacred Poet tells us,Psal. 19.1. The Heavens declare Gods Glory, the Sun rules the Day, and the Moon the Night; the Elements observe their appointed Stations, the Earth is Lowermost, the Sea keeps his bounds, the Air, Aethur, and Su∣peraethur observe their Sphaerical apartments; the Earth is our Ha∣bitation, the Beast of the Field our Food, Vegetables afford both Medicine and Nourishment, and all things admirably useful, and adap∣ted for the service of man.Psal. 19.3, 4. There is no speech nor language, where their Voice is not heard: Their line is gone throughout all the Earth, and their words to the end of the World. And are wonderful Indiciums of Gods Glory and goodness in their serv∣ing man; and shall he only dege∣nerate and prove Anomalous and Sceptical? shall the best piece of the Creation prove the worst, and unserviceable? The
noblest beings shew most Beauty in their opera∣tions,  and shall man that was crea∣ted to admire the Wisdom and goodness of his Maker, be silent, and do less than the dumb pieces of the Creation? God forbid. The all-wise God hath commu∣nicated the sensible and eminent influences of his mercy, goodness, and bounty, to the rational Na∣ture of man; that so Body and Soul jointly engaged, might pro∣duce an harmony of Praise and Thanksgiving to the great Creator of the World: wherefore did God give him his Tongue, the Organ of Speech, but to pray unto his Maker; and with David, O Lord open thou my Lips, and my Mouth shall shew forth thy Praise? God gave him his hands to lift them up in prayer to him,Tendens ad sydera pal∣mas. and with Da∣vid, that his Prayer might come before him as Incense, and the lift∣ing up his hands as the Evening Sa∣crifice.
So also the Inorganical parts are  to be chiefly imployed in our prayers to God,Elevatio mentis ad Deum. the Understand∣ing, Will and Affections, without which prayer is insignificant; 'tis only the spiritual and fervent pray∣er that availeth, which is called wrastling,Gen. 32.24. Oratio essi∣cax. Beza. and pouring out of the Soul to God; and 'tis that which is our indispensible Duty; all the faculties of the Soul must be en∣gaged herein, to supplicate and adore the great God, and intenti∣onally with David; exciting all within us to pray unto that God who gave us our Being, and to Praise him for all our Mercies and Benefits:Affectus operi nomen imposuit. St. Ambros. for 'tis the lively affecti∣ons of the Soul in a Duty that gives it a Name, and makes it suc∣cessful: so Eliezer here pray'd un∣to God for his Masters Son. And prayer is our Duty, to shew our dependance on God; In him we live, move, and have our Being; our daily exigencies invite us to it. Inf.Let us therefore pray daily, for
prayer is as useful to us, as our daily bread; and we are encoura∣ged hereto, for he filleth the hun∣gry with good things; and ex∣horted to pray without ceasing: In all things let your Requests and Supplications be made known to God. That some forms of Invocation and phraseologies, are very prevalent.Observ. 2. So Eliezer here, O Lord God of my Master Abraham; and this expression is used to strengthen Eliezers Faith. And we may learn from hence; That upon particular wants and oc∣casions, we ought to use such Phrase∣ologies, which are analogous to Gods Promises, or referr to our wants: Thus Joshua, after Israel had sinn'd:Josh. 7.8, 9 O Lord, what shall I say, when Israel turneth their backs before their Enemies? That was when they were pursued by the men of Ai; which implies his earnest Expostulation with God to preserve his own People, and concludes with this
prevailing  argument; And what wilt thou do unto thy great Name? The Prophet Hosea exhorts the Israelites to re∣nounce in these Expressions their former Sins.Hos. 14.2, 3. Take with you words, and turn to the Lord, and say unto him, Take away all Iniquity, and re∣ceive us graciously; so will we render the calves of our Lips. Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride upon Horses, neither will we say any more to the work of our hands, ye are our Gods, for with thee the Fatherless find∣eth Mercy. So Elijah prayed unto God,1 Kings 17.20. Hast thou also brought evil up∣on the Widdow with whom I sojourn, by slaying her Son? Which is as if he remembred God, who commanded him to go to that Widdow for succour, as we find in the beginning of that Chapter: And we read of Asa,2 Chron. 14.14. when he went to Battle, he used this pathetical way of expres∣sing himself to God: Help us, O Lord our God, for we rest in thee, and in thy Name we go against this Multitude: O Lord, thou art our God, let not man prevail
against thee: and  so Jehoshaphat, when the Army of the Heathens were coming against him, he prayed unto God.2 Chron. 20.6, 7. O Lord God of our Fathers, art thou not God in Heaven? and rulest not thou over all the Kingdoms of the Heathen? and in thine hand is there not power and might, so that none is able to withstand thee? Art thou not our God, who didst drive out the in∣habitants of this Land before thy Peo∣ple Israel, and gavest it to the seed of Abraham thy Friend for ever? Secondly, In our Thanskgiving and Exultation, we should admire and paraphrase on Gods power, suitable to the Nature of our de∣liverance: such was the Song of Moses, after the Children of Israels deliverance at the Red Sea, a para∣phrastical Triumph repeating the manner of their deliverance and Pharaohs overthrow; what pious Airs and Encomiums was chanted out by the thankful Israelites! And what was Deborahs Song, but the slaming
Raptures of a rejoicing  Heart? And the twenty second of Samuel, is a continued thanksgiving of David to God for his mercies; and the 105, and 106. Psalms, are a History of the deliverance of Gods People, and Davids thankful∣ness for Gods Mercies. Inf.Let us therefore remember the advice of the Apostle,1 Thess. 5.18. In every thing give thanks, for this is the Will of God in Jesus Christ concerning you: And as we expect any bles∣sings, we must pray for them; so also to improve what we have with thankfulness is the only way to have more. Observ. 3.That we ought to pray for each other. 1. Here was good Eliezer praying for his Masters Son; and 'tis the Duty of Christians to assist each other with their Prayers. The Apo∣stle bids us make Supplication for all Saints, and the Apostle pray∣ed for those that had not seen his
Face in the Flesh; and how passi∣onate was he for the prayers of of the People! and conjures them, For Christs sake,Coloss. 2.1. and the love of the Spirit, that they should strive with him in their Prayers to God for him. Tertullian calls it,Rom. 15.30. An holy conspi∣racy to besiege Heaven: this Con∣junction in Prayer edifies the whole Church, the Communion of Saints, and is of advantage to every mem∣ber; nay, even the wicked have a sense, and need of the Prayers of good men: so Pharaoh told Moses, Intreat the Lord your God to turn away this death only: That is, pray unto God for me; and the pray∣ers of Saints are very acceptable: God would not hear Job's Friends,Job 42.8. but says God, My servant Job shall pray for you. 2. This praying for one another does not terminate in personal Ob∣ligations, but comprehends pray∣ing for Christs Church and Peo∣ple; for the Propagation of his Gospel, that God would give him
the Heathen for his Inheritance, and the utmost part of the World for his Possession: and how pathetically did the Jews in Captivity express their zeal for the welfare of Jerusalem! By the Rivers of Babilon,Psal. 137. there we sat down, yea we wept when we remem∣bred Zion; and so to the end! and for Nations, it is St. Pauls exhorta∣tion,1 Tim. 2.1. That first of all, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions and giving of thanks be made for all men: For Kings and all that are in Authority, that we may lead quiet and peaceable lives, in all godliness and honesty. Nay further, we are commanded to pray for our Enemies,Mat. 5 44. and Christ prayed for them that crucified him,Luk. 23.34 Acts 7.60. Father forgive them; and that Protomartyr St. Step, prayed for them that stoned him. And 'tis the noble and heroick design of a graci∣ous Heart, to be serviceable to Church and State, by prayer, either to depre∣cate Judgments, or obtain Mercies. 1. To deprecate Judgements. How did Abraham
intercede with  God for Sodom! and God was pleased to answer him,Gen. 9.32. That if ten righteous were in it, he would not de∣stroy it for tens sake! And how Gracious was God to Jerusalem! And I sought for a man among them,Ezek 22.30. that should make up the Hedge, and stand in the gap before me, for the Land, that I should not destroy it, but I found none: It implies Gods great respect for the righteous; which Solomon styles fundamentum seculi, an everlasting Foundation: publick Spirited Persons are like Pillars, to bear up Gods Wrath from the place they live in. 2. To obtain Mercies; so Elijah prayed for Rain in the days of Ahab, and obtained it, after three years Intermission; and so Moses that great Master in Israel, after God had reveal'd his will to him, he cryed unto God for the Chil∣dren of Israel, and could bid them Stand still and see the Salvation of God; and we all know what a glorious Victory followed.
Inf.Let us therefore upon the whole, Pray for each other, Gods Church and People, that by the fervency and continuance of our Prayers, we may either stand in the gap with Abraham, or prevail with Jacob; at least be found among the righteous, that when Gods Judg∣ments are in the earth, God may say unto us as he did to Noah, Come thou and all thine house into the Ark,Gen. 7.1. for thee have I seen righte∣ous before me in this generation. Observ. 4.Prayer is the only way to obtain Mercies, or divert Judgments. How great Priviledge is it to be admitted into the Presence of some great Monarch! but how much greater Prerogative hath the de∣vout Christian, that by fervent Prayers, and ardent effusion of his Tears and Wishes, may freely con∣ferr with the King of Kings! this penetrates the
Clouds and Sphears, and mounts us to the bosome of  the great Benefactor; and a Charm that if rightly performed, pre∣vails on Omnipotency;Oratio pura coelos pene∣trans va∣cua non re∣dibit. St. Austin. this Dove sent to Heaven, often brings an Olive-leaf in his Mouth: This fer∣vent Prayer (sayes St. Austin) as it pierceth Heaven, so it will not return without effect. And not on∣ly our Duty, but our daily wants put us upon this undertaking; we are helpless Creatures of our selves, and Prayer is our only refuge; there is an admirable Oeconomy in the Divine Wisdome, to bring man to his Duty and Happiness; God tells us,Ezek. 36.37. That for this he will be enquired of by the House of Israel, to do this for them: And 'tis but highly rational to confess our de∣pendance upon him that gave us being. The Kingly Prophet ele∣gantly describes Gods goodness to those that call upon him in 145th Psalm, from the begining to the the end: And certainly 'tis no Mer∣cy that is not worth seeking to God for; but when sought and ob∣tained,
it makes the blessing the  more acceptable, and obliges us to improve it, with the greater thankfulness and sobriety: we can never lose any thing by prayer, for we are never out of Gods reach to relieve us; if God please to answer us, the Blessing is the more safe and sweet, and if deny∣ed we are the more humble, and patient, and content that God should be Master of his own boun∣ty. We have the Practice of Gods People recommended to our Imi∣tation, and the admirable effects of their Prayers recorded for our encouragement: here good Eliezer prayes unto God for good speed; he would not venture on it with∣out Petitioning the Lord God of his Master Abraham, and the good success he met with, was the ef∣fect of Prayers. Abraham tells him God would send his Angel before him, and prosper his way; which implies the strength of
Abraham's Faith; and his Servant, after he  had prayed,V. 13, 14. in the very next verses gives us a kind of Prophetick hint of what would come to pass, and resigns himself up to the conduct of Providence; Behold I stand here by the Well of Water; and so on:Non tentat Deum cujus instinctu ad hoc motus fuerat. Ju∣nius in loc. Junius observeth, he did not tempt God, because God prompted him hereto; for such manuductory pas∣sages of Providence are but Preli∣minary to success, and antecede the effects of our Prayers:Signum quod statuit congruum fuisse, erat, enim signa bonae uxoris & indolis affabilis, hospitalis & strenuae qualem no∣verat pla∣citurum & Isaaco & Abrahamo. St. Chrys. in loc. And St. Chrysostome well observes, The sign, sayes he, which Eliezer pitcht up∣on was very agreeable; for those things, as affability and courtesie, are the indications of a good Wife, and such as would please Isaac and Abraham also. David alludes to such antecedent Providences: sayes God, I will in∣struct thee, and teach thee in the way which thou shalt go, and I will guide thee with mine Eye; and such gra∣cious dealings of God with his People are our great encourage∣ment, and the effects of Prayer's
miraculous;James 5.17. as if Elijah could shut and open Heaven at his pleasure. Jacobs Prayer turned away the In∣dignation and Wrath of Esau, and his four hundred men: after Mo∣ses had cried to the Lord for the Children of Israel, the Egyptians were drowned in the Red-Sea. And after David had prayed unto his God,1 Sam. 17.37. That delivered him out of the paw of the Lyon and the bear, he also delivered him out of the hands of the Philistine: And when Elijah prayes unto God, That the meal shall not waste, nor the cruise of Oyl fail, till the day that God send Rain on Earth: And when Hezekiah prayed against Sen∣nacherib for reproaching the living God, the Lord was pleased to answer him,2 King 19. that he should not shoot one Arrow, nor come before the City with Shields or Bucklers, but re∣turn as he came; and God smote a hundred fourscore and five thou∣sand Assyrians, and even Sennacherib himself slain by his
two Sons: And let but those three Servants of  that God whom they trusted would deliver them, but pray to him in the fiery Furnace; though the ve∣ry heat slay even those that put them in, yet a hair of their heads shall not be singed, nor shall their Coats be changed,Dan. 2. neither the smell of Fire pass on them.: Nay, even the Son of God shall bear them Company and preserve them. And when Daniel is in the Den of Ly∣ons, God answers his Prayers, and sends his Angel and shuts the Ly∣ons mouths, that they could not hurt him. In fine, by Prayer the Moon hath stood still, the Sun gone backward, the Ravens have brought Food, the Heavens rained Manna, the Rocks afforded Water, the Fire hath given over Burning, the Lyons have stopt their Mouths,Fidelibus totus mun∣dus diviti∣arum est. St. Austin de Civ. Dei. and all Creatures shall muster up themselves to defend the Body of Christ; whereupon sayes St. Austin, The Saints have all the World at their service: And gives us the Reason, Domine quis tenet te? Lord, sayes he, who can hold
thee? who  can fetter and restrain Omnipoten∣cy? Nay, even Heathens and Turks have alwaies had a great venerati∣on for Prayer, which is a reproach to Christians, to be out-done by them. Numa Pompilius thought it sufficient for his safety, he could answer,At ego rem Divinam facio. But I nm about the Ser∣vice of my Gods: And 'twas the Heathen Custom, not to venture upon business of moment without the Invocation of their Gods: And the advice of Xenophon was Divine, That in Prosperity they should worship their Gods, that when they had a more particular need of their assistance they might with greater confidence approach them at their Altars, commending the success to the Power and Provi∣dence of those Deities they ser∣ved. Publius Scipio used alwayes to go to the Capitol before he went to the Senate, and so begin the service of the Commonwealth with prayer, as Suetonius tells usBenè ac sapienter Majores in∣stituerunt ut rerum agen∣daram ita dicendi ini∣tium à prae∣cationibus capere. Sueto. in vit. Caes.:
It was the Wisdom of those Go∣vernments to commence all their business with the service of their Gods. Let us Christians therefore,Inf. that have the Son of God to intercede for us (he is the Angel standing before the Throne with the Gol∣den Censer in his hand,Rev. 8.3. filled with the Odours of his Merits,Ipse solus est cujus gratia De∣um habe∣mus propi∣tium. Cal∣vin. to offer up with our prayers) be encou∣raged to come to the Throne of Grace, to find Mercy and Grace to help in time of need: For he is able to save to the uttermost all that come unto God by him. Let us come to God in all Conditions. In our Adversity, God tells us, No good thing will he withhold from them that diligently seek him: Prayer lists us in the service of the Almighty, and inrolls us under the Divine Standard, and from whence we may expect the favourable Protections of Providence.
And in our Prosperity, lest we  be full and deny God, let us re∣member the Corrective the Roman Emperours met with in the midst of their Triumph and Glory; Look behind thee,Respice post te & homi∣nem me∣mento te. Suetonius. and consider thou also art mortal, and subject to misery; for we know not to what extremities we may be ex∣posed. Let us therefore pray with David,Psal. 71.12. O Lord be not far from me, O God make haste for my help: And if we expect good success in our Prayers, let us be alwayes deeply affected with those things we pray for.St. Matth. 22.11. It is said, The King came in to see the Guests; so in Prayer, the King of Glory looks into the frame and disposition of our Hearts; let us therefore use Prayer aright, that it prime our Souls, and pre∣serve us in the Oyl of Grace from Wind and Weather. Observ. 5.Gods blessing and providing for Children, is a great blessing to Pa∣rents. 1. Jacob tells us, Children are the
Gift of God; when he met his Brother he told him,Gen. 32.5. These are the Children God hath graciously given me; and his great care and affection to his Children, is a great Pattern to Parents: Now Children being the same Flesh, and pieces of their Parents, their Affection to them must needs be very great, and be highly solicitous to promote their welfare; as our Saviours Parents at Jerusalem, did present him be∣fore the Lord for his Blessing: And we cannot give it you in ter∣minis, for Speech is lame, and words cannot reach the sence of the thing signified; but most cer∣tainly when God is pleased to an∣swer the Prayers of Parents, and bless and provide for their Chil∣dren, it is a very great kindness and Mercy to Parents: We will give you Davids sence of this matter; when Gods Promise was made known to David:2 Sam. 2.12. And when thy dayes shall be fulfill'd, and thou shalt sleep with thy Fathers,
I will set up thy seed after thee, which shall proceed out of thy Bowels, and I will establish his Kingdom: And we have Davids acknowledgment in the following verses, Who am I, O Lord God,V. 18, 19. and what is my House, that thou hast brought me hitherto! and this was yet a small thing in thy sight, O Lord God, for thou hast spo∣ken also of thy Servants House, for a great while to come, and is this the manner of man, O Lord God! Nay in the 20. verse, he wants words to express his thankfulness; And what can David say more unto thee? for thou, Lord God, knowest thy Ser∣vant: And when God had placed Solomon upon the Throne, he breaks out into this Elogium,1 Kings 1.48. Bles∣sed be the Lord God of Israel, which hath given me one to sit upon the Throne this day, mine eyes even seeing it. Thus the admirable care Abra∣ham took for Isaac, and his great charge to Eliezer, is an assured In∣dication of his great Love and Af∣fection; and that it would please God to answer Eliezers
request, he useth this Expression; And shew kindness unto my Master Abraham: And how did the Heart of old Jacob revive, when he heard of Josephs being alive! how did he contemplate and adore the myste∣ries of Providence, That God had so miraculously preserved and pro∣vided for him; and made him Go∣vernour over all the Land of E∣gypt! and when he met him, how was he overwhelmed with Joy!Gen. 46.30. Now let me die, sayes he, since I have seen thy Face, and thou art yet alive. 2. As 'tis a great mercy to Pa∣rents to see their Children blest and provided for, so on the con∣trary, undutiful Children are a great trouble and grief to their Parents. Solomon tells us, The Fa∣ther of a Fool hath no Joy; that is, hath a great deal of Trouble and Affliction: the words are a Meiosis, there is more intended than ex∣press'd. How bitterly did David mourn, when Tamar was ravished, Amnon kill'd, and Absalom
caught  by the Hair of his Head and slain! And we meet with Augustus, that had foolish and wicked Children, wishing that either he had lived single,Ʋtinam ut caelebs vix∣issem, aut orbus peri∣issem. or dyed Childless. 'Tis sad indeed to bring forth Children to the Murtherer, the Devil: and how miserably does the Mother in Plu∣tarch warble out her mournful ditty; Quo pueri estis profecti! Poor Souls, what's become of you! Inf.Let Parents therefore carefully instruct their Children, and be thankful for the Blessings God be∣stowes on them; and let Children be dutiful to their Parents, and let both observe Davids experience he found of both:Psal. 37.25 I have not seen the Righteous forsaken, nor his Seed begging Bread. Observ. 6. and last.How happy are the Saints, that up∣on all occasions, they may pray to God to sanctifie mercies! It is said of the Cherubims, that there were hands under
their wings;  to signifie, that where there is that ight of Knowledge, there should be hands to put that light into practice: And our Saviour tells us, If ye know these things,Joh. 13.3. happy are ye if ye do them; so that Happiness pronounced of practice, and not speculation; and here consists the Saints Happiness, that they im∣prove their knowledge by prayer and walking with God: And by This the Wise man tells us, they btain favour of the Lord; that is, s Mercer glosseth,Id vult quod à Do∣mino impe∣trat. Mer∣cer in lo∣cum. Matth. 7.7. They have as it were what they please of God, nd are sure of Gods favour and protection in all cases, and the promises of God on their side. Ask and it shall be given you, seek nd ye shall find, knock and it shall e opened unto you; and nothing can estrain Omnipotency but Unbe∣ief. Now, 'tis as true in Divinity as Philosophy, That Knowledge nd Power is to no effect, unless t be produced into Act; for the
end of Knowledge is Action;Frustra est potentia quae nun∣quam pro∣ducitur in actum. Arist. Eth. as if Arts and Sciences: And shall their Votaries improve themselves by all the advantages and benefits of A∣ction; nay, an Heathen affirm, That felicity consisteth not in the Theory, but in the practice of moral Vir∣tues; and tell the world, that the naked knowledge without the pra∣ctice of Virtue, is like those that ask advice of the Physician about bodily distempers, but will no suffer any remedy to be admini∣stred? And shall the Servants o God be satisfied with the Ideas o Truth floating in their Brains, with¦out an influence on the Heart and Life? No, the devout Christian la¦bours with as much more earnest¦ness, as his End and Reward is a¦bove others; he does not satisfie himself with Speculation or Cere∣mony, bare observance will no please him; he is altogether fo reality and performance, and ha a deeper insight into Divine my¦steries than other men: he wel knowes, that 'tis not those
tha  know only,James 1.21. but those that do the will of God, who shall enter into the Kingdom of his Father, as Christ tells us. Most admirable is the advice of Eliphaz to Job:Job 5. ult. A wise man labours to know the goodness of every thing; and here lyes the happiness of the Saints above other People, even in Creature-enjoyments, that by Prayer both Mercies and Afflicti∣ons are sanctified to them; others in their enjoyments suck in the Sing as well as the Honey, 'tis the good Christian only that feeds on clean and polite Pleasure: others are misled into corrupt apprehen∣sions and presumptions of things, the Saints only preserve their Intellectuals untainted; others in the midst of their abundance pro∣stitute their Affections, due only to God, to a corruptible Creature; the Saints only improve their com∣forts and enjoyments to Gods glo∣ry, as they are the emanations of
his bounty, and make the Crea∣tures serviceable to illustrate and set forward the accumulated glo∣ry of their Creator: others take up their rest, and place their Sum∣mum Bonum in the enjoyments of this world, and esteem it their only Joy when their Oyl and Wine increaseth: there is such Corruption in their Nature, and Sophistry in the Creature, that from the greatness of their wealth, they conclude they have much laid up for many years,Luk. 12.19. they may take their ease, eat, drink and be mer∣ry;Psal. 49.11. and the Psalmist tells us, Their inward thought is, that their Houses shall endure for ever, and their dwell∣ing places to all generations; and even Deifie themselves in the reflection of their own grandeur.Psal 49.14. Alas! they are asleep in their Tent of Epi∣curism and Sensuality, and little think that a day of visitation and recompense for sin is at hand; and on a suddain mortality overtakes them, as David tells us, Like sheep
they are laid in the grave, death shall feed on them, and the upright shall have dominion over them in the morn∣ing, and their beauty shall consume in the grave from their dwelling. Then is their mistaken happiness come to a final period, and their mise∣ry commenced ETERNAL; then their Cuts and Complements will appear nothing else but affected Vanities, their Pride and Luxury, their Swaggering and their Swear∣ing, their Formula's of Complai∣sance and Courtship shall then be pronounced but glittering Abomi∣nations: Then Apostles and Saints shall shine in Glory, when the per∣secuting Nero's of the World shall be thrown to Hell: And at last be forced to confess, We Fools counted their Life madness, and their end to have been without Honour: How are they now rec∣koned amongst the Saints, and have their Portion with the Al∣mighty!
But the Devour Christian hath Oculus in metam, his eye on the Mark, and steers all his actions by the Compass of Gods Wod; he uses the Creatures with a critical fruiion, and as helps only, not Remora's in his passage to the New Jerusalem; and by Prayer endeavours to reduce the Creature to it's primitive goodness, that so the Curse being subducted, he may enjoy them with a blessing; as the Apostle tells us, Every Creature of God is good, be∣ing sanctified by the Word of God and prayer: By which the Creature is sanctified these three wayes. 1. In obtaining Mercies: We ought to seek to God, as Eliezer did; and so the Apostle exhorts us: In all things with Prayer and Supplication, let your requests be made known to God: And we have the ex∣ample of Christ and his Apostles; and God expects that we should acknowledge his Dominion and Power over second Agents.
2. Prayer sanctifies the Enjoy∣ment and use of them. Solomon tells us, To reice in our labour is the Gift of God: pleasure is in it self lawful, but corrupt Nature is apt to make us Love pleasure more than God, therefore we ought to pray against its prevalency: And our Tables too often are turned into a Snare; we must pray there∣fore to use the Creature with that temperance and sobriety, as may raise us nearer to God in contem∣plation of the Divine Providence, and care over us, and as Eviden∣ces of Gods Love towards us, without which worldly abundance may prove but a deceitful argu∣ment of Gods favour; and some∣times Afflictions have proved the dissembled favours of Affection. 3. Prayer sanctifies the Creature, in the Rmembrance and Recogni∣ton of Gods Mercies in them, and with
Thankfulness to improve those  Dispensations of Grace and Favour: Thus did the Holy Psalmist.Psal. 23.5, 6. Thou preparest a Table for me in the presence of mine Enemies, thou anointest my Head with Oyl, my cup runneth over: Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the daies of my Life, and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. FINIS.
Books lately printed for John Salusbury at the Atlas in Cornhill near the Royal Exchange. OEconomica Sacra: Or, a Parae∣netical Discourse of Marri∣age; together with some particular Remarks on the Marriage of Isaac and Rebecka. Iter ad Astra: Or, The Portray∣ture of a Suffering Christian; with an Introduction of Mans Creation. By the same Author. Of Contentment, Patience and Resignation to the Will of God: In several Sermons. By Isaac Bar∣row, D. D. Never before Printed. Ʋnum Necessarium: Or, Christ's Justification of Mary's Choice, and of his Servants wrongfully Accused: Containing a Resolution of many weighty Cases of Conscience. Viz. Indifferent Things, Obedience to the Higher Powers, &c. With some Reflections on Popery, and a brief Account of the many Cruelties com∣mitted by the Papists. By Richard Baxter.
A Second Volume of Discourses: By Hezekiah Burton, D. D. late Re∣ctor of Barns near London, and Pre∣bendary of Norwich. The true Prophecies or Progno∣stications of Michael Nostradamus, Physician to Henr 2. Francis 2. and Charles 9. Kings of France, and one of the best Astronomers that ever were. A Work full of Curiosity and Learning. Translated and Com∣mented by Theophilus de Garencires, Doctor in Physick Colleg. Lond. The Fifteen Comforts of Rash and Inconsiderate Marriage, or Ani∣madversions upon the Miscarriages of a Wedded Estate: With the Ad∣ditions of three Comforts more. The Secret History of the most Renowned Queen Elizabeth and the Earl of Essex. By a Person of Qua∣lity. The Laws and Acts of Parliament made by King James I. and his Roy∣al Successors, Kings of Scotland. In Folio.
