r765 99832112 36583
THE ACCOUNT OF THE Popes Procession AT ABERDENE, The 11th. of January, 1689. which was delivered to the new Elected Magistrats and Council thereof, by the Students of Marishal-Colledge. WITH The Students Letter to the saids Magistrats thereanent. Printed in the Year 1689.
To the Right Honourable the Provost, Baillies, and new Elected Council of Aberdene. Right Honourable, AS nothing can be more destructive to any City or Incorpora∣tion, than the having of persons in publick Trust, who mind not the publick Interest of the Society; so it is certainly the greatest Happiness they can enjoy, to be govern'd by those who prefer the public Good to their own private Concern, and their Religion to any State-Interest or Advantage. That the first hath been in part this Cities Fate these several years bygone, is so well known, that he who runs may read it. But since now the Storm begins to Calm, and the antient Liberties and Fundamental Priviledges of this City, begin to receive their wonted lustre, and such Governours set to the Helm of Affairs, as we hope will never Impare the publick Good, or give the World occasion to say, that ever they Forfault their wonted Character of Religion, Loyalty, and Bon accord. And since all good Citizens (now in the entry of your Government) are giving all the Expressions of Joy in their Power upon this Exigent, we judge our selves bound to throw in our Mite, knowing you to be Men, not only well principl'd in the true Protestant Religion, but (as we our selves) are Abhorrers of all Popish Superstitions and Designs. Have therefore resolved to add to the Solemnity of this day of your Election, by carrying his Holiness in Procession through∣out this City in the greatest Splendor, where in end he will meet with a fatal Doom. And lest any ill principl'd or malicious per∣sons should represent us or our Actions as Tumultuary, we have thought fit to give you assurance there is no such Designs, neither intend we to injure the Persons or Goods of any. And to evidence our Ingenuity in this, we send you herewith the manner of the Procession, Indictment, and Sentence of his Holiness, with all its Circumstances and Solemnities; which if ye will countenance with your presence, will be taken very kindly. So wishing Prosperity and Safety to all the Maintainers of the True Protestant Religion, the Preservation of His Sacred Majesty, the Flourishing of our
Noble Patron and Colledge, the happy and peaceable Government of you as Magistrats, and the wonted Unity and Friendship among all the true Citizens of Bon-accord. We are in all Sincerity, Right Honourable, Your Honours most humble Servants, R. R. and A. I. Marishals-Colledge 11 Jan. 1689. A true Account of His Holiness Procession at Aberdene, January 11. 1689. Which was supposed to have been performed by His Holiness in the greatest Splendor, having come on purpose to Congratulat the good Success the Roman-Catholicks had in this Kingdom, & more particularly in Aberdene: In order to which His Holiness being Seated on a Chair of State with His Crown on His Head, His Keys on His Arm, and Clothed with Scarlet Robes Lined with Ermine; Began His Procession from the Col∣ledge-Gate, about four a-Clock in the Afternoon, and was ac∣companied as follows. FIrst Marched a Company of Men carrying Links, six a-breast. Next Marched the Janitor of the Colledge, carrying the Col∣ledge Mace before six Judges in Scarlet Robes. Next Marched four Whislers Sounding. Then four Priests, four Jesuits, four Popish Bishops, four Car∣dinals, all in their Robes, at a competent distance each from others, betwixt a Lane of burning Flambo's on each side. Then followed a Jesuite in Embroidered Robes, carrying a great Cross. Last of all came his Holiness, carried on a Magnificent Chair of State, with his Privy Counsellour the Devil sometime appearing at his back, having a great number of burning Tapers about him. In this manner he is carried thorow all the Streets of the City, distribu∣ting Pardons and Indulgences gratis: And being come to the High-Street, near the Cross, he placeth himself on a Theatre Erected on purpose; where after several Adresses made to his Holiness, one of his Cardinals made the following Speech.
Car. MOst Holy Father, of all the Earth the Prince, Who keeps the Keys of Hell, and Heav'n, e're since St. Peters days: You God of gods on Earth, Who can Bind, Loose, Save, Punish, at one Breath, All Souls of Persons: Condemn both Kings and Crowns, Who can make Souldiers Coats of Card'nals Gowns. What Joy is here! To see that You should Grace Us with Your Presence, in so Remote a Place: We therefore to you Presents offer now, For all the World to Baals gods must bow. There's none dare Question Your Prerogative, Most Holy Father, then for ever live. We'll make all owne Infallibility, Beside, wee'll add you have Ubiquity; You're still at Rome, tho' ye have grac'd this day With your own presence: Hail Father, Hail for ay. Pop. Good Cardinal, we know this is the time For to advance our Int'rest, let's Combine, Spare ye no Arts our Lustre to support; Go search all Mines t'enrich our shining Court. You may sell Heav'n, of Religion make a Trade, Indulgences in plenty can be had. Car. Most Holy Father, while Priest-craft bears the sway, We'll make Heav'ns Gate a Lock to your own Key: 'Gainst Hereticks our Swords we'll quickly draw, And will perform this Your so Sacred Law: Hundreds of Thousands we will make to share On common Doom; no Sex nor Age we'll spare, No kneeling-beauties Tears, no Virgins Cryes, No Infants smiles, none spar'd with us, all dyes. About the time that his Holiness and the Cardinal is at this Conference, Enters Father Peters in great haste, who delivers his Holiness a Letter; upon Reading whereof his Holiness falls a-Swown, and the Devil appears at his back to help him; upon sight of all which the Crowd cry,
Now Babylon falls, come, come, let us pull down That Scarlet Whore, and break the Triple Crown: We'll Countermine her Plots, we will Combine, And ever pray fo'Religion and our King. His Holiness awakes, and being possest with an extraordinary Collick, (the Devil all the while holding his head) Vomits Plots, Daggers, Indulgences, and the Blood of Martyrs, and cryes, Pop. Oh! We're undone. Oh! Mr. Devil, pray Help us with your advice, without delay. Dev. Hells Plots, are ended, Israels GOD combines, To crush our Counsels, to break our Designs. Pop. Oh! Mr. Devil, pray then take me hence Unto your Court, since ye'll find no defence. Dev. Good Mr. Pope, my Court cannot contain Your Holiness, except ye would go in Into my Kitchen; for my Court is throng With Popes, and Cardinals, who will admit of none But Nuns amongst them, where all the World may see, That they, with them, made pretty Companie. For while in Rome some Nephews got some Nieces, They now get Sons and Daughters in their places. But, Mr. Pope, since Priest-craft must be gone, And since there's few that will your case bemoan; To France I'le send you, where perhaps ye may Be made Groom-of-the-Stool to's Majesty. Pop. Oh! Mr. Devil, How can you thus torment Your wonted Friend? Oh! Will ye not prevent This fatal Doom? How can I go and Dight A Princes Breech? Who oft-times in the sight Of all the World, have made great Monarchs go, And lay aside their Crowns, to kiss my Toe. Pray then, Sir Devil, will ye but permit, If not to Court, unto the darkest Pit;
Rather than send me to the King of France, To wipe his Breech. Oh, most sad mischance! Dev. To Hell then go, in Chains I will you bind; But Jesuits a while must stay behind; That while you'r on your Journey unto Hell, These Lads may go and Ring the Trin'ty-Bell. At the end of the foresaid Conference, the Devil endeavoured to throw His Holyness in the Fire, but was hindered by Order of a High Court of Justice, who having heard of His Holyness's Pro∣cession, resolved to give him a fair Tryal by Law: And accord∣ingly having Erected a Bench, and the Judges having taken their Seats in their Robes, caused bring in His Holyness, attended by his good Friend Mr. Devil, (all the rest of his friends deserting him) and ordered the Clerk to read the following Inditement. Innocent the eleventh Universal Bishop and Pope of Rome, pre∣tended Successor to St. Peter, thou art Indicted and Accused of High Treason against the most High and Eternal God, as an Ene∣my to Religion, Monarchy and Government, and an open and avowed Murderer of Mankind. In so far as thou hast taken upon thee to Usurpe the Titles and Prerogatives only due to the Hea∣venly Father, hast most blasphemously Erected to thy self unknown gods, and in contempt of thy Maker hast Worshipped and Adored them; hast Usurped the Power of Dethroning Kings and Dispos∣ing of Kingdoms: Hast upon pretence of Religion committed Massacres and Murders, and Canoniz'd the Actors. And albeit thou thinks it damnable for Priests to Marry, yet thou proclaims it Venial for them to commit Fornications and Adulteries before and after Confession. Thou owns it meritorious for persons to Cheat and Lie for advancing thy Interest, and Emittest Indulgen∣ces to palliat these Faults. And therefore, Thou art guilty of the foresaid horrid and execrable Crimes, which being found to be of verity, Thou ought and should Forfault thy Life, Liberty and Goods, and suffer the Pain of Death, in such Form and Manner as this High Court of Judicature shall think sit. After Reading of the foresaid Indictment, the Lord Chief Justice
Interrogats his Holiness if he pleaded Guilty or not Guilty, to which his Holiness (being conscious of the Guilt of what was laid to his Charge) made no Answer; Thereafter the Court adduced sufficient Proofs by the Canons of the Church, Bulls, Pardons, and Indulgences lying in Process, they found him Guilty of the Crimes contained in his Indictment, and therefore ordered the Clerk to read out the following Sentence. Before Reading of which (the Lyon King at Arms, and his Brethren Heraulds, and Pursevants, being called to be present in their Robes,) the Trumpets sounded three times; thereafter the Clerk read, and Dempster of Court proclaimed the following Sen∣tence. Innocent the eleventh Universal Bishop and Pope of Rome, pre∣tended Successor to St. Peter; Forasmuch as thou art found Guilty by this High Court of Justice, of the horrid, treasonable, and exe∣crable Crimes contained in the Indictment; Therefore, the Lord Chief Justice, and remanent Lords here present sitting in Judg∣ment, Decern and Ordain thy Body in all thy Pontificalls, to be taken immediately to the publick place of Execution, and there to be burnt to ashes, and ordains thy Blood to be tainted, thy Honours, Reputation and Fame, to be blotted out of all Records: That neither Thou, nor thy Emissaries, Nuncio, Cardinals, Bishops, Priests, Jesuits, Munks, Friars, Nuns, Whores, Bawds, or Pro∣testants disguised, (tho by a Marginal Note of the True Protestant Religion, without Suspicion in the contrair) be ever admitted in any Civil Society, or ever have Power to bear Charge in any Office, Dignity or Trust within this Kingdom, or City, in any time hereafter. To which the Dempster of Courtadded; and this I give for Doom. After Reading of which Sentence, the Trumpets Sounded again three times; and the Lyon King at Arms, and His Brethren He∣raulds and Pursevants in their Robes, having the Pope's Arms in their Hands, Repeated the Sentence, Ranvers'd, and Teared his Coat Armorical, and threw it in his Face.
The Lord Lyon and Heraulds, after Reading of their Sentence in face of the Judicatory, March to the Cross in their Robes, the Trumpets all the way Sounding before them; And again from the Cross Proclaimed the former Sentence, with all its Solemni∣ties; which being ended, his Holiness was taken away from the Theatre, and the Sentence put in Execution against him. During the time of his Burning, the Spectators were intertained with Fire-works, and some other Divertisements. After all was ended, the Trinity-Church-Bell (which was the only Church in Scotland taken from the Protestants and given to the Papists, wherein they actually had their Service) was Rung all the Night. FINIS.
