S5399 R24112 7951973 40687
A MISCELLANY OF POEMS UPON Several Occasions BOTH Moral and Amorous: WITH Many Odes, Songs, Acrosticks, Epigrams and Elegies: AS ALSO DIVINE HYMNS. Composed by T.S. LONDON, Printed for Joseph Knight at the Blue Anchor in the Lower-Walk of the New-Exchange, 1689.
To the Worthy Thomas Coventry Esq With his most loving Brother Mr GILBERT COVENTRY, Sons of the Right Honourable Thomas Lord Coventry. THE high esteem and honour (which I'm infinitely oblig'd always to bear your Name) hath greatly urg'd me to exert some Speci∣men of my gratitude; although so mean, that I cannot chuse but blush at my boldness therein, as being con∣scious to my self, that, unless your Clemency transcend all, this my fond Oblation may justly require a second
Atonement. But your Merits being daily as perspicuous as the Sun, and your Influence too as propitious, are so Infallible Probates of your Candor, that I should assert my self most un∣worthy, did I even doubt, but that you like Heaven (whose Image you both most manifestly bear) would ac∣cept the true and sincere intent of your Oblator, be the act in it self never so frivolous and contemptible, In quo nil vobis dignum, nisi dantis amores. Wherefore I here presume (as a Can∣didate of your Favour) to tender at your Altar my First-fruits (however they may seem, at least, imperfect, if not wholly abortive) And whence I likewise hope for your Patronage, as being sufficient to defend this my weak Product from the churlish humours of
Criticks; The former of which, if you'll both be pleas'd to accept, and grant the latter, you'll transport me into an Elysium, and more (if more can be) oblige Your most devoted Servant, Thomas Steevens.
TO THE Landid Reader. MY Genius being always somewhat inclining to entertain the Muses, did by my diligent promotion at length exert some light and aery Flashes of Fancy, though truly (I fear) scarce rightly ballanc'd with sound Judgment, by reason of my Immaturity and Nonage; when this imperfect and abortive Product, did by many interruptions, at length, creep out of my tender, and too too weak (I doubt) capacity. Wherefore (I hope) should I here expose it (how mean soever it may seem) that the greatest Censurers, and strictest Criticks, first consi∣dering my Circumstances, and justly attributing its Imbecillity to my Minority (Dum nihil ortum est, simul & perfectum) may not dart on it a Grande supercilium, and so utterly abash it in its Infancy: But whether they frown or smile, damn or applaud, This is my safest Asylum, I matter not: Only I wish all as much pleasure in the reading as I had in the writing. T. S.
A MISCELLANY OF POEMS. Of humane Frailty. MAn's Days are few, His Glass is run, His Life is spent soon as begun, And dy he must. A living Man he proves to day, To Morrow but a Lump of Clay, And turns to dust. He's made of Earth, to Earth he goes, His Days are full of Grief and Woes, Which shorten Life: But yet he toils for Earthly pelf, Whereby he may enrich himself, With utmost strife.
He presses on with greatest power, Not dreaming that his fatal hour Doth draw so nigh: But in the midst of all his Joy, He many times is snatcht away, And forc'd to dy. His breath (like smoak before the wind, Or like a fleeting Cloud) doth find An easy way. He flourishes i' th' Morning Sun, But is cut down like Grass ere Noon, And fades away. Let's therefore spend our time to day, As tho' we were no more to stay On wretched Earth: Lest hasty Fate doth call away Before w' are ready for that day, In vertue's dearth. Of a guilty Conscience. ALas! the Poets Fictions prove too true, Who feign that hellish Furies do pursue, And lash with secret strokes a guilty Mind, Which hath to wickedness been long inclin'd: For (lo!) what horrid Terrours do surround, What poyson'd bites & Scorpion's stings to wound
A guilty Man! He falls into a maze, His fiery sparkling Eyes about do gaze; He thinks each hour he sees a dreadful Ghost, As tho' grim Pluto had sent forth his Host To take revenge, and hurry him away To his black Cell, to prove Perdition's prey. He beats his Breast, he raves, he storms, he swears, And blatters nonsence intermixt with tears. His burning heart doth shoot, he's all on flame, As tho' Hell's Fires were now already come. He gasps for breath, his Hair doth stand on end, He tears his flesh, and doth his Members rend: Yet sometimes seems to rest, and close his Eyes, But hence a sudden storm doth strait arise; And (like a Hurricane on Indian Seas) A second Tyde of grief disturbs his ease. He fain would live, but dreads (alas!) to dy, Twixt Life and Death he stupefy'd doth ly. But yet the pangs and pains that he endures, Are worse than death it self, and have no Cures: He now becomes forlorn and desperate too, He now denies that God can mercy shew: He nothing doth expect but fatal doom, And a long series of woes to come: When he shall suffer to Eternity, Sad, scorching flames due to's Iniquity. O what a state is this! what pains are these, Which nothing, neither Time, nor Death can ease! O mortal Men! correct your evil ways, Shake off your Vice before your latter days; That (when Death Summons gives) you may em∣brace Your instant Fate with an undaunted Face;
For (lo!) what Comfort and what Peace is this To dying Men, to have not done amiss, From whence they take the hopes of future bliss. Of Beauty's Frailty. 1. ALas! How soon doth Beauty fade! How like unto an empty shade It vanishes away Without delay! 2. Thus th' new-sprang Rose i' th' Morning dew Triumphs; but ere night bid's adieu, Faints, falls, hangs down her head; So soon she's dead. 3. Thus twinkling Stars do give one dash, Thus Lightning breaks into one flash, And then the vap'ring fire Doth strait expire. 4. Lo! Beauty but salutes our Eyes (Like Sodom's Fruit) and then denys All bliss, and toucht, to clay Doth mould away.
5. Alas! Alas! Anon pale Snow Will sit, where cheerful Lillies grow; And thus the fairest Face Will lose its grace. 6. Each day, nay hour, receives a spoil, And lab'ring storms do seem to toil, To plunder beauty's shapes With cruel rapes. 7. Sharp Sickness Beauty's fairest blow Doth blast when Fevers beat the brow, Like Whirl-winds furious storms, Oh burst of harms! 8. Old Age plows up the smoothest skin, And turns a Furrow too, wherein It seems to cast and hide All Beauty's Pride. 9. And when at length pale Death invades, And calls unto th' Elysian shades, The fainting Body dies, And Beauty flies.
10. What fatal ruins do pursue A bright Idea's Front, which do Corrupt all Beauty's joys, And plead 'em toys! 11. Those fleeting charms of Hellen's Face, Do witness to the World no space Of permanence, since they Are turn'd to clay. 12. Go too, thou Fop! Thy self admire, And doat and pride, 't will strait expire; The faded Rose's state Doth shew thy fate. The old Man. LO! Lo! how creeps the long-liv'd Man, Whose time's reduc'd into a span, Whose days are spent: Lo! Lo! I seek the Port of bliss, And am of Life it self remiss, To dy content.
My only Pray'r, is present death, O God, receive my latest breath; O let me dy! You'll thus exterminate my grief, And to my Soul bring kind relief; O hear my Cry! My fatal Thread is spun, fie, fie; O Atropes, cut off, that! May be at rest! My Life is worse than Death; In vain I cry for help; what horrid pain Doth me invest! The Sons of Art can find no Cure To heal those pangs which I endure; O wretched State! Death's stroke's my only remedie; How glad, how willing should I be T' imbrace my Fate! Pandora's Troops do sound Alarms, And for my Blood do whet their Arms, And Battle give; They captivate my trembling parts, And wound each Member with their Darts, But yet I live. How oft I've call'd upon the Grave With tott'ring steps, my limbs to crave Before this day!
When Nature first began to faint, And with her self all joys did taint, And drive away. My Senses fly, my Spirits fall; A burthen to my self and all I am now made. I cannot taste the daintiest meat, I can't distinguish, what I eat, Be't good or bad. My deafer Ears are stopt up quite, Hence Musick proves a dull delight, 'Cause 'tis not heard. My bleer Eyes lose their sight, and close, As tho' they 're going to repose, Yet do retard. Alas! Alas! All joys do go, And pleasure's turn'd to grief and woe: May I then dy, So that these horrid pains may cease, And I at length may be at ease From misery. Lo! Lo! how like a Lamb I dy, Without regret, a screak or cry, Worn out with years: I have now run this mortal race, I will Christ now in Heav'n embrace, Who'll wipe my tears.
Time brings all to the Grave. HOW fleet do Minutes post away! How soon the Glass runs out the Day! The Morning draws, the Noon puts on, The Sun doth set, the Day is gone: And thus the Year is wheel'd about, And thus Man's Thread is soon spun out. And Death draws nigh: Which is a Debt we all must pay; Whose pow'r we all must once obey; Sceptres and Crowns must yield to Death, And Kings, with Peasants, lose their Breath; The pious Saint receives his Fate, And stoutest Hectors change their state; For all must dye. Impartial Death we can't appease With Hecatombs, nor get release By all our Sacred Piety; Nor can with threats her terrify: But all must visit Charon's Boat, And o'r the Stygian Waters float, When she invades. We must once leave all Earthly Toys, And vanish from these frailer Joys. For Death (O Man) thy self prepare, That thou thy Fate t' embrace may'st dare; And ne'r for this thy short Life grieve, But live to dye, and dye to live In happy Shades!
A Farewel to Fortune. FOrtune farewel! No more I'll court thy Shrine; Nor shall thy Smiles my vassal heart combine. Thou fickle Goddess of these Earthly Dregs! I thee contemn, and scorn thy falsest Leagues. Why doth the foolish World so dote on thee, As though thou wert the greatest Deity? I can't, nor will not such a one adore, And for thy frail, inconstant Gifts implore. Thou never constant, 'less in motion prov'st, And now dost hate, whom once thou dearly lov'dst. If now thou smil'st, thou strait wilt grimly frown, And whom thou'st rais'd to day, thou't soon cast down. Hence Princes (tho' long flourishing in Thrones) At length lament their Fate with woful Groans. All Mortals, who now Fortune's Gifts enjoy, E're long will know, how quick they fly away. I'll therefore stedfast Vertue's face adore, And hence above this fickle Goddess soar; Where me her furious Storms cannot injure, But I'll despise her empty Blasts secure. Her Onsets I'll beat back with Vertue's Shield: For Vertue can to Fortune's Power ne'r yield.
Qui non est hodie, cras minùs aptus erit. SO ho, thou Fool! that dost let loose the reins, Whilst lively blood doth boil in youthful veins, And think'st thou may'st them time enough recal In latter days, before thy deadly Fall; Unless thou'lt sleep secure, and pleasures take Till the last sounding Trump doth thee awake, Disperse with speed the dismal Clouds of Vice, And crush i'th' Egg the priding Cockatrice. Begin to day to leave thy evil ways, And to divorce thy vain and sinful toys; By long delays for they'll habitual grow, And ev'ry hour will greater force bestow. Vice (like Diseases) craves more timely Cures, And [long being nurs'd] no remedy endures. He that neglects to purge his Soul to day, His Vices him to morrow will more sway. But grant thou may'st to Good at length return, And all thy former ways and follies spurn; Thou can'st not tell, but Death may sweep away, And put a period to thy Life this day.
—Non est mortale quod opto. LET doting Worldlings seek wth grov'ling eyes These vain and earthly Dregs, as th'only prize. Let Misers with poor Gold fill up their Chests, And amplifie their Stocks with areful Brests. Let Honour's Minions up to Heaven soar; Let Statesmen pride and domineer in pow'r; Let Beauty's Darling boast of's Symmetrie, And joy, because there's none so fair as he. But know they this, they will themselves deceive, When suddenly these Toys will take their leave. Riches have Wings, and straight do fly away, Honour's the Darling but of one short day: Beauty (like Lightning) but salutes our eyes With one bright flash, and then falls sick and dyes. Such vain and frailer Goods I don't admire, Nor do such pamphlet, trifling Toys desire. Immortal Vertue is my only Aim, Whereby t' all Ages I'll extend my Fame. Beauty, Wealth, Honours pass away (like Shades) But Vertue keeps alive, when Death invades.
—Hic vivimus ambitiosâ Paupertate omnes.— THE poorest Irus here ambitious grows, And on his Back now all his Wealth bestows, That (like a Croesus) gay he might appear T' th' World, and in his Purple domineer; And (tho' his meanness should these thoughts sup∣press He'll pride, and leave the World the rest to guess. His Outside proves a Royal Ornament, When with poor Food his Belly is content: His sordid House perhaps is all of Clay, And wants provision for the present day; Nay more, perhaps he's o'r-head plung'd in debt, And knows not how from Us'rers Bonds to get: Thus Beggars fain would wealthy Courtiers seem, And eager seek a Gentleman's esteem. Go to, Thou Fool, thy Tyrian Robes now buy, And (tho' thou'rt poor) yet boast of Gallantry; At length thou (like the priding Jay) wilt know (When thou art stript of these bright plumes) thy wo. 'Tis better still a Medium to pursue, And live to day, like as to morrow too.
Qui suum jactat genus, aliena laudat. WHY dost thou boast (O Spark) of Pedigree! And claim thy Parents worth thy own to be! Whilst thou dost strut (like th' Assi' th' Lions skin) Adorn'd without, but still an Ass within? He's like the Jay drest up i' th' Peacock's Plumes, Who Parents merits to himself assumes; And when these trapping Toys are claim'd away, He will become a scoff, a naked Jay. Heroick Fathers honour proves a shame To Sons, when they build on their Fathers Fame, And nought perform themselves, whereby may seem As Rivals of their Ancestors esteem. Nay more, he sacrilegious doth become, Who steals his Father's honour from his Tomb: For from the dead he derogates their Fame, Who from their Acts doth take his borrow'd name. Thus Parents noble Actions and Renown We most unjustly claim, and call our own. If thou then wouldst true honours pitch ascend, Go to, thy mind t' Heroick Vertues bend.
On the Fire-Works. LET Earth at Lightning stand amaz'd no more, Nor dread a Thunderbolt when Claps do rore, Since Heaven thereby its Triumphs seem'd to shew, When our Great Jove for Joy did thunder too: But's sacred NƲMEN brandished no Darts ('Less those of Love) to penetrate our hearts. So Heaven and Earth did Rivals prove in joy, When flash for flash, and clap for clap they'd pay, The more to celebrate the Princely Son, Whom (without doubt) the future Age will own Heir to his Father's Vertue as his Crown. But as the Royal Consorts view'd the Thames Streaming with Fire, how did they gild the flames With sacred lustre! How the Stars on high Receiv'd a Gloss from their bright MAJESTY! Spangled all o'r our Hemisphere did grow, Eclipsed Tapers glimmer'd in Heav'ns Brow, Stars shon i'th Air, and brighter STARS below, From whose kind influence may more joys still flow And may that VIVAT REX still flame and burn, Till Stars do melt, and Fate doth dread her Urn.
THE Oxford-Triumph: OR, The Academicks Congratulating his Grace the Duke of ORMOND, their new Chancellor. 1. NO more let swelling Deluges of Tears The mourning Oxford drown; No more let Groans the yielding Air divide, Nor Thamesis in hoarser murmurs glide, 'Cause its Great Patron soar'd above our Spheres To an Immortal Crown. 'Tis true his Merits were so great, so high, That Time can ne'r confound his Memory; But, Oxford! lo, the springing Day Displays new Symptoms of thy joy. 2. Look, how Aurora with redoubled Light Doth Nights black Veil disperse!
See how the radiant Phoebus on us streams With greatest lustre his new-rising beams! The Eaglets winging to th' East their direct flight Good Omens do rehearse; That now no cries resounding in the Strand, Fair Oxford's Columns shall triumphant stand, And to their new-made Basis pay Brave Victims of their hearts this day. 3. Thy Ormond (Oxford!) left thee not alone, Distracted in thy grief; Thy calm Castalia may flow gently on, And still the Muses sport in Helicon: A second Vice-Apollo gilds thy Throne, That Day-Star of relief. Thus Heav'n repairs thy loss! Thou now can'st shew A strong Palladium, and a Phosphore too. Thy old Mecaenas lives in's Heir; For Merit as for Title rare. 4. With how great Pomp then, and with what ap∣plause, With what surprizing joy Should the blest Alma Mater grace the Morn! Let bright Apollo's crisps her Front adorn; Let Choirs of Muses sing the joyful Cause, And round Parnassus play; Let all Minerva's Candidates rejoice, And let a Morning Ave be their Voice; That (Persian-like they may adore Their rising Sun, their growing Pow'r.
5. Oh let the Choristers o' th' Vocal Grove Their blooming hopes salute; Let 'em build stately Pyramids of praise, And fame their Patron worthy of their Bays; Under whose influence they may court their Love, Keep Daphne in pursuit. May our whole Athens boast its Halcyon days, And through each Clime diffuse its splendid rays: That all may now it's happy State, With Eulogies congratulate. A Description of a Battel. MArch on! March on! The Foe has seiz'd the Field, And vows he'll dy o' th' spot before he'll yield. Prepare your Arms (Great Sirs) th' event to try; Come on, Come on, let's fight for Victory. Draw up the Horse; the Foot-men I'll dispose; Fire, brave Boys; agen, agen; have 't our Foes. The Drums do beat, the Cornets rattle round, And Tara-tara-tantara doth sound. The Smoke (like Clouds) involves the heavenly Light, The dismal Day can scarce be known from Night. The clam'rous Shouts do shake the lofty Skies, And the tumultuous noise to Heaven flies. The Darts do whirl, the Bullets storm (like Hail) The roaring Ordnances break a Foil.
Here drops a Hector, there Achilles falls; Here gasps one, there another half-dead crauls. The prancing Steed receives his mortal wound, And, falling, casts his Rider to the ground, Where both do wallow in the bloudy Gore, And (Oh!) most wretchedly are trampled o'er. The sparkling Swords against each other twang, When Panoplia doth stave off the Bang. The Spear-men dip their hastal Points in bloud, The Earth is drowned in a Crimson Floud. The Conqueror now sheaths his blunted Sword, And to his tired Souldiers gives the Word, Retreat, Retreat; We now have won the day, Let's haste t' our Camp without a longer stay. The ground is strew'd with Corpse; The lively Souls The priding Victor with his pow'r controuls. This wants a Limb, another wants his Head; Here lies a mangled Trunk, all Members fled. The pious Mother weeps her Darling's Fate; The loving Wife condoles her Husband's State. What stony-hearted Scythian can't bemoan These ruins, under which the Earth doth groan? Now stately Trophies shew the Victor's praise, And's Acts commemorate to future days.
Of Woman. O Nature! Nature! too too kind and free, Whilst thou would'st seem to Man, and pious be, Thou prov'dst unkind; Thy gifts did noxious prove; Thou kill'dst him under a pretence of love. For (lo!) when thou would'st first create for Man A Help-meet Woman, thou did'st him trepan. She only proves a sweet delightful pain At best, and doth his doting heart restrain. She stupifies his sense with secret Charms, And under present bliss brings future harms. Nay, when she can a wretched Man once rule, She'll prove his Governess, and him befool. What mischief hath not this confounded Crew Of Women done, all former times can shew. Who tempted pious Adam first to fall? Who Mortals did with cursed Sin enthral? Who Man from Paradise did first debar? Who was the only cause of ten years War, When Dust and Ashes bury'd antient Troy? Who did the valiant Sampson's strength betray? A damn'd, confounded Woman, the worst of woes, The cursed'st Plague that Nature could impose. She yielded first to Sin, and still persists Therein, when she attempts what e'r she lists; And runs on like a Horse without a rein, That nothing can her wicked thoughts restrain.
She loves revenge with all her Soul and Blood, Hence through Flames she'll rush to let fly the Flood Of Passion floating in her angry Breasts, To plague and pester those whom she detests. She suffers no reproof and no controul, But (like Medea) will i' th' Chaos roul The World, and kill her dearest Darlings too, But she'll take sad revenge on those that do Hare, injure her, or (like a Jason) force A horrid, hateful, dismal, dire divorce. Lo! Women can the worst of Crimes contrive, And hotter, furious Spirits do them drive. If therefore you would take your gentle ease, (O Man!) and live a Life that may you please, Don't dote on Woman, learn to be content Without this painted pain, and sweet torment. On the King's Progress. LET Persian Monarchs rust in secret Thrones, And with Tiara's vail their torpid Bones: Great James our Prince hath found a nobler way, Whereby his Subjects may obeysance pay. For who can duly rev'rence Majesty That lies enwrapt in Clouds of secrecy? (Ixion-like) we do our selves betray, When (tho' we know not) yet we do obey. Heroick Breasts to sleep obscure do scorn; But love to shew themselves for Scepters born.
All silent Cells aspiring vertue spurns, And through all obstacles to light returns. Black Vice and shame may seek a lurking Cave, But Royal Vertues an appearance crave. That Prince is best, who (like Heav'n's Champion) streams, On every place his bright Phoebean beams. And with the influence of his Heav'nly rays, Doth bless his Realm, and cause Halcyon days. How worthy therefore is our gracious Prince, Who th' World of's Majesty doth thus convince. Plain Symptoms too of 's Clemency appear, Whose splendour lightens our dark Hemisphere. Hail great'st of Kings, and best of Princes too, Who so great Emblems of thy love dost shew: Hail Europe's Gem, and England's sole Defender, Who dost to us thy radiant Beams Surrender. With what applauding Pomp then should all grace Thy splendent, God-like, and Majestick Face! Go to, rejoice, nay celebrate his Praise, And 's Fame commemorate to future Days. Of the Spring. OLD Frosty Winter now at length retreats, And blust'rous Boreas mitigates his threats. Phoebus draws nigh; Phoebus doth now salute, With 's splendent Rays which do the Earth recruit. The Days extend, fourteen hours pass away, Before the am'rous Ev'ning crowns the day.
The murm'ring Brooks their Icy Bands do shun, And in their solit course do sweetly run. The Earth puts off her frozen Cloak of Snow, And fragrant Violets with Lilies blow. Each Meadow decks her self with divers Flow'rs. And doth adorn her Front with Prime-rose Tow'rs. The spangled Dazes do now represent So many Stars i' th' Heav'nly Firmament. The lofty Poplar doth now grace his head With new-sprung Garlands, which before seem'd dead. The painted Fruit-Trees too do fairly bloome, Which gives us hopes of great increase to come. The joyful Fields do sweetly laugh and sing, Triumphing i' th'approach of th' welcome Spring. Reviving Zephyrus doth gently move The florid Daffodils; The Turtle-Dove Now courts his Mate; Th'aspiring Lark now flies Aloft, and seems to beat the azure Skies. The Feather'd Crew all testify 'tis Spring, When with their various Notes the Woods do ring. Sweet Philomela tunes her warbling Notes, And to the silent Night her Charms devotes. Swift-winged Progne hath now crost the Seas Once more the lab'ring Peasant's Ears to please. The Cuckow too calls forth the honest Dames To hear their Hen-peckt Cuckold Husbands Names. The chatt'ring Pye now builds her lofty Nest, And tends her tender Brood with careful Breast.
Old Age now leaves the Hearth, that bright Sol's Beam, Might once more on her hoary pate now stream. The lazy Shepherd feeds his sporting Sheep, And with his Pipe doth tune himself asleep. The spruce young Lovers now i' th' dawn o' th' day Do seek their Nymphs, and with 'em fondly play. Brown Amaryllis in the Plains doth dance, And Corydon doth with her nimbly prance. Since all things therefore at this time rejoice, Let Mirth and Joy now be the common Voice. Of the Winter. GRey-headed Hyems now (alas!) returns, And happy dayes our Hemisphere now spurns. Our dismal Globe puts on a Tragick Face, And all this mortal Scene doth lose its grace. Our Coasts, that glorious Orb of Heav'n the Sun, (Lo!) ev'ry day now more and more doth shun. Zeph'rus is gone, and blust'rous Boreas roars, Beating the Waves against the rocky shores. No Philomela tunes her various notes, And to the calmer Ev'ning charms devotes. False Progne now has crost the stormy Seas, Seeking, than ours, a warmer Port of ease. Th' Hybernal Flocks unto our Shores are come, Being cursed Harbingers of future doom.
The piercing Frosts have nipt the fragrant Flow'rs, And ev'ry Mead has lost her Prime-rose Tow'rs. Where the fair Crocus was then wont to blow, The Earth's involv'd in winding sheets of Snow. The lofty Poplar has now shed his hair, And in obeysance to the Fates stands bare. The Riv'lets now with Icy Chains are ty'd, And can't i' th' solit currents purling glide. A Remora t' all bus'ness too is put, The Shepherd freezes in his open Hut; And can't his Flocks i' th' spacious Plains now feed, And th' hunger-starven Swains from Plows are freed. Nor can they by their Art manure the Earth, Which labours under a penurious dearth. Thus Nature now doth seem to be dissolv'd, And th' World i' th' Chaos to b' almost involv'd. But as fair Calms more furious Storms succeed, As after Day the Night puts on with speed; So after joyful times there follows woe, And Joy and Grief alternately do go. Let's therefore not in these our Ills repine, But to the Fates Decrees our Wills resign.
A general Petition of a School, re∣questing a Cock-Fight of their Master. LO! here (great Sir!) your tender Pupils all, With joint-consent do to you prostrate fall; Requesting one poor kindness, which from you To doubt, an Emblem of our Crimes would shew. 'T would plead our guilt, if we should not implore, Authority that bears as well as pow'r, propensive Will to grant; You can't deny; Concession (Sir!) is your chief property. On this Foundation then we build, we sue, And at your Altar humbly beg, that you Would this once more our solemn Games allow, And let our Pit with streaming Blood now flow, As heretofore 'twas wont. Hark, Gallus crows, Calls us to see, and 's Foe to feel his blows. Each object to this Royal Match invites, As when an Hector with Achilles fights. True Valour here doth still triumphant sit, To bear great Souls we may learn from the Pit, No small advantage (Sir!) there lies in it; Since Courage is the sum of Homer's Wit. May you then grant (good Sir!) that we enjoy This brave instruction by the sport to day; But pardon, if we seem too bold i' th' suite, Since they, who fearful ask, themselves confute.
A Dialogue between Alexander the Great and Diogenes the Cy∣nick, stating the perplexities of Greatness with the tranquillity of a low Fortune. Diogenes. HAil, thou Great Monarch of this Earthly Globe; Jove's Viceroy, hail! whom Purple doth enrobe. Alexander. Why call'st me Great? If thou admir'st my Fate, Why dost thou live thus in this sordid state? If thou affect'st a noble Royalty, Turn up thy Tub, a Courtier thou shalt be. Diogenes. In this my Tub I far transcend your Throne; None are so brave as those who scorn a Crown. Nay more, how many snares for Princes wait; What Hooks are cover'd with a gilded bait. If you'd your whole Dominions grant, I'd them (As dang'rous Toys) reject, and quite contemn. Alexander. Dost think my Life-Guards then can't me secure, Who with vast Forts my Person do immure?
My speaking Eye gives Laws to subject Souls; My beck the World's important part controuls. Diogenes. The sooner then some bold ambitious Spark Will strive t' Eclipse your Light, which makes his dark: For when one Prince by others is out-shone, He'll try all stratagems them to Dethrone. By those how many sacred Monarchs dy, From whom they ne'r expected Treachery. Alexander. But grant my greatness can't enough protect; Let me but on thy crazy Tub reflect. Can this against a storm a Bulwark stand? Here thou mayst perish by a common hand. Should Heav'ns crispt Cataracts to rush begin, Each gaping Chasm would greedy Death let in. Diogenes. I rest secure; with wrongs Inone offend; Whence none to wrong me their intentions bend. No dire Assassinates lay snares for me; I have no Gold their thirst to satisfie. No bloody Traytors tempt to cast me down, That they might get my empty Tub, my Crown. My harmless ways do please the Pow'rs above; Still Innocence is Harbinger to Love.
Alexander. But hark, O Old Fantastick Cynick Bard! Don't Heav'n more its Vicegerent's safety guard? Diogenes. Your more may fail; Let Heav'n both Patronize, You for your Kingdom, me for humbler Eyes. Alexander. Humility's a trifling toy, whose worth None recommend, but he, whose mind's on Earth. That Head's most sacred that can wear a Crown, That Hand is blest that can a Scepter own. Diogenes. Tho' Heav'n may seem to bless a Prince, yet he To's joy has still annexed misery. The burthen of a massy Crown is great, And anxious cares a Monarch's heartstrings eat. Alexander. This gilded World is nothing else, but care, False fear, vain hope, and languishing despair: In what a wretched state then must those dwell, Who Ant'dotes want these poysons to expel. I banish cares with the Falernian Wine, And with sweet pleasures I my life refine; Whilst (like the Country Mouse) thou quite dost starve, And wilt not of more dainty Dishes carve.
Diogenes. Alas your pleasure brings a sting with it, And all your happiness is counterfeit. Through jealous fear you can't your Nectar taste, No Theaters can calm your stormy Breast. In feasting the drawn Sword hangs o're your head, And restless cares perplex your Soul abed. Whilst I poor Water and mean Herbs enjoy, And with Philosophy chase time away. My thoughtless Breast no Hecticks do combure, But in my Tub I sleep whole nights secure. 'Tis better low and safe be, than t' advance, And mount upon the waxen Wings of chance. Alexander. But is't not brave bare Heads, bow'd Knees command, And have whole Kingdoms as your Vasals stand? Diogenes. Your high-aspiring thoughts this Pomp may please, But on the ground I'd rather take my ease; Where neither Wars, nor Fears, nor Fortune's frown, Can terrify, 'cause can't me low'r cast down. Alexander. Your Answer's right and strong; I must confess, These Arguments do make my Throne seem less Regarded in my Eyes: For those, who doe (Like Spanish Horses) feed on Winds, must rue.
The lofty Cedar furious Boreas tears, When the low shrub the storm uninjur'd bears. Thou safely liv'st, thy Life enjoy'st; To burn Thy Corpse being dead, thy Tub's a Pile and Urn. Hence were I not that Monarch stiled Great, I'd for thy Tub (Diogenes) entreat. My Wish. MAY I (ye Gods) enjoy a Country Life, Free from cares, and free from tort'ring strife; Whilst others to great Cities seek resort, Where nought but gilded Vices keep their Court. May I within my native Country dwell, And ne're to these my Borders bid farewel. For Wealth, whilst others plow the angry Seas, And for the Indian Toys disturb their ease; May I above contempt, and Fortune's Pow'r, In Summer solstice sleep i' th' shady Bow'r. Whilst other Patrons in their Forum plead, And for a Fee torment their sweating Head. May I in Winter chase the nimble Harts, And wound the Savage Boar with bloody Darts: Whilst others in their stately Buildings rest, And with hot Liquors burn their freezing Breast. May I at night my Caelia's Eyes admire, Until my Breast is warm'd with gentle fire: Whilst others on their painted Misses doat, Until their Veins with flagrant Blood do float.
May I by night enjoy my dearest Rose, Until my Body's ready for repose: Whilst others toss awake, perplext with cares, And dare not sleep for fear of secret Snares. May I in constant health spin out my days, No Gout, nor Stone, to interrupt my joys: Whilst others of their Serpents stings complain, And (which they get by riot) feel the pain. But when Death's sting my Spirits doth surprize, Let my poor Caelia, Caelia close my Eyes. An Epithalamium. WHat merry Muse doth now my Breast inspire? Or what inflames my Soul? Oh! 'Tis the fire, That darts (like Lightning) from the Lovers Eyes, Through which each others Soul its object spyes: Whilst (like two cooing Turtles) they do play, And steal, with smiles, each other's Heart away. The true Elysium they now claim their own; Whence they transcend a Scepter, or a Throne. They banish cares by th' ecstasies of love; Where Venus rules, we need not envy Jove. And that these rapt'ring Joys may long endure, Let no sad Omens with black Clouds obscure Our radiant hopes. Ye hellish Fiends forbear To light the Torches, and be Dancers here. Leave not ye Fairies your Tartarian Lakes, About your Heads to whip your anguisht Snakes;
Whose shrill trisulcate Tongues prognosticate, That storms will soon loves knot dilacerate. Let's hear no shrieks of the nocturnal Crew, Being Harbingers of dissolution too. But let each object happiness presage, That ye i' th' Bonds of Love surpass the Age Of old Tythonus with his ruddy Bride, Who Insect turn'd through years before he dy'd. Ye Nymphs and Satyrs here your steps advance, Ye Fawns and Graces here unite and dance. Let all the rural Deities adorn Their Fronts with Garlands blushing like the Morn; With greatest joys and pomp to solemnize The Nuptials, that so fair a pair comprize. Let Venus come; And let old Hymen stand, And seal the knot up with a faithful hand; That (Gordian-like) it may ne'r be dissolv'd, Until the World i' th' Chaos be involv'd. Hence may you flourish in your jugal state, And have no cause e're to repent your fate. Let neither jars nor frets infringe your joys, But in blest union spin ye out your doys, But in blest union spin ye out your days; Till Death at length severs you, when your Souls Must wing their course up to the starry Poles. May Heav'n show'r down it's Manna on your Head, And bless with an increase your toral Bed: May you (like Abram's Consort) multiply Your Seed to emulate the Stars on high. That (like fresh Olive-branches) you may see Your Children round you smile, each in's degree.
But hark, O Bride! What makes Vermilion now More rise in thy fair Cheeks? The lovely Snow Is courted by the Rose to melt away; Why dost thou blush? Doth Fire oppose delay? (Just like the Phoenix in her spicy Nest) Thou flutter'st in thy Bed: Thy flagrant Breast Will strait break forth in flames: Thy ardent zeal Thy blushing front no longer will conceal: My tedious Muse shall not therefore defer Your joys no more, nor longer shall occur Your burning Hectics: Lo! the Torch expires, And doth not flame so much as your desires: Hence giving you all joy we bid good night, And leave you to embrace your Souls delight. Of the Powder-Plot. WHat Hellish Furies do infest this Age, Where Plots, Rebellion, Death and Murther rage! Megaera and her Consorts now presume To leave their Seats, the more to urge our doom. Astrea's fled, nor will she more be seen; Since Hell to Earth has brought her Tragick Scene. The Devil sure these projects did contrive, For from no other Font they can derive Themselves; No treach'rous, forlorn Catiline, Did e're such fatal storms for Rome design. No Mimas e're did think on such an act, Nor could such Hellish Tortures e're compact.
Bloody, thrice bloody Tyrants! who would fain Thus sacred Purple with black Sables stain, And this great Nation utterly confuse, As tho' this Realm i' th' Chaos they'd reduce. No time to soften grief by just degrees, But (like a Hurricane on Indian Seas) The furious Tempest was design'd t' have rose, Whose blast should bring a sudden burst of woes. They'd give no symptoms by a lightning flash; But would puff up with one grand thund'ring crash The best of Kings and all's heroick Peers, As tho' they'd force them to their proper Spheres. But Heaven's prudent Senate, mov'd to see Such horrid, hateful thoughts of treachery, With speed consulted to prevent our fate, And these their damn'd designs t' infatuate. Hence Heav'n's bright Beams all secret Clouds away Did drive, and Night was turn'd to splendent Day. Their cursed projects plainly did appear, And they the works of their own hands did bear; Nor was there ever any Law more just, Than that such tempts should foil their Authors first, Who dare (like th' old Gigantic Brood) rebel 'Gainst Jove, and will not in subjection dwell. Go to now (Traytors!) lay your secret snares, Attempt great Monarchs whosoe're now dares! Angels are Guardians of that sacred Name, And Heav'n provides for its Vice-gerent's Fame.
Against false Report. WHat crafty Sphinx new Riddles doth propose? Or what Chimaera various shapes now shows? Oh! 'Tis Report; she is a Monster grown, Whose Fangs (like Cadmus Serpent's teeth) when sown, Spring up to arms, and strait do tumults cause, Contemning Mans, and scorning Nature's Laws. (Chamaelion-like) on empty air she feeds, And more depends on fancy than an deeds. She (Proteus-like) doth ev'ry moment change, And never constant in one tone doth range: But variously she out of envious spite, With her curst sting poor Mortals doth backbite. She always loves beyond the truth to glide; Whence she to Dev'lish Lying is ally'd. For Rumours still by rouling to and fro Increase (like Snow-Balls) and do greater grow. This fertile Hydra (when once seis'd the Field) Cannot by any Hercules be kill'd. O then that she would first of all destroy Those, that for her do first invent the way.
Of my Change to a City Life. WHY am I plung'd in this Abyss of woes? Are these (O cruel Fates!) your secret blows? Do you (like Cupid) throw your silent Dart, And where there is no cause, yet wound the Heart? If I've deserv'd to spend my hours in pain, And never to enjoy my self again: Why doth not thunder rend the yielding Skies, And Lightning dart its vengeance on mine Eyes. That to Jove's wrath a Victim I might fall; Then this would put a period to all. But here confin'd in close Imprisonment, I'm forc'd to lead my Life in discontent; Whilst tedious hours do pass as dull away, As theirs, who are confined from their Joy; To whom with sighs they send their ravish'd Souls, And mount 'em up unto the azure Poles. No joys, no sweet Parenthesis of ease, These pompous Objects can't my Soul appease, Where Tow'rs and Top-knots cloud the glimmer∣ing Skies, And painted Beauty dazzles weaker Eyes. If this Men count true happiness, there's none, Where pain succeeds as soon as pleasure's gone. Ah happy Spark! that courts his Country Lass, Whose native Beauty needs no paint nor glass; And near Sabrina's gentle murm'ring strearns, Lies down and sleeps, and of his fair one dreams.
O then that the kind Gods would deign my Eyes Once more to see this blessed Paradise, Where pleasure flows and unconfined Springs; Where ev'ry object an Elysium brings. A Jear to a High-flown Lady. 'GAd (Madam) tho' your Poets seem to raise Up for your Ex'lence Mountanies of praise, And feign, that you are constant, kind, and fair; I'll swear (by Jove!) they only Flatt'rers are. For (Faith!) your fancy d Beauty's not so great, That it may merit of a Clown a Treat. You think your Crystal Eyes do charm each Heart, When your whole Fabrick is scarce worth a F— And if you please to view your Face i' th' Glass, Your self will say with me, 'tis all my N— Nor could I e're experience you were kind, But (troth) you are as constant as the Wind: The crisped Waves that o're the Ocean rove, Are not so fickle as your sighs and love. But don't take snuff, tho' I now tell you true, You're a fine Scar-crow; But what if you do?— Come then, trust Sycophantic Pens no more, Suppress your Pride, and your defects deplore: For if you do believe each fawning Fop, (By Jove) you are as senseless as a Sop.
To his Valentine. MAdam! when you from Fortune's Urn did draw My Name, as yours, you gave a double Law. Your Beauty did one Obligation lay, Your Highness did transport me quite away; That one so meritorious and divine, Should have so mean, so low a Valentine. The thundring Monarch of th' Immortal Crew Had been a fitter Valentine for you. Blind Fortune's hand did erre, else with a kiss Great Jove from Heav'n had you saluted his. Ah Chance! why did'st so fair a Nymph degrade? Why did the Lot of Heav'n her hand evade? Can I those sacred merits parallel, Which all the Fabricks upon Earth excel? Thus (Fortune) thy promiscuous hand doth love To mix poor Mortals with the Pow'rs above! But since (fair Madam!) Chance so rul'd your hand, And you vouchsaf'd your unmeet Lot to stand, This meaner Sacrifice (pray) don't refuse, Which at your Altar for acceptance sues.
The Memorandum. SInce you, Dear Soul! by envious Fate's decree Must leave our Coasts, and (like an Eaglet) flee To some bright, beauteous Sphere, take this with you, And place it there, where lies a heart, that's true, As mine, from whence it came; There let it rest, And banish black Oblivion from your Breast: That you may ne're our former Leagues disown, Tho' separation doth make two of one. Long absence breeds a shiv ring cold in love, And (Ague-like) doth ardency remove. Hence by experience we too often find, That absent Darlings soon slip out of mind. May you then this Memento bear along, Which [seal'd with heart] shew's no perfidious Tongue. It bear's sincere Affection's stamp and coin, And (like the purging Mint) doth dross disdain. Thus now my Zeal a fond Oblation brings, Till presence pays more stately Offerings. But whensoe'r your vacant Eyes shall see This monumental Verse, Remember me.
Too much of School. CUrst Fate! How long wilt thou me doom to Schools? Must I ne'r mount above the Sphere of Fools, Who scarce their Alphabet can scrutinize, Unless the Festraw guide their roving Eyes? Both Latin, and Greek Authors I have read, And know in higher Elements to tread; Yet read I may, and read, and read again, And when all's done, my labour proves but vain: For no sublimer steps I can ascend; My long Beginning's like to want an end. Within the School's severe and dismal Cell (As an Imprison'd peccant) I must dwell, And spend my Age in vain: I plow the Sands, And wash the Black'moor's Head with frustrate hands. For progress now ly's dead; no pains, no sweat, Since what I've learnt already I repeat. But hence I toss disturb'd, I take no ease, The oft-boyl'd Crambe doth my doom increase. 'Twixt Life and Death (like Tityus) I do ly, And wish a clear Reprieve, or quite to dy.
An Epilogue to an old Play, as it was acted by Country Bumkins. OUR Play is done; Concoct it, as you please; 'Tis time our Theatre should be at ease: Since you have seen, what we poor Swains can do, How we can play the Fool as well as you. But tho' perhaps some Criticks damn our Play, And swear, that we our ignorance betray; Yet with these thoughts it may more currant pass, Ʋt desint vires, tamèn est landanda voluntas. 'Twas Fame (tho' not hereby (we fear) acquir'd) That then these our fantastick Souls inspir'd. We don't exhaust your Purse; Hence we have cause, (Since not your Coyn) to challenge your applause. But since o'th' Comick Scene your Tragick brow To kill the Players doth now Cloudy grow: We go to celebrate our nuptial rites, And then to crop the Lover's sweet delights, For which prepare a Joy, and so good night. To a very accomplish'd Lady. BE pleas'd (Dear Madam!) these submissive lines T' accept, which do triumph in their designs.
O kindest Heav'ns! O most propitious Fates! O prosp'rous Stars! O too too joyful States! The Phoenix now has left th' Arabian shores, And in our Hemisphere aloft now soars! A Heav'n-bred Goddess now descends on Earth, And ravishes the World in Beauty's dearth. Heav'n hath her charming Venus now distill'd, Whose splendid Beams my heart with bliss have fill'd. My Soul (fair Charmer) gluts it self with joys, E'r since it felt the comfort of your rayes. Heav'n's Monarch did his greatest blessing shew, When he blest my Eyes with Heavn'n's darling you: But if Jove should such gifts more oft bestow, The priding World would too too happy grow, Nay two Heav'ns there would be of equal bliss; And th' envious Gods would sometimes visit this. You (Dear Nymph!) the true Elysium prove, Fair as Venus, kind as the Turtle-Dove. The Golden Age doth now return in you; You (like the Day-star) happy times renew. Old banish'd Piety has found a shore, In your fair Breast, where lyes all vertue's store. Heav'n's spangled roof too glitters in your Eyes; You are our Jewel, and our choicest prize; With whom (I vow) no merits upon Earth Can parallel, for Beauty, Wit, or Birth; We all can put no prize upon your worth. But Sol shall freeze, and Night's pale Goddess burn, The solid Globe into its Chaos turn, Ere I'll desist your Beauty to adore, And for your Blessing Candor to implore.
A Dream. D. M. WHen Morpheus last Night clos'd my slum∣bring Eyes, And sleepy vapours did my Brain surprize, How did my active Soul chose you her Theam, On which she might insist in golden Dream. I re'lly thought (the Heav'ns to me being kind, That put these charming Amours in my mind.) Whilst I Parnassus forked top did seek, I found you slumb'ring in a silent Creek Near to the Muses Helicon; Where I With bended Knees first pay'd my obsequy; And then being shot with Cupid's Fiery Dart, I sought the Joys which Beauty's Charms impart. I prostrate fell upon your Snowy Breast, Where strait my ravish'd Soul did seize her Nest. Congratulating both our prosp'rous Fate, We lay some Minutes in that joyful state; And then O how great bliss my Soul possest, Being with your kind and sweet embraces blest. But whilst the dawning Morn Aurora brings, My lively Soul return'd with hov'ring wings, And strait to me rehearst her rapt'ring joys, How she had past into th' Elysian ways. And if my Body had from sleep been freed, I'd thought that dreams and truth had now agreed. But tho' it did a fancy'd Image prove, It may (I hope) portend to me your love.
Mr. Pye. TEll me, O tell me (Sir!) the reason, why Your glutted Eyes, not Stomach did deny That tempting bait of Christmas Guests call'd Pye? Was't Temp'rance: No 'twas rather Modesty. Modesty's Mean (I must confess) is good; But Modesty's extream is ill pursu'd. Thus when t' her dictates you t' obedient prov'd, The Mouth deny'd that which the Center lov'd. But were not you with tim'rous thoughts possest? And did strange Chimaera's shake your Breast. Whereas you sate near an Enormous Bug, Who empty'd one to fill a greater Mug. Expect therefore, nor don't response you've done, Before you plainly see all Courses gone: Nor (like an Ass) put up your Instrument, Lest you too late again the deed repent. Ʋnto a very fair Lady though somewhat freckled. BEauty (Dear Madam!) is the Poet's Theam, Religion's Idol, and the Lover's Dream. 'Tis you are Beauty's Darling, Beauty's Joy, Who need not Art, nor such an idle toy To force out Love, and wound a doting heart; But real Beauty grace's ev'ry part.
Your Cheeks (like Peacock's brighter Plumes) do shine, Compos'd of Metals of a diverse mind. For (lo!) therein the Snowy Lilies grow, And Crimson Roses intermixt do blow. Those neater marks which on your Front remain, Do not deface, but prove a charming stain: Nay kinder Nature seems to place 'em there As Stars and Lights to govern Mortals here. Your Face is Heaven's Starry Firmament, On which Astronomers may now content Themselves to gaze, and you alone admire, Who influence the Earth, and govern higher. Hence did not Phoebe sometimes cloud her light, And seem to frown and fume i' th' o'recast Night, I should have thought that you had soar'd up there, And rul'd your Chariot in the Heav'nly Sphere. What Monarch can't subject his Throne to you, And to so fair a Nymph give honour due? 'Tis strange, great Jove doth not his Juno leave, That he might mortal Swains of you bereave, Whose Charm's so strong, that Heav'n and Earth would prove, Sad, desp'rate Rivals, vying for your love. To what intent did Nature you create Of her refined Clay, and choicest State, Unless to charm all mortal hearts asleep, To wound the Gods and penetrate the deep? Yet who can't choose, but prove and witness this, That you through Beauty are the Spring of bliss? From whom (as from a Fountain) do proceed Those golden streams, which all true joys do breed.
And may those happy streams in you still flow; And may those cheerful Lilies in you blow; And may those Roses planted in your Face Appear most fresh, and never lose their grace; As long as Phaebus rules the beauteous day, And Phoebe doth by night her rays display; As long as Atlas bears the Heav'nly spheres: As long as Jove his Crown and Scepter bears. That happy, blest, and good that Man may prove, Who shall enjoy so fair, so sweet a Love. A Fancy. IF I had Daedalean Wings, my flight I'd take, and see my Fair One ev'ry night: I'd in the airy Mansions soar aloof, And emulate fair Heaven's spangled roof. No Phaebus then to melt my waxen plume, I'd not (like Icarus) receive my doom. I'd strike the top of our bright Hemisphere, And bring down Starry Venus for my Dear; With which I'd (like an Eagle) post away, And offer to my Caelia this my Prey; And when t' her happy Window I was come (Being with my rapt'ring joys now stricken dumb) I'd (like the burning Phaenix) strait begin To flutter till my Phoenix let me in; But when she had the passage soon made clear, I'd on my hov'ring Wings salute my Dear,
And give to her this Emblem of my love, To Venus Venus, and both from above. My bright Idea's arms I'd then enjoy, And 'bout her snowy neck my own display; I'd from her Lips too gently steal a kiss, And then congratulate our Heav'nly bliss. (Like two kind Turtles in the Myrtle shades) We'd coo and bill, until the Morn invades. But when Aurora brings on Phoebus ray, And Phosphorus leads on the hateful day, And thence breaks off our amours, I would seal Up with ten thousand kisses t' her my zeal; And then I'd to my former seats away; So till next night adieu unto my Joy. Requesting a Letter from his Mistress. AS when the long-tost Ark could find no shore, The Dove was sent to view the waves once more; Till then with tyred Wings the Pledge of Peace, She brought, and Harbinger'd the waves decrease. So now being wrackt i' th' raging Sea of love, My heart implores your hand to play the Dove, And grant the Olive-Branch wrapt in one line, That I may hope for Peace, whilst I'm still thine: Then shall no heart i' th' world be found more true Than mine, to that bright, charming Goddess you.
The Nightingale. DIsband (O Winter!) this thy sable dress, Let florid Garlands new-sprung joyes express; The Golden Age returns with speedy Wing, And we shall now enjoy Eternal Spring. Last night I heard sweet Philomela tune Such warbling notes, that even charm'd the Moon. Her Syren's Voice made Heaven's Choirs give ear, Such charming and sweet melodies to hear. She (like Amphion) made each Tree to dance, And ev'ry smiling Stone to give a glance. Here was th' Empyreum of sweet harmony, Whose Flashes high-born Fancies did descry. Whose flourish (meteor-like) did curl the air, Trembling like sweet Apollo's gilded hair. Her quav'ring Voice did up to Heaven rove, Whilst she sang forth the sweetest cares of love. The Winged People of the Skies can't sing Such well-tun'd Anthems to their Heav'nly King, As those, which this sweet Philomela gave, Which charm'd the Gods, and did my Soul enslave.
Ʋnto a Gentleman very strictly confining my Muse. WHen Eagles Wings are clipt, how can they soar, And gaze o' tho' nearer Beams with dauntless pow'r? Should Hills oppose, how could vast Nilus flow, And with its streams make Aegypt fruitful grow? When Fancy is deny'd her tow'ring flight, How can a Poet ought (but non-sense) write? Since she delights to wave her frothy Oar In the vast Sea, that's bounded with no shore. She loves to wing away from her own source, And scorns all Obstacles that stop her course. No more let Fops then bound a Poet's Wit, Lest they themselves be justly damn'd for it; When the Abortive Product doth appear, Which their confinement made the Poet bear. A very pathetical Poem to a Young Lady. WHat prosp'rous Gales did breath upon my sails, Whilst love was haven'd without usual toils?
How calmly (Madam!) did you steal my heart, When cheerful smiles did at me seem to dart? Your Crystal Front did bright (like Stars) appear, Whose gloss enlighten'd our dark Hemisphere. Grant me (Dear Madam!) but your charming hand, And you shall have my heart at your command. My Soul and Body would grow proud, if they Could but attain your Mandate to obey. To serve so fair a Nymph is not a doom, But Heav'n on Earth as well as Heav'n to come. If th'envious Fates should storm and prove unkind, And we from mutual Amours be confin'd, (Like Heav'n's Monarch) I'd break the strongest Tow'rs, T' imbrace my Danae in golden show'rs. I'd with Leander cross the stormy Seas, That you, my fairest Hero, I might please. If Heath'nish Crews my living Mass should burn, If I were headlong thrust into my Urn, And (like Mezentius) were interr'd alive, Against the solid Globe of Earth I'd strive; Th'establish'd Laws of Nature I would cross, Nor shou'd th' Elysian toys repair my loss. (Like Jove to's Semele.) I'd rise again, To you in Thunder to express my pain. Lightning Sparks splendent (like your lovely eyes) Shou'd be my Pages, and the Angels spies. The airy Spirits should my Servants stand To wait on me, who wait to kiss your hand. Your sacred Deity (I know) can bear These radiant Trains without the least of fear.
In your imbraces I'd consume the day, And then at Night I'd soar the Milky way. Now an Amphibious Creature I should prove, And live part here below, and part above. But when you had spun out your fatal thread, I'd lead you to th' Elysium of the dead; Where we in shades with clasped arms would ly, Imbracing Bliss to all Eternity. The Change. I Once admired Beauty's charming pow'r, And dreamed on my Fair One ev'ry hour: But now since I'm the object of her scorn, Than which I'd rather death it self have born; Farewel the Follies of a gilded Brow, Where Crimson Roses, and fair Lilies grow; Which (like the Damask Jewels) fade away, And flourish, fall, and dy, all in one day. Thus Vi'lets blushing on the Morning Sun, Do hide their Heads before his course be done. If I on Beauty have a mind to gaze, I'll have that mine, which so short time shan't raze. Aegyptian Monuments shall be my Bride, Which don't (like Women) glory in their Pride: Or else to Heaven I'll attoll my Eyes, And there admire the glory of the Skies; With which there's none on Earth can parallel, Whilst glitt'ring Stars the fairest Eyes excel.
So fair a Front no Earthly Phoenix wears, As Phaebe doth riding i' th' lofty Spheres. No Earthly Beauty then I'll more adore, Nor e're for Beauty's fairest Queen implore: The spangled Heaven shall my Mistress be, To which I'll tend my cries, and bend my knee. Acrosticks. On Mrs Bridget Wood. Boast th' happy World of these Halcyon days, Rising from you the native spring of joys. In you the fainting World begins to move, Drowning all cares i' th' Ecstasies of love. Great-Britain's shore a Paradise became, Ere since kind Heaven blest it with your name; This is our blazing Star, our Nation's Fame. Witty, brisk, kind, and fair, nay Pious too (O Heav'ns!) you are: Who merits thus like you? O Muses Darling, Hail! Hail, Beauty's gem, Dropt to Earth from Heav'n in a golden dream.
On Madam Frances Bosworth. Farewel to frowning Nature's Tragick Face; Resplendent Beauty now the Scene doth grace. AVenus lightens our dark Hemisphere, Nor doth she less than Heaven's pow'rs appear: Confinement only to these Earthly toys Eclipses (Madam!) your Coelestial rayes: Seize Heav'n, and you shall have Immortal praise. Beauty's chief Idol, and true vertue's gem (O Heav'ns!) you prove, and honours noble stem. Serener Nature all her gifts did heap, When you her dearest Darling she did shape; Or (like Apelles) the whole World did fleece; Rejoycing to make you her Master-piece. The Heav'ns triumph in these too happy days, Hail, fairest Phoenix, and the Font of joys.
On Madam Anna Cole. ASsist (O Muse!) the subject is too high For such a rustick silly Swain as I. All former times your worth (Dear Madam) shew; No sacred Nymph was e're so fair as you. Not Greece may charming Hellen more admire, A fairer Venus doth our Souls inspire. Can't this tho' seem a grand mysterious truth, Once that a Cole should prove so fair forsooth: Lo! candid Lilies in this Cole do blow; Each lovely part appears like driven snow. If this poor piece my meanness hath betray'd, (Fair Madam!) pardon, 'cause you were obey'd.
Another on Madam Frances Bosworth. From Beauty (Madam!) flows your Poet's theam, Religion's Idol, and the Lover's dream. Afairer Nymph the World did never know, Nor could the Heav'ns a greater gift bestow Conceding you, then when they blest our Coasts, Each charmed heart since of your influence boasts. Sure Nature made you of refined Clay, Being kind to Man, and studious of his joy; Or Heaven's Senate did your beams dismiss, Streaming on Mortals their coelestial bliss. Wise, fair you be, nay good and vertuous too; Of which each act's a proof that comes from you. Rejoice the World; Rejoice ye mortal Crew, Two Heav'ns to us the kindest Gods do shew; Heav'n with them, and Heav'n (Dear Madam) with you.
In eandem. Fausta dies! felix tempus! Redit Aurea Proles, Redduntur mundi gaudia prima sacri. Auster mutatur Zephyro; Fugêre labores; Nullus adest moeror; Nullus adest{que} dolor. Cuncta renascentis gaudent confinia mundi; Et nunc virtutes, nunc pietas{que} viget: Saturni veteris redeunt sic tempora laeta! Buccina nulla strepit; Ridet at alma quies. Ofelix aevum! Quam prospera secula currunt! Sic tu laetitiam (Nympha Venusta!) paris! Virtus influxu, radiis tua forma coruscis, Vultus sideribus pectora nostra beat! O faciles superi! Claro de limine Coeli Redditur alma Venus; Numen habemus, Ave. Tellus fit Coelum; Coelum (Dea pulchra!) tulisti; Hinc tibi sacra cadant; Hinc tibi Thura fluant. Of Man. May'st thou (Hyperbolized nothing Man, An empty shade, or Bubble!) know thy span, Now Life, strait Death; so frail a Creature's Man.
On Beauty in its praise. Bright Beauty doth the World's chief Idol prove, Each charming feature doth affection move. A Heav'n on Earth through Beauty we enjoy; Vain are all Forts, where Beauty leads the way. The Gods themselves to Beauty's charms indulge; Year's frozen Ice fair Beauty's beams infulge. On Time. Time stays for none, but still with fleeting wings Is posting on: With Scythe our doom she brings: Made bald behind she's too; Take Lock before, Else once being past, you ne're will see it more. On Death. Death's fatal stroke in time will pierce all hearts, Each mortal Man lies subject to her Darts. A Prince and Peasant in thy Laws agree, (Thou Death!) that summon'st all away to thee: Hence we but frail and fading Blossoms be.
Epigrams. Unto Madam Wood. THE Fawns and Satyrs once the saced Woods did store; But never was a Wood a Goddess made before. We now have (thanks to Fate) a Goddess and a Wood, In you the double comfort of this mortal brood. For (like a Goddess) you do fill the World with grace, And in your arms you (like a shelt'ring Wood, embrace. In Paulam nasum oblongum sortientem. AƲricomâ Venere, & formâ formosior ipsâ Paula foret, brevior si modo Nasus erat. Mille juventutis flagrantis basia Paula Acciperet, brevior si modò Nasus erat. Deni{que} connubio frueretur Paula beato, Ter felix, brevior si modò nasus erat. Consilium si (Paula!) meum petis, ultima nasi Drahe, nec Tantum Rhinocerotis habe.
In Rosellam odoribus nimis indulgentem. JƲrabo, quod sis hederâ formosior albâ, Et puto quod morbis (pulchra Rosella!) cares. Sed quorsum cunctis membris diapasmata spirant? Crede mihi, bene olet (nil olitura) Venus. De Leone, & Cane. DƲM pavidum Leporem sequitur Canis acris Asylum, Commiserans tutum praebuit ora Leo. Hoc decus (en!) fuerat, Romani Caesaris olim; Dignius at tu nunc Maxime Caesar habes; Dum Canis at{que} Leo concordant, vivitur una, Amplexas{que} Canem dormitat ungue Leo: Quos decet esse hominum tali sub Principe mores, Dum fera mitescens nil feritatis habet. Ad Amicam. NYmpha, Venus, Pallas, Virtus, Dea, Virgo, Virago, Indulge lachrymis; Verba suprema cape. En! Lachrymae trivêre genas, suspiria pectus; Venit summa dies; Captus amore cado.
On Phillis. COY Phillis vows she hates a kiss, And swears from thence proceeds no bliss; And if in Company you dare Her Lips but touch, she'll tear your hair: But if in private you her greet, She'll with her open Mouth you meet: Thus Maids affect a silent joy, And kissing love, tho' they seem coy. On Superba. WHat double Scents (Superba!) thou dost bring? Thou'rt sweet, yet stink'st; Thou smel'st of ev'ry thing. The sweet Pomanders do thy toys perfume; Thy poys'nous breath my Spirits doth consume. On Ficosa. WEll-bred Ficosa doth so tune her speech, Thro' Nose, you'd swear, she'd imitate your Breech. Nay 'tis force put; for she is an old Strumpet, Whose half-eat Nose doth wrattle like a Trumpet.
Ʋnto Rembombo. MY loathing heart (Rembombo!) can't thee love, Nor can I this with Arguments now prove: Of this thing only can I thee assure, I can't thee for thy noysom Breath endure. Love. MY Heart is gone, no more it is mine own; For she that claims it, who can't scorn a Crown? Fiery Passion. MY Dearest Life! I cannot brook delay, Haste, fly, come quick, or else I dy this day. Despair. MY Fair One's Fire is into Ice congeal'd, And hence (alas!) my horrid doom is seal'd. Break, Break (O Heart!) Weep tears of blood (O Eyes) I now must dy love's martyr'd Sacrifice.
The last Petition. GRant me my last request (My fatal Dear!) Upon my Fun'ral Urn distil a tear. 'Tis but a Debt most due and just, since I For you alone did Rivers weep, and dy. An Ode unto a scornful Lady. 1. WHY (proud Lucynda!) why Dost hold thy Head so high Above our Spheres? Would'st thou fain center Jove, And with Pride charm him down A Vassal to thy frown? Alas! The Gods such tow'ring hearts ne'r love. 2. Tho' Roses mixt with Snow, By art do florid blow: In thy fictitious Cheeks, who will adore Such gilded trifling toys, Such false and fleeting joys, Which kill, when please, and then are seen no more.
3. Thou'rt now puft up with Pride, And scorn'st to be a Bride, Unless to Heav'n: Swell up your pregnant Sails, And soar there, if you can! Thy Life is but a span, As well as mine: Know fate will pitch her Toils. 4. Thy blust'ring Pride can't save Thee from the vorant Grave; But when thou hast a few more minutes spent, The terror of decay Will fright thee into Clay, And then in dust thy lofty Pride's impent. 5. Thy Ruby Lips; Thy Eyes Like Starry Orbs; Thy Skies Of Marble Veins (when pale-fac'd Death shall seise) (Like mine) must fade away, And turn again to clay, Nor are they better in the Urn than these. 6. Why then dost thou thus ride Upon the Wings of Pride, And scorn adoring Man, as tho' unmeet For one so fair as you? Know, Beauty 'll soon adieu; And then who'll e're fall prostrate at your feet?
An Ode to his jealous Mistress. 1. MAdam! I thought your Faith had been more strong, Than to believe, that ever I could wrong Love vow'd to you my Soul's delight, And only Joy, tho' envious spite Accus'd me false to you, When (Heaven knows) I'm true. 2. True, True, resolv'd, and constant I abide, And do not steer away with ev'ry Tide, As false and fickle Lovers do, Whose Appetites are still for new. (By Heav'ns) you have my heart, From whom it can't depart. 3. The Center that is fix'd to Jove's great Throne, Can sooner be discus'd, than one, ev'n one Of all my former vows to you Be broke, and I perfidious grow. I'll (like Leander) prove Still constant in my love.
4. Then don't let that accurst Dog Jealousie (Backt with report) more gripe, and torture thee: Your faithful Servant I'll remain, As long as Heav'ns me life do deign; Now what my Pen hath vow'd, My Passion will make good. SONGS. 1. WHen through the Woods a nimble Deer I vig'rous once did chase, And brandishing my fatal Spear, Oppos'd his horned Face. 2. When Rock-wood made the Groves to ring, I (like Actaeon) found Diana slumb'ring near a Spring, Lay claspt upon the ground. 3. I thought it was some Goddess lay Enwrapt in golden dreams; Her Snowy Arms she did display, Lul'd fast with murm'ring streams.
4. I first refus'd her gentle ease To break with obsequies; But then my Passion did encrease, And I unclos'd her Eyes. 5. Which (like two rising Suns) did shine, When the lov'liest Creature To me did joyfully resign Every smiling feature. 6. I rais'd her up, and did salute Her with a tender kiss; And when her Spirits did recruit, She consummates my bliss. 7. What raptures did my burning Breast With am'rous joys inspire! How was my zealous heart possest With loves, love's gentle fire! 8. At length (alas!) Sol's absent ray The glimmering World defaces: And thus we spent that happy day In mutual imbraces.
The Syren. 1. WHen Phoebus dipt his blushing rays In the deep Euxine Port, And eager of his rapt'ring joys, To's Tethys did resort: 2. I gently mov'd my careless Feet To crop the Ev'ning joys, And near a purling stream so sweet, I heard my Fair One's Voice. 3. Where I lay down on the soft grass, To listen to her art; Whilst ev'ry note and high-rais'd flash Did penetrate my heart. 4. She (like the charming Nightingale) Did her sweet cares complain; Whilst ev'ry whisp'ring gentle gale, Did breathe to me her pain. 5. Love's raptures then my Soul did seise, And urg'd me to proceed; Nor I my Passion could appease, Until her charms agreed.
6. She then did chearful words impart, 'Twas time (Dear Joy!) to rise, Whereas I see thy burning heart To sparkle through thine Eyes. The Acquest. 1. LOng, long had my Fair One seem'd coy, And blasted my hopes with a Nay; But at length th' fierce flame of desire, And sense of true joy, Did steal her away, And blow'd up her languishing fire. 2. Love, Love in her heart is now come, And lights up his Torch with new flame: She loves me, she hugs me, and clips; No more she'll conceal, Nor stifle her zeal, With Kisses she'll wear out my Lips. 3. Coy frowns are now chang'd into smiles, And hope all despair now beguiles: With glances she vows me her love, With sighs she doth seal To me her hearts zeal, And in raptures doth coo like a Dove.
4. To me then (my Fair One) resort, That we (like two Turtles) may sport In the pleasures of love, and enjoy, What your scorn so long From us did prolong, And never no more be so coy. A Catch. 1. LET the Brimmers go round Like the Sun in the Sky, And the Glasses be crown'd, Till a Globe they descry. 2. In th' Abyss of the Bowls Let us plunge all dull care, And let's swell up our Souls With our Nectar so rare. 3. We'll this Night drink and sing, And brisk Bacchus admire; But when Morning doth spring, We'll begin to retire.
4. Then make use of your time, Come, troul it away; For I think it no crime, Thus our lives to enjoy. The Shepherd. 1. WHilst I my tender Flocks did feed In Tempe's lovely Plains, And when from care my Breast was freed Amongst the rural Swains: 2. I spy'd a shady Willow-Bed Near to my grazing Sheep, Where I lay'd down my thoughtless Head, And tun'd my self asleep. 3. My Dear Florella passing by My trembling hand did take; And mov'd me with a gentle cry, Ah, Corydon, awake! 4. At first she seem'd to be a Grace To my dim, slumb'ring Eyes: At length I knew Florella's Face, And did to her arise.
5. In mutual arms with equal flame, We did each other hold; And when the dawning Ev'ning came, We drove our Flocks to fold. A Catch. COme, Come (Boys!) fill up your Glasses, And drink to the Lasses; Let cheerful Bacchus now abound, And Kisses too go round. Let ev'ry Man now take his Glass, And 's kiss present to's Lass: For he's a sluggish drowzy Ass, That will let either pass. Good Wine will make us brisk and gay, And fill our hearts with joy; And then a lovely Damsel's kiss Will consummate our bliss. No one was ever in the dumps Whilst Wine and Virgin's Rumps He did pursue; Here lies pleasure, And the World's choice treasure.
Strike up then (Sparks!) And fear no claps In these sweet Virgins Laps. But when you do new Spirits lack, Here's good Maligo Sack. Love abus'd turns to hate. 1. I Never thought I could be shot With Cupid's fiery Dart; But now he hath Dominion got, And penetrates my heart: For Cupid's Arrows do resistless prove, And all are subject to the charms of love. 2. When first Althea's lovely Eyes On me did seem to play, She did my Spirits strait surprise, And rapt my Soul away. So soon a Damsel's glance and charming smile Doth fire our Breasts, and make our Blood to boyl! 3. I then beseech'd my Dearest Love To consummate my Joys, And meet me in a silent Grove With Phoebus setting rays. For what's the rapt'ring bliss of Lovers charms, When they ly clasped in each others arms?
4. I long did wait 'twixt hope and fear, And ev'ry gentle gale, That lightly toucht my list'ning Ear, I thought Althea's call. How great, how strong, (alas) was love's love's pow'r, When ev'ry minute seem'd a tedious hour? 5. At length of her I did despair, And all my hopes resign: Ah false Althea! Tho' so fair, Yet thou dost prove unkind. Now that, which I so dearly lov'd, I hate; And that I ever lov'd, I curse my Fate. LIFE. 1. WHat is Life, if we live Still dying with cares? If we languish and grieve, Still damned to fears? 'Tis Hell upon Earth, and a Grave, that is made Before we are dead, and our Fate doth invade.
2. Why are blessings showr'd down, If not to be enjoy'd? Why doth Nectar abound, If use is deny'd? Sure the Gods for Man's mirth consult and his joy, When Vineyards their Crowns of fair Grapes do display. 3. Then no more let's repine; Let sorrow away; But let's squeeze out the Wine, Then taste and enjoy: Lest the Gods thro' neglect should their favours detain, For Blessings unus'd become needless and vain. 4. Ah! Then fill up the Bowl, (Like Poets) we'll bibble: And whilst round it doth roul, With Misses we'll quibble: For he that revolts from his Glass or his Lass, Is justly esteem'd a nonsensical Ass.
The fair Enchantress. 1. WHat pow'rful charms Calisto's Eyes Do prove to mortal Swains! They make our Passion strait arise, And soon enflame our veins. 2. Her charming smiles do pierce our hearts, And strait our Souls enthral, Her Ruby Lips do wound like Darts, To which we Victims fall. 3. We gaze, we gaze; still more admire, And all we know, 's to yield: She burns our Breasts with secret fire, And conq'ring quits the field. 4. My Dear Calisto! Consolate Your Lover's bleeding heart, And (which you've caus'd) soon cure my fate, Or else my Life's but short.
A Catch. 1. LET Statesmen their honour advance, Let the Prodigals pride, And still deck up each side, With Pamphlets All-a-mode de France. 2. Let Puritans vertue improve; Let the Misers ne're rest Till with blessings opprest, Still dreading t' enjoy what they love. 3. (Alas!) Let such cares all adieu, Let damn'd troubles farewel, That are wont to rebel 'Gainst us, when we pleasures pursue. 4. Come, Come (Boys!) we'll drown 'em in Wine, We'll drink till w' are free, Then away we will flee, And our hearts to our Misses resign.
Musick's Empyreum, occasioned by the sight of a young Lady playing on the Flute near St. James's Park. 1. AS lovely Delia charming sate Near Tagus golden streams, And warbling out her Syren's art, Display'd her beauteous beams: 2. The glorious Angels Thrones above Forsook, her tunes to hear, And Heav'n's bright Choirs did Rivals prove, Which should her Triumphs bear. 3. Her charms the Crystal Rivers won, To stop their course and stay; Whilst Nymphs about 'em joyful run, And th' feather'd Crew did play. 4. Brisk Echo from the trembling Grove Did break her shrillest Voice, And still in vain to answer strove, Whilst ev'ry Tree rejoyc'd.
5. The nimble Harts did skip for joy, When strait they heard her charms; And ev'ry spark did wish and pray To clasp her Snowy Arms. 6. But tho' in vain fond wishes were, Yet they had pow'r to please; So Lovers sometimes banish care, When nothing else can ease. The Prisoner's Complaint. IF Heaven's choir can pity take, If God's poor Swains don't still forsake, Send me relief; Whose heart is full of tort'ring pains, Whose restless Soul (alas!) contains A Tyde of grief. I'm now involv'd in dismal Cell, Much like the deep Abyss of Hell: Alas! My woe! I once did happy times enjoy, And tasted pleasures ev'ry day, Tho' now 'tis so.
Hence far more wretched I become, And think it now a greater doom To be confin'd: Where Iron Bands my Members press, And tire my Limbs, nor do they less Disturb my mind. No sweet Parenthesis of ease Doth my continu'd pangs appease; I'm still in Death: The Stone of Sisyphus I roul, And Tityan Vultures tear my Soul. Oh Hell on Earth! My Summer Friends are from me gone, I'm now in Winter left alone; What Friends had I? O Gods! soon ease my sorrow's weight With your kind hands, or else I'll strait Despair and dy. The Effeminate Courtship. 1. LOng, Long Amaryllis had woo'd, And for her Menalcas had su'd, When still he repuls'd her the more, And the colder he grew. But th' earnester she did implore, And still urg'd him anew. Still cruel? still cruel? Oh! Why Wilt leave me to languish and dy?
2. Thou triumph'st enthron'd in my heart, Which Cupid has pierc'd with his Dart: I'll love thee, I'll clip thee, I'll hug Thee about with my Arms; I'll sport thee, I'll kiss thee and smug, And I'll lull thee with charms. Still, &c. 3. My heart I will freely resign, And still to thy will I'll incline: As true, as true Blue I will prove; No Ram's Horns shalt thou wear, Nor e're in the Frigat shalt move, Which peckt Cuckolds doth bear. Still, &c. 4. Don't I smile, and slick up my brow, And call you to Dinner from Plow? And every moment you stay, When I've call'd, seems a year: And do not I thee still obey, And endeavour t'endear? Still, &c.
5. In Marriage let's firmly then join, And all, that is mine, shall be thine. The Cart and the Plow thou may'st drive, And get money apace; I'll Knit, Spin, and Card, and I'll strive To procure thee a Race. Still, &c. 6. Each year I will bring thee a Calf, As big as a Bull and a half; And when we have rear'd these, brave Boys, Then they Carters shall be; I'll bring too a bonny brave Joice, To crush Cheeses with me. Still cruel? still cruel? Oh! Why Wilt leave me to languish and dy? The Invitation. 1. APproach, my pretty Dear, And sit upon my Knee; What Omen dost thou hear, That makes thee fly from me.
2. Why fear'st thy Maiden-head To give to one so true? Thou shalt have mine instead, And I'll exchange with you. 3. To what intent had you Your Sex from Heav'n above? Less you its use do shew By th' ecstasies of love. 4. What pleasures hence do spring, We both shall swim in joy, Nor envy Prince, nor King; Then why dost seem so coy? 5. What dost thou yet ev'n frown? A pox upon such toys; Come, Come (My Dear!) ly down, And we'll promote our joys. The Sympathy. 1. O Fair Clorina! Whom doth fate Thus menace in your brow? Can I thy joys anew create, And make thee happy grow?
2. Ye Heav'ns! To me reveal the cause, That makes my Fair One grieve: 'Tis Death to me amaz'd to pause, And not her pains relieve. 3. My Soul's Soul, and my Joy! declare, From whence these storms arise: Let me absterge each pearly tear, That sparkles in thine Eyes. 4. Clear up thy Front, and change this Scene, Let joys expel sad care: Dost think thy frets by me are seen, And I not bear a share? A drinking Song. 1. LEt's drink up our Wine, Our Wits 't will refine; It banishes care, it procreates joy; 'Twill make us both wise, both frolick and gay. 2. Great Souls it doth raise To a rapture of joys; It quickens the thoughts; The fancy inspires, And flames up a Poet with vap'ring Fires.
3. Apollo can prove, That Nectar doth move The mental conceit, with fancycal flight, He high'st aspires, when h' as tipl'd all night. 4. Then fill up the Glass, By none let it pass, And here is a Health to our gracious King, For whom we will drain out old Bacchus's Spring. The Beggar's Felicity. 1. LO! Lo! How the Beggars now play; They Sun their fat Herds, They stroke their long Beards, And mantle themselves in Sol's ray. 2. They wander through every coast, And never do stray, Nor miss of their way; But of their brown Lasses they boast. 3. With hunger when they are opprest, Their Packs they unloose, And Scraps do educe, Whilst on the soft Grass they do feast.
4. Grim Envy at them ne're doth strike; Securely they sleep, And safe o' th' ground creep: Like Snow that doth rest in the Dike. 5. No cares do perplex their free brain; But when they can get A penny, they're great, And merrily spend it again. 6. Their Pets they embrace and enjoy; They carry the Pack, With Bastard at back, And none are so happy as they. 7. All day they do rant and they sing; When Night doth o're spread, They seek not a Bed, But ligg near some murm'ring Spring. 8. Where the Heav'ns their Canopy prove; The Stars do enlight Their Chambers at night, Whilst they sport in the raptures of love.
9. Thus Beggers have joy without end; Thus Vagrants a Life Enjoy without strife, And Monarchs in bliss do transcend. The Dissolution. 1. WHat fatal influence rules the day? What cruel Planet bears the sway? That makes Clarissa seem so coy. 2. Her sparkling Eyes (like Lightning) dart Their fiery flashes at my heart, Which can ne're melt, nor feel the smart. 3. Her Front with Clouds doth ly obscur'd, Yet thence no drops can be allur'd, To quench my Flames by her inur'd. 4. Should I on her sow'r Face presume To cast a glance, she strait would fume, As though thereby t' increase my doom.
5. But fy (Clarissa!) why dost frown, On whom thou canst no more cast down; Because I am no more thine own. 6. For none but Fools, whose weaker brain Distemper'd doats, would love retain For those, who will not love again. The Voyage. 1. YE sacred Pow'rs! that rule the Main, Ye Nymphs! that sport i' th' Deep, Green Neptune's Tridens, and his Train, Whose Laws the Waters keep; To you I trust my self; With prosp'rous Gales Therefore may you promote my pregnant Sails. 2. O' th' sordid Land let others rust, In purer Spheres I'll live; Nor shall the storms deject my trust, Nor curled Waves me grieve. For still the Gods do innocence protect; On threat'ning Fate I'll dauntless then despect.
3. Tho' greedy Death doth seem to ride O' th' back of ev'ry wave; And when it does again subside, It shews to me a Grave; I'll not through fear my Votives swear to pay, But I'll triumph, and swell as well as they. 4. The barking Scylla I'll not fear, Nor deep Charybdis dread: Thro' Rocks, thro' Storms, thro' Sands I'll stear Safe to my Haven's Bed. And when the Winds do sigh and toss the Main, I'll mock them with my feigned sighs again. 5. The Indians Gold I'll see, but spurn; The Trojan soil I'll view; To Venice I'll my Streamers turn, And then to Rome I'll go. The mirrors of all Coasts I will pursue, And search the wonders of the Ocean too. 6. O then what pleasure will it be, When I'm arriv'd my shore, To recollect the casualty, That I've endur'd before. The grateful memory of dangers past Doth consolate, ev'n till we breathe our last.
The Hunt. HArk yonder, how the Woods do ring! Diana's sport doth now begin. Brisk Echo doth reverberate, What sweet-tongu'd Chanter doth relate. It puts to blush the Morning ray, To see the Nymphs so post away. The great Apollo strings his Bow, And at the prey his Darts doth throw: Out comes the Stag, which when they see, Away the little Lurkers flee. Fly, nimble Swift do run in view, And just i' th' Breech the prey pursue: Thro' Hills, thro' Dales; thro' Groves they fleet, And thred the Thicks with winged Feet. When Jovy Rock-wood his Voice shows, And with full scent holds up his Nose: Bold Rav'ner, and stout Thunder too, Do Musick to their Ears renew. But (lo!) they're all now at a Mute, When true-nos'd Whisker find's pursuit; And ope's his Jaws, then with full cry Away they whisk (like Wind) and fly. The tim'rous Stag they view again, And without loss the scent retain. They run (like Lightning) and so smart, That they'll soon break his panting Heart. Down drops the Prey, the Dogs do seize, Till them the Huntsman doth appease.
He winds retreats, and with his Spear Well-poys'd, doth pierce th' expiring Deer. Gynephilia. 1. LET those (that will) fair Women hate, And quite abhor; Cause they suppose, they fascinate Those that adore. I'll thank my Stars, I may So great a bliss enjoy. 2. So fair a piece as Woman is The World can't shew; She's the Elysium of true bliss, Our Idol too. Her Front, her Cheeks, her Eyes, May well the Gods surprise. 3. With charms she chases care away From poor Man's Breast: She fills his Soul with rapt'ring joy, And makes him blest: Her smiles, her frisks, and glance, His Soul to Heav'n advance.
4. To Gods themselves we come most near, When true love reigns; Hence we to th' stars (like Comets) Sphere With fiery trains. Thus Heav'nly joys abound, When love's pure Sphere turns round. To the Fair One. 1. HOW Cupid in Clarinda's Eyes Doth skip, doth sport and play! From whence his flaming Arrow flies, And makes us all obey. 2. We (like the Persians) do adore Those glorious Orbs of thine; And when we may not see them more, In Sables we repine. 3. The Venus-Star is not so bright, When Night's dark Scene doth draw; As thy fair Eyes, which can by right To Monarchs give a Law.
4. (My Dear Clarinda!) don't be coy, Nor dart on me a frown; Lest you your Lover quite dismay, And cast your Suiter down. The Combate. 1. AS Strephon and fair Flora lay, Enwrapt with clasped Arms, And silent cropt the rapt'ring joy, That flows from Beauty's charms: 2. The much-belov'd Amyntas came To pay his Sacrifice, And strait spy'd out their secret Game, With 's envious sparkling Eyes. 3. He then incens'd could not endure A Rival of his Love; But did his Foe forthwith assure, His right to her he'd prove. 4. They then an equal Duel fought For her their only prize, Until her trembling Spirits taught Their Hearts to sympathize.
5. She sigh'd, and strait did prostrate fall, To beg a mutual Peace: Oh Heav'ns! Oh Heav'ns! To you I call Their Passion to appease. 6. Each furious blow to me brings Death; Hold, Hold, these thoughts resign; Will ye drive out my wav'ring Breath? Was ever Fate like mine? The Lover's Complaint. 1. WHY dost thou, cruel God of Love, So wound my flagrant heart? Thy tort'ring Brand I can't remove By all the helps of Art. 2. I burn, I freeze, I take no ease, But toss like Waves o' th' main: I hate, I love; My pains encrease; I strive (alas!) in vain. 3. My Fair One's scorn, nor cold repulse Extinguish not my fire; The more she frowns, and seems averse, The more I her admire.
4. What then may I now ruminate; All hopes of her do dy: Despair must prove my horrid fate, I'll languish, faint and dy. The Lover's Wish. 1. LET Monarchs triumph in their Pride, And Caesars at Court still reside; Jove grant me the Phoenix I love, Then th' happiest of Swains I shall prove. 2. The Pomps of the World I reject, Which cannot from troubles protect. Jove, &c. 3. Love's raptures the sweetest of toys, Which locks up our senses in joys. Jove, &c. 4. Love's charms still great Souls should inspire, And warm their brave Blood with hot fire. Jove, &c.
5. The Elysium of bliss we enjoy, When love in our hearts bears the sway. Jove grant me the Phoenix I love, Then the happiest of Swains I shall prove. 1. TO Mars I will my Life devote; Come (Vulcan!) come, make me a Coat Of Mail; Command each Slave, That works in Aetna's Cave, My Thunderbolts to carve. 2. (Achilles-like) in Armour bright I'll march and lead the Fight; My Sword shall clear the way, And to Thee Victims pay By ev'ry Man I slay. 3. On threat'ning Death I'll boldly gaze; No terrors shall my Soul amaze: My Courser I will ride, And (like a Bride-groom) Pride, To marry Death my Bride.
4. Let Trumpets sound, let Drums alarm; Let Cannons roar, let Bullets storm: It's Musick in my ear, Grim Death I scorn to fear, I'll break through dangers near. Gynemisia. 1. UNhappy Man! Why dost thou dote Thus on faithless Woman? This is to trust thy tott'ring Boat To Waves, that toss o' th' Main. 2. Though in their mouths (like murm'ring Bees) They do sweet Honey bring; Yet in their Tayls there lurking lies A sharp, and deadly sting. 3. Their winks, their becks, their glancing smiles, Their fleers and seemings glad, Are Lures, whereby they do beguile, And Deaths in Liveries clad.
4. Tell 'em, what Hell-exceeding pain For them you undergo, They're all of Marble, and in vain Your grief you let 'em know. 5. Nay then the more they'll seem to scorn, And cast a killing Eye; That thou may'st wish, thou ne're wast born, Or being born to dy. 6. But grant thy Prayers should prevail, And get a nuptial Bed; Ere Morn thou would'st thy case bewail, And see thy joys were fled. 7. Perhaps she'll prove a Wife o' th' Horn, And seek unlawful play; She'll have Gallants, and thee quite scorn, And then where is thy joy? 8. 'Tis best to lead a single life, Void of these gilded Ills; Where pleasure sits without all strife, As in th' Elysian Fields.
On Caelia's glancing Eyes. 1. AS lovely Caelia fraught with joys Doth cross the spacious Plains, Her glancing Eye her heart betrays, And charms the rural Swains. 2. The Lightning flash doth melt the steel, And makes it flow with streams; Thus, thus our hearts to melt we feel, Being pierc'd with Caelia's beams. 3. The Star shoots through the spangled parts, Till it in gelly dies; But killing are the sparkling Darts, That fly from Caelia's Eyes. 4. The Basilisk with's poys'nous Eyes Doth close pursuers kill: When Caelia looks on Man he dies, She acts new murthers still. 5. She hates compassion, loves to see Man burn, and dy in charms, Who ardently implore to be Embraced in her arms.
6. Hence may these cruel Planets set, Ne're to be more ador'd, 'Less all their rigour they'll forget, And bless whene're implor'd. On my dubious Condition. COme all ye Feathers of my Soul, And Wing me to the starry Pole: To the Elysium let me soar, Where doubtful Fate can harm no more. But if the Gods do joys deny, In some dark Chaos let me ly, Where I may know my fatal pain, And not 'twixt Life and Death remain. 'Tis worse than Death to hang in doubt 'Twixt Heav'n and Hell, and ne're get out. (Like Tantalus) I strive in vain The flying Waters to detain. I'm tost from Rock to Rock, and then Fond hope doth rigg me up agen, Till hard despair doth overthrow All that weak hope did build so slow. O then, that I could know my fate, And Fortune's Wheel would keep one state. That its swift turns might cheat no more; I've been deceiv'd enough before.
The Vale. PHillis, farewel! For 'tis time to rebel, When Tyrants with fury do swell. Long have I lain, and ador'd you in vain, And now would you kill me with pain? But cold is my heart, nor e're shall it smart, 'Cause you'll not your Amours impart. Then never believe that hence I will grieve, But scorn for your scorn I can give. I'll love you no more, my folly is o're, Which made me so ardent before. No Beauty I see (my Eyes being free) Which once were so blinded with thee. Fancy did move when I courted thy love, For thou did'st a Venus ne're prove. But grant thou hadst been as fair as a Queen, Thy cruelty spoiled thy mien: For those that still are as cruel as fair, Be never accounted so rare. Now (Phillis!) go to, thy tyranny shew, But let me abandon you too.
The Health. 1. SO ho! Aurora gay Doth call Us all To welcome in the day. 2. Bright Sol begins to shine; Let's pay Him joy And Sacrifice with Wine. 3. Look! Yond the Nymphs do play, Fill up Your Cup, And drink their Healths away. 4. Thus, thus let it go round, And we Will see, That Nectar shall abound.
The Phoenix. 1. AS when Phoebus doth tip the new day, And regilds all the World with his ray; So the Fair One appears, When she lightens our Spheres With the new-blossom'd beams of her brow, Where the treasures of nature do grow. 2. As when Violets flourish i' th' Shade, And to no wand'ring Eyes are betray'd; So the Fair One close lies From the rapes of loose Eyes, And in some am'rous Rose-Bed doth rest; Whence such odours still breathe from her Breast. 3. As when Heaven its Manna doth give, And through mercy doth Mortals relieve; So the Fair one proves kind, And doth solace the mind Of poor Lovers that mourn in despair, 'Cause they dare not approach one so fair.
4. As when Heav'n is spangled with Stars, And bright Venus her Beauty declares; So the fair Ones fair Eyes, Are like Stars in the Skies, And do influence all our pierc'd hearts; As tho' Cupid thence shot forth his Darts. Thus Caelia, thus Caelia, is all o're divine; O that Heav'n, that Heav'n would make her but mine. A Song by way of Dialogue between Corydon and Amyntas, deploring the departure of their Caelia. 1. Cor. MAlignant Stars! Unhappy Fate, That rules the Scenes below! We now have lost our happy State, And no more bliss can flow: For (Earth's fair Goddess) Caelia's gone, And we poor Swains are left alone. 2. Am. She (like an Eaglet) soar'd on high, Bore up with Angels Wings, And to th' Elysium then did fly, Where pleasure always springs. Thus now we've lost our Heav'n of joy, Which chance before could ne're annoy.
3. Chorus. — Her bright And lofty flight Ravish'd all our delight: No more Must we adore! But must for e're deplore! Good Heav'ns! What a black doom is this? To burn in constant fire, To rage in grief, in flames to hiss, And ne're attain desire? 4. Cor. Hence must my flowing Eyes distil Whole streams of pearly tears; And my sincere laments must fill With grief the gloomy Spheres. With mournful Songs I'll bathe my woes, And by my sighing seek repose. 5. Am. No, No, We'll not exhaust our tears, Till all our hopes do dy; Why should we thus augment our cares, Before the sum we try? On fiery Wings let's send our hearts To steal her Soul away by arts.
6. Chorus. — Away, Your plumes display, Mount (swift Souls!) mount your way. One while To reconcile Our griefs bring back a smile. No more then we'll lament in vain, Tho' Caelia's ours no more; But hope t' enjoy her once again, And ever will implore. The Command. 1. AWay ye gentle sighs, And pierce the liquid Skies; Seek out the Fair One's Eyes, There pay your Obsequies. 2. She's gone (alas!) she's gone, And must I mourn alone? With flaming Wings my heart The distant Region part. 3. Into her Breast now Sphere, And stamp my Image there, Or make her heart to burn, And so again return.
4. But in thy Centre bring One am'rous smile to spring My fading joys anew, And then (Despair) adieu. 5. So ho! The Heav'ns rejoice, Her Guardian-Angel's Voice I hear, She's well, She's well, And still doth flame her Zeal. 6. Upon thy Wings then bear My Soul away to her, And still (Amariel) prove My Advocate in love. Hope choak'd with Despair. 1. A Curse upon that senseless hope, That swell'd my heart in vain, And made me aim at that fair scope, Which I can ne're attain. 2. Fond Fop! Art thou the Antidote Against despair and grief? With vain Idaea's thou dost nought But cheat: Ah poor relief!
3. The Chymist knows thy fallacy When's Fire's expir'd in vain: Thy sweet delusions flashes be, That sport the damn'd in pain. 4. Thus thy fond promises alive My drooping heart have born, Till now no hopes I can derive, But in despair I mourn. On Sylvia's Recovery. 1. AS after a dark stormy Night Fair Phosphore leads the smiling Day, The sable Clouds b'ing put to flight, And bright the Morning of our Joy. 2. So my Dear Sylvia springs again, From the fierce Onsets of dire fate: For what Disease could Trophies gain, Where one so firm so charming sate? 3. Thus (bold Disease!) thy toils were vain! For tho' eclipsed were her Eyes, She rose more glorious from her pain, And doth thy conquer'd pow'r despise.
4. Ah Sylvia, still fair Beauty's bloom, Still guarded round with silent charms, Quickly (bore up with Angels) come To bless thy longing Damon's Arms. An Elegy upon the Death of the hope∣ful Mr William Rose deceas'd, in the fourteenth year of his Age. 1. WHat makes our dull Minerva silent weep, As tho' she sought by tears relief? What makes us all in sorrow seem asleep, (Alas!) astonished with grief? The flinty Rock its trembling drops distills, And Marble Walls do sympathize our ills. The pious Muses mourn, and o' th' Castalian shore With shrill and doleful Naenia's their loss deplore. 2. Apollo plays upon his Barbiton, And on his Lyre no more will toy: For his beloved Darling's dead and gone, And all the Muses only joy. 'Tis thee (Dear Saint!) dost cause this mournful state, Whilst Learning's Candidates lament thy fate. But oh that all our tears being mingl'd with thy dust Could raise thee up, our heads into thy Urn we'd thrust.
3. 'Tis strange to see the Rosa Mundi fade, When in its infant Bud doth smile; To see black Clouds the morning beamso're spread, And Night our springing Day beguile. Ah Death! How cou'd'st our blooming hopes destroy, And blast our choice Fruit in its early day? Whilst he (so rare is hoary vertue!) promis'd fair, But dy'd too soon, his parts by actions to declare. 4. But if he'd liv'd, how great, how good he'd been, Each action had been proof so plain, That ev'ry Eye would have admir'd, and deem'd Him worthy, and without a stain. But since whilst he the Earth did thus forsake, To Heav'n's blest Mansion he his flight did take; Let's stop the Current of our tears, and place our Verse, As a true Monument upon his sable Herse. An Epitaph on the same. ALL you, whose softer hearts can vent a tear, First read my Fate, then weep and drop one here; Where faded Youth, and Vertues hopes do ly, Where goodness bud is forc'd to fall and dy;
Where comely Beauty turns to noisom Clay, Where early Zeal Death's sting could not allay. His Father's Joy, his Mothers sweet delight, The Muses Darling, and our springing light. Oh cruel Fates! Impartial Destinies: That never had the sense to sympathize. But tho' his Body's dead, his Fame's alive, And more and more shall ev'ry day survive. Epitaphium in egregiam Pellicem. HOc jacet in tumulo Pellex memoranda futuris, Quae rapuit pectus, diripuit{que} bona. Pestiferis factis sibimet monumenta reliquit; Dicere nam{que} licet de bonitate nihil. Orce tibi caveas, ne Fato Fata pararet; Littoribus nostris pessima pestis erat. An Elegy upon the Vertuous Lady Rebekka Townsend. WHat means this Tragick Scene, this tyde of grief, Which Heav'n condoles, yet will not send relief? The crackling Poles do echo forth their groans, And poor fond Nature her dire fate bemoans.
The Sun with dismal Clouds doth veil his face, As tho' he'd find for Mourning a fit place: In Night's black sables hence the glimm'ring day Involv'd repines: Each Sphere in dark array Distills her show'rs of tears which calms her Breast, With a fierce Hurricane of grief possest. The Winds do sigh, the Storms lament our woes, And the whole Scene of Earth in mourning goes. Sure Nature's choicest Darling now lies dead, And Earth's sole Paradise to Heaven's fled. The World's rare Phoenix ha's now taken Wing, And soar'd unto the glories of th' eternal King: For Heav'n's great Agent did in's Eyes foresee, That She was worthy of maturity; And that as great as Heav'n the World would grow, If blest (Dear Saint!) with thy bright beams below. Hence he to stop the Worlds just growing pride, Took thee to his, and this our Heav'n defy'd. The Tagus streams wherein there flow'd the joy Of all this Earthly Globe are past away, And run into the Font, from whence they came; Yet nought can put a period to their Fame: Her merits were so great, they'l never dy; But (like time) live to kiss Eternity. Nay, our own loss in her, our bereft State With tears will still her worth commemorate: Since when against her cruel Death did rage, We lost the splendent Jewel of our Age. Ah Death! so soon how could'st thou sweep away Our blooming hopes? Could pity not delay, Nor sighs nor tears thy fatal stroak? But must Our rising Day-Star so soon set in dust?
Impartial Fates! Faithless Mortality! All hopes of never dying dead here ly; Dead too, and having left no branch behind, Which might spring up, and parallel its kind. When Fate shall Nuptial Joys so swift pursue, Small are the benefits which thence accrew. From noble Veins she did her Blood derive, And by heroick Actions (whilst alive) She well did answer her Original; Nor did these tempting toys her pow'rs enthral; But (Angel-like) she did the World out-brave, And took pure Innocence into her Grave. For Prudence she (like Sheba) did appear, Whose Fame ha's mounted our bright Hemisphere. O' th' Wings of Pegasus she oft did soar (Where now she dwells) to the Coelestial Tow'r. The Vocal Choirs of Muses in her Breast More, than i' th' sacred Helicon did rest; From whence they vented Oracles of love, And warbled out their charms, enchanting Jove. She (like the Sun) to all display'd her rayes, From whence she built her Pyramids of praise. A safe Asylum to th' opprest she gave; Her Heart and Hand did still rejoice to save Poor Wretches from their doom, and to supply The wants of all that did for mercy cry. If then true Vertue ever dwelt on Earth, 'Twas here enshrined too with Beauty's worth. The Universe intitl'd her the Fair, Whose Charms no Cynick could unconquer'd bear. But now (alas) she like the beauteous Rose Doth fall, and fade, when furious Auster blows.
Thus when with Ruddy Wings the Morning ray Seems proud to usher in the new-born day; Then on a sudden an untimely night O'reclouds and darkens the new-blossom'd light: But were Aurora's smiles but half so fair As hers, the Clouds would have vouchsaf'd to spare. How hard's then Fate! that summoned away, Without remorse, this fairest Flow'r of May, To whom Posterity shall pay respects; Because the best Example of her Sex.
An Elegie on the Death of the Right Honourable John Lord Coventry. LET Europe's Confines flow with streaming tears, Let deep-fetcht sighs now pierce the sable Spheres. Weep, mourn, deplore, and let your Eyes now flow, Till ye (like Niobe) do Marble grow. The fatal influence that doth rule this day, Doth summon grief, commands our Eyes to pay Tears, as just Tribute: Nature doth assume New dismal shapes, which do portend our doom: Each object clad in Fates black Livery, Doth (Comet-like) some dire event descry. The Heav'n being veil'd with Clouds in mourn∣ing goes, The gloomy day Nights dark resemblance shows. Our Guardian-Angels flutt'ring in the air, Start back, as tho' they would remit their care; Each dreading Fate with murm'ring sighs condoles, And vents fond passion which doth shake the Poles. Th' etherial crew with doleful shrieks bemoans Our horrid Fate, and panting Atlas groans. Poor Echo's broken Voice doth iterate (Thus grief surprizes Speech!) O Fate! O Fate! Each Zone her pearly show'rs of tears distills, And sympathizing doth lament our ills.
Our Mother Earth too a chief Mourner proves, Her pious grief since Natures instinct moves. But what's the cause of these Effects? What strange Chimaera's Heaven's Face and Earths thus change? Our Play's sure Tragical, our Scene is sad, And the Catastrophe's exceeding bad. The whistling Winds with a faint whisper seem T'infuse into my Ears a just esteem Of grief; they prompt, that the great Coventry Conquer'd by Fates too hasty hand doth ly. (Alas!) Too true; He's dead, he's dead, and gone; Now all our hopes dy too; so good a one We ne're shall more enjoy; nought can repair The loss wherein we all this day do share. What recompence would Heaven's Darlings be, Since none can bear so brave a Soul as He? No Hero e're can parallel his Name, Whose Merits seiz'd the Pinnacles of Fame. He (Pharus-like) i' th' azure Skies did tow'r; Yet was not in the least puft up with pow'r. Profound Humility was the high sum, To which all his ambition e're would come. The splendent Palace of our Brittish Sun, From this bright Pillar it's sole Basis shon; Hence glorious rays our Coasts with light did gild, And quick'ning Beams great Solaces did yield. Under his Wings th' opprest a refuge found, And 's Charity (like Streams) did still abound. His only joy was to supply the wants, And gratify the Pray'rs of Supplicants. 'Twas no State-Cushion, nor a golden Ass, Whose trappings made him for Heroick pass;
But was a mighty Column of our State, Whose sacred Vertues did themselves dilate. The gilded blandishments of Court (which Souls Clog'd with this drossy World too much controuls) His noble mind (as Trifles) did neglect; Such Pamphlets Souls so great do still reject. His Sails were ne're swel'd up with flattery; But he'd discern such Plots with a quick Eye; His justice would allow no undue praise; His Merits only shou'd his Trophies raise. Heav'n him too good to live on Earth did count, Hence he (like Bird of Paradise) did mount, Maeand'ring to the Mansion up on high, Which Heav'n provided for's integrity. Just Heav'n! For the blest Throne, he sits in now, Before he seiz'd, he did acquire below. So falls this Pharaoh's Tow'r, our Ages cost, I' th' dust so this Ephesian Temple's tost! Whose great renowned Fame shall never dy, But prove the Mirror of Eternity. But oh our Fate! Why did'st (Dear Saint) so soon Turn from our Eyes thy Morning Beams to Noon? We now (like Hermites) live all desolate, Depriv'd of thee, we 've lost our happy State. (Like Adam when expell'd from Paradise) We rove in Desarts, and can find no bliss. We (like Heraclitus) do nought but mourn, And water with our tears thy silent Urn: But oh that hence we (Phoenix-like) could bring Out of thy ashes a new Soul to spring, Whose Numen might triumph o're conquer'd Fate, And all our fading Joys refuscitate.
But (ah!) how vain's our wish? Death's fatal stroke (When once is giv'n) we never can revoke. O cruel Fate! Could'st thou not pitch thy Toyl For other preys? Must thy black doom assail This starry Sphere? Do not ten thousand ly, Who fondly court their Fate, yet cannot dy? Than him we might a Myriad better spare, Whose breath and name (like bubbles in the air) Might vanish, and the World yet feel no wo: He was our Phosphore, and Palladium too. His worth whole Millions did preponderate; Hence he so soon was struck by envious Fate. So that if any one would sphere on high, Transcending all, he must resolve to dy; For (Herriot-like) Fate loves to seize the best; She takes them first, to mend she leaves the rest. Now in what Eulogies my Muse doth faint, And can't express thy worth, pardon (Dear Saint!) Pardon I beg; In matters so sublime To be deficient may not seem a crime: But where my Pen enough can't celebrate, Let Fame's shrill Trump the rest ebuccinate.
An Elegie on the Death of his Grace the Duke of Ormond deceas'd, July the 20th 1688. WHen Heav'n's bright Orb withdraws his ruddy Face, And Nights black Scene invades the World apace, How do the Persians veil their streaming Eyes, And still emplore their flying God with cries. So when our radiant Earthly Stars do fall, Their horrid Fate lamented is by all, Whose stony hearts are not enmarbl'd round, And where a place for pity may be found. Thus all now mourn, cause the great Ormond's dead, Ormond, with whom now all our joys are fled. Ah Tragic Scene! Tears sparkle in our Eyes, And with sad groans we all do sympathize. The Marble melts through grief; The Rocks rebound, And from all Coasts most doleful shrieks resound. The Court (which sparkling Jewels did adorn) In Sables is now drest, in blacks doth mourn; Whilst all the Great Ones Eyes do silent weep, Which manifests their sorrow's the more deep: Nor is it e're to be compris'd in Verse, How many Mourners did pursue his Herse. But should we all our Tribute-tears now pay Equal to's worth, and our own loss this day,
The Strand would (like the Thames) with Water flow, And ev'ry street would a deep River grow. White-Hall would feed the streams with new supplies, And to make Waves would vent out deep-fetcht sighs. Since he from noble Veins deriv'd his Blood, He by great acts his Pedigree made good. (If Loyalty on Earth hath now esteem) It's Magazine was situate in him. No greater loss could on our State befal, He was the great Palladium of all. His sacred Vertue did transcend each Sphere, He dwelt in Heaven when he sojourn'd here. No Pride, no Pomp, nor praise puft up his Soul; 'Twas Zeal that wing'd him to the Starry Pole. Humility her Darling might him call; So ready he would condescend to all. If Honour then and Vertue e're in One Conjoin'd, he was that Heav'nly One alone.
Divine Poems AND HYMNS.
Divine Poems AND HYMNS. A Penitential Hymn. 1. AWake, Awake, my drowsy Soul! How long wilt sleep secure? Shall nothing, nothing thee controul? Dost rest? Oh! this is pure, When Hell for thee doth gape her thirsty jaws, And Satan threatens with his angry Paws. 2. Break forth my Breast in sudden cries, Prevent th' approaching woes! Rouze (alas!) rouze my slumb'ring Eyes! Will ye for ever close? Ah! Gush forth tears, deplore those fruitless ways, Wherein I foolish spent my former days.
3. The dying Tree doth now revive; And I, forsaking Death, Do now begin to seem alive, And draw my wav'ring breath. I'll triumph now, and drown my crimes in tears; I'll trust in God, and cast off Hellish fears. 4. Begon (O works of darkness!) fly, No more I'll call you mine; I now shake off sin's Lethargy, And am (O Lord!) all thine. O guide me therefore in these steps to thee, And grant, that I thy Servant still may be.
A Spiritual Hymn. 1. O Greatest God! O Highest Pow'r! Mercy afford (O mighty Lord!) Who dwell'st in the Coelestial Tow'r. 2. The Heav'n, The Earth doth thee obey; Thou calm'st the Waves; Thou free'st sin's Slaves; O're all things thou dost bear the sway. 3. O cleanse me from Sin's Leprosie! O purge my heart, And ev'ry part! Let me no more sin's Vassal be. 4. O wash, O wash away each spot! Let not one stain In me remain; And all my former Crimes out blot.
5. My Soul (O Lord!) create anew, And pure like thee, O let it be! That I thy wond'rous works may shew. 6. In thee (my God!) I'll put my trust, I'll serve thee still, And fear none ill, Let envious Satan do his worst. 7. My God! My God! I'll spread thy Fame, I'll sing always Hallelujahs, And will for ever praise thy Name.
Penitence. PUT on (O Muse!) a penitential hue, And with Castalian drops thy Face bedew; That with a weeping show'r of mournful Verse, I may the praise of penitence rehearse. Welcome, O pleasing Legacy of tears! Welcome, deep sighs, which pierce the Heav'nly Spheres. A contrite heart is Heav'n's best Sacrifice, Acceptable'st in great Jehovah's Eyes. The Cordial of Repentance doth revive Our Souls being dead in sin, tho' seem alive. The groans of Converts open Heaven's Gate, And do provide for them a happy State. Thus pious David (tho' had gone astray) Did Heaven's wrath by's penitence allay: And as his sins were great when he rebell'd 'Gainst God, so he in penitence excell'd. 'Tis this, that doth our drossy Souls refine, And makes us in pure innocence to shine. No Man's own Merits can him ever save, 'Less he for Christ with penitence doth crave. Thou must with trembling, and with careful fear (O Man!) thy own Salvation work out here. Since none (alas!) can prove so innocent, Who may not for's repeated Crimes repent.
Whilst still we swell the number of our sins, And ev'ry day a new addition brings. The best of men in frequent errors fall, And can't preserve themselves scot-free from all The tempting lures of sin; But forc'd to yield, Do beat it off again with Christian Shield. But grant we could persist without a fault, And ne're from sacred Righteousness revolt; We all did in Sin's Leprosie begin Our Lives, and from our Parents drew the Sin, Which we must wash, and purge away with tears Of Penitence, which guilty Souls still clears, Or else we can't unspotted Garments keep, Nor please our Lord, the Shepherd of his Sheep: Turn then, O turn to God, repent your Crimes, That Christ may own you in the latter times.
A Hymn of Confession. 1. GOod God! In what an everlasting gire My black and loathsome sins go round; They pass the num'rous Sands o' th' shore, Nor are the Stars of Heaven more. Yet still encrease, they more abound, And ev'ry day doth raise the number higher. 2. Oh! Rouze my sleepy Soul! A stronger guard Thy watchful Enemies require. Still stand prepared with thy arms T' oppose the Devil, and his Charms: And when thy subtle Foe creeps nigher, Strait with the Shield of Faith his force retard. 3. How long wilt thou th' Aegyptian darkness love? How long intend'st to live secure? How long the light of Goshan spurn? Wilt from thy obscure ways ne're turn? How can'st such Labyrinths endure, Where light ly's hid, and thou i'th' dark dost rove?
4. With speed prevent this steep descent of Hell; This Precipice tread on no more; Climb up again, repent thy fall, And for God's boundless mercy call; Then He'll forgive thy sins before, And Satan's future onsets will repel.
Another. 1. TOo long (O Lord!) for Earthly Vanities I've been a Candidate; 'Twas worse than Hell, or fate To live reserv'd for Heav'n, and leave my toys; With magick charms they tic'd me on, Obscuring their delusion. 2. Those Circe's-Cups, Those Syren-Songs of sin Allur'd my Soul away, Pleasing when they'd destroy; But now (kind Heav'n!) their betray'd Snares begin To shew a treach'rous Scene of woes, The precipice of my repose. 3. Good God! What trifles did my Soul pursue! On what weak grounds I stood! Bubbles, or worse I woo'd; Fate, Death, and Hell, these pleasures would ensue; Dead in sin, charm'd with toys, no care For an Immortal Life I'd spare.
4. (O mighty Lord!) in what prepost'rous ways Was my blind Soul then lead! Bow down, Bow down my head! Bend, Bend my Knees! Implore my hands! Thy praise My Tongue sing forth, and mercy crave, Mercy, which doth poor peccants save. 5. I now (O Lord!) divorce those blandishments, That thus to sin entice; Away, begone, black Vice! My purged Breast no more shall prove your Tents. To thee (great God!) my Heart doth soar, Guide then, that it relapse no more.
My PRAYER. MY God! My God! who dwel'st in Heav'n above, And yet vouchsaf'st to us poor Worms thy love, Accept, Accept a truly contrite heart, And to my early Pray'rs thy Ears impart: Prevent (O Lord!) prevent my sinful ways, And turn my heart from all these Earthly toys; Direct, direct my sliding steps to thee, And still preserve me from sin's Lethargie. O purge my Soul, and the Old Man divorce! Guard me with Angels, and damp Satan's force. Let me (O Lord!) no more sin's Vassal be; But keep me from Satan's temptations free. To Faith and Righteousness my heart incline; And let thy dictates still my will confine: So that, when I have led a godly Life, And well have finished my Warlike strife, And thou (O Lord!) art pleas'd to call away My Soul to thee, to tast of Heav'nly Joy, I may it cheerfully to thee restore, And joyfully to thy Tribunal soar, Where I through Christ may absolution have, And through thy mercy Crowns of glory crave; There with thy Choirs of Angels sing always Praises to thee; until the latter days, When Heav'n and Earth shall in confusion ly, And Christ shall come in his bright Majesty;
And in Jehoshaphat Assizes keep; When the last Trump shall rowze all those that sleep, And Summon in all Nations to appear, In Judgment their last Sentence now to hear; Where all to give a strict account must come, Some to receive their Bliss, and some their doom. Then, then let me (O God!) on thy right hand Amongst th' Elected Saints in glory stand; And when each Judgment's giv'n, take me with thee, Enjoying thy bright presence still to be.
Vale Musis. 1. FArewel, ye fair Inspirers of Man's Soul! Farewel, O sacred Muse, Adieu, Adieu. Tho' I could rather choose To dwell with you, Did Heav'n by Contra's not my will controul. 2. To Law I'm call'd; Then must I not obey What Heav'n for me ordains? Let Fancy fret Confin'd in golden Chains; No more I'll treat My fruitless Muse, at best a pleasing toy. FINIS.
