T184 11945001 51313
AN ELEGY IN MEMORY OF THE Much Esteemed and truly Worthy Ralph Marshall, Esq One of His Majesty's Justices of Peace, &c. By N. TATE, Servant to His MAJESTY. Dignum Laude Virum Musa vetat Mori.Hor. LONDON: Printed by R. ROBERTS for the Author. MDCC.
TO THE READER. ALL that knew this Worthy Person, will see that I have endeavoured to Write his Elegy in the same honest Plainess and Sincerity with which He Liv'd. I confess I was more con∣cern'd for Resemblance, in this Piece, than for Fine∣ness of Strokes, or Embellishment of Colours. If the Features are hit, it will be acceptable to his Friends, for whose Consolation it was Design'd. I must here beg leave to mention one Circumstance, that is, His In∣tended Retirement from Affairs of This World, that He might devote Himself, Intirely, to the Concerns of a Better: Whither it has pleas'd Provi∣dence to call him sooner than Expected by his Survi∣vers, the Only Sufferers by his Removal. All the Reprisal we can make upon our Loss, is (for the Benefit of our Selves and Posterity) to Celebrate the Memory of his Exemplary Virtues: And an Epicede That does any Iustice to His Character, will be the most lasting Monument that can be made for Him.
ELEGY ON Mr. Justice Marshall. O Can such Worth and Virtue be Expir'd, (By All Lamented, as by All Admir'd), And Muses, whose Complaints should be most Loud, Mute Mourners stand amongst the sighing Crowd? All Rites perform'd, that to his Hearse belong, And no kind Bard provide the Funeral Song? How can they sing, whose Wit and Fancy's fled To fetch th' Arabian Phoenix Spicy Bed; And of their Treasure Eastern Climes beguile, To crown his Urn, and deck the Fun'ral Pile.
Mistaken Zeal! let Wit and Fancy rest; And Truth be Only for this Service prest: Unblemish'd Truth, that made his Actions shine, And grac'd his Life, will best Adorn his Shrine. Erect a Pyramid; no Lesser Tomb Can for his Merit's History have Room; That done—Invoke no Muse, but Only Write What Mem'ry, not Invention, shall Indite. HEre MARSHAL lies, whom English Virtue crown'd; Ev'n such as our Great Ancestors renown'd. Which, if esteem'd so Gen'rous and Sublime, When 'twas the Mode and Practice of the Time; O what was His! that Nobly did engage Against a Lewd and most Degen'rate Age; And (as of Iordan's Sacred Stream 'tis said) Through a Dead Sea of Vice her Current led Clear and Untainted, as the Fountain's Head. What Numbers can his Character relate, Or as a Member of the Church or State? Who though to Each a most devoted Friend, Wou'd Neither's Rights, in t'Other's Wrong extend; But justly render'd, as he Wisely knew, The Church's, Caesar's, and his Country's Due.
To Books no Stranger; Books that were of Use He read, and into Practice did reduce: Studied to know what Sages understood; Yet less he studi'd to be Skill'd than Good. His Judgment, though discerning and sublime, Disdain'd not to consult with Care and Time: This render'd his Performances so vast; Nor only great, but model'd Long to Last; And, by Deliberation made secure, The utmost Test of Censure will endure. Regard to Others Sentiments he paid, Yet still by Reason, not Opinion, sway'd; Held to old Custom's venerable Way, Till That from Truth's more Sacred Path did stray. Firm in Resolves, because with Caution wrought, The last Results of well-digested Thought. A Mind thus furnish'd, to compleat its Store, Could want or wish but One choice Blessing more; Which, happy Temper did to Him dispense, (The Gift at once of Nature and right Sense); That Others Weakness He did ne'er despise, Who was Himself the Wonder of the Wise.
His Conversation by strict Prudence steer'd, In which no Shadow of Offence appear'd; But of Demeanor the just Pattern gave; Discreet in Mirth; without Moroseness, Grave. Reserv'd, yet never fail'd in due Respect; Shew'd Courtesy to All, to None Neglect: Poor Honesty, Above its Rank, would treat; Yet ne'er was known to fawn upon the Great. For Piety None cou'd have more Esteem; Yet Pious rather strove to Be, than seem: Sincere as Saints; and, like true Saints, took Care To give Religion a Becoming Air. Nor thought it just or gen'rous to affright The World with That which was his own Delight. Not fierce the Zeal that did his Breast inspire; Though bright, and lasting, as the Vestal Fire: Secret like That—Yet, when from Human View 'Twas most Retir'd, descending Angels drew. To Bus'ness none more vig'rously appli'd; Yet with such easy Passage seem'd to glide, As if he always sail'd with Wind and Tide. Cross Gales must oft in Seas of Bus'ness rise; Cross Currents in each vaster Enterprize:
Yet, when perplex'd, a painful Course he steer'd, Freedom and Pleasure in his Looks appear'd. When Tempests rose, and Ruin was in View, When All, despairing, from the Helm withdrew, His Resolution with the Danger grew; Perform'd a Pilot's part of Pains and Skill, And left the Rest to Providence's Will. Those very Passions that our Peace molest, Supported the Calm Empire of his Breast; And, tam'd to Discipline, did only move By Duty's Call, and Orders from Above. Blest Temper, that, through Life's uncertain Scene, Could shun Extremes, and keep the Golden Mean; With modest Joy receive what chanc'd to Please; And to Affliction give an Air of Ease! His Counsels we like Gems did justly prize; Yet Oh how gen'rously would he Advise! Or if Occasion did Assistance crave, His Pains as free as his Advice he gave: And if Advice and Pains would not prevail, He cast his Int'rest in, to turn the Scale. Like a Warm Sun he dealt his Beams around; And Men of all Degrees his Influence found.
O Comfort, where such Warmth and Light were met! O Grief, that ever such a Sun should set! Wealth, for Wealth's sake, he never did pursue, But for the Good well-manag'd Wealth could do: Commanding That which sordid Souls Obey'd, The Miser's God his useful Servant made. Rich in Contentment with his mod'rate Gains, He reap'd the Harvest of his honest Pains; Nor envi'd Larger Fields, by Fraud procur'd, And with Extortion's poyson'd Dung Manur'd. His Justice would (should Fame his Justice tell) Be Disbeliev'd—or thought a Miracle. 'Twas such as Artless Innocence inspir'd, Before Astraea from the World retir'd: When ev'ry Soil produc'd her Grain, Untill'd, And Honey-Drops from ev'ry Tree distill'd: When Angels had of Mortals little Odds; Earth seem'd a Heav'n, and Men a Race of Gods. But One Celestial Flow'r is wanting yet, The Garland of his Virtues to compleat: His Charity—Still loath to come in View, As heretofore she modestly withdrew From the World's Eye; and fell like Midnight Dew.
Whene'er a Publick Visit she did make, 'Twas not for Pomp, but good Example's sake: To clam'rous Want more sparingly she gave; But Went to such as could not Come to Crave; Stole, to Domestick Poverty, her Way, That Sick and Gasping in Obsourement lay: Distress of ev'ry kind employ'd her Care, But modest Mis'ry had the Largest Share. From hence the vast Success we understand Of ev'ry Work that MARSHAL took in Hand. What could he not, with Prudence for his Guide, And Providence, in secret League Alli'd? Where will the Chain of his just Praises end, Should Fame as far her Elogy extend? Where shall she Write— The Husband, Father, Master, and the Friend? Happy the Realm where Government's maintain'd Like that which in his private Houshold reign'd; The Mansion, where, as in some Patriarch's Tent, Peace, Piety, and Angels did frequent. Yes—There so long they made their Residence, Till They, in kind Surprizal, bore him Thence.
They watch'd their Time to make Him now their Guest, And gently stole Him to Eternal Rest. Few Months had his long-wish'd Retirement giv'n, Which is on Earth, the nearest Stage to Heav'n; But Heav'n, as if Impatient of Delay, Sent down to meet th' Elijah on his Way. FINIS.
