T3181 09432067 43077
THE Good House-wife MADE A Doctor, Or, Health's Choice and  Friend Being a Plain Way of Nature's own prescribing, to Prevent and Cure Most Diseases incident to Men, Wo∣men and Children, by Diet and Kitchin-Physick only. With some Remarks on the Practice of Physick and Chymistry. By Thomas Tryon, Student in Physick; And Author of The Way to Health, Long Life and Hap∣piness. Country-mans Companion. The New Art of Brewing, &c. The Second Edition. To which is added some Observations on the Tedious Methods of Un∣skilful Chyrurgions; with Cheep and Easie Remedies. By the same Author. London, Printed for H. N. and T. S. And are to be Sold by Randal Taylor, near Stationers-Hall, 1692.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. HEalth is the greatest temporal Blessing we can enjoy in this Mortal state: Without it the choicest Beauty vanishes in a Moment, like a withered Flower; the stoutest Strength dwindles into a childish Weakness, scarce able to support the tottering Carkass; Riches become insignificant Lumber; Honour an empty Bubble, or extrinsick Shadow, yielding no delight; Nay Wit and Parts grow Vseless, and Life it self but an unwelcome load and continual Torture. For how often may we see Lords and Aldermen, the Rich and
the Great, swell'd with Dropsies, or wasted with Consumptions, or rack't with the Stone, or laid up with the Gout, or crippled with Sci∣atica's, and the like, heartily envy∣ing those Jolley Swains, who feed only▪ with Bread and Cheese, and trotting up to the Knees in Dirt, do yet with lusty Limbs, and vigorous Stomachs, and merry Hearts, and undisturbed Heads, whistle out more sollid Joys than the others, with all their Wealth and State can purchase. So that 'tis undeniably one of the most important Businesses of this Life, to preserve our selves in Health. And this all People, when they are actually groaning under the smart of Sickness, will readily ac∣knowledge. Oh! then they would give all they have in the World for Ease and Remedy, though it be but an Ague, or a fit of the Tooth-Ach!
but as soon as the Pain is over, and whilst Nature is yet pretty sturdy, and as long as ever she can bear up, they care not how they use her, and seem to value this precious Iewel [Health] no more than the silly In∣dians of old did their Wealth, when they contentedly parted with Gold and Pearl, for Toys, and Baubles, and Knives, and Beaugles, and Looking-Glasses. Most men will moil and toil like Horses, and rise early and lie down late, and eat the Bread of Carefulness, to get Money and Land, though they neither make good use thereof themselves whilst they live, nor know who shall enjoy it after they are dead▪ And how dili∣gent are others by fawning and flat∣tering, and courting those whom in their hearts they hate and scorn, and by servile Offices and irksome At∣tendances, and a thousand other pittiful Arts, to acquire a Rattle to
their Name, and get a Title of Ho∣nour, or some Place of Preferment that may give them an opportu∣nity▪ to domineer over their Infe∣riors, but there is scarce one Man or Woman of a thousand that does in earnest consider and pursue the means of preserving their Health, but ei∣ther lives at Random, or at least takes up with the pernicious Notions of Custom, Tradition and Blind Guides, whose Prescriptions of Diet are most improper and prejudicial, their Medicines Nauseates to Na∣ture, and their Physick a close Con∣federate with the invaing Disease. Nay, so prodigal are the gene∣rality of this insteeamble Blessing, that they use it not only with Neg∣lect, but Contempt, as if they ex∣posed it to sale by Ich of Candle, and he that bid least should have it. Rather than ot gratifie a liquorish Palate, the Stomach shall be over∣charg'd;
and rather than break up a foolish lewd Company, or refuse to comply with a wicked Drunken Custom, the Brain shall be set a-float, and Rea∣son turn'd a-drift, and Nature ex∣posed to a general Inundation of vi∣olent strong Liquor, and left to shift for her self, without either Pilot or Rudder. I am confident most Peo∣ple are more careful to provide whol∣som proper Food for their Cattel, and Gentleen are more curious in order∣ing and dieting their Race-Horses (though therein too they are generally mistaken, as I have demonstrated in a little Treatse, entituled, The Country-man's Companion) than in the Food which they take them∣selves, or about the course of their own Eating, Drinking and Exercises, whereon not only their own Health and Lives, but the strength and vi∣gour of their Posterity, does in so great a measure depend.
The Meats and Drinks commonly used are for the most part impro∣per, and detrimental in their Na∣ture and Composition, more in their unskilful ways of Prepara∣tion, and most of all by the Hetero∣genious Mixtures, and excessive Quantities. And this more espe∣cially to those that are already sick and languishing. Having therefore in this small Treatise resolved to detect those Errors in all three re∣spects, and the Reasons thereof: And on the other sie, to shew the true Method of Diet fit for the Preven∣tion or Cure of most Diseases, in∣termixing therewith several most useful and necessary Remarques touch∣ing the Nature, and right ways of preparing of divers sorts of the most beneficial Foods, I shall begin with those that best serve for the Assisting and Restoring of decay'd Nature, because I have therein observed both
the most common and the most dan∣gerous and irretreivable Errors to be committed; as also because from what we shall deliver on that subject, every one that has the Wit to know by a Penny how a Shilling is coyned, may learn what Diet is proper to b used both for the Preventing and Curing of most other Distempers. For Nature, like Truth, is always intire, uniform and agreeable to its self, so that whoeve has the right Key, may therewith unlock her whole Cabinet; whereas the blind Paths of Tradition, Ignorance, Custo and Error, are not only various and in∣terferring, but many times opposite and contradictory to each other.
The Contents. Chap. I. OF the several Causes of Consumptions, page 1, 2, 3, 4. The absurd Course of Diet usually oraerd in those cases, p. 5, 6, 7. And the proper Remedies for prevention and Cure of those decays of Nature, p. 8, 9. Other preposterous Courses prescribed by learned Doctors, Chymists, &c. for Cure of Consump∣tions, p. 20, 21, 22. Chap. II. The Nature of Milk, and the best ways of preparing and Cooking it, p. 25. How Milk ought to be eaten entire, p. 26, 27. An Excellent way of prepring Milk with Wheat-Flower, p. 28. Another way of preparing Milk with Water, Oatmeal and Eggs, p. 29, 30. Of Furmety, p. 33. Of Boniclapper, its nature and operation, p. 34. Chap. III. Of Water-Gruel, p. 39, 40. What it is that causes Butter made in Winter to have a bitter Taste, p. 42, 43. Another excellent healthy Food for all sorts of People, p. 45, 46. Chap. IV. Of Flesh Broths, p. 49. Chap. V. Of Fumery. p. 56. Chap. VI. Of the seval sorts of Bread, and which is best, especially for sickly People, p. 61. Chap. VII. Of Butter, its Nature, and how best to be eaten, p. 68.
Chap. VIII. Of Cheese, p. 71. Chap. IX. Of the best sort of Puddens, and the contrary, p. 74. Chap. X. Of Eggs, their Nature, and the best way of dressing and eating them, p. 80. Chap. XI. Of Pyes, &c. p. 83. Chap. XII. Of Raiins of the Sun, p. 93. Chap. XIII. Of Currants, p. 96. Chap. XIV. Of Spices, viz. Cloves, Mace, Nut∣megs, Cinnamon, Ginger, Pomento, &c. their Nature and Operation, p. 101. Chap. XV. Of Oyl, and its Nature, p. 115. Chap. XVI. Of Honey, its Nature and Operation, with some Notes on the Practice of Chymistry, p. 118. Chap. XVII. Of Sugar Sugar-Candy and Pan-Sugar, their Nature and Operation, p. 137. To prevent and Cure Colds certainly, p. 148. Chap. XVIII. Of the four principal Tastes, or th Bitter, the Saltish, the Sour, and the Sweet Qualities, and their respective Natures, p. 157. Chap. XIX. Of Drinks, and first of Canary, p. 170. Chap. XX. Of Sherry, p. 179. Chap. XXI. Of White-Wine, p. 180. Chap. XXII. Of Rheis-Wine, p. 185. Chap. XXIII. Of Claret, p. 188. Chap. XXIV. Of Cyder, its Nature and Ope∣ration; and several new ways prescribed how make good Syder, p. 195. Chap. XXV. Of Mum, its Nature, p. 205. Chap. XXVI. Of Coffee, p. 207. Chap. XXVII. Of Tea, p. 215.
Chap. XXVIII. Of Herbs and Sallads, both boyl∣ed and raw, p. 217. What Herbs may properly be mixed in a Salad, as also how to season and eat them to best advantage, p. 219. Sallads for the Winter, p. 223. Of the most proper times for eating of Sallads, p. 225▪ ow to supply the want of Oyl in Sallads where Persons do not love it, or can't have it, p. 227. Chap XXIX. The best way to make Herb-Pottage, not only in the Spring, but also at all times of the year, p. 229. Chap. XXX. The best way to make Diet-Drink with Herbs, Grains, Seeds, &c. or the proper methods of Infusion of Herbs in Beer, Ale, or other Drinks, p. 235. Chap. XXXI. Of Salt, its Nature and Vpera∣tion, p. 241: Chap. XXXII. Of the Scurvey, and its Gene∣ration, p. 253. Rules and Derections to prevent th Scurvey, p. 260. An Excellent Poul which cures Burns, Scalded Limbs, Boyls, Fellons, Tumors, &c. p. 271. Another, &c. ibid▪ Another, &c. p. 272. Another, &c. ibid. Another, &c. ibid. Another, &c. ibid. Observations on the tedious ethods of unskilful Chyrurgions, &c. p. 274. The Coclusion.
EVERY Good House-wife MADE A Doctor, &c. CHAP. I. Of the several Causes of Consump∣tions: The absurd course of Diet usually ordered in those cses. To∣gether with the proper Redies for Prevention and Cure there∣of. OF all Diseases, Consmptions, and the like wasting Distmprs, are those which hitherto ave been most attempted to be cured by Diet, but after such an unatural and
preposterous Method, that those very Rich and chargeable Foods which gene∣rally are by the learned prescribed in such cases, are apt, instead of bring∣ing Relief, to encrease the Disease, more impare the Powers of Nature, and hasten on Death, rather than a Cure: This, I doubt not, will appear to every considerate Reader, from the following Discourse, wherein I shall first give an account of the common Causes (or occasions) of those Diseases, and in the next place inform my Coun∣try-People of the proper Remedies for the same, by Foods fitly prepared and adapted for the supply and assist∣ance of Nature in all such Languish∣ments; withal, shewing how impro∣per and mischievous those things are which be commonly used and prescri∣bed for that purpose. Those Diseases called Consumptions are Decays of the Radical Moisture or Essential Oyl, whereby the Natural Heat of the Stomach is so weakned that it cannot make any perfect or due sepa∣ration of the Meats and Drinks recei∣ved, from whence arises abundance of evil Juices and Phlegm, so that no good
Nourishment is bred, though the Food be never so Rich, and the Drinks ne∣ver so Cordial, as most that are affli∣cted in this kind, may find by Expe∣rience. But though this be th general Na∣ture of these Diseases, yet they pro∣ceed from various Causes and Intem∣perances; As, 1. In some Complexions, from o∣vercharging of Nature with Rich Food, and too great Quantities; or in others, by much drinking of Wine, Brandy and Strong-Drinks, which weaken the Na∣tural Heat, and wash (as it were) Na∣ture away by destroying the action of the Stomach. 2. In others, these general Decay and Weaknesses are caused by a Seden∣tary and Idle course of Life, for want of proper Labour and Exercises, over∣warm Clothings, soft Father-Beds and ex∣cessive Lying in Bed, which always proves pernicious to the Health both of Bo∣dy and Mind. 3. There are others that contract these consuming Diseases by their too much Dalliance, and frequenting the Shades of Venus, and that not only by
eating and drinking such things as ir∣ritate and provoke Nature, but also by their heightned Lusts and depraved Imaginations, force her beyond her Power and Ability, who oft times cor∣rupts her in her very Radi: Many are caught in this Snare, as well Young-Marriea Pople, as the more Lewd and Lascivious, which prostitute themselves to common Mixtures; and many of these  Incureable. 4. Others fall into these Diseases by Surfeits of Oer-labur, excssive Heats or Colds, and the like Acci∣dents. 5. Some by great Feavers and long Fits of Sickness, which frequently leave behind them such Seeds of Diseases as are not without great difficulty over∣come or rooted out. 6. To some they happen through Grief or Trouble of Mind, a Melanchol∣ly Disposition, (one of the worst Com∣panions of Life) violent Passions, as of Love, Hatred and Envy, or a Dispir of Gods Divine All-sufficient and always Liberal and Indulgent Hand of Provi∣dence; and these by pining and fretting, waste their Spirits, and thence the
Natural Heat being weakned, is unable to generate a new Supply; and so having first disorder'd their Minds, the Body is destroy'd by Concomitan∣cy▪ for these two mutually operate upon, and enfluence each other, and you can hardly preserve either of them in its due state, unless you take care of both. Lastly, In not a few a Consumptive Constitution is Heredtary, and deri∣ved from one or both their Parents; and Th of all other is the most hard to Remedy. Now let us see what are the Com∣mon Methods whereby not only the Vulgar, but also the Learned many times, do think to help these Decays, and what are the usual things prescribed for the sick Party in this case, to restore him to Health and Strength? And that is, when any one is in such a weak languishing state of Body, every one, Doctor, Apothecary, Nurse and all, cry out, You must take Nourishing Meats and Drinks, sup goo Sack, Old Malago, Tent, or the like, with Yolks of Eggs in i; and get you good Rich Broths, and Jellies, and Pottages
made of Knucles of Veal, and the Flesh of an old Cock beat, and brui∣sed, and battered, and boyled all to pie∣ces; for you must boyl your Flesh till it fall off the Bones, that all the goodness and virtue may diffuse it self into the Broth; and be sure you boyl it in but little Water, that it may be the Hear∣tier; and keep your Vessel or Pot close cover'd, that the Virtue may not evapo∣rate, but your Broth may be thick, and good, and strong; for you want Strength (poor Creature!) and Nourishment, and this will cherish you bravely; toge∣ther with a Rich Cordial of Alcher∣mes that I'll send you: But forget not to keep your self warm with a Flannel Shirt, and a Wastcoat, Doublet, Coat and Campaign, a Gown over all lin'd, and a quilted Stomacher for your Breast; and have a care of Cold a Nights, but bathe your tender Nerves in a Down or soft Feather-Bed, and get a quilted Cap and a Napkin over it for your Head, and draw your Cur∣tains before your Windows and round your Bed, and there lie as long as you can; so Sleep is a great Refresher and Nourisher: And against you rise let
there be a Rouzing Fire in your Cham∣ber, and a Quart of New-Milk boyl'd above half away, with Snails in it, and well sweetned with Sugar, and then three or four hours after take a Mess, as much as you can get down, of the aforesaid Cock or Jelly-Broth, with good Spice in it; and after that you may eat a good Chicken, or some other nourishing Flesh tenderly boyled; and when you have done, take a good piece of fat toasted Cheese for Concoction, and wash all down with three or four Glasses of Racy Canary or stout Old Malago, wherein there is steeed a Quantity of Raisons of the Son ston∣ed, and a lettle Saffron to cheer the Heart; but if you do not so well like Snails, then take only Milk hot from the Cow, or Strokings, and sweeten it with Sugar or Sugar of Roses. And be sure continue this course constantly, and though you are now weak as Wa∣ter and have no more Spirits than a Dish clout, you shall shortly be as strong as Sampson, and as lusty as Hercules, who (they say) got fifty Children in one Night.—Probatum est.
This is the sum and substance of many a learned Lerry, and passes with the Crowd for most Orthodox Doctor Croft, though in truth the whole is altogether Ignorant Tattle, contrary to Nature, Reason and Experience. But lest I should seem (like those I oppose) to assert things without Proof or Demonstration, I desire the Reader would with me, impartially consider the unproperness and contrariety of these Prescriptions, to the end inten∣ded: First, In their Natur and Com∣position; and Next, in respect of the undue Preparains. 1. When Nature languishes, and is already weak and decayd then they cry, You must tak Nurishng things; when tis probable most times▪ that the first occasion of the Disease was and uprstty in Meats and Drinks, that did over charge Nature with two much Nouishnt. But howver,  be what it will, Natue is no wek and indisposed, the  dull'd, the Stomachs Na∣tural and digestive Faculty de∣cay'd, so that they cannot bear either
with great Quantity, nor Foods that are of a strong Quality which ought in the first place to be considered; for Overchaging, either in Quantity or Quality, is generally very prejudicial to those that are in Competent Health, but much more to such as are Sick; This being a most certain Aphorism, That Nature ought at all times to be stron∣ger than the Food, and not the Food too strong for Nature, as in these cases is general, but very absurdly practised; for if there be not a proportionable agreement between the Food and the Stomach, in vain do you expect Re∣lief, but rather thereby Nature is yet further oppressed, and her whole Con∣cord and Tranquility disordered and destroyed. For when-ever the Natu∣ral Heat is weak and impotent, the Food ought to be suitable: And to do otherwise, is just as if in very cold Weather, when your Fire is almost quite out, and not above a Spark or two left upon the Hearth, you should cry out, Throw  an huge imber-Log, or bring a Bsh or two of larg round Coles, for  is  best Fewel hat can be to make  Fire; which is
very true; but yet, in this case, in∣stead of encreasing your Fire, it will, by its weight and unsuitableness quite put it out; whereas if you had fed it at first with a little Small-Cole, Sha∣vings or Chips, you might have nursed it up into a competent Flame, and then, and not before, it would be able to deal with your Coles and your Tim∣ber, and turn them into Aliments for its self. The Application is easie, No∣thing does more hurt the Health than Disproportion, and to heap together Superfuity of Meats and Drinks, be∣yond the Power of the Digestive Fa∣culty, especially when they are made strong and fulsom by bad Preparations; and this respect the usual Prescriptions to Consumptive Persons are very much to be blamed. For, 2. Broths and Pottages made with a∣ny kind of Flesh, be it what it will, where 'tis boyled in small Quantities of Water, and the Vessel or ot kept close cover'd, and boyled so long till it becomes soft and a meer Mash, so that it falls from the Bones; such Broths, I say, will become thick, and of a blackish colour, or a stron unplea∣sing
scent or smell, and of a fulsom nauseating taste, hard of Concoction, and apt to cloy the Stomach; for the much, or over-boyling of any sort of Food (especially Flsh, which is of its own Nature th grossest of all Food, and most subject to Putrifaction) does destroy all the good Virtues, and so much the more speedily and certainly when it shall be boyled in small Quan∣tities of Water, and the Vessel kept cover'd; for thereby the pure volatile Spirit is suffocated, and then presently the sweet Oyl of such Food turns strong and our for want of the egress and re∣gress of the Air, which is the true Life and Preserver of the essential Spi∣rit, as the Spirit is the Life and Pre∣server of the sweet Body in every thing, and in whatsoever the Spirit suf∣fers violence, the Balsaick Body and Oyl is turned into a strong fulsom sub∣stance as is manifested by all fermen∣ted Liquors, which if exposed to the open Air, the Spirits will evaporate, and then the sweetness thereof turns sower, and becomes of an heavy dull Nature and Operation. But in the pre∣paration o a gross phlegmy Bodies,
especially Flesh, the Vessel being open, and having good Water▪ with the free Influences of the Air, keeps the Spi∣rits living, till such Bodies be digested, and the Spirits set at liberty; and then such thing is said to be enough, or rightly prepared: For if such Pre∣parations or Digestions be afterwards continued, the spirituous parts and brisk lively Tinctures become either suffocated or evaporated, let the thing be of what Nature it will; as is mani∣fest in all Preparations, especially in making of Hay, for there, when once the gross phlegmatick Body of the Grass is sufficiently digested or exha∣led by the virtue and power of the Sun and Elements, if the Hay be afterwards continued open abroad, the Sun and Air would quickly exhale and destroy the essential Virtues and good Proper∣ties also; the very same is to be un∣derstood in the Preparation of all sorts of Food Furthermore, if the Vessel in which your Food is prepared▪ be close cove∣red whilst it is boyling, such Food is thereby made yet worse; for then those ery sulphurous Fumes▪ and Vapours
which are raised by the Fire, and would freely pass away, as you see in a migh∣ty continual Reek or Steem, if the Vessel were uncovered, are stopt and forced back into the Meat, and being of a fiery sharp Nature, and full of gross Humidity, by this Reprcussion or Coninement, they become gradually more intense and raging, because of the want of the free Influence of the Air, and so sinking down again upon the Meat, do wound the pure volatile Spirits, and not only destroy the na∣tural Colour, Smell and Taste, but also make the Food Lumpish, close, hea∣vy, dull and gross on the Palate, hard of Digestion in the Stomach, genera∣ting thick Blood and unwholsom Nour∣ishment; from whence proceed dull In∣dispositions, and noxious Fumes flying up into the Head. For all Cooks and Husewives ought to note and understand, that the dige∣stive Faculty and true Virtue of all Food does consist in the pure spiritu∣ous parts, and if any violence be offe∣red or done unto them in the Prepa∣ration, hen such Food becomes dull, and as it were half dead of Taste;
for the Fumes or Vapours which Pots and Vessel, surrounded with the heat of the Fire, do send forth, are of a poysonous pernicious Nature, and con∣trary to the genuine heat of the Food; as you may perceive, if you take up a∣ny sort of Food, when boyled, and presently whilst it is hot, cover it close, which will force those fiery sharp Fumes back, and cause them to re-enter the Food, which will thereby presently be∣come Pall'd, and lose its natural brisk∣ness of Taste, Smell and Colour, be∣cause the pure Spirits are suffocated, and so such Foods will not only be hea∣vy, and have a dull gross Taste and Smell, but shall be unpleasing both to the Pallate and Stomach, and harder of Concoction. Therefore nothing is more unnatu∣ral than for People to eat or drink a∣ny kind of Food, whilst those fiery Steams and Fumes are in it, especially such as are weakly Consumptive People; for they Swell the Body, and generate Wind in abundance, send Fumes and Va∣pours into the Hed, infect the hole Mass of Blood with hot sharp Itching Scorbutick Humors: And indeed no sort
of Food or Liquors ought to be eaten or drank hotter than the Blood in cold Weather, but in hot Seasons most sorts are best cold, which a little use will make very easie and familiar to every one, let their Stomachs be ne∣ver so much depraved by Custom, as I have more at large demonstrated in my Way to Health, long Life & Happiness, &c. What hath been said of thick strong over-prepared Pottags and Broths made of Flesh, the very same ill effects have all or most Iellies; for by their impro∣per Mixtures and over preparing they became loathsome, and Nauseates to Nature, even as sick as the languishing Patient that takes them: And the like also may be understood of Snails and Milk boyled till it becomes of a Iellous substance, and then lustily sweetned with Sugar or Sugar of Roses (which is ten times worse than common Sugar) being burthensom to the sick Patients Pallate and Stomach, very heavy and hard of Concoction, and therefore the use thereof does generally prove of e∣vil Consequence; for undoubtedly if Heathy People should confine them∣selves to such tngs, they would in a
little time bring Disorders upon them, and how profitable they can be then to the sick and weak, or rather how ve∣ry destructive they must needs prove, may easily be judged. But here some will say, Many have been known to recover by or after the eating and drinking of such things.—To which I Answer, That it can never be proved, but is absurd to Reason, that they recover'd By such things, but that some may have recovered After them, may be true; for tho' I know them to be improper and dangerous, yet I do not say they are Mortal to all that take them; and if an hundred People be at one time sick of the same Disease, if they had neither Dctor's Advice nor Physick, there would (no doubt) many of them recover▪ but amongst the Ig∣norant, when any one happens to es∣cape they attribute the Glory to the Doctor and his Iscriptions, never con∣sidering the Divine Hand of the Lord, nor the secret working Power of his Hand maid atue, but cry with open Mouth Such or such a Doctor cured me, or ese I had been i my ; Or such a Pottage or ehy is a rar thig, it cured me
when all hopes of Life were past; when in truth neither the Doctor's Prattle, nor the Nauseous Slip-slop contributed any more to the Cure, than the Chattering of a Magpye, or the Roe of a Red Herring. But if the People will be cheated, let em; only give me leave to whisper a litter better Advice to the Sons and Daughters of Wisdom, who will be so thankful to Truth, so obedient to Rea∣son, and so kind to Themslves as to hearken unto it; And that is thus, When any Person shall find him or her self indisposed, their Stomacks to grow weak, with a general Disorder through the whole Body, and a decay of Strength, then first of all they ought to look back and consider what man∣ner or course of Life they have drove, as to Tempernce or Intmpeance in Meats or Drinks, and that both in re∣spect of the Quantity and Qualiy as also their Exrcises, and all other Ex∣treams they have inured themselves un∣to, which none can so well know, or be able to judge of as themselves; and likewise o consider the Air he hath lived in▪ where the Disease was bred. And by this Reflection, if it be impar∣tial,
serious and considerate, every man will be enabled to guess much more rightly at the Cause and Nature of his Distemper, than any Docter can by the supposed Magick of the Vrinal, Thumb∣ing the uncertain Pulse, or any other of their Whimsical Oracles. Having well considered the past Causes, that gave Birth to his present Distemperature, he ought then (gra∣dually) to Altr for the better the whole course of his Life, not only in the Na∣ture and Quality of Meats and Drinks, but in their Quantity; as also his Exer∣cises, and the Air, as far as the con∣dition of his Life will admit thereof. For if the same Intemperances, bad Airs and ill regulated Exercises, which were the first original of the Disease, (or rather Worse, as most do make it, by such strong and fulsom Preparations and contrary Mixtures, under the No∣tion of Helps and Remedies, as afore∣said) be continued, then there can be no rational hope of Cure, either by Medicine or any other way; but change of Food, Exercises and Airs do work wonders, especially when People be∣takes themselves to meer simple Meats
and Drinks that are easier of Concoction, and generate a finer and firmer Sub∣stance; for there is less danger in de∣clining strong Foods and Drinks, and using meaner, than in going from mean and simple to rich and strong▪ for this Alteration of Food, Drinks and Exercises, has power to alter, and does actually change the whole Hu∣mour and Constitution, according to the nature and simpathy of the Food, for the better or worse: And this not only manifest in the Humane Nature, but also in Beasts; for if the Food, Drinks, Air and Exercises be innocent and natural▪ then good Blood is gene∣rated, whence proceed pure fine Spirits, and the sweet Oyl or Radical Moisture burns clear and bright, and consequent∣ly the whole Disposition is airy, brisk and pleasant. And if this good state of Body hap∣pen in Beasts, as often it does, then such are of lively Dispositions, and their flesh proves tender sweet and de∣licate, and full of brisk Spirits, by reason of the plenty of which it will take Salt greedily: But on the contrary, if any sort of Cattel be fed plentifully
with Flesh (as some Creatures will eat it, as Swine▪ and the like) or with other strong Food, and kept close up that they cannot exercise their Bodys in the open Air, as Swine in Sties, and Hoses in their close hot Stables, then their Blood becomes very thick and wate∣rish and the whole Humours of their Bodies are gross tending towards ut∣rifaction, their flesh Rank, and more fulsom than such as divert themselves in open airy places▪ neither will such flesh take Salt so well, nor keep so long from . These things ought to be considered by all People, but more especially by such whose eath is already wounded by any of the aforesaid Accidents, but are too seldom thought of, either by the Learned or the common People; but presently when they find them∣selves, or their Friends, or Patients disordered, as aforesaid, they muster up all the Richest sorts of Food, and most Cordial Dinks they can think of; and to mend the matter, or rather to com∣pleat their own Tragady, they take the general Advice of some Lip-Learned Doctors, together with the no lese in∣fallible
Counsel of the good Dame and Sage Mistriss Nuse, what sorts of Meats and Drinks are most suitable to recover them out of their wasting Condition; and then (as every body is either a Fool or a Physiian) One ad∣viseth llies that are compounded of several Ingredients of disagreeing Na∣tures, and to be boyled stewed or ba∣ked so and so abundantly; Aother di∣rects As Milk, which perhaps may prove a Cure by mpath; The Third will have Cows Mink, (but for all Loves, let it be a Red ones, though you go to High-Gae for it) and Snales boyled in it; but be sure wash them well with Salt for you know Man was made of the Slime (for so I am told the Word in Hbrew signifies, rather than Dust) of the Earth; and if they should not be well scour'd, they might happen to be too like him, and do him too much Good, and so spoil the Doctor's Pra∣ctice) and when you have carefully Rin∣sed away all that's good of them, yet still to prevent any suspition of Ver∣tue from them, Boyl them stoutly to a tough thick substance, and sweeten them with Sugar till they are able to
Cloy the Stomach of an Horse; And if this will not recover the Co sumptive Creature bespeak the Sex on and the Flannel-Shroud; for there's no with∣standing of Death. But upon this, up starts a Politick paty Man-Lech, who always farts in Plush, and never strokes his Beard with∣out an Aphorisme of Hippocrates, and he cries out, Hod a Blow my Master! stop the Knll; there's Life in a Muscle: Let me tell you what you shall do, you see the poor Soul wants Flesh and good Heart∣ning things, therefore get me a dozen or two of Cock-Sparrows, a brace of Tur∣tle-Doves, taken just as they are Billing, and a parcel of Eringo-Roots, and boyl them in a Gallon of Alicant, till it is wa∣sted to a Quart, and then let him sup up Meat and Broth with a Boon Courage, and it shall make him as lusty as old Father Aeson, when he came out of the Life-re∣newing Balneo.—You prate like an old Gal∣lientical Cockscomb (says a young spruce Gallant that stood by, and affected the Title of Vertuoso I'll have a lusty Ram sent for, and first let the sick Patient have a Vein open'd, and at the same instant broach the Sheep on the Right Shoul∣der,
and by Transfusion of his Blood into the Man, you shall presently see him restored, and gow as hail ad sud as a Trout▪—But then a Chymist inter∣poses, and tells them, None of these dull stale Gallenical Devices are sufficiet, 'tis only Philosophy by Fire must do the Feat; therefore (quoth he) reach me my Crucible, and an Ounce of Aurum Potabile dissolv'd in the Yolk of a new∣laid Phaenixes Egge, with a Dram of Quicksilver, and a little of the Tincture of the Sun; let this be distilled seven days in Balneo Mariae, when Jupiter beholds Venus with a friendly Aspect, and whilst the Moon is in Leo, let the Patient take three Drops every four hours; and then I'll venture fourteen years Purchase upon his Life, though he were already as much stricken in years as old Father Parr, that out-liv'd six couple of Ravens. The serious Reader, I hope, will pardon this Mirth; for in earnest, 'tis but the effect of those Extravagan∣ces which some Pretenders to Science daily impose upon the credulous Vul∣gar; An hundred such Ridiculous Whimsies being advanced, as the Pro∣ducts of famous Skill, though they car∣ry
neither Reason, Sense nor Possiblity with them, but are meer ignorant frau∣dulent Fancies, the Authors knowing nothing (as they ought to do) of God Nature or Themselves; and by their Talk, poor silly People beig perswa∣ded, that they want Nourshment, heap up all the rich costly things they can get or think of, with which and the unnatural Preparations thereof they overload and oppress the weak Heats and Stomachs of the Sick so that they do not only continue the Diseases, but encrease them, forgetting that sure and stable Rule of Health and Temperance, That weak Heats and langishing Natures oght to have simple innocent Meats and Drinks, of a Natre proportionable. These mischievous Opinions, abo∣minable Customs and irregular Cour∣ses have much grieved me, when I have considered and consulted the innocent Ways of God in Nature, which hath moved and stirred me up to set down for a general benefit and service, Food, Drinks and Preparatins more na∣tural and agreeable to the Stomachs of sick and languishing Persons; And since Milk, and its Product and Compounds,
is one of the most excellent things i that kind, when rightly ordered, there∣fore I shall begin with That. CHAP. II. The Nature of Milk, and the best ways of Preparing and Cooking it. MILK in its own Nature is of a brave mild friendly nature and operation; for in this sublime Liquor, or rather Nectar, the Qualities of Na∣ture seems to stand in Equality, and therefore it may justly be called Con∣cord, or a thing which God and his Hand-Maid Nature hath befriended with all the good Vertues of the Ani∣mal Kingdom, having no manifest Qua∣lity that does too violently predomi∣nate, but is as well in its inward Na∣ture, as its outward Colour, the Em∣blem of Innocence, deriving that aim∣able and pleasant Candor from a Glea of the divine Light; and therefore 'tis said, The Holy Land did flow with Milk and Honey.
Tis certainly an incomparable Food, and being joyned or mixt with Bread or the Flower of Wheat, hath the first place of all Victuals, and is a Founda∣tion to all good Nourishment, there being so great an agreement in Nature between the Flower of Wheat and Milk, that when they are incorporated to∣gether, there is hardly any Food of equal Excellency, or that will gratifie Nature to that degree; for it does not only afford a brave friendly Nourish∣ment, but also of a strong firm Sub∣stance, standing nearest the Centre of VNITY, (whence is derived all Per∣fection) of any sort of Food, except Bread; and for this cause it is so much desired by Children, and the Young Ones of most other Creatures. How Milk ought to be eaten as it is entire. The best way for weak sickly Con∣sumptive People to eat Milk Raw, as they call it, or not altered, is after this manner, Take a Pint (or what quan∣tity you please) of New-Milk from the Cow, let it stand open to the Air two hours, and then skim the thick or crea∣my
my substance off the top thereof, and put it by, but the rest of the thin Milk that remains, eat with well bak'd Bread; but remember you neither Toast your Bread nor warm your Milk, except the season be cold, and then you may warm your Milk as hot as your Blood, but do not then toast your Bread, for it does it much harm; or if you please, you may eat Bisquet with your Milk, but be sure you do not eat too great aquantity at once; and some∣times it will do well to mix a little Water with your Milk, and then you may sweeten it with good White Sugar; if you make this your whole Food, you may eat thereof three times a day; for 'tis a brave sort of Diet, and will gallantly support Nature, and recover lost Strength, but then you ought to continue it for 6, 8, or 12 Months, or else you cannot prove it; for Diseases that have been several Months or Years a generating, and have crept on by de∣grees, cannot be recovered in a Mo∣ment, as some vainly and ignorantly imagin, but will require the like Gra∣duation in the Cure.
An excellent way of preparing Milk with Wheat-Flower. Take two thirds of new-Milk, af∣ter it has stood six or seven hours from the time 'tis milkt, and add threto one third part of River or Spring-Wa∣ter, set it on a quick clear fire, then take some good Wheat-Flower and tem∣per it with either Milk or Water in∣to a Batter, and when you see your Milk ready to boyl, but before it does actually boyl, put in your thickning, and stir it a litttle while, and when it is again just ready to boyl take it off, and add Bread and Salt to it, as much as you please, and remember to let it stand in the Dish or Platter you put it out into, a while to cool, but do not lade it with your Spoon, as the man∣ner is, but let it cool of it self, with∣out any such Motion, which will make it much sweeter than it will do when it is cooled with a Spoon. A good Spoonful of Flower is suffici∣ent to thicken a full Pint of Milk and Water, and so proportionably, but you may make it either thicker or thinner,
as you like it, but it is best about the thickness of ordinary Milk-Pottage, and will eat sweetest, and be easiest of Concoction. This sort of Food affords a Nourishment of a firm Substance, does neither bind nor loosen the Bo∣dy, but keeps it in good order, and breeds good Blood and fine Spirits, whence brisk and lively Dispositions proceed; this way of Preparation be∣ing much more friendly to Nature than the common way of Boyling, and the continual eating thereof will have better success, and never tire or cloy the Stomach. Another good way of ordering Milk. Take two thirds of Milk and one of Water, add what quantity of Oameal you please, or as you would have it in thickness, but inclining to thin is best, set it in your Sawce-pan on a fire that is quick and clear, and when it begins to rise or make a shew of boyling, take it off, and brew it in two Vessels or Juggs for that purpose eight or ten times to and fro, which will cause the fine Flow∣er of the Oatmeal to give it self forth,
and incorporate with the Milk; then put it again into your Sawce-pan, and set it on the Fire, and as soon as it is again ready to boyl up, take it off, and let it stand a little, if you would have it fine (for the Husky or Bran∣ny part of the Oatmeal will sink to the bottom) then add Bread and Salt, and let it stand in your Platter or Pottin∣ger till it be Blood-warm, without causing any Motion to cool it. This is an excellent sort of Pottage, very friendly and agreeable to weak Natures▪ affording a good firm Nourishment, and easie of Concoction. But if you are not satisfied that this will afford sufficient Nourishment, then you may between whiles, both in this Pottage, and also in the before-menti∣oned Flower'd Milk when you are min∣ded to regale your self with a Rich Dish, add one New-laid Egg to a Pint, or a Pint and half, after this manner, viz. when your Milk and Water is ready to boyl, have your Thickning ready, with the Egg or ggs beaten in it, and put it in, as aforesaid. So when you would add Eggs to Milk-Pottage, first put your Milk and
Water into your Sawce-pan, then take one spoonful of good Oatmeal newly make or grown'd, and beat it up with your Egg or Eggs, with either a little Water or Milk, and when it is ready to boyl, stir it in, as you did in Flow∣er'd-Milk, and then you will have no occasion to brew it, as aforesaid. This is also a brave substantial friendly Food, and the Composition agreeable, there being no variation made by the Ingre∣dients, but they imbrace and incorpo∣rate themselves mutually as one entire Body. However, in all the aforesaid Milk-Meats you ought to add some well baked Bread, and a little Salt, but do not by any means put Sugar in any of these Pottages; for Sugar is apt to obstruct the Stomach, hinder Concocti∣on, fur the Passages, and dull the edge of the Appetite; it also heats the Blood, and causeth a sharp itching Humour to possess it; for this cause the fre∣quent eating of it in our common Food, doth prove of evil consequence to our Norhern Bodies, but more especially to Children and Sickly weak People; the ame is to be understood of Spanish Fruits, and the Spices that come from
the East-Indies, they all growing in Countries as different from ours as Summer is to Winter; and therefore hose that do indulge themselves with such things may daily find the Evil ef∣fects thereof, as I have more particu∣larly demonstrated in The Way to Health, &c. But when there shall be occasion or reason for the sweetning of any kind of Food or Drinks, let it be done with good White Sugar, and not with Syrups as the custom of most is. Milk boyled intire or by it self, is nothing so commendable as when it is mixed with Water, Flower, Oatmeal, as aforesaid, being not so easie of Con∣coction, nor of so cleansing a Quality. Note also, That Milk is best the first half year after the Cow hath calved, but not so good after taking Bull or Conception, nor so wholsom either for the ickly or the healthy; consider Womens Milk after they conceive a∣gain with Child, is it so good as be∣fore? none will pretend it: Therefore those that have a mind to prove the Vertues of a Milk-Diet, let them be∣gin in the Spring, viz. March or April, take their Milk from Cows newly
calved, not from through-milch'd Cows, though this last sort is the thick∣est, but I advise none to esteem of Milk for that Property. There is yet another Preparation of Milk, called Furmety, viz. Milk and Wheat, which are in themselves two excellent things whilst they remain en∣tire, but when mixed and made into Furmety, according to custom, with Spanish Fruit, Sugar and Spice, it is no commendable Preparation of Food; for first, the long boyling of the Wheat destroyes not only the brisk spirituous Vertues, but also the firm binding sub∣stantial Essence, so that thereby it be∣comes weak, feeble and insipid: 'Tis true, being mixed with Flower and orreign Ingredients, it may be made a pretty pleasing grateful food, but the common frequent eating thereof will quickly tire and glut the Stomach, by reason of the improper Preparation and Mixtures; therefore 'tis nothing so good as plain Flower, Milk and Water, the same is to be understood of Wheat utier'd and sugar'd.
Of Boniclapper, its Nature & Operation. AMong the various sorts of Milk-Meat▪ I thought good to men∣tion this, which though last spoken of deserves the first place, for its excel∣lent use and vertue. Boniclapper is no∣thing else but Milk that has stood till it was sower, and become of a thick slip∣py substance, which will be in twenty four hours after it is milked, or there∣abouts, if the weather be very hot, not else; but if it be put into Vessels in which Milk use to be sowred, it will be done sooner; and being of a plea∣sant sowrish Taste, and thick slippy Sub∣stance, it must be eaten only with Bread, especially by Consumptive Peo∣ple; it is a brave Noble Food both for healthy and unhealthy, especially for all that are troubled or subject to any kind of Stoppages; for it it power∣fully openeth the Breast and Passages, its easie of Concoction, and helps to digest all hard or sweeter foods, and makes them easie; it also cools and cleanseth the whole Body, and renders it brisk and lively, quenceth Thirst to admiration; and we know no sort
of Milk-meat or other spoon-meat, that is so proper and beneficial for Consump∣tive and languishing People, as this; for tho' Nature be much debilitated, and the natural Heat wasted and the Spirit dull'd, yet this sort of Food will be light and easie on the Stomach, and be easily separated, and consequently digested, when new sweet creamy Milk cannot; for there is a ferment awakned in Milk by standing, viz. out of its own Body, which does tend to separation, and indeed is a high degree of Dige∣stion, which hath a near simile with the ferment and separative Quality of the Stomach; for in this time of stand∣ing, the Milk, by vertue of its own ferment, hath done that which is left for the Stomach to do, when Milk is eat∣en sweet and new; and indeed if the Stomachs of those that eat new sweet creamy Milk, be not in good habit and case, it cannot possibly make so gentle, mild or friendly fermentation or di∣gestion, as this sort of Milk does by vertue of its own erment; for most distempered Peoples Stomachs are so much depraved, through ill habits, that they are too sowr, with a keen
sharp matter, which doth in a moments time so violently coagulate and turn the creamy part into a thick curd or hard substnace, and the Wheyie parts into a sharp keen Liquor, both which are ve∣ry hurtful to Nature; Others Stomachs are dull and flat, the ferment, sepa∣rative and digestive Faculties have (as it were) lost their brisk Liveliness and Power, so that it cannot make any true separation or digestion, but the creamy and thick parts of the Milk and other Food, doth not only fur and obstruct the Passages, but they naturally gene∣rate crude lumors, evil Juices, dull heavy Spirits, and bad Blood; for this cause those People are dull, heavy and indisposed, full of disorders and pain, apt to be oppressed at the Stomach, specially after eating▪ indeed they are not well full nor fasting; wherefore we have advised such People, if they betake themselves to a Mild-Diet, to let their Mild stand three or four hours, or more, and then take off the op, which doth contain the thick or creamy substance, by which means the Milk becomes more easily digested and separated.
But here ome will be ready to say, That this sowred Milk will not agree with the Stomach, nor be pleasant to the Palate. This may be true at first; for Nature seems to dislike with all changes, though it be for the better, but a little custom and use will salve this sore, and make it not only familiar, but most pleasant to the Stomach and Palate; and he or she that have neither patienc nor wisdom to admit of a little inconveniency, shall never have op∣portunity to know the true intrin∣sick Vertue of any thing, nor its nature or Operation. We know no Reason in Nature why people should dislike with this sowred Food, seeing most de∣sire it in one degree or other, more es∣pecially such as have disordered Sto∣machs and weak Heats? for the help whereof Viniger, Verjuice, the Juice of Lemmones, Oringes, and many the like sharp keen Juices have been invented & mixed with Food, and no doubt to good advantage, if order be observed therein because all such things have some affinity with the ferment  Stomach, or rather with the separative Property▪
therefore Food, eaten, in which a pro∣per quantity of such Juices are mixed will be easier, and digest sooner than a like quantity of food will do, in which there is none. But still, this sowred Milk hath a far nearer affinity both to the ferment, separative and digestive Faculties of the Stomach, than any of the sharp Juices last men∣tioned; for in this Milk, as is said be∣fore, there is a real ferment and se∣parative Quality arises and proceeds out of its own body, and from the A∣nimal Spirits therein contain'd, which hath much agreement with the Sto∣mach, and above half the Work is done to Natures hand. And before People do envigh against this innocent simple Food, they should consider, that the Stomach and natural Heat cannot make any separation or digestion of any Food before there is a sowring or fer∣mentation? This is most manifest in all Chymical Operations and Prepara∣tions▪ the spirituous parts will not sepa∣rate from the gross body until such Menstrums are fermented, and become somewhat keen or sower, but then it must not be too keen or sharp, for the
the Spirit will suffer, and receive hurt; the same in some degree is to be obse∣rved in all sowred Food▪ it most not be too keen or sharp, for then it will heat the Blood and irritate the original or sleeping Poysons in the Body? but when this Sower Quality is moderate in any thing, or properly mixed, its a gleam of the life, and the true de∣light of the Spirit, it opposeth the fierceness of the Biter and Aringent Properties, and quickens and enlivens the Sweet, and is the quickning Power in every thing, all things are heavy, dull and flat when this Quality is im∣potent. CHAP. III. Of Water-Gruel. ANother thing very proper for weak Consumptive Natures, is Water-Gruel, and that is best which is made after this manner, viz. Take a quart of River or Spring-Water, add to it one spoonful and an half of good
Oatmeal newly made or grown'd, being stirred well together, set it on a clear Fire, when it is rising, or just ready to boyl, take it off, and brew it out of one thing into another, and so back again, as you do Butter'd Ale, then set it on the fire again till it be ready to boyl, but before it do so, take it off, and let it stand a while in the Swace∣pan▪ that the course Husks of the Oat∣meal may sink to the bottom, and then putting it out, add Bread and Salt, or if you please, Bread, Salt and Butter, stirring it about well until your Butter be melted, that it may not turn to Oyl, and then let it stand without any fur∣ther stirring till it be but Blood-warm; for much stirring or motion to cool it, does oft-times offer some violence to the pure Spirits; for all Gruels, Pot∣tages and Milk-Mats, if they are let stand after they are prepared and put into the Dish or Platter, do naturally, as it were, skin over, which does retain and keep in the pure Blsamick Vrtues, but will not confine the fierce furious Fires of Saturn and Mars, which be∣ing Aliens to the good Vertues of such Food, will not continue in it any longer
than forced by the continual heat of the Fire, wherefore of their own accord they hastily fly away. Besides, it is to be noted, that continual Motion in all Liquid Bodies destroys and causes to evaporate the essential Spirits and good Vertues thereof. An Example of this we have in that Milk Women carry about two or three Miles in their Pails, shaking and measuring of it out by degrees, causing thereby, as it were, a continual Motion, which makes the Volatile Spirits to evaporate, and then presently the sweet Body and oyly Quality is thereby wounded, and the Milk becomes thin and Wheyish, and it will not afford half the quantity of Cream, as Milk will do that is set to cream as soon as 'tis milk't; for that skinny substance that all Milk covers it self with, does keep in the pure es∣sential Spirits, whereby the sweet Oy∣ly Body is preserved in its full Vertue and Strength; for the Volatile Spirit is the true Life of the Balsamick Bdy, and the Oyly Body or sweet Quality in all things is the House or Habitation of the Volatile Spirits; therefore if one be destroy'd the other cannot subsist, but
immediately dyeth. Likewise all vio∣lent Heat and Cold doth the same; for which cause in cold frosty Weather the like quantity of Cream will no make above two thirds of the Butter as it will do in warm moderate Sea∣sons, and it will be much longer coming: The like in some degree is to be understood when the Season is extream hot; for hot weather too v∣olently evaporates the volatile Spirits, and causes the sweet Body to sower, as the cold condenses the spirituous parts, whereby they become less volatile, which hinders separation, so that the oyly fat Quality in the Milk cannot rise to the top in such quantity as in warm moderate Seasons. For this cause all Dairy-Women ought to have such Milk-Houses as are Warm in the Winter and Cold in the Summer; for in cold Weather most Women are forced to let their Milk stand a long time, viz. several days, or else they will have a very small quantity of Cream; which long standing of Milk to get the more Cream, does awaken the original Fires, viz. the astringent and bitter Qualities; for which reason most
of the Butter made in the Winter has a kind of sower bitter Taste, which does not proceed from the Hay or Grass, as some suppose, but from the long stand∣ing of the Milk, as aforesaid. For But∣ter made in Winter, if the Milk stand no longer than in Summer, will be ve∣ry good and sweet: And if the Hay had any such nature to cause a sower bit∣ter Taste, how comes it to pase, that the Flesh of all Beasts fatted in the Stall in the Winter with Hay, is not only more firm, but also far sweeter, and fuller of brisk lively Spirits than in Summer, and therefore will take Salt much better, and afford a firmer Nourishment, and also continue sound and good much longer. Note also, That Boyl'd Milk is no∣thing so good as either raw or scalded; for the boyling it does not only fix it, and thereby render it more stopping and harder of Concoction, but also the violent Motion of boyling does, as it were totally destroy the volatile spi∣rit, so that if boyled never so little, it will not afterwards afford any Cream but only a thin skin; for the volatile Spirit is so pure and subtle that it will
not endure any harsh or violent Mo∣tion, and so soon as that delicate Spirit is wounded, the sweet Quality of fa Oyl loosing its Power and Vertue, pas∣seth away in an invisible vapour orfume, nsensible to the Preparers; and this is the true cause why boyled Milk will not cream; whereas if you take Milk and scald it (but it must be done to a point, not too hot) and then take it off the Fire and let it stand in the same Vessel, and there will arise a brave thick clouted Cream, which way ma∣ny use in the West parts of England, and therewith make very good Butter; but if you let your Milk be too hot, it will not cream to such advantage as otherwise. And this I hope may be a suf∣ficient demonstration to the good Dame and provident Housewife, that the boyling of Milk entire, or by it self, is not pro∣per, espially for weak Consumptive Persons, or Children, but that it is much better for Health, and to prevent Windy Diseases, and breed good Blood and Nourishment, to eat it raw, or altered with Flower, as above directed. And if Women were so wise and kind to themselves and their Children, as
to eat such Foods as are proper both in Quality and Quantity, properly mixt and duely prepared, and to give their Children no other, we should quickly have a healthier Generation, and not be so strangely afflicted with such variety of torturing Diseases, nor have such great Numbers snatcht away with immature Deaths. And for their benefit herein, if they are not too follish to learn, and too froward to be taught, I will here add, A very excellent healthy Food for all sorts of Ages, but more especially for Chil∣dren and sickly People. Take a quart of good Water, two full Spoonfuls of Wheat Flower, and two or three Eggs, beat the Eggs and Flower together with some Water, and when the Water is ready to boyl, but before it quite boyl, stir in your batter or thickning, and keep stirring it till it be ready to boyl, by which time it will be sufficiently thick; then take it off, and add to it only Salt and Bread, and let it stand and cool without your help, till it become about as warm as
Milk from the Cow, and so eat it. If you wnat Eggs, you may instead there∣of add Buter after the Water and Flower is so prepared with Bread and Salt, but Eggs are best. This is a curious clean sweet Food, affords a brave sound Nourishment, o∣pens all the Passages, breeds good Blood and pure brisk Spirits, is plea∣sant unto the Palate, grateful to the Stomach, and easie of Concoction; the common use thereof sweetens the Blood, and all the Humours, prevents Windy Distempers, and griping pains, both of the Stomach and Bowels, hav∣ing no manifest Quality that does too violently predominate, all the Ingre∣dients bearing a simile with each other, so that it may justly challenge the first place of all Spoon-Meats or Pap, and is the next Food to Breast-Milk for Children, and indeed often-times much better, by reason of the many Disea∣ses and improper Foods many Women are subject to, or use. 'Tis also a special Diet for Consumpive eople, if they will keep constant to it for one half year or a twelve Month, eating nothing else, and drinking every day
two or three glasses of clear well brew'd Ale, with gentle Exercise, and sweet clean hard Beds, and moderate Clo∣thing. But remember that you do not add any other Ingredients to this sort of Food, as Sugar, Spices, Fruits, or the like, for then it will become of another nature and operation, and that for the worse, as I have demonstrated in the Chapter of Mixtures of Foods, in my Book intituled, The way to Health, long Life and Happiness, &c. It is further to be noted, that this sort of Spoon-meat, and also all others, ought to be made rather thin than thick; for in such Foods the Liquid Element ought to predominate, whe∣ther it be Milk or Water, else the pure spirituous parts being in a degree suf∣focated, they will become dull on the Palate and heavy on the Stomach; therefore all Pottages and Spoon-meats that are made thin, and quick prepa∣red, are sweeter and brisker on the Palate, and easier of Digestion, as be∣ing more spirituous than those that are thick and long a doing. And as all Foods that are properly mixt, and a due order observed in the Prepara∣tion,
will have no manifest Taste or strong Hugo, as all others have, but on the contrary, will yield a pleasant friendly Taste, and Smell most grate∣ful; so you may observe of all Meats and Drinks, whose Taste and Smell are innocent and fine, they never cause any loathing in Nature, because there is no manifest Quality that does too violently predominate, but all the Pro∣perties or Tastes seem to be united, or stand in equal weight and measure; for where any doth bear sway, it will quickly awaken its Likeness, whence Discord, and an unequal motion ari∣seth, and thence a loathing follows; for in Sickness, all such Meats and Drinks as were the original of the Di∣sease, the very sight and smell thereof is offensive, and for that reason Eng∣lish People eating much Flesh and strong Drink in Health, do for the most part perfectly loath and abomi∣nate such things in Sickness, desiring Water and more simple Foods, where∣in wise Nature indicates and points out the proper Diet in such cases, if Men would but hearken unto her.
CHAP. IV. Of Flesh Broths. IF sick languishing People must eat Flesh, which in my opinion is no∣thing so proper to recover lost Health and Strength, as more simple innocent Foods, for several Reasons; As, 1st. Because it is that which most, both Young and Old at all other times make their chief Food, and consequent∣ly from thence their Distempers most∣ly proceed. 2dly, 'Tis of a gross Phleg∣matick nature and operation, of a moist oily Quality, therefore harder of Con∣coction than many other sorts of Food, whereby it generates gross Humours and thick Blood. 3dly, The Beasts are often distempered, sometimes for want of care and skill in their Keep∣ers, at other times by hot Weather and much driving they are surfeited, and yet killed before they have reco∣vered those Disorders. 4thly, By be∣ing killed in improper Seasons, viz. in
the declining part of the year, as Au∣gust, September and October, at which time the central heat in all things de∣cays, and the Flesh of all Beasts be∣comes more gross, their fat soft, grea∣sy and full of Phlegm and corrupt Juices; and therefore Flesh will not take Salt nor keep so well then as at other times, and also, 'tis then their time of Generation and Unclean∣ness, which renders it still more dan∣gerous and pernicious. However, the common eating of almost all sorts of Flesh, both clean and unclean, hath gotten such a dominion in Man, that all that I can say is little likely to a∣bate those furious Inclinations; there∣fore if the Sick will still follow Cu∣stom, aud gratifie his Humour, and must needs have his Flesh-Pots and Flesh-Broths, we shall give some directions for the best ordering thereof, which is done after this manner, VIZ. Let your Flesh be fresh killed, and otherways good, whether Fowls, Beef or Mutton; First, make your Water boyl, then have your Flesh ready to put in, and encrease your Fire that it may not lie long in the Water before
it boyls again; and let your Pot or Vessel be large that it may hold a suf∣ficient quantity of Water, that the flesh may swim freely; and when it boyls take your Pot-lid off, that the sulpherous fiery Fumes may pass free∣ly away, and the Air have its free In∣fluences upon it; for that Element is the true Life of the Spirit, and by ha∣ving plenty of Water, the flesh is cleansed from its gross Impurities, which the best of Flesh is subject to; likewise you ought to keep a brisk clear Fire, that there be no intermissi∣on in the boyling, which would dea∣den or flatten the spirituous parts, so that the Meat will become dull and of an heavy operation, and grosser nour∣ishment; nor ought you to let it boyl too long; for Flesh over-prepared is of an heavy dull nature, and ungrate∣ful to the Palate and Stomach. All Broths made of Flesh ought to be thin, brisk and full of Spirits, which render them easie of Concoction, and breed thin pure Blood. Many People imagine Flesh not only the most Nour∣ishing, but also the Substantialst Food; but this must be numbered amongst
Vulgar Errors, it is indeed endued with abundance of gross Phlegmatic and corrupt Juices, and therefore those that make it their chief Victuals are most obnoxious to gross Scorbuti Humours in their Blood, whence pro∣ceed very impure Spirits, and bur-thensome unactive Dispositions, whic by degrees occasion and increase man Diseases; for all Flesh is of a moi Phlegmy Nature, subject to Putrifaction; and therefore such as make i their common Food are forc'd to dri much either with or after it, or least they accustom themselves so do, which much increases the afore∣said Inconveniences and Distempers But on the contrary, many sorts o Fruits, Grains, Herbs and Seeds are for the most part endued with a far mor firm, dry and cleaner Nourishment free from Corruption, and yieldi more sublime Spirits. And there as much difference between Them a Flesh as there is between Grass and Cor for true it is, Grass generates mor Humours, viz. flesh and fat, and in shorter time in all Cattel, but then suc flesh is more soft, greasie, phlegmatic
and subject to Putrifaction, than that which is fed with Hay and Corn. For this cause, the Flesh of all Beasts is much better in Winter than in Sum∣mer; and also all Grains and Fruits when the Sun and Elements have dry∣ed up and exhaled the gross cold phleg∣my parts, are thereby made substanti∣al, warming, and full of brisk lively Spirits, and will keep good several years without the help of Art; for the gross Humidity being purged a∣way, their own innate Salt and spiri∣tuous Vertues preserve them; but Flesh cannot be kept without Salt, nor with it but for a little season. So that most Men, as well the ignorant as the learned, are deceived, when they fancy Fesh to be a more substan∣tial warming Food than Fruits, Grains, Milk, Herbs, &c. for Experience will tell us that Bread, Buter, Cheese, Flow∣er'd Milk and Water, Raw Herbs in their Seasons made into Salads, mixt with Oyl, Salt and Vinegar, and the like, are not only cleaner Foods, but more substantial, affording a more chearing and warming Nourishment, and all that have ever lived on them for any
competent time, do find themselves not so subject to Coldness and Qualms at their Stomachs, as those that fre∣quertly eat Flesh; for all sorts of Foods that are in their own Nature clean, dry, and free from gross phlegmatick Juices, will not only keep longer from Purifaction without the Body, but they afford a cleaner and more solid Nour∣ishment, in the Body, warming, chear∣ing, exhilirating and encreasing the Spirits, whence proceeds an healthy vigorous Constitution of Body, strong and active Limbs, good Stomach and free Digestion; for always the more you imitate Nature in the Choice and Preparation of Food, the more useful it will be to you: For many Distem∣pers, especially that general one, (The Wind,) which few that out-live Youth are free from, are chefly caused through bad Preparations and impro∣per Mixtures, or excess in Quantity or Quality of Food; which Defects are not to be remedied without great Wisdom and Temperance. But those that have not the knowledge and mea∣sure of their own Natures and Com∣plexions, nor have seriously considered
the intrinsick Qualities of what they eat o drink, 'tis no wonder if their Thoughts or Imaginations are wrong (for blind men will stumble) so that what they think is best and most profitable for the Health of their Bodies and Minds, Proves the contrary. An Ex∣ample we have in Peoples eating of Food hot from the Fire, or out of the Pot or Oven, they cry out, The Meat will grow cold and be spoil'd, and there is little or no vertue in it if the fiery heat be gne; Others are for Boyling their Food and Pottages very much, untill they become unpleasant for Sight, Taste and Smell, and grow thick, gross and dull; Others there be that think themselves brave Doctors or Cooks, when they mix ten or twenty rich things together, crying, The more and the Richer, the better, as if they were to make Mithridate in their Bellies. All which, and many other the like preposterous Conceits and unnatural Ways, serve only to wound their Healths still more and more, as first to Contract, and afterwards to Con∣tinue and Encrease great numbers of Diseases.
CHHP. V. Of Flumery, its nature and ope∣ration. FLumery is the ancient Gruel the Brittains used to eat, and the use of it is still continued amongst the Welch; it is made after this manner; Take two or three spoonfuls of Oat∣meal, more of less, and put into it a convenient quantity of Water, and let it stand until it begin to be sowrish, th tae this Water and Oatmeal and put it into a Vessel▪ stirring it, and make it boyling hot with a quick Fire, and when it begins to rise, brew it to and fro with your Ladle, to keep it from boyling, this do about five or six Minuts, and thn take it off the Fire, for it is prepared to the highest degree. The Brains and those that now eat this  of Gruel, had and have various ys of eating it, viz. to mix Al amgst it, and so eat it with Bread, ohers Milk, Cream, and
the like, which Mixtures are not much amiss; but in my judgment those that have regard to their Healths, Strength, and brisk lively Dispositions, or such as eat it to open, cleanse, and help the digestive Faculty, and to remove offensive Matter from the Stomach, ought to eat this sort of sower Gruel only with Bread; for thereby it more powerfully removes the Obstructions of the Breast, helps the natural Heat, strengthens the Stomach, cools th whole Body, openeth the Passages, and makes the Body lightsome and airy. This is a most commendable Gruel to be eaten for a Breakfast in all hot Sea∣sons and Clymates; for the sowerness, or the fermentation doth so aptly fit it to the Stomach, and has, as it were, digested all tough or slimy matter, so that it becomes easily separated, and so passes away more quick and free, leaving no Dregs behing it that doth either fur or obstruct  Passages, which most sweet foods are  to, especially when any shall exceed in Quantity. I commend this sort of Gruel to all weak Stomach't People, and to such whose Breast and Passages
are fur'd and obstructed by sweet, tough or Phlegmy matter. There is also another way of mak∣ing this Gruel, used chiefly among the wanton Gentry, viz. they take Water and Oatmel, as is before mentioned, and let it stand a day, more or less, as they think fit, then they pour off that Water and put on fresh; some will do this four, five, six, seven, eight or nine times one after another, let∣ting each Water remain on the Oat∣meal a certain time, then they take it and boyl it up, and mix it with Milk, Cream and the like: But this way is nothing so brisk, lightsome and lively as the former; for Oatmeal hath passed through, in its Preparation, a certain fermentation or digestion, by which the gross body in the Oats is opened, and the more internal or central Ver∣tues become thereby volatile, so that it readily gives forth its vertue when it is committed to the great Men∣strum, viz. Water, even as Malt doth, though not to that degree, be∣cause the digestion or fermentation is not so high; but being washed with several War, it becomes thereby
stupid and destitute of all its good Qualities; nay, the very Air will ex∣hale and draw forth the more spiritu∣ous parts of all Flower, if exposed to it; though the Grain have never pas∣sed through any fermentation or dige∣stion, as the Flower of Wheat, which is the strongest, and of the best sub∣stance of any others; for this cause, Flower that hath been grown'd five or six Weeks, or more, though it be kept close in Sacks, will not make so sweet nor so moist pleasant Bread as that which is newly grown'd; there∣fore all Bread in London does eat drier and harsher than Bread in the Country that is made two or three days after the Wheat is grown'd; for so soon as any Grain is bruised or broken into a powdery substance, the essential Spi∣rits become thereby, as it were, vio∣lated, and liable to evaporation; for they are so subtle, quick and penetra∣ting that nothing can hold or continue them, but of necessity they either eva∣porate or become suffocated, if inclo∣sed by any thing: Therefore all Gru∣els ought to be made with new grownd Oatmeal, and Bread with new-grown'd
Flower; but this way does not please, neither is it so profitable for those that make a Trade of selling Meal; for Meal new grown'd will not so freely separate from the Branny sub∣stance, nor yield so much Flower; but lying a while after it is grown'd, makes a kind of Distillation, or giving way, that the branny parts, as is said before, are easier to be separated, and the lowry parts seem iner to the Nice Daes, but the Bread made of such Meal is nothing so good and bal∣samick, or at least not so opening nor cleansing; besides, or Flower in a lit∣tle time will from its own Body ge∣nerate Worms, which comes to pass by reason of the Essential Spirits and pure volatile Salt is wounded, suffo∣cated or evaporated; but all sorts of Grain kept intire and not violated, will remain sound and good a long time; and if the essential Spirits and sweet Vertues of any thing or Crea∣ture could be preserved intire from evaporation or suffocation, then that thing would continue sound and good forever; for the true Life, pleasure, delight and joy of all Bodies does con∣sist
in the essential Spirits and balsa∣mick Vertues, therefore no Vegeta∣ble, Animal or Mineral can be pre∣served any longer than the Spirit re∣mains intire and unviolated: This we would have all Men consider, especi∣ally Physitians and Preparers of Food; and we must needs say, he that inven∣ted this last way of making Flummery; was no Philosopher, his Eyes were too dim to behold the true Spirit and Life of things. CHAP. VI. Of the several sorts of Bread, and which is best, especially for sickly People. ONE of the best sorts of Bread for sickly People is made of Wheat Flower, the course or husky Bran dres∣sed out, but not fine dressed; for then it will be dry and husy, apt to obstruct the Stomach; for the inward skin or Branny parts of Wheat do contain the moist Quality, which is opening and ea∣sie
of Digestion, and in the fine flo∣ery parts does consist the Nutrimentive Property, therefore they do best to∣gether, and ought not to be too curi∣ously separated, as some nice People will do, who know no more of the Nature of things than an Horse, and observe less Also it is to be noted, that Leaven' Bread is to be preferred before that which is made of Yeast; for Leaven was a Philosophical Invention, that Sower quality therein being much more a∣greeable to the ferment of the Sto∣mach than Yeast, and easier of Di∣gestion, and more cleansing; So it opens the Vessels and Encreases the Appetite; and a little use will make it familiar and pleasant to the Eater. But Yeast has a contrary Nature and operation, it being a meer frothy fume or nauseous Excrement, which Nature throws off, and spews out as her Ene∣my, and when it is mixt with any thing it endues it not only with an ill Taste (which you will quickly perceive, if you are not accustomed to it) but also is apt to send fumes into the Head, and to foul the Stomach, and
therefore nothing so profitable and wholesom, as well made Leavened Bread; which may more manifestly appear by most of the Ale in London; for that not being sufficiently wrought and cleansed from this Yeasty matter, it is not only thick, but its Taste gross and unpleasant, sending dulling fumes into the Head, fouls the Blood, destroys the Appetite, and generates evil Juices in the Body. Leaven'd Bread is best when made after this manner; Take what quan∣tity of Flower you please, make an hole in the midst of it, then break your Leaven in, and take so much Wa∣ter made as warm as your Blood, as will wet half your Flower, mix the Leven and Flower well together, then cover it with the Remaining Flower close, this do at Night, and the next Mor∣ning the whole Lump will be well fer∣mented or Leaven'd; then add so much warm Water (but remember it be no hotter than the Blood) as will suffice, and knead it up very stiff and firm, until it be smooth and pliable; but the more pains you take in kneading it, the bet∣ter and smoother the Bread will cut,
and eat much softer and pleasanter in the Mouth, and be easier of digestion; and when you have well kneaded it, let it lie warm by some fire about two hours, until your Oven be ready, then make it into small Loaves as you think convenient, and let them be Baked▪ with the Ovens mouth not close stopt, that the Air may have more or less Egress and Regress; but the better way is to make it into thin Cakes, like Oat-Cakes, and bake them on a Stone, which many in the North of England use for that purpose, making a Wood Fire under it. This sort of Bread is sweeter, of a more innocent Taste, and far easier of Concoction than any Bread bak'd the common way in Ovens. After the same manner you may make Cakes of any sort of Grain, viz. Rye, Oats, or Barly, and you will find it a brave wholsome hearty Bread, and every way more profitable to Nature, than such as are made in the usual manner. Note also, that the putting of Salt into Bread is injurious; for Salt is an unseparated body, in which the Ori∣ginal Qualities do too violently pre∣dominate,
being of a keen tart hot Na∣ture and Operation, and therefore if it be joyned with any Body or thing that is not subject to Putrifaction, or full of Phlegmy gross Humours, then it presently preys on the good Vertues and essential Spirits; For this cause Salt does cause all forts of Bread to corrupt; for in it▪ it finds no mani∣fest matter of Putrifaction to work on, and therefore seizes the good Vertues, and by its keen fierce hot property destroys and corrupts it. Therefore such Bread as is intended to be kept a considerable time, no Salt is wont to be put into it, as Biskets that are car∣ried to Sea, and the like: But for such as make Flesh most of their Food, Salt is an excellent Ingredient, and for some other sorts of Food, that is for present eating, For Salt naturally sharpens  Appetite, begets good Digestn, being gratefull to the Sto∣mach, and resisting Putrifaction, pro∣vided it be not used in too great a Quantity, for then it spoils all or, when it hath lain in any Flesh or Fish too long, by which the good Vertues are Evaporated or Distempered; for
then such Flesh and Fish proves very Injurious to the Health, and corrupts the Blood, as is most manifest by such as feed on such over-kept salt Meats at Sea, for they are at the very next door to Putrifaction. And as Salt is endued with the firce Original fire, so on the other side, it hath a most pow∣erful lively spirituous Quality, but the firce harsh fires do predominate; Therefore 'tis fit to eat Salt with all fresh Flesh, or to have the Flesh salted three or four weeks before you eat it; but Bacon of all other is best when longer salted and smoak't. Likewise many Innocent Foods will admit of Salt, but then they must be eaten pre∣sently, as Pottages, Salads, and the like; so likewise in Butter and Cheese, Salt preserves them a considerable time. By the way, I would have the House-wife take notice, that Bread or Cakes baked on Stoes in Chimnies, or at the Ovens Mouth, will be much whiter than if the same were baked in an O∣ven close stopt up; for the former having the free Influences of the Air, the pure Spirits are thereby kept living,
and their pleasant white colour does not only shew its clean Innocent Na∣ture, but it proceeds from and is a true Gleam of Light, arising from the Tincture and Volatile Spirits, which are destroyed when the heat is intol∣lerable, and the egress and regress of that Friendly Element, the Air, ob∣structed. And therefore Bread baked in close stopt Ovens is of a duller dusky Colour, more Saturnine and Martial, according to the degree of Heat, and time of standing in the Oven. The good House-Wife may also remem∣ber, that Bread is not of so strong a substance and nourishment as Flower, when it is mixed with Water or Milk, for that potent glewy tough substance that naturally Flower is endewed with, is lost and destroyed in Bread by the intolerable heat of Ovens, and some other Circumstances that belong to the making of Bread; therefore it will not thicken either Water, Milk or any other liquid Body, nor be so strong, tough and glewy; and therefore all such Foods as are made with Flower are more strong and substantial than Bread mixed with such things. Also
lower so eaten is white, innocent, soft to the Touch of the Palate though o∣therwise it is a brave food, proper to be eaten with Flesh, Butter, Cheese, Herbs, and many other things, in so much that for its frequent and excel∣lent use it is not undeservedly called and accounted, The Staff of Life. CHAP. VII. Of Butter, its Nature, aud how bes to be Eaten. BVtter consists of the fat or Oyly parts of Milk, and is a brave wholsome Ingredient to be eaten mo∣derately with Bread, For few, and indeed scarce any of the other ways of eating and using it are proper or so agreeable to Nature; and that my as∣serting this may not startle the Rea∣der, I shall give him my Reason for it, which is this, Because Butter having already in the making of it passed through due Fermentation, the Spiritu∣ous properties thereof, are thereby
unbounded or set at liberty, and be∣come Volatile, the truth whereof you may perceive by this Experiment, If Butter be but exposed four or five days to the open common Air, it will lose a great part of its pure smell and taste; but much more if it be committed to the Fire; therefore all melted Butter, and such Foods wherein Butter is mixt, that are baked or fiyed, are not profi∣table for Health, but become heavy of Concoction, and strong upon the Pal∣late, and the common eating thereof doth generate evil Juices, thick Blood and dull heavy Spirits, whence pro∣ceeds, scorbutick Humours and vari∣ous Diseases in the Blood, But Butter in its own Nature is an excellent thing, and very profitable, if mixed with proper Food, as Bread, Herbs, Roots, and the like; but if not properly mixt and eaten, then it Oyls and Furs the Vessels of the Stomach and Passages, hinders Digestion, and generates evil Juices and many Diseases. The best Butter for the Stomach is that which is made from the beginning of May, to the last of Iuly, or middle of August, or there-abouts; for then Grass
is in its full strength and Vertue. Yet what is then potted or firkin'd up for Winter will have somewhat a stronger taste, by reaso of the length of time, and heat of Weather, but still it is much finer and more wholsom, and free from phlegm, and easier of Con∣coction than that which is made of Rowings or Leather-Math (as they call it) though this latter sort is oft times much sweeter to the Pallate at first eat∣ing, but it quickly cloyes, by Greasing the Stomach; for it is endued with much gross phlegmy matter, like the Grass at that season; For Hay made thereof is of little strength or Vertue, as all Husband-men do know. And as to Buter you may try it thus, melt a like quantity of the Summer and After-Math Butter, in two several Vessels, and let it stand a while, you will find the latter throw off and afford more Phlegm a great deal than the former; But as this is made near the Winter, so it is new, and that is the cause why it seems some-what sweeter to the Touch of the Pallate, though the former be much better, and wholsomer, and will go further. All Butter ought to be
well seasoned with Sat, for that quick∣ens and makes all fat Bodies brisk and easier of Concoction; For Butter other∣wise is but a dull heavy body, and ought by all People to be eaten spa∣ringly, but more especially by those that are weakly. CHAP. VIII. Of Cheese. CHeese is an hard tough strong Food, very nourishing and substantial, and excellent for healthy working Peo∣ple; for being eaten with good store of Bread, it endues those that com∣monly feed thereon with clean sound Bodies, and brisk lively Spirits, able to endure Labour and Travel, if good Drink be not wanting; And this so far beyond those that make Flesh their Food, that experience teaches us, that no Men are able to hold out in hard Labour with those that eat good Whea∣ten-Bread, and Fat Cheese, that is one or two Years old, (for both sorts are good according to the Country they
come from, and as the Cheese is in thickness, or the contrary) 'tis true Bread; and Cheese does not breed so much Nourishment as Flesh, but it is clean and of a stronger firmer sub∣stance, digesting and relishing Drink to better advantage than the best Fles in the World can. And suppose four Men were only to eat Bread and goo Cheese, intermixt now and then with Flower'd Milk, Milk-ottage, Water-Gruel and Raw Salads season'd with Vinegar, Salt and good Ol, and for their Drink good sound well prepar'd Beer or Ale, not over-strong: And a like Number of Men, seeming of equal Limbs and Strength, were to live on variety of Flesh, with Brad, and the same Liquor; and let both Companies be kept to the same hard Labour: In one half years time the former, by virtue of their plain simple Food will be able to out-do the latter, and tire them to Admiration; and the Reason hereof I taught you before, viz. be∣cause Flesh is gross and full of Phleg∣matick Juices, which load the Body with superfluous Humours; but Bread, Cheese, Pottages and Herbs are clean,
and free from such Impurities, and consequently breed better Nourish∣ment, fine Blood, pure brisk sparkling Spirits, which give great strength and vertue to the Body. Nevertheless, Cheese in its own Nature is somewhat hard of Concoction Where good strong natural Heats are▪ it proves a great strengthener to the Stomach and all the Vessels thereof, but all weak People ought to eat Cheese sparingly, viz. a litle Cheese and a great quntity of Bread, so that the Cheese may serve only to relish it; for as Cheese is a plea∣sing Food to the Palate, so it is grate∣ful to most dull flat Stomachs, if it be eaten sparingly, and with discretion, and will comfort, chear and strengthen them. What we said of Btter may be repeated of Cheese, That the best is that which is made from the beginning of May, to about the beginng of August; for after that season, the Sun, which is the central Heat and vivifying Power of all things declines with winged speed, and all Vegitations by sympa∣thy do the same.
CHAP. IX. Of the best sort of Puddens, and the contrary. THis is a great sort of Food in Eng∣land, we are famous for it abroad, and there is no Nation besides, that I know or have heard of, that practises it so much, and if we were not altoge∣ther so fond of them, especially as they are commonly made, 'twere no mat∣ter; for such Puddens as are enricht with various sorts of Spanish Fruits and Indian Spices are for the most part very hurtful to Health, because the variety of improper Ingredients does destroy most of the good genuine Vertues of our own Country-simples, so that such things cannot properly be called Food. 'Tis true, all sorts of Spanish Fruits, so long as they remain intire, and in their own simple Nature, and for proper uses, are brave rich things, but if any sort of aisins be alter'd, by being mix∣ed with several things, and then boyl∣ed,
the true natural Vertues are hurt, and they are rendred next door to Pu∣trifaction; for the Sun and Elements had before already prepared them to the highest degree, and whatever else is done by way of Preparation, proves injurious to them. In Puddens it is usual to mix Flower, Eggs, Milk, Raisins or Currants, and sometimes both Spice, Suet, the Fat or Marrow of Flesh, and several other things; whereas in truth any two of those things would far better have sup∣plied Nature with true and proper Nourishment; and if any healthy Per∣son should be confined to such Puddens but for one week, he would be tired, and perfectly loath them: whereas he may well live many years upon lower and Milk, or Eggs and Bread, or Rai∣sins and Bread; but when all these, &c. are jumbled together, they make a confused Portion. There is another sort of Pudden, called, Bread-Puddens, which are a sick fainty Food; for nothing can be good and proper, if twice prepared, if the first Preparation be to the highest de∣gree, as it is in Bread; also, to put
some things prepared, as Bread, with things unprepared, as Fower, Eggs, Spices, and the like, is not only impro∣per, but unnatural to the Stomach: Therefore such Foods ought not to be eaten by any that love thei Health and Strength. For common sense may suggest what a strange disorderly jum∣ble and Mishmash so many contrary In∣gredients must needs make, when boy∣led together in the Stomach, and what Heterogenious kind of Juices or Nourish∣ment the same wil produce. o Ex∣periment, be pleased to take Fower, Fat, Spices, Eggs, urrants and Raisins, put them altogether in any Vessel, and then take Flower and Milk and put into another Pot or Vessel, or Eggs and Flowers, or Fruit and Flower, or Spice and Flower, or Bread and Milk, and let both Pots stand two or three days, then observe both, and smell and taste of the one and the other, and you will certainly find, that the simplest and where the fewest Ingredients are, will smell and taste better, and be less offensive than that wherein they all are mixt; for the first will stink, corrupt d putrifie much sooner than the sim∣ple
things will. But this is nothing —How many things more besides these confused Puddens, do men eat at the same Meal, cram down into their Paunches, viz. various sorts of Flesh, Fish, Butter, Olives, Capers, Herbs, Roots, Mustard, Tarts, Raw Fruits, Cheese, &c. which when rightly consider'd cannot but appear a strange Composition, and odd Mess of Stuff, able to corrupt the strongest and best of Stomachs, only Custom does make them some-what more friendly, and easier for Nature to bear, than otherwise they would be; for do but put all the before-menti∣on'd Dishes of one extravagant Meal altogether in a lump into a Pot, or if that be too little, into a Caldron or Furnance, and mix them all together, Hicklede-Pickledy, and let them lie a day or two so and ferment, and then smell to the heap, and if you do not con∣clude that the common use of such Din∣ners or Suppers is Natures Destruction, and the Parent and Nurse of a multi∣tude of strange and complicated Dis∣eases, you are fitter to eat out of a Trough with Swine in a Stye, than to
be consulted with about Diet for Health. But since 'twill be difficult wholly to wean People from their beloved Pud∣dens, the best way of making them is thus, Take Wheat-Flower, Eggs, Milk and Water, of each a convenient quan∣tity, mix there-with a little Salt, and beat them well together, put this Bat∣ter into a Bag, boyl it sufficiently in a good quantity of Water, with your Pot-lid off, and a quick clear Fire, and let it boyl without intermission, till 'tis enough, and then sice it, and but∣ter it with good Butter. This is a good sort of Puddens for such as ad∣mire the, which   baked, before the hot furious Fumes are evaporated and dis∣persed, it will, the most of any Food generate Windy Diseases, which you may prevent by letting it lie in the Dish or on your Trensher a while, and these sulpherous Vapours will separate and fly away in a Rapid Motion. And in truth, a little use and custom will ren∣der this sort of Pudden, or any others,
more friendly to the Stomach, and in all respects wholsomer, and freer from Windiness, if eaten quite Cold, which is for certain more commendable than any other way. I cannot perhaps by words make People either belive it, or be sensible of it, Cutom, and the false Prophet rdition hath so blinded the Eye of Mankind, so that nothing but Experience will be able to convince them: And if none will try nor fol∣low the Rules of Rasen, I shall yet be well satisfied, in that I have done my Duty; therefore let none be offended at, or despie the simplicity of what I recommend; For all the Wayes of God, and his Hand-Maid Nature, are plain and familiar, and all needful Furniture, both for the Body and Mind, are every where ready at hand, cheap and obvious: But the Evil one hath taught subtil De∣vices, and men have found out many Inventions, equally chargeable and pernicious.
CHAP. X. Of Eggs, their Nature, and the best way of dressing and eating of them. EGgs are an excellent sort of Food, each of them compleatly contain∣ing all the true Properties and seminal Vertues of that Creature whence they proceeded, therefore are one of the best sorts of things that is eaten, being of a fat oyly quality, but very friendly and innocent in operation, if well pre∣pared, affording a strong substantial clean Nourishment, easie of Concocti∣on, and such as breed good Blood, but then they must not be eaten after the common way of dressing, that is to say, and after eaten with Butter; for Eggs, I told you before, are of an oyly ft Nature, especially the Yolks, and being eaten with Butter whilst the sul∣pherous heat of the Fire remains in them, that turns the Butter to a kind of a gross Oyl, which does not only tye or hold captive the sierce Atomes
of the Fire, so that they cannnot sepe∣rate and fly away, but the melted Butter does dull and flatten the brisk spirituous part of the Egg, and makes it gross and heavy of Concoction, as also cloys the Stomach; and for this cause many cannot eat hot buttered Eggs, without having their Stomach much offended, and so many do not love nor eat Eggs on this very score, but are insensible of the true cause there∣of. But these very Persons shall love them, and find them very agreeable, when prepared properly, as I have of∣ten known. Therefore I shall here briefly set down several Methods of preparing of Eggs both proper and na∣tural, and very agreeable to most Sto∣machs, both of strong, and of weakly, or consmptive People. 1. Boil Eggs rere, or soft, then break the Shells, and put them into a Plate or Pottinger, and let them stand till they are but Blood-worm, then eat them only with Bread and Salt, or such whose Stomachs are strong, and are great lovers of Eggs, may eat them with Bread and Butter, but the
Butter not melted, but spread upon Bread. 2. You may boyl them pretty hard, peel the Shells off, and when cold, eat them with Bread, Vineger and Salt. 3. Poaching, or boiling them unshel∣led in Water, is a commendable way, being eaten with Salt and Bread, or Bread, Salt and Vineger. 4. Take a Pint of Water, and one large spoonful of Wheat Flwer, made into Batter with Water, when your Water is boiling hot, break one Egg into this Batter, and beat it together, and just as the Water is ready to boil, stir in your Batter a little while, un∣til it be again ready to boil, then take it off, and it will be of a sufficient thickness, put thereunto a little Bread and Salt, and a small quantity of good Butter, stirring of it about that the Butter may not turn to an Oyl, then t it stand till Blood-warm, and eat it. This is a brave clean Food, easie of Digestion, breeds good Blood, and a firm Nourishment, with brisk Spi∣ts▪
Lastly, Eggs are very wholsom raw, supp'd off in a Morning, and Bread eaten after them; for they clear the Stomach and free the Passages from Obstructions, and make the Eaters thereof lively, and long breath'd, if frequently eaten. But let all People remember that they do never eat Eggs boyled in the Shells, whilst they are hot, for they often then prove pernici∣ous to Health. CHAP. XI. Of Pyes, how they ought to be made. APple and Pear-Pyes are a good wholsom healthy Food, provid∣ed such Fruit be thorow ripe, and no improper Ingredients added, as too frequently People of late do, both a∣mongst the Apples and in the Crs, for most put a great deal of Butter into the Crust, and such Dough or Crust having no Ferent, viz. Leaven or Yeast to make ilght, thereby becomes of a close eay btance, and the
Butter makes it still more heavy, close and ponderous, and being baked in the close strong sulpherous heats of Ovens, they yet become more unwholsom, hence ye-crust does load the Stomach, and disagrees with many; and those that find it best are more beholding to use, which has familiariz'd it to their Bodies: Besides, most that have where∣withal do put too great quantities of Sugar amongst their Apples and Pears, whereby it becomes more like a Medi∣cine than Food; therefore such Pyes, if a man makes a Meal of them, will not give his Stomach that satisfaction as all proper Foods will; and also the eating of much Sugar in our Food does extraordinarily foul the Stomach and fur the Passages, is injurious to the natural Heat, and breeds bad Blood, and fills the Body full of the Scurvey, taking off the edge of Appetite, and generates evil Nourishment; for this cause most People, and especially Chil∣dren and Women, who eat much Su∣gar and Spices in their Victuals, are so uling, and afficted with a number of Diseases; for much sweetness in Food is as dangerous, and proves as
great an evil to Health, as the bitter, our or astringnt Qualities do, when they shall ceed in any Food, and far more, because sweetness is more in∣ticing to most sorts of People, especi∣ally to Children and Youth; whereas the other Quality is not so, but the contrary, and no Person need so strong∣ly to arm himself against those Intem∣perances that his natural Inclinations do not lead to, but the greatest danger of his being misled or overcome, is by those Intemperances that are most a∣greeable to his temper, for by such Evils he is overcome, as it were, in∣sensibly: For sweetness is an inticing Quality, and though in it self the best, yet proves of dangerous consequence where it exceeds in Food, in which too much Sugar is mixed; for indeed every sort of proper Food has sufficient quan∣tity of Sugar, I mean sweetness in its self, to moderate the other Qualities, viz. the bitter, sour and astringent, so that when People mix such quanti∣ties of Sugar in their common Food, they destroy the Equality and Harmony of that thing, so that it becomes an extream, and causes the like disharmo∣ny
in the Elements of the Body; for the best Quality in Nature is as great an evil when it too violently predomi∣nates, if not greater than those we least esteem of, as the Bitter, Sour or Astringent; for these last carry their corrector with them, as having no in∣ticing property. But these things are seldom consulted either by the Learn∣ed or by good House-Wives, but they go on in the Road, and every day en∣crease hurtful Extravagances, perswad∣ing themselves that the more cost they bestow, the more rich things they jumble together, the better and more nourishing their Food must be; and more nourshing indeed it is, but of Diseases and evil Juices; whereas plain, course cheap, simple Foods are much more frindly to Nature, and conse∣quently more strengthning and resto∣rative. And therefore in former Ages, when Sugar, Spanish Fruits, Spices, Sweet-Meats, and the like, were not known in these Northen Climates, Peo∣ple were not oly healthier, but stronger, larger, and bigger bon'd than of late Years, since the frequent eating and mixing those forreign Ingre∣dients
with our more natural Food, whih have and do daily prove of fatal consequence to the Healths of many that immoderately use them. The best Pyes, whether of Apples or Pears, are made thus. Take good Wheat Flower, make it into a Paste with a little Leaven or Yeast, as you do Bread, with warm Water, or Milk and Water, but no warmer than your Blood; let your Apples and Pears be full ripe, and you need not mix any other Ingredients with them, except you please to put a few of our own Country Seeds, either Carraway or Fen∣nl-Seds, which are very good and a∣greeable to most Stomachs: The best fashion to make these Pyes in, is that of Pasties, which in some Countries they call Ovrstaps; for Crust or Paste that is made after this manner will not stand or be raised according to the com∣mon custom And indeed if this wholsom Food were in shion, and that esteem which it deserves, People need not be at that charge with their Daughters to learn them to Ris Paste, which invention was more for State and Pride than Health. This last sort
of Apple and Pear-Pyes are the best, most natural and agreeable of all o∣thers; for they afford a Nourishment of a fine clean substance, open Ob∣structions of the Brest, cleanse the Passages, and gently open the Belly, and you may eat of it every day, with∣out any kind of weariness, during the time such Fruits are in their full strength and vertue: I wish the Nice-Cockered Palated Citizens would but try the dif∣ference for one year, and then many of them would hate that Ignorance and Vanity whereby they have con∣tracted Diseases on themselves, and entailed them on their Posterity, which have no Remedy, if they shall continue stubborn, and walk down Hill to Destruction in the Path of blind Tradition; for no Medicines have power to cure the Distempers that are contrcted by improper Pre∣parations, Mixtures and Superfiuity, if the smae be still continued. This is evident from daily Experience; for do we not find every succeeding Gene∣ration more infirm and diseased than the former? 2. In the baking your Pyes the Ou.
ought to stand open, or at least the O∣venlid not so close but that some Air may pass, for this Element is the true Life of the Spirit: therefore all Pre∣parations in which the Air has its free circulation the Tincture and pure spi∣rituous Vertues are preserv'd from Suffocation, and thereby the true natural Colour, Smell and Taste pre∣serv'd without violation, which o∣ther-wise cannot be done to that ad∣vantage. 3. When your Pyes are sufficiently baked, draw them, and cut holes in the top of each, that the sulpherous Atomes and fiery vapours may the better pass away, and separate them∣selves, which will make such Pies sweet, and less windy, and much more wholsome. 4. You ought neither to eat them hot, nor put Butter into them, as the custom of some is; for that does but waste your Butter, and render your Pyes less wholsom than otherwise they would be. But if you let them stand, as aforesaid, till they are through cold, you may eat freely of them, for they are a brave wholsom food.
Also, ripe Apples raw are ve good, being eaten alone, or with Bread, not as a common food, but sometimes between whiles; for they clear an open Obstructions of the Stomach, an gently loosen the Belly; the same most other Fruits, as Apricocks, P∣ches, Plumbs of all sorts, Gooserr Currants, and the like, if eaten mode∣rately on clean well-prepared Sto∣machs, not after Dinner, or in Wan∣tonness on full Paunches, as is the cu∣stom of Gluttons, and such as are much strangers to Nature as to Tem∣rance As for Pies made of iesh, with Fruits, Spices and Butter in the Crust, they are utter Enemies to the Stomach, and the natural Heat thereof, they dull the edge of the Palate, stop and cloy the Orifice of the Stomach, ob∣struct and fur the Passages, breed evil Juices, bad Blood, and consequently, impure Spirits, causing heavy lumpish Dispositions to attend all those that frequently eat such improper Food, and this so much the more if eaten Piping-hot, as the common way is; And rather than the Veison-Pasty shall want
store of poysonous sulpherous Steams, my Lady will have it put into the Oven three of four days one after another, that it may forsooth!) come to the Table Reking-hot; whereas if her Ma∣damship had but any Acquaintance with Dame Nature, or the Princess Reason, or plain Grammer Experience, they would all tell her, That though her fine Pasty, with as many Towers o'th' top on't as a fortifi'd City, presaging danger or de∣struction to those that shall attaque it, be at best but an untoward unnatural kind of Food, yet 'twere much better Cold than Hot at first, much more after the grea∣sie Crust and stifled Flesh has so often been Parboyled in the furious Steams of a close sulpherous Oven. The cause of which I have oft told you already, and fear I must do so again, before you will understand, and so regard it as to aban∣don your old silly mischievous Customs; but the Reason is this, The pure vola∣tile Spirits and sweet Balsamick Vertues of all things are in a great measure de∣stroy'd by the sierce Saturnine and Mar∣tial Fires, and for want of the free E∣gress and Regress of the Air, and there∣fore a less quantity of baked Flesh, especially
hot, will cloy and dull the edge the Appetite, than either Roasted o Boyl'd, which is a sure demonstration that the Preparation is not so proper or natural. Likewise, here by the way I cannot but advertise all that regard their Health, That they ought to for bear the eating of Hot Bread; for the same does plentifully contain the fierce ful∣pherous Vapours and windy Fumes which are very injurious to the Health, of the Body; as also, that Bread ought not to be eaten till 'tis at least two days old; for before, it is stopping, and apt to fur and obstruct the Stomach, being harder of Concoction than that which is two, three or four days old, because in such new Bread, not only the fore men∣tioned sulpherous Atomes of the Fire lie lurking, but there is also a phlegmy humid part, which a little time does dissipate and dry away, and then the Bread becomes much wholsomer, and also easier of Concoction: 'Tis true, new Bread is much desired and eaten in Towns and Cities, but it is not for its Vertues, but meerly for Wantonness and Custom, and want of Understand∣ing
CHAP. XII. Of Raisins of the Sun. THis is a Forreign Fruit, but of late years become of general use, and by some admired and esteemed, especi∣ally in Diet for sick and weak People, as if it were as necessary as Weat, which is much to be pitied, except People did know how to use them to better advan∣tage than commonly they do. The truth is, Raisins are a brave noble Fruit, endued with an excellent Ver∣tue the aimable and friendly sweet Quality is predominate in them, and therefore they afford a good strong lusty Spirit, and are hot in operation, if not allayed by the mixture of some proper Ingredients; but they being unequal in their parts, the frequent eating them does naturally hat and sharpen the Blood, generate Phlegy Hu∣mours, obstruct the Passages. clog the Sto∣mach, dull the Appetite, and consequent∣ly indispose the whole Body; and they
are far more injurious to Children than to mature Age, though bad to both: 'Tis a sort of Fruit that ought not by any means to be mixed with our com∣mon Food, nor to be boyled or baked, as the usual Custom of the English is; for that destroys most of their pure Vertues, and renders them unhealthy, as most people may find by Experi∣ence. Besides, our Women, who are the chief promoters of such things, ought to consider that the Fruits that grow in hot Climates, are nothing so agreeable to our Natures and Constitutions as those of our own Growth, especially such things in which any Quality of Nature is extream, as it is in this Fruit, which the Sun and Elements have already prepared to the highest degree, and therefore they will not endure any other Preparation without violence done to the good Vertues, whch renders them next door to Pu∣trifaction, and whatsoever Food they shall be either boyled or baked in or with, such Food will stink and putrifie so much the sooner; and as they will keep good a year, if they remain in∣tire,
so being any wayes altered, then they will not keep three dayes good: Therefore all that are wise will for∣bear using them in such manner and Mixtures. Yet it must be acknowledged, that Raisins have their Uses, though we might well be without them, and ma∣ny others of the like Nature; For 1st. They are very good and wholsom be∣ing eaten with Bread for a Breakfast or a Supper; for the Bread moderateth the Inequality of the Raisins, and makes them easie of Digestion, cleans∣ing the Stomach, and gently loosen∣ing the Belly; and indeed this is the oly proper way of eating them as Food. 2dly, They are better in Phy∣sical Operations then any other sweet thing, especially than Sugar, because they are not altered from their first intire state, therefore their Juices are far more cleansing than Sugar, or any other Sweets that have been prepared by the Fire.
CHAP. XIII. Of Currants, their Nature, &c. CVRRANTS are much more inju∣rious to the Health of English Constitutions than Raisins; for the latter may be properly used by eating them with Bread; but do what you will with Currants, they will be no better than Doctor Butler's curiously prepared Dish of Cowumbers, only most excellently fit to be thrown away to the Dunghil: And indeed, the In∣conveniences of eating or mixing Cur∣rants amongst common Food, the Na∣tives of those Countries whence they come teach us, if Custom, and the com∣mon Cry of the Ignorant Multitude did not blind People with strange Prejudi∣ces against all the Rmonrances of Rea∣son or Expeience; for they will rarely ever eat them, either alone or mixed amongst their Food; for they do not esteem them wholesome, nor hardly so proper as our Hawthorn or Elder-Berries;
nay, these by a little custom would be much more proper for our Healths to be eaten by themselves, or mixed with other things, than Currants, which are of such an untoward Nature, that those Natives that work amongst them, and strew and pack them into the Casks, have their Feet, Legs and Hands made Leporous and Sabby thereby, which proceeds from their hot vnmous Qualities, and with these loatsom Le∣poous Feet and Legs they tread them into the Casks, and then you ca them for Dainties. And though when eaten here these evil Qualities, are mittiga∣ted by being mixed with our mode∣rate and more friendly Grains and Fruits; yet still, whatever they are put into, does thereby become the worse, and the more unwholsom. A∣mongst other Extravagances, it is a great fashion to boyl them in Water-Gruel, and after they are so boyled, this Water-Gruel cannot with any de∣light or pleasure be eaten with Buter and Salt, as plain Water-Gruel can, the Currants give it such an unpleasant flat nauseous Relish, having no true natural Sweetness, or lively Briskness
in it; the very same is to be under∣stood of Raisins, when boyled; there∣fore the good Housewife is forced to add another Ingredient viz Sugar, to raise it to a more full and perfect Taste and Relish. Now by these improper forreign Ingredients the true genuine Nature and Operation of that friendly Grain Oatmeal is destroyed, as though there had been no such thing; nor is the hurt less to many other sorts of Food that are of greater Consequence, which are daily spoiled by these im∣proper Mixtures, which render them hot, and subject to sop and fur the Passages, generating evil Juices, gross Blood and impure Spirits. For which cause all People that eat frequently of such Foods, more especially young Children, are nothing so strong, brisk or lively as those who are constrained by pure Necessity to feed and live on the most simple, and meanest of our own Country Fruits, Grains and Herbs. This all will confess, yet most that have wherewithall are so bewitch'd to Foreign Novelies, that they had rather be afflicted with an hundred Diseases and Miseries, and have their Children
weakly, Ricketty and Leprous, tha not to gratifie a wanton Desire. It is the common Opinion that Cur∣rants are Cooling, therefore both the Learned and your common Nurses ad∣vise, that they should be boyled in Water-Gruel for sick People, and then Bster'd and Sugar'd, which makes it not only very hot, but strong enough for an Healthy low-man, whereby it overcomes weak Stomachs, they al∣ways forgeting what ought always to be remembred, viz. Tha weak Hats must have proportionable Foods, or else Nature will come by the worst of it. And as for Currants being to ing, 'tis absolutely false, like most of the rest of the grounds they go upon; for all Fruits in which the Sweet Quality does carry the upper Dominion, are hot i operation, and if it were not so, such things would not affod the greatest Spirits, and also the most in qantity when the Distiller takes them in hand. Also, their Heat will hereby appear, if you put such things into Beer, Ale, Wine, nay, Water it self, it will make such Liquor to ferment, and render it much stronger than before; for if you
put Sugar into Strng Beer, a less quan∣tity will make a Man drunk, than that which hath none in it. Let a person eat a Pint of  that is, only ater and  with a little Selt, Buter and Bread in it, and at a∣nother time a Pint made with Curarts, Sugar, Butter and Bad, as the sal way is, and let him observe whih is hardest of Concoction, and hottest of Operation, and also which he is light∣somest after; he shall certainly fid by Expeience, that the Plain Gruel is not only coolest, but easiest of Digestion, and he most Airy and pleasant after it. The truth is, it Men would but give themseles the leisure to try and ob∣serve things, they could not be such strangers to the Method of Well-liv∣ing and to the knowledg of Nature, who is the Hand-maid of God. For the Rea∣sons afoesaid, you may undoubtedly onclude, Currants are not only hot, but may also learn, that they are of a Nausous Quality, and if much eaten or frequently mixed with Food, they breed thick gross Juices in the Body, and infect the Blood with a sharp salt itching Quality or scorbutick Humour,
whence proceed general Weaknesses in the Joynts and Limbs, and unnatural Heats in the external parts, causing a lumpish Indisposition both of Body and Mind. Therefore we advise all that have any regard to their Healths, to refrain all such hurtful things, and content themselves (as their innocent lusty Fore Fathers did) with the Growth of our own Country, which will abun∣dantly furnish our Tables, and contri∣bute whatsoever is needfull for the maintenance of Health and Strength; but especially, we caution Children, Young People, and such as are Sickly, from the use of them, they being most hurtful to weak Natures. CHAP. XIV. Of Spices, their Nature and Opera∣tion. ALL sorts of Spices that come from the East or West-Indies, are in nature and operation hot and dry, and therefore not agreeable to our Nor∣thren
Conitutions, nor by any means fit to be mixed with our common Food; for they too violently heat the Blood, and destroy the pure thin refreshing Vapours and Spirits, and awaken the central Heat, which ought by no means to be stirred up; for it presently sets Nature into an unequal Motion, mak∣ing all the external parts in a flame. There is a vast difference between the Regions and Climates, both in respect of Celestial Influences, and by the Na∣ture of Soil and Constitution of Air whence those Spices come, and ours, that it amounts to almost a perfect Opposition; and what is Poyson, but a violent Antipathy or Contrariety in Nature? And if the Natives of those Countries will so cautiously mix or use them, how sparingly ought we to med∣dle with them? But our English have such an itching desire after Novelties, and every Ioan is so proud to be of my Lady Fidde-Faddles Humour, and long for things Far-fetcht and Dear-bought, that if we had ten times as many more brought over as we have, there be those amongst us would cry up the excellent Vertues of them, tho' there
is scarce any one thing so much de∣stroys and hurts our Health, both of Body and Mind, as the eating and drinking Foreign Ingredients with and a∣mongst our common Food; and how absurdly are those things mixt toge∣ther, whose Vertues and Vices are as contrary to each other as the Climates are different? What agreement or af∣finity is there between our Fruits, Grains, Herbs and Seeds, and those that come from the East and Wst-Indies? not so much as between the Complexi∣on of a Fat-nosed Lubber-lip'd Black∣amore, or swarthy Bantame, with a Head like a Sugar loaf, and our most Florid Beauties. In particular, what likeness or correspondence is there be∣tween Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Cina∣mon, Ginger, or Pomento, and the Flow∣er of Wheat, or any other Grain, or with Apples, Milk, Buter, Herbs or Flesh? Verily there is no simile between them, and the foolish Painter, that to a Mans Head added a Stags Neek and a Fishes Body, did not Limn a more deformed Monster, than those prepare a mon∣strous unwholsom Diet for either the well or sick, who jumble together In∣gredients
so heterogenious, and as it were diametrically opposite. The compounding of these Forreign Ingre∣dits with our Domestick Prductions, that chiefly destroys the Health of our People, and not so much the Compo∣sition of our own Growth, though there are too often very improper Mixtres of them also, but those how∣ever are not pernicious to that degree as the others are: For Example, Is not Sgar the occasion of such great Quantities of Gosries, and many other Fruits are gathered and eaten whilst they are immature, and have no more goodness nor vertue in them than the Leaves or Sticks of the same Trees? Also, what abundance of the like un∣ripe Fruits are Presrv'd (as the call it (though more properly they might say, Desty'd) and when yov have been at all that pains and charge, pray tell me what they are really good for, un∣less to please Children and Fools, and indulge wanton Liquorish Palates, who yet for the most part pay dear e∣nough for those Vanities, by losing all Appetite to wholsom Food, and bring∣ing upon themselves variety of Disea∣ses,
and then the Wizard of a Doctor must be sent for, to Redress those Mis∣chiefs which the Mother's Fondness occasiond; but then he goes so awk∣wardly to work, that instead of Re∣midying, he Encreases the Distempers, and at last the puling Young Heir, or the most beloved Girl dyes, and then Fa∣ther and Mother weep and wring their hand, and are ready to be distracted; And indeed they have more cause of Grief than they commonly think of, for Thousands of Parents by their foo∣lish Indulgence, in giving their Chil∣dren rich costly improper Food, be∣come accessary to the shortning of their Lives. Many of our Gentlewomen, who look upon themselves to be Saints, do yet make no Conscience of spoiling those good Creatures and hopeful Fruits which the Providence of God sends in∣to the World for the real use and be∣nefit of Mankind, whilst they turn them into Wantonness, and waste and pervert them before ever they come to Maturity, to quite contrary ends than that for which the great and good Cetor designd them; for he inten∣ded
them to supply humane Necessi∣ties, they abuse them to Extravangance, and Riot, d iquorishness, He gave them Vertues to add Health and Strength to such as should in their due season eat them, but they, by seizing upon them with an unnatural and un∣timely Violence (the same thing to Ve∣getabls as Muder or Killing is to Ani∣mals) and using them absurdly and pre∣posterously, make them the occasions of Diseases and Destruction; and yet how many Pounds do some Women trisle away in a year upon these harm∣ful Vanities and Superfluities? yea, and think themselves rare Housewives too, for this Prodigality, and are at Pains or Cost to bring up their Daughters to these Baneful Mysteries of Preserving, Conserving, &c. All which, besides a most impetinent Waste of their Hus∣bands Money, and spoil of Gods good Creatures, tend likewise to the destru∣ction of their own Health, and that of their Children; for no sooner have they by Gluttony, or eating of too great Quantities of Flesh, Fish, or other Rich Fods or overstrong Liquors brought emselves out of order, but away
they run or send Iillian the Chamber∣maid (who has already spoil'd her Teeth with Sweet-meats and Kisses) to the Closet for some Conserves, Preseves, or other Confectionary-Ware; and if that will not do (as alas! how should such sower abortive things, only Em∣balm'd with nauseous Sugar, do any good?) then fetch the Bottle of Black-Cherry-Brandy, the Glass of Aqua Mi∣rabilis, and after that take a Dose of Plague-Water; and she is no Body that has not a Room furnish'd plentifully with these pernicious confused Slip stops and Extravagancies. But tell me, my good Dames! what have you to say for these Curisities? What Benesit, what Advantage do you receive by them? Are you more Sound, Healthy or Strong than the Honest poor Country-Woman, that has none of them? Are you more free from suddain Qualms or settled Distempers? Have you better Appetites than they? Have you more Pleasure in eating your Larks and Phea∣sants, your dainty Bis, with Rich Poi∣nant Sawces, and delicious costly Wines, than they have in a Mess of good Milk, or a lusty piece of Brad and Chese,
and a Cup of Nutbrown-Ale of their own Brewing? Are your Sleeps more sound on your Down Beds, double for∣tified with Curtains of Silk and Sarce∣net, than theirs on their wholsom Sraw-Couches open to the Air that whistles in between the wooden Windows? Are you more free from Colds with your lannel Shifts, and your Man-like Drawers, and your Quilted Wastcoats, and Pettioats so many as makes you shew as big about the Haunches as a Dutch-Woman, and would half set up a Long-Lane Broer? Are you, I say, with all this Furniture free from catch∣ing Cold, any more than the Rosie-Com∣plexion'd Lass that courts the sweet kis∣ses of the Air in her Smock Sleeves, and trips over the Dewy-Plains in a Winters rosly Mring with but a brace of Lin∣sey-Woolsey Coats that are not long e∣nough to conceal the shape of her Well-Proportioned Lgg? Or are your Chil∣dren born more Lusty, or more free from Disases, as the Kings-Evil, Le∣prsies, Rickets, Ioynt-Aches, and other Distempers? Or are they better Com∣plexon'd, or straier-Limb'd, or hand∣somer Shap'd, or in any kind more
active, sprightly or vigorours than theirs? Alas! none of all this; the Advan∣tages lie all on the other side: Whilst you are continually complaining and sigh∣ing, they are merrily Singing; Whilst you are weak, and lose your natural Complexions, and have no Apptite, and can scarce relish the rarest Dainies, and your Sleeps are restless, and Distempers are continually either actually seizing on you, or at least threatning you, so that you are always forced to keep a Doctor or two in Pension for your Life-Guard; They are strong and lusty, and look as fresh as a May-Morning, and have Stomachs as sharp as a Scyth, and all their Meat seems Nctar, and their Drink Ambrosia, and their Sleeps are sweet as Mariners after a Tempest, their Breath as fragrant as Honey-Suck∣les; they never so much heard of half the Diseases that you groan under, and look upon Doctors as only Bawbles for Gentlefolks, and find an Oatmeat Cawdle or a Cardus Posset better Physick than any the Apothcaries Shop affords; their Children are in all respects lustier, founder, healthier, more active and strong,
of better Complexions and compleater Pro∣portions for the generality, than yours And why then will you still so indulge a Sottish Fond Humour and wanton Paate, seeing it is so destructive to your Well∣being, and that of your Dear Poste∣rity! But waving this not unseasonable Digression, and to return to Spice,—It must be acknowledged, that God made nothing in vain; Cloves, Mace, Nut∣megs, Cinamon, Pepper, Ginger and Po∣mento or Iamaica Pepper are brave noble Fruits, and smell, as it were, of Pa∣radise, and the great and good Crea∣tor is as much to be admired in them as any other Vegetations, for though they are not so useful for common Food, yet they have their excellent uses: Their chief Vertues reside in their most pleasant Scent, which is ve∣ry refreshing and chearing to the Spi∣rits; also, they are endued with a warming Quality, very profitable in Physical Operations, especially for some sort of Melancholy and Phlegmatick Com∣plexions. The same is to be under∣stood in Brandy, and other distilled Spirits, which often prove profitable
being taken when there is just occasion, in a Physical way; but of fatal conse∣quence to such as accustom themselves to the drinking of it at every turn; for then it quickly wounds the Healt by destroying the natural Heat; the like is to be understood of all Extreams, in Drinks and Food, which are dis∣harmonious in their parts. Therefore it is no ways safe to mix unequal Fruits with those that are equal; for then the Harmony of the whole will be vio∣lated. As to use our familiar Exam∣ple, Take the Flower of Wheat, Milk and Water, mix them and heat them to a Pap, these three things are equal and agreeable in their peculiar parts each with other, and make a brave wholsom Food either for young or old, on which alone you may live healthy and conten∣tedly for divers years; but if you mix with them Sugar and Spice, or either of them, then the company of this Stran∣ger puts them out of Tune, and breaks the Consort, so that if any one should be confined to this last sort but for one Month or two, their Palates and Stomachs will grow weary and loath it; And so it is with Cakes, in which
eight or ten Ingredients are mixed; how long could those that love them best, eat them, and not be weary? Not sixteen days together: But take Flower and Water and make Cakes there∣of, and on them you may live several years and never be tired. In like manner Flesh, Bread and Herbs harmonive, and a man may eat of them every day, but mixt Spanish Fruits, Spi∣ces, and the like, with fat Flesh and Butter, and prepare them as well as you can, you shall not eat them every day for one Month without loathing and weariness; the very same is to be understood of all other Foods and Drinks, and if People would not pre∣fer Custom, and what is cried up by the Multitude before the simple inno∣cent ways of Nature, it would be ca∣sie for every one to chuse and under∣stand what is most proper and agree∣able to the Stomach. For if they would set Gustom aside, then most would be led to Meats and Drinks that are na∣tural and proper by meer instinct, as most of the inferiour Creatures are, except some unclean Savages, as Swine, Bears, Lyons, and the like: And in
truth the greater part of Beasts have more understanding in Meats and Drinks than many Men; for Man crys, What were those things made for? As if God intended that all, right or wrong, must be cram'd into his Paunch, and that there could be no other use for them, but for him to devour them; as if to be Ornaments to the Universe, to set forth the Power and the Wisdom of God, in the making, and feeding, and preserving so many innumerable Crea∣tures, and invite Man thereby to praise, magnifie and adore his Maker, were not more Noble ends than to eat them to his own Prejudice. But so greatly precipitated is he into Wrath, Violnce and Oppression, that he is not willing any thing should escape his luxurious Throat, though the use of it be to the destruction both of his Body and Mind. For the source of all Evils to Man hath been his suffering his Imaginations and unclean Desires to wander after those things that are neither needful nor any way benificial; for faslly imagining that all things were made meerly for his use, he entred with the power of his free depraved Will, with a rapid
Motion, into all Beastiality, and so de∣prived himself of the divine Vision which he was made in and for, and not to live in the Power of the dark Magick and Brutality, to domineer, and rend, and tear each other to pieces, far worse than the Savages of the Desart. For Man was created in the Image of God, and ordained to live under the Govern∣ment of the divine Principle, and if he had continu'd under its dominion, then every sort of innocent Food would have satisfied him, according to that Commission, Every green Herb and Tree bringing forth Fruit shall be to thee for Meat. Nor was he clothed with the Skins of Beasts before his Transgres∣sion, and they are still the Spoils and Reliques of Violence; for he was made Naked, that is, in Innocency, and his Clothing himself with the Excrements of Beasts, does truly intimate his de∣praved state, especially when he be∣comes proud thereof; than which there cannot be a greater Vanity in the World.
CHAP. XV. Of Oyl, and its Nature. AMongst all Fruits or other things eatable, brought from beyond Seas, OYL is one of the best, being of a brave nourishing clean Nature, mild and friendly to most Constitutions, far exceeding Butter or the Fat of lesh, and that it agrees not with some, is for want of use when they are Young; 'tis endued with Equality and Concord, as being distilled by Nature's choicest Limbeck, and It would be much for the Health of our English People if they did eat more of it, and less Fruits and Spices, though we have no necessity for either; but since our Desires do so itch after Novelties, it were much more commendable for us to chuse those things that have the nearest affinity with our Natures; and of all sorts of fat things, Oyl is the most innocent, as proceeding from the cleanest Radix, and being the product of Vegetation,
and therefore is very proper and agree∣able to humane Nature, being joyn'd unto and eaten with Hrbs and Fruits, they having the nearest afinity in their Basis or Original, and therefore Gyl being eaten with Bread or Herbs, is to an undepraved Palate, not only more delightful, and to the Stomach easier of Concoction, affording a finer and cleaner Nourishment, better Blood and purer Spirits, than either fat of Flesh or Butter, though the last of them is very wholsom, Cream and Butter being our Oyl, and eaten with proper or cleaner things, as Bread, Herbs, and the like, does make a proper Mixture, and con∣sequently good Food. The Reason why Oyl is with grea∣test commendation eaten with Herbs and Bread, is, because all Mixtures of Food are most agreeable to the Human Nature that bear the nearest affinity in their Basis; and as Oyl is the true fat of Vegetables, so it suits and agrees bet∣ter with them, than with any sort of Flesh, or other Food proceeding from Flesh; but with Fish it is very good and wholsom, especially Sal-fish, for by its Balsamick Quality it allayes the ierce
keen Property of the Salt, and swee∣tens the lean Body of the Fish: And for these Purposes it is far better than Butter. But it is to be noted, That Oyl ought not to come near the heat of the Fire, for that will presently destroy the pu∣rer parts and vertues thereof, and then it will become strong and fulsom; the same is to be understood if it be mixed with any Foods whilst hot which ought always to be pretty cool before you mix your Oyl: Therefore To sted Brend and Oyl, though frequently used, is not so good as cold bked Brad and Oyl; than which there is scarce a bet∣ter Breakfast or Supper; for it clean∣seth the Passages, is easie of Concocti∣on, breeds good Blood and fine Spi∣rits, whence proceeds any airy light∣som Disposition, and good habit both of Body and Mind. However, those that accustom themselves to the fre∣quent eating thereof, ought to remem∣ber their best Friend Tem erance, that is, to eat it sparingly, and not in too great Quantities. Olives, or the Fruit whence Oyl pro∣ceeds, are nothing so good as the Oyl
it self; for being gathered unripe, o immature, and put into a Pickle made for that purpose to keep them sound, they are apt, especially if frequently eaten, to obstruct the Stomach and Passages. The best way is to eat them with store of good Bread, now and then between whiles, but most that are eaten in England are taken on full Stomachs, in Superfluity and Wanton∣ness, so that it would be no loss to is to be without them. CHAP. XVI. Of Honey, its Nature and Opera∣tion, with some Notes on the Practice of Chymistry. THe Antients have attributed some hundreds of Medicinal Vertues to Honey; but in my opinion it will hardly perform half that which is said of it; yet to give it its due, it must be acknowledged to be a brave Noble and friendly thing to Nature, of which, some is better, some worse, according
to the Nature of the Herbs and Flow∣ers out of which this King of Flies extracts it; for cause, some Honey is of a more unpleasing Taste than other, as being harsh, and with a kind of bitterish farewell, apt to gripe the Sto∣mach and Bowels when it is tinged with Martia and Saturnine Herbs, as when the Bees gather it from the Blos∣soms of Furz, Centaury, or other Ve∣getables of like Nature, that grow upon harsh, sower, poor Commons and Heaths; yet for Women and Maids, who are afflicted with Stoppages, and the Disease call'd the Green-Sickness, Medicines made with this sort of Ho∣ney, are very powerful to remove those Evils: But for general use that Honey is best which is extracted or drawn from the most pleasant fragrant Flowers that grow in Meadows and sweet Downs, where Coslips, and the like, delight to grow; as also from the Blossoms of Corn, Peaches and Ho∣ney-Suckles; for the Honey thereof made is smoother, finer and pleasan∣ter than the other, and more agree∣able to Nature.
But there is yet a more subtle and almost nnknown difference in Honey, which ought to be noted; for as Ho∣ney being drawn from a vast variety of innocent delicate Herbs, and most beau∣tiful sweet smelling Flowers, (the bright Stars of Earth, as the Planets and Constellations are the Flowers of Heaven) may justly, in its own Na∣ture be stil'd, The most Transparent and Richest Iuice or Liquor in the World, and the finest and most pleasant Sweet of all others; so the same is to be under∣stood not so much of our vulgar Ho∣ney, as in its original Preparation and Perfection, viz. if it could be pro∣cured whilst it remains intire, as it is extracted out of the Herbs and Flowers into a little Bag or thin Skin, which lies in the very center of the Bee, as may be manifest to sense, if you can be so cruel, when you catch one of them, to sever it in two, for then, if you are quick, you may take out the bag intire, but if you are too long a∣bout it, then the Bee will suck it up, or destroy it. This Bag contains a most curious thin transparent Liquor, of an excellent fine Colour, and fine
innocent and perfect Taste, leaving be∣hind in the Mouth no Hugo, or strong Taste, as our vulgar Honey does, when eaten alone. Now this is the Bees true Elixir, the proper Paradisical Honey; but when the Bees hae dgested it, which cannot be done without some vi∣olation to the pure volatile Spirits, then they spue or vomit it up. Ater which it becomes of another colour, smell and taste, and also of a diffrent nature and operation; for whilst it re∣mains intire and undigested, its Co∣lour is clear and white, its Taste an innocent sweet, with a grateful come-off on the Palate, its Small pure, aiy and delightful, but after the Bee hath digested or separated it, and spued it up with her Winters Provision or store, then i loseth its white Colour, and its pure Tae, and its airy Smell, and be∣comes more strong, dull and unpla∣sant, and in no particular so gratefully as whilst it remai'd in the Bag intire. It is further to bunderstood, that this Spagyrical or Cymical Art of the Bees do scifl consi in the Poys us Root or Sting in Nature; for the At∣tractive Faculty stands in the wrathful
Poysons of Saturn, which powerfully attracts all things unto it self, and the Sparatire Propery consists in the bitter Sing of Mars and Mercuy, therefore the Chymical Furnace, the Bees Labo∣tory, or that Tool whereby they and some other Flies perform these won∣derful things, and separate the pure Essential Spirit and Balsamick Body of what they gather from the grose phleg∣my Qualities, is their Sting, which is of a poysonous Nature, as it appars, when they in Anger leave it behind them in any Animal, for presently the part rages and swells; but when they have thus lost or dispoiled themselves of this Sting or Poyson, then they can∣not be Labourers in this Spagyrical Art any longer, nor draw more Honey out of the Flowers, but pure necessity compels them to become Thieves and Robbers, and live on the spoil of others, and thenceforth are called Drones. Now so it is, that most sort of Flies do love Honey, and all sweet things, as Sugr and the like, to feed on, but only those that are naturally endued with a Venom or Sting, are able to ex∣tract it; for 'tis by that sting that they
separate the Vertue from the Vice, which is a wonderful Arcanum, and may afford a most curious Philosophical Speculation; for indeed it surpasses all the Spagyrical skill of men; for they make a present separation, and are not obliged to serment or sower their Li∣quor before they put it into their Lim∣beck; for if they should, they could obtain only the fierce fiery wrathful Spirit, as happens in all Distillations of Balsamick Liquors, as Wine, and the like; but the Bees extract the more pure substance, viz. the Volatile Spi∣rits, Tinctures, and sweet Balsamick Body, which in all Distillations is de∣stroy'd, and only the firce original fie∣ry Spirit preserv'd, which when it los∣eth its friendly Companion, is ami∣able Sun of true Light, and sweet plea∣sant Vertue, then presently it becomes a high lofty untameable Power, of a fierce fiery Nature and Operation, as is manifest in all such Spirits as Brandy, Rum, &c. which all prey upon the Natures of such as accustom themselves to those fiery Liquors; of which, if poor Mortals were snsible, they would hate themselves for their La∣bours
in that id, and Kings and other Goverous would make Laws, not only against the I inkers, but against the Invenion too of such pernicius Arts. Wherefore thn do our earned Spa∣gyri men spread their ums so large and lotily, and keep such a clut∣ter and boasting of their Art and Chy∣mical Medicines, which in their highest Preparations are not to be compared to the skill and product of a poor silly Fle  Bee? Let us survey the Method taken by these fiery Philosphers, and let Reas njudge what Vertues are to be ex∣tracted from such Preparations. First, when they tke any Herb, Flower, Seed, Crain or  to make a Mdicine of, they put it into some Mersrum as they call it or Liquor, wherein it may lie and ferment or sour, which does pre∣sently urn and suffocate the odoifer∣ous Smells, pure Vlaile Spiris and sweet Body, in which consists the true Vertue and healing Qlity of all things, both in the Animal, Vegerble and Mineral Kigdoms: After this, they put it into the Furner or Lambeck, and through the fierce heat of the Fire there will run off a Brandy, or hot sul∣pherous
Spirit, which does contain on∣ly the fierce original Sirits, void of the middle Quality, and all the Semi∣nal and Balsamick Vertus; therefore such their Spirits are at the end of Na∣ture, and you may add what Balsamick Bodies or Sweets you please, thy can∣not be made to work or ferment; and although such fiery Spirits are good in some Medicines, being properly mix∣ed with things of a Balsamick Nature, yet alone they are not, because they have lost the Medicinal Vertues in their Preparation; for the healing Vertue in all things proceeds from and consists in the benign and friendly Quality, which the Fire dissipates and destroys; and as long as it remains, so long the pure Smell and sweet pleasant Taste of that thing continues; but in the hot sul∣pherous fierce original Fires the evil Smells and nauseous Tastes (which most of the vulgar things called, Medicines, are subject unto) do consist. There is a certain Maxime, though ☞ little understood or regarded, That all Preparations, either in Food or Physick, that do not conserve the Essen∣tial Vertues of those things pretended to be
prepared (that is, the pure volatile Spi∣rits and sweet Body, whence the true Colour, pure Smell and delightful Taste, and all other good Qualiies, both Medicinal and Nutrimental, do arise and proceed) such Food and Medi∣ines can never answer the ends of Nature, being weak nausous, improper, and depri∣ved of those very Vertues whih should do the business for which they were admini∣stred. The truth of what is here deli∣ver'd may be confirmed from daily Experience; for do not all Vegetations quickly putrifie and rot when there is any Violence offered, to the subtle Spi∣its and sweet Qualities, whether it be by improper Preparations, or o∣ther Accidents proceeding from the Elements. Therefore there is required greater Understanding and skill in preparing Medicines, than most are either endued with or imagine; for the amiable heal∣ing Quality in all things is of a very sub∣tle tender Nature, and the pure Nutri∣mental and Medicinal Vertues, lie, as it were hid, or captivated in the crude Phlegmy Body both in Vegtables, Ani∣mals and Minerals; and when the Artist
would make a Medicine thereof, he must either by the help of the Coelesti∣al Fire and Elements, or by the com∣mon Fire, or some proper Menstruums digest and open the gross Saturnire and harsh Martial Body, which in all things does in some degree captivate the Essen∣tial Vertues and Paradisical Properties, but so delicate is the friendy Nature, that it will not endure any kind of Violence without great Prejudice; for being (by opening its Poyson, the crude Body) set at liberty and becomes volatile, if such Preparations be con∣tinued any longer than the proper point of time, the Essential Vertues being already upon the Wing, will presently fly away; and if the friend∣ly Element the Air have not its free Circulation, then they become suffo∣cated; for the Air is the Life of the true and living Spirit in all things. Is not this clear and manifest in Her∣bage, as Hay, which Husbandmen pre∣serve for their Cattel; and in Corn, if it stand after it is full Ripe, or when cut, if it lie too long in the open Air, will not the pure Essential Vertues de∣part and evaporate? and then, do not
all such things lose their natural Colour, pure mell and pleasant Taste, and so be∣come of no use nor true veue either for Food or Physick? The very same comes to pass in all Housewifery and Prepa ati∣ons; if it be under-prepared, it is gross, heavy and full of flatulent uies; if over, then its pure Vertues become evaporated, and it will afford no good nor firm Nouishment, but is of a ull Taste, a Duskie or else Martial Colour. For Example, Bread, whose predomi∣nant Quality stands in the Ventrial and Ivial Natue, and therefore of a pure White; but the aturnine and Martial heats of the Or, where the friendly Element, the Air, hath not its free egress and regress, it becomes of a Duskish Brown or Yellowish Colour, and a rough harsh Taste; whereas if the Pre∣paration were proper, it would be white, smooth, soft, and of a sweeter Taste, and easier of Digestion. From what hath been said, it ap∣pears, not to be an easie matter in Phy∣sical Preparations and Separatins to pre∣serve the friendly healing Properties compleat and intire, and yet at the same time open, digest and destroy the
gross Phlegmatick Body, since the for∣mer is so apt to be violated, if great Prudence be not used; And if once this benigne Quality be wounded, such Foods or Medicines become fulsome, fierce and nauseous to Nature, far worse and of more dangerous consequence than they were whilst they remain'd crude, as being hotter and more fierce, be∣cause the Moderator is gone; so that it would prove much safer if the diseased took the crude Herbs, &c. for then they would have the innate Vertues, as well as the Vice; but after the common Preparations, which most Physitians and Apothecaries use, you must be con∣tented with a meer Nauseate or Loathsome Medicine, in which the pure Essential Vertues are all, or for the most part, destroyed; for all Vege∣tations and other things, in which the Properties and Qualities of Nature are unequal, either by Nature, or rendred so by Artless Art, will be strong, and of a fulsome Taste, dull and heavy on the Palate and Stomach, &c. And whatsoever is said here of the improper Preparation of Vegetables, and the Evils that come thereby, will in a
more especial manner take place in the Spagyrical or Chymical Art, when it drives into the Mineral Kingdom; for all or most of the benigne Vertues or good Properties of Minerals are lockt up and captivated in the harsh Poysons and gross crude Bodies of Saturn and Mars, and their Birth and Generation is in the deep Bowels of the Saturnine cold Earth, where the Sun and Elements have not so free Influences and Circula∣tion through them, as they have on all Vegetations and Fruits; therefore they are far more harsh, hard and poy∣sonous, than those things that grow in the open Elements; neither are they in any degree so friendly and familiar to our Natures, as Herbs, Fruits, Grains and Seeds; therefore Mineral Medicines are of much more dangerous and fatal consequence than the others, if they be not prepared as they ought to be, that is, so as that the good Vertues be not destroy'd; for in Vegetable Preparations there does at best remain only a dull gross flatulent Body, which indeed has no power to cure, nor very much to hurt. But nothing is more dangerous and poysonous than ill prepared Me∣dicines
of Minerals: Therefore in Sik∣ness I had rather fall into the hands of an unskilful Gallenist, than of a rash and ignorant Chymist, the last being much more to be dreaded than the for∣mer, though both are bad. And it is common with some that think them∣selves great in the Chymical Art, to take Antimony and other Minerals, and prepare them, and make Medicines, which are tenfold worse than when it was in its natural crude Body, as ap∣pears by its fierce poysonous operation; for before its Preparation a man might take forty, sixty or an hundred Grains without any manifest prejudice, but when it has passed the strong sulphe∣rous Fires and Calcinings of the Chy∣mists, then ten or twelve Grains will do the business, that is, purge and vo∣mit, as if it would rend and tear Na∣ture to pieces; and if any should take but half the quantity that might safe∣ly have been taken whilst it remained crude in all its parts, it would prove an infallible Cure for all Diseases, by putting a period to Life. Whereby iundeniably appears, that the Chymist has not, as many falsly
boast, by his Art digested or meliora∣ted the terrible fierce Wrath and strong Poysons of Saturn and Mars, and pre∣served the blessed and most aimable Properties of Venus, Iupiter and Sol, which last endue all things, in which they carry the upper Dominion, with a gentle mild friendly Nature and O∣peration; but on the contrary, they render the poysonous Qualities more violent and intense; and the benign Pro∣perties in most Mineral Preparations are destroyed, suffocated and wounded by their fierce and improper Fires, and for want of Understanding in the time, so that the venomous Wrath becomes tenfold more fierce than it was before; and the chiefest matter they can boast of, is, That with much Art and Industry they have destroyed the good healing balsa∣mick Vertues, and so enraged the poyson∣ous Wrathful Nature, that a less quantity will do their business. But let them know, that all the Healing and Medicinal Pro∣perties rede in the friendly Principle, and in whatsoever Food or Medicine the amiable Vertue or balsamick Oyl is wounded, that thing thenceforth be∣comes abominable, so far from deser∣ving
the Name of an Help or Remedy, that it is a meer Nauseat to Nature. It is further to be noted, that all Me∣dicines that are fierce, wrathful, poy∣sonous, and unequal, in which the be∣nign Properties are impotent, and the fierce original dark Powers so predomi∣nate, that ten, twenty or thirty Grains or a few Drops will affright Nature, and put her into an Agonious fit, as for the most part destructive to the Well∣being and Health both of the Body and Mind; for they do incorporate with their Similes, and excite the lurking Poysons in the Body, and put a further Dismayment on the weak Oyl and pure Vertues, the strengthning of which would be the right Cure. And it is a very great chance if any such rough chur∣lish Medicines do any Cure, but altoge∣ther the contrary. 'Tis true, many per∣haps may recover after such Physick, but that is no Argument of their excel∣lency or safety. If a Physitian should have at any time three hundred Pati∣ents, one might safely pass ones words, That if not one of them took any of his Medicines, yet two hundred and fifty of them would recover; and ye
should the Physitian in this case have the glory of Curing them all, when in truth they owe the benefit solely to the Mer∣cy of God, and goodness of his Hand∣maid Nature. It is also to be considered, That there are some Chymical Preparations, as Powders, and the like, that have no Purgative or Vomiting Quality, nor any other manifest way of working or altering of Nature, being no more sen∣sibly felt than a crum of Bread after it is in the Belly. And these have been and are much cry'd up for the wonders they do: And in truth they are much to be preferr'd before the former un∣corrected Poysons, which rend and tear the Body to pieces; for these, per∣haps, do not hurt, and what do they do, I am not able to say; but most cer∣tain it is, that as many as happen to be well after the taking them, do attribute their Cure to these silent Medicines. However, this I will be bold to tell you, That in Chymical, and especially Mineral Preparations, it is a very difficult point, and I think, more than any mortal man can certainly undertake to perform, To correct, allay and destroy
the Venoms of Saturn and Mars, and at the same time preserve the more amiable and friendly Vertues, which are in their own Nature so very subtle, tender and fine, that every little Incon∣veniency or Violence wounds them; and the difficulty is hereby further en∣creased, for that in what Medicine so∣ever the original Fires of Saturn and Mars are destroyed or wholly annihil∣lated, the benign Properties can no lon∣ger subsist; For where there is no Fire there is no Light; for the Fire is the Fa∣ther of the Light, and all Life and Move∣ability stands in the Poysonous Root; therefore the Artist must not annihil∣late those poysonous Principles in Nature, for they are the very Original of every Life, but his work is to correct them, that the benign Principle and healing Qua∣lity may arise and tincture, or shine through them, that so their Strife may cease, and all the Properties incorpo∣rate and embrace each other, and so attain the Vnity, and then such a Medi∣cine will have power and vertue to tune the Discords of Nature into an Harmony, and allay the irritated Poy∣sons in the Body, and so awaken and
strengthen the dismay'd Oyl and fading Vertues, and so the Cure will be soon effected. Thus it appears, that to take a crude poysonous Mineral or Vegetable, and open its gross Body, and correct the Venoms, and awaken the good Balsa∣mick Vertues, that so they may predo∣minate and tinge the whole, is one of the highest and most difficult Points in the Spagyrical Science: But on the con∣trary, 'tis no great matter to make a Devil, being half made already, that is, 'tis easie to make a thing worse, but hard to render it better; for its Ver∣tues cannot appear till the Poysons be moderated, which must be done by the Artists helping hand, which to do, re∣quires as great Understanding as to obtain that wonderful Thing, so much talk't of, but rarely, if at all known or understood, viz. The Grand Elixir or Philosophers Stone; whereas indeed neither this nor the other can be attain∣ed by any humane Study, Learning, or Industry, but only by the divine Bounty and favourable Mercy of the God of Peace and true Love. But how∣ever, it often comes to pass, that though
the Medicines be not prepared in Na∣ture's own way, nor so as to them na∣rurally pofitable and Homogeneal, yet nevertheless the Prayers of the Ad∣minister, and the Faith of the Receiver, may and do often work Wonders; for Faith is abe to remove Mountains. There∣fore many Medicines, though in them∣selves impoper, have wrought great Cures, so great is the Power of Zeal and Faith, and sincere calling on the Name of the Lord, which is the only Universl and Infallible Medicine, and surest Port of Safety. CHAP. XVII. Of Sugar and Sugar-Candy, their Nature and Operation. SUgar is of late Years become of al∣most universal use with all that have where with to procure it, which proves of evil Consequence to most of them, especially Women and Children, who are the chief eaters thereof; 'tis in truth an excellent and rich Fruit, being indued
with the King of all Tastes; for Sweet∣ness is the best and richest Quality in Nture, being the moderator and qua∣lifier of the Bitter, Sour, Astringn or Salish Quality, both in Animals, Vege∣tables and Minerals, and from this a∣miable Quality doth arise all beauiou Colours, Smells and Tastes in Meats and Drinks, and other things, the House or Cabinet of the pure volatile and essen∣tial Spirits, the appeaser and qualifier of the fierce rathful Saturnine and Martial Fires; therefore in whatsoever things that sweet Quality is impotent, the same become fierce, wrathful and harsh; if in Animals they are ravenous and cruel, as Bears, Lyons, Tygars, Butchers, Souldiers, Wolves, Dogs, Crocadiles, Pikes, Cormorants, Sharks, Vultures, and many others both on Earth, and in the Air, and Water, of monstrous Shapes and hideous Forms; if in Vegetables, as Herbs and Fruits, they are strong, rank & poysonous, and much more in Minerals. Nevertheless, if this sweet and so much desirable Quality shall be too strong, so as it were totally to capti∣vate all the other Qualities, as happens in Sugar, and many other Fruits, then
its good and amiable Vertues are turn∣ed eil, for such are all extreams of whatsoever kind in Nature, and of bad consequence, if it be no properly mix∣ed or incorporated and eaten with o∣ther things, or by it self very sparing∣ly; for many times the best things prove as prejudicial to health as those of less value, nay, more harmful to Health, because they are more inticing. Thus the too frequent mixing of Sugar with our common Foods and Drinks, obstrcts the course of Nature, heats the Blood till it becomes thick and putri∣fied, whence proceed Stoppages of the Nerves, hindring the Passages of the Spirits, so that they become heavy, dull and impure, because the Blood cannot freely circulate; and these Evils do in an especial manner take place amongst Children, Women and Young People, who chiefly maintain the Confectioners, and are the great Devourers of Sweet-meats. Few there be that are sensible, or in∣deed so long as they live intemperate∣ly, can be sensible of the mischiefs of improper Mixtures; and as it must be confessed that Sugar in its own nature is
one of the best Vegetables, so it must be affirmed, that as it ian Exream or a thing unequal in its Parts and Qualifica∣tions, so whatsoever Foods and Drinks 'tis mixed withal, it inclines them to its own Nature, viz. to Inequality, if care and wisdom be not use; and therefore is not to be used with eable Fruits and Grains, as Wheat, and the like, nor with Milk, nor several sorts of Gruls and Pottges, for they are all endued with sufficiency of this Balsamick or Sweet Quality already. Besides, the art that is used to make the Juice or thin Liquor of the Sugr-Canes into Sugar, does so alter and change it from its simple Original, that it becomes of another Nature and Ope∣ration, as is manifest from the different Tastes of the one and the other; for the Juice of rpe Sugar-Canes has a most delicate fine simple, and as one may say, innocent sweetness, leaving Behind in the Mouth no strong Taste or ill Relish, but every way perfect, and without offence to Nature, and a man may without weariness eat more there∣of than he can of Sugar, especially of fine Sugar; but on the contrary Sugar
after the first 2 or 3 Mouhfuls, doth not only leave bhind it an usous strong Taste or Hug▪ but also quickly tires the eaters thereof. And as the mixing of Sugar with the before-mni∣ond bign Grains and Fruits is impro∣per, so kewise is it in vain to add the same to Martal atunine and unripe Fruits that are harsh, sour and bitter; for unripe Frus can no more be made propr by mixing mature Fruits with tem, tan Brandy can be made whol∣som Drink by mixing Sugar or Sweets with it; This you may perceive in the case of stale harsh Beer, you may mix Sugar with it, viz. such a quantity as will allay and hide the roughness and hardness of the Beer, as to the Pallate, and make it go down some-what plea∣santly, but when it comes into the Sto∣mach, (Natures Laboratory) here she makes separation, then t aturnine and Martial harshness will again appear in its own Form, and het the whole Body, and generate the Gravl or Sone, if it find suitable matter: The same is to be understood in Foods; what Sto∣mch will be satisfied after a whole Meal only of Goosebery-Tarts made of
young green Gooseberries made palla∣table with Sugar? and so of all other things that are either unripe or une∣qual in their parts, and the reason is at hand, viz. because two Extreams, though never so cunningly joyned, can∣not produce a thing of a middle Nature or equal Operation, and agreeable to Nature. But here perhaps some will object, If these good things, Sugar, Spanish Fruits, &c. most not be eaten, wherefore were they made? To which I answer; The Creator made all things for his own Honour and Glory, and made Man in his own Im∣age, and endued him with divine and humane Wisdom, by which he might be able to chuse unto himself the better part; but this Eye of the understanding he hath ut out, by suffering himself to be prepitated into all Evil, Suer∣fluity and Intemperance; but the All∣wise Creator did never command man∣kind to encrease and make vast Quanti∣ties, viz. a thousand times as much more as is needful of any sort of eatable or drinkable things, and then oblige them to swallow them down their
Throats for fear (forsooth) they should be spilt, or be counted useless, as if there could be any greater Spoil than that which spoils both the thing and the receiver, or as if it were not better to let a thing remain seemingly useless, than to abuse it to my own Destructi∣on? the truth is, the original of most superfluous and pernicious Inventions, and also of such a prodigious encrease of Sugars, Spanish Fruits, Wines and Spices, have chiefly sprang from the hellish Root of COVETOUSNESS, being promoted for the sake of Gain, and to raise great Estates, and to live a rich easie superfluous Life, and not for any private or publick good; and as their ends were bad, so the effects prove no better. Some also will say, We have need of them, and why should we debar our selves of those things? And thus if there were an hundred Toys and needless Novelties brought into Eng∣land more than there is, they would quickly find footing, and the People would quickly have as much need of them as they have of Tobacco, Brady, Sugar, Spices, &c. And that we have no real deed of any of these things
is undeniable, since our Fore-Fathers lived not only as well, but much better too, that is, were stronger, luier, longer-liv'd and freer from Diseases, before the use of such things, than their Posterity are since; nay, many Dis∣cases which we now-a-days groan un∣der, were not then known. But yet for all this it must be ac∣knowledged, as I said before, that Su∣ga is a brave noble Fruit, and has its uses, but chiefly as Wine, it ought to be taken and used as a Cordial, or in a Phy∣sical way, and not at every turn to be mixed with our common Food and Drinks, as most do at this day, it be∣ing oe of the richest Juices in the world, and therefore the fitter for Cor∣dials, when Natue wants such Re∣cruits: but the too common use there∣of is of evl consequence, particularly all sweetned Drinks and Foods do much forward the generation of the Gout, and other Obstructions and Diseases in the Body, which simle innocent Foods will prevent, if Temperance be at any ate observed; but if Suga be now and then a little used in Milk-Meats and Pottages for old People, it
will prove grateful and benefical; for of all sorts of People sweetned Foods are best for the aged, and are least hurtful to them. Touching Sugar-Candy and Pan-Su∣gar, I shall first discribe to you how it is made, and then shall the more easi∣ly make it appear how improperly it is used commonly amongst us. Sugar-Candy is made thus, First it is boyled as high as other Sugars, then they take this Syrup out of the Pans, and put it into an earthen Pot, and set it in an hot Stove, there to stand eight or ten days, in which time the fierceness of the sulpherous heat does Candy or coagulate it into an hard tough substance, and then you take it out from the Syrup, and put this Can∣dy, or the hard lumps into the Stove again, but made two or three degrees hotter, where it must remain ten or twelve days longer, and then it is done. There are two sorts of it, White and Brown, but they are both of one Nature and Operation, and the chief use that is made of either, besides spoiling of Childrens Teeth, is to se∣veral
sorts of People as a Medicine, when they are troubled with Coughs, Colds and inward Stoppages of the Breast. Now Sugar-Candy, as to its Nature and Operation, is the same in the Ra∣dix as Sugar, from whence it is pro∣duced, only it is nothing so good, nor of so cleansing and opening a Quality as Common-Sugar, though the contra∣ry is generally believed, but any Man that wears Eyes in his Head, may from the before cited method of its prepa∣ration easily perceive my Opinion to be true, for by that tedious unnatural preparation, and being made stronger of the Lime, that thereby it may more easily harden and coagulate. This Can∣did Sugar must needs become of an hot∣ter Nature, and tougher Substance than the common Sugar, and consequent∣ly not so wholsom especially for those People that are troubled with Colds or Stoppages, for being by that way of preparing dryed, hardened, and brought into an hard glewy tough Substance, of a slimy ropy Nature, when it comes to dissolve, it naturally heats and stops the Passages, instead of opening them, causing Drought, &c.
there being nothing more contrary and burdensom to Nature in such ca∣ses, than this very thing which is gi∣ven almost as an universal Medicine to both Young and Old; and therefore ought by all wise People to be aban∣don'd; for all things in which the Sweet Quality is extream (in which re∣spect Sugar is chief) do dull the Palate, clog and obstruct the Stomaeh, stop the Pas∣sages, destroy Concoction, spoil the natu∣ral Heat, making it weak and feeble, heats the Blood, and renders it thick, whence proceed dull and impure Spirits. There∣fore all such things ought to be avoi∣ded by ound and healthy People, but much more by such as are already ob∣structed, except they intend to en∣crease their Maladies, which is often done by such improper means, it be∣ing a custom too general when any such Disorder is on People, to make most of their Foods and Drinks sweet, that (forsooth) they may Rot away the Cold, as they call it; never consi∣dering the evil Consequences of such things, which are as far from any Pro∣perty to help such Infirmities, as I is from Darkness, and only
Blindness and olly have been and are the original of all such Customs and Inventions; for in truth, such as find themselves invaded with such Distem∣pers, the best Food is thin brisk Gruds and Pottages made in the manner we have taught before in the Chapter of Gruls, &c. also good Raw Salads, with Bread and Oyl, but Oyl sparing∣ly; likewise Bread and Butter and all sorts of lean Food that are light of Di∣gestion: And for Drinks Toast and Water, Water and Rhenish Wine, or Wa∣ter and White-Wine, two parts Water and one Wine, or clear small Ale, with moderate Clothing and Exercise in o∣pen airy places, which will gradually cleanse the Passages, open all Obstructions, and son remove those Evils. It is further to be noted, That all sorts of sweet Fruits, as Raisins, Figgs, and the like, being frequently eaten by such People as are subject to Stop∣pages and Colds, does encrease those Distempers, by heating the Blood and weakning the digestive faculty and natural Heat, and generating evil Iuices, ex∣cept such Fruits are eaten sparingly and with Bread, which with such Fruits
is to be preferred before any other things mixt or eaten with them what∣soever: Likewise there are various sorts of Drinks made by boiling Fruits in Beer, Ale, Wine, and the like, with various sorts of Herbs, Roots, Seeds, and Druggs of disagreeing Natures, and stoutly sweetned with Sugar or Ho∣ney, such Liquors for the most part prove of very evil consequence to Health; For no sweet Fruits ought to be boyled, neither for Food nor Phy∣sick; for boyling does naturally eva∣porate and destroy the pleasing friend∣ly opening Qualites, and sends pack∣ing the purer Spirits, as appears both by the Fruits after they are so boyled, and also the Liquor that they are boy∣led in, and the nauseous unpleasing Taste which remains in both, which is the Reason that all that use this way of Preparation, are forced to sweeten such Drinks with Sugar or Honey, or else they will not be drinkable; but if you take any of the before-mentioned Fruits raw, and bruise or stone them, and then infuse them in any of the said Liquors, especially in common Water, it will become sweet and pleasant, and far
more opening and cleansing, and eve∣ry way wholsomer: The same advan∣tage you have when you infuse Herbs properly gathered, dryed and preser∣ved, and also Seeds, Drugs and Roots, and all such Drinks will have a plea∣sant Taste, and be welcome to the Stomach; but if the same be boyled, it will be altogether the contrary, as having lost their essential Vertues by the Violence of Fire; for the pure volatile Spirits in all sweet lucious Fruits, are not only very powerful, but stand, as it were external, and on the surface, and therefore will not endure the fierce motion of the Fire, as Flesh, and several sorts of Martial and Saturnine Fruits, Grains and Seeds will; for in them the pure sweet ver∣tues and spirits, are (as it were) lockt up under the harsh Forms and earthly Properties of the Original Poysons, and therefore cannot be brought out to manifestation, but only by the heat of the external ire. These things ought to be consider'd and understood in all Preparations, both in Food and Phy∣sick, or else there will be but sorry Diet and worse Medicines.
As for Coughs, Colds and Stopages, (for which People commonly use Su∣gar-Candy and Pan-Sugar) the same are generally procured by Ill-living, and Intemperance in Meas, Drinks, Exer∣cises and Habits, and also by eating and drinking too much in quantity, and things of a contrary quality, or improperly prepared. These things are the ori∣ginal Inlets of your Colds; nor do proceed so much from thin Clothing, as most imagine; for if the inside be sound and clean, then there is but lit∣tle danger of outward Inconveniences; but the best way for such as are of weak tender Spirits and sanguine Na∣tures, and indeed for all sorts of Peo∣ple to prevent outward Colds, and the evils that happen through thin and thick Clothing, and by Heats, Sweatings, and the like, is to use themselves to change their Clothes often. As for Example; such as stay in the House in the Mor∣ning to put on one sort of Clothes, and when they go out to put off their Coats and Wastcoats to their Shirt, and put on fresh cold Clothes; and then again in the After-noon or at Night, when they stay at home, and
have no occasion to go forth, to put off their Clothes they went forth in, and put on the others; which a little custom will make so easie, familiar and delightsome, and so refresh them, that such as use themselves to such change of Habits, will not be satisfied if they omit it: And for others who are sub∣ject to Sweat by their Labours, if it be Extream, and more than is usual, then let them at all such times put off all their Clothes, Shirts and all, and put on fresh Shirts and cold Clothing; And for such as Over-Travel themselves, and are sweaty and weary, let them also put off all their Cloathing, and put on fresh; but let both one and the other observe to sit still a little while before they either eat or drink. Also, when you change your Clothes, as to put on thinner or thicker, or when you put on New-Clothes, which generally are warmer than old, you ought not to wear the thick or the thin, the new nor the old constantly, but to wear the new one day, and then on the Morrow to wear the old or thinner again, and so by degrees you may wear either without danger to
your Health; for Nature, especially when weak will not admit of suddain alterations or changes, either inward∣ly or outwardly, without injury. But some will be ready to say, That it is not only troublesom to change a Mans Clothes so often, but also the ready way to procure great Hurts by putting on old Clothes when they are hot. And 'tis con∣fest, this may at first seem very im∣proper; but if the matter be better considered, our Directions will not ap∣pear either unreasonable or unwhol∣some; for does not every one, even the most tenderest People, and such as do often sweat a Nights, and lie, ten, twelve or fourteen hours soaking themselves as in an hot Bath, yet eve∣ry Morning rise out of those close hot Beds, and put on cold Clothes, with∣out any prejudice to Nature or catch∣ing Cold? And if so, why then should putting on cold Clothes, when they are up in the cold open Air (which is far more tolerable than the former) do them any prejudice? Besides, the put∣ting on cold Clothes, provided they be not wetor damp▪ is so far from being an injury, that it is altogether
the contrary; for this fresh cold Clo∣thing shuts and closes up the Pores, and drives the natural Heat more central, which is the greatest security that may be to Nature, causing a lively brisk∣ness through the whole Body, shar∣pens the Appetite, and helps Conco∣ction, enabling the Natural Heat to withstand the attaques of outward In∣conveniences: Is not this further ma∣nifested in Swimming, Wading, and the like? Do not such Exercises wonder∣fully beget Appetite? Which is for no other Reason but by the Coldness of the Water, which shuts the Pores, and forces the Natural Heat more in∣wardly, which does in a moments time digest Crudities and cleanse the Sto∣mach from all slimy superfluous mat∣ter, which did dull and fur the Passa∣ges and hinder Concoction; so that you see what you fear as your greatest Enemy, is your chiefest Friend. Is is further to be noted, That iggs, Pruns, and also several sorts of Nuts, as Almonds, and many other things of like Nature, that are the Productions of hot Climates, are not agreeable to our Northern Consuti∣ons,
and ought not to be frequently eaten, or indeed not at all, except on∣ly with common Bread, or in a Physi∣cal way in opening Drinks. The Mis∣chiefs of eating such Fruits alone, may appear by their effects, viz. the Stop∣pages and Obstructions, thick Blood, weak Ioynts and Limbs, and troublesome un∣natural Heats, possessing all the out∣ward parts, whilst the more central are cold, whence proceeds dulness of Appetite, and many other Inconvenien∣ces, especially to Women and Children, who are the chief eaters of such things, to the great imparing of their Health. The like is to be understood of Green and Candid Gingers, as also all sorts of Conserves and Preserves that many of the more curious Dames stuff their own and their Childrens Paunches with; not forgetting the great quantities of the Confectinners Hodge-Podge, and the Cakes, the Buns, the Ginger-bread, &c. All which do wonderfully fur and ob∣struct the Passages, and generate Crudi∣ties, and indispose the Stomach, and prepare matter for the Regiment of Diseases.
Some may think or say, That I talk after a strange rate: But if they be so discreet and wise as to consider the Natues, Ingredients and Operations of the beforementioned things, or con∣sult either Doctor Reason, or their near Neighbour Doctor Experience, they will be of my mind. For there are as great Superfluities, Intemperances and Disorders committed in Meats and Drinks, as there are in Cloathings, Houses and Furnitures, but the Mis∣chiefs arising from the former are worse than those from the latter; for Excess, bad Preparations and impro∣per Mixtures in Foods and Drinks, do an hundred times more injury to Health and Tranquility of Body and Soul, than the highest Extravagances in Ornament and Clothing; The one being external, but the other inward; One is seen, but the other lies hid, and is felt to the disquieting of the Body and Mind; and as it is less Or∣namental, so is it less excuseable; For what are Monuments that Gluttons leave behind them? Verily nothing but an Ill Name, as stinking as their Carcasses, weakly and dseased Children
to curse their Intemperances and Fat Houses of-Office. CHAP. XVIII. Of the Four Principal Tastes, or the Bitter, the Saltish, the Sour, and the Sweet Qualities, and their respective Natures. HAving occasionally in the fore-go∣ing Discourse several times men∣tioned the Sweet Quality I shall here take leave to inform the Reader more particularly of the Nature of the four principal Tastes or Qualities, since the knowledge thereof will be very useful to all discreet Lovers of Health. The BITTER Taste or Quality is the Radix or central Fire in every Life, whether in Animals, Vegetables or Minerals, it hath the strong might of the Fire, whence ariseth the Attra∣ctive Quality, which draweth together the Water in the Air, and again dissi∣pateth it, by which it becomes sepa∣rable, distilling it self in drops and
Showers. And if Men or other Ai∣mals be dignified with this Quality, then have they strong Attractive Fa∣culties and great Heats, and conse∣quently eat much, and are subject to Wrah and Fierceness, especially if the Male Aspects and Configurations of the Stars and Elements be awakened; for then presently this bitter harsh fu∣rious Fire breaks forth, whence fol∣lows Thunder, Lightnings and terrible fierce Storms of Hail, Rain, Wind, and the like; and if it gets dominion in the Hearts of Men, then follows War, Dsolation of Countries, Burning of Cities, Devastation of Towns, &c. Also, this Quality being incorporated with the pure spirituous parts or vapours of the Air, Clothes all Vegetables with a pleasant lovely Green, but it does dif∣fer, some deeper, some more light, all according to the strength of the Salnitral Vertue in each Herb or Tree. If this Bitter Quality be temperate, and dwell meekly in either Men, Beasts, or other thing, then it is a most friendly chearing Life thereunto; for by its central and pleasant Heat, it dissipateth all Malignity and Evil In∣fluences,
is the cause of all Ioy and the Root of Motion: Therefore Men and all other Creatures in whom this Bit∣ter Quality is strong, are brisk, live∣ly, active and nimble; so Vegetatives wherein the same doth bear sway, are powerful Openers of all Obstructions in the Body, of which the Antients seems to have been sensible, by their attri∣buting opening cleansing Vertues and Qualities to Bitter Martial Herbs, Seds, Fruits and Grains. It is most true, that this is a power∣ful Quality, and when it is temperate in any Creature, causeth a pleasant Noise or Emotion, which in Men we call Laughter, in other things an Elevation of Spirits; and when the Astringent, Sour and Sweet Qualities do equally in∣corporate, gives the brisk lively Taste to all Food, which renders it not on∣ly pleasant and delightful to the Pa∣late and Stomach, but affords a profi∣table Nourishmennt that will never tire the Eaters thereof, being soberly used; For Equality and Concord main∣tain their like Properties, both in the Body and Mind.
But this Bitter Spirit or Quality hath likewise in it another Species, viz. a Fierceness and Wrath, which is a terrible furious Spirit, and the House of Death, a Corruption of all good, and Destru∣ction of the Life in Body; for if it be too much elevated in Man or Beast, then it presently enflames the central Fires, whence proceed cruel Burning Feavers, and other accute Mortal Disea∣ses; for this Quality is the principal Mother and kindler of the hot poyso∣nous Fire in all Elements; and when it too violently predominates in any Herb, Fruit, Grain or Seed, they are strong, fulsom, hot and bitter, not fit for Food, nor indeed for Physick, without skilful Correction; but if a wise Artist takes them in hand, that knows how to ally their fierce Marti∣al Poysons and hot bitter Fires, then they prove excellent Medicines; and if any shall mix such Herbs with their Drinks or Foods, as some do unadvisedly, by infusing of Wormwood, or the like, in Beer or Ale, letting it lie too long, till it becomes almost Rotten, by which means the volatile Spirits become suf∣focated, then such Liquours will be apt
to awaken the bitter hot fulsom Qua∣lities, and prove hot and unpleasant, and send dulling Fumes and Vapours into the Head, prejudicing both the Eyes and Brain. Nor can the wisest Cook make proper and agreeable Foods or Drinks of any thing in which either of the four Qualities are extream; in∣deed they may by various mixtures palliate and hide the Excess, and for the present render them pleasant to the Palate, but when the natural Heat of the Stomach comes to separate them, there still remains a Touch of the old Relish, and they afford neither a firm nor good Nourishment; and should any Person be confined but a Month to live only on them, he would perfectly loath them, which is a de∣monstration that they are not natural and wholsom. The SAITISH or ASTRINGENT Quality is the very original matter of every Creature in the four Worlds, it attracteth or naileth all things to∣gether, 'tis the Vestment of the Spi∣rit, and the true Cloathing of Life in all things, whether Animal, Vege∣table
or Mineral, an harsh drawing Pro∣perty, which encompasseth and enclo∣seth the Life, Spirit and Power of eve∣ry material Being, whence proceeds the Shell or Body▪ which serves to pre∣serve the more essential parts from being evaporated, suffocated, or other∣wise violated: Thus if the Skin, Shell or Body of any thing be any ways hurt, then presently the most essential parts are disturbed, and the Spirit of Life suffers, and becomes wounded, it be∣ing the first and the last in all things; and when this coagulating or saltish Quality is temperate in any Creature or Vegetation, being equally incor∣porated or mixed with the Bitter, Sour and Sweet Properties, it renders it benign and pleasant, and operates in number, weight and measure; for 'tis this sharp Quality that gives that delightful pleasurable Taste in all Meats and Drinks. But if this Astringent Quality be too highly exalted, if it be in humane Na∣ture, It becomes a terrible Fiercess, and inflames the bitter Root or Fire, whence are engendred in the Body Di∣seases of a tearing stoney Wrathful
Nature, as the Gravel, Stone, Gout, Palsies, Agues, &c. or if it happen to be inflamed in the Water, then it en∣genders Scabs, tedious Sores, Small Pox, Leprosies, Dropsies, and the like; but if it be violently enkindled in the Quality, then follows Consumpions, general Wstings of the Radical Moisture, Plague Sores and great Pox; or if en∣flamed in the Sour Property, then the Palate forfeits its Taste and good Relish, thence arises Loss of Appetite, Stoppages, sour Belchings and Vapours, Windy Di∣seases, and cruel Obstructions of the Sto∣mach and Passages: And when this Ine∣quality happens in any sorts of Foods or Drinks, then they are astringent, harsh, sour, sharp and unpleasant both to the Palate and Stomach, binding the Body, and generating the Gravel and Stone, and various other Diseases, ac∣cording as it finds matter in each Con∣stitution. And though Cooks and o∣thers do by their divers Ingredients and improper Compositions hide or captivate this harsh Saturnine Fire, so that it cannot be felt, or very little tasted on the Palate; nevertheless when the natural Heat of the Stomach
has made separation, then the afore∣said ill Juices become manifested and exert their harmful Operations and Effects, as all may know, if they will but give themselves the leisure and heed to observe it. For Example, Take any kind of harsh astringent Fruits, and allay them with Sugar, Spi∣cies, Spanish Fruits, Flower, Butter, Milk, or any other Balsamick pleasant things, and make it up together for Food, as in Pyes, Tarts, and the like, then make your whole Meals thereof for several days together, and you shall certainly find an unpleasant sour keeking or qual∣mish gnawing or griping at your Sto∣mach, as if it were always unsatis∣fied. The SOVR Quality, when it is mo∣derate, opposeth in any Creature, or other thing, then it opposeth all Ex∣treams, both of the Bitter, Sweet and Astringent Properties, being of a cooling refreshing nature and operation, it makes an excellent temperature, giving a most pleasant Taste to all sorts of Food, causing them easily to ferment and digest, so that they become, as
well the most pleasant as the wholso∣mest of Foods, being a quick lively powerful Quality, the true Habitation and delight of the pure Spirit; but if this Quality be too weak in any Crea∣ture, then they are dull, sottish and heavy; if in Foods, unpleasant, and apt to cloy both Stomach and Palate; but when it is too highly elevated, it engenders Sadness or Melancholy, cau∣sing a stink, or Putrifaction and Rank∣ness in all Animals ane Vegetables. The SWEET Quality opposes the other three, being an amiable, blessed and pleasant Property, comforting and refreshing every thing; 'tis an Asswa∣ger of Wrath and Fierceness, a Calmer of Storms and Tempests, and gives all things their pleasant and friendly Look, affords the pure spirituous fragrant Taste in Vegetables, whose fair, yellow, white and ruddy Colours do all from hence proceed; 'tis a Glimps of the divine Ray, a Qualification of Love and Mercy, the sweet Solace and Ioy of every created being; and when it is tempe∣rate and moderate in any thing, bearing a gentle sway over the Martial and
Saturnine Properties, then such Creatures are Sanguine, of Friendly Dispositions and Temperatures, of tractable hu∣mane Inclinations, and all Meats and Drinks in which it does a little pre∣dominate, are endued with Concord and Equality, as Bread, Milk, mild Ale, Beer well Brew'd and fermented, Cyder, Wine sufficiently allay'd with Water, &c. such Foods and Drinks do by consent administer a proportionable Nourish∣ment by equal Portions to all parts of the Body; for this good Quality does sweeten and allay the bitter hot Fires of Mars, and opens all the doors of the Melancholy Astringent Cham∣bers of Saturn, by its friendly Influ∣ences. But still this amiable Property doth contain a fierce wrathful Poyson, which is the Root and very Center of every Bee∣ing; for if there were no harsh nor fierce wrathful Fire, there could nei∣ther be any Light or Love, and when this lurking Poyson is too violently kindled in the bitter Quality in the Element of Water, then it engender∣eth many Disorders, as botchy Ses and Leprosics, which quickly corrupt the
Flesh; but if it be kindled by the heats of Mars, then it infecteth the Element of Air, and occasions a suddain and spreading Plague, that corrupts all in a moment. So when this Quality shall too violently bear sway in Foods and Drinks, they thereby become heavy and dull, apt to clog both the Appetite and the Stomach, hot in operation, making the Blood thick and sharp, and conse∣quently the Spirits impure, the Senses stupified, the Understanding clouded, the Joynts loaded with pernicious Juices, &c. By all which it appears, that when∣soever any one of the four Qualities be∣fore-mentioned, does too violently predominate, or is inflamed, it pre∣sently kindles or awakens the hot bit∣ter astringent Poysons, whether it be in Animals or Vegitables, so that the cen∣tral Fires which lay hid or captivated in the sweet Oyl begin to burn fierce, and appear in their own Form. Most People that enjoy Riches and Plenty may know this by their daily experi∣ence as when they have drank freely of Wine or strong Drink, doth it not first too violently burn up and waste
the sweet Oyl and pure volatile Spirits? Its either by Evaporation or Suffocation, and thence follows ex∣cessive Heat, so that all the Body burns with a burthensom and unnatural Flame; whereas before the intempe∣rate drinking of such unequal Liquors, all the Body and Members were cool, brisk, and full of Life and Pleasure; yet the same fierce wrathful central Fires were then as strong and powerful, only they lay hid or captivated in the sweet Oyl, and pure spirituous parts, which is the Moderator of those central Fires, but when by Inequality or disorder that sweet Oyl or Humor Radicalis is wounded, then these original Poysons appear, and manifest themselves in their fierce Forms and Natures, which so long as the good Vertues were strong, they could not do; for these four Qualities are set in opposition to each other, that thereby the fierceness of each may be temper'd and mitiga∣ted, that so all Creatures, Animals, Minerals and Vegetables might be brought to a fit temperature, by the embracing and incorporating of the said Qualities each with other; for
the sweet Quality opposeth and mode∣rateth the fierce Elevation of the Bitter, Astringent and Sour, and maketh an Harmony, resulting from them all; and the sour Quality opposeth the fierceness of the bitter, sweet and a∣stringent, being their cooling and re∣freshing Life; So again the saltish or astringent Quality makes an excellent Temperature in the btter, sweet and sour, as the bitter Quality opposing the excess of the other three, reduces them to Equality, making them more peasant and gentle in their operation. Therefore all sorts of Food and Drinks, in which any one of those Qualities are too highly exalted, become unequal, and the predominate quality presently incorporates with its  in the Body, and thereby discompose it, de∣stroying the Health and Harmony of the parts. But on the other side, all mean simple Meats and Drinks, in which the Properties are near equality, and have no manifest Taste that does too violently predominate, do by Sym∣pathy embrace and incorporate with their Likenesses in the Body, equally distributing proper Nourishment to all
parts and Members, which makes the whole Lightsome, full of Joy and Plea∣sure; if this were understood, a little practice of Temperance would make many loath themselves for their Dis∣orders, and their continual affronting of Nature, causing her to lose that simple innocent Way, wherein she delights to walk to Health and Felicity. CHAP. XIX. Of Drinks, and particularly of Canary. I Now proceed to speak of the most usual Drinks at this day used a∣mongst us, especially such as are esteem∣ed most Cordial, and prescribed many times in a kind of Physical way for Diet, or in order to the preventing or remidying of Diseases; and because the Richest of our Drinks is Canary, I shall begin with that. CANARY (commonly call'd Sack) is a brave noble Juice or Cordial, one
of the most excellent Drinks in the World, far transcending any Cordials prepared by the Apothecaries, or any Juice which the best of Flesh affords; the same being enriched with the choi∣cest Vertues of Nature, being too rich for common Drink, but nothing more cherishing and reviving, if taken on special occasions, when Nature doth require a Recruit; and indeed the in∣tent of those that first brought it into England, was for no other use: And therefore the first Ingrossers and Buy∣ers thereof were Apothecaries, who sold it again to their Patients in small quantities, as by the Advice of Physi∣tians, which then was of good use for the comforting and chearing sick weak decayd People, it being endued with a brave Balsamick Body, yielding abun∣dance of pure subtle Spirits; its pre∣dominant Quality stands in the Sweet Body, therefore ought not to be fre∣quently drank in times of Health, its Vertues being too great for common use; for that which is extraordinary good in season, may prove of ill con∣sequence when used unseasonably; for the common use thereof dulls the edge
of the Appetite, weaknes the natural Heat of the Stomach, and spoils the Concoction, and for that reason a very little will satisfie those that drink much of this Cordial Liquor; besides, it replenishes the whole Body with su∣perfluous Humours and evil Juices; for all sorts of Wine are Extreams, espe∣cially Sack, and though it eceed in the best Property of Nature, yet the frequent use of such high graduated Drinks may prove as prejudicial to the Health and Strength both of the Bo∣dy and Spirits, as things of meaner Vertus, nay, much more harmful; for all Extreams, or things in which any Property of Nature is too highly advanced, ought to be taken very sparingly, and as Physick rather than Food. 'Tis a dangerous Error to imagin (as most People do) That the sweeter and richer Drinks and Foods are, whether simple or compound, so much the better or stronger Nourishment they shall fford. Whereas the clean contrary is true; for nothing can maintain the Body and Spirits in good Health and Tran∣quility but such Meats and Drinks as
are simple, and nearest the Equality. For Drinks wherein the Spirit is pre∣dominant, if not taken very seldom and sparingly, are apt to destroy the action of the Stomach, and to incor∣porate with their similes, viz. with the pure natural Spirits, and balsa∣mick Vertues in the Body, causing them to burn too violently, so that an eva∣poration or suffocation of them fol∣lows; therefore although whilst such spirituous Drinks are in operation, all the Spirits of him that hath drank, are in an hot Rage or Tumult, and he for∣gets all Sorrow, Modesty and Tempe∣rance, and by the awakening an une∣qual Motion of the Spirit, skips like a Wild Asses Colt, and Sings and Rants, and becomes brisk and Jolley, and in his own floating Imagination as Great as a KING; yet when a little Sleep has quell'd this Tumult and dissolv'd these Fumes, you shall find the poor Creature with much fewer Spirits and less Oyl in his vital Lamp, than he had before the Merry Carrouze, and he is weak, and faint, and feavrish, and goes trembling, and looks as dejected as a conquer'd City; which shews what Spoil
and Waste, what Havck and Desola∣tion the strong spirituous Liquor has made upon his natural Spirits; and this is a sure Demonstration, which all tue Topers cannot but subscribe to and confirm from their own wretched Experience. Moreover, all Rich sweet Wines and Cordial Liquors, if frequently drank, though not the degree of disturbing the Brain, do yet heat the Blood, and put it into a kind of disorderly fer∣ment, and set the Gate of Venus open, and makes Men too Effemenate and Wo∣men too Slacious, being not at all agreeable to our Northen Constitu∣tions; therefore if healthy People will drink Wine, they ought to allay it with Water, and then it makes a Drink more equal and more wholesom, viz. two thirds Water and one Wine. And for such as are weak, sick and fainty, if they would have stronger Cordials than our own Country affords, let them drink some Wine, which is the choicest of Cordials, and higher gra∣duated in Nature than any other Li∣quor that can be made by Art; but if Men and Women addict themselves in
health to guzzle down the Richest Wines daily, as many Thousands do now a days, what must they have for Cordials in their Sickness? for their Bodies being so habituated to Wine, that will have no operation to help them. Shall they take Brandy and Re∣ctified Spirit of Wine? Alas! this too they have already made their common Drink, and Wine is long since become too cold for their destroy'd Stomachs, even when they are in the best Health they are capable of; and Bandy, Rum and Vsquebath are scarce able to fur∣nish out so much warmth and activity to the natural Heat, as to digest a small Dinner: Now when such People come to be sick, (and to be sure long they cannot continue well) what Cordial shall be prescribed for them? I be∣lieve the learnedst Doctor in Europe cannot tell, unless he should make them swallow two or three Ladles full of scalding Lead, boyling Pitch or flaming Brimstone: They are at the end of Nature, and therefore cannot arrive any higher; for those that drink strong Ale and Beer in Childhood, their Nature shall require Wine in their Middle Years,
and Brandy in Old Age; for Nature as it grows old, becomes weaker and colder, and so requires more hot spi∣rituous Drinks; and therefore Wine and such strong Liquors are drank with most advantage by the Aged. And if Children and Young People be used commonly to drink Water (which will be most for their Healths) then Small or middle Beer or Ale will be as cordial to them, and warm and com∣fort them as much in their middle Age, as Wine will, that drank strong Ale or Beer in Youth. And to speak truth, no sort of Drink does maintain the Spi∣rits and natural Heat in such vigour and strength as mean Liquors, viz. such as are of the middle Nature, or nearest the Temperature, viz. good Water, or well-brew'd Ale or Beer of a middling strength, or Wine allay'd with Water, as aforesaid. But now, most are grown to that degree of Blindness, Excess and Folly, that nothing will give their oracious Desires and greedy aunches satisfaction, but such Drinks as are strong, hot and unequal in their Parts, which indeed is like themselves; for ever since man hath suffered his desiers
to enter into Discord, he cannot but desire such disagreeing meats and drinks, for every Like desires its Likeness, and is its highest Joy; Inequality begets Dis∣cord, and Concords Peace. Therefore all plain simple Meats and Drinks, are for certain of the greatest strength and vertue, and the only maintainers and continuers of Healh and long Life. And English People have need of no other or better Drinks and Cordials than may be made of our own Seeds, Grains and Fruits, as Ale, Beer and Cyder, which may be made to what degree of strength and goodness you please; and being well prepared, are far more agreeable to the Con∣stitutious of English People, than the Liquors that come from other Coun∣ties. But all thick strong Ale and harsh, bit∣ter, or stale, strong Beer, is very inju∣rious to the Health, as also Double Beer, which is now a fashion, but never invented by Philosophers. The com∣mon drinking of such Drinks does strike at the very Sinews of Health, being much worse than Wine, especia∣ly than Wine and Water, which is
commendable clean healthy Drink, that begts Apptite, cleanseth the Stomach, Purgethy Vrine, and is endued with many excellent Faculties, and if it were the Growth of our own Coun∣try I would commend the use of it to my Country-men, but being a dear Drink, and therefore not Come-at-able by the middle or meaner sort of Peo∣ple, I shall forbear to speak any thing more of its Vertues, only I advise the Physitians and Apothecaries to use and prefer Wine, especially right Rich Racy Canay as their best and general Cordial in times of Disorder and Sickness; and do commend all People in general, to that brave mild friendly Drink, viz. Ale, made and brew'd according to our Directions in the Book, entituled, The Way to Health, Long Life and Hap∣piness, &c. there also you will find an account of the Vertues and Vices of Beer and common Ale, and which is most agreeable to Nature and best to preserve Health.
CHAP. XX. Of Sherry. SHERRY (by many here in England call'd Bristol-Milk) is a fine Cordial Wine, as good for common drinking as Canay, but nothing so Rich; being mixt with Waer it begets Appetite, helps concoction, cleanseth the Passages, and purges more by Vrine than Canary, nei∣ther is it so apt to weaken the Natu∣ral Heat, nor lead the Lovers thereof into Consumptions; but as it is a strong Wine, and heady, discretion and Temperance ought to regulate the use of it; for being too frequently drank, or in too great Quantity, it may prove of ill consequence: To which purpose, most of those Observations we have made upon Canary, may also conveniently be referr'd unto this sort of Wine. And though I am for∣ced to use Repetitions sometimes for the Readers sake, I take no delight therein for my Own.
CHAP. XXI. Of White-Wine. WHite-Wine is a brave clean brisk Drink, if moderately taken; it begets Appetite and purgeth by Vrine; yet it contains two Qualities that are not friendly to nature, especially if frequently drank, viz. Heat and a keen Sharpness, whereby if Temperance be wanting in the Drinkers thereof, it will quickly kindle and irritate the cen∣tral Fires of Mars and Saturn, which will not only indispose the Body and Spirits, by putting them into an un∣natural flame; but in some Complex∣ions generates an hard gritty matter or substance both in the Reins and Blad∣der: Therefore this, as well as the other Wines, ought to be well allay'd with Water, which will bravely mo∣derate, cool and sweeten the hot sharp Properties thereof, and bring them near the Equality; and then, viz. ths sort of Wine is thus allay'd,
Two thirds of Water to one of Wine, it is one of the best Stomach-drinks that I know; for it powerfully helps Concocti∣on, washes and cleanses all the Passages and Vessels, and egets Appettite, and gal∣lantly purges by Vrine. But if too frequently drank alone, as the custom of most is, then it heats the Blood and fumes into the Head, and after a little custom of drinking, is so far from being a Whet, (as our Tavern-haunters, to excuse their Morning-Debauches, call it) that it dulls the edge of Appetite, and hin∣ders Concoction, and breeds the Stone or Gravel by its sharpness and heat, and yet at the same time purges power∣fully by Urine, by reason of its pure thin spirituous and Balsamick Vertues, but notwithstanding that Torrent of Urine, it leaves behind it an hot harsh or gretty Substance, which in some Na∣tures or Complexions doth generate an hard stoney substance; and indeed all sorts of Drinks or Foods in which ei∣ther hear or sharpness doth predomi∣nate, are not proper nor Healthy to be frequently drank or eaten; for all such things do by degrees awaken and
strengthen their like Properties in the Body, stealing on them, as it were, insensibly, till such matter hath gotten strength, then presently they put Na∣ture into an unequal Motion; for which cause all Old Wines, (which some so much love and commend) are injuri∣ous; for the longer any Wines are kept after they are fit to drink, the clearer, sharper, brisker and hotter they become; for length of time does, as it were, digest or waste the sweet Balsamick Vertues, by which they become more sharp, harder and near∣er to the strong original Spirit: There∣fore all Old Wines and Stale Drinks do more heat the Body, and sooner irritate and awake the natural Heat, than New; it being a grand Error for any to imagine that New Wine or Ale is not so good or wholsome, or does not af∣ford so proper a Nourishment as Old Wine and Stale Beer; for indeed the for∣mer is far to be preferr'd before the latter; for the milder, sweet and friendly any Drink is, the more true Nourishment it affords both to the Body and the Spirit; and the Reason why such Liquors do not so soon and so
much heat the Body and irritate the Spirits, is because New Mild or Sweet Liquor contains more of the balsamick Body, which does qualifie, and as it were captivate the fierce original Spi∣rit, so that it can hardly be tasted or perceived. Not but that in all New or Balsamick Drinks, whether Wine or Ale, there is contained a far greater quantity of Spirits than in Old Wine or stale Beer; for the more gentle and the sweeter any Liquor is, the more Spi∣rits it contains, as all that are versed in Distillations well know; for such as make Spirits of Mault-Drink do al∣ways distil Ale, not stale Beer. And so in boyling strong sweet Wort, it shall waste more in quantity in one hour, than small Wort will in three; And wherefore is this? Only because the strong sweet Wort has a greater Bo∣dy, mild, friendly and Balsamick, con∣taining a larger quantity of pure Spi∣rits, that will not endure the Violence of Boyling without Evaporation. Likewise, the older any sort of Drink is, the leaner it becomes; for as the sweetness digests by length of time, so the original hot fierce Spirits
seem not only to be more in quantity; but stronger too, but it is not so, only the sweet pure Body or friendly Qua∣lity is weakned or digested by long keeping, which was the Allayer or Moderator of this hot Spirit; for a quart of New Ale contains more Spi∣rit than a quart of stale Beer that was originally of like strength and sweet∣ness; the same is to be understood of New and Old Wine, and other Drinks. For which Reasons we conclude New Wine is far more wholsome, healthy and agreeable to Nature than Old; And Ale, when well-brew'd, and according to the Rules set down in our Way to Halth, &c. is to be preferred before much boyled or stale Beer, and so of other Drinks, especially by all such People as are subject to the Stone or Gravel, who must observe to drink mild gentle friendly Liquors, that are neither sharp, keen nor hot in opera∣tion, as middle Ale, Water and Wine, and Water. The same Rule they ought to follow in their Food; for some sort of Victuals are altogether as apt to gene∣rate the Stone and Gravel as any sorts of Drinks, if not more; Therefore
all such Foods and Drinks as are of a middle Nature, and nearest the Sim∣picity, are always safest, as to Health, and for preventing all kinds of Di∣seases. CHAP. XXII. Of Rhenish-Wine, its Nature and Operation. THis sort of Wine is a kin to White-Wine, but more substance, a brave noble Juice, an excellent Cleanser of the Stomach, whereby it begets Ap∣petite and helps Concoction. Never∣theless it is endued with an hot sharp Quality, which when the same is too plentifully drank, heats the whole Body, and is apt to precipitate the Drinkers thereof into Feavers; and as for such as by their Complexions are any thing subject to the Stone, it will help forward the generation thereof; for though this Wine doth naturally purge by Vrine, yet there is in it an hot or harsh Quality, that heats the
Blood and congeals the Humours with a Saturnine or gretty Substance; for all sorts of Drinks and Foods in which the hot sharp Quality does predomi∣nate, are friends to the generation of the Stone and Gravel: But as every thing has in it a latent Poyson, and yet carries always above it its own Anti∣dote, if wisely handled; so if this sort of Wine be discreetly mixed with Wa∣ter, and drank only with Food, or when Nature require, then it will prove one of the best sorts of Drink, not only to beget Appetite, help Concoction, and cleanse the Stomach, but also prevent the gene∣ration of the Stone and Gravel; for this Drink does Purge by Vrine, as much, if not more than any other. The truth is, all sorts of Wine drank in Health, ought to be allay'd with Water, or other∣wise taken very sparingly; for there must be a sympathetical agreement be∣tween the Meats or Drinks and Na∣ture, both in number, weight and measure, or as near as may be, or else the Tranquility and Health of the Body and Mind cannot be continued; but such as are ill or faintish may drink now▪ and then a Glass of intire to great
advantage of their Health, being the best of Cordias, if used with discre∣tion. As for Old Hock, a sort of Rhenish, of which some will now and then boast, that it is twenty or thirty years old, I will only say, that then it has been kept seventeen or twenty five years too long. The keeping of Wine to that Age was only to gratifie Conceit, Vanity, Ostentation and a drunken Humour, and to offer the greater Vi∣olence to Nature; for how improper all such very stale supernatural Wines are, we have mentioned in the last Chap∣ter. And if People would be but so kind to themselves to observe the Di∣stempers of their Bodies, and what feaverish Heats they labour under after the drinking of such stale Liquors, they would certainly for the future forbear them.
CHAP. XXIII. Of Claret, its Nature and Operation. CLARET is a good Stomach-Wine, of a brisk chearing Operation, the moderate use thereof helps Concocti∣on, and begets Appetite, but it pur∣geth not so much by Urine as White-Wine, being of a rough or harsher Nature, but of the two more agree∣able to English-men's Stomachs; if healthy strong People drink frequent∣ly of this Wine, 'tis apt to make them fat, phlegmatick, especially such as therewith use little Exercise, as Gentlemen, Citizens, and the like; for no Creature, Man or Beast, will be fat, except they be given up to Idle∣ness and Superfluity; 'tis true, some People, and some Beasts will with the same Meats and Drinks be more full and fleshier than others, but not fat: Others that use Exercises, and but ordinary Food, seem to be fat, but
for the most part the same is a Distem∣per, as watry dropsical Humors, which in some puff up the embers and swell the Body; but the chief reason Claret-Wine makes Gentlemen, Citizens, and the like, fat, is for want of Exercise, and by its agreeableness with the Sto∣mach, which sharpens the Appetite, and opens the Vessels by its rough harsh quality, whereby they are inticed to eat great quantities of fat rich Foods and so passing their time without due labour, they become over-grown with Fat, like cram'd Capons (their belo∣ved Dish) or Swine in a Stye. Yet it must be acknowledgeded, that Claret is the best of Wines, for those that eat abundance of fat Flesh and succulent Foods, for by its rough keen quality, it digests and separates such oyly Foods, as many of our English Epicures too frequenly gormandize, which milder sweeter Liquors cannot do, as Canary, Ale, or the like; for this cause many that eat such fat Foods and Sawces made with Butter, do so mch desire brisk spirituous Drinks, finding that such Liquors do best digest them.
But yet they are to know, that the frequent use of such Drinks will wea∣ken the natural Heat, so that by degrees the Appetite of such People grows dull, and the Vessells of the Stomach are contracted, and then their Sto∣machs will desire still more and grea∣ter quanties, and to drink them oftner, till at length Health is utterly sub∣verted, and Nature debilitated; for (I cannot say it too oft) the frequent use of all spirituous strong Liquors, being unequal in their parts, do in a little time beget the like Inequality in the Elements of the Body, and in∣stead of preserving Health destroy it; for there cannot be a better thing than a glass of Claret, or a dram of Brandy, or the like, now and then when Peo∣ple have eat too much in Quantity, or Foods too fat or gross in Quality; but I know no necessity for those Spurs and Helps, except to such as lead idle gluttonous Lives, but for others who feed on plain simple Foods and middle Drinks, and use proper Exercises, and keep within the ounds of Moderation, they shall have no need to drink a glass of Claret before Dinner as a Prepara∣tive,
nor a dram of Brandy after for a Restorative of their natural heat, to help it concoct their simple natural Foods; for such innocent natural Diet will maintain the natural Heat in great Vigour, especially if the friendship and advice of Temperance be observed; but if Temperance be wanting, then the necessity which men do thereby bring upon themselves by drinking of Claret, does sufficiently revenge it self upon their Bodies as well as Purses; for it heats the Blood, sends Fumes up into the Crown, destroys the vigour of the Natural Heat, awakens the central Fires, makes the Stomach (by its continual use) flat and dull; by which means, Drinkers of this Wine can fast long, neither can they eat heartily with Appetite, except they do fast a considerable time, which gives a further occasion to a phlegmy Fatness, which many of its common Drinkers are subject unto; for those Persons that are of the Phlegmatick-Melancholly, Phlegmatick-Sanguine, or Phlegmatick-Chollerick Complexion, if once they get the habit of drinking this sort of Wine, though they do not well love it, yet their Nature will seem
to require it, so that if their Purse be but strong enough, they must have a Glass or two or three before Dinner, to clear their Stomachs of that gross slimy matter which their Over-Nights Dbauches, or superfluous Evening Draughts have occasion'd and left be∣hind and four or five Glasses at Dinner, as a spur to force it down, and five or six more after Dinner, with a File of Pipes o Tobaco to help Concoction. This is the Trade which some Gentle∣men, and too many Ciizens drive, which not only wastes their Estaes, and destroys their Health (which is the greatest En∣joyment in this World) but also beclouds their Intellectuals, stupifies their Senses, destroys that true natural Pleasure of eating and drinking, which is one of the greatest where Health is, and a well-prepared Appetite, joyn'd with a clean Stomach, free from Obstructions; for he that has a full-spread Table every day of various sorts of Rich compounded Foods, with strong Drinks and Wine, is a Thousand times more weary and glut∣ted with it, and hath nothing of that pleasure which the Poor Man (who eats
his Bread and Cheese in the Sweat of his Brows under an Hedge) enjoys. Nothing so much loys and oppresses the Appetite and Stomach as always to have varieties of Flesh and Fish, com∣pounded Sawces, Puddns, Pyes, Broths, Bisques, Oglio's, and the like Extrava∣gant uriture of Gluttony, enricht with East and West-India Ingrdients, and follow'd with heaps of Sweet-Meats and lucious Fruits, and other Kickshaws. This all that use such Intemperance, may know by their own woful Expe∣rience, and by the great number of Diseases, they do through Wanton∣ness contract, and yet (their Brains being sunk into their Bellies, and their Vnderstandings buried in the Ordure of their swelling Paunches) they have not the wit to consider it, but finding their Stomachs dull, weary, and apt to loathing, never thinking of the true cause thereof, will needs go about to mend this defect of Appetite by invented New Dishes, and more Poinnt Sawes, and greater variety of Compositions fool∣lishly imagining thereby to cure all, as if they would quench Fire with pou∣ring on Oyl; for too much of this was
indeed the original cause of their Grie∣vance. Therefore let all Men, that prize the Health either of their Bodies or Minds, fly such Excesses, and the Pomp of Glutony as they would do the Pesti∣lence; and for such as have a desire to drink of this charming ruddy Wie, they ought to allay and mix it with Wa∣ter, Two thirds Water and one Wine, but if you drink it commonly or fre∣quently, then three fourths Water and one Wine, will be enough, which will be an excellent Drink to beget Appe∣tite and cleanse the Stomach; it also Purges powerfully by Vrine, cools the Bo∣dy, makes the Blood thin and fine, whence proceed brisk lively Natural Spirits, Sen∣ses, Intellectuals, Dispositions and Incli∣nations.
CHAP. XXIV. Of Cyder, its Nature and Opera∣tion. CYDER, if well made and fer∣mented, is a fine brisk or quick Drink, and that is best which is made of good sound and proper Apples, of which there are various sorts, as Redstraks, Pppins, Pearmains, Iilly∣flowers, Golden-Pppins, and many others well known to the Makers of Cyder, and therefore needless here to enume∣rate. But this ought to be noted, that the Apples you intend for Cyder, be they of what sort soever▪ ought to be ripe before they are gathered, and af∣terwards to lie in an open Airy Room for two, three or four weeks, in which time, by the Apples sweating the phlegmatick raw Quality will in some degree be digested, which will nder your Cyder sweeter, of a better Bdy, and more Balsamick than that whi is made of Apples either unripe▪ or made
into Cyder as soon as they are gathe∣red. Note further, that those that would have a sweeter, stonger and better bo∣died Cyder than ordinary, ought in some degree to observe the Rules as are usual in Brewing, viz. not to press your Apples too hard, as commonly is done, but to half press them, and then put them by for a smaller Cyder; for the first that runs off, when you do but gently squeze your Apples, (as flowing almost of its own accord) is much sweeter▪ and more balsamick than that which is pressed forth with violence from the harsh centre of the Fruit, and consequently is stronger and more Spirituous, as from the Mault, that liquor or Wort which runs off first is many degrees better than the latter; for though it must be confessed, the case is not altogether the same, because the Mault has passed through several Digestions, which have open'd the Closset of Saturn, and set the sweet spirituous Quality at liberty, just upon the Wing, by which it rea∣dily gives forth its good Vertues, yet the Analogy holds in Apples and other
Fruits (for Nature's Operations are uni∣fom, he that rightly understands one Link, will easily comprhend the whole Chain) for if you observe, you shall find, that any sort of Fruits will, when any vi∣olence is offered to them, first give forth their more sweet Vertues and pure spirituous Qualities, as if you bite a piece of Apple, will not the sweeter and more pleasant Juices be extracted first? And so by degrees yield that which is harsher and more unpleasant? The astringent Properties of Saturn and the hot bitter harsh Qua∣lities of Mars are the first and last in all Vegetations: The same we find in the Stomach (Nature's Laboratory) does not she separate and extract all the Balsamick and good Vertues first, to the supply of Nutriment for all parts of the Body? As you may per∣ceive if you give your Stomach any occasion of Casting, if it be within an hour or two after you received your Food or Drink, then it will be some∣what sweet, very tollerable, and come up easie, but if this Puking happen long after, as sever, eight or ten hours, then it will be very nauseous, bitter,
sour, and of various Colours, as Yel∣low, Green, and the like, whereby 'tis evident that the bitter parts are drawn away first. So if Apples be pressed hard, there is forced out an hard, harsh, astringent, our Property, which may cause such Cyder to ripen sooner, and be thereby fit to drink in a shorter time, but it will also cause it to fret, or become of a keen sharp Nature, and often cau∣ses it to sour, more especially if such Cyder shall be put on a fresh ferment by Carriage; either by Land or Sea. Now to know when you have drawn enough from your first gentle pressing, the best way will be to taste your Juice as it comes from the Press, and when it begins to taste any thing harsh, un∣pleasant or bitterish, then hold your hand as to that, and keep the Juice of the latter pressing by it self, as Brew∣ers and Housewives do their latter Wort. If this course be duly observed, your first running from the Press will make a Noble Balsamick Cyder, altogether as good as White-Wi or Claret, and per∣haps better than either of them for
our English Bodies, If drank tempe∣rately. And as it will be thus much better than your common Cyder, so it will keep longer from being sour, sharp or eager, and consequently con∣tinues more friendly to Nature. Another, or new way to make Cyder. Take the first or second Juice you press out of your Apples, and put it into a Kettle or Copper, and make it ready to boyl, or boyling-hot, but not boyl, then put it into Coolers for that purpose, as you do in Brewing Ale or Beer, and when it is at the degree of coolness, as is usual for Wort, when set a working, then put a convenient quantity of Yeast of Barm to it, and let it work, observing the very same Method as is done in work∣ing and tunning up Beer and Ale, and when it hath done working stop it close up. This will be a brave full-bodied wholesom Cyder, keep very well, and drink pleasant and mellow; for this heating and fermentation does digest that crude phlegmy Quality which
makes Cyder drink lean and sharp, from which also it often gets a sour Quality. But if you would have your Cyder to keep long, or draw as Beer and Ale does, and not grow flat for a Month, two or three, then when you have heat your Juice or Liquor, as aforesaid, so that it begins to be hot, put in what quantity of good Hops you think fit, and let them infuse a full half hour, but let it not boyl, and then strain it as you do Wort, and put it into your Coolers, and when cool set it a work∣ing, as before directed; But therein observe two things, 1. That you do not let it stand too thick in your Coo∣lers, 2. Nor put it in to working be∣fore it be sufficiently cold; for if ei∣ther of those Accidents happen, it will cause the irritation or awakening of the Saturnal and Martial Poysons, which will destroy the Balsamick Ver∣tues or Seet Quality, by causing it to ferment too fiercely, which is caled Frting, and causeth all sorts of Drink to grow hard and stale in a short time.
This last sort of Cyder will not only drink pleasant, with a good Bo∣dy, but will also keep a long time, and draw or run good as long as Beer or Ale, and not flatten, as is usual for Cyder; so that you will not be obliged to the trouble of Bottling it, which for Families, and the common use of an House, is tedious and chargeable, and not so wholesom, as I have de∣monstrated in my Way to health, in the chapter of Beer and Ale. Note, that you may Boyl your Cyder, either small or strong, and use the same Order as common Brewers do in making of Beer and Ale, and some People of late years do manage their Cyder accordingly; but in my opini∣on it is not so good as that which is made either without boyling or heat∣ing at all, or that which is only heat, without boyling, as is before mentio∣ned; Not but that which is boyled may be made very good▪ and to drink, full and satisfactory to the Stomach, but still the former is to be preferred before it. No sort of Cyder ought to be kept above One Year, i th Drinkers there∣of
regard their healths though it may be kept several years in Bottles, and drink pleasing to the Palate of many People, especially such as have dull flat crasie cold Stomachs, but as I have told you already, no stale Drinks, whether Wine, Cyder, Beer or Ale, are so homogene∣al and profitable to Nature as those that are Newer, provided they be first sufficiently fermented; for the longer any fermented Liquors are kept after they have obtain'd to proper ripeness and clearness, the harder, keener and sharper they grow; and therefore are not so agreeable and friendly to Nature as milder, fatter, or full-bodied Drinks; for every thing being come to its mature Age, does by degrees tend towards the centre, and de∣cline; for there is no standing still in the operations of Nature. Thus in all Drinks the keeping them a proper time after they are made does digest a gross phlegmy Quality, which would make it drink fulsom or nause∣ous to the Palate and Stomach, which a little Age consumes, even as it comes to pass in all Herbage, as Hay, which when new cut down is sweet and fain∣tish
in comparison of what it will be when it has lain half a year or more in the Rick or Mow, but if such Hay lie too long, viz. three, four or seven years, then it becomes dry, harsh, and of less Vertue and Substance, and in no respect so good, as in its proper time: So when fermented Drinks have reached to a proper degree of Age, or digestion of the more unpleasing and phlegmatick Juices, then if it be continued much longer, it goes as fast backwards towards its Original, and the sweet Body or Balsamick Vertues are by degrees wasted, and as it were, eaten up by the fierce hungers and ea∣ger properties of the dark original Forms, viz. of the Saturnine and Mar∣tial Natures, which are greedy devou∣rers of the amiable sweet Balsamick Body; for the harsh astringent bitter fierce Qualities of Nature are always and in every thing the first and the last; Are not your curious delicate well-tasted Apples in the beginning of their generating, or whilst they are young and green, harsh, astringent, bitter, sour, and very unpleasing both to the Palate and Stomach, affording
a Juice or Nourishment altogether as ungrateful to Nature? But through the sweet Influences of the Coelestials and Elements, the Solar, Iovia and Venerial Qualities are awakened and strengthned to that degree that by their benigne Particles they moderate, allay and qualify both the astringent, bitter and sour harsh Properties, so that each of them does with an hearty and corteous friendliness incorporate and imbrace each other, whence does pro∣ceed that lovely pleasant Taste, Smell and Colour, which being once become full ripe, if they be kept much longer they will decay and fall into Putrifa∣ction, and neither be pleasant nor wholesom, and just so it is with the Liquor that comes from them after its kind; if it be kept too old or stale, it proves injurious to Health, being of a hot tart keen Nature and Opera∣tion, which heats the Blood, irritates the pure Spirits, causing weariness and hot Idispositions to possess the whole Body and generating various Disea∣ses, according to the Nature of each Constitution and Complexion, it be∣ing Igorance, Vanity and Custom
that have and do make so many and use such over-stale Liquors, not that ever any found any real be∣nefit thereby; for 'tis a never-failing truth, That all sorts of Drinks are best whilst the pre volaile Spirits are strong, ad the balsamick Body potent; and that the same is not only the wholsomest of all others, but the most pleasant too to the Palate and Stomach, and in every respect more agreeable to the needs and operations of Nature. CHAP. XXV. Of Mum, its Nature and Opera∣tion. MUM is a brave Balsamick Li∣quor, very wholsome for Me∣lancholy Phlegmatick Complexion'd Peo∣ple, if they observe the Rules of Tem∣perance, viz. To drink it sparingly, as also for those whose Food is dry, hard and lean, as course Bread, ordina∣ry Cheese, Flower'd Milk, Herbs, and lean Potages. But this sort of Drink
another Species or Property, viz. It is of an hot strong Nature; It dulls the Appetite, sends fumes into the Head, and is nothing so good, healthy and wholsome as clear well brew'd Ale; for being much being much boyled with the Mar∣tial Ingredients, they do not only suffo∣cate, evaporate and destroy the pure thin sutle spirituous parts, but it there∣by becomes of a thick gross tough sub∣stance, and consequently harder of Concoction, so that the Natural heat cannot so easily separate and digest it, as other clearer finer Drinks, as Ale, Cyder, Wine and Water, and the like: For this cause, it is not good for such as live at ease, and eat fat rich com∣pounded strong Food; for it naturally heats the Blood, and makes it thick, ge∣nerates heavy dull Spirits, whence pro∣ceeds hot unpleasant Dispositions; for it being unequal begets the like Inequality, both in Body and Spirits, so that the common use of it lays Foundations for Diseases, more especially in Cholerick and Sanguine Complexions, and all Chil∣dren and Young People.
CHAP. XXVI. Of Coffee, its Nature and Opera∣tion. COFFEE is a new Liquor, in∣vented by the Turks and Hea∣thens; for being by their Alchoran or Law prohited all Wine, they wanted something to spend their time in, and be a Companion to their Tobacco, of which in late years they take great Quantities, and therefore gratified their Appetites with this Liquor, which in few years is grown into much Esteem and Practice amongst the English, more because it is a New far∣fetcht drink, than for its Vertue, though it must be acknowledged to be one of the most Innocent and harmless drinks that is used in Publick Houses, and brings the least Inconveniency to the Drinkers thereof, only it wastes precious time and occasions many discourses which were better let alone.
This sort of drink ought not to be used, but in a Physical way, by such as are troubled with Fumes and Dlling Vapours that fly up into the Head, and thereby stupifie the Senses; also it is profitable for such as have brought up∣on themselves such distempers by too large drinking of Wine and strong Drink, or by Weariness, Labour or Fasting, and for such as are troubled with the Head-Ach. But for others that are well, and not troubled with any of the a∣foresaid Inconveniences, they ought not to addict themselves to the frequent sipping of this Black Broth, though there is not so much mischief to be apprehended from it, as from strong spirituous drinks. Yet it is not without its Inconveniencies; For Nature does not effect any kind of Inequality. Now Coffee is a Saturnine and Martial dink, it derives it sooty Colour and nausous Taste from Saturn, and its Bitterness from Mars; For the Iovial Solar, and Venereal Proprties are destroyed in the preparation, or making it into owder, that is to say, the ure subtl or Vola∣tile Spirits and Oyly Balsamick Vertues are suffocated, consumed or evapora∣ted,
by the harsh Fire, by which it be∣comes fixt in the properties of Saturn and Mars, and for that cause prevents Funes from flying up into the Crown, or at least it sends none; For all things in which the pure flying Spirits, sweet Oy∣ly Vertues and Natural Color are de∣stroyed by Preparations, are of a dull heavy Nature and Operation, and of no good Smell, Colour not Taste. Therefore this Liquor dulls the Appe∣tite, and if frequently drank, obstructs the Stomach, and generates evil Jui∣ces. One of the chiefest Reasons why the Turks at first invented and made Coffee a common Drink, was to allay the Fumes and stupifying Poysonous Vapours, caused by the common eating of Opium, which ill custom most of them art sub∣ject unto. Now Opium is apt to dis∣order the Eaters thereof by awakning the Natural Spirits, and then stupify∣ing and besetting them, even as the su∣perfluous drinking of our Wine and strong Drins does; For those Mahu∣metans being forbidden the Intoxicating Iuice of the Vine, had an itching desire to disorder their Brains some other
way, so fond is dpraved Humane Na∣ture to make it self mad (as we see by the Indians, when once they have ta∣sted Rum or Brandy, how passionately they will beg for more, crying, A little more, and then to sep) so at last they found out this way to Debauch them∣selves with eating of Opium, whose Poyson by custom and frequent use they have rendred easie and familiar to them, as also they and most of our People have done Tobacco, whose pre∣dominant Quality does likewise stand in the same poysonous Root; But to allay the stupifying fumes and Vapours, which Opium and Tobacco send up into the Head, they frequently drink Coffee; for the Invention of this Liquor was not for any pleasure, as most other Drinks have been, as Wine, Ale, Beer, Cyder, and many others, which do not only exhilerate the Spirits, but are of a most pleasant Taste; whereas Coffee altogether on the contrary, is very distateful to the Palate. Would Men but be so kind and Friendly to themselves as to observe the Rules of Temperance and Cleanness, a very little Coffee would serve, though
it hath it uses in a Physical way, as is before mentioned, and no otherwise, it being an improper and unequal drink, therefore not good for Common use or at every turn daily, or two or three times a day, as now a days many Thousands amongst us, especially in London and great Towns do. It is further to be noted, that seve∣ral of our own Grains will make not only as good Coffee, but in every par∣ticular like this sort, both in Smell, Colour and Operation, if it have the same preparation; for the species of Coffee before it is prepared is of a white Flowery substance, as our Grains are, and if you take Wheat, Barley, Ry or Oats, and prepare it in every respec  Coffee, it will have a like Taste,  mell, Colour and Operation; for there will only remain or lie hid in a Saturnine Powder, the fixed Salt, which no fire can destroy, and this too will stop or repress umes and vapours as well as the other, but who∣ever uses either of them frequently and wantonly, the Physical Vertues thereof to Him or Her will cease, and have little or no effect, and therefore
were it palpable that men in general are set upon Conceits, and wedded to Humours and Custos, and mad after things new and Forreign, it would be a wonder to see such swarms of People so fond of this nauseous exotick Liquor, which always carries its own Brand along with it; do but consider its Taste, Colour and Smell, and compare the same with proper and agreeable drinks, as Water, Al, Beer, Cyer and the like, how vast is the difference? Has not Water (that uiversal Mother of all Drinks) a pleasant friendly mild or meekly Taste, and to underbauched Pa∣lates, the most grateful of all Liquors, of a clear Whitish Colour and Aiery Smell, and agreeable to all Creatures, because the four Qualties there stand and have their Operati  Equality? Is not Ale pleasant, sweet, brisk, spirituous or Basamick Taste, its color Solar and Iovial, with a comfortable smell? The same is to be understood of all other proper Drinks, whereof the moderate use does hear, and refresh the Spirits, and maintain Health and Strength. But Cffe has none of these inviting pro∣perties, for its natural Vertues are
burnt up and totally destroyed in the preparation; Its lovey White and Yel∣low Clour, which proceed from Ve∣nus and Sol are turned into a Saturnine Blak, and its sweet Spirituous Taste into a nausous fusoe Bitter, with a smll un∣pleasant. And therefore the Drinkers thereof are forced to drink it very hot, to hide the ungrateful Taste; whereas Heat destroys the pleasant Taste of proper and Natural Drinks. And for this reason Coffee is dull on the Palate and Stomach, very apt to obstuct the as∣sages and inder Digestin, and ought not to be drunk but in the way of Me∣dicine; for there is as much and more reason for any Person to burn Wood, Herbs or rains to Ashes, and then take those Ashes and infuse them in hot Water, and when 'tis settled or clear, to drink it; or such sorts of rinks are edicies proper for several Diseases, but by no means to be drank as com∣mon Drinks. In a word, Coffee is the Drunkards Settle-brain, the ool Pss-Time, who admire it for being the Production of Asia, and is ravisht with delight when he hears the Berries grow in the Desarts of Arabia, but would
not give a farthing for an Hogshead of it, if it were to be had on Hampstead-Heath or Banstead-Downs; 'tis the Sawce for News, the Busie-mans Recrea∣tion, and the Idle mans Business, The Lazy Prattlers colourable pretence to spend his Money and more pretious Minutes vainly, and whilst he is cen∣suring his Superiors, and New-vamping the Government, his Wife wants Shoes, and his Children cry for Bread. But since the Indiscretion of the Age has rendred Sipping and Tippling almost necessary to Bargains and Business, and that men, especially in Cities and great Towns, many times cannot so conve∣niently transact their Negotiations, nor discourse their private Affairs, as in such places where there is Liquor sold, a Dish of Coffee now and then to be drank by an healthy Person, will not hurt him, nor make any variation, the quantity is so small; but drinking of it frequently, and smoking Tobacco there∣with, is injurious to Health; yet strong sound Bodies may drink or eat improper things, for continual custom will thereby render them less hurtful, especially if they be but small quantities
at a time. However, the best and su∣rest way for every one, is to let such Forreign Curiosities alone, and to take such Meats and Drinks only as are pro∣per in Quality, and therewith not to over-charge Nature in Quantity. CHAP. XXVII. Of Tea, its Nature and Operation. TEA is another Forregn Drink, the use whereof hath not been long known in Englad, the best that can be said of it is, That 'tis a pretty innocent harmless Liquor, it hath an opening Quality, and purgeth by Vrie, but not so much as many of our own Counry-Herb, and its great esteem is not from the more than ordinary Ver∣tues that it is endued withal, but chiefly for Novelty-sake, and because 'tis Otlandsh, and dear, and far-fetcht, and therefore admired by the Multi∣tude of ignorant People, who always have the greatest esteem for those things they know not. The truth is,
our Herb called Dandelion (that is in English, Lyons Tooth, because of the similitude of its Leaf) being gathered according to our Directions in The Way to Health, &c. and infused in boyl∣ing hot Water about half an hour, and then the Liquor poured from the Herbs, and sweetned with fine White Sugar, is a far better Drink than Tea, though the latter costs sixteen or twen∣ty Shillings a Pound, whereas the for∣mer may plentifully be had by most people for gathering, and is of far more use and vertue; for it cleanseth the Stomach, and powerfully purg th by Vrine; its natural Taste is a moderate Bitter, which being allay'd by Sugar, be∣comes as grateful, if not more than the best Tea. There are several other of our com∣mon Herbs that will perform the like, which I shall not trouble the Reader with in this place, only this I must tell you, that Sage, Peny-Royal, Mint, Mother of Thime, and Garden Thme be∣ing gathered and dryed in their pro∣per Seasons, and preserv'd in Baggs, will make more suitable Drinks for our
Constitutions, and answer the end of Nature's wants to a greater advantage than Tea. CHAP. XXIII. Of Herbs and Sillads, both boyled and Raw. THere are various srts of Herbs and fragrant  that are endued with most excellent Vertues, many of which are so ravishing and sublime, that with the favour of a Metaphor they may be called, The good Food of Angels; and therefore they were the only Food for Man in the beginning, when he remained in his Angelical state; for till he defaced the Image of God wherein he was created, every green Herb and Seed was his Meat, and should have been to this day, if he had continued in that heavenly Condition he was created in and to; but so soon as he suffered his Desires to wander after Vanity, then immediately the original Wrath got mastery, and the
divine Moderator became weak and impotent, whence arose that desire after Blood and Flsh, in which that out∣ward Life stands, and has birth from that strong might of Wrath; for the original of all Life stands in Poyson; therefore when Man ented into the Wrathful Nature and unqual pera∣tion of the original Forms, which does cause such greedy Inclinations, not only to eat Flsh ad , but also to Fighting, Killing and Oppssos▪ both of those of his own kind, and all the inferior Graduates; for according to what Principle and Quality doth carry the upper dominion in man's heart, whether Love or Angr, such Food, Drinks, Exercises, and all other things he desiers, Nature being always best gratified with that which has the near∣est affinity to its self; whence it ap∣pears that mens coveting Flesh and Blood, is a true sign and testimony of their miserable Fall, and that they live under the power of the dark fierce Wrath.—But I have discoursed more of this in my general Treatise, entitu∣led, The Way to Health, long Life and Happiness, As also I have there shewed
at large the excellency of Herbs, Grains and Seeds for Food, whereunto I refer the Reader; and shall here only tell you in particular how to make the best and wholsomest Salads, which if prac∣tised, may much conduce towards the Praservation of your Bodies in Health. 1. Take Spinnage, Parsey, Sorrel, Lettice, and a few Onions, then add Oyl, Vigar and Salt, a good quantity of each to make it of an high Taste and Relish, but let the Salt a little predo∣minate or exceed both the other In∣gredients, and eat nothing with it but Bread, which is sufficient▪ and will be much more grateful to the alate than if you eat Bread and Buter, or Brea and Cheese, or Bread and Meat, though all those things may be admitted, when you season your Sallad only with Salt and Vinegar; but it is not proper to eat Butter, Cheese or Flesh with such things or Sallads wherein Oyl is mixed, there being but little affinity in the Radix of Oyl and Butter or Cheese, and the natu∣ral Heat of the tomach doth not ike that Food in which there are several
sorts of fat things intermixed, of dis∣agreeing Natures; besides, at is al∣ways heavy of digestion. Another sort of good Sallade. 2. Take Lettice, Spinnage-Top, Penny-Royal, Sorrl, a few Onons and Persy, and season it as before mentioned, with Oyl, Salt and Vinegar. Another. 3. Take Lettic, Sorrel, Pepper-Grass, Spinnage Tops of Mint, and Onions, and season'd as before. Another. 4. Take Spinnage, Lettice, Tarragan, and Parsy, with some Leaves of Balm. Or, Sorrel, Tarragan, Spinnage, Let∣ticee Onions and Parsley. Or Tops of Penny-Royal, Mint, Lettice, Spinnage, Sorrel and Parsle. Or Lettice, Sinnage, Onions, Penny-Royal, Balm and Sorel. Or Sage, Lettice, Spinnage, Sorrel, Onins. and Parsley, and seasoned as before. Anoher. 5. Take Sage, Penny-Royal, Mint, Balm, a few Lettice, and some Sorrel,
and season it with Oyl, Salt and Vine∣gar, as is before mentioned. This is a brave noble warming Sallad, as in∣deed they all are, but this in a more especial manner. Another. 6. Take Lettice, Sorrel, Endife, Ce∣lery, Spinnage and Onions, seasoned as before. Another. 7. Take young green Buds of Col∣wots, or young Colow s, or Colwort-Plants, or a hollow Clworty Cabbage, with some Onions. This is a good Sallad, seasond in the same manner. Some there be that will make Sallads of hard Cabbage, but they are but very indifferent ones. Nor do I know any way of Preparation that can make an hard white Cabbage wholsome: Many People admire it for its whiteness; but though the pure White colour in some things is of excellent Vertues, it is not so in this, because it is not na∣tural for it to be so, but it comes to pass by Accident, that is, because the friendly Element, the Air, hath not its
free Circulation and Influence in and through it which causeth it to be so white; whereas its natural genuine Co∣lour is Green. And therefore, if you please to observe it, all white hard Cab∣bages are more fulsome, and of a stron∣ger nature and operation, either raw or boyled, than your open hollow greenish Cabbages, and harder of Con∣coction, and the Liquor in which they are boyled is more nauseous, and will sooner putrifie and stink than that in which Coworts are boyled. Therefore young green Colworts and Cabbage-Colwots, are the wholsomest, more cleansing and easier of Concoction. Another warming chearing Sallad. 8. Take the green fresh Leaves of Colworts or Cabbage Plants, Lttice, Sor∣rel and Parsley, Tarragan, Netle-Tops, Penny-Royal and Mint, let the quantity of each be according to your Palate, being season'd with Oyl, Salt and Vie∣gar, it is a brave warming or exhilira∣ting Sallade, if seasoned to the highest degree.
Sallads for the Winter. Take Colwort-Plants, Sorrel, Lettice, Endife, Celery, Parsley, Old Onions, (which are far better to be cut and eaten with Sallads in the Winter, than Young) and season them well with Salt, Oyl & Venegr. This is of a warming chearing Nature, and gives briskness to the Spirits, open∣ing and keeping the Passages from ob∣structions and furring, which in Win∣ter they are most subject unto; for then, Nature having, as it were, lockt up all her Gates, the central heat is driven more inward, which causeth great Appetite of hard, strong, fat and succulent Foods, and strong Drinks, which where Discretion, Order and Temperance are wanting, sows the Seeds and lays the Foundation for Di∣seases, that commonly manifest them∣selves in the Summer following, which the common and frequent eating of Herbs and Sallads in the Winter, will in a great measure prevent. And though Herbs have not so much Life and Vigour, nor are so much opening and cleansing in the Winter as in the
Spring, yet all such Herbs as do grow and continue fresh and green, do also retain their true natural Vertues and Qualities, and being eaten in Sallads, and season'd as they ought, have in a degree the same operation as at other seasons of the year. This few People do understand or consider, but cry out, Herbs in Winter! Who will or can eat them then? they are cold, and very hurtful—And this foolish false Doctrine they receive by Tradition from one to another, with∣out any experience or tryal; where∣as a Sallad well seasoned and ordered in December or Ianuary, if the season prove open and mild, is as chearing, and (being eaten only with good well made Bread) will warm the Stomach as much as two or three Glasses of Wine, and is for more pleasant and natural; or there is a greater excellency in all green Herbs in the Winter, than most imagine, especially for old People, and such as are subject to Stoppages or shortness of Breath, who instead of Onions may use a clove of Garlick in their Sallads, which is one of the best
ways of eating it, and it will bravely open, chear and warm the Stomach. Or you may make it thus: Take Lttice, Spinnage, Endiff, Celery, and cut half an head of Garlick amongst it, and then season it well with Oyl, Vinegar and Salt. This is a brave warming Sallet, and very wholsom. Of the most proper times for eating of Sallads Sallads are not improper to be eaten at all Times and Seasons of the Year, but more especially from the beginning of February to the middle or last of Iune, for then they are more brisk, lively and powerful then at other seasons, and better able to Cleanse, Purge, open Ob∣structions, sweeten and purifie the Blood, and make pure fine Spirits; for the fre∣quent eating of Herbs do prevent that pernicious and almost general Di∣sease, the SCURVEY, and all win∣dy Humors that does offend the Sto∣mach. Then again from the middle of September till December, and indeed all the Winter, if the Weather be mild and open, all green Herbs are well∣come
to the Stomach, and very whol∣om, because most People do then live hard strong substantial Food; and that can get them, on hot strong spiiuous Drinks, which are apt to disorder Nature, if Temperance and some Cleansing Foods be not eaten be∣tween whiles. In the Spring, Nettle-tops, Spinnage, Corn-Sallet, the young Buds of Cabbage and Colworts that grow on Stalks, and others of the like Nature, being boil∣ed; for though when you eat Herbs alone, as Food, you ought not to boyl them, yet when you use them only as Sawce, or a Corective to Flesh-Meats, you may boyl such of them as are pro∣per) make a good Sawce for such as eat Flesh, they loosen the Belly, help Concoction, and consequently open Ob∣structions, which the long Winter may have occasion'd; but later in the Spring, as April, May or Iune, there are several other excellent Herbs, as Lettice, Soweed, Spinnage, Parsley, Mint-Tops, Penny-Royal, Borrage, Endiffe, Suc∣cory, Beets White and Red, and many others in Gardens, besides divers that grow common in the Fields, as the
Red-Dock, Dandelion, Comfory, and the like, which being boyled in plenty of good River or Spring Water, with a brisk Fire (and one of Wood pre∣pares any Food best) and the lid or cover of the Vessel taken off as soon as they begin to boyl, till they are quite boyled, (which will be in a very little time) and then Butter melted with Wa∣ter into a thick substnace, being put to them, and some Salt, and then eaten with Bread, or Bread and Flesh, makes a brave wholsom Food—Touching the Nature of all Green Pulses, and that the frequent eating of them does generate crude windy Humours, and thick gross Blood, and are the occasion of several Diseases; see our before-cited Treatise, viz. The Way to Health, long Life and Happiness, &c. How to supply the want of Oyl in Sallets, where Persons do not love it, or cannot have it. For seasoning all sorts of green Sal∣lads I have mentioned Oyl as a princi∣pal Ingredient, and deservedly; for
nothing is more excellent for that pur∣pose, it being called Sallet-Oyl from that very use. But whereas some Peo∣ple for want of use, (or by I know not what secret Antipathy) do not love Oyl; and others many times can∣not procure it, especially here in England, I shall here acquaint them how they may furnish themselves to supply the want of it: You must know then, that Butter is our English Oyl, the nearest thing we have in affinity to the Nature of Oyl, and designed no doubt by Nature to serve our turn instead of it; for no Country yields all things, and yet such is the gracious Providence of God, that every Region affords all things necessary to the Inhabitants; if therefore you melt good Butter thick, and pour it upon your Sallad, it will re∣lish and suit with it excellently well, and serve very conveniently instead of Oyl, being so like it amongst the Herbs, both in shew and Taste, that an ordinary lover of Oyl will not doubt but he has it; and he that does not love Ol, may be sure he has it not, and both enjoy (upon the matter) as much Vertue, for Nourishment and Wholsomeness
as if they had eat the purest Salad-Oyl that is brought from beyond the Seas. A curious Secret, not common∣ly practised, and which I am confident many People will have reason to thank me for. CHAP. XXIX. The best way to make Herb Pottage, not only in the Spring, but also at all times of the Year. TAke Elder-buds, Nettle tops, Cli∣vers, and Watercresses or Smallage, and what quantity of Water you please preportionable to your quantity of Herbs, add Oatmeal according as you would have it in thickness, and when your Water and Oatmeal is just ready to boyl put your Herbs into it, cut or uncut, as you like best, and then when it is again ready to boyl, take a Ladle and lade it so that you keep it from boyling and when you have done thus near half a quarter of an hour, take it off the Fire, and let it stand a little
while, then you may either eat it with the Herbs or strain it, adding a little Butter, Salt and Bread, the best way will be not to eat it till it is some∣what cooled, and not past as hot as Milk from the Cow, and you are to remember not to let it boyl at all. This is a brave wholsom cleansing sort of Pottege, far beyond what is com∣monly made. Another sort of Herb-Pottage, Take Water and Oatmeal, make it boyling hot on a quick Fire, then take Spinnage, Corn-sallet, Tops of Penny-Roy∣al and Mint, cut them and put a good Quantity into it, let it stand on the Fire till it be ready to boyl, and then lade it to and fro five or six Minuits, then take it off, and let it stand a while, that the Oatmeal may sink to the bottom, then strain it, adding Butter, Salt and Bread, and when it is about Blood warm, Eat it. This is a gallant sublime Pottage, pleasant to the Palate and Stomach, cleansing the Passages by opening Ob∣structions; it also chears and comforts
the Spirits, breeds good Blood, and makes the whole body lightsom. The same method you ought to follow in making all sorts of Gruels and Herb-Pottages, be the Herbs of what Nature they will; for the boyling of Herbs, not only in Pottage, but for any other use of Food, was not invented by wise Seers into the Arcana of Nature; for it does, as it were, totally destroy the pure volatile Spirits and balsamick Vertues, as also the strong warming Properties thereof. For this cause, Raw Herbs are much better, affording a firmer Nourishment, better Blood and purer Spirits, and feel more warm∣ing in the Stomach than boyled; nor are they so apt to loosen the Bowels. But if any shall make boyled Herbs their Food, though they prepare them by dressing them with Butter, and the like, they will prove phlegmatick, cold and windy, with other evil Properties, and not afford half so good a Nour∣ishment as if they were Raw; nor are Raw Herbs more Windy than boyled, as some People, not for want of Igno∣rance, suppose, but rather the contra∣ry; for the common eating of Raw
Herbs does naturally resist all crude windy matter and gross Juices, by assisting the natural Heat and helping Concoction; they give Life to the Sto∣mach, by opening the Mouth of the Appetite, and sharpen it, as appears by such as have dull flat Appetites; for when such shall come to a good Salle, it does (as it were) create or revive a Stomach and good Taste, whereas before they could relish no∣thing: Also, they help to digest and carry off all heavy fat or gross Food, and make it less hurtful, insomuch that some have been thereby cured of win∣dy Phlegmatick Humours that offend∣ed the Stomach, and consequently sent Fumes up to the Head, causing it to ake. Therefore this was the way the wise healthy long-lived Antients pre∣pared their Herbs, who made them one of their principal Foods; but now-a days People do scarce eat them but as Sawce. And as boyling of Herbs does destroy the purer Vertues and firmer Substance of them, so that they become phlegmy, cold and windy; The same is to be understood in all sorts of Herb-Pottage, whether for
Food or Physick; for boyling any sorts of Herbs does in a Moments time ei∣ther suffocate or evaporate the vola∣tile Spirits of them, and then all the sweet pleasant opening cleansing Ver∣tues are gone, and they become like Beer, Ale or Wine, that has lost its pure Spirits, which is further eviden∣ced by that strong nauseous or fulsom Taste, ill Smell and dull Colour, all such boyled Pottages have, so that ve∣ry few care for eating them, unless they are forced to it, as they are to Physick that is against their Stomachs. For the pure sweet pleasant Taste and lively briskness of all things resides in the power of the Spirits; which all Housewives and Preparers of Food ought to consider▪ and understand, as also the degrees of the Fire, the quan∣tity of Water, and that the Water be in sufficient quantity, and that the Air have its free circulation, and to give it true time, or else none can prepare any kind of Food without prejudice; for in the sweet and spirituous Pro∣perties stand the healing nourishing Vertues, which will not endure any violent Heat or unequal Motion.
To make Garlick or Onion Pottage. Take Water and Oatmeal, stir it to∣gether, and when it is ready to boyl, bruise as much Galick as you please, to make it either strong or weak, put this bruised Garlick into your boyling hot Gruel, and brew it to and fro with your Ladle, that it may not boyl for five or six Minutes, then take it off, and let it stand a little, then add But∣ter, Salt and Bread, and eat it as warm as your Blood. Tis a brave warming cleansing and opening Gruel, nothing so strong and nauseous as that which is boyled; for this way you do extract the finer and purer parts of the Gar∣lick, and leaves the strong nauseous Qualities behind; but on the contrary, much boyling or boyling according to custom, does destroy the good opening cleansing Vertues, and awaken the Evil.
CHAP. XXX. The best way to make Diet-Drink with Herbs, Grains, Seeds, &c. or the proper method of nfusion of Herbs in Beer, Ale, or other Drinks. THe best, proper and most natu∣ral way to make all sorts of Herb-Drinks, is thus, First, gather your Herbs in their proper times and seasons, as we have taught in our ay to Health, &c. Then dry them in the Sun, and put them into close Paper-Baggs; and when you would use them, take such a quantity as you think fit, and put them into a Linnen Bag, and hang the same in your Bear or Ale when it is a working or fermenting, for two, three, four, five, six, seven or eight hours, and then take it out. (But if you would make Wormwood-Drink, then you ought not to let it lie so long, for of that 3 or 4 hours will be sufficient.) And thus if your Herbs
be rightly gathered and ordered as aforesaid, all their good, pure and Balsamick Vertues will as easily and readily give themselves forth into the Beer, Ale, Wine, or other Liquor, whatever it be, as the pure sweet spi∣rituous Quality in Mault does into the warm Liquor when you Brew, which is performed in one hour to admira∣tion. But as in this Example, if after you have put in your Mault you should let the Water or Liquor remain six, eight or ten hours before you draw it off, then the pure sweet spirituous Quality will become suffocated, and such over long continuance thereof will awake or irritate the phlegmy gross nauseous Properties, which would, as it were, totally destroy all the good Virtues, as every one that can but Brew a peck of Mault, may know by experience. So the very same is to be understood in infusing any sort of well prepared Herbs; for in such dryed fermented Bodies or things, the purer Vertues do stand as it were external, and when they are put or infused in any proper Men∣struum or Liquor, they give them∣selves
forth, first with all readiness, because the Essential Vertues of every thing consists in the volatile Spirit, and balsamick or sweet Body, which is an hidden flying Vertue, whence the true Colour, Smell and Taste do proceed: And therefore great care ought to be taken in all Preparations, that this benign Vertue be neither eva∣porated nor suffocated; for then the thing will presently tend to Putrefa∣ction, and become a Nauseate and loath∣ing to Nature. The Learned are Men of Tongues, and so they may talk at their pleasure, but I do assure all the humble Enquirers after Wis∣dom's Footsteps, That the long lying or Infusion of any sorts of Dry or Gren Hebs, does destroy their good Pro∣perties, as a Candle by being held downwards is extinguisht by that which before fed it, and also do irritate the gross fulsom Qualities thereof, as is plain by the ill Tastes and Smells of all such Drinks, more especially if it be Wormwod; for then they become harsh, strong, bitter, and very un∣grateful to Nature, and no less un∣wholsom; For the common Wormwood-ink
that is sold in Al-Houses, is of a string, bitter, hot, fuisom Natur and Operation, and the frequent drinking thereof does wound and destroy the natural Heat, and by degrees spoil Di∣gestion, so that the Drinkers thereof cannot be well without Morning-Draughts of their nauseous Purt; such fort of Drink especially if any shall drink much of it, being of kin to Spi∣rits and Brandy; those that are once much used to them, cannot without great difficulty leave them. The long lying of Wormwood in the Drink does totally destroy the subtle Spirits and pure fragrant Vertues, awakens the strong bitter poysonous Quality, which not only checks and debilitates the natural Heat, but heats the Blood, making it thick and gross, causing the Spirits to become heavy and dull, and sends up stupifying fames to the Brain, which falling upon the Optick Nerves, do oft times extream∣ly prejudice the Eye sight; but if Wormood rightly gathered and pre∣served be infused but for two or three hours when your Drink is working, and then taken out, you will have all
its good Qualities, and a most delight∣ful odoriferous Drink, and unattended with any of those ill consequences; if you love it very strong of the Wormwood, then add a greater quan∣tity, and not infuse it longer, as is usual with some. Another way of making Wormwood-Ale or Beer. Take what quantity you please, more or less, as you would have your Liquor strong or weak of the Herb, infuse it for half an hour in your boy∣ling hot Wort, then strain it out, and put your Wort a cooling, the ve∣ry same way as I have taught in The way to Health, of Brewing, and infu∣sing Hops, which does far exceed all the common ways for goodness and vertue. Wormwood-Drinks thus prepared, ei∣ther this or the former way, are brave noble Liquors, gentle, warming, helpful to Concoction, they fine the Blood, send no gross Fumes to the head, and therefore hurt not the Eyes, as the common sort generally does.
The same Method ought to be fol∣low'd in making all sorts of Drinks in which any strong bitter Herbs are infused; and whereas the usual way of making such Drinks does not only render them unpleasant but destroys all the Medicinable Vertues of the Herbs. This new Method which we recommend, makes them pleasant and grateful to both Palate and Stomach, and moreover preserves all the Physi∣cal vertues; for most bitter Herbs do naturally and powerfully open Ob∣structions, if they be wisely ordered, but otherwise they prove pernicious; for every thing has two adles, and Fire that is good to warm you, will also bun you, f you do not mannage it with Discretion.
CHAP. XXXI. Of Salt, its Nature and Operation. ALL common Salt is of an high sharp penetrating fierce hot wrathful Nature and Operation, an unseparated Body, wherein the poyso∣nous fierce Original Fumes or Qualities of Saturn and Mars are predominant, and therefore 'tis unequal in its Opera∣tion, except it be allay'd or modera∣ted by some other thing whose Na∣ture is more equal. The Sea or Sa-Water is as it were, the Original or Fountain of the Essential Salts in each particular thing, whence does pro∣ceed the brisk sharpness and distin∣guishing matter in all Tastes, and in what Creature or other thing this es∣sential Salt is strong and powerful, that Creature is brisk, lively, of good Complex on, strong Appetite and per∣fect Palate; if in Vegetabls, then such Herb, Seeds, Grams, or Fruits are vi∣gorous, and of good Colour Smell and Taste.
This is that Salt which the Wise Man saith, savours all things, and not that Pillar of Salt that Lots Wife was precipitated into, which was the strong Original Properties, where each form has its Operation in strife and inequa∣lity, where there is nothing but sharp∣ness, rending, teaing, bitterness and a Poysonous fierce Operation, of which the cmmon Salt is a true figure; there∣fore it must be moderated with some mild or meeker Body, to render it fit for humane use. Hence if in any sort of Food there be too great a quantity of Salt, the same is very apt to heat the whole Body, and consume the Ra∣dical Moisture, causing drought and uneasiness, and filling the Body full of Wind: it also heats and frets the Blood with an Ithy or Mangie hu∣mour; and indeed common Salt de∣stroys all sorts of Inanimate Foods, as Herbs, Seeds, Fruit, or Grains, if the same be not presently eaten; for it preys upon the Spirituous parts, and by its fierce hunger destroys the whole; for there is no sort of Food can be long preserved but only by its Salt, as appears by inter∣mixing
Salt with Bread; For that Bread into which you put Salt, will sooner decay than that which has none; therefore Bread that is provied for the Sea, where it must be kept very long, is always made without Salt. And all Bkers and House-wives Bread would be be much better, if they put none in, it being nothing but custom that makes Mens Palates expect or de∣sire Salt in their Bread, and the less Salt any shall eat, the less they will co∣vet it; for the mixing of common Salt with sundry sorts of Vegetable , does hide or Elipse the fragran∣cy and pleasant Taste of the Essential Salt, that it cannot be felt by the Pa∣late; for as this innae Salt is the pre∣server and keeper of each thing from Putrefaction, not only in Inanimate things, but also in all Animals, and therefore a very little of our common Sa will serve such as feed on Vegta∣tives; for the less Salt is put into those things, the milder, cooler pleasanter and easier they are of digestion; For much Sal in Food makes them not only hard of Concoction, but heats and dries the Body, and by simily stirs
up and awakens the Central Heat, thereby endangering Health. Yet still, our common Salt is a brave Noble thing and of mighty use, as the World goes, for those that eat Flesh and Fish; for it contains several Qualities, especially two, viz. One strong fiece hot Poysonous. Another, sweet friendly pleasant, sharp and lively, but the first exceeds and there∣fore all sorts of Flesh and Fish that do lie or are kept long after salted, do prove pernicious to such as eat them; for by length of time the corrupt parts of such Flesh does with a greedy hun∣ger eat up and destroy both the pure brisk sweet Spiriuous particles of the Salt, and also of the Flesh, and then such Flesh or Fish cannot be call'd back or recovered by a fresh salting, or any other Art, to its former state; and the reason is, because in such corrupt Flesh there is no simile for the second salting to Incorporate withal, there∣fore it will proceed to Putrifaction in deiance of all Art. For this cause all Flesh and Fish that has been log salted is Injurions to Health; for it dries, heats and frets
the Body and Blood, and is one great cause of the SCURVEY; It also spoils and loosens the Teeth and eats away the Gums: But ill, Salt is very pro∣per and wholsom to be eaten with fresh Flesh and Fish, and some sorts of Flesh (as Bef) may be salted two, three or four weeks, and if smoaked, it will continue good longer, and therefore the order used in Bacon is very Pro∣per; for Salt, where it is moderate in food, doth quicken the Appetite, and makes the Stomach brisk and lively, especially for those who by some dis∣orders or Intemperances have woun∣ded their Health and hurt the Essential Salts, which makes the Palate dull, and the Stomach flat and unrelishing, and then People cry,—My Stomach goes against both Food and Drinks; more es∣pecially they are averse to all such Meats or Drinks as are compounded or made by Art: But others, as for Example, fair Water, they can best take, it being more simple. The like is to be understood of Foods; but there is hardly any Food so simple in all par∣ticulars as Water; indeed Bread is a brave, mild, simple, friendly Food,
but the mixtures in making, and the manner of common Baking does alter the case, and make it nothing so sim∣ple as Water; therefore Water in all states, both Health and Sickness is plea∣sant and delightful to the Palate, Sto∣mach and all the Senses. For it is ob∣servable, that if you eat sweet things Water is grateful after them, or any other Foods of extream Tastes, but other compounded or fermented Drinks are not; which does commend Water to be the cleanest and complea∣test drink of all others, and that Peo∣ple may and can drink it with delight in Sickness, and when the Essential Saits have lost their savour, and also shews that the disease did not proceed from any of its Qualities; for when such Loathing and Distempers pro∣ceed from Meats or Drinks, as most commonly it does, then the Stomach and Palate do perfectly abominate all such things. Thus in all or most sick∣nesses People chuse Water before Beer, Ale, Cyder or Wine, and for Foods had rather eat Bread, Fruits, and the like, than Flesh, Butter, Cheese, Pud∣dens, &c. and most had rather eat
Fish than Flesh, the reason is, because in Health they seldom eat Fish, and so the Disease did not proceed from thence. Likewise Salt is a brave addition to Butter and Cheese, to preserve and keep it from putrifaction for a convenient season, but all sorts of Vegetations are highly to be esteemed, for that they have in themselves the Essential Salt, sufficient to preserve them a long time from falling into corruption; but that which is most to be admired is Oyl, which tho' it be of an unctious fat Nature, is yet so pure, and void of offensive matter, that it may be kept good several years, nor can the best salting preserve Butter half so long. Here you are to understand, that all sorts of Food that quickly tend and turn to putrifaction are not to be coun∣ted so good as those that by their in∣nate Vertue and Essental Salt, will con∣tinue good a considerable time, as all sorts of Grains, Whet, Barley, Rye, Peas, Beans, Fruits, &c. since they are far more strong, firm and spiritu∣ous, than any sort of Flesh or Fish. Not but that there is the same Essenti∣al
and pure Slt in these, as in Grains, or rather greater, but the gross phleg∣matick Body overcomes it, and as soon as the Sensitive Life is destroyed, the good Vertues are in a moments time dissipated and tend to corruption, and though it be saled, yet the Salt doth not, nor hath any power to extinguish or purge forth this gross Body of Cor∣ruption, but the Spirituous parts of the Salt do incorporate and joyn with the Essential parts of the Flesh, and captivate the gross body for a season, that it cannot proceed to putrifaction, but in length of time, viz▪ two, three, four, five, six, seven or eight months, the gross body continuing so power∣ful, and the more pure parts or Essen∣sial Salts both in the Flesh and Salt do by degrees waste, suffocate or evapo∣rate, and then the Original fierce Poy∣sonous forms of Saturn and Mars grow strong and powerful, and with a gree∣dy hunger quickly destroy all the re∣maining good Vertues, and then all falls into Corruption, from which there is no recovery. And indeed so powerful in Flesh and Fish is the gross Phlegmy Corruptive part, that there
is no way found that can continue it very long from Putrifaction; the best course to preserve it sweet, sound and wholsome is to dry Fish very well, and the same may be done with Flesh, but with more difficulty, and this is far the healthiest way. But I know no reason why People should be so fond of this sort of morose Food, or sustain any such difficulty to preserve it so extraordinary long, since the Lord our Bountiful Creator has in a superabundant manner supplied and furnisht us with varieties of brave, noble, friendly and most fragrant sorts of sound healthy Foods, easily provi∣dable, and which may in all particulars gratifie all the ends and necessities of Nature. To conclude this matter—Salt moderately used especially with Flesh, Fish, Butter and Cheese does prove of excellent use and benefit; for it natu∣rally warms, cheers, comforts and settles weak or disordered Stomachs, pre∣vents blching, vomitings, and other In∣conveninies o tat Natre; but if be immoderaely used or eaten, then
it hath the contrary operations. And in many Countries where Salt is scarce, People lie very healty without it to great Ages. For as he that drinks all Water will never want any other Drink, so Custom makes every thing not only a second Nature, but causes great seming Wants to be where there is no real or natural cause for it; and so Salt is very unpleasant to such as have never or very seldom eat any. But some may say, How can fat Foods or things be eaten without Salt? 'Tis true, if you have accustomed your self to eat plenty of Salt with such Foods, then your Palate and Sto∣mach will not without trouble, and some reluctancy, receive them with∣out Salt; but if you had never eaten any Salt with them, then you would have counted them much sweeter with∣out; though all fat Foods that proceed from Beasts do really want Salt, by reason of the abundance of gross hu∣midity, but all ft or Unctious things that proceed from the Vegetable King∣dom, do not need any Salt, they be∣ing so sweet and clean in their Ra∣dis, that if you incorporate Salt with
them, (unlss it be just when you eat them) i will destroy their natural Vertues; which does further shew the purity and excellency of the one, and the evil or grossness of the other. And this let all men know, and that of a truth; That there are no Iuices, Oyls, Fats, or any thing of that nature, whic depraved Man makes Food of, that ae so rich, clean, simple, whol∣some and grateful to Nature, as the Oyls, Fats, &c. of Grains, and other things that proceed from the Vegeta∣tive Kingdom. What production of Animals is for Food fit to be rankt in equal esteem with the Oyl either of Olives or Nuts? The former is enricht with such an essential Salt in it self, as can for several years preserve it soun and good; whereas the Animal Fat is so gross and corrupt, that it will presently turn to Putrefaction, if you have not the assistance of the grand Pillar of Salt, the fierce original or un∣separated Body. Is Flesh to be valued equal to Bread, which is deservedly entiuld, The Staff of Life, and under which we are taught by our Lord to comprehend all things necessary to our
subsistence here below, in that Petition, Give us this dyor daly Bead? Is Flesh, I say, (hic is gross humid subject to putreaction in the higest degree, always attended with dying Groans and dolorous Cryes, Rage, Violence ad Oppression, and in it self boh not healthy, and also unpleasant to the Palate and Senses, if once enlightned, and not debauched by custom) fit to be comped with Bread, a brave, no∣ble, fm, innocent, substantial, heal∣thy Food, and proper for Angelical Me? Nay, the Fruits that proceed from the Animal Kingdom, viz. Milk the most noble and useful of them all, cannot we use and dignifie with the most delicious Juices that flow from the Vegetative Regions, as the various sorts of excellent Wines, Cyder, Ale, Ber, &c. which if temperately used supply the wants of Man, and grati∣fie Nature to the highest, and by their ow inate alt preserve their own Bodies, without being beholding to the grand original Pillar of Salt? What have you in your Animal ore that can match the vast vareties of noble fra∣grant Herbs, Seeds, Grains, and Fruits,
whose Number is beyond any humane Capacity to coun? The one smells sweet, and fills the Air with most plea∣ant odoriferous Scents, ravishing the Senses of man, and serving im both for Food and Physick, Vse and e sure; whereas the other stinks, and fils the Earh with Ordure, and sends up Fumes alike unpleasant and unhealty, and by no Art can long be preserved from Pu∣trefaction and Rotenness. And as in these, so in many other respects, the Vegetative Productios so far transcend the Animal, as to Food, that whether you respect Innocecy or Wolsomness, Dlight or Cleanliness, there is no com∣parison to be made between them. CHAP. XXXII. Of the Scurvey, and its Generation. THe SCURVEY is of late Years be∣come an Epidemical, or almost ge∣nerl Disease amongst English people, the principal Causes of which are In∣temperance,
and want of care in some of the following particulars: 1. By eating too much in quantity, beyond the power of the digestive Fa∣culty, so tha the natural heat cannot make any perfect separation, whence Crudities and noxious Juices are gene∣rated, which do replenish the Joynts and Members, and not only cause the Blood to be thick, but infect it with a sharp keen fretting Quality, which dis∣colours the Flesh and Skin, and makes the Limbs and Members ake with pain. 2. The frequent eating of Foods that are of a contrary Quality to the Constitution, which do secretly wound the pure Spirits, and put Nature out of her natural way. 3. Improper Preparations of Food, which do render them burthensom to Nature, generating evil Nourishment, bad Blood, and i pure Spirits. 4. The frequent eating of moist phlegmatick Food, which naturally dull, stupifie and drown the Senses, and makes the Sweet Oyl burn dim, which causes Indisposition and unplea∣sant Humors.
5. The common eating of Flesh, without diinction, or regard had to the season of the Year, healthfulness or unhealthfulness of the Creatures, which do as it were corrupt the very Radix of Nature, from whom proceed various Diseases, as Pthycks, Stoppages of the Breast, Phlegm, and Phlegmatick Humors, which makes the Spirits dull and impure, whence do arise heavy, lumpish Dispositions, with ravenous fierce Inclinations and cruel Passions, which cause many of them to use such evil Words, demonstraing that the dark center of Wrath is awakened, and does predominate; for all evil Words are generated from the fierce wrathful or devilish Nature. This every one ought to consider, as in those two com∣mon Passions; when the poysonous and fierce fury of Saturn and Mars is stir∣red up, are not most then apt to belch forth vain, wicked and helish Speeches as Swearing, Cursing, and not only im∣piously prophaning the holy Name of God, but even challenging, and as it were daring his Tremendous Majesty, (whose Wrath is a consuming Fire) to damn and confound them, and calling
their fellow Creatures, Dogs, Whelps, Sons of Whores, Devils, and a hundred of the like evil Names. Now consider O Man! from what Root such Word: do take their Birth? And so on the con∣trary, do not all good Men, and o∣tes, when pleased or in good Hu∣mours, breathe forth amcable loving Words or Discouses, there being more, either good or evil, in words than most imagin, for they declare what King∣dom has the upper dominion in them; nor is it unobservable, that the word Scurvey denotes well and evil Affection of Mind, and a cross way-ward peevish ill conditioned Dsposition, as well as a disordered habit of Body, and not without cause, since they both proceed from the same occasion or radical cause of mans precipiating himself into the dark Absse or Cruelty, preying upon and devouring his fellow Creatures. 6. The much eating of Flesh and Fish does generate in some Complex∣ions cloded Blood, King's-Evil, Plurisies, Scabs, Leprosis, and many other man∣gie Diseases; or Dropsies, heaviness of the Spirit, and in some it causeth Fea∣vers, Swellings of the Members, also the
Gout, Stone, and many other unnatu∣ral Diempers; which at last having reduced the Body into a general dis∣crasie or unnatural Ferment, termi∣nates in the Scurvey, as so many stink∣ing Puddles into one Common-Shore; for indeed the Scurvey is a Complica∣tion of several Diseases and Disorders, as appears by the various and very dif∣ferent Symptoms, appearing on such as are afflicted therewith. 7. By eating most sorts of Food, whilst the fiery Heat is in it, not suf∣fering the sulpherous Vapours and erce, Fumes to seperate, after 'tis pre∣pared, which causes a Scorbutick Itch to possess the Blood, and swells the Body with winy Humors. 8. By eating too often, that is, be∣fore the former Meal be concocted, which does not only dull, and indispose the whole Body, but also it generates Crudiies and evil Juices, which cause Stoppages, and shortness o Breath. 9. By drinking too much in Quan∣tity of rich Cordial-dink, which irri∣tates and awakens the cenral Spirits, and by degrees destroys the digestive
Faculty and natural Heat, and hurts the Blood. 10. The drinking small Beer that is brewed after Ale and strong Beer, which is nothing but the washing of the Grains, viz. a sour nauseous Qua∣lity; nothing breeds worse Blood than the frequent drinking of such Liquor. 11. The drinking of Ale not well fermented, or such as has the Barm or Yest beaten into it, as is usual for Brewers to do in London, to make it seem strong, sweet and full in the Mouth, such Drin is very offensive to Nature, it generates Phlegm  th Stomach, dulls the edge of the Appe∣tit, furs the Passages, sends dulling Fumes and Vapours into the Head, and breeds bad Blood; likewise new small Beer and Ale is pernicious. 12. By drinking stale strong Beer, which is boyled a long time with Hops, this sort of Drink is pernicious, it heats the Blood, swells the whole Body, generates in some Complexions a hard gretty substance in the Reins and Blad∣der.
13. By drinking various sorts of Wine, when need and nature doth not require it, which do irritate the Spi∣rits, heat the Blood, destroy the Ap∣petite, and indisposes the whole Body. 14. By accustoming themselves to close Houses, warm Clothings, soft Feather-Beds, and lying long in Bed, which does soften and weaken Nature that she be∣comes impotent, and hinders the free circulation of the Blood. 15. Idleness, and want of proper Exercise in open airy places, destroys the Health and weakens the whole Body. 16. By visiting the Shades of Venus too often, and forcing Nature beyond her Inclinations and Power, which does corrupt her in the very Radix; and this is frequently done by imulating Nature with gluttonous Provocations, high compounded Foods, and rich Cordial Drinks, viz. such as need no Teeth to chew them, nor Stomach to digest them, that being done already in the Preparation. 17 By Carking Cares and Perturbati∣ons of Mind, Passions of Love and Ha∣tred, Superstition, Envy, and the like.
These are some of the Intemperances that have destroy'd the Health bth of the Body and Mind, even in the very Radix; and indeed when I consider the various Disorders that Mankind daily commits, I cannot admire at the great number of cruel Diseases they are afflicted with; but rather I am apt sometimes to wonder that there are any that escape, or that so many do out∣live Childhood; but it must be said, That through the custom of ill usage and disorders, great numbers do croud through many Inconveniences; as in the most fatal  some escape. Rules and Directions for suh as are Wise and Well minded, and would prevent the Scurvey, and other Diseases. 1. MEats and Drinks ought not to be taken hat are too strong for Nature, but rather she ought always to be stronger than the Food, and so the Stomach and the Natural Heat will be able to digest and make perfect Sepa∣ration, whence will be generated good
Blood and pure brisk Spirits, and they always make the Body light lightsme and agile. 2. Meats or Drinks ought not to be taken that are of a contrary Nature or Quality to the Constitution; but such as are simple in their kind, agreeable to the omplexion, and as near as may be, equal in ther parts, which will breed good lood, and encrease the Spirits, and keep the Passages free from Obstructions, and give strength to all the members of the Body. 3. Neither ought any to eat to Dull∣ness; for if healthy People feel them∣selves oppressed after Meals, they ought to make abatement in the quan∣tity. Do not most People before eat∣ting and drinking find themselves quik, brisk and lightsom, provided they have not, either by over-labour or fasting too long, evaporated or wa∣sted their Spirits? But after their eat∣ing ad dinking, because they do it immoderately, they are sensible of a cloging heaviness & dull Indisposition, which is a certain sign that the necessity and conveniency of Nature is exceeded;
for the intention of Food is to refresh, not to oppress or incommode her. 4. The pleasure of the Palate in eat∣ing ad dinking is prolonged many degrees beyond the necessity of the Stomach, especially where Foods or Drinks are made by Art and Compul∣sition, enticing, and many Pople thereby over-charge themseles, before they are aware, whence Crudities, nox∣ious Juices, and many cruel Diseases are generated, and in the end Death it self; therefore let all Persons watch over themselves in this respect, and take the wise mans advice, To set a Knife to thir Throat; that is, to take up a Resolution of Temperance when∣ever they find their Appeites tempted, and like to be inveigled, and drawn in to Excess. 5. Your Meats and Drinks ought in every respect to b properly prepared; for Food ill dressed does destroy Health in a secret, yet Powerful manner. Sme will but haf do it, others over-do it, both are great and dangerous Errors, so that the Somach cannot draw any good Nourishment from it for the Bo∣dy,
and so the Blood is thickned, the Spiits wounded, and many Diseases are multiplied. 6. All sorts of Flesh, and other gross Foods that are boyd, oght to be boyled in plenty of Water, with brisk quick Fires, without intermission, and as soon as they begin to boyl, the Vessel should be uncoverd until it be done; which will presrve the pure balsamick Vertues and Spirits, whence the pure delightful Taste, Smell and Colour do proceed. 7. Forbear to eat Flesh without di∣stinction, more especially in Iuy, Au∣gust, September and Octber; for then the Flesh of all sorts of Catel is more subject to putrifaction than at an other season, not only from the heat of the Weather, but because the Sun is then declining, which causes all other things to do so too; and the Grass on which they feed is weak, fainty and phlg∣matick, which is the reason why their fat is then so soft and greasie that it will not duly take salt, and more espe∣cially if hard diven, as most Cattel kill'd about Londn, and other great Cities, has been; therefore in the fore∣mention'd
Months the Griping of the Bowels and pnicios Favrs do reign more than at any other time of the year. 8. Forbear the freqent eating of Fish witout regard had to the Season, or to their cleanness or uncleanness, or their being killed after they are ta∣ken, that is, by a Wound, which would cause the free evacuation of the original Properties of Saturn and Mars, which is seldom done by the ignorant Fisher-men, but they let them dye, that is, strangle or suffocate them∣selves, whereby the pure Spirits and sweet Vertues (by the Agony of the Creature at the departure of Life) are fixt or overcome; for the original Ve∣noms, in which all Life consists, are then so terribly stirred up and aggita∣ted, that they immediately suffocate the pure Spirits and sweet Oyl, if there be not a Wound made, where∣by those raging Poysons may freely pass away in the Vehicle of the Blood. For this Reason Experience, that all Flesh, as of Fowls, or the like that ae strangled, will not eat so sweet and pleasant as others that have a
Wound made and bleed plentifully, but hath a stronger and grosser Taste and Smell, nor will it breed so good Blood or Nourishment as the other. 9. Remember that you eat not be∣fore the former Foods be digested; nothing is a greater Preserver of Health than proper Fasting, it cleans∣eth the Stomach, keeps the Passages from being furr'd, prevents Stoppages, Colds and Shortness of Breath, and makes People Aiery, strong, and of good clean Complexions. 10. Drink moderate and simple Drinks, not exceeding either in Quan∣tity or Quality, for fear you waste and destroy your Health; and be sure let your Drink be well fermented, clear and free from that Yeasty Quality, which most of your Ale in London is sub∣ject unto; nor such Small-Beer as is there commonly put off by Chandlers, which the Brewers make after the brewing of their Ale and strong Beer, being little better than the washing of their Vessels and contains a sour nauseos Property, that heats the Blood and hurts the Body. 11. Let your ordinary Drinks be mild and friendly to Nature, not stale,
hard, sour, nor too new; for all these are prejudicial. 12. Let your Habit or Day-Clothing be moderate, rather thin than thick, whereby the pleasant vapours of the Air may freely court Nature, and be suckt in at the Pores as by Spunges on all parts, which will continually cheer, comfort and refresh the Spirits and whole Body, and makes your Limbs strong, nimble and lively, preventing Drought, unnatural Heat, and the like Indispositions. 13. Let your Houses be Aiery; your Windows large, and often set open, your Beds hard, clean and sweet, for which purpose Straw or Flock-Beds, with Quilts on them, will be much better than Feather-Beds, and will not only prevent the generation of Vermin, but make you more healthful, and en∣able all the Limbs to discharge their respective Functions with ase and pleasure, as I have at large demonstra∣red, and given the Reasons thereof in my Way to Health, &c.
14. Forget not to use proper Ex∣ercises and Labour in open airy places, which will prevent many occasions of Weaknesses and Obstructions; and such as cannot or will not labour, let them take good Walks every day by River-sides, or on Downs and Plains. 15. Observe the Rules of Chastity, provoke not Nature, nor turn her out of her simple and innocent way, but use such Meats, Drinks, and Exercises, as will replenish her with brisk lively Spirits and Vertues; neither ought you to give way to loose Imagina∣tions, but to abhor unlawful Lusts, and to make use of the Remedy he hath permitted with Moderation, and only for the ends for which the same was ordained. 16. Avoid as much as may be, Com∣pounded Foods, especially uch as have been invented to intice Nature beyond her proper Inclinations, but content your selves with simple Meats and Drinks, which you will find to be the Sinews of Health and Strength, so that your Stomach and natural Heat shall continue good and vigorous all your appointed time.
17. Let not Carking Cares, nor Per∣turbations afflict your Minds about such things as are out of your power to help or remedy, nor abandon your selves too much to any Passion, be it Love, Hate, Revenge, or the like; avoid En∣vy, Strife, Violence and Oppression ei∣ther to Man or Beast; Stillness and Complacency of Mind are two main Props to support our Adamical Build∣ing; a cheerful Heart causeth the Countenance to shine; a good Con∣science is a continual Feast, and Content is Nectar to the Spirits, and Marrow to the Bones. Therefore study to be sa∣tisfied with your Portion, and thank and bless God for his Bounties which you enjoy, and use his Creatures for the end they were given thee; and above all, consider, that thou art made in the Image of God, and in thee is truly contained the Properties of all Elements, therefore thou art obliged to imitate thy Creator, and so to con∣duct thy ways that thou mayst attract the benign Influences of the Coelestials and Terrestrials, and the favourable Ir∣radiations of the superior and inferior Worlds; and on the other side, not to
awaken the Dragon, that is always lurking about the Golden Fruit in the fair Garden of the internal Hesperides, nor irritate the Original Poysons, nor raise Combustions within, by falling in∣to Disorders without; but managing all things in Temperance and Simplicity, and hearkening to the Voice of Wisdom, and the Dictates of Reason and Nature, thou shalt transact the days of thy Pilgri∣mage here in Peace and Tranquility, and be prepared for the fruition of more compleat and undisturbed, as well as endless Felicity.
Observing the tedious methods of some unskilful Chyrurgeons, to∣gether with their improper Compo∣sitions and unnatural Applycati∣ons, which do not only Ruin and Vndo many poor necessitous Peo∣ple, but to the losing of their Limbs, and sometimes their Lives too; therefore I think it no worth∣less Service to recommend unto the World, especially to the poor, the use of the following Remedies, which are not only cheap and easily Come-at-able, but certain in their Opperation, far beyond any things hitherto known or published, viz. An Excellent POULTICE. WHich does Cure Burns, Scalded-Limbs, Boyls, Fellons, Tumers, proceeding either from Choller, Phlegm, or Melancholly: Also Cures all Infla∣ations, Contusions or Bruizes, either
with or without a Wound, Vlcers, old Wounds, or running Sores; also an excellent Remedy against all sorts and kinds of the Gout, (and Inflamations of the Eyes, let them proceed from what cause soever.) By asswaging the swelled part, and easeth the torturing Pains thereof, as it were in a moments time; also it is admirable against sore Breasts, and bites of Dogs, or any other hurt of what kind or nature soever it be. Take one quart of good Water, viz. River, Spring, or Rain-Water, the last being the best, and as much small or ground Oatmeale as will make it thick, fit for a Poultice, unto which add two ounces of good Sugar, and a handful of andelion cut small, then put it over he Fire in an open convenient Vessel, keep it stirring all the time till it be eady to Boyl, or boyling hot, the it is done. Another. Take one quart of Water, and as much good well baked Household-Bread as will make it thick, then add three ounces of beaten Raisins of the Sun, and one ounce of Sugar, and a
glass of good new Ale, stir all your Ingedients together, and make it boy∣ling hot over a clear quick Fire, and then it is done. Another. Take one quart of good Ale, three ounces of Raisins of the Sun beaten, two ounces of good Sugar with some Mal∣low Leaves, cut them small, put them over the fire till boyling hot, or ready to boyl, then it is done. Another. Take one quart of Water, as much Bread as will make it thick, fit for a Poultice, five ounces of Raisins of the Sun, and one ounce of Coriander-se beaten with a glass of Ale, make boyling hot, and then it is done. Another. Take one quart of Water, as much Bread as will make it thick, two Ounces of Sugar, and a Glass of good Sack or other Wine, make it boyling hot, and then it is done. Apply the forementioned Remedies to the part grieved, viz.—Spread
your Poultice indifferent thick, on a Linnen Cloth, that will cover the whol part, somewhat warmer then Milk from the Cow, but not so hot as is usual, for all extreams prove preju∣dicial to Wounds, Sores, and Buises, except it be on some particular occa∣tions. These Poultices you must apply every hour, or every two hours, (at least) in the day, and three or four times in the Night, if your Hurt or Wound be dangerous, If not twelve or fourteen times in the Day and Night may do, viz. When your Poultice has lain on one hour, or an hour and a half, or two at the most, put it away off your Cloth, and put fresh on, and so keep a con∣stant repetition of it for 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, or ten days if occasion be, but it will heal and cure most of the forementioned Evils much sooner, if you observe this method,—but remember to wash your Wounds or Sores between whiles with Sugar and Water, and sometimes with fresh Butter and Water beaten together, to keep it clean and plyat.
These are noble Poultices, and all the Ingredients do cast a friendly as∣pect to each other, being of a cleansing mild Balsamick Nature and Opperati∣on, and therefore they do by their active penetrating Power, strengthen and raise up the dismayed Oyl or wounded Spirits by meliorating and asswaging the irritated or awakened fierce poy∣sonous Humors, by which this doth as far exceed the common and usual me∣thods and practices of Chyrurgeons, and other Practitioners, as that light doth darkness. But here I shall meet with a swing∣ing objection, viz. Why do you leave out of your Poultices the great lgre∣diet, viz. the fulso Grease of Swine and other Fats? which all skilled in the Art of curing, have for the most part advised, and for no other reason as I know, then that their Poultices should not offend the Patient by sticking to the Sore or wounded part, for their long lying on the grieved part, if there were not some Fats or Oyles, the Poultices would occasion them to become had and stiff, and so stick to the Sore, which we prevent by our
often repetition for the Spirituous Vertues and Qualities of Fats, are so hid and lockt up in the oyly Body, that Nature cannot separate nor draw forth their fine sweet Sprituous Ver∣tues to that degree, as she can from Vegetations, as all Men skilled in Na∣ture and Chymistry do know, they being of a heavy dull flat Nature and Operation, very offensive to the ten∣der Spirits and Blood, by which they impede and hinder the Cure, therefore those Poultices wherein Fats are mixed, the fine Spirits and Vertues thereof do not so easily nor powerfully penetrate the Wound as rich Vegetations, whose Spirits and lively Vertues are as it were on the Wing, and therefore Poulti∣ces aptly compounded thereof, their Vertues do in a moments time pee∣trate to the Center, and incorporate with their similes, by which they strengthen and raise up the wounded Spirits, and at the same time do qua∣lify the fierce raging Poysons, more especially if our method be observed, and o effect the Cure, not only in a shorter time, but much safer, and with greater ease to the Patient. For by
this Phylosophial Operation, of repeat∣ing doth migtily advance and forward the Cure: An Note, that every fresh Application of this Homo∣genial-oultice to the grieved part, do add nw and fresh Supplies of Ver∣tue, for in all Operations of this Na∣tur, the fine healing spirituous Qua∣lities thereof, do first impart and give themselves forth, which by a secret simpathetical Power, do penetrate the whole, and incorporate with their si∣miles, administring their sweet Ver∣tues, which gives a new Life to the wounded Spirits, and dismayed Oyles, and do at the same time withstand and allay the fierce raging awakned or irritated poysonous Humours; it being the way of Nature for all ho∣mogenial Bodies, that have passed through any Preparation; Digestion or Fermentation, when aptly applied or joyned to any proper Subject or thing. For the fine cleansing healing Qualities and good Vetues, do give themselves forth and joyn or incorpo∣rate with their Similies; even as the fine sweet spirituous Qualities of Maul o imbibe or give themselves forth
and incorporate with the hot Water in your Mash-Tub, in the method of Brewing; therefore every Applyca∣tion do add new Suplies of Vertue and strength to the wounded Spirits, and draws forth and consumes the gross humidity, and exalts the Essential Life of that part and are as refreshing to the wounded Spirits, as the pleasant influences and salutiferous Breezes of Wind in a hot season: For Note, that the Spirits and fine Qualities of each thing, are light, Volatile, ready, quick and powerful in Operation, that in a moments time they penetrate even to the Center; for evey parti∣cular Quality in Nature, has a Key in it self to open the Gate of its own Principl; what Man in the World would believe the attractive inclination which the Load-stone has upon Iron, if it did not appear to his sight; the ve∣ry same simpathetical Power have all other things, though in some it is more occult. And for this cause, one Body works upon another, by a cer∣tain natural attraction and simpathe∣ticl Inclination. Thus the wise and wonderful Creator, has endued every
thing with an attractive and influential Vertue; it is not therefore the gross Body of your Poultice, that will do your Business, that is full of corrupt and poysonous humours, which are awakned by the long continuation thereof, for these Reasons, the long lying of Poultices and Plaisters, on Wounds and Sores, have no better Ef∣fects, then the long continuation or standing of the Liquor on the Mault in your Mash-Tub, which if it con∣tinue more then two, three or four Hours, it will spoil and corrupt the whole, for First, (as I said before) the fine sweet Volatile Spirituous Ver∣tues, imbibes or incorporates them∣selves with the hot Liquor, and then if there be not a separation made in two, three or four Hours, by draw∣ing it off, but the applycation conti∣nued, then there will soon awaken another Quality of a gross harsh sour keen Nature, which with a rapid mo∣tion, tinges or transmutes all the fine sweet healing Vertues into their own Qualities, which all Brewers and good House-Wifes are sensible of; the like is to be understood in the applycati∣ons
of Poultices and Plaisters, do not their long lying of them on the woun∣ded or sore part, cause them to smell sour and stink, when they have been continued on for twelve or twen∣ty four Hours, which do not only in∣danger the part, and prolongs the Cure, but it puts the Patient to great pain and Torment, and often the Limb is cut off, and sometimes the Life too, which by this forementioned method might have been prevented; for if Physitians and Chyrurgeons do not understand Nature, then there can be no certainty in their Operati∣ons or Cures. Also Note, that during the time your Poultices, Plaisters, Ointments, or Salves, are making on the Fire, that you keep them stirring, by which you keep the fine Spirits and Qualities Living, for by this stirring, the friend∣ly powers and thin Spirits of the Air do penitrate the whole Mass or Body, which incorporate and assist the Spi∣rits and good Vertues, and keep them from being Stagnated or Suffocated, the Air being the Life of all things, and where its friendly influences and
circulations are prevented, the Life and Spirits becomes heavy, dull and gross; for these Reasons, all Spoon-Meats made thin, are sweeter and of a more quick penetrating Operation and Digestion, then those made thick, therefore despise not our method, nor our plain home-bred Poultices, I could produce many living Testimo∣nies of its Success, but it is needless, since every Man's Experience that tries it, will soon confirm the Truth of what is here delivered, nor I am not much Solicitous whether I am cre∣dited or not; it is the consideration of the publick good it may do to ma∣ny poor People, prompts me to pub∣lish it, whether you will follow the forementioned Rules or not, I have done my Duty in offering it, and there∣fore am satisfyed.
THE CONCLUSION. THus have I presented thee (ho∣nest Reader) with some Ob∣servations; nor shall I trouble my self to make Apologies for them t any, who having their Eyes blinded with the Dust of Custom and Tra∣dition, may be apt to condemn or slight these Advices, as Heterodox-Paradoxes, or needless Chymae∣rea's; but let such Capers say what they please, I am certain what I have deliver'd is agreeable to un∣disguised Nature, and whoever shall act accordingly, will certainly find very great Benefits accrewing
in respect of Health both of Body and Mind; but without Practice all Precepts are vain, or at least fruitless, unless it be only to remain as Monuments to reproach those Fools that despise and neglect them. I thought once to have proceeded further in this Treatise, to have dis∣covered the ways of making up or preparing most of the Medicines that are now a-days cry'd up; but on se∣cond thoughts I desisted, not as en∣vying my Country-men any thing that might tend to their general good, but for such Reasons as these: 1. There are very few of the com∣mon Medicines that deserve that credit, which by Knaves vapouring and Fools credulity they have obtain∣ed; and to speak truth, I humbly
conceive the People had e'en as good be without them as have them; and therefore I was very well con∣tent that the learned Doctors and their Labourers, the Apotheca∣ries, should enjoy to themselves their Pharmacentick Mysteries, or way of making of Medicines; and when they have done, let them alone, take and use them too if they please. 2. Those that shall observe the Rules herein laid down, of Tempe∣rance, Choice of Diet, due man∣ner of Prparation, &c. will (I am very confident) have little or no need of that which is commonly called Physick. And for others, if I had set down never so many excellent Re∣ceipts for the cure of Diseases, 'tis like they would have regarded them no more than these Directions for a∣voiding
the same. He that scorns to prevent a Mischief fore-told, scarce deserves a Remedy when he is fallen into it. But, 3. The discreet Reader will here find such things recommended to his use, both in Health and Sickness, which though they are more plain, pleasant, easie to be had, and cheap∣er, are not less effectual both to preserve and restore Health than those administred by the learned; and in vain he goes about, that may go to rights; or gapes for a Re∣medy to be brought him by another from the Indies, when he may make himself as good an one (and better) at home. What I have here candidly, and in a plain familiar manner deliver∣ed, I leave to God's Blessing, and
the Practice of all prudent Lovers of their Health, and humble followers of Nature, in her easie and innocent Methods. Farwell. FINIS.
