V451 09619289 43849
The Wells OF SALVATION OPENED: OR, WORDS WHEREBY We may be Saved. By THOMAS VINCENT, Minister sometime in Maudlins Milk-street, LONDON. Act. 16.29. Then he called for a Light, and sprang in, and came trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas, Vers. 30. And brought them out, and said, Sirs, What must I do to be saved? V. 31. And they said, Believe on the Lord Iesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thy House. V. 32. And they spake unto him the Word of the Lord, and to all that were in his House. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Golden Bible on London-bridge. 1668.
TO THE Citizens of LONDON. I Have sounded two Trumpets of Iudgement in your ears, the former signifying Gods terrible Voice to the City, in the late ter∣rible Iudgements of Plague and Fire which have devoured so many Inhabitants and Habi∣tations, as the space of many Ages (should the World so long continue) would not blot out the remembrance of; the later signifying Gods ter∣rible Voice to the World, at the second ap∣pearance of Christ to the last and Universal Iudgement of all the Children▪ of Adam, which is both sure and near; the dreadfulness of which Iudgement to the Wicked, no Tongue is able to express: The chief intent of both my Treatises concerning the late, and future Iudgement, hath been to awaken sleepy Sinners out of their carnal security, and to prepare them for the great Sal∣vation purchased by Iesus Christ, and proclaim∣ed, proffered and promised in the Gospel▪ there∣fore having at first purposed, and in my last Book of Christs Appearance to Iudgement, promised to treat more largely of Salvation than in the close of a Vse I could do; I have here endea∣voured
to fulfill my Promise, in telling you Words whereby you may be saved. We read 1 Tim. 1.15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the World to save Sinners. And Heb. 2.3, 4. that this Salvation began to be spoken of by the Lord, and was confirmed by them that heard him. The Lord speaketh to you from Heaven by his Spirit in his Word and Mi∣nisters, that you would accept of this Salvation: See then that ye refuse not him that speaketh; for if they escaped not who refused him that spake on Earth, much more shall not ye escape if ye turn away from him that speaketh from Heaven, Heb. 12.25. They that seek this Salvation diligently, shall finde it certainly; but they that refuse or neglect it, must needs perish unavoidably, and be miserable eternally. That this little Piece may be blessed by the Lord, and made use of as a Means to promote your Salvation, is the Prayer of him whose great de∣sire is, that you might be saved. Thomas Vincent.
WORDS Whereby we may be Saved. ACT. 11.13, 14. And he shewed us how he had seen an Angel in his house, which stood and said unto him, Send men to Joppa, and call for Simon whose sirname is Peter, who shall tell thee Words whereby thou and all thy house shall be saved. WEE read in the second and third Ver∣ses of this Chapter of the contention which some of the Circumcision had with the Apostle Peter, because he had gone in to, and eaten with such as were uncircumcised. Whereupon Peter giveth an account to them of his reason, and the occasion of his so doing; rehearsing the matter more briefly from Verse 4. to the 18th. which is related more largely in the whole foregoing tenth chapter. First he telleth them of his Trance at Ioppa, and the Vision which himself had of the Vessel descending
from Heaven with unclean Beasts in it; and the command from Heaven to eat, not calling that com∣mon and unclean which God had cleansed; the Lord hereby giving him to understand, That like as under the Law, though there were divers kinds of meats forbidden, and therefore unclean, and un∣lawfull to be eaten; yet under the Gospel, that pro∣hibition being taken off, and the meats sanctified by the word of Gods command or allowance, be∣lievers might freely eat of them without sin: So also, though under the Law, before the coming of Christ, the people of God in the Nation of the Iewes, where only the Church of God was to be found, were to separate themselves from all heathen Nati∣ons as unclean, and it was unlawfull for them to go in and eat with Heathen or Gentile persons, lest they should be defiled and enticed by such familiar converse with them, unto their Superstitions and Idolatries▪ yet God having before foretold and pro∣mised the accession of the Gentiles unto the Church; and under the Gospel having sent his Son, who brake down the middle wall of partition between the Iewes and the Gentiles; and having sanctified the Gentiles by his Spirit and Faith; they were no longer to be accounted unclean, and therefore it was as lawfull for the believing Iewes to eat and con∣verse with them as one with another. Moreover he he telleth them of the Circumcision of the Vision which Cornelius a Gentile had of an Angel, and the command, which he had from the Lord by the An∣gel to send for him, to preach the Gospel of salva∣tion unto him; together with the effect of his preach∣ing namely the falling of the Holy Ghost upon the Gentiles, as upon themselves at the beginning; and
therefore that it would have been no less than a withstanding of God himself for him still to have kept at a distance from the Gentiles. Which answer of Peter gave such satisfaction, that it did not only put to silence them which contended with him, but also caused them to glorifie God in behalf of the Gentiles. My Text is a brief rehearsal which Peter giveth of Cornelius his Vision which he had from his mouth. And he shewed us, how he had seen an Angel in his house, which stood, and said, Send men to Joppa, and call for Simon whose sirname is Peter, who shall tell thee words whereby thou and all thy house shall be sa∣ved. I might present you with divers Doctrines from the words, but because I intend to handle but two, I shall mention but two, which to me are the most observable. Doct. 1. That God doth make use of Ministers to preach the Gospel rather than Angels. Doct. 2. That Ministers are to tell people such words whereby they may be saved. It is the latter of these which I intend chiefly to insist upon; yet the former lying in the way, and being so worthy of note, and may be of such use, I shall spend a little time about it. SECT. I. Doct. 1. THat God doth make use of Ministers to preach the Gospel rather than Angels. The Angel appeareth to Cornelius, doth not preach the Gospel to Cornelius, but from the Lord directeth
him to send to Peter, to Peter, who was one of Christs Ministers, and He should preach unto him, and tell him such words whereby he and his should be saved. The Angel could have told him such words himself; he could have set forth the Lord Jesus Christ in his Divinity, and eternal abode with God; in his Humanity, with which he cloathed and vailed himself, and abode for a while here amongst men; in his Life so holy, his Works so powerfull, his Love so great, his Death so painfull, his Resurrection so soon, his Ascension so wonderfull, his Session and Intercession at the right hand of God; and the Glo∣ry which he hath with the Father in Heaven, how∣ever he had been vilified by some men when he was upon the Earth. The Angel could have preached the Law with such Thunder and Lightning, as should have made the Conscience of Cornelius to tremble, even as the Israelites did when the Law was given by their ministration on Mount Sinai. He could have shot the arrows of the Almighty so deep into his Spirit, as no balm on earth should have been able to heal his wounds: The Angel could have represented the God of Heaven in a more ter∣rible way than man can do, as Lord of an innume∣rable host of mighty Angels, of which he was but one, and as set in battel-array against Christless sin∣ners; and told Cornelius what dreadfull threatnings were denounced, and what heavy Curses did be∣long unto such as had broken Gods Law; and here∣by could have put him into such terrors and con∣sternation in reflection upon the least guilt, as should have sunk him down to the very brink of the burning Lake in his own apprehension, and forced him in the anguish of his spirit to cry out, O what
shall I do to be saved? And then he could have re∣presented the Lord Jesus Christ unto him as the only, and an all-sufficient, and most mercifull Savi∣our of Mankinde, who had undertaken the Office of Mediatour and Advocate, and was faithfull. He could have described his beauty and excellency in such high expressions, and invited Cornelius to come to Christ with such sweet words and pressing argu∣ments, as never proceeded out of the mouth of any man. But the Angel had no commission to preach the Gospel to Cornelius; only to speak to him from God, that he would send men to Ioppa, and call for Peter, and he should preach the Gospel unto him. And as it was in the beginning, so it is still, God doth not send Angels down from Heaven to preach Christ, and Salvation by Christ unto the people; but he sendeth Ministers, men whom he qualifieth and commissioneth for the work. The Reasons why God doth make use of Mini∣sters to preach the Gospel rather than Angels, may be chiefly these three. 1. Because of our Infirmity. 2. For the honour of the Ministry. 3. That he might secure his own Glory. Reas. 1. Because of our Infirmity. We could not in this state of darkness, weakness, and sinfulness, bear the preaching of Angels that are so holy and glorious: Our eyes would be dazled, our spirits would be amazed, and hearts sink within us at the voice of Angels, should they appear unto us in their glory. Manoah thought he should dye when an An∣gel came to him, and foretold him of a Son which
should be born to him, Iudg. 13. Zacharias was sore troubled at the appearance of an Angel with the like message, Lk. 1. The Shepheards in the Field were exceedingly afraid when the Angel came to them to bring tidings of the birth of our Saviour, Luk. 2. And Christs Disciples were no less afraid when the Angels brought news to them of his Re∣surrection. And if holy men could not bear the appearance of Angels, much less could the unholy and wicked, whose guilt and defilement would make them a thousand-fold more fearfull. If an An∣gel should immediately descend from Heaven into this place, and taking my room should preach un∣to this Auditory before me; would not fearfull thoughts arise in the hearts, and paleness get upon the checks of the best amongst you? But what dread would there seize upon the spirits of such of you as are graceless and profane, who are yet in your sins, and have not made your peace with God? How would you shrink and croud out faster than you crouded in, as not being able to endure? When Mo∣ses had been forty dayes upon the Mount with God, and had seen only his back-parts, yet his face did shine with such lustre by reflexion of the beams of Gods Majesty upon him, that the children of Israel could not look upon his face without a Vail: And if Angels who continually behold the face of God in Heaven, should come down and appear and preach, men would not be able to hear and bear: There∣fore God maketh use of Ministers to preach the Go∣spel, men of like passions and infirmities with our selves, for our infirmities sake: Men who will not affrighten us with their glory, whom we may look upon without dazling our eyes, whom we may speak
unto, and converse with familiarly, without dread and terrour. As Elihu said of himself to Iob, chap. 33.6, 7. So it may be said of Ministers, they are in Gods stead, and yet formed out of clay, and their terrour shall no make us afraid. Reas. 2. For the honour of the Ministery. Jesus Christ himself the Son of God was a Minister when he was upon the Earth, and his employment was to preach the Gospel; and the highest spiritual ho∣nour that can be conferred upon any, is to be Christs Embassadours, Representatives, and to succeed him in this office and work of the Ministery, which ho∣nour he hath conferred upon some men rather than Angels. I am not of their opinion, who think, that Gods people are exalted to a higher dignity than the An∣gels; neither do I think the consequences to be right from Heb. 1.1. on which this Notion is grounded: Are they not all ministring spirits (speak∣ing of Angels) sent forth to minister for them which shall be heirs of salvation? It doth not follow, be∣cause Angels do minister to the Saints, therefore they are inferiour to the Saints: for Jesus Christ himself did minister to them, though he be their Lord and King; when he washed his Disciples feet, in which act he appeared so like a servant, yet then he calleth himself their Lord and Master, Ioh. 13.13. Mini∣string to others doth not imply inferiority, unless it be such as doth withall imply dependency, but ra∣ther the contrary; our Saviour telleth his Disciples, when he perceived them to be ambitious of great∣ness, that whoever would be the greatest amongst them
should be their Minister, Math. 20.26. Indeed our humane Nature in Christ is exalted above Angels; but in other respects we are inferiour to Angels. The Angels are above us in regard of spirituality, they are all spirit, we are partly flesh, and but part∣ly spirit: In regard of immortality, they never dye, we cannot escape death long: In regard of purity, they have not the least tincture of sin; the most ho∣ly persons on earth are not without some remain∣ders of defilement: In regard of neerness unto God, they dwell with God in Heaven, and behold his face continually; we are on earth, and see but his back-parts, and what we see it is but darkly and thorow a glass: In regard of power, wisdom, and many excellencies which we may be ignorant of, for who doth perfectly understand the nature, and all the properties of Angels? Yet although in these and the like respects the Angels are above the Saints on Earth, the Lord hath given this honour to Mi∣nisters rather than to Angels, to preach the Gospel of salvation by Jesus Christ. We read of three thou∣sand converted by one Sermon of Peter, Act. 2. but where in the whole Scripture do we read of the conversion of any by Angels? Reas. 3. And chiefly for Gods glory it is that Mi∣nisters are made use of to preach the Gospel rather than Angels, that the efficacy of the Gospel preached in the conversion and salvation of people might ap∣pear to be from God alone, and so the glory might be ascribed in whole unto himself, and nothing un∣to the Creature. If Angels were employed to preach and convert souls, people would hardly be with∣held
from Idolizing, and giving that Worship to them which is Gods due; they would be ready to glory and boast in the Angels should they be wrought upon by their preaching, instead of glorying in God. If the Corinthians did so in their Teachers when they were men of great eminency for gifts, I am of Paul, I am of Apollos, I am of Cephas; much more would Christians be apt to glory in Angels, if they were sent to be their Teachers: I am of Michael, happily one might say, it was he convinced and awa∣kened my Conscience when fast asleep in sin and secu∣rity, and O with what thundering words did he speak, enough to pierce the ear of such as are dead! Another, I am of Gabriel, It was his Sermons which perswa∣ded me to repent and believe, and O what arguments did he use, such as would have moved a Stone! And thus instead of looking to, and admiring Gods free grace, people would be apt to look to and admire the Angels, and give them the praise which is due to God alone. Therefore God maketh use of Mi∣nisters to preach the Gospel, rather than Angels, that he might hedge in all the glory of Mans salva∣tion to himself; that if any sinners be converted and saved by such weak instruments, they may say, It is the Lords doing; it is the Lords work and free grace, and it is marvellous in our eyes. God will not make use of the wisdom of men in preaching of the Gospel, lest the Faith by such preaching should stand in the wisdom of men, and not in the power of God, 1 Cor. 2.4, 5. And this may be one reason why God doth not make use of the wisdom of An∣gels in preaching the Gospel, lest the Faith produ∣ced hereby should stand not in his own power, but in his Angels wisdom. God maketh use of the
foolishness of preaching (so accounted by the world because plain) by foolish Ministers (men of little esteem amongst such as are not able to discern reall worth) to save them that believe, 1 Cor. 1.21. God dealeth forth Treasures out of Earthen Vessels, that the excellency of the power might be of God, and not of men, 2 Cor. 4.7. SECT. II. Vse 1. FOr Reproof, doth God make use of Mini∣sters to preach the Gospel rather than Angels? this then may reprove, 1. Such as take upon them to preach, and are no Ministers. 2. Such as take upon them to be Ministers, and are no Preachers? 3. Such as blemish their Ministry by an ungodly Conversation. 4. Such as will hearken to the Devil rather than to Ministers, though God doth employ them to preach ra∣ther than Angels. 1. This reproveth such as take upon them to preach the Gospel, and are no Ministers. And here let none mistake me, as if I spake against the preaching of any that are true Ministers of Jesus Christ, whether they be set apart for the work and office in the Episcopal or Congregational, or Presbyterian way: But I speak against the preaching of them which are no Ministers, and have no call nor commission for this
work. The Angel is sent here to Cornelius, but he doth not preach the Gospel to him; yea he did not dare to do it, because he had no commission; for if the Angel had received a commission to preach, he would not have dared to have forborn: None will dny that the Angel had gifts sufficient, if that had been commission; but because he did not preach, it is a sign he had no commission; and if the Angel did not dare to preach when he was not commis∣sioned, how dare uncommissioned men to do it? I speak not only of the preaching of such as are la∣mentably deficient in gifts (except in their own con∣ceit) but also of the preaching of them which have good gifts (which might well and regularly be made use of in a private way) but they are of other call∣ings in which they are commanded to abide, if they would abide with God, 1 Cor. 7.24. How dare they to entrench so far upon the office of the Ministry, as to do that which is one of the chiefest parts of the work of the Ministry, namely, to preach the Gospel? If any such should read these lines, and have an ho∣nest design in what they do, and suppose they do well herein; let them seriously consider whether they be not under a temptation of the Devil, and think of these sad consequences which have been, and may be the fruit of such mens preaching. 1. The bringing of the Ministry of Christ into disesteem. Do not such persons themselves for the most part, do not their hearers slight true Ministers? and will not this one day be accounted a slighting of Jesus Christ himself, whose Ambassadours and Re∣presentatives they are? and will such be able to give a good account hereof, who have been the occasion?
2. The weakening the hands of Christs faithfull Labourers, whom all should endeavour to encou∣rage and strengthen in their arduous employment. I could tell you of a Lay-man, one Mr. Bernard in Wiltshire, who hath been eminently instrumental to bring much light into a corner which before was very dark, where some thousands do relish the Word and Ordinances, so that they will travail ma∣ny miles to hear good Sermons, and it is judged that some hundreds in those parts have been really converted; and this work hath been effected not by Mr. Bernards preaching himself▪ though in gifts he do exceed many who intrude upon the Ministe∣rial employment, but by calling able Ministers to preach, and standing by them, which hath (through Gods blessing) exceedingly promoted the work; whereas, if he had entrenched upon the office of the Ministry, and taken upon him to preach himself, I am perswaded he would have had as ill success as others; and we should not have had that cause of glorifying God for him, and for what hath been done by his means. 3. The encouraging of ungifted persons to preach, who in their own conceits have as good gifts as themselves, and may plead as good authority: as also the encouraging erroneous persons privily to broach false Doctrines unto the corrupting of the mindes of the hearers; and by consequence the introduction of confusion, and tearing the Church of Christ, which in the issue may prove its de∣ruction. I know that Lay-preachers will plead the practice of the Apostle Paul, who wrought in his Trade of Tent-making, whilest he was a Preacher of the
Gospel. I grant that Paul was a Tent-maker, but he was called and ordained to be a Minister; and though he did practise his trade after this, yet I do not remember that he did it more than once, which was amongst the Corinthians, and that upon a spe∣cial occasion, that he might preach the Gospel free∣ly, and be like some false Teachers who boasted herein: but when did he do it again? Did he not receive maintenance from other Churches without working for his living? besides, he had extraordi∣nary gifts by immediate inspiration, which none now may hope to obtain without the use of ordinary means. But whatever Pauls practice was, he doth never make mention of it for an example, which other Ministers should imitate him in; for when he writeth to Timothy a Minister, he enjoyneth him from the Lord to spend his whole time about his Ministry, and not in any other calling; he exhort∣eth him to give himself to reading, and meditation, and doctrine, to be in these things wholly, as the ori∣ginal word doth signifie. Moreover, the other Apostles, however they were at first Fisher-men by trade, yet when they were called to be Fishers of men, they leave their Nets, and after Christs ascen∣sion they would not so much as take upon them the work of Deacons to minister unto Widdows, why? read the reason, Act. 6.4. that they might give themselves continually to Prayer, and Ministry of the Word. Surely then it is the will of God that such as take upon them to preach, should give them∣selves to the Ministry of the Word, and not follow other callings. They have work enough to do in the Ministry, if they employ themselves therein conscienciously, for their whole time, had they more
time than they have, they had not need to be di∣verted by worldly businesses; they finde it hard enough to attend upon the Lord without much di∣straction, that have none of these secular employ∣ments: what an unsutable frame must they be un∣der that follow another calling all the week, and come reeking from the world, and engage to speak to people in an extemporaneous discourse? Is the Lord pleased with such Ministrations? If the Lord doth not strike such persons dead, who do thus pre∣sume to entrench upon the Levites Office, as he did Vzzah, who might have pleaded a greater seeming need of his help when the Ark did shake, and was ready to fall, than they can do, 2 Sam. 6.6, 7. Yet they are in danger of a greater spiritual Judgement than natural death, namely of being smitten with spiritual deadness; some wither strangely within, when they make a glorious outward flourish. Yet God forbid that the door of employment in the Ministry should be shut against all those that at first have been bred up in other callings; for if any Ly∣men that be holy, and knowing, and have gifts and hearts for this employment, do leave their other calling, and dedicate themselves wholly to the work of the Ministry, and be tryed, and set apart accord∣ing to the Rule, I should not be against their preach∣ing; but I am verily perswaded that such transgress the rule, that take upon them to preach whilest they follow other callings. Let such examine themselves wherefore it is that they continue in their other call∣ings; is it not from a carnal and worldly motive? is it not because worldly emolument cometh in this way? But would it not be more for their ad∣vantage, if by breaking off their trade they gained
less Estate for themselves, and more souls for Jesus Christ? Let them either leave their other calling, or leave their preaching; if they have not a liveli∣hood but by their trade, why may they not trust God for provisions as others have done? Hath not the Lord appointed that people should maintain their Ministers, and communicate unto them in car∣nal things who receive spiritual things, things of more worth from Ministers? But some will pretend an extraordinary com∣mission and call from God to preach, and this they think will bear them out in their preaching though they be no Ministers; bt let such take heed they be not under a delusion of Sathan herein: To caution such therefore against such delusions, I shall give you a Relation which Mr. Vavasir Powel did snd in a Letter to a friend of his in the City, when himself was in Prison; the words which I transcribed my self out of the Letter written with his own hand are these. Concerning that Delusion in Kent (a Relation of which I had and still should have in the Coun∣trey in writing, under the godly mans own hand and some other brethren) though I do not remem∣ber all the circumstances, yet the substance of it was this. There was one Iohn Moody a godly man, under Bapt. (I suppose first joyned to Mr. Kyff▪ in London) being in bed one night there appeared a great light in his Chamber, and a Voice spake to him thus: Iohn Moody, arise, and go preach my Gospel in the West, for my people perish for want of knowledge there. To which Iohn Moody answered, I am not fit to preach, I want gifts. The Voice
answered again, I will give thee gifts, and fit thee▪ Moody replyed, I am a poor man, and have no means to maintain me therein. The Voice said, Meet me at such a place (and so nam'd both time and place) and I will supply thee with silver and gold, and so departed. The next day Iohn Moody acquainted one or more of his Christian acquaintance; and they fearing it was a delusion, advised him to be very carefull what he did, and disswaded him from going, counselling him if it came again, he should ask who he was, and particularly, whether he was Iesus of Nazareth (for it was he that had power to send out Ministers.) The Devil came again either the next night, or within few nights after, in the same manner, asking him, Why he did not go upon his message. Iohn Moody asked him who it was that sent him; the Voice answered, I am God. But saith he, Art thou Iesus of Nazareth. The Voice said again, I am God. Then Iohn Moody resolutely answered, If thou be not that Iesus that suffered at Ierusalem, and that sits at the right hand of God in Heaven, I will not go. Thereupon the Devil departed, making a great noise, and taking part of the top of the house away with him. This was the substance, and the thing undoubted∣ly true. Thus far are the very words of Mr. Powels Letter. Now if this Man had not questioned this thing, but gone into the West to preach, he and others who heard the relation, might have judged that it was an extraordinary call and commission which this man had from Heaven, and that with seeming greater grounds than what others pretend for their
extraordinary commissions; whereas upon further search, you perceive it was the Devil was sending a good man out of his way; if he being no Minister had then preached upon this sending, he had been a Messenger of the Devil, and not a Messenger of Jesus Christ. For my part, I cannot believe that any are called and commissioned by Christ to preach, unless they can show their call and commission in the Scripture; Take heed then (my Beloved) espe∣cially you which are young, that if gifts encrease you be not puffed up with pride, and begin first to undervalue Christs Ministers, and think you can do their work better your selves, and so venture to transgress Scripture-rules by preaching without commission and Scripture-warrant; very dangerous may the consequences of such preaching be, as I could give some instances. God hath appointed one Office for this work of Preaching, and that is the Office of the Ministry; and though he have Angels about him full of wisdom and knowledge in the my∣steries of salvation, yet he doth not employ them in the work, but qualifieth and calleth some men unto it; and if Angels which are not Ministers of the Gospel must not preach, much less may men do it who are not Ministers. 2. This reproveth such as take upon them to be Ministers, and are no Preachers. God maketh use of Ministers to preach the Gospel rather than Angels, therefore they ought to preach, or they are unwor∣thy to be Ministers. Such as call themselves Mini∣sters, but are ignorant and unskilfull in the work of preaching, which Ministers are called unto; such as
take upon them to be teachers of others, and have need to be taught themselves which be the first Principles of the Oracles of God, and are children, yea babes in understanding, being unacquainted with the Word of righteousness and mysteries of salvati∣on: Such who know not how to divide the Word of God aright, and give every one his portion; whose Sermons are like wood, and hey, and stubble, without any silver, or gold, or precious stones of spiritual, heavenly and soul-saving doctrine; who give men chaff instead of corn, and stones instead of bread; who fill their Sermons with frothy wit, or husky quotations of Authors, or knotty School-notions, and distinctions, or secret, bitter invectives, and scorpion-slings and lashes at the power of godli∣ness, instead of convincing, soul-edifying truths, which may administer grace unto the hearers; they will have a fearfull account to give unto the great Shepheard, when he shall appear to make inquiry concerning the flock committed to their charge, and shall charge upon them the guilt of the blood of so many souls as have perished through their neglect. Are there not many such Ministers at this day in England that can neither pray without a book, nor preach without a book; I do not speak of those Ministers who road their own Notes which they have studied in their Closets, but of them which read others Notes, as if they were their own unto the people. It is not long since I spake with a Book∣seller, who hath sold many Manuscript Sermons un∣to such, who signified plainly enough unto him the use they intended to put them unto. Yea some have been so audacious as to preach out of the Printed Books of others, as is well known both in the City
and other places; yet, however such as cannot make their own Sermons are not fit to be Ministers of the Gospel, they may by reading good wholsom Sermons of others be more beneficial to the people, than those who without acquaintance with the Word, preach their own, but it is such raw, crude, indigestd, unprofitable matter, as raiseth blushes in the cheeks of the judicious, and rendereth them ridiculous unto the most that hear them. Surely, no Angel from Heaven would have directed a Corne∣lus to send for such Ministers to preach the Gospel unto him. 3. This reproveth such who blemish their Ministry by an Vngodly Conversation; when God honoureth Ministers so as to imploy them to preach the Go∣spel, rather than Angels, God doth expect that they should be Angelical in their Doctrine, and Angeli∣cal in their Lives; some there are that be so in their Doctrine, but their Lives are so loose and intempe∣rate, that they both cast a blot upon their Function, and invalidate their Doctrine, yea are hereby instru∣ments of hardening the wicked more effectually than if they could not preach at all. I have heard of a woman who sate under the Ministry of one who preached very powerfully, but lived very wickedly, whereupon she was tempted to Atheisme; of which she gave this reason to him upon demand of the cause, that it was from himself, That when she heard him preach so like an Angel, and saw him live so like a Devil, she was thence prone to believe that there was no God. We read of the wickedness of Eli's Sons, who were Priests, which made the offering
of the Lord to be abhorred, 1 Sam. 2.17. And so the drunkenness, uncleanness, covetousness, oppressi∣on, and profaneness of many in our dayes, who call themselves Ministers, maketh the administration of Gods Ordinances by such persons to be abhorred by many serious and sober-minded Christians. None are more honourable than such Ministers as tread in their Masters steps, as are holy and exemplary in their conversition: But wicked Ministers of all others are the vilest and most contemptible; they are spots and blemishes in the body of the Church; they are the scum, the filth, and off-scouring of the pot; the foam and froath of the water; they are Trees without Fruit, Salt without savour, Candles without light; they are a deep pit, full of mire and dirt; they are Clouds without rain, for whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever. 4. This reproveth such as will hearken to the De∣vil rather than to Ministers, though God employeth them to preach the Gospel rather than Angels. 1. And first this reproveth them that hearken to the Devil when he perswadeth them to sin, and will not hearken unto Ministers who perswade them to accept of Jesus Christ: Such as readily open the door when Sathan knocks, though he be their ene∣my, and intend their ruine; but shut the door, and deafen the ear against the calls of Ministers in the Name of Christ, though they be their friends, and seek their salvation: Such are perswaded by the Devil to wound themselves by sin, to drink sweet poson which will introduce eternal death, and suf∣fer themselves to be drawn in the Chains of Sathan,
in the broad way to Hell, but will not hearken to Ministers, who are spiritual Physicians, and would endeavour the cure of their deadly wounds, who are spiritual Guides, and would lead them in the way to Heaven. None in the world are such fools as those persons who are Satans slaves, and led cap∣tive by him in the cords of their own lusts: They are blinded and deluded, the Devil putteth the greatest cheat upon them, and beguileth them (worse than children are beguiled) of such things, that when their eyes are opened at the last, and they per∣ceive what they have lost by their sins, which the Devil hath drawn them unto, and that their loss is irreparable; and when they are awakened to feel the pain and torment which the Devil by sin hath brought them unto, and they see that now it is un∣avoidable, and though so intollerable, yet will be eternall; they will then be ready to tear themselves to pieces for their folly and madness, that they should hearken to the Devil, and not hearken to Christs Ministers: that when the Devil proffered only Coun∣ters, but Ministers Gold, that which is more pre∣cious than fine Gold; when the Devil proffered Pebbles, Ministers the Jewel of the greatest price; when the Devil proffered Pictures, such as all worldly vanities are, but Ministers proffered Deeds of Con∣veyance to a great Inheritance, even a conveyance of the eternal Inheritance by the deed of the King of Heaven. O the folly and sottishness of sinners! that they should choose the former, and refuse the latter; that they should sow the windes all their dayes, grasp a shaddow, pursue a Father, follow lying vanities, through Satans perswasions, and here∣by not only neglect and miss of mercy which Mini∣sters
brought to their doors; but also run headlong into the flames of everlasting burnings, when Mini∣sters warned them so frequently hereof, and entrea∣ted them so earnestly to close with Christ, who alone could deliver them; they will then perceive too late and rue to no purpose their desperate madness in complying with Satans temptations, and neglecting the calls and counsels of Christs faithfull Ambassa∣dours. 2. It reproveth such as hearken to the Devil when he perswadeth them unto damnable errours, and will not hearken to Christs Ministers, who would teach and establish them in the soul-saving truths of the Word. Satan doth appear many times like an Angel of light, 2 Cor. 11.14. not as the Angel did to Cornelius, to direct men unto Christs Ministers, but to draw them away, endeavouring the subversion of the Ministry and Ordinances of Christs Institution. Satan hath his Ministers, who appear like Ministers of righteousness, when indeed they are Wolves in Sheeps cloathing, who by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the sim∣ple, Rom. 16.18. who are deceived themselves, and labour to deceive others: First endeavouring to pre∣judice them against Christs Ministers, and then pri∣vily bringing in damnable heresies, wresting the Scripture to their own and others destruction. Where people do turn away their ears from the truth, and open them to their errours and delusi∣ons, when they forsake and cannot endure the sound teaching of Christs Ambassadours, but with itching ears are delighted with the pretended new discove∣ries of false Teachers, and greedily drink in the poyson of their false doctrines, and follow the pr∣nicious
waies of such as are given up to the efficacy of errour to believe lyes; they chuse the Devil for their Teacher, instead of Jesus Christ by his Ministers, and then you may easily guess whither he is like to lead them. SECT. III. Vse 2. FOR Exhortation 1. Of Ministers. 2. Of People. 1. For exhortation of Ministers: Doth God make use of Ministers to preach the Gospel, rather than Angels? It is a great honour the Lord hath put up∣on us, and there is great duty which the Lord doth expect from us. Let this consideration 1. Qicken us to diligence and faithfulness in Preaching. 2. Engage us to a blameless and exemplary con∣versation. 1. Let us be diligent and faithful in preaching the Gospel. Let us be instant in season and out of season to reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering and doctrine, 2 Tim. 4.2. In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if peradventure the Lord will give them repentance, 2 Tim. 2.25. Let us fulfill the Ministry the Lord hath entrusted us with, Col. 4.17. serving the Lord, and the souls committed to our charge, with all humility of mind, and faithfulness; keeping back nothing which is pro∣fitable for them, that we may keep our selves pure from the blood of all men. Let us testifie repentance towards God, and faith towards the Lord Jesus
Christ, and open the treasures of the Gospel, and mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, with all plain∣ness and perspicuity, dealing forth wholesome food unto hungry souls, as faithful Stewards of the ma∣nifold grace of God. Let us not use deceit, or guile, or flattering words, or a cloak for covetousness or uncleanness, or boasting words, but as we are al∣lowed of God to be put in trust with the Gospel; so let us speak and preach, not as pleasing men, but as pleasing God, who searcheth the heart; being so af∣fectionately desirous of the salvation of souls, as to be willing to impart unto them our souls with the Gospel if we could, and it would do them good. And let us not count estate, or liberty, or life it self dear to us, that we finish our course with joy, and the Mini∣stry we have received from the Lord, Act. 20. 1 Thes. 2. 1 Pet. 4. 2. Let the honour the Lord hath conferred upon us, engage us unto a blameless and exemplary conversa∣tion. Let our conversations shine with holiness, as well as our Sermons shine with truths: Let us teach by our life, as well as by our doctrine: Let us be examples to the Believers in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity, 1 Tim. 4.12. Let the way to Heaven be read in our steps: Let us be blameless, and harmless, the Sons of God, and Ministers of Christ without rebuke in the midst of a crooked generation, amongst whom let us shine as lights, as we hope hereafter to shine like stars: We are employed to preach rather than Angels; let us live as if we were Angels on earth, and as those who hope to live with Angels in Heaven.
2. For Exhortation of People. Doth God make use of Ministers to preach the Gospel, rather than Angels? Be exhorted then 1. To love and esteem Your Ministers. 2. To Hear Your Ministers. 3. To Believe Your Ministers. 4. To Obey. Your Ministers. 1. Esteem and love your Ministers, 1 Thes. 5.12, 13. We beseech you Brethren, that you know them which labour amgst you, and are over you in the Lord, that you esteem them very highly in love for the works sake. How beautiful should the feet of them be that bring glad tidings of good things? How welcome should their voice be that preach the Gospel of peace? Rom. 10.15. We read of some who had so great love to the Apostle, that they could have plucked out their eyes, and given to him, yet his affection was greater, for he could have plucked out his heart and given to them. How should people love their Mi∣nisters, who are their spiritual Fathers, and Nurses, and Physitians? Love them, they are your soul-friends, and therefore your best friends: Esteem them, they are Christs Embassadours and Represen∣tatives. The Galatians received the Apostle Paul, notwithstanding his infirmities, as an Angel of God, even as Christ Jesus, Gal. 4.13, 14. Give them reve∣rence as those which stand in the room of Christ, and are in this honoured above Angels to be employed by the Lord to preach the Gospel. Give them coun∣tenance; do not forsake them when they fall into trouble for the Gospels sake: give them maintenance▪
they impart their spirituals unto you, and you ought to impart your carnal things (far beneath in worth) unto them, and this by the Lords ordination, 1 Cor. 9.11, 12, 13, 14. Give them audience, which is the se∣cond thing. 2. Hear Ministers. Wo be to them if they do not preach the Gospel, when they are commissioned to the work, rather than Angels; and wo be to you, if you do not hear the Gospel which they preach: He that heareth them, heareth Christ, Luk. 10.16. And they that turn away their ears from hearing them, it will be more tollerable for the Land of Sodom in the day of Judgement, than for such persons, vers. 11. 3. Believe Ministers, what they preach out of the Word of God▪ it is not their own, but is of Divine Authority, and therefore is true infallibly. Believe in Christ whom they tender to you by the preaching of the Gospel; they call you to repentance, hearken unto them; they hold forth Christ, believe in him, close with him by faith. If you do not repent and believe by their preaching, you will not by any other means, no, though God should send some out of the other world to preach unto you. If a Dives should come from Hell to his wicked brethren, and tell them what torments he felt, and must endure there for ever for such sins as they lived in the practice of, and that they were like to come to the same place if they did not repent, this might affrighten them, but it would not convert them: If they believe not Moses and the Prophets, neither would they be per∣swaded though one should rise from the dead and preach unto them, Luke 16.31. Suppose that God should send unto you which are wicked from Hell, and let loose one of your wicked companions out of
the dark prison, where he hath been filled with un∣expressible anguish under the sense of Gods imme∣diate wrath, which hath immediately been laid up∣on him; and he should appear to any of you who are going on in a course of such sins as once he joyn∣ed with you in, and should come, and should appear to you in the dark, silent night, and awaken you out of your sleep with a hideous noise, and there roar out before you under the sense of the pain which he doth endure, crying out of his drunkenness, his un∣cleanness, his swearing, and Sabbath-breaking, and should tell you that for such sins he is tormented most horribly, and must be tormented eternally; and that your sins unrepented of will certainly be punish∣ed with the like plagues. This might startle you, and scare you (it may be) out of your wits, but it would not convert you from your sins. If you be not perswaded to repent by the preaching of Mini∣sters, who as certainly foretell you of the same eter∣nal Judgements out of the Word of God, which are prepared in Hell for the impenitent, and with whose preaching God hath promised his blessing, which alone can make any means effectual for working re∣pentance; surely the other means without his bles∣sing, which he hath no where promised, would be ineffectual. Or suppose that an Angel should come down from Heaven, and tell you what he hath there seen and enjoyed, and how happy all true Believers departed are in the vision and fruition of God, and should set forth the joyes of Heaven with such words as no man can utter; and withall should invite sinners unto Christ, that they might through him have a title unto, and at length share in this glory and happiness; yet if they do not believe, and will
not be perswaded to come to Christ by the preach¦ing of Ministers, which is accompanied with the holy Ghost sent down from Heaven, 1 Pet. 1.12 which is more than if an Angel should be sent down from Heaven; they would not be perswaded by the preaching of an Angel. 4. Obey Ministers, Heb. 13.17. Obey them which have the rule over you, for they watch for your souls,  they that must give an account. And you also must give an account; what they command you out of the Word of God, obey, as if God spake to you with an audible voice from Heaven; and what they for∣bid out of the Word of God, forbear, as you wi answer it at the great day. SECT. IV. Doct. 2. THat Ministers are to tell people such word whereby they may be saved. In handling of which point I shall first shew what salvation is here meant, and what it is for a people to be saved. 2. What words Ministers are to tell people whereby they may be saved. 3. How they are to tell the people such words. 4. Why Ministers must tell people words whereby they may be saved, where I shall give the Reasons of the point. 5. And lastly, Make some application. 1. The first thing is to shew, what salvation is here meant, and what it is for a people to be saved. Negatively, we are not here to understand any temporal salvation; not a salvation from numerous, po∣tent and furious earthly enemies, which come forth against Gods Israel to destroy them; not a preserva∣tion
from a Senacharibs host, or an Ethiopian Myriad, r the confederate bands of Moab and Ammon, and lount Seir, who joyn together to cut off the name of Gods people from the face of the earth; not a escuing from Egyptian bondage, or Babylonian capti∣ity, or Turkish Vassallage; not an opening of pri∣son doors, a pulling out of deep dungeons, and nocking off strong Iron chains and shackles; not a sheltring of houses from fire, when in danger of being onsumed, or of persons from the evil arrows of Pe∣tilence, when they fly thick about the ears; not a eliverance from sore pain of body, or violent sick∣ness, or any outward calamity which might render the life grievous, and keeping off for a while the ruel stroke of temporal death, which none can long scape. But positively, by salvation here we are to under∣stand spiritual and eternal salvation; and a people may be said to be saved in the sense of the Text, 1. When they are saved from the wrath and dis∣pleasure of an angry sin-revenging God, who is the most potent and furious enemy against whom there is no lifting up the hand to defend, when he lifts up the hand to destroy. The whole world of mankind is guilty of sin before God; our first Parents sinned, and n them all their posterity, who are conceived and born in sin, and unto all of whom sin is natural, un∣ill the nature be renewed. And, as when the Angels inned, they were cast out of Heaven, and became Devils; so when our first Parents sinned, they were cast out of Paradice, and since all sinners are out of fa∣vour; yea, they lye under Gods anger and dis∣pleasure,
until they be reconciled: All the children of men are by nature the children of wrath, Eph. 2.3. And God is angry with the wicked every day▪ Psal. 7.11. They have a natural enmity in their hearts against God and his Law, Rom. 8.7. and God is an enemy unto them▪ yea, hath a hatred in his heart against all the workers of iniquity, Psal. 5.6. God is an enemy unto the wicked, because of their sins; and this is worse ten thousand degrees, than  they had all the creatures in the world their enemies▪ because of the power of his anger, which none ca resist, when once he suffers it to break forth. We read of the stout-hearted, and men of might, th chariot and horse cast into a dead sleep at one o Gods rebukes, and who can stand in his sight wher once he is angry, Psal. 76.5, 6, 7. And God is com∣ing forth with armed vengeance against his enemies▪ he hath prepared instruments of death; he hath whe his sword, and girt it upon his thigh; yea, drawn it forth, and lifted up his arm to strike; he hath bent his bow, and made ready his arrows upon the string, and sinners can neither fly from him, nor defend themselves against him. Then a people are saved in∣deed, when they are saved from Gods displeasure, when his anger, and the guilt of their sin, which is the cause, is removed; when their peace is made with God, through the mediation of Jesus Christ, when God forgiveth all their sins, and accepteth of them as perfectly righteous in his sight, through the imputation of his Sons righteousness unto them, and so puts up, and layeth aside his sword, unbends his bow, and casts it behind his back, and receiveth them into favour, as if they had never offended him.
2. When they are saved from the slavery of the De∣vil, and their own lusts. All the wicked are spiri∣tual slaves and vassals, they are in worse than Egyp∣tian bondage, their thraldom and captivity is greater, than that of the Iews once to the Babylonians: The Devil hath his fetters upon their hands and feet, and leadeth them captive by the chains of their own lusts at his will, 2 Tim. 2.26. They are shut up as it were in prison, and lye in a deep dark dungeon, where no light doth shine; they are fallen into a horrible pit, and their feet stick in the miery clay; they are sunk into deep waters, and the stream is gone over their soul; they are fallen into a deadly sickness, and a loathsome disease hath seized upon their spirits; they are full of boils, and blains, and putrifying sores, all this and a thousand times worse is their condition, through the power and reign of sin in them; then a people are saved in a spiritual sense, when they are redeemed from sin and Satan, when the Lord Jesus Christ doth rescue them out of the Devils chains, when he leadeth captivity captive, spoileth principa∣lities and powers, and snatcheth them like a prey out of the teeth of the roaring Lion, when he de∣livereth them from the power of darkness, and translateth them into the houshold and family of God, when he brings them out of the house of bon∣dage, and leads them out of Egypt through the Red Sea of his own blood, in which he drowneth and de∣stroyeth their Egyptian lusts which do pursue them, when he openeth the prison doors, and pulls them out of the deep dungeon, and knocks off the chains from their feet, when he breaks the bonds of the
Devil, and sin, and brings them forth into freedom and enlargement; when he takes them out of the pit, and draws them out of the water; when he healeth their sickness, cleanseth and cureth their pu∣trifying sores; I mean, when he delivereth them from the power of sin which entangled, over∣whelmed and defiled them, and was more dangerous than any sickness of body could be unto them: then they are saved, when Satan is taken off, and sin hath no more dominion over them, and the Throne of Christ is erected in their hearts, and his graces im∣planted there, which do beautifie them instead of lust, which did besmear and deform them; when being made free from sin and Satan, they are become the Servants of God, and yield up their members as instruments of righteousness, Rom. 6.13, 22. when they are enabled to overcome the Devil and his temp∣tations, and to crucifie the flesh with its lusts and affections; when the old Serpent is wounded in the head, and cast out, and the old man is wounded in the heart, and its reigning power taken down, and they are made victorious through Christ the Captain of their salvation who loveth them. 3. When they are saved from the Law; not only from the yoak and bondage of the Ceremonial Law, which the Iewish Church of old was under, which required many burdensome, expensive, and more carnal services, but also from the rigour, irritation, curse and malediction of the Moral Law. The Law is like the Egyptian Task-masters, who required Brick of the Israelites, but gave no Straw; it requireth duty, perfect obedience, but giveth no strength; it
discovereth sin, but giveth no power to overcome it; and it enjoyneth service, but it giveth no ability to perform it; therefore the Law is said to be weak through sinful flesh, Rom. 8.3. Yea the Law when it breaketh in with a full spiritual light and convi∣ction of sin upon the spirit, forbidding heart concu∣piscence, and the least motion or inclination of the soul to sin, and pressing to spiritual and heart-purity and obedience; it is so far from beating down and killing the power of sin, and from strengthening the soul, and enabling it unto obedience, that it doth re∣vive the power of sin, which seemed to be dead be∣fore in the soul, and occasionally doth irritate and provoke to all manner of concupiscence; the disco∣vering it awakens the enmity of the heart against it self, which lay before dormant. As the Apostle doth complain, Rom. 7.5. For when we were in the flesh, the motions of sin which were by the Law, did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death. And v. 7, 8. Sin taking occasion by the Law wrought in me all man∣ner of concupiscence; for without the Law sin was dead, but when the Commandment came, sin revived, and I dyed. Moreover, the Law doth curse all the children of men that are within its power and reach, because of their sins, which none are wholly free from, Gal. 3.10. For as many as are of the works of the Law, are under the curse: for it is written, Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things which are written in the Book of the Law to do them. People are saved from the Law when they are delivered from the rigorous yoak of the Moral Law, which is called the Law of sin and death, as it occasioneth sin, and threatneth death for it; or discovereth our death and utter insufficiency of our selves to obey its injunctions;
and have instead thereof, their necks put under the sweet and easie yoak of the Law of Christ, which is called the Law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, be∣cause life and strength is given by the Spirit of Christ, to yield obedience thereunto: As Rom. 8.2. For the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Iesus hath made me free from the Law of sin and death. And vers. 3, 4. For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh; that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. The Law could not give strength against sin, because of the strength of the flesh; the Law discovered sin, but it could not subdue sin; but God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, in which flesh he suffer∣ed and offered a sacrifice for sin, by which sin, or sin-offering (as the word sin doth elsewhere signifie; as Hos. 4.8. They eat the sins of my people, that is, the sin-offerings of my people) he condemned sin in the flesh; sin was hereby judged and condemned to lose its power in his people; it was condemned to death, which death or sin-offering of Christ hath vertue and influence upon sin to kill it, to crucifie it, like as Christ was crucified for it; and so Gods people are said to be delivered from the Law, from the irritating and provoking power of it unto sin, that being dead wherein they were held, and whereby the Law did stir up such motions, that they might serve in newness of spirit, Rom. 7.6. that they might yield the fruits of new obedience, that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in them, sin having lost its strength, they have strength from the Spirit of Christ to yield such obedience to the Law, as through
Christ shall be accepted: And with this deliverance of people from the rigour and irritation of the Law is conjoyned their deliverance also from the curse and malediction, by Jesus Christ, who was made a curse for them; instead whereof the blessing of Abra∣ham the father of the faithfull, is given unto them, as it is expresly said, Gal. 3.13, 14. Christ hath re∣deemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us, as it is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree, that the blessing of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles through Faith. 4. When they are saved from the eternal damnati∣on of Hell; all unbelieving sinners are under the sen∣tence of damnation, Ioh. 3.18. He that believeth not is condemned already; they are condemned by the great Judge unto an utter exclusion from the glorious presence of the Lord in that place of joy and happiness which is above, and to endure most horrid, extream and endless anguish and torment in soul and body, in the place of utter darkness which is beneath, where their worm shall never dye, and where the fire shall never be quenched: This sen∣tence is dreadfull, and all unbelievers are lyable eve∣ry moment to the execution thereof upon their souls. So soon as God shall give commission to the Serjeant Death to arrest them, and clap up their bodies into the Prison of the grave, then their souls being found guilty will be delivered into the hand of the Devil the Jailor of Hell, whither he will drag them, and where they must remain full of anguish, through sense of Gods immediate wrath wherewith they will be filled, and bound up in chains of dark∣ness
and wo untill the Judgement of the great day; on which great day the Lord Jesus Christ will be sent by God to judge the whole world together, and they shall be brought forth in chains to his barre, and having reassumed their bodies shall be judged by him soul and body unto the flames of everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels; and O the dread and horrour which will then possess them: O the howlings and bitter lamentations which then they will make, when the God of Hea∣ven shall execute the fierceness of his anger upon them for their sins, in the extream and remediless torments of Hell which shall never have an end. The sentence of eternal damnation which all unbe∣lievers, whilest such, are under here is dreadfull, yet whilest here it is reversible, whilest the reprieve of execution lasteth, a repeal of the sentence may be obtained, by an appeal from the Court of the Law, to the Court of Chancery, from the Barr of Gods Justice to the Throne of Grace, by application of themselves unto Christ to be their Advocate, and of his Righteousness to themselves by Faith, whereby Justice hath been satisfied, and they may be acquit∣ted. People are saved from eternal damnation, when through an interest in Christ they obtain pardoning mercy, and so are freed from all obligation to pu∣nishment by their sins; hence it is said that there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Iesus, Rom. 8.1. and they that believe, are not condemned, Joh. 3.18. and that because Jesus is their Saviour, and hath delivered them from the wrath which is to come, 1 Thess. 1.10. Believers have a title to eter∣nal salvation here through their title to Christ; it is sure, and they may be assured of it; but hereafter
they shall actually obtain it at the day of Judgement and perdition of the ungodly, when the wicked shall be condemned, and thrust into the place of tor∣ments, they shall be acquitted, saved, and received into Heavenly Mansions, prepared by their Re∣deemer for them in his Fathers house, where there is fulness of joy, and pleasures for evermore, and so they shall march along with him unto the Zion which is above with shouting and the voice of triumph, with Songs in their mouths, and unspeakable de∣light in their hearts; they shall then obtain ever∣lasting joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away, and no place be found for it to dwell, where they shall take up their eternal abode. This is the Salvation which is here meant, and which God hath promised to shew unto them who believe, and order their conversation aright: And thus you see what it is for a people to be saved. SECT. V. 2. THE second thing is, To shew what those Words are which Ministers are to tell people whereby they may be saved. And here I shall for the present speak only of those words which the Apostle Peter told Cornelius, whereby he and his house were saved; there was great power and vertue which went along with them, for it is said, whilest he was speaking of them, the Holy Ghost fell upon the Gentiles unto whom he preached, as upon the Apo∣stles themselves at the beginning, chap. 10.44. and therefore they are worthy your serious regard; pos∣sibly you that are unconverted in the hearing or
reading these words, may have the Holy Ghost fall upon you, and feel such a wonderfull power going along with them, as shall draw you unto Christ, and bring you out of the estate of spiritual death and damnation in which you are by nature, into a state of life and salvation; whilest I am speak∣ing to your ears, God may speak to your hearts, whilest I am presenting these words before you, and holding forth the light unto you, God may open your eyes, and give you by his Spirit such a spiri∣tual discerning of these things as you never had be∣fore, and so affect your hearts, as no word of man is able to do: hear then a Sermon of God out of the mouth of the Apostle Peter, which hath been effe∣ctual for conversion, and who knoweth but it may produce the same effect in some of you in the repe∣tition and explication of it, as it did in the Gen∣tiles in the first preaching of it? It is said, the Ho∣ly Ghost fell upon all them which heard these words when Peter preached them; O that the Holy Ghost might fall upon some of you whilest I am preaching them! The Gentiles had extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost given unto them in their hearing Peter, O that you might have a true work of conversion by the Holy Ghost given in the hearing of me! They are the Words of God, receive them as his words, which may effectually work to your salvation, if the Lord give faith in the hearing. Look up then to the Lord for his blessing, on which the efficacy of the Word doth depend. The words are in Act. 10. from the 34th to the 44th Vers. I shall first read them, and then open these words of salvation to you. After that Cornelius had sent for Peter to Ioppa, he sent for many of his friends to his house, and when
they were come together, and Peter was come, and had a relation from Cornelius of his ision, and they had told him, that they were all there present before God, to hear the things which were com∣manded him of God. Vers. 34. he begins his Ser∣mon. Then Peter opened his mouth, and said, Of a truth I perceive, that God is no respecter of persons▪ but in every Nation he that feareth him and worketh righteousness is accepted with him. The Word which God sent unto the Children of Israel, preaching peace by Iesus Christ (he is Lord of all) That Word (I say) ye know, which was published throughout all Judea, and began from Galilee, after the Baptisme which John preached: How God anoynted Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost, and with power, who went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the Devil, for God was with him. And we are witnesses of all things which he did, both in the land of Judea, and in Jerusalem, whom they slew and hanged on a tree: him God raised up the third day, and shewed him openly; not to all the people, but to witnesses cho∣sen before of God, even to us who did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead. And he com∣manded us to preach unto the people, and to testifie, that it was he which was ordained of God to be the Iudge of quick and dead. To him gave all the Pro∣phets witness, that through his Name, whosoever be∣lieveth on him shall receive remission of sins. This Sermon of Peter's, which is the first Ser∣mon which was preached unto the Gentiles after the partition-wall was broken down, is but brief, but it hath much sweet and soul-saving doctrine in it, and it is likely that the Scripture doth bt briefly rehearse the heads of that which the Apostle
discoursed of more largely unto them; and there∣fore I shall endeavour to open this Sermon unto you, which is like a rich Cabinet of most precious treasure, wherein is to be found the Pearle of the greatest price, which the wise Merchant-man will sell all that he hath to obtain, because it is not only de∣sireable to enrich him, but also necessary to save him; I mean the Lord Jesus Christ whom the Apostle doth describe and hold forth unto the Gentiles. We read, Luk. 24.31. that the Disciples hearts burn∣ed within them, whilest our Saviour spake to them by the way, and opened to them the Scriptures, and O that you might feel your hearts burn within you, whilest I am opening unto you this Scripture, which doth relate Peters Sermon. The Sermon of Peter may be reduced to Four general heads. 1. Concerning God. 2. Concerning the Word. 3. Concerning Iesus Christ. 4. Concerning the way of salvation by Christ. SECT. VI. 1. THE Apostle speaks unto the Gentiles con∣cerning God, v. 34. and 35. Of a truth I per∣ceive that God is no respecter of persons, but in every Nation he that feareth him and worketh righteousness is accepted with him. Two things he gives them to understand concerning God. 1. His gracious disposition to accept of Men. 2. His good will towards the Gentiles.
1. He lets them know how gracious God was in be∣ing willing to accept of men, of any men, without re∣spect of persons, whatever their sins had been, so that they did turn from them, in his fear, and wrought righteousness for the future. This is needfull for sinners to know, that they might be encouraged to seek after salvation: For if they apprehend God only as he is holy, and just, and jealous, if they are told only that he is powerful and furious, and a sin-re∣venging God; when they reflect upon their guilt, they will be ready to fly away from him, under a sla∣vish fear of punishment, and in discouragement and despair go on in the practice of sin as long as they can: Therefore Ministers must represent God unto sinners as gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, pardoning iniquity, transgression and sin, as he sets forth himself to Moses, Exod. 34.6, 7. they must tell sinners, that God is gracious, and ready to accept of all those that fear him, and turn from their evil waies, and resolve to work righte∣ousness for the time to come, and that he will be found of, and give a reward unto all such as diligent∣ly seek him, Heb. 11.6. He that cometh to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of all them that diligently seek him. O that you who are going on in sin, were perswaded of this, how gracious and merciful the Lord is, whom you do so highly offend by sin, and how ready he is to accept of you, if you would but turn from sin: He hath given us Mi∣nisters commission to tell you, that there is an ac∣cepted time, and a day of salvation for your souls, which he yet lengthens out unto you: Yea, we are sent as his Embassadours to entreat and beseech you that you would be reconciled unto God, 2 Cor. 5.20.
And when God declares by us that he is so willing to accept of you, that he desires you to accept of his salvation, and beseecheth a reconciliation, when he can so easily avenge himself upon you, and glorifie his justice and wrath in your destruction, and stand∣eth in no need of you, only for your own sake en∣treats you to be reconciled, that you might not be destroyed, that you might not even force him to punish you, which he will do with a witness, and with a vengeance, if you refuse: Methinks this amazing condescention and kindness of God should astonish you, and stop you in the way of sin, and make you tremble, and let fall your weapons out of your hand, with which you have been fighting against him, and cast your selves with shame and self-loathing at his feet, grieving at the very heart, that ever you offended a God of such infinite loving kindness. 2. Peter tells them further of Gods good will towars the Gentiles, that in every Nation whoever feared him should be accepted with him. They were Gentiles whom he preached unto, and they might have feared that salvation was only to be found amongst the Jews; and that however God were gracious and rea∣dy to receive men unto favour that feared him, yet that God having made choice of but one Nation in the world to be his peculiar people, and they being none of that Nation, that no grace or mercy was attainable by them, who were Heathens, who are called the people of his wrath. Therefore Peter gives them to understand, that however God had set narrow bounds to his Church formerly, and confined
his mercy to one Nation, yet that now the hedge and middle wall of partition was broken down, and any Nation might find acceptance. This was the first appearance and breaking forth of Gods mercy towards the Gentiles, in that he declares himself now to be no longer a respecter of Nations, but that other Nations should taste of his favour as well as the Iews. This was intended from the beginning by God, and foretold long before by the Prophets. See Isa. 49.18, 19, 20, 21, 23. Lift up thine eyes (speaking to the Church) round about; behold all these gather them∣selves together, and come to thee: as I live, saith the Lord, thou shalt surely clothe thee with them all as with an ornament, and binde them on thee, as a Bride doth; the Land shall be too narrow; the children which thou shalt have after thou hast lost the other, shall say in thine ears, the place is too strait for me, give place to me that I may dwell. Then shalt thou say in thine heart, Who hath begotten me these, seeing I have lost my children, and am desolate? and who hath brought up thse? Thus saith the Lord, Behold I will lift up mine hand unto the Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people, and they shall bring thy Sons in their arms, and thy Daughters shall be carryed upon their shoulders, &c. And chap. 54.1, 2, 3. Sing O barren that didst not bear, break forth into singing and cry aloud, Thou that didst not travel with child, for more are the children of the desolate, than of the married wife, saith the Lord. Enlarge the place of thy Tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thine habitations: Spare not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes; for thou shalt break forth on the right hand, and on the left, and thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles, and make the desolate Cities to be inhabited, &c. And the Apostle Paul writing to
the Gentile Romans, which were converted to the Christian Faith, makes mention of divers Prophecies together, of Gods good will which he intended to shew unto the Gentiles, through his Lord Jesus Christ; as you may read, Rom. 15.9, 10, 11, 12. And that the Gentiles may glorifie God for his mercy,  it is written, for this cause will I confess unto thee amongst the Gentiles, and sing unto thy Name. And again he saith, Rejoyce ye Gentiles with his people. And again, Praise the Lord all ye Gentiles, and laud him all ye people. And again Isaiah saith, There shall be a root of Iesse, and he that shall rise to reign over the Gentiles, and in him shall the Gentiles trust. And this he writes for their encouragement and comfort, that they might be filled with all joy and peace in be∣lieving, vers. 13. Now the time was come for the fulfilling of these Prophecies, when Christ was come, who had reconciled unto God both Jew and Gentile in one body by the Cross, breaking down the middle wall of partition between them, and destroying that which was an occasion of enmity, even the Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances, for to make in himself of twain one new man so making peace, Ephes. 3.14, 15, 16. Therefore he gave Com∣mandment to his Disciples, after his resurrection, to preach the Gospel unto all Nations, and here sends Peter to Cornelius, and them that were with him. This is ground of singular comfort and encourage∣ment unto us who are Gentiles, that the Lord hath good will for us, and hath sent his Gospel to be preached amongst us by his Ministers, which may give further hopes of your attaining salvation, when God hath given you the means, and sends his Mini∣sters to preach to you such words whereby you may be saved.
SECT. VII. . PEter speaks to them concerning the Word which God sent unto the children of Israel; and he tells of a twofold Word sent to them by God. 1. The Word of Repentance, which he calls the aptism which Iohn preached unto them. 2. The Word of Peace which was preached unto them by Iesus Christ. 1. He tells them that God sent a Word by Iohn to the children of Israel, and that was a word and Baptism of Repentance which he preached. Iohn was Christs orerunner, who went before his face to prepare his way, and to make the people ready for the entertain∣ment of Christ: He came to level the mountains of pride, and to straighten crooked dispositions, and to smoothen rough spirits; his doctrine was a doctrine of Repentance, Luk. 3.3. He came into all the Countries about Iordan, preaching the Baptism of Re∣pentance for the remission of sins. And in Mat. 3.1, 2. it is said, Iohn came preaching in the wilderness of Iudea, and saying, Repent ye, for the Kingdom of Hea∣en is at hand. Iohn preached the Law to convince men of sin, and to awaken them unto repentance; he telleth sinners plainly, that they were a genera∣tion of Vipers; doth not spare the hypocritical Pha∣isees, who boasted so much in their priviledges, but were grosly deficient in moral duties; he telleth them of Gods Ax which was laid to the root of the tree, ready to cut them down if they did not epent; he telleth of the unquenchable fire which they should be cast into, if they did not reform. The
word of Repentance is a necessary word unto salvation, and therefore is necessary to be preached to all and what Iohn the Baptist cryed in the wilderness, would cry in your ears this day, Repent. Repent if yo would have remission of sins. Repent if you woul be prepared for the entertainment of Jesus Chris Repent, or else you will all certainly perish, Luk. 13.3 Repent, or else iniquity will be your ruine, Ezek 18.30. Repent, or else ye cannot be saved. When th Jews who had crucified the Lord of glory, heard Peters Sermon, which ripped up their sin, and they being pricked in their hearts, cry out to Peter and the rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren, What shall we do? Act. 2.37. We have committed a great sin, and what shall we now do? What course shall we take that we may be saved from that eternal wrath and death which we have deserved? The Apostle directs them to Repent for the remission of sin, vers. 38. And will not conscience accuse you of the guilt of sin? Are there no drunkards in this place? no swearers? none that have committed adultery, and been un∣clean in secret places? no unrighteous persons that have defrauded their neighbour? no Sabbath-breakers, nor profane persons? no lyars nor cove∣tous persons? and are not the most civil and moral∣ly honest of you all that are out of Christ, guilty of many heart-sins, yea and lip-sins, and some gross slips in your life, which conscience doth sometimes twinge you for? Are not you guilty of impenitency and hardness of heart, and unbelief, and want of love to God, and his Son, and neglect of your own salvation? Let me tell you all that have not yet re∣pented, that unless ye repent, and that speedily, ye shall all perish certainly, and ye shall be miserable
everlastingly. Repent of your sins, mourn for sin, and turn from sin, or else you will weep for sin here∣after to no purpose, and burn for sin for ever. Loath sin, and leave sin, or else Christ will disdain you at the last day, and sentence you to depart from him into everlasting fire. Confess sin, and forsake sin, or else you will finde no mercy here, nor end, or the least asswagement of misery in the other world. Drunkards, repent of your sins, you have felt (after your revellings, and excessive carousings) your heads ake, and have vomited up your drink sometimes, O that you could now feel your hearts ake, and that you would vomit up your sin by repentance. Swearers, repent of your sins; you have taken Gods Name in vain, yea even torn it in pieces by your oaths, O that you would hallow Gods Name in confessing your sin, and that you would rend and tear your hearts with sorrow for the affronts you have by your oaths offered to the highest Majesty. Adulterers and unclean persons, repent of your sins; you have tasted sweetness in your oul sins, O labour to taste bitterness in grief for your sins, that you may not feel the bitterness of hell torments, which with∣out repentance will certainly be your portion. Unrighteous persons, lyars, covetous persons, repent, or you will not escape Gods righteous judgements. Sabbath-breakers, get your hearts broken for your sins, or else God will break you to pieces with his Iron Rod. Prophane persons, and all ye that have sinned more grosly, repent, and humble your selves before the Lord the more deeply: The most crimson and scarlet ins may be washed away; those who embrewed their hands in the blood of Christ were forgiven upon repentance; and there may be hope
of remission for the worst of you if you repent. And you that have been more civil, yet under the power of some sin which hath reigned in your hearts, though it hath not broken forth so notoriously in your lives, and have moreover lived in the neglect of Christ, and your own salvation by him, not perceiving your need so much of him. Let me tell you, as our Saviour told the Scribes and Pharisees, that some∣times Publicans and Harlots, the vilest and most no∣torious come into the Kingdom of Heaven sooner than you, because they are more readily awakened, and humbled, and made sensible of their need of Christ, than the civil and fair dealing men and wo∣men who are very apt to lean and trust to their own righteousness, without such earnest seeking of the righteousness of Christ to justifie them: There∣fore let me warn you also to repent of your sins, of heart-sins, and Gospel-sins, which are the greatest sins, and will certainly sink you without repentance. Look upon your own righteousness as filthy raggs, and cast it away, and loath your selves, and be per∣swaded, that if ever you be pardoned and saved, you must be as much beholding to free grace as the vilest sinner. 2. Peter tells them that God sent a Word of Peace, which was preached by Iesus Christ. It is said, Ioh. 1.17. The Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth, and I may add peace too, came by Iesus Christ. The Law which came by Moses, was given for this end to lead men; yea, it was a School-master to whip men to Christ; and God did enjoyn those legal services upon his people, that they might look
to Christ in them, and look for Christ who should deliver them from that yoak of bondage. The Law, which was from Mount Sinai, gendereth to bon∣dage, and was given with thunderings and light∣nings to awaken men; and in preaching of the Law God giveth a spirit of bondage to work men to fear and repentance: But Christ came in a more mild way, and in a more soft and still voice preached Peace, and the Gospel of Reconciliation. The word of Peace was that which the Angels preached unto the Shepherds at Christs birth, Luk. 2.14. Glory be to God in the highest, on earth peace, and good will to∣wards men. Peace was that which Christ preached in his life, Ephes. 2.17. He came and preached Peace to you which were afar off, and to them which were nigh. Peace was that which Christ purchased by his death, Col. 1.20. He made Peace by the blood of his Cross. Peace was that which he spake to his Dis∣ciples at his appearance after his resurrection, Ioh. 20.19. Iesus came and stood in the midst of them, and said, Peace be unto you. Peace he left with his Dis∣ciples behind him as a Legacy, when he was to go away from them, Ioh. 14.27. Peace I leave with you, my Peace I give unto you. And Peace he commis∣sioned his Disciples to preach unto the world, Mark 16.5. Go ye into all the World, and preach the Gospel unto every creature: Which Gospel is a Gospel of Peace, containing glad tidings of good things, Rom. 10.15. Christ preached Peace, not Peace with men (though this also he would have his Disciples en∣deavour after, as much as in them lyeth, to live peaceably with all men, Rom. 12.28. and to follow after peace with all men, so far as it consisteth with holiness, and a pure conscience, Heb. 12.14.) For
he tells his Disciples, Luk. 12.51. Suppose ye that I am come to give Peace on earth, I tell you nay, but rather division. Whatever peaceable disposition he taught, and his Gospel doth work in the heart where it prevails, yet accidentally it causeth di∣vision, and stirreth up to opposition in those that will not yield obedience thereunto; and therefore the world hate and contend with his Disciples, be∣cause he hath chosen them out of the world; wicked men have an enmity in their hearts against Be∣lievers, and will not be at Peace with them. But Christ preached Peace with God. Christ came from Heaven to bring this glad tydings to earth, that the God of Heaven was willing to be at Peace with sinfull men. It would not have been an easie thing to have made sinners believe (espe∣cially if they had been convinced of sin, how heinous it is in its own nature, how highly it affronts and provokes the highest Majesty; if they had been awakened with a sense of the dread∣fulness of the punishment which God hath threat∣ned, and they had deserved for their sins) that so great and holy a God should be willing to put up all affronts, and forgive all iniquities, and be at Peace with sinners; yea, that he should seek after it: They might have questioned not only how this could be, but also how any could have known it: But to put all out of doubt, Christ the eternal Son of God hath come forth from Heaven, declaring what he hath heard of the Father, and hath made known this, that God is willing to be at peace with us. Christ was sent from the King of Glory upon the Embassage of Peace, and he preached Peace therefore unto men;
not unto all men, for Isa. 57.21. There is no Peace to the wicked; that is, to such as are im∣penitent and senseless of their sins, and go on still in their trespasses. Christ threatned the wicked as severely as Iohn Baptist; he tells the impeni∣tent that they should perish, Luk 13.3. and the unbelievers, that they should die in their sins, Ioh. 8.24. And he calls the hypocritical Pharisees (who persevered in their opposition of him and his waies) Serpents and Vipers that could not escape the damnation of Hell, Matth. 23.33. But Christ preached Peace to all that repented, were troubled for their sins; that mourned and turned; that believed and yielded up themselves to the obedience of the Gospel. He preached the Gospel to the poor, to the bruised and broken, that is, such as were sensible of their sins, and their need of a Saviour, Luk. 4.18. And we Ministers have commission from the Lord to preach Peace to the children of men; we are Ministers of the Gospel of Peace; unto us is committed the Word of Re∣conciliation, 2 Cor. 5.19. Indeed we must sound the Trumpet of War from Heaven in the ears of secure sinners to awaken them; but we are to hang out the white flag, and to come with Olive branches of Peace from God to them that tremble at Gods Word, and are humble for their sins. Sinners, are there any among you, whose hearts the Lord hath touched and bruised for sin, yea broken to shivers, and melted, and filled with grief and sorrow for a life of past-wickedness, that have not only legal terrours, but true Evan∣gelical
repentance: I have a word of Peace to deliver to such of you from the Lord. God is willing to be at Peace with you through his Son: There is an Advocate with the Father, who is ready to make up the breach which sin hath made between God and your souls; and God doth call you to lay hold on his strength, that you may make Peace with him, and he pro∣miseth that you shall make peace with him, Isa. 27.5. Thus concerning the word of Repentance and Peace which Peter tells Cornelius, and them which were with him. SECT. VIII. 3. PEter speaks to them of the Lord Jesus Christ, by whom this Peace was purchased, and the Word of Peace preached, and that, 1. Concerning his Vnction. 2. Concerning his Life. 3. Concerning his Miracles. 4. Concerning his Death. 5. Concerning his Resurrection. 6. Concerning his Ordination to be the Iudge of the World. 7. Concerning his Mission of them to preach. 1. Peter speaks to them concerning the Vnction of Christ. He tells them that God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost, and with
Power. God poured forth his Spirit without mea∣sure upon Christ, which qualified him for his offi∣ces, and he gave him power and authority to exe∣cute them. There is a Threefold Office which Christ was anointed unto. 1. The Priestly Office. 2. The Pphetical Office. 3. The Kingly Office. 1. Christ was anointed to the Priestly Office; who offered up sacrifice to God, even a sin-offering and Peace-offering, o make reconciliation for sin; not the sacrifice of Bulls and Goats, or Lambs, or Rams, which could never of themselves take away guilt; but he through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, he offered the sacri∣fice of himself for a sweet-smelling savour, and shed his own blood for the remission of sins, by which blood having obtained eternal redemption for his people, he entered into the Holy place not made with hands, which was but figurative, but into Hea∣ven it self, there to appear in the presence of God, to make intercession for them. Christ is the great High priest, not after the order of Aaron, who were many, and mortall, and sinfull, and their Priest∣hood changeable; but he is a High-Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec; hath an unchange∣able Priesthood, therefore is able to save all those to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession in their behalf, Heb. 7.25. Moreover, v. 26. he is holy, harmless, undefiled, se∣perate from sinners, and yet very tender and com∣passionate
towards sinners, being touched with the feeling of our Infirmities, and knows how to pity them which are tempted; he is mercifull and he is faithfull too in this Office which the Lord hath an∣ointed him unto. Having therefore such an High-Priest over the House of God, sinners have encou∣ragement to draw neer unto God, with full assu∣rance of acceptance through him, Hebr. 10.21, 22. 2. Christ was anointed to the Prophetical Office: Christ is that Prophet whom the Lord promised to raise up to his people like unto Moses, Deut. 18.15. but is far greater than Moses, who came down from Heaven to preach the Gospel of salvation to lost sinners; who revealed the counsels of the Fa∣ther, which were hid from ages and generations, and kept secret untill his time, from the foundati∣ons of the World; who discovered the purposes of Gods Love, and the promises of his Grace, and brought life and immortality to light by the Gospel. Christ is the great Prophet anointed by the Father to teach his people by his Word and Spirit, who opens the eyes of the understanding which naturally is dark and blinde, and leads his people into all truth, who of themselves would wander into errour, without whose teachings there can be no saving light, nor spiritual discerning and relish of Gospel Myste∣ries. 3. Christ was anointed unto the Kingly Office: Peter in his Sermon calls him Lord of all. God hath given him a Name above every Name; he hath ex∣alted him above all Principalities and Powers, and Might and Dominion, both in Heaven and Earth,
and hath put all things under his feet, and all pow∣er into his hand, and appointed him to be head over all unto his Church. He is the King of Saints, whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and whose Scepter is a Scepter of Righteousness; he hath given Laws to his people with great wis∣dom, and ruleth in their hearts with great power, and whosoever will not submit to his Sceptr to be ruled by his Laws, he will break them in pieces with his Ion Rod. Thus concerning Christs Vction to his Offices. 2. Peter speaks to them concerning Christs Life; that he went about doing good. His Life was holy, free from sin, he did no evil, no injury to any man, he was harmless, his whole employment was to do good. Never was there such a man living upon the face of the Earth, who never committed any sin in his life, neither in thought, word, or deed. Some indeed have said they had no sin, but they have lied; for no man liveth that sinneth not: but Christ was born without sin, and lived without sin; he was perfectly good and righteous, and he did good. His Life was exactly according to the Rule; he fulfilled the Law not only by his passive, but also by his active Obedience. 3. Peter speaks to them concerning Christs Mia∣cles, whereof they were witnesses: instance is given of his casting out Devils, likely he told them of more, of his calming the Winds and Sea with a
word, his feeding five thousand with five Loaves, his opening the eyes of them which were born blinde, his raising the dead that had been buried several dayes, and the like; which works were a testimony of his Divinity, and that he came from the Father. 4. Peter speaks to them concerning Christs Death. Him they slew and hanged upon a tree. Christ humbled himself not only to take upon him our Humane Nature, to be born of a mean Virgin, and live in a low condition, when he was Lord of all, and God equall with the Father, to take upon him the form of a servant; but he humbled himself further, to become obedient unto Death, even the death of the Cross, Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. It was a cursed, disgracefull, lingering and painfull death, which he endured, and however it was inflicted upon him by the hands of cruel, blood-thirsty men, yet it was according to the fore-appointment of God, for the satisfaction of Gods Justice, for the expiation of Mans sin; it was not only for an example of suf∣fering to men, but in the room and stead of sin∣ners, who otherwise must all have unavoidably perished; and for the ratification of the New Te∣stament and Covenant of Grace: So that the sal∣vation of Man from sin and Hell, and the Inheri∣tance of glory and happiness doth depend upon the Death of Christ which was the purchase hereof.
5. Peter speaketh to them concerning Christs Re∣surrection. Him hath God raised from the dead, and shewed openly. Though Christ dyed and was buried, yet the bands of death could not hold him, and the Holy One did not see corruption▪ his bo∣dy was not so long in the grave as to putfie, but within three dayes he arose again from the dead, and was seen of Mary Magdalen first, after of two Disciples as they went unto Immaus, after of Peter and all the Apostles, after of above five hundred Brethren at once. He was declared to be Man by his death, he was declared to be the Son of God with power, by the Spirit of holiness in him, which raised him from the dead; forty dayes he remained upon the Earth after his Resurrection, and then was caught up to the Throne of God in the pre∣sence of his Disciples, and there he that was dead is alive, and lives for evermore; whose Resurrecti∣on as it hath an influence upon the spiritual Re∣surrection of his people from sin, who when dead in sin are quickened by the same Spirit which raised him up: So it is the first fruits of the resurrection of his people from the grave, who in their order and Gods appointed time shall be awakened out of their long sleep of death, and come forth of the dust, and be caught up to meet him in the Air at his last appearance to Judge the World, which is the next thing Peter speaketh of Christ.
6. Peter speaketh to them concerning Gods or∣dination of Iesus Christ to be the Iudge of quick and dead. God hath appointed a day in which he will judge the World in Righteousness, and hath ordained Jesus Christ to be the Judge; who will so soon as the mystery is finished, and the Elect are gathered, come down from Heaven where now he is, with a great shout, and the sound of a Trumpet, and awaken all the dead, and sum∣mon the whole world to his barr, and render un∣to all according to their works; to them that have repented and believed, and by patient con∣tinuance in well-doing, have sought for glory and honour, and immortality, he will give eternal life; but to them which have been impenitent and hard-hearted, and disobedient to the Gospel, he will give indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, and sentence them to eternal Death. 7. Peter speaketh to them concerning Christs Mission of them to preach. He sent the Apostles to preach repentance and remission of sins in his Name; and he hath appointed the Office of the Ministry to continue to the end of the World, for the calling and conversion of those which be∣long to the Election of Grace, and the building up and perfecting the Saints which are called, un∣till they all come into the unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a per∣fect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fulness of Christ, Eph. 4.12, 13. Thus the Apo∣stle Peter preacheth Christ unto Cornelius, and them which were with him. SECT. IX. 4. AND lastly, Peter speaks to them concerning the Way of Salvation by Christ, vers. 43. To him gave all the Prophets witness, that through his Name whosoever believeth in him should receive remission of sins. There is no Name under Heaven whereby we can be saved, but the Name of Christ, Act. 4.11. and there is no salvation by Christ but by Faith. When the Jaylor with trembling enquired of Paul and Silas, What shall I do to be saved? they tell him, Believe in the Lord Iesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, Act. 16.30, 31. There are three Arguments which will evident∣ly prove, That all such as truely believe in Christ do receive remission of sins, and consequently are in a state of Salvation: The First may be drawn from Christs Satisfaction: The Second from Christs Intercession: The Third from the Promises of the New Testament. I. First from Christs Satisfaction. If Christ hath fully satisfied Gods Justice for the sins of men, and this satisfaction be accepted by the Father in the behalf of sinners; and this satisfaction be imputed unto all them that truely believe in Christ, as if they bad made it themselves: Then all those that truely believe in Christ, do receive remission
of sins; inasmuch as guilt being an obligation to punishment, and where satisfaction is made, this obligation is removed. (1.) But first Christ hath made satisfaction to Gods Justice for the sins of men; he only was qua∣lified to do it, and he hath actually done it. 1. Christ only was qualified to do it; no meer man could make it, because Gods Justice being in∣finite requireth an infinite satisfaction, and all Crea∣tures are finite: but Christ was more than a Crea∣ture, he was God and Man in one person. It was necessary that he should be a Creature, because otherwise he could not have suffered, the Deity being impassible; it was necessary he should be Man, because Gods Justice required, that the same Nature which did commit sin, the same Nature should suffer punishment for it, Gen. 2.17. In the day thou eatest thereof, Thou a Man shalt die. There∣fore Christ took not upon him the nature of An∣gels, but the seed of Abraham, Heb. 2.16. And it was necessary that he should be God; because other∣wise he could never have born up under, nor have got loose from that dreadfull punishment which was inflicted upon him: It would have sunk the whole Creation under its weight: Because other∣wise his Merits would not have been of infinite value, and fully satisfactory to Gods Justice: there∣fore he was God and Man in one person, and so duly qualified to make satisfaction. 2. Christ hath actually made satisfaction to Gods Justice for Mans sin: he hath born the punishment which their sins did deserve, 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own self bare our sins, that is the punishment of
our sins, in his own body on the tree, Isa. 53.5. He was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities, and the chastisment of our peace was upon him. And Ephes. 5.2. He hath given himself for us, an offering and sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savour; which leadeth to the second particular. (2.) This satisfaction which Christ hath made un∣to Gods Justice, is accepted in the behalf of sin∣ners: There might be sufficiency of value in Christs sufferings and sacrifice to make satisfaction for the sins of the whole world, and yet God might have required the satisfaction from the of∣fending party, and received the debt from none but sinners themselves that owed it: but God hath accepted Christs satisfaction, as is evident, 1. From Gods eternal Covenant with him, that if he would make his soul an offering for sin, he should see his seed, and should prosper in his work, Isa. 53.10.2. From his sealing and setting him apart for the office and work of Mediatour, Ioh. 6.27. Him hath God the Father sealed. 3. From his mission or sending him into the world for this very end, Ioh. 3.16. Gal. 4.5. 4. From his owning of him when he was sent, and that both by a voice from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased▪ and by his large effusion of the Spirit upon him, which did ap∣pear in his life so holy, his doctrine so pure, his miracles so powerfull. 5. From his raising him up from the dead on the third day, where he must have continued for ever, if having under∣taken to satisfie, he had not done it, and it had not been accepted. 6. From his receiving him
up into glory, and setting him at his right hand, and hearing his prayers in the behalf of sinners▪ All which Arguments do abundantly prove Gods acceptation of Christs satisfaction. (3.) The satisfaction is as really imputed unto true Believers, as if they had made it themselves. Forasmuch as Faith doth appropriate Christ and his Righteousness, and therefore Christ is called (speaking of Believers) the Lord our Righteousness, Ier. 23.6. And we are called (through the im∣putation of the merits of his death by faith) The Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. Christs Righteousness is made over to Believers by Faith as if it were their own. If then Christ hath fully satisfied Gods Justice for the sins of men; and this satisfaction is accepted by the Father in behalf of sinners, and imputed unto all true Believers, then all true Believers are absolved from the guilt of sin; and that not only upon the account of mercy, but justice too, which cannot require a double satis∣faction; therefore God is said, as he is just, to justifie them which believe, Rom. 3.28. II. The second Argument to prove, that all true Believers do receive remission of sins, may be drawn from Christs intercession. If Christ doth intercede for the remission of sins, and this intercession be prevalent with the Father, and all true Believers have an interest in this intercession, then all true Believers do receive remission of sins. 1. But first Christ doth intercede for the remission of sins, Heb. 7.25. Heb. 2.17. He intercedeth for re∣conciliation, therefore for remission of sins. 2. This Intercession is prevalent with the Father.
Whatever Christ prayed for on earth he obtained, Ioh. 11.42. Surely then his intercession in Heaven is prevalent, which might be made further evi∣dent from his neerness and interest in the Father, from the dear love of the Father unto him; and be∣cause his intercession for remission of sins, is for that which he hath purchased by his death, and what the Father hath purposed and promised, and is for his glory to give. 3. All true Believers have an interest in Christs Intercession: having by faith an▪ interest in Christs person, they have an interest in Christs interces∣sion. III. The third Argument to prove that all true Believers do receive remission of sins, may be drawn from the promise of remission of sins in the New Testament, Heb. 8.12. I will be merciful unto their unrighteousness, and their sins and niquities will I re∣member no more. Which New Testament is of full force through the death of Christ the Testator, Heb. 9.16, 17. And Believers have an interest in, and by faith do apply the promises to them∣selves; therefore true Believers do receive remis∣sion of sins. Thus concerning Peters Sermon to Cornelius, and them which were with him, and the words which he spake to them whereby they were saved.
SECT. X. 3. THE third thing is to shew, How Ministers must tell people words whereby they may be saved. Now this must be done 1. Sincerely. 2. Plainly. 3. Convincingly. 4. Boldly. 5. Compassionately. 6. Warmly. 7. Earnestly. 8. Frequently. 1. Ministers must preach the words of salvation Sincerely, and that both as to the matter, and as to the design. 1. As to the Matter, the Doctrine of salvation which they preach, must be sincere; in Doctrine they must shew uncorruptness, sincerity▪ sound speech, which cannot be condemned, Tit. 2.7, 8. The Apostle complains of many who corrupt the Word, 2 Cor. 2.17. The Word is corrupted when the Scripture is wrested, and the sense perverted, when errours and damnable opinions are broached and vented for truths, and mingled with some truths of the word, which will bring destruction and not salvation to them that receive them, 2 Pet. 3.16. Ministers must draw forth the pure waters of the Sanctuary out of the fountain of the Scripture, and the sincere milk of the Word out of the two breasts of the Old and New Testament, 1 Pet. 2.2. They must deal forth the wholesome food of sound doctrine, which is according to godliness, called words of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and words of faith whereby the re∣ceivers may be nourished, 1 Tim. 4.6. chap. 6.3. 2. As to the Design, Ministers must have a sincere design in preaching the word of salvation; like the Apostle Paul with his fellow-Ministers, 2 Cor. 2.17. But we are of sincerity as of God, in the sight of God speak we in Christ. They preached neither corrupt doctrine, neither had they corrupt designs, but were sincere in their preaching, as of God, as sent of God, as Embassadours of God, the great King of Heaven; as in the sight of God, who searched the heart, and could discern what their aims were unto whom they endeavoured to approve themselves; as in Christ, as in the room of Christ, as Christ preached when he was upon the earth; or as in Christ, as those which were ingrafted into Christ, and had an interest in Christ themselves, and therefore did sincerely endeavour the bringing of others to him. The chief design of Ministers in preaching, should be the glory of God, and the sal∣vation of them that hear them. 1. The glory of God above all should swey with them, not their own glory and esteem, nor of men sought we glory, 1 Thes. 2.6. They must sincerely endeavour the magnifying, not of their own name, but the name of God; and the promoting not of themselves, but of their Master in the esteem of men: If some kind of discourse would advance their Lords name and honour, though their own reputation should hereby be lessened amongst some, they must use it; and if on the contrary they could gain much honour to themselves by some kind of preaching wherein they might appear in great flourish of words, and
give delight to the fany by the ostentation of their wit and ingenuity; but their Masters were not like to be glorified, nor the souls of their hearers sound∣ly edified, they ought herein to deny themselves. 2. Ministers must design in their preaching, the sal∣vation of their hearers; they must not use the Word as a clok for covetousness, and design the gainng of filthy lucre to themselves; but the gaining of souls to Jesus Christ; they must not endeavour to make a gain of their hearers; a gain of their souls they ought to endeavour after, but not a gin of their estates, as the Pharisees, who made long prayers, that they might devour Widdows houses▪ they must not chifly seek any profit, or earthly emolument unto themselves, but the profit of their hearrs, that they might be saved. When the Apostle was crafty, as he tells the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 12.16. he was sincere; and when he used some kind of gule, it was to catch them from destruction, unto which they were hastening; it was in spreading the Gospel Net most cunningly to draw them out of that stream of sin in which they were swimming to∣wards the Ocean of Gods wrath. 2. Ministers must preach the words of salvation Plainly, not with wisdom of words, as 1 Cor. 1.17. not with excellency of speech, or of wisdom, or with enticing words of mans wisdom, chap. 2.4. but with plainness of speech, such as is most intelligible and edifying, such as is most likely to attain the end of preaching most effectually; some kind of wisdom of words doth both obscure and enervate
the Sermons that are stufft with it, and therefore should be forborn. Not that all wisdom of words, or humane wis∣dom is to be forborn: For, 1. It is lawfull for Ministers in preaching to make use of the most apt, proper and significant words: there are some words which are more ponderous and weighty, which carry a greater force and evidence, and perspicuity than others; which Ministers should make use of for the more effectual clearing and pressing their matter; and of all words those which we finde in the Scri∣pture are the most weighty, which having often∣times more significancy in the Original than in the Translation, therefore Ministers should be acquain∣ted with the Original tongues, that they may have the more full understanding of the meaning of God in his Word, themselves, and that they may the bet∣ter explain it to others. 2. It is lawfull for Ministers to use some kinde of Eloquence in their preaching. It was the com∣mendation which the Scripture gave of Apollos, that he was an eloquent man, Act. 13.24. Variety and fluency of expression in explaining and proving, in applying and pressing the truths of the Word, is of singular use. There is much Rhetorick and di∣vine Eloquence, especially in some parts of the Scri∣pture, which Ministers in preaching may make use of and imitate. 3. It is lawfull for Ministers to make use of Philosophy and humane Reason in preaching the Gospel; Logick is needfull for the regulating of thoughts, the methodizing of discourse, the distin∣guishing
between things that differ, the defining and explaining of things that are obscure, the or∣dering, deciding and determining of controversies: Ethicks, Physicks, especially Metaphysicks are very usefull unto a Minister, for the refining of his un∣derstanding, and enabling him to speak the more clearly and edifyingly to others, and to defend the truth against such as do oppose it. But there is a Wisdom of Words which may not be used by Ministers in preaching. 1. Ministers must not in preaching shew more wisdom in their Words than in their Matter; and study more for outward shew than for in∣ward substance; more that their Sermons be well worded, than that their doctrine be well proved; more that their Sentences may have a handsome close, than that their Arguments be conclusive: It ill becomes thin and weak sense to be cloathed with fine and neat speech: Ministers must take heed that their matter be not drowned and lost in the stream and abundance of words. Such whose wisdom and art doth shew it self in gathering a bun∣dle and heap of the finest words together, neglect∣ing substantiall matter, their wisdom is but folly, and pains to little purpose. Words may fill the ear; Things soak and sink into the soul to edification. 2. Ministers must not ordinarily in preaching make use of words of another language which the people do not understand; nor fill their Sermons with quotations and allegations out of Fathers, School-men, and other Authors, which doth but stun and amuze ordinary and the generality of hea∣rers, and savours mostly of ostentation, but tends
to little edification. Though the Apostle could speak with more tongues than any beside, yet in the Church he chooseth to speak five words in the known tongue to edifie, than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue, 1 Cor. 14.18, 19. Indeed Original words sometimes may be mentioned with their interpretation, as the tongues were to be used in the Church, 1 Cor. 14. and Authors may be quoted, when there is real need, so it be done rarely and soberly; but for Ministers to enterlard their Sermons all over with Greek and Latine, and sayings of men, they must needs leave out much of the Word of God which they might use, and it cannot be so profitable for the Hea∣rers. 3. Ministers must not use such words and speeches as gender strife, I mean the perverse disputings which Sceptical Philosophy will put them upon, whereby they may be spoyl'd, and deceive both themselves and others, through the errors and mi∣stakes, which hereby they may run into. 4. Ministers must not use in preaching too much neatness of speech, and humane Eloquence: The most excellent, and enticing words of mans wisdom the Apostle did forbear, 1 Cor. 2.4. It is not needfull for a Minister to read all Heathen Poets and Orators, that he may fill his Sermons with their fancies and rhetorical expressions; but he should chiefly fetch his Rhetorick from the Bible; Indeed Apollos was commended for his Elo∣quence, Act. 13.24. not humane Eloquence but divine. It is not said, he was mighty in other Learning, but mighty in the Scriptures; not
mighty in the writings of Heathens, but mighty in the writings of God; his Eloquence was drawn from the Word, which is most persuasive. The Lord doth not require that his Ministers should preach the Gospel neatly, but plainly; the former may make them esteemed as the better Scholars, but the latter wil make their hearers the better Christians: That way of preaching thy should use which is most intelligible and profitable, not that which is most learned and Scholastical, Melius est ut nos reprehendant Grammatici, quàm non intelli∣gant populi; saith one, that could speak in an elo∣quent strein. It is better that Grammarians should reprehend us, than that the people should not un∣derstand us: and he desired that since the vulgar could not ascend so high as to understand a more refined language, that learned men would stoop so low as to accommodate their speech to their ca∣pacities. Thus Ministers must preach the Gospel, not with wisdom of words, but with plainness of speech. There is a light in the Gospel, the purest and most glorious that ever shined; wisdom of words doth darken and obscure this light, it doth ully the truths which shine most when they are naked without such ornaments: It is like a bright Cloud between us and the Sun, which keeps off the greater light, like painting of a Diamond or a beautifull face. There is a power goth along with the Word preached to convert sinners. Heb. 4.12. The Word is compared to a sharp, two-edged Sword, piercing and separating between the joynts and the marrow, between sin and the soul,
which are more neer than marrow is to the bone; but wisdom of words, or humane Eloquence doth guild as it were the edge of the Sword, which takes away its sharpness; or is like to a rich Scab∣bard, which delights the eye, and pleaseth the fancy, but keeps the Sword from entring the bowels and wounding the Conscience: It is in plain preaching that the Sword is drawn forth naked, which makes the sinner slie or yield. Plain preaching is the most effectual means to pull down the strong holds of sin and Satan, and to draw men unto a closure with Jesus Christ. Humane wisdom usually puffeth up both them that use it, and those that hear it. Humane wisdom is apt to beget an humane faith, which standeth in the wis∣dom of men; plain preaching begetteth faith which standeth in the power of God. There is no such edification as in plain preaching: In plain preach∣ing, the bread of life and wholsom food of the Word is distributed; but humane wisdom is like hey and stubble, which is food for horses and not for men; so humane wisdom may please and best agree with natural and bruitish men, but true Christians cannot feed upon it; it is no more suitable to their spiritual appetite than hey and stubble is to their naturall. It is like Pictures in learnd books, which may delight children, a Scholar doth not regard the Pictures, but the writing; the word of God doth feed and edifie a gracious heart when it is preached plainly and homely; humane wisdom, or wisdom of words in preaching, doth take away much of the taste and relish, and doth hinder its vertue and operation. The Word is compared to milk, which must be sin∣cere,
to food which must be simple and uncom∣pounded, that it may nourish and strengthen the body: It is compared to Wine that must be un∣mixed that it may chear and refresh the spirits; wisdom of words is like water, or rather like some fulsome liquor mingled with the wine, which doth much invalidate and render it nauseous unto the Appetite of the New Creature. Ministers therefore must preach the word plainly, that they may do it edifyingly: they must not use wisdom of words, which will evacuate the Cross of Christ, and ren∣der their preaching ineffectual, and put a cloud between the light and the eye, especially of the ordinary hearers; much less may they use myste∣riousness of words, dark sayings, and high-lown notions, that shall puzzle the mindes of the wisest to guess at the meaning of: They must not in preaching make plain things difficult by their way of expressing them, as many do, but make more difficult things plain, they must preach plainly. I have been more large in this head, I shall be more brief in the rest. 3. Ministers must preach the words of Salvati∣on Convincingly. They should preach so as to con∣vince the Judgement of truth, and to convince the Conscience of sin, and therefore they should preach in the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.4. 1. Ministers should labour to speak so as to convince the Judgement of the truth which they preach. They must not only assert Truths, but prove them; they must hold forth the Word of
Faith with a clear evidencing light, and hold fast the Word in a strenuous defence of it a∣gainst opposers, and with sound doctrine they must not only exhort but also convince gainsay∣ers, Tit. 1.9. Ministers should make manifest the words of salvation which they preach, that they are the words of the God of truth, with whom dwells no errour or falshood: They should prove by undenyable Arguments that the Scriptures are of Divine Authority, and therefore as full of truth as the Sun is full of light; and then they should prove the doctrine which they preach by the Word, and that with such reason for the belief of it, that no reason may be left to contradict it. Ministers should be shining lights in the places where they live, dispersing abroad the bright beams of Gospel-truths with such power and conviction, as may be sufficient through the concurrence of the Spi∣rit to vanquish and dispell all those clouds of ignorance which the minds of men naturally are filled withall. 2. Ministers should preach so as to convince not only the Judgement of truth, but also so as to convince the Conscience of sin; and that they may do this, they must not rest in general dis∣courses of the nature of sin, but particularly apply themselves to their hearers, and reprove them homely and sharply for their particular sins: They must not sow pillows under the el∣bows of secure sinners, and deal gently, fearing to touch the soars of some, lest they lift up the heel against them; but with all faithfulness they
must tell all of their sins, and endeavour to awa∣ken them by discovery of their danger; their words must be like Nails and Goads which will prick unto the quick; they must lance and rip up the soars, that they may be healed; they must cry aloud and spare not; they must lift up their voice like a trumpet, and cause the people to know their iniquities; they must bend the bow, and shoot the arrows of bitter and sharp reproof into guilty Consciences; they must draw forth the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, and therewith lay about them in Gods Name, and as those which are in Gods room, and lash and wound sinners to the very heart, that have been so audacious as to break Gods Law▪ they should endeavour to make the sword enter into the Soul with such a force that sinners being convinced, judged, and condemned, may with trembling fall down, and in perplexity cry out, as those did whom Peter had convinced of their great sin in crucifying the Lord of glory, Act. 2. Men and brethren what shall we do? 4. Ministers must preach the words of salva∣tion Boldly: This the Apostle desires prayers for himself to the Lord that he might be enabled to do, Eph. 6.19, 20. And for me, that utte∣rance may be given unto me, that I may open my mouth boldly to make known the mystery of the Go∣spel; for which I am an Ambassadour in bonds, that therein I may speak boldly as I ought to speak.
Ministers should deliver their Message with all boldness and authority, as being the Ambassa∣dours of the King of glory; they should speak boldly without shame and without fear. 1. They should speak boldly without shame, as Paul, Rom: 1.16. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God unto salvation, unto every one that believeth; the preaching of the Gospel is accounted folly by some of great account in the World for wisdom; and the Preachers of the Gospel are accounted Fools, and despised: Some reproach them, others mock and deride them, especially when they preach in such plain language as is most easie for all to un∣derstand; but Ministers must preach boldly, notwithstanding all the scoffs of the ungodly and profane; and in a good sense they may glory in their shame; for indeed that which the wic∣ked do make the matter of scorn and shame, is matter of the greatest glory; it is the honour of Ministers to preach the Gospel of salvation, such an honour as the Lord hath not conferred upon the Angels (as hath been shewn) and there∣fore they should preach boldly without shame. 2. Ministers should preach boldly without fear, they must deliver the message they are entrusted withall by God, without fear of the face of men. 1 Thess. 2.2. We were bold in our God, to speak unto you the Gospel of God with much contention. Though the wicked contend with them, and oppose, though they persecute and do what they can to hinder them; though they command them to preach no more, and
would stop their mouths, and threaten impri∣sonment, banishment, death; yet being intrusted with the Gospel, they must preach the Gospel with all boldness: This was the practice of the Primitive Ministers when they were threatned for preaching, Act. 4.29. And now Lord, behold their threatnings, and grant unto thy servants that with all boldness they may speak thy Word; and this is the duty of all Ministers, if God open to them a door of opportunity to preach, they should open their mouths boldly to declare the mysteries of salvation, whatever danger they may incurr of sufferings hereby. Men may say, Wo be to you, if you do preach the Gospel; but when God saith, Wo be to you if you do not preach, they have reason to fear and obey God rather than Men. 5. Ministers must preach the words of salva∣tion Compassionately. The Apostle Paul writes to the Corinthians with many tears, 2 Cor. 2.4. and he preacheth to the Ephesians with many tears, Act. 20.19. O what tender bowels of compassion should Ministers have towards poor souls in preaching the Gospel of salvation to them! how should they pity sinners that lie wltring in their blood, that have no pity for themselves, that are cruel to their own Souls, that are wounding themselves, as being more distracted than the man we read of, who tore his own flesh, and cut himself with stones? Mark 5.5. How should they commiserate sin∣ners
that are wounding their Consciences by sin, not knowing what they do, and are posting on in the broad way unto destruction and eternal misery, not knowing whither they go, that are running against a rock, which will dash them to pieces, and ready to leap into flames, where they must burn for ever? Ministers should weep and bleed over such, and with the greatest ten∣derness tell them of their danger, and shew them the inevitable ruine which is before them, and beseech them to turn from their evil wayes, that iniquity may not be their ruine, and accept of Jesus Christ, by whom they may attain salva∣tion. Ministers should be ready to beseech sin∣ners upon their knees (if that would do) that they would not destroy themselves: O Turn ye, turn ye, why will you die? and be ready to lay their hands under their feet, (if that would move them) to put their feet into the narrow way of salvation. 6. Ministers must preach the words of sal∣vation Warmly; and that both with a warm love to the Souls they preach unto, and with a warm sense of what they preach upon their own spirits. 1. They must preach with a warm love to Souls, as the Apostle with other Ministers to the Thessalonians, 1 Thess. 2.8. So being affectionately desirous of you we were willing to have imparted unto you not the Gospel of God only, but also our own souls, because ye were dear unto us, Ministers
should preach the Gospel with such ardent af∣fection to Souls, and thirsting desires after their salvation, so as to be willing to pluck out their hearts, and give them to their hearers, if this would promote their salvation; they should be ready to spend themselves and be spent, and not think much to consume themselves with fervour of heart towards, and for the good of poor souls. 2. Ministers should preach with a warm sense of what they preach upon their own spirits, as those that have been under the impressions of the Word, and have experienced the powerful operations thereof unto their own salvation. Moreover, they should get their hearts affected more and more with the words which they preach, that they may preach the more feelingly; that they may speak as if they were in earnest, as those that believe and know those things to be true which they deliver unto others. Cold or lukewarm preaching usually makes little im∣pression upon the hearers; when the Word doth little affect the heart of the Minister, it doth sel∣dom affect the heart of the people. When Mi∣nisters preach Sermons as Scholars speak Orati∣ons, in which they have no concernment, only to shew their good language and ingenuity, they may possibly gain applause amongst some of a slight and trivial spirit, but they are not like to gain souls; the Word must come from the heart that is likely to reach the heart. Ministers must preach warmly if they would preach affectingly.
7. Ministers must preach the words of salva∣tion Earnestly. Ministers must be very earnest in their preaching with souls to endeavour after their salvation; they must use all the persuasive arguments and motives they can think of that they may prevail; tell them of the necessity hereof, of the manifold advantages, of the ho∣nour they shall attain hereby, and the unspeak∣able pleasures; tell them of the great evils they are under, and the greater evils they are expo∣sed unto whilest they are out of a sate of salva∣tion: And then they must urge arguments as fully, and press upon them as homely as they can; and use the greatest importunity with them, as if they were begging for their own lives, as if their own salvation and happiness were bound up with their hearers; they should take no denyal, if possibly a grant may be ob∣tained, they must call and cry, and pray, invite and wooe, and intreat that sinners would come to Christ, that they may be saved by him. 8. And lastly, Ministers must preach the words of salvation Frequently; they must lay hold on all opportunities to call sinners to Christ, they must be instant in season and out of season, 2 Tim. 4.2. on the Sabbath-day, on the Week∣day: In the Morning they should sow the seed of the Word, and the Evening they should not with-hold their hand, because they do not know which the Lord will prosper.
Thus you see how Ministers are to tell people Words whereby they may be saved. SECT. XI. 4. THE Fourth thing is to shew, Why Mi∣nisters must tell people Words whereby they may be saved. Reas. 1. Because they have a Commission to do it. Mark 16.15, 16. And he said unto them, Go ye into all the World, and preach the Gospel unto every Creature; He that believeth and is baptized, shall be saved; he that believeth not shall be damned. They are the words of our Saviour, who being the King and Head of the Church, had power to make Church-officers, and to give Commissions; he commissioneth his Apo∣stles in the first place to preach the Gospel of salvation, and in them all his other succeeding Ministers unto the end of the World, with whom he promiseth to be, so long as the Sun should endure, Math. 28.20. Ministers they are Christs Ambassadours, 2 Cor. 5.20. and they have a Commission from Heaven to declare the glad tydings of salvation, to give notice to the World out of the Word, of the Saviour which God hath provided for fallen, lost sinners, and the way of salvation by him; to make known the Covenant of grace which the Lord hath made with men through his Son, and the ex∣ceeding great and precious promises of pardon, and grace, and salvation; all which promises
are yea and Amen in Christ, who hath purchased with his blood whatever is promised in the Co∣venant. Ministers have a Commission to preach the Gospel, and they may do it authoritative∣ly, and they ought to do it, it being their du∣ty, and the great work they have to do in the World. Reas. 2. Because the Lord hath qualified them for this work, not only by bringing them into a state of salvation, but also by pouring forth his Spirit more plentifully upon them, and bestowing ministerial gifts upon them, utterance in preaching, prayer, &c. for this end, that they might shew men the way of salvation. Reas. 3. Because they must give an account of the souls which are committed to their charge, and wo be to them if they do not preach the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.16. Ministers that neglect to shew men the way of salvation will have a fearfull ac∣count to give, they draw upon themselves the guilt of the blood of Souls. They are the Lords Watchmen, and if they do not blow the Trum∣pet, and tell sinners of their sin and danger, and how they may be saved by Jesus Christ, sinners in∣deed will dye in their sins, but their blood will the Lord require at the Watchmans hands, Ezek. 33.8. Knowing therefore the terrour of the Lord, we perswade men, saith the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.10. knowing the terrour of the Lord, not only in re∣spect of the people which we preach unto, how terrible the Lord will be unto them at the last day, if they be found under the guilt of sin; but also knowing the terrour of the Lord in respect of our selves, how terrible the Lord will be unto us,
f we be found unfaithfull, we perswade men to en∣deavour their salvation, and to flee from the dread∣full wrath which is to come. Reas. 4. Because by telling people words where∣by they may be saved, Ministers may be instru∣mental not only to save themselves, but also to save them that hear them. God is most glori∣fied in the salvation of Souls, and it is the greatest glory of Ministers to be made instrumen∣tal herein; it is better to be the Father of one Soul, than to be Heir to the largest Revenues upon the Earth: But if they be instrumental to turn many to Righteousness, they shall receive a Crown of glory which fadeth not away, at the appearance of the great Shepheard, 1 Pet. 5.4. they shall shine not only as the brightness of the Firmament, but also like Starrs for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3. SECT. XII. Vse 1. ARE Ministers to tell People Words whereby they may be saved? Hence learn what a Priviledge such People enjoy, that have liberty to hear such Ministers as are faithfull in declaring the glad tydings of salvation. We read of some temporal blessings which render a people subordinately happy, Psal. 144.12, 13, 14, 15. when their Sons spring and grow up like pleasant Plants in their Garden; when their Daughters are like the polished Corner-stones of a Palace; when their Garners are full and reple∣nished with all manner of store; when their Sheep
increase in their Fields by thousands and ten thousands; when their Oxen are strong to la∣bour, when there is a hedge about their sub∣stance without any breaches; when there is no complaining in the streets through wrong and in∣jury; happy are the people saith the Psalmist that are in such a case; but far more happy are the people that enjoy spiritual priviledges, that hear the joyfull sound of the Gospel, that have Mini∣sters to shew them how they may be saved from eternal death and wrath which they have deserved, and by sin are exposed unto. Moreover, you may here learn the reason why so many people, especially those who most seri∣ously and earnestly desire and endeavour their sal∣vation, choose to hear Ministers preach rather than others; because they are commissioned by the Lord to preach the Word of salvation, and their Ministry is most likely to be effectual: Others may preach without a Commission the same words and do no good, for want of Gods blessing; It is not the bare speaking the words of salvation that will bring salvation, but the re∣velation of Gods arm and operation of his Spi∣rit with the Ministry of the Word: As when our Saviour raised Lazarus from the dead, he cryed with a loud voice, Lazarus come forth, and he that was dead received life, and came forth, Ioh. 11.43, 44. Others could have spoken the same words as our Saviour, and cryed over the grave with as loud a voice, Lazarus come forth, but with no effect; the dead man would have re∣mained still in the state of the dead, whatever any man could have spoken or done; but when
our Saviour spake the words, the dead man was quickened; there went forth a vertue and effica∣cy, a divine power and spirit with our Saviours words which raised him from the dead; so un∣commissioned persons may entrench upon the work of the Ministry, and preach the Gospel, speak words of salvation, and cry to sinners to leave their sins, to arise from their spiritual death, to come forth from their graves, they may exhort them to repent and believe, that they may be sa∣ved, and yet none of their words be likely to take impression, and effect a saving change in the heart, because being out of Gods way they can∣not expect Gods blessing; but Ministers are qua∣lified and commissioned for the work, and through Gods blessing there is a life and power goeth along with their preaching, which maketh it effectual for salvation: no wonder then if such as are led by the Spirit do choose to hear Ministers preach (re∣fusing others) that they may be safely guided by them in the way of life and salvation. SECT. XIII. Vse 2. FOR Reproof 1. Of Ministers. 2. Of People. (1.) Are Ministers to tell people words where∣by they may be saved? this then reproves such Mi∣nisters, 1. As do not preach at all: 2. As do not preach soul-saving Truths: 3. As do not preach in such a Way as is likely to do good. But my business be∣ing chiefly to speak unto People, I shall pass by this Use.
(2.) People are here to be reproved, unto whom the Lord sends faithfull Ministers to tell them such words whereby they may be saved. 1. It reproves such as persecute such Ministers; that are of such a spirit as the wicked Iewes of old spoken of, 1 Thess. 2.15, 16. Who both killed the Lord Iesus and their own Prophets, and persecu∣ted us; and they please not God, and are contrary unto all men; forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles, that they may be saved, to fill up their sin alway, for wrath is come upon them to the uttermost. Some there are that persecute Ministers with the tongue, by reproaching of them, others persecute Ministers with the hand by imprisoning of them, and many other wayes afflicting of them, seeking the extir∣pation of them, as persons not fit to live upon the face of the earth; thus ungratefully they endea∣vour the ruine of them that desire and seek their salvation, and foolishly endeavour to blow out the light which would shew them the way to Heaven. 2. It reproves such, who if they do not persecute Ministers, yet hate them, bear a secret spight and enmity in their hearts against them; and the reason is because they testifie that their works are evil, upon which account our Saviour was hated, Ioh. 7.7. they hate them because they reprove them for their sins, and disturb their Consciences sometimes, by sounding peals of Judgement in their ears, that they cannot sin with that freedom and security as they desire: Poor souls, how will they endure the pains of Hell themselves, that cannot endure the sore-thoughts of them, and hate them which bring such sad thoughts into their mindes, though it be in or∣der to their escape? Would any of you hate a neigh∣bour
that should cry aloud in the dead of the night, Fire, fire, and bounce at your doors, and awaken you out of your sleep, to warn you of a Fire draw∣ing neer to your habitation, which if not prevented would burn house and goods and persons together? And what do Ministers more than cry Fire, fire, and tell you of your near approach to everlasting burn∣ings, in which without some speedy course taken for prevention, will certainly seize upon you, and con∣sume you everlastingly? And have any reason to be troubled and offended, and hate Ministers for awa∣kening them upon such an account as this, when their souls lie at stake, and are in such danger? A Physician of the body is not hated, that tells his Pa∣tient that his disease is dangerous, which if let alone without taking such a remedy will certainly be his death: And have any reason to hate Ministers who are Physicians of the Soul, because they tell men of the disease of sin, which if not cured by the blood of Christ will certainly and may suddenly bring eter∣nal death? 3. It reproves such, who if they do not so deeply hate Ministers, yet will not be perswaded to hear them; such as are so drencht in the World, and so over head and ears in worldly business, that they minde nothing else. If any could tell them of a good bar∣gain, or some notable way of thriving in their Estates, such a one they would visit and hear, and O how would they relish such discourses! But though Ministers give notice of the best bargain that ever was made, and bring tydings of the most nota∣ble way of thriving, namely of the way of thriving in spiritual and heavenly riches, and shew men how they may gain pardon, and peace, and the favour of
God, and the graces of the Spirit, and escape future misery, and attain salvation and everlasting happi∣ness; yet like Gallio they minde none of these things, they will not step over the threshold to hear Mini∣sters preach the Gospel of salvation; and how shall they escape who neglect so great salvation? Heb. 2.3. 4. It reproves such, who if they do hear Ministers, yet do not understand them; that are so dull of hear∣ing, that they know not what Ministers say, nor whereof they affirm; that gather about a Minister as beasts about a Man that sounds a Trumpet, and stare upon him, but know not what the meaning of the sound is; so they hear Ministers, and look and stare upon them, some strange things are brought to their ears, which they know not the meaning of, and are like words of another language to them, because their eyes are closed, and they want spiritual sense and di∣scerning; and a great reason is, because they do not desire, and will not take pains to get an understand∣ing in these things, by beginning first with the Prin∣ciples of Religion in the Catechisme, and begging earnestly for the teachings of the Spirit, and readiness to do according to what they already know. 5. It reproves such, who if they have some notional knowledge of the Doctrine of salvation preached by Ministers, yet they do not believe the Doctrine: their words seem to them like idle tales, or some cunningly devised Fable; they do not receive it as the Word of Truth, as the Word of God, which effectually work∣eth in them that believe, 1 Thess. 2.3. they feel no effectual operation of the Word in the change of their hearts, and the change of their lives; they that were filthy are filthy still; and they that were unjust are unjust still; and they that were Drunkards, and
Swearers, and the like, go on still in their sinful course, whatever notion they have of sin, and whatever di∣scovery of their danger, and Saviour, and way of sal∣vation by him; which is an evidence that they do not believe; and this unbelief is the great God-pro∣voking and Soul-damning sin; such make God a ly∣ar, 1 Ioh. 5.10. but they will find him to be true to their cost and pain. 6. It reproves such, who if they have some notional knowledge, and historical Faith, yet do not relish the Words of salvation which are preached by Ministers; 1. Those that do not relish the things, who make no account of salvation, as if there were no desireable∣ness therein: 2. Those that if they desire salvation from Hell-torments and future misery, yet they do not relish the terms, they do not like the Lords Yoak, they will not bear his Cross, they will not be perswaded to deny themselves, to mortifie the deeds of the body; they could like to be saved from Hell, but they do not like to be saved from sin; they could like to have Christ to be their High-Priest and Advo∣cate, but they will not have him to be their King and Lord, and will not have him to reign over them: To part with all sin, and to be universally holy, to lay down Estate, Liberty, Life it self, at the Lords feer, and be resolved to suffer the loss of all, if they stand in competition with Christ; are such hard sayings that they cannot bear: But how hard will it be for them to bear the loss of Heaven and happiness, and endure the dreadfull, eternal wrath of God in Hell, as they shall certainly do, who will not accept of sal∣vation upon the terms of the Gospel.
SECT. XIV. Vse 3. ARE Ministers to tell People Words whereby they may be saved? I shall then endeavour to put in practice this duty of Mi∣nisters, in telling you words whereby you may be saved. In order to your salvation, I shall speak, 1. Some Words to try you whether you be in a state of Salvation. 2. Some Words to move you to endeavour after your Salvation. 3. Some Words to guide you in the way to attain Salvation. 1. The first words shall be to try you, whether you be in a state of Salvation; and here I must put you upon the tryall of your selves, wherein I may give you some help; take the Exhortation of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the Faith, prove your own selves. Examine your selves by the Rule of the Word: And because these Words are chiefly intended in order to the sal∣vation of such as have not yet attained it; to pre∣pare them for the following Motives and Directi∣ons, which, if they mistook themselves to have al∣ready attained to a state of salvation, would likely
do them no good: Therefore I shall briefly out of the Word of God give Some Characters of such as are not in a state of Salvation. 1. Ignorant persons are not in a state of salvation. See this Isa. 27.11. It is a people of no understanding, therefore he that made them will not have mercy on them, and he that formed them will shew them no fa∣vour: Those that are grosly ignorant of the Fun∣damental Truths of Religion, concerning God and Christ, the lost estate of Man since the fall, the way of Salvation, Repentance, Faith, the Resurrection from the dead, the last Judgement, and the future Rewards and Punishments in Heaven and Hell, and the like Principles of Religion, which are necessary to be known in order to salvation, they cannot for the present be in a state of Salvation; the meanest understanding is capable of knowing these things by the teachings of the Word and Spirit, therefore such as do neglect the means of Instruction, and do not search the Word, and cry to God for it, but nuzzle up themselves in an affected ignorance in these things, are inexcusable in their fault, and will bring unavoidable destruction upon themselves, Hos. 4.6. My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge. 2. Negligent persons are not in a state of salvation, I mean such as neglect their salvation. Heb. 2.3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation? Such as do not value and prize this great salvation purchased by Christ, and published in the Gospel; such as never were made sensible of their need here∣of; such as never had any great desires after it;
such as never took any pains in the use of means to obtain it; all which are evidences of their neglect, they cannot escape the dreadfull punishment of Hell, which is prepared for such persons. Such as are diligent to make provision for their Bodies, but neglect the salvation of their souls; if they persevere in this negligence they must needs miss of salvation. 3. Impenitent persons are not in a state of salvati∣on. Luk. 13.3. Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise pe∣rish. All are guilty of sin original, and actual, and have matter for repentance; such as have an obdurate and impenitent heart, which never was broken, and melted, and humbled; which never was af∣fected with true evangelical sorrow for sin; but on the contrary, can commit sin with delight, rolling it as a sweet morsel under their tongue, which they will not part withall, they must needs perish everlastingly, if they should die in this estate; the word is express, that iniquity will be the ruine of the impenitent, Ezek. 18 30. 4. Vnregenerate persons are not in a state of sal∣vation. Ioh. 3.3. Except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Such as never had a gracious change wrought in their hearts, that are asleep in sin, and never were awakened; as are dead in sin, and never were quickened; such as have old natures and old hearts, and never were renewed; that never put off as concerning their former con∣versation the old man which is corrupt, according to deceitfull usts, and put on the new man, which is created in righteousness and true holiness, Eph. 4.22, 24. they are uncapable whilest such, of this salvation, there is no entrance for them into the Kingdom of Heaven.
5. Christless persons are not in a state of salva∣tion, 2 Cor. 13.5. Know ye not your own selves, that Iesus Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates. Such as have not Christ, and are not themselves in Christ, they are for the present in a state of Re∣probation; It is Christ only can save; those that are without Christ, that are not united to him by Faith and the Spirit, that are Unbelievers without Faith, and carnal without the Spirit, they cannot, whilest such, be saved. 6. Vnsanctified persons are not in a state of sal∣vation. Heb. 12.14. Without holiness none shall see God. Such as are unholy, such as live after the flesh shall die, none but those that through the Spirit do mortifie the deeds of the body shall live, Rom. 8.13. 7. And in a word, Disobedient persons are not in a state of salvation. Heb. 5.9. He became the au∣thor of Eternal Salvation to all them that obey him, to none else; and Eph. 5.6. The wrath of God cometh upon the Children of disobedience. Such as walk in a course of disobedience, as live and al∣low themselves in the practice of known sins, what∣ever they be, they are children of wrath because children of disobedience. The Scriptures are so plain, that I need without many words of mine, only lay them before you, as a Glass wherein you may discern your spiritual state. Try your selves by these places, these Texts will reach all that are not in a state of salvation.
SECT. XV. II. THE second words shall be to move you to en∣deavour after your Salvation. The Motives to stir up you to endeavour your salvation may be drawn, 1. From the consideration of your selves, Whom you should endeavour the salvation of. 2. From the consideration of the salvation which you should endeavour to obtain. 3. From the consideration of the Damnation of all such as do not obtain salvation. Motive 1. From the consideration of your selves, whom you should endeavour the salvation of: It is the salvation of your selves, which I would press you unto; It was the exhortation of the Apostle, Phil. 2.12. Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling, and this is my exhortation of you this day, Labour after your own salvation: If I were to perswade you to do some great kindness for another, were it a difficult thing and like to cost you much labour and trouble, I should not likely prevail; but when I am perswading you to do a kindness for your selves, and the greatest kindness in the World, even to endeavour after the salvation of your selves; me∣thinks the natural Love which you bear to your selves should induce you to hearken and do what∣ever is requisite in order hereunto, though it can∣not be done without difficulty and trouble. How far will carnal self-love carry carnal men? what
difficulties will they go thorow? what expences of time and pains and strength will they be at? how will some rise up early and sit up late, deny themselves food and rest and many comforts of this ? how will others compss Sea and Land and hazzard life it self, and all to get an estate in the wod for themselves? and should not spiritual , which is the only reall self-love, carry y now difficulties? should you think much of exnding time and pains that you may get salvation for your selves? carnal self-love will bring destruction and misery upon such as are swayed by it, and in the issue will prove self hatred; as you really love your selves, as you would escape the most dreadful mi∣sery, and obtain the chiefest happiness for your selves, labour after salvation for your selves. Your self, your Persons do consist of two parts, namely, Soul and Body; it is the salvation of both, which I exhort you unto. 1. Consider, it is the salvation of your Souls which I would have you endeavour after, the sal∣vation of your precious souls; your souls are more precious than your bodies, and they are more pre∣cious than the whole world. 1. Your souls are more precious than your bo∣dies, they are by far your more excellent part: the original of your soul is more immediately from God: he formeth the spirit of man within him, Zach. 12.1. they are beams, they are streams that issue forth immediately from God; moreover they carry more of the impress and image of God upon them as they are invisible, spiritual, rational, free, im∣mortal; they have also more high and excellent operations than the body is capable of, as of the
understanding, conscience, memory, will, affecti∣ons; and I may add that if there be any lustre upon the body, it doth receive it from the soul, when the soul is gone, the beauty is gone; whatever mo∣tion or use there is in the body, it doth depend on the soul; when the soul is departed, the body can neither hear, nor speak, nor see, nor walk, nor do any business; the body is a rotten stinking carkass without the soul; and whilest the soul doth abide in it, the body is the inferiour part, the body is but the Cabinet, the soul is the Jewel; the body is but the house of clay, the soul is the living inha∣bitant; the body is as it were the beast (as one saith Corpus homini jumentum) which the soul doth make use of to carry it from one place to another; the body is the servant, it is the soul that rules, O labour then after the salvation of your souls, which are your most excellent part; what care do some take to preserve their bodies? much more reason have you to endeavour the salvation of your souls: when London's Fire was burning the houses, those who could not save all their goods, took care to save those which were the most precious, especially their money and jewells; O whatever become of your bodies here, whatever sickness or hardship they be exposed unto, labour to save your jewels, your precious souls; the Cabinet will be spoilt, the clay and mudd-wall will be broken down, and the soul will survive the body; O take heed that when your souls come forth of their houses of clay, that they be not cast into the deep and dark prison of Hell. 2. Your souls are more precious than the whoe world; our Saviour esteem'd them so, and he best knew the worth of souls, who knew the makng
of them, and made purchase of so many lost souls, see Matth. 16.26. What is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? Suppose that you had your hearts-desire in the world, that your baggs should throng in your Coffers, till there were no more room; your gold and silver should encrease without number; sup∣pose you had great possessions abroad, large revenues, stately houses, fruitful gardens and orchards, plea∣sant groves and walks, spacious fields and mea∣dows, which as the Poet saith, would weary the wings of a Kite to fly over in a day, suppose that you had sweet and beautiful wives at home, like loving Hindes and pleasant Roes unto you, like fruitful Vines about your houses, that you had towardly and hopeful Children like Olive-plants round about your Tables; that you had most kind and faithfull friends of most pleasant conversation; that you had servans, horses, chariots, coaches, doggs, hawks, and all sorts of serviceable and delightful creatures, the best and in the greatest number at your commands to attend your pleasure: suppose you were cloathed with purple, wrapped in fine linnen, adorned with gold and silver, and preti∣ous stones, and had the most rich and glorious Attire that the greatest cost and art could make for you: suppose that your food were most delicious, that Aire, Earth, and the Sea were ransack'd to pro∣vide dainties for your Table; that your courses were served up with the most rich and generous Wine, the most sweet and harmonious musick: suppose that you were laden with titles of honour, and had all the Crowns and Scepters of the earth laid
at your feet, and that the whole world had you in the highest esteem, and were in willing subjection unto you; yet what would it profit you to gain all these things, or any thing else that the heart of man could desire in the world, and lose your souls, which are a thousand fold more pretious: the gain of these things are but for the body, and but for a while; whereas the loss of the soul is for ever; and when the soul is lost, all is lost; when the soul leaveth the body, a period is put to all earthly enjoyments; and the more you have of these things, the more grievous will it be to part with them; Think with your selves that you must dye certainly, and may dye suddenly, and then, if not before, you will ac∣knowledge the worlds vanity and the preciousness of your souls, which are of longer duration than the age of ten thousand worlds put together, and what is the gain of the world which is so transitory and temporal, in comparison with the loss of the soul which is immortal, and whose loss is irrepaira∣ble: a loss in the estate may be recovered, Riches may fly away upon the wing, and sometimes return upon the wing again, as in the case of Iob; but the loss of the soul can never be recovered; when once the soul hath taken wing and is fled into the lower regions, it will never find wings to return again to its former estate: O therefore whatever you lose, take heed you do not lose your souls, your souls are very precious, seek after their salvation. 2. It is the salvation also of your Bodies which I would have you endeavour after: I do not mean the salvation of your bodies from sufferings, which Reli∣gion doth sometimes call you unto; nor a salvation of your bodies from sickness and temporal death,
which Religion doth not exempt any from; but the salvation of your bodies from perpetual death and pain of Hell; you may pamper your flesh for a while on Earth, which may make it a more fit bait for the Worms in the grave, and your bodies after death may be at rest, and take a sweet sleep for many years in the dust; but there is a morning approach∣ing after the long night of death and many hours of darkness, in which the graves will be opened and the dead will be awakened, and then your bo∣dies will come forth of the dust; and they will be adjudged by Christ unto most horrid and endless tor∣ments in Hell, to burn for ever in unquencheable Fire, if you be found under the guilt of sin: O there∣fore labour after the salvation of your Bodies; when your bodies now are sick, you endeavour to get them cured, when they are full of pain, you use means to get the pain removed; and you will fly as fast and as far as you can from natural Death, and you will do much to lengthen out and strengthen the thred of your life, though do what you can, it will in time be cut asunder, and death which hath you up∣on the chase will overtake and overcome you what∣ever resistance be made; O labour to get deliverance from the pains of body which are prepared in Hell for the damned: Fly, O Fly from eternal Death and the strokes of Gods wrath which will come upon the bodies of the wicked hereafter; if you would not have those faces scorched, those eyes and tongues and hands rosted, and that flesh broiled and fearfully tormented in the flames of Hell fire, labour after salvation. As you love then your selves, your souls and bodies, seek after your salvation.
SECT. XVI. Motive 2. FRom the consideration of the Salvation which you should endeavour to obtain; and here I shall set before you some properties of this salvation to move you the more effectually to seek after it. 1. It is a great Salvation. 2. It is a rare Salvation. 3. It is a necessary Salvation. 4. It is a possible Salvation. 5. It is a neer Salvation. 6. It is an evident Salvation. 7. It is a free Salvation. 8. It is a sure Salvation. 1. It is a great Salvation, and that both in regard of the thing it self, and in regard of the causes of it. (1.) It is great in regard of the thing it self. As in Motion, so in Salvation there is the terminus à quo, and the terminus ad quem, the term from which, and the term to which; that which people are in Sal∣vation delivered from, and that which in Salvation they attain unto, both which are exceeding great. 1. That which people in Salvation are delivered from. There are six great evils which those that are saved are delivered from. 1. From sin, the greatest evil of all, from the guilt of sin, Eph. 1.7. and the power, the reigning power of sin, Rom. 6 14. 2. From Sathan the greatest enemy of
all, from his power and tyranny, Col. 1.13. 2 Tim. 2.26. 3. From the Law, the evil which it occasi∣oneth, namely, the provoking to concupiscence and disobedience, Rom. 7.5, 6. and the evil which it de∣nounceth, namely Gods curse, Gal. 3.10, 13. 4. From the world, not in regard of their place, but in regard of their course, Gal. 1.4. Ioh. 15.19. Ioh. 17.16. 5. From Death, the sting of death, and the fear of death, at least the grounds of fear, Heb. 2.14, 15. 6. From wrath, the wrath of God which is to come, 1 Thes. 1.10. 2. This Salvation is great in regard of that which in Salvation people do attain unto. All the priviledges of the Gospel are wrapt up and included in the word Salvation. Election is the foundation of it; Effectual calling is the begining of it, Justi∣fication, Adoption and Sanctification are contained in it, and Glorification is the consummation of it. This Salvation then is great in regard of the thing it self. (2.) This Salvation is great in regard of the causes of it. 1. Efficient. 2. Meritorious. 3. Instrumental. 4. Finall. 1. This Salvation is a great Salvation in regard of the efficient cause, and that is God the Father: Sal∣vation is ascribed to him as the author, Tit. 3.5. According to his mercy he saved us. God is the cause of our Salvation, 1. as he hath chosen us unto Salvation, Eph. 1.4. As he hath chosen us in him be∣fore the foundation of the world: which Election be∣ing of Free grace, we are said to be saved by Grace, Eph. 2 5. 2. As he hath sent his only begotten Son into the world, to purchase Salvation for us,
Joh. 3.16. God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. Gal. 4.4, 5. When the fulness of the time was come God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, made under the Law, to redeem them which were under the Law, that we might receive the Ado∣ption of Sons. 3. As he revealeth this Salvation unto us by the Preaching of the Gospel, for which end he qualifyeth and sends his Ministers upon this Embas∣sage to make known the glad tydings of Salvation. 4. As he conferrs Salvation actually upon us in our effectual calling, Justification, Adoption, Sanctifica∣tion and Glorification, all these are from God. Now that must needs be a great Salvation which is effe∣cted by the great God, especially if we consider that it is the greatest and most glorious of all his works in the world, and unto which all his other works have some kind of tendency. 2. This Salvation is a great Salvation in regard of the meritorious cause, and that is the Lord Jesus Christ, the excellency and greatness of whose na∣ture, office and sufferings do demonstrate the great∣ness of this Salvation which was purchased by him. The sufferings of Christ were most properly the me∣ritorious cause of mans salvation, and they were the greatest sufferings that ever were endured, inso∣much as 1. They were the sufferings of the greatest person; as man he was the head of the creation in regard of dignity, he was a greater King than So∣lomon, Matth. 12.42. a greater Prophet than Moses, Heb. 3.3. a greater Priest than Aaron, even a Priest after the order of Melchisedec, Heb. 7. Moreover he was God as well as man, God manifested in the flesh, 1 Tim. 3.16. and though the Godhead could
not properly suffer, yet through its union in the same prson to the Manhood, it put an efficacy in his suffering, and strengthened the humane nature to undergo greater sufferings as to the value of them in that short space of time, than all the Angels and Men in the world (had their strength been united toge∣ther in one person) could have endured, if the greatest extremity of misery had been layd upon such a one unto all eternity: For 2. The sufferings of Christ were equivalent unto eternal death, and he torments of the damned in Hell, yea they were far exceeding, as is evident, because Gods infinite Justice is hereby fully satisfied, and there is sufficiency of merit in them for the redemption of the whole world not only of Believers, but also of Unbelievers, not only of Men but of Devils too: Christs sufferings were of infinite value, not in regard of the sufferings, but in regard of the Divine nature so closely united unto the Hu∣mane nature: Therefore the salvation purchased by these sufferings must needs be a great salva∣tion. 3. This salvation is a great salvation in regard of the Instrumental Cause, and that is Faith; faith is a grace of great worth and excellency, insomuch as it doth not spring from any root or power of na∣ture, but is wrought by the power of God, and requireth such exceeding great power in the effect∣ing of it; we read of the exceeding greatness of Gods power towards them that believe according to the working of his mighty power, Eph. 1.19. which shews that the salvation is great which is ef∣fected by this grace of Faith. 4. This salvation is a great salvation in regard of the Final Cause, and that is the manifestation of
Gods glory: 1. The glory of his Wisdom in con∣triving such a way for Mans salvation, which no created understanding could have thoght of: 2. The glory of his Justice which is as fully satisfied through Christs sufferings, as if all Believers had been eter∣nally punished: 3. And chiefly the glory of his free grace and mercy, which is set forth and magnified so eminently in all the degrees of mans salvation, that nothing may be ascribed unto Man, but all un∣to God alone. Thus you see, that this salvation is a great salva∣tion in regard of the Thing it self, and in regard of the Causes of it. It is so great salvation as it hath no comparison, and is beyond expression, therefore labour to attain tis salvation; some endeavour to get a great Estate, others to get great Friends, others to get great honour and repute in the world, do you labour to obtain this great salvation which doth exceed all in greatness, it is a high and noble design, and is worthy your uttermost care and diligence in seeking after it; other things are but small things, meer toyes and trifles in comparison; nothing in the world hath the least degree of worth, compared with this so great slvation. I shall be more brief in speaking of the other properties of this salva∣tion. II. This salvation is a Rare Salvation: I mean, that few do obtain it; Many are called, few are chosen, Matth. 20.16. Many are damned, few are saved: There are many troops of sinners that are posting in the broad way of destruction, it is but a thin scattered company that are pressing forward in
the narrow way of life and salvation; this is evi∣dent from the Answer of our Saviour upon the Question propounded unto him, Luk. 13.23, 24. Then said one unto him, Lord are there few that he saved? And he said unto them, Strive to enter in at the strait gate, for many I say unto you will seek to enter in, and shall not be able. In which words he doth in effct say, that Few, very Few should be saved, for he tells them plainly, that the gate of sal∣vation is a strait gate, and many cannot pass tho∣row a strait gate; and although many should seek to enter in at this gate, yet they should not be able; and if many that seek to enter in shall not be able, then it follows, that none of those which do not seek to enter in shall be able: Hence then we may gather a strong argument to prove, that very few shall be saved; If the most of men and women in the world do not seek salvation at all, and they can∣not possibly attain it, and many that seek salvation shall never finde it, then there are but few that shall be saved; but the most in the world do not seek salvation at all, to say nothing of the Heathen world which is by many degrees the far greater part of the world, who sit in darkness, and from whom the Gospel of salvation is hid, and therefore are expresly said to be lost, 2 Cor. 4.3. Even in the Christian world where the light of the Gospel doth shine, the most of men and women, that bear the name of Christians, are ignorant, or profane, or only civil and morall, and live in the total neglect of the salva∣tion of the Gospel, and such cannot possibly attain salvation that do not at all seek after it: And of them that make some profession of Religion, and do some∣thing in order to salvation, many shall not be able
to attain it; our Saviour saith, that many shall seek to enter in and shall not be able, because they do not seek in a right manner, because they do not seek salvation chiefly; they seek the satisfaction of their lusts, before the salvation of their souls; because they do not seek it diligently, they are careless and for∣mal in the use of the means of salvation; they seek, but they do not strive to enter in at the strait gate; they do not press towards the mark for the prize of the high calling, and therefore they fall short and miss of it; there are but few that strive to enter in at the strait gate, that strive as wrestlers in wrestling, or racers in running, or warriours in fighting, as the word  doth signifie; few that seek their salvation above all other things, and with all their heart and might, few that are resolved for salvation whatever it cost them, whatever they do, or suffer for it, unto which resolution and endeavour all must come, or else they cannot be saved, and these being so few, certainly there are but few that shall be sa∣ved. More plainly our Saviour speaks to the same purpose, Math. 7.13, 14. Enter ye in at the strait gate, for wide is the gate and broad is the way that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat; because strait is the gate and narrow the way which leadeth unto life, and few there be that finde it. The gate and way of sin which leads to death and Hell, are wide and broad, and the most in the world are passing thorow this gate, and walking in this way; the course of the world is a course of sin, the end of which course is destruction, and the reason why so many go in at the gate of sin, which is the outer gate of Hell, is, because strait is the gate, and narrow the way which leadeth unto life;
because of the difficulties in the way of life and sal∣vation, which require much pains and diligence if we would go thorow them; we must give all dili∣gence, if we would make our calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. We must work out our salvation with fear and trembling, if we would attain salva∣tion, Phil. 1.12. we must labour if we would enter into Rest, Heb. 4.12. we must strive if we would enter in at the strait gate, Luk. 13.24. we must run if we would obtain the prize, 1 Cor. 9.24. we must fight the good fight of Faith if we would lay hold on eternal life, 1 Tim. 6.12. the Kingdom of Heaven suffereth violence, saith our Saviour, and the violent take it by force, Math. 11.12. we must lay siege to Heaven, if we would take it, and wih force and vio∣lence overcome those potent enemies, the Devil, the Flesh, and the World, who would draw or drive us away from the walls and gates of the New Ieru∣salem. It is not an easie thing to be saved, the way to Heaven is narrow, and it lyeth up hill, our en∣deavours for Heaven especially at the first, are like climbing up a steep hill, like hewing a way thorow hard rocks, like swimming against a strong stream, like cutting hard wood against the grain; and be∣cause of the opposition and difficulty in the way of salvation, therefore there be but few that finde the path thereof; most choose a broader and easier way. It is evident then from what hath been said, that this salvation is Rare and scarce, the consideration whereof should not discourage you, but quicken you unto the greater diligence in your endeavours after it; the rarity of it sheweth the worth and excellen∣cy of it; Jewels and precious stones are rare and hard to be got; what difficulties will some goe
thorow? what dangerous voyages unto the utter∣most parts of the Earth will some undertake, to bring home some rare things? but especially the conside∣ration withall of the necessity of salvatio (of which in the next particular) should quicken you to seek after it. Think with your selves (my beloved) think seriously, and think frequently, that there are but few that shall be saved; and then examine, what reason you have to think that you are in the num∣ber of those few: When our Saviour told his Disci∣ples that but one of them should betray him, they looked one upon another, and every one asked him, Lord is it I? there was none of them without their fears which made them so inquisitive, and they seem to be in pain untill they are resolved; what then would they have thought and said? how fearfull would they have been, if our Saviour had told them that the most of them should have betrayed him, yea that all of them should betray him, but one? May not I without uncharitableness say, that not one in twelve, no nor one in twenty, no nor one in a hundred in this City and Nation shall be saved? If I should tell you that hear me this day, that some of you will be damned, yea that many of you will be damned, yea that most of you will be damned, and that but few of this great company will be sa∣ved, should I be a false Prophet? I will not say it will be thus, neither can I do it, because this is Gods secret; much less do I desire it should be thus, for the end of my preaching is, that you all might be saved; but let me tell you, that I fear that many of you here present will be found in the number of those many our Saviour speaketh of, that shall seek to enter in at the strait gate, and shall not be able;
our Saviour told his Auditors, that flocked to hear him, thus, and are you better than they? you all seek to enter in at the strait gate, by coming into this place where the Gospel is preached, and where the gate is set open before you; but are there not many amongst you that seek in a careless and negligent manner? May not I say of all the seekers here, that there are but few that strive to enter in at the strait gate? Do you all, or the most look as if you had your eye upon the mark and glorious prize before you, and were pressing with all your might towards it? do you hear as if it were for your lives, as if you might hear words this day whereby you may be saved? do you pray and seek as if you were in earnest, as if you were resolved to take Heaven by violence, and whatever you were denyed in, would not be denyed your salvation? Such as do not strive shall never get thorow the strait gate. Think with your selves, It may be that many in this place shall be damned, and then say, Shall not I? shall not I? and O what a miserable wretch shall I be if I should be damned! if I should get only to the gate of Heaven, and not get thorow! if I should come only to the borders of the Heavenly Canaan, and dye in the Wilderness! if I should be found in the number of the negligent seekers which will miss of salvation? What grounds have I to think that I shall be saved? there are but few, can I think that I am in the number of the few? Methinks this con∣sideration of the Rarity of salvation should awaken you to give earnest heed that with the most that seek it, you may not miss of it.
3. This salvation is a necessary salvation: the great difficulty of obtaining some precious things discou∣rageth the endeavours of the most in seeking after them, especially when they may be well enough without them; but this salvation is necessary, you cannot be without it; it is of absolute and univer∣sal necessity; some things you may have, this you must have; without it you are undone, you will be irrecoverably and eternally miserable; there is no medium, no middle condition between salvation and damnation (of which more by and by): some things are necessary to the body, but salvation is necessary to your happiness, without it there is no possibi∣lity (in this fallen state) of obtaining the chief end, the chief good which you are capable of; without this no coming neer to God in whom your chiefest happiness doth consist, no vision or fruition of him either in part here, or in full and eternally hereafter. Some men have need of one thing, and some of ano∣ther, but all the men and women in the world have need of salvation, because all are sinners, all are children of wrath by nature. There is not one per∣son amongst you all but have been guilty of sin, for the whole world is guilty before God, Rom. 3.19. and every moment of your lives you are exposed unto the punishment of sin in Hell, unless you are brought into a state of salvation. It is necessary therefore that all of you should above all things seek after your salvation. 4. This salvation is a possible salvation; though there were never so much worth and excellency in, never so much necessity of this salvation, yet if there
were an impossibility of obtaining it, all arguments would be used in vain to press any to endeavour after it; but this salvation is possible, it is possible that you should attain it, that the meanest of you, the vilest of you, yea that every one of you that hear these words may attain it. 1. The meanest of you may attain this salvation, and that 1. Such of you as are of the meanest parts, though you have neither humane learning, nor ca∣pacity or ability for it; though your judgement be shallow, your fancy and invention dull, your me∣mory weak, and so could never understand and re∣tain the many Arts and Sciences in Philosophy, and the divers kinds of Languages, which learned men have written their books in; yet you are capable of being made the Schollars and Disciples of Jesus Christ, and he can teach the dullest and shallowest of you all the deep mysteries of salvation by his Spi∣rit, yea and he can give you a greater understand∣ing in them, than the wisest and most learned men that are without the Spirit do attain unto; For he hideth those things from the wise and prudent which he revealeth unto babes, Matth. 11.25. And the natural man, let him be never so learned a man, receiveth not the things of the Spirit, neither can he know them because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. And therefore when not many wise men afer the flesh are called, God chooseth the foolish things of the world to exalt the riches of his free grace in their salvation, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 31. Surgunt indcti & rapiunt coelum, quum nos cum omni doctrinà in Gehennam detrudimur, saith one. The un∣learned arise, and take Heaven by violence, when we with all our learning are violently thrown down
into Hell. So that you who are of no learning, and but mean natural abilities, have encouragement to seek after this salvation of the Gospel, seeing the Lord can teach you by his Spirit, and it doth bet∣ter suit with his design of glorifying his free grace in bestowing it upon such as you, rather than on the wise and learned men of the world, who would be apt to ascribe the glory unto themselves. 2. Such of you as are not only of the meanest parts, but also of the meanest condition in the World, may attain this Salvaion; the poor have the Gospel preached unto them, Matth. 11.5. If with poverty in regard of Estate, you are also poor in spirit, the riches of grace and salvation are tendered free∣ly unto you; read for your encouragement what the Apostle saith, Iam. 2.5. Hearken my beloved Brethren, hath not God chosen the poor of this World, rich in Faith, and Hirs of the Kingdom, which he hath promised unto them that lo him. If you were to seek some great favour from an Earthly Prince, your mean attire and condition might keep you at a distance; and you might have no regard given to your request, should it have a hearing; The Pe∣titions of the great and rich are heard in Courts on Earth, when the poor and mean are despised: but the King of Heaven doth regard the rich no more than the poor, Iob 34.19. And if you seek diligently after this Salvation, you may have as free access to the Lord as any, and your Petitions shall be heard in the Court of Heaven, and you shall certainly obtain this Salvation which you seek after. 2. The vilest of you all may attain Salvation; Some of you it may be have been notorious sinners,
your consciences do accuse you of such great sins, with such hainous aggravations, that you may be discouraged and out of hope that such as you should be saved; you have offered such high affronts and indignities unto the highest Majesty that you think he can never put them up; you have run so deep and so long upon the score, that you think the scores can never be wiped off; if they had been smaller faults, or more ordinary slips, or you had sought after Salvation sooner, you might have hoped to speed, but now you fear the door of mercy is shut, and the day of Grace is spent, and there is no par∣don and salvation for such vile sinners as you: But let me tell you that the vilest of you all may attain Salvation, the door of mercy is not so fast shut as yet, but by knocking hard it may be opened; and so long as the day of your life is continued, and the means of grace are continued, you cannot say that the day of grace is quite ; there is salvation attainable by the worst of you all, if you will look after it; our Saviour tells us of Publicans and Harlots that entred into the Kingdom of Heaven sooner than the Pharisees who boasted in their own righteousness, Matth. 21.31. He conversed with, and called the worst of sinners to repentance, Matth. 9.11, 13. In∣ded when the Apostle maketh mention of notori∣ous sinners, he telleth us, that such whilest such, could not be saved, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idola∣ters, nor Adulterers, nor ffeminate, nor Abusers of thmselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, no Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God. Those that are such no∣torious
sinners, and continue in the practice of such sins without repentance, they cannot be saved; but withall he addeth in the 11. verse, that some of them had been such sinners, but were now in a state of Salvation through their interest in Jesus Christ, and the operation of the Spirit of God upon their hearts, And such were some of you; but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Iesus, and by the spirit of our God; they were justified, their sins pardoned and persons accepted, in the name of the Lord Jesus, through the imputation of his righteousness unto them, and they were washed and sanctified by the Spirit of God, through infusion of Grace by the Spirit into them: I might add further instnces of notorious sinners who have been saved, as Manasses, Mary Magdalen, Paul, who before Conversion calleth himself the chiefest of sinners, yet obtained Mercy and Salvation; and let me tell you moreover, that if you repent now and apply your selves to Christ, the greater your sins have been, the more will Gods glory be illustrated in your Salvation, and the abounding of your sins will make way for the super-abounding of his grace. 3. All of you that hear these words may obtain Salvation, it is possible that every one of you in this place may be saved; it would be a rare thing, but it is a possible thing: indeed there are but few that shall be saved; but who knoweth but all of you may be found in the number of those few; and O how would it rejoyce my heart to see all those faces in Heaven whom I see here this day to hear the words of Salvation. Be encouraged to seek after your salvation by the possibility of obtaining. Now
salvation is possible for all of you that have not as yet attained it; but let me add, that it will not be pos∣sible long for you all; whilst you are in the land of the living it is possible, though you be condemned to Hell for sin whilst unbelievers, Ioh. 3.18. He that believeth not is condemned already; yet the sen∣tence of condemnation is traversible, you may ap∣peal from the Court of the Law, to the Court of Chancery; you may fly from the bar of Gods ju∣stice, unto the throne of grace; and if you heartily repent of sin, and by faith lay hold on Christ, you may obtain pardon and salvation: Whilst the reprieve of your life lasteth, salvation is attainable; but when once your life is come to an end (which you know not how soon it may be) and you be found in a state of impenitency and unbelief, then the percullis will be shutt down upon you for ever; then the black flag will be hung out; then the talent of lead will seal up the measure of your wickedness; and your condemnation will be irreversible; when the day of your life is spent, the day of grace will be spent too, and the door of mercy will be shut upon you for ever; and it will be impossible for any of you that have not attained, then to attain salvation. 5. This salvation is a neer Salvation. Say not in your heart, Who shall ascend up into Heaven to learn what it is there? or who shall descend into the deep to bring notice of it from thence? or who shall take the wings of the morning, and fly into the ut∣termost parts of the earth thence to bring tydings of it to you? for the word of salvation is near unto you, it is brought home to your own doors, it is
that word which is now sounding in your ears, even the words which we Ministers preach unto you: read what those words are which are brought so nigh, Rom. 10.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that is the word of faith which we preach, That if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Iesus, and shalt believe in thy heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved: For with the heart man believeth unto righte∣ousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto sal∣vation. For the Scripture saith, Whosoever believeth on him shall not be ashamed: For there is no difference be∣tween the Iew and the Greek: for the same Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon him: for whosoever calleth upon the Name of the Lord shall be saved. Here∣tofore salvation was only amongst the Jews, and whoever of other Nations would be saved, they must travel to Ierusalem, and worship the Lord in his Temple, and enquire for salvation in that place: then salvation was afar off from the Gentiles, espe∣cially from these Brittish Isles; but now since the revelation of Jesus Christ, as those which were afar off are made nigh by the blood of Christ; so the word of salvation is brought nigh unto us; you have many Messengers of Peace, which bring the glad tydings of salvation near unto you, and this may fur∣ther encourage you to seek after it. 6. This salvation is an Evident Salvation: I mean, that it is more clearly and evidently made known un∣to us, than it hath been in former ages unto any, or than it is in other places unto many. In former ages this salvation was not made known
so clearly unto any, I mean in the ages before the coming of Christ: the Prophets themselves who prophesied of it, did not fully understand what the Spirit in them did signifie, when it foretold of this grace which should come unto the Church in after ages, 1 Pet. 1.10, 11. And therefore the first preach∣ing of the Gospel of salvation, is called a revelation of the mysterie which had been kept secret since the world began unto that time, Rom. 16.25. And a ma∣nifestation of that mysterie to the Saints which had been hid from ages and generations, Col. 1.25, 26, 27. The Gospel of salvation was indeed revealed in the dispensation of the Law upon Mount Sinai by Moses, but it was more obscurely; it was wrapt up in types and figures; and as there was a vail before Moses his face, so there was a vail before the truths of salvation, so that the children of Israel could not stedfastly look unto the end of those things which were after to be abolished, 2 Cor. 3.13. but this vail is done away in Christ, v. 14. When Christ suffered upon the Cross, the vail of the Temple, which kept the people off the Holy of Holies, was rent from the top to the bottom of it, and then the way into the Holy of Holies was made manifest, and Christ by his appear∣ance abolished death, and brought life and immor∣tality to light by the Gospel, 2 Tim. 1.10. Then dark∣ness did pass away, and the true and marvellous light did shine upon the Church, 1 Ioh. 2.8. And now with open face believers do behold as in a glass the glory of the Lord, 1 Cor. 3.18. The scope of which places is to shew the obscurity of former reve∣lations, and the clearness and evidence of the reve∣lation of the Gospel in these latter daies. In other places this salvation is not made known so
clearly unto many; it is not made known at all un∣to the most in the world; a thick darkness of igno∣rance doth overspread the greatest part of the face of the earth, and even amongst those that call them∣selves by the name of the Church of Christ: there are in many places such fogs and mists of errour and heresie, that the truths of salvation are darkened, and peoples minds are blinded; but now unto you this salvation is made so clear and evident; the thing and way of it is made so manifest, that it is a great encouragement to seek after this salvation. 7. This salvation is a Free Salvation; it will cost you no money, you may have it for nothing, you may have it for accepting: If you were taken captive by men, if you were slaves to the Turks, possibly you might not be delivered without some considerable summ for your ransom; but you may be delivered from the slavery of the Devil, and your own lusts, you may be saved from sin and Hell without money: Indeed a price hath been paid for your ransom, not silver or gold, but that which is ten thousand times more precious, and that was the blood of Jesus Christ, which was shed upon the Cross for you; yet though your salvation cost Christ dear, it is free unto you, it will cost you nothing; pardon is free, and grace is free, and eternal life unto you is a free gift; you are invited to come unto the waters, and to buy wine and milk, but it is without money and without price, Isa. 55.1. The Spirit saith, come, and the Bride saith, come, and whosoever is a thirst let him come, and take of the waters of life freely, Rev. 22.17. There is sufficiency of grace in God for
the salvation of you all, and you may come and par∣take of this grace in your salvation freely: You may have it without money, if you be poor, the gifts of God cannot be bought; and you may have it with∣out merit; if you conceit that you deserve any thing, you shall be sure to have nothing; if you are sensible of your unworthiness, and apply Christs merits and righteousness, through him you may have salva∣tion freely. 8. And lastly, This salvation is a Sure Salvation; you have the promise of God for it, and there can be no greater certainty of a thing than the word of God, especially if you consider that God is in∣finite in power, and therefore can do whatever he will, and that God is infinitely true, and therefore will do whatever he hath promised: God is most powerful, and therefore able to save you; there is strength sufficient in his Almighty Arm, to bring sal∣vation unto you; and God is most faithfull in the promises of salvation, which he hath made in the Covenant of Grace; if you get faith to apply the promises, you shall certainly have the thing: There is an uncertainty in every thing else in the world, but there is a certainty in this salvation, that there is such a thing is certain from the revelation of the Word of God, who cannot lye; and that you may have it if you will accept of it, is certain from the nature and firmness of the promises; and when you have attain∣ed unto any degrees of this salvation, the perfecting of it will be most sure; for he that hath begun a good work in you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.6. Thus I have laid before you the properties of this salvation; it is a great salvation; it is a rare salvation; it is a necessary salvation; it is
a possible salvation; it is a near salvation; it is an evi∣dent salvation; it is a free salvation; it is a sure sal∣vation; all which being laid together, may be a strong motive and inducement to you to labour that you may attain a share in this salvation. SECT. XVII. FRom the consideration of the Motive 3. Damna∣tion of all such as do not obtain salva∣tion. The damnation of all such persons will be Dreadfull and Certain. (1.) The Damnation of such as are not saved will be dreadful. 1. The Day of their damnation will be dreadful. 2. The Sentence of their damnation will be dreadful. 3. The Execution of their damnation will be dread∣ful. 1. The Day of the damnation of such as are not saved will be dreadful, and that is the last day, the day of judgement: O how dreadful will this day be to you that are wicked and ungodly, when the Heavens shall be opened, and the Lord Jesus Christ, the Judge of the world shall descend with a shout, with the voice of the Arch-Angel, and the loud sound of a Trumpet; when the Earth shall be opened, and you shall be raised out of the dust, and summoned to appear before Christs Tribunal; and the Books shall be opened, and all your sins shall be made ma∣nifest before the whole world; when the Heavens shall be on fire, and melt down upon you, and pass away with a great noise; and the Earth shall be on fire, and burn under you; and every Mountain and
Hill shall flee away before Christs face; and Christ shall be on fire, and come in flames of anger to take vengeance upon you for your sins. Think, O think how dreadful this day of damnation will be unto all such of you as shall not then be found in a state of salvation! O what dread will seize upon you so soon as your eyes are opened, and you find the pre∣dictions of the word which you formerly slighted to be true, and perceive that now indeed the day of Gods wrath is come, when you shall be dragged like so many malefactors before the Judgement-seat, and there stand naked horribly lashing your selves in the reflections of conscience upon your fore-past wickedness; how will you be ready to tear your selves to pieces for your folly and madness, that you did not provide for this day, and flee from this wrath of God, which then you will not be able to escape? how willingly would you creep into some rock, or under some mountain, or abide still in your grave, or cast your selves into the Sea, if possibly any place could be found to hide you in this terrible day, but shall be able to finde no hiding-place for your selves? Think what hideous thoughts, what sinking fears, what horrible perplexity of mind you will on this day be filled withall, it will be a dreadful day. 2. The Sentence of the damnation of such as are not saved will be dreadful; when the Books are opened where your sins are recorded, and you are convicted by the Judge; then he will proceed to pass sentence upon you. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Matth. 25.41. O dreadful words! the voice will be loud with which they will be pro∣nounced, such as shall reach the ears of all the wicked
together of all generations, and how will they all quake and tremble at the sound thereof! You may cry it may be to the Lord for mercy, but it will be in vain; you may say, Lord open to us, and receive us into thy Kingdom, that we may participate in the joyes thereof; but he will say unto you, Depart from me, I know ye not all ye workers of iniquity: But if you must depart, you may wish for his blessing, as Esau, though it were but an inferiour blessing; no, depart ye cursed, depart with a curse: If then you must depart with a curse, you may wish for some convenient place of abode, and good company, as Cain, when he went forth from the presence of the Lord with a curse, he built a City to dwell in, and took some comfort, it may be in his habitation, and wife, and children; no, depart into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels; you must dwell in devouring fire, and inhabit everlasting burn∣ings, and your companions will be the Devil and his Angels, and fellow-damned sinners, in whom you will not find the least comfort, which leads to the third particular. 3. The Execution of the Damnation of such as are not saved, will be dreadful, and this will be in Hell; when the irreversible sentence of damnation is passed upon you, immediately the execution will follow, and you will be haled from the Judgement seat, and the everlasting doors of the prison of Hell will be lifted up, where a horrible fire is burning, which can never be quenched, into which you must enter, and be shut down, and shut in to take up your eternal abode in that place of torment; there every part will be tormented, every member of your bo∣dies, every faculty of your souls, and that in the
highest degree of extremity beyond your now ca∣pacity, and your torments will have no intermissi∣on, neither will you have any hopes of their con∣clusion. I have already treated in my Book of Judgement of the universality, extremity, and eter∣nity of the torments of the Damned, and therefore shall not here inlarge. From what hath been said, you may evidently perceive, that the Damnation of such as are not saved will be dreadfull, which should awaken you to endeavour after your salva∣tion, especially if withall you consider, (2.) That the Damnation of such as are not sa∣ved will be Certain; where there is no Salvation there will be unavoidable Damnation, because be∣tween these two hereafter there will be no middle condition; such as are not saved will most certainly be damned; Heaven or Hell, eternal happiness, or eternal misery will be the portion of all the Sons and Daughters of Adam. I might shew, that Gods Justice, and Holiness and Truth, doth require the Damnation of all such as do not obtain Salvation by Jesus Christ, so that either God must prove un∣holy, and unjust and false in his Word, which is impossible, or you which are not saved must be damned, therefore this is most certain, there is no escaping of the damnation of Hell by such as neglect the great Salvation of the Gospel, Heb. 2.3. And methinks by this time I should hear some of you cry out as the Iews when Peter preached, or the Jaylor, O what shall we do to be saved?
SECT. XVIII. III. I Am to tell you Words to guide you in the way to attain Salvation. And here I shall 1. Direct what things you must do, that you may be saved. 2. Shew what Means you must make use of to help you in those things. 1. What Things you must do that you may be saved. Take this in these Ten Directions. 1. You must see your selves lost. 2. You must mourn for sin. 3. You must turn from sin. 4. You must believe in Iesus Christ. 5. You must get a new Nature. 6. You must lead a New Life. 7. You must resolve upon sufferings for Christ, if called. 8. You must study and apply the Promises of the Co∣venant of Grace. 9. You must give up your selves in Covenant unto God. 10. You must be stedfast and persevere in the Wayes of God unto your lives end. Direction 1. You must see your selves lost, if you would be saved; Luk. 19.10. our Saviour telleth us, that he came to seek and save that which was lost. You must be lost if you would be found: We read Luk. 15. of the lost Sheep, the lost Groat, and the
lost Son, all which were found again, and that with joy. When sinners perceive themselves to be lost and undone, and know not what to do, then they are neer to be found and saved by Jesus Christ: O then as ever you expect Salvation by Christ, you must see and be sensible of your lost estate, whilest you are in a state of Nature: And for this end you must get a Conviction, 1. Of your sin. 2. Of the Punishment you have deserved for your sin. 3. Of your Insufficiency to satisfie Gods Iustice. 4. Of your inability to make resistance, and defend your selves. 5. Of the Impossibility of your fleeing and esca∣ping Gods wrath. 6. That as yet you have no Interest in Christ, who alone is able to deliver you from the wrath to come. 1. That you may be sensible of your lost estate, you must get a Conviction of your sin, your eyes must be opened to see your selves guilty of sin before God, and your mouths must be stopped, so as to have nothing to say if the Lord should condemn you. You must not only understand the nature of sin in the general, that it is a transgression of the holy, and righteous, and good Law of the holy and glorious God of Heaven and Earth; but also you must be particular∣ly and thorowly convinced, that you have transgres∣sed this Law of God; you must be convinced of your particular sins: As to the kinds of your sins, you must 1. See your selves guilty of Original sin, of Adams first transgression by a just imputation, you being in his loyns, and parties in the first Covenant: and then you must see what inherent sin there is in
your nature, that you were conceived and born in sin, that you are a viperous brood, a Sepntine ge∣neration, a seed of evil doers; that the Toad is not fuller of poyson, than your natures are full of sin; that your natures are contrary unto the nature of God, and have an enmity in them against the Law of God, Rom. 6.7. You must be convinced, how your natures are depraved, being wholly destitute of Original Righteousness, empty of all good, and inclinable wholly unto evil; that they are a pollu∣ted fountain, from whence can proceed nothing but what is unclean; that they are a bitter root, from whence doth spring forth such cursed fruits of sin in your lives; and you should look upon your sin of nature to be the worst, because the Original of all actuall transgressions. 2. You must be convinced of your actual sins, how you have broken Gods Law in thought, word and deed, you must see your sins of Omission, and your sins of Commission, against the first and second Table of the Law, and take no∣tice of the number of them, so far as you can re∣member, together with their aggravations; if they have been committed through ignorance when you have had means of knowledge, if against light of Nature and the Word, if against the reluctance of natural Conscience, if against many Warnings and Reproofs, if they have been committed with securi∣ty, hardness of heart, delight, greediness, pride, pre∣sumption, obstinacy, and the like; and that you might be convinced of the gult of sin, you must look into the Law, in which as in a glass you may see your natural face, and all the spots thereof; the Law will discover the sin of your natures, as it requireth perfect conformity thereunto in habit, disposition,
and inclination, and forbiddeth all evil byasses of the will and heart to sin, as well as external trans∣gressions; Moreover the Law will discover to you your actual sins; but then you must look beyond the head Precepts of the Law, which are but ten, for you must take notice of the several branches be∣longing to every head, which are many; as for in∣stance, If you would finde out whether you are guil∣ty of Adultery, you must not only look upon the Precept as forbidding only the gross outward act, Thou shalt not commit Adultery, but as reaching to the inward desires and inclinations, and so our Sa∣viour, Math. 5.28. interprets this Precept, that whosoever looketh upon a woman to lust after her, hath committed Adultery with her already in his heart; and so in the Precept, Thou shalt not kill, it is murder not only to take away the life of another by violence, but also to be angry with our brother without a cause; and so in the other Precepts. And as you must look into the Law for Conviction of sin, so you must also look into your own Consciences, and read what is there registred, and compare your hearts and lives with the Law; and you should call to minde the places you have lived in, the bu∣sinsses you have been employed about, and the cir∣cumstances of your lives may bring to remembrance many sins committed long ago, with their aggrava∣tions. You must get thus a conviction of the guilt of your sins, especially if you have fallen into any grosser sin in your life, as adultery, drunkenness, theft, if you have been guilty of swearing, Sabbath-breaking, profaneness, or the like; you must see the heinousness of them, and withall you must see that every sin which you have committed is heinous, as
it is a dishonour to the highest Majesty, who is infi∣nitely more exalted above the greatest Earthly Kings and Potentates, than they are exalted above the meanest Worm, or Flie; and for such as you to dishonour and affront him by sin, is very heinous. This is the first thing, a Conviction of your sins, which you must endeavour after. 2. That you may be sensible of your lost estate, you must get a convicion of the punishment which God hath threatned, and you have deserved for your sins; will the Lord put up the affronts which are offered to him by his Creatures? will he bear the disho∣nours of his great and glorious Name by sin, with∣out punishing the sinnrs? No surely, his holiness will not permit it, his Justice hath been offended, and must have satisfaction, and therefore he threat∣neth to punish the offenders most severely; God threatneth temporal calamities and death, as the wages of sin; and because through patience he for∣beareth to punish many transgressions so remarkably in this life; and the most dreadfull temporal Judge∣ments which he inflicteth upon any, are no wayes proportionable to the desert of their sins, and the demands of his infinite Justice; therefore he threat∣neth eternal punishment in Hell; look into some places of Scripture, where the Lord doth denounce severe threatnings against sinners, Gal. 3.10. Cursed in every one that continueth not in all things which are written in the book of the Law to do them. Rom. 1.18. The wrath of God is revealed from Heaven, against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. Eph. 5.6. Because of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. 2 Thess. 1. 8, 9. Christ will come in flaming fire, taking vengeance
on them which know not God, and obey not the Gospel, who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and the glory of his power. Rom. 2.6, 8, 9. God will render unto every man ac∣cording to his deeds, to them who are contentious and do not obey the truth, indignation and wrath, tribula∣tion and anguish on every soul of man that doth evil. That you may see and be sensible of your lost estate, you must be convinced not only in the general of the justice and equity that such Judgements should be inflicted on sinners, because God himself hath denounced them in his Word, who cannot be un∣just toward his Creatures; and because sin hath de∣served them, being the breach of his Law, which is holy and just and good; and an offence of an infinite Majesty, whose Justice is infinite, and must be satis∣fied with a proportionable punishment unto the offence: but also you must be convinced that you are such sinners; that you have committed such and such sins, that you have broken the Law in such a point, and such a point, and in every point; that you are guilty of fornication, or drunkenness, or theft, or covetousness, or lying, or profaneness; and it may be of all these, and more than these: The first is the conviction of the Law, the second the con∣viction of the Fact, then follows the third convicti∣on which is of the State, that therefore you are un∣der the Curse, that you are condemned, that the wrath of God hangeth over your head, and that you must be tormented for sin most horribly and eternally in Hell: It is the conviction of the dread∣full punishment of Hell which God hath threatned, and unto which you are exposed for sin, that will awaken you to a sense of your lost state, when the
conviction is imprinted deep upon you by the Spi∣rit; when you believe that Hell is no Fiction, but a reality, as certainly prepared for the wicked, as God is above preparing places in Heaven for his people; and you have a peep-hole (as it were) into Hell, and imagine something of the torments which the dam∣ned there do, and shall endure for such sins as you have committed; how they roll and tumble in flames of brimstone, how they are lashed by an accusing Conscience, tormented with and by the Devil, and even consumed by the wrath of a sin-revenging God, how they cry, roar and howl, how they weep and wail, and gnash their teeth, and that this must be their condition for ever; and when withall you think that you are walking upon the brink of this pit, and hastening towards the place of these flames, that Hell doth belong to you, that you are in the num∣ber of the cursed crew, some of whom have alrea∣dy taken up their lodging in Hell, and that you are like to come thither shortly, that you are lyable every moment to drop into the burning Lake, then you will perceive that you are lost and undone. 3. That you may be sensible of your lost estate, you must be convinced of your insufficiency to satisfie Gods Iustice for your sins; if you could do this, you might do well enough; but this you cannot do, Gods Justice is infinite, and requireth infinite satis∣faction, which you being finite are insufficient to give; what can you offer to God? thousands of Rams, rivers of Oyl, Mines of Silver, Mountains of Gold, Rocks of Pearl, yea the whole Creation, if it should offer it self to be annihilated, could not make compensation to Gods Justice for one sin, no∣thing less than infinite must be the satisfaction; and
therefore this should make you further sensible of your lost estate in your selves. 4. You must get a conviction of your inability to resist and defend your selves against God, who hath threatned so severely to punish you for sin; as Gods Justice is infinite, and therefore you cannot satisfie it; so his Power is infinite, and you cannot resist it; who can stand in his sight when once he is angry? who can defend himself against an Omnipotent arm? If God whet his glittering Sword, and his hand take hold on vengeance, what Powers of Earth are strong enough to make resistance? Read how God expresseth himself concerning such as set themselves against him, Isa. 27.4. Who would set the bryars and thorns against me in battel? I would go thorow them, I would burn them together. Look upon your selves as briars and thorns, yea as dryed stubble before a consuming fire, which hath no power to resist the flame; and therefore that you are lost and undone in your selves because of your sins. 5. You must get a conviction of the impossibility of your fleeing from and escaping Gods wrath, which hath you in pursuit; whither can you go from his presence? or whither can you flee from his anger and indignation? See Amos 9.2, 3. Though they dig into Hell, thence shall mine hand take them; though they climb up into Heaven, thence will I bring them down; and though they hide themselves in the top of Carmel, I will search and take them out thence; and though they be hid from my sight in the bottom of the Sea, thence will I command the Serpent, and he shall bite them. You cannot flee into any place but God will follow you; you cannot hide your selves in any place but God will finde you; there is as little hopes
of escaping Gods Wrath, as of resisting his Power. See Psal. 21.8, 9. Thine hand shall finde out all thine enemies, not only some, but all sinners, thy right hand shall finde out them that hate thee: Thou shalt make them as a fiery Oven in the time of thine anger, the Lord shall swallow them up in his wrath, and the fire shall devour them. By this time sinners, methinks you should perceive your selves to be lost and un∣done; all refuge now fails you, there is no escaping for you. 6. But lastly, that you may fully know that you are in a lost estate, you must get conviction, that as yet you have no interest in Christ, who alone can de∣liver you from the wrath of God, which is to come upon the ungodly. Indeed Christ can and doth deliver his people from wrath, and the punishment their sins have deserved; but when you know that you are out of Christ, then you may know you are in a lost estate; if you suppose that you have an interest in him without good grounds, you are like to be lost irrecoverably, and not know it till it be too late; therefore you must know that as yet you have no interest in him, that all your pretensions to him have been presumptuous conceits; that so you may be lost in your own apprehensions. Can you think you have an interest in Christ, that never truly mourned for sin, that never hungred after Christ, that have no true Faith to apply him? have you interest in Christ that have no true Love to Christ, and never yielded subjection to Christ? Have you interest in Christ that have no Influence from Christ? have you Union to Christ that have no Commu∣nion with him? No, no, all you that are Unbe∣lievers, and have persisted hitherto in a sinfull course,
are strangers unto Christ, and therefore be convinced that you are in a lost estate: And O how should fear and trembling possess you through the apprehensions of the dreadfull wrath of God? how should you go up and down like condemned malefactors, that are condemned to Hell, and know not how soon they may be dragged to execution? O what reason have you to lye down in terrour, and rise up in ter∣rour, and feed upon terrour all the day long! Such thoughts as these are suitable to the condition of such as you. It may be the next step I take, I may step into Hell: Alas! Alas! I am in a state of damnation, and did not know it; I have been dancing about the brinks of Hell, and did not perceive it; I have been af∣fronting God all my daies by my sins; now I see that God is highly offended with me for those sins I made light of: I am the covetus person whom the Lord abhorreth, Psal. 10.3. I am the deceiver whom he curseth, Mal. 1.14. I am the Adulterer whom he will judge, Heb 11.4. I have greatly sinned, and now I see God is greatly an∣gry, and his anger burns like fire; he frowns, and his frowns are most dreadfull, and I fear he will cast me to Hell, and make me feel the power of his anger in my everlasting ruine; I fear I must dwell with devouring fire, and take up mine eternal abode with the Devil and my fellow-damned sinners: O I fear I am damned! I am damned! O happy is the Dog and the Hrse, yea the Worm and the Toad, who ere long shall be anihilated; but I am cursed, and I fear that I shall eternally be tor∣mented: O I am lost, I have lost my God, and I fear I am lost, and shall be lost for ever! O I am undone! un∣done I vile and miserable sinner! O wo be to me that ever I was born! that ever I sinned, and provoked God to such displeasure! But is there no spark of hope
yet? is there no escaping, no reconciliation attainable? O what shall I do to be saved! I cannot save my self, and no creature can help me; but is there no other way? Thus you must see and be sensible that you are lost in your selves if you would be saved. Direction 2. You must mourn for sin, if you would be saved; except ye repent, saith our Saviour, ye shall all likewise perish, Luk. 13.3. Those that laugh and rejoyce now in a way of sin, shall mourn and weep for it for ever to no purpose, Luk 6.25. But blessed are they that mourn for sin now, for they shall be comforted and saved, Matth. 5.4. The seed time of repentance accompanied with the showers of tears, will return with the harvest of salvation, and sheaves of joy and comfort, Psal. 126.5, 6. They that sow in tears shall reap in joy; he that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoycing, bringing his sheaves with him, Therefore see what the Apostle exhorteth unto, which is necessary to your salvation, Iam. 4.9. Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep; let your laughter be turned into mourning, and your joy into heaviness. Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you up. Sinners, you have delighted your selves in sin, you must now be afflicted for it; sin hath been sweet in your mouth, it must now be bitter to your heart: God calls you to salvation by his Son, but withall he calls you to weeping, and mourning, and deep humiliation in order hereunto; not that your tears can wash off the guilt of your sins, no∣thing can do this but the blood of Christ; not that God delights in your griefs and sorrows as such, but
because mourning is needful for you to prepare you for Christ, and Salvation by him; whilst sin is sweet unto your taste, you will roll it under your tongue, and hug it in your bosom; you will spare it, and no∣thing will perswade you to part with it; but when you taste the bitterness of sin in compunction and sorrow for it, then you will spit it out; when you perceive the gall and the wormwood, then your mouth will be put out of rellish, then you will de∣sire no longer to suck at the breast of sin; whilst you are insensible of sin, you will be insensible of your need of a Saviour: None but sick persons do prize and send for the Physitian, and none but such as are sick of sin, and groan and mourn under the burden of this sickness, do prize a Christ who is the soul-Physician, Matth. 9.12. Were you made sensible of sin indeed, you would eagerly enquire after Christ, and greedily hearken unto the glad tydings of salva∣tion which he hath purchased; what shall I do to get an interest in Christ? where is he to be found? how is he to be received? what are his terms? what are his commands? do any thing, part with any thing, you would not then think much to lay down your selves, and all that you have at his feet, so you might have him; none but Christ, none but Christ would you then desire; and if you might have all the world without him, you would not be contented. Sinners, would you be saved by Christ, get your hearts af∣fected with godly sorrow for sin, and that you may mourn deeply and kindly, you must get not only a conviction of the guilt of sin, and the punishment which is due for it, which you cannot escape; but you must look further into the nature of sin, and get a sight and sense of the evil of sin; you must look
not only to the consequential evil of sin, but also to the intrinsecal evil of sin; not only to the Hell which is like to follow upon it, but also to that Hell which there is in it; look to the evil of sin not only as it is like to burn you, but as it hath black and smutted you; as it hath depraved and deformed your souls, which are of heavenly original, as it hath degraded and debased yo, polluted and de∣filed you. But chiefly look upon the evil of sin as it reflecteth dishonour upon God, upon God that is so holy and glorious, and that is so good and gra∣cious, as it displeaseth that God that made you, that hath exercised so much patience towards you, when he could so easily have cut you off in the act of sin, and appointed you your place and portion amongst the damned in Hell long ago; and that hath more∣over been so bountiful to you, though sinners and his enemies, that he hath maintained you at his cost and charges all your daies; but especially see the evil of sin, as it offendeth that God who is ready to be reconciled, and hath made such provision for recon∣ciliation, which you could never have thought of, namely, through the death and mediation of his Son, whom he hath given for you, and proffers to give to you; and in him doth treat with you, and by us Ministers doth send intreaties to you, that you would accept of this reconciliation, lay down your wea∣pons, and be reconciled unto him, 2 Cor. 5.20. Break, break ye rocky hearts at this, what is God willing indeed to put up such high affronts? and to forgive such great sins? and doth he stoop to en∣treat and beseech such mean creatures, and wretched sinners as you to be reconciled? O be filled with astonishment and admiration, and go cast your
selves down at his feet with self-loathing and abhor∣rency at the hideous nature, and monstrous ingrati∣tude, and baseness of your sins! let your hearts melt within you like Wax, or Snow, when the Sun shineth upon it with heat and brightness; let your eyes drop down tears, as the morning doth drop dew upon the flowers: What! have I affronted such greatness? dared such power? trampled upon such patience? and abused such goodness too? and after all doth God be∣seech me to be reconciled? was it such a God whom I offended? vile wretch! O that I had never committed such sins! O that I had never been drunk, or unclean, or profane! O that I had never sworn, nor lyed, nor stoln, nor offended God in any of my actions! It repents me, it grieves me at the very heart that I have sinned, and that I can grieve no more for it. Direction 3. You must turn from sin, if you would be saved; see Psal. 7.11, 12, 13. God is angry with the wicked every day; if he turn not, he will whet his sword; he hath bent his bow, and made it ready; he hath prepared for him the instruments of death. And God threatneth, Psal. 88.21. that he will wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy scalp of such as go on still in their trespasses: Therefore men must turn from all their transgressions, otherwise iniquity will be their ruine, Ezek. 18.30. They must cast away their sins as a menstruous cloth, saying unto them, get ye hence, if they would be received into favour, Isa. 30.22. They must not only confess their sins, but also forsake them, if they would find mer∣cy, Prov. 28.13. The wicked must forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and turn to
the Lord, and then he shall have pardoning mercy abundantly, Isa. 55.7. When men cease to do evil, and learn to do well, then, though their sins have been as scarlet, they shall be white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be like woll, Isa. 1.16, 17, 18. Sinners, turn from your evil waies, you have done iniquity, do so no more; you have gone on hitherto in a way of sin, proceed no further, it is the way to Hell, turn out of it: Let him that hath stoln, steal no more; and him that hath been filthy, be filthy no more; and him that hath been unjust, be unjust no more: Drunkards, forbear your drinking; swearers, refrain swearing; lyars, teach your tongues to speak truth: Break off your course of sin; turn from all gross sins as to the practice, and turn from all sins as to the affection. Direction 4. You must believe in the Lord Iesus Christ, if you would be saved: This is the direction which Paul gave to the Jaylor, when under con∣viction of sin he came in to him and cryed, What shall I do to be saved? he saith to him, Believe in the Lord Iesus Christ and thou shalt be saved, Act. 16.30, 31. So in Peter's Sermon, Act. 10.43. To him gave all the Prophets witness, that through his Name, whoso∣ever believeth in him should receive remission of sins. There is no Saviour but by Christ; and there is no salvation by Christ bt by faith, and therefore we are said to be saved through faith, Ephes. 2.8. As faith is the instrument to apply the merits and righteousness of Jesus Christ. Let me then exhort you to get faith, which is absolutely necessary unto salvation: Get faith of the right kind; there is a general, common, historical, temporary, hypocritical, dead
and ineffectual faith; but do you labour after a spe∣cial, lively, unfeigned, effctual, justifying and sa∣ving faith; and that you may not be mistaken in this great point on which your salvation doth depend, I shall describe that faith which is of the right kind, and will certainly save you if you obtain it. Faith is a grace wrought in the heart by the Spirit of God, whereby a poor sinner being made sensible of the guilt and power of his sins, and the utter insufficiency of himself, or any creature in the world, to give him any help or succour; and having in the Gspel a discovery and proffer made unto him of the Lord Iesus Christ, as an all sfficient, most merciful and faithful Advocate and Saviour, doth go quite out of himself, and accpt, lay hold, rely, and rest vpon him, and him alone, for pardon, and grace, and eerlasting happiness. Or more brefly thus, Faith is a grace of God wherby the humild sinner doth accept and rely upon Christ alone for salvation, as he is held forth in the Promises of the Gospel. If you would attain this grace of Faith, take these Directions. 1. You must be fully perswaded that the Scri∣ptures which reveal Christ, are indeed the word of God; this is the foundation of all faith, therefore I shall briefly suggest some Arguments to prove the divine Authority of the Scriptures: As 1. Because of that majesty, purity, holinss, heavenliness which doth appar in the Srptures beyond all other writings. 2. Because of the design and drift of the Scriptures to debase man, and exalt God and his glory above all. 3. Because of the admirable con∣texture, and contrivance, and sweet harmony of the Scriptures in all the parts thereof, though writ∣ten by so many several men in several ages and places,
which sheweth that they were all acted by the same Spirit of God. 4. Because of the wonderfull work of mans Redemption there set forth at fist more dark∣ly, afterwards more clearly, which no mortal bain could have invented, much less could any created power have effected. 5. Because of the great power which this word hath to convince, convert, and comfort. 6. Because of the confirmation of the Scri∣ptures by miracles. 7. Because of the acknowledge∣ment of the Scriptures to be Gods Word in all ages. 8. Because of the many millions of Martyrs, who have sealed the Truths of the word with their blood. 9. Because of the witness of the Spirit in and with the word, which doth bear testimony to the hearts of Gods people, that the Scriptures are his Word, and were indied by his Spirit. Whence it fol∣loweth, that the Scriptures are true, because God, the Author of them, is true, and cannot lye; and whatever is there revealed, is as certain as those things which are most demonstrable to sense or rea∣son: This is the first step to your believing in Christ who is made known in the Scriptures, to believe that the Scriptures are Gods Word. 2. If you would attain a saving faith in Christ, you must be convinced and fully prswaded of your lost estate without Christ, and your absolute need of him, of which before. 3. You must be perswaded, that it is not in your own power to believe, that it is not of your selves, but is the gift of God, Ephes. 2.8. and therefore must apply your selves to God, that he would not only give you his Son, but also give you the hand of faith to lay hold on him, that he would work in you this grace of faith by his Spirit.
4. You must consider those Arguments of Scri∣pture which encourage faith: As for instance, I shall mention four heads of Arguments for faith, from the consideration 1. Of God. 2. Of the Promises. 3. Of Christ. 4. Of the Saints. 1. From the consideration of God, who hath given his Son to save sinners; it is an encourage∣ment to aith, to consider, 1. That God is mercifull, and therefore willing to pardon and save, otherwise he would not have sent his Son; he doth not de∣light in the death of sinners, Ezek. 18.23. but de∣lighteth to shew mercy; see Micah 7.18, 19. Exod. 34.6, 7. Psal. 103.8, 9, &c. 2. That God is faith∣full in his Promises of salvation, which he hath made through his Son in his Covenant of Grace: God needed not have made the Covenant, nor promised mercy to any sinners▪ but having made the Cove∣nant, he is enggd to make it good. 3. That it is for his glory to save sinners through his Son, the glory of his free grace, yea and justice too, which hath been fully satisfied by Christs death. 2. You have encouraging Arguments for faith, from the consideration of the Promises, which are, 1. Large, made to all sorts of persons, and all sorts of sinners, none are excluded. 2. Full, they extend to all sorts of sins, though never so many and great, Isa. 55.7. 3. Free, nothing is required on your part but accepting. 4. Sure, being the Promises of God in Christ. 3. You have encouragement to believe in Christ for salvation, from the consideration of Christ, the proper object of faith: 1. The quality of his person who is God and man in one person, that he might reconcile man unto God. 2. The merit of his
sufferings, which (as hath been shown) was of infi∣nite value, and sufficient for the redemption of men. 3. His alsufficient power to save those that come to him, Heb. 7.25. 4. His mercy and faithfulness to make reconciliation, Heb. 2.17.5. His interest with the Father. 6. His continual intercession at the right hand of God, Heb. 7.25. 4. You have encouragement to believe in Christ for salvation, from the consideration of the Saints, the experience which they have had of salvation by Christ, some of whom have been as vile sinners as you: You have as good grounds to come unto Christ, and believe in him for salvation, as the most holy men alive before conversion. 5. If you would attain this grace of faith in Jesus Christ, you must labour to act it, looking up to God for help herein; endeavour to cast and roll your selves upon Christ, to apply Christ and his merits, and to rely upon him and his righteousness: It is in your endeavour that God doth work; and hre you must endeavour again and again against all opposition which you find from the Dvil and your own evil heart of unbelief, which will be ready to carry you away from Christ. So much for the 4th. Direction. Direction 5. You must get a new Nature, if you would be saved: You must be made partakers of the Divine Nature, if you would be made partakers of this salvation: You have brought unholy and im∣pure natures into the world with you, which must be changed and renewed after the Image of God, in knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness, before you can be in a state of salvation, and see the Kingdom
of God: This new nature, which is absolutely ne∣cessary uno salvation, is begun in the work of rege∣neation, and carried on in the work of sanctifica∣tion: In regeneration the work of grace is begun, the habits of grace are infused; a new principle of spritual life is put into the soul; and sin (which be∣fore lved, and had dominion over the man, imploy∣ing all his members as instruments of unrighteous∣nss, to make provision for the satisfaction of its af∣fections and lsts) doth receive its deaths wound, and loseth its ce and rigning power: In sancti∣fiation, the work of grace is crid on, the habits of grace are strengthned and eneased; the nw man doth grow, and the old man doth decline and deay; there is a vivification or quickning more and more of grace, by the influence of the Word and Spirit, and a mortification or subding more and mor of emning iniquity. What our Saviour tells Ndemus, h. 3.3. Exept a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God: I may tell you, that unless ye be born again, unless ye be regenerated, ye cannot be saved, no possibility of entring into the Kingdom of Haven, without yo get this new na∣ture: A man must be born the first time, before he can possss a temporal inheritan; and a mn mst be born again, before he can possess the eternal inhri∣tance: You mst be children bore you can be heirs, Rom. 8.17. children not only by aoption, but also by regeneration: Ye must b Sun, before meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Sints in light, Col. 1.12. You must have the new nature, before you can enter into the New Ierusalem: You must be made like to God in holiness, before you can be ad∣mitted to live with God in the place of everlasting
happiness; God doth suffer the wicked that are un∣clean and unholy, to live before him in the Out-house of the Earth; but he will not permit any except such as are sanctified to live with him in the Palace of Hven. O then labour after a work of Grace upon your heart; be perswaded of the worth of Grace, that  and precious Jwl, that the lst measure of Grace is of mere worth than ten thousand World; be sensible of your want of it, that naturally you are without it, that it doth not grow in Natures Garden, that you have no good Nature in you before God, till your Nature i renewed; be ready to receive the eed of Grace, which drops down from above whilest People are attending upon Gods Ordinances▪ be ready to hearken and yield to the Spirits motions, whereby this work of Grace is effected: And having the work begun, O cherish the Grace you have got, and as new-born Bbes dsire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow threby; and labour to cleanse your selves from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, that ye may perfect holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. Dirin 6. You must lead a new life, if you wold be saved, see wht knd of Life the grace of God whch brith slvation doth rqre and  namly▪ to  and wrldly  and godly in this pre∣sent world,  You must dny ungo i∣llness and worldly last, you must put off concern∣ing the  the old mn which is corrupt  to dcifull .
and not fashion your selves according to the former lusts, in your ignorance and unregeneracy, 1 Pet. 1.14. not running with others unto the same ex∣cess of riot, 1 Pet. 4.4. not walking according to the course of a profane and ungodly world, Eph. 2.2. but saving your selves from an untoward ge∣neration, Act. 2.40. as he that hath called you is ho∣ly, so you must be holy in all manner of conversa∣tion, 1 Pet. 1.15. you must live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world; soberly in regard of your selves; righteously in regard of others; and godly in regard of the Lord. 1. Soberly, in regard of your selves; which im∣plyes, 1. Temperance in eating and drinking, you must take heed of Gluttony and Drunkenness: 2. Chastity, you must take heed of Adultery and Uncleanness, in thought, speech, look, and act. 3. Moderation, you must be sober in your desires after these earthly things, and take heed of inordi∣nate affection to any thing. 2 You must live Righteously in regard of others: You must give to every one their due, and do to others as you reasonably can desire that they should do unto you, you must take heed of unrighteous∣ness either in regard of Commutative Justice in your buying and selling, borrowing and lending; and in regard of Distributative Justice in dispensing of re∣wards and punishments; you must beware of op∣prssing, afflicting, injuring any, of going beyond or defrauding any, of withholding dues, keeping back wages from those that have done you service, knowing that if they cannot, God will be the aven∣ger of all such. 3. You must live godly in regard of the Lord;
you must especially shew your New Life in the immediate Worship of the Lord, and that publick∣ly in his House, privately in your Families, secret∣ly in your Closets; you must worship God in the Ordinances of his own appointment; and this you must do with reverence, having an awe and dread of God upon your spirits, with whom you have more immediately to do; with sincerity, having a sincere respect to Gods glory therein, and that you might be accepted by him, and meet with him; with vigilancy watching the sittest time in regard of the thing, and the temper of your Bodies and Souls, and the breathings of Gods Spirit; with hu∣mility, sensible of your sinfulness, unworthiness, weakness, emptiness, neediness; with diligence, be∣fore to prepare your hearts, and in Ordinances to engage them, and resist the Devil and the contrary workings of the flesh; with frequency, laying hold on all the opportunities as you can, without neg∣lecting other businesses, which for that time you may be more necessarily called unto; with ferven∣cy, getting your hearts if you can raised and en∣larged, labouring that they may burn within you with love to God; with delight and complacency in God, and above all with Faith in Jesus Christ, through whom alone it is that you can have strength to perform duties, and that you can have any ac∣ceptance in them by the Father. Direction 7. You must resolve upon sufferings for Christ, if called, if you would be saved; you must bear the Cross, if you would wear the Crown, re∣mmbring that if the Cross be weighty it will work
for you a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. you must rekon upon sufferings for Christ before hand, and resolve that you will stick to him and his wayes, though you should lose esteem by it, and become the Drunkards Song, and be reproached amongst men; though you lose liberty by it, and be thrust into Prison; though you should lose Estate by it, and be brought to pinch∣ing want; though you should lose Friends by it, and have none to stand by you; though you should lose Life by it, and be cut off in the midst of your years; otherwise you cannot be Christs Disciples indeed, and obtain this salvation which he hath purchased. See the terms which our Saviour pro∣pounds, Luk. 14.26, 27. If any man come unto me, and hate not his Father and Mother, and Wife and Children, and Brethren and Sisters, yea and his own life, he cannot be my Disciple. This we are to un∣derstand, that a man must choose to displease Fa∣ther, Mother, Wife, Children, the nearest and dearest Relations, and part with any thing in the world, yea with Life it slf, rather than to displease and part with Jesus Christ; and that we must resolve to bear the Cross, whatever it be that God hath al∣lotted for us, otherwise we do not accept of Christ upon Gospel-terms; you must resolve to be parta∣kers of the affliction of the Gospel, if you would obtain the salvation of the Gospel; you must resolve to suffer with Christ, and for his sake when called, if you would reign and be glorified together with him. Whatever profession you make of Christ and his wayes in time of peace and prosperity, when the Sun of persecution doth  upon you with burn∣ing heat, you will wither and fall away, and turn
fearfull Apostates, and then your last estate will be worse than your first; and as your sin will be greater here, so your punishment will be more dreadfull hereafter in Hell, where you will confess that the light sufferings which you have declined for Christs sake here, are not worthy to be compared with the far more exceeding and eternal weight of wrath which you must endure for your Apostacy unto all eternity. Direct. 8. You must study and apply the Promises of the Covenant of grace, if you would be saved; without the Covenant of grace there had been no possible salvation for any of the fallen Children of Men; the Covenant of Works which God made with Man at the first, being broken by sin, it doth condemn all that are under it, it is by vertue of the Covenant of Grace that any are brought into a state of salvation; therefore study and apply the Promises of this Covenant: Now you must know that all the Promises of the Gospel, which are scat∣tered up and down the Scripture do belong unto this Covenant; but I shall spread before you those few more general Promises which the Apostle doth make mention of, where he treats of the New Co∣venant, Heb. 8 10, 11, 12. For this is the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those dayes, saith the Lord, I will put my Lawes into their minde, and write them in their hearts, and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a People; and they shall not teach every man his Neighbour, and eve∣ry man his Brother, saying know the Lord, for they shall all know me from the least to the greatest; for
I will be mercifull unto their unrighteousness, and their sins and iniquities will I remember no more. Here are Four great Promises which the Lord hath made to his People, which I shall explain (though not in the order of the Text) that you may the better understand and apply them. 1. God promiseth that he will be to them a God, and they shall be to him a People; this includes all the rest: It is a full and sweet promise that God will be our God, it hath a great deal more in it, than we can conceive; we may look and look again, and though our Faith have never so piercing an eye, never so large and deep reach, yet we cannot look to the bottom, and fathom the depth of this Pro∣mise; we may suck and suck again at this breast, and though we draw never so hard, we can never draw forth all the sweetness that is in this Promise. To have God to be our God, it is very great, it is very sweet: Indeed God is the God of all his Crea∣tures, yea of his enemies, and the vilest sinners; but to be our God in this place sounds and signifieth more than that which is common to all; it speaketh a peculiar relation, a special interest and propriety in God; in this promise God doth make over him∣self and all that he hath to us, so far as we are ca∣pable of receiving; he giveth himself to be our portion, he engageth his Power, Wisdom, Good∣ness, Mercy, Love, and all his Attributes to be em∣ployed for our good, he promiseth to be our God here, and to be our God for ever; it signifieth that he will be our Father to love and cherish us, to preserve, and provide for us whilest we live, and to take our Souls to himself when we dye, and to raise up our bodies at the last day, and make both
perfectly glorious and happy in Heaven, when time shall be no more. He promiseth also that we shall be his People; we cannot make our selves so, but he promiseth that he will make us so; he will make us his Children, he will adopt us, he will regene∣rate us, give us the title, and give us the disposition of Children; all this and much more is contained in this Promise, That God will be our God, and we shall be his People, even the whole work of our salvation from our effectual Calling unto our eternal Glori∣fication. 2. A second great Promise of the Covenant of Grace is, That God will be mercifull unto our unrighte∣ousness, and that he will remember no more our sins and iniquities; it is a promise of mercy in the free pardon and forgiveness of all our sins, this is an ex∣ceeding great and precious promise, without which there were no access for us unto God, no attain∣ing eternal happiness, no escaping eternal misery, guilt would shut us out of Heaven, and sink us in∣to Hell without a pardon. This Promise is of vast extent, it reacheth to all sort of sins, Unrighteous∣ness, Sins, Iniquities; no sin is too great for God to pardon, if the sinner doth believe. 3. A third Promise of the Covenant of Grace is, that God will give us the knowledge of himself; they shall not teach every man his Neighbour, and every man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord, for they shall all know me from the least to the greatest; they shall not teach one another the knowledge of God, that is, they cannot, or they shall not be able to do it; they may and ought to teach one ano∣ther instrumentally; it is the duty of some to teach, and the duty of others, and they have need, to learn,
but they shall not be able to teach effectually; they may give instructions to one another concerning God and his wayes, but they cannot give light; they may set the light before them, but they cannot set up the light in them; they may open Truths, but they cannot open the Understanding; this is the work of God only to do, and this he hath undertaken by Promise to do, they shall all know me, they shall be taught of God by his Spirit the knowledge of himself; he teacheth by men instrumentally, but he will teach us by his Spirit effectually. 4. A fourth Promise of the Covenant of Grace, is, that God will put his Laws into our hearts, and write them in our minds: the Law was written be∣fore on Tables of Stone, but here he promiseth to write them on fleshly Tables of the heart; which is done not with Pen and Ink, but by the Spirit of the living God, 2 Cor. 3.3. this Promise is very com∣prehensive, it includes not only the giving of a spiritual discovery of the minde and will of God, but also the giving of spiritual dispositions, affecti∣ons, and strength to perform it; and by consequence the removal of indispositions, the purging out of corruptions, the mortifying of lust, the taking away the heart of stone, and giving a heart of flesh, the giving a new heart, the putting the Spirit within us, and causing us to walk in his Statutes, and to keep his Judgements and do them, as this Promise is branched forth, Ezek. 36.25, 26, 27. These in brief are the chief Promises of the Co∣venant of Grace, labour to understand them, and apply them that you may be saved.
Direct. 9. You must give up your selves in Covenant to God, if you would be saved; God hath put his hand and seal to the Covenant which he hath made through his Son with you, and you should put your hand to the Covenant and engage your selves unto the Lord; you were dedicated to the Lord by your Parents when you were bptized, then you understood not what was done; now you are arri∣ved to years of understanding, you should make it your own act, and dedicate your selves to the Lord: and the more solemnly you enter into Covenant with God, the more strong Obligation it may be upon you to walk closely with God all your dayes: Some have directed to do it under hand-writing, subscribing the name, and some have put words into your mouths, which you may do it, in if you are not so well able to express the terms your selves; you have this done in Mr. Guthry and Mr. Allen's books, if those Books be not at hand, I shall set be∣fore you this Platform, which you may make use of in entring solemnly into Covenant with God. I A.B. do acknowledge my self to be the Creature and Subject of the great and glorious Majesty of Heaven and Earth, in whom I live, move, and have my being, and from whom I receive every good thing which I receive; and therefore am obliged to conform my minde, will and affections, to order my words, wayes and whole conversation according to his most wise and good, most righteous and reasonable Laws: Besides which natural Obligation, however born in sin, and thereby disenabled, yet being born in the Church, and
Baptized in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and by my Parents dedicated unto God when I was an Infant; I am further obliged by Covenant to be the servant of the Lord. But having proved a Rebel and Traytor against the Highest Majsty, breaking his Laws, and Covenant-ties which have been upon me, spending years of my life in a state of strangeness and enmity to God, in the service of the Devil and my own Lusts, I do now solemnly reew my Covenant with God, that the breach may be made up which sin hath made between God and my Soul. Being in the First place convinced of the guilt of my sins, whereby I have affronted and offended the highest Majesty, whose Iustice must be satisfied; and withall convinced of my own utter inability to make the least satisfaction either by doing or suffering, and that my Righteousnesses are as filthy rags, and therefore alto∣gether insufficient to procure for me the pardon of sin, the favour of God, and the peace of Conscience; as also fully perswaded that no meer Creature is able to give unto me any help and relief in this case. And being informed by the Word of God what the Lord Iesus is, hath dne, and suffered for poor sinners, That there is no Name undr Heaven given amongst men whereby we can be saved, but only the Name of Iesus Christ; that he is able to save all them unto the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing be ever liveth to make in∣tercession for them; that he is a mercifull and faithfull High-priest in things pertaining to God, to make Re∣conciliation for the sins of the People; that whosoever cometh unto him, he will in no wise cast out: and finding a Promise in the Covenant of Grace that God will be mercifull unto our unrighteousness, and that our sins and iniquities he will remember no more; which
Covenant is of full force through the death of Christ the Testator thereof: and having Christ set forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his blood, and his Righteousness declared for the remission of sins which are past through the forbearance of God; and this Christ freely tendered unto me, and being invited earnestly, yea entreated that I would be reconciled unto God through him; and by the Spirit being per∣swaded of the truth of these things, and hereby encou∣raged to apply my self unto Christ, and the Promises through him unto my self: I do now (grieving that I have offended God, groaning under the burden of sin, renouncing all my own righteousness, hungring after the Lord Iesus Christ and his righteousness) upon the bended knees of my soul come unto him, and cast my self wholly upon him; I chose him for my only Advo∣cate to plead my cause in the Court of Heaven, to procure for me Pardon and Reconciliation, that being justified by Faith, I may have peace with God through my dear Lord Iesus Christ. Next, repenting from the bottom of my heart of my sins, grieving that I have such a sinfull Nature, such a deceitfull heart, that I have so adulterated my affections, and gone a whoring from God to the Crea∣tures, that I have so indulged my flesh, and satisfied its irregular desires, that I have given ear to the Devil, and complyed as I have done with his tempta∣tions: I now renounce all allegiance and service to the World, to the Flesh, and to the Devil, these enemies of the Lord, and of my peace, which warr against my Master, and against my own soul; cove∣nanting and promising never to give away my heart any more from the Lord unto any person or thing in the World; to refuse the World for my portion and
chief happiness; to deny my flesh its sinfull desires and demands; to resist the Devil and his Temptati∣ons; not to live and allow my self in any known sin, and to make use of all the known means which the Lord hath prescribed for the crucifying of the World, for the mortifying and utter extirpation of sin, for the resisting and overcoming the Devil. And being perswaded of the power and interest, the subtilty and deceitfulness of these enemies, and withall sensible of my own imprudence, folly, weakness and inconstancy, I humbly and earnestly implore and beseech the highest Majesty, who is infinite in wisdom, power, and goodness, that he would give me counsel and discre∣tion in the use and management of all means and helps that I may not neglect any, nor through sloth and imprudence sffer a lesser duty to justle out a greater, that he would give me courage, strength and constancy in the maintaining my spiritual warfare against these my spiritual enemies unto my lifes end. And if ever I should fall through unwatchfulness and weakness, (which the Lord grant I may never do) I do promise in the strength of the Lord to arise again by Faith and Repentance. And because of the Body of sin within me, and remaining corruptions, I shall be subject (during my abode here) unto daily failings and infirmities; I do promise to pray, watch and strive against them, beseeching the Lord to strengthen me herein, and grant that my sinfull infirmities may be lesse every day than other; in the mean time looking upon those disallowed miscar∣riages contrary to the settled bent and resoluti∣on of my heart, as insufficient to make my Covenant void.
Furthermore, being convinced of the vanity, empti∣ness, and utter insufficiency of any or all the Crea∣tures in the World, to make me happy, had I the most desireable enjoyment of them; and having a discovery of the infinitely blessed God made unto me in his Works, chiefly in his Word, as being the chief good of man, and withall a Promise in the Cove∣nant of Grace that he will be our God, yea our Father through Christ, and that we shall be his peo∣ple, his Sons and Daughters: I do here with deep veneration of Soul, and chief estimation of minde, choose the thrice Blessed Iehovah for my Portion and chief good, beyond all persons and things in this World; and do avouch him this day to be my God. I humbly accept of the relation of a Servant and a Son, or Daughter, which he hath called me unto. I put my self under his wing, and commit my self to his care and Tuition; and henceforth shall be bold through my dearest Lord to call him, and look upon him to be my God and Father; and humbly shall expect from him Protection and Provision in his way and work, Correction, Audience of Prayer, and the fulfilling of all those Promises unto me, which he hath made unto his Children. Moreover, being perswaded that none can come un∣to the Father, but by the Son; nor share in any spiritual priviledge, but through Christs death and intercession, and being perswaded of the infinite ami∣ableness of Christs person, the greatness of his love and affection unto the children of men, as also of his infinite desireableness in regard of those offices, and relations which he hath vouchsafed to take upon him, and enter into for the good of his people: I do avouch the Lord Iesus Christ to be my only Saviour, and
choose him in all his Offices and Relations. I choose Christ to be my High-Priest, to intercede, and pro∣cure for me daily pardon, access unto God, ac∣ceptance of my person and service, audience of my prayers, and supply of all my wants. I choose Christ to be my Prophet, to teach me by his Word and Spirit the will of the Father. I choose Christ to be my King to rule and govern me, to command my whole man into the obedience of himself. I choose Christ to be my Captain, to go before me, and to tread down my spiritual enemies under my feet. I choose Christ to be my Friend and Brother, to coun∣sel and advise me, to stand by me in all the diffi∣culties and straights of my life. I choose Christ to be my Husband and beloved, humbly accepting of this near and sweet Relation which he calleth me unto. I joyn and espouse my self unto the Lord Iesus; and do promise to be for him only, and with full pur∣pose of heart to cleave unto him, to love, honour and serve him, never to deny nor leave him whatever re∣proaches and distresses I may meet withall for his sake; though Persecution should arise, and that even unto death, I do promise to own his Name, and Cause, and Truths, and Wayes, so long as I have breath in my Body: But knowing that I am utterly insuffi∣cient to do any of these things in my own strength, therefore upon the knees of my Soul, I earnestly be∣seech that I may have strength for all these from him∣self alone. Further, because God my Father is invisible to the eye of sense, and incomprehensible by the grasp of Reason; and because my dearest Lord Iesus Christ, who alone hath declared him, in regard of his bodily presence is now in Heaven, absent from his people;
and because whatever spiritual light or life, grace, comfort, or spiritual communion with the Father, and with his Son, is vouchsafed unto the people of God, it is by the Holy Spirit, who is appointed by Office hereunto, and graciously promised unto them in the Word: Therefore I avouch and choose the Holy Ghost to be my Teacher and Guide, to be my Sancti∣fier and Comforter, to help my infirmities in duties; to strengthen me with might in my inner man against sin and Satans Temptations; to cleanse me from all filthiness of flesh and spirit; to heal me of all my spiritual distempers; to revive me under all my faint∣ings; to supply me with all Graces as to kinde and measure, as shall be needfull for me in my place and work; to testifie Gods love to my Soul; to give me earnests of Glory, and to seal me up unto the day of Redemption: And O that I might have the presence and abode of the Spirit of God with me, and never grieve, quench, resist, and drive away the Spirit any more! Also, because the Holy Scriptures are the Word of God, endited by the Holy Ghost, the Epistle of Iesus Christ, wherein he hath given notice of his love and will; because they are the only sufficient, and in them∣selves a perfect Rule for Faith and a holy Life, and so fully do declare the way and means unto ever∣lasting happiness: Therefore I choose the Word of God to be the Rule of my Faith and Life; and the Or∣dinances of God therein prescribed to be the means of my acquaintance and converse with my God so far as I am capable of, and he shall vouchsafe; and to be the means also of preparing of me for the full and perfect enjoyment of him beyond my present capa∣city.
And, because the Ordinances are but dark glasses to see the Lord in; because ignorance and unbelief do exceedingly vail God from mine eyes, flesh and corruption do damp my love to God, and my spiri∣tual Ioy in him, and interrupt my communion with him; because of the sins, sorrows, temptations, and afflictions which I cannot be wholly free from, and therefore cannot be perfectly happy here in this World; and having life and immortality brought to light by the Gospel; a discovery and promise of eternal Life made unto me in the Word, and withall a command of my Lord, to lay up my Treasure in Heaven: Therefore I choose Heaven for my Treasure and In∣heritance, for ever to live there in the company of all the holy Angels and Saints, in the blessed sight, love, and enjoyment of the infinitely blessed God, to see and share in the glory of my Dearest Lord Ie∣sus Christ, whither I hope my Soul shall be transport∣ed by the Angels, so soon as it is separated from my Body; and that my vile Body, when awakened and raised in the Morning of Chriss coming, shall be fashioned like unto Christs most beautifull and glorious Body, and both inherit the Kingdom prepared and pro∣mised by my Father. Lastly, being perswaded of my Duty, and encou∣raged by Gods promise of assistance and acceptance; I now dedicate and deliver up my self fully, freely, and for ever unto the Lord; I yield and resign up my Soul with all its powers and faculties; my Body with all its senses and members to be the instruments of righteousness unto God: I resign up my Minde to think upon the Lord, and those things which concern his Interest and Glory, to receive, embrace and main∣tain his Truths; I resign up my Memory, to be a
store-house and receptacle chiefly of the great things which do belong to his Kingdom, and other things of a more inferiour rank, as they may have a refe∣rence unto his Glory. I resign up my Conscience to receive light and purity from his Word and Spirit, and desire that it may act faithfully as the Lords De∣puty. I resign up my Will unto the Will of God, to submit to his Precepts, to embrace his Promises, to oppose what he hath forbidden, to comply with all the dispensations of his Providence towards me, to be wil∣ling that I should be, and do, and bear, and choose and lose what God would have me. I resign up my Heart and Affections to fear and reverence the Lord, to believe and trust in the Lord, to desire and seek after the Lord, to love and delight in the Lord, and desire to put them all under his Government, and to have them exercised according to his will. I resign up my Fancy to be governed and employed by my Reason in the service of my Master. I resign up my Sensual Appetite after meat and drink, sleep, and any pleasures to be subsrvient to my Rational Appe∣tite, and no further to have satisfaction, than will tend to the glory of the Lord. I sign up my Hands to work for God, my Feet to walk for God, my Ears to hear for God, my Eyes to see for God, my Tongue to speak for God. I resign up all my Graces, all my Gifts, all my Talents, to be used for the Glory of my Lord and Master; and my whole Man to be ruled and governed by his Laws: Promising, though my Flesh do contradict and rebell, that I will endea∣vour to order my whole conversation according to his Word; humbly looking up to him for strength so to doe, that I may be enabled by him to every duty. And now I look upon my self no longer my own,
or that any thing I have is at my own dispose; but I wholly belong unto the Lord: And therefore, bles∣sing, and praising, and giving thanks unto the Lord, for vouchsafing to enter into Covenant with me, and enclining my heart to enter into Covenant with him; Bending my neck under the feet of the most glorious Iehovah, I subscribe my self, Witness my Hand and Seal. The devoted Servant of the Lord, A. B. Direct. 10. You must be stedfast, and persevere in the wayes of God unto your lives end, if you would be saved: And here you must be stedfast, 1. In the wayes of Truth. 2. In the Wayes of Gods Commandements. 1. You must be stedfast and persevere in the wayes of Truth; in the belief of the Truths of the Word, without turning aside into wayes of Errour; there are wayes of Errour which will lead you as certain∣ly, and more securely to Hell, than the wayes of open profaneness. The Apostle tells us of damnable errours, as well as open, damnable sins, 2 Pet. 2.1. and we read of some that are damned for believing a lye, that their delusion hath been the cause of their damnation, 2 Thess. 2.11, 12. The Devil leads as many as he can in the cords of more gross and known sins towards the place of endless misery; but
if any of them begin to perceive their thraldom and danger, if their eyes be a little opened, and Con∣science awakened, and hearts affected, and they are perswaded to look after their salvation, then he en∣deavours to draw them into wayes of Errour, he hath his Agents and Ministers, who are very subtle and crafty, and lye in wait to deceive, who with good words and fair speeches insinuate poysonous doctrines; and pretending more glorious discove∣ries, higher and more excellent wayes, draw them out of the way of the Word and Ordinances, into paths of darkness, where they wander and lose them∣selves for ever; where they are tossed up and down, and beaten to and fro with every winde of doctrine unto the shipwrack of their Faith and their Souls. As you hope for salvation, you must take heed of Errour; diligently inquire after Truth; search for it as for silver, and digg for it as for hidden treasures; digg for it in the golden Mines of the Scriptures, let the Word of God be the only Rule of your Faith; and having found the Truth, keep it, hold it fast, labour to fix it in your mindes, let it be as a girdle about your loins; lay it up in your heart, let it be rooted there; apply your selves to Christ as a Pro∣phet to lead you by his Word and Spirit into all Truth, and to keep you from being deceived and deluded; and keep close to the Ministery and Or∣dinances of Christs Institution, which the Lord hath appointed to continue unto the end of the World, for the edifying establishment, and perfecting of the Saints, Eph. 4.11, 12, 13, 14. 2. You must be stedfast, and persevere in the wayes of Gods Commandements; you must patiently
continue in well-doing, if you would obtain im∣mortal glory, Rom. 2.7. you must endure to the end if you would be saved, Matth. 10.22. you must be faithfull unto the death, if you would gain the Crown of life, Rev. 2.10. It is absolutely necessary unto salvation, that you hold out in the wayes of God; none but such which come to the end of the race will obtain the prize; the Gate of Heaven lyeth at the further not the hither end of the Holy Path; therefore you must stedfastly persevere in this way; if you should fall down, you must rise again, and go on; if you should fall back or through mistake turn aside, you must return again, and make the more haste; but if you should fall off, if you should fall away (as some have done who have seemed very zealous and forward Christians as to the outward Profession) you are lost, you are cast-awayes, and you will tumble and fall down into the bottomless Pit, from whence there is no returning. Be not then followers of them that draw back to perditi∣on, but of them that believe to the saving of the Soul, Heb. 10.39. Be followers of them who through faith and patience inherit the Promises, Heb. 6.12. It is a glorious Inheritance that is be∣fore you, that is promised and prepared in Heaven, let this encourage you to diligence and perseverance unto the end; I shall conclude with the words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.58. Therefore my beloved Bre∣thren be stedfast, unmoveable, alwayes abounding in the work of the Lord, for asmuch as ye know that your la∣bour is not in vain in the Lord. Thus I have given you Directions, What things you must do that you may be saved.
SECT. XIX. II. THE Second and last thing for your guidance in the way of Salvation, is, To shew you what Means you must make use of to help you in these things. There are Ten Means to be used in order to the attaining of Salvation: 1. Self-examination. 2. Reading the Word of God, and other good books. 3. Hearing the Word Preached. 4. Meditation. 5. Prayer. 6. Christian-conference. 7. Watchfulness. 8. Sanctification of Fasting-dayes. 9. Sanctification of Sabbath-dayes. 10. Improvement of Sacrament-dayes. Means 1. Self-examination. You must examine your selves, if you would see your selves lost; you may read the mistake of the Laodiceans, Rev. 3.17. Thou sayest, I am rich, and encreased in goods, and have need of nothing; and knowest not that thou art wretched, miserable, and poor, and blinde, and naked. You must examine and prove your spiritual state, that you may have a right judgement thereof, that you may perceive how poor, and wretched, and miserable you are whilest you are in a state of Na∣ture. You must examine your selves, that you may get a sight and sense of sin: Ier. 8.6. I hearkned and heard, but they spake not aright, no man repented
him of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? every one turned to his course, as the Horse rusheth in∣to the battel. You must examine what you have done, if you would repent of your sins; you must search and try your wayes, if you would turn from your evil wayes; you must commune with your hearts, and come to your selves, with the Prodigal, if you would return unto God, and turn your feet unto his Testimonies. Be serious then in this great duty of Self-examination; and that you may be so, I would advise that you would set apart time for it, when your thoughts are most free, and affections most sedate and quiet; get out of the hurry of the world, and lay aside other business for a while; and withall separate your selves from company, and retire into secret, where you may be free from ex∣ternal disturbances and interruptions; whatever in∣dispositions and withdrawments of heart you finde, force your selves to the work; resist Satan, who will endeavour to divert and discourage you: Set your selves in the presence of God; desire him to search you; beg his help in the duty; labour to keep your minde close to it; if vain thoughts arise, and would hurry you away, look up to Christ to rebuke them, and to bring them into captivity and obedience unto himself. And then sit down, and seriously consider what you have done ever since you came into the World, and withall think with your selves what you will do when your life and this world shall come to an end. Take a review of your sins; they are noted down upon the book of your Consciences, peruse this book; and if you ex∣tracted a Catalogue of your sins, it might be a help to you. Note down your original sin; your actual
sins; your transgressions of Gods Law, in the first and the second Table thereof; your disobedience to the Gospel; the aggravations of your sins. Means 2. Reading the Word of God, and other good books. The rule whereby you are to examine your selves is the Word; this is like a Candle, which will give light in dark corners; this is like a Glass, which will discover spots in the face; you must search the Word, and try your selves herby, if you would have knowledge of sin, and your spiri∣tual state; and you must search the Word, if you would have knowledge and acquaintance with God and his will. You may arrive to some knowledge of God by reading the Book of Nature; the whole world is full of God, and every Creature doth re∣present him; but the world is full of sin too, and the more immediate representations of the Creatures are sensitive things, which our sense layeth hold on first, and is apt there to stick, without further piercing and searching to finde out God; and where we have one provocation from the Creatures to love and serve him (through the bewitching temptations of the world, meeting with the worldly lusts of our hearts) we have a thousand incitements and allure∣ments from them to sin against God; but the Word is full of God, and no incitement there to sin, full of perswasives to holiness and obedience; God is to be seen more easily, and he setteth forth himself there most conspicuously; In the Book of the Scri∣ptures you have the most glorious discoveries of God, in his greatness, majesty, power, holiness, love, mercy, and the like; and the way made known of acquaintance and communion with him; if you
would be acquainted with God in Christ, you must acquaint your selves with the Scriptures: Read the Scriptures daily, and search them; Ioh. 5.39. read not only the history of the Word, but labour to un∣derstand the mystery of Godliness therein revealed, 1 Tim. 3.16. endeavour after a spiritual discerning of the things of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.14. when you meet with Doctrines in your reading the Word, labour to understand and believe them; when you meet with Precepts labour to obey them; when with Prohibitions and Threatnings, be cautioned against sin by them; when you meet with promises, labour to apply them, to draw vertue from them. Read this Book as the Word of God, and hide it in your heart; lay it up there, as a choice treasure, get your hearts cast into the mould of it; get it written upon your hearts, and let it have an in∣fluence upon your whole conversation; and that you may the better understand and apply the truths of the Word, read as you have time other good books, which open the Scriptures, and treat of need∣full points of Religion, especially such as direct in the great work of Conversion, and give Rules out of the Word for the ordering of your whole conver∣sation; but above all Books read and study the Scriptures. Means 3. Hearing the Word Preached. It is by the foolishness of Preaching that God saveth such as do believe, 1 Cor. 1.21. however the preaching of the Word is to them that perish foolishness, yet unto Believers it is the power of God unto salva∣tion; therein God doth put forth his power, and maketh bare his arm, in bringing salvation to lost
souls. Hear and thy Soul shall live, Isa. 55.3. Faith cometh by hearing, Rome. 10.17. Lydia's heart was opened whilest she attended upon the Word preach∣ed by Paul, Act. 16.14. Attend therefore diligently upon the Word preached by Christs Ministers, as an Ordinance of his own institution for the working and increase of Grace: Look upon Ministers as Christs Ambassadours; he that heareth them hear∣eth Christ, and he that turneth away his ear from hearing them, turneth away his ear from Christ, who by his Spirit in them speaketh from Heaven unto men, and how impossible it is for such to escape the wrath of God, see Heb. 12.25. Much more shall not they escape that turn away their ear from him that speaketh from Heaven. Hear the Word with reve∣rence, as the Word of God, as if the Lord should speak to you from Heaven with an audible voice; hear the Word with diligence and attention as for your lives, as for the salvation of your Souls; hear the Word with faith and love, without which it will not profit and work effectually in your hearts; and in hearing look not so much for those things which may please, as for that which may edifie; I mean, do not regard so much mens fancies, as the wholsom Truths of the Word, which tend most to conviction, edification, to the killing of sin, quickning and in∣crease of Grace, and nourishment of the spiritual life. Means 4. Meditation. The Word like Food must be digested by Meditation, that it may turn to spiri∣tual nourishment; you must ponder and consider in your mindes the Truths of the Word, that you may both understand them, and get your Hearts affected
with them, and your Lives ordered by them. Medi∣tation is a great help in Heavens way, such as are re∣miss herein cannot walk so steddily, nor chearfully; accustome your selves unto this duty, set apart time for it; I know that some complain of barrenness in their thoughts, when they endeavour to meditate; such I would advise, if they have not that fruitful∣ness of thoughts themselves to supply them with matter, that they would make use of others help; let them meditate on the Scriptures they read, on the Sermons they hear; moreover I would offer some general heads for Meditation, which you may make use of. 1. Sometimes meditate on God, his Attributes, his infinite Majesty, power, holiness, om∣nipresence, omniscience, eternity, unchangeableness, his infinite wisdom, truth, faithfulness, justice, good∣ness, mercy and loving-kindness; his Councels, espe∣cially his eternal decree of Election, which is of most sweet consideration to Believers; his works of Cre∣ation and Providence. 2. Sometimes meditate on Christ; his near relations, of Friend, Brother, Hus∣band; his needfull Offices of Priest, Prophet, and King. 3. Sometimes meditate on the Spirit, his way and workings on the minde and heart, how he enlighteneth, enliveneth, strengtheneth, com∣forteth, &c. 4. Sometimes meditate on the Cove∣nant of Grace, and the rich, free, suitable, sure Pro∣mises of pardon, grace, salvation therein. 5. Some∣times meditate on the Gospel, and its priviledges, Justification, Adoption, Sanctification, Assurance of Gods love, peace of Conscience, Joy in the Holy Ghost, communications of grace, &c. 6. Sometimes meditate on the four last things, namely, Death, Judgement, Heaven and Hell. 7. Sometimes medi∣tate,
and that frequently, daily, of such Arguments as tend to the mortifying of your particular sins, which are most strong and prevalent, and to the strengthening of your graces which you finde most weak and deficient. Means 5. Prayer. Pray secretly; retire your selves from company into your Closets, or some private place, and there confess your sins, and make known your requests to God, that seeth and heareth in se∣cret, and hath promised an open reward to such as se∣cretly and sincerely seek him. Pray frequently, be often upon your knees, give your selves unto Prayer; begin the day, conclude the day with Prayer, and recover some other time to visit and speak to God; at least mingle ejaculatory Prayer with every other work; and labour that your minds may be always in a praying frame; and do not withdraw, but be glad when an opportunity offereth it self to come to the throne of grace. Pray fervently, pour forth your hearts before God in the duty; wrstle with God in Prayer like Iacob, be earnst in your Peti∣tions as for your lives, be instant and importunate, take no denyal, follow hard after God; stir up your selves to take hold on him, use arguments in Prayer, to plead with him. Pray believingy, mingle your prayers with Faith; make use of the name and medi∣ation of Jesus Christ; and make application of the Promises which God hath made to his People, which he hath made to Faith, and which he hath made to Prayer. Means 6. Christian Conference. Take heed of the company of the wicked; from such turn away; if
and when you are there, labour to mourn for sin, which hath pierced the Lord; to hunger after his righteousness; to receive him by Faith; to apply the Promises of the Covenant of Grace, whereof the Sacrament is a Seal; endeavour after a burning love to him whose love hath been so great as to dye for you; and let your hearts be filled with joy, and your mouths with Praises, and deliver up your selves in Covenant unto the Lord in this Ordinance; After you come from the Lords Table, reflect upon your carriage towards the Lord; if you have been straitened, endeavour to find out the cause, mourn, and by after-pains and application of Christ, endea∣vour to get some benefit, and prepare better against the next time; if you have been enlarged, be hum∣ble, be thankfull, be watchfull, live up to Obliga∣tions; draw vertue from Christs death for the crcifying more and more of your flesh, with its affcti∣ons and lusts; and fetch influences of grace and spi∣ritual nourishment▪ that you may encrease with the encreases of God. Finally, be diligent in the use of these, and all other means and helps, and so at length you shall attain the ultimate end, for which they are appointed, even your Salvation and Eternal Happiness. FINIS.
