5168.7 99846243 11197
A NECES∣SARY DOCTRINE AND ERVDITION FOR ANY CHRISTEN man, set furthe by the kynges ma∣iestie of En∣glande &c. Psal. xix. Lorde preserue the Kyng and here vs whan we call vpon the. Psal xx. Lorde in thy strengthe the Kynge shall reioyse, and be meruailous glad through thy saluation.
The contentes of this booke. The declaration of fayth. The articles of oure beliefe, called the Crede. The seuen sacramentes. The .x. commandementes of almyghty god. Our lordes prayer called the Pater noster. The salutation of the angell / called the Aue Maria. An article of freewyll. An article of iustification. An article of good workes. Of prayer for soules departed.
❧HENRY THE EYGHT BY THE GRACE OF GOD KYNG of Englande, Fraunce, and Irelande, de∣fendour of the faythe, and in earthe of the churche of England and also of Ireland, supreme hed, vnto all his faithful and lo∣uyng subiectes sendeth greetyng. LIke as in the time of darcke∣nesse and ignoraunce, fyndynge our people seduced and drawen from the truth by hypocrisy and superstition, we by the helpe of god & his worde haue trauayled to purge and clense our realme frome the apparant enormities of the same, wherin by openynge of goddes trueth, with settyng furth and publishyng of the scriptures, our labours (thankes be to god) haue not ben void and frustrate: So nowe perceiuing, that in the tyme of knowledge, the deuil (who ceasseth not in all tymes to vexe the worlde) hath attented to returne agayn, (as the parable in the gospel she with) into the hous purged and clensed, accompanied with seuen worse spirites: and hypocrisy and superstition beyng ex∣cluded and put away, we fynde entered into some of our peoples hartes, an inclination to sinister vnder standynge of scripture, presumption, arrogancye, carnall liberty, and contention: we be therfore con∣strayned for the reformation of them in tyme, and
for auoyding of suche diuersitie in opinions, as by the sayde euyll spirites might be engendred, to sette furth with the aduise of our clergy suche a doctrine and declaration of the true knowledge of god and his worde, with the principall articles of our reli∣gion, as wherby all men may vniformely be ledde & taught the true vnderstandyng of that whiche is necessary for euery christen man to know, for the or∣dering of him selfe in this lyfe, agreably to the will and pleasure of almyghty god. Which doctrine also the lordes bothe spirituall and temporall, with the nether house of our parliament, haue both sene and lyke very wel. And for knowlege of the ordre of the matter in this boke conteined, for as muche as we knowe not perfectly god,Faythe but by fayth, the declara∣tion of faith occupieth in this tretise the first place. Wherunto is nexte adioyned the declaration of the articles of our Crede,The crede conteinyng what we shulde beleue. And incontinently after them foloweth the explication of the seuen sacramentes,The sacra¦mentes. wherin god ordinarily worketh, and whereby he participateth vnto vs his speciall giftes and graces, in this lyfe. Whiche matters so digested and set forth with sim∣plicitie and plainesse, as the capacities and vnder∣standynges of the multitude of our people may ea∣sily receyue and comprehende the same:The com∣maunde∣mentes. There folo∣weth conuenientlye the declaration of the .x. com∣maundementes, beyng by God ordeyned the hyghe way, wherin eche man shulde walke in this lyfe, to finishe fruitfully his iourney here, and after to rest eternally in ioy with him. Whiche bycause we can
not doo of our selfe, but haue nede alwayes of the grace of god, as without whom we can neither con∣tinue in this lyfe ne without his speciall grace doo any thing to his pleasure, wherby to atteine the life to come: We haue after declaration of the cōmande∣mentes, expounded the .vii.The pater noster. petitions of our Pater noster, wherin be conteined requestes and suites for all thynges necessary to a christen man in this pre∣sent lyfe, with declaration of the Aue Maria,The Aue as a prayer conteinyng a ioyfull rehersall, and magnifi∣yng of god in the worke of the incarnatiō of Christ whiche is the grounde of our saluation, wherin the blessed virgin our Lady, for the abūdance of grace, wherwith god indued her, is also with this remem∣brance honoured and worshypped. And for as mu∣che as the heades and sensis of our people haue ben imbusied, and in these dayes trauailed with the vn∣derstandyng of Freewill, Iustification,Freewyll, Iustifica∣tion. Good wor¦kes. Praier for soules. Good wor∣kes, and Praying for the soules departed: we haue by the aduise of our clergie, for the purgation of er∣ronious doctrine, declared and sette furthe openly plainly, and without ambiguitie of speche, the mere and certain truthe in them. So as we verily truste that to knowe god, and howe to lyue after his plea∣sure, to the atteining of euerlastyng life in the ende, this boke conteyneth a perfecte and sufficient do∣ctrine, grounded and established in holy scriptures. Wherfore we hartily exhorte our people of all de∣grees, willyngly and earnestly bothe to reade and printe in theyr hartes the doctrine of this boke, con∣sidering that god (who as saynt Paul sayeth, distri∣buteth
diuideth to his churche his graces distinctly) hath ordered some sorte of men to teache other, and some to be taught, that al thynges shulde be done semely and in ordre, and hathe beautified and set furthe by distinctiō of ministers and offices, the same church: And consideryng also that for the one parte whiche shuld teache other, is necessary not only knowlege, but also learnyng and cunnyng in the same know∣lege, wherby they may be hable conueniently to di∣spence and distribute to their audience the trueth of god, accordyng to theyr connyng for the edification of other, and by true exposition of the scriptures ac∣cordynge to the apostolicall doctrine receyued and mainteined from the beginnyng, and by conferring and declaration of them, to conuince, refell, and re∣proue all errours and vntrouthes set furthe to the contrary & finally be also able to giue an accompte, as saynt Peter sayeth, of that they professe: It must be agreed than that for the instruction of this parte of the church, whose offyce is to teache other, the ha∣uing, redyng, and studyeng of holy scripture, bothe of the olde and newe testament, is not onely conue∣nient but also necessary: But for the other parte of the churche ordeined to be taught, it ought to be de∣nied certainly that the reading of the olde and newe testamēt, is not so necessary for all those folkes, that of duty they ought and be bound to reade it, but as the prince and the policy of the realme shall thynke cōuenient, so to be tollerated or taken from it. Con∣sonant whervnto the politike lawe of our realme hath nowe restrained it from a greate meyny, este∣ming
it sufficient for those so restrained, to here and truely beare away the doctrine of scripture taught by the preachers, and so imprint the lessons of the same, that they may obserue and kepe them inward∣ly in their harte, and as occasion serueth, expresse thē in their dedes outwardly, wherby they may be par∣takers of that blisse, whiche the gyuer of blessednes our sauiour Christe spake of and promised to suche, sayeng: Beati qui audiūt uerbum dei, & custodiunt illud. Blessed by they that here the true doctrine of god, and kepe it, whiche is the true sense of that texte, Wher∣fore we exhorte and desyre al our louyng subiectes, that they prayeng to God for the spirite of humili∣tie, do conforme them selues as good scholers and learners ought, to here and beare away as afore, and willingly to obserue such ordre, as is by vs and our lawes prescribed, and to rede and beare well a∣way the true doctrine, lately by vs and our clergye set forthe for theyr erudition, wherby presumption and arrogancye shall be withstanded, malyce and contention expelled, and carnall libertie refrayned and tempered, and disdeyne clerely remoued and ta¦ken away. So as endeuouryng our selues to lyue quietly and charitably togither, eche one in his vo∣cation, we shall be soo replenyshed with manifolde graces and gyftes of god, that after this lyfe we shall reigne in ioy euerlastyng with the onely head of the vniuersal catholike churche our sauiour and redemer Iesus Christe. Amen.
Faithe. FORASMOCHE AS IN this boke, whiche is sette furthe for the institution and crudition of the common people, the articles of our faith haue the fyrste place, it is very necessarye, before we entre into the declaration of the sayde articles, some thyng to en∣treate of fayth, to the intent that it may be knowen. what is ment proprely by the worde Faythe, as it is apperteynyng to a christen man, who by faythe is partaker of goddis benefites by Chryste. And al∣though Faith be diuersly taken in scripture, it shal be sufficient to entreate here, of two kyndes or ac∣ceptions of the same. FAythe in the fyrste acception, is consydered as it is a seuerall gyfte of god by it selfe dystincte from hope and charitie, and so taken, it signifieth a perswasion and belefe, wrought by god in mannes harte, wherby he assenteth, granteth, and taketh for true, not onely that god is, whiche knoweledge is taught and declared by the marueylous workes of the creation of the worlde,Rom. i. as sayeth saint Paule in the epistle to the Romains, but also that al the wor∣des and sayenges of god, which be reueled and ope∣ned in the scripture, be of moste certaine truthe and infallible veritie. And further also, that all those thynges, whiche were taught by the apostles, and haue ben by an hole vniuersal consent of the church
of Christe, euer sythe that tyme, taught continual∣ly and taken alwayes for true, ought to be receyued accepted and kept, as a perfect doctrine apostolyke. And this is the first acception of Faith, which man hath of god, wherin man leaneth not to his owne naturall knowledge, whiche is by reason, but lea∣neth to the knowledge, atteyned by Fayth, without the whiche Faith, we be ignorant and blynde, and can not vnderstande, accordynge as the prophete Esaie saythe,Vii. iuxta sept, Nisi credideritis, non intelligitis, Onles ye beleue, ye shall not vnderstande. And this faithe is the beginning, entrie, and introduction vnto all christen relygion and godlynes. For as saynt Paul sayth,Hebr. xi. He that commeth to god, must beleue that be is, and that he is a rewarder vnto theym, whiche seeke to please hym. And this faithe, although it be the necessary beginning of all rightuousnesse, yet if it procede not further, to Hope and Charitie, it is cal∣led in scripture a deade Faythe, bycause it is voyde and destitute of the lyfe and efficacy of charitie. Faythe in the second acception is considered as it hath hope and charitie annexed and ioyned vnto it: And faith so taken signifieth not onely the belefe and perswasion before mentioned in the fyrst acception, but also a sure confidence and hope, to atteyn what so euer god hath promised for Christes sake, and an harty loue to god, and obedience to his commaundementes. And this Faythe is a lyuely faythe, and worketh in man a redy submission of his wyll to goddis wylle. And this is the effectu∣all faythe that worketh by charitie, whiche faynte
Paule vnto the Galathians affirmeth to be of va∣lue and strengthe in CHRISTE IESV.Gala. v. By this Faythe, Abraham, not knowing whether he shulde goo, went out of his countreye,Hebr. xi. and dwelte in the lande of beheste, as in a straunge lande, lokynge and trustynge for a citie founded and buylded by almyghty god. By this Faythe also, he was ready to offer vp his onely begotten sonne Isaac, whan he was tempted, in whom he loked for the promyse, nothynge doubtynge, but that god was able to rayse hym vp agayne frome deathe. And this wyse is Faythe taken in the moste part of the examples, whyche be recyted of sainte Paule in the eleuenthe chapiter of his epistle to the Hebrues. And this Faythe euery christen man professeth and couenan∣teth to keepe, whan he receyueth the sacrament of baptisme. For declaration whereof, it is to be noted, that all promyses of god, made to man after the falle of Adam, for Christes sake, be made vnder this condi∣tion, that man shoulde beleue in god, and with the grace of god, gyuen for CHRISTE, endeuoure hym selfe to accomplyshe goddis commandemen∣tes. The churche (therfore intendynge that man shoulde alwayes haue in mynde, how the promyses of god be made vppon condition, and without ke∣pinge of the condition, no man is partaker of god∣dis promyses) hathe taughte and ordeyned, that menne before they receyue baptisme, shall promyse and couenaunte to fulfylle the sayde condytion, and to forsake the deuyll and the worlde, and to
serue onely god. And of this especiall couenaunt, wherby man byndeth him self to god, he is called in latyn Fidelis, faithefull, and he that neuer made the same couenant, or after he hath made it, renounceth and refuseth the same, is called amonges chrysten men Infidelis, vnfaythfull or heathen. And bycause god hath made promise and couenant with man (as is before declared) whiche we muste moste assuredly beleue, that god wyll obserue and kepe, and is euer in his wordes and promyses, most true, moste iuste, moste constant: therfore god is called (as he is in dede faythfull to man, and keepeth and obserueth his fayth, that is to say, his promyse to man, requi∣ryng that man shulde lykewyse kepe his faithe and promyse towardes hym. Nowe of that whiche is beforesayd, it is mani∣fest, that Fayth (as it is taken in the second accepti∣on) is the perfect faythe of a true christen man, and conteineth the obedience to the hole doctrine and re∣ligion of Christe. And thus is faythe taken of saynt Paule, and in other places of scripture, where it is sayd, that we be iustified by fayth. In which places men may not thynke that we be iustified by faythe, as it is a seuerall vertue separated from hope and charitie, feare of god and repentaunce, but by it is ment Faith, neither only ne alone, but with the for∣sayd vertues coupled togyther, conteining as it is aforesayde, the obedience to the hole doctrine and religion of Christe. And here is to be noted, that euery man, that dothe offende god, dothe not lose his faythe therby.
For they that synne by frailtie and sodeyn motions (whiche iuste men doo not auoyde) and be taughte therfore of Christ to say in their Pater noster, Forgiue vs our trespasses, as we forgyue them that trespasse a∣gaynste vs: Yet those men, so breaking their promyse with god, and slackyng in suche care and desyre, as they shulde haue to please god, neuerthelesse be not accompted to haue lost theyr fayth therby, yea they also who after the knowlege of god, fall into dead∣ly synne aduisedly, as they that committe murther, adultery, and other abhominations, and soo falle from faythe, as it is taken in the seconde acception, and be therfore out of the state of grace and fauour of god for the tyme, yet do not those men fall frome fayth, as it is taken in the fyrst acception,Luc. xii. that is to saye from certayne and assured knowledge of god and his doctrine. And therfore the gospell speaketh of a seruaunt, that knoweth the wyl of his lord, and dothe it not. And saynt Iames in his epistle sayeth,Iacob. ii. that Faythe may remayne without charitie. Wher∣fore a transgressour of the lawe of almyghty God after baptisme, kepeth styll a remorse of conscience, and the lyghte of knowledge by Faythe, wherby he seeth the remedyes, howe to atteyne remyssion of synne, and by a special gyfte of further grace is mo∣ued to vse the same remedyes, and so by faythe wal∣keth the wayes ordeined to atteine remission of sin∣nes, as in the sacrament of penance, shalbe declared. Thus we haue shewed two acceptions of fayth and declared, that the fayth of knowledge may re∣mayne in hym that hath fallen from fayth, after the
second acception. But whether there be any special particular knowlege, which man by faith hath cer∣tainly of him self, wherby he may testify to him selfe, that he is of the predestinates, which shal to thende perseuere in their callynge, we haue not spoken, ne can not in scripture ne doctours find, that any such faith can be taught or preached. Truth it is, that in the sacramētes instituted by Christ, we may cōstant¦ly beleue the workes of god in them, to our present comfort, and applycation of his grace and fauour, with assurance also, that he wyll not faile vs, if we fall not from hym. Wherfore so continuinge in the state of grace with hym, we may beleue vndoubted∣ly to be saued. But forasmoche as our owne frailty and naughtynes, ought euer to be feared in vs, it is therfore expedient for vs to lyue in contynuall watche, and continuall fight with our enemies, the deuyl, the fleshe, and the world, and not to presume to moche of our perseuerance & contynuance in the state of grace, which on our behalfe is vncertayne and vnstable. For although goddis promises made in Christe be immutable, yet he maketh them not to vs, but with cōdition, so that his promise standyng we may yet faile of the promise, bicause we kepe not our promise. And therfore if we assuredly recken v∣pon the state of our felicitie, as grounded vppon goddis promise, and do not therwith remēbre, that no man shalbe crowned, onles he laufully fight, we shal triumph before the victory, and so loke in vain for that whiche is not otherwise promised, but vn∣der a condition. And this euery christen man must assuredly beleue.
¶The Crede or the .xii. articles of the christen faythe. i I Beleue in god the fatheralmigh¦ty maker of heauen and earth. ii And in Iesu Christe his onely sonne our lorde. iii whiche was conceiued by the holy goste, borne of the virgine Mary. iiii Suffred vnder Pōce Pylate, was crucifi¦ed, dead, buried, and descended into hell. v And the third day he rose agein frō deth. vi He ascended into heauen, & sitteth on the right hand of god the father almighty. vii From thens he shall come to iudge the quicke and the deade. viii I beleue in the holy goste. ix The holy catholike churche. x The communyon of sayntes: The for∣gyuenes of synnes. xi The resurrection of the body. xii And the lyfe euerlastynge. Amen.
THE NOTES. Here folowe certayne notes for the better vnderstanding of this Crede. FIrst it is to be noted, that all and singular the .xii. articles, contei∣ned in this Crede, be so necessarye to be beleued for mans saluation, that who so euer wyll not constantly be∣leue them, or wyll obstinately affirme the contrary of theym, can not be the very members of Christe, and his espouse the churche, but are very infidelles or heretikes, and members of the deuel, with whom they shall be perpetually damned. Secondly it is to be noted, that all true chri∣sten men, ought and muste moste constantly beleue, maynteyne and defende all those thinges to be true, whiche be comprehended in this Crede, and in the other .ii. credes, wherof the one is vsed to be sayde at masse, and is approued by the auncyen: generall councelles, & the other was made by the holye man Athanasius: And also all other thynges which be cōprehended in the hole body & canon of the bible. Thirdly that all true christen men ought and must not onely repute take and holde all the sayde thynges for the most holy, most sure, and most cer∣tayne and infallible truthes of goddis worde, and suche as neyther oughte ne can be altered or con∣uelled by any contrarye opinion or authoritie: but also must take & interpretate all the same thynges accordynge to the selfe same sentence and interpre∣tation,
whiche the wordes of scripture do signifie, and the holy approued doctours of the churche, do agreably intreate and defende. Fourthly that all true christen men ought and must vtterly refuse and condemne al those opiniōs contrary to the said .xii. articles of our crede, whi∣che were of longe tyme paste condemned in the .iiii. holy counsels, that is to say, in the counsel of Nece, Constanstinople, Ephese, and Calcidonense. The fyrst article. I beleue in god the father almigh∣ty maker of heauen and earthe. FOr the plain vnderstandinge hereof, euery materiall worde of this article shalbe declared hereafter. And first we muste knowe,God. that God is a spiritual and an inuisible substance, or nature, of infinite power and eternall, without beginning or endyng, & of incomprehensible know∣lege, wysdome, goodnes, iustice, and mercy, and that there is but one very god, thre persons, the father, the sonne, & the holy gost, & that these thre persons, be not three goddis, but all one god, one nature, one substance, all one euerlastinge essence or being, and all lyke and equall in might, power, wisdome, knowlege, rightwysnes, and all other thynges be∣longyng vnto the deitie. And that besyde or with∣out this god, there is none other god.
Moreouer we must knowe, that god the father is the fyrst persone in trinitie,Father. and Father of his onely begotten sonne, the second persone in Tri∣nitie, and that he dyd begette him of his owne sub∣stance, by eternall generation, that is to say, by ge∣neration that neuer had begynning. And where this article conteineth, that god the father is Almighty, it is as moch to say, as that he may do all thynges that he wil. in heauen and in earthe, and nothyng is to hym impossible, and that his godly power and myghte excelleth infinitely, and incomparably all other powers, in heauen, earth, and hell: so that all other powers whiche be in heauen, earthe, or hell, be nothynge as of theym selues, but haue all their might force and strength of hym, and be all subiecte vnto his power, and can not resyst or lette the same. And althoughe god be omnipotent, and of infinite power, yet he is not au∣thor or worker of any synne: for whan soeuer any synne is done by any creature, the same is wrought by the malice of the deuyll, or free wyll of man, on∣ly by the sufferance and permission of god, not and by the working & power of god, in styryng vp, fur∣theryng, or assisting the malice of the euyll thought or deede. This article conteineth further, that god the father Almighty, dyd at the begynnynge, create, fourme, and make of nought, heauen and earthe and all thynges visible, and invisible, and that he dyd gyue vnto them, all theyr power and myghte, and so he doth from tyme to tyme continually pre∣serue,
gouerne, susteyne, and mainteine the hole worlde, and all creatures therin, by his onely good∣nesse and high prouidence, in so moche that with∣out his continuall workynge, nothinge shulde be able, any while to continue. And for the more euydent and playne vnder∣standyng of the firste parte of this article, whyche is, I beleue in god, it is to be noted, that we muste not onely beleue stedfastly, that god is, and that he is true in all his wordes and promyses, and that he is omnipotente, and creatour of heauen and earthe, and so forthe: but we muste also with this our beleue, loue god, and cleaue onely vnto hym, and that with al our harte and power, and so conti∣nue and dwelle styll in hym, by loue. It sygnifieth also, that we must obey vnto his wyll, as well in al our inwarde thoughtes and affections, as also in al our outwarde actes and dedes, and that we must abhorre all vyce, and not wishe or desyre of god, any euyll or vngodly thing. It sygnyfyeth also that we must constantly betake and commytte our selues, and all ours holy vnto god, and fyxe all our hole hope, trust, and confidence in hym, and quyete our selues in hym, beleuynge perfectly and assuredly that he wyll in dede shewe no lesse goodnesse, loue, mercy, grace, and fauour vnto vs, than he promy∣seth by his word to do with vs, vsing our selues as afore is sayde. This maner of beleue we ought to haue in no creatour of god, be it neuer so excellente, but in god only, & therfore in this crede, the said maner of spea¦king
kyng, I beleue in, is vsed onely in the thre articles, whiche concerne the thre persons in trinitie, that is the Father, the sonne, and the holy goste. The seconde article. ¶And in Iesu Christ his onely sonne our lorde. FOr the vnderstandinge of this second article, it is to be knowen, that IESVS CHRIST is the only begotten sonne of almighty god the father, and yt he was begotten of his godly nature & substance eternally, and that he is very god, the same substance with god the father, and the holy gost, vnto whom he is equall in all thinges of the godhead. And although we christen men, may be called the children of god by adoption and grace, yet onely our sauiour Iesus Christe is god the fa∣thers sonne by nature. We must knowe also and beleue, that IESVS CHRIST, was eternally preordeined and appoin∣ted, by the decree of the hole Trinitie, to be our lorde, and to redeme and brynge vs from vnder the dominion of the deuyl & sinne, vnto his kyngdome, lordshyp, and gouernance, and therfore is worthely called IESVS that is to say, sauior: and CHRIST that is to saye, anointed king & priest, and LORDE, that is to saye, redemer and gouernour, for he hath done and fulfilled for all mankinde the very office
bothe of a priest, and of a kynge, and lorde. Of a priest, for asmoch as he hath made sacrifice and ob∣lation on the crosse, in that he there willingly suffe∣red his naturall body to be slayne, and his bloudde to be shed for remission of synne, and so was bothe the prieste and the sacrifice it selfe. And of a kinge and lorde, in that he hath like a moste mighty con∣querour, ouercome and vtterly oppressed his enne∣myes, and hath spoyled theym of the possession of mankinde, whyche they wanne before by fraude and deceyte, by lyinge and blasphemynge, and hath brought vp now into his possession and dominion, to reigne ouer vs in mercy, lyke a most louing lord and gouernour. And therfore in this article we call hym Our lorde. And although this worde Dominus, diuers ty∣mes is translated in to our englysshe tongue, the lorde, and the place and circumstance of scripture, oftentimes requireth the same, yet amonge vs chri∣sten men, in our common speche, when we speake of Christe and call hym Lord, it is mooste mete and conuenient, that we call hym, Our lorde, to signifie and admonishe vs, that we be his peculiar people, redemed by hym, and deliuered from the dominion and the captiuitie of the deuyll, and be made his owne propre and obedient seruauntes, after which sorte, the heathen people (bycause of their infideli∣tie) be neither his seruauntes, ne partakers of his benefites, and therfore can not say, and call him as (Christen men do) Our lord.
The thirde article. whiche was conceyued by the holy gost borne of the virgin Mary. FOr declaratyon of this arty∣cle, ye shall vnderstande, that whan the tyme was come, in the whiche is was before ordeyned and appoyn∣ted, by the decree of the hole Trini∣tie, that mankynde shoulde be saued and redemed, than the sonne of god, the seconde person in Trini∣tie, and verye god, descended from heauen in to the world, to take vpon him the very habite fourme and nature of man, and in the same nature to suf∣fer his glorious passion for the redemption and sal∣uation of all mankinde. And for farther declaration hereof, it is to be consydered, that before the commynge of Christe, mankynde was so blynded and drowned in synne, that the true knowlege of god was euery where in the world forgotten, and his lawes broken, not on∣ly by the gentiles in all other nations, but also by the iewes, the chosen people of god, to whome god had by his seruaunt Moises giuen his lawes, wher by they myght knowe howe to auoyde synne and pleased hym, and where those lawes gyuen by god, were often by them transgressed, yet almighty god dyd from tyme to tyme, sende to theym his prophe∣tes, inspired with his holy spirite, bothe to admo∣nyshe them of their synnes, and to teache them how
they shuld truely vnderstande and obserue the said lawes gyuen by his seruaunt Moyses. After the whiche admonitions many tymes so gyuen by the prophetes and nothynge regarded, almyghty god of his infinite goodnes and inestimable mercy, for the loue that he beare to mankynde, dyd send at the last in to the worlde his onely begotten sonne, being his eternal wisdome, by whome in the begynnyng he dyd create heauen and earthe, and all creatures in them, to take vpon hym mans nature, for to re∣deme mankynde, and to teache the world the truth of his lawes, and by what meanes the world might by faythe to be gyuen to his wordes and doctrine, amende theyr lyues, and atteyne to comme to the lyfe in heauen, folowyng hym in his doctrine, who was the waye, to come to the father, the Truthe, to atteyne the knowlege of the father, and the Lyfe it selfe, wherin he shulde finally leade them, to come vnto the father, vnto whom god the father, com∣maundyng the worlde to gyue full credence sayd to all men, Ipsum audire, beare hym.Mat. xvii. Wherfore the sayd sonne of god, in the wombe of the blessed virgin called Mary, dyd take vppon him of her very fleshe, nature and substance, mans nature, and beyng conceiued by the holy gost, was borne of her body, and dyd vnite and conioyne to∣gither the same nature of man, takē of the substāce of the said most blessed virgin, with his godheade in one persone, with suche an indissoluble and inse∣parable knotte and bonde, that he beynge one per∣sone IESVS CHRISTE, was, is, and euer shall
be in the same persone, verye perfecte god, and very perfecte man, whiche holy worke of the incarnati∣on, was not wrought by the seede of man, but by the holy goste in the sayde moste blessed virgine, with∣out any motion of concupiscence or spotte of synne, and was accomplysshed without any violation or detriment vnto the virginitie of that blessed vir∣gine saint Mary, who bothe in the conception and also in the byrth and natiuitie of our sauiour IE∣SV CHRIST her chylde, and euer after reteyned styll her virginitie pure and immaculate, and as clere without blotte as she was at the tyme that she was fyrst borne. The fourth article. Suffred vnder Ponce Pilate / was cru∣cified, dead, buried, and descended into hell. FOr declaration of this article it shalbe expedient brefely to repete the processe, of a great part of our sauiour Christis lyfe, from the beginninge, vn∣to the tyme of his most glorious passi∣on, with the same passion also, and the descense of his soule into hell, wherfore we must vnderstande, that Christe very god and man, after he was con∣ceyued and borne of his blessed mother, waxed and lyued forthe here in the worlde, vntyll he came vn∣to the .xxxiii. yere of his age, and that in all this tyme of his lyfe, he suffred and endured for our sa∣kes
and our welthe, & also for our example, moche bodyly affliction, moche labour, moch trauaile, mo¦che hunger, thyrst, and pouertie, moche iniury and ignominy, and many other such miseries and infir¦mities, as all mortall men be subiecte vnto (syn and ignorance onely except (& so passed ouer al the hole course of his lyfe, euen frō his natiuitie vntyll his death, in suche perfect obedience vnto the lawes of god and man, accordyng to the wyll of his father, and in suche perfecte innocencye of lyuing, that no faute or blame of lyuynge, ne any offence or trans∣gression coulde iustly and truly be laid against him and yet the blynd, ignorant, and obstinate Iewes, replete with enuy and malice, as the very members of the deuyll, by whom they were prouoked and en¦duced thervnto, laboured continually by all craft and meanes they coulde, to dystroye hym, and at length conspiring togither, they toke him serching and procuringe false wytnesse to accuse hym, and after they had bette him, and spette in his face, and vsed al the vyllany they could vnto him, they boūd him, and brought him before Pontius Pilatus, be¦inge than the chiefe iudge in Ierusalem, vnder the emperour of Rome, and there they most falsely ac∣cused hym, as a subuerter of the lawes of god, and as a persone that seduced the people, and moued se∣dition amonge them, and as a traitour against the emperour of Rome, after whiche accusations our sayde sauiour and redemer Iesus Christ was gre∣uousely scourged, by the commaundement of Py∣late, and had a crown of thorne put vpon his head
by the souldiours of the garrison, and was by them not onely moste spitefully mocked and scorned, but also most cruelly tormented and afflycted, and af∣ter this he was at the last in publike and open iuge¦ment, condemned by the sentence of the said iudge, to be crucified, to the intent he shoulde suffer that kynde of deathe, whyche amonge the Iewes was euer most abhorred and detested, and accompted to be the moste shamefull and cursed of all other: and so accordynge to the sayde sentence, the souldiours of the garryson crucified hym, that is to say, they nayled hym throughe handes and feete to a crosse, and hanged hym vppon the same betwene two the∣ues, vpon a certayne hyll callyd Caluary, vntyl he was deade: and after he was thus deade, one Io∣seph of Aramathia, beynge one of Christis disci∣ples, obteyned lycence of the sayde iudge, to take downe the blessed bodye of oure sauioure IESV CHRIST from the sayde crosse, and that done he and an other of Christis disciples, callyd Nico∣demus, wrapped and foolded the same bodye in a cleane syndon, and soo layde it and buryed it in a newe graue or sepulchre, whyche the sayde Ioseph had made a stone, wherein there was neuer man buried before. and after he was thus crucified and deade vppon the crosse, he descended in soule into hell, and losed the peynes or sorowes therof, wher¦with it was not possible, that he shulde be holden, and conquered and oppressed bothe the deuyll and hell, and also deathe it selfe, wherevnto all man∣kynde was condemned by the falle of oure forefa∣ther
Adam into synne. The proces of our sauiour Iesu Christis life, deathe, buriall, and discence to hell, thus declared, it is specially to be noted, and to be beleued for a certaine truthe, that our sayde sauyour, in all the tyme of his moste bytter and greuous passion, and in sufferynge his moste peynfull and cruell deathe, not only indured and susteyned for our redempti∣on, all the peynes and iniuries, and all the obpro∣bries and ignominies, whiche were done to hym, mooste pacientely withoute resistence, and like an innocent lambe, but also that he did wyllyngly and gladly suffer this crosse, and this kinde of deathe for our example, that we shulde folowe the steppes of hym, in pacyence and humylitie, and that we shulde beare our owne crosse, as he did beare his, and that we shoulde also hate and abhorre all synne, knowinge for suretie, that who so e∣uer dothe not in his harte, hate and ab∣horre synne, but rather accompteth the breache and violation of god∣dis commandement, but as a lyght matter, and of small weyght and importance, he estemeth not the price & value of the passion and deth of Christ, ac∣cordynge to the dignitie and worthy∣nesse therof.
The fyfte article. And the thyrde daye he rose againe from deathe. BY this article it appereth / howe our sauiour Iesus Christ, af∣ter he hadde conquered and spoyled the deuyll and hell, he retourned a∣gayn from thens, like a most migh∣ty kyng & conquerour, in triumphe and glory, and so resumed and toke agayn his bles∣sed natural body, the thirde day after his said deth. And so doynge, rose out of that sepulcre, in his na∣turall and perfecte manhode, that is to say, in his soule, and in the selfe same body, whiche was borne of the virgin Mary, and dyd hang vpon the crosse. After whiche resurrection, he was conuersaunt in the worlde, by the space of forty dayes, and did eate and drinke with his apostles and his disciples, and preached vnto them, & authorised them to go forthe into the worlde, to manifest and declare, that he was the very Christ, the very Messias, and the ve∣ry god and man, whiche was promysed in scripture to come to saue and to redeeme all those, that bele∣uynge in hym, ordered them selues in obeying and folowynge his preceptes and commaundementes accordyngly. In this article of Resurrection it is to be no∣ted, that there is nothynge, that can in all aduer∣sitie and trouble, be more ioyefull and comfortable
vnto vs, than the belefe of this article, that Christe rose againe from corporall deathe to lyfe, and that we shall also do the same. The faythe and belefe of this (if we do continue in lyuynge well) is our vi∣ctory and triumph ouer the deuyll, hell, and death, and a speciall remedy, to put away the horrour and feare of theym, for as moche as hereby we be assu∣red, that as deathe coulde not holde Christe, euen soo it can not holde vs, whiche are by a chrysten faythe, the very membres and body of Christe, but that we shall ryse from deathe, and lyue agayne in glorye with hym, euerlastyngely, yf we order and conforme our wyll in this worlde to his preceptes. And the onely hope hereof, shoulde make vs not to feare the aduersities in this worlde, bycause we ly∣uyng as afore, be assured to haue a better and more glorious lyfe after this, as sainte Paule wryteth to the Corinthians, sayinge:i. Cor. xv. If we christen menne bad no hope of other lyfe, than this that is pre∣sent, than were we the moste myserable of all menne. But nowe Christe is rysen againe from deathe, and hath declared therby, that there is a life after this lyfe, whiche all christen men hope to come to. Accor∣dyng herevnto sayth saint Augustine. All the hope of our faythe standeth in this pointe, that we shall ryse agayne.Hebr. xi. This made the faythefull and good men (of whom saint Paul speketh to the Hebrues) to refuse to be preserued from bodyly death, bycause they loked assuredly for a better resurrection. Of this article the epistles of saint Paul, and the newe testament be full, to the Romayns he wri∣teth
Christ rose againe for our iustification.Rom. iiii. ii. Tim. ii. Act. i. & . to Timo∣the he sayth: Remēber that Iesus Christ is risen agein from death. The apostles besides other names per∣teynyng to their office, be specially called the wyt∣nesses of Christis resurrection, the whiche resurre∣ction, as it was by many and sundry apparitions and other infallible argumentes, declared and pro∣ued vnto them, so they dyd in all places, and at all tymes open and inculcate the same, as a special and a chiefe article of Christes doctrine, wherin shulde depende and rest, the greate comforte and solace of all true and faithfull beleuers in Christ. Moreouer by this article, it is not onely con∣fyrmed vnto vs, howe the naturall bodye of man, shall after the corporall deth and departyng out of this present lyfe aryse again, as is before expressed, but also by this resurrection of our sauiour Christ we be admonyshed, that as Christe after his death rose agayne, so we dyinge from sinne, shulde ryse a∣gayn, and walke in a newe life of spirite and grace. The syxte article. ¶He ascended into heauen / and syt∣teth on the ryght hande of god the father almyghty. THis article conteineth, howe our sauiour IESVS CHRISTE, af∣ter that he had perfectely accomplis∣shed and performed the hole mistery of the redemption of mankynde, by
his incarnation, his birthe, his passion, his deathe his buriall, his descendinge into hell, and rysynge agayn from deathe to lyfe, and after he had bene here in earthe, conuersant with his apostles and disciples, by the space of forty dayes, after his re∣surrection, whan he was amonge the apostles, he in theyr syght ascended vp into heauen, in the very same his naturally body, whyche was borne of the blessed virgine his mother, and was crucified vpon the crosse, and so did withdrawe his accustomed vi∣sible conuersation, from the presēs of his apostles, and from the bodily syght of all other creatures, By remembraunce wherof, both they and we shuld here in earthe eleuate and lyfte vp our hole hartes, myndes, desyres, and all affections, from earthely thynges, and frome all carnall and worldly cares, towardes heauen and heauenly thinges, and soo shulde by his grace prepare our hartes, and make our selues mete and apte to receiue his spirituall gyftes, which he sendeth into the worlde. In this article also is exppressed, howe our sa∣uiour Christe, beinge ascended into heauen, sytteth on the ryght hande of god the father, that is to say, hath and shall euer haue communicate vnto hym of god the father, glorye, honour, felicitie, power, and euerlastynge monarchye, gouernaunce, rule, and dominyon ouer all the pryncipates, potesta∣tes, powers, dominions, and ouer all creatures, that can be named eyther in this worlde, or in the worlde to come, to be ordeyned kyng of al kynges, and lorde of all lordes, and all thynges in heauen
and earth, to be caste vnder his fete and made sub∣iecte vnto hym, and he is appointed the onely head of the vniuersall catholike churche, whiche is his mysticall body. And lykewise as the head always excelleth all the other membres, so Christe doth ex∣celle incomparably in honour and dignitie, all the members of his sayde bodye, the Churche, whereof he is the onely perfection and consummation, and is also the onely eternall prieste and bysshoppe of his sayde churche, that is to saye, the onely media∣tour betwene god and mankinde, the redemer, in∣tercessour, and aduocate, for the remyssion of syn∣nes, as hereafter in this boke it shall more at large appere. And it is to be noted, that although the inter∣cession and mediation by prayer of sayntes depar∣ted, and of such the membres of the catholike chur∣che, as be yet lyuynge on earthe, be good, accepta∣ble, and profitable vnto vs, yet that is onely by the mediation and intercession of Christe our head, in whom god the father is pleased and contented, and through whom saintes departed this lyfe, and rai∣gning in heauen with Christe, and suche as truely confesse Christ, in the churche catholyke, yet liuing, may and do effectually pray for vs: and therfore be of vs also auaylably prayed vnto, that is to say, desyred to pray for vs: accordynge wherevnto all common prayers of the churche, oughte to be al∣wayes fynyshed and ended, with a remembrance of our sauiour Iesu Christe, In whom, by whome, and for whome, all is accepted of god, and without
whom, nothyng can be effectually done or granted. And therfore it is moche to our comfort, to re∣membre the exaltation of mans nature in our head, our sauiour and redemer IESV CHRISTE, whi∣che inseparably and indissolubly conioyned and v∣nited to the deitie, in the person of hym, sytteth on the right hande of god the father almighty, by cō∣munion of preeminence, and power, as before is ex∣pressed, wherby we be certified, how our sauiour Ie¦sus Christ, is god, equall to god the father in god∣head, & therin not inferyour vnto hym, and therfore to be honored, worshypped, loued, and dread, feared and trusted on, beleued & hoped on, as on very god almighty, to whome nothyng is impossible, and yet he is man also, whiche hath experience of our infir∣mities, and can and wyll mercyfully haue compas∣sion on the same, who ascended vnto heuen,Ephe. iiii. to sende giftes vnto men, wherby we myght be able & strong to passe ouer this transitorye lyfe to the pleasure of god, and the atteynyng of euerlasting lyfe. The seuenth article. From thens he shall come to iudge the quicke and the deade. IN this article it is declared / howe our sauiour and redemer IE∣SV CHRIST, shal come from thens that is to saye, frome heauen, to the whiche he ascended, and commyng in his maiesty and glory, shal than in the very visible
fourme of his naturall body, appere vnto the bo∣dily eyes of all the people of the worlde in his per∣fecte manhode, and in the selfe same bodye, wherin he ascended, to the inestimable comfort and reioyce of the good, and to the extreme terrour and confu∣sion of the wycked. Where beinge accompanyed with his holy aungels his ministers, wayting vp∣pon hym, he shall sytte openly in the cloudes of the ayre, and shal iudge all, quicke and dead, according to truthe and iustyce: and accordynge to his holy worde expressed in scripture, that is to saye, accor∣ding to euery mans owne workes and dedes, done by him in his lyfe tyme, whiche workes and deedes shalbe than examyned, discussed and tried, not after mens owne fantasy and inuention, without autho¦ritie and ground of scripture, but accordyng to the commandement of god, and the teachyng of Christ and his apostles, for at that day of iudgement, all the people of the worlde, quycke and deade, that is to say, as well all those whyche shall be founde on lyue in the worlde at that day, as also al those, whi∣che euer sithe the creatiō of Adam liued here in this worlde, and dyed before that day, shal come and ap∣pere afore the presence of Christe, in their very bo∣dies and soules. And whan they shall be so gathered and assem∣bled togyther, our sauiour IESVS CHRIST, shall pronounce the fynall sentence and iudgement of euerlastynge saluation, vppon all those perso∣nes, whyche in theyr lyfe tyme obeyed and confor∣med themselues vnto the wyl of god, and exercised
the workes of right beliefe and charitie,Rom. ii. and so per∣seueryng in well doinge, sought in theyr hartes and deedes, honour, glorye, and lyfe immortall: And contrary, vpon all those, whiche in their lyfe tyme, were contentious, and dydde repugne agaynst the wyll of god, and folowed iniustyce and iniquitie. rather than truthe and vertue our sauiour Christ shall than and there pronounce the sentence of euer lastyng punyshement and damnation.Mat. xxvi In whiche sentence there shall be made a perfect separation or dyuision, betwene these two sortes of people, that is to say, betwene the shepe and the gotes, the corne and the chaffe, the good and the badde, the blessed and the cursed, the membres of his bodye, and the membres of the deuyl, and so the good and the bles∣sed beyng vppon his ryght hande, he shall clerely and perfectly delyuer theym for euer, from the po∣wer and malice of the wicked, and from all the pai∣nes and euyll, and so take them all vp with hym in∣to heauen, there to be crowned and rewarded in bo∣dy and soule, with honour and glorye, and euerla∣stynge ioye and peace, whyche was prepared for them from the begynnynge of the worlde. And all the other, whiche shall be iudged to euerlastynge payne and deathe, beinge vpon his lefte hande, he shall sende them downe into hell, there to be puny∣shed in body and soule eternally with fyer, that ne∣uer shall haue ende, whiche was prepared from the begynning of the worlde, vnto the deuyll and his aungelles. And here it is especially to be remembred, howe
this article was for great consideratiōs added im∣mediately and conioyned vnto the former articles, and chiefly to the intent that no man shulde in his life time, presume vpon the said benefites of Christ, or take occasion of carnall libertie or securitie, and so lyue without feare to transgresse, or without re∣garde, to obserue the commaundementes of god: but rather that euery good christen man, shulde in euery parte of his lyfe, haue a continuall remem∣brance and respect, vnto the last day of iugement, and so be in continual feare, to committe any thing contrary to the wyll of god, for the which he might deserue, to haue the sentence of euerlasting damna∣tion, pronounced vpon him. For this is certainely true, that at that day, euery man shall be called to an accompte of his lyfe, and shall be than fynally iudged, according to his workes, good or bad, done in his lyfe tyme,Rom. . that is as saynte Paule saythe: to theym that perseuere in well doinge, and labour to atteyne glory, honour, and immortalitie, shall be gyuen lyfe euerlastyng: and to theym that be con∣tentions, and obey not the truthe, but folowe and do iniustice, shall come indignation, yre, affliction, trouble, and peines euerlastyng. In this article it is further to be noted, that lyke as there is nothinge more certeyne vnto vs, than that we be all mortall and shall ones dye, and yet noo man lyuynge knoweth the tyme whan he shall dye: euen so there is nothyng more certayne, than that this daye of iugement shall ones come, and yet the houre and tyme whan it shalbe, is hid∣den
and kepte secrete from the knowlege of all men and aungelles, and is reserued to the onely know∣ledge of god. whiche thynge procedeth of his onely goodnes towardes vs, and is done, to the intent we shulde alwayes here in our lyfe tyme, flee frome synne, and imploy all our hole study, and endeuor, to walke in the wayes, of god, that is to say, in such fayth, hope and charitie, as God requireth of vs, & so prepare our selues, and ordre our lyuyng towar∣des god, that we may be in a redynesse at all tymes, whan so euer it shall please god to calle and sum∣mon vs, to appere before hym in the sayd generall iudgement, there by his mercy and goodnes to re∣ceyue the crowne, whiche he promysed vnto al men, that do feare hym, and loue hym, and walke in his wayes. The eyght article. I beleue in the holy goste. THe holy goste is the thyrd per∣sone in trinitie, verye god and lorde, authour and former of all thynges created, and procedeth bothe frome god the father, and frome god the sonne, one with them in nature and substance, and of the same euerlastynge essence or beinge, whiche the father and the sonne be of, and equall also vnto them bothe in almyghtynesse of power, and in the worke of creation, and all other thynges pertey∣ning vnto the deitie or godhead, wherfore he is also
to be honored & glorified, equally with them bothe. This holy goste, whiche is the spirite of god, is of his nature all holy, ye holynes it selfe, that is to say, he is the onely goste or spirite, which with the father and the sonne is, was, and euer shall be the autour, causer, and worker, of all holynes, pu∣ritie, and sanctimonye, and of all the grace, com∣forte, and spirituall lyfe, which is wrought, and cō∣meth into the harte of any man, in so mothe that no man can thynke well, or do any thynge that good is, but by the motion, ayde, and assistence of this holy spirite, neyther it is possible, that the deuylle, or any of those euyll spirites, whiche doo possesse and reygne in suche persons as be subiecte vnto synne, can be expelled or put out of theym, but by the power of this holye spirite, neyther it is possi∣ble, that the harte of any man, beinge ones cor∣rupted and made as prophane by synne, can be purged, purified, sanctified, or iustified, without the worke and operation of this holy spirite, ney∣ther it is possible for any man, to be reconciled vn∣to the fauour of god, or to be made and adopted in∣to the numbre of his chyldren, or to obteyne that incomparable treasure, whyche our sauyour Ie∣sus Christe hath purchased and layde vp for man∣kynde, onelesse this holy spirite, shal fyrste illumine and lyghten his hart, with the ryght knowlege and faythe of Christe, and styrre hym by grace, to haue due contrition and penaunce for his synnes, and shall also instructe hym, gouerne hym, ayde hym, dyrecte hym, and indue hym, with suche spirituall
gyftes and graces, as shall be requisite and neces∣sary to that ende and purpose. Moreouer this holy sipirit of god, is of his own nature, full of all goodnes & benignitie, yea good∣nes it selfe, from whom procedeth all and syngu∣lar graces and gyftes of feare, wysedome, vnder∣standynge, counsell, strength, fayth, charitie, hope, and all other, whiche be gyuen, conferred, and di∣stributed vnto vs mortall men here in the eatthe, at his owne wylle and dispensation, and that noo man can pourchase or obteyne, ne yet receyue, re∣teyne or vse any one of theym, without the specyall operation of this holy spirite, whiche gyftes neuer the lesse he gyueth not, nor dyspenseth the same e∣qually, and vnto euery man in lyke, but he dyuy∣deth them, particularly and specyally to euery mem¦ber of the churche, as is most necessary for the hole body, and in suche plentye and measure, as vnto his godly wyll and knowledge, is thought to be mooste beneficiall and expedient for the same: All whyche thynges he dothe of his mere mercye and goodnes, freeely and aboue our deseruynge. Farthermore this holy spirite is of his owne nature, full of charitie and holy loue, yea charitie it selfe, frome whome procedeth all charitie, and soo by his godly operation is the bonde and knot, wherewith our sauiour IESVS CHRISTE, and his moste dere espouse the churche (whyche is also his mysticall body) be vnited, knyt, and conioyned togyther in suche perfecte and euerlastynge loue
and charitie, that the same can not be dissolued or separated: And ouer this is also the very bond and knot, wherby all and euery one of the very mem∣bres of Christis churche and body, be vnited, cou∣pled, and conioyned, the one of them with the other in mutuall loue and charitie. Also this holye spirite of god is the spyrite of trouthe, and the autour of all holy scripture, con∣teined in the hole canon of the bible, and did not on∣ly inspire and instruct all the holy patriarches and prophetes, with all the other members of the catho∣lyke churche, that euer was from the beginnyng of the worlde, in all the godly truthes and verities, that euer they dyd knowe, speake, or write, but also descended and appered in the symilitude & lykenes of fyery tongues, and dyd lyght vpon the apostles and disciples of Christ, and inspired them with the knowlege of all truth, and replenyshed them with heauenly giftes and graces: and shall be continu∣ally present in the catholyke churche, & shall teache and reuele vnto the same churche, the secretes and mysteries of all truthes, whiche are necessary to be knowen, and shall also continually from tyme to tyme, rule, directe, gouerne, and sanctifie the same churche, and gyue remission of synnes, and all spi∣rituall comforte, as well inwardely by secrete ope∣rations, as also outwardly by the open ministrati∣on and efficacy of the worde of god, and of the ho∣ly sacramentes in the sayd churche, and shall endue it with all such spiritual graces and giftes, as shall be necessary for the same.
Finally it is to be noted, that albeit holy scrip∣ture dothe worthely attribute vnto the holy goste, our sanctification, our iustification, & all other be∣nefites, whiche Christe by his passion hath merited and deserued for vs, yet neuerthelesse the same be also the workes of the hole trinitie, and be not to be separated in any wise, although scripture common∣ly dothe attribute them vnto the holy goste: For in lyke maner dothe scripture attrybute power vnto the father, and wisedome vnto the sonne, which ne∣uerthelesse be common vnto all thre. The nynth article. The holy catholyke churche. AFter the eight articles of our belefe, in which we knowledge god∣des might and power in the creation of the worlde, his mercy and good∣nes in our redemption, and his spi∣rituall benefites exhibited and gyuē to vs by the holy goste, foloweth the nynth article, in whiche we declare that we do beleue and confesse the maner of goddis working, in calling vs to haue fruition of hym, and to be made partakers, of hys sayde benefites. Wherfore we must vnderstand, that besides the inward and secrete calling, which god hath alwais vsed, and yet still doth vse, he hath also ordeyned an outward callynge of the people vnto him by, prea∣chynge
of his moste holy worde, vpon whiche out∣warde callynge, the people yeldyng, assentyng, and obeyeng to the same worde of god, and receyuynge it also with true fayth, & the sacrament of baptisme (as Christis lawe requireth) be named in scripture Ecclesia, that is to saye, an assemble of people called out from other, as from infidels or heathens, to one faythe and confession of the name of Christ, whiche worde Ecclesia, is in englyshe called Churche. And it is to be noted specially, that in our en∣glyshe tungue, by the worde Churche, we vnder∣stande not onely the hole multitude of people, whi∣che be called of god to one fayth, be they of the cler∣gye or of the laymen, but also by the same worde we signifie the place, wherin the worde of god is com∣monly preached, and the sacramētes ministred and vsed, and call that the churche: to entreate wherof at this time in this article, is no part of our entent, but onely of the assemble and cōpany called to pro∣fesse Christe in one faythe, whiche in this article is named the Holy churche. For all be it in this assemble of men, called by the worde of god, and receyued by faythe and bap∣tisme, be many euyll men, many synners, many that tourne by true penance to grace, and sometyme yet fal agayn, some after theyr tourne by true penance, styll perseuere and increace in goodnes, many that fall and neuer ryse agayn: so that spottes, blottes, and imperfections, appere euidently in this chur∣che, and many tymes in the more parte therof: Yet
neuerthelesse bycause the callyng is of it selfe holy, the caller also holy, and the ende of the callinge ho∣lynes, with this also that the people so called, pro∣fesse holynes, and make a bodye, wherof the onely heade our sauiour CHRIST is moste holy, and holines it selfe, by the merites of whose passion they be relieued and norisshed with dyuerse holy sacra∣mentes, and be in theyr callyng indued with moste speciall holy giftes and graces of almightye god, autour therof, and by his holy spirite directed and gouerned in the same, so long as they by folowyng theyr concupiscence, the deuyll, or the worlde, fall not frō that estate: For these causes (although some membres therof be euyll) the churche is called Holy churche, takyng the name Holy, of that, that Christ the onely head is holy, the caller holy, the professi∣on and callyng holy, and the ende holynes, whyche of very duety ought to be in al them, that be called, and is in deede in suche membres, as contynue and perseuere in that holy callynge. And for so moch as god of his goodnes calleth people, as afore, without acception of persons, or priuilege of place. Therfore this holy church is al∣so Catholike, that is to say, not limitted to any one place or regiō of the world, but is in euery place v∣niuersally through the world, where it pleaseth god to cal peple to him, in the professiō of Christis name and faith, be it in Europe, Affrike, or Asia. And all these churches in diuers coūtreis seuerally called, althoughe for knowlege of the one from the other, among them they haue diuers additions of names,
and for their moste necessary gouernement, as they be distinct in places, so they haue distinct ministers and diuers heades in earthe, gouernours, and ru∣lers, yet be al these holy churches but one holy chur¦che catholyke, inuited and called by one god the fa∣ther, to enioy the benefite of redemption, wrought by our onely lord and sauiour Iesu Christ, and go∣uerned by one holy spirite, whiche reacheth to this foresayde holy churche, one truthe of goddis holy worde, in one faith and baptisme. And this churche is relieued, norished, and fortified, by his holy and inuincible worde and his sacramentes, which in al places haue eche of them their owne propre force & strength, with giftes of graces also, distributed by the goodnes of almighty god in al places, as to his wisedome is sene conuenient. Wherby it appereth, that the vnitie of these ho∣ly churches in sundry places assembled, stādeth not by knowledging of one gouernour in earth ouer al churches. For neyther the hole churche catholyke togither, nor any particular church apart, is boūd to aknowlege any one vniuersall gouernour ouer the hole churche, other than Christe, althoughe by sufferaunce of some princes and potentates, not be¦inge truely instructed in the worde of god, by suche as of duety both to god & them, oughte to haue de∣clared the truthe of scripture to them, and by hypo∣crisy and vsurpation of the see and court of Rome, the bishoppe of the same, giuinge him selfe more to worldly polycy, than to the execution of his duety, hath longe tyme gone aboute to obteine and esta∣blishe
vnto hym selfe, suche an vniuersall auctori∣tie, and hath by abuses alwaies compassed to cause other, to vpholde and mainteine the same, contra∣ry to goddes lawe, as more largely shall be decla∣red in the sacrament of orders. The vnitie therfore of the churche, is not con∣serued by the bishoppe of Romes auctoritie or do∣ctrine, but the vnitie of the catholyke churche, whi∣che all christen men in this article do professe, is cō∣serued and kepte, by the helpe and assistence of the holy spirite of god, in reteining and mainteynynge of suche doctrine and profession of christen faithe, & true obseruance of the same, as is taughte by the scripture and the doctrine apostolike. And particu∣lar churches ought not in the said doctrine so accep¦ted and allowed to vary one from an other, for any lucre, arrogance, or any other worldly affectiō, but inuiolably to obserue the same, so that by reason of that doctrine, eche churche that teacheth the same, maye be worthely called (as it is in dede) an aposto¦like churche, that is to say, folowing such teachyng as the apostels preached, with ministration of su∣che sacramentes, as be approued by the same. And this vnitie of the holy church of Christe, is not diuided by distance of place, nor by diuersitie of traditions and ceremonies, dyuersely obserued in diuerse churches, for good ordre of the same. For the churche of Corinthe, and of Ephese, were one churche in god, thoughe the one were farre distant in place from the other: And though also in traditi¦ons,
opinions, and policies, there was some diuer∣sitie amonge them, lykewise as the churche of En∣glande, Spaine, Italy, and Poole, be not sepa∣rate from the vnitie, but be one churche in god, not withstandynge, that amonge them, there is great distance of place, diuersitie of traditions, not in all thinges vnitie of opinions, alteration in rites, ce∣remonies, and ordinances, or estimatiō of the same, as one churche peraduenture doth esteme their ry∣tes, traditions, lawes, ordinances, and ceremonies to be of more vertue and efficacie, than an other churche dothe esteme the same. As the churche of Rome doth affirme certaine of theyr lawes and or∣dinaunces, to be of suche estimation, that they be of equall force with the worde of god, and that who so euer disobeyeth or transgresseth the same, commyt∣teth deadly synne: Yet we perceyuing the same, to be discrepant from the truthe of scripture, must nedes therin dissent from them. But such diuersitie in opi¦nions, and other outward maners and customes of policie, doth not dissolue and breake the vnitie, whi¦che is in one god, one faith, one doctrine of Christe and his sacramentes, preserued and kept in these se∣ueral churches, without any superioritie or preemi¦nence, that one churche by goddis lawes, maye or ought to chalenge ouer an other. And therfore the churche of Rome, beinge but a seuerall churche, chalenginge that name of Catho∣like, aboue all other, dothe great wrong to all other churches, and dothe onely by force & mayntenance, support an vniust vsurpation: for that church hath
no more ryghte to that name, than the churche of Fraunce, Spayne, England, or Portugale, whiche be iustly called catholyke churches, in that they doo professe, consent, & agree in one vnitie of true fayth, with other catholike churches. This vsurpation before rehersed well considered, it may appere, that the bishop of Rome, doth contrary to goddis lawe, in chalengynge superioritie and preeminence, by a cloke of goddis lawe ouer all. And yet to make an apparance, that it shulde be soo, he hathe and dothe wreste scriptures for that purpose, contrary both to the true meanyng of the same, and the interpretati∣on of ancient doctours of the church, so that by that chanleng he wold not do wrong onely to this chur∣che of Englande, but also to all other churches, in claymyng this superioritie, without any authoritie by god, so to him gyuen. For God by his goodnes hath called indifferently and equally, all such chur∣ches, in sundry places, as his highe wisedome, hath thought good to assemble and call vnto hym. Moreouer the perfitte beleue of this article, worketh in all true christen people, a loue to conti∣nue in this vnicie, and a feare to be caste out of the same, and it worketh in them that be synners and repentaunte, great comforte, and consolation, to ob∣teyne remission of synne, by vertue of Christis pas∣sion, and administration of his sacramentes at the ministers handes, ordeyned for that purpose, for as muche, as god doth not ordinarily giue suche thin∣ges, but onely within this churche.
It is to be noted, that this churche of England, and other knowen particular churches, in whiche Christis name is truely honored, called on, and pro¦fessed in faythe, and baptisme, be membres of the hole catholike churche, & eche of them by him selfe, is also worthyly called a catholyke churche, whan they merely professe and teache the faythe and rely∣gion of Christ, according to the scripture and the a∣postolike doctrine. And so euery christe man oughte to honour, gyue credence, and to folowe the parti∣cular churche, of that region soo ordered (as afore) wherin he is borne, or inhabiteth, and as al christen people, as well spirituall as temporal, be bounde to beleue, honour, & obey our sauiour Iesus Christe, the onely heade of the vniuersall churche, soo lyke∣wyse they be, by his commaundemente, bounde to honour and obey, nexte vnto him selfe, christen kin∣ges and prynces, whiche be the heade gouernours vnder him, in the particular churches, to whose of∣fyce it apperteyneth, not only to prouide for the trā∣quillitie and wealthe, of theyr subiectes, in tempo∣ral and worldly thynges, to the cōseruation of their bodyes, but also to forsee, that within theyr domi∣nions suche ministers be ordeyned and appoynted in theyr churches, as can and wil truely and purely set out the true doctrine of Christe, and teache the same, and to see the commaundementes of god well obserued and kepte, to the wealth and saluation of theyr soules.
The tenth article. The communion of sayntes / The forgyuenes of synnes. IN this article be taught two speciall fruites and benefytes, whi∣che all men called of god, and obey∣ing to the same calling in theyr wyl, and workes, doo obteine by goddes grace, in the saide catholike churche, whiche benefites be, the communion sayntes, and forgyuenes of synnes. And here is to be noted, that althoughe this word Sayntines our english tungue signifieth pro∣prely them, that be departed this lyfe, and be esta∣blysshed in glory with Christe: Yet the same worde Saintes, wherby in this article we expresse the latin worde Sanctorum, is here extended, to signifie not onely these before mencioned, but also all suche, as be called into this holy assemble and churche, and be santified in our sauiour Iesu Christe. And as touching the communion, that is to say, the mutuall participation of these sayntes, ye must vnderstande, that lyke as all the partes and mem∣bres, which be liuing in the natural body of a man, do naturally cōmunicate and minister eche to other the vse, commoditie, and benefite of all theyr for∣ces, nutrimentes, & perfections: (In so muche that it lieth not in the power of any man to say, that the meate, which he putteth into his owne mouth shal
nouryshe one particular membre of his bodye, and not an other, but that all and euery one particular∣ly, shall receyue of the sayde nutriment, and of the vertue and benefyte therof, more or lesse accordyng to the naturall disposition, portion, and place, whi∣che it hath within the same body): euen so, what soo euer spirituall gyftes or treasure is gyuen by god vnto any one membre of the holy church, although the same be gyuen particularly vnto one membre, and not vnto an other: Yet the fruite and merites therof, shall by reason of theyr abydyng together in the vnitie of the catholike churche, redounde vnto the common profyte, edifienge, and increace of all the other membres of the same catholike churche. In so muche that there shal nede no mannes auto∣ritie to dispence and dystribute the same, or to ap∣plye it vnto this membre or that, but eche membre shall be made participante of the sayd treasure, and shall haue and enioy the fruite and benefyte of the same, in such quantitie and measure, as for the rate and proportion of the faythe and charitie, which he hath in the same body, shall be expedient and neces∣sary for hym to haue. And hereby is notified and declared vnto vs, the vtilitie and profyte, whiche all the membres of the church do receiue, by the merites, suffrages, and prayers of the churche. And forasmoche as the moste blessed sacra∣ment of the Aultare, wherin by the myghty opera∣tion of goddis worde, is really present in fourme
of breade, the naturall lyuynge body and bloude of our sauiour and redemer IESV CHRISTE, in∣creaseth and worketh in them that worthily receiue it, the communion and coniunction in body & soule of them to Christe, and Christe to them, with a mu∣tuall coniunction also in loue and charitie, of eche good man in Christe to other: Therfore the sayde sacrament may worthely be called the Communion of saintes. And so the fyrst parte of this article hath ben by good deuout and lerned men expounded, to sygnifie the sayde blessed sacrament of the aultare, which we must beleue to be a reall & effectuall com∣munion of all saintes, that is to say, of al men, whi∣che be called by the holy callynge of god, and there with wyllyngely and obediently do knowlege and folowe the same. In the seconde parte of this article, we be taught to beleue remission of synnes, which is one of the effectes and chiefe benefites of the moste blessed passion of Christe, head of the holy churche, whiche is called and assembled in his name, in which churche is ap∣plyed the benefites of remission of synnes, by the workynge of god in his sacramen∣tes ministred in the same, as shalbe hereafter de∣clared in theyr place. ❧
The .XI. and .XII. article. The resurrection of the body / and the lyfe euerlastynge. AT the daye of the generall dome or iugement, whan Christ shall come (as in the seuēth article of this Crede is conteyned) and syt to iudge both quycke and dead, almighty god shall stirre and raise vp againe, the very fleshe and bodies of all men, women, and children, bothe good and bad christened & heathen, that euer lyued here in this world, from the beginning of the same, and died before that day. And althoughe the sayd fleshe and bodies were dead and buryed, yea and consu∣med, or by any meanes, destroyed, yet god shall of his infinite power make them all at that daye, hole and perfite again. And so euery man generally shal resume and take againe, the verye selfe same body and fleshe, whiche he had whiles he liued here on earthe, and so shall ryse from deathe, & lyue againe in the very selfe same body and soule, which he had before. At whiche tyme, man beyng thus made perfit in coniunction of body and soule, shall at that day, appere before the highe iudge our sauiour IESV CHRIST, and there shall make an accompte of his workes and his dedes, suche as he dyd, good or euyll, while he liued here in this worlde. And suche as haue ledde theyr liues, in obedience and obserua¦tion
of goddis commandementes, and die in true faith and charitie, shal than be perfitely sanctified, purified, and deliuered from al contagion of sinne, and from all corruption and mortalitie of the flesh, and shall be perpetually glorified, & receyue bothe in body and soule together, euerlastyng lyfe. Whiche lyfe euerlastynge, thoughe it passeth al mennes wittes, to expresse how pleasant and ioyful it is, nor yet mannes capacitie, can compryse and vnderstande the same, as saynte Paule wytnesseth, saieng, That, which the eie hath not sene, nor the eare hath not herde, nor hath not entred in to mans harte,i. Cor.  God hath ordeyned for them, that loue him: Yet ho∣ly scripture speketh of it, after our capacitie and in¦telligence, but farre vnder the worthynes and ex∣cellency therof. The prophet Esaie saith,Esa. xxxv. Euerlasting gladnes shall be ouer their heades, they shall haue ioy and gladnes, sorowe & wayling shall forsake them.Apoc. vii. And saynte Iohn saythe, God that sytteth on his throne, shall dwell ouer them. They shall not hun∣ger or thyrst any more, neyther sonne, nor heare shal hurte them, for the lambe, that is in the myddes of the throne, shall feede them, and brynge them to the fountaines of the water of life: And god shal wipe away, all wepyng and teares from theyr eyes, death shall endure no longer. There shall be no waylyng, nor cryenge, nor sorowe any more: Yea there is no ioy or comfort, that can be wished for, but it is there most plentifully. There is true glory, where prayse shall be without errour or flatterye. There is true honour, whiche shall be giuen to none, onles he be
worthy. There is true peace, where no man shalbe molested or greued, neyther by hym selfe, nor by o∣thers. There is true and pleasant felowship, where is the company of blessed angels, and the elect and chosen saintes of god. There is true and perfecte loue, that neuer shall fayle. For all the heauenly company, is linked and fastened together, by the bond of perfecte charitie: wherby also they be vny∣ted and knytte to almyghty god euerlastyngly. Fynally there is the true rewarde of al godly∣nesse, God hym selfe: The syghte and fruition of whom, is the ende and rewarde, of all our beliefe, and all our good workes, and of all those thinges, whiche were purchased for vs by CHRISTE, he shall be our sacietie, our fulnesse, and desyre, he shalbe our life, our helth, our glory, our ho∣nour, our peace, our euerlasting reste and ioye: He is the ende of all our desyres, whom we shall see conti∣nually, whom we shall loue moste fer∣uently, whom we shall prayse and magni∣fy, world with out ende.
¶The sacrament of Baptisme. AS touchyng the holy sacra∣ment of Baptisme, it is to be noted: Fyrst, that this sacrament was insti∣tuted and ordeyned, by our sauiour IESV CHRISTE, in the newe testa∣ment, as it doth appeere by Christis owne wordes vnto his apostles, where he sayeth: Go ye abrode through out all the world,Math. xxviii. and preache the gospel vnto al people, and baptise them in the name of the father, of the sonne, and of the holy goste. Furthermore that the effecte and vertue of this sacramente, is forgyuenes of synne, and grace of the holy goste, as is manifestely declared in the seconde chapiter of the actes of the apostles, where it is sayde: Do penance, and be baptised euery one of you, and ye shall haue forgyuenes of synne, and shall receiue the gyfte of the holy goste. Whiche effecte of grace and forgyuenes of synne, thys sacramente hath by vertue and force of the workyng of almigh¦ty god, accordyng to his promyse annexed and con∣ioyned vnto this sacrament, as is manifestly decla∣red by the worde of Christe, sayeng: who so euer be∣leueth and is baptised, shall be saued.Marc. xvi. Whiche sayeng of our sauiour Christe, is to be vnderstande, of all suche persons, which die in the grace conferred and gyuen to them in baptisme, and do not fynally fall from the same by synne. Moreouer bycause all men be borne synners,
throughe the transgression of our father Adam, in whom (as the apostle sayeth):Rom. v. All haue synned, and can not be saued without remission of their synne, whi∣che is gyuen in baptisme, by the workyng of the holy gost. Therfore the sacrament of baptisme is neces∣sary for the atteyning of saluation and euerlasting lyfe,Iohn. iiii. accordinge to the wordes of Christe, sayinge: No man can entre into the kyngedome of god, excepte he be borne agayne of water and the holy gooste. For whiche causes also it is offered, and pertayneth to all men, not onely such as haue the vse of reason, in whom the same duely receyued, taketh awaye and purgeth all kynde of synnes, both originall and ac∣tuall, commytted and done before theyr baptisme: but also it apperteyneth and is offered vnto infan∣tes, whiche bicause they be borne in original synne, haue nede and ought to be christened: Wherby they being offred in the faith of the churche, receyue for∣giuenes of their synne: and suche grace of the holy goste, that if they dye in the state of theyr infancye, they shall therby vndoutedly be saued. ¶And here we must knowe, that as touchynge originall synne in infantes, lyke as they take of theyr parentes, theyr originall and naturall quali∣ties: euen so they receiue from them original sinne, by whiche, they are made the children of theyre of god, and by the same haue a naturall inclination to synne, by lustes and desires, whiche in further age and tyme, sensibly moue and styrre them to wicked∣nes. For although the parentes be neuer so cleane purged, and pardoned of theyr origynall synne by
baptisme, and grace gyuen in the same yet neuer¦theles the chyldren of them begotten, be conceyued and borne in original synne. Example we may take of corne, whiche thoughe it be neuer soo cleane wi∣nowed and purged from the chaffe, yet if it be caste into the ground and sowen, the newe, whiche sprin∣geth of it, is full of chaffe agayne, vntyll it be also wynowed and clensed: So lykewyse the chyldren of christen men be full of chaffe and corruptution of originall sinne, vntyl that by baptisme, they be wa¦shed clensed and purged from the same, as their pa∣rentes were. And where as we haue before shewed, that ori∣ginall synne is remitted and taken awaye, by bap∣tisme, bothe in infantes and all other, whiche ha∣uyng the vse of reason, duely receyue the same: Yet further we thynke good, to note a speciall ver∣tue and efficacy of this sacramēt of baptisme. Whi∣che is: That all be it, there remayne in vs that be christened, a certaine infirmitie or inclination of synne called Concupiscence, whyche by lustes and desyres, moueth vs many tymes to synne and wic∣kednes, yet almighty god of his great mercye and goodnes, hath giuen vs suche grace in this his ho∣ly sacramēt of baptisme, that such carnall and flesh∣ly lustes and desyres, shal or can in no wise hurt vs if we do not consent vnto theym. And by the same grace also conferred vnto vs in baptisme, we be made more strong and able, to resist and withstand the sayde concupiscences and carnall desyres, than is any other man, which neuer was christened.
Farthermore for as moche as in these dayes, certain heresies haue risen & sprong vp, against the christenyng of infantes. It is to be noted, that (as the holy doctours of the church do testifie) the vni∣uersall consent of the churches in al places, & of all tymes, vsyng & frequēting the christening of infan∣tes, is a sufficient witnes & profe, that this custome of the church in baptising of infantes, was vsed by Christis apostles them selues, & by them gyuē vnto the churche, and in the same hath ben alwais conti∣nued euen vnto these dayes. And this custome and perpetuall vsage of the churche, euen from the be∣ginning, is agreable with the saying of saint Paul: Christ loued his church,Ephe. v. & hath giuen hym selfe to the death for his churches sake, to sanctify her & make her holy in clēsing her by the foūtain of water in his word &c. So that no mā is, nor can be of this church, but he which is clēsed by ye sacrament of baptisme: Lyke as the texe before alledged, sheweth, where Christe saith:Ioan. iii. who so euer is not born againe of water and the holy gost, shal not enter into the kyngdome of heauen. Wherfore seing that out of the churche, neyther in∣fantes, nor noo man elles can be saued, they muste nedes be christened and clensed by baptisme, and so incorporated into the churche. And as the infancye of the chyldren of the Hebrues, in the old testament did not let, but that they were made participant of the grace and benefite giuen in circumcision: Euen so in the newe testamēt, the infancy of chyldren doth not let, but that they may and ought to be baptised, and so receyue the graces and vertues of the same.
In this parte also it is to be noted, that children or men ones baptised, ought neuer to be baptised a¦gayne. And all good christen men ought and muste repute and take all the Anabaptistes & the Pelagi∣ans opinions, whiche be contrary to the premisses, & euery other mans opinion, agreable vnto the said Anabaptistes, or the Pelagians in that behalfe, for detestable heresies, and vtterly to be condemned. Moreouer for bycause, as well this sacrament of baptisme, as all other sacramentes instituted by Christe, haue all theyr vertue, efficacy, and strength by the worde of god, which by his holy spirite, wor∣keth al the graces & vertues, which be giuen by the sacramentes, to all those that worthily receyue the same: We must vnderstand & knowe, that although he which doth minister the sacrament, be of a sinful & euill conuersation, yet the vertue and effect of the sacrament, is therby nothing diminished or hurted, neither in infantes, nor yet in them, whiche beinge indued with the vse of reason, come thervnto, truly contrite and penitent of al their sinnes done before beleuyng & confessing all the articles of the Crede, and hauyng a sure fayth and truste in the promises of god, of remission of their synnes, and purposing euer after to lyue a christen lyfe. Finally this sacrament of baptisme, may wel be called a couenant betwene god and vs, wherby god testifieth, that he for his sonne Christis sake, iustifi∣eth vs, that is to say, forgiueth vs our synnes, and indueth vs with his holy spirite, & giueth vs suche gracis, that therby, we be made able to walke in the
workes of iustyce ordeyned by god, to be exercysed of vs in this present lyfe, to the glory and prayse of god: And so perseueryng, to enioye the fruite of the lyfe euerlastyng. And we agayne vpon our parte, ought moste diligently to remembre and keepe the promyse, that we in baptisme haue made to almigh∣ty god, that is, to beleue only in him, onely to serue and obey hym, to forsake all synne, and the workes of Satan, to mortifie our affections of the flesshe, and to lyue after the spirite in a newe lyfe. Of whi∣che promyse and couenant by vs made to god, saint Paule putteth vs in remembrance, sayeng: Knowe ye not that all we,Rom. vi. whiche are baptised in Iesu Christe, are baptised to dye with hym, for we be buryed with hym, by baptisme to dye, that lykewyse as Christ was raysed vp from deathe by the glory of his father: euen soo we shulde walke in a newe lyfe? By the whiche wordes saint Paule giueth vs to vnderstande, that all we whiche be baptised in Christe, that is to saye, whiche by baptisme are incorporated in to the my∣stycall body of Christe, haue professed and bounde ourselfe in baptisme, to dye from synne, and vtter∣ly to absteyne from the corruption of our olde syn∣full lyfe, and to walke and procede in a newe lyfe of grace, and the spirite, into the whiche we are cal∣led by the worde of god, and by faythe and due re∣ceyuyng of this holy sacramente, are brought and sette into the same.
The sacrament of penance FOr the cleere vnderstanding of this sacramente, it is to be consy∣dered, what penance is, & also what is the sacrament of penance. Penance is an inward sorowe and griefe of the harte, for the synnes by vs doone and committed, and an hatrede and detestation of the same with an earnest desyre, to be purged frome them, and to recouer agayne the grace and fauour of god, by suche meanes and remedies, as god hath appoynted for the obteynyng therof, with a stedfast purpose and mynde, neuer to offende agayn. For he that sayeth, that he is sory for his offences commyt∣ted agaynst the hyghe maiestie of god, and yet styll contynueth or intendeth to contynue in the same, is no penytent person, but a dissembler, or rather a de∣ryder of penance. And thus is penaunce commonly taken in the scripture, as welle in the newe, as in the olde testament. And this penance is a thynge so necessary for mans saluation, that without it, no man that offendeth god, can be saued, or attayne e∣uerlastyng lyfe. The sacrament of penaunce is proprely the ab∣solution, pronounced by the priest, vpon suche as be penitent for their synnes, and so do knowledge and shewe them selues to be. To the obteynynge of the whiche absolution or sacrament of penaunce, be re∣quyred, contrition, confession, and satisfaction, as
wayes and meanes expedyent and necessary to ob∣teyne the sayde absolution. In all which ways and meanes, fayth is necessarily required, as the groūde and foundation of all thynges, that are to be done for to atteyne the benefite of the sacramente of pe∣nance. For who can haue tru penance, with hope to atteyn any grace of remission of sinne therby, onles he beleue stedfastly, that god is, and that in the new testamēt by the mean of our sauiour Iesu Christ, & by the force of his passion, there is promise made to his church, to grant remission of synnes, by his mi∣nisters, to suche as falling from the grace receyued in baptisme, do at his callyng turn vnto him by pe∣nāce? And like as they, which were not baptised, be∣ing infantes, whan they come to the yeres of discre∣tion, and desyre baptisme, be taught fyrste to beleue in god, and to renounce the deuil & his workes, vp∣pon which ground of faith, they desyre baptisme, as a necessary sacrament for remission of syn: So eue∣ry man, before he entreth into the wayes of fruite∣full penance, must haue for a grounde and founda∣tion, such a belefe, as wherby he hopeth and loketh by the sacrament of penance, to atteine remission of all his synnes, whervnto we do come (as is afore∣sayd) by contrition, confession, and satisfaction. Contrition is an inwarde sorow and griefe for synne, whiche euery true penitent, called by goddis grace, hath by knowlege of the worde of god, wher∣vpon, remembrynge his owne synfull and viciouse lyuynge, wherby he hath prouoked the hygh indy∣gnation and wrathe of god: and on the other syde,
consideryng, the dignitie and puritie of that state, whervnto he was called in baptisme, and his pro∣myse made there to god, the manifold benefites al∣so, dayly receyued of god. Herevpon the sayd peni∣tent, moued and stirred, with the great loue & good¦nes of god, shewed before towardes him on the one partie, and his owne ingratitude or vnkindnes to∣wardes god on thother partie, conceiueth an ernest sorowe, for that he hath relinquisshed so louynge a lorde, and an hatefull displeasure, that he hath fo∣lowed sinne, and therby so greuously offended god, of whom he was before called, to be in the state of a sonne, & inheritour with our sauiour Iesu Christe. And thus beynge moued and troubled in spi∣rite, and lamentynge the myserable state, whiche he is nowe in, by his owne defaut, is pricked and styr∣red in his harte, accordynge to the teachynge of his mother, holy churche; to repaire to suche a minister as god hath ordeyned, to pronounce the sentence of remissiō of synne. And knowing him to occupy that place, as deputed of god, doth prostrate him selfe to god, & there humbly procedeth to confession, wherin he callyng to his remembrance, his sinful life past, doth knowlege to the priest al such synnes in which his conscience telleth hym, that he hath greuousely offended the goodnes of god almighty, & the same, before the priest goddis minister, he declareth & vt∣tereth with his mouthe, and so blameth, accuseth,Luc. xv. Luc. xii. and condemneth him selfe, for an vnkind prodigall sonne, to almighty god his father, for a naughty seruant, that knewe by light of grace, the cōmande∣ment
of his lord Iesu Christe, and dyd it not, was indued with many giftes of the holy goste, and ex∣ercised them not. And so detestinge and abhorryng synne, and desyrous to be raysed frome that estate, confesseth in humilitie, the cause of synne, to haue ben of hym selfe, by yeldyng to the concupiscence of the fleshe, the worlde, and the deuyll. Wherfore he is gladde to submytte hym selfe to suche dyscipline and wayes of reformation, as the priest hering his synnes & offences, shall by his discretion and wise∣dome, accordyng to the word of god, thynke conue∣nient. Whiche humble submission to the gostly fa∣ther, with consent and agrement to receyue the said discipline, is a parte of satisfaction, whiche is the thirde way or meane to the sacrament of penaunce, as is before rehersed. And this satisfaction declareth a desire to plese and content god his father, for the vnkyndenes to∣wardes hym, in fallynge from the estate of grace, wherein he was called to be his sonne, and inhery∣tour of heauen, vnto the myserable condition of synne, wherby he hath made hym selfe mooste vile bondman vnto the deuyll. But here ye must vnderstand, that the satisfa∣ction (whiche is here spoken of) is not so to be ta∣ken as though the penitent synner coulde worthy∣ly merite or deserue remission of sinnes, by any peyn or punishement to be by him suffered, or to make to god any iuste or full recompence, equiualent to the synne, that he hath committed against him, and so to satisfie, which he can neuer do. For that satisfa∣ction,
hath onely our sauiour Christe wrought in his glorious passion. But to satisfie (as here is mēt by satisfaction) is to plese god with an hūble low∣ly harte, redy to bringe forth the fruites of penance, & to bringe them forth in dede, as in almes, prayer, and fastynge, with all suche meanes, as maye serue for the cutting away of the occasion of synne, as the minister shall thynke good, according to the worde of god, and with suche weping, lamentyng, & way∣ling, as do burst out of the hart, with a ful purpose to leade a newe life, and therwith to forgiue al men theyr trespaces, to restore to all men, that he hath vniustly taken or reteyned from them, to recompēce all hurtes and iniuries done by hym, accordyng to his abilitie and power, and as he may, not onely to wyll, but also to do thus, to his neighbour in dede, wherin the neighbour ought to be satisfied. And hereby appereth, howe god estemeth satis∣faction, both to him selfe, and to the neyghbour, af∣ter the wyll and power, and not after the equiua∣lence of that which is done. For to god no man can so satisfie for sinne. And Christ therfore hath satis∣fied for all, by vertue wherof, our satisfaction is accepted and allowed of god, who of his infinite goodnes, and for Christes sake, is satisfied, that is to say, pleased with that littell we do. Whervpon after this contrition had in harte, confession made with mouth, and satisfaction she∣wed and promised, the penitēt may desire to here of the minister, the comfortable wordes of remyssion of synnes. And the minister thervpon, according to
Christes gospell, pronounce the sentence of absolu∣tion, vnto the whiche absolution, the penitent must gyue credence, and beleue with a perfite fayth, that his synnes be now forgyuen frely, by the merites of Christes passion, to the whiche forgyuenes, he hath recourse by the sacrament of penance, as he had at the firste entrie vnto Christis religion by the sacra∣ment of Baptisme. It is also to be noted, that confessiō to the priest is in the church profitably commanded to be vsed, and frequented, for many other good causes, & spe∣cially for this cause, that they whiche by custome be drowned in synne, & se not the abhomination and fil thines therof, ne remembre the goodnes of god, and want therfore contrition, may by a good gostly fa∣ther, be stirred and moued, to deteste & lament their sinne, by declaring vnto thē the word of god in such scriptures, as serue for that purpose, in suche wyse, that not only contrition shal arise in the hart, to the pleasure of god, but also satisfaction ensue, wher∣with goddis merciful goodnes shalbe cōtēted. So that the wordes of absolutiō may be effectually pro¦noūced to the penitēt, of the remissiō of his synnes. Fynally it is to be remembred, that not withstā¦dynge this waye before described, is the ordinary meane, for penitent synners, to opteine remission of synnes, & to be reconciled to the fauour of god, yet in case there lacke a minister, to pronounce the wor∣des of absolution, or in tyme of necessitie, whan a sinner hath not sufficient leysure or oportunitie to do the workes of penance before declared, if he tru∣ly
repent him of his sinful life, and withal his hart, purpose through goddis grace to change & amende the same, he shal vndoubtedly haue pardon and for¦gyuenes of all his missedoynges. For as saynt Cy∣prian sayeth: Euen in the houre of deathe, whan the soule is ready to departe out of the body, the greate mercifull goodnes of god despiseth not penaunce: In so muche that than, neither ye greatnes of sinne, nor the shortenes of tyme, nor yet the enormitie of lyfe, excludeth from the mercy of god, if there be tru contrition, and an vnfayned chaunge of the harte from synnefull conuersation. The these that han∣ged vpon the crosse, asked mercye with a contryte harte, and forthwith was made a citezen of Para∣dise, and where as he deserued condemnation & pu∣nyshement, this contrite hart, changed his peyn in∣to martyrdome, and his bloude into baptisme. yet not withstandyng, no mā ought vpon hope of god∣dis mercy, stil to continue in sinfull lyuing. Like as no man wold be sycke in his body, vpon hope to re∣couer helth. For such as wyll not forsake theyr wic∣kednes, and yet thinke that god wyl forgyue them, be oftentymes, so preuented with the iuste plage of god, that neither they haue time to cōuert, nor grace to receyue the benefitte of forgyuenesse. Therfore scripture saith: Slacke not to conuert and tourne to god. And linger not from day to day. For his an¦gre wyll come sodeynly, & in the time of vengeance, he wyll distroy the. Wherfore imbracyng the mer∣cy of god on the one syde, and fearynge the iustyce of god on the other side: Let vs at no time, neyther dispayre
mā ought to reson ouer farre, nor go about to com∣passe the will and worke of god, by his weake sense and ymagination: But we muste without further serching giue firme assent and credence, vnto Chri∣stis almighty worde, by the whiche heauen & earth were made, & not trouble our wittes, in labouryng to comprehend the power and might of god, but ra∣ther (stedfastly giuing fayth to his word) apply our hole wil and affection, to atteine the fruite and pro∣fite of this moste holy sacrament, towardes our sal∣uation, according to thentent of Christis instituti∣on: Who, of his inestimable mercy & loue towardes vs, willing that we shuld haue perfit hope, strēgth, comforte and ioy in him, and that we shuld haue cō∣tinuall remembrance, of his most dere charitie, she∣wed towardes vs, in his death and passion, dyd in∣stitute this sacrament, as a permanent memorial of his mercy, and the wonderful worke of our redem∣ptiō, & a perpetual fode & nourishement for our spi∣ritual sustentation, in this dangerous passage and trauaile of this wretched life. It is therfore necessa¦ry, that in the vsyng, receiuing, & beholding of this sacramēt, we haue harty remēbrance, of our most lo¦uing & dere sauiour Iesu Christe, that is to say, that we thinke effectuously of his most bitter passiō, whi¦che he being ye lord of glory suffred for vs. And to be waile our synnes, which were cause of ye sayd death & passion, callyng mekely for grace and the mercy of god, which most abundantly is obteined, by the ver¦tue & merite of the same passion. And thinking that our lord, which gaue him self in that maner for vs,
wyll not forsake vs, or cast vs awaye, but forgiue vs, if we truely repent, and wyll amende, & become faithfull seruantes to hym, whiche so derely hath bought vs, & paied for vs, neither golde ne yet sil∣uer (as sainte Peter saith) but his owne precious bloud. Wherfore, seinge we be so bought,i. Pet. i. we muste know, that we be not our owne, yt is to say, We may not be at the libertie & wildnes of our owne fleshe, nor we maye not be seruantes to the worlde, nor the deuyl: but we must be seruantes to our lord, & mai∣ster Iesu Christ, in all obediēce vnto rightwisenes, & godlines, according to his wil & cōmandementes. Therfore when so euer we shall receyue or vse this holy sacrament, we must take hede, and haue re¦uerence to the maiestie therof, and beware that we come not vnworthely thervnto.i. Cor. xi. For as saint Paule saith: He that eateth of that heauēly fode, or drin∣keth of the cuppe of our lord vnworthely, that is to say, without due reuerence, faith, repentance, chari∣tie, & the feare of god, he eateth & drinketh his own dānation, bicause he putteth no difference, betwene the body of our lord and other meates. And further truly, sense christen men ought to haue remembrāce of god, whensoeuer they go, to theyr bodely meate or drinke, & receiue it not without thanckes giuing vnto god (as saint Paule saith) whether ye eate or drink or whatsoeuer ye do,i. Cor. x. do it in the name of our lord Iesu Christ: how moch more ought all christen men (whan they come to be fed at the table of our lorde, and to receiue this blessed and glorious sacrament) to haue special & entier deuotion, with most thācke∣full
remembrance to god, for his goodnes, declared towardes vs, in the benefite of our redemptiō. And therfore amonges other names, this sacrament is called Eucharistia, that is to saye, the sacrament of thankes and blessinge. For as moche, as it setteth before vs, and doth exhibite vnto vs, the very price of our redemtion, and saluation, whiche is the bo∣dy of our lorde that suffred and died for vs. Furthermore here is to be noted, as touching the receyuyng of this sacrament, that although our sauiour Iesus Christ, at the first institution therof in his supper, did minister it vnto his disciples thā present, vnder both the kindes of bread & wine: Yet that fascion & maner of ministring is not so necessa¦ry to the receyuer, excepte it be to the priest whan he consecrateth, that without the due obseruation of that waye, man myghte not receyue that blessed sa∣crament, to his saluation. For the benefite or hurt that cometh to a christen man by receyuing of this sacrament, standeth not in the fascion or maner of receiuing of it, vnder one or both kindes, but in the worthy or vnworthy receiuing of the same. For he yt receiueth this sacrament worthely, vnder the one kinde, as vnder the fourme of bread only, receyueth the hole body and bloud of Christe, & as many and great benefites of Christ, as he that receyueth it in both kindes. And therfore if any man shuld teache, that the lay people (which by the ordinance & anci∣ent custome of the catholike church haue vsed to re∣ceyue this holy sacrament in fourme of bread only) be seduced, & so cause them to thynke, that the hole
body and bloud of Christe were not comprehended in that onely forme of breade, as wel as in both the kyndes, this doctrine ought vtterly to be refused and abiected, as a pestiferous & a diuelyshe schole. For surely scripture teacheth the contrary. And also naturall reason, although it can not comprehende the hole mystery of this sacrament, yet herein it tea∣cheth vs agreably with scripture, that the lyuely body can not be without bloude, and so men oughte to be ledde from that fonde opinion (if any suche be) bothe by that faythe and credyte they owe to scrip∣ture, and in this poynte also by naturall reason. Wherfore christen men ought not to grudge at this fourme and maner of receyuyng of this sacramente vnder one kynde, vsed and allowed by the catholike churche, both to auoyde that errour afore rehersed, and also for many other weyghty considerations, concernyng bothe the honour of the sacrament, and the libertie and cōmoditie of the hole churche. And not onely laye men, but also priestes (sauyng whan they consecrate) vse to receyue this sacrament none otherwyse. Let christen men therfore, humbly apply them selfe, to put all erronious fantasies (if any su∣che aryse) cleane out of theyr hartes, and satisfye thē¦selues with this, that whan they receyue this sacra∣ment worthely, thoughe it be but in one kynd, they lose no parte of the profite and benefite promised by vertue of the sayde sacrament. Wherfore consideryng (as is afore rehersed (the dignitie and excellency of this sacrament, we ought with all humblenes of harte and deuotion, to pre∣pare
our selues, that we (vsynge accordyngly the same) maye be partakers of suche fruite and grace, as vndoubtedly is offered and gyuen to all suche, as in due maner receyue this sacramente. For they that so doo, be made one with Christe, and dwelle in hym, and he in them, as he sayeth in the .vi. chapter of saynt Iohns gospell, where he speaketh also of this sacrament: This is the breade whiche descended from heauen, that who so euer eateth therof shuld not dye, I am the liuely bread, which haue descended from heauen, if any shall eate of this breade, he shall lyue e∣uerlastyngly. And than he declaryng him selfe, what he meaneth by the breade, sayeth, as incontinentely foloweth: And the breade, whiche I shall gyue, is my fleshe, whiche I shall gyue for the lyfe of the worlde. Whiche wordes be moste comfortable, for the per∣fyte confirmation and establishment of our faythe in this sacrament: For as muche as they bothe cer∣tifie vs, that his very fleshe, bloudde, and bodye, is that meate, whiche we receiue in the sacrament, and that also it preserueth from deathe, and conferreth lyfe to all,Math. ix. whiche duelye receyue it. For seyng it is the very body of our sauiour Christ, whiche is vni∣ted and knytte to his godheade in one persone, and by reason therof, hath the very vertue and substance of lyfe in it, it must nedes consequently, by the most holy and blessed participation of the same, giue and cōmunicate lyfe also to them, that worthely receyue it: And it endueth them with grace, strength, & ver∣tue, against all temptation, sinne, and death, & doth much ease, and relieue all the troubles dieases and
infirmities of theyr soule. For seynge the woman, which was diseased with the fluxe of bloud (as it is written in the gospell) was healed, by touchyng the hemme of the garment of Christe, through the ver∣tue whiche came from hym: Howe muche more shall they fynde remedy of the sickenes & malady of theyr soule, whiche with due reuerece and faythe receyue and eate the blessed body of Christe, and so be made lyuely temples of hym, dwellynge in theym, yea made as one fleshe and body with him? For this he∣uenly meate is not tourned into our substaunce, as other corporall meate is, but by the godly operati∣on therof, we be tourned towardes the nature of it, that is to saye, of earthely, corruptible, and synfull, we be made heauenly spirituall, and strong agaynst synne, and all wyckednes. And further it is to be remembred, that as in the receyuyng of this sacrament, we haue moste en∣tter communion with Christe: so be we also ioyned by the same, in most perfite vnitie with his churche, and all the mēbres therof. And for that cause amon∣ges other, this sacrament was instituted of our sa∣uiour Christe, in the fourme of breade, to sygny∣fye the vnitie, concorde, and charitie, that is be∣tweene Christe oure heade, and hys mysticall body the churche, and euery part and membre therof one with an other. For as bread is made of many gray∣nes or cornes, whiche all make but one loofe, soo shulde all true christen people, being many in num∣bre, yet be all one in faythe and charitie, as sayncte Paule sayeth, we be one breadde and one bodye,i. Cor. xi. all
that be partakers of one breade, that is of this blessed sacrament. Fynally it is to be noted, that although Christ at the fyrste institution of this sacrament, dyd con∣secrate and giue it to his disciples, at supper, after they had eaten the paschal lambe, partly to declare that the sacramentes and sacrifices of the old lawe, shuld from thensforth ceasse and take an ende, and partly, that by this sacrament, being the last thing that he nexte before his deathe, lefte vnto his disci∣ples, the remēbrance of him shuld be the more depe∣ly and effectuously imprinted in the hartes of them and of all other, that after shulde receyue the same: Yet (as saint Augustine saith) it was thought good to the apostles and the vniuersall churche, beynge moued with the holy goste, for the more honour of so high a sacrament, and for the more reuerence and deuout receyuynge therof, that it shulde alwayes be receyued of christen people, whā they be fastyng, and before they receyue any bodily sustenāce, except it be in case of syckenes or necessitie. Wherfore considering the most excellent grace, efficacy, and vertu of this sacrament, it were great∣ly to be wyshed and prayed for, that al christen peo∣ple, had suche deuotion thervnto, that they wolde gladly dispose and prepare themselues, to the more often worthy receyuynge of the same. But seynge that in these laste dayes,Mat. xxiiii Charitie is waxed colde, and synne doth abound (as Christ sayeth in the go∣spell that it shulde) yet if christen men wyll auoyde the great indignation of god, it shall be good for
theym, whan so euer they receyue this sacrament them selues, or be presente, where it is ministred or vsed, as speciallye in the tyme of masse, to behaue them selfe reuerently, in pure deuotion and prayer and not to talke or walke vp and down, or to offend their brethern, by any euyl example of vnreuerence to the saide sacramente: excepte they wyll declare theym selfe to haue smalle regarde to our sauioure CHRIST, there bodyly present, of whiche vnre¦uerence and contempt may ensue, not onely spiritu∣all punishemementes of god, by withdrawyng his grace from suche vngodly persons,i. Cor. xi. but also bodily and opē scourge, as saint Paul sheweth to the Co∣rinthians, That for the vnworthy entreatyng and vsynge of this sacramente, many amonges them were weake, sycke, and dyed. The sacrament of Matrimony. AS touchynge the sacrament of matrimonye, and the institution therof, you shall vnderstande, that almighty god at the fyrste creation of man, consideryng of his infynite goodnesse and wysedome, howe ne∣cessary it was, to couple and conioyne man and wo∣man togither in mariage, as well for theyr mutuall aide and comfort, and for the preseruation and con∣tinuance of mankynde in lawful succession, as also that the same generation myghte after the falle of mā, be exercised perpetually vnto the worldes end,
without synne and offence towardes god, dyd con∣ioine Adam and Eue together in mariage. And thā instituted matrimony, and consecrated and blessed it by his holy word, as appereth in the boke of Ge∣nesis, where is also described the vertue and effy∣cacye of the same, by these wordes folowyng: Gene. ii.Nowe this bone is of my bones, and this flesshe is of my flesshe, and therfore the man shall leaue hys father and mother, and adhere and cleaue vnto his wyse, and they shall be two in one flesshe and in one bodye. By whiche wordes it is mente, that by the vertue & efficacy of matrimony, rightfully and by the aucto∣ritie of god contracted, the man and woman which were before two bodyes, be nowe vnyted and made one body, duryng theyr lyues, so that the husbande hath no power of his owne body, to vse the same as hym lyst, and with whom hym lyketh, but it is hys wyues, and with her onely he maye vse the acte of matrimonye. Nor the wyfe hathe any power of her owne body, to vse it as her lyst, or with whom her li∣keth, but her body is her husbandes body, and with hym onely may she vse the acte of matrimony. And therfore the sayde two persones, so conioyned, may not after be deuided, for any affection to father or mother, or for any earthely thynge in the worlde, but eche muste adhere and cleaue to other, for as muche as they be nowe two persones in one flesshe and in one body. Secondely howe that almyghty god, allowing and approuing the sayd institution of matrimony, sanctified and blessed it with his holy worde imme∣diately after Noes fludde, sayeng vnto Noe, and
his chyldren in this wyse:Rom. vl. Increase and be ye multi∣plyed, and replenyshe the earthe. This institution of matrimonye thus allowed by god, vnto Noe and his chyldren, although it was a sufficient instructiō vnto them, and all theyr posteritie, howe to vse the same in al puritie and clennesse, to goddis pleasure and his contentation: Yet god consideryng the na∣turall inclination of man to malyce and synne, dyd afterwarde, further explycate and establysshe the same, by his other lawes wrytten, wherby god pro∣hibited, that any matrimony shulde be made in the degrees folowyng, that is to say. No man shall marry with his mother, hys graundame, his great graundame, and so vpward: neither may he marry with the wyfe his father, his graundfather, or his greate graundefather, and so vpwarde: neyther any man may marry with the sy∣ster of his father, or of his mother, his graundefa∣ther or his graundmother, and so vpwarde: neyther may any man marry with the wyfe of hym, that is brother to his father, his mother, his graundefa∣ther, his graundmother, and so vpwarde. And lyke wyse euery woman is forbidden to marry any man, within any degrees aboue rehersed. It is also fur∣ther forbydden, that any man shall marry with hys syster, whether she be his hole syster, or his halfe sy∣ster begotten in mariage, or out of mariage: neither may he marry with his brothers wyfe, nor with his wyues syster. Whiche lawes of prohibition in ma∣ryage, althoughe they were not, by expresse wor∣des of God, declared at the fyrste instytution of
matrimonye, ne also whan the same was allowed after Noes flud, yet god dyd ingraue and imprinte the same lawes in the hart of man, before they were wrytten by Moyses. And forasmuch as the natural lyght and knowledge of man, was not onely by ori∣ginall synne, obscured and blynded, but also in the most parte of men, by the increace of synne and ma∣lyce, in longe continuaunce and proces of tyme al∣moste peryshed and extincte: In so muche that they coulde not perceyue nor iudge, what thynges were of theyr owne nature naught and detestable in the syght of god, ne yet howe farre the naturall hone∣stie and reuerence, whiche we owe vnto suche per∣sones as be nere of our kynne, or alliance vnto vs, was extended: God therfore wyllyng manne to re∣turne from darckenesse, commaunded his prophete Moyses, to promulgate & to declare by his worde vnto the people of Israell, the sayde lawes of pro∣hibition of matrimony in certayne degrees of con∣sanguinitie and affinitie, as is before mentioned. In the declaration of the whiche lawes of prohibi∣tion, Moyses soo tempred his wordes, that it maye euidently appere therby, that not onely the Iewes. but also all other the people of the worlde, were as muche and as streyghtly bounden, to the continual obseruation of the same lawes, as they were to the other morall lawes of the ten commandementes. Thyrdely / that the coniunction betwene man and woman in matrimony, dothe not onely signifie and represent the perfyte and indissoluble coniun∣ction and vnion of the nature of god with the na∣ture of man, which was fulfylled, whan the second
person in trinitie, descendyng from his father, dyd take vpon him the very forme and substance of our nature, and so these two natures were vnited and knyt togither in one persone: but also therby is sy∣gnified and represented, the societie and coniuncti∣on in perfite and indissoluble loue and charitie be∣twene Christ and his church, that is to say, the con∣gregation of al christen people. And this to be true saynt Paule him selfe affirmeth in the fyst chapy∣ter of the epistle vnto the Ephesians. In whiche place the apostle myndynge to proue and perswade, that al women, beyng marryed, oughte to loue, to reuerence, to honour, to obeye, to be subiecte vnto theyr husbandes in all thinges, euen as the church is subiect vnto Christe: and lykewyse that all hus∣bandes ought and be bounde to loue theyr wyues, euen as they loue theyr owne selfe and theyr owne bodies, and euen as Christe loueth the churche his espouse: He bringeth in the first institution of ma∣trimonye, as it was ordeyned by god in Paradise, and alledgeth the wordes of god as they be before rehersed: vpon whiche wordes the apostle inferreth and saythe. This coniunction of man and woman togither in mariage, wherby they are knytted, vni∣ted, and made al one fleshe and one body, Is the sa∣crament, that is to saye: a mystery and signification of that great and meruaylous coniunction, whiche is betwene Christe and his churche. For lyke as by vertue and efficacy of the fyrst institution of matri∣mony, the husbande and the wyfe be made to be but one body, wherof the husbād is hed: Euen so Christ
doth knytte and vnite, conglutinate and make his churche to be one body with hym, wherof he is the very head. By the whiche wordes of saint Paule, it appereth not onely what is the vertue and efficacy of matrimony, in the vnitinge and incorporatynge of two bodies in one, but also that it dothe signifye this other coniūction, which is betwene Christ and his churche. And that this coniunction betweene Christ and the churche, is the very selfe thing, whi∣che is signified and represented by the other coniun¦ction of man and woman in mariage. For thoughe saynt Paule vsed in this place, other argumentes & persuasions, taken of the lawe of nature, to enduce maried {per}sons, the one to loue the other, saying that men naturally do loue and nourishe their owne bo∣dies and their owne flesshe: Yet he vseth this as a reason of great efficacye, to persuade his purpose, that is to say, that all husbandes and wiues ought so to vse them selues, the one to the other, that their matrimony and all their workes and affections in the same, myght and shuld corresponde, and be cō∣formable and like vnto that moste holy thyng, whi∣che is signified and represented thereby, that is to say, vnto that spirituall coniunction, whiche is be¦twene Christ and his espouse the churche. And that therefore especially, the man ought and is bound to loue his wife, and the wyfe to loue and obeye her husbande in all thinges, lest by doinge the contra∣ry, they shuld make their matrimony vnlike to the thing that is signified therby. And thus was matrimony not onely instituted
by god, sanctified by his word, and dignified by his lawes, euen from the beginning of the world: But also Christ him selfe did accept, approue, and allow the same in the newe testament, aswel by his worde, as also by his sundry workes and dedes testifienge the same: In so moch that he being inuited to a cer∣tain mariage, made in Cana a towne of Galile,Ioan .i. did vouchesafe, not onely to come thyther, & there to ho¦nour the said mariage with his corporall presence, and with the presēce also of his blessed mother and his holy apostles: but there he began also, by tour∣nyng of water in to wyne, first to worke myracles, & to manyfeste his glory vnto the worlde.Matt. xix. And after∣warde in one other place whan the pharisees came vnto hym, & demanded, whether a man might lau∣fully be diuorced from his wife for euery cause: Christ puttyng the said pharisees in remēbrance of the first institution of matrimony sayd vnto them: Haue you not red, how that god whiche created all thynges in the beginning, did also forme and cre∣ate man and woman, & said these wordes: Therfore the man shal leaue his father and mother, and shal adhere and cleaue vnto his wyfe, & they shalbe two in one fleshe & one body? Wherfore vnderstand you (saith he) that sith man & woman conioyned in ma∣trimony, be by goddis ordinance but one fleshe and one body, they shuld not afterward be separated or diuorced one from the other. And vnderstande you also that it is not laufull for any man, to separate and diuide those persons a sunder, whiche by god∣dis worde and his wyl and power be conioyned to∣gither.
And whan the pharisees replying thervnto sayde: Why than dyd Moyses commande vs, to make a lybell of diuorce, and so to departe and se∣parate our selues from our wyues? Christe answe∣red them and sayd. Moises consydering the harde∣nes and obstynacy of your hartes, dyd permyt and suffre you so to do. Howe be it I say vnto you, that it was not so at the beginnynge, that is to say, it is cleane contrary to the godly institution and natu∣rall order of the lawes of matrimony, as it was in¦stituted by god at the beginning, that any mā mar∣ried, shulde be diuorced from his lawfull wyfe, and be set at libertie to marry. And therfore I say again vnto you, that who so euer doth forsake his laufull wyfe, onles it be for adultery, commytted by her, and mary an other, I say he commytteth adulterye in so doinge, And lykewise what woman soo euer doth forsake her laufull husbande, and marrieth an other, she also committeth adultery, and the man also that marrieth her offendeth in like maner. These wordes of Christe euydently declare his sentence in the approbation of the instytution of matrimony, made at the beginning of the worlde, and that it is Christes wyll and commaundement, that the people of god shulde folowe and conforme theyr doinges vnto the lawes of matrimonye than made, & shuld obserue the same in such purity & san¦timony, as it was fyrst ordeyned, without separatiō or diuorce, & that vnder the peyne of damnation. And here also is one thing specially to be noted that in these wordes of Christe, (That, whiche god
hath conioined, man may not separate) is declared the infinite benignitie and goodnes of god towardes vs, in that he hathe not onely conioyned our fyrste progenitours Adam and Eue togyther in maryage wherby he gaue vnto vs the originall beginnynge of our procreation, but that he dothe also euer syth that tyme, continually assiste man and woman, and worketh with them in this cōiunction of mariage, and is the very authour of all matrimonies, which be laufully made betwene man and woman. And therfore saint Paule saith:Hebr. xiii. Honorabile coniugium in omnibus, & thorus immaculatus, that is to say, Matri∣mony is honourable in all, and the bedde vndefiled. An other thyng also is to be noted, that not on¦ly the act and procreation, whiche els of it self were vnlawfull, is by this sacrament made lawfull: but also that the good bryngyng vp of chyldren, borne in matrimony, is so wel accepted of god, that vnto it as vnto other good workes, doone in faythe by grace, is promysed life euerlasting, accordynge to the wordes of saint Paule, where he saith?i. Tim. ii. The wo∣man was seduced and blynded by the serpent, and soo synned dayly, but she shalbe saued by procreation and bringing forthe of children: if the same doo perseuere and continue in faith and loue towardes god, and in holynes and temperance in their actes and dedes. And as this is spoken of the woman, so it is also very∣fied in the man, doing his duetie lykewyse, as is re¦quired of the woman. Fynally it is to be considered, how in matrimo¦ny be cōmēded specially thre good thinges, al which
they that contracte matrimony, ought to remembre and regarde: Fyrst of al, the thing it selfe, whiche is signified therby, whiche as is sayde before, is the hygh, the myghty, and incomprensible worke of god, in the coniunction of Christe and the churche together, wrought by hym to our singular benefite and euerlastynge saluation. And that therfore the man & wyfe ought to liue together in perfite vnitie and concorde, & to loue eche other as their owne bo∣dies, and to vse the same in all cleannesse, puritie, and honour,Ephe. v. euen as Christe him selfe loued his es∣pouse the churche, and suffered all afflictions and peynes to make her glorious and voyde from all maner of spotte or wrinkle of vncleannesse. Whiche matter saint Paule moste godly declareth in his e∣pistle to the Thessaloniās, where he wryteth in this maner. Te. iiii. I pray you brethern, and instantely desyre you, for our lorde Iesu Christis sake, that like as ye haue herde heretofore of vs, howe and in what maner, you shuld go forward, & please god, so ye do procede in the same, and that after suche sorte and maner, that you may contynually profitte and en∣creace therin. You remembre, I doubte not, what preceptes and commandementes I haue giuen vn∣to you in tymes past, in the name of our lord IESV CHRIST: And now in lyke maner, & in his name also I say agayne vnto you, that the wylle and cō∣maundement of god is, that you shoulde sanctify your selues, that is to saye, that you shulde absteyn from all maner of fornication, and that euery one of you shulde vse and keepe the vesselle of his bo∣dye,
in holynesse and honour, and not in desyre of carnall concupiscence, lyke as the Gentyles doo, whiche know not god, and that no man shuld craf∣tyly compas and circumuent his brother, to obtein his flesshely lustes: For almighty god taketh ven∣geance vpon all suche people, as do committe any of those thinges. Knowe you also, that god hath not called vs to vncleannes and fylthynes of lyfe, but vnto holines and santimonie. And therfore I do ex∣horte you all, and in the name of god commaunde you, to eschue all fornication and adultery, all vn∣cleannesse and carnall concupiscence, all fylthynes and vnpure lyuynge in flesshely lustes of the bo∣dy. And I saye further, that who so euer despyseth and breaketh these my commandementes, doth not despise me, but despiseth god: For they be his com¦maundementes, whose spirite ye haue receyued. The second good thyng, which ought to be re∣membred in the said sacrament, is the faith and mu¦tuall promyse, made betwene the husbande and the wyfe, conioyned in lawful matrimony. wherby and by the vertue of the sayde sacrament, the persons so laufully conioyned, be bound esche one to kepe pro¦myse with the other, according to such trust and cō¦fydence, as eche had in the other, and expressed by wordes in the same contracte, whiche promise god did assiste and ratifie, and is now partie thervnto: so that the breach of that promyse and faith, is now a high and displeasant offence vnto almighty god, lyke as the obseruation and keping therof, is in the syght of god, pleasant, acceptable, and meritorious
and the knotte also and bonde of matrimony, con∣tracted betwene the sayde persons, is made therby to be indissoluble. Trouthe it is, that if in any ma¦riage, it may appere, and be duly proued, that there is suche insufficient impediment, by the lawes of god, or by the lawes of the realme, that the same ma¦trymony was at the beginning vnlauful, & of none effect: in that case, the church may and ought, to di∣uorce the same persons so vnlaufully contracted, & declare, that suche matrimony is vnlauful, and the bonde therof, to be of no strengthe or efficacie, by∣cause is was neuer good from the beginninge. Not¦withstandyng, in mariages laufully made, and ac∣cordyng to the ordinance of matrimonye, prescribed by god and the lawes of euery realm, the bond ther∣of can not be dissolued, durynge the liues of the par¦ties, betwene whom such matrimony is made. The thirde good thyng to be consydered and obserued in matrimony, is the child that cometh of maryage, and the good and vertuous education and bringynge vp of the same. Whervnto all mar∣ried men & women ought to haue a speciall regard, and to folowe therin the example of Thoby,Tobi. iiii. which taught his sonne from his infancie, to loue & dread god, & to flee & absteine from all maner of sinne, for goddis sake. For surely if the fathers and mothers be negligent in good bringing vp of their children in their youth, and suffer them to fal in to folies and synne, in defaut of due correction and chastisement of them for the same: no doubte they shal aunswere vnto god for it, as it appereth by the greate stroke and
punyshement of god,i. Reg. ii. &. iiii. whan he dyd sodaynly strike Ely vnto death, bicause that he knowinge his chil∣dren to do amisse, dyd not punishe them therfore. And therfore let all parentes emply theyr dili∣gence and busy cure, to educate and instructe their children, by al meanes in vertue & goodnes, & to re∣strain them from vices, by cōuenient discipline and castigation, according to the saying of the wise mā: Withdraw not thy iust discipline frō thy child, for if thou do so, he wyll fall into sundry inconueniences,Pro. xx. and so finally shalbe lost & vndone. Wherfore spare not to chastise thy childe with the rodde, and so do∣ing, thou shalt delyuer his soule from hell. And cō∣cerninge the childes duetie towardes the father, it shalbe declared hereafter in the commandementes. The sacrament of Orders. AS concerning the sacrament of Orders, tt is to be vnderstād, that order is a gift or grace of mynistra∣tion in Christis church, giuen of god to christen men, by the consecration & imposition of the bishops handes vpon them, and this sacrament was conferred and gyuen at the be∣gynnyng by the apostles, as it appereth in the epi∣stle of saint Paule to Timothe, whom he had orde∣red and consecrate prieste, where he saythe thus:ii. Tim. i. I do exhorte the, that thou do styrre vp the grace of god, the whiche is gyuen the by the imposition of my han∣des. And in an other place he doth monish the same
Timothe, and put hym in remēbrance of the rome & ministery, that he was called vnto in these wordes: Do not neglect the grace,i. Tim. iiii. whiche thou hast in the, and the whiche is gyuen the through prophecy, and with imposition of handes, by the authoritie of priesthode. Wherby it appereth, that saint Paul did consecrate and order priestes and bishops by the imposition of his handes. And as the apostles them selues, in the beginninge of the churche, dyd order priestes and byshops: So they appointed and wylled the other byshops, after them, to do the lyke, as saynt Paule manifestly sheweth in his epistle to Tite, sayinge thus:i Tim. v. For this cause I lefte the Crete, that thou shuldest ordeyne priestes in euery citie, according as I haue appointed the.T. i. And to Timothe he saythe: Se that thou be not hasty, to put thy handes vpon any mā And here is to be noted, that althoughe this forme before declared, is to be obserued in gyuyng orders: yet there is no certaine rule prescribed or li∣mitted, by the word of god, for the nomination, ele∣ction, presentation, or appointing of any such eccle∣siasticall ministers: But the same is holy left vnto the positiue lawes and ordinances of euery christē region, proiuded and made, or to be made in that behalfe, with the assent of the prince and ruler. And as concernyng the office and duetie of the sayde ec∣clesiasticall mynisters, the same consysteth in true preachynge and teachyng the word of god vnto the people, in dispensyng and ministring the sacramen∣tes of Christe, in consecratynge and offerynge the blessed body and bloud of Christe in the sacrament
of the aulter, in losynge and assoylyng from synne, suche persons as be sory and truly penitent for the same, and excommunicatynge suche as be gyltie in manyfest crimes, and wyll not be refourmed other∣wise, and finally in praying for the hole churche of Christ, and specyally for the flocke committed vnto them. And althoughe the office and minysterye of priestes and byshoppes, stande chiefly in these thin¦ges before rehersed: yet neither they nor any of them may exercise and execute any of the same offices, but with such sort & such limitation as the ordinances & lawes of euery christē realme, do permit and suffre. And bycause it is not mete, that this so charge∣able a cure, shuld be committed to euery man, that peraduenture, ambiciously wolde desyre it: Ther∣fore saynt Paule dothe dilygently set out to his di∣sciples Timothe and Tite, the conuersation, lear∣nyng, conditions, and qualities of them that shuld be admitted to the mynistery of priesthode,i. Tim. iii. & Tit. i. writyng in this maner: A bishop or a priest ought to be blame∣lesse, as the stewarde of god, not wilfull, not angry, no drunkarde, no fyghter, not gredy of fylthy lucre, but giuen to hospitalitie, liberal, discrete, sobre, rightuous, deuout, temperate, and continent, and such one as hol∣deth the true worde of doctrine, that he may be able to exhort with bolsom lerning, and to reproue them that saye against it. Thus we haue shortly touched fyrst, the ordrynge of priestes and bishoppes: Secondly, their ministery office and duetie, with the charge & cure belonging thervnto, and finally the qualities and conditions required in the same.
And for as moche as it is an olde heresie of the Donatistes, condemned in the generall counselles, to thynke that the worde of god, and his sacramen∣tes shuld be of no efficacy, strength, or vertue, whā they be ministred by euyll men, it is to be remēbred, that according to the saying of saynt Gregory Na∣zianzene: Lyke as there is no differēce betwene the selfe same image or figure of any thyng imprinted with a signet of golde, and a signet made of yron, or of woode, or any other viler mattier: euen so the worde of god, and the sacramentes of god myny∣stred by an euyll and noughty man, be of the selfe same vygour, strength, and efficacie, as whan they be ministred by a man of excellent vertu and good∣nes. The cause and reason wherof is, for that the priestes and byshops, although in the execution of their office and administration, they do vse and ex∣ercise the power and auctoritie of god, committed vnto them: yet they be not the principall causers, nor the sufficient, or of them selues the efficient cau¦sers or gyuers of grace, or of any other spirituall gyfte, whiche procedeth and is gyuen of god, by his word and his sacramentes. But god is the on∣ly principall, sufficient, and perfite cause of all the efficacy of his worde, and his sacramentes, and by his only power, grace, and benefites it is, that we receyue the holy goste, and his gracis, by the office and administration of the said priestes and byshop∣pes, and the sayde priestes and bysshoppes be but onely as officers, to execute and minister with their handes and tongues, the outwarde and corporall
thynges, wherein god worketh and gyueth grace inwarde, accordynge to his pacte and couenaunt, made with and to his espouse, the church. And this also Chrisostome affirmeth the .lxxxv. homily vpon saynt Iohn, where he sayth in this maner: What speake I of priestis, I say that neyther aungel nor archangell can giue vs any of these thynges, whi∣che be giuen vnto vs of god, but it is the father, the sonne, and the holy goste, whiche is the effectu∣all cause of all these thynges, the priest dothe one∣ly put to his handes, and his tongue. And in this poynt saynt Ambrose also agreeth, with the sayde sayinges of Chrisostome wrytyng thus. The priest layeth his handes vpon vs, but it is god, that gy∣ueth the grace, the priest layeth vpon vs his bese∣chynge handes, but god blesseth vs with his migh¦ty hande. The byshoppe consecrateth an other bys∣shoppe, but it is god that gyueth the worthynesse. Wherfore we must always thynke and beleue, that the vertue and efficacie of the word of god, and his sacramētes, consisteth and dependeth, in and vpon the commandement, ordinance, power, and aucto∣ritie of god onely, and that neyther the merites or worthynes of the ministers, be they neuer of suche excellencie, do gyue them theyr auctoritie, strength, or effycacie, neyther yet the malyce, nor corrupte lyuynge of them, be it neuer so euyll, can frustrate or take away from the sayde worde or sacramentes, their sayd power, authoritie, strength, or vertue. Moreouer as touchynge the order of deacons we rede in the actes of the Apostles,Act. vi. that they were
ordered and instituted by the same apostelles, by prayer and imposition of their handes vpon them. And as for the qualities and vertuous conuersati∣on, whiche be required in them, saynte Paule set∣teth them out in his epistle to Timothe, in these wordes:l. Tim. iii. Deacons oughte to be chaste, not double tounged, no drunkardes, not gredy of fylthy lucre, hauynge the mystery of faythe in a pure conscience. And their office in the primitiue churche, was part∣ly in mynistringe meate and drynke, and other ne∣cessaryes, to poore people founde of the churche, partly also in mynystrynge to the bysshoppes and priestes, and in doinge theyr duetie in the churche. And of these two orders onely, that is to saye, prie∣stes and deacons, scripture maketh expresse menci∣on, and howe they were conferred of the apostels by prayer and imposition of their handes. And to these two, the primitiue churche did adde & conioyn certain other inferiour and lower degrees, as sub∣deacons, accolites, exorcistes, with diuerse other, of the whiche mention is made of bothe of the most auncient writers, that we haue in the churche of CHRIST, after the apostelles, and also in diuerse olde counsayles, and namely in the fourthe coun∣sayle of Aphrike, in whiche saynte Augustine was present, where as all the kyndes of orders, whiche were than in the churche, be rehersed, and also with what rites and ceremonies, they were cōferred and giuen at that time. And thus by succession from the apostles time hath Order continued in the churche and hath euer bene called and counted for a sacra∣ment,
as it may appere by dyuers other aunciente writers, and speciallye by sainte Augustine, where he writeth thus, speakinge bothe of the sacrament of baptisme, and of order: Eyther of them (saythe he) is a sacrament, and eyther of them is gyuen to men, by a certain consecration, the one whan a mā is baptised, and the other, whan he is ordered, and therfore neyther of them both, may be iterate or re∣peted in the catholyke churche of Christe. And where as we haue thus summaryly decla∣red, what is the office and ministration, whiche in holy scriptures hath ben committed to bysshoppes and priestes, and in what thinges it consisteth, as is afore rehersed, leste peraduenture it myghte be thoughte to some persones, that suche auctorities, powers, and iurisdictions, as patriarches, pry∣mates, archebysshoppes, and metropolitanes, now haue, or heretofore at any time haue had iustly and laufully ouer other byshoppes, were gyuen theym by god in holy scripture. We thynke it expediente and necessarye, that all men shulde be aduertised and taught, that all suche laufull powers and au∣thorities of any one bysshoppe ouer an other, were and be gyuen to them, by the consent, ordynaunce, and posytiue lawes of men onely, and not by any ordynaunce of god in holy scripture. And all other power and authoritie, whiche any bysshoppe hath vsed or exercysed ouer an other, whyche hathe not benne gyuen to hym by suche consente and or∣dynaunce of menne, (as is aforesayde) is in verye deede noo laufull power, but plaine vsurpation
and tyrannye. And therfore where as the byshoppe of Rome, hath heretofore claymed & vsurped, to be head and gouernour of all priestes and byshops of the hole catholyke churche of Christe, by the lawes of god: It is euydent, that the same power is vtterly fay∣ned and vntrue, and was neyther gyuen to hym by god in his holy scripture, nor allowed by the holy fa¦thers in the auncient generall counsels, nor yet by the consent of the hole catholyke churche. For it is playne, that Christe neuer gaue vnto saint Peter, or to any of the apostels, or theyr successours, any suche vniuersall authoritie ouer all the other. But he set them all indifferently, and in lyke power, di∣gnitie, and authoritie, as it dothe euidently appere in all suche places, where any authoritie is gyuen to them by Christe. And also by sainte Paule, in his epistle to the Galathians, where he compareth him selfe to Iames,Gala. ii. Peter, and Iohn̄, whiche were the most notable emonge the apostles, affirminge hym selfe to be equall in authoritie with them. And as concerning the most auncient and most famouse holy generall counsayles, it is euydent, that they gaue the byshops of Rome, no suche au∣thoritie, for in them be dyuerse actes and decres, playnely testifieng the contrary. As fyrst in the former counsaile of Nece, emonge other, there is one decree, that the patriarches of A¦lexandria, & Antiochia, shuld haue like power ouer the countreys about those citees, as the byshoppes
of Rome, haue had ouer the coūtreis about Rome. Also in the counsayle Mileuitane, in which coū¦sayle saint Augustine was presente, and subscribed to the same, it was decreed, that if any clerke of the countreys of Aphrike, wolde appeale out of Aphri∣ca, vnto any bysshoppes beyonde the sea, that suche a one shulde be taken through out al the countreys of Aphrica, as a person excommunicate. Moreouer in the general counsayle Constan∣tinopolitan the fyrste, it was likewyse decreed, that euery cause and controuersy betwene any persons, shulde be determined within the prouinces, where the matters dyd lye, and that by the byshops of the same prouinces. And also that no byshops shuld ex∣ercise any power out of his own dioces or prouince. And this was also the mynde of the holy doctour and martyr saint Cypriane, and of the other holye fathers of Aphrica, before the tyme of any generall counsayle. And for the better and more playne and assured confirmation, that the bishop of Rome hath no su∣che vniuersall authoritie, neyther by goddis lawe¦ne yet by any ordinances of any ancient catholyke coūsayle: It is to be considered, that in the .vi. great counsayle Carthaginense, the bishop of Rome sente his legates to that counsaile, to alledge and vendi¦cate his vsurped primacy, and by title of the same, to defend and mainteine the receyuing of appeles made vnto hym of causes and controuersies com∣menced in Aphrike, bycause the hole counsaile had
by theyr decree, prohibited & forbidden before, al su∣che appeles to any toreyn byshop. In the entreting and debatyng of which matter, the bishop of Rome for his title, alleged onely a canon, made (as he pre¦tended) in the firste Nicene counsaile, The bishops of Aphrica denieng any such canon to be made. For triall wherof, messangers were sent to the patriar∣ches sees of the orient, to make searche for the hole canons of that counsayle. And finally after longe & diligēt searche, whā the hole canons were brought forthe from thense, there was no such canon emon∣ges them, as the byshop of Rome for his sayde title had alledged. Whervpon two thynges are to be noted, as e∣uident by the premisses. Firste that the bishoppe of Rome hath no such primacy, nor any such can chal∣lenge by any wordes in scripture: For than the by∣shop of Rome wolde at that tyme by his legates haue alleged it, and the great multitude of so many fathers, as were assembled in that Aphrican coun∣sayle (of whō saynt Augustine was one) were so wel & profoundly lerned in holy scripture, that no such thynge (if it were there) coulde haue ben hidde vnto them. And also they were soo good and vertuouse, that if they had knowen it there, they than wolde haue made no acte before to the contrary, nor yet at that tyme, so ernestly and extremely refused it. The seconde thyng to be noted as euident by the premisses is, that the byshops of Rome, haue no suche power giuen them by any auncient generall counsayle. For they at that tyme of this Aphicane
counsayle, wold than haue alleged it, where in dede they alleged none but a pretensed canon of the fyrst Nicene counsayle, which after great trial & searche as is aforesayde, coulde neuer be founde in the au∣tentikes. And that chapiter autentique, which of al the canons of that counsayle moste concerneth the bishop of Rome, maketh directly & playnly against the sayde pretensed vniuersal primacy, giuyng (as is saide before) to other patriarches, lyke and equal authoritie in theyr countreys, as bishops of Rome had and vsed than in the countreis about Rome. Thirdly that the bishops of Rome had no such vniuersall primacy gyuen vnto them by the cōmon cōsent of the hole catholyke church, it wel appereth in that ye dyuers patriarches & archebysshops haue of ancient tyme refused, to owe vnto them any such subiection, as they by colour of an vniuersal prima¦ry chalenged & required ouer them. As the patriar∣ches of Constantinople & other of the east, & the ar∣chebisshops of Rauenna, Millan, & such other. And also Agatho him selfe being bishop of Rome, longe after the .iiii. fyrst vniuersall counsayles, in his let∣ters sent vnto the emperour, concerning a generall counsaile to be holden at Constantinople, playnely declareth and confesseth his primacy to extend one∣ly to the byshops of the weste & north parties: And that in suche wise, as it is euident, that at that tyme the bishops of Rome, neither by the wordes of scrip¦ture, nor by any decree of ancient generall coūsels, nor by the cōsent of the hole catholyke churche, had any such vniuersall primacy, as he nowe requireth.
And yf the bysshops of Rome, wyll allege any later counsayles, for their pretensed vniuersall pri∣macy, as the counsayles, of Constance, Basill, and Florence: It is manyfest and open, that the coun∣sailes of Basill and Constance were in the tyme of scismes, and they which were there deuided in to fa∣ctions, after the fauour of their princis, which prin¦cis were also deuided, some fauouring the one part of the scisme, some the other. And the great part of the lerned men that were there, were of this later in¦stitute religious, and therfore obsequente to the pleasure and wyll of the bishoppes of Rome, and brought vp only in this later scolasticall doctrine, and lytell exercised or lerned in the holy scriptures, or in the olde auncient doctours and writers. And bothe of those counsayles were dyssolued and bro∣ken vp, without any perfit ende or conclusion. And sith that tyme, the canons pragmatical of these two counsayles, be no where vsed, nor yet alleged, as to be of effecte, by the authoritie of those counsayles. And as to the counsayle Florentine, ouer and be¦sides, that the greattest parte of lerned men there, were suche, as we spake of before, the consent also in this matter, of the Orientalles and Grecians, that were there, seemed to the hole countreyes that sent them, so farre bothe agaynst scripture, and ge∣neral counsayles, and their auncient holy writers, that they forthwith shewed them selues soo moche discōtent with that consent of theyr ambassadours, that they then neyther wold receiue the determina∣tion, concerning the vniuersall primacy of the bi∣shop
of Rome, neyther sithe that tyme coulde be in∣duced to agree to the same. And thus by all those thinges before rehersed, it plainly appereth, that the bishops of Rome, clai∣ming this pretensed vniuersall primacie, do yet not onely without any grounde of holy scripture, and without any consent of the hole catholike churche, but also contrary to the determination and decrees of suche generall counsayles, as the bisshoppes of Rome, these many hundred yeres vnto this day, in theyr creation do solemnely and expressely professe to kepe & obserue. For as it appereth by theyr owne lawes and actes from tyme to tyme, euery bysshop of Rome, whā he is created, doth openly & solemne∣ly professe, that he shall inuiolably obserue & kepe all the canons of the fyrst .viii. generall counsailes, amonge the whyche be the canons before rehersed, playnely repugnant and contrary to his sayde pre∣tensed vniuersall primacy. Fynally this beynge manifestly declared and proued, that the byshoppes of Rome, hath not iust∣ly and laufully any suche vniuersal power ouer the bysshoppes and clergy, al wyse men may easily per¦ceyue and see, that they maye moche lesse clayme to haue the hole monarchye of the worlde, and such authoritie ouer all princes and kynges, that they may therby depose them from theyr realmes, domi∣nions, and seignories, and transferre and gyue the same vnto such persons, as them liketh. Where as the scripture dothe teache and commaunde the contrary, that is to saye: That all christen people
as well priestis and bishops, as all other, shulde be obedient vnto princes and potestates of the world. For the truth is, that god constituted and ordeined the authoritie of christen kynges and princes, to be the most high and supreme, aboue all other powers and officers in this worlde, in the regiment and go∣uernemēt of theyr people, and cōmitted vnto them, as vnto the chiefe heades of theyr cōmon wealthes, the cure and ouersight of all the people, which be in theyr realmes, and dominions, without any excep∣tion: And to them of right, and by goddis cōmaun∣dement, belongeth not only to prohibite vnlawfull violence, to correcte offendours by corporall death or other punishment, to conserue morall honesty a∣monge theyr subiectes, accordinge to the lawes of theyr realmes, to defend iustice, & to procure the pu∣blike wele & cōmon peace & trāquillitie in outward & earthly thinges: But specially and principally to defende the faith of Christ, and his religion, to con∣serue and maintein the true doctrine of Christe, and all suche as be true preachers and setters forth ther¦of, & to abolishe all abuses, heresies, and idolatries, and to punishe with corporal peines, such as of ma∣lice be the occasion of the same. And finally to ouer see and cause that the sayd bishops & priestes, do ex∣ecute their pastoral office truely & faithfully, & speci¦ally in those pointes, which by Christ and his apo∣stles, were giuen and committed vnto them: and in case they shall be negligent in any parte therof, or wolde not diligently execute the same, to cause them to redoube and supply theyr lacke. And if they obsti¦nately
withstand theyr princes kynd monition, and wyll not amend theyr faultes, than and in such case to put other in theyr roumes and places. And god hath also cōmanded the sayd bishops & priestes, to obey with all humblenes & reuerence, both kynges and princis, and gouernours, and all theyr lawes not beynge contrary to the lawes of god, what so e∣uer they be, and that not onely propter iram, but al∣so propter cōscientiā, that is to say, not only for feare of punyshment, but also for discharge of conscience. Wherby it appereth well, that this pretended mo∣narchy of the bishop of Rome, is not founded vpon the gospell, but it is repugnant thervnto. And therfore it apperteyneth to christen kinges and princis, for the discharge of theyr office & dutie towarde god, to endeuour them selues to refourme and reduce the same againe vnto the olde limittes and pristine estate of that power, which was giuen to them by Christe, & vsed in the primitiue churche. For it is out of doubt, that Christis faith was than most firme and pure, & the scriptures of god, were than beste vnderstande, and vertue dyd than moste abounde & excel. And therfore it must nedes folow, that the customes and ordynaunces than vsed and made be more conforme and agreable vnto the true doctrine of Christ and more conducynge vnto the edifieng and benefite of the churche of Christ, than any custome or lawes vsed or made by the bysshop of Rome, or any other addicted to that see and vsur¦ped power, sith that tyme. And therfore where as the kynges moste royall
maiestie, cōsidering of his most excellent wisedome, not only the notable decay of Christis true and per¦fite religion, emonges vs, but also the intollerable thraldome, captiuitie, and bondage, with the infy¦nite dangers and preiudices, whyche we his subie∣ctes continually susteyned, by reason of that longe vsurped and abused power, whiche the bysshops of Rome were wōt to exercise here in this realme: hath nowe of his most godly disposition, and by the con∣sente of his nobles spirituall and temporall, by au∣ctoritie of the hole parliament determined, no lon∣ger to suffer the byshoppe of Rome, to exercyse any parte of his vsurped iurisdiction here within this realme, but clerely to delyuer vs from the same, and restore vs agayne vnto our libertie. Surely we haue great cause, most ioyfully and thankefully to enbrace and accepte the same, consi∣deryng that therby no preiudice is done to goddis worde or his ordinaunces. For as we haue shewed and declared before, it was by princes sufferaunce onely, that the bysshoppe of Rome, exercised any su∣che iurisdiction within this realme, and not by the authoritie giuen vnto hym by Christe. And as for the bysshop of Rome, he can not pretende hym selfe no more to be greued or iniuried therwith, than any of the kynges officers myght worthily thynke, that the kynges byghnes shulde do him wronge, in case he shulde vppon good cause, remoue hym from his roume and office, and committe it to an other. And as for vs the kynges faythfull subiectes, we shall vndoubtedly receyue and haue thereby syngular
welth and commoditie, as well spiritually to the e∣difieng of our soules, as corporally to the increase of our substance and richesse. The which how moch it was impaired & decayed continually, from tyme to time, by the great exactions of the byshoppes of Rome, and suche treasures as wente yerely out of this realme to his coffers, for annates, annuities, and exemptions, pardons, and suche other vnlaw∣full exactions, we doubte not, but all men indued with any witte and zeale to the welthe of this our countrey, do right well perceiue and vnderstande, and accordingly with hart and minde, wil not one∣ly pray for the kynges highnes and his preseruati∣on, by whose occasion this lighte came fyrste vnto vs, but also firmely and constantly stycke to those lawes, wherby we haue so moche ease of wrongfull exactions and abuses, and also our prince & kyng, now enioieth most rightfully his iust title, with re∣stitution of his royall and imperiall dignitie and princely gouernance. The sacrament of Confirmation. WE reade in holy scrypture / how the apostels, in the beginnyng of the churche, althoughe they dyd certainly knowe and beleue, that al suche as had duely receyued the sa∣crament of baptisme, were by vertu and efficacie therof, perfitely regenerated in Christ, perfitely incorporated and made the very members
of his body, and had receyued full remission of their synnes, and were indued with graces and giftes of the holy goste, yet they went vnto the people, after they were baptised, and so by their prayer and impo∣sition of theyr handes vppon them, the holy goste was giuen and conferred vnto them. And the sayde people did speake diuerse languages, and prophe∣cyed, wherby not onely they, whiche had receyued baptisme and professed Christ, were the better con∣firmed and established in Christis religion, & made more constant to confesse the same: But also other whiche were out of the churche, & infideles, mighte the soner be reduced, by suche gifte and miracle frō theyr errours, and be brought in to the right beliefe of Christe and his gospele. Whervpon the holy fathers of the primitiue church taking occasion, and founding them selues vpon the saide actes and dedes of the apostles, and considering also, that suche as had ones receyued the giftes and benefites of the holy goste, by the sa∣crament of baptisme, might and oftentimes dyd in dede, by temptation, frailtie, or otherwise by theyr owne sinne and malice, lose and fall from the same againe: dyd vse and obserue (as it hath ben hither∣to by succession of ages continued) that al christen people, shuld after theyr baptisme, be presented to theyr bishops, to the intent that by theyr prayers, and imposition of theyr handes vpon them, & con∣signing of them with the holy Chris, they shulde be confirmed, that is to say, they shuld receyue su∣che gyftes of the holy goste, as wherby they shulde
be so corroborated, and establisshed in the giftes & graces before receyued in baptisme, that they shuld not lyghtly fall againe from the same: but shulde constantly reteyne them, and perseuere therin, and shulde also be made stronger and hardier, as wel to confesse boldly and manfully theyr faith, before all the persecutours of the same, and to resist and fight against theyr gostly ennemies, the world, the deuil, and the fleshe: as also to beare the crosse of Christe, that is, to suffer and susteine paciently all the affli∣ctions and aduersities of this worlde, and fynally that they shuld atteyne encreace and abundance of vertues and graces of the holy gost. And although men ought not to contemne this sacrament, but shuld present theyr children vnto the bishoppe, to receyue at his handes the sacrament of confirmation, yet it is not to be thought, that there is any suche necessitie of confirmation of infantes, but that they being baptised and dieng innocentes before they be confirmed, shall be assured to atteine euerlastinge lyfe and saluation, by the effecte of the sacrament of baptisme receyued. The sacrament of extreme vnction. AS towching extreme vncti∣on, we must vnderstand, how accor∣ding to scripture, and the rule and ordre prescribed by the holy apostle saint Iames, the catholike churche of Christ, hath obserued and miny∣stred
this sacrament, to such as haue required it in their sickenes and disease of body, to the entent that by the workinge of god, in ministration therof, the sicke man through prayer of the priest the minister, and suche as assist him, might be releued of his bo∣dely disease, and also atteyne pardon and remission of his synnes. For saint Iames saith: If any be sick among you, let him cal for the priestes of the churche, and let them pray ouer him, annointing him with oile, in the name of our lorde, and the prayer of fayth, shall saue the sycke man, and if be be in sinnes, they shall be forgiuen him. By whiche wordes, like as the vse of the sa∣crament is confirmed, and proued, so that the chur¦che may well vse the same, with assurance that god assisteth the ministration therof: So we must also remembre, that although helth of body, which here is prayed for, doth not always folowe, yet we shuld not doubte, but god ordereth mannes praier therin alwaies to the best, as he doth of his infinite good∣nes, all other prayers that men make, who in dede knowe not what they shuld aske, ne what is best or moste profitable for them. Wherfore, albeit we be taught to make all our prayers in a most certayne fayth, to atteine our desires, according to the gene∣rall promise made by god throughe Christe: Aske and you shall receyue,Mat. vii. whiche promise can not fayle, for goddis worde can not be frustrate, but taketh e∣uer effect: Yet may we not trust our owne determi∣nation, and our iugement so precisely in our pray∣er and requestes, but committing our selues holy
to goddes gouernans, we ought to take, esteme, and iudge, for the beste, what so euer god shal ordre and dispose for vs, althoughe it be contrary to our praier, and desire, whiche must euer haue direction and submission to goddis pleasure,Sap. x. who knoweth our necessities, and can and wyl dispose al thinges swetely and pleasantly, to the atteynyng of euerla∣styng comforte, whiche all good men chiefly desire and pray for. And where as saint Iames speaketh of remissi∣on of synne to be obteyned in this sacrament, in as moche as the remission of synne, is a necessary peti∣tion to be made of and for all men, considering the frailtie of mannes nature, whiche continually sin∣neth, and therfore continually is taught to saye: Dimitte nobis debita nostra, Lorde forgiue vs our tres∣paces: We ought assuredly to truste,Math. vi. that god wor∣kynge in the ministration of his sacrament, dothe by the prayer of the minister, and of suche as assiste hym, forgiue those sinnes of the sicke man which by the frailnes of his nature, in sodaine motions and vehement agonies, he doth commyt and fall into. And yet we ought not therevpon, to conceyue a vaine false hope of the effect of this sacramēt, that liuing in filthy and abhominable sinne, and not ca∣ringe to be delyuered from it by true penance, we shulde by the ministration of extreme vnction haue all our sinnes forgiuen: For this sacrament is mi∣nistred fruitfully, onely to those, that be membres of Christis churche, and suche as beinge fallen out of the state of grace by deadely sinne, haue bene by
penance restored to the same, which men by this sa∣crament, be strengthned and comforted in theyr a∣gonye and fight, against the deuil, who in the time of sickenes and vexation of the body, is very busye to assaulte them. And where it is called thextreme vnction, that is to saye, the last vnction, we muste not so vnder∣stande it, as though this sacrament might neuer be mynistred but ones, that is to saye, in extreme peril of death, whan men be without hope of lyfe: for it shuld rather be mynistred, in the entrie of sickenes, and so oftner, whan so euer any greate and peryl∣louse sickenes, and maladie shall come to any man. But the fathers of the churche did call it by the said name of extreme vnction, bycause it is the laste, in the respect of the other vnctions, whiche be myni∣stred before, in the other sacramentes, of baptisme, confirmation, & ordre, in whiche sacramentes chri∣sten men be also annointed. And for as moche, as the sacrament of the aul∣tare, (beinge duely receyued) is the very spirituall foode, and the very sustentation, comforte, and pre∣seruation of all christen men, in all dangerous pas∣sages and aduentures: therfore it is expedient, that the sayd sacrament of the aultare, shuld be receiued after this auodinge done, in the tyme of syckenes. For surely the receyuyng of the body of our sauiour Iesu Christe, is the very consummation, not onely of this, but also of all other sacramentes.
THe seuen sacramētes thus decla∣red, the vse and effecte of them dothe ma∣nifestely appere. For by baptisme we be incorporated into the body of Christes churche, obteyninge in that sacrament, remission of synne, and grace wherwith we be able to leade a newe life. By the sacrament of penance, they that be fal∣len into deadly sinne, may be restored vnto the state of grace, receiued in baptisme, and so made againe the liuely members of Christis mysticall body. In the most blessed sacrament of the aultare, is the most precious body and bloud of our sauiour & redemer Iesu Christ, bothe in fourme of bread and wyne, by whom, for whom, and in whom, all sacra∣mentes take effecte, and therfore is this the moste worthy sacrament, and of highest dignitie. The sacrament of Matrimony is a necessa∣ry thing for due generation of man, to goddis plea¦sure, whiche although it be honorable and accep∣table to god, and therfore the laufull coniunction of man and woman, is assisted by god in this holy sacrament, yet this estate is not commaunded as necessary, to any particular man, but lefte at liber∣tie, to all men, sauing priestes, and to other whiche of theyr free libertie, by vowe aduisedly made, haue chosen the estate of continencie, who accordinge to their free choyse, must frely and willingly continue in the same. The sacrament of ordre, although it be not com¦maunded
to any particular man, as necessarye for the atteyning of euerlastyng life: yet in the churche whiche is the mysticall body of Christ, it hath a ne∣cessitie, to the entent that by ministers duely placed there maye be due spirituall fathers, for spirituall generation. So that bothe the estates of matrimo∣ny and order, be for the hole churche necessary, but yet not so necessaryly commaunded to any particu∣lar man. The other two sacramentes of confirmation and extreme vnction, although they be not of suche necessitie, but that without them men may be saued, yet for as moche as in the ministration of them, yf they be worthely taken, men receiue more abūdant∣ly gostly strength, ayde, and comforte, They be ve∣ry holesome and profitable, and to be desyred, and reuerently receyued. The .x. commandementes of almighty god. i THou shalte haue none other goddes but me. ii Thou shalte not haue any grauen ymage / nor any like∣nesse of any thynge that is in heauen a∣boue / or in the earth beneth / or in the wa∣ter vnder the earthe / to the intent to do
and godly honoure and worshyppe vn∣to them. iii Thou shalte not take the name of thy lorde god in vayne. iiii Remembre that thou kepe holy the sab∣botte daye. v Honour thy father and thy mother. vi Thou shalte do no murther. vii Thou shalte not committe adultery. viii Thou shalte not steale. ix Thou shalte not beare false wytnes a∣gainst thy neyghbour. x Thou shalt not vniustly desire thy neigh¦bours house / nor thy neighbours wyfe / nor his seruant / nor his mayde / nor his oxe / nor his asse, nor any thynge that is thy neyghbours.
The exposition of the firste com∣mandement of god. Thou shalt haue none other goddis but me. THis fyrste cōmandement lyke as it is the fyrst in ordre, soo it is the most chief & principall among all the other preceptes. For in this first com∣maundemente god requireth of vs those thinges, in the whiche consysteth his chiefe and principall worshyp and honour, that is to say, perfyte faythe, sure hope, and vnfayned loue and dreade of god. And therfore it is to be noted, that to haue god, is not to haue hym, as we haue other outwarde thynges, as clothes vpon our backe, or treasure in our chestes, nor also to haue him in our mouth out∣wardly, or to worshyp hym with knelynge, or suche other gestures onely: but to haue hym our god, is to conceyue hym in our hartes, to cleaue faste and surely vnto hym, with harte and mynde, to put all our trust & confidence in him, to set all our though∣tes and care aboue all thynges to please hym, and to depend holely of hym, takyng him to be infinite∣ly good and mercyfull vnto vs, beynge his creatu∣res, and continuyng in his flocke. Secondly god commandeth vs thus to do to hym onely, and to no creature, nor to no false and fayned god. For as a kynde and louynge man, can
not be content, that his wyfe shulde take any other husband: So can not our most kynd & most louing god and creatour, be pleased, if we shulde forsake hym, and take any other goddis. And surely he is more presente with vs, and more ready to shewe vs all kyndnes and goodnes, than any creature is or can be. And already of his gyft, we haue al that we haue, meate, drynke, clothe, reason, witte, vnder∣standynge, dyscretion and all good thynges, that we haue, perteynynge bothe to the soule and the bodye. And therfore he wylle not suffre vnpunys∣shed soo muche ingratitude and vnkyndenesse at our handes, that we shoulde forsake hym, and fyxe our faythe and godly truste in any other thinge be∣sydes hym. Thyrdly by this precepte god commandeth vs not onely to truste thus in hym: but also to gyue hym the hole loue of our hartes, aboue all worldly thynges, yea and aboue our selues, so that we may not loue our selues, ne any other thyng but for him, according as Moises saith in the boke of Deutro∣nomie: Thy lorde god is one god,Deut. vi. and thou shalte loue hym with all thy harte, and with all thy soule, & with all thy minde, and with all thy strengthe and power. And this loue muste brynge with it a feare, that e∣uen for very pure loue, we ought to be muche asha∣med and afrayde, to breake the leaste of his com∣maundementes: Lyke as the chylde, the more he lo∣ueth his father, the more he is lothe and afrayde to displease hym in any maner of case. Fourthly all they offende agaynste thys com∣maundemente,
whiche set theyr hartes and mindes vpon any worldly thing aboue god. For what so e∣uer we loue aboue god, so that we set our myndes vpon it, more than we do vpon god, or for it we wyl offende god, truely we make that for the tyme our god. For as saint Paule sayeth: The couetous man maketh his goodes his god, And the gluttonous man maketh his bealy his god. For the one setteth his mynde vpon his goodes, the other vpon his bealy, more than they do vpon god, and for them they will not sticke to offende god. Also all they whiche haue more confidence in the creatures of god, than in god, do make the crea∣tures of god theyr god. And howe greuousely god is offended therewith, we fynde in the boke of Pa∣ralipomenon, Par. xvi. where it is written, that whan Aza kynge of Iuda, beynge sore constrayned by Baasa kynge of Israell, sente for helpe to Benadad kinge of Syria, and gaue hym greate treasure, for to al∣lure hym to his ayde. Our lorde sente the prophete Hanani to Aza the kynge of Iuda, who sayde vnto hym on this maner: Bycause thou haste trusted in the kynge of Syria, and not in thy lorde god, ther∣fore the hoste of the kynge Syria is escaped from thy handes. Were not they of Ethiopia and Libia. of farre greatter power, bothe in charyottes and horsemen, and in numbre and multitude, whyche were innumerable, and yet our lorde (as longe as thou dyddest put thy truste in hym) dyd yelde them in to thy handes? The eyes of god do beholde all the worlde, and gyueth strength to them that truste
in him with all theyr harte. In whyche wordes it dothe appere, that it is layde to Azaes charge, that he dyd not beleue in our lorde, bycause he dyd more trust in Benadad the hethen prince thā in our lord. It is noted also in the same chapiter, that where as Aza had very great peyne in his feete, he sought not to our lorde for remedy of his disease, but tru∣sted more in the art and remedy of phisike. Wherby we maye learne, that it is one great parte of perfit belefe in our lorde god, to put our truste and confi∣dence moste principally and aboue al other in him, wherfore they that do otherwyse, do transgresse this commandement, and make to them other goddis. Also all they transgresse this commaundement, whiche eyther presume so muche vpon the mercy of god, that they feare not his iustice, and by reason thereof do styll continue in theyr synne, or elles soo muche feare his iustyce, that they haue no truste in his mercy. Also they be of the same sorte, whiche by lottes, diuination, chatterynge of byrdes, and lokynge of mens handes, or other vnlawfull or superstitiouse craftes, take vpon them certeinly to tell, determine, and iudge before hand, of mens actes and fortunes which be to come afterwarde. For what do they but make them selues goddis in this behalfe, as the prophete Esaie sayeth? Tell vs afore what shall come,Esai. xii. and we shall say that ye be goddis. Also al they, which by charmes and witchecraf∣tes, do vse any prescribed letters, sygnes, or carectes
wordes, blessynges, roddes, christall stones, scep∣tures, sweardes, measures, or for any superstitious entente, charmes, or wytchecraftes, hange saincte Iohns gospelle, or any other thynge aboute theyr neckes, or any other partes of theyr bodies, or vse to drynke holy water, or any other suche vayne ob∣seruation, trustyng therby to continue in long life, to dryue awaye syckenes, to preserue them from sic∣nes, fier, water, or any other peryll, otherwyse than phisike or surgery dothe allowe, doo also offende a∣gaynst this commaundement. But moste greuousely of all, and aboue all o∣ther, they do offende agaynst this commaundement whiche professe Christe, and contrary to theyr pro∣fession, made at theyr baptisme: do make secrete pa∣ctes and couenantes with the deuyll, or do vse any maner of coniurations, to rayse vp deuyls for trea∣sure, or any other thynge hydde or loste, or for any maner of cause, what so euer it be: for suche com∣mitte so hygh offence and treason to god, that there can be no greatter. For they yelde the honour due vnto god to the deuyll, goddis ennemie. And not onely all suche as vse charmes, wytchecraftes, and coniurations, transgresse this chiefe and high commandement, but also all those that seke and re∣sorte vnto them, for any counsayle or remedy, accor∣dynge to the sayinge of god, when he sayde: Let no man aske counsayle of them that vse false diuina∣tions,Deu. xviii. or suche as take heede to dreames, or chatte∣ring of birdes. Let there be no witche or enchanter amonges you, or any that asketh counsaile of them,
that haue spirites, nor of sothesayers, nor that seke the trouthe of them that be dead, for god abhorreth all these thinges. The exposition of the seconde com∣maundement of god. ¶ Thou shalte not haue any grauen I∣mage, nor any lykenes of any thyng, that is in hea¦uen aboue, or in earthe benethe, or in the water vnder the earth, to the entent to do any god∣ly honour and worshyppe vnto them. BY THESE wordes we be not for¦bydden, to make or to haue simili∣tudes, or ymages, but onely we be forbydden, to make or to haue them to thintent to do godly honour vn∣to them, as it appereth in the .xxvi. chapiter of Leuiticus. And therfore although ymages of Christ, and his saintes, be the workes of mennes handes only: Yet they be not prohibited, but that they maye be had and sette vp, bothe in churches & in other pla∣ces, to the intent, that we (in beholdyng and loking vppon them, as in certaine bokes and signes) may call to remembraunce the manifolde exaumples of vertues, whiche were in the sainctes, whome they do represent: And so may they rather be prouoked,
kindled, and styred, to yelde thankes to our lorde, and to prayse hym and his sayde sayntes, and to re∣membre and lamente our synnes and offences, and to pray god, that we may haue grace to folow their goodnes and holy lyuyng. As for an example, the image of our sauiour hangeth on the crosse in the roode, or is paynted in clothes, walles, or wyndowes, as an open boke, to the intente that besydes the examples of vertues, whiche we maye learne at Christe, we maye be also many wayes prouoked, to remembre his peynfull and cruell passion, and also to consyder our selues whan we beholde the same image, and to condemne and abhorre our sinne, whiche was the cause of his so cruell deathe. And farthermore, consideringe, what high charitie was in hym, that wolde dye for vs his enemies, and what greate dangers we haue escaped, and what high benefites we receiue by his redemption: we maye be prouoked, in all our dy∣stresses and troubles, to rounne for comforte vnto hym. And these lessons, with many mo, be brought to our remembrance, by the boke of the roode, if we beyng fyrst wel instruct and taught, what is repre∣sented and ment therby, do dilygently beholde and loke vpon it. And as our sauiour Christe is repre∣sented by this ymage of the roode: euen so the holy saintes, which folowed him, be represented vnto vs by theyr ymages: and therfore the said images may well be set vp in churches, to be as bokes for vn∣lerned people, to put them in remembrance of those sayntes: of whom they maye learne exaumples of
faith, humilitie, charitie, pacience, temperance, and of all other their vertues and giftes of god, whiche were in theym, for whiche causes, ymages may be sette in the churche, and ought not to be de∣spised, but to be vsed reuerently, althoughe we be forbidden to do any godly honor vnto them. These lessons shulde be taught, by euerye curate to their parrishe. And where as we vse to sense the sayde y∣mages, and to knele before them, and to crepe to the crosse, with such other thinges: Yet we wust knowe and vnderstande, that suche thynges be not, nor ought to be done to the image it self, but to god and in his honour, although it be done afore the image whether it be of Christe, of the crosse, or of our la∣dy, or of any other saint. Against this commandement dyd offende ge∣nerally, before the commynge of Christe, all genti∣les, and people, that were of the nation of Israell. For they dyd godly honour vnto images, and wor∣shipped false goddis, some one, some an other, of the whiche sorte there was a great number. For be∣sydes their common goddis, euery countrey, euery cytie or towne, euery house and familye, had theyr propre goddis: wherof is moche mencion made in authours, bothe christen and heathen. And these Gētiles, though they had knowlege of a very god, yet (as saint Paule saith) they had ydell and vayne fantasies, which led them from the truthe, & where they compted them selues wise, they became fooles. And agaynst this commandement offended the Iewes, many and sundry tymes, and almoste con∣tinually.
For not withstandinge, that they profes∣sed the knowlege and worshipping of the very true god, yet they fel to the adoration of ymages, idols, and false goddes, as the holy scripture maketh men¦tion in many places. Also all they do greatly erre, whiche put diffe∣rence betwene image and image, trustynge more in one than in an other, as thoughe one coulde helpe or do more than an other, whan bothe do represente but one thinge, and sauyng by way of representati∣on, neither of thē is able to worke or do any thinge. And they also do erre, that be more ready with their substance to decke images gorgiousely, than with the same to helpe poore christen people, the quicke and lyuing images of god, whiche is the necessary worke of charitie commanded by god. And they also offende, that so dote in this behalfe, that they make vowes, and go on pylgremages, e∣uen to the images, and there do call vpon the same ymages for ayde and helpe, phantasyng, that either the image woll worke the same, or elles some other thinge in the image, or god for the image sake, as thoughe god supernaturally wrought by ymages carued, ingrauen, or painted, brought ones in to churches, as he doth naturally worke by other his creatures. In whiche thinges, if any person here∣tofore hath, or yet dothe offende, all good and lear∣ned men haue great cause to lamente suche errour and rudenes, and to put their studies and diligen∣ces for the reformation of the same.
The exposition of the thirde commandement of god. Thou shalt not take the name of thy lorde god in vayne. IN this commandement god requireth of vs to vse his name with all honour and reuerence. Whervp∣pon you shall vnderstande, that the right vse of the name of god, and the true honour of the same, standeth chiefely in those thinges folowinge, that is to saye, in the constant confession of his name, and mainteyning of his do∣ctrine, in the ryghte inuocation of him, in the gy∣uyng of due thankes vnto hym, as well in aduer∣sitie as in prosperitie. For Christ saith,Math. x. He that opē∣ly confesseth me before men, I shall confesse him before my father in heauen: And he that is ashamed of me, to confesse my name before men, I wylle be ashamed of hym before my father in heauen. In whiche wordes Christe teacheth vs not onely to professe the name of god, but also boldly and constantly to defend the same, and not to swarue from it, for any maner of persecution or iniurie. We must also in our tribulation and necessitie, and in all temptations and assaultes of the deuyll inuocate and cal vpon the name of god, for god ac∣compteth his name to be halowed, magnified, and worshipped, whan we call vpon hym in our nede: Call vppon me, saythe he, in the tyme of trouble,Psal. xlix. and
I wyll delyuer the,Pro. xviii. and thou shalt honour me. And a∣gayne the wise man saithe. The name of god is the most stronge towre, the rightuous man runneth to it, and he shall be holpen. Furthermore we may not seke our own name laude and fame, but vtterly avoyde and eschue the desye of al worldly honours, glorye, and prayse, and must gyue all laude, prayse and thankes vnto god for his benefites, whiche be so many in num∣bre, and so great, that we ought neuer to cesse from such laudes & thankes, lyke as the prophet Dauid admonisheth vs,Ps ix. saying: Offer vnto god the sacrifice of laude and praise. And saynt Paule commandeth vs, Cor. x. whan soeuer we eate, drinke, or do any maner of busines, to giue honor, praise, & thankes vnto god. And fynally they that be appoynted, to be my∣nysters of goddis worde, muste also preache the worde of god truely and purely, and set forthe the name of god vnto other, and reproue all false and erromouse doctrine heresies and idolatries. And al¦though the bishops and priestes onely, be specially called and deputed to be publike ministers of god∣dis worde, teachers, preachers, and interpretours of the same: Yet euery christen man is bounde par∣ticularly by good example of liuing and according to the godly knowledge, that he hath learned, to teache and order his family, and suche as be vnder his gouernance within his house, whan tyme and place requiteth. So that as moche as in him lyeth, he suffice not synne to be vsed in his rule and famy∣ly, but vertue to be vsed and exercised.
Secondly by this precepte wee commanded, to vse the name of god to all goodnes and truthe. And contrary wyse, we be forbidden in the same, to e his name to any maner of euyll, as to lyeng, de∣ceyuinge, or any vntruthe. And therfore againste this commandement, they do offende that sweare in vaine. They sweare in vaine, that sweare with out lawfull or iuste cause: For that they take the name of god in vaine, although the thinge, which they sweare be true. And lykewise do all they, whi∣che for euery lyght and vayne thinge, be ready to sweare vnprouoked, or prouoked of lyghte cause. And they that do glory in outrageous othes, or of custom do vse to swere, or that do swere, a false othe, and be forsworne wyttingly. And suche an othe is not onely periury, but also a kinde of blasphemy and is high dishonour and iniury to god, bycause suche persons as make suche othes, do wyttingly brynge god for a false wytnesse, who is all truthe, and hateth all vntruthe. They also do take the name of god in vayne, whiche sweare any thinge, that is true or false, they being in doubt, whether it be trewe or false, and do not afore well examine and discusse, whether it be true or false: or that swere that thynge to be false whiche though in dede it be false, yet they thinke it to be true: or sweare that thynge to be true, whiche thoughe in dede it be true, yet they thynke it to be false. They also do sweare in vayne, whyche sweare
to do that thing, which they intēd not to do, or swere to forbeare that, which they intend not to forbeare, or sweare to do any thyng, whiche to do is vnlaw∣full, or sweare to leaue any thynge vndone, whiche to omytte or leaue vndone, is neither right nor rea∣sonable. And all suche as sweare to do thinges vn∣laufull, not onely offend in suche swearyng, but al∣so they moche more offende, yf they perfourme the thynge whiche they do sweare. They also breake this commandement, whiche make any othe contrary to their lauful othe or pro∣myse made before, so longe as theyr promyse stan∣deth in strength, whiche in no wyse it dothe, if it be contrary to the lawes of god, or to the due obediēce to the prynces, and their lawes. They also breake this commandement, whiche by rewardes or faire promises, or by power or feare do induce or constraine any man to be periured. They also breake this commandement, whiche eyther by preachynge or teachyng, or by pretence of holy liuynge, do abuse this holy name to theyr own vayne glory, or to any other vngodly purpose. And generally all euyll christen men, which professe the name of Christe, and liue not accordynge to their profession, do also take the name of god in vayne, in wordes confessynge Christe, and denyinge hym in deedes. They also breake this commandement, why∣che in trouble do murmure or grudge, and doo not call vppon the name of god, nor doo thanke him in
all thynges bothe swete and sowre, good and euyl, welfare and euyl fare. For god dothe sende vs ma∣ny troubles, and aduersities, bycause we shoulde runne to hym, crye to hym for helpe, and call vpon his holy name. Thyrdly for as moch as the giftes of helth of body, helth of soule, forgiuenes of sinnes, the gifte of grace or life euerlastyng, and suche other, be the gyftes of god, and can not be gyuen but by god, who so euer maketh inuocation to sayntes for these gyftes, praieng to them for any of the sayd giftes, or any suche lyke, whiche can not be gyuen but by god onely, yeldeth the glory of god to his creature contrary to this commandement.Esai. xlii. For god saythe to his prophete: I wyll not yelde my glory to any o∣ther. Therfore they that so pray to saintes for these giftes, as though they coulde gyue them, or be gy∣uers of theym, transgresse this commaundement, yeldynge to a creature the honour of god. Neuer the lesse, to praye vnto saynctes to be intercessours with vs and for vs, to our lorde in our suites, whi∣che we make vnto hym, and for suche thinges as we can obteyne of none but of him, so that we e∣steme not, or worshippe not theym, as gyuers of those gyftes, but as intercessours for the same, is laufull, and allowed by the catholyke churche, and yf we honour theym any other waies, than as the frendes of god dwellynge with hym, and establys∣shed nowe in his glory euerlastynge, and as exam∣ples, which were requisite for vs to folowe in holy lyfe & conuersation, or if we yelde vnto sayntes, the
adoration and honour, whiche is due vnto god a∣lone, we doo (no doubte) breake this commaunde∣ment. Fynally it is to be considered, that bycause no temple, ne churche, nor aultare ought to be made, but onely to god (For to whome we make temple, churche, or aultare, to hym, as saincte Augustine saythe, we do sacryfice: And sacrifice we maye do to none, but to God) Therfore where we vse in our englisshe tongue to calle the temples, chur∣ches, or aultars, by the name of any saincte, as the church or aultare of our ladye, the churche or aul∣tare of saincte Michaell, saincte Peter, of saincte Paule, and so of other saintes, the trewe meanyng therof is, and ought to be taken, that the saide aul∣tars and churches, be not dedicate to any saynctes, but to god onely, and be of the sainctes but a me∣moriall, to put vs in remembraunce of them, that we maye folowe theyr example and lyuynge, and also to make a knowlege of dyuersitie bytwene one churche or aultare, and an other. And therfore yf we meane otherwyse, than here is declared, whan we call theym churches or aultars of saynctes, we yelde the honour of god from hym to the sainctes, and breake this commandement.
The exposition of the fourth com∣mandement of god. Remembre that thou kepe holy the sabbote day. AS touchynge this comman∣dement it is to be noted, that this worde Sabotte, is an hebrue worde, and signifieth in englishe Rest: So that the sabotte daye, is as moche to saye, as the daye of reste and quietnes. And there is specially a notable difference betwene this commandement, & the other nyne commandemen∣tes. For as saint Austine saith: all the other nyne, be merely morrall commandementes, and belonged not onely to the Iewes, and all other people of the worlde, in the tyme of the olde testament, but also belonge now to all christen people in the new testa∣ment. But this precept of the Sabbote, as concer∣ning rest from bodily labour the seuenth day, is ce∣remoniall, and perteined onely vnto the Iewes in the olde testament, before the comminge of Christe, and perteyneth not vnto vs christen people in the newe testament. Neuer the lesse as concerninge the spirituall rest, whiche is figured and signified by this corporall rest, that is to say, rest from the car∣nall workes of the fleshe, and all maner of synne, this precepte is morrall, and remayneth still, and bindeth them that belonge vnto Christe: and not for euery seuenth day onely, but for all dayes, hou∣res,
and tymes. For at all tymes we be bounde to rest, from fulfillinge of our owne carnall wyl and pleasure, and from all sinnes and euyl desires, from pride, disobedience, yre, hate, couetousnes, and all suche corrupte and carnall appetites, and to cōmit our selues holely vnto god, that he maye worke in vs all thinges that be to his will and pleasure. And this is the true sabbote or rest of vs that be christe∣ned, whan we reste from our owne carnall wylles, and be not ledde therby, but be guided by god and his holy spirite. And this is the thing that we pray for in the Pater noster, whan we say: Father let thy kingdome come to vs. Thy wyll be done in earth, as it is in heauen. Reigne thou in vs. Make that we may do thy wyll, and from our corrupt will we may rest and ceasse. And for this purpose, god hath ordeyned fast, watche, and labour, to the ende that by these & suche other exercises, we moughte mortifie and kyll the euyll and sinfull desyres of the fleshe, and attein this spirituall rest and quietnes, whiche is figured and signified in this commandement. Furthermore besydes this spirituall reste, whiche chiefely and principally is required of vs, we be bounde by this precepte, at certayne times, to ceasse from bodily labour, and to giue our mindes entierly & holly vnto god, to heare the diuine ser∣uice approued, vsed, and obserued in the churche, & also ye word of god, to aknowlege our owne sinful∣nes vnto god, and his greate mercy and goodnes vnto vs, to gyue thankes vnto hym for his bene∣fites, to make publike and common prayer for all
thynges nedeful, to visite the sick to instruct euery man his children and familye in vertue and good∣nesse, and such other lyke workes. Whiche thinges although all christen people be boūde vnto, by this commandement, yet the sabbote day, whiche is cal∣led the saturday, is not now prescribed and appoin¦ted thervnto, as it was to the Iewes, but in stede of the sabbote day, succedeth the sonday in the me∣mory of Christis resurrection. And also many other holy & festiuall daies, which the church hath ordei∣ned, from tyme to tyme, which be called holy daies, not bycause that one day is more acceptable to god than an other, or of it self more holy than an other, but bycause the churche hath ordeyned, that vpon those daies, we shuld giue our selues holly without any impediment, vnto such holy workes, as be before expressed, where as vpon other dayes we may do & apply our selues to bodily labour, & be therby mo∣che letted from suche holy and spirituall workes. And to the entent the ignorant people maye be the more clerely instructed, what holy and spiritual workes they ought to do vpon the holy daye, here foloweth a brefe declaration therof. Firste let them make an accompt with them selues, how they haue bestowed the weke past, remēbryng what euyl min∣des and purposes they haue had, what wordes they haue spoken, what thinges they haue done, or lefte vndone, to the dishonour and displeasure of god, & to the hurt of their neyghbour, & what example or occasion of euyll they haue giuen vnto other. And whan they haue thus recollected and considered al
these thinges in theyr myndes, than let them hum∣bly knowlege their fautes vnto god, and aske for¦giuenes for ye same, with vnfained purpose in their hartes to conuert and retourne from theyr naugh∣ty lyues, and to amende the same, and let them also clerely and purely in theyr hartes, remitte and for∣giue al malice and displeasure, which they beare to any creature. Than let them fall vnto praier accor∣dinge to the commaundement of Christ, where he saith: .xi. whan you beginne to praye, forgiue what so e∣uer displeasure you haue against any man. And whan they be wery of prayer, than let them vse reading of the worde of god, or some other good or heauenly doctrine, so that they do it quietly, without distur∣bance of other, that be in the church, or els let them occupie their mindes, with holsome and godly me∣ditations, wherby they may be the better, and they that can reade, maye be well occupied vpon the ho∣ly day, if in tyme and place conuenient, they reade sobrely and quietly vnto other, suche as they haue charge of, suche good bokes as be allowed, whiche maye be vnto them in stede of a sermon: for al thin∣ges that edifie mans soule in our lord god, be good and holsome sermons. And truely if men wold occupie them selues v∣pon the holy dayes, and spende the same dayes ho∣lily after this fourme and maner, not onely in the house of god, but also in theyr owne houses, they shulde eschue therby moche vyce, confounde theyr ancient ennemie the deuyll, moche edifie both them¦selues and other, and finally atteyne moche grace
and highe rewarde of almyghty god. Also men must haue specyall regarde, that they be not ouer scrupulouse, or rather superstici∣ouse, in absteinynge from bodely labour vpon the holy daye. For not withstandynge all that is a∣fore spoken, it is not ment, but we maye vppon the holy daye, gyue our selues to labour, for the spe∣dy perfourmaunce of the necessary affayres of the prynce, and the common welthe, at the commande∣ment of them, that haue rule and authoritie therin. And also in all other tymes of necessitie, as for sa∣uynge of our corne and cattel, whan it is like to be in dangier, or lyke to be destroyed, if remedy be not had in tyme, for this lesson our sauiour teacheth vs in the gospell, and we nede not to haue any scruple or grudge in conscience, in suche case of necessitie, to labour on the holy dayes, but rather we shulde of∣fende, if we shulde for scrupulositie nor saue, that god hath sente for the sustenance and reliefe of his people. And yet in suche tymes of necessitie (if their busines be not very great and vrgen) men oughte to haue suche regarde, to the holy day, that they do bestowe some conuenient tyme, in hearynge diuine seruyce, as is aforesayde. Against this commaundement generally doo offende all they, whiche wyll not ceasse from theyr owne carnall willes and pleasures. Also they, whiche hauynge no lawfull impedi∣ment, do not giue them selfe vpon the holy daye to heare masse, to heare the worde of god, to remembre
these thinges in theyr myndes, than let them hum∣bly knowlege their fautes vnto god, and aske for giuenes for ye same, with vnfained purpose in their hartes to conuert and retourne from theyr naugh∣ty lyues, and to amende the same, and let them also clerely and purely in theyr hartes, remitte and for∣giue al malice and displeasure, which they beare to any creature. Than let them fall vnto praier accor∣dinge to the commaundement of Christ, where he saith: .xi. whan you beginne to praye, forgiue what so e∣uer displeasure you haue against any man. And whan they be wery of prayer, than let them vse reading of the worde of god, or some other good or heauenly doctrine, so that they do it quietly, without distur∣bance of other, that be in the church, or els let them occupie their mindes, with holsome and godly me∣ditations, wherby they may be the better, and they that can reade, maye be well occupied vpon the ho∣ly day, if in tyme and place conuenient, they reade sobrely and quietly vnto other, suche as they haue charge of, suche good bokes as be allowed, whiche maye be vnto them in stede of a sermon: for al thin∣ges that edifie mans soule in our lord god, be good and holsome sermons. And truely if men wold occupie them selues v∣pon the holy dayes, and spende the same dayes ho∣lily after this fourme and maner, not onely in the house of god, but also in theyr owne houses, they shulde eschue therby moche vyce, confounde theyr ancient ennemie the deuyll, moche edifie both them¦selues and other, and finally atteyne moche grace
and highe rewarde of almyghty god. Also men must haue specyall regarde, that they be not ouer scrupulouse, or rather superstici∣ouse, in absteinynge from bodely labour vpon the holy daye. For not withstandynge all that is a∣fore spoken, it is not ment, but we maye vppon the holy daye, gyue our selues to labour, for the spe∣dy perfourmaunce of the necessary affayres of the prynce, and the common welthe, at the commande∣ment of them, that haue rule and authoritie therin. And also in all other tymes of necessitie, as for sa∣uynge of our corne and cattel, whan it is like to be in dangier, or lyke to be destroyed, if remedy be not had in tyme, for this lesson our sauiour teacheth vs in the gospell, and we nede not to haue any scruple or grudge in conscience, in suche case of necessitie, to labour on the holy dayes, but rather we shulde of∣fende, if we shulde for scrupulositie not saue, that god hath sente for the sustenance and reliefe of his people. And yet in suche tymes of necessitie (if their busines be not very great and vrgent) men oughte to haue suche regarde, to the holy day, that they do bestowe some conuenient tyme, in hearynge diuine seruyce, as is aforesayde. Against this commaundement generally doo offende all they, whiche wyll not ceasse from theyr owne carnall willes and pleasures. Also they, whiche hauynge no lawfull impedi∣ment, do not giue them selfe vpon the holy daye to heare masse, to heare the worde of god, to remembre
the benefites of god, to giue thankes for the same, to pray, to exercise such holy workes, as he appoin∣ted for suche dayes, but (as cōmonly is vsed) passe the tyme, either in idelnes, in glotony, in ryot, or o∣ther vaine, or idel pastime, do breake this comman∣dement. For surely suche keping of holy day is not accordinge to the intent and meanyng of this com∣mandement, but after the vsage and custome of the Iewes, and doth not please god, but dothe moche more offende him, and prouoke his indignation & wrath towardes vs. For as saint Austine saithe of the Iewes. They shulde be better occupied, labou∣ringe in their feeldes, and to be at plough, than to be ydle at home. And women shulde better bestowe theyr tyme in spinning of woll, than vpon the sab∣bot day, to lose their tyme in leapyng or daunsyng, and other ydell wantonnes. All they do also offende against this commaun∣dement, whiche do heare the word of god, and giue not good hede thervnto, that they may vnderstand it, or if they do vnderstand it, yet they endeuour not theyr selues to remembre it, or if they remembre it, yet they study not to folowe it. And all they breake this cōmandment, whiche in masse tyme, do occupie their mindes with other matters, and lyke vnkind people, remembre not the passion and death of Christ, nor giue thankes vnto him: whiche thinges in the masse tyme they ought specially to do. For the masse, wherin after the con∣secration is really present the very blessed body and bloudde of Christe, is celebrate in the churche for a
perpetuall memory of his death and passion. And lykewyse do all those, which in suche tyme as the cōmon prayers be made, or the worde of god is taught, not onely them selues do gyue none at∣tendance thervnto, but also by readyng, walkinge, talking, and other euyll demeanour, let other that wolde well vse them selues. And lyke wyse do all they, whiche do not ob∣serue, but dispise suche laudable ceremonies of the churche, as set forthe goddis honour, and apper∣teyne to good ordre to be vsed in the churche. And therfore concerning suche ceremonies of the chur∣che, as haue ben institute by our forfathers, and be allowed by the princes or kynges of the domyni∣ons, whiche nexte to god be the chiefe heades of the churches: althoughe men oughte not to haue soo fonde opinion of the said ceremonies, to thinke that they haue power to remytte synne, yet they be very expedient thynges, either to excite or stirre vp mens deuotion, and to cause them to haue the more reue∣rence toward the sacramentes: as the hallowing of the fonte, of the chalice, of the corporace, of the aul∣tare, and other lyke exorcismes and benedictions, done by the mynisters of Christis churche: or elles to put vs in contynuall remembrance of those spi∣rituall thynges, whiche be signified by them. As sprinklinge of holy water, dothe put vs in remem∣brance of our baptisme, and of the bloud of Christe sprinkled for our redēption vpō the crosse. Giuinge of holy breade doth put vs in remembraunce of the sacramēt of the aultare, which we ought to receyue
in right charitie: And also that all christen men be one body mysticall of Christe, as the bread is made of many graines, and yet but one lofe. Bearynge the candels on Candelmas day, dothe put vs in re∣membrance of Christ, the spirituall lyght, of whom Symeon dyd prophecy, as is redde in the churche that daye. Gyuinge asshes on ashwednesday, doth put vs in remembrance, that euery christen manne shulde considre, that he is but ashes and earth, and thervnto he shall retourne. Bearyng of palmes on palme sonday, dothe put vs in remembrance of the receiuynge of Christe in to Hierusalem a lyttell be∣fore his deathe, and that we must haue the same de∣syre to receyue him in our hartes. Crepynge to the crosse on good friday, & there offeryng vnto Christ before the same, and kyssynge of it, declareth our humble submission and thankes giuynge to Christ for our redemption, whiche he hath wroughte for vs vpon the crosse. And so finally the settyng vp of the sepulchre of Christe, whose body after his death was buried: And al other like laudable customes, rites, and ceremonies do put vs in remembrance of some spiritual thyng. And therfore they be not to be contemned, and caste away, but obediently to be v∣sed and continued, as thynges good and laudable for the purposes abouesaid.
The exposition of the .v. com∣maundement of god. Honour thy father and thy mother. IN this commandement / by these wordes, Father and mother, is vnderstande not onely the naturall father and mother, whiche dyd car∣nally begette vs, and broughte vs vp, but also princes and all other gouernours, rulers, and pastours, vnder whom we be nourished and brought vp, ordred, & guiged. And by this worde Honour, in this commande∣ment, is not onely ment a reuerence, and lowlines in wordes and outwarde gesture, whyche chyldren and inferiours ought to exhibite vnto their paren∣tes and superiours, but also a prompt and a redy o∣bedience to theyr lawfull commandementes, a re∣garde to theyr wordes, a forbearyng and sufferinge of them, an inward loue and veneration towardes them, a reuerence, feare, and lothenes to dysplease or offende them, and a good wyll or gladnes to as∣siste them, ayde them, succour them, and helpe them with theyr counsayle, with their goodes and sub∣stance, and by all other meanes to theyr power, as hereafter is declared. This is the very honour and duetie, whiche not onely the chyldren do owe vnto theyr parentes, but also all subiectes & inferiours, to theyr heades and rulers. And that children owe this duetye to theyr fa∣thers,
it appereth in many places of scripture: in ye prouerbes it is written:Prou i. Obey my sonne the chastise∣ment of thy father, & be not negligent in thy mothers commandementes.Deu xxvi. In the boke of Deutronomie it is also written: Accursed be he that doth not honour his father and his mother. And in the boke of Leui∣ticus it is sayde:Leuit. xix. Let euery man stande in awe of his father & mother: xxi. And yf any man haue a stubburne and a disobedient sonne, whiche wyll not heare the voyce of his father and mother, and for correction wyll not amende and folowe them: Than shall his father and mother take him, and brynge hym to the iudge of the citie and saye: This our sonne is stub∣burne & disobedient, and dispiseth our admonitiōs, and is a riotour and a drunkerde. Than shal al the people stone him to death, and thou shalt put away the euill from the, that all Israell may here therof. and be afrayde.Exod. xxi. And in the boke of Exody, it is also writtē: He that striketh his father or mother, he shall be put to deathe: And lykewise be that curseth his fa∣ther or mother shall be put to death. And in the boke of prouerbes,Prouer. xxviii. the wise man also saith: He that stea∣leth any thyng frō his father or mother, is to be taken as a murtherer. And although these great punysshe∣mentes of disobedient children by death, be not now in the newe lawe in force & strength, but lefte to the ordre of princes & gouernours and their lawes: yet it euidently appereth, how sore god is agreued & di¦pleased, with such disobediēce of children towardes their parentes, for as moche as in the olde lawe he did appointe thervnto so greuouse punishementes.
And as almyghty god doth threaten these pu∣nishementes vnto those children, whiche do breake this commandement, so he doth promise great re∣wardes to them that kepe it. For he that honoureth his father, saythe the wyseman,Eccle. iii. his synnes shall be forgyuen hym. And he that honoureth his mother, is as one that gathereth treasures. who so euer ho∣noureth his father, shall haue ioy in his owne chil∣dren, and whan he maketh his prayer vnto god, he is herde. He that honoureth his father shall haue a long and a prosperous lyfe. And as the chyldren by this commaundement be bounde to honour and obey theyr parentes, ac∣cordinge as is afore expressed, so it is implied in the same precepte, that the parentes shulde nourysshe and godly brynge vp their chyldren, that is to say, that they muste not onely fynde them meate and drinke in youth, and also set them forwarde in lear∣nynge, labour, and some other good exercise, that they maye eschue idlenes, and haue some crafte or occupation, or some other lauful meane to get their lyuynge: but also they muste learne them to beleue and truste in god, to loue him, to feare him, to loue their neighbours, to hate no man, to hurte no man, to wisshe well to euery man, & so moch as they may, do good to euery man, not to curse, not to sweare, not to be riotous, but to be sobre and temperate in al thinges, not to be worldly, but to set their mindes vpon the loue of god & heauēly thinges, more than vpon tēporall thinges of the worlde. And generally to do all that is good, & to eschue all that is euill:
and this the parentes ought to do, not by cruell en∣treatinge of theyr children, wherby they might dis∣courage them, and prouoke them to hate theyr pa∣rentes, but by charitable rebuking, threatning, and charitable chastising and correcting of them, whan they do euyll, and cherishynge, mainteyninge, and commending them, whan they do well. This office and duetie of the parentes towardes theyr chyldren is witnessed in many places of scripture. First saint Paule writeth thus:Epe. vi. Fathers prouoke not your chil∣dren vnto angre, but bringe them vp in the correction and doctrine of god.Deut. vi. And in Deutronomy al mygh∣ty god saythe:Pro. xxix. Teache my lawes and commandemen∣tes to thy children. And the wise man saith: The rod of correction giueth wisedome. The chylde that is left to his owne will,Prou. xiii. shalbe confusion to his mother. And in an other place he saith: He that spareth the rod, hateth his sonne, and he that loueth hym, will se hym corrected.Pro. xxiii. And in an other place he saythe: Se thou withdrawe not from thy childe discipline and chasty∣synge, if thou strike hym with the rodde, he shall not die, thou shalte strike him with a rodde, and shalt therby deliuer his soule from hell.. And on the other syde it is written: The sonne vntaught and vnchasti∣sed is the confusion of his father. And for this cause we fynde in the boke of ye kinges, how that our lord conceyued great indignatiō against Hely the chiefe prieste,i Reg ii. bycause he dyd not duely correcte his two sonnes Ophni and Phinees,i Reg. iii. whan he knewe that they dyd greuously offende god, and how in reuen∣ging of theyr fathers negligence and remissenes in
correcting of his children, almighty god toke from Hely, and all his issue and householde for euer, the office of the high priesthode, & how his two sonnes Ophni and Phinees were slayne bothe vppon a day, and Hely theyr father brake his necke. This example of Hely is necessary for fathers to imprynt in theyr hartes, that they may se theyr children well taught and corrected, lest they runne into the great indignation of almighty god, as Hely dyd, and not onely in this world haue confusion: but also in the worlde to come, haue damnation for the mysorder of theyr children throughe their defaute, and they muste not thynke, that it is inough to speake some∣what to them, whan they do amisse, for so dyd Hely to his sonnes, and yet our lord was not pleased, bi∣cause he dyd not moche more sharply correcte them, and se them refourmed: but whan wordes wyll not serue, the fathers and mothers must put to sharper correction, and by such discipline saue theyr soules, orels they shall aunswere to god for them. And tru∣ly they greatly deserue the indignatiō of god, that whan they haue receyued of hym chyldren, do not bringe them vp to his seruice, but without regarde what cōmeth of them, suffer them to runne into the seruice of the deuyl. Wherfore al fathers ought di∣ligently to consider and remembre, how moche and how greuously they offende god, and of how many euils they be the cause, which either bring vp their children in wantonnes and idelnes, and do not put them forthe be tyme to some facultie, exercise, or la∣bour, wherby they may after gette theyr lyuyng, or
occupie theyr lyfe to the profite and commoditie of the common weale, or elles do suffer their chyldren in youth to be corruptid for lacke of good teaching and good bringing vp in the true knowlege of god, and of his wyl and commandementes, or committe in word or dede such thinges, in the presence of their children, wherof the yonge tendre hartes of the said children (whiche like a smal twygge be inclinable e∣uery way, and by fraylenes of youth be inclyned to euyl) do take so euyl example and corruption of vi∣ces, and worldely affections, that harde it wyll be for them after to eschue the same. This cōmandement also conteineth the honour and obedience, which subiectes owe vnto their prin¦ces. And also the offyce of prynces towardes theyr subiectes. For scripture taketh prynces, to be as it were fathers, xlix. & nurses, to their subiectes. And by scripture it appereth, that it apperteyneth vnto the office of princes, to se that the righte religion & true doctrine of Christ, be mainteined and taught, & that their subiectes be wel ruled & gouerned, by good & iust lawes, & to prouide and care, that the people & common weale maye encreace, and to defende them frome oppression, and inuasion, as well within the realme as without, their subiectes aiding them ther¦vnto, & to se that iustice be ministred vnto them in∣differently, & to here by themselues, or by their my∣nisters beningly, al their complaintes, and to shew toward them (although they offende) fatherly pitie. And finally so to correct them that be euil, that they had yet rather saue them than lose them, yf it were
not for respect of iustice & maintenance of peace and good ordre in ye cōmon weale. And therfore al theyr subiectes must again on their partes, and be boūde by this cōmandement, not onely to honour & obey their said princes, accordyng as subiectes be bound to do, & to owe theyr truth & fidelitie vnto them, as vnto their naturall lordes: but they must also loue them, as childrē do loue their fathers, yea they must more tendre the suretie of their princes person, and his estate, than their owne or any others, Euen like as the health of the head is more to be tendred, thā the health of any other membre. And by this commandement also, subiectes be bound, not to withdrawe their said fealtie, trouth, loue and obedience, towardes their prince, for any cause what so euer it be, ne for any cause they maye conspire against his person, ne do any thing towar∣des the hinderance or hurt therof, nor of his estate. And furthermore by this commandement they be bounde to obey also, all the lawes, proclamati∣ons, preceptes and cōmandementes made by their princes and gouernours, except they be against the commandementes of god. And lykewyse they be bounde to obey all suche as be in authoritie vnder their prince, as farre as he wyll haue them obeyed. They must also gyue vnto their prince, aide, helpe, and assistaunce, whan so euer he shall requyre the same, either for suretie, preseruation, or maintenāce of his person and estate, or of the realme, or of the defence of any of the same against all persons. And whā so euer subiectes be called by their prince vnto
pryuy counsayle, or vnto the parliament, where is the generall counsayle of this realme, than they be bounde to giue vnto theyr prynce, as theyr lear∣nynge, wysedome, or experyence can serue them, the moste faythefull counsayle they can, and suche as may be to the honour of god, to the honour and su∣ertie of his regall person and state, and to the gene∣rall wealthe of this hole realme. And further if any subiecte shall knowe of any thynge, whiche is or may be to the noyaunce or da∣mage of his princis person or estate, he is bounde by this commandement to disclose the same with al spede, to the prynce him selfe, or to some of his coū∣sayle. For it is the very lawe of nature, that euery membre shal imploy him selfe to preserue & defende the heade. And surely wisedome and polycie wyll the same: for of conspiracy and treason commeth no goodnesse, but infinite hurte, damage, and perill to the common weale. And that all subiectes do owe vnto theyr prin∣ces and gouernours, suche honour and obedience as is aforesayde, it appereth euidently in sundry places of scripture, but specially in the epistles of saint Paul,Rom. xiii. and saint Peter. For saint Paul saythe in this maner: Euery man must be obedient vnto the hyghe powers, for the powers be of god. And therfore who so euer resisteth the powers, resysteth the ordynaunce of god. And they that resyst the or∣dynaunce of god, shall get to them selues damna∣tion: For rulers are not feareful to them that be good, but to them that do euil. Wilt not thou feare
the power? Do well, and thou shalte haue prayse of the same: for he is the minister of god for thy welth. But yf thou do euyll, then feare, for he beareth not the sworde without cause. For he is the minister of god to punishe the euyll doer, therfore you muste o∣bey, not onely for the feare of punysshement, but al∣so bicause of conscience. And for this cause ye paye tributes, for they be goddes ministers seruinge for the same purpose. Gyue therfore to all men that is due, tribute to whom tribute is due, custome to whō custome is due, feare to whom feare is due, and ho∣nour to whō honour is due. And saint Peter sayth, Obeye vnto all sortes of gouernours for goddes sake,i. Peul. ii. whether it be vnto the kyng, as vnto the chiefe heade, or vnto rulers, as vnto them that be sent of him, to pu¦nyshe euyll doers, & to cherishe them that do well. And shortly after it foloweth, Feare god, honour the king And there be many exaumples in scripture, of the great vengeaunce of god, that hathe fallen vp∣pon rulers, and suche as haue bene disobedient vn∣to theyr princes. But one principall exaumple to be noted is of the rebellion, whyche Chore, Dathan, and Abiron made againste their gouernous,Num. xvi. Moy∣ses, and Aaron. For punyshement of whiche rebels god not only caused the earthe to open, and to swa∣lowe them downe and a great numbre of other peo∣ple with them, with theyr houses, and all theyr sub∣stance, but caused also the fyer to descende from hea¦uen, and to burne vp. CCl. capitaines, whiche con∣spired with them in the sayde rebellion. Moreouer all christen men be bounde by this
commaundement to exhibite due honour and reue∣rence vnto the spirituall fathers & parentes, whych haue cure and charge of theyr soules, as vnto those who be appoynted by god to minister his sacramen¦tes vnto the people, & to feede them with his worde, and by the same to conducte and to leade theym the strayght way to the father in heauen euerlastynge. And our sauiour Christe in the gospell maketh mencion as well of the obedience, as of the corporal sustenance, whyche all christen people do owe vnto theyr spirituall fathers. Of the obedience he sayth: That who soo euer receyueth you,Math. x. receyueth me. And in an other place he sayth: He that heareth you hea∣reth me,Luc. vii. and he that dispiseth you, dispiseth me. And saynte Paule sayeth, Obey your prelates, and gyue place vnto them,Heb. xiii. for they haue muche charge, and muche care for your soules, as they, whyche muste giue an accompte therfore, that they may do it with ioye and not with griefe, that is to saye, that they may gladly, and with muche comfort do theyr cure and charge, whan they do perceyue, that the people be obedient to theyr teachynge. Lyke as contrarye wyse, although they be bounde to do it, yet the peo∣ple gyue theym lytle comforte to doo it, whan they fynde them disobedient and repugnant. And for the sustenance of theyr lyuynge, whiche is comprised in this word Honour,Luc x. (as before is de∣clared) Christe sayeth in the gospell: The workeman is worthy his wages.Corin. ix. And saynt Paule sayeth: who goeth on warfare vppon his owne stipende? And who planteth the vine, and eateth no parte of the fruite?
And who fedeth the flocke, and eateth no parte of the mylke? And after foloweth & Euen so hathe the lorde ordeyned, that they whiche preache the gospell,1. Tim. vi shulde lyue of the gospell. And therfore in an other place it is written: Priestes that rule well, be worthye of dou∣ble honour, specially they that labour in the ministra∣tion of the worde of god, and his doctrine. In whiche place the apostle meaneth by Double honour, not onely the reuerence, whiche is due vnto the spiritu∣all fathers, as is aforesayde, but also sufficiencye of all thynges necessary and requisite, as wel for theyr sustenance and findyng, as for the quiete and com∣modiouse exercisynge and executynge of theyr sayd office. Fynally in this commandement is conteyned the honour and obedience of the seruaunt vnto his mayster: that is, to loue his mayster, to be reuerente and lowly to him in all his wordes and gesture, to suffre and forbeare hym, to be redy with a good wyl without murmuration or grudging, to obey all his laufull and reasonable commandementes, to feare hym, and to be loth to displease hym, to be faythful and true vnto hym. And to his power to procure & doo that, whiche is for his maysters honestie and profyte. And that as well in his maysters absence, and out of his syght, as whan he is present, and lo∣keth vpon him, accordynge to the wordes of saynte Paule, where he saith:Ephe. vi. Seruantes be you obedient vnto your maisters, with feare and trembling, with simple and playne hartes, as vnto Christe, not ser∣uyng onely in theyr syghte, as pleasers of men, but
as the seruantes of Christe, doynge the wyll of god from the harte, and with good wyll, thynkyng that ye serue god, and not men. And be you sure, that of all your good seruice, you shall receyue rewarde of god.Tit. ii. And agayn to Titus he writeth thus: exhorte the seruantes to be obedient vnto theyr maisters, to please them well in all thynges, not to be patterers and praters against them, nor pickers nor priuy cō∣ueiours of theyr maisters goodes. But to shewe all truth and faythfulnes.i. Petri. ii. Saynte Peter also byddeth seruantes to obey theyr maisters with all feare, not onely yf they be good and gentile, but also thoughe they be frowarde. And of the other syde, the offyce and duetie of maysters to theyr seruantes is, to prouide sufficient¦ly for them, of all thynges necessarye, to se them in∣structe in the knowlege of the commandementes of god, and that they obserue the same, and not be o∣uer rigorouse vnto them, but with discretion to cor∣recte them, whan they do amisse, and to commende and cherishe them, whan they do well, accordyng to the saying of saynt Paule:Col iiii. You that be maysters, do vnto your seruantes, that is ryght and reason, know∣ynge that your selues haue also a mayster in heauen. Ephe. vi.And in an other place he sayeth: Be not rigorous vn∣to your seruātes, for you haue a master in heauen, that regardeth al persons indifferently. And the wyse man sayth:Ec. xxxiii. Meate, correctiō & worke is due vnto seruantes. Set thy seruante vnto labour, that he be not ydle, for idlenes bringeth moche euyl, set him to worke, for that belongeth to him: if he be not obedient, correcte him.
And in this commandement is also implied, that chyldren and yonge folkes, shuld gyue due honour and reuerence to olde men, and to all suche as be theyr maysters and tutours, to brynge them vp in lernyng and vertu, whiche be in this behalfe as fa∣thers vnto them, and so as fathers, must be honou∣red and obeyed. The exposition of the .vi. com∣mandement of god. Thou shalt do no murther. IN this commaundement is forbidden, not onely bodely killing, and all maner of violent layinge of handes vpon any man, as strikyng, cuttyng, woundynge, and all maner of bodyly hurtyng, by acte or deede: but also all malice, anger, hate, enuye, disdaine, and al other euyll affections of the harte, & also al sclan∣der, backbityng, scoldyng, bannyng, raylynge, scor∣nyng, or mockynge, and all other euyll behauyour of our tongue agaynste our neyghbours, whiche all be forbidden by this commaundemente, for they be rootes and occasions of murther, and other bodely hurte. The contrary of all these thynges be comman∣ded by this commandement, that is to saye, that we shulde with our hartes loue our neyghbours, and with our tonges speake well of them and to theym,
and in our actes and dedes do good vnto them she∣wyng towardes them in harte, worde, and dede, pa∣cience, mekenes, mercy, and gentylnes, yea thoughe they be our aduersaryes, and ennemies. And that this is the true sence and meanyng of this comman¦dement, it appereth, by the expositiō of our sauiour Christe in the gospell,Math. . where he declareth, that we shulde neyther hurte any man in dede, nor speake of hym or vnto hym maliciousely or contemptuousely with our tounges, nor beare malice or angre in our hartes: But that we shulde loue them that hate vs, say well by them, that saye euyll by vs, and do good vnto them that do euyll vnto vs. And accordynge to the same sayeng of Christ, saynt Iohn sayth also: That he that hateth his brother,. Ioan. iii. is a manqueller. It is not forbydden by this commaundement, but that al rulers and gouernours, as princes, iud∣ges, fathers, maisters, and suche other, maye for the correction of theym, whyche be vnder theyr gouer∣nance, vse suche maner of punysshemente, eyther by rebukefull or sharpe wordes, or by bodyly chasty∣sing, as the lawes of euery realme do permitte. And not onely they may do thus, but also they be bound so to do (onles they se reasonable cause to the contra¦ry) and offende god if they do it not, as is before de∣clared in the .v. commaundement. All rulers also muste beware and take hede that in theyr corrections and punishmentes, they do not procede vpon any priuate malyce of their hartes, or displeasure towardes any man, or for any lucre, fa∣uour, or feare of any persō, but that they haue theyr
eye and consideration only vpon the reformation & amendment of the person, whom they do correct, or elles vpon the good ordre and quietnes of the com∣mon weale, so that styll there may remayne in theyr hartes charitie, and loue towardes the person, they punyshe. And lyke as the father loueth his chylde, euen whan he beateth him: Eeuen so a good iudge, whan he gyueth sentence of death vppon any gylty person, although he shewe outwardly sharpenes, & rigour, yet inwardely he ought to loue the person and to be sorye and heauy for his offences, and for the death whiche he hym selfe by the lawe, doth and must nedes condemne him vnto. And although in∣feriour rulers and gouernours, maye correcte and punysshe suche as he vnder their gouernaunce, yet they maye not punysshe by deathe, nor mutilate, maime, or imprison them, or vse any corporall vio∣lence towardes theym, otherwyse then is permitted by the hyghe gouernour, that is to say, by the prince and his lawes, from whom al suche authoritie doth come. For no man may kylle, or vse suche bodily co∣ertion, but onely princes, and they whiche haue au∣thoritie frome princes, ne the sayde princes, nor any for them, may do the same, but by and accordyng to the iuste ordre of theyr lawes and ordinances. Moreouer no subiectes may drawe theyr swor∣des agaynst theyr prynce for any cause what so euer it be, nor agaynst any other (sauynge for laufull de∣fence) without theyr princes lycence. And it is theyr duety to draw theyr swordes for the defence of theyr prynce and realme, whan soo euer the prynce shall
commande theym so to do. And althoughe princes, whiche be the chiefe and supreme heades of theyr re¦almes, do otherwise than they ought to do: Yet god hathe assigned no iudges ouer them in this worlde, but wyl haue the iugement of them reserued to him¦selfe, and wil punyshe them whan he seeth his time. And for amendement of such princes that do other∣wise than they shulde do, the subiectes maye not re∣bell, but must praye to god, whyche hath the hartes of princes in his handes, that he so turne theyr har∣tes vnto him, that they maye vse the sworde, which he hath gyuen them, vnto his pleasure. Agaynste this commandement offende al they, whyche do kyll, mayme, or hurte any man without iuste ordre of the lawe, and gyueth counsayle, ayde, fauour, prouocation, or consent therto. And also all they, whyche maye (yf they wyll) by theyr authoritie or laufull meanes, delyuer a man from wrongfull death, mutulation, hurte or iniury, and wyll not do it, but wyll wyncke therat, and dis∣semble it, be transgressours of this commādement. And al iudges, which seyng no sufficient matter or cause of death, or vpon lyght triall, without suf∣ficient examination and discussion, gyue sentence of death, or whan the matter or cause of death is suffi∣cient, and the triall good, yet delyte in the deathe of the person, be transgressours of this cōmandement. And lykewyse be all those, whiche in causes of lyfe & deathe, beyng impanelled vpon inquestes do lyghtly cōdemne or endite any person, without suf∣ficient
euidence, examination, and discussion of the informations gyuen vnto them. And moreouer all those, whiche either in such causes do gyue false e∣uidence or information, eyther wittyngly, contrary to their owne conscience, or doubtynge of the truth of those informations, or without sufficient exami∣nation, do promote, enforce, or mainteine such eui∣dences, informatiōs, or inditementes, do also breake this commandement. So do all they whiche wyllyngly do kyll them¦selfe for any maner of cause, for so to doo, there can be no pretence of lawfulle cause, ne of iust order. And therfore he that so dothe, kylleth at ones both body and sowle. Fynally all they, whiche beare hatred and ma∣lyce agaynste their neyghbours, and eyther maly∣ciousely speake wordes of contempte, dyspite, checkynge, cursynge, and suche other, or el∣les publysshe theyr neyghbours offences to theyr sclander, rather than to theyr amendemente: And generally all they that liue in yre, malice, en∣uy, and murmuringe at other mens welth, or reioysing at other mens trouble or hurt, or suche other like, they offende all againste this pre∣cepte.
The exposition of the seuenthe commandement of god. Thou shalt not cōmitte adultery ALthough this word Adultery doth signifie properly the vnlaufull commixtion of a maryed man with anye other woman, than with his owne wyfe, or elles of a maried wo∣man with any other man, than her owne husbande: yet in this commandement, it is taken not onely for that, but also for all maner vn∣laufull copulation betwene man and woman ma∣ried and vnmaried, and all maner of vnlaufull vse of those partes, whiche be ordeyned for generati∣on, whether it be by adultery, fornication, incest, or any other meane. And in laufull matrimonye a man may breake this commandement, and lyue vnchaste with his owne wyfe, yf he do vnmeasurably or inordinatly serue his or her fleshely appetite or lust. And of such the deuyll hath power, as the angel Raphael sayde vnto Thoby:Tob. vi. They that marrye in suche wyse, that they exclude god out of their hartes, and gyue them¦selues vnto their owne carnal lustes, as it were an hors or a mule, whiche haue no reason: apon suche persons the deuyll hath power. Also all christen people ought highly to regard the obseruation of this cōmandement, consideryng howe moch god is displeased, and what vengeance
he hath alwaies taken, and euer wyll take for the transgression of the same. For confirmation wher∣of, you shall vnderstande, that god in the tyme of Moyses lawe, cōmanded, that who so euer commit∣ted adultery, shulde be stoned to death. And that almightye god, after the childerne of Israel had committed adultery with the women of Moab and Madian, cōmanded fyrste, that the hea∣des and rulers of the people shulde be hanged for that they suffred the people so to offende god. And afterwarde commaunded also, euery man to slea his neyghbour, that had so offended. In so moche that there was slayn of that people the numbre of .xxiiii. M. and many mo shulde haue ben slaine, had not Phinees the sonne of Eleazar the high prieste, tur∣ned the indignation of god frome the chyldren of Israell. For this Phinees, whan he sawe Zamry, chief of the tribe of Simeon, in the presence of Moi¦ses, and al the people, go vnto Cosoy, a noble mans daughter of the Madianites, to committe fornica∣tion with her, he rose from among al the multitude, and takyng a sworde in his hande, went into the house where they were, & thrust them both through the bealyes. Whose feruent mind and zeale, god dyd so moche allowe, that he dydde therfore bothe ceasse frome the farther punisshement of the Israelytes, and also graunted to Phinees, and his successours for euer, the dignitie of the high priesthode. Also the tribe and stocke of Beniamin was soo punisshed for the maintenaunce of certaine persons
of the citie of Gaba, whiche had contrarye to this commandment, shamefully abused a certain mans wyfe, that of .xxv.M. & .vii. C. men of armes, there remayned on lyue but .vi. C. Gen. xix.Moreouer almighty god for the transgression of this commandement, caused brymstone and fire to rayne downe from heauen, vpon al the countrey of Sodome and Gomor, and so destroyed the hole region, both men women and beastes, and all that grewe vpon the earthe, reseruynge onely Loth and his two doughters. These terrible examples and many other lyke, almighty god dyd shewe in times past, to the entent we shulde haue them in our continuall remēbrance and shulde euer stande in awe and feare so to offend god. For though he dothe not presently punyshe vs here in this worlde, as he dyd the persons afore re∣hersed: yet his longe pacience and forbearynge, is no allowance or forgyuenes of our offences, if we continue styll in them, but a sore accumulation and heapinge togither of goddis wrathe and indigna∣tion against the daye of iudgement. At whiche time in stede of this temporall payne, we shall receyue euerlastinge paine,Rom. ii. being (as saint paule sayeh) ex∣cluded from the euerlastinge kingdome of heauen. And as Christe saith in he gospel, and saynt Iohn in the apocalypse: we shall be caste into the burnynge lake of hell,Mat. xxv. Luc. xiii. where is fyre, brymstone, wepynge, way∣lyng, and gnasshyng of tethe without ende. Furthermore in this commandement not on∣ly
the vyces before rehersed, be forbidden and pro∣hibited, but also the vertues contrary to them be re¦quyred and commanded: That is to say, fidelitie, and true kepyng of wedlocke, in them that be mar∣ried, continence in them that be vnmaried: And ge∣nerally in all persons, shamefastnes and chastenes not only of dedes, but of wordes and maners, coū∣tenance and thought. And moreouer fastynge, tem¦perance, watchynge, labour, and all laufull thin∣ges that conduce and helpe to chastitie. And therfore against this cōmandement offend all they, whiche take any syngle woman, or other mās wyfe, or that in their hartes do couet or desyre vnlaufully to haue them. For as Christ saith:Mat. xxv. who so euer beholdeth a woman, couetynge her vnlaufully, hath alredy committed adultery with her in his hart. They also offende this commaundement,Leui. xviii. & .xx. that take in mariage, or out of mariage, anye of theyr owne kynrede or affinitie, within the degrees for bydden by the lawe of god. They also offend this commandement, whiche abuse them selues, or any other persons against na∣ture, or abuse their wyues in the tyme of their men∣struall purgation. They also that do nourishe, styre vp, and pro∣uoke them selues, or any other, to carnal lustes and plesures of the body, by vnclenly and wanton wor∣des, tales, songes, syghtes, touchinges, gay and wanton apparell and lasciuious deckynge of them selues, or anye suche wanton behauiour and intice∣ment.
And also all those, whyche procure any suche acte, or that minister house, licence, or place thervn∣to. And all counsaylers, helpers, and consentours to the same, do greuousely offende, and transgresse this commaundement. Likewise al they that auoide not the causes hereof so moche as they cōueniently maye, as surfettynge, slouth. idlenes, immoderate sleepe, and company of suche both men and women, as be vnchaste and euyll disposed, be giltye of the transgression of this commandement. The exposition of the eyght com∣mandement of god. ¶Thou shalt not steale. VNder the name of thefte or stealynge, in this commandement, is vnderstande all maner of vnlaw∣full takyng away, occupiyng, or ke∣pyng of an other mans goodes, whe¦ther it be by force, extortion, oppressi∣on, brybery, vsury, simony, vnlaufull cheuisance, or shiftes, or els by false bying and selling, either by false weightes, or by false measures, or by sellyng of a thyng counterfayt for a true. as gylte copper, for true golde, or glasse for precious stones, and ge∣nerally all maner of fraude and deceyte. And like as the vices before rehersed, be forbid∣den by this precepte: Euen so sundry vertues con∣trary
to the said vices, be cōmanded by the same, as to deale truely and plainly with our neighbours in all thinges, to gette oure owne goodes trewly, to spende them liberally vpon them that haue nede, to feede the hungery, to giue drynke to the thristy, to clothe the naked, to harborowe the harbourlesse, to comforte the sycke, to visite the prisoners: And fy∣nally to helpe our neighbours, with our learnyng good counsayle and exhortation, and by all other good meane that we can. Against this commandement offende al they, which by craft or violence, vpon sea or lande, spoile robbe or take away any other mans seruāt or child, lande, or inheritance, horse, shepe, or cattell, fysshe, foule, conies, or deere, money, iewels, apparaile, or any other thyng, which is not their owne. Likewise offende all they against this cōman∣dement, whyche haue goodes gyuen to an vse, and put them not to the same vse, but kepe them to their owne aduantage, as maisters of hospitals, and fals executours, which conuert the goodes giuen to the sustentation of the pore folkes, & to other good and charitable vses, vnto their own profit. And also all they, which receiue rent or stipend, for any office spi∣ritual or temporal, & yet do not ther office belōging thervnto, be transgressours of this commandemēt. And so al they, which take wages or fee, pretē∣dyng to deserue it, and yet do not in deede, as labo∣rers, and hyred seruantes, whiche loyter and do not applye theyr busynesse. And lyke wyse aduocates,
proctours, attourneys, counsaylours in any of the lawes, whiche sometyme for lyttell payne take mo∣che stipende, or by their defaut & negligence, marre good causes, or do any thynge to the hinderance of spedy iustyce, for theyr aduauntages, do transgresse this commandement. Also all ydell vacabundes and sturdy beggers, whiche beynge able to get theyr liuynge by labour, take suche almes, wherwith the poore and impo∣tent folkes shulde be releued and susteyned, do of∣fende against this commandement. Moreouer all they transgresse this commande¦ment, which bye any stoolne goodes, knowing that they be stoolne, or that bye thynges of theym that haue none authoritie to sell them, or alienate them, yf they knowe the same. And lykewise do they, whi∣che withholde goodes stoolne, or that fynde thyn∣ges lost, and knowinge the owner therof, wyll not restore them, or wyl not do their diligence to knowe the owner. They also whiche defraude theyr hyred seruan∣tes of their due wages, and they that borowe anye thynge, or reteyne any thyng delyuered vnto them vpon truste, and wyll not restore the same agayne. And they that vse false weyghtes or mesures, or de∣ceytefull wares, or sell theyr owne wares at an vn∣reasonable price, farre aboue the iuste value. And they that ingrosse and bye vp any kynde of wares holely into theyr owne handes, to the intent that they may make a scarcenes therof in other mēs
handes, and sell it againe as they lyste. And generally all couetous men, whiche by a∣ny meanes vnlaufully gette, or vnmercifully kepe their goodes from theym that haue nede, be trans∣gressours and breakers of this commaundement. The exposition of the nynth com∣mandement of god. Thou shalt not beare false wyt∣nesse agaynst thy neyghbour. BY this commaundement is forbydden all maner of lying, sclan∣deryng, bakbyting, false reportyng, false accusyng, euyll counsaylynge, and all such mysusyng of our tonge to the hurt of our neighbours, whe∣ther it be in theyr bodye or goodes,Iacob. ii. or in theyr good name and fame. The apostle saynt Iames likeneth the tong of a man, vnto the bitte of an hors mouth, which turneth the hole horse euery way, as pleaseth hym that sytteth on the horse backe: and he compa∣reth it also to the healme of a shyp, whereby all the hole shyp is ruled, at the pleasure of him that gouer¦neth the healme. And thirdly, he compareth it vnto a sparke of fyer, which if it be suffred, wyl burne vp an hole towne or citie. And surely all these compa∣risons be verye apte and mete. For the tongue of a man no doubt, is the chiefe stay of all the hole body
eyther to do muche good, or to do muche hurt. The voyce of the tounge perceth the hartes of hearers, and causeth them to conceyue of other men, good or euyll opinion. It kyndleth or quencheth contentiō. It disposeth men to warre or peace, and moueth the hearers sundry ways, to goodnes or vyce. And like as the greate ragious flames, that goo from house to house, come but of one sparkell, whiche in the be∣gynning mought haue ben easily quenched, but by neglygence and sufferaunce encreaseth and waxeth so great, that no man can resist it: And lyke as fire is a greate cōmoditie many wayes, if it be well and wysely vsed, & contrary an vtter destruction, if it be suffered, and not taken hede vnto: Euen so of mans tounge, althoughe it be a very small membre of the body, yet there commeth excedyng great benefites, both to him self and to others, if it be wel and wise∣ly gouerned. And contrarywyse, if no hede be taken thervnto, but be suffred to runne at large, than it is not one euyll alone, but a roote and occasion, or ra∣ther a heapyng togither of all euyls. And bycause that of the tonge commeth so mo∣che good, or so muche euyll: Therfore by this com∣maundement is not onely forbidden all euyll vse of the tonge, to the hurt of our neighbours, but al∣so in the same is commanded all the good vse of the tonge, to the benefite of our neighbours, as to be true and plaine in our wordes, to be faithfull in co∣uenantes, bargaines, and promyses, to testifie the truth in all courtes, iugementes, and other places, to report well of them that be absent, to gyue good
counsayle and exhortation to all goodnes, to dys∣suade from all euyl. And whan we knowe any man to do amysse, not to publyshe his faute to other men to his sclander, but rather to admonishe him priui∣ly betwene him and vs, and to seke his reformatiō to speake wel by our ennemies, to pacifie and set at one theym that be ennemies, to excuse them, and to answere for them, that be vniustly slaundered: and generally in all other thynges to vse our tounges in truthe, to the wealthe of our neyghbours. Agaynst this commandement offende all they, which by lying and vttering of false speche, deceyue and hurte any man. And suche lyers, be the deuyls childrē. For as saint Iohn saith in his gospell:Ioan. viii. The deuyll is a lyer, and father of lyers. And therfore byd¦deth saint Paule:Ephe. iiii. That we shulde put away lyinge and speke trouth euery man to his neighbour. They also offende againste this cōmandement, which be detractours, backebiters, and sclanderers whom the wiseman doth liken vnto serpentes, that priuely byte or sting men behinde,Eccl. . whan they be not ware therof. And surely such men (what so euer they pretende) go not about to heale and amende theym that do amysse, but rather do satisfie theyr owne malyce. and sclanderous tongues. For lyke as the surgeon, that wyl heale a wounde, dothe couer it, and bynde it that it take no open ayre: So yf we intend the amendment of our neighbours fau, we must not open it abrode to his hurt, but we must be sory, and pray to god for him, & so taking him to vs we must priuely counsaile and exhort him. And this
louyng correction, wyll make him beware and take hede, that he offende no more. But if we tel his fau∣tes, fyrst to one, and after to an other, and charge e∣uery one to kepe counsaile, as though we had tolde it to no mo, this is no amendment of his faute, but a declaration of our owne, and a reprehension of our selues, in that we vtter forthe vnto other, that thyng which we our selues iudge not to be vttered. And surely we condemne our selues therin, for we shulde fyrst haue kepte it secrete to our selues, if we wolde not, an other man shulde vtter the same. And therfore the wyse man sayth:Eccl. xix. If thou hast herde any thing against thy neighbour, let it dye within the, and be sure it wyll not burst the. An in an other place: As euyll is be that backebiteth priuely, as the serpent whiche styngeth vnwares. And they also offende against this commande∣ment, whiche gladly gyue eares, and be redy to here suche backebitoures. For as saint Barnarde sayth: Lyke as the backebiter caryeth the deuyll in his mouthe: so the hearer carieth the deuyll in his eare. For the detractour is not glad to telle but to hym, whiche is glad to heare. And the wyse man sayeth. That lyke as the wynde driueth away the raine,Pro. xxv. euen so dothe a sadde and a dyspleasant countenaunce dryue away the toung of the backebitours, and maketh them abasshed. They also breake this commaundement, why∣che with flatteryng and double tounges, go about to please such as be glad to here complayntes. Iu∣ges also, whiche gyue sentence, contrarye to that,
which they knowe to be true, and they that in iuge∣ment do hyde and supresse the truth, and they that make false plees, to the delay and hynderance of Iustice, or any otherwyse do stop iustice: And en∣questes: which vppon lyght groundes, or vppon groundes not well examined or discussed, gyue ver¦dite, be transgressours and breakers of this cōman¦dement. And aboue other, they do trāsgresse this cō¦maundement, whiche in preachyng or other wayes, do teach or meinteyne anye false or erronious do∣ctrine, contrary to the word of god, or that do teach fables, or mens fantasies and imaginations, affir∣ming them to be the word of god. And such be wors than false wyttnesses of worldly matters, for they beare false wytnes against god and his truthe. The exposition of the tenthe com∣mandement of god. Thou shalt not vniustly desire thy neigh¦bours house, nor thy neighbours wyfe, nor his seruaunt, nor his mayde, nor his oxe, nor his asse, nor any thing that is thy neighbours. VVhere as in the other cōmā∣dementes before rehersed, be forbid∣den all wordes and dedes, which be agaynste goddes pleasure, and the loue of our neyghboures: In this last precept is forbidden the inward consent of the harte, to all vnlefull motions, desy∣res,
delites, inclinations, and affections vnto euyl, whiche thinges be so roted and planted in al vs the children of Adam, euen from the fyrst houre of our byrth, that although by the inspiration of the holy goste, and the grace of god gyuen vnto vs, we doo entende neuer so well, and wolde moste gladly es∣chue all euyll: yet there remaineth in vs a dispositi∣on and redynesse vnto such thinges, as be contrary to the wyll and cōmandement of god: In so moche, that if the grace of god did not helpe vs to stay and resiste our naughty thoughtes & delite vnto synne, the same our concupiscence and noughtines, shulde be so moche, that we shulde tunne headlynge in to synne and mischefe, our nature is corrupte, and we be so farre from the perfecte obedience vnto god¦dis wyl, whiche obedience Adam had in the state of innocency. And of this corruption of our nature and redynes vnto euyll, complayneth saint Paule in his epistile vnto the Romans, where he declareth at length,Rom. vii. that the nature of man is so full of con∣cupiscence and euyll affections, that no man dothe or can of him selfe satisfie or fulfil the lawe of god: And that the law condemneth all men as transgres¦sours, and that therfore euery man for his saluati∣on, muste haue refuge vnto the grace and mercy of god, obteyned by our sauiour Iesu Christ. Furthermore lyke as in the fyfte cōmaunde∣ment, vnder the name of father and mother is vn∣derstande al superiours: And in the .vi. commande∣ment, vnder the name of kyllyng is vnderstand al wrothe and reuenging. And in the .vii. commande∣ment,
vnder the name of adultery, is vnderstande all vnchaste lyuynge. And in the eyght commande∣mente, vnder the name of thefte is vnderstande all disceytfull dealynge with our neighbours: And in the .ix. commandement, vnder the name of false wit∣nesse, is vnderstande all misreporte, and vntrewe vse of our tonge: So in this laste commandement, vnder the name of desyring of an others mans wife and goodes, is vnderstande all maner of euyll and vnlaufull desyre of any thynge. And lyke as in this precepte be forbydden euyll desyres, euen so in the same be commaunded good desyres, good affections, good inclinations to god∣ly thynges, and the perfect obedience of our hartes vnto goddis wyll, whyche althoughe we shall not fully and absolutely atteyne vnto, whiles we be in this lyfe: Yet this commandement doth bynde vs to enforce and endeuour our selues thervnto, by cō∣tynual fyghtynge and resystyng againste the sayde corruption, concupiscence, and euyll desyres, for as muche as by theym man is continually tempted to euyll dedes and vicious lyuyng, accordinge wher∣vnto sayncte Iames wryteth: Lette no man saye,Iacob. i. whan he is tempted to euyll, that he is tempted of god. For as god can not be tempted to euyll, so he tempteth no man to euyll, but euerye man is temp∣ted drawen, and allured by his owne concupiscence: than concupiscence whan she hath conceyued, brin∣geth furth synne. All they be transgressours of this commande∣ment, whiche by delyberation and full consent, cast
theyr myndes and lustes, to accomplysshe the con∣cupisence and desyre, whiche they haue to obteyne and gette vnlawfully an other mannes wife, child, seruant, house, lande, cattall, or any thing or goo∣des that be his. And they also be transgressours of this com¦mandement whiche by enuy, be sory of theyr neygh∣bours wealth and prosperitie, or be gladde of theyr sorowe hinderance and aduersitie. And also all they whiche do not set theyr myndes and studies, to pre∣serue, maynteyne, and defende vnto theyr neygh∣bours (as moche as it is in theym) theyr wyues, chyldren, seruauntes, howses, landes, goodes, and all that is theyrs. For (as before is declared) this commaundement not onely forbideth vs to desyre vnlaufully from our neighbour any thyng that is his: But by the same we be also comman∣ded, gladly to wishe and wyl vnto him, that he may quietly possesse & enioy al that god hath sēt him, be it neuer so great abundāce. And this minde we ought to beare vnto euery man by this commandment, not only if they be our fren¦des and louers, but also if they be our enne∣myes and ad∣uersaries. ❧
¶Here foloweth the exposition of the prayer of our lorde called the Pater no∣ster, deuided in to seuen petitions. i OVr father which art in hea∣uen: halowed be thy name. ii Thy kingdome come. iii Thy wyll be done in earth, as it is in heauen. iiii Gyue vs this day our dayly breade. v And forgyue vs our trespasses: as we forgyue them that trespasse against vs. vi And let vs not be ledde into temptation. vii But deliuer vs from euyll. Amen. The notes. FOr the better and more am∣ple declaration of this prayer, ye shall vnderstande, fyrst that our sa∣uiour Iesus Christe, was the au∣thour and maker therof, and that therfore like as he is of infinite wise¦dome, and of infinite loue and charitie towardes vs: euen so al christen men ought to thynke and be∣leue, that this same praier is the most excellent and most sufficient, & most perfect of al others. For nei∣ther there is any thinge in this praier superfluous, neyther there wanteth any petition, suite, or request
for suche thinges as be necessarie for oure iourney and passage in this worlde, or for oure furtherance to that eming of the lyfe and glorye euerlastinge. Secondly that euery good christen man may be assured to atteine the requestes made in this prai¦er, if he shall enforce hym selfe, and apply his hole harte and wyll to the wyll and grace of hym, vnto whom this prayer is made, and also if he shal vtter and offer the said petitions inwardly with his hart and with suche faith, confidence, and truste in god, as he requireth. For surely no prayer is thankfull vnto god,Ps cxviii. Exod. xiiii but that whiche is made with the hart. And therfore the prophet Dauid crieth to our lorde with all his hart. And Moyses is noted to crye out aloude, whan he spake no word with his mouth, but he spake aloude with his hart. And our lord by his prophete noteth,Psal. xxix. that some pray with theyr lyppes and in their hartes minde nothinge lesse than that which they praye for. And therfore who so euer in∣tendeth by saying his Pater noster, to atteyne his de∣syre, he must haue with faith a good and ernest de∣uotion, and his hart as nigh as he can, voyde of vayne thoughtes, and applyed to god, so that the entente and desyre of his harte maye be ioyned al∣waies with the prayer of his mouth. And for this purpose it is mete & moch requisite, that the vnlearned people shulde vse to make theyr prayers in their mother tounge, which they best vn¦derstand, wherby they may be the more moued and stirred vnto deuotion, and the more ernestly minde the thinge that they pray for.
Our father which art in heauen halowed be thy name. OF these wordes, Our father, placed in the beginning of this pe∣tition, all true christen mē ought to conceiue a great comfort and ioy, in that they be taught and commaun∣ded in this prayer, to take almighty god for their father, and so to call him, as for exam∣ple: If oure soueraine lorde the kynge wolde saye to any of vs, take me for your father, and so call me, what ioye in harte, what comforte, what confi∣dence wolde we cōceyue of so fauourable, & graci∣ouse wordes? Than moch more incōparably haue we cause to reioyse, that the king & prynce of al prin¦ces shewith vnto vs this grace & goodnes, to make vs his children. And surely as the naturall sonne may assuredly trust that his father wyll do for him all thinges that may be for his settyng forth and ad¦uancemēt: euen so we may vndoubtedly assure our selues, that hauyng almighty god to our father, v∣singe our selfe as obedient children, we shall lacke nothynge whiche may be profitable for vs, toward the euerlastinge inheritaunce prepared for vs. And here is to be noted a lesson, that as this word Father, declareth the great beneuolence, mer∣cy and loue of god towardes vs, as well in the cre∣ation, as also in the redemption of man: so it admo∣nisheth vs againe of our duetie towardes him, and
howe we be bounde to shewe againe vnto hym our hole harte, loue, and our obedience and redynes to fulfyll all his preceptes and commaundementes, with all gladnes and humilitie. And therfore who so euer presumeth to come to god with this prayer, and to call hym father, and yet hath not full entente and purpose to vse hym selfe in all thinges lyke a kinde and an obedient sonne, he cōmeth to hym, as Iudas came to Christe with a kisse,. xx.i. pretending to be his frende and his seruant in callyng hym may∣ster, and yet he was in dede a traytour to hym, and a deadly ennemy. And for this consideration, euery christen man that intendeth to make this prayer, ought inwardly and thoroughly to inserche and ex∣amine him selfe, and yf he finde in him selfe any no∣table crime, for the whiche he ought to be ashamed to call god his father: Let him accuse him selfe ther¦of to god, and recognise his vnworthynes, sayeng, as the prodigall sonne sayde: Father I haue offen∣ded the,Luc. xv. I am not worthy to be called thy sonne. And with due repentaunce, and firme purpose & intente to amende his naughty lyfe, let him lyfte vppe his harte to god, and callinge for his grace of reconci∣ltation humbly say: Our father. &c. Moreouer by these wordes, Our father, is si∣gnified that we ought to beleue, that almighty god is the common father of al true christen people, and fatherly regardeth all, throughe and by the meane of our sauiour Iesu Christe, vnto whom all faithe∣ful and obedient christen men be brethern by grace and adoption, and called to inherite with him the
kingdome of heauen. And they be also brethern eche one to other, hauing al one father, which is god al∣mighty. And therfore we ought not onely to be of one spirite towardes our said father, and to employ and endeuour our selues to the vttermost, to please him, and to kepe his lawes and commandementes, but we ought also eche to consent with other, in per¦fite loue & charitie, & eche to helpe & further other, towardes the saide inheritaunce of heauen. And fy∣nally in al our praiers to god eche to cōprise other, and to praye for other, lyke as in this prayer we be taught to say: Our father, gyue vs our breade: for∣giue vs our synnes: suffer vs not to fal into tempta∣tion: and delyuer vs from euyll. By these wordes, whiche art in heauen, we be taught that we ought to haue an inwarde desyre, and a great care & study, to come to the place where our heauenly father is, and moche couet his sighte and presence. For lyke as a louynge chylde is euen desirous to be where his father is: euen so oughte we euer desyre to be with our heauenly father, and to endeuour our selues that our conuersation be al withdrawen from the worlde, the fleshe, and the de∣uyll, and be sette in heauen and heauenly thinges,Phili. iii. as saint Paule teacheth, and we shulde continua∣ly wayle and lament, bycause we be not with oure heauenly father, sayenge with the prophete:Ps. cxix. wofull am I, that my dwellynge apon the earthe is so moche prolonged. In these wordes, Halowed be thy name, it is to be noted, that by the name of god, is vnderstande
god him selfe, the power of god, the myght, the ma∣iestie, the glory, the wysedome, the prouidence, the mercy and goodnes of god, and al suche other good thynges, as in scripture be attributed vnto god. And this name is halowed, whan it is praised, glo∣rified, sette forthe, honoured and magnified of vs both in worde and deede. And where in this petition we praye, that his name myghte be halowed, it is not to be taken or thought, that this name of god, whiche in it selfe is euermore moste holy, most gloriouse, most maruey∣lous and full of maiestie, can be eyther aduanced or diminished by vs, or any thyng that we can do, but we desyre here, that this most holy name may (accor¦dinge as it is in it selfe most holy) be so taken, vsed, honoured, & halowed of vs, & of all others, as well heathen as christened, like as on the contrary part, this name is sayd to be polluted and defyled, whan we do either in worde or deede, contumeliously, and contemptuously or otherwise disshonour the same. We desire therfore in this petition, that al false faythe, by the whiche men eyther mistruste god, or put theyr confidence in any other thynge more than in hym, maye be destroyed. And that all witchecraf∣tes and false charmes and coniuratiōs, by the whi∣che Sathan and other creatures be inchanted may ceasse and gyue place to goddes holye name, and so likewise, that all heresies and false doctrines maye vanishe awaye, so that goddis holy worde maye be truely interpreted, and purely taught and set forth vnto all the worlde, and that all infidels may re∣ceyue
the same: and be conuerted to the right catho∣lyke faith, wherby all disceite, hypocrysie, and coū∣terfaiting of truthe, of rightuousnes, or of holines myght clerely be extincte. Furthermore we beseche and praye god here, that his name may be halowed, so that no mā shuld sweare in vayne by it, or otherwyse abuse ye same, to lye or to disceyue his neyghbour. And generally, ye none shulde fall into pride or ambition, in to desire of worldly glory and fame, into enuy, malice, coue∣tousnes, adultery, glutteny, slouth, backebytynge,Coll. i. slaundering of his neighbours, ne into any other e∣uyll or wicked thoughtes and dedes, wherby the name of god may be dishonoured and blasphemed. In this prayer also we require god to graunt vs, that in all perilles and daungers we runne vn∣to hym, as vnto our onely refuge, and cal vpon his holy name, and that in our good wordes and wor∣kes, we may please and magnifie him, & be by him preserued from the most damnable sinne of vnkind¦nes towardes him. And also that we, whiche do al∣redy professe the right faith, maye stil continue ther¦in, and may do and expresse the same as well in our outwarde conuersation, as in confessynge it with our mouthe, so that by our good lyfe, and our good workes, all other maye be moued to good, and that by our euyll workes and sinnes, no man maye take occasion to slaunder the name, or dimynysshe the laude and prayse of god,Phili. iii. but that all our workes & doynges myght returne to the honour and prayse of goddes name.
Thy kyngdome come. THis seconde petition is ve∣ry necessary, for no doubte our aun∣cient ennemie the deuyll, goeth a∣boute contynually by all craftye meanes, to deceyue vs, and bringe vs vnder his power and dominion. And surely so longe as pryde and dysobedyence reigneth in vs, so longe as yre, enuye, wrothe, or couetousnes reigneth in vs, so longe as glotteny, lechery or any kynde of synne reygneth in vs, so longe we be vnder the dominion and kingedome of the deuyll. For the deuyll vndoubtedly, is kyng ouer all the chyldren of pryde, that is to saye, ouer all them that be synners, rebelles and disobedient vnto god. And for as moche as it is not in our power to deliuer our selues from vnder this tyranny of the deuyll, but onely by goddes helpe (for our perdition and vndoing is of our selues, but our helpe and salua∣tion is of god,Osc. xiiii. as saith the prophete Osee) therfore it is very necessary for al tru christen people, to make this petition incessantly vnto our heauenly father, and to beseche hym accordynge to this doctrine of Christe, that by his grace and helpe, we may escape the dominion and power of the deuyll, and that we may be made subiect vnto his heauenly kingdome, therfore in this petition we desire god to gyue vs a¦fore all thinges, true and constant faith in him, and
in his sonne Iesu Christ, and in the holy gost, with pure loue and charity towardes him and al men, to kepe vs also from infidelitie, desperation, and ma∣lice, whiche mighte be the cause of our destruction, to delyuer vs from dissentions, couetousnes, leche∣ry, and euyll desyres and lustes of sinne, and so the vertue of his kingdom to come, and to reigne with in vs, that all our hart, minde, and wittes, with al our strength inwarde and outwarde, maye be orde∣red and directed to serue god, to obserue his com∣mandementes and his will, & not to serue our selfe the fleshe, the worlde, or the deuyll. We desire also, that this kingdome ones in vs begunne, may be dayly encreased, and go forwarde more and more, so that all subtyll and secrete hate or slouth, whiche we haue to goodnes, be not suffe∣red to rule so in vs, that it shall cause vs to loke backe again, and to fall into sinne, but that we may haue a stable purpose and strength, not onely to be¦ginne the life of innocency, but also to procede er∣nestly further in it, and to perfourme it accordinge to the saieng of saint Paule, where he praieth,Coll. i. that we may walke worthely, pleasynge god in all thin∣ges, being fruitfull in all good workes, and gro∣wing and encreasing in the knowlege of god. Also in an other place he sayth: worke and do the truth in Charitie, and encrease and go forward in Christe.Ephe. iiii.i Therfore in this prayer, desiring the kinge∣dome of god to come, we require also, that we being alredy receiued and entred in to the kyngedome of grace and mercy of god, may so continue and perse∣uere
therin, that after this lyfe, we may come to the kyngdome of glory, whiche endureth for euer. And this is that great and feruēt desire, wherwith good men being mortified from worldly affections, haue lyen and be alwaies kyndled & enflamed, as appe∣reth by saint Paule,Phili. i. whā he said: I wold be losed frō this body, and be with Christ. And in an other place he saith:Rom. viii. we that haue receyued the first fruites of the spirite, wayle and mourne in our selues, wisshinge & lo∣kinge to be deliuered from the mortalitie and miseries of this body, into the glory of the children of god. The thirde petition. Thy wyll be done in earth, as it is in heauen. FOr the better vnderstāding of this thyrde petition, we muste know, that by disobedience & synne of our firste father Adam, we be as of our nature onely without the grace of god, vnable to fulfyll the will & preceptes of god, and so enclined to loue our selues, and our own willes, that we can not hartely loue neither god nor man, as we ought to do. And therfore we beinge ones christen men, it is requisite for vs to pray, that lyke as the holy aungelles and saintes in heauen (in whom god reigneth perfectly and hooly) do neuer ceasse ne shall ceasse to glorifie hym, to prayse him, and to fulfill his wil and plea∣sure
in all thinges, and that most readyly & gladly without any maner of grudging or resisting therū∣to, knowing certainly and clerely, that his wyll is alway the best: euen so that we the children of god in earth, may dayly and continually prayse god, & by our holy conuersation in good workes, & good lyfe, honour and glorifie him. And that we may frō time to time so mortifie our owne natural corrupte and sinfull appetite and wyll, that we may be euer redy, like louyng children, humblye, lowly, and o∣bediently, to approue, allow, and accomplysshe the wil of god our father in al thinges, and to submitte our selues with all our harte vnto the same, and to acknowlege, that what so euer is the wil of god, the same is most perfite, most iust, most holy, and moste expedient for the wealth and helthe of our soules. Wherfore in this petition also, we desire of god true and stable pacience, whan our wyll is letted or broken, And that whan any man speaketh or dothe contrary to our wyll: yet therfore we be not out of pacience, neyther curse or murmure, or seke venge¦ance agaynst our aduersaries, or them whiche lette our wyll, but that we may say well of them, and do wel to them. We pray also, that by goddis grace we may gladly suffer al diseases, pouertie, dispisinges, persecutions, & aduersities, knowing that it is the wil of god, that we shulde crucifie and mortifie our willes. And whan any suche aduersitie chaunceth vnto vs, attribute all vnto the wyl or sufferance of god, & giue him thankes therfore, who dothe ordre all suche thynges for our weale and benefite, eyther
for the exercise and the triall of the good, to make them stronger in goodnes and vertue: or elles for the chastisement and amendement of the euyll, to suppresse theyr euyll motions and desyres. And also we pray, that whā so euer it shal please god to call vs out of this transitory lyfe, we may be wyllinge to die, and that conformynge our wyll to the wyll of god, we may take our deathe gladly: so that by feare or infirmitie, we be not made disobedi¦ent vnto hym. We desire furthermore, that all our membres, eyes, tongue, harte, handes, and fete be not suffred to folowe the desyres of the fleshe, but that all may be vsed to the wyll & pleasure of god: and that ma∣liciousely we reioyse not in their troubles, whiche haue resisted our wyll, or haue hurte vs, nor that we be enuiousely sory, whan that they prosper and haue welfare, but that we maye be contented and pleased with al thinge that is goddis wyll. The fourth petition. Gyue vs this day our dayly breade. FOr the better declaration of this fourth petition, ye shall vnder∣stand first, that our lord teacheth vs not in this petition to aske any super¦fluous thing of plesure or delite, but onely thinges necessary and sufficient, and therfore he biddeth vs onely aske bread: wherin is not ment
superfluous riches, or great substance or abundāce of thynges aboue our estate or condition, but such thynges only as be necessary and sufficient for eue∣ry man in his degre, and accordyng thervnto,i. Tim. vi. saint Paule saythe: we haue broughte nothynge in to this worlde, ne shall take any thinge with vs whan we de∣part hense. And therfore if we christen mē haue meat and drinke and cloth, that is to say, thynges suffici∣ent, let vs hold our selues content, for they that set their mindes on riches, and wyl haue superfluities more than nedeth, or is expedient to their vocation, they fal into dangerous temptations, & into snares of the deuyll, and into many vnprofitable and noi∣some desires, whiche drowne men in to perdition & euerlasting damnation: for the spring and roote of all euils, is such superfluous desyre. The wyse man also making his petition to our lord saith:Pro. xxx. Giue me neither pouertie nor excesse, but only thynges sufficient for my liuing, left that hauing to moch, I be prouoked to denie god, & to forget who is the lord, & on the other side, lest that by pouertie constrained, I fall in to thefte & forsweare the name of my god. These two wise men the one of the old, & the other of the newe testament, agree with the lessō of our sauiour, for both declare that they desire onely thinges necessarye, sygnified here by breade, and both refuse and renounce super∣fluities vnprofitable, daungerouse and noysome. Secondely in these wordes of our sauiour Ie∣su Christ, be reproued all those persons, which eate not their owne bread, & deuoure other mens bread, of which sort be all those whiche liue of rauen and
spoiles, of theft, of extortion, of craft and deceite, & they also whiche neither labour with their handes, nor otherwise apply their study, industry & diligēce to some thing which is good and beneficiall to the cōmon weale, and to the honour of god, but liue in ease, rest, idelnes, & wanton plesure, without doinge or caring for any suche thyng. And al they likewise be reproued, which being called in this world vnto any rome, office or authoritie, do abuse the same, & do not emply them selfe, according to theyr vocatiō. Thirdly as the husbande man tilleth and so∣weth his grounde, wedeth it, and kepeth it from de∣stroieng, praying therwith to god for the encrease, & putteth al his truste in him, to send him more or lesse at his pleasure, euen so besides our owne diligence policy, labour and trauaile, we must also pray day∣ly to god, to sende vs sufficient, and we muste take thankefully at his handes al that is sent, and be no further carefull than nedeth, but putting to our en∣deuour, set our hole cōfidence & truste in him: for our sauiour Christ saith in ye gospel, I say to you be not careful for your liuyng,Math. vi. what ye shall eate, ne what clothes ye shall weare: Is not life better than your meate, & your body better thā your clothinge? Loke vpō the birdes of the aire, they sowe not, they reape not, they bring nothinge in to the barne, & yet your heauenly father feedeth them, be not you of more price then they? Loke vpon the lillies of the fielde, they labour not, they spin not, & yet I tell you, Sa∣lomon in al his precious & roiall apparel, was not so clothed as one of them, therfore care you not for
these thinges: Leaue this care to them that knowe not god, your heauenly father knoweth yt you haue nede of all these thinges, but seke you first the king¦dome of god, & his rightuousenes, & the waies iust∣ly & truly to liue, and thē god shal cast al these thin∣ges vnto you. These be the wordes of Christ, ful of good & comfortable lessons, that we shulde not care ne set our hartes to moche vpon these worldly thin∣ge, ne care so moche for to morowe, that we shall seme to mistrust our lord. And here is a thing great¦ly to be noted in cōfort of the true laboring man, for surely be he craftes mā, or be he labourer, doing tru¦ly his office whervnto he is called, he maye in that state and kind of lyfe please god and atteine salua∣tion, as surely as in any other state or kynde of ly∣uinge. And although our lord hath so prouided for some, that they haue alredy sufficient and plenty for many daies & yeres, yet that not withstandyng they oughte to make this petition to god and say: Giue vs this day our dayly bread, for as moch as their sub¦stance (thoughe it be neuer so great) like as it coulde not haue ben gotten, without god had sent it, so it can not prospre and continue except god preserue it. For how many gret riche men haue we knowen so∣dainly made pore, some by fier, some by water, some by theft, & many other waies? Was not Iob the on day the richest man that was in all the este lande, & the morowe after had vtterly nothinge? It is ther¦fore as nedefull to pray our lord, to preserue that he hath gyuen vs, as to pray him to giue it, for if he giue, & do not preserue it, we shall haue no vse of it.
Fourthly by this breade, whiche we be taught to aske in this petitiō, may be vnderstand the holy sacrament of the aultare, the very fleshe and bloud of our sauiour Iesu Christe, as it is write in the .vi. chapiter of saint Iohn:Iohn. vi. I am the breade of life, whi∣che came downe from heauen. And the bread which I wyll gyue is my fleshe, whiche I wyll gyue for the life of the world. And in this prayer, we desyre, that the same may be purely mynistred & distributed, to the comfort and benefite of all vs, the true chyldren of god. And that we also may receiue the same with a right faith and perfite charitie, at all tymes, whan we do and ought to receiue the same, so that we may be spiritually fed therwith to our saluation, & ther∣by enioy the life euerlastinge. Fynally by the breade, which our sauiour tea∣cheth vs to aske in this petitiō, is ment also the true doctrine of the word of god, which is the spirituall breade that fedeth the soule. For as the body is nou¦rished & brought vp, groweth & feedeth with bread and meate, so nedeth the soule euen from our youth to be nourished and brought vp with the word of god, and to be fed with it. And like as the body wol faynt and decay, if it be not from tyme to tyme rele∣ued & refresshed with bodily sustenance: euen so the soule waxeth feble & weake towardes god, onlesse ye same be cherished & kept vp with the worde of god, according to the saieng of Christe: A man liueth not with meat onely, but with euery worde that procedeth frō the mouth of god. And surely the word of god is the very cōfort remedy, & helth of ye soule. For if we
haue aduersity in this world, as pouertie, sickenes, imprisonment, and such other miseries, where shuld we seke for comforte but at goddis worde? If we thinke our selues so holy that we be without synne, where shulde we fynde a glasse to se our synnes in, but in the worde of god? If we be so full of sinnes, that we be lyke to fall into desperation, where can we haue comfort and learne to knowe the mercy of god, but onely in goddis worde? Where shall we haue armure to fight against our thre greate enne∣mies, the worlde, the fleshe, and the deuyl? Where shall we haue strength & power to withstande them but as Christ did, in & by ye word of god? And final∣ly, if we haue any maner of syknes or disease in our soules, what medicine or remedy can we haue, but that is declared in goddis word? So that the word of god is the very breade of the soule, and therfore as well for this breade of the soule, as for the bles∣sed sacrament of the aultare, also for the breade and dayly sustenance of the bodye, our sauiour Christe teacheth vs to pray in this fourthe petition. The fyft petition. And forgiue vs our trespasses / as we for gyue them that trespasse against vs. IN this petition we be taught a fruitefull aduertisement of mans e∣state in this present lyfe, whiche con∣sydered, no mā ought to glory in hym selfe, as though he were innocent, and
without synne, but rather that euery good christen man without exception, oughte to knowledge him self to be a sinner, and that he hath nede to aske for∣gyuenes of god for his sinnes, and to require him of his mercy: for doubtles we dayly commyt sinne, whiche be commaunded daily to aske remyssion for our sinnes.Ioan. i. And saynt Iohn sayth in his epistle: If we say that we be without sinne, we deceiue our selues, and truthe is not in vs. Moreouer it is to be noted, that we be taught to desyre god to forgyue vs our synnes, lyke as we forgiue them that trespasse against vs, so that if we forgyue in harte, god wyll forgyue, and not other∣wyse, as by many places of scripture maye appere, fyrst by expresse wordes,Ma i. Christe saythe: If you for∣giue men their offences done agaynst you, your heuen-father wyll forgyue you your offences, and yf you wyll not forgiue them that offende you, viii. be you assured your father wyll not forgyue you your offences. And in an other place, whan Peter came to our lorde, and demanded of him howe ofte he shulde forgyue his brother, whiche had offended him, and whether it was not suffycyent to forgyue him seuen tymes: Our lord answered him & sayd, I tell the Peter, that thou oughtest to forgiue him not only seuen tymes but seuenty tymes seuen tymes, meaning therby that frō tyme to tyme we must continually forgiue our bro∣ther or neighbour, although he trespasseth against vs neuer so often. viii.And Christ also declareth the same by a parable. There was (sayth Christ) a king, whiche calling his
seruauntes vnto a compte, and findinge, that one of them shulde owe vnto him the summe of tenne thousande talentes, bycause he hadde it not to pay, cōmaunded that the sayd debtour, his wife, and his children, and al that he had, shuld be solde: but whā the debtour came vnto the kyng and praied him on his knees to haue paciēce with him, promising him to paye all, the king had pity of him, & forgaue him the hole debt: it fortuned afterward, that this man being thus acquited, mette with an other of his fe∣lowes, that ought him but one hūdreth pence, and with violence almoste strangled him, and saide vn∣to hym: Pay that thou owest. And the sayd seruant his felowe fell vpon his knees, and prayed hym to haue pacience, promising to pay all, whiche wolde not, but cast him into prison vntyll all was payde. and whan the rest of his felowes seing this cruelty, had tolde the king therof, the king forthwith sente for this cruell felowe, and saide to him: O wycked man I forgaue the thy hole debt at thy sute and re∣quest, it shuld therfore haue besemid the, to haue she¦wed like cōpassion vnto thy felowe, as I shewed to the. And the kyng sore displeased with this crueltie cōmitted him to tormentours, that shuld roughly & streitly hādle him in prisō, til he had paid ye hole det. Vpon this parable Christe inferreth and saith, Euen so shal your heuēly father do with you, if you wil not forgiue euery one of you his brother euen from the hart. Thus it apereth plainly, that if we wil be for giuen, if we wil scape euerlasting damnation, we must put out of our hart al rācour, malice, & wil to
reuenge and, satisfie our owne carnall affections referryng the punishement of the offenders, whi∣che in their offences haue transgressed the lawes of god, or of the prince, to the order of iustice, wherof vnder god, the princes and rulers be mynysters in earth, In whiche doing we please god, so that we vtterly forgiue our owne priuate grudge and dy∣spleasure. And if any paraduenture wyl thinke it to be an hard thyng, to suffre and forgiue his enemy, whi∣che in worde and deede hath done him many disple∣sures, let him consider againe, howe many harde stormes our sauiour Christe suffered and abode for vs, what were we whan he gaue his most precious lyfe for vs, but horrible synners and his ennmies? howe mekely toke he for our sake all rebukes, moc∣kes, byndyng, beating, crownyng with thorne, and the moste opprobrious deathe? It is vndoubtedly aboue our frayle and corrupte nature to loue our ennemies that do hate vs, and to forgyue them that do hurt and offende vs: and it is a dede of greatter perfection than man hath of him selfe, but god that requireth it, wyll gyue grace that we may do it, if we aske and seke for it. And therfore in this petition our sauiour Christe teacheth vs to aske this grace of our heauenly father, that we may forgiue our en¦nemies, and that he wyl forgiue vs our trespasses, euē so as we forgiue them that trespas against vs. It is further to be noted, that to forgiue our bro¦ther his defaute, is also to pray to god, that he wyll forgyue him, and wyl not impute his offence to him
and to wyshe to hym the same grace and glory, that we desyre vnto our selues, and also our selfe whan occasion shall come, to helpe hym as we be bounde to helpe our christen brother. And finally for as moche as in the expounding and declaration of scripture, it is conuenient, and requisite to obserue and folowe this rule, that whā so euer scripture speaketh of any duetye to be done of one christen man to an other, that than the same duetie be so plainly and fully opened and set forthe that eche man may heare his owne duetie to wched: so that both parties (that is to saye) as well he that is bounde to forgiue, as he whyche receyueth for∣gyuenes, may indifferently knowe their duetie and be hauyour, and accordinge thervnto, endeuour theym selfe to do the same. For these causes it is ex∣pedient, that lyke as in the former parte of this pe∣tition, we haue declared the part and duetie of him, whiche shulde for charities sake forgyue, so to de∣clare the part and duetie of them, to whom forgiue∣nes shulde be made, leste euyll doers and naughty mynded people, myghte by the former declaration take occasion stylle to perseuere in their naughtye myndes and doinges, and yet claime forgiuenes of their neyghbour. Wherfore ye shall vnderstande, that forgyue∣nes afore spoken of, is not so ment in scripture, that by it iustyce or lawes of princes shoulde be broken, condemned, or not executed. For although our sa∣uiour Christe in this petition dothe teache vs to re¦mitte and forgiue all iniuries and trespasses done
agaynst vs, yet he whiche hath done the iniurie or trespas, is neuertheles bounde to aknowlege his faut, and to aske forgiuenes therfore, not onely of god, but of him also whom he hath offended, and to intend to do no more so. And furthermore to re∣compence and make amendes vnto the parties, a∣gainste whome he hath trespassed, according to his abilitie and power, and as the greuousenesse and greatnes of the offence requireth. And in case he whych hath commytted the offence or trespasse, be obstinate, and wyll not do these thinges before re∣hersed, whyche he is bounde to doo by the lawe of god: than may the partie, whiche findeth him selfe greued, notwithstanding any thing that is saide before in this petitiō, laufully and without offence of goddis commandementes aske and seeke recom∣pence of suche iniuries, as be done to him, accor∣ding vnto the order & prouision of the lawes of the realme, made in that behalfe, so that he alway haue an eye and respect vnto charitie, and do nothing for rancour or malyce, or for sinister affection, neither beare any hatred in his hart towardes him, whom he sueth, but only vpon a zeale & loue of the mayn∣tenance of iustice, correction of vice, and reforma∣tion of the partie that hath offended, remembringe always that he excede not, nor go beyonde the limi∣tes and boundes of this generall rule, taughte by our sauiour Christe in his gospel: As ye wold that other men shoulde do vnto you, euen so doo you vnto them. For this is the lawe and the prophetes. And thus we christen folke, wayinge forgyuenes on
the one partie, and the duetie of hym that is forgy∣uen on the other party (as here nowe we be taught) shall the better knowe how to endeuour our selues to obserue bothe ways. And by these meanes se and vnderstand more perfectly, the agrement and in∣tent of scriptures, whiche we be bounde to obserue and folowe. The syxte petition. ¶And lette vs not be led in∣to temptation. IT is to be noted fyrst that there be two maner of temptations, whereof one commeth and is sent to vs by god, who suffreth those that be his, to be tēp∣ted by one meanes or other, for theyr probation or triall, al be it he so assisteth and aydeth them, in all suche temptations, that he tourneth all at the ende vnto theyr profit and benefite. For as the wise man saythe: Like as the ouen trieth the potters vessell,Ec. xxviii. so dothe temptation of trouble trie the rightuous man. And with this maner of temptation, god tempted sundry wyse our holy father Abraham, he tempted also Iob with extreme pouertie, horrible syckenes, and sodayne deathe of his children, and dayly he tempteth and proueth all suche as he loueth. The other maner of temptation cometh chiefe∣ly of the deuyll,i. Pet. v. whiche lyke a furyouse and a wood lion ragith & rūneth about perpetually seking how he may deuour vs. And commeth also of our owne
concupiscence, which continually inclineth and sti∣reth vs to euyll,Iacob. i. as saynt Iames sayth, Euery man is tempted drawen and entised by his owne concupis∣cence. This concupiscence is an inclination and pro¦uate of our inordinate nature to synne, whiche im∣perfection man hath by the fall of Adam, so that al∣though originall sinne is taken away by baptisme, and the dyspleasure appeased betwyxte God and man, yet remayneth the dysorder & debate betweene the soule and the fleshe, whiche shall not be extincte but onely by bodily deathe. For there is no man so mortified, so sequestred from the worlde, and so raui¦shed in spirite, in deuotion, or in contemplation, but that some concupiscence is in him: how be it by god∣dis grace & mercy it raigneth not, nor is of god ac∣compted for synne, nor is hurtful but only to them, that by consent yeld vnto it. It wyl neuer cesse but one way or an other it wyll euer assaut vs, & if we do not fight with it, and resist it continually, it will ouercome vs, and brynge vs into bondage, so that the deuyll by this our concupiscence and our con∣sent, all vice and synnes be ingendred, lyke as be∣twene man and woman children be ingendred, ac∣cordinge to the sayinge of saynte Iames where he sayth:Iacob i. Concupiscence whan she doth conceyue, she brin∣geth forth synne, and that of all sortes, that is to say, first actes and dedes, contrary to the lawes of god, and after that, vse and custome of the same deedes, and at length blyndnes and contempt. For so the wise man sayth:Pro. xviii. The wycked man whan he cometh to the bot∣tome of sinne, setteth nought therby, but blinded with
euyl custome, either thinketh the sinne that he vseth to be no sinne, orels if he take it for syn, yet he carith not for it, but either vpon vain trust of the mercy of god (which is in dede no right trust, but a very pre∣sumptiō) he wil cōtinue stil in purpose to syn, orels vpon vain hope of long lyfe, he wyll prolonge, dif∣ferre, & delay to do penance for the same, vntyll the last ende of his life. And so ofttimes preuented with sodaine death, dieth without repentance. Wherfore considering how daungerous it is to fal into sinne, and how harde it is to arise: the chief and the best way is, to resist with goddis helpe the firste sugge∣stion vnto synne, & not to suffre it to preuayle with vs, but as soone as may be, to putte it out of our myndes. For if we suffre it to tary any whyle in our hartes, it is great perill, lest that consent and dede wyll folowe shortly after. Secondly that our sauiour Iesus Christe tea¦cheth not vs in this syxt petition, to pray vnto god our father, that we shuld be clerely without al temp¦tation: but that he wol not suffre vs to be ledde in∣to temptation, that is to say, that whan we be temp∣ted, he woll giue vs grace to withstand it, and not suffre vs to be ouercome therwith, according wher∣vnto saint Paule saith: God is true and faithful,i. Cor. ii. and wyll not suffer vs to be tempted aboue that we maye beare, but he wyl so moderate the temptation, that we may susteyne & ouercome it. And saint Iames sayth:Iacob. i. Thinke that you haue a great cause to ioye, whan you be troubled with diuerse temptations. For the trienge of your faith bringeth pacience, and pacience maketh
perfect workes, so that you may be perfect and sound, lackynge in nothyng. And almighty god also exhor∣teth vs, and calleth vpon vs to fyght against temp¦tations,Iaco. i. saying: He that getteth the victory agaynste them, I shall gyue hym to eate of the tree of lyfe. And againe he sayeth:Apo. ii. He that ouercometh them, shall not be burte with the seconde deathe. And saynte Paule saith:ii. Tim. ii. No man shall be crowned, excepte be fight lau∣fully, that is to say, excepte he defende him selfe, and resist his enemies at all pointes to his power. And our sauiour giueth vs a good courage to fyght in this battaile,Iohn. xvi. where he saieth: Be of good comforte, for I haue ouercome the world, that is to say, I haue had the victory of all synnes and temptations, and so shall you haue, if the faute be not in your selues. For ye fyght with an aduersary, whiche is already vanquyshed and ouercome. The seuenth petition. But delyuer vs from euyll. IT is firste to be noted, that lyke as in the syxte petition Christe taught vs to desyre of our heauen∣ly father, that we shuld not be ouer∣come with temptation, ne broughte into synne, so nowe in this seuenth and laste petition, he teacheth vs to pray hym, that if by frailenes we fall in to the captiuitie of the de∣uyll by synne, he wyll soone delyuer vs from it, not to lette vs contynue in it, not to lette it take roote
in vs, not to suffre synne to raigne vpon vs, but to delyuer vs free from it. Synne is the exceding euyll, from the whiche in this petytion we desyre to be delyuered: And though in this petitō be also cōprehended all euils in the worlde, as syckenes, pouertie, derth, with o∣ther lyke aduersities, yet chiefly it is to be vnder∣stande of synne, whiche onely of it selfe is euyl, and ought euer without condition to be eschued. And as for other aduersyties, neither we can ne ought to refuse, whan god shall sende them nei∣ther we ought to pray for the eschuyng of them, o∣therwyse than with this condition, yf goddis plea∣sure so be. Many thynges we suffre in this worlde, and take theym for euyll, but they be not euyll of them selfe. All affections, dyseases, punysshemen∣tes and tormentes of the bodye, all the troubles of this worlde, and all aduersities, be good and neces∣sarye instrumentes of god for our saluation. For god hym selfe (who can not saye other than truthe) sayeth: Those that I loue, I chastise.Apoc i. Hebr. xii. And agayne the apostle sayeth. He receyueth none, but whom he scourgeth. This is tyme of scourgynge, and the tyme to come, is the tyme of reste, ease, and blysse. And surely it is a great token, that we be in the fauour of god, whan he dothe scourge vs, and tri∣eth and fyneth vs lyke golde in the fyre, whyles we be in this worlde. As contrary it is a greate token of his indignation towardes vs, to suffre vs lyuyng euyll, to continue in prosperitie, and to haue all thynges after our wylle and pleasure, and
neuer to trouble vs or punyshe vs with aduersitie. Therfore our sauiour Christ Iesus (who knoweth what is best for vs) teacheth vs to praye and desyre to be deliuered, not chiefly from worldly afflictiōs, trouble, and aduersitie, whiche god sendeth abun∣dantly, euen to them, whom he best loueth, and with whome he is best pleased: But the euyll, which we moste chiefely shulde pray to be delyuered from, is Synne, whych of it selfe is so euyll, that in no wyse god can be pleased therwith. And bycause our ancient enemy the deuyl, who is the well and sprynge of iniquitie, and is not one∣ly hym selfe an homicide, a lyer, and an hater of the truth from the beginning: but also is the very rote and occasion of all synne, and the common prouo∣ker and styrer of man to the same, and the letter and hinderer of all vertue and goodnes, bycause this en¦nemy neuer ceasseth, but continually sercheth by all craftes and wyles to enduce vs to synne, and so to deuoure vs, and to bryng vs therby to euerlasting damnation: Therfore lyke as we desyre here to be deliuered from synne, so also we desyre, that our hea¦uenly father wyll saue vs, and defend vs from this euyll, the causer of synne, that is to say, the deuyll, and from his power and tyranny,, so that he shuld not by his malyce and gyles intice vs and draw vs into synne, wherby we myghte fynally be broughte vnto euerlastynge damnation. From the whiche al∣so we pray here to be delyuered.
¶The salutation of the angell to the blessed virgine Mary. HAyle Mary full of grace / the lorde is with the, blessed arte thou emonge women, And blessed is the fruite of thy wombe. FOr the better vnderstanding of this salutation of the angel, made to the blessed virgine Mary, ye shall fyrst consyder, how it was decreed of the hole trinitie, That after the falle of our firste father Adam (by which mankinde was so long in the great indignation of god, and exiled out of heauen) the seconde person, the euerlastynge sōnne of the father euerlastyng, shulde take vppon him the nature of mā, and so as he was perfect god shuld be perfect man, to redeme mankynd from the power of the deuill,Luc. i. and to reconcile the same again to his lord god. And for this purpose (as saint Luce in his gospel declareth) in the .vi. moneth after saint Elizabeth was conceiued, with saint Iohn the Bap¦tist, the aungell Gabriel was sent from god, into a city of Galilee, named Nazareth, to a virgin, which was despoused or ensured to a mā, whose name was Ioseph, of the house of Dauid, and the virgines name was Mary. And whan this angell came vn∣to this said virgin, he said these wordes: Hayle ful of grace, the lord is with the, blessed art thou emong
women. And whan the virgine hearing these wor∣des, was troubled with theym, and mused with her selfe, what maner of salutation ti shuld be. The an∣gell sayd to her: Feare not Mary, be not abasshed, for thou haste founde fauour in the syght of god. Lo thou shalte conceyue in thy wombe, and shalte bryng forthe a sonne, and thou shalt call his name IESVS, he shall be great, and shall be called the sonne of the hyghest. And the lorde god shall gyue vnto hym the seat of Dauid, his father, And he shall reigne ouer the house of Iacob for euer, And his kyngdome shal haue no ende. Than sayd Ma∣ry to the aungelle: Howe can this be done? for I haue not knowlege of man. And the aungelle an∣swerynge saide vnto her: The holy gost shall come from aboue in to the, and the power of the hyghest shall ouershadowe the. And therfore that holy one, that shalbe borne of the, shall be called the sonne of god: And lo thy cousyn Elyzabeth hathe also con∣ceyued a sonne in her olde age, and this is the syxte moneth sythe she conceyued, whiche was called the bareyn woman: for there is nothyng vnpossible to god. To this Mary answered: Lo I am the hand∣mayde of our lorde, be it done vnto me as thou hast spoken. And than forthwith vpon the departure of the angell. Mary beyng newly conceyued with the most blessed childe IESVS, went vp into the moun∣taynes with speede in to a citie of Iuda, and came to the house of Zacharye, and saluted Elyzabeth. And as soone as Elyzabeth hearde the salutation of Mary, the chylde sprange in her wombe, and
furthwith Elyzabeth was replenyshed with the ho∣ly goste, and cried with a greate voyce and sayde: Blessed arte thou emonge women, and blessed is the fruite of thy wombe. And wherof cometh this, that the mother of my lorde commeth to me? For lo, as soone as the voyce of thy salutation was in my ea∣res, the chylde in my wombe lept for ioy. And bles∣sed arte thou that dyddest beleeue, for all thynges that haue ben spoken to the from our lorde, shall be performed. Secondly it is to be noted, that the angel Ga∣briell, which spake to the virgine, was an high an∣gel, and an high messanger. And truely it was con∣uenient, that he shoulde be so, for he came with the highest message, that euer was sente, whiche was the entreaty and leage of peace betweene god and man. And therfore the fyrst word of his salutation, that is to ssye, Hayle, or be ioyfull, was very con∣uenient for the same. For he came with the message of ioy, and so sayde the other aungell, whiche at the byrth of our sauiour, appered to the shepherdes,Luc. ii. I shewe to you (said he) great ioye that shall be to all the people. And surely consyderyng the effectes that en∣sued vpon his highe message, all mankynde hadde great cause to ioy. For man beinge in the indigna∣tion and displeasure of god, was hereby reconciled, Man beinge in the bondes of the deuyll, was here∣by delyuered, Man beinge exiled and banyshed out of heauen, was hereby restored thither againe. These be suche matters of ioy and comforte to vs, that there neuer was or shall be nor can be any
lyke. And not onely for this purpose he began with this high worde of comforte, but also for he percey∣ued that the virgine being alone, wolde be moche a∣bashed and astonied at his maruailous and sodeine commyng vnto her. And therfore he thought it ex∣pedient, fyrst of all to vtter the worde of ioye and comfort, whiche might put away all feare from the blessed virgine. And he called her Full of grace, by god endued so plentuously, bycause she shulde con∣ceyue and beare hym, that was the very plenytude and fulnes of grace, the lorde of grace, by whom is all grace, & without whome is no grace. And this is the syngular grace, by which she is called, not on¦ly the mother of man, but also the mother of god. Thirdly by these wordes, The lord is with the, is declared, why the angell called her full of grace: for surely our lorde is not with them, that be not in grace, nor tarieth with them, that be voyd of grace and be in synne. For there is a separation and dy∣uorce betwene the synfull soule and our lord, as the wyse man saythe: Peruerse thoughtes make a sepa∣ration and a diuorce from god. Fourthly by these wordes, Blessed arte thou e∣monge women, was ment, that there was neuer wo∣man so blessed. And truely she may wel be called so, moste blessed emong all women: for she had greate and high prerogatiues, whiche none other woman euer had, hathe, or shall haue. Is not this an high prerogatiue, that of all women she was chosen to be mother to the sonne of god? And what excellent honour was she put to, whan, not withstandinge,
the decree was made of his natiuitie by the hole tri¦nitie, yet the thyng was not done and accomplished without or before her consent was granted? For the whiche, so solemne a messanger was sent. And also howe highe grace was this, that after the defaute made through the perswasion of the firste woman our mother Eue, by whom Adam was brought in∣to disobedience, this blessed virgin was electe to be the instrument of our reparation, in that she was chosen to beare the sauiour & redemer of the world? And is not this a wonderfull prerogatiue, to see a virgine to be a mother, & conceyue her chylde with¦out synne? we may worthily say, that she is the most blessed of all other women. And to thentent that all good christen men shulde repute and take her so: Beholde the prouidence of god, that wolde by an¦nother wytnesse confirme the same, for euen the ve∣ry same wordes that the aungell spake, the blessed matrone saint Elyzabeth spake also, and where the angell made an ende, there she beganne. The angell made an end of his salutation, with these wordes, Blessed art thou amonge women, The blessed matrone began her salutation with the same wordes, declarynge that she was inspired with the same spirite, that sent the aungell, and that they were both ministers to the holy Trinitie, the one from heauen, the other in earth. And afterward she added these wordes, saying: And blessed is the fruite of thy wombe. These be not the wordes of the angel but of saint Elizabeth: For whan the vyrgin Mary came to salute her, the sayd Elizabeth beyng inspi∣red
with the holy goste, and knowyng that the vir∣gine Mary was conceyued, spake these wordes, of the fruite that the virgine shulde bring forth. And there is also an other wonderfull thyng to be noted, For as it appereth in the gospell, the child in saynt Elizabethes wombe, that is to say, saynt Iohn Baptist (whiche yet had scant lyfe) gaue te∣stimony to this Fruite, that this fruite shulde saue hym and all the worlde, and as a prophete he lepte for ioy in his mothers wombe, & although he could not than speake, yet neuertheles he declared by such signes and tokens as he could, that blessed was the fruite of that wombe, And worthily called the fruit of her wombe in that the substance of the nature of man, whiche our sauiour Christe toke vppon him, was taken of the substance and nature of the moste blessed virgin, and in her wombe. And so is called the fruite of her wombe. And well he may be called the blessed fruite, whiche hath saued vs and gyuen vs lyfe, contrary to the cursyd fruite, whych Eue gaue to Adam, by whyche we were destroyed and brought to deathe: But blessed is the fruite of this wombe, whyche is the fruite of life euerlasting. And it is to be noted, that although this saluta¦tion be not a prayer of petition, supplication, or re∣quest or suit: Yet neuertheles, ye church hath vsed to adioyn it to the end of the Pater noster, as an himne, or a praier of laude and praise, partly of our lorde & sauiour Iesu Christe, for our redemtion, and partly of the blessed virgin, for her humble cōsent gyuen & expressed to the angell, at this salutation. Laudes,
praise, and thankes ar in this Aue Maria, principal∣ly gyuen & yelded to our lorde, as to the autour of our redemption: But herewithal the virgin lackith not her laudes, praise, and thankes, for her excellent and singular vertues, and chiefly for that she bele∣ued & humbly consented, according to the saying of the holy matrone saint Elizabeth whan she said, vn∣to this virgine: Blessed arte thou that dyddest gyue trust and credence to the angels wordes, for al thinges that haue ben spoken vnto the, shall be perfourmed. The article of free wyll. THe cōmandementes & threat∣ninges of almighty god in scripture wherby man is called vpon, and put in remembraunce, what god wolde haue hym to do, moste euydently do expresse and declare, that man hath freewyll also nowe after the falle of our fyrste father Adam, as plainely appereth in these places folowyng.Rom. xii. i. Tim. iiii i. Ioan. ii. Mat. xix. Be not ouercome of euyll. Neglecte not the grace that is in the. Loue not the worlde. &c. If thou wylte enter into lyfe, kepe the commandementes. Which vndoubted∣ly shulde be saide in vayne, onelesse there were some facultie or power lefte in man, wherby he may, by the helpe and grace of god (if he wil receiue it, when it is offered vnto him) vnderstand his cōmandemē∣tes, and frely consent and obey vnto them: whiche thyng of the catholyke fathers, is called Freewyll,Free wyll which if we wil describe, we may cal it cōueniently
in all men, A certayne power of the wyll ioyned with reson, wherby a resonable creature, without constraint, in thinges of reason discerneth and willeth good and euil, but it willeth not that good, whiche is acceptable to god: except it be holpen with grace: but that whiche is yll, it willeth of it selfe: and therfore other men de∣fyned frewyll in this wise: Frewyl is a power of re∣son & will, by which good is chosen by the assistance of grace, or euil is chosē without the assistāce of the same. Howbeit the state and condition of freewylle, was otherwyse in our fyrste parentes, before they synned, than it was either in them, or in theyr poste¦ritie after they hadde synned. For our fyrste paren∣tes Adam and Eue, vntyll they wounded and ouer∣threwe them selfe by synne, had so in possession the said power of freewyll, by the moste lyberall gyfte and grace of god their maker, that not onely they myght eschue all maner of synne, but also knowe god, and loue hym, and fulfylle all thynges apper¦teynyng to theyr felicitie and welthe. For they were made ryghtuous, and to the ymage and symilitude of god, hauing power of frewyll (as Chrisostom sayth) to obey or disobey. So that by obedience they myght liue, and by disobedience they shuld worthy∣ly deserue to dye. For the wyse man affirmeth, that the state of them was of that sort in the beginning: saying thus:El. xvi. God in the beginning did create man: and left hym in the handes of his owne counsell, he gaue vnto him his preceptes and cōmandementes, saying: If thou wylt kepe the cōmandemētes, they shall preserue the: he hath set afore the fyre and wa∣ter
put furth thy handes to whether thou wylt, be∣fore man is lyfe and deth, good & euyl what him li∣keth, that shall he haue. From this moste happy state, our fyrst parentes falling by disobediēce, most greuously hurted them selues and theyr posteritie. For besides many other euils, that came by, ye trans∣gression, the high power of mans reason, & fredome of wyll were wounded and corrupted, and all men therby brought in to such blyndnes and infirmitie, that they can not eschue sinne, except they be illumi∣ned and made free by an especiall grace, that is to say, by a supernatural helpe and working of the ho¦ly goste, whiche although the goodnes of god offe∣reth to all men, yet they onely enioye it, whyche by their free wyll do accepte and imbrace the same. Nor they also that be holpen by the sayde grace, can ac∣complyshe and performe thynges that be for their welth, but with moch labour & endeuour: so great is in our nature the corruption of the fyrst synne, & the heuy hurdein bering vs down to euyl. For truly albeit the light of reason doth abide, yet it is moche darkened, & with moch difficultie both discerne thin¦ges yt be inferior, & {per}teyne to their present life, but to vnderstād & perceyue thinges that be spiritual, & {per}∣teyn to the euerlastīg life, it is of it self vnable. And so likewise although there remayn a certain fredom of will in those thinges, which do {per}teyn vnto the de¦sires & workes of this present life, yet to {per}forme spi∣rituall & heuenly thinges, Frewyl of it self is insuf∣ficiēt: and therfore the power of mans frewyl, being thus wounded & decayed, hath nede of a phisition
to heale it, and an helpe to repaire it, that it may re∣ceyue lyght and strēgth, wherby it may se, and haue power to do those godly & spiritual thynges, which before ye fall of Adā, it was able & might haue done. Ps. Cxviii.To this blyndnes and infirmitie of mans na∣ture, procedyng of original synne, the prophet Da∣uid had regard, whan he desired his eies to be light¦ned of almighty god that he might consider the mer¦uaylous thinges that be in his lawe. And also the prophet Hieremy, saying: Hele me O lord, and I shal be made hole.Hier. xviii Saint Augustine also playnely decla¦reth the same, saying: We conclude that frewyll is in man after his fall, whiche thyng who so denieth is not a catholike man: but in spirituall desyres & workes to please god, it is so weake and feble, that it can not either beginne or performe them, onelesse by the grace and helpe of god, it be preuented and holpen. And hereby it appereth, that mans strength and wyll in all thynges, whiche be helthfull to the soule, and shal please god▪ hath nede of grace of the holy goste, by whiche such spirituall thinges be in∣spired to men, and strength and constance giuen to perfourme them, if men do not wylfully refuse the sayde grace offered vnto them. ¶And lykewyse as many thynges be in the scri∣pture, whiche doo shewe freewylle to be in man: so there be no fewer places in scripture, whiche do de∣clare the grace of god to be so necessary, that if by it freewyl be not preuented and holpen, it can neither do nor wyll any thyng,n. xv. good and godly. Of which sorte be these scriptures folowynge: without me ye
can do nothing. No man commeth to me,Iohn. vi. ii. Cor. iii. except it be gyuen hym of my father. we be not sufficient of our selfe, as of our selfe to thinke any good thing. Accor∣dyng vnto whiche scriptures, and suche other like, it foloweth, that free wyll, before it maye wyll, or think any godly thing, must be holpen by the grace of Christ, and by his spirite be preuented and inspy¦red, that it may be able therto. And being so made able, may from thensforthe worke togither with grace, and by the same susteyned, holpen, and main¦teyned, may do and accomplyshe good workes, & a∣uoyd synne, & perseuere also, and encrease in grace. It is surely of the grace of god onely, that fyrst we be inspired and moued to any good thynge: but to resyst temptations, and to persyste in goodnes and go forwarde, it is bothe of the grace of god, and of our free wyll and endeuour. And fynally after we haue perseuered to the end, to be crowned with glo∣ry therfore, is the gift and mercy of god, who of his bountifull goodnes hath ordeyned that rewarde to be gyuen after this lyfe, accordinge to suche good workes as be done in this lyfe by his grace. Therfore men ought with moch diligence and gratitude of mynde, to consyder and regarde the in∣spirations and holsome motions of the holy goste, and to imbrace the grace of god, whiche is offered vnto them in Christe, and moueth theym to good thinges. And furthermore to go about by all mea∣nes to shew them self such, as vnto whom the grace of god is not gyuen in vayne, And whan they doo feele, that not withstandinge their diligence, yet
throughe their owne infirmitie, they be not able to doo that they desyre, than they oughte earnestly and with a feruent deuotion, and stedfast faythe, to aske of hym whiche gaue the begynnynge, that he wolde vouchesafe to performe it: whiche thynge god woll vndoubtedly graunt, accordynge to his promyse, to suche as perseuere in callynge vppon hym. For he is naturally good, and willeth al men to be saued, and careth for them, and prouydeth al thyng, by whiche they may be saued, except by their owne malice they woll be euil, and so by rightuous iudgement of god, perishe and be loste. For truely men be to theym selues the autours of synne and damnation. God is neither autour of sinne, nor the cause of damnation. And yet dothe he moste rygh∣tuousely damne those men, that do with vices cor∣rupte their nature, whyche he made good, and doo abuse the same to euyll desyres agaynste his moste holy wyl. Wherfore men be to be warned, that they do not impute to god their vice, or theyr damnatiō, but to them selues, whiche by freewyl haue abused the grace and benefites of god. All men be also to be monisshed and chiefely preachers, that in this hygh matter, they lokynge on bothe sydes, soo attempre and moderate theym selues, that neyther they soo preache the grace of god, that they take away therby freewylle, Nor on the other syde so extoll free wyll, that iniury be done to the grace of god.
The article of Iustification. FOr the more clere vnderstan¦dynge of this article folowynge, it is to be noted that all men after the fall of Adam, naturally descendyng and comming of him, be borne in o∣riginall synne, that is to saye, they lacke that original iustice and innocency wherwith Adam in his creation was endued, and whiche al∣so all his posteritie shulde haue had if he throughe his disobedience, and breakyng of the commande∣ment of god, had not lost the same from hym selfe, & all his posteritie. And further also they be borne with concupiscence, wherof springe vnlaufull de∣sires, repugnant and contrarye vnto the lawes of god, and be giltie to euerlasting deathe and damna¦tion, from the whiche they can in no wyse be dely∣uered by any strength or power that is in them, but rather fall daily into further displeasure of god, by committyng and addyng of many actuall synnes. Wherfore to the entent, that man might be deli∣uered out of this wretched & miserable state, wher∣vnto he had brought him selfe, and might recouer againe the same thinges that were giuen vnto him in his fyrste creation, and therby atteyne the euer∣lasting blisse in heauen, it pleased almighty god of his great and infinite mercy and goodnes, to sende his owne onely begotten sonne, the seconde person in trinitie, to take vpon him the nature of man, and therin to worke the mistery of our redemtion, that
is to say, to deliuer vs from the captiuitie of the de∣uill, synne, and damnation, & to be the very meane of our reconciliation to god, & of our iustification. And surely this reconciliation of mortal man to the fauor of god immortal, did necessarily require such a mediatour betwene them, as had in hym selfe the perfect nature of them bothe, which is the very pro¦pertie of a meane betwene two, to be partener with bothe them, betwene whom he taketh vpon hym to be a meane. For if he be holely ioyned with the one and clerely separated from the other: Than he is not mete to be a mean, or mediatour betwene two, whiche be at debate and enmitie. Wherfore our sa∣uiour Christ being naturally god, toke vpon hym the nature of man, that he might therby be conuer∣saunt among men, and by his death redeme them, & yet he stil reteined and kepte his godhead, and was both god and man together. For if he had ben man onely, and not god, than his death coulde not haue ben a worthy and sufficient satisfaction for sinne, to the iustice of god. And if he had ben onely god and not man, than he by his bodily conuersation, could not haue called vs againe to god, nor suffered and died bodily for vs. And this propertie of a media∣tour saint Paule consideryng writeth to Timothe, That there is but one mediatour betwene god & man which is Christ Iesus, Tim ii. meaning therby, that bycause he onely had bothe the natures in hym, therfore he onely, and none other but he, was able to be a suffi∣cient mediatour and meane of our reconciliation to god, and of our iustification.
And for a further declaration, how and by what meanes, we be made partakers of this benefite of iustification. It is to be noted, that this word Iusti¦fication, as it is taken in scripture, signifieth the ma¦kynge of vs rightuous afore god, where before we were vnryghtuous, as whan by his grace we con∣uert vnto him, & be reconciled into his fauour, and of the children of ire and damnatiō, we be made the children of god, and inheritours of euerlasting life that by his grace we may walke so in his wais that finally we may be reputed & taken, as iust & rightu¦ous in the day of iudgement, & so receyue the euer∣lasting possession of the kingedome of heauen. And albeit god is the principal cause, & chiefe worker of this iustificatiō in vs, without whose grace no mā can do no good thyng, but folowing his free wil in the state of a sinner, encreaseth his owne iniustice, & multiplieth his sinne: Yet so it pleaseth the hyghe wysdome of god, that man preuented by his grace (which being offered, man maye if he wyll refuse or receiue) shall be also a worker by his free consent, & obedience to the same, in the atteinyng of his owne iustification, and by goddis grace and helpe, shall walke in such workes, as be requisite to his iustifi∣cation, & so continuing come to the perfect end ther¦of, by such meanes & waies, as god hath ordeyned. Wherin it is to be considered, that although our sauiour CHRIST hath offered hym selfe vpon the crosse, a sufficient redemption & satisfaction for the synnes of al the world, and hath made hym selfe an open way and entre vnto god the father for al man
onely by his worthy merite and deseruynge, and willyng all men to be saued, calleth vpon al the worlde, without respecte of persons, to come and be partakers of the ryghtuousnesse, peace, and glory, whiche is in hym: yet for al this benignitie & grace shewed vniuersally to ye hole world, none shal haue the effect of this benefit of our sauiour Christ, & en∣ioy euerlastyng saluatiō by him: but they that take suche wayes to atteyne the same, as he hath taught and appointed by his holy word, in suche ordre, ma∣ner, and fourme, as here foloweth: that is to say, Fyrst as touchynge all them, whiche be of age, and haue the vse of natural reason afore they be christe∣ned, the will of god is, that all suche (if they will be saued) shall at the heryng of his blessed worde giue stedfast faith and assente thervnto, as saint Paule saith:. xi. He that commeth to god must beleue: and by that faith groūded on the truth of the word of god, beinge taughte bothe of the threatnynges of god, agaynst sinners, and also of the great goodnes and mercy of god, offered to mankinde in our sauiour & redemer Christ Iesu, they muste conceyue an harty sorowe and repentance for theyr sinnes, with a sure trust to haue forgyuenes of them, by the merytes & passion of our sauiour Christe. And ioyninge ther∣vnto a full purpose to amende theyr lyfe, and to cō¦mitte sinne no more, but to serue god al their life af∣ter, they muste than receyue the sacrament of bap∣tisme. And this is the very playne ordinary way, by the whiche god hath determined, that man beynge of age, and commynge to christendome, shuld be iu∣stified.
For as for infantes, it is to be beleued, that their iustification is wrought, by the secrete opera∣tion of the holy gost in theyr baptisme, they beynge offered in the fayth of the churche. And this Iustification, wherof we haue hither∣to spoken, may be called the first Iustification, that is to say, our first cōming into goddis house, which is the churche of Christ, at whiche comming we be receiued and admitted, to be of the flocke and fami∣lie of our sauiour Christ, and be professed & sworne to be the seruantes of god: and to be souldiours vn∣der Christe, to fyghte against our ennemies the de∣uyll, the worlde and the fleshe. Of whiche enemies if it chaunce vs, after our baptisme to be ouerthro∣wen, and caste into mortall synne, than is there no remedy, but for the recouering of our former estate of Iustification, whiche we haue loste, to aryse by penance, wherin proceding in sorowe and moch la∣mentation for our sinnes, with fasting, almesse prai¦er, and doing all suche thinges, at the leaste in true purpose and will, as god requireth of vs we muste haue a sure trust and cōfidence in the mercy of god, that for his sonne our sauiour Christis sake, he will yet forgiue vs our sinnes, and receyue vs vnto his fauour again, and so being thus restored to our iu∣stification, we must goo forward in our battayle a∣foresayde, in mortifienge our concupiscence, and in our dayly spiritual renouation, in folowing the mo¦tions of the spirite of Christe in doing good wor∣kes, and absteining from sinne, and all occasions therof, being armed with faith, hope, and charitie,
to the intent we maye atteyne our finall iustificati∣on, and so be glorified in the day of iugement, with the rewarde of euerlasting lyfe. Wherfore it is necessary for the keping and hol¦ding of this Iustification, ones conferred and giue in baptisme, or recouered again by penāce, through the mercy of our sauiour Christ, and also for the en∣creasynge of the same iustification, and fynall con∣summation therof, to take good hede, and to watche that we be not deceyued by the false suggestion and temptation of our gostly enemie the deuyll, who as saint Peter saith,i. Petri. v. goeth about like a roring lion, se∣king whom be may deuour. And it is no doubt, but although we be ones iu∣stified, yet we maye fall there fro, by our owne free wyll and consenting vnto sinne, & folowing the desyres therof. For albeit the house of our consciēce be ones made cleane, & the foule spirite be expelled from vs in baptisme, or penance: yet if we waxe idle and take not hede, he wyll returne with seuen worse spirites, and possesse vs a gaine. And althoughe we be illuminat, and haue tastid the heauenly gift, and be made partakers of the holy gost: yet may we fal and displease god, Wherfore as saint Paule saith: He that standeth,. Corin. x let hym take bede that he fal not. And here all phantasticall imagination, cury∣ous reasoning, and vain trust of predestination, is to be laid apart. And according to the plain maner of speaking & teaching of scripture, in innumerable places, we ought euermore to be in dreade of our owne frailtie, naturall pronitie to fall to synne, &
not to assure our selfe, that we be elected any other wyse, than by feling of spiritual motiōs in our hart and by the tokens of good and vertuous liuing, in folowing the grace of god, and perseuerynge in the same to the ende.ii. Petri. ii. And this sainte Peter exhorteth vs to make our vocation and election sure and sta∣ble. And Christ saieth:Ma. xxii. He that perseuereth vnto the ende, shalbe saued. And in reuelation of saint Iohn: Be faithful vnto death,Apoc. ii. and I shal giue the the crown of life. Wherfore whan we be ones elected, and ad∣mitted vnto goddis seruice (as is aforesayde) and haue receyued our iustification in baptisme, or be restored thervnto by true penance, than muste we continually walke after Christ, bearyng our crosse, and encreasinge in his grate by good workes, and so doing procede, go forwarde and encreace in our Iustificatiō, according to the saieng of saint Iohn: He that is iuste, let him be more iustified. For as the grace of god and the giftes therof, that is to saye, fayth, repentance, dreade, hope, charitie, with other fruites of the holy gost do encreace in vs, so do we waxe and encreace in our Iustification. And therfore it is playne, that not onely fayth, as it is a distincte vertu or gifte by it selfe, is requi∣red to our iustificatiō: but also the other giftes of ye grace of god, with a desire to do good workes, pro∣ceding of ye the same grace. And where as in certain pla¦ces of scripture, our iustification is ascribed to faith without any further additiō or mētion of any other vertue or gift of god: it is to be vnderstand of faith in the second acception, as before is declared in the
article of faith wherin the feare of god, repentance, hope, and charitie, be included and comprysed, all whiche must be ioyned together in our Iustificati∣on: So that no fayth is sufficient to Iustification or saluation, but suche a fayth, as worketh by cha∣ritie, as is playnely expressed by saint Paule in his epistle to the Galathians. And that also our good workes,Gala. v. which we do, being ones iustified, by faith and charitie, auaile bothe to the conseruation and perfection of the said vertues in vs, and also to the encreace and ende of our Iustification and euerla∣stinge saluation. And althoughe we can neuer be iustified with∣out these gyftes of the holy goste, faith, repentance, hope, charitie, with desyre and study to bring forthe good workes: Yet it is to be vnderstande that ne∣uerthelesse we be iustified Gratis, that is to say, fre∣ly, for as moche as all giftes or workes, whereby our iustification is wroughte and accomplyshed, come of the free mercy and grace of god, and not of our deseruing: So that our pride and glory in our selfe, and our owne worthynes, is vtterly excluded. For we be not able of our selues, as of our selues, not as moche as to thinke any good thing, but our ablenes and our sufficiency is of god, which giueth vs the sayd gyftes of his own inestimable goodnes and dothe also assiste vs with his holy spirite, and strength vs, to kepe his commandementes. And further where our kepyng of them is vn∣perfect, and euen in the beste men wanteth a greate deale of that duetye to god, whiche they ought and
be bound to do: yet almighty god of his mere mer∣cye and goodnes, accepteth the same as a perfecte fulfillynge of them for our sauiour Christis sake, which hath fulfilled the law for vs, and is the ende and perfection of the lawe, to all that truely beleue in him. And so we haue all Gratis, that is to saye of his grace, and not of our worthinesse, or any me∣rite goinge before grace, but receiuing all of god, as saint Paule saith:i. Cor. iii. what hast thou that thou hast not receiued? we referre all vnto his goodnes and mercy, by the whiche we both come vnto the begin∣nynge of our iustification, and do procede and go forwarde in the same, and finally atteyne the ende therof, and be brought to euerlasting life, vnto the which the very way appoynted by Christe (whose worde no man may change) is, to kepe and obserue the cōmandementes of god, for he saith expressely: If thou wylt enter into lyfe,Math. xix. kepe the commandemen∣tes: that is, apply thy hole study and affection to walke in the law of god, wherin if thou per∣seuere, thou shalt be saued. And so after thy iustification, thou shalte be glorified according to the order of god, whi∣che saynte Paule speaketh of whan he sayth: Quos iu∣stificauit, Illos glori∣ficauit. ❧
The article of good workes. AL preaching and learnynge of the word of god in Christis chur∣che, ought to tende to this ende, that men maye be induced, not onely to knowe god, and to beleue and truste in hym, but also to honour and serue hym with good workes wrought in faith and charitie, and vt¦terly to forsake the workes of synne and the fleshe, which who so euer do committe (excepte they repent and amend by penance) they shal not (as saint Paul saith) inherite the kingdome of god. And that holy scripture goth to this pointe, to persuade men to lyue well, and to do good workes saint Paule testifieth saienge vnto Timothe: All scripture writen by the inspiration of god, is profita∣ble to teache, to reproue, to correcte, to instructe, that the seruaunte of god may be perfecte, and made apt vn∣to euery good worke. And where as we speake of good workes, it is to be vnderstand, that we meane not only of outwarde corporall actes and dedes. but also and rather of al inwarde spiritual workes, motions, and desires, as the loue and feare of god, ioye in god, godly meditations and thoughtes, pa∣cience, humilitie, and such lyke. And also it is to be vnderstande, that by good workes, we meane not the superstitiouse workes of mennes owne inuen∣tion, whiche be not commanded of god, nor appro∣ued by his worde, in whiche kynde of workes ma∣ny christen men, and specially of them that were
lately called religious (as monkes, friers, nunnes, and suche other) haue in times past, put theyr great truste and confidence. Nor yet we meane not of su∣che moral actes, as be done by the power of reason and naturall will of man, without fayth in Christ: which albeit of their owne kinde they be good and by the lawe and light of nature, man is taught to do them, and god also many tymes dothe temporal∣ly rewarde men for doing the same, yet they be not meritoriouse, nor auaylable to the atteynynge of e∣uerlasting life, whan they be not done in the faythe of Christe, and therfore be not accompted amonge the good workes, wherof we do here intreat: but we speake of suche outwarde and inwarde workes as god hath prepared for vs to walke in, and be done in the faith of Christe, for loue and respecte to god, and can not be brought forthe onely by mans power, but he must be preuented and holpen therto by a speciall grace. And these workes be of two sortes, for some be such as men truely iustified, and so continuinge, do worke in charitie of a pure harte, and a good con∣science and an vnfayned faith: Which workes al∣though they be of them selues vnworthy, vnperfect and vnsufficient: yet for as moch as they be done in the faith of Christe, and by the vertue & merites of his passion, theyr vnperfectues is supplied: the mer¦cifull goodnes of god accepteth them, as an obser∣uation and fulfillinge of his lawe, and they be the very seruice of god, and be meritoryouse towardes the atteyninge of euerlastinge lyfe. And these be
called the workes and fruites of rightuousnesse. Other workes there be, whiche be not so per∣fect as these, & yet they be done by the grace of god in faith and good affection of harte towardes god, as those be, which mē that haue ben in deadly sinne and by grace turne to god, do worke & bring forthe vpon respecte and remorse, that they haue for theyr offences done against god. And these may be called proprely the workes of penance. As for exaumple: whan a sinner hearing or remembring the lawe of god, is moued by grace, to be contrite and sorye for his offences, and beginneth to lament his estate, & to fall to prayer and other good dedes, seking to a∣uoide the indignatiō of god, and to be reconciled in to his fauour: These workes come of grace, but yet this mā is not to be accompted a iustified man, but he is yet in sekinge remission of his sinnes, and his iustification, which the anguishe of his own consci∣ence telleth him, that he yet wanteth, but he is in a good way, and by these meanes doth entre into iu∣stification, and if he do procede & with harty deuo∣tion seke for further grace, he shall be assured of re∣mission of his sinnes, and atteine his iustification, and so be made able and mete to walke in the very pure seruice of god, with a cleane conscience, and to bringe forth the foresaide workes of rightuousnes in Christ, which he can not do, afore he be iustified. And that suche workes of penance, as we haue spoken of, be required to the atteining of remission of synnes and iustification: It is very euident and playne by scripture, as when our sauiour Christe
sayth: Be penitent, and beleue the gospel,Marc i. that is to say, Fyrst be contrite, and knowlege your synnes, & than receiue the glad tidinges of remission of your sinnes. And saint Iohn Baptist preached penance, and made a way vnto Christ, and taught men whi∣che came vnto hym, what they shuld do to come vn∣to Christe, and to haue remission of sinnes by hym, as it is wryten in the thirde chapiter of Luke, and specially that they, which be ones christened, and af¦terwarde fall from the grace of god by mortall syn, can not recouer their iustification without penāce, it is playne by the saying of saynt Peter vnto Si∣mon Magus, where he sayeth:Act. vii. Do penance for this thy wyckendnes, and praye god, if peraduenture this thought of thy hart, may be forgyuen vnto the. And truely this waye and forme of doctrine is to be obserued, which is the very trade of scripture, wherin men be taught, firste to leaue synnes, and to retourne by workes of penance vnto god, and that than they shall receiue remission of synnes and iu∣stification. And although suche workes of penance be required in vs, towardes the atteining of remis∣sion of synnes and iustification: yet the same iusti∣fication and remission of sinnes is the free gifte of god, and conferred vnto vs, Gratis, that is to say, of the grace of god, wherby we doyng suche thynges, and hauing suche motions and workes of penance, be prepared and made more apte, to receiue further grace of remission of our sinnes and iustification. And it is not inconuenient that suche thynges shulde through grace be done by vs fyrst, and yet it
shulde be sayd, that we receyue the sayde gyft freely. For Christe sayth in the reuelation of saynt Iohn, Qui sitit ueniat,Apo. xxii. & qui uult, accipiat aquam uitae gratis: He that is thristy, let hym come, and he that woll, lette hym take the water of lyfe frely. Where he af∣fyrmeth this gyfte of god to be freely gyuen & con∣ferred, and yet there is required some labour before as to haue a wyll and desire to come, which cōming can not be without arising by faithe and penance, & proceding in the same, & so to take the water of lyfe, yt is to say iustificatiō, through our sauiour Christ: whiche ones receiued in baptisme or after baptisme being recouered by penance, although man dayly do offende and fall into dyuers veniall synnes, by reason of his infirmitie and weakenesse, and ther∣fore hath nede of continuall and dayly repentance: Yet as longe as he consenteth not to deadely sinne, he leseth not the state of his iustification, but remai¦neth styll the chyld of god. And being in that state, hath power by goddis grace, dwellyng in hym, to do suche workes, as by acceptation of god through Christ, be compted workes of rightuousnes, and do serue for the preseruation and encrease of his far∣ther iustification, and be appointed by goddis most gratious promyse, to haue euerlasting rewarde in heauen. Whiche bothe inward and outwarde wor∣kes be not onely the declaring of our faith and con∣fidence in god, and of the grace whiche we haue re∣ceyued: but also a continual exercyse, nourishment, preseruation, encrease, and perfection of the same. For yf we shulde not, after that we haue professed
Christe, apply our wyll to worke well accordyng to our sayd profession, than shulde we falle from the grace of god, and the estate of rightuousnes and iu¦stification, whiche we were ones set in, and become agayne the seruantes of synne. And as saint Peter saith: we shuld be in wors case,ii. Pet. ii. than we were before we receyued the knowlege of Christ. And that we encreace in grace by workynge in the grace of god ones receyued, it appereth by the worde of our sauiour Christ, where he saith: Omni habenti dabitur & abundabit. Meaning therby, that who so euer vseth well the grace of god, whiche is offred vnto hym al redy, he shall haue more, & waxe plentyfull in grace. wherfore as we contynue and perseuere in good workes, so more and more we go forward and procede in our iustification, and in en∣creasyng the same, whervnto sainte Peter exhorteth vs, saying:ii. Pet. . Fall not frome the sure estate wherin ye be sette, but increase and grow in grace, & in the know∣lege of our lorde and sauiour Iesu Christ. And to ascribe this dignitie vnto good workes, it is no derogatiō to the grace of god. Forasmoch as it is to be cōfessed, that al good workes come of the grace of god. And our merites, as saint Augustine sayth, be but the gyftes of god, and so in our selfe we may not glory nor loke backe on our owne wor∣thines or dignity, whiche is naught, as of our self: but of the onely acceptation of goddes mercy. And therfore we must as saynt Paule sayth:Phili. iii. Extende our selfe to that whiche is afore vs, to the rewarde of the heauenly callynge, whiche is in Christe, and stille pro∣cede
in good workes, knowynge our selues to be euer∣more greatter debtours to god for his grace. And whan we haue done all, whiche we be bydden doo, the scripture teacheth vs to say, that we be vnprofi∣table seruantes:Luc. xvii. bicause that what so euer we haue done, it is but our duety, nor we haue done nothing but that we haue receyued of his gifte to do, and that to our profite and not to his. But yet must we take hede, that seing we haue receyued the grace of god, we be not found vnprofitable seruātes in this wyse, that is to say, idell seruauntes: to whome it shall be sayde: Cast out the vnprofitable seruaun∣tes,Ma. xxv. into the outwarde darkenes, where shalbe we¦pynge and gnashyng of tethe. And saint Paule al∣so exhorteth saying: Cor. ii. Receyue not the grace of god in vayne: that is to saye: worke well: For the grace of god is giuen you to that entent, and to that ende we are redemed by Christe, and delyuered from the thraldom of synne, and captiuitie of the deuyll, that we shulde serue god, as Zachary sayth, in holines and rightuousnes afore hym all our life. And in an other place saincte Paule saythe: The grace of god hath appered to bryng saluation vnto all men, teaching vs, that we renouncynge all vngodlynes, and worldly desyres, shulde lyue in this present worlde sobrely, iustly, and deuoutely, loking for the bles∣sed hope and apperance of the glory of the great god, and our sauiour IESV CHRIST: Which gaue hym selfe for vs, to redeme vs from all wy∣kednes, and to clense vnto hym selfe, a special peo∣ple whiche shoulde be studious folowers of good
workes. In whiche godly sentence of saint Paule, besides other great plenty of fruitfull lerning and edifienge, he toucheth in thre wordes, all the good workes of a true christen man, where he saith So∣berly, Iustly, and Deuoutly. For in this worde So∣berly, he comprehendeth all abstinence and tempe∣rance, and our duetie touchinge our body. And in saieng, Iustly, he conteineth al workes of charitie to¦wardes our neighbour, with due obedience to our princes, heades and gouernours. And in this word Deuoutly, he concludeth all our workes spirituall which be done immediatly vnto god, as praier, thin¦kinge of god, desiringe of his glory. &c. And vnto all these workes, ought we moste di∣ligently with all labour and care to apply our wyl, for these effectes and endes, that is to saye, the glo∣rye of god, the profite of our neyghbour, and our owne merite, that we may shewe our self thankful seruantes to our sauiour Iesu Christ, and to be the very people of god, and that he may be glorified in vs, that his churche maye be edified by our exaum∣ple, that we maye auoyde falling into temptation and sinne, that we maye scape the scourge of god, that the grace of god and the giftes therof may en∣creace, and be made perfecte in vs, that we maye make our election stable and sure, that we may at∣tayne euerlastinge life, being founde fruitful in the daye of iudgement, where euery man shall receyue according to his workes.
Of prayer for soules departed. FOr as moche as due ordre of charitie requyreth, and the boke of Machabeis, and dyuerse auncient doctours playnely shewe, that it is a very good and charitable deede, to pray for soules departed. And for as moch as suche vsage, hath continued in the churche so many yeres euen from the beginning: men ought to iudge and thinke, the same to be wel and profitable done. And truely it standeth with the very ordre of charitie, a christen man to pray for a nother bothe quycke and deade, and to cōmende one an other in their praiers to goddis mercy, & to cause other to praye for them also, as wel in masses & exequies, as at other times, and to giue almes for them, according to the vsage of the churche, & ancient opinion of the old fathers: trusting that these thinges, do not only profite and auayle them, but also declare vs to be charitable folke, bycause we haue mynde and desire to profite them, which notwithstanding they be departed this present lyfe, yet remayne they stil, membres of the same mystical body of Christ, whervnto we pertein. And here is specially to be noted, that it is not in the power or knowlege of any man, to limit and dispence, how moch, and in what space of time, or to what person particularly the said masses, exequies, and suffrages do profite and auayle: Therfore cha∣ritie requireth, that who so euer causeth any suche masses, exequies, or suffrages to be done, shuld yet
(though their intente be more for one then for an o∣ther) cause them also to be done for the vniuersal cō¦gregation of christen people quycke and deade, for that power and knowlege afore rehersed perteineth only vnto god, which alone knoweth the measures and times of his owne iudgement and mercies. Furthermore bicause the place where the sow¦les remaine, the name therof, the state & condition which they be in, be to vs vncertaine, therfore these with al other suche thinges, must also be left to al∣mighty god, vnto whose mercy it is meete and con∣uenient for vs, to cōmende them, trustyng that god accepteth our prayers for them reseruyng the reste holy to god, vnto whome is knowen theyr estate & condition, And not we to take vppon vs neyther in the one part, ne yet in the other, to gyue any fonde and temerarious iudgement, in so hyghe thynges, so farre passing our knowlege. Finally it is moch necessary, that all such abu∣ses as heretofore haue bene brought in, by suppor∣ters and mainteners of the papacye of Rome, and their complicies, concerning this matter, be clerely put awaye, and that we therfore absteine from the name of purgatory, and no more dispute or reason therof. Vnder colour of whiche, haue ben aduansed many fonde and great abuses, to make men beleue that through the bishop of Romes pardōs, soules mighte clerely be deliuered out of it, & released out of the bondage of synne. And that masses sayde at Scala celi, and other prescribed places phātasied by mē, did there in those places more profit the soules,
them in an other. And also that a prescribed numbre of prayers, soner than other (thoughe as deuoutly said) shuld further their petition soner: yea special∣ly if they were saide before one image more than an other, which they phantasied. Al these and such like abuses be necessary vtterly to be abolished and ex∣tinguished. This boke bounde in paper boordes or claspes, not to be solde aboue .xvi. d. ❧IMPRINTED at London in Fletestrete by Thomas Barthelet printer to the kynges hyghnes, the .XXIX. day of May, the yere of our Lorde M.D.XLIII. CVM priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.
