B826 12095763 53979
Brutum Fulmen: OR THE BULL OF Pope Pius V. Concerning the Damnation, Excommunication, and Deposition OF Q. ELIZABETH, As also the Absolution of her Subjects from their Oath of Al∣legiance, with a Peremptory Injunction, upon Pain of an Anathema, never to obey any of Her Laws or Commands. With some Observations and Animadversions upon it. By THOMAS Lord Bishop of Lincoln. Whereunto is Annex'd the Bull of Pope Paul the Third, containing the Damnation, Excommunication, &c. of King Henry the Eighth. Come out of her my People, that ye partake not of her Sins and Plagues. Rev. XVIII. 4. LONDON, Printed by S. Roycroft for Robert Clavell at the Peacock in St. Paul's Church-yard. MDCLXXXI.
The Right Hon.ble Algernon Capell, Earl of Essex, Viscount Maldon, and Baron Capell of Hadham: .
THE EIPSTLE TO THE READER. Reader, WHoever thou art (Protestant or Pa∣pist, Courteous or Censorious) ha∣ving made these Papers publick, thou hast a liberty to read, and a right to judge; and that thou maist do it impartially, (not out of hate or kindness to me, but upon a serious and just Consideration of the Cause) I shall neither importune thy Favour, nor deprecate (when 'tis just)
thy severest Censure. For, 1. 'Tis truth, I have im∣partially desired, and not indiligently sought; and if (by the blessing of God) I have found it, Magna est ve∣ritas & praevalebit, it will prevail, in despite of all Enemies and Opposition; , nat su∣per, non immersabilis undis. Truth we know (e∣specially Divine Truth, which concerns our Souls and their salvation) ever had, and, so long as there are De∣vils and wicked Men, will have in this World many E∣nemies; who will indeavour (what they cannot do) to suppress it; premi potest veritas, opprimi non po∣test. They may dipp, and (for some time) keep it un∣der water, but they cannot drown it. If these Papers contain truth, (as I hope they do) then I am sure that every Intelligent Reader, and pious lover of Truth, will be its Patron; and (though in this Epistle I do not sol∣licit him) ready to vindicate it from the Objections of its Adversaries. But (on the other side) if my Reader relate to Rome, and be possess'd with strong delusion to believe (against Reason and Divine Revelation) his Catholick Cause, the Papal Monarchy and Infallibili∣ty, it will be in vain for me, in this Epistle, to desire (what I believe IThe reason why I cannot expect the fa∣vour or assent of my Adversaries, (especially of the Jesuites) is, be∣cause Maldonate tells us, That Luther and Calvin (Arch-Hereticks) are not to be followed, though they speak things consonant to Scripture—Cum sacris literis con∣sent ancadocent, Non Se∣quendi. Nay Calvinists and Lutherans, Even When They Speak Truth, are no more to be hearken'd to, Then To the Devil. Lutherani & Calvinistae à Deo, & Ecclesia tanquam pernicio∣sissimi Haeretici declarati, non magis, Etiam Cum Vera Dicunt, Audiendi sunt, Quam Diabolus, Maldo∣nat. Comment. in Matth. 16. vers. 6. p. 336. C. Nor is this Maldona's peculiar Opinion; for the Censor Librorum, who approves his Commentaries on Matthew, tells us, That Omnia in illis juxta Or∣thodoxam Apostolicae ac Romanae Ecclesiae Doctrinam Summa Cum Eruditione exponi. Ita Joh. Clavius De villo. Libr. Censor. cannot have) his Favour. However, he shall have my Pity and Prayers, That God Almighty would be graciously pleased to o∣pen his Eyes, and bless him with the Knowledge and Love of the Truth.
2. We know 'tis true, what the great Roman Orator long since said—Humanum est errare, labi, decipi, &c. The wisest men have their mistakes; Bernardus non videt Omnia, & quandóque bonus dormitat Homerus. Since Adam fell, the best men have their Infirmities, and sometimes erre, even when they desire and seek Truth. Since the Prophets, our blessed Saviour and his Apostles, left the world, I know no man Infallible; nor any, save the Pope, who (against evi∣dent Reason and the sense of Christendom) pretends to it. For my own part, I do humbly acknowledge my ma∣ny and great Infirmities; and for these Papers—Ho∣minem pagina nostra sapit, there may be mistakes and errors in them; yet it is my hope and (not unground∣ed) belief, that there are none such as may prove perni∣cious, or (in the main) dangerous—Non hic Centau∣ros, non Gorgonas, Harpyasve invenies. No such prodigious and pernicious errors, as our Popish Adver∣saries maintain, & (so far as they are able) vindicate: such I mean as their stupid Doctrine of Transub∣stantiation (contradictory to Natural Reason, Divine Revelation, and all our Senses) their Idolatrous Adora∣tion of a piece of Bread, with DivineNullus dubitand Locus, quin Cultus Latriae qui Vero Deo debetur, sic huic Sacramento exhiben∣dus. Concil. Trid. Sess. 13. De Encharistâ. cap. 5. Worship due to God only) their Sacrilegious robbing the Laity of half the Sacrament in the Eucharist, contrary to our blessed Saviour's expressMatth. 26. 27. And they obey'd, and did all drink. & Marc. 14. 23. Command, and the pra∣ctise of the ChristianCardinal Bona, De Rebus Liturgicis, l. 2. c. 18. pag. 491: 492: Paris. 1672. Lindanus Pano∣pliae, l. 4. c. 56. p. 342. Co∣lon. 1575. World (even of the Church of Rome her self) for above a thousand years (as their own great and learned Writers confess) &c. I say, such errors as these, I do (and have reason to) believe, the Reader will not find in these Papers. Though it be cer∣tain and confess'd, that every one, even the best and
most learned Writers are fallible; yet so long as they ra∣tionally build their Conclusions upon the clear Princi∣ples of Nature, Scripture, or Vniversal Tradition, They may be sure enough, (and so may their Reader too) that they are not actually false, nor what they so write erro∣neous. However if the Reader find any errors of what nature soever, and can make it appear, that they are in∣deed errors, I shall not (as I said before) deprecate his se∣verest Censure, but concur with him, and Censure them my self, as much as he; and do hereby promise publickly to retract them, and heartily thank him for the discove∣ry. For in this Case my Reader and I shall both be Gainers, and (in a several way) Conquerors—Vid. Hieronym. ad∣versus Luciferianos, in si∣ne. Tom. Operum. 1. p. 230. Col. 2. G. Vici∣mus utérque nostrum, palmam Tu refers mei, Ego Erroris; my Reader has overcome me, by manifesting my mistakes, and I (by his help) have overcome those errors; otherwise, in Cyprian's opinion and language, Cyprian Epist. 71. ad Quintum fratrem, p. 140. in Editione Rigaltij, Paris. 1648.Non vincimur cum offeruntur nobis meliora, sed instruimur. He, who by his Adversaries help and concluding Arguments, gains the knowledge of Truth, is (in that good Father's opinion) not conquered, but in∣structed. But if the Intelligent Reader discover any er∣ror in these Papers, and can, and will really make it ap∣pear to be so, let him call it what he will, Victory or In∣struction, I shall thankfully submit, and both love that truth, and him for the discovery of it. 3. I know that this Tract of mine (as every one of the like nature) is already prohibited and damned at Rome; for the RulesExtant dictae Re∣gulae Indici Tridentino praesixae, in Calce Con∣cilij Tridentini. Antv. 1633. presix'd to the Index Librorum Pro∣hibitorum, contrived by the Authority of the Trent Council, declare all Books ofLibri Vulgari Idie∣mate de Controverstis inter Catholicos & Haereticos no∣stri temporis disserentes, non passim permittantur, sed de iis idem servetir quod de Bibliis Vulgari Linguâ scriptis Statutum est. Ibidem Reg. 6. Controversies be∣tween Catholicks and Hereticks (Protestants and Pa∣pists)
in any Vulgar Tongue, prohibited and damned; nei∣ther to beLegentes, aut haben∣tes, poenas in Sacris Cano∣nibus, Constitutionibus A∣postolicis, & Indicibus Li∣brorum prohibitorum con∣tentas, incurrere volumus, Ita Bulla Creg. 15. Data Rom. 30. Decemb. 1622. had nor read by any Papist, under pain of Excommunication, and many other Penalties contained in their Canons, Papal Constitutions, and their Expur∣gatory Indices. So that although our blessed Saviour, by his holy1. Thess. 5. 21. & 1. Joh. 4. . Spirit, in the Gospel, Command all (even the Common people, for to those he writes) to Examin and try all things, to use that understanding and discre∣tion God has given us, to distinguish truth from error (for that's evidently the meaning of those words, prove all things, asOmnia probate, i. e. Per Discretionem dijudi∣cate. Dr. Hen. Holden in Locum. scher and learn∣ed Papists confess) and when we have done so, then we must hold fast that which is good. I say, in this Case, in the choice of our Religion, wherein the Eternal weal or woe of our Souls is concerned; though Christian pru∣dence require it, and our blessed Saviour, (by his Apostle) Command, that we should not believe every Spirit, but try before we trust, and diligently examin Things till we be assured of truth: yet his pretended Vicar, with an Antichristian Pride and Impiety, Contradicts this, and Commands the contrary. He forbids all Examination; Those under his Tyranny (at least the unlearned and Common people) must believe as the Church believes; that is, all that he proposeth, though it be Transubstan∣tiation, or any thing evidently repugnant to their Rea∣son and Senses too. They mustSublato Omni Pro∣prio Judicio, paratus sem∣per sit Animus, ad Obedi∣endum Ecclesiae. Vide Ex∣ercitia spiritualia Ign. Loyolae. Tolosae, 1593. p. 172. Reg. 1. renounce their own Reason, and if he say that is white, which they see black, theySi quod Oculis no∣stris apparet Album, Eccle∣sia Nigrum definierit, debe∣mus quod nigrum sit pro∣nunciare. Ibid. Reg. 13. p. 176. are to believe what he says, and not their own Senses. All means for the People to examin, whether it be truth or error, which the Pope and his Church proposes, is prohibited, and deny'd them; nor is it only the Books of Protestants which write of Re∣ligion,
but the Bible and Sacred Scripture too; even the whole Law of God, and the Gospel of Jesus Christ (in any vulgar Language, which the People can understand) come amongst prohibited Books, and damn'd at Rome; and the reason they give of such prohibition is impious and blasphemous. For they say (horresco referens) the reading of the Holy Scripture by the People, in any vulgar Tongue, is moreSi Sacra Blia vul∣gari ingua, passim sine discrimine permittantur, Plus Inde, ob hominum te∣meritatem, Detrimenti, cum Vtilitatis Oriri. Ita Reg. 4. Indici Tri∣dentino praesixa. pernicious then profi∣table, and brings more loss then benefit to the Rea∣der. Although this Doctrine be (as I said) impious, and (against God and his Holy Word) blasphemous; yet it is publickly own'd amongst those Rules for prohibited Books, contrived by aVid. Praefat. ad In∣dicem Librorum Prohib. Confectum à Deputati∣one Synodi Tridentinae; Author. Praef. erat Fran∣cisc. Forerius Deputati∣oni Secretarius. Deputation (or Commit∣tee) of the Trent Fathers, according to the De∣cree of that Council; and afterwards approved and confirmed by Pius the Fourth, Sixtus the Fifth, and Clemens the Eighth, asIndex Libr. Pro∣hib. ex Concil. Trid. prae∣scripto; Authoritate Pij. 4. primo Editus, postea à Sixto. 5. auctus; demum Clement. 8. Juss recog∣nitus. the Title of the Trent In∣dex assures us. After them (that we may be sure they continue their Antichristian Tyranny, to prohibit and damne the Bible and all Books which make against them)Greg. 15. Bulla da∣ta Rom. 30. Decemb. An. 1622. in Calce Indicis Trid. Antv. Ann. 1633. Gregory the Fifteenth, andConstit. 114. Urba∣ni. 8. dat. Rom. 2. April. 1631. Urban the Eighth do further approve and confirm the Impious Rules and Doctrine afore-mention'd; and both of them expresly declare, and in the same words; 1. That it is known that the Reading prohibited Books, (the Bible is one of them) bringsCum Librorum Pro∣hibitorum Lectio, Magno sincere Fidei cultoribus Detrimento esse noscatur, &c. Those be their words in both their Bulls. great detriment to the Professors of the sincere Faith. (Roman Errors and Popery they mean, which they miscall sincere Faith). And what they say, is most certain; for there is no Book under Heaven so de∣structive of their Popish Superstition and Idola∣try
(which they call sincere Faith) as the Bible, as it has been truly explain'd and preached by Pro∣testants, since Luther's time. Which is evident in this, that so many Kingdoms and Provinces, by the help of Scriptures and Knowledge of the Go∣spel, have clearly seen the Errors of Rome, and just∣ly abhorring her and them, are come out of Baby∣lon. 2. All Licences to read any prohibitedOmnes & singulas licentias legendi aut haben∣di Libros quoscunque prohi∣bitos, quibuscunque Perso∣nis, cujuscunque gradus, e∣tiamper literas Apostolicas, à Nobis aut Praedecessori∣bus nostris concessas, revo∣camus, cassamus, anulla∣mus. So both of them declare in the same words. Books, who∣soever gave them, & to whomsoever they were given) they recall, cassate, and declare null. 3. Then they Command (under severestQui Libros prohibi∣tos habuerint, eos ad Epis∣copum ant Inquisitorem, qui illos quantocius Comburere debeat, deferre teneantur. Ibidem. punishments) that all those who have any prohibited Books, (the Bible is one, if it be in any Vulgar Tongue) they are to bring them to the Bishop or Inquisitor, and they are presently to Burn them. 4. And then they declare,Néque de caetero si∣miles Licentiae, nisi à Con∣gregatione Sancti Officij, quae singulis hebdomadis coram Nobis habetur, vel ab aliis per Nos, in eadem Congregatione deputandis concedantur. Urban. 8. di∣ctae Bullae. §. 3. That no man shall have any Licence for the future, to read or have any prohibited Book, (no Bible or Protestant Book concerning Religion, in any Vulgar Tongue) save on∣ly from the Congregation of the Sacred Office, (the supream Office of the Inquisitors) which sits e∣very week before the Pope at Rome. By the Premisses, I think 'tis certain, that these Papers of mine are (in Antecessum, and) already pro∣hibited and damn'd at Rome; and if their Papal Con∣stitutions be obligatory and obeyed, not to be read or had by any Papist, save only such as have a faculty and li∣cence from the Congregation of the Sacred Office, (as they call it) the Roman Inquisitors; and we may be sure, that those watchful Fathers who guard the Capitol,
and industriously study to preserve and promote the Pa∣pal Greatness and Interest, (on which their own depends) will give licence to none to read such Protestant Writings, save to those, who (for fidelity to their Catholick Cause and Learning) they judge able and willing to Answer and Confute them: That is, None shall have Licence to read such (to them) dangerous and damned Books, save such as haveHanc Catholicam fi∣dem, extra quam nemo sal∣vus esse potest, quam in prae∣senti Profiteor, & veraci∣tèr Yeneo, eandémque In∣tegram, usque ad extre∣mum vitae spiritum, con∣stantissimè retinere, & confiteri, & a meis subdi∣tis, vel illis qurum cura ad m spectat, Teneri, & Praedicari, quantum in me rit, curaturum, Ego idem N. Spondeo, Voveo, ac Ju∣ro. Ita in Bulla Pij Papae 4. super forma Juramen∣ti Professionis fidei, in Concil. Trident. Sess. 24. De Refor'. c. 12. p. 4 52. Editionis Anverp. 1633. solemnly Promised, Vow'd and Sworn firmly to believe and constantly to hold and profess to their last breath (and, to the utmost of their Power, indeavour that others, un∣der them do so too) their new Trent-Creed, and so the whole Mass of their Popish Errors and Idola∣tries contained and commanded in it. The Case being evidently this; that (if their Papal Constitutions be obligatory and obey'd) none are to read or have these Papers, save such as have promised, vow'd, and sworn ne∣ver to believe them; as I have little reason to desire or hope for their favour, so (be it known unto them) I do as little fear their Confutation, or (what I am like enough to have) their Calumnies. 4. Although I well know (to say nothing of others) that all our English Papists (both in their Words and Writings) do constantly call themselves Catholicks, and Roman Catholicks; yet they must pardon me, if in these Papers, I neither do, nor justly can call them so: Papists I do call them, and (I hope) they will not be of∣fended, or take it ill, that I do so. ForRecentiores Haere∣tici Catholicos homines Pa∣pistas vocant; & certe nul∣lo sublimiore Gloriae Titulo Exornare potuissent. Sint ideo nobis viventibus, haec semper Praeconia Ladum, & post mortem, Tituli Se∣pulchrales, ut sic Semper Dicamur Papistae. Baroni∣us Notat. ad Martyrolo∣gium Rom. Oct. 16. B. p. 707. Col. Agrip. 1610. Baronius (their great Cardinal and Annalist) having said, That the Hereticks (we know whom he means) call'd them Papists; he adds, That we could not honour them with a more glorious Title then that of Papists, and
therefore he desires that they may have the ho∣nour of that Title while they live, and that (after death) it may be writ upon their Tombs and Se∣pulchral Monuments. For my part, so long as they be∣lieve and profess their new Trent-Creed, and the Popes Monarchical Supremacy, I shall (according to the Cardinal's desire) call them Papists, and if it be so honou∣rable a Title (as he saies it is) let them have it, I shall not envy them that honour, but pity their error, who glory in that which is indeed their sin and shame: For the o∣ther Title of Catholick, which our Adversaries, (without and against reason) appropriate to themselves; we grant, and know, that anciently it was, and (when rightly used) is a word of a good sound & signification, when it was ap∣plied to persons, (as a Catholick Bishop, or Catholick Doctor, &c.) it signified such persons as were, 1. In re∣spect of their Faith, Orthodox; who intirely believed and profess'd the true Christian Faith, rejecting all per∣nicious and dangerous errors, and so were no Hereticks. 2. In respect of their Charity, such as were in Commu∣nion with the Church of Christ, without any uncharitable Separation from it, and so no Schismaticks. Now that our Adversaries of Rome are (as they pretend) such Ca∣tholicks, is absolutely deny'd; not only by Protestants, but (except themselves) by all Christians in the World, and that upon evident and great reason; Considering, 1. Their many and monstrousConcerning the Errors, Superstition and Idolatry of the Church of Rome, (with which I charge them) I do not here name the Particu∣lars, much less the proofs of them. It is not the bu∣siness of this Epistle. But many of our learned Writers have long since effectually done it. Such I mean, as Bishop Jewel, Bp. Morton, Davenant, John White, Chillingworth and Dr. Crakanthorp, and (to omit many more) lately, my learned Friend Dr. Stillingfleet Dean of Pauls. The Reader (if he please) may consult these and find satisfaction. Some thing also is said to that purpose, in the following Papers. But if my Popish Adversaries (who are not easily, if at all to be satisfy'd) re∣quire me particularly to make good my Charge; I shall undertake it; and hope (by the blessing of God, and the help of the Writings of those learn∣ed Persons I have named) to say that which might (though may be it will not) satisfie my Adver∣saries. Errors (contradictory to sacred Scripture, and the sense and belief of the Christian World for a thousand years after Christ our blessed Saviour) which they approve and publickly receive as Articles of their Faith, in their new Creed, the Trent-Council, and Ro∣man Catechism; Considering also their many Superstitions
and stupid Idolatry, professed and practised by them in their sacred Offices (their Missal, Breviary, Horae B. Virginis, their Ritual and Pontifical, &c.) I say, these things impartially considered, they may be (and really are) Idolatrous Hereticks; but 'tis impossible they should be, (what they against greatest evidence pretend to) true Catholicks. 2. Considering the unchristian (indeed Anti∣christian) Pride and Tyranny of the Pope and his Party, Excommunicating, Cursing and Damning all Christians, save themselves, (without and against that Charity which the Gospel requires) and so Schismatically cutting off from the Body of Christ whole Kingdoms at a Clap (as Pius the Fifth does,Declaramus praedi∣ctam Elizabetham Haere∣ticam, eique Adhaerentes Anathematis Sententiam incrrisse, esséque à Christi Corporis Vnitate Praecisos. In dictâ Pij. 5. Bullâ. §. 3. in the following Bull) which are things inconsistent with the Christian Temper and Cha∣rity of a true Catholick; I say these things considered, and that the Pope and his Party are really guilty of such un∣charitable Actions, dividing and violating the Vnion of the Church; it evidently follows, that they are so far from being true Catholicks that they are great and formal Schismaticks; And therefore they must pardon me, if in these Papers, I do not call them (what really they are not) Catholicks; and for the same Reason, I do not call them Roman Catholicks. For, as it is neither reason nor sense to call him an English Gentleman, who is no Gentleman at all; or him a Sorbon Doctor, who never saw Paris, or ever had or desired that Degree; so it is alike irrational to call him a Roman Catholick, who really is an Er∣ring Schismatick, and no Catholick at all. 5. I know some (otherwise learned and pious) Writers, who say that those words Roman Catholick are incon∣sistent, and imply a Contradiction, as signifying a par∣ticular Universal. But this (I confess) is a manifest mi∣stake.
For not only particular Persons, (of which before) but particular Churches, in this or that City (be it great or little) have anciently and usually been call'd Ca∣tholick Churches, without any Contradiction or Impro∣priety. In an Epistle of aSynodus innumera∣bilium fere Episcoporum (as Valesius renders it) apud Euseb. Hist. l. 7. c. 29. pag. 278. D. great Council at Antioch, we find the homo professionis Catholicae. Even Paulus Samosatenus, till he was discovered to be an Here∣tick, was call'd a Catho∣lick. Ibid. c. 30. p. 282. B. Bishop of that City call'd a Catholick, and that particular Church a. speaking of the Church of Anti∣och, Euseb. Ibid. p. 282. 6. Catholick Church. So in the Subscriptions to Nazianzen's last Will and Te∣stament, Optimus Bp. of Antioch, subscribes thus; Op∣timus Bp. of the Catholick: Testam. Nazian. cum Invert. con∣tra Julian. Graecè Aetonae 1610. p. 126. & apud Le∣unclavium, Juris Graeco-Rom. Tom. 2. p. 203. vide Epiphan. Edit. D. Petav. Paris. 162. 2. Tom. 2. p. 2. Church at Antioch; and the rest of the Bishops who subscribe that Testament, (and they are six or seven) use the same Form. So Nazi∣anzen subscribes himself Bishop of the Catholick Church in Constantinople; Amphilochius Bishop of the Catholick Church in Iconium; and so all the rest. In the Appendix to the Theodosian Code, Pope Vigilius begins his Encyclical Epistle thus—Vigilius Vid. App. Cod. The∣od. per Sirmondu p. 218.Episcopus Ecclesiae Catholicae Urbis Romae: Bi∣shop of the Catholick Church of the City of Rome. So PopeLeo Papa Ecclesiae Catholicae Urbis Romae. Conc. Chalcedon. part. 1. num. 10. 12. & Act. 8. Leo the Great (andThe Reader may have a very large Cata∣logue of such Subscripti∣ons, by John Launoy. E∣pist. part. 1. In Epist. ad Franc s. Bonum. many more Bishops of Rome) uses the very same form. The Popes stiled them∣selves Catholicae Ecclesiae (non Orbis, sed) Urbis Ro∣mae Episcopos. The Antichristian stile of Universal Bi∣shop, (as PopePope Gregory damns that proud Title, twelve several times; the places are particularly cited by Joh. Launoy (and he no Luheran) in the Episte ad Bonum before-nam'd▪ Gregory the Great calls it) was not yet usurped at Rome. The Bishops of Rome then, and their Church, were Catholick, and so was every Orthodox Bishop and his Church, as well and as much as they. Constantinople, Iconium, Antioch, &c. and their Bi∣shops, were as truly Catholick as St. Peter's Successor, or Rome it self: The truth is evidently this; the Pope and his Party are in this, nec Christi, nec Petri, sed Donati Successores; they do not follow Peter or our
blessed Saviour, (as they vainly bragg) but that impious Heretick Donatus, whose damnable Schism and Here∣sie they have espoused. St. Augustin (who well knew it) tells us, inVide Augustinum Breviculi Collat. cum Donatistis, Collat. 3. Di∣ei. Tom. 7. p. 568. Edit. Basil. 1569. & Epist. 67. ad Alipium. Tom. 2. p. 323. several places, That the Donatists as∣sumed to themselves the Name of Catholick, said that their Sect was the only true Church, and so damn'd all other Christians; and upon this Here∣tical Opinion, they Schismatically separated from the whole Catholick Church. The Pope and his Party (with as little reason and charity) do the very same thing; they (as the Donatists anciently) Heretically affirm, That they, and they only, are truly Catho∣licks, and the only Members of the true Christian and Catholick Church: and then Schismatically Seperate from, Excommunicate and Damn all o∣ther Christians. 6. And further (that I may freely speak, what I really believe) I am so far from believing the Pope and his Party to be (what they vainly pretend) the only true Christian and Catholick Church; that I do believe them (and so did thousands before Luther, and many whole Kingdoms and Provinces since) to be Ecclesia Malig∣nantium an Antichristian Sect and Synagogue (in side) highly erroneous, and (in facto) as highly impious. And the Pope so far from being Peter's Successor, and our B. Saviour's Vicar-General, that he is2 Thess. 2. 3. 4. See Bishop Jewel on this Chapter, and this fourth Verse. Sir Christoph. Sib∣thorp's Advertisement to the Catholicks in Ire∣land. Dublin 1622. part. 3. c. 2. p. 280. 281. 282. &c. Andr. Rivet. contra Silvestrum Petrasanctam c. 28. p. 537. 538. &c. vid. Georg. Dounamum, Dia∣r de Antichristo, l. 3. & 4. Lond. 1620. that man of Sin, , That Adversary of our blessed Sa∣viour, and the great Antichrist, the Apostle speaks of, who Exalts himself () above all Kings and Emperors. This (I hope) will in part appear by what is said in the following Papers. At present, I shall desire the Impartial Reader (who possibly
may read this short Epistle, and trouble himself no fur∣ther, to read what follows) to consider, That the Pope really and professedly does Exalt himself above all Kings and Emperors, and so has this Mark of the Beast, and Indelible Character of Antichrist. That he does so Exalt himself, will evidently appear, thus, 1. Pope Innocent the Third tells theVide Cap. Solitae. 6. Extra de Major. & O∣bedientia; and the Lem∣ma to that Chap. which is this—Imperium Sa∣cerdotio subest, & ei Obe∣dire Tenetur. Emperor of Constantinople (and with prodigious Error and Impu∣dence, indeavours to prove it out of1 Pet. 2. 13. (which place evidently proves the contrary) Jer. 1. 10. Gen. 1. 16. Joh. 21. 16. Matth. 16. 19. Scripture) That theQuanta est inter Solem & Lunam, tanta in∣ter Pontifices & Reges dif∣ferentia cognoscitur. Di∣cto Cap. Solitae. 6. Pope is as much greater Then the Emperor, as The Sun is greater Then the Moon. So Innocent the third; and (that we may be sure his Successors liked it well) Gregory the Ninth approves, and refers it into the Body of Canon-Law: AndBulla Romae data 1580. Juri Can. prefixa. Greg. the Thirteenth approves it too; and (with the other Decretals) confirms it for Law; and 'tis continued in all Editions of that Law, ever since. It is then certain and confess'd, That the Pope Exalts himself above all that is call'd God, above all Kings and Emperors; and that he is far great∣er then they: And if you inquire of the Proportion, how much he is greater? I say, 2. That their approved and received Glosses on their Law, (with some difference of Opinion) calculate how many times the Sun is greater then the Moon, and then infer the Pope's Greatness a∣bove the Emperor. And here 1. The Author of the Gloss, (Bernardus de Botono was the man) a good Lawyer, but (sure I am) no good A∣stronomer, tells us, (ignorantly and ridiculously)— That the Sun is greater than the Moon, (and consequently the Pope greater than the Empe∣ror) Cum igitur terra sic septies major Luna, Sol au∣tem octies major terra: re∣stat ergo, ut Pontificalis Dignitas Quadragesies sep∣ties su major Regali. Glos∣sa verbo. Inter Solem & Lunam. Cap. Solitae. 6. Extra. de Major. & O∣bedientia. I quote the Edition of the Canon Law at Paris, 1612.Forty seaven times. This is pretty well, but much short of that Magnitude the Pope meant,
(if he knew what he said) when he affirm'd, That he was as much greater then the Emperor, as the Sun was greater than the Moon. 2. And therefore anotherAlias quinquagies septics. Ita Nota in Mar∣gine, ad dictum Cap. Soli∣tae verbo, Inter Solem & Lunam. Ibid. Canonist, would have the Sun greater than the Moon (and so the Pope greater than the Emperor) Fifty seaven times. 3. But this (as too little) does not please the Pope's Par∣ty and Parasites; and therefore Laurentius (another Canonist) says, That it isManifestum est, quod magnitudo Solis continet magnitudinem terrae Cen∣ties quadragies septies & duas medietates. Vid. Addi∣tionem ad Glossam. ver∣bo. Inter Solem & Lu∣nam. Cap. Solitae. 6. manifest, that the Sun is greater than the Moon (so the Pope than the Emperor) an hundred forty seaven times. I o∣mit the fractions; for if the Pope be. 147. times great∣er than the Emperor, me thinks it might satisfie his Ambition, so that he needed not stand upon the fracti∣on, or little overplus. 4. But this also comes far short of that Magnitude, which they ascribe to the Sun above the Moon, (and so to the Pope above the Emperor) for they tell us,Palam est, quod mag∣nitudo Solis continet mag∣nitudem Lunae septies mil∣lies septingenties & qua∣dragies quater, & insuper ejus medietatem. Ibidem in dicta additione ad di∣ctam Glossam. That the Sun is greater than the Moon (7744 ½) seaven thousand seaven hundred, forty four times, and one half more. To such a Prodigious greatness, does the Bishop of Rome exalt himself. So that if St. Paul say true, (That he is Antichrist, who exalts himself above all Kings and Emperors) then it will evi∣dently follow, that the Pope is Antichrist; for never man did, or (without Antichristian Pride and Impie∣ty) can so exalt himself. They sometimes tell us in their Law,—Aurum non tam pretiosius est plumbo, quam Regia Dignitate sit Altior Dignitas Sacerdotalis. Gratian. Can. Duo sunt. 10. Distinct. 96. That the Papal Dignity is to be prefer'd to the Imperial, more then Gold is to Lead; and if Gratian saytrue) it was the Pope who said so. And the Gloss gives the reason of this Papal Quia Colla Regum & Principum submittuntur Genibus Sacerdotum. (By Sacerdotes here, the Popes are principally meant, as is evident both by the Text and the Gloss) Glossa ad dictum Can. verbo. Dúo sunt.Greatness above all Kings; Because Kings and
Princes are to submit their Necks to the Popes Knees; (he might have said, and theirPapa excipit Impe∣ratorem ad osculum pedis∣ut primum videt Papam, detecto Capite, illum, gen terram tangens, venerau,—& Poutificis pedes De∣votè osculatur. Lib. Sacrarum Ceremo∣niarum, Rom. 1560. l. 1. Tit. 5. p. 22. Col. 2. 3. Mouthes to the Popes Feet, which the Emperor is bound to kiss). That this is Impious and Antichristian Do∣ctrine, I think evident; and I have some reason to believe, that intelligent and impartial Judges will think so too, and yet it has heretofore, and still is approved, and (as Catholick) received at Rome. For, 1. That Decretal of Pope Innocent the Third, was by Gregory the Ninth made a Law, & (amongst other Decretals) by him commanded to be received as Law, in allVolentes ut hac tantum Compilatione utan∣tur Vniversi in Judiciis & in Scholis, &c. Greg. 9. in Literis Acad. Bono∣niensi, dat. 1230. Juri Ca∣nonico Praefixis. Edit. Lugduni. 1661. Vniversities and Papal Consistories, abont 450. years ago, and so continues to this day. 2. For the Glosses before-mentioned, they are not on∣ly in theEdit. Paris. 1520. cum Glossis. old Editions of their Law, but were ap∣proved and confirmed afterwards byVide Bullam Greg. 13. datam Romae, Anno 1580. Corpori Juris Ca∣nonici praefixam. Gregory the Thirteenth (and so stand approved and confirmed to this day) who expresly tells us, That the Law being by hisNulli liceat Libris Canonici Juris, de mandao nostro Correctis, Recognitis, & Expurgatis quicquam addere, detrahere, vel im∣mutare, &c. Ibid. dicta Greg. 13. Bulla. command receiv'd, corrected and purged; no man (for the future) should dare to add, detract, or change any thing in it. In short, whether the Champions of the Church of Rome and Catholick Cause, (as they call it) will think what is said in these Papers, worthy of any Answer, or no, I know not. But in case they do, I shall make them (if I mistake not) a very fair offer, which (if accepted) will much lessen their pains and labour, yet so, as (if they perform the Condition annexed) they may (as to my self) effectually do their business, and make me their Proselyte: The thing I mean is this; If they can from Scripture, (by any one Cogent and Concluding Argument) prove any one of these following Propositions (and unless they be
all proved, their Papal Monarchy cannot stand) I will grant the rest, and give them the Cause. I say then, if they can make it appear, 1. That our blessed Saviour before his Ascension, did constitute Peter his Vicar, and gave him such a Monarchical Supremacy and Jurisdiction (as isThey tell us, that it was our blessed Saviour himself, who Constituted Peter and his Successors, Supream Monarchs of the Catholick Church. Christus Catholicam Eccle∣sim, Vni Soli in Terris Petro, Petríque Successori Rom. Pontifici, in Potesta∣tis Plenitudine, tradidit Gubernandam. So Pius the Fifth in this Bull of Ex∣communication of Eliz. In Principio. And Bel∣larmine says—Suc∣cessio ex Christi Instituto, & Jure Divino est, quia Ipse Christus Instituit in Petro Pontificatum, ideo quicum∣que Petro succedit, à Chri∣sto accipit Pontificatum. De Rom. Pont. l 2. c. 12. § ut autem. Cum Papa in Petri Cathedra Sedeat, sum∣mum in eo Dignitatis gra∣dum, nonnullis Humanis Constitutionibus, sed Divi∣nitus datum agnoscit. Ca∣techis. Trident. Part. 2. c 7. De Ordinis Sacramen∣to. § 28. vide Can. Sacro∣sancta. 2. Dist. 22. & Glossam & Turrecre∣matam. Idem. now contended for) over the Apostles and the whole Church. For if Peter had no such Power he could not transfer it to his Successors; it being im∣possible, that they should have that Power (Jure Suc∣cessionis) which their Predecessor never had. 2. If they can prove, that St. Peter, while he lived, did exercise such Power and Supream Jurisdicti∣on, even over the Apostles, &c. By their ownBaronius▪ says, that Peter suffered Martyr∣dom Anno Christi. 69. & therefore 34. or 35. years after our blessed Saviours Passion. Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. 69. §. 1. Computation, St. Peter lived 34. or 35. years after the Ascension of our blessed Saviour, and was (as they say) Bishop of Antioch, 7. and of Rome, 25. years. Now if it neither do, nor can appear, that in all that time he exercised any such Monarchical Power or Ju∣risdiction; we may safely conclude, either that he had no such Power (which is most true) or betray'd his trust in not making use of it, for his Masters Glory, and his Churches good; which (I suppose) our Adversaries will not say. In this Case, Idem est non esse & non apparere; and therefore our Adversaries must pardon us, if we do not believe (what they cannot prove) St. Peters Monarchy. 3. But let it be supposed (which neither has been, nor can be proved) that Peter had, and executed such Pow∣er; let them make it appear that it was not Per∣sonal and Temporary, to cease with his Person, (as the Apostleship did) but to be transferred
to someBellarmine says, tha 'tis evident in Scripture that Peter's Supremacy was to descend to a Suc∣cessor—Aliquem Petro Succedere, deducitur Evi∣dentèr ex Scripturis. De Rom. Pont. l. 2. c. 12. § Observandum Tertio. Successor. For if it was temporary, and ceas'd with St. Peter's Person, then whoever (af∣ter Peter's death) pretends to that Power, is not bonae fidei possessor, but an Impious and Antichristian Usurper. 4. But let all those Particulars be supposed, (which being untrue, cannot possibly be proved) that Peter had and executed such Power, and that it was to be transmit∣ted to his Successor; Let them make it appear that the Bishop of Rome was thatBellarmine tells us, that it is not expresly in Scripture, that the Pope is Peter's Successor, but that must be proved by Apostolical Tradition. Rom. Pontificem succedere Petro, non habetur expresse in Scripturis, sed habetur ex traditione Apostolicâ. Bellarm. Loco dicto. Successor, that Peter was (as they say) 25. years Bishop of Rome, or 25. days, or that he ever was at Rome: For, if it be so far from truth that Peter was 25. years Bishop of Rome, that it cannot appear from Scripture, that he was ever Bishop there at all, or that he ever was at Rome. It will evidently follow, that the Pope is not St. Peter's Successor, and so can have no Title (Ju∣re Successionis) to that Supremacy, they say, Peter had: It being impossible that the Pope should succeed Peter, if he never preceeded him in the Bishoprick of Rome. 5. Let them make it appear, that our blessed Saviour, while on Earth, either exercis'd or had such a Temporal Monarchy, as theThey constantly tell us, the Pope has two Swords; and of the Temporal Sword they say—Figurat Ponti∣sicalis hic gladius potesta∣tem summam Temporalm, à Christo ejus Vicario col∣latam; juxta illud, data est mihi omnis Potestas in Ce∣lo & in Terrâ, & alibi, dominabitur à Mari usque ad Mare, & à Flumine, usque ad Terminos Orbie Terrarum. Liber Sacra∣rum Ceremoniorum Ec∣clesiae Rom. Romae. 1560. Lib. 1. Tit. 7. De Ense be∣nedicendo, p. 36. Col. 1. Pope now chal∣lenges as his Vicar. For unless this appear, all their pretences to such Power, (as Vicars of our B. Saviour) will be vain and irrational; it being impossible that the Pope or Peter should derive from him that power which he himself neither had, nor ever here on Earth exercis'd. These are the Foundations upon which the Papal Monarchy (Spiritual and Temporal) is built; and if
these fail, the whole Fabrick will and must fall; and therefore they are concern'd, by some real and rational proof, to make them good. Now if our Adversaries can and will make it appear, from Sacred Scripture, that Peter ever had or exercised such a Power, as is pretend∣ed; that▪ it was not personal in him, but to be transmit∣ted to his Successor; that he was 25. years Bishop of Rome, and actually transferred that Power to his Suc∣cessor there; or that our blessed Saviour ever had or ex∣ercis'd such a terrene and temporal power, as they pretend the Pope (as his Vicar) has from him: I say, let them make all, or any one of these Pariculars appear from Scripture, and I will confess, and retract my error. Nor is the Condition unjust or unequal, when I require Scrip∣ture proof. For they themselves constantly affirm that the Pope has Right to his Monarchical Supremacy Jure Divino; by the Constitution of our blessed Saviour, and Divine Right; and this their Popes, Canonists and Di∣vines (with great noise and confidence, but no reason) endeavour to prove from Scripture, miserably mistaken and misapply'd. I know, that their lateVide Methodum Veronianam, seu mo∣dum, quo quilibet Ca∣tholicus potest Solis Bi∣bliis, Religionis praeten∣sae Ministrum evidentèr mutum reddere, &c. Au∣thore Francisco Verono Parisiensi, Societatis Jesu Theolog. Colon. Agrip. 1610. Vide Jac. Masenij meditatam Concordiam Protestantium cum Ca∣tholics, ex verbo Dei. Edit. Colon. 1661. Jesuitical Methodists (so muchFrancis. Veroni Scientiam, è doctissimâ Societate Jesu prodeun∣tem, veneramur, senten∣tiam libenter sequimur, & labores, optimo suc∣cessu à Deo donatos, ho∣noramus. Adrian. & Pe∣trus Walenburch in Ex∣am Princip. fidei, &c. Ex∣am. 3. §. 1. num. 3. p. 111. magnify'd by their Party) re∣quire of Protestants to confute their Popish Doctrines (Transubstantiation, the Sacrifice of the Mass, Purga∣tory, &c.) by express words of Scripture) not admit∣ting of Consequences, however deduced from plain Texts as Premisses. This method of theirs (being irrational andVide Dispute. de fi∣dei ex scripturis demon∣stratione, contra novam nonnullorum Methodū Per Joh. Dallaeum. 8▪ Ge∣nevae, 1610. demonstrated so to be) I shall not tye them too: But if they can prove any of the aforesaid Positions by the express words of Scripture, or by good Consequen∣ces deduced from it, or (what they pretend to) Vniversal and Apostolical Tradition; I shall admit the proof. Nay,
I shall make our Popish Adversaries two further, and (if that be possible) fairer offers. 1. Let them prove by any just and concluding reason whatsoever, that any Christian Church in the World acknowledg'd, or the Church of Rome her self assumed and publickly pleaded for such a Papal Supremacy, asThey do now pre∣tend to potestatem Sum∣main Temporalem; as the Book of their Sacred Ce∣remonies (a little before cited) tells us. That our blessed Saviour gave Pe∣ter, (& in him the Pope) Coelestis & Terreni Imperij Jura. Can. Omnes. 1. dist. 22. Power to depose Kings and Emperors, ab∣solve their Subjects from Oaths of Allegiance, and dispose of their Domini∣ons. Plat. in vita Greg. 7. Conc. Lateran. sub. Inno∣cent. 3. Can. de Haeret. 3. Hence it was, that Bonif. 8. (that Prodigy of Antichristian Pride and Impiety) in the So∣lemn Jubilee shew'd him∣self to the People the first day in his Pontifi∣calibus, and the next day, Imperiali habitu, Intula Caesarea Insignis, gladium ante se nudatum jussit de∣ferri & sedens alta voce ∣statur; Ecce duo gladij. Vide Paralip. ad Chron. Urspergen: ad An. 1294. p. 344. now they pretend to, for 1000. years after our B. Saviour; and (for my own part) I will confess and retract my Error. 2. Let them prove, by any such concluding reason, that any Church in the World (Eastern or Western, Greek or Latin) did acknowledge (what now the Pope and his Party so earnestly and vainly contend for) the Popes Infallibility, and his Supremacy over all General Councils, for 1500. years after our blessed Saviour; and for my part, Cedat Jülus Agris, ma∣nus dabimus captivas, I will retract what here I have affirmed, and be (what I hope I never shall be) their Proselyte. To Conclude, I have no more to say, (my Adversaries will think I have said too much) save only to desire the Readers, who sincerely and impartially desire truth and satisfaction, to read and consider the Margent as well as the Text. In this, they have my Positions, and the proofs of them, in plain English: In the Mar∣gent, the Authorities and Authors I rely upon, in their own words, and the Language in which they writ: and I have (for the Readers ease, not my own) cited not only the Authors and their Books, but the Chap∣ter, Paragraph, Page, and mostly the Editions of them: That so the Reader may with more ease, find the pla∣ces
quoted, and judge whether I have cited and trans∣lated them aright. It is notoriously known, that our Popish Adversaries have published many forged Ca∣nons and Councils, many spuriousIt is notoriously known how many De∣cretal Epistles have been forged, and fathered up∣on the ancient Bishops. I shall only instance in the fifth Epistle of that pi∣ous Pope and Martyr, Clemens the first; in which he pleads for a community of all things in the world, even of Wives. Communis usus Omnium, quae sunt in hoc mundo, Omnibus esse Debuit. In Omnibus Sunt Sine Dubio, & Conjuges. Joh. Sichardus and James Merlin have that Epistle, and those very words; & Gratian has refer'd them into the Canon Law. Can. dilectissimis. 2. Caus. 12. Quaest. 1. and there they are still, in all the Editions of that Law, e∣ven that corrected and approved by Pope Gre∣gory the Thirteenth. Decretals, and supposititious Tracts, under the names of Primitive Fathers, and ancient Bishops; that they have shame∣fully corrupted the Canons of LegitimateI shall instance on∣ly in one, the 28. Canon of the Council of Chalce∣don, as it is shamefully corrupted in Gratian. Can. Renovant. 6. Dist. 22. where, 1. It is in the Original, , definimus, statuimus; for which Gratian has, Petimus. 2. In the Original Canon, it is , Senior Roma; but Gratian has Superior Roma. 3. In the Original, it is, ,/Aequalia Privilegia; But Gratian has Simi∣lia privilegia: as being unwilling that Constantinople should have equal priviledges with Rome. 4. In the Original Canon, it is—, &c. That Constantinople should be equal to Rome, in Ecclesiastical Matters, etiam in Ecclesiasticis. But Gratian (in contradiction to the Canon) says, Non tamen in Ecclesiasticis, &c. So it was in Gratian, in the old Editions; only in the Later E∣ditions of Gratian (An. 1612. 1618. 1661. &.) this last corruption is acknowledg'd, and (which is not usual) mended. But other corruptions remain still, in their last and best Editions of Gratian. Coun∣cils, and thousands of other Authors; making them (by adding and substracting words or Sentences) say what they never meant, or not to say what indeed they did both mean and say: and this they themselves have (without shame or honesty) publickly own'd, in their Expurgatory Indices; and after all this fraud and falsification of Records, these Apocryphal Books and supposititious Authors, are continually produced by them (for proofs of their Errors) against Protestants who well know, and (as many sober men of their own Communion) justly condemn such impious Roman Arts—Nec tali auxilio, nec defensoribus istis Christus eget. Truth needs no such forg'd and false; Medium's to maintain it; nor will any honest man use them. Sure I am, I have not, in this Discourse, built the truth of my Positions upon the Testimonies of our own Protestant Authors, (knowing that our Ad∣versaries would with scorn reject their Testimony) nor
of any supposititious or spurious ones. The Testimonies and Proofs I have quoted, and rely upon, are drawn from Scripture, the genuine Works of the ancient Fathers and Councils, or (which ad hominem, must be valid) from their own Councils, the Popes Bulls, their Canon Law, their Casuists, School∣men, Summists, the Trent Catechism, the Book of the Sacred Ceremonies of the Rom. Church, their approved and received Publick Offices, (such as their Missal, Breviary, Ritual, Pontifical, &c.) which Authorities (if I do not misquote, or mistake their meaning) are, and (to them) must be just proofs of those Positions for which I have produced them. But let the Evidence of the Testimonies, and the Au∣thority of the Authors quoted, be what it will; I have little hope, that they will gain any assent from our Adversaries; so long as they believe the Infallibility of their Pope and Church, and their Learned Men are solemnly sworn, firmly to believe their new Trent Creed, (the whole Body of Popish Errors) to their last breath, and to Anathematize and Damn what Doctrine soever contradicts it. For while they are possess'd with these Principles, it may be truly said of them, what was said of the Luciferian Hereticks in St. Hierome—Fa∣cilius cos Vinci posse, quam persuaderi, you may sooner bassle, then perswade them: They will (in despite of Premisses) hold the Conclusion; nor shall the clearest demonstration overcome their blind Zeal and Affection to their Catholick Cause. However, that God Almighty would be graciously pleased to bless us and them, with a clear know∣ledge
of Sacred Truth, with a firm belief, and (in dangerous times) upon undanted and pious pro∣fession of it, is and shall be the Prayer of Oct. 3. 1680. Thy Friend and Servant in Christ, T. L.
The Damnation and Excommu∣nication of Elizabeth Queen of England, and her Adherents, with an Addition of other Pu∣nishments. Pius Bishop, Servant to God's Servants, for a perpetual memorial of the mat∣ter. HE that reigneth on High, to whom is given all Power in Heaven and in Earth, committed one Holy, Catholick and Aposto∣lick Church (out of which there is no Salvation) to one alone up∣on Earth, namely, to Peter the Prince of the Apostles, and to Pe∣ter's Successor the Bishop of Rome, to be governed in fulness of Pow∣er. Him alone he made Prince over all People, and all Kingdoms, to pluck up, destroy, scatter, con∣sume, plant and build, that he may contain the faithful that are knit together with the band of Charity in the Unity of the Spirit, and present them spotless, and umblameable to their Saviour.
Sect. 1. In discharge of which Function, we which are by God's goodness called to the Govern∣ment of the aforesaid Church, do spare no pains, labouring with all earnestness, that Unity, and the Catholick Religion (which the Author thereof hath for the trial of his Children's Faith, and for our amendment, suffered to be punished with so great Afflictions) might be preserved uncorrupt: But the number of the ungodly hath gotten such power, there is now no place left in the whole World, which they have not as∣sayed to corrupt with their most wicked Doctrines: Amongst o∣thers, Elizabeth, the pretended Queen of England, a Slave of Wic∣kedness, lending thereunto her helping hand, with whom, as in a Sanctuary, the most pernicious of all men have found a Refuge. This very Woman having seized on the Kingdom, and monstrously usurping the place of Supream Head of the Church in all England, and the chief Authority and Jurisdiction thereof, hath again brought back the said Kingdom into miserable destruction, which was then newly reduced to the most Catholick Faith and good Fruits. Sect. 2. For having by strong hand inhibited the exercise of the
true Religion, which Mary lawful Queen of famous memory, had by the help of this See restored, af∣ter it had been formerly over∣thrown by Henry the Eighth, a Re∣volter therefrom; and following and embracing the Errors of He∣reticks, she hath removed the Roy∣al Council consisting of the Eng∣lish Nobility, and filled it with ob∣scure men, being Hereticks, op∣pressed the Embracers of the Ca∣tholick Faith, placed impious Prea∣chers, Ministers of Iniquity, abo∣lished the Sacrifice of the Mass, Prayers, Fastings, choice of Meats, unmarried Life, and the Catholick Rites and Ceremonies. Command∣ed Books to be read in the whole Realm containing manifest Here∣sie; and impious Mysteries and Institutions, by her self entertain∣ed, and observed according to the Prescript of Calvin, to be likewise observed by her Subjects; presum∣ed to throw Bishops, Parsons of Churches, and other Catholick Priests, out of their Churches and Benefices; and to bestow them and other Church Livings upon Here∣ticks, and to determine of Church Causes, prohibited the Prelates,
Clergy, & People to acknowledge the Church of Rome, or obey the Precepts and Canonical Sanctions thereof, compelled most of them to condescend to her wicked Laws, and to abjure the Authority and Obedience of the Bishop of Rome, and to acknowledge her to besole Lady in Temporal and Spiritual matters, and this by Oath; impo∣sed Penalties and Punishments up∣on those which obeyed not, and exacted them of those which per∣severed in the Unity of the Faith, and their Obedience aforesaid, cast the Catholick Prelates and Rectors of Churches in Prison, where many of them, being spent with long languishing and sorrow, miserably ended their lives. All which things, seeing they are manifest and notorious to all Nations, and by the gra∣vest Testimony of very many so substantially proved, that there is no place at all left for Excuse, Defence, or Evasion. Sect. 3. We seeing that impie∣ties and wicked actions are multi∣plied one upon another; & more∣over, that the persecution of the faithful, & affliction for Religion, groweth every day heavier & hea∣vier, through the instigation and means of the said Elizabeth; because we understand her Mind to be so hardned and indurate, that she hath not only contemned the god∣ly Requests and Admonitions of
Catholick Princes, concerning her healing and conversion, but also hath not so much as permitted the Nuncios of this See, to cross the Seas into England; are strained of necessity to betake our selves to the Weapons of Justice against her, not being able to mitigate our sorrow, that we are drawn to take punishment upon one, to whose Ancestors the whole State of Christendom hath been so much bounden. Being therefore supported with his Authority, whose pleasure it was to place Us (though unable for so great a burthen) in this Supream Throne of Justice, we do out of the fulness of our Apostolick power, declare the aforesaid Elizabeth, being an Heretick, and a favourer of Hereticks, and her Adherents in the mat∣ters aforesaid, to have incurred the sentence of Anathema, and to be cut off from the Unity of the Body of Christ. Sect. 4. And moreover, we do declare Her to be deprived of her pretended Title to the Kingdom a∣foresaid, & of all Dominion, Dig∣nity, and Priviledge whatsoever. Sect. 5. And also the Nobility, Subjects, and People of the said Kingdom, and all others, which have in any sort sworn unto her, to be forever absolved from any such Oath, and all manner of Du∣ty,
of Dominion, Allegiance, and Obedience; As we also do by Au∣thority of these presents absolve them, and do deprive the same Elizabeth of her pretended Title to the Kingdom, and all other things abovesaid. And we do Com∣mand and Interdict all and every the Noblemen, Subjects, people, and others aforesaid, that they presume not to obey her, or her Monitions, Mandates, and Laws: And those which shall do the con∣trary, We do innodate with the like Sentence of Anathema. Sect. 6. And because it were a matter of too much difficulty, to convey these presents to all places wheresoever it shall be needful; our will is, that the Copies thereof, under a publick Notaries hand, and sealed with the Seal of an Ec∣clesiastical Prelate, or of his Court, shall carry altogether the same credit with all people Judicial and Extrajudicial, as these presents should do, if they were exhibited or shewed. Given at Rome, at St. Peters, in the Year of the Incarnation of our Lord, 1570. the Fifth of the Calends of May, and of our Popedom the Fifth year.
Damnatio & Excommunicatio Eli∣zabethae Reginae Angliae, eique Adhaerentium, cum aliarum poe∣narum Adjectione. Pius Episcopus, Servus Servorum Dei, ad perpetuam Rei memoriam. REgrans in Excelsis, cui data est Omnis in Coelo & in Terra Po∣testas, unam Sanctam, Catholicam & Apostolicam Ecclesiam (extra quam nulla est salus) soli in terris, vi∣delicet, Apostolorum Principi Petro, Petrique Successori Romano Pontifi∣ci, in Potestatis plenitudine tradidit Gubernandam. Hunc unum super omnes Gentes, & omnia Regna Prin∣cipem constituit, qui evellat, destru∣at, dissipet, disperdat, plantet, & aedisicet, ut fidelem populum, mutuae Charitatis nexu constrictum, in uni∣tate Spiritus contineat, salvumque & incolumem suo exhibeat salvatori.
Sect. 1. Quo quidem in munere obeundo, Nos ad praedictae Ecclesiae gubernacula Dei Benignitate vocati, nullum laborem intermittimus, omni operà contendentes, ut ipsa Vnitas, & Catholica Religio (quam illius Au∣ctor ad probandam suorum fidem, & correctionem nostram, tantis procellis conslictari permisit) integra conserve∣tur. Sed Impiorum numerus tantum potentia invaluit, ut nullus jam in Orbe locus sit relictus, quem illi pes∣simis doctrinis corrumpere non tentâ∣rint, adnitente inter caeteros flagitio∣rum servâ Elizabeth, praetensâ An∣gliae Reginâ ad quam, veluti ad a∣sylum, omnium infestissimi profugium invenerunt. Haec eadem, Regno occu∣pato, supremi Ecclesiae capitis locum, in omni Angliâ, ejusque praecipuam Auctoritatem atque Jurisdictionem monstruose sibi usurpans, regnum ip∣sum jam tum ad Fidem Catholicam & bonam frugem reductum, rursus in exitium miserum revocavit. Sect. 2. Vsu namque verae Religi∣onis, quam ab illius desertore Henri∣co
VIII. olim eversam, Clarae Mem. Maria Regina legitima, hujus Sedis Praesidio reparaverat, potenti manu inhibito, secutisque & amplexis Hae∣reticorum erroribus, Regium Concili∣um ex Anglicâ Nobilitate confectum diremit, illudque obscuris hominibus Haereticis complevit, Catholicae Fi∣dei cultores oppressit, improbos Conci∣onatores, atque Impietatum Admini∣stros reposuit, Missae Sacrificium, Pre∣ces, Jejunia, Ciborum delectum, Ri∣tusque Catholicos abolevit. Libros manifestam Heresim continentes, toto Regno proponi, impia Mysteria, & In∣stituta ad Calvini Praescriptum à se suscepta, & observata, etiam à subdi∣tis observari mandavit. Episcopos, Ec∣clesiarum Rectores, & alios Sacerdo∣tes Catholicos, suis Ecclesiis, & Bene∣ficiis ejicere, ac de illis & aliis Eccle∣siasticis rebus, in haereticos homines disponere, dque Ecclesiae causis decer∣nere ausa, Praelatis, Clero, & Populo, ne Romanam Ecclesiam agnoscerent, nve ejus Praeceptis, Sanctionibusque Canonicis obtemperarent, Interdixit; plerosque in nefarias leges suas venire, & Romani Pontisicis Auctoritatem at∣que obedientiam abjurare; seque solam in Temporalibus & Spiritualibus Do∣minam agnoscere jurejurando coegit;
poenas & supplicia in eos qui dicto non essent Audientes, Imposuit; easdemque ab iis, qui in unitate sidei, & praedi∣cta Obedientia perseverârunt, Exegit. Catholicos Antistites, & Ecclesiarum Rectores in vincula conjecit, ubi mul∣ti diuturno Languore & Tristitia Confecti, Extremum vitae diem miserè siniverunt. Quae omnia cum apud Omnes Nationes perspicua & notoria sunt, & gravissimo quamplurimorum Testimonio, it a comprobata, ut nullus omnino locus Excusationis, Defensio∣nis, aut Tergiversationis relinquatur. Sect. 3. Nos, multiplicantibus a∣liis atque aliis super alias Impietati∣bus, & facinoribus, & praeterea fide∣lium persecutione, Religionis{que} afflicti∣one, impulsu & Operâd. Elizabeth quotidie magis Ingravescente, quoni∣am illius animum ita obsirmatum at∣que induratum Intelligimus, ut non modo pias Catholicorum Principum de sanitate & conversione, preces, moni∣tionesque contempserit, sed ne hujus quidem sedis ad ipsam hac de causâ
Nuncios in Angliam trajicere permi∣serit; ad Arma Justitiae contra eam de necessitate conversi, dolorem lenire non possumus, quod Adducamur in u∣nam animadvertere, Cujus majores de Republicâ Christianâ tantopere meruêre. Illius itaque Auctoritate suffulti, Qui Nos in hoc Supremo Ju∣stitiae Throno, (licêt tanto Oneri Im∣pares) voluit Collocare, de Apostolicae potestatis plenitudine declaramus praedictam Elizabeth Haereticam, hae∣reticorumque fautricem, eique adhae∣rentes in praedictis, Anathematis sen∣tentiam incurrisse, esseque à Christi Corporis unitate praecisos. Sect. 4. Quin etiam ipsam prae∣tenso Regni praedicti jure, necnon om∣ni & quocunque Dominio, Dignitate, Privilegioque privatam. Sect. 5. Et etiam Proceres, subditos, & populos dicti Regni, ac caeteros om∣nes qui illi quomodocunque jurave∣runt. A Juramento hujusmodi, ac omni prorsus Dominii, Fidelitatis, & obsequii debito, perpetuo absolutos,
prout Nos illos Praesentium Auctori∣tate absolvimus, & privamus eandem Elizabeth praetenso Jure Regni, ali∣isque Omnibus supradictis. Praeci∣pimusque & Interdicimus Vniversis & singulis proceribus, subditis, popu∣lis, & aliis praedictis, ne illi ejusve monitis, Mandatis, & Legibus aude∣ant obedire. Qui secus egerint, eos si∣mili Anathematis Sententiâ innoda∣mus. Sect. 6. Quia vero dissicile nimis esset, Praesentes quocunque illis Opus erit perferre, volumus, ut eorum ex∣empla, Notarii publici manu, & Prae∣lati Ecclesiastici, ejusve Curiae Sigil∣lo Obsignata eandem illam prorsus fi∣dem in Judicio, & extra illud, ubi∣que Gentium faciant, quam ipsae Prae∣sentes facerent, si essent exhibitae vel ostensae. Dat' Romae, apud Sanctum Petrum, Anno Incarnationis Domi∣nicae 1570. 5. Cal. Maij Pontisicat' nostri Anno 5.
SOME ANIMADVERSIONS AND OBSERVATIONS Upon the Impious Damnation & ExcommunicationExtat haec Bulla in Bul∣lario Romano. Romae 1638. Tom. 2. p. 229. OF Q. Elizabeth BY PIUS V. Anno 1570. BEfore I come to a particular and distinct Examination of the several parts and para∣graphs of this Impious Popish Bull, I shall in general observe, 1. That Pius V. was not the first or only Pope,Observ. 1. who usurped this Extravagant and Antichristian power over Kings and Emperors; to damn, depose, and deprive them of all their Royal Rights and Im∣perial
Jurisdiction; for both his Predecessors and Successors approved, and with prodigious pride and impiety, exercis'd such power. That this may ap∣pear, I shall give the Reader some Instances, extant upon Record, in their own Popish Annals and Hi∣stories. 1. PopeCarolus Sigonius de Regno Italiae, lib. 3. pag. 58. Constantine in a Council of Italian Bi∣shops (it was about the Year 711.) Anathema∣tises all who deny'd the worshipping of Ima∣ges, andOmnium Consensu, omnes qui Imaginibus ve∣nerationem negarem, dam∣nati; & Philippicus ip∣se Nominatim, Diro in eum composito Carmi∣ne, Poenis Inferorum de∣votus. Ibid. particularly, and by name damns the Emperor Philippicus to the Torments of Hell. So Carolus Sigonius tell us, and Martinus Polonus, and the Fasciculus Temporum concur with him. 2. After Pope Constantine, Gregory the second, and Gregory the third, succeedCar. Sigonius de Regno Italiae. l. 9. p. 219. Extabant praeclara Gre∣gorii 2. & 3. exempla, qui Leoni Isauro Imperatori, Sacris Interdicere, & Ju∣ratâ Italiae obedientiâ spo∣liare non dubitârant, uno o Crimine, quod Imagini∣bus se Inimicum praebuisset.; and both of them Excommunicate the Emperor Leo Isau∣rus, for this only Crime, because he was a∣gainst worshipping of Images; and though the Italians had sworn Allegiance to him, yet they null that Oath: And the Historian commends these Actions of those two Popes, as excellent Examples for Posterity. And Platina says, that Gregory the thirdGregorius 3. Leo∣nem Imperio & Commu∣nione fidelium privat. Plat. in vita Greg. 3. Excommunicated the Emperor Leo, and deprived him of his Empire. 3. To Gregory the third, succeeded Pope Zachary, and (if Gratian say true) heZacharias Papa Regem Francorum, non tam pro ejus Iniquitatibus, quamquod erat inutilis de∣posuit: & Francigenas à juramento fidelitatis ab∣solvit. Gratian. Can. A∣lius. Caus. 15. Quaest. 6. deposed Childe∣ricus King of France, and absolves his Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance, and gives his Kingdom to Pipin: And this he did, not for the great crimes of Childeric, but because he was unprofitable, and unfit for the Government; not that he was Insufficient (says theNon quod insuffici∣ens sed quod dissolutus e∣rat cum mulieribus, & effoeminatus. Gloss. ibid. verbo Inutilis. Gloss) but be∣cause
he was Effeminate, and dissolute with Women. And from this Canon, Joh. Semeca (theNon quod Insuffi∣ciens sed quod dissolutus e∣rat cum Mulicribus, & Effoeminatus, Gloss. ibid. verbo Inutilis. Glossator) infers, That the Pope may de∣pose the Emperor; and proves it by citing o∣ther Canons, And by the Authority of Pope Gloss. ibid. verbo Alius.Gelasius, who tells Anastasius the Emperor, That he had power to Depose him, and proves it from the Example of this Pope Zachary. I know, that what Gratian, and the Canonist, say, of Pope Zachary's Deposing Childeric, is evidently untrue, (and by manyVid. Joh. Launoi∣um Epist. Tom. 7. p. 117, 118, &c. & p. 245, 246, &c. Hottomanni Fran∣co-Galliam, cap. 13. p. 96, 97, 98. demon∣strated so to be) yet it stands uncensur'd in their last and bestVid. Edit. Paris 1612. & 1618. Edition of the Canon Law, which Pope Gregory XIII.Vid. Bullam Gre∣gorij 13. dat. Romae 1. Die Julij 1580. approved and publish'd, as most correct. And they further tell us, That Clement VIII. published anVide Indicem Li∣brorum prohibitorum Lusitanicum Olysipone, 1624. p. 350. in Carolo Molinaeo. Exact Correction of all the Glosses and Additions to the Canon Law, and yet this of Pope Zachary's deposing Childeric (and, what the Gloss says of it) is neither left out, nor any way censur'd. Whence it is evident, that they approve the Doctrine of deposing Kings, and (having no just reason for it) forge Instances to prove it. 4. Pope Hildebrand, orVide Bullarium Romanum Romae Anno 1638. Tom. 1. p. 49. Gregory VII. deposeth the Emperor Henry IV. by the Authority given Potestate à Deo data Ligandi & Solven∣di in Coelo, & in Terra. Ibid.by God, (as he says) of binding and loosing both in Heaven and Earth: And then heOmnes Christia∣nos à vinculo Juramenti, quod sibi faciunt, aut fa∣cient, absolvo, & ut nul∣lus ci serviat, sicut Regi, interdico. Ibid. §. 1. ab∣solves his Subjects from their Oath of Fidelity, and then prohibits them to obey him. This Bull is da∣ted at Rome, Anno Domini 1075. and five years after he xcommunicates, and Deposes him
again 1080. And implores the Assistance of Pe∣ter and Paul, in this his Excommunication and Deposition of the Emperor; that the World may Vt Mundus Intel∣ligat, quia si potestis in Coe∣lo ligare & solvere, pote∣stis in Terra Imperia, Reg∣na, Principatus, Marchi∣as, Ducatus, Comitatus, & Omnium Hominum pos∣sessiones, pro meritis tollere, Vnicuique & Concedere. In dicto Bullario Roman, Bullae Excommunicationis. Hen. 4. §. 10. p. 51. Col. 1.know, that as they have power to bind and loose in Heaven; so they have power on Earth to give and take away Empires, Kingdoms, Principa∣lities, Dukedoms, Earldoms, and (according as they shall deserve, and he isSive Roman. Pon∣tificem Supremum in Ec∣clesiâ Dei Judicem. Ita Gregorius 13. in Bulla data Romae, 8 Apr. 1575. In Ecloge Bullarum Lugduni. 1582. p. 359. Col. 2. Judge of that) the possessions of all men. This power, he says, Peter had; and so he, and the Bishops of Rome have it too, and that from God, as Vicars of Christ, and Peter's Successors. And so by this most Er∣roneous and Impious Doctrine, the Popes have a Power (which neither Peter, nor any, nor all the Apostles ever had) to dispose of all mens Temporal Estates in the World, whether they be Supream or Subjects. 5. After this, Pope Gregory IX.Vide Bullam. 13. Gregorij 9. datam Ro∣mae. Anno 1239. In Bul∣lario Romano, Tom. 1. p. 89, 90. Excommuni∣cates the Emperor Friderick II. Absolves his Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance, lays an Interdict on all his Cities, Castles, and Vil∣lages, Excommunicates all that favour him, or any way assist or obey him, commands the German Bishops (upon pain of Excommu∣nication) solemnly to publish this Excommu∣nication with all their Impious Solemnities, ringing of Bells, lighting, and then extinguish∣ing Candles, &c. 6. After this, PopeVid. Constitutio∣nem Ejus 3. dat. Lugdu∣ni 1245. In Bullario Romano, Tom. 1. p. 94, 95. Innocent IV. (in the like form) Excommunicates and Deposes the said Frederick. The Lemma or Title prefix'd to the Bull is thusDamnatio & Ex∣communicatio Frideri∣ci. 2. Ibidem., The Damnation and Excommu∣nication
of Frederick II. &c. And least this might be thought a rash and inconsiderate Act of the Pope, he himself tells us, ThatCum Fraribus & Sacro Concilio, delibera∣tione diligenti habitâ. Ib. dictae Constitutionis. §. 6. Bullarij dicti. p. 95. Col. 1. lin. ultimâ. he did diligently deliberate about it, with his Bre∣thren (the Cardinals he means) and the Sacred Council, the General Council of Lions.) I know, that Matthew Paris says, that he pub∣lish'd that Excommunication in that Council, not without theNon sine Omni∣um audientium & Cir∣cumstantium stupore & horrore. Matth. Paris in Hen. 3. ad Annum 1245. p. 668. lin. 33. Horror and Amazement of all who heard it. But Platina tells us, That it was done by theFridericum Omni∣um Consensu Imperio & Regnis privavit. Platina in vita Innocentij 4. p. 209. Col. 1. Edit. Col. Agripp. 1626. general and concurrent consent of the Council. And Innocent himself expresly says, That it was done (Friderick Excommunicate) by theQuem (Fridericum) Concilium Generale Lug∣dunense Cassaverat & Con∣demnaverat. Matth. Paris in Hen. 3. ad An. 1250. p. 773. lin. ultimâ. Council it self; (and therefore the Major part must concur) and if it was not so, that Pope was not only fallible, but actually false: And it is a considerable Observation which Matthew Paris has, (and therefore I shall not omit it) when he tells us—That some did positively affirm, (and he believed it) that A nonnullis affir∣mative dicebatur, quod Dominus Papa sitienter & super Omnia desiderabat, Fridericum (quem mag∣num Draconem vocabat) pessundare, ut ipso suppedi∣tato & Conculcaeo, Reges Francorum & Angliae, a∣liósque Christianitatis Re∣ges, (quos omnes Regulos & Serpentulos esse dicebat) faciliùs, Exemplo dicti Friderici perterritos, Con∣culcaret, & Bonis suis, ac Praelatos eorum, ad Libi∣tum spoliaret. Matth. Pa∣ris in Hen. 3. ad dictum Annum 1250. p. 774. lin. 2. &c.Innocent IV. did above all things earnestly desire to ruin the Emperor Friderick, (whom he called the great Dragon) that, he being trampled upon, the King of France, England, and other Christian Kings, (whom he call'd diminutive Kings, and little Serpents) affrighted with the sad Fate of Friderick, might more easily be kept under, and they and their Prelates spoiled of their Goods, and by him plundered. So that although he, and other Popes did pretend, (as appears by their Bulls) that they deposed Kings for the Extir∣pation of Heresie, the Preservation of the Ca∣tholick
Faith, and Christian Religion; yet 'tis evident to any intelligent and impartial Judge of their Actions, that it was their prodigious ambition and covetousness, their inordinate and erroneous desire of Dominion, of Rule and Riches, which made them usurp and ex∣ercise a power to depose Kings and Empe∣rors, which St. Peter (from whom they pretend to have it) never had, nor pretended to. 7. Pope Paul III.Vide Bullam. 7. Pauli. 3. dat. Romae 3. Cal. Sept. Anno. 1535. In Bullario Romano. Tom. 1. p. 514. Editionis Ro∣mae 1638. Excommunicates, Curses, Deposes and Damns Henry VIII. of England, and all who adhere to him, favour or obey him; absolves his Subjects from all Oaths of Allegiance; commands them all, under pain of Excommunication, not to obey him, or anyMandantes, ut ab Henrici Regis, suorúmque Officialium, Judicum & Magistratuum quorum∣cunque Obedientâ penitùs & omninò recedant, nec illas in superiores recog∣noscant, néque eorum Mandatis Obtemperent. Dictae Bullae. §. 10. Magistrate or Officer under him; nor to acknowledge the King or any of his Judges or Offi∣cers to be their Superiors. And further (with a strange Impiety and Impudence) he declares King Henry and his Complices and Favourers, and their Children and Descendents to be In∣famous, incapable to be Witnesses, make Wills, or be Heirs to any; Incapable to do a∣ny legal Act, and that in any CauseEt Nulli ipsis, sed Ipsi aliis super quocunque debito, & negotio, tam Civili, quam Criminali, de jure respondere tenean∣tur. Ibid. §. 11. of Debt, or any other Cause Civil or Criminal, none should be bound to answer them, and yet they bound to an∣swer every body. And to omit the rest, (for I shall at the end of these Observations, set down the whole Bull) he commands thePraelatis quóque & Caeteris personis Ecclesia∣sticis mandat sub poenis in Bulla Contentis, quatenùs de Regno Angliae disce∣dant,  revertantur, do∣nec dicti Excommunicati, privati, maledicti, & damnati meruerim abso∣lutionis Beneficium. Ibid. §. 13. p. 516. Eccle∣siasticks (Secular and Regular) to quit the King∣dom, and not to return, till the Persons Excommu∣nicate, deprived, cursed and damn'd (the King
and all his Loyal Subjects he means) be absol∣ved from their Censures. This Bull, though fram'd and ready to be publish'd, yet the Ex∣ecution of it was suspended for three years, and then actually published in the Year 1538. which was the fifth year of Pope Paul III. as appears by the Date of it, in the aforesaid Bul∣lary. And when it was published, as it was in itself highly Impious, so (to Hen. VIII and his Loyal Subjects) it was ridiculous; and all the Effect it had was, that it increased their hate and contempt of the Antichristian pride and folly of its Author. It appeared (what indeed it was) Brutum fulmen, and that King had too great a courage and understanding, to be frighted with an Ignis fatuus, Papal Squibs and Wild-fire, which could neither warm or burn him. 8. Lastly; as the Popes preceeding Pius V. so those who followed approved and (so far as they were able) put in practise that execrable Doctrine of Deposing Kings. Pope Grego∣ry XIII. did immediately succeed Pius V. and renues and confirms his Bull for deposing Queen Elizabeth, and absolving her Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance (as is testified not only byCambdens Eliza∣beth. lib. 3. p. 360, 361. ad Annum 1588. Cambden, but by the Romish Priests themselves, (theSee a Book with this Title—Impor∣tant Considerations, &c. written by the Secular Priests here in England, printed Anno. 1601. and reprinted with other Tracts, with this Title—A Collection of se∣veral Treatises concerning the Reasons and Occasion of Penel Laws, &c. Lon∣don 1675. In which Col∣lection, pag. 76. the Se∣cular Priests tell us, that Pope Gregory. 13. did ex∣communicate Queen E∣lizabeth. Seculars, who seem'd most moderate) and in prosecution of that damnatory Sentence, the said Pope Gre∣gory did constitute Fitz-Gerald (an Irish Rebel against the Queen) General of all the Irish Re∣bels;
that so he and they by Fire and Sword might Execute the Sentence of those two Popes, deposing that Queen. This is expresly testify'd by Fitz-GeraldGregorius. 13. in Ducem ac Generalem hu∣jus belli Capitaneum, Nos Elegit, ut ex ipsius Diplo∣mate constat: Quod tanto magis fecit, quia ejus Prae∣decessor Pius. 5. Elizabe∣tham haeresium Patronam Omni Regia Potestate pri∣vaverat. Vid. Edictum Illustriss. D. Jac. Geral∣dini, de Justitia ejus bel∣li, quod in Hibernia pro side gerit. 'Tis Extant in the History of the Irish Re∣bellion. Lond. 1680. in the Appendix, p. 8. himself, in an E∣dict publish'd by him, after he was General, declaring the Justice of that Irish War, which (he says) was undertaken for the Catholick Faith, and restoring it in Ireland. To Grego∣ry. XIII. Sixtus Quintus immediately succeeds, and confirms the damnatory Sentences of his two Predecessors, and (as he who well knew, tells us) Excommunicates andCambdens Eliza∣beth. lib. 3. p. 360, 361. deposes the Queen, Ab∣solves her Subjects from their Oaths of Fidelity, and published a Croisado, as against Turks and Insidels (indeed as afterwards evidently ap∣pear'd against England and Queen Elizabeth) and gave (what he Never had o give) plenary Indulgence to all who should assist in that War. Nor is this all; Cardinal AllenCambden ibid. lib. 3. p. 364. writ a Trai∣terous and Seditious Book, to Exhort all the Eng∣lish and Irish Papists, to joyn with the Spanish Forces (against their Queen and Country) under the Prince of Parma: and Pope Sixtus V. sends Allen (with that Book, and his own Bull) into the Low-Countries, and there a great number of those Books and Bulls were printed at Ant∣verpe, to be sent into England. Were it ne∣cessary, many things now might be said, per∣tinent to this purpose; but (I suppose) the Instances already given, will be sufficient to convince Intelligent and Imptial Persons, That Pope Pius. V. was neither the first nor
last, who usurped this Extravagant Power to Depose Princes; seeing several of his Prede∣cessors and Successors, for above. 600. years, have owned, approved, and (as they had op∣portunity) put that Power in practise: This in General premis'd, I come now to consider the Bull of Pius. V. wherein he damns and de∣poseth Queen Elizabeth; wherein two things occur very considerable; 1. The , or Title prefix'd to the Bull. 2. The Particulars contain'd in it. For the first;Observ. 2. the Title prefix'd to the Bull is thus: —The Damnation of Elizabeth, &c. where, though Damnation may seem a very hard word (as indeed it is, in the sense they use it, as shall by and by ap∣pear) yet it is not unusual; but occurs in other Bulls of the like nature: So we find it in the Bull of Pope Innocent. IV. wherein he Excommunicates the Emperor Friderick. II. For the Lemma or Title of that Bull is thus—Damnatio & De∣positio Friderici. 2. Vid. Bullarium Romanum, Romae 1638. Tom. 1. p. 94. Col. 7. Edita erat Bulla ista Anno 1245. The Damnation & Deposition of Friderick. II. So in the Bull of Pope Paul III. Excommunicating Henry. VIII. the Title prefix'd to it is—Damnatio Hen. 8, ejúsque Fautorum, &c. In Bullario Romano. ibid. p. 514. Col. 2. Edita di∣cta Bella, Anno 1535. & postea 1538. The Damnation of Henry VIII. and his Favourers, &c. So that Pius. V. Damning Queen Elizabeth, was not singular (though Impious) he had some of his Predecessors; Forms to follow. I say, his Predecessors; for I do not find that any Bishops in the World (save those of Rome) ever used such Unchristian, and indeed Anti-christian Forms
of Excommunicating and Damning Kings and Emperors. And it is observable, and well known to those who diligently read and consider the Papal Bulls now extant, (of which there is a vastVid. Bullarium Ro∣manum Lugduni. 1655. in. 4. Tomis in Folio, & Eclogen Bullarum & motu propriorum Pii. 4. &c. Lugduni. 1582. 80. & Novam Collectionem, &c. Eman. Roder. Tur∣noni. 1609. fol. where in that one Volume you have above. 500. Bulls, with the Names of. 46. Popes, who published them. num∣ber) that the Popes of later Ages, when they go a∣bout to justifie some extravagant Act of their unsur∣ped Power; they usually citeVid. Constitut. 22 Julij Papae. 2. In Bullario Romano Tom. 1. p. 378. & Constitut. 81. Grego∣rij. 13. In dicto Bullario Tom. 2. p. 348. vide Ex∣travag. Communes, 1. 5. Tit. 9. cap. Unigenitus 2. the Bulls and Con∣stitutions of their Predecessors, who had done the like; not for matter of fact barely, but to prove a Right; that because their Predecessors had done so formerly, therefore they (who succeeded in the same Power) might do it too. Now, although to Argue thus, à Facto ad Jus, be evidently incon∣sequent and irrational: (no better than this—Pe∣ter (de facto) deny'd and forswore his Master: Ergo, His Successors (de jure) may do so to.) Yet, if their Principles were true, (as I suppose they may think them) such Arguing would be more concluding. For, Pope Leo. X. expreslyDocuissemus cum (Lutherum) Luce clarius, Sanctos Rom. Pontifices Praedecessores nostros, in suis Canonibus seu Consti∣tutionibus Nunquam Er∣rasse. Vide Bullam Apo∣stolicam Leonis 10. con∣tra Errores Lutheri, & sequacium. Dat: Romae 17 Cal. Julij, An. 1520. & Pontificatus sui, 80. Apud Pet. Crab. Conc. Tom. 3. p. 715. &c. And his Predecessor, Julius. 2. says as much for the Church of Rome,—S. Sancta Ecclesia Roma∣na, Magistra fidei, Om∣nium Errorum Expers, u∣nica, immaculata, &c. Constitutio. 27. Julij. 2. data Anno. 1512. In Bul∣lario Romano Tom. 1. p. 384. affirms, and pub∣lickly declares, in one of their General Councils, that it is more clear than light it self; That None of his Predecessors, Popes of Rome, Did ever Err, in any of their Canons or Constitutions. Now if this were true, (as it is evidently false, and his Asserting it, an Argument not only of his Fallibility, but of his great Error and Folly) That none of his Predecessors ever Err'd, then they might with more Security follow them; for certainly, it can be no great fault or danger to follow an unerring Guide. Especially if it be true which they tell us. For 1. In their Laws and Canons, approved by their Supream Authority, and retained in publick
use in their Church, we are told,Sic Omnes Aposto∣licae Sedis Sanctiones ac∣cipiendae sunt, tanquam Ip∣suss Divini Petri voce Fir∣matae sint. Can. sic Omnes 2. dist. 19. & Ibid. Can. 3. 4. &c. That all their Papal Sanctions are so to be received, as if the Divine Voice of Peter himself had Confirmed them: This (as Gratian there tells us) was Pope Agatho's Sentence, & is Received into the Body of their Canon Law, Revised, Corrected, and Purged from all things Contrary to Catho∣lick Verity: SoVide Bullam Greg. 13. datam Romae. 1. Jul. 1580. Jur. Can. praefixam. Gregory XIII. says, and confirms it. Whence it evidently follows; that (in Pope Gregory's Judgment) This Sentence of Agatho is not repugnant to Catholick Verity: And in the same place it is farther declared for Law, (Pope Ste∣phen. I. is cited as Author of that Sentence) That,Quicquid Statuit, Quicquid Ordinat Roma∣na Ecclesia, Ab Omnibus perpetno & Irrefragobili∣tèr est Observandum. Ibid. Can. Enimvero. 4. Dist. 19 Whatever the Church of Rome does Ordain or Consti∣tute, it is (without all Contradiction) perpetually to be Observed. 2. Though this be (beyond all truth and rea∣son) highly erroneous; yet the Jesuits (of late) have gone much higher, and in their Claromont Colledge at Paris, publicklyChristum ita Caput Ecclesiae Agnoscimus, ut il∣lius regimen, dum in Coelos abiit, primum Petro, dein successoribus commiserit, & eandem quam habebat Ipse infallibilitatem, concesse∣rit, quoties ex Cathedrâ loqueretur. Datur, ergo, in Eccles. Rom. Controver∣siarum fidei Judex Infalli∣bilis, etiam Extra Concili∣um generale, tum in Quae∣stionibus Juris & Facti. Vid. Exposit. Theseos. in Coll. Claromontano propositae. 12. Dec. 1661. maintain'd these two Positions. 1. That our Blessed Saviour left Peter and his Successors, the same Infallibility, he him∣self had, so oft as they spoke è Cathedra. 2. That (even out of a General Council) He is the Infallible Judge in Controversies of Faith, both in Questions of Right and Fact. This (as to the main of it, though Erroneous and Impious) is maintain'd by others, as well as Jesuits. F. Gregory de Rives, a Capuchin Priest, tells us (and his Book is approved by the General, and several others of his Order, and by Father D. Roquet, a Dominican, and Doctor of Divinity, &c.)Si Christi Autho∣ritas non penderet à Conci∣lio, si adhuc in terris vive∣ret, sed Omni Concilio Ma∣jor esset. Eâdem Ratione, & Pontificis Authoritas, quae ipsius Christi Vicaria est, Concilio superior est—Privilegium Infallibilis veritatis, non Concitio, sed Pontisici à Christo Collatum est. Luc. 22. 32. Gr. de Rives Epitome Concil. in Principio, praelud. 5. That as the Authority of Christ (our blessed Saviour) if he were now on Earth, were
greater than all Councils, so by the Same Reason, the Authority of the Pope (who is Christ's Vicar) is greater than all Councils too. That the Priviledge of Infal∣libility was given to the Pope, not to Councils; and then Concludes; That theEcclesia Romana est Judex Controversiarum in Rebus Fidei, & Ipsius Determinationes Sunt De Fide. Ibid. Praelud. 9. Edit. Lugd. Anno. 1663. Church of Rome (he means the Pope) is Judge of Controversies, and all her Desi∣nitions and Determinations are De Fide. Thus De Rives. And three or four years before him, Lud. Bail (a Parisian Doctor and Propenitentiary) ex∣presly affirms, That theVerbum Dei, vel est Scriptum in Scripturis: vel non scriptum, Traditiones: vel Explicatum, cum dubia in verbo Scripto aut Tra∣dito Explicantur. Quod fit Praesertim per Papam, sive Extra Concilia, seu in Con∣ciliis. Isque modus ultimus Magis probat us est, & Ma∣jori suavitate ei Plures ac∣quiescunt, ut nihil ulterius Contendendum existiment. Lud. Bail in Print Appa∣ratus ad summam Conc. De tripliciverbo Dei. Word of God is threefold. 1. His written Word, in Scripture. 2. His unwritten Word, in the Traditions of the Church. 3. The Word Declared or Explain'd; when doubtful passages in Scri∣pture or Tradition are explain'd, and their meaning de∣termin'd by the Pope, whether in, or out of Councils; and this (he says) is the most approved way, in which men acquiesce, and think they need look no further. And hence he Infers, That seeing this is so; weQuae cum it a sint, nec Nos debemus vereri e∣jus ductum sequi, In Do∣ctrinâ Fidei & Morum, ejus Judicio Nos sistere, & scripta Omnia corrigenda submittere. Idem in Calce praefationis ad Lecto∣rem, Tom. 1. praefixam. ought not to be affraid to follow the Pope's Guidance in Doctrines of Faith and Manners, but acquiesce in his Judgment, and submit all our writings to be Corrected by him. I neither will nor need Cite any more Au∣thorities, to prove the aforesaid Particulars; That Their Popes may Damn and Depose Kings and Empe∣rors (especially if they be Hereticks) and think they have (as Christ's Vicars) a just Prerogative and Power to do it. Sure I am, that these Positions (though Erroneous and Impious) are generally maintain'd by the Jesuits, Canonists,Vide Aquinatem. 2. 2. Quaest. 11. Art. 3. Vtrum Haeretici sint tolle∣randi? negat. & ibid. Quest. 12. Art. 2. Vtrum Princeps propter Apostasi∣am à fide, amittat Domi∣nium in Subditos, ita quod ei obedire non Tenentur? He affirms it, and says—Ejus Subditi à Dominio ejus & Juramento Fideli∣tatis (si sit Excommuni∣catus) Ipso facto liberan∣tur. Schoolmen, and their Followers (which are very many) receiv'd into the Body of their Canon Law of their best, and (as they themselves say) their most Correct Editions,
and approved, and (when they had opportunity) practis'd by (their Supream Powers) their Popes and General Councils. I would not be mistaken; I do not say that all who now do, or for this Six hundred years last past, have liv'd in the Commu∣nion of the Church of Rome, either do, or did ap∣prove such Papal Positions or Practices. I know the Sorbon and Vniversity of Paris, and many in o∣ther Countries, have publickly Declared their dis∣belief and dislike of them; Especially inVid. Johan. Aven∣tinum Annal: Bojorum. Lib. 5. 6. 7. Carol. Sigo∣nium de Regno Italiae. Matth. Paris. &c. Ad An. 1078. p. 10. 11. & p. 13. lin. 1. & p. 668. lin. 30. & 773. lin. 49. &p. 774. lin. 1. 2. & p. 875. where R. Grosthead (for his Ty∣rannical Usurpations) calls the Pope Anti∣christ. Germa∣ny, in the time of Hen. III. Hen. IV. Friderick II. &c. not only private Persons, but some Synods declared the Papal Excommunications and Depo∣sitions of their Emperors, not only Injust and Impious, but Antichristian. I grant also, That Father Caron in his Remonstrantiâ Hibernorum (if some have rightly told the Number) has cited Two hundred and fifty Popish Authors, who deny the Popes Power to depose Kings: And though I know that many of his Citations are Impertinent; yet I shall neither deny nor doubt, but that there are many thousand honest Papists in the outward Communion of the Church of Rome, who dislike this Doctrine. But this will neither Justifie or Excuse the Church of Rome, so long as her Go∣verning and Ruling part publickly approves and maintains it. For, 1. FatherRemonstrant: Hi∣bernorum, part. 1. Cap. 3. &c. Caron himself tells us, that (notwithstanding his Book, and all his Authorities for Loyalty to Kings) The Divines of Lovane, The Pope's Nuncio, the Cardinals, four or five Popes, (Paulus. V. Pius. V. Alexander. VII. In∣nocentius. X. (he might easily have reckon'd many
more) did condemn his Doctrine, The Inquisitors damn'd his Book, and his Superiors Excommunicate him. 2. It is confessed, That the Supream Infal∣lible Power of their Church, resides either in the Pope, or Council, or both together; And 'tis al∣so certain, That their Popes, in their approved, and (inVolentes (verba sunt Gregorij Papae. 9.) ul hac Tantum Compila∣tione Vniversi ut antur, & in Judiciis & Scholis, &c. Bulla Greg. 9. Decretal. praefixa. publick use) received Canon Law, in their Authentick Bulls, (publish'd by themselves) in their General Councils (andInnocent. 4. Ex∣communicates. Fridè∣rick. 2. in the General Council at Lions, Omni∣um Consensu, &c. Platina in vita Innocent. 4. And Pope Innocent himself said constantly that the Council of Lions Ex∣communicated and De∣posed that Emperor. Matth. Paris in Hen. 3. Ad Ann. 1250. p. 773. lin. 58. 59. And Pope Pasch. 2. tells us, That he Ex∣communicated the Em∣peror Hen. 4. Judicio To∣tius Ecclesiae. Carol. Sigo∣nius de Regno Italiae. l. 9. p. 237. lin. 18. Observ. 3. with their Consent) have approved, and (for this Six hundred years last past) many times practis'd this Doctrine of Deposing Kings; nor has the Church of Rome (I mean the Governing and Ruling part of it) by any Publick Act or Declaration disown'd or censur'd it, as doubtless she would, had she indeed disliked it. Quae non prohibet, cum possit, jubet. If any man think otherwise, and can really shew me, that their Popes and General Councils have not formerly approved, or since have disown'd and disapprov'd this Doctrine: I shall willingly acknowledge my mistake, and be thankful to him for a Civility, which (at present) I really believe I shall never receive. However, Grata supervenient quae non sperantur. 3. Seing it is Evident that Pope Pius. V. (and his Predecessors in the like Cases) calls the Anathema and Curse contain'd in this Bull, The Damnation of Q. Elizabeth; The next Query will be, What that hard word signifies, and what they mean by it, in their Bulls? For the Solution of which doubt, and Satisfaction to the Query: 1. I take it to be cer∣tain and confess'd; That the word Damnum (from
whence Damnation comes) signifies aDamnum à demendo, quia damnum est Rei di∣minutio unde Damna Lu∣nae, apud Gellium. Noct. Atticarum lib. 20. Cap. 8. And Varro; Dam∣num à demptione lib. 4. de Legibus. So Isiodore lib. 5. Orig. Cap. 22. dimi∣nution, orDamnum est a∣missio eorum quae habueras. Quinctilianus Decla∣mat. 120. And a good Lawyer tells me, that—Damnare; est rem sine remedio sublevandi tormentis seu Ignominiae sententialitor deputare. Panormitan. in Cap. Damnamus. in. 2. No∣tab. de summâ Trinit. & side Catholicâ. loss of some good things, had and en∣joyed before, or of a right to future good things, and then Damnation (as to our present Case) will be a judicial sentence, which (by way of punish∣ment) imposes such loss and diminution. 2. As the Damnum or loss may be either of Temporal things here (as loss of Honours, Liberty, Lands or Life) or of Spiritual and Eternal things, (as Heaven and Salvation) hereafter; so the Damna∣tion also (according to the Nature of the sen∣tence, and the mischief intended by it) may be Temporal or Eternal, or both; if it penally inflict the loss both of Goods Temporal and Eternal. 3. I say then (and I hope to make it evident) that the mischief intended by this Papal Bull, and Ex∣communication (so far as the malice and inju∣stice of an Usurped Power could) endeavoured to be brought upon that good Queen, was not only Temporal, but also Spiritual and Eternal. This the word Damnation, in the , or Title of the Bull, (in their Popish Construction) intends and signifies. For the Temporal mischiefs in∣tended to be brought upon that Good Queen, there is no question; they are all particularly named in the Bull it self, as we shall see anon. For the Spiritual, that is, a seclusion out of Heaven and Happiness, and Eternal Damnation of Body and Soul; that these also were the intended and designed Effects of this Impious Bull and Excom∣munication, is now to be proved. And here it is to be Considered,
1. That they constantly say, and (having strong Delusion) possibly may believe it; That Hereticks (and such the Queen is declared to be in the Bull) dying Excommunicate, (as that Queen did, and all true Protestants do) are Eternally Damn'd. For, 1. A very greatExcommunicatus est Membrum Diaboli. Lindewood ad Cap. Se∣culi Principes. verbo. Re∣conciliationis. De Im∣munit. Ecclesiae. Canonist of our own Nation, (while Popish Superstition unhappily prevail'd here) tells us, That every Excommunicate Person is a Member of the Devil. And for farther proof of this, he CitesGratian. Can. Om∣nis Christianus. 32. Caus. 11. Quaest. 3. Gratian and their Canon Law, (and he might have Cited other as pertinent pla∣ces in Gratian) who tells us, in another CanonExcommunicatio est Aeternae Mortis Dam∣natio. Idem Gratian. Can. Nemo. 41. Caus. 11. Quaest. 3., That Excommunication is a Damnation to Eternal Death. And John Semeca the Glossator gives us their meaning of it; That it is certainly true, when theEst Perpetua Damna∣tio cum ab Excommunicato contemnitur. Gloss. ad dictum Can. verbo mor∣tis. Person Excommunicate is incorrigible, and con∣temns the Excommunication, (as for my part I real∣ly do contemn all their Excommunications, as Bru∣ta fulmina, which neither do, nor can hurt any honest Protestant) so that by their Injust Law, and most uncharitable Divinity, not only Queen Eli∣zabeth, but all Protestants (who are every Year Excommunicated by the Pope, in their BullaThis Bulla Coenae often (with some alte∣rations) occurs in Bul∣lario Romano. vid. Con∣stit. 25. Julii. 2. Tom. 1. pag. 382. Edit. Romae. 1638. & Constit. 63. Pauli. 5. Tom. 3. p. 83. ubi reliqua, hujus Bul∣lae Exemplaria dicto Bullario comprehensa, indicantur. Coenae Domini) are Eternally damned, and that è Ca∣thedra. A Sentence Erroneous and Impious; and (though it be the Popes, whom they miscall Infal∣lible) inconsistent with Truth, or Christian Charity. 2. But we have (both for Learning and Au∣thority) a far greater Author than Lindwood or Gratian, and (in our days) long after them; I mean Cardinal Baronius; who tells us—
Non modo deponi, sed etiam Excommunicari, & in Aeterno Examine Damnari Decrevit. Ba∣ronius Annal. Tom. 8. ad An. Christi. 593. num. 86.That Pope Gregory. VII. did not only depose the Emperor Hen. IV. but Excommunicate, and Decree him to be Eternally Damn'd. And for this heGregor. 7. lib. 4. Epist. 2. & 23. & lib. 8. Epist. 21. Cites Pope Gregory's own Epistles, who surely best knew his own mind, and the meaning of his own Decree. 3. But we have greater Authors and Authority for this, than Baronius; for Pope Paschal. II. tells us,Henricus. 4. pri∣mum à Gregorio Papâ, de∣in ab Vrbano, Postremo à Nobis, Judicio Totius Ec∣clesiae, Perpetuo Anathe∣mate Obligatus est. Car. Sigonius de Regno Ita∣liae. lib. 9. pag. 237. That he had Excommunicated the Emperor Hen. IV. in a Council; and adds, That by the Judg∣ment of the whole Church, he lay bound under An E∣ternal Anathema. And after this Pope Paul. III. Henricum, Ejús{que} fautores, Adhaerentes, &c. Excommunicatos Decer∣nimus, cosque Anathema∣tis, Maledictionis, & Ae∣ternae Damnationis mu∣crone percutimus. In Bulla Damnationis Hen. 8. Dat. Romae. Cal. Sept. Ann. 1535.Damns (thats the word) and Excommunicates our King Hen. VIII. and all his Favourers and Adherents; And we smite them (saith he) with the Sword of an Anathema, Malediction, and Eternal Damnation. In the Year 1459. Pius. II. (with the Vnanimous Consent of his Council, at Mantua, Excommunicates and Damns all those (evenSi Imperiali, Re∣gali, aut Pontificali Dig∣nitate praefulgeant. §. 3. dictae Bullae. Kings and Emperors) who shall Appeal from the Pope to a General Council, and that they shall be punish'd asPoenis quae Loesae Majestatis & Haereticae pravitatis reis Imponun∣tur. Ibidem. Traytors and Hereticks. Pope Julius. II. afterwards confirms this Constitution of his Predecessor, as to all the Punishments contain'd in it; Excommunicates and Curses all Persons, Ecclesiastical and Secular, of what Dignity soever (though Kings) who shall offend against that Constitution; and Decrees that they shall haveDecernentes eos pro Schismaticis, & de Ca∣tholicâ fide male sen∣tientibus, cum Da∣than & Abiron partem & Damnationem habere: Constit. 22. Pii. 2. §. 6. vid. P. Crab. Concil. Tom. 3. p. 690. Col. 2. & ibi forman—sub paenâ Maledictionis Ae∣ternae. their Portion and Damnation with Dathan and Abiron. The Damnation then in∣tended and threatned in this Impious Bull of Pi∣us V. (as in other Papal Bulls of the like nature) is not only some Temporal loss and damage (though
that also be included and expressed) but the Eter∣nal Damnation of Body and Soul. Which further appears by that Famous (or indeed Infamous, Er∣roneous and Ridiculous) Constitution of Boni∣face VIII. wherein having said, That there is but one Catholick Church, out of which, there is no Sal∣vation; and that our Blessed Saviour made Peter and his Successors his Vicarij, Vice-Gerents, and Heads of that Church; he adds, ThatPorro subesse Rom. Pontifici Omni humanae Creaturae declaramus, di∣cimus, definimus, & pro∣nunciamus Omnino esse de Necessitate Salutis. Con∣stit. Bonifacii. 8. dat. Romae. Ann. 1301. Pont. Ann. 8. Cap. unam san∣ctam. 1. De Major. & Obed. Extrav. Commu∣nes. whoever are not of that Church, and in Subjection and Obedient to the Pope, can have no Salvation. And Pius. V. in this very Bull, expresly says the same. For, 1. He says, That out of the ApostolickEcclesia Apostoli∣ca, extra quam nulla est Salus. In Prin. Bullae. Pii. 5. Church (he means evi∣dently his own Roman Church) there is no Salva∣tion. 2. He Declares Queen Elizabeth anDeclaramus Eli∣zabetham Haereticam ei∣que Adhaerentes Anathe∣matis sententiam, incurris∣se, esseque a Christi Cor∣poris Vnitate Praecisos. I∣bid. §. 3. Here∣tick, that she and all her Adherents had Incurr'd an Anathema and Malediction, were Excommunicate, and cut off from the Body of Christ. So that Queen Eli∣zabeth, and all her Loyal Protestant Subjects, who never were, nor could be, (as without great Er∣ror and Impiety they could not) subject to the Pope, nor Members of his Apostolical Church, are (by this Bull) Eternally Damn'd. 4. But this is not all; for we have greater Evi∣dence, that by the word Damnation in their Bulls, wherein all Hereticks, (Protestants you may be sure, who without Truth or Charity, they call so) are Curs'd and Excommunicated, they do and must mean Eternal Damnation. For, 1. Pope Leo. X. in the LateranCum de necessitate Salutis sit, Omnes Christi fideles Romano Pontifici subesse, prout Divinae Scripturae & Sanctorum Patrum Testimonio edoce∣mur, & Constitutione Bo∣nifaii Papae. 8. quae in∣cipit Vnam Sanctam, de∣claratur.—Constitu∣tionem Ipsam Sacro prae∣senti Concilio Approbante Innovamus, & Approba∣mus. Conc. Lateran. sub Leone. 10. Sess. 10. apud P. Crab. Conc. Tom. 3. p. 697. Col. 1. Council, (which with them is General and Oecumenial) innovates and establish∣eth (with the Approbation and Consent of that
Council) the aforesaid Doctrine and Constitution of Pope Boniface. VIII. 2. The Trent Council does so too, and absolutely Anathematizes and Damns all those who do not believe their whole new Creed; (in which there is not one true Article, but all Erroneous, many Superstitious and Impi∣ous) and tells us, It is the CatholickContraria Omnia & Haereses, ab Ecclesia Damnatas & Anathema∣tizatas Ego paritèr Ana∣thematizo. Hanc veram Catholicam fidem, Extra quam Nemo Salvus esse Potest, quam veracitèr teneo, & ad Extremum vitae Spiritum, Constantis∣simè retinere, spondeo, vo∣veo, juro. Conc. Trident. Sess. 24. De Reformat. in Calce Cap. 12. p. 452. E∣dit. Antverp. 1633. Faith, with∣out the belief of which, no man can be saved, and swear firmly to believe it to their last breath, and Ana∣thematize all who do not. And (which is further very considerable and pertinent to confirm what is abovesaid) they do in that Oath promise, vow, and swear to receive and imbraceOmnia à Concilijs Oecumenicis tradita, defi∣nita, & Declarata, Indu∣bitantr recipio, & profite∣or. Ibid. p. 452. All Things deli∣vered, defined, and declared in their General Coun∣cils, and AllApostolicas Tradi∣tiones, reliqusque Ejus∣dem Ecclesiae Constitutiones firmissimè admitto & am∣plector. Ibid. p. 451. the Constitutions of their Church; For these Particulars are parts of that new Creed, to the Belief and Profession of which they are sworn. And the Trent Council it self (as well as the Pope in that Creed)Conc. Trident. Sess. 24. De Reformat. cap. 12. Proviside Bene∣ficiis, &c. Teneantur fidei publicam sacere professio∣nem in Rom. Ecclesiae Obe∣dientiâ se Permansuros spondeant ac Jurent. p. 432. dictae Editionis. And that we may know that the Faith they are to profess and swear to, is the Creed of Pius. V. in the afore-named Edi∣tion of the Council of Trent, at Antverp. 1633. Pius. 5. his Creed, and the Forma Juramenti Pro∣fessionis Fidei, is placed immediately after that 12. Cap. Sess. 24. De Re∣format. pag. 450. requires that they make such a Profession. Whence it evidently follows, that all their Bishops, all Regulars of what Order soever, who are provided of Monasteries, Religi∣ous Houses, &c. All Canons and Dignitaries in their Church, all who have any Cure of Souls, and all who profess and teach any of the Liberal Arts, &c. (for all these are required to take that Oath) are sworn to receive, believe, and profess all the Desini∣tions of the Lateran Council under Leo. X. and the Constitution of Pope Boniface. VIII. which denoun∣ces Damnation to all those who submit not to the Pope, and imbrace not their Popish Religion; and hence it further, and as evidently follows, that not
only Queen Elizabeth, but all good Protestants then, and ever since, (who neither did, nor with∣out great Error and Impiety, could so submit to their Popes, or believe their New Creed) are, by their Papal and uncharitable Divinity, Eternally Damn'd. So that it is not only some Temporal mischief or loss, but the Eternal Damnation of Bo∣dy and Soul, which is threatned, and Declared to be the Effect and Inevitable Consequence of this against Queen Elizabeth, and such other Excom∣munications of those whom they call Here∣ticks. 4. In the beginning of this Impious Bull,Observ. 4. we are told by the Pope, That our Blessed Saviour com∣mitted the Government of His Church (with all pleni∣tude and fulness of Power) to Peter and his Successors. And that we might know, how great the Power was over all Kings and Kingdoms, he miserably misapplies a Text inJer. 1. 10. Jeremy; and says—Petro & Successo∣ribus, Ecclesiam, in pleni∣tudine Potestatis gubernan∣dam tradidit. Hunc unum super Omnes Gentes, & Omnia Regna Principem Constituit, qui Evellat, De∣struat, Dissipet, Disperdat, plantet & aedificet; ut fide∣les Salvos exhibeat Salva∣tori. That our blessed Saviour did Constitute Peter alone a Prince, over All Nations, and All Kingdoms, to Pull up, and Throw down, to Dissipate and Destroy, to Plant and Build (in Ordine ad Spiritualia) in Order to the Sal∣vation of his Faithful People; so that (if we may believe this Infallible Expositor) the same Power which God gave Jeremy over all Nations and King∣doms, to pull up and destroy them; the very same did our blessed Saviour give to Peter and his Succes∣sors. Nor is Pius. V. the only Pope who makes use of that Text to prove their extravagant Papal Power over Kings: Pope Alexander. III. having told some of his Brethren, how theCum Ascenderemus Palfredum nostrum, Fride∣ricus Imp. Stepham tenuit. &c. Constit. 8. Alexand. 3. In Bullario Rom. Tom. 1. p. 65. Col. 2. Emperor
held his Stirrup when he mounted his Palfrey; In his next Constitution, (having said, That the Dili∣gence of the Bishops and Pastors was necessary to pull up, and cut off Hereticks, and wicked men in the Church) he Cites the place of Jeremy to prove it; and says, That the Power over Nations and Kingdoms, to pull up, cast down, and destroy, was Gi∣ven to JeremyDeus Jeremiam, & in illo Evangelicum Sa∣cerdotem instruxit dicens; Ecce Constitui Te super Gentes & Regna, ut Evel∣las, destruas, disperdas, &c. quae Potestas imminet in Romano Antistite, qui à Christo, ut sit Caput Eccle∣siae, accepit. Ibid. Constit. 9. p. 65. Col. 2., and In Him, to the Evangelical Priest, to Peter and his Successors, as he there ex∣presly explains it. And Pope Paul. III. tells us; —Ejus Vices gerenics in terris, & in Sede Justi∣tiae Constituti, Juxta Jere∣miae Vaticinium, &c. super Omnes Reges Vniversae Terrae. In Bullâ Damna∣tionis Hen. 8. data Rom. 1535. & 1538. That he was Vicar of Christ, our blessed Savi∣our, and plac'd in the Throne of Justice Above All Kings in the whole World, According to the Prophecy of Jeremy; And then Cites the words of Jeremy be∣fore mention'd. And (to omit others) Pope Bo∣niface. VIII. Cites the same Text (though to as little purpose) to the same end; to prove theSpiritualis Potestas terrenam judicare debet, si bona non fuerit: sic Veri∣ficatur Vaticinium Jere∣miae, Constitui Te super Gentes, &c. Cap. unam Sanctam. 1. de major. & Obed. Extrav. Commu∣nes. Popes power above Kings, so as to punish and depose them. And before him Innocent. III. in his wild and irrational Epistle to the Emperor of Constan∣tinople Cap. Solicit. 6. Extra. De Major. & O∣bedientia., Cites the same Text of Jeremy, and a∣nother (Gen. 1. 16.) more impertinent (if that be possible) to prove the vast Power of Popes above allDeus Papam To∣tius Orbis praecipuum obi∣nere voluit Magistratum. Bonif. 8. in Bulla. 6. De∣cretalium praesixa. Kings and Emperors. By all which, Papal Bulls and Constitutions (as by many others of the like nature) it may evidently appear, that they challenge a Power to depose Kings, and that they bring the Text of Jeremy as a ground and proof of it. But although their Popes brag, That they have Dictum Bonif. 8. Cap. Licet Romanus. De Constitut. in. 6. Romanus Pontifex jura Omnia in Scrinio pectoris sui cense∣tur habere.all Laws in the Archives of their own breasts, and that they are Supream and Infallible Judges in all
Controversies of Faith; yet their whole Discourse and Deductions from the Text of the Prophet Je∣remy, is inconsequent, and indeed ridiculous, and no way concerns either Peter, or any of his pre∣tended Successors. For, 1. This Power which God gave to Jeremy, was Personal, to himself only, not hereditary or af∣ter his death to be continued to any Successor; much less to Peter, who came above Six hun∣dred years after. That the Popes of this or for∣mer Ages, were Successors to Peter, both the Popes themselves, and Popish Authors univer∣sally affirm; but (as yet) I have found none (ex∣cept the Pope and some few of his Party) who say that either Peter, or any Pope, was Successor to Jeremy. It's true, Pope Alexander. III. (in the Place quoted a little before) says; That that Power over Nations and Kingdoms, to pull up▪ dissipate, and destroy, &c. was (by God) given to Jeremy, and in Him to Peter. So that (by this wild Supposition) Peter succeeded into that Power, which before him, Jeremy had. But (notwithstanding his Infallibility) this is gratis dictum without any shadow or pretence of Rea∣son: For he who succeeds into a Right which another possess'd before him, must do it either, 1. Per generationem & Jure Sanguinis; as a Son succeeds his Father, or the next Heir, In jus de∣functi: and that Peter, or any Pope did this way succeed Jeremy, as none (with any reason) can, I suppose none will say. 2. Per Consecrationem & Jure Ordinis; so one Bishop succeeds another
in the same Bishoprick. Neither could Peter succeed Jeremy this way; for Jeremy was never Bishop of Rome, or any other place; and then 'tis impossible that they should succeed him in a Place he never had, and be Successor to one who never was their Predecessor. 3. A man may be said to succeed another, who has a new Commission given him, to Execute an Office which (though intermitted) some had lo before him. So suppose the King should give one a Commission to be High Constable of England, after the Place had been long void; he who had such Commission, may be said to succeed him, who had that Office last, though One or Two hundred years before. Now if the Pope (or any for him) can shew, that our blessed Saviour gave Peter the same Commissi∣on, which God gave Jeremy, and set him over Nations and Kingdoms, to pull up, dissipate, and destroy, &c. (as Pope Pius. V. expresly says Regnans in Excel∣sis (i.e. Christus) Ecclesiam soli Petro & Successoribus tradidit Gubernandam. And then it immediate∣ly follows—Hunc Vnum (Petrum scilicet) super Omnes Gentes, & Omnia Regna Principem Constituit, qui evellat, de∣struat, dissipet, disperdat, plantet, &c. Bulla dicta in Principio.he did, in this His Impious Bull against Q. Elizabeth) then I will Confess, that in this Sense Peter may be called Jeremy's Successor. But that our blessed Saviour gave Peter any such Commission (though the Pope say it) is abso∣lutely untrue; not only without any foundati∣on or ground of Reason for it in Scripture, (and nothing else can prove it) but point blank a∣against it. As our Saviour's Kingdom was not of this World, no Temporal Power or Dominion; so he neither exercis'd any such Power himself, nor gave Peter or his Apostles, (who, all of them
had Equal Power with Peter) any suchPope Nicol. 1. (and he as Infallible as any of his Successors) tells us; That Ecclesia non habet Gladium nisi Spiritualem, qui non occi∣dit, sed vivisicat. Luit∣prandus in vita, Nicol. 1. Cap. 107. But he lived above. 800. years since, and though Gratian re∣cords it for Law (Can. inter haec. 6. Caus. 33. Quaest. 2.) yet the Case is alter'd since, and the Gloss upon that Canon (verbo Gladium) tells us, that the meaning is; that the Pope has not the Temporal Sword, Quo∣ad Executionem only: the Power of the Temporal Sword belongs to the Emperor, but the Pope makes him Emperor, and gives him that Power: and this he proves out of a Decree of Pope Innocent 3. Cap. Venerabil. 34. Extra. De Elect. & Electi Potesta∣te. Tem∣poral Power over Nations and Kingdoms, to pull up, destroy, and dissipate, &c. All the Power they had was Spiritual; they could punish no man (un∣less miraculously, which the Pope pretends not to) in his person, by loss of Life, or Liberty (by Imprisonment) nor in his purse, by imposing and exacting Pecuniary Mulcts; as has been, and might be farther demonstrated, were it now my business: Only (by the way) I crave leave to observe, That Pope Pius in this Bull, makes that Commission, which he says, our blessed Savi∣our gave Peter, far larger than that which God gave Jeremy. For he tells us, 1. That our blessed Saviour didHunc unum (Pe∣trum scilicet) Principem Constituit, &c. Ibid. in dicta Bulla. Constitute Peter a Prince, to pull up, and destroy, &c. but there is no such thing in Jeremy's Commission. 2. That Peter was Con∣stituted a Prince overSuper Omnes Gen∣tes, & Omnia Regna, I∣bid. All Nations, and All King∣doms; but Jeremy had not such Universal Pow∣er, as is evident from theJer. 1. 10. Text. But to make this further appear, it is to be Consi∣der'd, 2. That Jeremy was a Priest, and a Prophet; so that if Peter and his Successors succeeded him, it must be in one of those two Capacities. But, 1. 'Tis certain, that neither Peter, nor any Chri∣stian Bishop did, or could succeed him, as a Priest; he being a Priest of Aaron's Order, which absolutely ceased at our Saviour's death. 2. Nor did he succeed Jeremy as to his Prophe∣tical Office. 1. Because that was, Extraordi∣nary, Temporary, and Expired with his Per∣son.
The Prophetical Office was not Heredi∣tary or Successive. 'Tis true, some Prophets preceded in time, and some afterwards follow∣ed: SoVide Corn. A La∣pide in Prin. Argument. Comment. sui in Jere∣miam. Jeremy was after Isaiah about One hundred sixty five years; Ezekiel after him Four and thirty years; Daniel after him Twenty years. But each Prophet had a new Call and Commission, and that for particular and diffe∣rent purposes, as is evident by the Prophecies themselves. 2. Jeremy and those Prophets were , Divinely Inspired, and that to an In∣fallibility, and their Prophecies (as Divine, and the Word of God) referr'd into the Sacred Ca∣non of Scripture; Now although Peter, (not by Succession from Jeremy, but by a new Call and Commission from our blessed Saviour) was , and had such an Assistance of the Ho∣ly Spirit, as made him Infallible, and his Do∣ctrine Divine Truth; yet such assistance being personal in him, (as it was in all Prophets be∣fore him) his Successors cannot, without Impu∣dence and Impiety pretend to it; though some of theFor proof of this, see the Quotations be∣fore Observ. 2. Canonists, the Jesuits, and Papal Pa∣rasites, would have us believe (what thePope Honorius, and Pope Vigilius anci∣ently condemned for Hereticks in General Councils; and of later times, the General Coun∣cils of Pisa, Constance, and Basil condemned o∣thers. World knows to be false) that they are Infalli∣ble. 3. But that I may (in short) come to the main scope and hinge of the Question; the truth is Evident, That all these Popes in the Exposition and Application of this Text in Jeremy, (not∣withstanding their pretended Supremacy and Infallibility) are miserably mistaken, and put a
sense upon it, which, before them, never any Father or Ancient Author did; no nor their own Learned Writers of later times, even when Popery most prevail'd; a sense (if I may call it so) inconsistent with the true and certain mean∣ing of Jeremy. For when 'tis in that Text, I have set thee over the Nations and Kingdoms, to pull down, dissipate, destroy, plant, and build; That whichVide Constitut. 9. Alexand. 3. In Bullario Rom. Tom. 1. p. 65. Col. 2. Alexander. III. (and other Popes af∣ter him) Cite this Text for, is, to infer a Power in Jeremy, (and from him, in them) so far, to pull down, dissipate, and destroy, as to Depose Kings and Emperors, and Absolve their Subjects from all Oaths of Allegiance: Though the Text mean nothing less; nor can any such Impious Conclusion, by any (save possibly Popish) Lo∣gick, be deduced from it. For when the(2) Jer. 1. 10. Text says, I have set thee over the Nations, to pull down, and destroy, &c. 1. The meaning is not, that Jeremy (by this Commission) had Power and Jurisdiction, (per modum Imperantis) as a Prince and Superior, to pull down and destroy any man, much less Kings and Emperors; nay so far was he from that, that he quietly and pati∣ently submitted to the Authority and Com∣mands of Injust and Impious Superiors, (as is evident in his Prophecy) and was several times He is beaten by Pashur. Jer. 20, 1. Appre∣hended and Arraigned. Jer. 26. 8. Imprison'd by Zedekiah. Chap. 32. 3. and beaten and impri∣son'd by the Princes. Jer. 37. 15. by them put into a Dungeon. Jer. 38. 6.Imprison'd and cast into Dungeons, with great danger of his Life, at Jerusalem; and when carried Captive into Egypt, by some Re∣bellious Jews, who would not obey the Word of God by him, he was more miserably used,
and at last, by themA suis Concivibus in Taphnis Aegypti, La∣pidibus Obrut us, Martyr occubuit. Ita Hieronymus, Tertull. Doroth. Epi∣phan. Isiodor. &c. Corn. A Lapide Comment. in Jerem. in Argumento. murder'd and martyr'd. So far was Jeremy (after God had given him thatThe Commission was given him, when he was a Child. Jer. 1. 6. 7. when he was 14. or 15. years old. So Corn. A Lapide in Prin. Argu∣menti Commentariis su∣is in Jeremiam praefixi. Commission) from pulling down, or destroying any man, that (on the contrary) he patiently submitted to his Superiors, and was by them (though most injustly) punished, pull'd down, and at last destroy'd. 2. But the mean∣ing of that Text evidently is, I have set thee o∣over Nations and Kingdoms, to pull down, destroy, and dissipate, &c. Per modum Prophetantis, & Quid Judicio Justo facturus esset Deus, praedicentis; As a Prophet, to foretell what God would do; that (unless they repented) he would pull down, destroy, and dissipate those Nations and King∣doms, against which (by God's express Com∣mand) he Prophesied. Jeremy had no Com∣mission, no Power or Authority to pull down, or destroy any one single Person, much less Kings and Emperors; nor did he ever do, or attempt any such thing; he only Prophetied, and premonish'd them from God, that Destru∣ction would come upon them for their sins, but it was God only who could and did execute that Sentence, and when they repented not, destroy∣ed them. So in Scripture, the Prophet is said to do that, which he foretells will be done. Jo∣seph in Prison, tells Pharaoh's Butler and Baker, That within three days the one should be restored to his Place, and the other hanged. This coming to pass (not by any Power of Joseph, for he was a Prisoner) yet theGen. 41. 13. Text says, That He resto∣red the one, and that He hang'd the other. And
this, those Popes, who so often urge this Text of Jeremy, might have easily and certainly known, had they studied Scripture and Divinity as much as Human Policy (as tooIt is a memorable Story we are told to this purpose; not by any Lu∣theran, but a Learned Sorbon Doctor, an ear∣witness of it, who says, That when Pope Inno∣cent. X. was pressed to Determine the Contro∣versie between the Jesu∣its and Jansenists, He (who was bred a Law∣yer) told them that he was No Divine, that Di∣vinity was not His Pro∣fession, nor had he studied Divinity. Monsieur de St. Amour in his Journal Part. 3. Cap. 12. & p. 120. many of them do not) For what I have said is expresly said in the very Text of Jeremy's Prophetie; as he who compares and considersVide Jer. 18. 7. 8. &c. Jer. 25. 15. 16. 17. &c. & Cap. 42. 10. & 45. 4. two or three Chapters in it, may evidently see. Sure I am, (to say nothing of the Fathers and Anci∣ent Writers of the Church) what I have said of the true meaning of this place in Jeremy, is ac∣knowledg'd even by the Jesuits and Canonists (the greatest Flatterers of the Pope, and Stick∣lers for his pretended Supremacy) who Ex∣pound the Text as I have done. I shall instance in One or Two. 1. Corn: A. Lapide (a Noted and Learned Jesuit Expounding this Place of Jeremy, says thus— Constitui Te ut E∣vellas, i. e. ut Intermine∣ris Hostibus meis, (quos Regionibus suis Plantavi) Me inde per Bella, &c. evulsurum, nisi resipuerint. A Lapide. in Jer. 1. 70.I have set thee over the Nations, that thou should pull up: That is (saith he) that thou shouldst Threaten my Enemies, that unless they re∣pent, I will pull them out of the Countries, where I have placed them. And then he tells us truly, that this is the Opinion of Hierome, Theodoret, Rabanus, Vatablus, Lyranus, Dion-Carthusianus, and others. And then he adds—Ita Deus Plant at & Evellit Gentes: nam Je∣remias reipsa nec planta∣vit nec Evlsit Gentes. Ergo, ut Evlas & Plan∣tes; Idem est quod, ut has Gentes evellendas, illas plantandas A Deo mine∣ris ac Praedices. Idem Ibidem. That it is God (not Jeremy) who Pulls up, and Plants the Nations. So that when 'tis said—I have set thee To pull up, and plant the Nations: it is all one as if he had said—I have set thee to Threaten and Preach that God would Pull up and Plant those Na∣tions. This is that we say and prove to be th
meaning of that Text in Jeremy, and the Jesuit fully Consents, and Acknowledges it to be true. 2. Pope Innocent. III. in hisCap. Solitae. 6. Ex∣tra de Major. & Obedi∣entia. Epistle to the Em∣peror of Constantinople, (amongst several other places of Scripture) brings this Text of Jeremy, to prove the Priest (especially Peter's Successor the Pope) to beOstendit Scerdo∣tium praeeminere Rgibus, dicto Jeremiae Glossa ad dictum Cap. verbo. So∣litae Benignitatis. Superior to all Kings: and yet Bernardus de Botono (theVide Corpus Ju∣ris Can. Cum Glossis; Paris. 1612. In Nota, Titulum. Tom. 2. Imme∣diatè (seu pagina pro∣xima) sequente. Author of the Gloss there) when he comes to Explain that Text— I have set thee over the Nations, to pull up, and plant; he has nothing of Deposing and setting up Kings: but Conceives the meaning to be—That Jeremy was set overConstitui Te, ut Evellas] Vitia scilicet, & plantes] Virtutes, Glossa ad dictum Cap. Solitae. verbo, Constitui Te, &c. Nations, To pull up Vices, and plant Virtues. He truly Conceives, that Je∣remy was not Constituted a Prince, with Domi∣nion and Jurisdiction over Kings and Empe∣rors; to set them up, or pull them down, at his pleasure; (to which purpose many of the Popes produce it) but a Prophet, to foretell them, what God would do. That is, He would plant them, if they were Penitent; if not, pull down and destroy them. So the Author of the Gloss; and they tell us, that heGlossas Eruditis∣sumas Edidit. Vid. dictam Notam in Prin. Tom. 2. Juris Can. Paris 1612. writ most Learned Glosses upon the Decretals of Gregory. IX. which Vid. Bullam Greg. 13. Corp. Juris Can. prae∣fixam.afterwards had the Approbation of Pope Gregory XIII. Be it concluded then, that Pius. V. and those other Popes before mention'd (notwithstanding their Infallibility) have mise∣rably mistaken the true meaning of this place of Jeremy. And indeed he who reads and seri∣ously Considers the several Places of Scripture,
which the Popes of the last 600. years have explain∣ed in their Bulls and Decretals, and produc'd as proofs of their extravagant & usurp'd Suprema∣cy; I say, he will have just reason to believe, that Popes are not the best Expositors of Scripture. For Instance; (to omit others) I shall refer the Rea∣der to those1. Peter 2. 13. 14. Jer. 1. 10. Gen. 1. 16. 17. &c. Joh. 21. 16. Matth. 16. 18. 19. Luc. 22. 38. Rom. 13. 1. 2. Gen. 1. 1. 1. Cor. 2. 15. 8. or 9. Places, which Pope Innoc. III. and Bonif. VIII. have Cited, and Explain'd, in two of their Constitutions, both Extant in their That of Innocent 3. Cap. Solitae. 6. Extra de Majorit. & Obed. And that of Boniface. 8. Cap. Unam Sanctam. 1. Eo∣dem Tit. Extrav. Com∣mun.Canon Law, in the places before Cited, where the Expositions and Applications of those pla∣ces, by those Popes, are not only evidently Er∣roneous, but (being repugnant to all good Sense and Reason) exceedingly ridiculous: such as may give their Adversaries reason to believe that the Authors of such wild Interpretations,Observ. 5. are rather Fools than Infallible. 5. Pope Pius. V. here in the beginning of this his Bull, callsChristus Ecclesiam Apostolorum Principi tra∣didit gubernandam; & hunc unum Super Omnes Gentes & Omnia Regna Principem Constituit. Di∣ctae Bullae principio. Peter (as other Popes and their Parasites usually do) Prince of the Apostles; and tells us, that our blessed Saviour did set and constitute him a Prince over all Nations and Kingdoms. From whence, they (Illogically and without any shadow of Just Consequence) would Conclude, Peter's Su∣premacy, his Dominion and Authority even over all the Apostles. For although Peter in the Go∣spel (when the Names of the Twelve Apostles are numbred) is calledMatth. 10. 2. , Primus; and a∣mongst Latin Authors anciently (Princeps Aposto∣lorum) The Prince of the Apostles; yet thatPetrus Apostolo∣rum Primus & Primas, poterat Apostolis praecipe∣re, & si in fide aut mo∣ribus errarent, Corrigere, &c. Corn. A Lapide in Matth. 10. 2. Pa∣pal Supremacy, which the Popes and their Party generally attribute to him, that they (as his Suc∣cessors)
might have it themselves, cannot thence be concluded. SoCaeteri Evangelistae Matthaeum praeponunt Tho∣mae, Matthaeus Thomam Praefert, Paulus ad Galat. 2. 9. Jacobum primo Loco recenset, ante Petrum & Johannem, Existimat Hie∣ronymus (so Erasmus says) Ejus esse, Ordinem Aposto∣lotum distribuere, Qui illos Elegit: innuens, Autho∣ritatem Apostolis Omni∣bus Parem fuisse, quod ad Apostolici muneris functi∣onem attinet. Erasmus in Locum. Erasmus tells us, (out of St. Hierome) That the Apostles in the other Evangelists, are not reckon'd in the Order they are in Matthew; lest any man should think, that Peter were first of all the Apostles, because he is reckon'd in the first Place. Mat∣thew reckons Thomas before himself; but Mark after him: Matthew reckons Andrew before James and John, but Mark after them. So St. Paul reckons James before Peter and John, though Matthew puts Peter first. And Erasmus there says further, that Hierome intimates, That the Apostles were all (as to their Apostolick Office) Equal. That which makes me believe, that what Erasmus Observes out of Hierome, is true, is this; The Spanish Inquisitors have damn'd it, and (in their IndexIndex Librorum Prohib. & Expurg. Ma∣driti. 1667. p. 289. Col. 1. Expurgato∣rius) Commanded it to be blotted out. But E∣rasmus adds further,—Certe ex Ordine re∣censionis, non Efficacitèr Colligitur Quis Cui sit prae∣ferendus; siquidem ubi multi numerantur, aliquis primus sit opportet. Eras∣mus ibidem, in Matth. 10. 2. That it cannot Logically and firmly be concluded, from the Order wherein the A∣postles are number'd, which of them is to be preferr'd before the rest, because where many are number'd, there is a necessity we begin with some one, and 'tis not ma∣terial which we begin with. And This the Inquisi∣tors let pass, without a Deleatur; they do not con∣demn it to be blotted out, and so seem to approve it, otherwise it had not pass'd; so that (even by our Adversaries consent) all that can be rationally Inferr'd, from that Text, where in numbering the Apostles, Peter is called , first, is only So the word  usually signifies; Eusebius calls Simon Magus,  primus Dux Haerese∣os, scilice Primus Ordine Temporis, non Jurisdictio∣nis. Euseb. Hist Lib. 2. Cap. 13. p. 51. Edit. Va∣lesii.a Primacy of Order, (which we willingly grant) but no Primacy (much less a Supremacy) of Authority, Dominion, and Jurisdiction over the
rest of the Apostles; which the Pope and his Par∣ty desire, and we justly deny. 2. And as or Primus; so Princeps, or Prince (amongst the best Latin Authors) usually signifies Order Only, or some Excellent Quality in those who are call'd Principes, without anySo Homer and Virgil are call'd Poeta∣rum Principes. So in Tul∣ly, Patroni Principes, e∣minent Advocates. So Plato and Aristotle, Phi∣losophorum Principes, and yet no Dominion or Jurisdiction meant in these Expressions. Authority or Jurisdiction over those in relation to whom they are so call'd. And that the Rest of the Apostles were call'd Principes as well as Peter, I have Authentick warrant, even the Roman Breviary, restored according to the De∣cree of the Council of Trent, publish'd by Pius V. (The very Pope who publish'd this Impious Bull a∣against Queen Elizabeth) and then Revised by the Authority of Clement. VIII. and Vrban VIII. and Printed at Antverp. 1660. In this Breviary, we have thisDicti Breviarij Part. aestivâ, ad Diem. 29. Junij, in Festo SS. Apostolorum Petri & Pauli. p. 476. & in Festo S. Andreae. Nov. 30. Ibi∣dem pag. 780. Hymn, in the Office for the Feast of St. Peter and Paul; Ecclesiarum Principes, Belli Triumphales Duces, Coelestis Aulae Milites, Et vera Mundi Lumina, &c. Now in this Hymn Peter and Paul too, are call'd Ecclesiarum Principes, Princes of the Churches; For being a Hymn for the Feast of those two A∣postles; Ecclesiarum Principes cannot relate to less than two; nor Properly to any but them two in that Place. Though elsewhere itVide Commune Sanctorum in Calce Par∣tis Aestivae, dicti Brevia∣rij, & in Communi A∣postolorum & Evange∣listarum. pag. 4. relates to all the Apostles; as in the Place cited in the Mar∣gent; when after the Invitatory, (as they call it) Ad matutinum, Invitatorium. Regem A∣postolorum Dominum, Ve∣nite adoremus.Come let us adore the Lord, King of the Apostles; it follows thus,
Aeterna Christi munera, Apostolorum Gloria, Palmas & Hymnos debitos, Laetis canamus mentibus. EcclesiarumVide Card. Cusan Opera. p. 836. & Grati∣an. Caul. 2. Quaest. 7. Can. Beati. 37. & Theodoret in Gal. 2. p. 270. where Peter and Paul are call'd . & in 2. Cor. 11. 6. p. 251. Principes Apostolo∣rum alij praeter Petrum. Vid. Bellarmin. de Rom. Pontif l. 1. c. 12. p. 861. Potestas clavium transt∣vit ad alios Apostolos, & ad Omnes Ecclesiae Prin∣cipes, &c. These are the words of Pope Leo (and he Infallible) cited there by Bellarmine. Principes, Belli Triumphales Duces, Coelestis Aulae Milites, Et vera Mundi Lumina, &c. So that if we may believe their own Authentick Breviary, Publish'd and Carefully Revised by these Popes, according to the Decree of the Trent Coun∣cil; All the other Apostles (under our blessed Sa∣viour, and by his Authority) were Princes of the Christian Church as well asHoc erant utique & Caeteri Apostoli, Quod suit Petrus, Pari Consor∣tio praediti & Honoris & Potestatis. Cyprian de U∣nitate Ecclesiae. p. 208. Edit. Rigaltij. Peter. Now I desire to know, how these things will Consist? Ecclesiam suam V∣ni Soli, Petro Commisit gubernandam; & hunc Vnum Super Omnes Gen∣tes & Regna Principem Constituit. Bulla dicta in Principio.Pius. V. in this Bull against Queen Elizabeth, says, That our blessed Saviour Committed the Govern∣ment of his Church to One Only, to Peter, and Consti∣tuted him Only a Prince over all Nations and Kingdoms (so he in his Bull) and yet the same Pope, in this Roman Breviary, (for it was Approved and Publish∣ed by him) and the Hymn here cited, says, That all the Apostles were Ecclesiarum Principes; and if so, then Peter was not the Only Prince to whom the Government of the Church was Committed; no, the Commission of every Apostle (given by our blessed Saviour) was as unlimited and as large as Peters. This will appear in all the Particulars of it, equally given to all, as they are expresly set down in Scripture, from whence alone, we can
surely know, what their Authority and Commis∣sion was. Our blessed Saviour tells them, and us, —Joh. 20. 21. 1. As my Father sent me, so send I you. There we have the Author and Authority of their Com∣mission. The same blessed Saviour of the World sends them all. 2. Then he breath'd upon them, and said,Ibidem. vers. 22.Receive ye the Holy Ghost. There we have the Principle inabling them to discharge that great Office and Trust reposed in them; It was that Holy Spirit, which gave them, 1. Infallibili∣ty in their Doctrine. 2. Power to work Miracles for Mark. 16. 20.Confirmation of it. 3. Then he adds,Ibid. vers. 23. whose sins ye retain, they are retained, &c. Here we have the great Spiritual Power given them for the cal∣ling and governing the Church, which is elsewhere called,Matth. 16. 19. The Power of the Keys; which Consists in binding and loosing, retaining and remitting sins. For so 'tis Explain'd by our blessed Saviour in the Place last cited, and is (by our Adversaries)Ministri Ecclesiae ad Remmissionem peccati, Per Virtutem Clavium Ministerialiter operantur. Lyran. in Joh. 20. 23. Vid. Tirinum, Menochium, &c. in Matth. 16. 19. con∣fess'd. So that 'tis Evident that the Power of the Keys, the Power of binding and loosing, of re∣taining and remitting sins, is Equally given to all the Apostles, to every One as well as Peter. 4. He Assigns them their Place and Province, where, and the way how they were to Exercise their Apostoli∣cal Power—Matth. 28. 19. 20.Go and Teach All Nations, baptizing them, and teaching them to observe all things, whatsoe∣ver I have Commanded you. Their Diocese was the World—Mark. 16. 15. Go ye into All The World, and preach the Gospel to every Creature (every man.) And the administring the Sacraments, and teaching men to believe and observe the whole Gopel, was the
business they were to do in that their Diocese. 5. And to incourage them to this great and difficult Work, he graciously promises his Presence and Divine Assistance; Lo, I amMatth. 28. 20. with you Always, even to the End of the World. These are the Powers and Promises given to the Apostles, and (which to me seems Evident) with∣out difference or distinction; Equally to all; to Simon the Cannite, (forSimon, who Matth. 10. 4. is call'd Simon the Cananite, in the Syri∣ack Version there, and Luk. 6. 15. is call'd Simon , which is the Greek word for Canni∣ta, or Cinnaeus. For the Syriack  Canna sig∣nifies . vid. Ang. Caminium, in Explicat. locorum. N. Test. p. 51. so it should be writ) as well, and as much as to Simon Peter. If any think otherwise, if he can, and will (by any Cogent Reason) make it appear either, 1. That the fore∣going Powers and Promises were not Equally gi∣ven to all the Apostles. 2. Or that some other Power or Promise was (in Scripture) given pecu∣liarly to Peter, whereby he had an Authority and Dominion over the other Apostles and the whole Church, to make him Only a Prince over all Nations and Kingdoms, (as Pope Pius. V. in this his wild Bull confidently affirms) I say, he who can and will make both or either of these appear, shall have my hearty thanks for the Discovery, and I shall (for the future) have a better Opinion of Peter's Supremacy; which (at present) I take to be a groundless Error, without any proof or probabi∣lity.Objection. I know that the Popes in theirVide Constitut. Bonif. 8. Cap. unam San∣ctam. 1. De Majorit. & Obed. Extravag. Com∣munes. & Innocent. 3. Cap. Solicitae. 6. Extra. de Major. & Obedientiâ. Constitutions, and their Party usually urge that place inMatth. 16. 18. 19. Mat∣thew to prove Peter's, (and thence their own) vast and Monarchical Supremacy over the whole Church, (even the Apostles themselves not excep∣ted) the words These—Thou art Peter, and upon
This Rock, I will build my Church.—And I give unto thee, The Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. From this Place, (most irrationally, and without any Sense or Consequence) they infer, ThatPromittit hic Chri∣stus Petro, quod ipse & Suc∣cessor Ejus Omnis, sit Ec∣clesiae Supremum Caput, Princeps & Monarcha. Jac. Tirinus in Math. 16. 18. 19. Peter, and every Successor of his, was Constituted Supream Head, Prince and Monarch of the Vniversal Church. So that what Peter or hisQuamvis mortalis homo sit Petrus Ejusque Successor, tamen Coelesti praeditus Potestate, & quod ille è Cathedrâ decreverit, habendum est tanquam ab Ipso Deo Decretum. Idem Ibidem, ad vers. 19. Gra∣tian. Can. 2. Sic Omnes. dist. 19. Successor shall (è Ca∣thedrâ) Determine and Decree, is to be received, as if God himself had decreed it. So Tirinus, and their Canon Law, in their most Correct Editions. Though this be Erroneous, and evidently Impi∣ous, yet Tirinus, Gratian, and their Canonists are not singular in this point, another Learned Jesuit (in his Commentary on this Place) tells us, That when our blessed Saviour says, On this Rock will I build my Church; he speaks ofDe Petro ut Funda∣mentali Petra loquitur Christus. Joh. Stephan. Menochius in Matth. 16. 18. Peter, as the Fundamental Rock, on which the Church is built. And he adds—Christus est Fun∣damentalis Petra Praecipuè, sed ei Successerunt Petrus & reliqui summi Pontifi∣ces, ut Ejus Vicarij cum Summâ Potestate. Meno∣chius ibid. p. 41. Col. 2. vid. Gratian. Can. In no∣no. Dist. 21. That though our blessed Saviour was chiefly that Fundamental Rock, yet Peter and the Popes of Rome succeeded him, as his Vicars, with Supream Power, &c. This place, they conceive; con∣cerns no Apostle but Peter, and proves his, and his Successors Supremacy. To this, I say, 1.Responsio. 1. That all they say, in this par∣ticular, is gratis dictum; for they only say it, with∣out any pretence of proof. If we will take their bare word, we may; otherwise we may chuse; for they bring no proof to prove their Exposition of this Text, such as might command and neces∣sitate our Assent. And then a bare denial, is An∣swer enough to a bare Assertion. For (as St. Hie∣rome says in the like case) an unproved Position,
eâdem facilitate rejicitur, quâ Affirmatur. 2. When they say, our blessed Saviour was the chief Fundamen∣tal Rock on which the Church was built, and that St. Peter and the Popes succeeded him, with Supream Pow∣er. They consequently must say Two things; 1. That our blessed Saviour left his Place and Of∣fice of being the Fundamental Rock, to Peter, when he left this World. For if he kept it, and still do keep it, neither the Pope nor Peter could be his Successors. No man can be Successor and suc∣ceed into a Place till his Predecessor leave it. Linus neither did, nor could succeed Peter in the Bishop∣rick of Rome, whilst Peter liv'd, and possess'd it himself; so that by this Erroneous and Impious Doctrine, they have displac'd our blessed Saviour from being the Fundamental Rock, on which the Church is built, and instead of him, have plac'd Peter first, and then particular Popes successively. And then let the World judge, in what a miserable Condition the Church of Christ must be. 1. When the Fundamental Rock on which it was built, was anMarcellinus Ponti∣fex ad Scrificia Gentium ductus, Deos alienos Ado∣ravit. Plat. in vita Marcel. Idolater, as Marcellinus was. 2. Or an He∣retick; asCum Arianis sentie∣bat, &c. Plat. in vit. Liber. Liberius,Honorius Synod. 6. damnatur. Act. 18. vid. Theoph. Chrona∣graph. p. 299. 301. Ana∣stas. Biblioth. in vitis Pontif. p. 54. Francis. Combesis in Auctario Biblioth. Graec. Patrum. Tom. 2. p. 66. Synodus Nicena. 2. apud Joveri∣um. Part. 1. p. 106. Col. 2. Honorius,Vid. Synod. 5. & Rich. Crakanthorp. in vigilio Dormitante. Ed. Richerium in Hist. Con∣cil. Generalium. p. 302. Vigilius, &c. were. 3. Or an Impudent whorish Woman, as Johannes Anglicus, or PopeVid. Plat. in vitâ Johan. 8. & Notas Car. Annibalis Fabroti, ad vitas Pont. Anast. p. 290. Joan certainly was. 4. Or when many Popes together, no less than Fifty (by the Confession of their own Learned men) wereVid. Genebrardi Chronol. circa Initium seculi. 10. l. 4. p. 807. ad Annum 901. Apostatici potiùs quam Apostolici. 5. Or when the Popes were suchTunc foedissima Rom. Ecclesiae facies, cum Romae Dominarentur sordidissi∣mae Meretrices, quarum ar∣bitrio, Intruderentur in Sedem Petri earum Ama∣sij Pseudopontifices; qui non nisi ad fignanda tempora, in Catalogo Rom. Pontif. scripti: Quis enim à scortis intrusos sine lege, legitimos dicere possit Romanos fu∣isse Pontifices? Baronius Annal. Tom. 10. ad An. 912. §. 14. p. 663. vid. eundem an Ad. 897. §. 8. p. 624. & ad An. 925. §. 10. p. 688. Edit. Annal. Antverp. 1618. vid. loca & hic adde. Monstrous Villains, as were put into, and out of St. Peter's Chair
by Impudent Whores, made Popes by Violence and Simo∣ny, such (as even in Baronius his Judgment) none should, or dared call true Popes, whose names were re∣corded only to fill up the Catalogues of the Roman Bishops. 6. Or in the Vacancies, when forPost Clem. 4. va∣cat Sedes. Ann. 3. m. 2. dies. 10. Post Nicolaum 3. vacat Sedes. Ann. 3. Post Clement. 5. vacat Sedes. Ann. 2. m. 3. d. 17. Platina in Ejus vita. two or three years, and (if someSunt qui scribunt, post mortem Nicolai. 1. Sedem vacasse Ann. 8. Mens. 7. d. 9. Platina in Calce vitae Nicolai. 1. Writers say true) sometime for Eight years, there was no Pope at all, and so (by this Doctrine) the Church had no Fundamental Rock at all, for several years together. 7. Lastly, Or when they had for nearIn that great Schism, commonly rec∣kon'd for the 27. Schism in their Church; which begun about the Year 1378. Vrbanus. 6. being Pope at Rome, and Clem. 7. at Avignion. Fifty years together, two or three Popes at the same time; when it was Impossible they should be all Legiti∣mate, and true Successors of St. Peter, and (what they pretend to) Vicars of Christ our blessed Sa∣viour; and which, or whether any of them, were such indeed, none did, or could know: Nay, 'tis certain, (and must by our Adversaries be confess'd, (unless they will deny their own received Princi∣ples) that sometimes, all of the Pretenders were Impious Usurpers of the Papal Chair, without a∣ny Just Right or Title to it. Then the first Coun∣cil ofAnno Dom. 1409. or as others. 1410. Pisa met (and it was a General One, con∣sisting of above. 600.Longus A Corio∣lano. Summa Con. p. 857. Col. 2. Fathers) there were Two Popes in being (such as they were) Gregory XII. and Benedict. XIII. who were bothIn maximâ Prae∣latorum Frequentiâ, utér∣que Pontifex ab iis dam∣natus est, utróque tanquam Perjuro, Schismatico, Hae∣retico, è Pontificatu de∣jecto. Idem Ibidem Col. 1. Damn'd and Deposed, as Perjur'd Persons, Schismaticks, and He∣reticks, &c. and that by an unanimous Consent and Decree of that Great Council. At the Council at Constance (four or fiveConcil. Constan∣tinse Anno 1414. years after) there were three Popes; the two beforenamed, Gregory and Benedict, (who would not sit down, though damn'd at Pisa, and John. XXIII. For the two former,
what Villains they were, the Council of Pisa has told us. For John. XXIII. the Council of Constance gives him this Character—Nobis Legitimè Constat. Johan. Papam. 23. à tempore quo fuit assum∣ptus, usque nunc, Papatum in Scandalum Ecclesiae no∣torium rexisse; vitâque sua Damnabili ejúsque Ne∣phandis moribus, populis exemplum vitae Male prae∣buisse. Concil. Constant, Sess. 10. That he was a Per∣son (all the time he was Pope) notoriously Scandalous to the Church, that his Life was damnable, and he in his Conversation guilty of Impieties not to be nam'd: And the Council adds, (in their Definitive Sentence of his Deposition)Johan. 23. Schis∣matis nutritivum, à voto, promisso, & Juramento per Ipsum Deo, Ecclesiae & huic Concilio praestitis di∣rimativum, Simoniacum notorium, suis Inhonestis & Detestabilibus vita & mo∣ribus Ecclesiam Dei & Populum Christianum no∣torie scandalizantem. I∣dem Concil. Sess. 12. in sententia contra Johan. 23. desinitivâ. That he had broke his Vow, his Oath, and Promise made to God, and his Church, that he was Notoriously Simoniacal, and by his dishonest and detesta∣ble Life and Manners notoriously Scandalous, &c. Now if these (and such other) Popes be the Fun∣damental Rock upon which the Church is built, (and this they say, and would have us believe it) She must of necessity be in a miserable Condition, and the Gates of Hell must prevail against Her; when they evidently prevail against the Rock, up∣on which (they say) she is built; for if the Rock and Foundation fail, that which is built upon it, must evidently fall and come to Ruin. This is the first Consequence of their Doctrine, manifest∣ly Erroneous: but this is not all; For there is a second Consequence of it, both Erroneous, and indeed Blasphemous. For, 2. when they say, that our blessed Saviour was the Fundamental Rock on which the Church was built, and that Peter and the Popes aftr, did succeed him in that Place and Of∣fice, cum Potestatis plenitudine, (says Pius. V. here) Cum Summâ Potestate (as others Generally) Hence it follows, That the present Pope has (and every one of his Predecessors had) the same Power requi∣red to the being of a Fundamental Rock, which
our blessed Saviour had. For if they succeed him in the same Place, and with a Supream Power, then they have the same Place and Power our blessed Sa∣viour had. His Power neither was, nor could be greater then Potestas summa; (summo non datur Su∣perius, there can be nothing higher then the high∣est, nor superior to the Supream) and if Peter had, and every pitiful Pope has potestatem summam, Then they have a Power as great, and equal to that our Blessed Saviour had before he Resigned it to his Successors: But I might have saved the Labour of proving this; for 'tis Acknowledg'd and expresly Affirm'd in their Roman Catechism (ex Decreto Con∣cilij Tridentini, juslu Pii. V. Edito) in which they say, that Peter wasCatechismus Ro∣manus. Part. 1. Cap. 10. §§. 11. 12. Caput & Princeps Omnium A∣postolorum. And then it there follows, ChristusIbid. §. 13. p. 117. Edit. Paris. 1635. Petrum Vniversi Fidelium Generis Caput, ut Qui ei successit Eandem Plane Totius Ecclesiae Potestatem ha∣bere voluerit. It was our blessed Saviour's will, That Peter should have The same Power our blessed Saviour had. Sed Apage nugas Impias & Blasphemas. The bare recitation of such wild Positions, should and will be Confutation enough to all sober Chri∣stians, who are solicitous to maintain our blessed Saviour's Honor, and will never give that Place or Power to the Pope or Peter, which is solely and e∣ternally due to their Redeemer. 3. But further, when our Adversaries, upon that Place of Matthew [ThouMatth. 16. 19. art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church] would have us believe, That Peter was that Rock, while he liv'd, and his Successors after him; And thence infer their
Supremacy. They must pardon our Infidelity, if we believe it not. For, 1. They do or might know, that not only Protestants, but the Fathers, andVid. Chrysost. in. Matth. 26. Hom. 82. pag. 702. Edit. 1607. Isiod. Pelusiota. l. 1. Epist. 235. Aug. Retract. l. 1. c. 20. & De verbis Dom. Serm. 13. Tom. 18. Col. 58. ita Cyrillus & Anonymus in Catena Nicetae Serra∣rum Episcopi ad Matth. 16. 18. vide Catenam Graecam in Matth. per Possinum Jesuitam Cap. 16. 18. Hilarius Picta∣niens. De Trinitate. l. 2. p. 25. Edit. Erasmi. The∣ophylact. in Matth. 16. 18. Ancient Ecclesiastical Writers generally, by Rock in that Text, understand not Peter's Person, but either the Profession of his Faith he there made, or our blessed Saviour. But our Adversaries like not this Doctrine; And therefore when Hilary had truly said—Vnum hoc est immobile fundamen∣tum, Vna Haec est foelix fidei Petra, Petri Ore Con∣fessa; and Erasmus had put this Note in the Mar∣gent, Petram Interpretatur Ipsam Fidei Professionem; and when the same Erasmus on Matth. XVI. 18. had cited Augustin for the same sense of the place, which Hilary gives; And had put in the Margent —Ecclesia non est fundata super Petrum. The Index Librorum Prohibit: & Expurg. Ma∣driti. 1667. In Desid. E∣rasmo. p. 289. Col. 1.Spanish Inquisitors command it to be blot∣ted out of Erasmus his Text and Margent; Al∣though Hilary and Augustin; and many others (as they well knew) said the same thing. 2. And this truth is so Evident, that not only the Fathers, and Ancient Authors, but Sober and Learned men in the Church of Rome, even in darkest times when Popery unhappily prevailed, were of the same Judgment; And by the Rock in this Place of Mat∣thew, [upon this Rock I will build my Church] un∣derstand not Peter, but that Confession of his Faith there made, to be meant. SoSuper hanc Pe∣tram; i. e. super fidei Tuae soliditatem. Can. loqui∣tur. 18. Caus. 24. Quaest. 1. verbo. Petram, in Glos∣sâ. John Semeca, Au∣thor of the Gloss upon Gratian, andSuper hanc Petram, quam Confessus es; i. e. Christum. Lyranus in Matth. 16. 18. Nic. Lyranus, and Ansel. Laudunensis, Author of the Super hanc Petram, i. e. Christum in quem credis. Glossa Interline∣aria in dictum Locum.Interlineary Gloss, upon his Text of Matthew; by the Rock on which the Church was built, un∣derstand
Christ (our blessed Saviour) and not Pe∣ter So Gregorius Magnus in. 7. Psalmos Poenitential. Tom. 2. O∣perum Paris. 1619. pag. 908. D. Christus est Pe∣tra, à qua Petrus Nomen Accepit, & Super Quam se aedificaturum Ecclesiam dixit—Quod Eccle∣sia nullis Persecutionibus sit superanda, Ipse Super Quem aedificata est, Osten∣dit, cum ait, Portae In∣ferorum non praevalebunt contra eam. So Strabo Fuldensis in his Ordin. Gloss. on Matth. 16. 18. circa Ann. 840. And af∣ter them Lyranus (in the Place cited) who though he was a Fran∣ciscan Frier, and flou∣rished almost Four hun∣dred years ago, and in many things (as those times were) Popish e∣nough; yet he was not come so far, as to make Peter, or any but Christ, the Rock on which the Church was built: And again, on the 1. Cor. 3. 11. Solus Christus est Fundamentum Ecclesiae, quod ex se firmitatem & stabilitatem habet. And the Gloss on their own Canon Law, says, That Christ was the Rock; for Boniface. 8. in that famous Extravagant. Cap. Unam Sanctam. 1. Indeavouring to prove the Papal Supremacy from several Places in Scripture; he adds, That the Authority given to Peter and his Successors by our blessed Saviour, was not Human but Divine. Haec Authoritas, licet homini data, non humana, sed potius Divina, ore divino Petro data & Successoribu, &c. The Gloss on these words, Est autem haec Au∣thoritas. p. 191. says thus—Haec Authoritas est Divina, quia firmata est in Petra firma, in Chri∣sto, qui erat verus Deus: & quod sit Divina, quia fundata in eo; patet ex Evangelio; quia Christus loquebatur cum dixit, super hanc Petram; id est, super meipsum (qui sum Petra, & qui significor per Petram) aedificabo Ecclesiam meam. Ita Gloss. verbo, Est autem haec Authoritas. Ad Cap. Unam Sanctam. 1. Extrav. Commun.. And a late Learned Sorbon Doctor (though he would seem to say, that Peter was that Rock) yet acknowledgeth, that by that Rock, theSuper hanc Petram, i. e. Super Ipsum Petrum, seu Petram seu Cepham, vel Super Fidem Petri quae est Catholica. Dr. Hen. Holden in Annotat. in Nov. Testam. Paris. 1660. ad Matth. 16. 18. & ad. 7. Matth. vers. 25. Faith of Peter might be meant, and not his Person. Nay, which is more considerable (and may seem strange to the Reader) the Fathers of the Trent Council expresly say, That theSynodus Statuit, praemittendam esse Confessionem Fidei—Symbolum fidei; quo Romana Ecclesia utitur, tanquam Principium—ac Fundamentum firmum ac Vnicum, contra quod portae Inferi nunquam praevalebunt. Conc. Trident. Sess. 3. Feb. 4. Ann. 1546. Creed or Profession of Faith, which the Church of Rome useth, (the Constantinopolitan Creed they mean, and there set it down), is The Firm and Only Foundation, against which the Gates of Hell can never prevail; and our presentMatth. 16. 18. Text is in the Margent Cited for it, whence it evidently appears, that those Fathers at Trent have Declared, That the Creed, or true Faith of Christ, is that firm Rock, and The Only Foun∣dation on which the Church is built, and against which the Gates of Hell cannot prevail; and if that Faith be the only Foundation of such firmness, then the Pope is not. For if there be another, then that is not (what the Trent Fathers say it is)
the Only Foundation. And lastly, it is very consi∣derable, whatPer Petram, Con∣fessionem Fidei intelli∣gunt Chrysostomus, Cy∣rillus, Hilarius, & Rom. Pontifices, Leo magnus, Agatho, Nicolaus, & A∣drianus primus in suis Decretalibus, Stapleton, Princep. Fidei Doct. De∣monstr. Controvers. 2. l. 6. c. 2. p. 207. 208. Stapleton (their Learned Pro∣fessor at Doway, and great Champion of their Church) confesseth (and without great Impu∣dence, he could not deny it) that not only Chryso∣stome, Cyril, and Hilary; but four Popes, Leo, Aga∣tho, Nicolas, and Adrian (each of them the first of that name) have, in their Decretal Epistles, decla∣red, That the Rock on which the Church was built, was not Peter's Person, but his Faith or Confes∣sion of it. This was the Opinion of those ancient Popes, and they as infallible sure as any of their Successors. By the way, (that we may observe the Contradiction amongst our Adversaries, not∣withstanding the pretended Infallibility of their Church) The Trent Catechism says—Loquitur Dominus ad Petrum; Ego dico Tibi, quia Tues Petrus, & Su∣per hanc Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam. Super Illum Vnum aedificat Ec∣clesiam. Catechis. Trid. ex Decreto Conc. Trid. à Pio. 5. Editus. Part. 1. Cap. 10. de. 9. Symboli Art. §. 12. p. 115. Edit. Paris. 1635. That Pe∣ter Only was the Rock on which our blessed Saviour built his Church. And this the Author (or Authors) of the Catechism pretends to prove out of Cyprian, & some others there named. So that if the Trent Council say True: the Creed, or the Confession of the Cathol. Faith, is the Only Foundation on which the Church is built, but if the Trent Catechism be in the Right, Peter Only is that Rock and Foundation. Now seeing it is im∣possible, that both these Positions should be true, it Evidently follows, that there is an Error in the Council or Catechism, or (which I rather believe) in both. That this may further appear, I say, 4. That 'tis certain, and generally Confess'd, That a Lively Faith, and a firm belief of the Gospel, is a Rock and Foundation against which the Gates of Hell cannot prevail. Our blessed Saviour tells us, That
he whoMatth. 7. 24. 25. hears his sayings, and doth them; (he who really and practically believes the Gospel) builds up∣on a Rock. And St. John tell us, That such Faith is 1 Joh. 5. 4. 5.victorious, nay victory, and cannot be overcome. Hence it is, that in the Liturgie of St. James, in the Administration of the Eucharist, they pray— That God would bless the Sacred Elements, that they might be Effectual, to theOrat Sacerdos, ut Sacra Symbola Omnibus cedant, . In Lit. Jac. Graec. Paris. 1560. p. 20. vid. Fabr. Stapu∣lensem in Matth. 16. 18. So Pope Nicol. 2. Eccle∣sia super Petram fidei fun∣data, Gratian. Can. Om∣nes. 1. Dist. 22. And the Apostle in his Canonical Epistle (Jude 20.) ad∣viseth all, to build up themselves on their most holy Faith. Establishment of the Holy Catholick Church, which he had Founded and Built upon the Rock of Faith. But though Faith and a firm belief of the Gospel, be a Rock, yet 'tis not (as the Trent Fathers say) the Only Rock, on which the Church is built. Peter was a Rock too; this our Adversaries Confess, and earnestly Con∣tend for. But neither was he the Only Rock (though the Trent Catechism and Popish Writers commonly say so) nor such a Rock, as they (with∣out any Reason or Just Ground) would have him. That this may Appear, it is to be Considered, (1.) That (by Evident Scripture) our blessed Sa∣viour is the Prime and Chief Fundamental Rock on which the whole Church is built.Isa. 28. 16. Behold (says God by Isay) I lay in Sion, for a Foundation a Stone, a precious Corner Stone, a Sure Foundation, &c. I know that in the Vulgar Latin ofEdit. Rom. 1590. Sixtus. V. andEdit. Rom. 1592. Clemens. 8. it is untruly render'd— Lapide pretiosum in Fundamento Fundatum. WhenceBellarmine, in Praefat. ad Libr. de Pon∣tif. Rom. vid. R. Cra∣kanth. Contra Spalatens. Cap. 81. §. 3. p. 612. Bellarmine will have it meant of Peter, and so of the Pope; who (in his Opini∣on) is Lapis pretiosus in Fundamento fundatus. But had the Cardinal consulted the Hebrew Text, or the Version of the Septuagint, orVid. Hieronym. in Isaiae 28. vers. 16. Isiodor. Clarius in. 1. Cor. 3. 10. Fundatissimum Fundamen∣tum Christus. Hieromes
Version of both, and his Notes upon them; he might have seen his Error: But though Bel∣larmine Expound this Place of Isay, to be meant of Peter; yet1 Pet. 2. 6. 7. 8. and Act. 4. 11. Peter himself (who under∣stood that Text as well as the Cardinal) refers it to our blessed Saviour, so doesRom. 9. 33. & 10. 11. 1. Cor. 3. 11. & 1. Cor. 10. 4. Paul too; and if this be not sufficient to Convince the Car∣dinal, and such other Papal Parasites; our blessed Saviour expounds it not of Peter, but himself, and that after he hadMatth. 21. 42. But though Paul and Peter, and our blessed Saviour himself do expound the word Rock on which the Church is built, not to be meant of Peter, but Christ the Messiah, (as ap∣pears by the foregoing Texts) yet Maldonate the Jesuit (whose words I shall cite anon) says—That 'tis very far from sense so to expound it. Mal∣donate in Matth. 16. 17. p. 339. Col. 1. E. And yet Card. Cusanus says, That Christ was that Rock. Operum p. 826. And so Cyrill in the Aurea Cate∣nâ Graec. Patrum in Psal∣mos David. 50. per Dan. Barbaram Patriarcham Aquileiensem; Venet. 1569. ad vers. 2. Psal. 39. (aliâs. 40. p. 400. 401. So Gregorius Magnus in 7. Psal. Poenitent. Tom. 2. p. 980. D. So Chry∣sostom, &c. said to Peter—Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church. (2). This being granted (as of necessity it must) that our blessed Saviour is the first Immoveable Rock, and most sure Foundation on which the Church is built; It is also granted, and must be so, (Scrip∣ture expresly saying it) That Peter is a Founda∣tion too, on which the Church is built. But in a way far different from that our Adversaries dream of; (for they do but dream, nor will a∣ny Considering and Intelligent Person think them well awake when they writ such things) For, 1. When we say, That Peter is a Foundati∣on on which the Church is built; our meaning is not, that he has by this, any Prerogative or Su∣periority, much less (what our Adversaries pre∣tend) any Monarchical Supremacy over the rest of the Apostles, and the whole Church; for every one of the Apostles is, as well and as much a Foundation of the Christian Church, as Peter. The1. Pet. 2. 5. Apostle tells us, That the Church is a spiritual House, which is built upon Eph. 2. 20.The Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets,
Jesus Christ being the Chief Corner-stone. And St. John to the same purpose speaking of the Church, the New Jerusalem, says—Rev. 21. 14. The City had Twelve Foundations, and in them the names of the Twelve Apostles of the Lamb. In these Texts, all the Apostles (James and Paul, as well as Pe∣ter) are Foundations of the Church equally, and without any distinction or difference; no Prerogative given to Peter above the rest; much less that vast Monarchical Supremacy which is pretended to. Both the Greek and Latin Fa∣thers say, That the Gospel, the Christian Faith, or the Creed (which contains the Sum of it) or Peter's Confession of our blessed Saviour to be Christ the Son of the Living God, (which is the Chief Fundamental Article of our Faith, I say, That (in those Father's Judgment) this Faith is the Foundation on which the Church is built; St. Augu∣stin, Explaining the Creed to the Catechumens, has these words—Noveritis Symbo∣lum hoc esse Fundamentum super quod aedificium Ec∣clesiae surrexit. Ang. lib. 3. de Symbolo ad Catechu∣men. Tom. 9. Know you (saith he) that this Creed is the Foundation on which the Edifice or Building of the Church is raised. To the same purpose Theophylact tells us— The∣ophylact. in Matth. 16. 17. 18. That the Faith which Peter Confess'd, was to be the Foundation of the faithful, that is of the Church. This is a Truth so evident, that a Learned Jesuit, having Cited and approvedAlcazar's words are these—Censco Apostolos ideo fundatores Ecclesiae dici; quia fidei summam ediderunt, & eff us Cruoris Testimonio, necnon praedicatione & Miraculi in hominum a∣nimis inseverunt. Corn. A Lapide in Apocal. 21. 14. p. 112. Col. 2. C. Alcazar, (a Zealous Roman Catholick) for this very same Opinion, does not only receive and approve, but largely and undeniably prove it, out of Clemens Romanus, Augustin, Hierome, Russin, theConcil. Trident. Sess. 3. Apostolicum Sym∣bolum vocat firmum atque Vnicum Fundamentum, Contra quod portae Inferi non praevalebunt. Idem, ibid. Col. 2. E: Trent Council, andTale Fundamentum à Paulo fuit Jactum. 1 Cor. 3. 10. in Saptens Ar∣chitectus Fundamenum posui. Idem, ibidem. St. Paul: And then adds—Idem dicnt alia Concilia & Pares. Ibid. That other
Councils and Fathers say the same. AnotherSunt inter veteres Authores, qui Interpretan∣tur super hanc Petram; i. e. Super Hanc Fidem; aut Super hanc Fidei Con∣fessionem quâ me Filium esse Dei vivi dixisti: ut Hilarius, Greg: Nyssenus, Chrysostomus, Cyrillus A∣lexandrinus, Ambrosius in Epistolas Pauli, &c. Maldonat. in Matth. 16. 17. p. 339. Col. 1. E. Learned Jesuit confesses, that it was the opinion of many Ancient Fathers (yet he endeavours to Confute it) that those words—(upon this Rock I will build my Church);] are thus to be under∣stood— Upon this Faith, or Confession of Faith which thou hast made, (That I am Christ the Son of the Living God) will I build my Church; And then he Cites many Fathers to prove it; and imme∣diately quotes St. Augustin, and (with little re∣spect or modesty) says—ThatLongiùs etiam à Sensu Reccdens Augusti∣nus interpretatur, super hanc Petram, i. e. Super meipsum, quia Petra erat Christus. Maldonat. ibid. Augustine's Opinion was further from sense, then those he there Cited; because he made Christ the Rock on which the Church was built. (3.) I take it then for Certain, and Confess'd, (and so does a veryCertum est apud Omnes haec. 12. Funda∣menta (Rev. 21. 14.) sig∣nificare. 12. Apostolos; ip∣sorum enim humeris quasi innixus Ecclesiae murus re∣cumbit. Ideo enim eorum nomina fundamentis In∣scripta sunt, ut significe∣tur Ipos esse fundamente & fundatores (haec enim duo eodem recidunt) Ec∣clesiae. Corn. A Lapide in Apoc. 21. 14. p. 312. Col. 1. D. Learned Jesuit too, that the Twelve Foundations, in that Place in the Revela∣tion before Cited (Cap. 21. 14.) signifies the Twelve Apostles on whom the Wall of the New Jerusalem, or the Church of Christ was built; and therefore their Names (as St. John says) were written on those Foundations, to signifie, that the Apostles (Paul as well as Peter) were Founders or Foundations of the Christan Church. And that this may more distinctly appear, and from Scripture it self, that every Apostle, (as well as Peter) is a Foundation of the Christian Church; we are to Consider, First, That in Scripture the Church is commonly call'd1. Tim. 3. 15. 1. Cor. 3. 9. 16. a House, the House of God; and every good Christian is a1 Pet. 2. 5. Lively Stone which goes to the building of that spiritual House. 2. Our
blessed Saviour call'd and sent all his Apostles (as well as Peter) toEph. 4. 11. 12. build this House. He gave some Apostles—for the Edifying () or build∣ing the Body of Christ; That is, theEph. 1. 22. 23. The Church which is his Body. Church. 3. The Apostles all of them, (Paul1 Cor. 3. 9. 10. And I (says Paul) as a Master-Builder, &c. as well as Peter) were Master-Builders of this House. E∣vident it is (in the Text Cited) that St. Paul was a Master-Builder, and St. Peter was no more; nor is he any where in Scripture, expresly said to be so much; though I believe, and grant he was. 4. The Means by which these Master-Builders edify'd and built the Church, were these: Their diligent Preaching of the Gospel, (first, and more Infallibly Communicated to them, then to any others) Their Pious and Exemplary Conversation, which made their Preaching more Effectual, and gave Reputation to it, and themselves; Their Confirming with Miracles, and Sealing the Truth of it, with their Blood and Martyrdom. 5. Hence, the Gospel it self and our Christian Faith, is call'd the Foundation of the Church; as may appear by what is said before, and by St. Paul, who expreslyYe are Gods build∣ing, and as a skilful Ma∣ster-Builder, I have laid The Foundation. 1. Cor. 3. 11: 12. where  peri∣tum, significat. . Hesy∣chius. calls it so. For that Foundation, which he there says he had laid at Corinth (as may appear from the Context) was theFundamentum po∣sui; i. e. prima initia fi∣dei Annunciavi. Lyranus. Annunciavi vitae aeternae fundamentum, id est, Chri∣stum. Fab. Stapulensis. . Theodor. vid. Cor. A Lapide in Apocal. 21. 14. p. 312. Col. 2. E. vid. Gro∣tium in 1. Cor. 3. 10. Rom. 15. 20. Hebr. 6. 1. Ita etiam Lyranus & Glossa Interlinearia. Gospel he had preach'd among them. So that (by the Authorities a∣bove Cited) I think it may appear, that Divines (Ancient and Modern, Protestant and Papist) seem to agree in this; That there is a double Foundation of the Church, Doctrinal and Per∣sonal: The first is the Gospel, or those Holy
Precepts, and gracious Promises contain'd in it; On the belief and practise whereof, the Church solely relyes for Grace here, and Glory hereaf∣after; And therefore, they are Commonly and Justly call'd the Foundation on which the Church is built. Whence it is very usual in Scripture, to say, that by Preaching the Gospel, theAct. 9. 31. 1. Cor 14. 3. 5. 12. so St. Paul's Authority was given him for Edification, or build∣ing the Church. 2. Cor. 10. 8. Church is Edify'd or Built. And because our blessed Saviour immediately call'd all his A∣postles, gave them Authority, and the Infalli∣ble Assistance of his Spirit, and sent them to Preach the Gospel, and they (with great success) did it, Converting Nations, building or found∣ing Churches) therefore they were call'd Master-Builders, Founders, and Foundations of the Chri∣stian Church; as ourIdeo enim Apostolo∣rum nomina Fundamentis Ecclesiae Inscripta sunt. Rev. 21. 14. ut significetur Ipsos esse Fundamenta & Fundatores (haec enim duo eodem recidum) Ecclesiae. Corn. A. Lapide ubi su∣pra, in Apoc. 21. 14. p. 312. Col. 1. D. Adversaries Confess. Now (as to this Particular) as the Apostles were Founders or Foundations of the Christian Church; Peter had no Preheminence or Prerogative a∣bove the other Apostles; He was no more Pe∣tra, a Founder or Foundation of the Church, then the other Apostles. Nay in this (if any) certainly St. Paul might challenge a Preference and Preheminence above Peter himself, or any of the Rest. For he (with truth and modesty enough,1. Cor. 15. 10. I laboured More abundantly then They All. And 2. Cor. 11. 23. tells us—That in Preaching the Gospel he laboured More then they All: (AndPlus reliquis; quia illi, ut plurimum, Judaeis praedicabant, quorum faci∣lis Catechizatio (cum le∣gem & Prophetas admise∣runt) Paulus Gentibus, qui utrāsque negabant. Irenaeus Adversus Haere∣ses lib. 4. cap. 41. p. 379. C. Edit. Feu-Ardentij. Irenaeus gives the Reason of it) His Sufferings were2. Cor. 11. 23. Vid. Originem contra Celsum, Graeco-Lat. p. 49. more, He planted more Churches, He writ more Epistles, then they all; (his be∣ing Fourteen, and all the rest but Seven, and they (in respect of his) short ones too; which
then were, and ever since have been, and (while the World stands) will be Doctrinal Foundati∣ons of the Christian Church. But that which makes more against Peter's Supremacy, and for St. Paul's Preference before him, (at least his In∣dependence upon Peter (as the Supream Mo∣narch of the Church) is; That he tells the Co∣rinthians, That the care of2. Cor. 11. 28. . All The Churches lay upon him. Nor that only, but that he made Orders and1. Cor. 7. 17. . Constitutions for All those Churches, which they were bound to observe—So I Ordain (saith he) in All the Churches. So our English truly renders it. I know the Vulgar Latin (which the TrentConcil. Trident. Sess. 4. In Decreto de E∣dit. Sacrorum Liborum. Fathers ridiculously declare Au∣thentick) renders it otherwise—So I teach in all Churches: but the; Inde ; Edictum, , Constitutio. Glossae veteres in Calce Cyrilli, &c. word there, signifies not to teach, but properly to. Phavorinus, verbo . Ordain and Le∣gally Constitute, Define, and Command. So that thereupon Obedience becomes due from those who are Concern'd in such Constitution or Or∣dinance. And this Theodoret took to be the true meaning of that Text; and therefore he says, That Paul's Ordaining in all Churches, was giving them a. Theodor. in. 1. Cor. 7. 17. Oecumenius and The∣ophylact say to the same purpose, on the same place. Confer 1. Cor. 16. 1. Law, which they were to o∣bey. So that here are two things expresly said of Paul in Scripture, and that by himself, who best knew, and was Testis idoneus, & , a Witness beyond all Exception. 1. That the care of All the Churches lay upon him. 2. That he made Ecclesiastical Laws and Constitutions for them All: whereas (in Scripture) no such thing is said of Peter, or any other Apostle. Upon
consideration of the Premises, some of the An∣cients have call'd St. Paul, A Preacher to the whole World; So. Photius Epist. 117. pag. 158. & ibid. p. 109. Photius and Nicolaus Methonensis Episcopus, speaking of several Apostles Officia∣ting at several places; as of James at Jerusa∣lem, John in Asia, Peter and Paul at Antioch, &c. He adds; concerning. Paulus autem peculiaritèr Orbi V∣niverso. Nicol. Methon. De Corp. & Sang. Chri∣sti in magna Bibl. Pa∣trum. Tom. 12. p. 519. Paul—That he did particularly Officiate to the whole World. And to the same purpose Theodoret, Expounding the words of the Apostle—That the care of All the Churches lay upon him; He says, That the. V∣niversi Orbis Terrarum sol∣licitudinem mecum gero. Theodor. in. 2. Cor. 11. 28. sol∣licitude and care of the Whole World lay upon Paul. More than this cannot be said of Peter, nor is there half so much said of him, as of St. Paul in Scripture. Had Peter told us —That the care of All the Churches lay upon him; and that He made Orders and Constituti∣ons, to be observed In All Churches, (both which are expresly said of St. Paul) the Canonists and Popish Party, would have had some pre∣tence (who now have none) for Peter's Supre∣macy. I urge not this, to Ascribe to Paul, that Supremacy we deny to Peter; (For neither had they, nor any other Apostle, any such thing) but only to shew, That St. Paul (his La∣bos, Sufferings, the many Churches founded by him, and His Canonical Writings consider'd) may be thought (not without reason) a more eminent Founder of the Christian Church, then St. Peter. 2. But as it is, and must be confess'd by Divines, Ancient and Modern, Protestants and Papists, That the Gospel is the Doctrinal
Foundation, and that Petra, on which the Church is Built; So there is also a Personal Foundation, evidently mention'd in Scripture. I mean Persons, on whom the Christian Church is built: And they are 1. Our blessed Saviour. 2. His Apostles. 1. That our blessed Saviour is a Rock,1. Our blessed Saviour. and that , the most firm and immoveable Rock on which the Church is Built, is evident from the Vid. Matth. 21. 40. Rem. 9. 33. & Rom. 10, 11, & 1. Cor. 3. 11. & 1. Cor. 10. 4. & Act. 4. 11. & 1. Pet. 2. 6. 7. 8. & Isai. 28. 16. The Sep∣tuagint Translate it thus—. Vid. Hiero∣nymum in locum; & 1 Pet. 2. 6. 7. ubi Isaiam ci∣tat▪ & eadem pene verba habet, quae apud. 70. In∣terpretes hodiè Extant. vide Procopium in Isai. 44. p. 504. & Fabr. Sta∣pulensem in Matth. 16. 18.Scriptures before Cited. Such a Rock, as Pe∣ter neither was, nor could be, much less any of those they call his Successors. For, 1. Our bles∣sed Saviour was, and still is a Rock onChristus lapis sum∣mus Angularis Omnia su∣stinens, & in unam fidem Abrahae Colligens eos, qui in Vtroque Testamento apti sunt in aedificationem Dei. Irenaeus lib. 4. c. 42. p. 380. Edit. Feuardentij. which (as Irenaeus tells us) the Vniversal Church, both be∣fore and since his coming into the World, was built. He wasGen. 3. 15. promised by God presently after the fall of Adam, and then successfully byAct. 13. 18. 24. Luc. 1. 70. & Luc. 24. 27. all the Prophets; His Death and Passion was a Propi∣tiation, as well for the Sins of those whoHebr. 9. 15. li∣ved before, as ours who live after it; and those Pro∣mises of the Messiah were such, as all the Patri∣archs, Prophets, and Pious men before Christ did Hebr. 11. 13. vid. Eusebium Hist. lib. 1. cap. 2. pag. 6. B. Edit. Valesij. . &c. Omnes ab origine Generis hu∣mani qui Justitiae laude floruerunt, ut Abraham, Moses, & Quicunque postea Justi, Omnes Chri∣stum agnoverunt, eíque tanquam Dei Filio, debitum Cultum Exhibuerunt. Et Demonstrat. Evang. lib. 1. Capp. 5. 6.know and believe. Nay, (if we believe Euse∣bius)
the Promises of the Messias, were. Christum distinctè cognitum habuerunt. En∣seb. Hist. lib. 1. c. 4. p. 16. B. clear∣ly and distinctly revealed to the Ancient Patriarchs and Prophets (though in a less degree and measure of clearness) and their Belief and suitable Obedience such, that (though they had not the name, yet they might truly be. Si non no∣mine, reipsa tamen Chri∣stianos. Idem plane ha∣bet Augustinus, Retract. lib. 1. cap. 13. call'd Christians before Christ. The Apostle tells us, That theGalat. 3. 8. Gospel was preach∣ed to Abraham, and so it was to all the Ancient Church, by theLuc. 24. 25. 26. 27. 44. Prophets; who foretold them of the Incarnation, Passion, and Resurrection of Christ. It was the Gospel St. Paul every where preach'd, and yet he says, that He preached NoAct. 26. 22. 23. and Act. 28. 23. other Things, then those which The Prophets And Moses did say should come. And this is a truth so mani∣fest, that (to say no more of the Ancient Christi∣an Writers)Lombard. Sent. I. 3. Dist. 25. vid. Johan. Mar∣tinez de Ripalda ad di∣ctam Distinctionem. Peter Lombard, and the Popish School-men, writing De fide Antiquorum, of the Faith by which the Saints, before our blessed Sa∣viour, were saved; they all say, that they then (as we now) were saved by Faith in Christ their Re∣deemer. The difference was, 1. They believed in Christo Exhibendo, we in Christo Actu Exhibito. 2. Their Faith before our blessed Saviour's com∣ing, was more Imperfect and Implicit; Ours (since he is come, and the Gospel clearly publish'd) much more Perfect and Explicite. This I say, to prove that our blessed Saviour was the Rock, on which the Church under the Old Testament was built, and (in this Particular) such a Rock and Founda∣tion of the Church as Peter never was, nor could be; it being impossible he should be a Foundation of that Church which was founded almost Four
thousand years before he was born. 2. Our bles∣sed Saviour is a Rock and Foundation, on which the whole Christian Church is built, even the Apo∣stles themselves, as well as others: who (all of them,Augustinus in E∣vang. secundum Matth. Serm. 13. Tom. 10. p. 58. D. Basil. 1569. Super hanc Petram quam confes∣sus es, dicens; Tues Chri∣stus Filius Dei vivi, aedi∣jicabo Ecclesiam meam. Id est, Super Meipsum aedifi∣cabo Ecclesiam meam. Super Me aedificabo Te; non Me super Te—Non in Pauli, nec in Petri Nomine baptizati sumus, sed Christi; ut Petrus ae∣dificetur super Petram, non Petra super Petrum. Ibid. pag. 59. A. Peter as well as Paul) in respect of Christ (who is the great Immoveable Rock, which sustains the, &c. Om∣nium siquidem fundamen∣tum est Christus, qui sibi ad mota, fixa firmáque susti∣neat. Procopius in Cap. 44. Isaiae. p. 504. And a little after—, &c. Ecclesiae idem fundamentum jesit, qui Ipse Fundamentum est, super quod & nos, tanquam Lapides pretiosi, superstruimur. Procopius ibid. pag. 519. Omnis Ecclesiae Compages innititur & Incumit, ut nunquam cadat, summo Angulari Lapide Christo Jesu. Augustin. Enarrat. in Psal. 86. Tom. 8. pag. 955. Operum Basil. 1569. whole Building) are Superstructions; though otherwise, in respect of the Christian World converted by their Preaching, they are call'd Foundations; yet only Secundary Founda∣tions, all of which are built upon the Principal and prime Foundation Jesus ChristFundamentum est solus Christus, vel fides Ipsius. Object. Apoc. 21. 14. Apostoli sunt Fun∣damenta. Sol 1. Fundamentum propriè, est illud quod habet firmitatem & stabilitatem in se; sic Solus Christus est Fundamentum. 2. Impropriè, illud quod adhaeret primo Fundamento; sicut sunt Lapides primarij Fundamento inhaerentes: sic Apostoli dicuntur fundamenta qui Primitùs Ad∣haeserunt Christo. Lyranus in. 1. Cor. 3. 11. vid. Per. Lombard. in locum. pag. 73. C. D. Christus primus Lapis & Angularis; super Christum Apostoli & Prophetae, super illos, Nos aedificati sumus. Maldonatus in Matth. 16 pag. 342. And again—Multi in eodem Fundamento Lapides sunt; summus & primus solus est Christus, & praeter illud, Fundamentum Aliud nemo potest ponere; super illud autem, etiam alia sunt, quae eo nituntur, Fundamenta: nam & Apostoli & Prophetae Fundamentum Ap∣pellantur, sed ipso summo Angulari Lapide Christo Jesu. Eph. 2. 20. Maldonat. in Matth. 7. 24. p. 178. So in the like Instance, all the Apostles (Peter as well as the rest) were both Sheep and Shepherds. 1. Sheep, in re∣spect of Christ, who is the. Hebr. 13. 20. great and 1. Pet. 5. 4. chief Shepherd. MyJohn 10. 27. Sheep hear my voice, (says our blessed Saviour:) The Apostles did so; when he call'd them, they heard and obey'd him. Again, I layJohn 10. 15. down my life for my Sheep; so he did for his Apostles, else they could not have been saved;
And therefore they also are his Sheep. 2. Yet they were Shepherds too (sent by, and subordinate to the great and chief Shepherd Jesus Christ) in re∣spect of the Church and Christians, over which theAct. 20. 28. Holy Ghost had set them. 3. Our bles∣sed Saviour is such a foundation and Founder of his Church, as does not find, but make these Lively Stones, which are the Materials with which he builds it. He gives his Spirit, and by it Grace and a Lively Faith, which things alone make men Lively Stones, and fit for that Building. This no Apostle, (not Peter, much less any succeed∣ing Pope) ever did, or could do; nor (without great folly and impiety) can pretend to. 4. Our blessed Saviour is such a Rock, such a Foundati∣on and Founder of the Church, as was and is Proprietary and the sole true Owner of it; 'tis his House, purchased with his precious Blood; and he e∣ver had, and still hath a Magisterial and Imperial power over it, to rule and govern it; He isRev. 15. 3. King of Saints. 'Tis true, the Prophets and Apo∣stles are called Foundations and Founders of the Church; Those of the Judaical Church, before our blessed Saviour's Incarnation; these of the Christian Church, after it. But the Power, and the Authority, the Prophets or Apostles had, (even the greatest of them (Moses, or Peter) was only Ministerial, the Authority of Servants, deriv'd from our blessed Saviour, and Exercised under him. So the Apostle tells us—Hebr. 3. 5. 6. , ut famulus: Christus , super domum, ut Filius & Do∣minus. That Moses was faithful in all his House, (i. e. in the Judaical Church) As A Servant; but Christ as a Son, over
his Own House, whose House Are We, &c. So in the Christian Church, the Apostles (All of them) were Prime and Principal Ministers, from and un∣der Christ, to call and build the Church. They were Servants of Christ, and (for his2. Cor. 4. 5. sake) of the Church: they had Ministerium, but not Imperium. Neither Peter, nor any other, had that vast Monarchical Supremacy over the whole Church, which is (not without great Error and Impiety) pretended to; when they blasphemous∣ly say—That PeterChristus Petrum V∣niversi fidelium Generis Caput Constituit—ut qui Ei Successit, Eandem Plane Totius Ecclesiae Po∣testatem habere voluerit. Catechismus Tridenti∣nus Part. 1. cap. 10. §§. 11. 12. & praecipuè. §. 13. p. 117. Edit. Paris. 1635. 2. The Apostles. was our blessed Saviours Suc∣cessor, and (by him) Constituted the Head of the V∣niversal Church, with the very same Power our bles∣sed Saviour had. But this they say only, without any Proof or Probability; and so transeat cum cae∣teris erroribus. 2. But although we say, (and have evident Rea∣son and Authority for it) That our blessed Savi∣our was the one and only prime and chief foundation and founder of the Church, and all the Apostles (Pe∣ter as well as the Rest) Superstructions in respect of him; yet we know and acknowledge, that (both in Scripture and Antiquity) they are called Foun∣dations and Founders of the Christian Church in respect of the Churches, call'd, Converted, and Con∣stituted by them; but all Equally so; Peter was no more a foundation then Paul, or James, or John. For, 1. They were all immediately call'd by ourMatth. 10. 1. 2. 3. &c. Mark. 3. 14. Luk. 9. 1. &c. blessed Saviour, without any de∣pendence Paulus Apostolus non ab hominibus nec per hominem, Gal. 1. 1. , &c. Dominus eum vocavit voelitus, homi∣ne non usus Administro. Theodoret in loc. Non Petro. Estius in locum.upon Peter, or any body else, (as is Evident in the Text it self) And this is gene∣rally Confess'd by the Popish Commentators, even
the Jesuits, such as Tirinus, Menochius, &c. I say, all the Apostles had this immediate calling to their Apostleship, from our blessed Saviour, except Matthias; and he was not chosen by Peter (who neither knew nor had any such Supremacy, as without all reason, is now ascribed to him) but theMatthias à Collegio Apostolorum factus est A∣postolus; Ita Estius in Gal. 1. 1. Colledge of the Apostles, and consent of the faithful there present. And though a Learn∣ed Jesuit, (zealous for Peter, and the Popes Su∣premacy) would have Peter to be theHaec omnia factae sunt dirigente Petro, qui totius Operis fuit Chorae∣gus. A Lapide in cap. 1. Act. Apost. p. 57. Col. 1. C. Directior in that business (the Election of Matthias) yet he can∣not deny, but it was done by the CommonApostoli cateríque fideles Communi consensis Nominarunt duos, &c. A. Lapide, ibidem. Con∣sent of the Apostles and Brethren. 2. As the Apo∣stles all of them, (Matthias excepted) had their call Immediately and Equally from our blessed Savi∣our, without any dependence upon St. Peter; so they had their Commission immediately from him, and in it, the very same Power, equally given to all. The same power given to any one, (even St. Peter) was given to every one. This is Evident, 1. From those plain Texts where theirMatth. 10. 1. 2. 3. &c. Mark. 3. 13. 14. 15. Luk. 9. 1. Com∣mission and Apostolical Power is given them by our blessed Saviour, before the Resurrection; when they were sent to theMatth. 10. 5. 6. Jews only; and the very same Power equally given to all. 2. And from those other (as clear and plain) Texts, where∣in (after the Resurrection) they had Commissi∣on and Authority given them by our blessed Savi∣our, to preach toMatth. 28. 18. 19. Mark. 16. 15. 16. John. 20. 22. 23. all Nations; where it is—As my Father sent me, so I send you, and Go ye, &c. All equally sent, no difference or distinction of the Persons, as to any Priviledge or Precedence, no
Degrees of Power more or greater in one, then e∣very one. Their Commission and Authority gi∣ven in it, was the very same, and equally given to all the Apostles. These Truths are so evident in the Text, that some sober Popish Writers do both profess and industriously prove them. Franc: A Victoria, (prime Professor of Divinity at Salaman∣ca in Spain, and (as they esteemed and called him) anFrancis. A Victoria. SS. Theol. Salamanticensis Academiae, in primariâ Cathedra Professore Exi∣mio & Incomparabili. Ita habet Libri sui Epigra∣phe seu Titulus. Excellent and Incomparable Divine) Propo∣ses and proves these two Conclusions. 1. All the Omnem Potestatem, quam Apostoli habuerunt, reciperunt Immediatè à Christo. Victoria Prelect. 2. De Potest. Eccles. Conc. 3. p. 84.Power the Apostles had, was (by them) recei∣ved Immediately from Christ. 2. All theApostoli Omnes ha∣buerunt aequalem Potesta∣tem cum Petro. Ibid. Conc. 4. p. 85. Apo∣stles had Equal Power with Peter: And then he Ex∣plains his meaning thus—Quod sic Intelligo; quod quilibet Apostolus ha∣buit Potestatem Ecclesia∣sticam in toto Orbe, & ad Omnes Actus ad quos Pe∣trus habuit. Ibid. That every Apostle had Ecclesiastical Power in the whole World, and to do Every Act, which Peter had Power to do. But then (to please the Pope and his Party) he Excepts those Acts which were proper and belong'dNon loquor de il∣lis Actibus, qui spectant ad solum summum Ponti∣sicem, ut Congregatio Ge∣neralis Concilij. Ibidem. peculiarly to the Pope; as Calling of a General Council. But this is gratis dictum, without any pretence of proof, or probability from Scripture, and evidently contra∣dictory to the known Practise of the Christian World, after the Emperors became Christians, who alone (and not the Pope) call'd all the Anci∣ent Councils; as is fully proved by a late and LearnedVid. Hist. Conc. Generalium, per Ed. Ri∣cherium Doct. & Socium Sorbonicum. Colon. 1680. where he clearly proves, the first Eight General Councils were call'd by the Emperors. Sorbon Doctor. 5. But to proceed; That Place inMatth. 16. 19. Matthew is urged in the foregoing Objection, to prove the Monarchical Supremacy of Peter—I Give unto thee, the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and what∣soever thou shalt bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, &c. Now that I may give a short
and distinct Answer to this place: I consider, 1. That this Text is generally urg'd (though most Impertinently) to prove Peter's and the Popes Power over Kings and Emperors. SoCap. Solicit. 6. Ex∣tra De Major. & Obedi∣entiâ. vid. Baron. Tom▪ 11. ad Ann. 1076. §. 25. 26. In∣nocent. III. Cites it to prove, that the Emperor is subject to the Pope. To the same purpose Pope Boniface VIII. produceth it, in his Impious and (as to the Nonsense and Inconsequence of it) ridiculousCap. unam sanct. 1. De Major. & Obedi∣entia. Extravag. Com. Extravagant; whichBellarm. de Pont. Rom. l. 5. c. 7. §. Item; & §. sic enim. Bellar∣mine approves, and Leo. X. and hisConc. Lateran. sub Leo. 10. Sess. 11. apud Bi∣nium. Tom. 9. p. 153. A. B. Lateran Council (which they call a General one) Inno∣vates and Confirms; and yet a lateHonoratus Faber Societi Jesu, libro cui Titulus—Una Fi∣des, Unius Ecclesiae Rom. Delingae. 1567. cap. 19. Cujus Lemma est; Claves Regni Coelorum Duntaxac Petro Datae fuerunt. Jesuit, expresly tells us, (and you may be sure, with theProdiit dictus Li∣ber, cum facultate Superi∣orum, & Privilegio Caesa∣reo. Approbation of his Superiors) That the Keys were given Only to Peter. These, and ma∣ny more, quote this Place to the same pur∣pose. 2. It is certain (andDabo ait, non do; promittit, non dat. Luc. Brugensis in Matth. 16. 19. Ita etiam Faber Sta∣pulensis in dictum lo∣cum, ut & alij. Vide Ca∣tenam Graecorum Pa∣trum in Matthaeum à Ni∣cetâ Serrarum Episcopo Collectam; & à Balth: Corderio Jesuita Editá Tholos. 1647. & ibi Cy∣ril. p. 548. ubi ait, Chri∣stum Claves Petro promis∣sisse. Matth. 16. 19. Sed non dedisse. Joh. 20. 22. 23.—, &c. Confess'd) that our bles∣sed Saviour in this place of Matthew, does not Actually give St. Peter the Power of the Keys (be what it will) but (pro futuro) promise that he will give it. For it is in that Text,  da∣bo, I will give, not I have given, or do give; and therefore they must shew some other place in Scripture, where that Power is Actually given to Peter, and that to him alone; else, (if it be given to the other Apostles as well as to him) it will be Impossible to prove his Prerogative and Supremacy over the other Apostles, from that Power, which they have as well as he.
3. But it is certain, that the Power of the Keys (b what it will) was (by our blessed Saviour) af∣terwards given to all the Apostles, as well, and much, as to Peter. So it evidently Appears b St.Matth. 18. 18. Matthew, in the place Cited. Where ou blessed Saviour speaking to all his Disciples, a well as Peter, hath these words—Verily I say unt You, ('tis all &c. Petro dedit Cla∣ves cum Ligadi Potesta∣te; eam vero Potestatem tradidit & Discipulis Om∣nibus. Procop. in Isaiae Cap. 61. & p. 715. 716. Potestatem tribuit Aposto∣lis. Hieronym in Matth. 18. 18. so even the Po∣pish Commentators up∣on that Place; Menochi∣us. Luc. Brugensis, &c. of them he speaks to) whatsoeve you shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heave and whatsoever you shall loose on Earth, shall loosed in Heaven. Here his Promise made befor to Peter, Chap. 16. 19. is made Good to him and the Power of the Keys given him; but 't manifest, that it is (in the same time and Plac equally given to all the Apostles, as well as Peter. Their own Authentick Offices, no and heretofore in Publick use in the Church Rome, do attest this truth. In one of which they are taught to Invocate the Apostles in th Form—Processionale jux∣ta Ritum Ecclesiae Ro∣manae restitutum Paris. 1663. p. 205. In Com∣mendatione Animae. Orate pro eo Omnes Sancti Aposto Quibus à Domino data est Potestas Ligandi & Svendi. The Power of Binding and Loosin (and so the Power of the Keys) was given to the Apostles, as well as to Peter. This theManuale dictum. Londini. 1554. p. 72. Manual of the Church of Salisbury acknowledg that the Power of binding and loosing, was given Paul as well as Peter; and further adds—Quilibet Sacerdos est Vicarius Petri & Pau∣li, &c. Ibid. p. 73. Th Every Priest is Vicar of Peter and Paul, and Petri & Pauli ligat & solvit) binds and looseth their stead and place. TheMissale dictum Ms. In Formulâ Abso∣lutionis. p. 111. 112. Ancient MS. Msal belonging to the Abbots of Evesham, says the ∣ry same thing; So doesApud Eadmerum Hist. Novorum, per Sel∣denum lib. 1. pag. 27. their St. Anselme: a
the OldApud G. Ferrari¦um De Cath. Eccl. Divi nis Officiis. Romae. 1591 p. 39. in Absolut. plurali & p. 40. In Absolut. sin¦gulari. Col. 1. A. B. Ordo Romanus expresly says; That the Power of the Keys, or the Power of binding and loosing, was (by our blessed Saviour) given to all the Apostles, and (in them) to all their Succes∣sors. Vide Bandinum, Lombardum, &c. Sent. lib. 4. Dist. 18. 19. and the rest there. Their Trent Catechism (published by Pope Pius. V. accord∣ing to the Decree of the Trent Council) assures us, That everyCatechis. Roman. Paris. 1635. Part. 2. c. 11. De. 10. Symboli Artic. §. 4. 6. Dominus Episcopis tantum & Sacerdotibus hanc Potestatem dedit. Et Idem habemus §. 9. Ibi∣dem. Bishop and Priest has the Power of the Keys given him by our blessed Saviour. Hence it is, that in their RomanPontificale Roma∣num. Romae. 1611. p. 52. De Ordinat. Presbyteri. Pontifical, in their Ordination of a Priest, this Power of the Keys, of remitting and retaining sins, is given to every one Ordain'd to that Office, and (which may seem strange) in the veryJoh. 20. 22. 23. Ac∣cipe Spiritum Sanctum, quorum remisseris peccata, remitt antur eis; & quorum retinueris, retenta sunt. same words our blessed Saviour used, when he gave that Power to Pe∣ter and the other Apostles. Nor is this all; Their Oecumenical Council of Trent approves and (by a Synodical Definition and Decree) confirms all this; And says further, That ourChristus Ascensurus in Coelos, Sacerdotes sui Ipsius Vicarios reliquit, tanquam Praesides ac Judi∣ces, ad quos Omnia mor∣talia crimina deferantur; quo, Pro Potestate Clavi∣um, remissionis & retenti∣onis Sententiam pronunci∣ent. Concil. Trid. Sess. 14. De Poenitentia. c. 5. blessed Saviour, before his Ascention, left All Priests His Vicars, as Presidents and Judges, who By the Power of the Keys, should Pronounce Sen∣tence of the Remission and retaining of Sins. And this they there prove out of this very PlaceMatth. 16. 19. Conc. Trident. Ibid. c. 6. of Matthew, from which they would (and ge∣nerally endeavor to) prove the PopesSummam Absolu∣tamque Potestatem, Supre∣mum Caput, summumique Pastorem. Luc. Brugensis. in locum Matth. 16. 19. Ab∣solute Monarchical Supremacy, And Power to De∣pose Kings and Emperors. To omit all other In∣stances (which are too many) sure I am, that Pope Innocent. IV. builded his Power to De∣pose the Emperor Friderick upon this one
Text—Nos Christi Vices tenentes, in terris, Nobis∣que in. Petri Personâ, di∣ctum sit, Quodcunque Li∣gaveris, &c. Imperatonem Privamus, & Subditos à Juramento fidelitatis ab∣solvimus. Apud Binium. Conc. Tom. 7. Part. 2. p. 854. We (saith that Pope) being Christ's Vicar, and it being said to us, in the Person of Peter, whatsoever thou shalt bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, &c. do Depose that Emperor, and Ab∣solve all His Subjects from their Oaths of Allegi∣gance, &c. From the Premisses, and Authorities above Cited, I think 'tis Evident, 1. That in that Text Matth. 16. 19. The Power of the Keys, was only promised, but not Actually given to Peter. 2. When it was really and (de facto) gi∣ven him, Matth. 18. 18. It was as well, and as much given to all the other Apostles as to him: as (besides what is aforesaid) is attested, and ex∣presly affirmed by PopeVide Sacramenta∣rium Gregorij Magni, per Hugonem Menardū Paris. 1642. p. 113. In Vi∣gilia 88. Petri & Pauli. Where they pray thus—Deus, qui Ligandi Solven∣dique Licentiam This A∣poslolis Commisisti, &c. Barlaam de Primatu Pa∣pae. lib. 2. Confesseth that the Keys were given to Peter—, &c. Sed Non illi so∣li, sed Pari cum Ipso Dig∣nitate, unicuíque è duode∣cem. And then he proves, it from Matth. 18. 18. and Joh. 20. 22. 23. The Learned Dan: Huetius cites this, In Notis ad Originem. Part. 2. p. 46. Col. 1. but neither gives, nor pretends to give a∣ny Just Answer to it. Only he says—Bar∣laamum corrupit . This was easily said, and Barlaam might as easily have answered, Doctssimum Huetium corrupit . Gregory the Great, in his Book of the Sacraments, published by Hugo Menardus, a Learned Benedictine Monck; where Pope Gregory (and he as Wise and Learned, and as Infallible as those who follow him) teaches them to pray thus; O God, who hast Committed the Power of Binding and Loosing To the Apostles, &c. He knew not (it seems) any Supremacy given to Peter by our blessed Saviour, when he gave him Potestatem Clavium, The Power of the Keys; seeing the same Power was given to other Apo∣stles, who never claim'd any such Supremacy. 3. Lastly, I desire then to know, by what Logick they can prove St. Peter's Supremacy over all the Apostles, for having a Power (the Power of the Keys) which every Apostle had as well as He. 4. There is one placeJoh. 20. 21. 22. 23. more (and but one) where∣in the Power of the Keys is Actually given to Peter; The words are these—As my Father sent
me, so send I you; And he breathed on them, and said; Receive the Holy Ghost; whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted, and whose sins ye retain, they are retained. Where, 1. It is certain and confess'd, That though the Power of the Keys, be not here expresly nam'd, yet to retain and remit here in John signifies the very same thing, That to bind and loose in Matthew, where only the Power of the Keys is named. This the Trent Catechism, and the Trent Fathers themselves must, and do acknowledge, (as will manifestly appear by the Places cited in theVide Catechism. Trident. Part. 1. cap. 11. §. 4. et. loca in Margine notata, in Edit. Paris. 1635. p. 129. & Ibid. §. 9. p. 132. & Part. 2. cap. 5. De Poenitent. §. 12. p. 309. 310. & Ibidem §. 55. p. 339. 340. & Conc. Trid. Sess. 14. De Poenitentiâ. cap. 5. & 6. Margent) and the most Learned Commentators on this Place in John, allow it, and tell us truly,Remittuntur eis, ve∣rè & reipsâ Judicio meo Patrìsque Coelestis, Soluta sunt in Coelo; quomodo lo∣quitur Matth. 16. 19. Luc. Brugensis in Joh. 20. 23. Comment. Tom. 4. pag. 134. Vid. Catenam Graec. Patrum in Johan. per Corderium, ad Joh. 20. 23. p. 459. And Ammo∣nius there. That remittere here in John, is the very same with solvere, to loose, in Matthew; and so reti∣nere here, the same with ligare in Matthew. 2. And 'tis as certain, (from the express words of the Text) and the undoubted meaning of them) that the Power of the Keys is here given Equally to all the Apostles, as well as Peter; For so the words of their Commission, I send You (mine Apostles) and he Breathed on Them; (his Apostles) whose sins Ye (my Apo∣stles) retain, &c. The Authority and Power here mention'd, is (without distinction or dif∣ference of Degree) Equally given to all; to James, and John, and Jude, as well as Peter. 3. Nay more; it isEgo, filius Dei, per∣functus Vicibus meis, mitto Aequali Authoritate in Mundum Vniversum, vos, quos creavi Apostolos me∣os,—Ordino vos Suc∣cessores meos—Quod ait Euthymius, Chrysosto∣mum secutus—Apostoli tanquam Legati ac Vica∣rij Christi, sustinentes Per∣sonam ipsius absentis. Luc. Brugensis in Joh. 20. 21. Commentariorum in. 4. Evangelia. Tom. 4. pag. 172. Confess'd, and positive∣ly and truly affirm'd, by a very Learned Popish Author, That all the Apostles (as well as Peter) are by this Commission Vicars and Successors of
Christ, and have the Power of the Keys (to bind and loose, retain and remit sins) Equally gi∣ven to them All. Now, if this be true, then it will inevitably follow, That all the Arguments they usually bring to prove the Pope's Monar∣chical Supremacy (even over Kings and Empe∣rors) because he was Christ's Vicar, and had the Power of the Keys given him; I say, All such Arguments, from such Topicks, will not only be inconsequent, but indeed altogether imper∣tinent and ridiculous. For if this Argument be good and concluding, The Keys were given to Peter, and he is the Vicar of Christ: Ergo, He is the sole Supream Monarch of the whole Church. Then this will be as good and concluding—E∣very Apostle (as well as Peter) was the Vicar of Christ, and had the Keys given him: Ergo, E∣very Apostle was sole Supream Monarch of the whole Church. And then (by this wild Logick) we shall have Twelve or Thirteen Persons, and every one of them sole Supream Monarch of the whole Church. That the Power of the Keys, was by our blessed Saviour, given to All the Apostles as well as Peter, seems to me Evident by the Premisses, and that all of them (as much and as well as He) were Christi Vicarij, Christ's Vicars, may be as Evident, and must be Confess'd, even by our Adversaries; unless they will deny the plain Truth of Scripture, and their own recei∣ved Principles. For, 1. Our blessed Saviour tells us—As myJoh. 20. 21. Father sent me, so send I you. Christ was our greatHebr. 3. 1. Apostle sent immedi∣ately
by his Father, so that he was Legatus & Vicarius Patris, his Father's Vicar and Ambassa∣dor (as St.Deus erat in Chri∣sto, quasi in Vicario & Le∣gato. Ambros. in. 2. Cor. 5. 19. Explicat. Ambros. Cap. 16. Ambrose says) And our blessed Saviour sends his Apostles, as his Vicars and Am∣bassadors. So the same Father tells us, in the Deus pro Christo Vicarios dedit Apostolos, ut Pro Ipso praedicarent re∣conciliationem. Idem ibi∣dem.same place; and St. Paul says as much of 2 Cor. 5. 19. 20.himself and the other Apostles—He hath Committed to us the Word of Reconciliation; now then We are Ambassadors, for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us; we pray you in Christs's stead. All the Apostles were (by our blessed Saviour) Commission'd and sent as his Ambassadors, what they did was in Christ's stead and place. They were his Vicars, and what they did was as his Deputies, Vice-Christi, supplying his place. ThusObsecramus pro Chri∣sto; i. e. Loco Christi, cu∣jus sumus Ministri. Lyra∣nus in locum. 2. Cor. 5. 20. Lyranus, and the InterlinatoryMinisterium recon∣ciliationis dedit nobis; i. e. Vicariis Apostolis; And again, Legatione fungi∣mur pro Christo; i. e. Vice Christi. Glossator, (and they no Lutherans) Explain that place; so the Famous Bishop of Paris, and Fa∣ther of the School-men, PeterDedit quosdam A∣postolos; i. e. Vicarios Prae∣dicationis suae. Lombard. in Eph. 4. pag. 171. & rursus in. 2. Cor. 5. 19. 20. Dedit Ministerium reconciliationis nobis A∣postolis, Vicariis Christi. pag. 125. Col. E. Lombard; so PopeVide Johan. La∣noium Epist. Tom. 6. pag. 292. Gregory the Great; nay the Jesuits (Instituta Societat. Jesu. Tom. 3. pag. 262. 263. acknowledge their Superiors (though they be neither Popes nor Apostles) to be Vicarios Chri∣sti, Christ's Vicars. And that I may neither trouble the Reader, nor my self with more Te∣stimonies; Their own Authentick Offices, which have been; or are Approved, and publickly used in their Church, expresly say the very same thing; That the A∣postles (All of them as well as Peter) were Christ's Vicars; particularly, the present Ro∣man
Vid. Missale Ro∣man. ex Decreto Conci∣lij Trident. restitutum, Pij. 5. Jussu Editum. Cle∣ment. 8. Authoritate re∣cognitum; Antv. 1619. Inter Praefationes Missae sine notis. p. 219. ubi in Praefat. De Apostolis, Sic Orant—Aequum est Te Domine supplicitèr ex∣orare, ut gregem tuum, Pa∣stor aeterne, non deseras; sed per Apostolos tuos, conti∣nuâ protectione Custodias; ut iisdem Rectoribus guber∣natur, quos operis Tui Vi∣carios eidem Contulisti prae∣esse Pastores. Hanc O∣rationem iisdem plane verbis conceptam, habes in Missali secudum u∣sum Yorke, inter Prae∣fationes Missales, in Cal∣ce Tom. 1. & in Missali secundum usum Ecclesiae Salisburiensis. Inter Prae∣fationes Missales. And Guil: Estius the Learned Professor and Chancel∣lor of the University of Doway, expresly ap∣proves, and confirms this; in his Comment. on the. 2. Cor. 5. 20. Postquam Sublatus est Christus in Coelum, Nos (Apostoli) Illius Vices Gerimus in terrâ. Deus igitur primus Author, Chri∣stus Minister principalis, Nos (Apostoli) Ministri secundarij, at que Vicarij, A Deo & Christo Missi.Missal, as does manifestly appear by the place quoted in the Margent. This then being certain, and (by our Adversa∣ries) Confess'd, That every Apostle (as well as Peter) was Christ's Vicar, and had the Pow∣er of the Keys given him by our blessed Sa∣viour, at the same time, and in the very sameMatth. 18, 18. Joh. 20. 22. 23. words when and wherein they were given to Peter: I say, this being granted (as it is, and must) it will be absolutely im∣possible for them to prove any Superiority in Peter (much less a Monarchical Supre∣macy) over the other Apostles, from his Ti∣tle of Christ's Vicar, or the Power of the Keys, both which every Apostle had as well and as much as He, unless you will say, That very Power which only makes Peter E∣qual to the rest, makes him their Monarch and Superior. Sure I am, if this Argument be good (and they have no better) Peter is Christ's Vicar, and has the Power of the Keys: Ergo, he is Superior to John. Then this will be good too—John is Christ's Vicar, and has the Power of the Keys: Ergo, He is Superior to Peter. But enough (if not too much) of this. For the Arguments they bring for the Popes Supremacy, drawn from his being Christ's Vicar, and having the Pow∣er of the Keys, are such as rather deserve pi∣ty, or scorn, then any serious Answer, were it not that their greatest men (for Place and
Learning, evenSo Pope. Bonif. 8. urges that Place, Matth. 16. 19. Quodcunque Li∣gaveris, &c. Cap. unam Sanctam. 1. De Major. & Obed. Extrav. Com∣mun. And Innocent. 4. Justifies his Deposing the Emperor, (as is a∣foresaid) from those words—Quodcun∣que Ligaveris, and the Power given to Peter and the Pope by them. Binius Concil. Tom. 7. Part. 2. pag. 854. Edit. Paris. 1636. And Gregory. 7. cites the same Place, to the same purpose. Lib. 8. Epist. 21. And the same Gregory grounds his Excommunication of the Emperor Hen. 4. upon the Power of the Keys. Mihi est Potestas data Ligandi in Coelo & Terrâ. Hac Ideo Fiduciâ Fretus, Henrico totius Regni Teutonicorum & Italiae gubernacula Contradico, & Omnes Christianos à vincu∣lo Juramenti, quod sibi fecere, ant facient, absolvo. Baronius Annal. Tom. 11. Ad Ann. 1076. §§. 25. 26. their Infallible Popes in their Authentick Bulls) perpetually urge them, to prove the Pope Superior to Kings and Empe∣rors, and to have (what Pope Pius. V. in This Impious Bull against Queen Elizabeth pretends to) Power to Depose them, and Absolve Sub∣jects from all Oaths of Allegiance and Fidelity. The Premises considered, I think it is Evident, and (I doubt not but) Impartial and Intelligent men think so too: 1. That every Apostle, as well as Peter, was Christ's Vicar, and had the Power of the Keys Com∣mitted to him, by our blessed Saviour, and that Immediately without Any dependence on Peter, or any other; Sure I am, that Cardinal Cusanus (though a zealous Assertor of the Pope's Su∣premacy) was convinc'd of this Truth (as to St. Paul, and so he might for the Rest) and does in Terminis Acknowledge it. He says, That both Peter and Paul werePetrus & Paulus ambo Principes. Card. Cusanus. Epist. 2. De u∣su Communionis ad Bo∣hemos. Operum. p. 836. Edit. Basil. 1565. Ecclesiae Principes, Princes of the Catholick Church; That they (both of them) had theNec Mysterio ca∣ret, Romanum Pontificem. Authoritate Petri & Pau∣li Ligare & Solvere. I∣dem ibid. Power of the Keys, power to bind and loose; and both of them had itDe utriusque tam Petri inter Judaeos, quam Pauli inter Gentes Primatu, Immediate à Christo Vtrique Collato. And this he proves, out of Ambrose on the Galat. 2. 7. who says the same thing. Idem ibidem. Immediately from our blessed
Saviour; That as Peter wasPotuit utérque ubi{que} Ecclesias fundare, tam in Circumcisione, quam praepu∣tio; Licet Principalis Com∣missio cum Primatu, Petri fuerit in Circumcisione, & Pauli in Praeputio. Idem ibidem. Primate, as to the Jews; so Paul was Primate as to the Gen∣tiles; and so, that (in this Primacy) Peter was not subject to Paul, norNec in hoc Alter Alteri Suberat, sed Ambo sub Christo Immediate. I∣dem ibidem. Paul to Peter, but each of them had that Primacy Immediately from Christ, without any dependence on each other. And this Cusanus there proves out of Ambrose, Augustine and Hierome. 2. And as every Apostle, as well as Peter, was Vicar of Christ, and had the Power of the Keys; so it appears by the Premises, and is Confess'd by our Adversaries (in the Places before Cited) that all of them transferred that Title and Power to their Successors; so that every Bishop, and every Priest, after the Apostles, is Christ'sCyprian says, That the Bishop is—Judex Vice Christi, and that the Bishops, Apostolis Vicariâ Ordinatione succedunt. This Rigaltius observes; And adds, Ecce Episcopos, avo jam Cypriani, Vicarios Christi. Rigalt. Observat. in Epist. Cypr. p. 73. And a little after,—Epis∣copus est Dei Sacerdos, & Vicarius Christi. Vicar, and has the Power of the Keys. Whence it Evidently follows, that the Bishops of Rome (notwithstanding their great Noise, and groundless pretence to the contrary) are no more our blessed Saviour's Vicars, nor have any more Power of the Keys, then any, (I say again, then any) other Bishop in the World; The Pope and Bishop of Rome no more, then the Bishops of Roan and Rochester. For their own Oecumenical and (with them) Infallible Council of Trent, assures us of two things. 1. That all Bishops areSynodus declarat Episcopos, qui in Aposto∣lorum locum successerunt. Conc. Trid. Sess. 23. De Sacramento Ordin. c. 4. Apostolorum Suc∣cessores, Successors of the Apostles. 2. That our blessed Saviour, when he was about to As∣cend into Heaven,Christus Ascensu∣rus, Sacerdotes sui Ipsius Vicarios reliquit, &c. Con. Trid. Sess. 14. De Poenit. c. 5. de Confessione. left Sacerdotes (that Vid. Ibid. c. 6. De Minist. Sacramenti Poe∣nitent. where it is evi∣dent, that by Sacerdotes, c. 5. all Bishops & Priests are meant; And that it should be sure that they are meant, in the Index of that Council these words are expresly set down,—Saoerdotes sunt Vicarij Christi. And refer to the. 14. Sess. c. 5. before Cited. In Edit. Conc. Trid. Antv. 1633.is Bishops and other Priests) his Vicars,
and gave them the Power of the Keys, to bind and loose, to remit and retain sins. To conclude this Point; If the Pope and his Party, have no better ground in Scripture, (then the Places a∣bove mention'd) to prove and support that vast Papal Supremacy, they most vainly and ir∣rationally pretend to; the whole Fabrick must of necessity fall. It being impossible that so vast a Superstruction as their Popish Monarchy should be so sustain'd, by such Reasons which are so far from being Cogent, that they are al∣together Impertinent. Well;Object. but if these will not prove (what they are produc'd for) the Popes Supremacy; other Texts they bring, with as much Noise and Confi∣dence as they did the former, and (if that be pos∣sible) with less Reason or Consequence. For In∣stance, they Cie (to prove the Pope's Supremacy over the whole Church, even over all the other Apostles) Joh. 21. 15. 16. 17. Pasce Oves meas, Feed my Sheep. And tell us—Christus in Coelum abiturus, hic suum creatum Vicarium designat ac sum∣mum Pontificem creat Pe∣trum; Promiserat Christus Id Ipsum Petro. Matth. 16. 18. Sed hoc loco praestat; eumque Principem & Pa∣storem Totius Ecclesiae Constituit. Corn: A La∣pide in Joh. 21. 15. pag. 546. That our blessed Sa∣viour leaving the World, did create Peter his Vicar, and highest Priest, and Prince of the Vniversal Church, which he had promised before, Matth. 16. 18, and now perform'd that promise. And again (they say)—Ex hoc loco patet S. Petrum (& Ejus Suc∣cessores Rom. Pontifices) esse Caput & Principem Ecclesiae, Omnésque fideles, & jam Apostolos ipsi Sub∣jici, & ab eo pasci & Re∣gi debere. Idem ibid. pag. 547. Col. 2. It appears from this place, That Peter (and his Successors Popes of Rome) is Head and Prince of the Church, and that all the Faithful, even the Apostles are made Subjects to him, to be fed and ruled by him. This place is urged by Pope Innocent the Third to the like (though God knows little) purpose: who would have us understand by those
words, Feed my Sheep; that our blessed SaviourAit Christus Petro & Successoribus: Pasce O∣ves meas; non distinguens inter has oves & alias: ut alienum à suo ovili de∣monstraret, qui Petrum & Successores Ipsius, Magi∣stros non recognosceret & Pastores. Cap. Solicit. 6. Extrav. de Majorit. & O∣bedientiâ. meant all his Sheep, all good Christians. That he might shew, (says that Pope) that they were none of our blessed Saviours Sheep, who would not Acknow∣ledge Peter and the Popes of Rome to be their Ma∣sters and Pastors. And (to name no more) Pope Boniface. VIII. indeavours to prove, that our bles∣sed Saviour by those words, Feed my Sheep, meant Vniversally all his SheepPasce Oves, inquit, & generalitèr non singula∣ritèr has vel illas: per quod Commisisse sibi Intelli∣gitur Vniversas. Cap. u∣nam Sanctam. 1. De Ma∣jor. & Obedientiâ. Ex∣trav. Commun. Ita. Tiri∣nus Reliquique passim. in Joh. 21. 15.—because he does not say singularly these or those, but generally Feed my Sheep: And from this Place so Expounded, they would prove Peter's, and so the Pope's Monarchical Supremacy o∣ver all Christians, even the Apostles, Kings, and Em∣perors. 1. Were it not certain,Answer. that there is no possi∣bility that any man should bring a true and con∣cluding Reason to prove an erroneous and false Position; it would hardly be credible that other∣wise Learned men, furnished with great Parts of Art and Nature, should bring such miserable Stuff, such misapply'd and misunderstood Scripture, to prove that greatThe Popes Supre∣macy consists in this, that he is, Petri Successor, & Christi verus & legiti∣mus in terris Vicarius. Catechis. Trid. Part. 2. c. 7. §. 28. p. 391. Edit. Paris. 1635. And this an Article of their Creed, (I mean their new Creed) to which they swear (all who have a∣ny Dignities, Cure of Souls, &c. Vide Bullam Pij Papae 4. Super forma professionis fidei in Con∣cil. Trident. Sess. 24. De Reformat. post. cap. 12. Edit. Antverp. 1633. Article of their Popes Su∣premacy; which being a manifest Errour, with∣out any Foundation in Scripture or Primitive Antiquity, I cannot blame them, for not bring∣ing (what they neither have, nor can have) better Arguments; but that they bring any at all, to establish that, which they ought, and with evident and cogent Reasons, might confute. 2. As Antiquity did, so we do grant (all that with any Reason or Just ground they can desire) that Peter had a Primacy of Order (but not of
Power or Jurisdiction) amongst the Apostles. For the Evangelist naming the Apostles,Matth. 10. 2. says— The First was Peter. First in Order, or (if you will) first respectu vocationis; as first call'd by our blessed Saviour; not to be one of his Disciples; for so Andrew was call'd before him (as is evident in theJoh. 1. 40. 41. 42. Text) but in respect of his Call to be an Apostle. For when, out of his Disciples he chose Twelve to be his Apostles, Matthew (in the Place Cited) saith; The first was Peter. So we grant to the Bishop of Rome (what anciently was given him) a Primacy of Order, and Precedency, before all the Bishops in the Roman Empire; But not Jure Divino, by Divine Right (which with∣out all Reason,Catechis. Trid. in the Place and Section last Cited, says—Romanus Pontifex est E∣piscoporum Maximus; Id∣que Jure Divino. Thats the Lemma to that Se∣ction. And then 'tis ad∣ded, That the Supream Jurisdiction of the Pope, Nullis Synodicis, aut Hu∣manis Constitutionibus, sed Divinitùs data est. they pretend to) but by the Consent of the Ancient Fathers and Councils. And for this, we have the Synodical Definition and Declaration of Six hundred and thirty Fathers in an Ancient and received General Council; who said—. &c. Etenim Antiquae Ro∣mae Throno, quod Vrbs il∣la Imperaret, Jure Patres Privilegiadederunt. Conc. Chalcedon. Can. 28. A∣pud Bin. Tom. 3. p. 446. That because old Rome was the Imperial City, therefore the Fathers had rightly given Privi∣ledges to the Episcopal Seat of that City. Where it is evident, that in the Judgment of that great and good Council, (and of the General Council of Conc. Const. 1. Can. 5. apud bin. Conc. Tom. 1. pag. 661. Episco∣pus Constantinopolitanus habere debet. Primatûs Honorem Post Romanum Episcopum, quia Civitas illa est nova Roma.Constantinople too, which they there Cite.) 1. That the Priviledge and Precedency the Bishop of Rome had, was not Convey'd to him by any Divine Right (as they now pretend) non à Christo vel Petro, sed à Patribus; it was the Fathers who gave them. 2. And the Reason why they gave him such Priviledge, and Precedency, was not be∣cause he was Christ's Vicar and St. Peter's Successor,
but because Rome was Vrbs Imperialis, the great Metropolis of the Roman Empire. I know the Popes Legats in that Council, did what they could to hinder the passing that Canon, and Pope Leo out of it, (when the Canon was passed) did oppose it, as much as he was able, but in vain. For the Canon was Synodically passed, by the Con∣current Consent of the wholeVid. Binium Conc. Tom. 3. Edit. Paris. 1636. pag. 461. & pag. 464. , &c. Council, (the Popes Legats excepted, which was acknowledg'd by the. Binius ibidem. p. 463. E. F. & 464. D. Judges, and thenVide Edictum Valentiniani & Marcia∣ni. Ibid. pag. 476. 477.  &c. Uni∣versi ideo quae à Synodo Chalcedonensi Constituta sunt, Custodire debent. Et vide ibid. p. 477 478. E∣dictum Marciani, de Confirmatione Synodi Chalcedonensis. Confirm'd by the Emperor, and Received into the Codex Cano∣num Ecclesiae Vniversae. That which troubled the Pope, was, that Constantinople should have Equal Pri∣viledges with Rome (Precedency only expected) e∣ven in all Ecclesiastical business; and that (by the Canon of that great Council, and Confirmation of the Emperor) the Patriarch of Constantinople should have so vast a Territory under his Jurisdi∣ction, to wit, Three whole Dioceses, (Thracica, A∣siana, Pontica,) more then (by any Law of God or Man) the Pope ever had under him. And 'tis here observeable, that although this Canon (gi∣ving Equal Priviledges to the Bishop of Constanti∣nople, as to him of Old Rome (Precedency only excepted) absolutely deny'd that Monarchical Su∣premacy and Jurisdiction over all Patriarchs, (which the Popes were then nibling at, and have since openly own'd) yet Leo in his Epistles to the Binius ibid. Conc. Tom. 3. p. 480.Emperor,Ibid. pag. 479. Anatolius,Ibid. pag. 481. Pulchoria Augusta, &c. wherein he writes fiercely against this Canon, never pretended (as afterwards, and now they do) That the Bishops of Rome had by DivineSo Pope Nicol. 1. tells us, That Primatûs Sedis Romanae non à Patri∣bus, aut Imperiali Civita∣te, sed à Christo & Beato Petro. Vid. Binium Conc. Tom. 6. p. 508. Col. 2. F. Edit. Paris. 1636. & pag. 513. Col. 2. C. So the Trent. Catechis. part. 2. cap. 7. §. 28. Papa Rom. Suprematum habet—Non ullis Synodicis, aut humanis Constitutionibus, sed Divinitùs, &c. See the Authorities they there urge for it. p. 391. Edit. Paris. 1635. Right,
(as Vicars of our blessed Saviour) a Supream Ju∣risdiction over all Bishops and Patriarchs in the whole World: but complains of AnatoliusApud Binium ubi supra. pag. 479. E. his pride, (Catalina Cethegum) the Violation of the Nicene Canons, and the wrong done to the Patriarchs of Alexandria and Antioch. To talk of such a Mo∣narchical Supremacy then, as the Popes have since pretended to; Pope Leo neither did, nor durst; it was a Doctrine unheard of in those purer times; and had he challenged it then, as due to him by Divine Right, as he was Christ's Vicar, he would have made himself Odious, and (having no ground for such a Challenge) ridiculous to the Christian World. But when (notwithstanding all his Le∣gates could do in the Council, or he out of it) the Canon pass'd, by the Unanimous Consent of the Council, and was Confirm'd by the Imperial and Supream Power of the Emperor; (for the Pope does Petition andClementiam vestram Precor, & Sedulâ Sugge∣stione Obsecro, &c. Ita Leo Papa in Epist. Marciano Imperatori, Apud Bini∣um. Conc. Tom. 3. p. 481. Col. 1. B. Supplicate to him as his Superior) though the Pope in a Private Epistle to Pulcheria Augusta (with great Insolence, and without any Ground) pretends toConsensiones Epis∣coporum (even those in the General Council at Chalcedon he means) in irritum mittimus, & per Authoritatem Beati Pe∣tri, Generali Definitione Cassamus. Leo Papa in Epist. ad Pulcheriam, a∣pud Binium. Tom. 3. p. 482. B. Cassate and null that Canon by the Authority of St. Peter, (who never had any such Authority to Null any Just Imperial or Synodical Constitutions) yet that Canon was approved, received, and (as de Jure it ought) Obey'd by the Eastern Churches, both then, and everIt was in terminis Confirm'd in the sixth General Council at Con∣stantinople. Can. 36. And the second General Council at Constantinople. Can. 5. give the same precedence to the Bi∣shop of Byzantium, which the Council of Chalcedon does. after. When these Pretensi∣ons of the Pope and his Legats prevailed not, nor were regarded by the Council, or Emperor, or the Eastern Church; other Arts were used at Rome, to Conceal that Canon (which they could not
Cassate) from the knowledge of the Western Church. And to this end, 1. They Corrupt the Codex Canonum Ecclesiae Vniversalis (the most Au∣thentick Book, next to the Bible, the Christian Church has, or ever had)Dionysius Exi∣guus Abbas-Romanus sub Justiniano, Circa An. 540. as Trithemius, or. 520. as others. Dionysius Exiguus a Roman-Abbot, begins that Impious Work; and in his Latin Translation of that Code (amongst other things) leaves out that Eight and twentieth Canon of the Council of Chalcedon, andSo Isiodor. Jac. Merlinus. Paris. 3535. Codex Canonum vetus Eccl. Romanae. Edit. 2. Mogunt. 1525. dein Pa∣ris. 1619. Editio Latina prisca Canonum, Apud Justell. Biblioth. Tom. 1. p. 300. So Pet. Crabb. Joverius. Joh. Sichardus. Post Opera D. Clement. Paris. 1568. &c. others of the Popish Party, follow him. 2. They Corrupt theCan Renovantes. 6. Dist. 22. Petimus, ut Constantinopolitana Sedes Similia Privilegia, quae Superior Roma habet, ac∣cipiat; Non tamen in Ec∣clesiasticis rebus magnifice∣tur ut illa, &c. So Grati∣an in the Old Editions, as is Confess'd. Vid. Cor∣pus Jur. Can. Cum Glos∣sis. Paris. 1612. & sine Glossis. Paris. 1618. & ibi Notas ad hunc Cano∣nem. Canon it self; and by putting in other words in their false Translation, they make it con∣tradict the Greek Canon, and the certain Sense of the Council that made it. So in Gratian, the Cor∣ruptions of this Canon, are thus— 1. For  (aequalia Privilegia) in the O∣riginal Greek; Gratian has Similia Privilegia; like, but not equal Priviledges. 2. For , (Senior Roma) Gratian has Superior Roma—Old Rome must be Superior to New Rome, or Constantinople, if Forgery and Falsification of Records can do it: for better Grounds they have none. 3. For, , etiam in Ecclesiasti∣cis magnificetur ut illa. Gratian impudently reads, Non Tamen in Ecclesiasticis, &c. But notwithstanding all that Pope Leo or his Legats could do, and all their other Indirect Arts afterwards, this Eight and twentieth Canon of the Council of Chalcedon was received in the Christian
World, and long after Confirmed by General Councils, not only by the Synodus 6. Generalis, which was held Anno 681. (of which a little be∣fore) But the Eighth General Council under Pope Adrian. II. about the Year 870. gives thatDefinimus neminem Mundi Potentum, quen∣quam qui Patriarchalibus praesunt Sedibus, in honora∣re praecipuè sanctissimum Papam Senioris Romae, de∣inceps autem Constantino∣poleos Patriarcham, deinde Alexandriae, &c. Ita Sy∣nodus. 8. habita sub A∣driano Papa. Can. 21. And this an approved Council at Rome. Pre∣cedency to the Patriarch of Constantinople, which the Canon of Chalcedon before gave him; And this acknowledged and referred into the Body of theirGratian. Can. De∣finimus. 7. Dist. 22. Vid. Glossam Ibid. Canon Law, in the best Editions of it, Revised and Corrected by PopeVid. Bullam Greg. 13. dat. Romae. 1. Julij 1580. Juri Canonico praefixam. Edit. Paris. 1612. & 1618. Gregory. XIII. And 'tis to be observed, that this Synodus. 8. was Subscribed by the Pope or his Legats there, and was then, and still is approved and received at Rome: Nor need we wonder at it, For what it did, was carried chiefly by the Popes Authority, who was by that Council, basely and servilly flatter'd; they Calling him Most. In Epist. Synod. 8. ad Adrianum. Apud Binium Conc. Tom. 7. Part. 1. p 984. Holy and Oecumenical Pope, and Equal to the Angels, &c. This Title Oecumenical, the Pope took kindly then, though his PredecessorVid. Greg. Maj. Regist. l. 4. Epist. 32. & 34. 36. 38. & l. 6. Epist. 30. & l. 7. Epist. 30. pag. 220. Gregory the Great ab∣horr'd it, as Antichristian. But to return to the Objection. 3. And here before I give a Particular and Di∣stinct Answer to this Place of John, (Feed my Sheep) on which they commonly (and vainly) build the Popes Supremacy; I shall crave leave, a little to Explain, the nature and measure of that Power which they give the Pope under the name of his Supremacy. And here they say, That our blessed Saviour gave His own Power to Peter, made him his Vicar, Head and Pastor of all the Faithful in the World; and that in most ample Words, when he bad
him, Feed his Sheep, and that it was our blessed Sa∣viours Will, that all Peter's Successors should have the very same Power, which Peter had; (so the TrentSalvator Noster Pe∣trum suae Potestatis Vica∣rium praefecit; & Vni∣versi Fidelium generis Ca∣put & Pastorem Constituit, cum illi Oves suas pascen∣das, Verbis Amplissimis Commendavit; ut qui ei successit, Eandem planè Totius Ecclesiae Regendae Potestatem habere volù∣rit. Catechis. Trid. ex Decreto Conc. Trid. à Pio. 5. Editus. Part. 1. c. 10. §: 13. p. 117. Edit. Paris. 1634. Vid. N. Ri∣galtij Observat. Galea∣tam, Notis suis in Cy∣prianum praefixam. Catechism tells us) And this is that Plenitude of Power by which they Erroneously and Impiously Depose Kings and Emperors, and (as Pius. V. does, in this Bull, we are now speaking of, against Queen Elizabeth) absolve their Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance, and sworn or natural Fidelity. This premised, I shall proceed to a direct (and I hope a full and satisfying) Answer to that place in John, Feed my Sheep: &c. And here I consi∣der, 1. That, if the Supremacy was first given to Peter, in those words—John 21. 15. 16. Pasce Oves, Feed my Sheep, (as is confess'd, and by our Adversaries posi∣tively affirm'd in the Objection) which was af∣ter our blessed Saviours Resurrection: then it is Evident he had it not before: It being impos∣sible he should have it before it was given him. And then it will as Evidently follow, that all those Places in the Gospel, spoken of, or to Pe∣ter, before our blessed Saviour's Passion, are Im∣pertinently urged to prove Peter's Supremacy, which he had not till after the Resurrection. And yet Innocent. III. Boniface. VIII. and other Popes in their Bulls and Papal Constitutions, the Ca∣nonists, School-men, and Commentators usu∣ally Cite many places in the Gospel (besides this, Pasce Oves) to prove that Peter had the Supre∣macy before our blessed Saviour's Passion; which here they Confess was not given him till after
the Resurrection. That they do urge many such Places is known to all Learned men, vers'd in these Controversies; but if any man doubt of it, and desire Satisfaction, I shall refer him to what a Learned Popish Writer (and Capucine) has said in theVide Epitomen Canon. &c. per Greg. De Rives Capucinum. Lugd. 1603. Tract. de Primatu, p. 3. 4. where for Peter's Supremacy, he cites Matth. 16. 17. 18. 19. Super hanc Pe∣tram: & dabo Tibi Cla∣ves: Matth. 10. 2. Pri∣mus Petrus. Matth. 17. 27. Christ paid Tribute only for himself and Peter. Joh. 1. 43. Thou shalt be called Cephas. Joh. 21. 7. 8. Peter alone cast him∣self into the Sea. Matth. 14. 28. He calls Peter only to come to him; Et ita Vnicum se Christi Vicarium designavit. Matth. 18. 21. Matth. 19. 27. Mark. 14. 37. He said only to Peter, Simon sleepest thou. Others Cite for Peter's Supremacy, Luk. 22. 38. Here are two Swords. So Pope Bonif. 8. Cap. Unam Sanctam. 1. Extrav. Commun. vide Glossam. verbo, Coelestis. Can. Omnes. 1. Dist. 22. Though their proofs from all those Places, (and they have no better) are not on∣ly Inconsequent, and Erroneous, but indeed Ridiculous. Vid. Tho. Campegium, Episc. Feltren∣sem, De Potestate Romani Pontificis. Venet. 1555. Cap. 4. 5. Opus Paulo. 4. Papae dedicat. ubi loca haec & plura, ad probandum Papae Suprematum, vanè adducit, & ridicule explicat. vid. etiam Bellarmin. De Romano Pontif. lib. 1. cap. 10. 11. 12. & inde ad cap. 24. Inclusivè. Margent, where he tells us, how many places are Cited for the Supre∣macy. 2. When our blessed Saviour says, Pasce Oves, Feed my Sheep, and Feed my Lambs; he useth two words— and . Both which words the Vulgar Latin renders, Pasce, feed my Sheep and Lambs: Now their Commentators on this place, (to very little purpose) make a great stir and pudder to shew (what'Tis certain, and confess'd, that  sgnifies to rule. Kings are call'd , populi pastores. So Me∣nelaus and Agamemnon u∣sually in Homer, and in Hesychius . And . And the Gloss. veteres in Galce Cyrilli,  pecor, a pasco and , Rego. none denys) that  signifies to rule and govern. But let the word signifie what it will, in the Ci∣vil State, yet in the Ecclesiastical and Scripture Sense of the Word, where our blessed Saviours Lambs and Sheep (that is the Faithful) are to be fed, every Bishop and Presbyter (as well as Pe∣ter) are , Pastores, and may and ought , to feed the lock of Christ. So, 1. St.
Paul tells us,Act. 20. 17. . The Presbyters of that Church. who from Miletum, sends for the Presbyters of Ephesus, (I say Presbyters, for Timothy, who was their first Bishop, was with Paul atAct. 20. 4. 6. Miletum, and so was none of those he sent for) and when they came, he Exhorts them to take heed unto themselves, and the Flock, Vers. 28. cap 20.  &c.To feed the Church of God, &c. where St. Paul (when he bids the Presbyters feed the Church) useth the very same word our blessed Saviour doth, when he bids Peter feed his Sheep. 2. So 1. Pet. 5. 2. . Peter himself (who little dream'd of any Supremacy given him by those words, Feed my Sheep) writing to the Asiatick Dispersion of the Jews, and Exhorting the Jewish Elders, (or Pres∣byters) to a diligent care, in feeding the Flock; he useth the very same word to them, our blessed Saviour did to him,  (says he) Feed the Flock; He thinks it their duty, as well as his, to feed our blessed Saviour's Sheep. And that which further, and (ad hominem) more strongly confirms what I have said (in this Par∣ticular) is; That our Adversaries grant (though in Contradiction to the Sense many of them ive of those words, Feed my Sheep, when they ould build the Popes Supremacy upon them) hat the word , both as it signifies to rule and feed, and so the duty of ruling and feeding our blessed Saviours Sheep, is so far from being Peculiar to Peter, or proving his Supremacy, that it is the Duty, not only of Peter, but of every Bishop in the Christian World, both to rule and feed our blessed Saviour's Sheep. This
theEpiscopi (says that Catechism) singulis Epis∣copatibus praeposi sunt, t Caeteros Ecclesiae Mini∣stros, & fidelium populum Regant, & eorum saluti summâ Curâ Prospiciant; unde in Sacris Literis Pa∣stores Ovium) saepe Appel∣lantur. Catechis. Trid. part. 2. cap. 7. §. 26. pag. 389. 390. Editionis Pa∣ris. 1635. Trent Catechism expresly affirms, That all Bishops (as well as Peter) are Pastores, Pa∣stors to Rule as well as Feed the Flock and Sheep of our blessed Saviour; and to prove this, they Cite the Two veryAct. 20. 28. 1. Pet. 5. 2. 3. places which I (a little be∣fore) produced to the same purpose, whence it manifestly appears, That even in our Adversa∣ries Judgment, (when the Popes Supremacy is a little out of their Head) the feeding our blessed Saviour's sheep, is not Peter's Supream Preroga∣tive, but a Duty required of every Bishop in the World. 3. But this (though enough) is not all; we have greater (and with them Infallible, and therefore undeniable) Authority to confirm what I have said, and Confute our Adversa∣ries, as to their proof of Peter's, or the Pope's Supremacy, from those words, Feed my Sheep. For their Trent Council (which if the Pope say true, wasDominus Patres Tridentinos Divinitùs Inspirare dignatus est. Pius Papa. 4. in Bullà su∣per formâ Juramenti professionis Fidei. Divinely Inspired, and therefore Infallible; and if he do not say true, he himself was not only fallible but actually false) expresly tells us, That not only every Bishop, but every one Praecepto Divino Mandatum est Omnibus, quibus Animarum Cura Commissa est, Oves Ag∣noscere, pro iis Sacrifici∣um offerre, verbi praedica∣tione, Sacramentorum Ad∣ministratione, ac bonorum operum Exemplo pascere, pauperum curam paternam gerere, & in Caetera Mu∣nia Pastoralia incumbere—ideo Synodus eos ad∣monet, ut praeceptorum di∣vinorum memores, in Judi∣cio & veritate Pascant & Regant. Concil. Trid. Sess. 21. De Reformat. cap. 1. Edit. Antvrp. 1633. pag. 284.who had Cure of Souls, was bound by the Law of Christ in the Gospel, to rule and feed his Sheep, by offering Sacrifices for them, by preaching the Word, Administring the Sacraments, by good Exam∣ple, by a Paternal Care of the Poor, and All O∣ther Pastoral Offices. And this is there proved by Texts, quoted in the Margent; which (with some others) are the very same with those I have (a little before) cited out of
theAct. 20. 28. Acts of the Apostles, and1. Pet. 5. 2. St. Pe∣ters Epistle: Nor those only, but this very place ofJoh. 21. 15. 16. St. John (on which they would build Peter's Supremacy) is Cited in the Mar∣gent, as containing a Precept obliging (not Pe∣ter only, but) All, who had Cure of souls, to feed Christ's sheep. Now if those words, Feed my sheep, contain Praeceptum, a Precept, Obliging all Pastors to a Pastoral Duty; then they do not contain (what they pretend) Donum, a Dona∣tion of Supremacy. 4. But Pope Boniface. VIII. and Pope Innocent. III. in their before mention'dThat of Bonif. 8. Cap. Unam Sanctam. 1. De Major. & Obed. Ex∣travag. Commun. and that of Innocent. 3. cap. Solicitae. 6. extra eodem Titulo. Constitutions, tell us; that by Oves meas, our blessed Saviour means, All his sheep, All Christians in the World▪ Because he does not speak singularitèr of these or those; but Generalitèr of his sheep. Whence they, (and many after them) conclude, Tha our blessed Saviour Committed all his Sheep Universally to Peter's Care, so that even the Apostles, (being his Sheep) were commit∣ted to Peter's Care, and by Consequence, he be∣came their Pastor and Superior. Certainly they who reason at this rate, and so irrationally may possibly be fit Pastors to feed Sheep and Oxen, and such other brutish Cattle, but sure∣ly not to feed Men and Christians. For▪ 1. Feed my sheep, (as all know, unless they b such as those two Popes were) is an Indefinite Proposition: and then any Novice or young Sophister in the University, could have truly told them, That Propositio indefinita in materi
Contingenti, (as this evidently is) aequivalet par∣ticulari. When we say men are young or wise, or learned; we mean, not all, but some are such. So he who says, Christ's sheep are to be fed by Pe∣ter; must mean some of them are to be fed by him, pro loco & tempore, as he had place and time to meet with them. It being impossible he should feed themMaldonut. speak∣ing of Matth. 28. 19. where our blessed Savi∣our gives Commission to all his Apostles—Go ye therefore into All the World, &c. He says thus—Non fieri po∣terat ut Singuli omnes ter∣rae partes peragrarent, Gen∣tésque Omnes docerent; néque erat necessarium. Quid enim erat Opus, ut Omnes à singulis, modo Omnes ab hominibus, aliae ab aliis docerentur. Mal∣donat. in Joh. 21. 15. 16. &c. §. 65. p. 1889. E. This he says, and truly. But then he should have con∣sider'd, that if it was im∣possible for every one of the Apostles to teach all the world; then it will be impossible for any one. Impossible for Pe∣ter to feed all Christ's Sheep in the whole world: and yet this he endeavours to prove—Quicunque intra Ecclesi∣am erant, Petro pasendos tradit. Dicit enim pasce O∣ves, non has, aut illas, fed pasce Oves meas. Omniui ergo suarum Ovium curam illi dedit. Ibid. §. 62. all. There were ma∣ny thousands of our blessed Saviour's Sheep, whom Peter never did, nor could see, nor they hear him: And certainly his gracious Lord and Master would not tye him to Impossibilities. 2. When they say, (which is evidently untrue) that by those words—Feed my sheep, all the Faithful are meant, and are Committed to Pe∣ter's care and charge; and therefore theEx hoc loco (Joh. 21. 15.) patet Sanctum Pe∣trum (& Ejus Successores Romanos Pontifices) esse Caput & Principem Eccle∣siae, Omnésque fideles, eti∣am Apostolos Ipsi Subjici, & ab eo Pasci & Regi debere. Corn. A Lapide, in Joh. 21. 15. p. 547. Col. 2. A∣postles themselves (being our Saviour's Sheep as well as others) are part of his Charge; and under his Jurisdiction. This they say indeed usually, but (miserably mistaken) only say it. For they neither have, nor can have any Just Ground or Reason for it. For it is certain, 1. That our blessed Saviour, is (to his whole Church) the onlyHeb. 4. 14. . High Priest, the1. Pet. 5. 4. . Prince of all the Pastors, and the GrandHeb. 13. 20.  Shep∣herd of the sheep; and as King, has Imperial Pow∣er to Rule and Govern them. 2. It is certain, the Apostles (from and under him) are Pasto∣res and Shepherds, as well as Peter, to feed the Flock. But their Power is Ministerial, not Im∣perial.
Even the Apostleship it self isAct. 1. 17. 25. a Ministery, and they Ministers of Christ, and his2. Cor. 4. 5. Church. Now though in respect of Christ the great Shepherd, they are Sheep, even Peter himself: yet (on Earth) they are Shep∣herds only, not Sheep, neither in respect of the Church, over which our blessed Saviour has set them to be Shepherds; nor in relation one to another. Paul, or James, or John, are no more Sheep in Respect of Peter, to be fed and ruled by him, then he to be fed and ruled by them▪ And therefore to say (as our Adversaries vainly do) that in those words, Feed my sheep; Peter is Commanded to feed and rule the rest of the Apostles, as his Charge, (who were Shepherds only, and Sheep to no Superior Pastor, except our blessed Saviour; And by their Apostolical CommissionHoc erant Caeteri Apostoli, quod fuit Petrus; Pari Consortio praediti & Honoris, & Potestatis, Cy∣prian. de Unit. Eccles. p. 208. Edit. Rigaltij. Pasto∣res sunt Omnes Apostoli, sed Grex Vnus, qui ab Om∣nibus unanimi Consensione Pascatur. Pasce Oves me∣as, belong'd equally to all the Apostles, as well as to Peter, in Cyprian's Opinion, as shall ap∣pear anon. Equal to himself) is irratio∣nal; without any ground in Scripture, or purer Antiquity. There is another Metaphor con∣cerning the Apostles, and their Feeding and Building the Church, which may illustrate this business, All the Apostles (as well and as much as Peter) are in Scripture call'd Foundations the Church, converted, fed, and confirm'd by them. In respect of Christ, our blessed Savi∣our (who is the only prime and principal firm Rock on which the Church is built) they are (all of them) Superstructions; but in respect of the Christian Church, Foundations; and that without any dependence upon Peter; he is not the Foundation on which they are built, but
but both he and they immediately upon the Prime Rock and Foundation, Jesus Christ: So that as the Apostles are Superstructures in the House of God (the Church) in Respect of Christ, the Prime firm Foundation; and none of them Superstructures, in respect of Peter: being neither built upon him, nor made Super∣structions by him, by his Feeding or Ruling them: So they (and Peter too) are Sheep in Re∣spect of our blessed Saviour, the great Shep∣herd of the Sheep; but not in respect of Pe∣ter; they are Shepherds as well as he, and never Committed to his Care or Cure, that (as his Sheep) he should feed and govern them: And as all the other Apostles (in Respect of Peter) were Foundations & Shepherds of the Church, coordinate with, and equal to him: So all o∣ther Bishops, the Apostles Successors, were E∣qual to Peter's pretended Successor (the Bishop of Rome) and no way bound to give any Reason of their Administration to him, as to their Su∣perior; much less as to a Supream Prince and Monarch of the Christian World, as the Ca∣nonists, Jesuits, and the Popish Party, do now Erroneously and Impiously miscall him. This was Cyprian's Opinion, in the Place but now Cited; And Rigaltius (a Learned Roman Catho∣lick) though heNicol. Regaltius in Observatione Galea∣ta, Notis suis ad Cypri∣ani Opera praesixa. seem to say much for Peter's and the Popes Supremacy; yet he Con∣fesseth, (as upon a serious Consideration of se∣veral Passages inVid. Cypr. Epist. 67. p. 128. 129. Edit. Ri∣galtii: & Epist. 72. Ibid. p. 142. in Cale dictae E∣pistolae, &c. & Epist. 55. p. 95. Cyprian, and the African Councils, well he might) That Cyprian'sSingulis Pastoribus Episcopis portionem gregis esse adscriptam, quam re∣gat unusquisque; Actus sui, sive Administrationis suae rationem redditurus; Non Romae, sed in Coelis; Non Cornelio, sed Christo—Negat (Cypria∣nus) Ecclesiae Romanae Vllas ess Partes in Causa Novatiani, peractâ jam in Africâ Cognitione damnti. (There lay no Appeal to the Pope, as Superior to the Bishops of Africa). Rigaltis in Notis ad  ∣stolam 55. p. 95. & No∣tarum p. 77. 78. Opi∣nion
was, That all Bishops were equal, and were bound to give an Account of their Administration to our blessed Saviour Only, and not to any Superior Bishop, no not to Peter's Successor, the Pope. Nor is it any way probable, that a Person so Excel∣lent and Knowing as Cyprian, should think o∣therwise; seeing in his time (as is notorious and well known to all who know Antiquity) there was no Patriarch or Archbishop Superior (by a∣ny Law of God or Man) to the Ordinary Bi∣shops, (as may, and when there is an Opportu∣nity, shall be made Good.) It is true, Cyprian (if it be he, and not the Interpolator of that Tract) says, That the PrimacyCyprian De Uni∣tate Ecclesiae, pag. 208. apud Rigaltium. Hoc rant Caeteri Apostoli, quod fuit Potrus, Pari Consortio praediti honoris & Potesta∣tis; sed Primatus Petro datur. was given to Peter; and that the Church of Rome was TheCyprian. Epist. 55. ad Cornelium, pag. 95. Ad Petri Cathedram, & ad Ecclesiam Principalem, un∣de unitas exorta est. Principal Church. Now this Primacy, and Prin∣cipality Cyprian speaks of, is, by me before, and now freely granted. A Primacy of Order and Precedency, not of Jurisdiction, or that Monar∣chical Authority, which (Anciently was not pre∣tended to by themselves) they now contend for. And this Primacy, which anciently was allowed to the Bishop of Rome, was not from our blessed Saviour's gift, but the greatness of that Imperial City; Non à &c. Quia Vrbs illa Imperaret, Patres de∣derunt Privilegia. Conc. Chalcedonense. Can. 28. Petro, sed à Pa∣tribus, (as the Canon of Chalcedon tells us.) And that which makes it more probable, that I have given the true Sense of Cyprian, is; That Rigaltius (a Learned Roman Catholick) in his Dissertations, and Notes on Cyprian, Explains Cyprian's meaning just as I have done, reducing the Primacy and Principality of the Roman Church,
not from any Prerogative given to that Bishop or Church by our blessed Saviour, but from the greatness of thatAd Ecclesiam Prin∣cipalem] Id est, in Vrbe Principali Constitutam. Rigaltius ad Epist. Cy∣prian. 55. p. 78. Notarum Imperial City: And then Cites the Canon of the General Council of Chalcedon, which in Terminis, and (when Tran∣slated) in plain English, says the very same thing I have done. And indeed that Canon, made by Six hundred and thirty Fathers Synodically met, in a legitimate General Council, confirm'd byJustiniani Constit. Novel. 115. Cap. 3. §. 14. Graeco-Lat. Lugd. 1571. p. 745. & Novel. Const. 131. cap. 1. ibid. p. 1056. where the Emperor says— &c. dictarum quatuor Sy∣nodorum dogmata, sicut Sanctas Scripturas accipi∣mus, & Canones sicut Le∣ges Observamus. Imperial Edicts, and received into the Codex Canonum Ecclesiae Vniversae, does Authen∣tickly and utterly overthrow that vast Monar∣chical Supremacy, which the Pope and his Par∣ty for some Ages last past (without any just ground) contend for. If any of our Adversa∣ries think otherwise, (as possibly they may) I shall make them this fair offer; Let them bring me any Canon, of any General Council (of equal Authority and Antiquity with this of Chalcedon) by which they can prove the Popes pretended Supremacy, (or any one Article of their own new Trent Creed). And for the fu∣ture, I shall acquiesce, and they shall have my Thanks and Subscription. 6.Observ. 6. Pius. V. in his Bull says further—Christus Catholicam Ecclesiam uni soli in terris, Apostolorum Principi Pe∣tro, Petríque Successori Rom. Pontiici, in Potesta∣tis plenitudine tradidit gu∣bernandam. Ita Bulla dicta in principio. That our blessed Saviour Committed the Care and Charge of the Vniversal Church, with a plenitude of Power to govern it, to one only, that is to Peter the Prince of the Apostles, And His Successors. Here I consi∣der, 1. That although it be certain, (from Scripture, and evident Testimonies of pure and primitive
Antiquity) that Peter never had, nor Executed any such Monarchical Supremacy over the o∣ther Apostles, and the whole Christian Church, as is now vainly pretended to; yet 'tis as cer∣tain, that the Pope (and his Party) cry up, and magnifie St. Peter's Power, that he (as his Heir and Successor) may possess the same Power. For this they say, (and without any just proof, say it only) That it was our blessed Saviour's will, that Peter's Successor should haveChristus Petrum u∣niversi fidelium generis Caput & Pastorem Con∣stituit, cum illi Oves suas pascendas commendavit, ut qui ei Successisset▪ Ean∣dem Plane totius Ecclesiae regendae Potestatem habere voluerit. Catechis. Trid. Part. 1. De. 9. Symboli Art. §. 13. p. 117. Paris. 1635. The Very same Power Peter had; and this because he was Cum in Petrì Ca∣thedrâ sedeat, ut Petri Successor, Christique Vi∣carius in terris, Vniver∣sali Ecclesiae Praesidet. I∣bid. Part. 2. cap. 7. §. 28. p. 391.Christ's Vicar, (though every Bishop in the World, (as shall, God willing, appear anon) be Christ's Vicar as well, and as much as he) and sat in Peter's Chair, as his lawful Successor. 2. But admit, (dato non Concesso) which is abso∣lutely untrue, That Peter had such a Suprema∣cy and Monarchical Power (as they Erroneous∣ly pretend to) yet it might be Personal, to him∣self, and for his Life only, (as his Apostolical power was; as to that part of it, which was properly Apostolical) and not Hereditary, to be transferred to any Successor. So that the Hinge of the Controversie will be here, and our Adversaries concern'd to prove two Things. 1. That Peter's Power (be what it will) was not Personal, but Hereditary, and to be Trans∣mitted to his Successor. 2. And that the Pope and Bishop of Rome was his Legal Successor. For if they do not, upon just Grounds, make both these good, good night to their pretended Supremacy.
For the First; That the greatest Power St. Pe∣ter and the Apostles had, was Extraordinary and Personal, not to be Transmitted to any Successor (what Power they did transmit, I shall anon shew) will be Evident, in these Particulars. 1. Peter and the Apostles, had Vocationem à Christo Immediatam. Our blessedMatth. 10. 1. Mark. 3. 14. Luk. 9. 1. Saviour call'd them all (except Matthias) Immediately; as is evident from the Text. And, sure I am, that the Pope cannot pretend to such an Immediate Call. 2. The Apostles (every one as well as Peter) had a Power given them to do Miracles, to Cast out Ibid. Matth. 10. 1.Devils, and heal all manner of Diseases, and Sicknesses. Nor can Peter's Successor (who∣ever he be) pretend to this. 3. The Jurisdiction, which was by our blessed Saviour given to every Apostle, (to James and John, and Paul as well as Peter) was Universal; the whole World was their Diocese. Not that every one could possibly be in every place, but where ever any of them came, they had Au∣thority to Preach, Administer the Sacraments, Constitute and Govern Churches. So Paul did atIt does not appear in Scripture, that Peter ever was at Antioch, save once. Gal. 2. 11. But Paul was many times, and long there, and con∣stituted that Church. See Act. 11. 26. Act. 14. 21. 28. Act. 15. 35. Act. 18. 22. 23. Antioch and Rome, as much, andPaul was there two whole years, Act. 28. 30. writ them a long and excellent Epistle; But 'tis certain, Peter ne∣ver writ to them, nor can it appear from Scri∣pture that he was ever two weeks, much less two years, at Rome. Where St. Paul is, by Origen, said to be (next Christ) Primus Ecclesia∣rum Fundator. Origen Contra Celsum, lib. 1. pag. 49. Graeco-Lat. more than Peter; though they pretend that Pe∣ter alone (and not Paul) was first Bishop of both those Places. That every Apostle (as well as Peter) had Universal Jurisdiction and Authority over the whole World, is in Scrip∣ture Evident by the Commission our blessed Saviour gave them—Matth 28. 19. 20. Go and teach all Na∣tions,
baptizing them in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe whatsoever I have Commanded you. And again, —Mark. 16. 15. Go ye into all the World, and Preach the Gospel to every Creature. Here I observe, 1. That the Apostles in their first Mission, were sent to theMatth. 10. 5. 6. Jews, and them only. But now their Commission is Inlarged; and they are E∣qually sent (every one as much as any one) to all Nations (says Matthew) To All the World, (, asEuseb. 1. 3. Demon∣strat. Evangelicae. p. 136. and he has our blessed Sa∣viour's word for it. Matth. 24. 14. , Eusebius Ex∣plains it) says St. Mark; Jidem Jurisdictionis Apo∣stolicae & Orbis Termini; The whole World was their Diocese; every ones Jurisdiction Extend∣ed so far, and Peter's could not extend no fur∣ther. 2. For the Persons they were to Preach to, they were Every Man in the World. It is , to every Creature, (every Rational Creature, who (if Infancy and Infirmity hinder'd not) was ca∣pable. They were to Convert Pagans, and make them our blessed Saviour's Disciples and Sheep, and then feed them, with the Word and Sacra∣ments: , (says Matthew) Convert, and make them Disciples, and then Baptize and Teach them to observe whatever I have Commanded you. Those words, Feed my sheep (on which without any just Reason, they would build Peter's Su∣premacy) contain only an Indefinite Proposition, which (as every one who understands Logick, must Confess) is only equivalent to a Particular; But here the Commission, given by our bles∣sed Saviour, (to every Apostle as well as Peter)
is expresly Vniversal; Preach to every Creature: That is, Feed All my sheep. This is a Truth so evident, that a LearnedFranc. Victoria. Relect. Theol. Lugduni. 1587. Relect. 2. De Po∣testate Ecclesiae Concl. 4. p. 85. where he tells us, Apostoli Omnes habue∣runt Aequalem Potestatem cum Petro. Quod sic In∣telligo; quod Quilibet A∣postolorum habuit Potesta∣tem Ecclesiasticam in Toto Orbe, & ad Omnes Actus ad quos Petrus habuit. Non tamen loquor de illis Acti∣bus, qui spectant ad solum summum Pontificem, ut est Congregatio Generalis Con∣cilij. And this he there proves; as to their Pow∣er over the whole world; and to Acts; only (and he dared do no other∣wise) he excepts some few, to which no Pope, for many Ages, pretend∣ed. In the present Ro∣man Breviary the Uni∣versal Jurisdiction of Paul (as well as Peter) is acknowledg'd; Paul an Apostle, Praedicator veritatis per Vniversum Mundum. In Festo Ca∣thedrae Petri Antiochiae. Febr. 22. Roman Catholick Confesseth and fully proves it. Only (to save the Popes and his own Credit) he says, That to call General Councils belong'd only to Peter and the Pope, by their Supremacy, and not to any other, But this is, gratis dictum, and an evident Un∣truth. For the Pope (by no Law of God or Man) has, or ever had Power, to call any Ge∣neral Council: And for many Ages never pre∣tended to it; which I only say now, and (when there is a Convenient time) can and will make itA Learned Papist, Doctor of the Sorbon (newly come to my hand) has saved me the labour, and ex professo, and data opera proved, that all the Eight first General Councils were call'd solely by the Emperors: The Popes did indeed (as he evidently proves) sometimes Peti∣tion the Emperors, to call a Council at such a time or place; but they were always both call'd and confirm'd by the Emperors. Vid. Edm. Richer. D. Sorb. in Hist. de Conc. General. Colon. 1680. Good. In the mean time, I think 'tis certain, either, 1. That by those words, Feed my sheep, (on which they build the Popes and Pe∣ters Supremacy) our blessed Saviour gave Peter no supream Power to call General Councils, that by them he might feed his Sheep: Or, 2. That the Apostles and Primitive Christians in their times, knew no such thing. For, 1. When a Controversie arose at Antioch, about Circumcision, they send not to Peter, as su∣pream Head of the Church, desiring him to call a Council; but to theAct. 15. 2. Apostles and El∣ders. Had they known and believ'd, that Pe∣ter had been Invested with such Power and Su∣premacy, as is now pretended; it had been Civility and Duty in them, to have sent to him
in the first place; But they send to the Apostles and Elders; without any notice taken of (what they knew not) Peter's Prerogative. 2. It nei∣ther does, nor can appear, that Peter call'd that Council. 3. Nor did he (as Head and Presi∣dent of the Council) speakAct. 15. 7. first; but the Question was much disputed, before Peter spoke any thing. 4. Nor did Peter (after the Question was debated) give the Definitive Sen∣tence; For 'tis EvidentAct. 15. 19. 20. 21. in the Text, That James the Less, Son of Alphaeus, and Bishop of Jerusalem, gave the Definitive Sentence, which both Peter and the wholeAct. 15. 22. Council acqui∣esc'd in. 5. Nor did Peter send his Legats to Antioch, to signifie what he, and the Council had done, but theIbidem. Apostles and the whole Church chose and sent their Messengers. 6. Nor are the Letters sent in Peter's Name, or any no∣tice taken of any Primacy or Prerogative of his, above the other Apostles; No, the  is, Act. 15. 23. Vide dictum Edmundum Ri∣cherium D. Sorbonicum, in Hist. Conc. Generali∣um, lib. 1. cap. 13. §. 5. pag. 401. Edit. Colon. 1680. Ubi ex Card. Alliaceno, & Concilio hoc Apostolico Act. 15. demonstrat, Petrum Pri∣matum (qualem Jesuitae vellent) non habuisse, sed Primatum illum Monar∣chicum ab Hildebrando, seu Gregorio. 7. retro∣ductum. Ibid. §. 2. 5.The Apostles, Elders, and Brethren send Greet∣ing. 7. Nor was that Decree publish'd To the Churches in Peter's Name, as made orAct. 16. 4. confirm'd by him, more than any other Apo∣stle. 8. Nay, the Apostles send Peter on a Act. 8. 14.Message to Samaria (and he obeys and goes) which had been a strange piece of Pre∣sumption, had either he or they known his (now pretended) Monarchical Supremacy, 9. So far were those Primitive Christians, from knowing or acknowledging the now pretended Monarchical Supremacy of Peter, that even in
the Apostles times and Presence, they question andAct. 11. 2. 3. call him to an Account for his Actions. , disceptabant adversus illum (says the Vulgar Latin) tanquam valde offensi expostula∣bant (says Chrysostom.) And honest John Ferus (a Roman Catholick) tells us,Petrus Apostolorum Primus, rationem reddere Ecclesiae Cogitur, nec in∣digne fert, quia non Do∣minum sed Ministrum Ec∣clesiae se agere sciebat. Ferus in Act. 11. 2. That he was Compell'd to give a Reason of his Actions to the Church; nor was Peter offended at it, because he knew that he was not a Lord, but Minister of the Church. But now (asImpijautem Ponti∣fices Nunc nec ab Ecclesiâ argui, aut in Ordinem co∣gi volunt, quasi sint Do∣mini non Ministri. I∣bidem. Ferus there goes on) the Case is alter'd; for wicked Popes, (as though they were Lords and not Ministers) will not be Que∣stion'd for any thing, or reprov'd. Had the Canon Law been then in force, (which his pretended Successors have approved, and by their Su∣pream Authority publish'd) he might have told those who Question'd him,Si Papa innumera∣biles populos sccum ducit, primo mancipio Gehennae, &c. Hujus Culpas redar∣guere praesumat mortalium nullus: quia Cunctos ipse judicaturus, à nemine est Judicandus; nisi sit à si∣de deviss. Can. si Papa. 6. Dist. 40. That he was to judge all men, and none him; nor was he to be re∣prov'd by any mortal man, though by his Impiety and ill Example, he carried thousands to Hell with him. 10. Nay, St. Paul does not onlyGal. 2. 11. 12. 13. 14. question St. Peter's Actions, but to his face, before the People publickly condemn them, and that justly; for (he says) he was to be blamed: which he neither would, nor indeed well could have done, had he known Peter to have been so far his Superi∣or as to have (by Divine Institution) a Mo∣narchical Jurisdiction and Power over him. 11. Lastly, St. Paul himself tells us,2. Cor. 11. 5. & 12. vers. 11. That he was in Nothing Inferior to the Chiefest Apostles; not to Peter, James, or John, whomGal. 2. 9. else∣where he reckons the chiefest. I know they say,
That Paul was equal to Peter as to his Apostolical Office, but Inferior to Peter, as he wasLocus hic non de∣rogat praerogativae Petri, qui totius Ecclesiae rector & Pastor Constitutus, eti∣am ipsis Apostolis Major & Superior fuit. Estius in 2. Cor. 12. 11. Supream Pastor over the Apostles, and the whole Church. But this is gratis dictum, and indeed a begging of the Question, and taking that for granted, which never was, nor ever will be proved. How∣ever, 'tis certain, 1. That every Apostle (as well as Peter) had an Vniversal supreamQui Apostolus est, Sammam habet in Omnem Ecclesiam Potestatem, Bel∣larmin. De Rom. Pontif. lib. 2. cap. 12. in Respons. 3. & Object. 2. Authori∣ty and Jurisdiction, in any Part of the World, and over any Christians wherever they came. 2. That this largeness of their Jurisdiction, was Apostolical, and Personal to themselves, which they neither did, nor could transmit to their Successors; whose Jurisdiction was limited to some City and Territory, and that particular Place, the Care and Charge whereof was com∣mitted unto them; as Ephesus was to Timothy, and Creet to Titus. 3. Our Adversaries con∣fess this, (as to all the other Apostles) but for Peter, they say, HeSuccessio ex Christi Instituto, & Jure Divino est, quia ipse Christus Insti∣tuit in Petro Pontificatum, infinem Mundi duraturum, ac ideo quicunque Petro succedit, à Christo accipit Pontificatum. Bellarmin. dicto lib. & cap. §. ut au∣tem. transmitted his Suprema∣cy and Vniversal Jurisdiction over the whole Church to his Successor, and that by the Institution of our blessed Saviour, and Divine Right. If they could prove this, the Controversie were at an end; we would acquiesce, and admit (what upon un∣deniable evidence we deny) the Popes Suprema∣cy. But this they neither do, nor is there any possibility they ever should prove. For there is not one Syllable inRomanum Pontifi∣cem succedere Petro, non habetur expresse in Scrip∣turis, (no, nor Implicitè neither) tamen succedere aliquem Petro, deducitur evidentèr ex Scripturis, illum autem esse Romanum Pontificem, habetur ex tra∣ditione Apostolica. Bellar∣min. dicto lib. & cap. §. Observandum Tertio. Scripture, of Peter's Successor, or of what Power he received from him: and nothing but Scripture can prove our blessed Saviour's Institution, and Divine Law,
whereby Peter's Supremacy is transmitted to his Successor. The truth is, that Pius. V. in the beginning of this his Impious Bull, and other Popes manyVid. Cap. Solitae. 6. Extra. de Major. & Obedientiâ. & Cap. Per venerabilem. 13. Extra. Qui filij sunt legit. & Cap. Ad Apostolicae. 2. De Sent. & re judicatâ, in. 6. & Cap. pro Hu∣man. 1. De Homicidio, in. 6. times in their Bulls, Breves, and Decretal Constitutions, and their Writers gene∣rally, take it for granted, that our blessed Savi∣our gave Peter the Supremacy over the whole Church, and to his Successors after him: And whenVid. Tho. Cam∣pegium Episc. Feltren∣sem, de Potestate Rom. Pont. Capp. 13. 14. & Bellarminum de Roman. Pontisice, lib. 2. c. 12. &c. some of them, sometimes go about to prove it, the Reasons they bring, are so far from Sense and Consequence, that they may de∣serve Pity and Contempt, rather than a serious Answer. But when Reason will not Convince, they have other Roman Arts to Cosen men into a Belief, that what was given to Peter, was like∣wise given to the Pope his Successor; and that is (amongst other ways) by Corrupting the Ancient Fathers with false Translations. So when Chrysostom had faid, That the Power of the Keys, was not given to Peter only, but to the rest of the Apostles: Pet. Possinus adds, Successors; and renders it thus—The Power of the Keys was not given only to Peter And His, &c Non id Petro uni Succes∣sorbusque suis reservatum. Pet. Possinus Jesuita, Ca∣tena Graec. Patrum in Matth. Tom. 1. p. 232. Successors, &c. where Chrysostome (whom he Translates) has no∣thing of Peter's Successors: but truly and plain∣ly says—That the Power of the Keys was not given only to Peter, but to the rest of the Apostles, when our blessedJoh. 20. 22. 23. Savionr told them, whose sins ye remit they are remitted, and whose sins ye retain, they are retained. So in the Epistle of PopeVid. Pet. de Marca de Concordia Sacerdo∣tij & Imperij. Tom. 2. 1. 5. c. 10. §. 2. p. 35. & Pet. Crab. Conc. Tom. 1. pag. 945. Col. 2. The words are these; Vnde Sanctis∣simus & Beatissimus Papa, Caput Vniversalis Eccle∣siae, &c. Leo to the Bishops of France, and of his Legat Pas∣chasinus about the Condemnation of Dioscorus,
in the Council of Chalcedon, these Words occur in the Latin Copies—The most holy and most bles∣sed Pope Leo, Head of the Vniversal Church: Where these words—Head of the Vniversal Church, are not in the Greek Copies; (as that Learned Archbishop ingenuously and trulyAbsent à Contex∣tu Graeco, verba illa, Ca∣put Vniversalis, &c. loco dicto, in margine. Confesseth) but (by Roman Arts) falsly and basely interserted, that so they might by fraud (what by no Reason they can) maintain, the Pope's impiously usurped Supremacy. And that we may know, how unpleasing the pub∣lishing of such things (though evidently true) are to the Pope and his Party at Rome, (who are resolved, in despight of truth) to maintain the Popes pretended Supremacy) this Learned Work of that great Roman Catholick Arch∣bishop Vide Indicem Li∣brorum Prohibitorum Alexand. 7. Jussu Edi∣tum, Romae, Ann. 1664. verbo, De Concordia Sa∣cerdotij, &c. p. 29. & p. 352. ubi extat Decretum Congrationis Jndicis, in quo damnatur hic Petri de Marca Liber., is damn'd by the Inquisitors, not to be printed, read, or had by any. He who se∣riously reads (and understands) the Latin Ver∣sions of the Greek Councils, Fathers, and other Greek and Latin Writers, may find an hundred such Frauds, to maintain (what they know, they have no just reason for) their Papal and Antichristian Tyranny: And their Jndices Ex∣purgatorij are Authentick Evidences, to Convince them of these Unchristian Practises, to conceal truth, and cosen the World into a belief of their pernicious Papal Errors. Nor is this all, (nor the worst) for so desperately are they set upon it, that if their Interest and the Papal Mo∣narchy cannot otherwise be maintain'd (as 'tis impossible it should by any just and lawful
means) they speak impiously and blasphemous∣ly of our blessed Saviour. Thomas Campegius Episcopus Feltrensis, in his Book of the Power of the Pope, to Paul. IV. says,—Non fuisset Christus Diligens Pater-familias, si non dimisisset in Terrâ aliquem qui Vice suâ possit subvenire necessitatibus Ec∣clesiae, &c. De Potestat. Rom. Pontif. cap. 1. §. 3. pag. 2. That our blessed Saviour had not been a Diligent Father of the Fa∣mily, to his Church, unless he had left such a Mo∣narch over his Church, as the Pope, of whom he is there speaking: And the Cites Pope Innocent, and Aquinas to justifie it. Albertus Pighius is as high to the same impious purpose, and expresly says—Christus Ecclesiae Defuissct, nec de Necessa∣riis prospexisset, Nisi Mo∣narcham aliquem & Judi∣cem Constituisset, &c. Vide Albert. Pighium Con∣trovers. 3. fol. 70. 71. 76. That our blessed Saviour had been want∣ing to his Church in things necessary, if he had not Constituted and left such a Monarch and Judge of Controversies. And a greatChristus dum fuit in Mundo, de jure natura∣li, in Imperatorem & Quos∣cunque Alios Deposnionis Sementias ferre potuisset, & Damnationis—& Eadem Ratione & Vica∣rius ejus potest. Nam non videretur Dominus Dis∣cretus fuisse, nisi unicum post se Talem Vicarium re∣liquisset. Fuit autem iste Vicarius Petrus: & idem dicendum est de Successo∣ribus Petri. Ita Petrus Bertrandus in Addit. ad Glossas ad Cap. Unam Sanctam. 1. De Major. & Obed. Extrav. Com∣mun. Canonist (if that be possible) more blasphemously says— That our blessed Saviour, while he was on Earth, had power to pronounce the Sentence of Deposition, and Damnation against the Emperor, or any other; And by the same Reason, His Vicar now can do it. And then he impiously adds—That our blessed Saviour would not have seem'd Discreet, unless he had left such a Vicar, as could do all these things, &c. So if it be granted (which is most evident and certainly true) that our blessed Saviour left no such Monarchical Vicar, as the Pope; then they are not affraid to accuse him of want of Diligence and Discretion. And this impious Gloss is approved and confirm'd by PopeVide Bullam Greg. 13. dat. Rom. 1. Julij, Ann. 1580. praefixam. Corp. Juris Can. Paris. 1612. & 1618. Gregory. XIII. as (we may be sure) what makes for his Extravagant Power and Papal Monar∣chy (how Erroneous and Impious soever) shall not want his Approbation. And thus much of
the third Priviledge of the Apostles, their Vni∣versal Jurisdiction; equally in them all, in James, and John, and Paul as much as Peter; and this Jurisdiction Personal to all, and never trans∣mitted to any of their Successors. 4. Besides the Immediate call of the Apostles, their Power of doing Miracles, and their Universal Jurisdiction over all the World; they were (all of them) , Divinely Inspired by the Holy Ghost, so that they had Infallibility, so far, as whatever they preach'd or writ was Di∣vine, and the undoubted Word of God. This Priviledge also was Personal, nor ever was Com∣municated to any of their Successors. I know that theSic Omnes Aposto∣licae Sodis Sanctiones acci∣piendae sunt, tanquam Ipsius divini Petri voce firmatae sint. Can. sic Omnes. 2. Dist. 19. And this the Gloss there indeavours to prove, from a spuri∣ous and ridiculous, as well as impious Canon. Can. Non Nos. 1. Dist. 40. Canonists andThe Jesuits in their Thesis proposed in the Claromont Coll. 12. Decemb. Ann. 1661. Im∣pudently and Impiously say, Christus Ecclesiae re∣gimen primum Petro, dein Successoribus Commisit, & Eandem quam habebat Ip∣se, Infallibilitatem, Conces∣sit, quoties ex Cathedrâ lo∣queretur. And then. Thes. 20. tells us—Datur Infallibilis Controversia∣rum Judex, etiam Extra Concilium Generale, Tum in Quaestio ibus Juris, tum facti. Jesuits, (in the last and worst of times) would make the World believe (without any shadow of ratio∣nal ground) that Peter transferred his Infallibi∣lity to the Pope, and made him the Infallible Judge of all Controversies of Faith, and Fact too. A thing so evidently false, and without any possibility of proof, that 'tis a wonder, tha any should have the Confidence to assert it, e∣specially in Paris, the great Metropolis of Church which constantly does, and has deny the Popes Infallibility and Superiority to a Ge∣neral Council. 2. But that which might fo ever silence this Irrational and Injust Claim Infallibility in the Pope, is, that (for Matter o Fact) none of them, (though they were some times nibling at a kind of Supremacy) for above a Thousand Years after our blessed Saviour, ei∣ther
did or dared pretend to Infallibility; and if they had, they had made themselves ridicu∣lous. For, 3. It was notoriously known, that several of their Popes were Hereticks. For in∣stance, Hieronymus de Scriptoribus Ecclesiast in Fortunatiano.Liberius,Vid. Hist. Haeresis Monothlitarum, per Fran. de Combesis Domi∣nicanum. Paris. 1648. p. 65. &c. 121. &c. ubi contra Pighium, Baroni∣um, &c. probat eviden∣tèr Honorium Synodo. 6. damnatum. Honorius,Vid. D. Rlch. Cra∣kanthorp, in Vigilio dormitante. Vigilius, &c. And for Heresie Condemn'd in General Councils, as is evident from the Acts themselves. and has been demonstrated, not only by Prote∣stants, but by very Learned men of the Roman Communion. 4. And he who seriously reads, and impartially considers their Papal Bulls, Breves, and DecretalLet any man read those two Constitutions before nam'd. 1. That of Innocent. 3. Cap. Soli∣citae. 6. Extra de Major. & Obedient. &, 2. That of Bonif. 8. Cap. Unam Sanctam. 1. eodem Titu∣lo. Extravag. Commun. and if he have eyes, and will Impartially use them, he will find what I say, true. Or he may (with the same success) read the Bulls and Dam∣nations of the Emperor Hen. 4. by Greg. 7. in Bull. Rom. 1638. Tom. 1. p. 49. 50. 51. And of Freder. 2. Ibid. p. 94. 95. by Innoc. 4. And the Ex∣communications of the same Emperor, by Greg. 9. Ann. 1239. Ibid. in di∣cto Bullario. Tom. 1. p. 89. 90. Constitutions; and in them how ridiculously they reason, and prophane (rather than expound) Scripture; will have a∣bundant reason to believe, that those Popes were so far from Infallibility, that their own Writings Convince them guilty of Gross Igno∣rance and Folly. 5. Lastly, All the Apostles were Fundamenta Ec∣clesiae, Domus Dei, Foundations of the Church, or House of God, (as has before been evidently proved from Scripture) and this was in all the Apostles Extraordinary, and a Personal Aposto∣lical Priviledge, to which, (as it was in the A∣postles) none of their Successors (no not the Pope,) ever did, or (with any reason) could pretend. And as this Apostolical Priviledge, so the other four before mention'd (1. Imme∣diate Vocation. 2. Power to work Miracles. 3. V∣niversality of Jurisdiction. 4. Infallibility in all things they preach'd or writ.) I say, all these Pri∣viledges, were Extraordinary and Personal to
the Apostles, and never were transmitted to any of their Successors. And this being granted, (as of necessity it ought and must) it will evi∣dently follow, that Peter neither had, nor could have, that Monarchical Supremacy over the Apostles and Universal Church, to which the Pope and his Party vainly, and without any rea∣son or ground pretend. For that Papal Supre∣macy and Monarchy they pretend Peter had, (according to their Hypothesis) consisted prin∣cipally, in the Universality of his Jurisdiction over the whole Church, and his Infallibility, as a Judge, to determine Controversies of Faith; both which every Apostle had, as much and as well as he) and therefore it was impossible, that (in these respects) he should have any Su∣periority (much less Supremacy) over the o∣ther Apostles, more than they over him; especi∣ally, seeing in Scripture, (to men who have good Eyes, and will Impartially use them) there is not one Syllable looks that way. Nay, see∣ing our blessed Saviour hath expresly deter∣min'd the contrary. The Apostles were dispu∣ting and reasoning amongst themselves, which of them should be greatest: (they had their Infirmities and ambitious desires). But our Sa∣viour tells them—Matth. 20. 26. 27. Whosoever will be great among you (though Peter be the man) let him be their Minister; and whosoever will be, Primus seu Princeps, (plus est quam esse Magnum) a∣liis Omnibus Major (yet this the Pope would have). Luc. Burgensis. in Matth. 20. 27. chief, let him be your Servant. And again,—Matth. 23. 8. 9. 10. 11. Be not ye call'd Masters, for one is your Master, e∣ven Christ (not Peter) and ye are Brethren; but
he that will be greatest among you, shall be your Servant. The Apostles had no Master under Heaven, but their blessed Saviour; it was of him, and him Only, that they learned the Go∣spel, and that Immediately; they had it not fromGal. 1. 1. any man, nor one from another. Our blessed Saviour was their only Master and Superi∣or, and they his Scholars, subordinate to him, and co-ordinate amongst themselves. He tells them, that they are Brethren; Condiscipuli, School-fellows. Names which (in themselves, and in their Master's meaning) import Equality; e∣specially as to any Jurisdiction one over ano∣ther. There may be amongst Scholars of the same School, and Brethren, an inequality, (and so there was amongst the Apostles) 1. In respect of Age; Some might be elder, some younger. 2. In respect of their coming to that School; some might come before others; So Andrew was first call'd to our blessed Saviours School, (before PeterJoh. 1. 40, 41, &c.). 3. In respect of Natural Parts and Abili∣ties, some might have greater Capacities then others. 4. In respect of their Masters Love and Kindness, he might love one more then another, So amongst the Twelve, John was the belovod Disciple. Such inequality there was amongst them, and we willingly grant it. But to say, (as the Pope, and many of his Party most vain∣ly do) that amongst these Brethren, and School-fellows in our blessed Saviour's School, Peter, (or any other) had not only an Authority and Jurisdiction, but a Monarchical Supremacy, over
all the rest, this is so contradictory to our bles∣sed Saviour's plain words, and the manifest and undoubted meaning of them; that were it not, that we know men may be sway'd with worldly Interests, and sometimes have strong Delusions to believe a Lye; it were incredible that any Learned men should (with so much Confidence, and no Reason, assert the Contrary. To pass by all Testimonies of Ancient Fathers for many hundred years, and many sober Papists before Luther, (who neither knew, nor believed Pe∣ter's Monarchy over the Church and his fellow Apostles, his Equals) sure I am, 1. That Francis Matth. 23. 8. Omnes autem vos fratres estis. On which words, Luc. Bru∣gensis saith thus—Quia fratres sumus, Ne∣minem in alios Magisterio fungi Concedit—Fra∣tres non Magistri Alii in Alios—estis Condis∣cipuli, nemo in alium pro∣prie agere potest Magi∣strum. Nullus aliorum Ma∣gisterium mereatur, se ha∣bere vos Omnes merito de∣beatis Condiscipulos. Chri∣stus Solus Omnium Magi∣ster agnoscendus. Ita L. Brugensis Commentar. in. 4. Evang. ad. 23. Math. 8. p. 361. vid. Hieronym. in Gal. 2. 1. ubi dicit Pe∣trum, Paulum, & reli∣quos Apostolos fuisse ae∣quales.Lucas Brugensis, a Roman Catholick (in our days) eminent in their Church for Dignity and Learning, says the same thing I have done (and on the same Texts) for the Equality of the Apostles, against Peter's pretended Monarchy. 2. And a greater then he, (I mean,Sed quia Ecclesia regenda est juxta unita∣tem, necessarium fuit, In∣stitui ab Apostolis modum quendam Communionis in∣ter Episcopos, secundum Ex∣emplum, A Christo datum in Institutione Collegij A∣postolici; quod Vniversum Ecclesiae Corpus repraesenta∣bat: Ideoque praescribenda ab iis fuit forma regiminis, Aristocratici nimirum, it a ut unus Praesideret. Pet. de Marca de Concordia Sacerdotij & Imperij, lib. 6. cap. 1. §. 2. pag. 58. Col. 1. Petrus de Marca Archbishop of Paris) convinc'd with the Evidence of the former Texts, and Truth, was of Opinion, and has publish'd it to the World, That our blessed Saviour, at his As∣cension, did not leave the Church establish'd in Peter, and a Monarchy; But in an Aristocratie, or the Colledge of the Apostles. In which Col∣ledge Peter was one, not Superior (much less a Monarch) to the other Apostles; and the A∣postles left the Government of the Church E∣stablish'd in the Bishops, and Aristocratical; only he thinks, that both in the Colledge of the A∣postles, and Councils of Bishops after them,
there was (for Orders sake) to be a President, (not a Monarch, for that was Inconsistent with Aristocratie) And (if this will content them) we will grant it. Because we do know, that the An∣cient Church allow'd the Pope the prime Place and Precedency in Councils, (for Orders sake) and that not by any Divine Right, (which was not in those days, so much as pretended to) but because Rome was theConc. Chalcedon. Can. 28. Conc. Constant. 1. Can. 5. apud P. Crabb. Conc. Tom. 1. pag. 411. Imperial City, and Metropolis of the Roman Empire; the greatness of the City usually giving greatness and prece∣dency to the Bishops; such were Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, &c. I know the Inquisitors at Rome have damned this Book ofBut it is not only Pet, de Marca, but even the Popish General Councils of Pisa, Con∣stance, and Basil, and the Gallican Church and Sor∣bon, and the Ancient Church for a thousand years after our blessed Saviour, which main∣tain'd the same Do∣ctrine Marca did; as is evidently proved by a Learned Sorbon Doctor, Edm. Rechier. In Hist. Conc. General. l. 1. Edit. Colon. Ann. 1680. The design of the whole Book is against the Popes Mo∣narchical Supremacy and Infallibility. Vide di∣cti lib. cap. 13. pag. 393. &c. Petrus de Marca, but this is no Argument, that what he has said, is not true; Grande aliquo bonum est, quod à Nerone (ab Inquisitoribus) damnatur. To conclude this Point, if our Adversaries assent not to this manifest Truth, as (being Contradi∣ctory to their worldly Interest and misconcei∣ved Infallible Pretensions) 'tis probable they will not; I shall make them this (to all unprejudiced Lovers of Truth) fair offer. Let them give me any one cogent Argument from Scripture or Universal Tradition (and nothing else can do it) whereby they can prove, the following Positions; I will thank God and them for the discovery, and promise hereby to be their Pro∣selyte. 1. If they can (by any such Argument) prove that Peter (by Divine Right) had such a Mo∣narchical Supremacy and Jurisdiction over the
Apostles, and the whole Church, (as is vainly pretended) I will yield the Cause. But if he had no such Power, 'tis impossible he should transmit the Power (he never had) to his Successors. 2. Let it be suppos'd, (which yet is evidently un∣true) that St. Peter had such a Monarchical Au∣thority and Jurisdiction, even over the rest of the Apostles, let them prove by any such Argu∣ment as is before mention'd; that it was not only Temporal, & his only for his life; that it was not to have an end and period with his Person. For if it was, then his Successor (whoever he be) can have no pretence to it. For 'tis impossible, that any Successor, can have any legal or just Claim to that Power, which vanish'd and ceas'd to be, with his Predecessor, who possess'd it on∣ly for his life. 3. Admit both these to be true, (which yet are equally and evidently false) that Peter had such a Power, and that it was not Personal, but to be transmitted to his Successor, seeing such trans∣mission must either be done by our blessed Sa∣viour immediately, or (by Power deriv'd from him) by Peter. Let our Adversaries make it appear, that either our blessed Saviour himself, or Peter (by Power deriv'd from him) did actu∣ally transmit that Power to any Successor, and I submit. 4. Lastly, Suppose all these to be (what not one of them is) true; yet unless it do appear, that the Bishop of Rome (and not the Bishop of Antioch, (where they say Peter was Bishop first) was
that Successor of St. Peter, to whom such Su∣premacy was transmitted; he can have no pre∣tence to it. For in this Case, Idem est non esse & non apparere. Let our Adversaries then make it appear, that either our blessed Saviour imme∣diately by himself, or Peter (by Authority from him) didI know that some of them (eminent for Learning and Dignity in their Church) say; That our blessed Saviour did give Peter power to transfer his great Au∣thority to his Successor, and only to him, not to any of the other Apostles; But this they say only, without any pretence of proof. And I commend their Prudence, not to attempt Impos∣sibilities. Johan. Franciscus Bordinus Archbishop of Avignion, has published his Opinion, in these words—Christus Vniversale Totius Ecclesiae Caput Petrum Constituit, qui suas Vices in Terris ageret. Quo quidem in Munere, & si dum viveret, Aequales (mark that) habuit caeteros Coapostolos, Nulli tamen Eorum, quod à Domino accipissent, jus per Successionem in alios transferendi facult as fuit. Soli Petro Id Promissum, Soli Petro Id Traditum, ut Petra esset, & post Christum Ecclesiae funda∣mentum. Ita Johan. Fran. Bordinus Archiepiscopus Avenionensis, in Serie & Gestis Roman. Pontif. ad Clement. Papam. 8. ad Annum Christ. 34. Tiberij. 18. transmit the Supremacy to the Pope, and we shall be satisfy'd; and thankful for the Discovery. And this brings me to the Second thing proposed before. 2. The thing next to be enquired after is,2. Whe∣ther, and how it may appear that the Bishop of Rome is Peters Successor. Our Adversaries say, (and vainly say it only) that Peter was Supream Head (after our blessed Saviour's Ascension) and Monarch of the Church; and from him, (Jure Suc∣cessionis) the Pope derives his Monarchical Power and Supremacy; and that by the Institution andPetrus Romae Sedem suam, Jubente Domino, Collocavit. Bellarm. de Rom. Pontif. l. 2. c. 1. §. 1. Com∣mand of our blessed Saviour, and so not by Humane, butProbatur, Roman. Pontificem Petro Succedere, in Pontificatu Ecclesiae V∣niversae Ex Divino Jure, & Ratione Successionis, Bellarmin. Ibid. lib. 2. cap. 12. §. Primum ergo. Papa in Petri Cathedrâ Sedet, summum in eo dignitatis gradum, & Jurisdictionis amplitudinem, non Humanis Constitutionibus, sed Divinitus datum agnoscit: est Pater Vnixersalis Ecclesiae Petri Successor, & Christi Vicarius, &c. Catechism. Trident. Part. 2. cap. 7. §. 28. pag. 391. Edit. Paris. 1635. Divine Right. This is a Position of great∣est Consequence, and will require good proof.
Nor is it possible to prove the Bishop of Rome to be Peter's Successor in that Bishoprick, unless it first appear that Peter was his Predecessor in that See. Linus, Clemens or Cletus cannot (with any Truth or Sense) be said to succeed Peter, unless it appear first, that he preceeded them. Our Ad∣versaries (I confess) do constantly (with great noise and confidence) affirm, That Peter did pre∣ceed in the Bishoprick of Rome; but sure I am, that hitherto, they have not brought any, so much as probable (much less cogent and concluding) Rea∣son to prove it: nor do I think it possible they should bring (what they neither have, nor can have) any true and concluding proof, to prove (what this is) an erroneous and false Position. And that this may not be begg'd and gratis dictum, I shall offer to the Impartial Reader, these Conside∣rations. 1. When theyBellarm. Locis proxime citatis, (ut & alij passim). And Pope Pius. 5. in this his Impi∣ous Bull. §. 1. Christus Ec∣clesiam Catholicam uni soli Petro Petrique Successori Romano Pontifici in Po∣testatis Plenitudine Tra∣didit Gubernandam. say, That Peter fix'd his Epis∣copal Chair at Rome, Jubente Domino: Let them shew thatNullum Christi, ea dere, Decretum Extat. So A Lapide Confesses; in Apoc. 17. vers. 17. pag. 268. Col. 2. A. Command, and there will be an end of the Controversie; we will obey our bles∣sed Saviour's Command, and the Pope too. But this they have neither done, nor can: It being impossible, they should shew that to be, which never was, nor ever had any being. 2. That ever Peter was at Rome, (much less that he was Bishop there, for Five and twenty years (as is vainly pretended) cannot be made appear out of Scripture, or any Apostolical or Authentick Record; and therefore that he was there at all, (where he might be, as he was in
many other good Cities, and not Bishop of a∣ny of them) must depend solely upon human and fallible Testimonies, (I say, Testimonies cer∣tainly fallible, if not absolutely false; which many Learned men have, and do believe). Now seeing the whole Papal Monarchy and Infallibi∣lity, depend upon Peter's being Bishop of Rome, and the grounds we have to assure us, that he ever was there, are fallible and dubious; and seeing it is irrational (if not impossible) that a∣ny considering Person, should give a firm and undoubted assent to any Conclusion, inferr'd only upon fallible and dubious premisses. Hence it evidently follows, That our Faith and belief of the Papal Monarchy and Infallibility is, and (till they find better, and more necessary premis∣ses) must be fallible and dubious. And here I desire to be inform'd how it comes to be an Article of Faith, in their new Roman Creed; That the Bishop of Rome is Vicar of Christ, andRomano Pontifici, Beati Petri Apostolorum Principis, Successori, ac Christi Vicario, veram O∣bedientiam spondeo ae ju∣ro. Vid. Bullam Pii. 4. super forma Juramenti Professionis fidei, in Conc. Trident. Sess. 24. p. 452. Edit. Antv. 1633. Peter's Successor; which Article (with the rest in that Creed) they promise,Hanc Catholicam fidem, extra quam nemo Salvus esse potest, quam in Praesenti profiteor, & teneo, eandem usque ad ultimum vitae spiritum Con∣stantissime retinere, &c. Spondeo, Voveo, Juro. I∣bidem. swear and vow, to believe and profess most Constantly, to their last breath. With what Conscience their Church can require, or they take such an Oath, Most Constantly and firmly to believe, to their last breath, such things, for the belief of which, they have no grounds (if any) save only fallible and very dubious, Ipsi viderint. 3. I know, that the Assertors of the Papal Mo∣narchy (according to their Interest) are very desirous to prove out of Scripture, that Peter
was at Rome; and to that end produce those words in his first Epistle—1 Pet. 5. 13. The Church which is at Babylon salutes you: And by Babylon, they say, the Apostle meant Rome: And for this, they cite Papias inPrimam Petri E∣pistolam Romae Scriptam () aiunt, quam Pe∣trus,  appellat. Eusebius Hist. l. 2. c. 15. p. 53. B. Valesio. Eusebius, That by Babylon, Rome is figuratively to be understood. So that (if this be true) Peter writ that Epistle at Babylon; that is, at Rome, and so must be at Rome when he writ it: And the proof of this depends upon the Authority of Papias Bishop of Hierapolis, and those who follow him. Now how little Credit is to be given to Papias in this, (or any thing else) will manifestly appear out of the same Eusebius; who tells us, 1. That Papias was much given to Tradition;Curiose sciscitabar (said Papias) à Seniori∣bus, quid Petrus, quid Ja∣cobus, dicere soliì essent. Néque ex Bibliorum Le∣ctione, tantam me utilita∣tem capere posse Existi∣mabam, quantam ex ho∣minum vivâ voce. Euseb. l. 3. c. 39. p. 111. inquiring (of the Elders who had heard the Apostles) what Peter, or James, or John, &c. had said: thinking he gtless benefit by reading Scriptures, then by the talk of those who heard the Authors of them. 2. That he had by such Ex Traditione non scriptâ habuit novas quas∣dam Servatoris parabolas & praedicationes, aliáque Fabulis propiora; inter quae Mille Annorum spa∣tium post resurrectionem, fore dicit. Euseb. ibid. p. 112. Tradition, strange Parables and Preachings of our blessed Saviour, and other things very Fabulous: Such as the Heresie of the Mille∣naries; which he believed and propagated. That he thus err'd, byIta opinatus vide∣tur Papias, ex male In∣tellectis Apostolorum nar∣rationibus. Fuit enim Me∣diocri Admodum Ingenio Praeditus. Euseb. ibidem. Lit. c. Misunderstanding the Apostles Doctrine: For (as Eusebius goes on) he was a man of very little understanding. 4. And yet (as the same Author says) he was the occasion that, Plerisque tamen post Ipsum Ecclesiasticis Scri∣ptoribus, Ejusdem Erroris occasionem praebuit, homi∣nis vetustate, Sententiam suam tuentibus. Ibidem D. Ita etiam Nicepho∣rus Hist. Lib. 3. cap. 20. pag. 252. D.most of the Ecclesiastical Writers who follow∣ed him (Reverencing his Antiquity) err'd with him.
I know,Object. that in Eusebius (both in the worst E∣dition of him, byColon. Allobr. 1612. Christopherson, (sometime a Popish Bishop of Chichester) and the best byParis. 1659. Hen. Valesius) we have a high Commendation of Pa∣pias; Papias eadem aetate Celebris fuit; Vir Imprimis disertus, & eruditus, ac Scripturarum peritus. Eu∣seb. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 36. E∣dit. Valesij: Sed in Edit. Christopherson. Cap. 35. Grae. 30. Latinae Versio∣nis.At the same time (says Eusebius, as Vale∣sius renders him) Papias was famous; a man very Eloquent and Learned, and well skill'd in Scripture. But Christopherson (his other Translator) goes high∣er, (as usually he does when it makes for the Ca∣tholick Cause) and in his Translation says more in Commendation of Papias, then is in the Text: For he tells us, That Papias (besides his knowledge of Scripture) was a manOmnium aliaruni Artium scientiâ vir planè disertissimus. Ibidem. certainly most learned in the Knowledge of All Other Arts. Now if this be true, then that Character I have given him before, is not so; and then his Antiquity (which wasPapias was a friend and familiar of St. Poly∣carpe. Euseb. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 39. and Polycarpe suffered Martyrdom Anno Christ. 167. Baro∣nius Annotat. ad Marty∣rolog. Romanum, ad di∣em Jan. 26. p. 81. Col. 1. great) and his great Learning (in all Arts and Sci∣ences, as well as Scripture) consider'd; his Testi∣mony, that Babylon, whence St. Peter writ, was Rome, will be more valid, and of greater Autho∣rity. In Answer to this;Answer. I say, 1. That all this Com∣mendation of Papias before mention'd, is so far from having any Authority from Eusebius, that 'tis a plain Forgery. Eusebius (as to this passage) is evidently corrupted; and this Commendation of Papias (by whose Ignorance or Knavery, I know not) shuffled into the Text, long after Euse∣bius his death. For, 2. Ruffinus (who Translated Eusebius his History above One thousand two hundred years ago) in the place above quoted, says only thus—About this time flourished Polycarpe
Bishop of Smyrna, and Papias Bishop of Hierapolis. So the Printed Edition ofQuibus Temporibus floruit Polycarpus Smyrnae∣orum Episcopus, & Papias Similiter Apud Hierapo∣lim Sacerdotium gerens. Ruffin. l. 3. c. 35. in Excu∣so Rhenarci. Basil. 1528. Ruffinus by B. Rhe∣nanus; and a very Ancient and Compleat MS. of Ruffinus (in my Keeping and Possession) exactly In Cod. MS. Ruffi∣ni, est. Lib. 3. cap. 32.agrees with it; and there is not one word of that Commendation of Papias, which is now ex∣tant in Eusebius: And therefore we may Con∣clude, that Anciently it was not there, but the Text of Eusebius (by fraud or folly) is since Cor∣rupted: For had it been in Eusebius when Ruffin Translated him, there had been no reason he should have left it out. 3. And which is yet more con∣siderable, Valesius (a very Learned Roman Catho∣lick) who last published Eusebius, Ingenuously Confesses, that of three or four Greek MSS. of Eusebius, which he made use of in his Edition, not any one of themTotum hoc Elogium Papiae deest in nostris Codi∣cibus. Valesius in Not. ad Lib. 3. Eusebij. c. 36. p. 55. had that Commendation of Pa∣pias; and therefore he doubts not, but these words were Non dubito, quin hae verba ab Imperito Scholiastè adjecta sunt, praeter Eusebij mentem & Sementiam. Valesius Ibi∣dem.added by some Ignorant Scholiast, contrary to the Judgment and Sense of Eusebius. For (saysQuomodo fieri po∣test ut Eusebius Papiam hic appellet virum doctissimum, & scripturarum peritissi∣mum, cum in fine Libri affirmat diserte, Papiam Mediocri Ingenio praedi∣tum, Planéque Rudem ac Simplicem. Valesius Ibi∣dem. he) how is it possible that Eusebius should call Papias a Most Learned Man, and Most Skill'd in Scripture, who in the sameEuseb. lib. 3. c. 39. Book says, he was A Rule and Simple Person, of Very Little Wit or Judgment. And his Ignorance especially appears (as in other things) in that 1. He says that Philip, whose Daughters were Pro∣phetesses, was Philip theEuseb. Hist. lib. 3. c. 39. p. 112. Valesij Edit. vide Nicephor. lib. 3. c. 20. Apostle; when the Act. 21. 8. Vide Nicephor. Hist. lib. 3. pag. 252. C.Text, (had he read or remembred it) ex∣presly says, That it was Philip the Deacon.
2. Papias said, (and in his Writings published his Opinion) That hearingVide Euseb. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 39. Hieronym. de Illust. Doct. cap. 18. Nicephor. l. 3. c. 20. Oral Traditions, was more profitable, then reading Scriptures). That is, to hear the Stories and Tales of private and fallible Persons (and that in Matters of Religi∣on) was more profitable, then to read the Sa∣cred Oracles of God, penn'd by Divinely In∣spired Infallible Persons. St.Joh. 20. 30. 31. & 21. 25. John tells us, he had writ so many and such things, as were necessary and sufficient to Salvation, yet left out thousands of things, which he thought not necessary. But Papias (with great Ignorance and Impiety) prefers the unwritten Tradition of those things concerning our blessed Saviour, which the Apostles had omitted, as not neces∣sary, nor so useful as those things they had writ. And so in Contradiction to the Holy Spirit and St. John (his Infallible Amanuensis) calls the Tradition of those unwritten things more useful, which they had omitted as not useful at all. And this his Ignorance and want of Judgment further appears, 3. Because Eusebius tells us, That he had (amongst his Traditions), &c. Novas quasdam Servato∣ris parabolas ac praedica∣tiones. strange and novel Parables and Doctrines of our blessed Saviour, and other things more Fabulous; and amongst them his Millena∣ry Heresie, of which he was Father, and (to the Infecting many others) did propagate it: And he fell to those wild Opinions chiefly by his Ig∣norance and Misunderstanding of Scripture; as Eusebius and Nicephorus tell us. And yet this simple Person, and Arch-Heretick, is the prin∣cipal
and prime Witness Rome has, to prove that Babylon (in the Epistle of Peter) signifies Rome, and that Peter was there. For other place in Scripture, they have none, and only Papias (and his Followers) for that. By the Premisses, I think it may appear to Impartial Persons, That seeing Papias preferr'd Tradition (or some mens talk before the Scriptures) that he was a man of very weak understanding, and err'd by misunderstanding Scripture, that he writ Fables rather than History, and maintain'd the Millenary Opinion, which Rome now calls Heresie: I say these things Consider'd, his Au∣thority and Credit is, (if any at all) very little; and yet 'tis all our Adversaries have (his Fol∣lowers Testimonies being derived from, and depending upon his) to prove out of Scripture, that Peter writ that Epistle at Rome, or ever was there. This is a Truth so manifest, that not onlyScaliger in Anno∣tat. in Joh. 18. 31. Petrus Romae nunquam fuit: sed praedicabat , Cujus Metropolis e∣rat Babylon, ex quâ scri∣bit Epistolam suam. Vid. Johan. Rainoldum con∣tra Hartum, &c. Protestants, but most Learned Roman Tametsi Veteres Ex∣istimaverint Petrum voca∣bulo Babylonis signisicasse Vrbem Romam, probabilis est Scaligeri Conjectura; qui ex Ipsa Babylone scrip∣tam à Petro putat Episto∣lam hanc ad Judaeos di∣spersos, &c. Petrus de Marca▪ Archiepiscopus Parisiensis. De Concor∣dia Sacerd. & Imperij. l. 6. c. 1. §. 4. p. 59. Tom. 2.Catholicks, say and prove; that Peter writ that Epistle, not at Rome, but Babylon in Chal∣dea. And further; that he did not write it at Rome, will be evident from Scripture, and what their own most Learned Author Confes∣ses. For, 1.Baronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Annum Chri∣sti 45. §. 16. 17. Baronius tells us, It was writ, Anno Christi 45. 2. To make this probable, both he, Petavius, and others, generally say; That Peter went to Rome in the second year of Claudius; which was Anno Christi 44. 3. But this a very Learned Roman Catholick evidently Haec Sententia re∣felli videtur ex Actis Apo∣stolorum, ex quibus con∣stat Petrum, in Judaea ac Syriâ semper mansisse, usque ad ultimum Annum A∣grippae, &c. Hen. Valesius in Notis ad Cap. 16. l. 2. Hist. Eccles. Eusebij pag. 33. 34.Confutes from Scripture, and good Au∣thorities;
and plainly shews, that Peter was al∣ways in Judea or Syria, till the death of Herod Agrippa, which was in the fourth year of Clau∣dius, and the Six and fortieth year of our bles∣sed Saviour. And therefore it was impossible that Peter should write that Epistle at Rome, in the Five and fortieth year of our blessed Savi∣our, who never came thither till the year Forty six, unless they will say (and they do say things as impossible) that he writ an Epistle at Rome when he was not there. 4. Nay, 'tis certain from what Luke says in theAct. 15. &c. Acts of the Apo∣stles, that Peter continued in Judaea till the Council met at Jerusalem about the Question concerning Circumcision, and the Ceremonial Law. Sure it is, that he was present at that Council; which was Anno Christi 51. saysBaronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. 51. §. 6. Baronius, Bellarmine, and others; the Learned In Chronico Alex∣andrino Concilium Hiero∣solymitanum refertur Anno Claudij. 6. (Christi. 48.) melius dixisset. 7•. sic e∣nim cuncta egregié conve∣niunt, &c. Hen. Valesius in Notis ad Cap. 18. l. 2. Hist. Eccles. Euseb. p. 37. Col. 2. A.Valesius thinks (and gives his reason for it, (more probable to me, then any brought for the Contrary Opinions) that the Council was held, Anno Claudij. 7. and Christi. 49. take which Computation you please, if St. Peter wrote that Epistle at Rome, Anno Christi 45. he must have writ there, several years before he came thi∣ther. 5. Nay, 'tis further Evident, (let that Council be when they will) that Peter was not at Rome, in the year. 51. which Baronius men∣tions, but at Jerusalem. For St.Gal. 1. 18. Paul tells us, that three years after his Conversion, (which was about the year. 37.) he went to Je∣rusalem to see Peter, and found him there: And
thenGal. 2. 1. 8. 9. fourteen years after, (which was a∣bout the year. 51.) he went to Jerusalem again, and then found Peter there. According to our Adversaries Computation, in the year. 51. Pe∣ter had sate Bishop in Rome aboutThey say, he sate at Rome. 25. years, and that he was martyr'd Neronis. 13. or Anno Christi. 68. so that those 25. years must begin Anno Christi. 43. And then Anno Christi. 51. he had sate at Rome eight years. eight years; and yet St. Paul neither found, nor sought him at Rome (where he was not) but at Jerusa∣lem, where he was, with the Jews, who were Committed to his Charge and Cure. 6. Last∣ly, 'Tis Evident, St. Peter writ that first Epistle to the Asiatick1 Pet. 1. 1. Dispersion of the Jews, of which Babylon was the Metropolis: And sure it is, that when he says, The Church of Babylon salutes you; he intended (as all men do, who write Epistles of that Nature) that they should know where he was, and who they were who saluted them; which was Impossible for them to do, if by Babylon he meant Rome. For at that time, Rome neither was, nor could be known to any by the name of Babylon; no Author (Sacred or Civil) having ever call'd it so. 'Tis true, St. John aboveThe First Epistle of Peter was writ Anno Christi. 45. So Baronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. 45. §. 16. And the same Baronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Annum Christ. 97. §. 1. tells us, that the Re∣velation of St. John was writ Anno Christi 97. that is, 52. years after. Fifty years after, call Rome, Babylon. But he writing Mysterious Pro∣pheties, spoke (to use Eusebius's word) used many Types, Figures and Metaphors, to express future things. But that Peter, writ no such Mysterious Prophetical Predict∣ons, but the plain Duties, and Promises of th Gospel, should use such Types or Figures, ha neither truth nor any probability. By the Pre∣misses, I hope it may appear, that it cannot be proved out of Scripture, that ever Peter was at Rome.
4. But let it be granted, that it could be proved out of Scripture (which is manifestly untrue) that Peter was at Rome, yet thence it will not follow that ever he was Bishop there: much less for Five and twenty years, as is vainly pre∣tended. For, 1. That he was Bishop of Rome (or any place else) there is not one syllable in Scripture; and so from thence there can be no proof of his Roman Bishoprick. And, 2. If it be granted (which is evidently untrue) that it could (out of Scripture) be clearly proved, that he was at Rome a longer time, yet hence it does not follow that he was Bishop there: For he was at Jerusalem, Samaria, Joppa, &c. (as is evident in Scripture) and yet our Adversaries neither do, nor (with any sense or reason) can say, that he was Bishop of all those places. 3. Irenaeus (an ancient and an approved Author) expresly says,Petrus & Paulus fundantes Ecclesiam Ro∣manam, Lino Episcopatum tradiderunt. Succedit ei A∣nacletus, post eum Tertio Loco ab Apostolis Clemens. Irenaeus. lib. 3. cap. 3. That Peter and Paul Constituted Linus first Bishop of Rome; That Anacletus succeeded him, and that Clemens (after the Apostles) was the third Bishop there. After him, Eusebius says the same thing; That after the &c. Post Pauli Petríque Martyrium, Primus Eccle∣siae Romanae. Episcopatum suscepit Linus. Euseb. Hist. l. 3. c. 2. vide Niceph. l. 3. cap. etiam. 2. Martyrdom of Paul and Peter, Linus was the first Bishop of Rome. And again, speaking of the Bishops of Rome, he says, That, Primus fuit Linus, secun∣dus Anencletus. Euseb. Ibid. l. 3. c. 21. Linus was the first, and Anencletus (or Anacletus, as he is usually call'd) the second. And though Eusebius say, That Li∣nus wasEuseb. Ibid. lib. 3. cap. 4. . Primus post Petrum, the first Bishop of Rome after Peter; yet his meaning is not, that Peter was Bishop of Rome before him, as is evident by what he says afterwards; That
ClemensClemens, . Tertius à Paulo & Petro Romae E∣piscopus. Euseb. loco di∣cto. cap. 21. vide Epi∣phanium adversus Haere∣ses. lib. 1. Haeres. 27. Carpocratianorum §. 6. pag. 107. was the third Bishop of Rome, After the Apostles Paul and Peter; and by what Irenae∣us said before him, That Clemens was the third Bishop of Rome After the Apostles. For if this be good consequence—Linus was first Bishop of Rome after Peter; Ergo, Peter was Bishop Rome too. Then this (in Irenaeus and Eusebius, who both say it,) will be good Consequence al∣so; Clemens was third Bishop of Rome after Paul and Peter▪ Ergo, Paul and Peter, were both Bi∣shops of Rome. The truth is, that neither Con∣sequence is good. Irenaeus and Eusebius did indeed believe Paul and Peter Founders of the Roman Church, but neither of them to be Bi∣shops there; which a Learned Roman Catholick evidently saw, and publicklySciendum est Euse∣bium Apostolos Inordine Episcoporum minime N∣merare. Hen. Valesius in Annotat. ad Hist. Eccle∣siasticam Euseb. l. 3. c. 21. & Notarum. pag. 50. Col. 2. B. acknowledg∣es. By the way, let me observe; That Eusebi∣us in two places hereLib. 3. Cap. 2. & Cap. 21. cited, puts Paul be∣fore Peter: and not only Eusebius (a fallible Author) but St. Paul himself puts James before Gal. 2. 9.Peter. Now if Eusebius or St. Paul had known and believ'd St. Peter to have been (what the Pope and his Party, without any ground vainly Imagine) the Supream Monarc over the whole Church and the Apostles themselves; it had been a great Affront and Injury to St. Peter, and such an Incivility as St. Paul would not have been guilty of. 4. And 'tis yet more Considerable, what St. Paul saysGal. 2. 1. 7. 8. 9. in the place last cited; For there we have these things certain in the Text, 1. That Peter was the A∣postle of the Circumcision; the Jews were Com∣mitted
to him, as hisGal. 2. 7. Charge and Cure, as the Gentiles to Paul. 2. It was our blessed Saviour whoVnus & idem mihi Evangelium praeputij, & Petro Circumcisionis credi∣dit; me misit ad Gentes, Illum posuit in Judea. Hi∣eronymus in Cap. 2. ad Galatas. d. Commission'd both of them, and appointed them those Provinces; for none else could. He only could assign them their Provinces, who gave them the Apostolical Power to govern them. Peter (as our Adversaries say) was Supream Mo∣narch of the whole Church, had no Superior but our blessed Saviour, and so none else to Com∣mission him, or Appoint him his Province. 3. Both of them till that time, had diligently, and (with great Success) effectually labour'd in theirVers. 8. several Provinces; Peter amongst the Jews, Paul amongst the Gentiles. 4. By a mutual Agreement, theyVers. 9. consent and pro∣mise, That Peter (as he hadAs is evident in the Acts of the Apostles, and by his first Epistle writ (as Baronius says) Ann 45. Christi. Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. 45. Num. 16. vid. Euseb. Hist. l. 3. c. 1. where he says, that Peter preach'd the Go∣spel long to the Asiatick Dispersion of the Jews, before he came to Rome; and Nicephorus says so too. before, so) for And 'tis certain, that after the year. 51. (of which we now speak) he took the Jews for his Charge and Cure: as is evident from his two E∣pistles writ to them, Ann. 68. And the Con∣fession of Baronius, An∣nal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. 68. Num. 3.the future, He should go to the Jews, and make them his Charge and Cure, and Paul to the Gentiles. 5. And this Agreement was about the year of our Lord. 51. when (according to our Adversaries Computation) he was, and had been Bishop of Rome Eight or Nine years. 6. I desire then to know, Whether Peter (after this Consent and Agreement of the Apostles) con∣tinued Bishop of the Gentiles at Rome, (as our Adversaries pretend he did) or not? If he did, he contradicted his Commission, which our blessed Saviour had given him, to be the Apo∣stle of the Circumcision, and Neglected the Jews, whom he hadGal. 2. 7. , &c. Petro Concreditum est Evangelium praeputij. Concredited to his care, and Committed to him, as his proper Charge. For to take the charge of the Gentiles and Jews too, was not only against his Commission, but
against that Solemn Consent, and Agreement of the Apostles before mention'd, wherein it was agreed and promised, That Peter should go (not to Rome) but to the Circumcision, and Paul to the Gentiles. Nor can it be credible that Peter would Act in Contradiction to his Com∣mission, and his Agreement so solemnly made with the Apostles. But if at the time of that Agreement, (which was Anno Christi. 51.) he ei∣ther was not, (which is most true) Bishop of Rome, or then left it; then it evidently follows, That he Continued not Bishop of Rome for Five and twenty years, as is by our Adversaries, (with great confidence and no reason) asserted. 7. And this is further manifest, from our Ad∣versaries own Principles and Positions: Baroni∣us tells us, That Peter wasQuod spectat ad Ec∣clesiam Antiochenam, hoc Anno (Christi. 39.) In∣stitutam à Petro, & sep∣tem Annis ab eodem admi∣nistratam, &c. Baronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad An∣num Christi. 39. §. 9. Bishop of Anti∣och seven years; and at Rome five and twenty years: And for this he Cites Eusebius his Chro∣nicon. By the way, (concerning what Baronius says of Peter's being Bishop for so many years at Antioch and Rome) Observe, 1. That Eusebius says indeed, that PeterPetrus Ecclesiam Antiochenam fundans, in∣de Romam adiit. Euseb. in Chron. ad Ann. Claud. 1. And they say he went to Rome, Our blessed Savi∣our Commanding him so to do. Cum. 7. Annos An∣tiochiae sedisset, Postea Ju∣bente Christo Romam ve∣mit. Longus A Coriola∣no in summâ Concil. in Principio, in serie Pon∣tificum. founded the Church of Antioch; and then, by our blessed Saviour's Command, (as they say) went to Rome. But so far is he from saying that he was seven years Bishop there, that he expresly says, That Euo∣dius was the First, &c. Antio∣chenae Ecclesiae Episcopus Primus erat Enodius. Idem in Chronico, ad Annum Claudij 2. Bishop of Antioch. 2. When he Cites Eusebius hisBaronius Ibidem; ad Ann. 39. §. 9. Chronicon to prove that Peter was Five and twenty years Bi∣shop of Rome, and refers us, to what Eusebius All that Eusebius says, is only this—. Ad Ann. Claudij. 1.says) ad Ann. 2. Claudij. The man (who
understood no Greek) is miserably mistaken; as Universally he is, when he meddles with Greek Authors, unless their Translations be true) for Eusebius in his Greek Text, (as all know, and may see) has no suchThe words Baro∣nius Cites, as being Eu∣sebius his words Ad An∣num. 2. Claudij, are in∣deed (part of them) Ad Annum. 1. Claudij: but the rest (Peter's being five and twenty years Bi∣shop of Rome) are nei∣ther at that, nor any o∣ther year of Claudius. thing, as Five and twenty years; nay, he does not so much as say, that he was Bishop of Rome at all; much less that he was Five and twenty years Bishop there. But the Latin Copies (Interpo∣lated and Corrupted, as thousands others are by Roman Arts) deceived him. But to let this pass; Baronius says, That Peter was Seven years Bishop of Antioch, and Five and twenty of Rome. So that (in the whole) he was Two and thirty years Bishop in Syria and Italy, and took upon him the Charge and Cure of the Gentiles in those Provinces. Now our blessed Saviour's Passion and Ascension wasBaronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. Christi, 34. §. 1. & 2. Anno Christi. 34. to which if 32. be added (the time wherein Peter was Bishop of Antioch or Rome) the product will be. 66. So that from the As∣cension of our blessed Saviour till the year. 66. Peter had taken the Episcopacy and particular Charge of a Gentile-Church; and hisIdem. Tom. 1. ad Ann. Christi. 69. §. 9. Martyr∣dom was. 13. Neronis, that is, Anno Christi, 68. or (as Baronius Computes) 69. whence (by this their Account) it evidently follows, that during all the time from our blessed Saviour's Ascension to his Martyrdom (about two years only ex∣cepted) Peter was the Apostle and Bishop of a Gentile-Church. Which is, 1. Manifestly un∣true, and inconsistent with what is said of Peter
in the Acts of the Apostles, with his Commissi∣on, in which the care of the Circumcision was concredited to him by our blessed Saviour, and with his Solemn Agreement with the Apostles to go to the Circumcision, as Paul was to the Gen∣tiles. And, 2. It is without any the least ground in Scripture, by which, it neither does, nor can appear that ever Peter was at Rome, so much as for one Day, much less that he was Bishop there Five and twenty years. Nor can it appear in Scripture, that ever he was at Antioch, saveGal. 2. 11. 12. 13. &c. once; nor is there any mention of any thing he then did there; save that he dissembled, and was justly reprehended for it, by St. Paul; whereas it is evident in Scripture, that St. Paul was at Antioch for a wholeAct. 11. 26. year at one time, con∣stituted the Church there, confirmed themAct. 14. 22. afterwards in the Faith, andAct. 14. 23. ordain'd El∣ders to govern them, staid there aAct. 14. 26. 28. long time; andAct. 15. 35. vid. Act. 18. 22. 23. continued there preaching the Gospel; and yet (notwithstanding all this) if we will believe them; Peter was Bishop there, and not Paul. The truth is; though it be Evident that Paul, as Apostle, did all Episcopal Acts there; yet 'tis certain, that neither he nor Peter, was parti∣cularly Bishop of that, or any other place. 3. It is utterly incredible, that Peter the Su∣pream Head and Monarch of the Church (as they pretend) should for Two and thirty years be Bishop, and have the particular Charge and Cure of two of the greatest Cities in the Ro∣man Empire, and that while the Apostles liv'd;
and yet none of them (nor he himself) in any of their Writings, should say one Syllable of it, nor mention so much as one single Episco∣pal Act done by him, in either of those Cities, in those two and thirty years; no nor St.I confess Baroni∣us, and Hierom (whom he Cites, Commentari∣orum in Epist. ad Gal. lib. 1. cap. 2.) tell us, That Peter was Bishop of Antioch; and are not well pleas'd that Luke left it out of his Histo∣ry in the Acts of the A∣postles. Nay they speak irreverently of him, and say, That he left that, and many other things out of his History, by a Li∣berty or Licence he took to himself. Hanc cum tacuit Lucas, & alia Mul∣ta Historiographi Licen∣tia Praetermisit. Primum Episcopum Antiochae Pe∣trum fuisse Accepimus (says Hierome there) quod Lucas penitùs Omisit. But Hierom (though an ex∣cellent Person) had his Passions and Errors, and in that very place, indeavours to justifie Peter, as not to be blam'd, against the express words of St. Paul, Gal. 1. 11. Luke writ by the direction of the Holy Ghost, and if he writ not all that Hierome or Baronius would have him, yet they should not Censure him. Vide Baronium ad An∣num Christi. 39. §. 8. Luke in the Acts of the Apostles, nor St. Paul, who liv'd long in Antioch, and longer in Rome, and had opportunity, nay (had it been true) a necessity to mention it. He had need of a strong Faith, who can believe this; for my part, Credat Judaeus Apella, &c. 4. And as for Peter's being Seven years Bishop of Antioch, and Twenty five of Rome; it is further Considera∣ble, That the greatest Patrons of this Popish Posi∣tion, although they agree in the Conclusion, that Peter was so long Bishop at those two places; yet they Contradict each other, and the Truth; and by their own Positions, (to save their Adversaries that Labour) utterly Overthrow and Confute that Positi∣on they indeavour to prove. This Evidently ap∣pears in this Case, as it is stated by Onuphrius, Ba∣ronius and Bellarmine. 1.Onuph. Panvin. in Annotat ad Plat. in vitis Pont. ad vitam Petri. Onuphrius tells us; That Peter remain'd constantly in Judea, for NineEx his. 9. primis An∣nis, us{que} ad Initium An. 2. Imper. Claudiij, Petrum Ju∣daea nunquam exessisse, ex quo & Paulo, apertissimè Constat. Idem. ibidem. years next after our blessed Saviour's death, that is till the year of Christ. 43. after this, he was Bishop of Antioch Seven years; to the year of our blessed
Saviour. 50. And then Five and twenty years he sat Bishop of Rome; that is, (by his own Computation) till the year of Christ, 75. So that by this Account, Peter was Bishop of Rome, Anno Christi. 75. And yet he there says, That PeterPetrus Cruci Affix∣est, novissimo Neronis Anno, Christi vero 69. I∣bidem. died, Anno Christi. 69. And then (by his Calculation) Peter was Bi∣shop of Rome Six years after his death.Baronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. 39. §. 8. 9. &c. 2. Baronius states the Question thus. Peter came to Antioch Anno Christi. 39. and was Bishop thereBaronius Ibidem. §. 13. Seven years; that is, till the year of Christ. 46. And then he says, that from Antioch Peter went to Rome, and sate there BishopBaronius Ibidem. §. 9. Ann. 39. Five and twenty years; that is, till the year. 71. And so (by his own account) Peter must be Bishop of Rome two years after he was dead: For the same Baronius tellsAnno Christ. 69. Capitone & Rufo Coss. Petrus & Paulus Mar∣tyrium subiere. Annal. Tom. 1. an Annum. 69. §. 1. Neronis. 13. us, that Peter died Anno Christi. 69. And though this Account of Peter's Episcopacy at Rome, be not only Erroneous, but (to all Intelligent Persons) Ridiculous; yetVide Bellarm. de Script. Eccles. in Petro Aposto; & Chronol. suae Part. 2. ad Annum 39. & 44. Bel∣larmine maintains the same Opinion, not only in Contradiction to Onuphrius, but to Eusebius, Hierome, Epiphanius, &c.Vide Baronium Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. 69. §. 2. whose Opinions Baronius endeavours to con∣fute. In short, as there is no ground in Scripture, that Peter ever was at Rome; so that he was Twenty five years Bishop there, neither Scripture nor purer Antiquity af∣fords them any proof, or probability: Eu∣sebius his Greek Chronicon, baselyVide Jos. Scaligeri Animadvers. in Chrono∣logica Eusebij; Amste∣lod. 1658. pag. 189. corrup∣ted in a Latin Version of it, about Four hun∣dred
years after our blessed Saviour, being that they must rely upon. 5. Our Adversaries had ill luck, when they made Peter first Bishop of Rome, attributed the Su∣premacy to him, and (that he might have it) made the Pope his Successor. For had they chosen Paul in stead of Peter, they might have had far more (though not enough) to prove (and that out of express Scripture) both Paul's Supremacy, and the Popes Succession to him. For these following Particulars (every one of them) may evidently be proved out of Scrip∣ture. 1. That the Romans wereRom. 1. 13. Gentiles. 2. That Paul (by our blessed Saviour'sAct. 22. 21. Gal. 27. 8. Appointment) was the Apostle of the Gentiles, Peter was not, but of theIbidem. Jews. 3. Paul was two wholeAct. 28. 30. 31. years at Rome, Converted, and Established a Church there; but it cannot appear by Scripture, that Peter was ever there. 4. The Care ()2. Cor. 11. 28. 1. Cor. 7. 17. of all The Churches lay upon St. Paul; no such thing in Scripture ever said of Peter. 5. St. Paul made Orders and Constitutions for the good govern∣ment of. (hinc , & , Edictum, Constitu∣tio.) So I ordain in all Churches. Versio vulg. frigidè—In Ecclesiis Omnibus doceo. 1. Cor. 7. 17. vide Act. 18. 2. All the Churches (without any Au∣thority, Leave, or Commission from Peter) no such thing ever said of Peter, either in Scrip∣ture, or primitive and pure Antiquity. 6. St. Paul writ a Long and Excellent Epistle to the Romans, Peter did no such thing. Had the Holy Ghost in Scripture expresly told us, 1. That our blessed Saviour had Appointed, and Commission'd Peter to be the Apostle of the
Gentiles (and such were the Romans), 2. That he was two whole years residing at Rome, Convert∣ing and Establishing a Church there. 3. That the Care and Cure of All the Churches lay upon him. 4. That he made Orders and Constitutions for the Government of All The Churches. 5. That he had writ an Epistle to the Romans, to Confirm them in that Faith he had preach'd amongst them: I say, had all these things been in Scripture expresly said of Peter, our Adversaries with great noise and confidence would (and with far more rea∣son and probability might) have asserted Peter's Supremacy, and his Roman Episcopacy, and that the Pope was, and is his Successor. But seeing not one of all these is said of Peter, and every one of them expresly said of Paul, it is Evident, that there is far more reason and pro∣bability (and that grounded upon express Scripture) that Paul was Bishop of Rome (and not Peter) and so the Pope might be his Suc∣cessor. And yet our AdversariesI confess Bellar∣mine would (out of Ire∣naeus as he vainly thinks) perswade us, that both Peter and Paul were Bi∣shops of Rome. Irenaeus (says he) lib. 3. cap. 3. fixit Catalogum Romano∣rum Episcoporum, & Primo Loco ponit Petrum & Paulum. De Rom. Pontif. lib. 2. cap. 4. §. 6. Irenaeus. reject Paul, and will have Peter their first Bishop (though some of them impiously say, ourSeries & Successio Rom. Pontif. sic est: Primus Jesus Christus. Longus à Coriol. summa Co∣cil. in Prin. in Serie Rom. Pontif. we have the very same words in the Edition of Platina, De vi Pont. Col. Agripp. 1626. But Platina (basely corrupted since his death) has no such thing in the Old Edition, 1485. But to make our blessed Saviour the first Bishop of Rome, is not only errone∣ous, but impious. 1. He never was at Rome. 2. He was not sent, save to the lost Sheep of the Ho of Israel, (not in Person sure, not to be a Bishop of any Gentile Church). 3. There was no Chri∣stian Church at Rome while he liv'd of which he could be Bishop. 4. Our blessed Saviour remains a Priest for ever, and cannot have any Successor. Heb. 5. 6. And therefore Bellarm. justly denies ou B. Saviour to have any Successor, because he is Pontifex aeternus. Bellar. de Script. Eccles. in T. Aquia▪ blessed Saviour was their first Bishop) That St.
Paul was not Bishop of Rome (notwithstanding all the former things said of him, in Scripture) we believe and know, and willingly grant. But on the other side, to say, that Peter was Bi∣shop of Rome, concerning whom no such things are said in Scripture, either in express terms, (as they are of Paul) or by Equivalence or any just Consequence; this we say, is very irratio∣nal. For in things Moral or Historical (and of such we are now speaking) which are Incapable of Physical or Mathematical Demonstration, the highest Prudential Motives and Probabili∣ties will, and ought to carry the Assent of all wise men: and therefore seeing it is deny'd (and justly too) that Paul was ever Bishop of Rome, though the Probabilities, grounded on Scrip∣ture, that he was so, be far greater then Peter can pretend to; for our Adversaries to say, that Peter was Bishop of Rome, must be, and is, evi∣dently irrational. If the great probabilities we have that Paul was Bishop of Rome deserve not our Assent, certainly we cannot rationally conclude from far less Probabilities that Peter was so. But when they would magnifie the Pope's Power and Supremacy,Object. (having no better Argu∣ments) they make use of several Honorary Titles given to the Bishop of Rome, and his See, and of some Priviledges which they take (or mistake rather) to be peculiar to the Popes, such as▪ these. 1. The Bishop of Rome in many Stories
and Canons, is calledApostolicus non nisi à Cardinalibus inthroni∣zaendus, Gratian. Dist. 79. Part. 1. & ibidem. Can. 1. Alitèr inthronizatus non est Papa vel Apostolicus, sed Apostaticus &, Can. si Papa. 6. Dist. 4. In em∣mate. Damnatur Aposto∣licus, suae & fraternae sa∣lutis negligens. Apostolicus. 2. His See is call'd Sedes Apostolica, and Cathedra Apostolica. 3. He is call'd Successor Petri. 4. Vicar of Christ. 5. That our blessed Saviour gave him the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, &c. I confess that these, and many suchBellarmine gives us a Catalogue of fifteen such Papal Titles; which are these—Papa, Pater Patrum, Christiano∣rum Pontifex, summus Sa∣cerdos, Princeps Sacerdo∣tum, Vicarius Christi, Ca∣put Ecclesiae, Fundamen∣tum Ecclesiae, Pastor Ovi∣lis Domini, Pater & Do∣ctor Omnium Fidelium, Re∣ctor Domus Dei, Custos vineae Dei, Sponsus Eccle∣siae Dei, Apostolicae Sedis Praesul, Episcopus Vniver∣salis, ex quibus Omnibus & Singulis Apertè Colligi∣tur Ejus Primatus. De Romano Pont. lib. 2. cap. 31. Parti∣culars have been urged, and (as pertinent) stood upon by several Popes in their Bulls,Answer. their Decre∣tal Constitutions and Epistles, and generally by all their Party; especially the Clergy (Secular and Regular) whose great and principal Interest it is, to maintain the Papal Supremacy: for if that fail, they irrecoverably fall with it. In some Centuries past, while gross Ignorance and Tyran∣ny, benighted and overaw'd this Western Part of the World, such Arguments did their Business; For few could, and (the danger being very great) few, or none, durst Answer them. But after Luther arose, and Learning reviv'd, all knowing and im∣partial Persons did see and know, that all the Ar∣guments they did (or could) bring from such To∣picks, were not only Inconsequent, but indeed impertinent and ridiculous. That this may not be gratis dictum, I shall indeavour to make it Ap∣pear by plain Instances, (and I hope Effect it) that none of those Honorary Titles or Priviledges do, or can afford any just ground of that Supremacy, and Papal Monarchy, they now so earnestly con∣tend for; And here 1. It is to be observed, that the word Apostolicus, which (for some Ages last past) the Pope has Assumed, and his Flatterers given him, as pe∣culiar
to himself, was Anciently a Title given to all Archbishops. SoCum Episcopus Ci∣vitatis fuerit demortuus, Eligitur alius, & veniunt ad Apostolicum cum Ele∣cto, ut cis Consecret Episco∣pum. Alcuinus de Divinis Officiis. Cap. 36. Alcuinus Flaccus tells us, That when a Bishop was Elected, they sent him, ad Apostolicum, that he might Consecrate him. The Learned ArchbishopPetrus de Marca de Concordiâ Sacerdotij & Imperij. Tom. 2. lib. 6. cap. 3. §. 3. pag. 67. of Paris, tells me this; and also that this was the use of that word in the Sixth Century, in the time of Gregorius Turonensis, who was made Bishop a∣bout the Year. 572. but afterwards, That Title wasSequens aetas absti∣nuit—& deinceps Aposto∣lici Titulus Soli Summo Pontifici attributus est ab Authoribus. Idem Ibi∣dem. appropriated to the Pope. Now I desire to know of our Adversaries, how The Title, being Appropriated to the Pope, does make more for his Supremacy, then it did for the Archbishops, when it was common to them all? 2. That Rome was Sedes Apostolica, and Cathedra Apostolica, we grant. Because we are sure St. Paul (though not as Bishop) sate there. But that Peter ever was there, neither we nor our Adversaries are, or can be sure. But it is, and (by our Adversaries) must be granted too; That Jerusalem, Antioch, and otherThe Archbishop of Paris next before ci∣ted, amonst the Aposto∣lical Churches (besides those I have named) rec∣kons Alexandria, Ephesus, Ancyra, Corinth, Thessalo∣nica; and he might have added Philippi, &c. (De Concordiâ Sacred. & Im∣perij, lib. 7. cap. 4. § 7. Tom. 2. p. 224.) for Ter∣tullian adds it, in the Place next cited. Churches (besides Rome) were Sedes Apostolicae, and Ecclesiae Apostolicae, and eo Nomine, were of great Esteem in the Ancient Church. But the Bishops of none of them then did, or could pretend to any Supremacy, much less to an Ecclesiastical Monarchy: And why Rome should more then they, when our Ad∣versaries can, and will give (which as yet they never did) any Just and Cogent Reason, I shall
submit.Age jam qui voles Curiositatem melius exer∣cere in negotio salutis tuae, percurre Ecclesias Aposto∣licas, apud quas Ipsae ad∣huc Cathedrae Apostolorum suis locis Praesidentur; a∣pud quas Ipsae Authenticae Literae eorum recitantur, sonantes vocem, & reprae∣sentantes faciem uniuscu∣jusque. Proxima est Tibi Achaia, habes Corinthum: Si non longe s à Macedo∣niâ, habes Philippos, aut Thessalonicenses. Si potes in Afiam tendere, habes Ephesum: si autem Italiae adjaces, habes Romam. &c. Tertullian. de Praescript. cap. 36. pag. 338. Edit. Pamelij, 1662. Tertullian also reckons the Apo∣stolical Churches, such as Corinth, Ephesus, Thes∣salonica, Philippi, Rome, &c. and tells us, That Cathedrae Apostolorum, the Chairs of the Apostoles were then in those Apostolical Churches; That Bi∣shops presided in them; that if they had great Cu∣riosity and Care of their Salvation, they should make their Address to those Apostolical Chairs and Chur∣ches. He sends them not all to Rome, and Peter's Chair there: But (saith he) if thou art near Ma∣cedonia, thou hast Philippi and Thessalonica to go to; If in Asia, Ephesus; If in Achaia, Co∣rinth; If thou art near Italy, thou hast Rome to Address to. He knew no Supremacy or Infal∣libility annex'd to Peter's Chair at Rome, more then to Paul's at Corinth, or Philippi. He di∣rects them to that Apostolical Chair and Church which was next them, and Judged that sufficient, without going to Rome. The Bishop of Rome in those days, pretended to no more Su∣premacy or Infallibility in the Apostolical Church and Chair at Rome, then the Bishop of Ephesus or Corinth, in the Apostolical Chairs and Churches of those Cities. If Sedes Aposto∣lica, and Cathedra Apostolica be a sufficient ground to infer and prove Supremacy; then either all such Churches must be Supream, (which is impossible) or none at all, which is certainly true. 3. But they say; The Bishop of Rome is Peter's Successor, and on this they principally and general∣ly ground his Supremacy; as derived to him,Ecclesiae Rom. spe∣cialius in Petro, Coeli Terraeque retine habenas. Gratian. Can. Si Papa. 6. Dist. 40. Jure
cessions, andJus Successionis, Pon∣tificum Romanorum in eo∣fundatur; quod Petrus Se∣dem suam, Jubente Domi∣no, Romae Collocaverit. Bel∣larm. de Rom. Pont. l. 2. c. 1. §. 1. Jure Divino too; by Divine Right and Succession. Now if this be true; if Succession to Peter carry Supremacy with it, Then seeing they constantly say, 1. That Peter wasEcclesia Antiocheia hos Anno (Christi. 39.) à Petro Instituta, & 7. An∣nis ab eodem administrata. Baron. ad An. Christ. 39. §. 9. Tom. 1. p. 269. Edit. Antverp. 1612. seven years Bishop of Antioch before he was of Rome. 2. And thatBaron. ibid. §. 18. p. 272. and in their pre∣sent Roman Breviary, Antverp. 1660. They have a Holy-day for St. Peter's Installment at Antioch; In Cathedrâ Sancti Petri Antiochiae, (so they call it) In parte Breviarij Hiemali▪ ad di∣em. 22. Februarij. And we are there told, that that Festival was call'd Cathe∣dra Petri; Quia Primus Apostolorum Petrus hodiè Episcopatus Cathedram sus∣cipisse referatur. Ibid. Lect. 3. p. 760. Col. 2. And for this they cite St. Augustin De Sanctis, Serm. 15. n known supposititius and spurius scrap, unworthily father'd on St. Augustin. Euodius was his Successor there. I desire to know, why the Su∣premacy did not descend to Euodius, his first and immediate Successor? For admit, that Peter had such Supremacy, and that it was not Personal, but to be transmitted to some Suc∣cessor; (both which are manifestly untrue) yet seeing such Transmission of his Suprema∣cy, must be done either, 1. By some Act of our blessed Saviour. Or, 2. By some Act of Peter, transmitting his Supremacy to his Suc∣cessor at Rome, and not to Euodius at Antioch: it will concern our Adversaries to shew such Act of our blessed Saviour, or Peter. For if they can, we will submit, and give the Cause; but if they cannot, then seeing, idem est non esse & non apparere; they must pardon our unbelief, if we assent not to that, which they cannot prove. I say, cannot prove; there being not one syllable in Scripture or Antiquity for Six hundred years, (I might give more) either expresly affirming, or from which it may (by good Consequence) be deduced, that either our blessed Saviour or Peter did transmit such a Monarchical Supremacy and Infallibility to the Bishop of Rome, more then to the Bishop of Antioch. If any man think otherwise, let him
give us good proof of the contrary, and we will give him thanks and the Cause. 2. But ad∣mit, that the Pope succeeds Peter, and really sits in Cathedrâ Petri, as his Successor, (which is evidently untrue) yet this will not prove his Monarchical Supremacy; if it do appear that any other Apostle succeeded our blessed Savi∣our (before Peter was Bishop any where) and by his own Appointment, sat in our blessed Sa∣viour's Place and Episcopal Chair, as his Suc∣cessor; I say, if this appear, then as our blessed Saviour is far greater then Peter, so his Succes¦sor will be greater then the Pope, and have a fairer pretence for the Supremacy, as our bles∣sed Saviour's immediate Successor, then the Pope can possibly have, as Peter's. Now for this, let our Adversaries consider, what Epipha∣nius says, Thus;. &c. Hic Primus Episcopalem Cathe∣dram caepit, cum ei Ante Coeteros Omnes, Suum ei in Terris Thronum Dominus Tradisset. Epiphanius Adversus Haeres. lib. 3. Tom. 2. Haeres. 78. §. 7. pag. 1039. B. James the Brother of Lord was the first Bishop, when our blessed Savior concredited and resign'd to him, before all others his Throne or Episcopal Chair on Earth. And he let it be consider'd, 1. That in Scripture blessed Saviour is call'd1. Pet. 2. 25. a Bishop, Vnivers Bishop of the whole Church; withRev. 17. 14. & 19. 16. Monarchical and Kingly Power. 2. He was in a particula and peculiar way, Bishop of the Jews; he , a Peculiar Oversight and Cure them. He was sent (in Person) only toMatth. 10. 6. & 15. 24. Rom. 15. 8. them: He Constituted a Church among them, Ordain'd Apostles, and Seventy othe Luk. 10. 1. 2.Inferior Ministers, whom he sent to Preac and do Miracles in Confirmation of their Do∣ctrine;
he constantly preached the Gospel a∣mongst them, and did all those Acts a Bishop should do in his Diocese. 3. And Jerusalem being the Metropolis of the Jews, Epiphanius tells us, that it was (on Earth) his Throne, (Thro∣nus suus) his Episcopal Seat, or Chair; where he usually was, preach'd and did Miracles. 4. He says, That our blessed Saviour chose James, before all the Rest, even before Peter) and concredi∣ted and resigned to him, Thronum suum, his Episcopal Seat, and that James was Bishop of Je∣rusalem, is attested by all Antiquity. And this probably was the Reason, 1. Why PaulGal. 2. 9. names James (as Bishop of Jerusalem) before Peter. 2. Why in the Council of the Apostles, James (and not Peter) gave the definitiveAct. 15. 13. 19. 20. Sentence. So that these things seem to me certain, 1. That our blessed Saviour, though Bishop of the Universal Church, yet he had a Particular Episcopal Cure, and Charge of the Jews, As his Father was King of all the World, yet Particularly of the Jews.God your King: (so Samuel tells them) and so 1. Sam. 8. 7. and cap. 10. 19. 1. Sam. 12. 12. it wasSo Josephus and Philo call the Jewish Government, from Moses to Saul. God was per∣sonally their King. 1. He himself Personally did give them all their Laws. 2. He Personally sent his Vice-Roys, Mo∣ses, Joshua, and all the Judges. 3. He received, and personally answered all their last Appeals, which are evident Cha∣racters that he was their Supream Power, their King. . 2. That James was his Successor in that Cure. 3. And (if Epi∣phanius say true) our blessed Saviour himself ap∣pointed him his Successor. Let our Adversa∣ries (by so good Authority) shew; that Peter was our blessed Saviour's Successor, either at Rome, (as some of them, before mention'd, on∣ly pretend) or any where else; and (for my part) let them take the Cause. Otherwise, if they cannot, then we may evidently conclude,
That if James never did, nor could pretend justly to a Monarchical Supremacy over the whole Church, though our blessed Saviour's Succes∣sor; much less may the Pope for succeeding Peter. Q. E. D. 4. But the Pope (they say) is Christ's Vicar; and that he is, or should be so, we grant. But we further say; that many thousands (besides him) are Christ's Vicars as well, and as much as he. This has been manifestly proved before. I shall only add; that the Trent Fathers (who, far they,Synodus à Spiritu Sancto, qui est Spiritus Sa∣pientiae & Intellectûs Edo∣cta declarat, &c. Concil. Trid. Sess. 21. de Com∣munione, cap. 1. And yet what it declares there is most evidently untrue. were inspired by the Holy Ghost, and so surely Infallible) expresly say, and Syno∣dically define, That our blessed Saviour before his Ascention, left all Priests hisChristus à Terris Ascensurus ad Coelos, Sa∣cerdotes sui Ipsius Vicarios reliquit tanquam Praesides ac Judices, ad quos Omnia Mortalia Crimina deferantur. Conc. Trid. Sess. 14. De Poenitentiâ, cap. 5. De Confessione. vid. Aqui∣nat. part. 3. Quaest. 8. Art. 6. in Corpore. own Vicars, to whom, as to Presidents and Judges, all Mortal sins were to be Confess'd. AndAquin. 2. 2. Quaest. 88. Art. 12. Praelatus ge∣rit Vicem Christi. Aquinas, (and their Schoolmen) say; That in the Church, the Bishop is Christ's Vicar; and they prove it well, from the express and plain words of the 2. Cor. 2. 10.Apostle; and they might have added also 2. Cor. 5. 20. And Henry Holden, a Learned Sorbon Doctor, in his Annotations upon those Texts, says the same thing. And now if to be Christ's Vicar, give any ground or pretence to Supremacy, then all Bishops and Priests (who are Confess'd to be Christ's Vicars) may pretend to Supremacy as well as the Pope. And they being Christ's Vicars as to the Power of Absol∣ving and Retaining Sins,Si periculum mor∣tis immineat, approbatús{que} desit Confessarius, Quilibet Sacerdos Potest à Quibus∣cunque Censuris & Pecatis absolvere. Rituale Roma∣num Pauli Papae. 5. Jussu Editum Antverp. 1652. De Sacramento Poeni∣tentiae pag. 61. & 65. every poor Priest has as much power to absolve the Pope, as he him. So that any Argument drawn from this Title,
that he is Christ's Vicar, to prove the Popes Su∣premacy, is not only Inconsequent, but Im∣pertinent, and indeed Ridiculous: And yet up∣on this ground, and another as Insignificant, Pope Innocent the Fourth, in their General Coun∣cil at Lions, Excommunicates and Deposes the Emperor Friderick; Seeing (says the Pope there) we are Christ'sCum Jesu Christi Vices teneamus in Terris, Nobísque in Petri personâ dictum sit, Quodcunque Ligaveris, &c. Memora∣tum Principem Omni Dig∣nitate privatum denuncia∣mus, & Sententiando pri∣vamus; Omnésque ei Ju∣ramento Fidelitatis astri∣ctos, à juramento absolvi∣mus; inhibentes ne quis∣quam de Coetero ei, ut Im∣peratori pareat; & qui Ip∣si favorem aut auxillum praestiterint, sint Ipso facto Excommunicati. Cap. ad Apostolicae, 2. Extra de Sent. & re judicata. vid. Cap. Quanto. 3. Extra de Translatione Episcopi. Vicar on Earth; and it was in the Person of Peter said to us, Whatsoever thou binds on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven; we declare and denounce the said Friderick deprived of all his Honour and Dignity, absolve his Sub∣jects from all Oaths of Allegiance, and Excommu∣nicate all who shew him any favour, or obey him as Emperor. And to the same purpose their Trent Catechism tells us;Cum in Petri Cathedrâ Sedeat, summum in eo Dignitatis gradum, non ullis humanis Constitutio∣nibus, sed divinitùs datum agnoscit: Estque Moderator Vniversalis Ecclesiae, ut Petri Successor, & in terris verus Christi Vicarius. Ita Catechis. Trident. part. 2. cap. 7. de Ordinis Sacramento. §. 28. vid. etiam Bullarium Romanum, Tom. 1. pag. 347. Col. 1. §. 6. where Alexand. Papa. 6. gives all the West-Indies to the King of Spain, as Vicar of Christ. That the Pope has (by Divine Right, (not by any Human Constitutions) that Supream Degree of Dignity and Jurisdiction, over the Vniversal Church, as Peter's Successor, sit∣ting in his Chair, and as Vicar of Christ. 5. But that which they press with most Noise and Confidence, is, That our blessed Saviour gave Peter the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. They seem to be in Love with these words, Dabo Tibi Claves, &c. For in theirVid. Breviarium Romanum, in Cathedrâ S. Petri Antiochiae. Febr. 22. & in Festo Cathedrae S. Petri qua Romae pri∣mum Sedet. Jan. 18. Bre∣viarij parte Hiemali. Offices, for only two of St. Peter's Festivals, they are repeated almost Twenty times. But how Im∣pertinent
this is, to prove any Supremacy (much less their Papal Monarchy) will evident∣ly appear, in that this Power of the Keys, which they would appropriate to the Pope, was given to the rest of the Apostles, as well as to Peter (as is proved before) nay to every Bishop and Priest in the World. For, 1. So their own Roman Breviary, published by the Authority of Pope Pius the Fifth, and after∣wards revised by Clement the Eighth, and Vrban the Eighth expresly says; for having told us, that our blessed Saviour gave the Keys to Peter: it follows;Petro dedit Claves; transivit quidem etiam in Alios Apostolos vis potesta∣tis illius, & in Omnes Ec∣clesiae Principes. Breviar. Rom. in Festo Cathedr. S. Petri Antioch. Febr. 22. Lect. 9. Part. Hiema∣li. p. 762. Edit. Antverp. 1660. That this Power did pass to the other Apostles and Princes of the Church. 2. Their Trent Catechism, havingPart. 1. cap. 11. §. 4. spoke of the Power of the Keys; afterwards tells us, to whom our blessed Saviour gave and concredited that Pow∣er before he Ascended into Heaven; And it was To theEam Potestatem E∣piscopis & Presbyteris con∣cessit. Ibid. §. 9. Bishops and Presbyters. So that Ca∣techism, publish'd according to the Decree of the Council of Trent, by Pope Pius the Fifth. And, 3. Their Roman Pontifical gives the Au∣thentick Form how they Ordain a Priest; in which the Power of the Keys is given to every Priest, in the very sameJoh. 20. 22. 23. words our blessed Saviour did give it to the Apostles—Pontificale Roma∣num jussu Clement. 8. re∣stitutum Rom. 1611. p. 52. Accipe Spiritum San∣ctum quorum remiseritis peccata, remittuntur eis; & quorum retinueritis, re∣tenta sunt. Receive the Holy Ghost, whose sins you remit, they are re∣mitted; And whose sins you retain, they are re∣tained. 4. Lastly; The Trent Fathers are yet (if that be possible) more express; For speak∣ing of the Sacrament of Pennance and Absolu∣tion, TheyDeclarat Synodus, falsas esse Doctrinas Om∣nes, quae ad alios quosvis praeter Episcopos, & Pres∣byteros, Clavium Ministe∣rium extendunt, Putantes verba illa, Quodcunque Li∣gaveris, &c. & quorum remiseritis peccata, remit∣tentur, &c. ad Omnes fi∣deles indifferenter dict, &c. Conc. Trid. Sess. 14. De Poenitentiâ, cap. 6. declare all their Opinions to be false
and erroneous, who think that the Exercise of the Ministery and Power of the Keys, belong to any, save The Bishops and Presbyters; and who think those words—Whatsoever you shall bind on Earth, &c. And whose sins you remit shall be remitted, &c. to be spoken indifferently to all the Faithful; and so think that any of the faithful may bind and loose, remit and retain sins. In which words the Council does (I suppose) Infallibly De∣clare (at least in our Adversaries Opinion) 1. That those twoMatth. 16. 19. & Joh. 20. 23. Texts (which are cited in the Margent of theConc. Trid. Antv. 1633. p. 152. Council) are to be understood of the Power of the Keys; though in one of them (that of John) the Keys be not expresly named. 2. That the Exercise of that Power of the Keys belongs To the Bishops and Presbyters, but to none else; neither to Lay∣men nor any Inferior Orders. By the Premisses, I think it evident, (and con∣fess'd by our Adversaries) that every Apostle had the Power of the Keys, as well as Peter, and (since they left the World) every Bishop and Priest, as well as the Pope. Whence it further (and mani∣festly) follows; That 'tis impossible that the Bishop of Rome, or any of his party, should (as they vainly indeavor) prove his Supremacy from his Power of the Keys; which is common, and really possess'd by so ma∣ny thousands beside himself. For this is just as if Ti∣tius should brag, that he is far richer then Sempro∣nius, because he has Five hundred pounds per An∣num; when Sempronius has an equal Estate, and of the very same Value. Or as if Sejus should say he
had far greater Power then Cajus, when the Pow∣er given them by the Emperor was equal and the same. And yet such is the vanity and folly of their pretended Infallible Judges, that in their Bulls, and Papal Constitutions, received into the Body of their Canon Law, Dabo Tibi Claves, this Power of the Keys, is laid as a (Sandy and Insig∣nificant) Foundation, on which they build the vast and Insupportable Fabrick of their Suprema∣cy. I shall Instance only in two (though I might in many more,) 1. In that famous Decretal of In∣nocent the Third (before cited) wherein he impi∣ously and ridiculously indeavors to prove, that the Papal Dignity, is as muchVid. Cap. Solicit. 6. Extra de Major. & Obe∣dientiâ. Where the Lem∣ma or Title prefix'd to that Decretal is thus—Imperium non praeest Sacer∣dotio, sed subest, & ei Obe∣dire Tenetur. This he indeavours to prove by several ridiculous Instan∣ces; and then comes with Dabo Tibi Claves, & quod∣cun{que} Ligaveris, as a most known ground of his Supremacy. Illud tanquam Notissimum omittamus, quod Dominus dixit Petro & in Petro ad Successores Ipsius; Quodcunque Liga∣veris, erit ligatum in Coe∣lis, &c. Nihil excipit, qui dixit Quodcunque, &c. And a little before he tells the Emperor of Con∣stantinople, (to whom he writes) Quanta est Inter Solem & Lunam, Tanta inter Pontifices & Reges, Differentia Cognoscatur. greater then the Im∣perial, as the Sun is greater than the Moon: And amongst other wild and ridiculous Arguments to prove his equally wild and extravagant Position, he comes at last, to this, Dabo Tibi Claves, to the Power of the Keys, as the most known ground of his Supremacy. 2. The second Instance, is that of Pope Innocent the Fourth, in his Impious Ex∣communication and Deposition of the Emperor Frederick, (who had been before Excommunicated by his Predecessor Gregory the Ninth) in the Coun∣cil of Lions. It isCap. ad. Apostol. 2. De Sent. & re Judica∣ta. In. 6. Extant in the Canon Law, and two things there prefix'd to that most Impi∣ous Decretal. 1. That he depos'd Frederick in the Council, for a perpetualInnocentius Sacro praesente Concilio in Memo∣riam Sempiternam. memory of it. And so it stands for a perpetual memory of his Antichri∣stian Pride and Impiety. 2. That the Pope can De∣pose thePapa Imperatorem depoere potest ex Causis Ligitimis. Emperor for lawful Causes. And then, in that Impious Decretal, he grounds his Power
to Depose the Emperor principally upon the Power ofCum à Christo No∣bis in Petri Persona dictum sit; Quodcunque Ligaveris super Terram, Ligatum e∣rit in Coelis, &c. Memora∣tum Principem, suis Liga∣tum peccatis, Omni Digni∣tate privatum denuncia∣mus, sententiamus & pri∣vamus; Omnésque ei Ju∣ramento astrictos, à Ju∣ramento perpetuo absolvi∣mus; Inhibentes ne quis∣quam sibi de Coetero, tan∣quam Imperatori pareat. the Keys; which (he says) was given to him in Peter, when our blessed Saviour said, Whatsoever thou shalt bind on Earth, should be bound in Heaven, &c. so he, (and his Predecessors and Successors generally for this Six hundred years last past) applies that Power of the Keys (which is pure∣ly spiritual) to carnal and temporal ends, and im∣pious purposes. And here it seems to me, Consi∣derable, (and I believe will seem so, to pious and dis-interessed Persons) that in formerVid. 1. Breviari∣um Romanum, by Card. Quignonius, approved and highly commended by Clement the Seventh, and Paul the Third, and often printed at Paris, An. 1536. Again, An. 1537. and at Lions, An. 1543. and at Lions, 1546. and, 1548. and again at Lions, 1556. and at Antv. 1566. and though it be the best Breviary Rome has had this Six hundred years; yet 'tis damn'd by Pius. 5. Bullâ Romae dat. 7. Idus Julij, 1568. 2. Breviarium Romanum, ex Decreto Concilii Trident. Jussu Pij. 5. Antverp. Editum, 1568. & iterum, 1585. Roman Breviaries (as also in our Portiforium orPortiforium Salis. Lond. 1555. Part. Hiemali. in Festo Cathedr. S. Petri, Febr. 22. Brevia∣ry of Sarum; and in theMissale Secundum usum, Sarum, Paris. 1555. eo∣dem festo & die. Missals of Salisbury andMissale secundum usum Hereford Rothomagi, 1520. eodem Festo & die. Hereford, we have this Prayer; 1. Deus qui Beato Petro Apostolo tuo, Collatis Clavi∣bus Regni Coelestis, Animas Ligandi atque Solvendi Pontisicium tradidisti; Concede, ut Intercessionis e∣jus Auxilio, &c. O God, who by giving the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven to thy Apostle Peter, hast concredited and delivered to him the Pontifical Power of binding and loosing mens Souls, grant that by the help of his Intercession, &c. Where it is evident that, (in the sense and plain meaning of this Prayer and Scripture too) the Power of the Keys is spiritual, to bind mens souls, (if Im∣penitent)
and (if Contrite and truly Penitent) to loose them. I say spiritual, for edification and saving mens souls, and not temporal, for Deposing Kings and Emperors, and absolving their Subjects from their Oaths of Allegi∣ance. 2. But this Doctrine was not pleasing to the Pope and his Party; And therefore in their lateBreviarium Rom. Antv. Ann. 1660. parte Hiemali, in Festo Cathe∣drae Petri Antioch. Febr. 22. p. 759. & parte aesti∣vâ in Festo Cathedrae Pe∣tri Romae, Jan. 18. Ibid. p. 698. Breviaries andMissal. Rom. Antv. 1619. In Festo Cathedrae Petri Romae, Jan. 18. p. 331. And they have the same again in Festo Ca∣thedrae Petri Antiochiae, Febr. 22. Missals, they have left out the word Animas, Souls, and say only, that God had given Peter Power of binding and loosing; not mentioning in that Prayer, what it was he had Power to bind and loose. 3. But that we may better know their meaning and reason why they left out the word Souls; it follows, a little after in those late Offices— Dict. Brev. Rom. Antv. 1660. in Festo Ca∣thedrae Petri Antiochiae, Febr. 22. In Resp. post Lect. 4. p. 760. Partis Hi∣emalis. And that it might not be forgotten, (being a Doctrine that makes so much for the Papal Interest) it is re∣peated again, in Festo Petri & Pauli, Jan. 29. Partis aestivae, p. 482. & in Festo Petri ad vincula. Ibidem p. 541. Tu es Pastor ovium, Princeps Apostolorum; TibiThough I find the word Animas, left out in some of their Older Of∣fices; yet these words Tibi Tradidit, &c. I find in none till of late.tradidit Deus Omnia Regna Mundi; & Ideo Tibi traditae sunt Claves Regni Coelorum. They all agree, That the Power of binding and loosing is (as they call it in that Prayer) Pontifi∣cium, the Pontifical or Papal Power; and having told us, That God had given All the Kingdoms in the World, to Peter and his Successors; they add, That Ideo, Therefore he gave him Pontificium, the Papal Power of binding and loosing, superior to all KinglyThe Popes Tribu∣nal (they say) is Supremus Justitiae Thronus. So Pius the Fifth in this his Bull, . 3. Power; so that they might, by it, Depose Kings and Emperors, if they were not Obedient to the Pope; for so their Popes (as appears before) have, in Thesi, affirm'd, and (in their Bulls, their Publick and Authen∣tick Constitutions approved, and publickly
maintain'd that Doctrine; and (in Praxi) to the fatal Mischief and Disquieting of the We∣stern World, the ruin of many Princes, and scandal of Christian Religion, impiously acted according to it, and put it in practice; when they had advantage and opportunity. By the Premisses, I hope it may (and does) appear, that all those Honorary Titles given to the Pope, or his See, (Apostolicus, Sedes Apostoli∣ca, Cathedra Apostolica, Peter's Successor, Christ's Vicar, the Power of the Keys, Prince of the Apostles, &c. having been Anciently given to Thousands (beside the Pope) who never had, nor dream'd of any Supremacy: Though in these late, and worst Ages, they have been appropriated to the Bishop of Rome, and (though Old and Inno∣cent Titles) made use of, to amuse and deceive the Ignorant, to cover, and give some Colour and Credit to New Errors, and made Argu∣ments to prove (what he never had) the Popes Supremacy; yet 'tis Evident, that all such Ar∣guments, drawn from such Topicks, are not on∣ly inconsequent, but (as I said before, and still believe) Impertinent, and indeed ridiculous; and Conclude nothing, save that surely they who bring so bad, had no better Arguments. Two other words there are (Papa and Summus Ponti∣fex) now appropriate to the Bishop of Rome, and as generally and impertinently used (as the for∣mer) to Insinuate (what they can never prove) the Popes Supremacy. For many Learned men have evidently proved (or confess'd) that Anci∣ently,
every Bishop was calledVide Originem Dialogo contra Marcio∣nitas Graeco-Lat. per Rad. Westenium, p. 247. & Westenij Notas, pag. 230. 231. Pet. Delalan∣de Concil. Antiquorum Galliae Supplemento, p. 35. 36. 39. Baronium in Notis ad Martyrologi∣um Rom. ad Diem, Jan. 10. c. p. 35. Nomen Pa∣pae transit in Dignitatis Nomen, ut Clerici vene∣randi eo nomine Appella∣rentur. Postea nomen illud capit esse peculiare Epis∣coporum, usque enim ad Annum, 850. Nomen Commune fuit Omnibus E∣piscopis, inde peculiarius tribui eonsuevisset Rom. Pontifici, & sequitur, p. 36. Gregorius. Papa. 7. in Concilio Romae habito, 1073. Statuit, ut Nomen Papae Vnicum esset in toto Mundo, &c. Papa, a Pope, and SummusVid. Pet. de Mar∣cade Concord. Sacerdo∣tij & Imperij, Lib. 6. c. 13. §. 3. Tom. 2. p. 126. Col. 1. So Ruffinus calls Chromatius, Pontisicem maximum. Vid. Russin. Opuscula, Paris. 1580. E∣pist. ad Chromatium, Pon∣tificem maximum, post p. 194. So Clemens Romanus (one of the best and An∣cientest Popes Rome ever had) calls every Bishop , Summus Sacerdos. Clemens Rom. Epist. ad Corinthios, per Patr. Junium, p. 53. Edit. Oxon. 1633. Pontifex too. Baronius a most Zealous and Partial Assertor of the Popes Supre∣macy and Monarchy over Kings and Emperors) has, in the Place quoted in the Margent, confess'd (what without great Impudence he could not de∣ny) that Anciently every venerable Presbyter was usually call'd Papa, or Pope. Afterwards (he says) the word Papa became common to all the Bishops, though more particularly given to the Bishop of Rome; and he further adds, That the name Papa continued common to All the Bishops, for Eight hundred and fifty years; till Hildebrand (Pope Gregory the Seventh) in a Council at Rome,) in the Year, 1073. decreed, That there should be but one Pope (meaning himself) in the whole World. Here we see, that Hildebrand (that Prodigy ofPlerique tum priva∣tìm tum publicè, Hildebrandum Antichristum praedicant, Titulo Christi, negotium Antichristi agitat: in Babyloniâ in Templo Dei Sedet. Super Omne quod Colitur, extollitur, quasi Deus sit, se errare non posse gloriatur, &c. Aventinus Annal. Bojorum, Lib. 5. p. 352. & Lib. 7. p. 473.. Antichristian Pride and Tyranny) appropriates the name Pope to himself and See, which had for Eight hundred years (he might have said a thousand) been commonly given to Bishops and Presbyters, as well as to the Pope. Now I desire to know, how this, or any of the a∣foresaid Honorary Titles or Priviledges, (which were common to all Bishops, and usually given them, for many Ages, as well as to the Bishop of Rome); can be an Argument or Ground of the Popes Supremacy, which were confessedly no
ground of any such Supremacy in other Bishops, who had the very same Titles and Priviledges, as well, and as much as he? Suppose twenty Swans (possibili posito in esse, nil absurdi sequitur) to have equal whiteness, and the same Degree of that Quality; To say that any one of those Swans was, by far, the whitest Swan in the World, when as nineteen others were as white as that one: Or sup∣pose twenty men of Equal Piety, all having the same Degree of Goodness and Vertue; to say, that any one of them, was, by far, the most Pi∣ous man in the World, when nineteen others were as Pious as he; this were certainly irrational, and ridiculous. And yet our Adversaries reason no better, when they say; The Pope being Christ's Vicar, and having the Power of the Keys, has a Mo∣narchical Supremacy over all the Bishops in the World; when all those Bishops are Christ's Vicars, and have the Power of the Keys, as well as he. But enough (if not too much) of this. For were it not for the great noise, number, and confidence of our Adversaries, such miserable inconsequent Reasonings, might deserve Pity and Contempt, rather than any serious Answer. 7.Observ. 7. Having made some Observations upon the , or Title and Preamble of this Impious Bull; I come now to the Penal part of it, to ob∣serve what Punishments and Curses are contain'd in it, and the Persons against whom they are de∣nounc'd. For although in the Title prefix'd to the Bull, 'tis call'd, The Damnation and Excommuni∣cation of Queen Elizabeth only; yet Thousands be∣sides
the Queen, are concern'd in those Curses, (as will appear anon). Here then, it is to be Observed, 1. That in this Uncharitable Bull, the Pope Ana∣thematizes and Excommunicates the Queen, as a Slave ofFlagitiorum Serva. Ita §. 1. who they are who speak ill of Digni∣ties, (which the Arch-Angel would not do of the Devil) St. Jude tells us, in his Epistle, vers. 9. Impiety, as anApostolicae Potesta∣tis plenitudine declaramus praedim Elizabeth Hae∣reticam, & Haereticorum fautricm, Anaethematis Sementiam incurrisse, Es∣séque à Christi Corporis u∣nitate praecisam. §. 3. Heretick, and a Favourer of Hereticks, and Cuts her off from The Vnity of Christ's Body. 2. He deposes and deprives her (so far as the Ple∣nitude of his Usurped Power and Tyranny could) of her pretendedQuin etiam ipsam Praetenso praedicti regni ju∣re, necnon Omni & quo∣cunque Dominio, Digni∣tate, Privilegioque priva∣tam. §. 4. And again; Dictam Elizabeth. Prae∣tenso jure Regni privamus. §. 5. right to the Crown of England, and of all, and all manner of Domini∣on, Dignity, and Priviledge. By the way; what the Pope speaks here (notwithstanding his In∣fallibility) is neither Reason, nor Sense; for if her Right to the Crown, was only (as he calls it) Pretended; he could not possibly take it away, no not by his Plenitude of Apostolical Power (if he really had it): For, 1. (Notwith∣standing all his Excommunications and Cur∣sing) she might keep that Right, and as strong∣ly pretend a Right to the Crown after, as before his Anathema's. 2. And if she had only a Pre∣tended Right, then he could not deprive her of any real Right; it being impossible to deprive her of a Right she had not. 3. He Absolves all herItemproceres, Sub∣ditos, & populos dicti Reg∣ni, ac coeteros Omnes qui illi Quomodocunque jura∣verunt, à Juramento hu∣jusmodi, ac Omni prorsus Dominij, fidelitatis & Ob∣soquij dehito. Perpetuo ab∣solutos, prout nos Autho∣ritate Praesentium absolvi∣mus, Ibid. §. 5. Subjects, and All O∣thers, who were bound to her by Any Oath, from their Oaths, and all Debt of Fidelity and Obe∣dience, and that For ever. Where observe, 1. That 'tis not only her own Subjects he ab∣solves from Oaths of Allegiance; but All O∣thers,
who were bound to her, by Any Oath whatsoever. So that if any French-man, Dutch, or Spaniard, any Pagan, Jew, or Turk had sworn to pay her Ten thousand pounds, really (and by the Law of God and Man) due to her; he absolves them from their Oaths; and so (if they had not more Honesty and Conscience then he) she must loose her Money. The Pope, in the mean time, being more kind to Turks, and Pagans, then to (a far better Christian then himself) Queen Elizabeth. 2. He absolves them from all such Oaths For ever. So that, if the Queen hadNay, such is  Antichristian  and barbarous  to those they call ; ticks; that when  are once actually  ju∣dicially condemn'd▪  though they turn good Catholicks, and repent never so sincerely; and though our blessed Saviour Jesus would pardon Penitents, yet Antichrist will not. For by the Popish Law, such Penitents are to be put into Prison, and be immured there, and live and dye in a miserable condition. Si dicat Haercticus se velle paenitere, ac Haereses abjurare, de misericordia possit recipi, ut Haereticus poenitens, & Perpetuo Immurari. Nic. Eymericus, Direct. Inquisitorum, part. 3. pag. 516. Col. 1. And Fran. Regne in his Commentary upon Eymericus there. Comment. 46. p. 517. Col. 2. Num. 202. turned Papist, none of her Subjects (if the Popes Absolution had been va∣lid) were, by an Oath, (unless they took a new one) bound to Obey her, as their Sove∣reign. 4. Nor does he only Absolve all the afore men∣tion'd (Subjects and all others) from all Oaths made to thePraecipimus & In∣terdicimus Vniversis & Singulis Proceribus, Sub∣ditis, Populis & Aliis Prae∣dictis, ne illi Ejusvè Mo∣nitis, Mandatis, & Legi∣bus Audeam Obedire. Ibid. §. 5. Queen; but also severely in∣terdicts and prohibits them all, to Obey any of her Laws or Commands. That is; he for∣bids them to do that, to which (by the Indi∣spensable Law of God and Nature) they were absolutely bound.
5. And if any of the Persons mention'd in the a∣foresaid Particulars, didPraecipimus Vni∣versis & Singulis Praedi∣ctis, ne Ejus Mandatis aut Legibus audeant Obe∣dire, Qui secus Egerint, eos Simili Anathematis Sententiâ Innodamus. I∣bidem, §. 5. otherwise, and obey'd any of her Laws or Commands; he pro∣nounces the same Excommunication and A∣nathema against them. So that, 1. If any French, Spanish, or Italian Papists lived in Eng∣land in Queen Elizabeths days; (after the Bull and Excommunication was publish'd, (as many did, and do, either as Merchants or Travellers) and obey'd the Laws of England; (as of neces∣sity they must, and ought to conform to the Civil Laws of the Country where they live) all these, (by this wild Bull) did stand Excom∣municate. Nor had they any way to Escape it, but either by Leaving the Kingdom, and all their Trade and Interest in it, to their great loss, and possibly the ruin of some: Or by staying here, and disobeying the Queens Laws, (which never was, nor would be permitted) to undergo all the Severity and Penalties of those Laws. 2. But (which is yet much more strange) suppose any Jews, Turks, or Pagans in England in the Queens time; he Excommu∣nicates all those, if they obey the Queen; But surely this Rash and Impious Sentence, was not pronounc'd è Cathedrâ; for (which is no good Sign of his Infallibility) he does in this undertake a thing beyond all the Power he did or could pretend to, an absolute Impossibility. For Excommunication being a Selusion and Depriving a man of Ecclesiastical Communi∣on, a turning out of the Christian Church;
it was absolutely Impossible that either Peter, or the Pope his pretended Successor, should de∣prive those of a Communion they never had, or turn them out of a Church in which they never were. 6. He Excommunicates all Papists, as well as Pro∣testants, if they obey'd any of the Queens Laws or Commands. So that their Case was this; If they obey'd the Queen, their Sove∣reign, (to whom they ought a natural and sworn Allegiance) the Pope Curses and Damns them; and if they did not obey her, (as St. Rom. 13. 4.Paul assures us) God himself would Condemn them. Certainly, all pious and considering Persons will think this an easie choice; and that it is better rather to Obey God then Men, and be∣lieve St. Paul rather then the Pope; and yet such is the Power of Error and strong Delusi∣on, that the generality of the Papists, (I do not say all) choose to obey the Pope; as shall appear evidently anon, by their many open Re∣bellions, and continual Plots and Conspiracies to disquiet the Government, and their Indea∣vors (by Pistol or Poyson) to Assassinate and take away the Queens Life. 2. That all Papists who gave any Obedience to the Queens Com∣mands or Laws, were Excommunicate, as well as Protestants, is evident by this: That the Popish PartyTheir Petition was, That Their most holy Lord Gregory the Thirteenth, would give a Declaratory Explication of Pius the Fifth's Bull, against Queen Elizabeth, and her Adhe∣rents; that it might be un∣derstood so, as always to bind her and the Hereticks, but not the Catholicks, as matters then stood; but hereafter, when Publick Execution of the Bull may be had. The Answer was, These Graces the highest Bishop hath granted to Rob. Parsons and Ed. Campian (who are now coming into England) the Seventeenth day of April, 1580. in the Presence of Rather Oliver Manark Assistant. Camden in his History of Elizabeth, ad Ann. 1580. Elizabeth. 23. pag. 217. Edit. Angl. Lond. 1635. petion'd Pope Gregory the Thir∣teenth, Ann. 1580. Elizabeth. 13. That he would declare, that the Bull of Pius the Fifth should al∣ways bind the Queen, and all Hereticks, but not
the Roman Catholicks, As Things then stood; but hereafter only, when That Bull might be put in Ex∣ecution. They were willing to Obey the Pope, and Disobey their Queen, when they had an Opportunity; They Petition the Pope to give them leave to do, what God (by Divine Law, Natural and Positive) had Commanded them to do; that is, to obey their Lawful Sove∣reign, and that they will Obey no longer, then till they have a Power and Ability, (with Security to themselves and Estates) to Dis∣obey. 7. It is a certain Rule of Law and Justice, that before any Judge can Legally Condemn any; Two things are necessary to preceed; 1. Cogni∣tio The necessity of these things ariseth from the Infirmity and Fal∣libility of all Human Judges; which is attest∣ed by Pope Innocent the Third, in the Canon Law; Judicium Dei ve∣ritati, semper inititur, Ju∣dicium aut em Ecclesiae, non∣nunquam opinionem sequi∣tur, quam & fallere Saepe contingit, & falli; prop∣ter quod contingit inter∣dum, ut Qui Ligatus est apud Deum, apud Ecclesi∣am sit solutus; & qui liber est apud Deum, Ecclesiastica sit Sententiâ innodatus. Innocent. 3. Cap. A Nobis. 28. Extra. De Senten∣tia Excommunicationis. It is Pope Innocent the Third who says this; and if he was Infalli∣ble, (as the Jesuits, Canonists, &c. pretend) then the Church of Rome does (Saepe) often err in her Excommunications; and if he was not Infallible, then both he and his Successors may err.Causae, a Convenient Knowledge of the Cause; What Accusation the Actor or Plaintiff brings; what Answer and Defence the Reus, or Defendant makes. 2. That the Proofs and E∣vidence be such, as may be a just ground for a Damnatory Sentence. If either of these be wanting, either the Judge or Sentence, (or both) are unjust. Qui aliquid Statuit, parte inaudita alterâ, Aequum licet Statuerit, haud aequus fuit.
And hence it was that a Pagan Judge could tru∣ly say, It isAct. 25. 16. not the manner of the Romans to deliver any man to Dye, before he which is Ac∣cused have the Accuser face to face, and have Ly∣cence to answer for himself. Such was the Justice of Pagan Rome. But as Christian (or, I fear, Antichristian) Rome, the Case is alter'd. Pius the Fifth, the pretended Vicar of Christ (our blessed Saviour) Anathematizes and Damns many hundred Thousands, even Two whole Kingdoms at once, Causâ indictâGen. 18. 20. 21. The Cry of the Sins of Sodom was great; but be∣fore God did destroy them, I will go down And See, whether they have done Altogether according to the Cry of it, which is come to me; and if not, I will know. Si Judicas Cognosce. God gives us an exam∣ple, that we ought to be sure of the sin, which deserves it, before we pass Sentence to punish it. But the Pope here, Curses two Kingdoms, without any Hearing or Cognizance of the Cause, or possibility to know (notwithstanding the Cry which might come to Rome) that every one whom he Cursed, deserved it. 2. God would have spared Sodom and Gomorrah for ten righteous men, Gen. 18. 32. But the Pope Curses two Kingdoms, though he neither did, nor possibly could know, but that there might be in them Ten thousand pious Persons who deserved it not: Nay, he Excommunicates them for their Pie∣ty to God and their Prince, in Obeying the Commands of both, to which by the Law of God and the Land, they were indispensably obliged. & inau∣ditâ. An Action so prodigiously Impious, as hath no ground or pretence for it in Nature or Scripture, or any Precedent amongst Pagans or Christians for a Thousand years after Christ; till Hildebrand, one of the worst in the Papal Catalogue (to the Scandal of Christianity, and fatal Disturbance of Christendom) unhappily Introduc'd it, and his Successors since, have (with like Antichristian Pride and Tyranny) impiously practis'd it. 8. Seeing it appears by this Bull of Pope Pius the Fifth,Observ. 8. (as by many more such, published by his Vide Bullarium Romanum Romae, 1638. & ibi Excommunicat. Frideric. 2. à Gregor. 9. Const. 13. Tom. 1. p. 89. & Excommunicat. Hen. 8. à Paul. 3. Tom. 1. p. 514. &c.Predecessors andGregory the Thirteenth, and Sixtus the Fifth, renewed the Bull of Pius the Fifth. Camden's History of Queen Elizabeth, Ad Ann. 1588. p. 360. 361. Edit. Anglicanae. Successors) that the
Bishops of Rome Usurp and Exercise such a vast Extravagant Power, to Excommunicate Kings and Emperors, to Depose and Deprive them of all their Dominions, Honour, and Dignity; to Absolve their Subjects from their Oaths of Alle∣giance and Fidelity: To Inhibit and Interdict them (against the Laws of God and Man) to give any Obedience to their Lawful Sovereigns; and if they do, to Anathematize and Curse them for so doing; and lastly, to Excommunicate whole Kingdoms at once (Causa indicta & inauditâ) if they do their Duty, and give any Obedience to their Prince, when they forbid them, &c. I say for this, (and many other Reasons) I believe the Bishop of Rome has the fairest Plea, of any in the World, to be than Man of Sin, and the great An∣tichrist spoken of in the Gospel. It is neither my intention or business now, fully to dispute that Question. Whether the Pope be Antichrist? (many have with great success, already, done it) I shall only (in short) give the Reader two or three Ar∣guments, or Motives, which (at present) induce me to believe that the Pope is Antichrist; And those Motives, either grounded on Scripture, the Confessions of our Adversaries, the Testimo∣nies of many and great men before, or the con∣current Consent of the Reformed Churches since Luther. Here consider, 1. That it is not onlySee the Annotat. on 1. Pet. 5. 13. and Ti∣rinus the Jesuit says, (in his Commentary on the same Text) Vnanimitèr sserunt Patres & Docto∣res Orthodoxi, Citati apud Bellarminum, Riberam, Viegam, Pererium, Alea∣zar. &c. per Babylonem, Romam Intelligi. And so Corn. A Lapide on the same place: The same A Lapide upon Rev. 17. 16. on these words—.Hi odient fornicaeriam, sci∣licet, Babylozem; i. e. Ro∣mam. Vide Hen. Valesium in Notis ad Lib. 2. Euse∣bij Hist. Cap. 15. Nota∣rum p. 33. Col. 2. Ribe∣ram in Apocal. 14. 8. §. 25. Confess'd by our Ad∣versaries (in their Commentaries on 1. Pet. 5. 13. The Church of Babylon salutes you) but in∣deavour'd to be proved by many Arguments
they bring, That Rome is that Babylon, St. John speaks of, in the Revelation; which he calls the Great Whore, Mother of Harlots, and Abomi∣nations of the Earth, and (in more plain Terms) TheRev. 17. 18. Great City which reigns over the Kings of the Earth; which cannot possibly be meant of any but Rome, that being then the only great City, which Reigned over the Kings of the Earth. I know that some of them would have Pamelius Annot. ad Lib. 3. Tertul. adver∣sus Marcionem, num. 98. pag. 687.Pagan Rome meant: but this evidently un∣true; for, 1. It must be Apostatical Rome; (as indeed it is) for the Apostle expresly tells us; That Antichrist will not come, till an2. Thess. 2. 3. vid. 1. Tim. 4. 1. , An Apostacy from the Faith. Aposta∣sie and falling from the Faith come first: which cannot be meant of Pagan Rome; it being im∣possible they should fall from the Faith, who never had any. 2. It is meant of that Babylon, or Rome, which St. John calls theRev. 17. 1. 5. And so Hierome calls her (al∣luding to this Place, Cum in Babylone versarer (says he) & Purpuratae Mere∣tricis esses Colonus, & Jure Quiritum viverem, &c. in praefat. ad Didy∣mum. Alexandrinum, de Sp. Sancto, Tom. 6. p. 217. And again, lib. 2. Adversus Jovinianum; Sed (Hierom. Tom. 2. p. 379. 380. in calce Li∣bri) ad Te loquor, qui scrip∣tam in frome blasphemi∣am, Christi Confessione de∣listi. Vrbs Orbis Dominâ, Maledictionem, quam Tibi Salvator in Apocalypsi Comminatus est, potes ef∣fugere per poenitentiam, &c. Marian. Victorius in Notis ad dictum Librum & Locum, num. 68. says he means Pagan Rome. But 'tis certain (which I only cite him for) that Babylon in the Revelation (in Hierom's Opinion) is Rome: Sure I am, that Tertullian is of the same judgment; (Libro adversus Judaeos, cap. 8. pag. 142. num. 106.) Sic & Babylon apud Johannem, Romanae Vrbis figuram portat, proinde & Regno superbae, & sanctorum debellatricis. And he has the same words again, (Lib. 3. Adversus Marcion. cap. 13. num. 98. p. 674.) where Pamelius in his Notes on those places, 1. Would have Pagan Rome meant. However, by Babylon in the Revelation (in Tertullian's Opinion, as well as Hieroms) Rome is meant. 2. He would have those words, (Babylon Roma) which were in the Margent of a former Edition of Tertullian, blotted out; that men might not be put in mind that Rome was the Mystical Babylon, more Romano, corrupting Records, and blotting out whatever makes against them. Great Whore, and Harlot: but in Scripture, none but Apostates from the Faith, and trueSee Hos. 1. 2. &c. and Hos. 2. 2. Religion, are call'd so; none but she who was once a Wife, and afterwards falls into Spiritual Whore∣dom; which of Pagan Rome neither is, nor can
be true. 3. The Actings of Antichrist are call'd 2. Thes. 2. 7. Rev. 17. 5. 7.Mysterium, a Mystery, things hard to be un∣derstood: but that Pagan Idolaters should perse∣cute and oppress Christians, and be drunk with the Blood of the Saints, this is no Mystery. But that all this should be done in pretence of the only True and Catholick Religion, in Honour of Christ, and by his Vicar; this is indeed a Mystery, not easily understood. So that it is evident, and confess'd, that Rome is Babylon, (Mystical Babylon) call'd so, (as she is call'dRev. 11. 8. Sodom and Egypt) in respect of that Analogy and Similitude between the Literal and Mysti∣cal, the Pagan and Antichristian Babylon, (Ba∣bylon Chaldaeae & Italiae.) Some of the Parti∣culars wherein that Similitude consists, are here in theThe Similitude between the Pagan Ba∣bylon, in the Old, and the Antichristian in the New Testament, may appear in this; 1. They were both very great Cities. (Isai. 13. 19. Rev. 16. 19.) 2. They were both Impious and Idola∣trous. (Isai. 46. 1. Rev. 9. 20.) 3. They were both Oppressors of the Church of God; the Literal and Pagan Baby∣lon, of the Jews, (Jer. 50. 11.) the Mystical Ba∣bylon of Christian Church. (Rev. 17. 6.) 4. They both propagated their Impiety, and made o∣ther Nations to sin with them. (Jer. 51. 7. Rev. 13. 16. &c. Rev. 17. 2.) 5. In the Pagan Baby∣lon God had some Saints and Servants, and they were Commanded to come out of her. (Jer. 50. 8. & 51. 6.) And so in the Mystical Babylon, (Rev. 18. 4.) 6. The destruction of both is de∣nounced in the same words, of Pagan Babylon, (Isai. 21. 9. Jer. 51. 8.) and of Mystical Babylon, (Rev. 14. 8. & 18. 2.) Margent; and he who considers what St. John says of the Mystical, and what I∣saie and Jeremy of the Literal Babylon, may find more. I take it then for a manifest Truth, (and confess'd by our Adversaries) that by Babylon in the Revelation, Rome is meant, and that it is the Seat of Antichrist. The next Query will be, Who that great Antichrist is, whose Seat is to be at Rome? And this will best appear by the De∣scription and Characters of him in Scrip∣ture.
2. One Characteristical Note and Mark of Anti∣christ, is given by2 Thess. 2. 4. . St. Paul; That he is an Enemy, an Adversary to Christ (our blessed Sa∣viour) so the word in St. Paul properly. Hesychius. , Adversarius. Glossae veteres in Calce Cyrilli. Etymolog. Mag∣num, in verbo ; which he renders . and then adds; . signifies; so their Authentick; Vulgar Latin Filius perditionis, qui Adversatur.translates it, and their LearnedCorn. A Lapide in 2. Thess. 2. 4. Com∣mentators prove it. So that we are agreed on this; That Antichrist (whoever he be) is an Ad∣versary to our blessed Saviour; and though he may pretend (as we know he does) to be Christ's Vicar, and Act by his Authority, and for him; yet he is really his Adversary, and acts in Opposition, and Contradiction to him. Now if this be a true Cha∣racter of Antichrist (and it is St. Pauls) then the Pope has a fairer Plea to be that Beast, then any man in the World. For under the Name and Notion of Christ's Vicar, and by a vainly pretended and usurped Power from him, he acts contrary to Christ, and the express Com∣mands of the Gospel. I shall (of many) give two or three Instances, 1. Our blessed Saviour, at the Institution of the Eucharist, expresly Commands his Disciples (and so all Christians, who are of Age and rightly qualify'd)Matth. 26. 27. Drink Ye All of this: And another Evangelist tells us, that they obey'd, andMark. 14. 23. Did All Drink. But the Pope, in Contradiction to this,Concilium Con∣stantiense, Sess. 13. abso∣lutely forbids all (save the Priest who Conse∣crates) to drink the Eucharistical Cup; and so (in Contradiction to our Saviour's Command) deprives them of half that Sacrament. And this they do with a blasphemous Impiety, for∣bidding
bidding all Laicks to have the Communion in both kinds, Notwithstanding theLicet Christus post coenam, Instituerit, & Dis∣cipulis sub Vtrâque Specie panis & vini administra∣verit: Hoc non Obstante, &c. Ibid. Institution of Christ, and notwithstanding that in theLicet in Primitivâ Ecclesiâ hoc Sacramentum reciperetur à fidelibus sub Vtrâque Specie, tamen Consuetudo ab Ecclesiâ in∣troducta, pro lege habenda est. Ibidem. By the way, let the Intelligent and Impartial Reader consi∣der, with what contra∣diction to truth and right reason the Fathers at Constance, establish their half Communion. They reject the uninter∣rupted perpetual Cu∣stom of the Universal Church, (both Greek and Latin, Eastern and Western) for above One thousand two hundred years, for receiving the Communion in both kinds: and yet tell us, That a late Custom of the Roman Church on∣ly, and that in some pla∣ces only (for it was not a general Custom in the Roman Church to receive only in one kind, till Ann. 1414. the Council of Constance met and defined it) must be a Law to oblige all to receive only in one kind. Primi∣tive Church it was Received in both kinds: and they further declare themPertinacitèr asseremes oppositum, tanquam Haeretici arcndi sunt & Gravitèr puniendi. Ibidem. Hereticks, who think o∣therwise; and Command, that no Priest shall ad∣minister it in both kinds to any Lay-man, under pain ofNul∣lu Presbyter sub poenâ Excommunicationis, Communicet populum sub utraque Specie. Ibidem. Excommunication. By the way; it is observable, That it is Confess'd by our Adversa∣ries Lindanus in Panoplia, Lib. 4. Cap. 56. pag. 342. Edit. Colon. 1575.Lindanus, CardinalCard. Bona de rebus Liturgicis. Lib. 2. Cap. 18. pag. 491. 492. Paris. 1672. Bona, &c.) that the whole Church of God (Lay and Clergy) for a∣bout One thousand two hundred years, Received in both kinds, even the Church of Rome her self: And after that, inIn Qui∣busdam Ecclesiis observatur, ut populo Sanguis Sumendus non detur. Aquinas part. 3. Quaest. 8. Art. 12. in Corpore. Aquinas his time, it was but in someWhich was about the year of Christ, 1265. Bellarmine de Script. Ecclesiasticis, in Tho. Aquinate. Churches, that the Cup was deny'd to the Laity. The sum is this; He who acts in Opposition and Contradiction to our blessed Saviour's Commands in the Gospel, abrogates them, (so much as in him lies) calls them He∣reticks, and Excommunicates those who obey them, and Incourages those who disobey Christ, and obey him; he (I say) is an Adver∣sary to Christ and Antichrist. But (by the Pre∣misses) it appears, that the Pope does all this,
more signally in taking away the Cup in the Eucharist then any (who pretends to be a Christian) in the whole World; Ergo, he is Antichrist. 2. The next Instance whereby it may appear, that the Pope is , an Ad∣versary to our blessed Saviour, and so has one Character of Antichrist, is this; St. Paul in his Epistle to the1. Cor. 14. Corinthians, tells them, (and he says they are theIbid. vers. 37. The things I write unto you are the Commandments of the Lord. Commandments of Christ he writes) 1. That it is the Commandment of our blessed Saviour, that in their Assemblies all things be done toIbid. vers. 26. & vers. 12. Edification. 2. That speaking in an unknown Tongue, does notIbid. vers. 17. E∣dify orIbid. vers. 6. Profit the Church to which he speaks; Ibid. vers. 2. 9. 14. 15. 16.because they understand not what he says. 3. He absolutely forbids all speaking in their As∣semblies (if there be none to Interpret) in anyIbid. vers. 28. unknown Tongue. Now whether the Pope be not , an Adversary to Christ, let the Reader Judge, by that which follows. Our blessed Saviour expresly Commands, that in the Assemblies of Christians all things should be in a Tongue understood by the People, for their Edification, (and the Apostle thinks itIbid. vers. 23. mad∣ness to do otherwise) that they might know his Precepts and gracious Promises; and so their Duty, and Incouragements to do it. But the Pope (as all know) in Contradiction to this, absolutely forbids what our blessed Saviour ex∣presly Commands; and prohibits all Publick Prayers in any Vulgar Tongue; nay, the print∣ing, reading, or having their ownCum quidam Missa∣le Romanum, ad Gallicam vig arem linguam conver∣tere tent averint: Nos No∣vitatem istam Ecclestae de∣coris deformatricem, dete∣stamur; & Missale praedi∣ctum Gallico Idiomate con∣scriptum, damnamus, ac Interdicimus, sub poenâ Excommunicationis latae Sententiae, Ipso Jure incur∣rendae. Mandantes, ut qui illud habuerint tradant Or∣dinarijs, aut Inquisitoribus, qui sine Morâ, Exemplaria igne comburant. Bulla A∣lexand. 7. dat. Romae, 12. Jan. 1661. Pontificatûs Ann. 6. Roman Mis∣sal
in FrenchVid. Bullam Clo∣ment. 9. Rom. 9. April, 1668. It was to be burnt by the Bishop or Inquisi∣tors, even their own Mis∣sal in French., into which it was faithfully Translated, (not by any Hereticks, but by good Roman Catholicks). This evidently appears by the Authentick Bull of Pope Alexander the Se∣venth, and some of his words cited in the Mar∣gent. And he there tells us, That the Transla∣tors and Publishers of that Missal, were Studiers of Novelties, to theQuidam Perditio∣nis Filij in perniciem Ani∣marum novitatibus studen∣tes, & Ecclesiasticas San∣ctiones, & praxin Contem∣nentes, ad cam nuper Vesa∣niam pervenerint, ut Mis∣sale Romanum in Gallicam vulgarem linguam conver∣tere tentaverint. So it is in the said Bull. ruin of Souls; Contemners of the Sanctions and Practise of the Church; and that they were Sons of Perdition. But in this, I think his Holiness was not well advised. For if the Apostles2. Thess. 2. vers. 3. 4. Character of Antichrist be true, he himself has a better claim to that Ti∣tle, and really is (what he calls them) The Son of Perdition. What they say in Answer to St. Paul, and the clear Texts against all praying to, or praising God in an unknown Tongue, is most Irrational, and Indeed Impertinent. It is not my Business or Intention (in this place and time) particularly to Examine it; but refer the Reader to theirVide Corn. A La∣pide in 1. Cor. 14. Coste∣ri Enchiridion. Cap. 17. De precibus. Latine Re∣citandis, pag. 502. &c. Johan. Eckij Enchiridion adversus Lutherum, pag. 392. Colon. 1565. vide Azorium Instit. Moral. Part. 1. lib. 8. cap. 26. Learned Writers for their Latin Prayers, where he may see what they say; and if he be Intelligent, and an Impartial Seek∣er, and Lover of Truth, he will find that St. Paul Condemns all Prayers to, and Praises of God in an unknown Tongue. Sure I am, a very Learned Sorbon Doctor in hisHen. Holden. The∣ologus Parisiensis, in An∣notat. ad i. Cor. 14. Pa∣ris. 1660. Notes on that place in St. Paul (convinc'd with the E∣vidence of the Text and Truth) does acknow∣ledge it, and explains St. Paul as I have done. If they damn and burn their own Offices in a∣ny Vulgar Tongue, (which deserve to be burnt
for many other better Reasons) we may easily guess (when they have power to do it, which I pray and hope they never will) what they will do with ours. 3. But that which is the high∣est and most evident Instance, that the Pope is , an Adversary and Enemy to our blessed Saviour Christ, and true Christianity, is; That whereas the Gospel was writ to be read and studied (by all who had ability) as the great means of their Salvation; and ac∣cordingly was Translated into all Christian Languages, and all permitted to have and read it; that they might (for their direction and comfort) know the holy Precepts, and graci∣ous Promises contain'd in it; and continued so to this Day in all Christian Churches (except Rome) and in that too, for many hundred years after Christ, while Latin was their Vul∣gar Tongue. But when the Impiety and Ty∣ranny of the Bishops of Rome unhappily pre∣vail'd, the Gospel it self, and the whole Book of God, was reckon'd amongst Damned Books▪ and Authors, and not permitted to beNulla conceditur facultas Legendi vel reti∣nendi Biblia vulgaria, aut alias Sacrae Scripturae par∣tes, quavis Vulgari Linguâ Editas, & Insuper Summa∣ria & Compendia etiam Historia Sacrae Scripturae, quocunque vulgari Idioma∣te conscripta; quod Invi∣olatè Observandum. Vid. Observat. ad Regul. 4. In∣dicis, in Calce Concilij Trident. Antverp. 1633. & Indicem Expurg. A∣lexand. 7. Rom. 1667. p. 14. verbo. Biblia, & Bi∣bliorum. read in any Vulgar Tongue; no not so much as any Summary or Historical Compendium of it. And further, amongst the Rules of the Index Expur∣gatorius, publish'd by the Command of the Trent Council, we are told, (with great Impie∣ty and Blasphemy) that by permitting the Scrip∣ture to be commonly read in Vulgar Tongues, there comesPlus inde ob homi∣num temeritatem, Detri∣menti quam Vtilitatis O∣riri. Ibid. Reg. 4. In Indi∣ce Alexand. 7. p. 4. more Mischief than Beneit. Pope Vr∣ban the Eighth saysLibrorum prohi∣bitorum Lectio, magno sin∣cerae fidei Cultoribus De∣trimento esse noscitur. Ur∣ban. 8. Constit. 114. Bul∣larij Rom. Tom. 4. §. 1. p. 119. Edit. Rom. An. 1638. the very same, (with as
much Impiety as his Predecessors) and further adds; That all who have any prohibited Books, (of which number it is Evident the Bible in any Vulgar Language is one) they must bring them to the Bishop or Inquisitor, and they must Burn them presently, by the hand of the Hangman, or some such Officer, (for I suppose they are not to do it themselves). And we have a late and further Instance of this Antichristi in Impiety, in a Bull of Pope Clement the Ninth. The New Testament (as appears by the Bull) was Tran∣slated into French, and Printed at Lions; The Pope (Animus meminisse horret)Liber Versionis Gal∣licae Novi Testamenti, cui Titulus est—Le Nou∣vean Testament de nostre Seigneur Jesus Christ, &c. Nos Librum hujusmodi tanquam temerariu, Dam∣nosum, à vulgatâ Editione deformem Damnamus, & prohibemus: ita ut nemo cujuscunque Conditionis sub poena Excommunicationis, illum legere aut retinere audeat, sed Ordinariis aut Inqlisitoribus deferat. &c. Ita Clem. 9. Bulla data Rom. 20. Apr. An. 1668. Damns and prohibits it, under the very Name, The New Te∣stament of our Lord Jesus Christ; and Excom∣municates all, of what dignity soever, who shall print, sell, read, or have it; and Commands (under pain of Excommunication) that they who have it, bring it to the Ordinary orli qui Libros prohi∣bitos habuerint, cos ad Episcopum aut Inquisitores deserant, qui eos quantocy∣us Comburere debeant. Ibid. §. 3. In∣quisitors; and what they must do, with it, the Bull of Vrban the Eighth, (but now Cited) will tell you; they must burn it, and (as a damned Book) abolish it. So Clement the Ninth Com∣mands theIn his Bull, 9. Apr. 1668. Pontificatus sui Ann. 1. Damnamus—mandantes, ut quicunque librum illum Ritualem ha∣buerint vel habebunt, loce∣rum Ordinariis, vel Inqui∣sitoribus statim tradant, qui nullâ interpositâ mora, igni comburant, aut com∣buri faciant, &c Roman Ritual in French, to be burnt. But that which makes their Error and Impiety more evident, is; That even then and there, where they absolutely prohibit the Go∣spel in any Vulgar Tongue, and Damn it to the Fire, they permit theItem Alboranus Mahometis in Linguâ Vulgari, ex Concessione In∣quisitorum haberi possit. Index Librorum prohi∣bitorum. Alexandr. 7. E∣dit. Rom. 1664. pag. 3. the Turkish Alcaron in a Vulgar Tongue, with leave had from the Inquisitors, who yet could give no leave to any (as appears before by the Rules of their
ExpurgatoryBiblin quocunque I diomate Vulgari conscrip¦ta. Ita Index Librorum prohibitorum, Alexand. 7. Jussu Editus Romae, 1667. verbo Biblia, p. 14. Index) to have the Gospel, or any part of it, in any Vulgar Tongue. Pro∣digious Impiety! The Turkish Alcoran (the con∣trivance of a Monstrous Impostor, and Enemy to Christ and Christianity) is permitted; and the Gospel of our blessed Saviour is absolutely prohibited and damn'd. And though in doing this, they Act very Impiously, yet (in their Ge∣neration and Circumstances) very wisely. For neither the Alcoran, nor any Book in the World, is so fatal to their miscall'd Catholick Religion, as (when truly understood and believ'd) the Bible. That Book evidently discovers, and condemns their Errors; and therefore they are concern'd to keep it from the People, least they should find (as by that Divine Light they easily might) and forsake their Errors. The Pre∣misses consider'd, let the Reader judge, Whe∣ther the Pope have not this Mark of the Beast, and Character of Antichrist, that he is, the Adversary of Christ, and that Religi∣on Establish'd by him; who prohibits the ha∣ving and reading (and so the Understanding) of the Gospel, Damns it to the Fire, and burns it; and yet at the same time permits the Alcaron. 3. Another Characteristical Note or Mark of Antichrist given by St. Paul, is; That he Exalts himself above all that is called God, or Worship∣ped; So our English Translation; so their Authentick VulgarExtollitur super Omne quod dicitur Deus, aut quod Colitur. Clem. 8. in Bibliis, 1592. Latin; and their own LearnedCorn. A Lapide in 2. Thess. 4. §. 27. Commentators justifie it. The
word in the Text properly, Co∣lo, veneror.  (Suidae & Hesychio) , Colendum, vene∣randum, Id quod vene∣ratur. Athanasius Orat. Contra Gentes, (ex sa∣pientiâ Sirach, c. 14. 17.)  ubi  Numen, Deum significat. Sic Act. 17. 23.  Sacra Gentilia, quae venerabantur, seu Numi∣na, Altaria, Templa, &c. Hinc Caesares , Augusti; Hesychio, . signifying, Id quod Colitur, any thing or Person, which is the Object of Honour and Veneration. So that thus far we are agreed, That Antichrist will Ex∣alt himself above all that is called God, (as all Magistrates Subordinate and Supream, Kings and Emperors in Scripture are) or worshipped. This then (in Thesi) being granted; we must next (in Hypothesi) Inquire, Whether this Chara∣cteristical Note and Mark of Antichrist, may be truly affirm'd of the Pope, and be really found in him? In Answer to which Query, I say; I hope it may, and does appear by the Premisses, That the Pope does Exalt himself, far above all Kings and Emperors, more then any man in the World ever did, or (Antichrist excepted) ever will; and therefore I shall only add two or three things in Confirmation of the Premisses. 1. Then, his Favourers and Flatterers give him (and he approves and assumes it) TheSanctiss. Vrban. 8. Vniversi Imperator. Ange∣lus Maria Cherubinus, in Calce. Tom. 4. Bulla∣rij Romani, Rom. 1638. pag. 120. Title of Emperor of the Vniverse. Upon this account, That the Pope is Emperor of the Vniverse, of the whole World; it follows, That all Kings and Emperors are his Subjects, and he their Su∣pream Lord and Sovereign, and so, far greater in Power, then any one, or all of them toge∣ther. And least we should mistake, and under∣value his Papal Greatness; Pope Innocent the Third told the Emperor of Constantinople, (and has told us in the Body of their approved and received Law) That the Pope is as much greater then the Emperor, as theVid. Cap. Solicit 6. Extra. De Major. & Obed. Quanta est inter Solem & Lunam, tanta in∣ter Pontifices & Reges dif∣ferentia cognoscatur. Sun is greater then the
Moon. And here the Author of the Gloss, (Bernardus de Botono, a great Lawyer, but no good Astronmer) tells us, That the Sun is 47. times greater then the Moon; and so (by that Computation) the Pope is 47. times greater then the Emperor. This is pretty well, and gives so vast a Magnitude to the Pope above the Em∣peror, that a man would think it might satisfie his Ambition, so that he needed not ask, nor his greatest Flatterers give him more. Yet they do give much more. For in a Marginal Note on the said Chapter, (in their mostVid. Corpus Juris Canon. cum Glossis. Pa∣ris. 1612. Correct Editions of their Law) we are told, That the Sun is greater then the Moon, Quinquagies Septi∣es, 57. times; and so the Pope so much greater then the Emperor. But this is not all. Lauren∣tius (a Canonist) in the samePalam est, quod magnitudo Solis continet magnitudinem▪ Lunae 7744 ½. Vice Addit. ad Gloss. verb. Inter Solem. Ad dictum cap. 6. place, tells us; That it is evident, that the Sun is 7744 ½ greater then the Moon; and so the Pope (omitting the Fra∣ction) Seaven thousand, seaven hundred, and forty four times greater then the Emperor. This is so prodigiously erroneous and impious, as none, save their most Holy and Infallible Guide, could be guilty of such Error and Impiety. But a Learned RomanClavius Comment. in Johan. de Sacro Bosco. p. 189. Catholick (who un∣derstood Astronomy, and the Magnitude of the Sun, (much better then the Pope, or his Parasites) seriously tells us, that the Sun is greater then the Moon. 6539. times. And so by the Popes Logick and Decretal Definition, and the Com∣putation of his best Artists, he must be. 6539. times greater then the Emperor. Monstrous
Pride and Ignorance! which is so far from proving him to be our blessed Saviours Vicar, that it evidently proves him, to be that2 Thess. 2. 4. Man of Sin, the great Antichrist, who exalts himself () above all Kings and Emperors. Certainly Antichrist cannot exalt himself more, then to declare to the World, (as the Pope here does) in his Publick Laws and Constitutions, that he is. 6539. times greater then any King or Emperor. So that al∣though St.Rom. 13. 1. Paul, and1. Pet. 2. 13. Peter too, acknow¦ledged the Emperors Power Supream, and requi∣red that all men (even the Pope if he were a man) should conscienciously obey them; though St. PaulAct. 25. 11. appeal (not to Peter, but) to Caesar, as Supream: Though Athanasius say, That there lay noAthanasius in A∣pologia, ad Constantium Tom. 1. p. 680. D. Appeal from the Emperor, but to God; and thoughTertull. ad Scap. cap. 2. & Apolog. c. 30. Tertullian say, That the Empe∣ror was, Solo Deo minor; and the Bishops of Rome, for almost One thousand years after our blessed Saviour, acknowledged the Emperors their So∣vereign Lords, yet Hildebrand and his Succes∣sors, have (as above) exalted themselves far a∣bove all that is call'd God, and have that inde∣lible Character of Antichrist. Q. E. D. 2. And they further say, That this Vniversal Monarchy is given him by God himself; and so he has it, (not by any Human Right or Injust Usurpa∣tion, but Jure Divino) by the Law of God, and a Right derived from him; and this is said, not once only, nor by any privateTu es Pastor Ovi∣um, Princeps Apostolorum; Tibi Tradidit Deus Omnia Regna Mundi: Breviar. Roman. Antv. 1660. part. Hiemali, in Festo Cathe∣drae S. Petri Antiochiae, in Resp. post Lect. 4. p. 760. Person, (whose Authority might be question'd) but
many times in their Authentick RomanIbid. parte Hiema∣li in Festo Cathedrae Sti. Petri Romae, ad diem Jan. 18. p. 700. Col. . & in dicti Breviarij Part. Aestiva, p. 482. In Festo Petri & Pauli, Jun. 29. & ibidem rursus p. 541. In Festo S. Petriad vincula. Bre∣viary, restored according to theThe  or Title of that Breviary, is thus—Breviarium Romanum, ex Decreto Sa∣cro-Sancti Concilij Tri∣dentini restitutum, ij. 5. Pont. Max. Jussu Editum, & Clement. 8. primum, nunc demum Vrbani P. 8. Authoritate recognitum. Antv. 1660. Decree of the Council of Trent, and revised and publish'd by the Authority and Command ofPius. 5. Clem. 8. Urban. 8. as above. three Popes successively; so that we may be sure they approve it. That Breviary has it thus, (speak∣ing of Peter)—Thou art Prince of the Apostles; And God hath Given Thee All the Kingdoms of the World. These are the words of that Authentick Breviary, approved and confirm'd by the Au∣thority of those three Popes before mentioned, (as appears by their Bull prefix'd to the Edition) and is now in publick use in their Church. So that he Exalts himself, as Universal Monarch, over all the Kings and Kingdoms in the World; and that (as he impiously pretends) by a Di∣vine Right, and the Donation of God himself; And hence it is, That not only the Canonists (the constant and great Parasites of the Pope) but e∣ven the Learned Divines of the Roman Church, give the Pope (and he Approves and Assumes) such Extravagant and Blasphemous Titles, as none but the Man of Sin, who Exalts himself above all that is called God, would approve. To pass by many hundreds of the like nature, I shall In∣stance only in one. Stapleton (an English man, and a very Learned Professor of Divinity at Doway, in his Dedicatory Epistle to Pope Gregory the Thirteenth, calls that PopeStapleton, in Aca∣demiâ Duacenâ Theol. Professor, in Epist. Greg. 13. Princip. Fidei Do∣ctrin. Demonstrationi praefixa; Papam appellat, Catholicae Ecclesiae Virti∣cem Coruphaeotatum, Toti∣us Orbis Magistrum & Su∣premum in terris Numen.—The High∣est Top and Prince of the Catholick Church, The Master of the whole World, and on Earth The Su∣pream God or Deity. Certainly, he who ap∣proves
and admits such Titles to be given him, Exalts himself above all that is called God, and so has the Character of Antichrist mention'd by the Apostle, 2 Thess. 2. 4. And here (though I intended it not) I shall crave leave to add two or three Passages more, which casually come in my way and memory, and are very pertinent to our present purpose. 1. The Gloss on their Nec Deus es, nec Homo, quasi neuteres, inter utrúmque. Glossa ad Pro∣oemium Clement. verbo, Papa.Canon Law tells us, That the Pope is neither God nor Man, but something more then Man. And though this Impious and Blasphemous Gloss wasVide Censuram in Glossas Jur. Can. per Tho. Manrique, Colon. 1572. p. 13. 14. Censured to be left out, by the Master of the Sacred Pallace. YetVide Indicem Ex∣purgat. Olysipone, 1624. p. 350. Clement the Eighth thought otherwise; and those words are still in the best Edition of theParis. 1612. Canon Law; only with this Note in the Margent, Haec verba sunt sano modo intelligenda, prlata enim sunt, ad Ostendendum Amplissimam Pontificis Rom. Potesta∣tem. But this Gloss is something modest, though it make the Pope more then Man; and being in Verse, may have some Poetical Licence allow'd. 2. But another Gloss in plain Prose expresly says, That it isCredere Dominum Deum nostrum Papam non posse sic statuere, Haereti∣cum Censetur. Glossa ad Cap. cum inter. 4. verbo. Declaramus. De verbo∣rum signific. Extravag. Johan. 22. our Lord God the Pope. For although in someEdit. Paris. 1519. Old Editions of the Canon Law, it was only Our Lord the Pope; yet now in the mostEdit. Paris. 1612. Correct Edi∣tions of that Law, confirmed by Gregory the Thirteenth, it is (without any Qualification in the Margent) our Lord God the Pope. 3. And to make the Blasphemy full, and evidently Anti∣christian, Ant. Puccius in an Oration made by him in their General Lateran Council, speaking to
Pope Leo the Tenth, says,Diviniae Majesta∣tistuae Conspectus, rutilan∣ti cujus fulgore oculi mei Caligant, &c. Crab. Concil. Tom. 3. Conc. La∣teran. Sess. 9. p. 648. Col. 2. That the Rayes of His Divine Majesty did dazle his Eyes. Impious and Antichristian Pride and Blasphemy! yet approved at Rome, and by themselves (to their shame) published to the World. Nor is this all: He pretends to, and assumes an Infallibili∣ty, and that of so high a Nature, that all his Definitions and Determinations of Doubts (whether è Cathedrâ or not; whether in a Gene∣ral Council, or out of it; to be the Word of God. So a Learned PopishVerbum Dei est triplex: 1. Scriptum, sci∣licet Scriptura sacra. 2. Non scriptum, Traditio. 3. Explicatum; Cum du∣bia in verbo scripto vel non scripto Explicantur, & determinantur: & hoc sit praesertìm per sum∣mum Pontificem, sive Ex∣tra Concilium, su in Con∣cilio. Lud. Bail: in Ap∣paratu de triplici verbo Dei, Tom. 1. Summae Concil. Praefixo. Author tells us; That the Word of God is threefold; 1. His written Word, the Scriptures: 2. His unwritten Word, Traditions: 3. His explained or declared Word; when Scrip∣ture or Traditions are declared and explained by the Pope; whether in or out of a Council. And he says;Iste Modus ultimus (the Popes determinations of doubts) Magis Probatus est, & cum majore suavita∣te ei Plures acquiescunt. I∣bidem in principio dicti Apparatus. That this Last word of God, (the Popes Definitions and Explications) is the most approved, and most men do with greater pleasure acquiesce in it. Though this be much, yet not all. For the Pope does not only pretend to, and assume to himself an Universal Monarchy, over all the Kingdoms of the World; but such an Absolute Power to dispose of them; that he can (parte inconsultâ) give away Kingdoms (pro Arbitrio) to whom he pleases. A Memorable, and (for Papal Pride and Injustice) a Prodigi∣ous Instance we have of this, in Pope Alexander the Sixth, who at one Clap, gave toDe nostra mera Li∣beralitate, Omnes Insulas & Terras firmas inventas & Inveniendas, versus Oc∣cidentem & Meridiem, fa∣bricando unam. Lineam à Polo Arctico ad Antarcticum, quae Linea distet à qualibet Insularum quae Vulgaritèr dictae sunt, De  Azores y Cabo Virde, Centum Leucis versus occidentem, Cum Omnibus illarum dominijs, Ciritatius, Castris, Villis, Juribus, & Pertinentiis Vniversis, vobis, haeredibus & successoribus in . Constit. 2. Alexand. 6. §. 8. in Bullario Rom. Tom. 1. p. 347. Ferdinand
and Elizabeth, (King and Queen of Castile) and their Heirs for ever, All the West-Indies, from Pole to Pole, and all the Isles about them (which lay One hundred Leagues Westward from Cape Verd, and the Azores) with all their Dominions, Cities, Castles, Villages, all the Rights and Jurisdictions belonging to them. And this, he says, he gives, of his own meer Liberality, by Power deriv'd from Peter, and as Vicar of Christ. Then he Excom∣municates all of what degree soever, Kings and Ac Personis cujus∣cúnque Dignitatis, etiam Imperialis, Regalis, &c. sub Excommunicationis latae Sententiae poenâ, districtius Inhibemus, ne ad Insulas aut terras dictas, pro mer∣cibus habendis, vel causa aliâ quavis, accedere prae∣sumant, absque veniâ ve∣strâ, aut Haeredum Specia∣li Licentiâ. Ibid. §. 8.Emperors (by name) who shall dare to trade into the West-Indies (given to Ferdinand by him) without the leave and licence of the said Ferdi∣nand. Here we see, the Pope gives away al∣most half the World, from the true Owners, Causa incognita, inaudita, indicta; the Persons and their Quality being utterly unknown to him. If it be said, They were Pagan Idolaters: Grant that. Yet, 1. What they all were, he neither did, nor could know. 2. If they re∣ally were such, (as probably they were) yet dominium non fundatur in gratiâ; a Pagan and I∣dolater may (jure naturae) have as just a Tem∣poral Right to his Estate, as a Christian. Caesar was a Pagan in our blessed Saviours time; and yet he Commands them toMatth. 22. 21. give to Caesar the things which were Caesars. Some things were Caesars in which he had a propriety, and to which he had a right, and his Subjects an Obligation to pay him tribute, and other things Rom. 13. 7. The Apostle commands the Romans to pay tribute to whom it was due, that is, to Caesar; for to him only they were Subjects, and to him only Tribute was due from them. Our blessed Saviour (as man, born in the Roman Em∣pire) was subject to Cae∣sar, and paid him Tri∣bute. Matth. 17. 25. And that (as Cajetan and Lu∣cas Burgensis on that place, truly say; That he paid that Tribute, not de facto only, but de de∣bito.due to him. But I hope this will not be deny'd: For if none, but pious men, and true
Christians have any just Right to what they possess, it will (I fear) go hard with his Holy∣ness, and he will have no Propriety in St. Peters Patrimony, or any other thing he does possess. And therefore (if he Impartially consider it) he may find some reason, if not for Truths sake (which with him is not always a prevailing Motive) yet for his own, to be (in this) of my opinion: By the Premisses, I hope it may, and does appear, That the Pope Exalts himself above all that is called God, or worshipped; and so re∣ally has the Characteristical Note and Mark of the Beast, that Man of Sin, and is indeed that great Antichrist described and foretold in Scripture. 4. Nor am I singular in this Opinion; many Ex∣cellent Persons (both for Learning and Piety) have said as much: and some have given us a Catalogue of theirVide Testimonia ex variis Authoribus Col∣lecta Romam Babylona es∣se, Ejúsque Episcopum jure Antichristum dici; per Simon. Schardium, in cal∣ce Epistolarum Petri de Vincis. Basil. 566. Testimonies. I shall say nothing of the Fathers; many of which make Rome Babylon in the Revelation, some of them I have Cited before, and Schardius (in the Place last Quoted) has more. Nor shall I say any thing of the poor persecuted Waldenses and Wiclisists, or the Reformed Churches since Lu∣ther; who both believ'd and constantly affirm'd and prov'd the Pope to be Antichrist; especial∣ly the Church of England, as appears, both by her ablest Writers, and her AuthentickSee the third part of the Homily of Good Works; in the first part of the Homilies, p. 38. and the sixth part of the Homily against Rebel∣lion, in the second part of the Homilies, p. 316. where the Pope is call'd the Babylonical Beast of Rome. Ho∣milies, confirmed by the Kings Supream Au∣thority in Convocations and Parliaments. O∣mitting all these (which yet were abundantly
sufficient to shew, that I am not singular in this Opinion) I shall only (of very many more) give a few Evident Instances and Testimonies of those who lived and died in the Communi∣on of the Church of Rome. And here 1. The Emperor Frederick the Second, in a Letter to the King of France, complaining of the Pro∣digious Pride and Tyranny of the Pope, and his Impious Practices to divide the Empire, and ruin him; he says, That he Indeavour'd to build theNovissime ad Sup∣plantationem nostram a∣spirans, ut adversus Da∣vid, turrem Construeret Babylonis, &c. Apud Pet. de. de Vincis, Epist. Lib. 1. cap. 13. pag. 129. Tower of Babylon against him. And that we may know what and whom he meant by Babylon, in another Epistle to the King and No∣bility of France; he Complains of the horrid Injuries and Injustice done him by the Pope and his Party; he calls themVidete Orbis ge∣nerale Scandalum, dissi∣dia gentium, generale justitiae doleatis Excidi∣um, exeunte Nequitia A Senioribus Babylonis, qui populum hactenus Regere videbantur, &c. Apud e∣undem, lib. 1. cap. 21. pag. 152. the Elders of Babylon, &c. 2. A faithful Historian (speaking of Pope Hilde∣brand, or Gregory the Seaventh, and his Prodi∣gious Tyranny and Impiety) tells us,Plerique tum pri∣vatim, tum Publicè indig∣num facinus clamitant, Pro Concione Gregorio Maledicunt, Hildebrando male precantur; ipsum An∣tichristum esse praedicaent, Titulo Christi, negotium Antichristi agitat; in Ba∣bylonia, in Temple Dei Se∣det; super Omne id quod colitur, extollitur; quasi Deus sit, &c. Joh. Aven∣tinus Annal. Bojor. lib. 5. p. 352. Basil. 1615. vide plura Ibid. p. 363. That in those times, Most Men, both Privately and Pub∣lickly, curs'd Hildebrand, call'd him Antichrist: that under the Name and Title of Christ, he did the work of Antichrist; that he sat in Babylon, in the Temple of God; and (as if he had been a God) Exalted himself above all that is worshipped, &c. And much more to the same purpose; a∣bundantly Testify'd by the Historians of those times, who were neither Lutherans, nor (by the
Roman Church) then reputed Hereticks. And afterward (speaking of the same Hildebrand) we are told—Hildebrandus an∣te Annos. 170. primus specie Religionis Anti∣christi Imperij fundamen∣ta jecit. Hoc bellun ne∣fandum primus auspicatus est, quod per Successores huc usque continuatur—Flamines illi (Papas Rom. Intelligit) Babyloniae Soli regnare cupiunt: ferre pa∣rem non possunt, in Tem∣plo Dei Sedeant, Extol∣lantur supra omne id quod Colitur: Ingentia loqui∣tur perditus homo ille, quasi Deus esset, &c. Aventine Ibid. lib. 7. pag. 420. 421. Vide plura ibidem pag. 444. That he laid the Foundation of the Kingdom of Antichrist One hundred and seaven∣ty years before that time (when that was said) un∣der a colour and shew of Religion; He begun the War with the Emperor, which his Successors conti∣nued to that Day, (till the time of Friderick the Second, and Pope Gregory the Ninth) where we have many things more, concerning the Prodigious Pride, Impiety, and Tyranny of the Pope, to prove that he was Antichrist. The same Historian also tells us; That almost All Good, Just, andPlerique Omnes Boni, justi, ingenui, sim∣plices, tum Imperium An∣tichristi coepisse, quod ea quae Christus tot Annos Ante nobis Cantavit, evenisse cernebant, memoriae Literarum prodidere. Joh. Aventinus, Ibidem, lib. 5. pag. 363. Edit. 1615. & Edit. 1580. pag. 470. And the Learned Marcus Ephesius in the Council of Florence, call'd Rome Babylon. Binius Concil. Tom. 8. pag. 980. Edit. Paris. 1636. Honest Men did in their Writings publish to the World, that the Empire of Antichrist begun about that time, (the time of Hildebrand he means) because they Saw those things then come to pass, which were foretold long before. 3. But this is not all. We have further Testimo∣nies of this Truth. 1. Robert Grosthead, who (both for Learning and Piety) was Inferior to none in his Age: He (on his Death-bed) ha∣ving spoke of many horrid Enormities of Rome, and loss of Souls by Papal Avarice; he adds—Episcopus deleus de jacturâ Animarum per Pa∣palis Curiae Avaritiam, su∣spirans ait: Christus deve∣nit, ut animas Lucraretur. Ergo, qui animas perdere non formidas, nonne Anti∣christus merito dicendus est? Matth. Paris in Hen. 3. ad Ann. 1253. p. 875. Is not such a one deservedly call'd Antichrist? Is not a Destroyer of Souls (the Pope he means) anNonne ergo Ani∣marum destructor inimicus Dei & Antichristus cen∣setur? Ibidem. Enemy of God and Antichrist? And after a
long List of Papal Tyranny and Impieties, he calls Rome Egypt; (so Saint John calls itRev. 11. 8. Spiritually Sodom and Egypt) and concludes that theIbid. p. 876. Edit. Watsij. Nec Liberabitur Ecclesia ab Aegyptia ser∣vitute, nisi in ore Gladij Cruentati. Church will never be deliver'd from that Egyptian Servitude, but by the Sword. 2. Nor is this all: we have great Councils of whole Nations, in their Publick Edicts and Constitu∣tions, expresly declaring the Pope, to be that Antichrist, who Exalts himself above all that is called God. We have a Publick Edict, published by Ludovicus Bavarus Emperor, and his Coun∣sel; wherein Pope John the Two and twentieth is call'dQuise Mystas Chri∣sti ferunt, sunt Nuncij An∣tichristi—Nec per hunc Antichristum, licet Christianis pacm à Deo datam servare. Joh. Aven∣tinus Annal. Bojorum, lib. 7. pag. 469. Editionis Basil. 1615. Antichrist, the Disturber of the Peace of Christendom, and the Bishops and Clergy who ad∣hered to him, Messingers of Antichrist. And not long after, the same Emperor, in a Diet or Counsel of the Bishops and Nobility of Germa∣ny and Italy too, and with their joynt Consent, publishes an Edict, in the Year 1328. wherein we have a long Catalogue of the Prodigious Impieties and Tyranny of the Pope, and then and there they call him—Sicuti Pastor est Personatus, ita Mysticus est Antichristus. Ibidem, p. 473. vid. Epist. Eccle∣siae Leodiensis ad Pas∣chal. 2. apud Binium, Tom. 7. part. 2. p. 518. A Personated Pa∣stor, (one who would seem to be a Pastor of the Church) but was indeed, That Mystical Antichrist. And in the same great Counsel, they publish a∣nother Imperial Decree or Constitution, where∣in having set down that Character ofIn Temlo Dei, hoc est, Ecclesiâ, quasi Deus, Sedebunt, & super Omne illud quod usquam Gentium, aut Colitur, aut cultum est, extollentur. Dominatio∣nem, Vrbi orbique Terra∣rum, rejecta Cruce Christi, arripient, &c. Anti∣christ, That he should Exalt himself above all that is called God, or worshipped, and assume a Power and Domination over the whole World: They add, That by manyQuae ideo vates ve∣ridici, Nobis ante Conta∣runt, verissima esse experi∣mentis animadvertimus; & nisi planè Asini simus, Sentimus, &c. Experiments, they saw these Predictions, come to pass, and (unless
they were as stupid as Asses) they must be sensible of them; And thenQui contra obstre∣pere ausit, tanquam Rei∣publ. hostis, inimicus Pie∣taetis & Satelles Antichri∣sti, ultimo Supplicio Parri∣cidium luet. Conditum est hoc Decretum. Ann. 1338. Extat apud Aven∣tinum, Annal. Lib. 7. p. 479. Declare, That all who adhere to, and follow the Pope, are Antichristians, and He Antichrist. I know that the RomanThe Portugal In∣dex Expurgatorius. Oly∣sipone, 1624. pag. 29. damns Aventine, in Ge∣neral only. But the Spa∣nish Index Expurgat. Madriti, 1612. & p. 449. and at Madrid, 1667. p. 562. Col. 2. sets down particularly, all the pas∣sages to be Expunged. Inquisitors have call'd Aventine, Author damatus, an Author damn'd by them; and have noted all these places, I have Cited, to be Expunged; (I have the Inquisitors own Book, wherein all the Places in Aventine are to that purpose, Vncis inclusi, and to be left out in all following Editions of Aventine). But the World knows, that they have (with great Impieties and Im∣pudence) corrupted thousands of Authors, put∣ting out whatever makes against their Errors, and putting in, what makes the Author say, what he never meant. But their damnation of what Aventine says, out of the Imperial Con∣stitutions, is no refutation of it; nor are those things untrue because they would have them Expunged: as the Second Commandment is no less Divine, and a part of the Decalogue, because they leave it out. But enough of this; The Case is too plain, to need more proof. But some say,Dubium. That Antichrist is not yet come; nor will come till towards the end of the World. AndBellarm. de Rom. Pontif. lib. 3. cap. 3. §. 1. Bel∣larmin says, That this is the Opinion of Catholicks. And some Learned Protestants (as Grotius and Doctor Hammond) say, That Antichrist is both come, and gone, 1600. years ago. For Caius Caligula (Grotius his Antichrist) diedBaronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. 43. §. 1. Anno Christi, 43. And Simon Magus (who by Dr. Hammond is supposed to be Antichrist) diedItem Tom. 1. ad Ann. 68. §. 16. 17. Anno Christi, 68. So
that both Caius and Simon Magus, (who are their supposed Antichrists) are dead above a thousand six hundred years ago. Whence it will follow, That the Pope neither is, nor ever was, or can be Antichrist. For if either Caius the Emperor, or Simon Magus were then, when they lived, Anti∣christ, then the Pope was not; (neither of them being Bishop of Rome) and both of them being (so many Ages since) dead; the Pope neither is, nor ever can be Antichrist, unless you will have two great Antichrists; which no man yet ever did, or (with any Reason or Sense) can say. In Answer to this,Sol. 1. I shall say a few things: And, 1. For Bellarmine (who says, That the Catholick O∣pinion is, That Antichrist is not yet come) I confess he, and all his Party are highly concern'd to say so. For if Antichrist be Actually come, then the Pope must be that Man of Sin; He (and none in the World but he) having all the Characters and Marks of Antichrist mention'd in Scripture, so plain, that he who runs may read them. 2. Though Bellarmine say, 'Tis the Catholick Opinion, that An∣tichrist is not yet come; yet it evidently appears (by the many Authentick Testimonies before Cited, and the Authors were Papists) That Antichrist is come Six hundred years ago, and that the Pope was he, Plerique Omnes Boni, &c. (says the Histo∣rian before Cited) Most Good Men believed Rome to be Babylon, and the Pope Antichrist. 3. Bellar∣mine Bellarm. de Rom. Pontif. Lib. 3. cap. 3. §. Refert. B. Augustinus.Cites one, (and he Bishop of Florence) whoseConcilium Floren∣tinum, Episcopornm 340. Praeside Paschal. 2. contra Fluentinum illius Loci E∣piscopum, qui Motus Quo∣tidianis Portentis, quae tunc Accidebant, dicebat jam tum natum esse Anti∣christum. Genebrard. Chron. Lib. 4. ad Annum 1105. p. 355. Opinion was, That Antichrist was then
come, (almostSince that Council wherein he was censu∣red, (Ann. 1105.) are 574 years pass'd. Six hundred years ago) and was severely rebuked for it by Pope Paschal the Second, in a Synod call'd by him at Florence. But Bellar∣mine might have named Five hundred more, (which he wisely conceal'd, because they were a∣gainst him; and he neither had, nor could have any just Answer to so many, and so evident Te∣stimonies) I shall only add (besides those before mention'd) one signal Testimony more, to shew, That even at Rome it self, it was believ'd, that An∣tichrist should come in the end of the Tenth Cen∣tury. I have seen (and the Book, if any desire it, is still to beIn Bodley's Libra∣ry in Oxon. Cod. 76, su∣per D. Arts. The MS. was given to St. Peter's Church in Excester, in Edward the Confessor's time, by Leofricke; first Bishop of Exon, as ap∣pears by his own hand, in the beginning of that Manuscript. seen) a very Ancient and Excel∣lent MS. Missal, belonging anciently to the Church and City of Rome, (for there are some particular Services in it, to be said in some of the chief Churches in Rome) In this MS. Missal, in the beginning of it, there is a Chronological Ta∣ble, in which (amongst other things) we are told, That à Christo ad Antichristum sunt Anni. 999. So that it was believ'd then at Rome, that Antichrist should come in the last year of the tenth Century: and if he did so, (and so it was believed then) Syl∣vester the Second (a ProdigiousMalis Artibus Pontificatum adeptus est—Ambitione & Diabolicâ dominandi cupiditate Im∣pulsus, Archiepiscopatum Rhemensem, dein Raven∣natem, postremò Pontifica∣tum, Adjuvante Diabolo, consecutus. And a little before, Relicto Monaste∣rio. Diabolum secutus, cui se Totum tradiderit, &c. Plat. in vitâ Sylvest. 2. See the Hist. of Magick by Gabr. Nandaeus, c. 19. pag. 255. & Johan. Stella de vitis Pontificum, (opus revisum & correctum sub Julio. 2. as we are told in the last page save one) Basil. 1507. in vita Silve∣stri. 2. Villain was then Pope, who was a famous (or rather infamous) Magician, and obtain'd the Popedom by the help of the Devil, as their own Platina, and Johan. Stella tell us. I know their Writers and the Popes Parasites since Luther, do (but without any just reason) question the truth of what Platina, Stella, and o∣thers more ancient have said of this Sylvester; so In Annotat. ad vit. Silvest. 2. apud Plat. Edit. 1626.Onuphrius, PapiriusIn vitâ Silvest. 2. Massonus, and others;
who against Truth, and the Faith of all former Historians, indeavour (Aethiopen lavare) to quit Sylvester of all these Crimes, and make him (what he was not) an Excellent Person. 2. ForGrot. in 2. Thess. 2. 4. 5. Grotius, who would have Caius Ca∣ligula to be Antichrist, and Dr. Hammond, who thinks, that SimonDr. Hammond on the same place, and more largely, contra D. Bon∣dellum Dissert. 1. Pro∣oemialis. De Antechristo. Magus and his Gnosticks bet∣ter deserv'd that Name: I confess they were very Learned and Worthy men, but men; and had (as the best have) their Errors. Optimus ille non qui nullis, sed minimis urgetur. Certainly it is as law∣ful for me (and not more immodestly) to contra∣dict them, as it was for them to contradict all (Ancient and Modern) who ever writ on those Passages in the Second to the Thessalonians, con∣concerning Antichrist. I had, and have great respect and reverence for their Persons, and Me∣mory, but more for Truth; and therefore, the Apology of Aristotle (concerning the Errors of his Master Plato) may, and shall be mine. Amicus Plato, . He (whoever he be) who out of Reverence and Respect to any men (how great soever) either imbraces, or (when he knows them) conceals their Errors, wants Charity to himself, and others; who possibly (if he had not conceal'd them) might have avoided those Errors, and gain'd the knowledge of Truth. In short then, I consider 1. That it is evident in the Apostle, that Anti∣christ was not come when St. Paul writ that E∣pistle; for he tells them,2. Thess. 2. 6. 7. That an Apostacy must first come, and that which hindred the Appear∣ing
of Antichrist, must be taken out of the way, (neither of which was done, when he writ that Epistle) Grotius saw this, and therefore (un∣less he would Contradict Truth and the Apo∣stle) he could not make Caius Antichrist, unless the Epistle were so dated, that it was writ be∣fore Caius appear'd. For this purpose, he tells us, That Paul writ the Epistle, AnnoSecundum Com∣putum Dionysij vulgat. 38. sed Ann. Christ. 40. secundum verum Com∣putum. Collegi (inquit Grotius) scriptam hanc Epistolam Anno Altero Caiani Principatus. Groti∣us in Prologo ad 2. ad Thess. Christi, 38. or, 40. in the Second year of Caius Caligula; and (he says) that although Caius was Emperor before St. Paul writ this Epistle, yet his Impiety did not appear till afterwards; He in the beginning of his Reign carrying himself like a good Prince. So that the main Hinge on which Grotius his Opinion turns, is this date of Paul's Epistle: For if it was not writ before Caius appeared, (or the year, 40.) then 'tis evident that Caius cannot be Antichrist, nor Grotius his Hypothe∣sis true. Now that this Epistle was writ in the Second year of Caius Caligula (which Grotius affirms) is so far from being true, that (by the Judgment and Consent of the most Learned Chronologers (Papists and Protestants) it was writ at least Seaven or Eight years after Caius was dead. Such, I mean, as the late Lord Pri∣mate of Ireland Dr.Usserius Annal. Part. posteriori. Aetat. Mundi. 7. ad Ann. 54. p. 667. in which year he says, and proves this E∣pistle to be writ. Vsher,Baronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. Christ. 53. §. 1. p. 408. In which year he says this Epistle was writ. Baronius, Ed. Simpson Chro∣nici Cathol. part. 7. ad Ann. 51. p. 36. hoc Ann. 2. ad Thess. Epist. scrip∣tam putat.Simpson,Corn. A Lapide in Argumento ad. 2. ad Thess. & in Chronolaxi Actuum Apostolorum ad Ann. Christ. 53. pag. 4. quo Ann. 2. ad Thess. Epist. esse Scriptam asse∣rit. A Lapide,Calvisius ad Ann. Christ. 50. hoc Ann. 2. ad Thess. scriptain vult. Calvisius, &c. all of which Authors (and many more) say, and prove, that it could not be writ before the year of Christ, 50. and some of them, that it was writ Anno Christi, 53. or, 54. So that the Learned Primate of Ireland (Second to none in
Exactness in Chronology) speaking of Grotius his date of this Epistle, says,Annal. part. poste∣riori, Aetate Mund. 7. ad Ann. Christ. 54. p. 668. Toto Coelo erravit Grotius, cum hanc Epistolam sub Caio exaratam existima∣bat. That Grotius erred exceedingly, when he said this Epistle was writ in the time of Caius Caligula. 2. But that it may evidently appear, that St. Paul did not write this Second Epistle to the Thessalonians Anno Christi. 40. (as Grotius says) but at least Ten or Eleven years after; let it be consider'd, 1. That it is a received Truth, that Paul was Converted Anno Christi. 34. 2. 'Tis certain in the Text, that Paul had been at1 Thess. 1. 5. Thess alonica, before he writ his First Epistle to them. The Query then will be, When he came to Thessalo∣nica: For if he had not been there, before the year 40. Grotius his Hypothesis will be evident∣ly untrue. And that he was not, will appear from that Account Scripture gives of him, af∣ter his Conversion; Thus, 1. He himself tells us, that immediately after his Conversion, he Gal. 1. 17.went into Arabia, and returned to Damas∣cus; And thenGal. 1. 18. after three years, he went to Jerusalem (which was Anno Christ. 37. and Gal. 2. 1.fourteen years after, he and Barnabas went up to Jerusalem (Anno Christ. 51.) 2. He and Barnabas (sent from Antioch) went to Jerusalem, and were at theAct. 15. 2. Council of the Apostles there; which Council was held, Anno Christ. 47. saysChron. Catholici, part. 7. ad Ann. 47. p. 34. Simpson; Ann. 48. as theCentur. 1. Lib. 2. cap. 9. p. 420. Magdebur∣genses think; Ann. 50. saysTheatro Hist. ad dictum Annum. Helvicus; Ann. 51. soTom. 1. ad Ann. 51. §. 6. Baronius,Chronol ad dictū Annum. p. 93. Funccius,In Chronotaxi, ad Ann 51. A Lapide, In Chronot sua ad dictum Annum.Bellarmine, &c. Anno Christ. 52. saysUsserius Annal. Part. 2. ad Ann. 52. pag. 660. Archbishop Vsher. Now let the Council be
held which of these years you please, it will ut∣terly overthrow Grotius his Hypothesis. For, 3. It is evident in the Text, that Paul at the time of that Synod, had not been at Thessalonica, and so had writ no Epistle to them; seeing he says,1. Thess. 1. 5. that he had been with them before he writ his First Epistle. That he had not been at Thessalonica at or before the time of the Coun∣cil, appears by what Luke says of him after the Synod: who tells us, that he went toAct. 15. 30. Anti∣och; then throughIbid. vers. 41. Syria and Cilicia; then to Act. 16. 1. 2.Derbe and Lystra, Circumcised Timothy, and took him along with him. Then he went throughIbid. vers. 6. Phrigia, Galatia, and Mysia, and so to Troas. And (in a Vision) being call'd toIbid. vers. 11. 12. Macedonia, he went to Neapolis and Philippi: and having pass'd through Amphipolis and Apol∣lonia, he came toAct. 17. 1. Thessalonica (the first time he ever was there; but, as yet, had never writ to them. Thence he went toIbid. vers. 10. Berea,Ibid. vers. 15. A∣thens, andAct. 18. 1. Corinth; At Corinth, Aquila and Priscilla (banish'd from Rome, as all Jews were, by Claudius) came to him: and this was the Ninth year of Claudius, (that is, Anno Christ. 51.) as Josephus, Orosius, Baronius, and all Chronolo∣gers testifie, as a very LearnedOrosium secuti sunt Omnes deinceps Chrono∣graphi; & Baronius, &c. Hen. Valesius in Notis ad Cap. 18. Lib. 2. Eusebij. p 37. Historian tells me: And he himself confesses, that Paul came into GreecePaulus Anno de∣mum Claudij. 9. venit in Graeciam. Ibid. Col. 2. B. Anno Claudij. 9. that is, Anno Christ. 51. And yet Paul had writ no Epistle to the Thessalonians, till Timothy (whom he left at Thessalonica) came to him into1. Thessal. 3. 2. 6. vide Hen. Holden The∣olog. Parisiensem in Ta∣bula Gestorum Pauli, in Calce N. Test. à se, cum Arnotat. Edit. Paris. 1660. p. 883. 884. ubi haec Omnia firmat. Greece, (as he himself tells us) so that by the Premisses, I
think it may, and does appear, that the First Epistle to the Thessalonians, was not only writ after the Synod of the Apostles, Act. 15. but af∣ter Paul had pass'd through and preach'd in all those Countries before mention'd, after he had been at Thessalonica, left Timothy there, came into Greece, met Aquila and Priscilla come from Rome, (which was Anno Christ. 51.) and Timothy was returned to him; then (and not till then) he writ his First Epistle to the Thessalonians; and therefore it is impossible Caius Caligula should be Antichrist; who was not come (as2. Thess. 2. 6. 7. St. Paul tells us) when he writ his Second Epistle, who yet was come and dead, at least Seaven or Eight years before he writ the first. 3. And Dr. Hammond confirms what I have said; who grants, that the Second Epistle to theDr. Hammond in the Prologue to his An∣notat. on the Second to the Thessalonians. Thessalonians was writ Anno Christ. 51. which was at least Seaven or Eight years after Caius (Grotius his Antichrist) was Baronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. Christ. 43. §. 1. In which year 'tis certain Caius died.dead and gone. So that (byDr. Hammond An∣not. p. 718. Col. 2. ex Pro∣fesso proves that Caius could not be Antichrist. Dr. Ham∣mond's Principles) Gretius his Hypothesis is ut∣terly overthrown, and Caius the Emperor can∣not possibly be that Antichrist St. Paul speaks of; who was not come, when he writ that E∣pistle. 2. And by the same. Principles, Dr. Hammond has evidently Confuted his own Opinion, and Ex∣cluded Simon Magus from all possibility of be∣ing Antichrist. For that Doctor expresly af∣firms two things; 1. That the Second Epistle to the Thessalonians, was writ, in the year of
our blessed Saviour, 51. 2. That then Anti∣christ (when that Epistle was writ) was not come or reveal'd: which two things being granted, (as they must, for the Doctor says the one, and the Apostle the other) it evident∣ly follows, that Simon Magus neither was, nor could be that Antichrist the Apostle speaks of in that Epistle. For it is certain, that Simon Ma∣gus was come, and his Heresie and Prodigious Impiety discovered many years before. For, 1. It is certain, that when Peter and John were sent toAct. 8. Samaria, they met Simon Magus there; who though he had beenIbid. vers. 13. baptiz'd by Philip the Deacon, was no better for it, and Impiously offer'dVers. 18. Money to purchase Pow∣er to give the Holy Ghost; Peter (cursing both They Money perish with thee, vers. 20.him and his Money) told him, That he was in theIbid. vers. 23. Gall of Bitterness, and the Bond of Ini∣quity. 2. Now this was done, in the year of our blessed SaviourBaronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. 35. §. 9. Ita etiam Hen. Holden, Dr. Theol. in Tabulâ Gestorum Petri, in Cal∣ce N. Test. cum Annot. suis Edit. Paris. 1660. p. 881. 35. which was Fifteen or Sixteen years before, the Second Epistle to the Thessalonians was writ, or Antichrist come and revealed, (according to Dr. Hammond's own Computation) And therefore it is impos∣sible that Simon Magus should be that Anti∣christ, the Apostle speaks of. For that from the year. 35. till after. 51. (for Sixteen years together) he should not discover, but conceal his Impiety, (who was a Magician and an Im∣pious Villain before, and then declared by Peter, to be in the Gall of Bitterness, and Bond of Iniquity) is utterly Incredible. Sure
I am, thatMagus cum inde recessissent Apostoli, contra eos obniti, corúmque Do∣ctrinae adversari non dubi∣tarct: & qui olim Sama∣ritas dementarat, Judaeos iisdem Artibus aggressus, quos Apostolis Insensos videat, se esse Dei Filium, illis Suadere Conatus est. Baronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. 35. §. 20. Baronius and &c. I∣táque hinc Simon Magus aemulatione percitus, contra Apostolos, corúmque Do∣ctrinam se Armavit. Ni∣cephor. Histor. Eccles. Lib. 2. cap. 6. p. 141. Nicephorus, (to name no more) tell us, That after the Apostles were gone from Samaria, Simon Magus set him∣self against our blessed Saviour and his Apostles, (whom he thought only better Conjurers then himself) and by his Magick and Diabolical Arts seduced many Samaritans and Jews, and made them believe that he was the Son of God, &c. So far was he from Concealing his Impie∣ty, till after the writing of that Second Epistle to the Thessalonians, and the year. 51. That by all the Magick and Malice he had, he publickly seduc'd both Jews and Gentiles, long before that time; and so could not be that great Antichrist St. Paul speaks of. 2. But I neither shall, nor need bring any further proof of this Particular, (that Simon Magus had before the year. 51. dis∣covered himself to be an Adversary to our blessed Saviour, and his Apostles and Christia∣nity) because Dr. Hammond himself (though in Contradiction and Evident Confutation of his own Hypothesis) doth both Confess, and ex professo, prove it. For he tells us—Dr. Hammond in his Annotat. on 2. Thess. 2. 3. Lit. E. p. 719. Col. 1. That af∣ter he was baptiz'd, Act. 8. he went on in his way of deceiving the People by Sorceries, as appears, by his desiring to buy the Power of working Miracles from the Apostles, and being deny'd that, Soon after he set up, and opposed himself against Christ, and accordingly is here call'd , the Adver∣sary, &c. where Dr. Hammond tells us, That soon after Simon's being with the Apostles at Samaria, he discovered himself to be an Adversary to Christ,
our blessed Saviour. Now 'tis certain, that his meeting the Apostles at Samaria, was AnnoBaronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. Christ. 35. §. 9. Christ. 35. and so (by Dr. Hammond's Compu∣tation, who says that Epistle (the Second to the Thessalonians) was writ Ann. 51. that is, Fifteen or Sixteen years before Antichrist came, and therefore it is impossible Simon should be that Antichrist Paul speaks of, who was not come when he writ that Epistle, unless you will say, (which is highly irrational) that Antichrist came Fifteen or Sixteen years, before St. Paul says he was to come. 3. Nor is this all; for the same Learned and ReverendDr. Hammond An∣notat. on 2. Thess. 2. 3. li∣terad. p. 718. Col. 2. Doctor tells us, out ofEusebius Hist. Ec∣clesiast. lib. 2. cap. 12. In the Latin; but, 13. in the Greek. Eusebius; That Simon Magus came to Rome, in the Beginning of Claudius his Reign; where he did such Miracles by the help of the Devil, that he was taken for a God, and had a Statue e∣rected for him. And almost all the Samiritans, and some of other Nations confess'd him to be the first and principal God, and worshipped him with all sorts of Sacrifices, &c. These are his words; by which it is Evident (in the Doctors Opini∣on) that Simon was at Rome, In the Beginning of Claudius his Reign, and sufficiently revealed to be an Adversary to our blessed Saviour and the Gospel, and prevailed so far, that (asHierome De Scri∣ptor. Eccles. in Petro. Hie∣rome tells us) Peter went to Rome, Anno Claudij. 2. (which was Anno Christ. 44.) to oppose Simon and defend the Gospel. Now all know, that Claudius began his Reign, AnnoBaronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. 43. §. 1. Christ. 43. which was at least Seaven or Eight years (in Dr. Hammond's own Computation) before the
Second Epistle to the Thessalonians was writ, or Antichrist come; And therefore Simon Magus could not be that Antichrist Paul speaks of, who was not come or reveal'd, when that Epi∣stle was writ; whereas Simon was both come and reveal'd some years before. 3. Many things are said of Antichrist in Scripture, which cannot be applied to Caius, or Simon Ma∣gus, with any truth or probability. 1. Anti∣christ was (by usurpation) to have a Supream Power and Authority, (as ourVide Hen Holden. Dr. Parisiens. in cap. 13. vers. 1. Apoc. vidi Besti∣am; i. e. Antichristum, ha∣bentem Cap. 7. i. e. Autho∣ritatem Supremam, & Cor∣nua. 10. id est, potestatem Maximam. Vid. Grotium in dictum locum. Adversaries confess) and should make war with, and perse∣cute the Servants of Christ, and (as to killing the Body) overcomeApoc. 13. 7. them, till he was drunk Apoc. 17. 6.ith the Blood of the Saints. This neither Caius nor Simon Magus did. Caius (though he had a Supream Power) was no persecutor of Christians; much less so far, as to be drunk with their Blood. NeroEuseb. Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 25. , &c. Nero Rom. Imperat. primus Hostis, &c. Ita Tertullianus—Neronem primum in sectam nostram gladio ferocisse. Euseb. in Chronico ad Ann. Christ. 70. was the first Roman Emperor who persecuted Christians; three and twenty years after CaiusCaius died Anno Christ. 43. and the first Persecution under Nero was Anno Christ. 66. Ba∣ronius Tom. 1. ad Ann. 43. §. 1. & ad Ann. 66. §. 9. was deed: And as for Simon Magus (a despicable and beggarly Magician) he never had any Power of the Sword, nor ever did, or could make War a∣gainst the Christians, much less overcome them, and be drunk with their blood. 2. But (that I may not trouble the Reader, nor my self, with any more Particulars) I say (and think it an E∣vident Truth) that there is nothing said in Scri∣pture, or in the Works of the Fathers, or in any Writings of Ecclesiastical Authors, for Six∣teen hundred years after our blessed Saviour,
from which it may but probably be concluded, that Caius the Emperor, or Simon Magus, was that great Antichrist mention'd by St. Paul and St. John; But  on the contrary, it does appear both by Scripture and the Consent of Christendom, for Sixteen hundred years, that neither of the two was, or possibly could be that great Antichrist. For, 1. It does appear (by what is above said) that what St. Paul says of Antichrist, 2. Thess. 2. cannot be meant of Caius or Simon Magus; because St. Paul in that place says expresly, that when he writ that Epistle, the Man of Sin, and Son of Perdition was not come and reveal'd. And yet that Epistle being writ (as Dr. Hammond Confesseth) Anno Christ. 51. Caius was both come and dead at least Sea∣ven or Eight years before the year. 51. and therefore could not possibly be that Anti∣christ who was not come till after it. And for Simon Magus, he was (as Dr. Hammond grants and proves) both come and reveal'd as many years (as Caius was dead) before St. Paul writ that Epistle; and consequently before Antichrist was come or revealed. And so he (who was come and reveal'd) could not be that Antichrist, who (as St. Paul assures us) was not then come or re∣vealed.
2. St. Paul elsewhere gives us some Chara∣cters of Antichrist, and his Adherents; as 1. Tim. 4. 1. 2. 3.men giving heed to seducing spirits, speaking lies in Hypocrisie, forbidding to marry, and com∣manding to abstain from meats, which God had created to be received, &c. Where I observe, 1. That in the former place, (but now2. Thess. 2. 3. spoken of) he told the Thessalonians, that an Apostasie must precede the coming of Antichrist; and he tells us, what kind of Apostasie it must be;. 1. Tim. 4. 1. A departing or fal∣ling from the Faith. 2. That these two Maks of Antichrist (forbidding marriage, and com∣manding to abstain from meats) are such as none but the Pope can pretend to; who so severely forbids the marriage of the Clergy (Secular and Regular) that it is aGravius peccat Sa∣cerdos, si matrimonium contrahat, quam si forni∣cetur, & domi concubinam foveat. Vid. Costeri En∣chiridion, cap. 15. Pro∣pos. 9. p. 459. Edit. 1587. greater sin (with them) for a Priest to marry (though God Approves and Commands it) in such as otherwise have not the gift of Conti∣nence) then it is for him to commit Fornication, and keep a Concubine. Nay they say, that a Priests marriage isHaereticorum Mi∣nistri Sacerdotium Incestis Nuptiis foedant; quae non sunt Nuptiae, sed Pejora Omnibus Adulteriis Sacri∣legia. Idem ibid. p. 460. Incestuous, Sacrilegi∣ous, and worse then All Adulteries. Nor is this Abominable Doctrine, the Opinion of any private Doctor only, but is approved as Orthodox, bySee the Appro∣bations of Coster's En∣chiridion in the Begin∣ning. Edit. Colon. 1587. & Edit. Turnoni, 1591. Where we have, 1. The Approbation of the U∣niversity of Mentz; and they say, they had read it diligently; Dignissi∣múmque judicasse quod in publicum prodiret, mani∣búsque Studiosorum Assi∣duè tereretur. 2. The University of Colon: Approbat, Omnibúsque ve∣ritatis amantibus Pluri∣mum Profuturum testatur. 3. The University of Lo∣van:—Dignum judicat, quod adversus pestilentes no∣stri Temporis Sectariorum errores, Catholicorum ma∣nibus teratur. 4. The Di∣vines of Triers:—En∣chiridion Costeri, quia & eruditè & Orthodoxè Per Omnia Scriptum, Summa Cum Vtilitate legi possit. several Vniversities. So that in both these [forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats] what God in his Word expresly approves, the Pope condemns; and what God Commands, he Impiously Contradicts; and so evidently
proves himself to be, That Man of Sin, who Exalts himself above all that is called God. 3. What the Apostle in this Epistle speaks of the Apostasie and Antichrist which follow∣ed, is not of things past or then in being, but of things to come afterwards. For he expresly says—1. Tim. 4. 1. . That in the Latter Times some should depart from the Faith, &c. Nei∣the Apostasie nor Antichrist were then come; but afterwards, in the Latter times, should come. 4. Now he writ this Epistle, as some So Ed. Simpson Chronol. Cathol. Part. 7. ad Ann. 54. p. 37.think, Anno Christ. 54. or as someSo Baronius An∣nal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. 57. Num. 189. so Ger. Mer∣cator Atlant. Minoris Arnhemij, 1621. p. 676. In Itinerario Pauli. And so Corn. A Lapide in Chronotaxi, ad Ann. 57. others (and they far more) Ann. 57. or (as the most ExactJac. Usserius Ar∣machanus Annal. Part. 2. ad Ann. Christ. 65. pag. 688. Chronologer) Anno Christ. 65. Now let my Adversaries chuse which Compu∣tation they will, for the date and time of writing this Epistle; let it be (if they please) the year 54. which is furthest from Truth, yet most favoura∣ble to their Opinion. I say, admit that this first Epistle to Timothy was writ by St. Paul, Ann. 54. yet it will appear by the Premisses, 1. That Anti∣christ was not then come, nor revealed, because St. Paul says so. 2. And therefore, that neither Caius nor Simon Magus could be Antichrist; Be∣cause Caius was both come and dead ten or eleven years before; and Simon Magus was come, and his Heresie and Impieties revealed (as Dr. Hammond grants and proves) long before that time.
3. AfterIn his Second to Tim. 3. 1. 2. 3. &c. which Epistle was writ, says Ba∣ronius, Ann. Christ. 59. Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. 59. num. 19. And Arch∣bishop Vsher says it was writ Anno Christ. 66. An∣nal. Part. 2. ad dictum Annum, p. 691. this, St. Paul speaks of this Apo∣stasy from the Faith; but still as of a thing not yet come, but to come in future2. Tim. 3. 1. times; , in the last times; so that if St. Paul say true, that great Aposta∣sie (which was to2. Thess. 2. 3. preceed the coming of Antichrist, was not come when he writ that Epistle, which was (as the Learned Primate of Ireland Dr. Vsher thinks) Anno Christ. 66. or (as Baronius) Anno Christ. 59. And there∣fore it is impossible that Caius or Simon Ma∣gus should be Antichrist, both come, and their Villanies revealed long before. 4. St. Peter writ his Second Epistle a little be∣fore his Martyrdom; for so he himself says —2. Pet. 1. 14. , velox est de∣posito tabernaculi mei. Versio Vulgata. Knowing that I must shortly put off this Tabernacle, (or that my death hastens) now an ExactJac. Usserius Ar∣mach. Annal. Part. 2. ad Ann. 67. p. 691. vide Ly∣ranum in Glossa ad Pro∣logum Hieronm. in. 7. Epist. Canonicas, & Hi∣eonymum, De Illust. Eccles. Doctoribus, c. 1. Chronologer tells me (and proves) that he died Ann. 67. and writ this Idem Usserius ibid. p. 691.Epistle Anno Christ. 66. I do know that someSimpson Chron. Cathol. Part. 7. ad Ann. 67. p. 44. say he writ it Anno Christ. 67. and Baronius saysBaronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. 69. §. 1. he writ it Anno 69. But, 2. which of those years soever it was writ in, the great Apostasie (which preceeded the coming of Antichrist) was future and after∣wards to come. So he himself tell us,2. Pet. 2. 1. But there were false Prophets among the People, even so () there shall be false Teachers a∣mong you, who privily shall bring in damna∣ble Heresies, &c. These false Prophets and the great Apostasie were (when he writ that Epistle) future and to come. And there∣fore
'tis certain Caius or Simon Magus could not be Antichrist. For if it was writ in the year. 66. Caius was come, dead and gone three and twenty years before; and Simon Magus his Heresies and Impieties publickly reveal'd and known, as is afore prov'd, even by Dr. Hammond himself. 5. In the Revelation, St. John does more fully describe Antichrist; ThatRev. 13. 1. he rose out of the Sea, with seaven Heads and ten Horns, and on his Horns ten Crowns, &c. That he should make WarRev. 17. 6. with the Saints, overcome them, and be drunk with their blood; That his Seat should beRev. 17. 18. Rome, mystically, orRev. 11. 8. spiritually call'd Egypt, Sodom, and Babylon; That tenRev. 17. 12. 13. Kings should give their Power to that Beast, aid and assist him in his Tyranny and Im∣pieties; That those Kings should at last forsake him, and utterly destroyIbidem vers. 16. 17. him, and burn and utterly destroyRev. 18. 2. 21. Babylon (or Rome) his Seat, never to be inhabited any more: Which is such a Description of the great Antichrist, as never can (with any truth or probability) be attributed to Caius Caligula or Simon Magus. 2. But that which here, I more particularly press, is, 1. That St. John in the Revelation speaks of Antichrist, (not as past, or present, but) as future, and yet to come, when he writ that Book (as is evident in the Text, and is, and must be confess'd. 2. And it is as certain, and generally agreed upon, that he writ the Revelation inRev. 1. 9. Pat∣mos
(whither he was banish'd byJohannes Apoca∣lypsin viderat, pene sub nostro seculo, ad Finem Do∣mitiani Imperij. Irenaeus advers. Haeres. l. 5. p. 259. Col. 2. Edit. Erasmi. So Eusebius Hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 23. where he cites Clemens Alexandr. for the same purpose. So the Acta Martyrij Timothei, apud Photium Biblioth. Cod. 254. p. 1402. 1403. So Orosius Hist. l. 7. c. 10. 11. p. 598. And so Hie∣rom, de Doct. Ecclesiae Illust. c. 9. ad Ann. 97. Domiti∣an) AnnoBaronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. 97. §. 1. Christ. 97. The Premisses be∣ing granted, (as they ought and must; be∣ing built upon better Authority, then any is, or can be for the contrary, 1. That An∣tichrist was future and to come, when St. John writ the Revelation. 2. That he writ it Anno Christ. 97. It will evidently follow, that it was impossible, that either Caius the Emperor, or Simon Magus, should be that greatThe Revelation was writ Anno Christ. 97. Cai∣us died Ann. 43. (Baroni∣us Annal. Tom. 1. ad An. 43. §. 1.) and so was dead 54. years before Anti∣christ came. Antichrist. Caius being dead four and fifty, and SimonSimon Magus died Anno Christ. 68. (Ita Ba∣ronius, ex Eusebio, Epi∣phanio, &c. Tom. Annal. 1. ad Annum Christ. 68. §. 17. 18.) which was. 29. years before the Revela∣tion was writ, or Anti∣christ come, if St. John says true. Magus nine and twenty years before St. John writ the Revela∣tion, and so before Antichrist was to come. I know that the Reverend Dr.Dr. Hammond in his Premonition to his Annotat. on the Revela∣tion, p. 906. & 907. Hammond indeavours to prove, that John was in Pat∣mos, and writ the Revelation there in the time, and about the ninth year of Claudius, which was Anno Christ. 51. which was six and forty years before the time I have as∣signed for St. Johns being in Patmos, and writing the Revelation. Now for his Opi∣nion, Dr. Hammond neither has, nor pre∣tends to any Testimony of Antiquity, save only that ofEpiphanius Hae∣resi. 51. § 12. & 33. Epiphanius; who in that particular is miserably mistaken, (as he is in many more) as isBaronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Annum. 99. §. 2. Dionysius Petavius in Notis ad Epiphan. Haeresin. 51. Num. 33. & Baronius Ibid. ad An. 93. §. 9. D. Blondellus de Sybillis, lib. 2. cap. 2. Possevin. in Apparat. verbo Johannes Apostolus, p. 814. &c confess'd and prov'd by Learned men, and they such, who have a due Reverence for the Fathers, and particu∣larly
for Epiphanius. 2. That St. John should be banish'd, and write the Revelation under Claudius, (which only Dr. Hammond andGrot. in Apoca∣lyp. 1. 9. Grotius say (out of Epiphanius) to give some Colour to their new and contra∣dictory Hypothesis) is evidently against the concurrent Sense and Testimonies of Anci∣ent and Modern Authors. For besides Ire∣naeus, Clemens Alexandrinus, Eusebius, Acta Martyrij Timothei apud Photium, Hierome, and Orosius (before Cited) Johan.Joh. Malela in Do∣mitiano MS. in Biblio∣theca Bodleiana Oxon. pag. 161. alias 171. Malela An∣tiochenus, Haimo Hist. lib. 3. cap. 15. pag. 55.Haymo,Arethas in Apo∣calyps. cap. 1. 9. Arethas, AdoAdo Viennensis in Chronico, ad Annum Christ. 84. apod Lau∣rent. de la Barre, p. 493. Vi∣ennensis (and many more) constantly say; That John was banish'd into Patmos, not by Claudius, but by Domitian, and writ his Revelation there. 3. But I shall not go about any further proof of this; For Dr. Hammond has saved me the Labour, and confess'd it; For it is certain from the Text, that Antipas had suffer'd Martyrdom, before John writ the Revelation; John himself telling usRev. 2. 13. so, Thou hast not deny'd my faith, when Antipas my faithful Martyr was slain among you. So that 'tis Evident, Antipas had suffer'd Mar∣tyrdom before John writ his Revelation. Now Antipas suffer'd, and was slain by Domitian, in the Second Persecution of the Christians, which was Anno Domitiani. 10. Christi. 92. So the Old RomanMartyrologium Romanum ad diem Apr. 11. Martyrology, andBaronis Annot. ad Martyrologium Ro∣man. ad dictum diem A∣pril. 11. & Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. Christ. 93. §. 9. Baronius assures us; and Dr.Dr. Hammond in Annotat. ad Apocal. 2. 13. lit. 1. pag. 927. Col. 1. Hammond confesses it, That Antipas suffer'd Martyrdom under Domitian. Whence it evidently fol∣lows,
That St. John speaking of Antipas his Martyrdom, as a thing past when he writ his Revelation (and that in Domitian's time) he could not write it in Claudius his time, who was deadMoritur Claudius Ann. Christ. 55. seu 56. Baronius ad An. Christ. 56. §. 42. & Domitianus Imperium adiit Anno Christ. 84. Baronius ad dictum Annum. §. 1. And hence it appears, that Claudius died either 84 55 29 Twenty nine, or, 84 56 28 Twenty eight years before Domitian came to the Empire. eight or nine and twenty years before Domitian came to the Empire. So that Antipas being put to death, in Domitian's time, (as Dr. Hammond affirms) and St. John in the Revelation, mentioning his Mar∣tyrdom as a thing past, when he writ; 'tis Evident, that he writ that Book after the death of Antipas, and so in, or after Domitian's time, and not in the time of Claudius. 6. St. John in his first1 Joh. 2. 18. & cap. 4. 3. Epistle, speaks of An∣tichrist as then to come, when he writ that E∣pistle. It is the last time (saith he) and as you have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now there are many Antichrists, &c. Here two things (I conceive) are Evident; 1. That , nunc, when St. John writ this Epistle; there were many Antichrists; that is, many Nunc multisunt An∣tichristi  qui unum illum praecedunt, it érque illi parant: . Oecumenius in 1. Johan. Epistol.  p. 573. C. D. So Bede, E∣stius, &c. in. 1. Joh. 2. 18. 80 Gagnaeius. Ibid. &c.false Prophets and Hereticks forerunners of Antichrist, who made way for him. 2. And that the great Antichrist, was to. Idem Ibidem. Nunc multi sunt Antichristi; qui Omnes Maximo illi Anti∣christo In Finem Secul; Vanturo, qusi suo Capiti, Testimonium creddunt. Be∣da in. 1. Joh. 2. 18. come, when St. John writ. This Oecumenius, Bede, Estius, and generally all Commentators (Ancient and Modern, Prote∣stant and Papist) which I have yet met with, constantly affirm. 'Tis true, that when St. John says1. Joh. 4. 3. . afterward, that Antichrist was Now in the World already: they truly Explain it, that the meaning is, That he is now in the
World; NotJam in Mund, est; . Oecu∣menius Ibidem , p. 587. D. personally, but in respect to his Forerunners (false Prophets and Hereticks) who make way for him. I take it then for a cer∣tain truth, that when St. John writ this Epi∣stle, The Antichrist, or (as Ve∣nerable Bede calls him) Maximus ille Anti∣christus, was future, and to come. And (which is something strange) Grotius confirms what I have said (which makes much for mine, but little for his purpose) For, 1. He grants, that this Text (1. Joh. 2. 18.) speaks ofVide Grotium in 1. Joh. 2. 18. Antichrist, as future, and to come. For though the word here (and cap. 4. vers. 3.) be ; in the Present Tense, yet Grotius con∣fesses, that it must be taken in the, est sono praesens, sensu futurum. Grotius in 1. Joh. 4. 3. future; Veniet Antichristus, Antichrist will come. 2. He says, that amongst those many Antichrists St. John here speaks of, there shall be oneInter Antichristos, unus futurus erat Caeteris Eminentior, ad quem Lo∣cus. 1. Joh. 4. 3. pertinet, is vero non alius fuit quam Barchochebas. Grotius in 1. Joh. 2. 18. more Eminent, which he says was Barcoche∣bas, who appeared not (he says) till the Empe∣ror Adrian's time (which wasApparuit Barcho∣chebas Ann. Christ. 130. Adrian. 11. apud Baro∣nium, Annal. Tom. 2. ad Ann. 130. Num. 4. 5. long after St. John writ this Epistle). And he further says, (in Confirmation of what is aforesaid)Grotius in. 1. Joh. 4. 3. Talis Prophetia (he speaks of the Propheties of false Christs, and Prophets) viam struit Magno Ipsi & Eximio An∣tichristo. That the false Christs, Hereticks, and false Pro∣phets, (which John calls Antichrists) do make way for that Great and Eminent Antichrist. I take it then for certain, (and confess'd by Gro∣tius) that the great Antichrist was not come, when St. John writ this Epistle. The next thing to be in∣quired after, is, When this Epistle was writ; for if it was writ after Caius Caligula, and Simon Magus were dead, then it will be undeniably Evident,
that neither of them could be that great Antichrist, of whom St. John speaks; who (when he writ this Epistle) was future, and to come. Now here it is to be considered, 1. That 'tis a common and received Opinion a∣mongst Learned men, that St. John writ this Epistle AnnoSo Baronius An∣nal. Tom. 1. ad Annum Christ. 99. Num. 7. Bart. Gavantus Comment. in Rubricas, Breviarij Rom. Sect. 5. p. 84. Christ. 99. or at least afterJohannes vero nul∣lum post Evangelium & E∣pistolas Scripsit; Scilicet post mortem Domitiani; quia reversus de Exilio invenit Ecclesiam per Haereticos perturbatam, & tunc, Scri∣psit Evangelium & Episto∣las contra Ipsos. Lyranus in Glossa ad Prologum Hieronymi in septem E∣pist. Canonicas. the death of Domitian (which was Anno Christ. 95.) So Baronius, Gavantus, Lyranus, (in the places cited) and many others. Now if this Compu∣tation be true, (as in the Opinion of very ma∣ny Learned men it is) then Grotius his Antichrist (the Emperor Caius Caligula, who died Ann Christ. 42. was dead seaven and fifty years be∣fore John writ this Epistle; and therefore sea∣ven and fifty years before Antichrist came; for St. John says, he was future, and to come when he writ. And for Simon Magus (Dr. Hammond's Antichrist) it isBaronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. 68. Num. 16. 17. &c. certain, he died Anno Christi 68. and so One and thirty years before Anti∣christ was come. 2. But be this as it will; I shall not (though I might) stand upon it; but take the Computation which bothuto Scriptam hanc Epistolam non multo ante Excidium Hierosolymorum. Grotius Annot. in. 1. Johannis, In Principio. Grotius, and Dr.This Epistle seems to have been writ A Little Before the great destru∣ction which befell the Jews, &c. Dr. Hammond in his Prologue to his Annot. on the first of John. Hammond ap∣prove; for they both agree in this, that St. John writ this Epistle a little before the destruction of Jerusalem; and (in the places cited) indea∣vour to prove it. 2. This being granted; it is further certain, that the Excidium Hierosoly∣morum, was in the second year of Vespasian; that is, Anno Christ. 72. That this is so,Josephus de Bello Judaico, lib. 7. cap. 47. p. 969. Josephus, Eusebius in Chro∣nico ad Ann. 72.Eusebius,Usserius Annal. part. 2. p. 698. Jac. Vsserius Armachanus,Baronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. 72. Num. 20.
Baronius, &c. assure us. 3. And hence it evi∣dently follows, That both Caius Caligula and Simon Magus were dead before the year. 72. when Antichrist (as St. John assures us) was not come. Caligula being dead thirty, and Si∣mon Magus four years before that time. By the Premisses (I believe) it may, and does ap∣pear, that in Scripture, Antichrist (the great Anti∣christ) is never spoken of, but as future and to come: and therefore it is impossible by Scripture, (and there is no other Medium can do it) to prove that Antichrist was come, in any part of that time in which Scripture was writ. 2. And as the Apostles believed and writ, that in their times, (even in St. John's, who livedHierom. de Illust. Eccles. Doctoribus, c. . says St. John liv'd. 68. years after the Passion of our blessed Saviour, to which if we add. 34. (the year of the Passion) it will appear that St. Joh. died Anno Christ. 102. Trajan. 2. vel. 3. longest) Antichrist was not come. So the Fathers, and Ecclesiastical Writers after them, for about a thousand years generally, (if not universally) speak of Antichrist as still fu∣ture, and (in their several times) to come. I know that someVid. Baronium Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann. Christ. 70. Num. 3. 4. ex Augustino, De Civitate Dei, lib. 20. c. 19. where he says, That by those words (2. Thess. 2. 7.) Mysterium Iniquitatis jam operatur; Neronem volue∣rit Intelligi: cujus jam fa∣cta velut Antichristi vide∣bantur. So Athanasius tells us, that Constantius (the Arian Emperor) acted all those things, which are spoken of Antichrist, but was not that Anti∣christ spoken of in Scrip∣ture, (for he was future, and to come, says Atha∣nasius) Quid Igitur Hic (Constantius) Quod An∣tichristi Est, Omisit? aut Quid Ille ubi Venerit, plus committere poterit? Atha∣nasius Epistola ad Solit. vitam Agentes. p. 236. anciently (and wildly) thought, that Nero was Antichrist, and as much might be said for him, as Grotius has said for Caligula) but they said, that he was to rise again, and come Sub Seculi Finem, and Act as Antichrist. But I never yet read or heard of any, besides the Learned Grotius and Dr. Hammond, who (in Sixteen hun∣dred years after our blessed Saviour) ever seriously affirm'd, that Caligula, or Simon Magus was Anti∣christ: The two Learned Persons (before menti∣on'd) are the first, and they Contradict each other, themselves, the received Opinion of the Christian World, and gratifie Rome; whilst they indeavour
(which neither they, nor any body else can do) to free the Pope from being the great Antichrist. For if either Caligula, or Simon Magus (who have been dead this Sixteen hundred years and more) be that Antichrist, then (unless you will have two or three such Antichrists) The Pope is secure, and (wrong'd by those who call him so) miscall'd An∣tichrist. Sed salva res est, there is little danger from such extravagant Opinions; they will nei∣ther be beneficial to the Pope, nor prejudicial to his Adversaries, to believe and prove him to be Antichrist. That Caligula, or Simon Magus, was that great Antichrist, none, or (if any) very few believe. The Reformed Churches say, that the Pope is Antichrist, and have great reason to say so: ma∣ny of the Propheties, and Predictions of him in Scri∣pture, being now actually fulfilled, and so the truth of the Prediction made Evident, and easie to be understood by the Event. On the other side the Po∣pish Party say, that Antichrist is not yet come; and so neither Party does believe Caligula or Simon Magus to be Antichrist; because it is a Novel and Apo∣cryphal Hypothesis (take which of the two you will) without truth or probability. Sure I am, that the Reasons those two Learned Persons bring for their Opinions, are evidently Illogical and In∣consequent. For, 1. If Grotius his proofs for Caligula, be cogent and concluding, then Dr. Hammonds for Simon Magus are Inconsequent; and if Dr. Hammonds be Good, those of Grotius are not. Whence 'tis evident, that all the proofs of the one Party, (at least) are Impertinent, and
to prove his Position Insufficient. 2. But indeed all the Reasons they both bring, to prove their se∣veral Positions, are (as I said) Illogical and Incon∣sequent. That this may not be gratis dictum; I say, 1. That both their proofs are built and rely upon the same ground; they take (not all, but) only some of the Characters and Marks of Antichrist which the Apostles give him in Scripture. 2. They indeavor to accommodate and apply those Marks to Caligula, or Simon Magus; and think they make it appear, that such Marks are really found in Caligula or Simon Magus. 3. And hence they Argue and Conclude thus— Such Marks of Antichrist are to be found in Cali∣gula, or Simon Magus: Ergo, They (the one of them at least) are that Antichrist: Or (which is all one) Magus and Antichrist agree in some things; Ergo, They are the same. 4. Now such Arguing is miserably Illogical and In∣consequent; and no better then this—A Duck and a Goose do agree in many things (each of them has one Head, two Legs, two Eyes, a flat Bill or Beak, and sometimes Feathers of the same co∣lour, &c.) Ergo, A Duck is a Goose. Or thus —Sempronius and Titius agree in many things (they have the same Father and Mother, Romans both, born in the same Hour, (being Twins) bread at the same School, both good Scholars, &c. Ergo, Titius is Sempronius. The Reasons those Learned men bring to prove their several Antichrists, prove no more then those I have given; that is, just nothing.
5. The reason of such Inconsequence, in such Arguments, is this; Young Sophisters in the University can tell you, out. Porphyrius in Isagog. c. 2. §. 38▪ of Porphyrie, Aristotle, and their Scholiasts) That every indivi∣dual person or thing, is made up, and does con∣sist of such Properties and Qualifications, Quorum Collectio nunquam in aliquo alio Eadem esse potest. It is certain, that a Collection of all the Properties and Qualifications which Constitute any Indivi∣dual person, cannot be in any other person whom∣soever; though it is as certain, that some of them may. Now had Grotius or Dr. Hammond taken a Collection of all the Characters and Marks of An∣tichrist, given him in Scripture, and made it ap∣pear, that all those Marks had been really found in Caius Caligula, or Simon Magus, their proofs had been Logical and Consequent, (This they nei∣ther did, nor could) But their accommodation and applying only some of the Marks of the Beast, to Caius or Magus, and thence Concluding that they were Antichrist, such deductions are evi∣dently Illogical and Inconsequent. And so much the more Inconsequent, because even those marks of Antichrist which they indeavour to prove to be really in Caligula or Simon Magus, never were in either of them, in that sense and extent, in which they were (and since his coming are) to be found in Antichrist. If any man censure me (as may be some will) for contradicting those two Learned Persons (Dr. Hammond and Groti∣us) all the Apology I shall make, (for it needs none) is only this; It is as lawful for me to
contradict them, in defence of evident truth; as it was for them to contradict each other, and the Christian World, in defence of a manifest Error. 9.Observ. 9. The Pope in this his Impious and Lying Bull, declares the Queen to be (what he really was, and she was not) aElizabetha praeten∣sa Angliae Regina, Flagi∣tiorum Serva. Bulla. §. 1. Slave of Sin, aDeclaramus praedi∣ctam Elizabeth Haereticam & Hereticorum fautricem. §. 3. Heretick, and a favourer of Hereticks: And then (with a prodigious Antichristian Pride and Impiety) pro∣nounceth his Penal Sentence against her, of Dam∣nation, Excommunication, Deprivation, &c. And here it is further to be observed; 1. What this Papal Power is (and whence he has it) which he pretends to inable and authorize him, to sit Judge and pass such Damnatory Senten∣ces against Princes and Supream Powers, for Heresie. 2. What that Heresie is, and who the Hereticks, who (by the Pope) are so severely damn'd for it. 3. What those punishments are, which they pre∣tend they may, and actually do Inflict upon such Hereticks. 1. For the first, Pius the Fifth, in the begin∣ning of this Impious Bull, tells us; that this Pa∣pal Power is Divine. For he says—Christus Soli Petro, Petríque Successori, Roma∣no Pontifici, in Potestatis, plenitudine Ecclesiam tra∣didit Gubernandam. Hunc Vnum super Omnes Gentes & Omnia Regna Princi∣pem Constituit, qui Evel∣lat, Destruat, Dissipet, Disperdat, &c. In dictae Bullae Principio. That our blessed Saviour did Constitute Peter and his Successors, the Popes of Rome, Princes over all Nations, and Kingdoms, with a Plenitude of Power, to Pull up, Dissipate, and Destroy, &c. Thus he, and so others, in their Damnatory Bulls; but with some variati∣on; and (if it were possible) in such words as are more Extravagant, Erroneous, and Impious. I
shall only Instance in one; Paulus the Fourth, who was next Predecessor (save one) to Pius the Fifth, who in his BullHereticorum, Schis∣maticorum corúmque f∣torum poenae. That's the Title of the Bull. against Hereticks and Schisma∣ticks and their Favourers, expresses his power to damn them, thus—Romanus Portifex, qui Dei & Domini nostri Jesu Christi Vices-gerit in terris, & super Gentes & Regna, plenitudinem Pote∣statis, obtinet, Omnésque Judicat, à Nemine in Se∣culo Judicandus, &c. In Bulla. 19. Paul. 4. Bullarij Rom. Tom. 1. p. 602. E∣dit. Rom. 1638. The Pope of Rome here in Earth is Vicar, or Vice-Roy of God and our Lord Je∣sus Christ, and has Plenitude of Power over Nations and Kingdoms, and is Judge of All men, and not to be Judged by any Man in the World. And that you may see, that they are not asham'd to pretend to, and u∣surp such an Antichristian Power (for none but2. Thess. 2. 4. Antichrist ever pretended to it). This Bull of Pope Paul the Fourth is referr'd into theCorpus Juris Ca∣nonici per Pet. Matthae∣um, Francofurti, Ann. 1599. Cap. Cum ex A∣postolatûs, 9. De Haeret. & Schismat. in 7. Body of their Canon Law (almost One hundred years ago) dedicated to Cardinal Cajetan; and lately publish'dIn Corpore Juris Ca∣nonici, Lugduni, 1661. again, as a part of their Law, without any Contradiction (and therefore with the approba∣tion) of the Pope or his Party. That this their Opi∣nion of the Papal Power is far from truth or proba∣bility, I have indeavoured to prove before; & sic transeat cum caeteris erroribus. 2. As to the second point; What is Heresie, and who is the Heretick, who is to be persecuted with such fearful Damnations and Excommunications? I say in short, 1. That it is agreed amongst theirHaeresis est Error in Fide, Cum Pertinaciâ. Card. Tolet. Instruct. Sa∣cerd. lib. 1. cap. 29. §. 2. Casuists, and Gratian. Can. dix∣it Apostolos, 29. & Can. Qui in Ecclesiâ. 3. Caus. 24. Quaest. 3. & Glossa .Canonists, That Heresie is an Error against that Faith which they ought to believe, joyned with per∣tinacy; or it is a pertinacious Error in Points of Faith; and he who so holds such an Opinion, is an Heretick.
2. And he is pertinacious, they say, who holds such anEst autem pertina∣cia, quando homo scit, aut scire debuit & potuit, ali∣quid esse contrarium Scri∣pturae, aut ab Ecclesiâ dam∣natum. Cajetan. ibidem. Opinion, which he does, or might, and ought to know to be against Scripture, or the Church. By the way; I desire to be inform'd, how it is possi∣ble for their Lay-people and unlearned, to know (with any certainty, or assurance) what Truths are ap∣proved, or Errors damn'd in Scripture; when they areVide Regulas, In∣dici librorum Prohibit. ex Decreto Conc. Trid. Confecto, praefixas; Reg. 4. & Observat. Regulae dictae annexam. prohibited (under pain of Excommunication) ever to read, or have Scripture in any Tongue they understand? Nor are Bibles only, in any Vulgar Tongue prohibited; but all Books of Controversie between Protestants and Papists, in any Vulgar Tongue, areLibri Vulgari Idio∣mate, de Controversi i∣ter Catholicos & Haereti∣cos nostri Temporis die∣rences, non passim permit∣tantur; Sed Idem de ipsis servetur, quod de Bibliìs vulgari linguâ scriptis, Statutum est. Ibid. Reg. 6. equally prohibited. So that they are absolutely deprived of the principal means to know Truth and Error, what Doctrines are E∣vangelical, what Heretical. 3. And although they are pleased sometimes to mention Scripture in the Definition of Heresie; yet 'tis not really by them meant. For (by their re∣ceiv'd Principles) a man may hold a hundred Errors, which he Does, or Might and Ought to know to be against Scripture and the Articles of Faith, and yet be no Heretick. For thus Car∣dinal Tolet tells us—Vnde multi Rusti∣ci, habentes errores contra Articulos fidei, excusantur ab Haeresi; Quia Igno∣rant Articulos, & sunt Parati Obedire Ecclesiae, &c. Card. Toletus In∣struct. Sacerd. lib. 4. cap. 3. §. 7. Many Rusticks or Coun∣try Clowns, having Errors against the Articles of Faith, are excused from Heresie; because they are Ignorant of those Articles, and are ready to Obey The Church. And a little before—Siquis rret in his, quae tenebatur scire, tamen sine pertinaciâ, Quia nes∣cit esse contra Ecclesiam, paratúsque est credere, quod tenet Ecclesia, non est Hae∣reticus. Idem ibidem. If any man err in those things he is bound to know; yet so, as it is without pertinacy, because he Knows it not to be against The Church, and is ready to believe as the Church believes, he is no Heretick. So that (by
their Principles) let a man believe as many things as he will, contrary to Scripture; yet if he have the Colliers faith, and implicitly believe, as the Church believes, all is well; he is (by them) esteemed no Heretick. 4. And hence it is, that they have of late, left the wordNon enim ut quis{que} primum in fide peccaverit, Haereticus dicendus est. Sed qui Ecclesiae Authori∣tate neglectâ, impias opini∣ones pertinaci animo tue∣tur. Catechis. Trid. ex Decreto Concilij Tri∣dentini, Jussu Pij. 5. Edit. Paris. 1635. Part. 1. cap. 10. De 9. Symboli Articulo, §. 1. p. 107. Scripture out of their definition of He∣resie; and they only pass for Hereticks at Rome, (not who hold Opinions contrary to Scripture, but) who receive not, or contradict what is believed to be de fide, by the Pope and his Party. And there∣fore they plainly tell us; That None can be an Heretick, who believes that Article of our Creed, The Holy Catholick Church (you may be sure they mean their own Popish Church, not only with∣out, but against all reason) For so theirFieri igitur non possit; ut aliquis se Haere∣sis Peste Commaculet, si iis fidem adhibeat, quae in hoc nono fidei Articulo creden∣da proponuntur. Catechis. Trident. loco dicto. Trent-Catechism tells us; not only in the Text, but (least we should not take notice of it) in the Margent too; where they say, Verus. 9. Articuli Professor (that is, he who will believe what their Church believes) Nequit dici Haereticus. That is, he who believes the Church of Rome, to be the Catholick Church in the Creed, and that Church Infallibly assisted by the Holy Ghost, he shall not (we may be sure) be call'd an Heretick at Rome. Nay, so far are they in Love with their most irrational Hypothesis; That to believe as the Church believes, excuses their Laicks and the Vnlearned from Heresie; that they expresly say, That such men may in some Cases, (not only Lawfully, but Meritoriously) believe an Error contrary to Scrip∣ture, which (in another more knowing Person,
would be a real and formal Heresie. The Case is this, (as Cardinal Tolet and Robert Holkott propose it,Rursus, si Rusticus circa Articulos Credat suo Episcopo, proponenti ali∣quod Dogma Haereticum, in Credendo Meretur, licet sit Error; quia Tenetur Credere, donec ei Constet esse contra Ecclesiam. To∣let. Instruct. Sacerd. l. 4. c. 3. §. 7. Idem habet Rob. Holcott, in. 1. Sentent. Quaest. 1. in Replica. ad 6. Principale: where he tells us, that simple peo∣ple may err in many things, Dummodo velint Credere sicut Ecclesia Ca∣tholica credit. And when he puts the case in an old simple woman, and says—Si audiat praelatum praedicantem Propositionem erroneam, quam ipsa nescit esse erroneam, & ei credit: Non peccat, sed Tenetur Errare, quia tenetur ei Credere; & Meretur vo∣lendo Credere Errorem; & concedo (Inquit) quod ipsa potest adipisci Meritum Debitum Martyri, si ipsa Imerficitur pro tali Err∣re, quem credit Articulum fidei, &c. If a Rustick or Ignorant Person, concerning Articles of Faith, do believe his Bishop proposing some Heretical Opinion, he does Merit by believing, although it be an Heretical Error; be∣cause he is Bound to believe, till it appear to him to be against The Church. So that in the mean time he is no Heretick. For, 1. He may lawful∣ly do it. 2 He is Bound to do it, to believe his Bishop, and the Doctrines proposed by him. 3. Nay, it is a Meritorious action to believe such Heretical Errors, though it be contrary to Scrip∣ture and the word of our gracious God. This is strange Doctrine, yet publickly maintain'd by Especially the Jesuits; In the end of the Exercitia Spiritualia Ignatij Loyalae, Tolosae, 1593. there are Regulae Servandae, ut cum Ecclesiâ verè Sentiamus. The first of which is, Sublato Proprio Omni Judicio, tenendus est Paratus Animus ad Obediendum verae Ecclesiae. You may be sure they mean the Church of Rome. The thirteenth Rule is this—Si quid quod Oculis nostris Album apparet Ecclesia Nigrum esse definierit, debemus itidem, quod nigrum sit pronunciare. And to the same purpose Bellarmine tells us—Fides Catholica docet, Omnem virtutem esse bonam, & Omne vitium malum. Si autem Papa erraret, praecipiendo vitia & prohibendo virtutes, Tenetur Ecclesia Credere vitia esse Bona, & virtutes Malas—Tenetur credere bonum esse quod ille praecipit, & malum quod ille prohibet. Bellarm. de Rom. Pontif. l. 4. c. 5. §. ultima. Ita etiam V. Erbermannus contra Ame∣sium, Tom. 1. lib. 3. cap. 6. §. 5. pag. 401. 402.their Casuists and Schoolmen, and approved by their Church. For I do not find it Condemn'd in any Index Expurgatorius, nor (in any publick de∣claration) disown'd by their Church; & quae non prohibet peccare, aut errare cum possit, Jubet. And here, in relation to the Premisses, I shall further propose two things, and leave them to the Judg∣ment of the Impartial Reader.
1. That seeing it is their Received Doctrine, that an Implicite Faith in their Church, and a profession and resolution to believe as she believes, is enough to free a Papist from Heresie, and the punishment of it: though otherwise (through Ignorance) he hold some heretical Errors, contrary to what his Church believes: why may not a Protestants Implicite Faith in Scripture, with a Profession and Resolution to believe every thing in it, as it comes to his knowledge; free him from He∣resie and the punishment of it; though other∣wise (in the mean time) he may believe some things contrary to Scripture? Certainly, if an Implicite Faith in the Doctrines taught by the Pope and his Party, (for they are the Roman Church) with a resolution to believe them all, when they come to their knowledge, be sufficient to free a Papist from Heresie and the Punishment of it; much more, will an Implicite Faith in the Do∣ctrines taught by our blessed Saviour, and his Apo∣stles in Scripture, with a Resolution to believe them all, when they really come to their knowledge, be sufficient to free a Protestant from Heresie and the punishment of it. Because the Doctrines taught by our blessed Saviour and his Apostles are Divine, and in such a measure and degree In∣fallible, as the Doctrines taught by the Pope, and his Party, (without great Error and Impu∣dence) cannot pretend to. 2. Seeing it is their Received Doctrine (as may ap∣pear by the Premisses) that if any Bishop preach to his People, (the Laity and Unlearned Ru∣sticks)
some Heretical Doctrine, they are bound to believe it, and may not only Lawfully, but Meritoriously do so, till it appear that their Church is against it. Hence it evidently fol∣lows; That if the Bishop preach'd this Do∣ctrine, That 'tis lawful to kill an Heretical King, who is actually Anathematiz'd, and Deposed by the Pope; they were bound to believe it, and might lawfully and meritoriously do so; and then, if it was meritorious to believe such a Doctrine, then to put it in Execution, and actually kill such a King, could not be unlawful and vitious. So that we need not wonder, that those prodigious Popish Villains who were hired to Assassinate our Gracious King in the late Conspiracy, undertook such an Impious Imployment, since besides great store of Gold given to incourage them, their Religi∣on and Learned Casuists afforded them such Prin∣ciples (which they were bound to believe) to warrant and justifie their Villany, so that without scruple of Conscience they might do it. In short, they are Hereticks whom the Pope and his Party are pleased to call so; for (by theirCrimen Haeresis est Mere Ecclesiasticum. In∣nocent. 8. Constit. 10. §. 2. In Bullario Romano, Romae, 1638. Tom. 1. p. 337. Col. . vide Cap. Ad abolendum, 9. Extra de Haereticis. Qui alitèr do∣cent quam Ecclesia Roma∣na, Excommunicantur. Law and Canons) they are sole Judges of the Crime (what Heresie is,) and the punishment due to it. 'Tis true, when they have passed Sentence upon any Heretick, they deliver him to the Civil Ma∣gistrate; but he is only their Executioner, to hang or burn according to their Sentence; but has no Power to reverse their Sentence, nor so much as to Examine whether it be just or un∣just; but (right or wrong) must do as they de∣termine.
And here (to say nothing of the Im∣piety and Injustice of the Roman Church, in Con∣demning those they call (or rather miscall) He∣rericks; I shall take notice of a strange piece of their Hypocrisie, used by them, when (after Condemnation) they deliver the Condemned Person to the Civil Magistrate: when the Bi∣shop or Inquisitor who delivers him, thus be∣speaks the Civil Magistrate—Domine Judex, ro∣gamus Vos cum Omni af∣fectu, quo possumus, ut A∣more Dei, Pietatis, & Misericordiae Intuitu, & nostrorum interventu pre∣caminum, miscrimo huic nullum mortis, vel mutila∣tionis periculum Inferatis. Pontif. Roman. Romae, 1611. p. 456. & Hostien∣sis in summâ. l. 5. De Hae∣reticis, pag. 424. Edit. Ludg. 1517. Sir, We passio∣nately desire you, that for The Love of God, and in reguard of Piety, Mercy, and our Mediation, you would free this miserable Person, from All Dan∣ger of Death or mutilation of Members. And it is there said, that the Bishop may do this,Pontifex Essicaci∣tèr, & ex Corde, Omni In∣stantiâ intercedit, &c. Ibi∣dem in Rubrica. Ef∣fectually and from his Heart. But notwithstand∣ing all this seeming Piety and Tenderness, when they have Sentenced an Heretick to death; they expect and require the Magistrate to Execute that Sentence, withinInfra. 6. dies, sine aliqua Processuum Visione, Sententias latas promptè exequantur, sub Excommu∣nicationis poenâ, aliisque Censuris. Innocent. 8. Constit. 10. In Bullar. Rom. Tom. 1. p. 337. six days, upon pain of Ex∣communication, Deprivation, and loss of Authority and Offices. Hence it is, that Pope Alexander the Fourth, about the year. 1260. gives Au∣thority to the Inquisitors, toFacultas Cogendi Quoscunque Magistratus, sub poena Excommunica∣tionis & Interdicti, &c. Alexand. 4. Const. 17. in dicto Bullar. p. 117. Tom. 1. & Constit. 18. in Lem∣mate. Ibid. Compel All Magistrates to Execute their Sentence, (be it what it will). And Pope Innocent the Eighth says, they must neither ExamineSine Aliqua Pro∣cessuum Visione. Innocent. 8. dicta Constit. 10. Nor see the Process against those they are to Execute. Nor is the matter mended since the times of Innocent the Eighth, and Alexander the Fourth; their Successors are for the same Compulsatory Power. The Council of Trent expresly says—Cogantur Omnes Principes Catholici Con∣servare Omnia Sancita qui∣bus Immunitas Ecclesiasti∣ca declaratur. Conc. Trid. Sess. 25. De Reformat. c. 20. In Lemmate, Edit. Antverp. 1633. That All Catholick Princes are to be Compelled to observe
All the Sanctions and Constitutions declaring their Ecclesiastical Immunities, amongst which this of punishing Hereticks is not the least, &c. By the Premisses (I believe) it may appear, that the Hypocrisie of the Popish Church is inexcusa∣ble, when she takes God's Name in vain, and prays the Civil Magistrate, For the Love of God, &c. to do that which she knows (if he were willing) he neither can nor dare do; nor will she permit him to do, having under pain of Excommu∣nication (and many other Penalties) absolutely prohibited him to do it. I say, 'tis not only the Bishop who so intercedes to the Civil Magistrate, but the Church of Rome her self, by him. Pope Innocent the Third is my warrant for saying so; who (in a Decretal Epistle to the Bishop of Pa∣ris) tells us; That when a Condemn'd Person is delivered to the SecularDegradatus propter flagitium damnabile & damnosum, traditur Curiae seculari; pro quo tamen de∣bet Ecclesia efficaciter In∣tercedere, ut contra mortis periculum, circa eum sen∣tentia moderetur. Cap. Novimus. 27. Extra. De verb. significatione. Judge, The Church must effectually interceed, that he moderate the Sentence so, (which she knows he neither dare, nor by their Law can do) that the Condemn'd Per∣son may be in no danger of death. I know thatRoffensis cotra Lu∣therum, ad Art. 33. Ope∣rum p. 642. Dixit enim Lutherus, Eos dicta Ora∣tionis formulâ non Orare, sed ludere. Roffensis, (& other of the Popish Party) do endea∣vour, with many little shifts, to palliate the Hypo∣crisie of their Church, but in vain. For Omnia cum fecit, Thaida, Thais olet. Sure I am, thatEcclesia Haereticum Excommunicat, & ulterius relinquit cum Judicio Se∣culari, à Mundo Extermi∣nandum Per Mortem. A∣qin. 2. 2. Quaest. 11. Art. 3. Respondeo. Si Judex Ecclesiasticus tradat Curiae Seculari haereticum, non po∣test in aliquo cognoscere se∣cularis; scilicet, An Bene vel Male fuerit judicatum, sed tenetur exequi omninò. Card. Tuschus Conclus. Practicarum Juris. Tom. 4. Lit. H. Concl. 95. §. 4. p. 166. vide Turrecre∣matam summa de Eccle∣sia. Venet. 1561. part. 2. l. 4. p. 411. where he cites Wicliff's Opinion, That the Popish Bishops are like the Pharisees, who having said, Non licet nobis quenquam occidere, Christum Seculari potestati tradide∣runt, erant tamen homicidae Pilato Graviores. And when the Gloss (verbo deprehensi. Cap. Excom∣municamus, 15. Extra de Haereticis) made some distinction of Persons deliver'd to the Secular Magistrate, and that docentes erant ultimo supplicio, officiendi; discentes vero decem Libris auri, &c. There is this Note in the (b) Margent—Hodie nulla est talis distinctio, nam Magistratus Se∣cularis, Quemcunque Haereticum, sibi à Judicibus fidei traditum, debet Vltimo Supplicio afficere. Cap. ut. Inquisitioni de Haereticis. Lib. 6. (b) In Corpore Juris Canon. cum Glossis. Paris. 1612. Aquinas
(BannesBannes ibidem. Conclus. 3. and others who Comment on that part of Aquinas) tells us, That the Condemn'd Heretick is deliver'd over to the Secular Power, to this very end, that he may be Put to Death, and taken out of the World; and a great and famous Sed quicquid dica∣tur, Ad Hoc fit ista Tra∣ditio ut Puniatur morte. Vid. Panormitan. ad Cap. Novimus. 27. Extra. De verb. significat. §. 8.Canonist (Hostiensis) says expresly, what I have done; that this Intercession of their Church to the Secular Magistrate, in behalf of the Con∣demned Heretick, is, (in the Common Opinion) barely a Colour, and verbalSolet Communitèr dici, quod ista Intercessio est Potius Vocalis & Colo∣rata quam Effectualis. I∣dem Hostieusis, ibidem. only, not real. For thus I find him cited in Panormitan on the Decretals—Whatever (says he) may be said to the contrary; yet To this end, is He Delivered to The Secular Power, That He may be punished with death. Upon these Premisses, I think it evident, that the Church of Rome, in this her Intercession to the Secular Power, does (with strange Hypocra∣sie) seem earnestly to desire that of the Magi∣strate, which she knows he dare not do; nay, which she herself, by her publick Laws, has Com∣manded him not to do. How she will Answer God (who Infallibly knows all her Hypocrisie) or her Adversaries, objecting it, I know not; ipsa viderit. In short; it isOmnes qui ab Ec∣clesiâ Rom. hactenus desci∣verant, pro Haereticis ha∣biti fuerint. Honorat. Fabri Contra Indifferen∣tes; Dilingae, 1657. lib. 2. cap. 18. & Mart. Bresse∣rum. De Conscientia, lib. 1. cap. 25. pag. 113. 117. 118. Qui in Vno rejici∣unt Authoritatem Ecclesiae. pag. 117. Col. 1. Lin. ulti∣ma & penultima. confess'd, that all those who will not be Inslaved to Rome, and believe as she believes, in every thing, are He∣reticks; and not only so, but damn'd, and while they continue so, and do not intirely be∣lieve their New-Trent-Creed, they are out of all Possibility of Salvation. So theirIn Ecclesiâ dunta∣xat Romana homines sal∣vari possunt. Honorat. Fabri, Loco citato. pag. 133. So Bresserus and the rest of them not only of late, but above five hun∣dred years ago; (yet af∣ter the Devil was let loose, and Antichrist re∣vealed) For an old Col∣lector of their Canons tell us (Ivo Cornotens. De∣cret. part. 1. De fide. c. 38.) Firmissimè tene, & nulla∣tenus dubites, Omnes Paga∣nos, Judaeos, Haereticos & Schismaticos, qui Extra Ecclesiam Catholicam (Romanum Intelligit) finiunt vitam, in Ignem Ae∣ternum ituros, qui diabolo & Angulis ejus paratus est. This is the Charity of Rome, to damn all but themselves. Casuists
perpetually affirm, and their Trent Council (in that Forma Juramenti Professionis Fidei, in the Bull of Pope Pius the Fifth, Extant in theConc. Trid. Antv. 1633. Sess. 24. De Re∣form. p. 452. Constitutions of that Council) requires all their Ecclesiasticks, to promise, vow, and swear to believe and maintain it to their death. For in the end of that Creed, the words are—Ibid. Haec est Fi∣des Catholica Extra quam, Nemo Salvus esse potest. This is the Catholick Faith, out of which no man can be saved. And then, they mustHanc fidem teneo & profiteor, in Praesenti, & Constantissimè tenere ad ultimum vitae spiritum spondeo, voveo, juro. Ibid. promise, swear, and vow to believe and profess it, most constantly as long as they live. So that although mens lives be exempla∣ry and innocent, their Doctrines which they believe, Ancient and Catholick, yet if they dissent from Rome in any one thing, (and that too upon just grounds and evident reason) yet they shall be call'd, and used as Hereticks. A signal Instance we have of this in the Wal∣denses anciently: and because many perhaps, (I speak not of the Learned) may neither know what it is, nor where to find it; I shall here crave leave to set it down.Reinerus contra Waldenses, Cap. 4. in Magna Bibliothecâ Pa∣trum. Paris. 1654. Tom. 4. Part. 2. Col. 749. Sectae Haereticorum fuerant plu∣res quam. 70. quae Omnes deletae sunt. Cap. 4. Reine∣ri. Reinerus, a Dominican Frier, an Inquisitor, a severe Perse∣cutor, who writ against the Waldenses, does (to their great honour, and the shame of Rome) give them this signal Testimony. He tells us of more then Seaventy ancient Heresies, most of which (he says) in his time, were overcome and vanished; But (says he) of all the Sects that were, or had been,Inter Omnes sectas quae adhuc sunt, vel fue∣runt, non est Perniciosior Ecclesiae, quam Leonista∣rum, & hoc tribus de Cau∣sis. Ibidem. None was so pernicious to The Church of Rome, as the Leonists, or Wal∣denses: and that for three Reasons.
Prima est, quia est Diut urnior; aliqui enim dicunt quod duraverit, à tempore Sylvestri; aliqui, A Tempore Apostolorum.For the Antiquity and long Continuance of these Waldenses, from the time of Pope Sylvester (who was made Pope, Anno Christ. 316.) as some said; or (as others) from the time of the Apostles. Quia est Genera∣lior; Ferè enim nulla est Terra, in qua haec Secta non sit. Ibid. cap. 4. For the Generality of that Sect; because there was Scarce any Country where they were not. Tertia, quia Cum Omnes aliae Sectae immani∣tate Blasphemiarum in De∣um, audientibus horrorem inducunt; Haec Leonista∣rum, Magnam Habet Spe∣ciem Pietatis; eo quod co∣ram hominibus Justè Vi∣vant; & Bene Omnia De Deo Credant, & Omnes Articulos Qui in Symbolo Continentur. Ibidem. When all other Hereticks (by reason of their Blas∣phemies against God) were abborr'd by those who heard them: The Waldenses had A Great Appear∣ance of Piety; because they Lived Justly Before Men; Believ'd All Things well of God, and All the Articles of the Creed. (The Twelve Articles of their New Trent Creed, were neither then be∣liev'd, nor known, no not at Rome). Well, if all this be true, (and it is their Enemy, who gives them this ample Testimony) what was it, that made this Sect of all others the most pernici∣ous to the Church of Rome? Certainly, the Anti∣quity or generality of this Sect, the Piety of their Lives, their believing all things well of God, and all the Articles of the Creed; none of these could be ernicious to any Truth, or any True Church. What was it then? Why, he tells us, in the next words, that it wasSolummodo Romae∣nam Ecclesiam Blasphe∣mant, & Clerum; cui Mul∣titudo Laicorum Facilis est ad Credendum. Ibid. only this; They Blas∣phemed, (or spake ill of) the Church and Clergy of Rome; And (as he Confesses) The Multitude of the Laity easily believed them: which is an evident Argument, that it was neither incredi∣ble nor altogether improbable, which the Multi∣tude of the Laiety so easily believed. Two things indeed those poor persecuted Waldenses said, which were very true, and most pernicious to
the Church of Rome; (for nothing is more per∣nicious to darkness and error then light and truth) 1. They said, That theEcclesia Romana est Meretrix in Apocalyp∣si. cap. 17. vers. 1. 2. &c. Reinerus loco citato. c. 5. De Sectis Moderno∣rum Haereticorum. Er∣rore. 6. pag. 750. Church of Rome was the Whore of Babylon in the Revelati∣on. 2. That the Pope was thePapa est Caput Om∣nium errorum, &c. Ibid. Errore. 8. they deny'd al∣so Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Invocation of Saints, the Popes Suprema∣cy. Vide Card. Turre∣crematam, in summa De Ecclesiâ. Part. 2. Lib. 4. cap. 35. pag. 407. Edit. Venet. 1561. Head of all the Errors in that Antichristian Church. And on this Account it was, that the Church of Rome did call those poor Waldenses Hereticks, and as such, did (with Fire and Sword and the ut∣most Cruelty) persecute them. For (as is a∣foresaid) he is an Heretick at Rome who contra∣dicts or disbelieves theHaeresis est, cum quis non sequutus Doctri∣nam Christi, vel Apostolo∣rum, vel Ecclesiae, Eligit si∣bi novam credulitatem. Card. Tuschas Conclus. Juris. Tom. 4. Lit. H. Concl. 91. verbo Haeresis. p. 164. Haereticus est, qui aliquid credit, non obstante quod Ecclesia contrarium decreverit. Debet enim Intellectum Captivare Sa∣crae Scripturae Sanctae{que} Ec∣clesiae. (Cajet. in sum. ver∣bo Haeresis.) And by Ho∣ly Church you may be sure they do mean their own Roman Church, for they acknowledge none else, but damn all other Christians, as Hereticks. Canons and Constituti∣ons of that Church; although he do not really disbelieve any Divine Truth contain'd in the Canon of Scripture. Now as it was with the poor Waldenses; so we are sure, it has been, is, and will be with all Protestants (Princes and Peo∣ple, Supream or Subjects) they are (at Rome) declared Hereticks, and liable to all the Punish∣ments of that, which they are pleas'd to call Heresie; and (when they have opportunity and ability) those Punishments will certainly be In∣flicted, without any Pity or Mercy. And this brings me to the third Inquiry, What those Pu∣nishments are? And here, because the Punish∣ments of Heresie are very many, and very great, it is neither my present business nor pur∣pose, particularly to set them all down, and ex∣plain them; Only I shall (in favour to the Or∣dinary Reader, for to the Learned they are better known) name some Authors, where he may find a Distinct and full Explication of the
Nature of Heresie (according to the Popish Principles) and the Number of its Punishments. And here, 1. The Gloss of their Canon Law reduces the Punishments of Hereticks to Four Heads, in the General: Hereticks (says theQuadruplex Haere∣ticorum poena secundum Canones: scilicet, Excom∣municatio, Depositio, Bono∣rum ablatio, Militaris Per∣secutio. Gloss. ad Cap. ad Apostol. 2. De Sentent. & re Judicata. In 6. ver∣bo. Haeresis, In additio∣ne. Ita Hostiensis in sum∣ma. Lib. 5. pag. 424. Edit. Lugd. 1517. Glossator) are to be punished either, 1. By Excommunication. 2. Deposition. 3. Loss of all their Goods. 4. By Military Persecution: that is, by Fire and Sword, by War and armed Souldiers. This isReynerius de Pi∣sis, in summa De Haere∣si. cap. 4. & F. Reynerus contra Waldenses. cap. 10. appro∣ved by several of their Learned Writers. 2. For the Body of the Canon Law, (to pass by Gratian and his Decretum) those who have a mind and leasure, may consult the Titles De Haereticis, which occur in theDecretal. Greg. 9. Lib. 5. & Tit. 7. Decretals of Greg. 9. ofDe Haereticis. Lib. 5. Tit. 2. In Sexto. Bonis. 8. in theClement. Lib. 5. Tit. 3. De Haereticis. Clementines, ExtravagantesExtrav. Commun. Lib. 5. Tit. 3. De Haereti∣cis. Communes (and in the lately addedSeptimi Decret. Lib. 7. Tit. 3. De Haereti∣cis & Schismaticis. This seaventh Book of the Decretals was first Prin∣ted with the Body of the Canon Law, (dedicated to Card. Cajetan) at Francfurt. 1590. and since at Lions, Anno 1661. Seaventh Book of the Decretals) with the Glosses, and Panormitan's large Comment upon them. 3. For the Punishment of Hereticks by the Civil Laws; they who have a mind to know, may consult Justinians Code. Lib. 1. Tit. 5. De Haereti∣cis & Manichaeis, with the Gloss there. And e∣specially the Theodosian Code, Lib. 16. Tit. 5. De Haereticis, Manichaeis & Samaritanis, with the Larger and most Learned Notes of Jacobus Go∣thofredus; in the Edition of the Codex Theodosi∣anus at Lions, 1665. Tom. 6. pag. 104. To these may be added the Severe Laws of the Empe∣ror Leges Frider. 2. extant in Corpore Jur. Civilis cum Gloss. Lugd. 1618. in Calce lib. 2. Feu∣dorum. Tom. 5. pag. 137. 138. &c.Friderick the Second, made in pursu∣ance of theConc. Laterani fub Innocent. 3. Ann. 1215. & praecipuè Canonis. 3. De Haereticis. Lateran Council, and (though
he had little reason for it) to gratifie the Pope in his barbarous designs to ruin all those he call'd (generally miscall'd) Hereticks: which Laws (as we may be sure they would) theNos Honorius, Ser∣vus Servorum Dei, has le∣ges à Friderico, pro utili∣tate Omnium Christiano∣rum (pro Pernicie Wal∣densium) Editas, Lau∣damus, Approbamus, & Confirmamus, tanquam In Aeternum valituras. Ita Honorius Papa. 3. in Cal∣ce dictarum Legum. Pope and his Party did highly approve. And have referr'd them into the Body of their Ca∣non Law. 7. Decretalium. Lib. 5. Tit. 3. Capp. 1. 2. In Edit. Corporis Juris Can. Lugduni, Anno 1661. 4. And for a full and particular Explication of those Laws, and the Quality of the Punishments of Hereticks Inflicted by them, their Casuists and Canonists may be consulted: Amongst ma∣ny others, such as these;Moral. Quaest. Tract. 32. cap. 7. De Poe∣nis Haereticorum. Filliucius,Speculi. Lib. 4. part. 4. De Haereticis. Du∣rantus, Summae. part. 2. Tit. 12. Cap. 4. De Haere∣si. & Haereticorum Poenis.Antonius Archiepiscopus Florentinus, Instit. Moral. Tom. 1. Lib. 8. Capp. 10. 11. 12.Azorius, PaulTheol. Moral. Lib. 2. Tract. 1. c. 16. p. 202. Layman,Summae. Tom. 1. De Haeresi. p. 1017. Ve∣net. 1585. Raynerius, Johan deSummae de Ec∣clesiae. part. 2. Lib. 4. cap. 1. &c. Turrecremata, CardinalHostiensis in sum∣mae. Lib. 5. De Haereticis. p. 422. Edit. Lugd. 1517. Hostien∣sis, and Antonius Augustinus Archiepiscopus Ter∣raconensis (a most Learned Canonist, and a very useful Book) has given us a Catalogue of theirEpitome Juris Pontisicij Veteris. Lib. 34. Tit. 3. & lib. 38. & lib. 11. Tit. 53. part. 1. & 2. &c. Canons De poenis quae sunt Hoereticis Constitutae. In short, whoever has a mind, op∣portunity and ability to Consult the afore∣mention'd Authors, (or such others) may ea∣sily find the Number and Nature of those Pu∣nishments, which (by their Impious Papal Canons and Constitutions) are to be Inflicted on those (better Christians then themselves) they are pleased to call Hereticks. 10.Observ. 10. Concerning this Impious Bull, containing the Damnation (as he calls it) and Excommuni∣cation
of Queen Elizabeth, by Pope Pius the Fifth; it is further to be observed, That it is no new thing. For Queen Elizabeth was actually Ex∣communicate before, 1. In their famousVide Constit. 63. Paul. 5. In Bull. Romano. Rom. 1638. Tom. 3. pag. 183. Vbi Omnes Istiusmo di Bullae, quae dicto Bullario occurrunt Notantur. Bulla Coenae Domini (take famous in which sense you will, the worst is good enough) wherein they do (at Rome) Anathematize andAnathematizamus Quoscunque Hussitas, Wic∣kliffistas, Lutheranos, Suinglianos, Calvinistas, Hugonottos, §. 1. dictae Bullae. Curse all Protestants (both Kings and Subjects, Princes and Common People) It is called Bulla Coenae Domini, because it is published every year on Maundy Thursday, the Day in which our blessed Saviour Instituted (Coe∣nam Domini) the Sacrament of his last Supper. And here, (by the way) we may observe the dif∣ference between Christ, and (his pretended Vicar) Antichrist. 1. On that Day our blessed Saviour Institutes that Sacrament, as a blessing and seal of the mutual Love between him and his Church, and of the Communion and Charity of Christians amongst themselves; but the Pope (far otherwise and unlike him, whose Vicar he pretends to be) on the very same Day, (without and against Christian Charity) Anathematizes and Curses the greatest part of Christians. 2. Our blessed Saviour was that Day ready to Dye for the Salvation of Sinners; but his pretended Vicar is ready, (on the same Day) and (so far as he is a∣ble) does actually Damn the greatest part of the Christian World, and has been drunk with the blood of the Saints. 3. Nor did Queen Eliza∣beth stand Accursed (before Pius the Fifth's Ex∣communication of her) only in that Bulla Coenae, but in several other Papal Bulls. I shall only name
one; and (because it is of signal Consequence, and to our present purpose) give some short Ac∣count of the Contents of it. The Bull I mean, is that of PopeVid. Paul. 4. Con∣stit. 19. In dicto Bullar. Tom. 1. p. 602. Paul the Fourth, next Predecessor, (save one) to Pius the Fifth, and isBulla Paul. 4. data Romae, 15. Cal. Mart. Ann. 1559. Bulla autem Pij. 5. data Rom. 5. Cal. Maij. 1570. Eliz. 13. In dicto Bullario. Tom. 2. p. 229 dated ele∣ven years before that of Pope Pius the Fifth. Now concerning this Bull, I observe 1. That it was no rash Act of that Pope, but (if he say true) made withHabita deliberatione Maturâ, de Cardinalium Consiliis & unanimi assen∣su. Bullae dictae. §. 2. Mature deliberation, by the Counsel and unanimous Consent of himself and the Cardinals. 2. And it is furtherBullam Paul. 4. &c. Renovamus Confirmamus, illámque Inviolabilitèr, & Ad Vnguem Observari vo∣lumus & Mandamus. Con∣stit. Pij. 5. 22. §. 3. dicti Bullar. Tom. 2. p. 151. Confirmed by his Successor Pius the Fifth, who Approves and Commands it to be Inviolably kept and observed. Nor is this all; but (that we may see how such Doctrine is ap∣proved at Rome). This Bull of Paul the Fourth, and that of Pius the Fifth, which so fairly con∣firms it, are now both of them referr'd into the Body of theirVid. Cap. 9. 10. De∣cret. 7. De Haereticis & Schismaticis. In Corpore Juris Canon. Ludg. 1661. Canon Law. Now in this Bull of Pope Paul the Fourth, thus confirm'd, approved, and received into the Body of their Law; 1. He doesOmnes & singulas Excommunicationis, Pri∣vationis, &c. & Quasvis alias Censuras & Poenas à Quibusvis Rom. Pont. aut Pro Talibus Habitis, in Constitut. contra Haereti∣cos Quomodolibet Latis, Approbamus, Innovamus, ac Perpetuo observari, ac in Viridi Observantia esse de∣bere decernimus. §. 2. Approve, Innovate, and Confirm All the Censures and Punishments due to Hereticks and Schismaticks, by any Constitution of any former Pope, or those who were Reputed Popes, How∣soever those Constitutions were made and promul∣gated, and Commands them to be kept in fresh Memory, and perpetually Observed.
2. And then heNecnon Quoscun{que} qui hactenus à fide Catho∣licâ deviasse, aut in Schis∣ma aut Haeresin incidisse deprehensi sint, seu in Po∣sterum incident, cujuscun{que} Conditionis, Gradus, seu Praeeminentiae existunt, e∣tiamsi Baronali, Ducali, Regali, & Imperiali excel∣lentia profulgeant, & eo∣rum Quemlibet, Censuras Poenas praedictas incurrere Volumus ac Decernimus. Ibidem. §. 2. declares (with as little Chari∣ty as Infallibility) that All Hereticks which are, or For the Future shall be, do Incurr All these Censures and Punishments, and 'tis his express Will and Decree they should do so. And that we may not mistake his meaning, as if All those Censures and Punishments were by him Inflicted and Denounced only upon and a∣gainst some Inferior Persons and Hereticks; he does seaven or eight times expresly name Counts, Barons, Marquesses, Dukes, Kings and Emperors: And further says; That as Heresie and Schism in them is more Pernicious to others, so ought their Punishment to be more severe; and then (by his Constitution, which he declares to beHac nostra Consti∣tutione in Perpetuum Vali∣turâ, sancimus, statuimus, definimus, &c. §. 3. perpetually and for ever Obligatory, he actually and totallyComitatibus, Baro∣niis, Marchionatibus, Du∣calibus, Regnis & Imperi∣is penitus, &, in Totum Perpetuo Privati sint, &c. Ibidem. Deprives them of their Counties, Baronies, Marquisats, Dukedoms, King∣doms and Empires, and leaves them to the Se∣cular Power, toSecularis relinquan∣tur arbitrio Potestatis, ani∣madversione Debita puni∣endi, habentúrque Pro Re∣lapsis. Ibid. §. 3. receive Due Punishment, that is, Death; as is evident by the Conse∣quents in that Constitution). Nor is this all; He damns them to anAd illa de Caetero sint Inhabiles & Incapa∣ces; nec Restitui aut Re∣habilitari Possint. Ibidem. Incapacity and Per∣petual Inability of being restored to their Ho∣nours or Possessions; No, not if they seriously and truly repent, and become good Catholicks. For in that case of their true Repentance and forsaking their Heresie, they shall save their Lives; yet they must beApparentibus verè Poenitentiae Judiciis & Condignis fructibus, in loco aliquo Regulari, ad Pera∣gendum Perpetuam in Pa∣ne Doloris & Aqua Moe∣stitiae poenitentiam, Detru∣dendi sunt—& evitari Omnique Humanitatis So∣latio destitui debent. Ibid. Cast into Perpetual Prison, and there be fed with Bread of Sorrow, and Water of Sadness, and to have no Comfort or Humanity shew'd them by any, no not by
Kings or Emperors. And though this be the height of Impious and Antichristian Tyranny, yetEx Ipsius Sanctae Sedis Benignitate & Cle∣mentia. Ibid. §. 3. N. Ey∣mericus Directorio In∣quisitorum, part. 3. pag. 516. Col. 1. it must be Imputed (as he tells us) to the Popes Clemency and Benignity. By the Pre∣misses it may evidently appear, That Queen Elizabeth was (by many Papal Bulls and Dam∣natory Constitutions) actually Excommuni∣cate, before this Bull of Pius the Fifth. I desire then to know, Whether those Anathema's of former Popes, (which they Declared and Com∣manded to be in force against all Hereticks For ever, and Perpetually Obligatory) were valid and did Actually and (as they Intended) Effectually Exclude that Queen out of their Church, or not? If not; then 'tis certain, the Pope has not that Supream Power he pretends to. For when so many Popes, in their Damnatory Bulls, (and that Ex Plenitudine Potestatis Apostolicae) declare the Queen, and all such Hereticks, Excommu∣nicate, and (as their Phrase is) cutEsséque à Christi Corporis unitate praecisam. In Bulla Pij. 5. §. 3. & Paul the Third in his Dam∣nation of Hen. 8. and all his Adherents, says, E∣ósque Anathematis, Male∣dictionis, & Damnationis Aeternae Mucrone Percuti∣mus. Bulla Paul. 3. 7. §. 7. In Bullario Rom. Tom. 1. p. 515. Col. 2. Edit. Ro∣mae, 1638. off from the Vnity of the Body of Christ, and Eternally damned: If this be not Effectually done, then all those Bulls are Bruta Fulmina, Inefficacious, Null and Insignificant. But if those Anathe∣ma's and Excommunications of former Popes, were valid, and the Queen by them, Actually put out of the Church, (as will, I suppose, and must (by them) be granted) then Pius the Fifth his Excommunication is a nullity, and indeed a ridiculous Impossibility. It being impossible, he should take from her, what she had not; and deprive her (by any Excommunication) of that
Ecclesiastical Communion, of which the stood Actually deprived before by his Predecessors; especially by Pope Paul the Third, who Ex∣communicates and Curses not only Henry the Eighth, but particularly allHenrici Regis ex dicta Annanatos & nasci∣turos, aliósque descenden∣tes, usque ad gradum in Jure Constitutum, nulla ae∣tatis aut sexus ratione ha∣bitâ, dignitatibus, Domi∣niis, &c. Privamus. & ad Similia obtinenda Inhabi∣litamus. Ibid. dictae Bul∣lae. §. 9. his Children, Male and Female, born or to be born of Ann Bolen (Mo∣ther of Queen Elizabeth) declares them deprived of all Power and Dominion, and of all their Goods and Patrimony, and Incapable of restitution to that Power and Patrimony, and of Acquisition of any other for the future. And that we should not doubt, that this was the Popes meaning, they have added a Marginal Note to that Bull in the Roman Edition, which tells us; Filiòsque eorum de dignitatibus, Dominiis, &c. & bonis Omnibus Privatos, & Ad Alia de Caetero Obtinenda Inhabi∣les esse declarat. Ibid. in Margine.That the Pope (in that Bull) did deprive the Children of Henry the Eighth, and his Adherents, of All their Goods and Dignities, and declared them Incapable of any other for the future. By the Premisses, I think it may be, and is Evi∣dent, that Queen Elizabeth (by most Papal Bulls and Constitutions) stood Actually Excommuni∣cate and Depos'd before this Bull of Pius the Fifth. Sure I am, the Popish Party never own'd her as their lawful Sovereign, but call'd her an Usurper of the Crown, to which (as a Declared and Ex∣communicate Heretick) she had no right at all. And it seems, Pope Pius himself was of the same Opinion. For in this very Bull, he speaks of her only asElizabetha Prae∣tensa Angliae Regina. Bul∣lae. . 5. §. 1. Pretended Queen; and of herIpsum Praetenso Reg∣ni Jure privatam. Ibidem. §. 4 Pre∣tended right to the Crown. And hence we may with Reason and good Logick Infer, That when Pius the Fifth in this his Bull Excommunicates and Depo∣ses
her; he does (notwithstanding his Plenitude of Power and Infallibility) ridiculously undertake (what he could not do) an Impossibility. For as it is impossible to turn Sempronius out of a House in which he never was; or deprive him of a Do∣minion which he never had, (turning out of a House, necessarily presupposing his being in it, and deprivation presupposing Right and Possessi∣on) so it is a like Impossibility for the Pope, by a∣ny Excommunication, to turn the Queen out of the Communion of the Popish Church, in which she never was; (being born, baptiz'd and always bred in the Protestant Church and Religion) or deprive her of those Dignities and Dominions, which (according to their ownIt is a Resolved Case in the Canon Law, (and Pope Gelasius is the Casuist who Resolves it) Quicúnque in Haeresin s∣mel damnatam labitur, e∣jus damnatione seipsum in∣valuit: Or (as it is in the Lemma prefix'd to that Canon) Ejus Dam∣nationis participem se fa∣cit. Vid. Can. Achatius. 1. Caus. 24. Quaest. 1. And Can. Majores. 2. Idem Gelasius codem modo Statuit. And Pope Fe∣lix says, Non ultra in eum procedere oportet, qui in hae∣resin damnatam incidit. Ibid. Can. Achatius. 3. Principles) she never had any right to, nor ever could have any; being (by their Law, and many Papal Anathema's and Decretals) utterly disabled, and made incapa∣ble of any such Dominions or Dignities. 11. It is evident that the Pope in this Impious Bull,Observ. II. does (by his usurp'd Antichristian Power) Depose and Deprive Queen Elizabeth of all her Royal Authority, Dominion and Dignity, and so puts her into the Condition of a poor private Person, without any Power or Jurisdiction over all, or any of her Subjects. Whence these dam∣nable Doctrines and Impious Conclusions evi∣dently follow, 1. That if any Jesuit, any Villanous Raviliac, or through pac'd Papist had kill'd, or with Poyson or Pistol had taken away her Life, (as they often
Indeavor'd) it had been no Treason. For all know, that Treason is CrimenVid. Justinianum F. ad. Leg. Juliam Maje∣statis; & Statut. 25. Ed∣vardi. 3. c. 2. in the Sta∣tute of Purveyors, Anno Domini. 1350. Majestatis, or Laesa Majestas; a Crime against Sacred Maje∣sty; either Immediately, against the Person, or Persons in whom Majesty resides; or medi∣ately against those who are his nearer Repre∣sentatives, as the Lord Chancellor, Treasurer and the Judges, when they are in Execution of their Office. And though there be an Inferior Degree of Treason, (as of a Servant a∣gainst his Lord and Master, a Wife against her Husband) yet no Treason ever was (either by the Imperial and Civil, or our National and Common Laws) but against a Superior. And therefore the Queen being deposed by the Pope as an Heretick, and actually deprived, not only of all her Royal Power and Majesty, but of all Jurisdiction and Superiority over her Subjects (and they absolved from their Oaths of Allegi∣ance and Fidelity) and so a private Person on∣ly, without any Power to command Obedi∣ence. I say, upon these Impious Popish Prin∣ciples, to kill the Queen could not possibly have had the Nature or Name of Treason. Had they by open War, or privately by Poyson or Pistols, taken away her life (as they Intended, and often Indeavor'd, as we shall see anon) they might have been Murderers, but not Traitors. So that the Pope and his Party be∣lieving that the Queen was Actually deposed and deprived of all her Royal Dignity and Do∣minion, as a Heretick; they must consequently
believe, that the Murdering of her, by any of her former Subjects, neither was, nor could be Treason. But this is not all, For 2. Admit she had not been deposed, by any Papal Law, Bull or Decretal Constitution; yet any of their Popish Clergy might have murder'd her, and been no way guilty of Treason, though they were English men, and born her Subjects; nay, though they had actually taken the Oaths of Allegiance before they took Popish Orders. The reason of this is evident, and a necessary Consequent, from their Impious and Rebelli∣ous Principles. For they say, That the Clergy Clerici Rebellio in Regem non est Crimen Lae∣sae Majestatis, quia nen est Subditus Regi. Eman. Sa Aphoris. Confess. verbo Clericus. p. 41.Are no Subjects of any Prince; and therefore they themselves conclude (as well they may) that if they Rebel and seek the Ruin of their Prince, yet (in them) it is no Treason. This Emanuel Sa, the Jesuit expresly tells us, in a Book (not sur∣reptitiously sent into the World, but) publish'd with hisColon. 1599. Name to it, Dedicated to the Virgin Ad Beatiss. Dei Matrem. Accipe (Sapien∣tiae Divinae Sacrrium) Libellum huc; tuoque Prae∣sidio sic tuere & promove, ut ad Multorum proficiat aeternam Salutem. Ibid. pag. 2.Mary, approved, highly Commended, and Licenc'd byHi Aphorismi Docti sunt & Pij, Multámque utilitatem alaturi Confes∣sariis Omnibus. Ibid. pag. 384. Sylvester Pardo. Ec∣cles. Antverp. Canonicas Librorumque Censor. Publick Authority. Thus is this Rebellious Doctrine approved, not only by the Librorum Censor at Antverp; but in Heaven too; at least in the Opinion of the Author, who o∣therwise would not have dedicated it to the Virgin Mary, and desired her Patronage, and Promotion of it, for the good of Souls. Sure I am, I do not find it Condemn'd in any of their Indices Expurgatorij (neither in theIndex Librorum Prohibit. Novissimus, Madriti. 1667. Eman. Sa non Omnino meminit. Spanish Index, nor that ofIndex Librorum Prohibit. Olysipone. An. 1624. p. 543. Portugal, nor that of PopeIndex Librorum Prohibit. Alexandr. 7. Romae, 1667. pag. 41. Alexander the Seaventh at
Rome, &c. Nay, so far are the Inquisitors from Condemning this Rebellious Doctrine of E∣manuel Sa, that the Spanish Index does not so much as name, much less censure him or his Aphorisms. But theLoco dicto. Portugal Index, (in which both the Author and his Aphorisms are ex∣presly nam'd) censures only two Propositions (one about Pennance, the other about Extream Vnction) which the Inquisitors (the SupreamIi Aphorismorum Codices deinceps permit tun∣tur, à quibus Expunctae sunt duae Sententiae, quas Ann. 1611. pridie Calend. Mart. Cavendas Rescrip∣sit, Sanctae & universalis Inquisitionis Congregatio, per Illustriss. Card. Arrago∣nium. Index Olysipone. 1624. loco dicto. Congregation of them at Rome) would have left out; and then approved and permitted all the rest. And so that Erroneous and Impious Aphorism, That Clergy-men are not Subjects of Kings, and therefore not Capable of Committing Treason, al∣though they actually Rebel against and Murder them. But the late Index of Pope Alexander the Seaventh, speaks more fully and home to our present purpose, and expresly, permits, and approves (for we may be sure they will not per∣mit what they do not approve) all Editions of thoseEmanuelis Sa A∣phorismi Confessariorum Hactenus Impressi, etiam Romae, ante Ann. 1602. post autem tale Tempus Ro∣mae Editi de mandato Ma∣gistri Sacri Palatij Per∣mittuntur. Index Alex∣andri. 7. loco dicto. Aphorisms, (Even at Rome) before the year 1602. In all which this Rebellious Aphorism, we are speaking of, was, and so was approved by them. This does further and (if that be pos∣sible) more evidently appear out of these their Approved and Authentick Expurgatory Indi∣ces, wherein this Proposition—(Priests Are By The Law of God Subject to Princes) is damn'd as Erroneous and Heretical, both in theEx Indice Joh. Chrysostom. Basil. 1558. Dele sequentia. And then (amongst many other e∣vident truths) this Pro∣position follows; Sacer∣dotes Etiam Principibus Jure Divino Subditi. This must be Expunged. In∣dex Libr. Prohib. Madri∣ti. 1667. pag. 703. Col. 1. Spa∣nish Index, and that ofAnd the Index of Portugal, Edit. Olysi∣pone, Ann. 1624. p. 753. Col. 1. damns the very same Position. Portugal. For the Inquisitors finding it in theIn Indice Operum Chrysostom. Basil. 1558. ex Officina Frobeniana. Index of Chry∣sostom, Command it to be expunged and blot∣ted
out; Although Chrysostom (in the Text) says the very same thing. Hence it evidently follows; That if this Proposition (Priests (by the Law of God) Are Subject to Princes) be erro∣neous and false, as the Pope and his Party say it is, (their Inquisitors Commanding it to be Expung'd, as Erroneous) then the Contradi∣ctory (Priests Are not by The Law of God Subject to Princes) must of necessity be true, and by them approved and believed. Unless they will say, (which were highly irrational and ridicu∣lous) that Contradictory Propositions may be both false, and they believe neither of them. But this they neither do, nor will say; for their greatest Writers publickly say, and Indea∣vour to prove, That Priests Are not Subject to Princes. Nay,Persona Cujuslibet Cle∣rici est Sancta quoad hoc, quod Non Potest Subjici Potestati Seculari. Caje∣tan. in. 2. 2. Quaest. 99. §. Ad Quintum Dubium mihi. p. 247. Col. 3. 4. Cardinal Cajetan expresly says, That the Clergy are so Sacred, that 'tis Im∣possible they should be Subject to Princes. When he says, It is impossible, his meaning is, that 'tis (not naturally, but) morally impossible; because if any Prince should use his Priests and Clergy as Subjects, it were a great Sin, and (in his Opinion) Sacriledge; and therefore Impossi∣ble: Because, according to the Rule of Law, Illud solum Possumus quod Jure Possumus. So we have that great Roman Cardinal expresly ap∣proving that Rebellious Doctrine, That Priests are not Subject to Princes. Nor (we may be sure) was it any private or singular Opinion of his, which died with him; For whenR. Patris Emanu∣elis Sa Aphorismi Con∣fessariorum. Coloniae 1599. after∣wards, Emanuel Sa's Aphorisms (wherein the
same Doctrine was maintained) were publish'd, as aOpusculum Theolo∣gis Omnibúsque animarum Curam habentibus Vtile ac Necessarium. Ibid. in Libri dicti . Work Profitable and Necessary for Di∣vines, and All who had Cure of Souls. An Ad∣vocate of the Parliament of Paris (eminent for Law and Learning) tells us two Things: 1. That those Aphorisms were Approved atVide Librum cum hac , Les Oe∣vures de Maistre Jacques Leschasier, &c. Paris. 1652. p. 421. Libellus A∣phorismorum Romae Proba∣tus. Rome: 2. And then passes a just Censure upon them —Quae Doctrina (that the Clergy are not Subjects to Princes) est pestis & eversio Rerum pub∣licarum—Regia pote∣stas vel suprema nihil ali∣ud est, quam Constitutio Dei, quae Omnes Mortales Jurisdictioni Regum subji∣ciuntur. Ibidem. That such Doctrine was the Plague and Ru∣in of Commonwealths: Royal and Supream Pow∣ers being the Ordinance of God, by which All Men are made Subject to the Jurisdiction of Kings; So that Learned Person. And (to pass by all o∣thers) an Excellent Person) of great Judgment and Integrity, and a Roman Catholick, (I mean FatherVide Historiam Interdict Veneti, per P. Sarpium, 1626. Edit. La∣tina. Paul of Venice) tells us; that in the Quarrels between Pope Paul the Fifth, and the Venetians, a World of Books were writ (by Je∣suits and others) to vindicate the Popes Cause, and theyOmnes, in eo Con∣cordes asserebant, Clericos Non esse Principi Subditos, ne in Crimine quidem Lae∣sae Majestatis. pag. 107. dictae Historiae & pag. 13. All Agreed in this, That the Clergy were Exempt from all Secular Jurisdiction, & quoad Personas & Bona; Secular Princes had nothing to do with their Persons or Purses; nor were They Sub∣jects to Princes, no not in Cases of High Treason. Nor was this Rebellious Doctrine maintained only by the Popes Party and Parasites; but the Pope himself (whom the Jesuits and Canonists miscall Infallible) approves and justifies it; and in Decemb. 1605. tells the Venetian Ambassador, ThatEcclesiasticos non Comprehendi inter Subdi∣tos Principis, nec ab eo posse poenis affici, etsi Rebelles essent. They are the words of Pope Paul the fifth to the Venetian Ambassador, in Decemb. 1605. in the aforesaid History, pag. 13. Greser tells us—Clrici non pertinent ad Regis Jurisdictionem. Considerat. ad Theolog. Venetos. l. 2. pag. 137. Edit. Ingolstadij, Ann. 1607. And there (besides Bellarmine and Baronius) he gives us a List of Thirteen or Fourteen Authors, who writ for the Pope in his Quarrel with the Venetians, of the same Opinion. Gretser Ibid. p. 380. Ecclesiasticks were not Comprehended in
the number of A Princes Subjects, nor could be Pu∣nished By him, though they were Rebels. A hun∣dred such Passages (out of their School-men, Canonists, Casuists, (especially the Jesuites) and their Canon Law) might easily be quoted; but these, to Impartial and Intelligent Persons, will be sufficient to Evince, That the Pope and his Party do publickly and expresly maintain this Rebellious Doctrine, and (when it makes for their Catholick Cause, and they have Op∣portunity and Ability to put it in Execution) do also practise it. The Sum of which Dam∣nable Doctrine (repugnant to the clear Princi∣ples of Nature and Scripture, and all Religi∣ons, save that of Rome) is this; If any King be Excommunicate and Deposed by the Pope, then any of his Subjects, Clergy or Laity, (horresco referens) may take Arms and Rebel a∣gainst him, or Murder him, and yet (by this Impious Popish Doctrine) be neither Rebels nor Traitors: And if their King be neither Excom∣municate nor Deposed, but stands rectus in Cu∣ria Romanâ, and be (as they call it) a good Ca∣tholick; yet if any of his Ecclesiasticks (Secu∣lar or Regular) Rebel or Murder him, it can be no Treason or Rebellion in them; seeing (ac∣cording to their Principles) they are none of his Subjects, nor he their Superior; and Treason or Rebellion against an Equal or Inferior, is (in propriety of Law) impossible. But this is not all. For;
3. Let it be granted, (which is both Impious and Evidently untrue) That any Popish Assassin or Roman Raviliac, had not been Guilty of any Treason, if he had kill'd the Queen, after the Pope had Deposed her, as a Heretick; yet sure, they must grant that it was Murder, and an Im∣pious Act, to kill a Person overwhom he had no Jurisdiction. No; this they deny: the ap∣proved and received Principles of the Popish Church acquit such Prodigious Villains not on∣ly from Rebellion and Treason, but from Mur∣der too. He who had kill'd the Queen, after Excommunication and Deposition by the Pope, had been no Traitor, nor (which is less) so much as a Murderer. We are told in the Body of their Canon Law—Nont sunt Homici∣dae, qui adversus Excom∣municatos Zelo Matris Ecclesiae, armantur. Ita Lemma praesixum Can. Excommunicatorum. 47. Caus. 23. Quaest. 5. vide Lemma hujus Can. apud Juonem. Decreti part. 10. cap. 54. That they are no Mur∣derers, who (out of Zeal to the Church) take Arms against Excommunicate Persons. So the Title prefix'd to the Canon cited in the Mar∣gent; and the Text of the Canon says further; Those Souldiers so armed,Non eos Homici∣das Arbitramur, quos ad∣versus Excommunicatos, Zelo Catholicae Matris ar∣dentes, aliquos corum Tru∣cidasse contigerit. Ibid. in Canone. Are not Murderers, if out of a burning Zeal to their Catholick Mother (the Church of Rome he means) they Kill any of such Excommunicate Hereticks: Thus the Case is deliberately determin'd by their Supream In∣fallible Judge, Pope Vrban the Second, a little before theIvo Carnotensis Episcopus; Decret. part. 30. cap. 54. end of the Eleventh Century; and about Twenty years after (by Ivo Carnotensis) referred into aMoritur Urban. 2. Anno Christ. 1099. Collection of the Roman Canons: And Gratian (about Forty years af∣ter Ivo) Registers it in his Decretum, which PopeVide Bullam Gre∣gor. 13. dat. Romae, 1. Jul. 1580. Corpori Juris Canonici praesixam. Gregory the Thirteenth approves and
confirms for Law; and so it stands confirm'd, and received for Law,Vide Edit. Juris Canon. cum Glossis Pa∣ris. 1612. & Edit. sine Glossis, Paris. 1618. & Editionem Lugduni, 1661. &c. in their last and best Editions of that Law, ever since. Whence it may (and does) appear, that this Impious and Rebellious Doctrine, (That Killing Kings or Queens Excommunicate by the Pope, was no Mur∣der) has been approved at Rome (sinceRev. 20. 2. 3. the Devil was let loose, and Antichrist appeared) a∣bove Six hundred years. I know that honest FatherRemonstrant. Hi∣bernorum part. 5. c. 13. §. 10. pag. 34. Caron (not so dis∣loyal as most of his Party) indeavours to mollifie this Rebellious Constitution of Pope Vrban the Se∣cond; and tells us, that the meaning of that Ca∣non is only thisSi Contingentèr trucidaverit, non esse Ho∣micidam Formalem, &c. Ibidem.—That if any man by Chance and Casually had kill'd an Excommunicated Person, (si contigerit trucidasse) then he was not A Formal Mur∣derer: So Pope Urban's Sentence was not toVrbani ideo Sen∣tentia Non suit, Excom∣municatos vel Haereticos De Proposito interimi posse. Ibidem. Ex∣cuse those from Murder, who Intended, and directly Purposed to kill Hereticks and Excommunicate Persons. For (says he) this were toAlioquin certe ve∣ritatem Omnem & Fidem expugnasset. Ibidem. Overthrow all Truth and Fidelity to Princes. The good man was (God forgive him) a Roman Catholick, and believed (though. Erroneously) that the Supream Head of his Church, and St. Peter's Successor and Vicar of Christ, could not approve and maintain such a Rebellious and Impious Position and Principle, That men might lawfully be kill'd, because they were Hereticks or Excommunicate Persons: which he there truly calls—Horrendum igitur Principium, Maledictum & Execrabile est, Haereti∣cos, vel Excommunicatos, eo ipso interimi posse, &c. And again, Inter Damna∣bilia & Anathemata repo∣nimus. Ibid. §. 11. p. 35. A Horrible, Cursed and Execrable Principle. That the Doctrine is Cursed and Exe∣crable, is easily believed, and (by me) willingly granted. But that Vrban the Second did not, in
that Canon, approve it, (notwithstanding what Father Caron has said to the contrary) I absolute∣ly deny. Sure I am, 1. That Cardinal Bellar∣mine (as is confessed by Father Caron in the place cited) expounds that Canon as I have done. 2. So doesTurrecremata ad Can. Excommunicator. 47. Caus. 23. Quaest. 5. Cardinal Turrecremato too; who says, That Excommunicate Hereticks may be kill'd, not only Casually (as Father Caron mistakes the Text) but with anIntentio requiritur, quia licet bonam habue∣rint voluntatem, potuerunt tamen peccare Intentione. Si Interfecerunt Haereti∣cos, quia Infestabant Ec∣clesiam, in hoc Bonam ha∣berunt Voluntatem; pecca∣verunt tamen si Intende∣bant habere Bona Haereti∣corum. Si ergo bono Zlo & Mandato Ecclesiae ali∣quos Interfecerunt, non sunt Homicidae Reatu, nec Vlla Poenitentia est Im∣penenda. Turrecremata loco dicto. Intention and Purpose to kill them; and yet they who intend and do kill them, be no Murderers; but both the Intention and Act Just and Innocent. But then their Intention must not be to get the Goods of those Hereticks they kill, but it must be Zelo Matris Ecclesiae, to secure the Church from the Mischievous Designs of those Hereticks. So that in the Opinion of this great Cardinal, and Cano∣nist, (who well knew the opinions and practise of their Church) killing of Hereticks was so far from being Murder, that it was no Crime at all; but sine Reatu (as he says) without all guilt; and there∣fore (nulla poenitentia erat imponenda) it needed no Repentance. 3. Cardinal Peron in his Orati∣on to the Estates of France, does expreslyAgnoscit Peronius, (Orat, ad Status, pag. 107.) Tyrannum Vsurpatione Licitè interimi posse: at qui Rex Omnis semel à Papa depositus, si postea admini∣straverit, Rex Vsurpatio∣ne & Tyrannus est; quia absue Jure Jus Vsurpat. F. Caron. Remonstrant. Hibernorum. part. 4. c. 1. §. 20. p. 265. af∣firm, That all Tyrants by Vsurpation, may law∣fully be kill'd; and such was Queen Elizabeth, and all Protestant Kings and Princes now are, (in the Judgment of the Pope and his Party) seeing they all did, and now do stand Excommunicate (at Rome) and deprived of all Dominion; and there∣fore, their medling with the Government, after such Deprivation, is evidently Usurpation (in the Opinion of our Adversaries) and then it follows
on their Principles) that they may lawfully be kill'd, and therefore the killing of them cannot be Murder; it being impossible that a Crime a∣gainst the Indispensable Law of Nature, should be lawful. 4. But we have greater Evidence to prove, that (at Rome) the killing of Protestant Princes, (as Excommunicate Hereticks) is not Murder. For in the year 1648. when the Par∣liament was, (or seemed to be) severe against Pa∣pists, as believing and maintaining Principles In∣consistent with our Government: This Question (amongst others) was proposed to some of our English Popish Divines—An Pontifex Roma∣nus Principes seu Magi∣stratus Protestantium pos∣sit deponere, vel Occidere, tanquam Excommunicatos? Vide F. Caron Remon∣strant. Hibernorum part. 1. cap. 4. §. 3. p. 12. Whether the Pope could Depose or Kill Protestant Princes or Magistrates, as Excommunicate Persons? Some of those Divines met, and (whether out of Love of Truth, or fear of the Parliament, I know not)Convenientibus er∣go in hac Causa Theologis Anglicanis, pro Negativâ resolverunt. Ibid. §. 3. num. 3. Subscribed the Negative; That the Pope could not Depose or Kill such Protestants. But when this was heard atHis nunciis Romae receptis, sacra Congrega∣tio resolutionem illam ne∣gativam, tanquam Haere∣ticam mox Condemnat, citatisque Romam Autho∣ribus, Carceres & Censurae parantur. Ibidem. Rome, the Pope and his Sacred Congregation (as they call it) Condemned that Negative Proposition, as Heretical, and Summon'd the Subscribers to Rome, where Prisons and Censures (as Father Caron tells us) were prepared for them. Whence it is Evi∣dent, that to deny the Popes Power to Depose and Kill Protestant Princes, is (at Rome) declared He∣retical; and therefore, that he has a Power to Depose and Kill, is a part of their Catholick Creed, and believ'd three. Whence it further follows, that they do think such Killing of Protestants to be no Murder, nor those who kill them, (out of Zeal to the Catholick Cause) Murderers. 5. When Ray∣mundus
Floruit sub Greg. 11. circa Ann. 1311. Ni∣col. Eymericus Direct. Inquisit. p. 255. Col. 2. D. Lullus (aPossevin. Apparat. in Pet. Remundo. man famous in his time and after it) had said, and in his Writings pub∣lished, That it wasInterficientes Hae∣reticos sunt Injuriosi & vi∣tiosi in suo Memorari, In∣telligere, & Velle, &c. Ey∣mericus Ibid. p. 260. Col. 2. A. unlawful and impious to kill and murder Hereticks; (for he had seen and heard, of the bloody Persecutions of the Waldenses, and such as at Rome were call'd Hereticks, in, and be∣fore his time) Nic. Eymericus (Inquisitor of Arra∣gon) complains of him, and his Writings, to Pope Gregory the Eleventh; who (in full Consisto∣ry with theGreg. 11. in Con∣sistorio, etiam de Consilio Fratrum, interdixit & condemnavit Doctrinam Raym. Lulli, &c. Eymeri∣cus loco dicto. p. 255. Council of his Cardinals) damns the Doctrine of Raymundus Lullus; and declares for the Lawfulness and Justice of Killing Hereticks. 6. And Lastly, Pope Leo the Tenth in his Oecu∣menical (so they call it) Lateran Council (Sacro ap∣probante Concilio) with the Consent and Approba∣tion of that Council) declares; That our blessed SaviourChristus Petrum E∣júsque Successores Vicari∣os suos Instituit, quibus (ex Libri Regum Testimo∣nio) Ita Obedire Necesse est, ut qui non Obediret, Morte Moriatur. Binius Concil. Tom. 9. pag. 151. Col. 2. E. Edit. Paris. 1636. Did Institute Peter and his Successors his Vicars; to whom (by the Testimony of The Book of Kings) it was so necessary to yield Obedience, that Whosoever would not (as no true Protestant ever would or could) was to be punished with Death. The Pope was not pleased to tell us, what Book of Kings (for in their Vulgar Latin Version, there are four Books of that name) nor what Chapter or Verse he meant: and he did wisely to conceal what Place in those Books he intended; for had he nam'd a∣ny particular place, (though he pretended to In∣fallibility) his folly would have much sooner ap∣peared. It is indeed ridiculous, for any man to think, that any thing said in those Books of Kings, can prove, that our blessed Saviour Constituted a Vicar General over his whole Christian Church,
with power to kill all who would not comply with him, and that Peter and his Successors the Popes, were the men: seeing there is not one Syllable of all, or any of this, in any of the four Books of Kings; Nor any Text from which it may (with any sense or probability) be deduc'd. Nor have the Publishers of that Lateran and other Councils (Peter Crab, Surius, Binius, Labbe, &c. supply'd that defect, and told us, what place Pope Leo meant, and from which he, or they could prove the Popes Power to kill all who comply'd not with his Com∣mands. I know thatPet. Crab. Concil. Colon. Agrip. 1551. Tom. 3. p. 694. Col. 2. So Turrecremata summa de Eccles. l. 2. cap. 114. Prop. 7. Crab,Laur. Surius Con∣cil. Colon. Agripp. 1567. Tom. 4. p. 681. Col. 2. Surius, andBinius Concil. La∣tet. Paris. 1636. Tom. 9. pag. 151. Col. 2. B. Binius (though Labbe has omitted it, as Imperti∣nent) have, in their Editions of the Councils, cited in their Margents, Deut. 17. for a proof of that Erroneus and Impious Position, (it seems their Infallible Judge mistook Kings for Deuteronomy, or that they could find nothing in any Book of Kings for the Popes purpose.) But they name not the Verse; though (I believe) it is the Twelfth Verse of that Seaventeenth Chapter they mean. Where 'tis said, That he who will not hearken to the Priest or Judge, That Man shall Dye. This (I say) is alto∣gether impertinent, as to the proof of the Popes Position. For admit (which isVide Grotium and Ainsworth in Deut. 17. vers. 9. 12. &c. Vide 2 Chron. 19. 8. 9. &c. manifestly un∣true) that by Priest here, the High Priest only was meant: yet it will neither be consequence nor sense to say, Whosoever disobey'd the Sentence of the High Priest, in the Jewish Church, must be put to death: Ergo, Whoever disobeys the Pope in the Christian Church, must be so too. This (I say) is Inconse∣quent, for the Priests in the Jewish Church (not
only the High Priest, but other Priests and Le∣vites) by the express Law of God, had as Judg∣es in many Cases, Power of Life and Death: but in the Gospel, our blessed Saviour left no such Power to his Apostles and their Successors; Ex∣communication is the highest Punishment, Peter, or any, or all the Apostles could inflict, by any Au∣thority from our blessed Saviour in the Christian Church, and this Power succeeded Intersection or putting to death in the Judaical Church. So St.Non nunc Agit in Ecclesia Excommunicatio, quod tunc (ante Christum in Synagoga) agebat Inter∣sectio. Aug. Quaest. super Deuteronomium, lib. 5. cap. 38. And elsewhere; Phineas Sacerdos Adulte∣ros simul Inventos ferro ultore confixit, Quod uti{que} Degradationibus & Ex∣communicationibus, signi∣ficatum esse faciendum hoc tempore. Idem. Aug. de Fide & Bonis Operibus. cap. 6. Augustin expresly tells us, and to him I refer the Reader. By the Premisses, I think it may appear, that, if (after the Popes Damnation and Deposition of Queen Elizabeth) any of her Popish Subjects, (Laity or Clergy, Regular or Secular) had by taking Arms publickly, or by Poyson or Pistol, Privately taken away her life, (according to their approved Principles) it had been no Re∣bellion, Treason or Murder, but (in their Opini∣on) an Action Just and Innocent. But this (though too much) is not all; their Error and Impiety rises higher. For, 4. Had any of Queen Elizabeths Subjects (after the Popes Excommunication) kill'd her, that Ex∣ecrable Fact had been so far from being Murder, that (in their opinion) it had been an Action not only Indifferent, or Morally good, but Meritorious. In the year 1586. (which was the Nine and twen∣tieth of Elizabeth) in the Colledge of Rhemes, Giffard, Dr. of Divinity, Gilbert Giffard and Hodg∣son, Priests, had so possess'd the English Semina∣ries, with a belief of this Doctrine, That John
Savage willingly and gladly vowed to kill the Queen. The Story is inIn the English Se∣minary at Rhemes, some there were, who believ'd, Pius the fifth's Bull to be dictated by the Holy Ghost, and they perswaded themselves and others, that it was meritorious to take away the lives of Princes Excommunicate, and Mar∣tyrdom to spend a man's life in the Cause. These things Giffard, Dr. of Di∣vinity, Gilbert Giffard and Hodgson inculcated so deeply into John Savage, that he willingly and glad∣ly vowed to kill Queen Eli∣zabeth. Camb. Annals of Q. Eliz. l. 3. p. 301. 302. of the English Edi∣tion, (I have not the La∣tin now by me) Lond. 1635. Cambden (an Histo∣rian of unquestionable truth and fidelity) After Ann. Christ. 1598. Eliz. 41. apud Cambde∣num Annal. l. 4. p. 498. 499. dictae Editionis.this, Walpoole, the English Jesuite, perswades Edward Squire, that it was a Meritorious Act to take away the Queen; tells him, it might easily be done, by Poysoning the Pomel of her Sadle; gives him the Poyson; Squire undertakes it, Walpoole blesseth him, and promises him Eternal Salvation, and so (ha∣ving sworn him to Secresie) sends him into England: where (notwithstanding all the Jesuits blessings) he was taken, confess'd all this, and was Executed in the year. 1598. And CamdbenIbid. p. 499. there tells us, That a Pestilent Opinion (as he truly calls it) was got amongst the Popish Party (even amongst their Priests) That to take away Kings Excommunicate, was Nothing Else, but to Weed the Cockle out of the Lords Field. It is true, none of those impious and damnable Designs, had their desir'd Effect; God Almighty protecting that good Queen, (it being impossible that any Power or Policy should prevail against his Providence) yet the Matter of Fact (confessed by themselves, or evidently pro∣ved by Legal Witnesses) manifestly shews, that they thought killing the Queen, (for the benefit of their Catholick Cause) was a Meritorious Work, which they designed to do, and (had their Ability been Equal to their Impiety) would have done. 2. Nor was this the private opinion of some Priests and Je∣suits only; but the definitive Sentence of several Popes, (theirAll the Popes San∣ctions (they say) are Di∣vine (Can. sic Omnes. 2. dist. 19.) as if Peter him∣self had made them. And no wonder, seeing they tell us, That God by his Holy Spirit, speaks in the mouth of the Pope, Deus ipse, Spiritu suo, per Ora Pontificum loquitur. Pet. Matthaeus J. C. Lugdun. Praefat. praefixa Corp. Ju∣ris Can. à se Edito, Fran∣cof. 1590. Infallible and Supream Judges) publickly declared, and (that we may be sure they
are obligatory at Rome) amongst other Papal De∣crees referr'd into the Body of their Canon Law,Jul. 2. Conc. Late∣ran. 5. Generali, appro∣bante Concilio. Sess. 5. a∣pud Binium. Tom. 9. p. 48. Col. 1. F. 2. A. confirm'd by Gregory the Thirteenth, and by their General Councils (the fifth Lateran, and that of Trent) Commanded to be obeyed, Tanquam Divina In∣spiratione Edita, & TanquamConcil. Trid. Sess. 25. De Reformat. c. 20. p. 624. Edit. Antverp. 1633. Dei Praecepta. Now the Papal Sentences or Decrees I mean, are 1. That of PopeCan. Omnium. 46. Causa. 23. Quaest. 5. Nicolas to the French Army: wherein the Pope tells them, That if any of them were slain in that War against the Insidels, that is, (as CardinalTurrecremata ad dictum Canoncm. Turrecremata explains it) against the Hereticks, HeavenRegna illi Coelstia minime negabuntur. should not be deny'd them: They should be sure of that. But the Lemma or Summa∣ry prefix'd to the CanonIn Certamine quod Contra Infideles (Haereti∣cos) geritur quisquis mori∣tur Coeleste Regum meretur. says, That those Soul∣diers who faithfully fought against the Hereticks, if a∣ny one of them were slain in the sight, He should me∣rit Heaven. Murdering Hereticks, was (in the Popes Opinion) a meritorious Work, and if the Soul∣diers could kill them, and take away their Tempo∣ral Life here, they should (for that good Service to the Pope) gain to themselves, an Eternal Life hereafter. 2. PopeCan. Omni Timo∣re. 9. Caus. 23. Quaest. 8. Leo (to the same purpose, and almost in the same words) Incourages a French Army toOmni timore Depo∣sito contra inimicos San∣ctae Ecclesiae virilitèr agre Studete, novit enim Omni∣poteus, si quilibet vestrum morietur, quod pro veritate fidei mortuus est, & Ideo Proemium Coeleste conse∣quitur. sight stoutly against the Enemies of the Faith, and of the Church, (you may be sure he means the Roman Church) and tells them, that they need not be any way affraid, to kill Hereticks and the Churches Enemies, for God knew, that if any of them died in that Service, it was for the true Faith, for which Heaven should be their Reward. So the Pope in that Canon. And because some of those Soul∣diers might fear (as there was great reason they
should) that the Persecuting those poor Christi∣ans, whom the Pope call'd Hereticks, with Fire and Sword, might rather deserve punishment then a Heavenly Reward; John Semeca (the Glossator) tells us, That the Popes meaning was,Hortatur Papa, ut virilitèr pugnet contra Ini∣micos Ecclesiae; & si qui pro∣pter hoc moriatur, Non Poenam, sed Coeleste Prae∣mium Consequetur. Glossa Ibidem. that (be∣ing secured from Punishment) Heaven should be their Reward. These, and such other Principles, must (of ne∣cessity) be a great Incouragement to the Popish Party, who believe (though without, and in con∣tradiction to Truth and Reason) the vast usurped Papal Power and Infallibility, to Execute the Popes Damnatory Bulls and Excommunications, and kill all Hereticks (even Kings and Emperors) ha∣ving Heaven promised for doing it. This is ve∣ry much, but there are more and greater Promi∣ses made by the Pope, for killing Hereticks. For, 5. The Pope (out of his great Ability and Bounty) promises such Impious and Bloody Mur∣derers of Hereticks, not Heaven only, but a higher Degree of Glory in it, and many other great Privi∣ledges, to be injoy'd here, before they came to Heaven; and this Promise the Pope makes, not sin∣gly by himself, but in, and with the consent of the greatest General Council Rome ever had. Innocent the Third is the Pope, and theConc. Later. mag. num sub Innocentio. 3. Ann. 1215. fourth Lateran is the Council I mean; in whichIta Abbas Ursperg. in Chronico ad dictum Ann. 1215. Binius in Hist. Conc. Later. 4. praesixa. there were, above Twelve hundred Fathers. By the Autho∣rity of thisCan. 3. De Haere∣ticis. Council, an Army was to be raised for theAd Haereticorum Exterminium. Destruction of Hereticks (the poor Wab∣denses) and they were to have the sumeIlla Indulgentia & Privilegio muniti sunt, quod Accedentibus ad ter∣rae Sanctae subsidium con∣ceditur. Ibid. dicto Can. 3. Privi∣ledges
which were granted to those who fought against the Turks to recover the Holy Land. What those Priviledges were Pope Innocent (in hisConst. Innocent. 3. 12. data Lateran. 19. Cal. Jan. 1215. Bull) tells us. 1. They were to be freed fromA Collectis, Talliis, aliisque gravaminibus sunt Immunes. Bullae dictae. §. 10. all Taxes, Impositi∣ons, and all Burdens whatsoever. 2. They were to be received into theQuorum Personas & Bonasua sub Beati Pe∣tri & Nostrâ Protectione suscipimus. Ibidem. Protection of St. Peter and the Pope; there is nothing of God's Protection mention'd. The Pope (who sits in the Temple of God,2. Thess. 2. 4. shewing himself that he is God) thought (and would have them think so too) that he was sufficient to protect them. 3. If they had borrowed any Money upon Use, and had solemnly sworn to pay it; yet the Pope Commands that they shall be freed both from their Si ad Praestandas usuras Juramento tenean∣tur astricti, Creditores ut remittant Juramentum & Vsuras Compelli praecipimus. Ibid. §. 11.Oath, and paying any Vse. 4. If they went to kill and exterminate Hereticks in Person, and at their own Expences, then A Full Plenam peccatorum Veniam Indulgemus, & Sa∣lutis Aeternae pollicemur Augmentum. Ibidem §. 17. In Bullario Romano, Romae, 1638. Tom. 1. p. 78. Col. 7. vide Matth. Paris. ad Ann. 1213. In Johanne. pag. 241.and Plenary Pardon of All their Sins here, and A Greater Degree of Glory hereafter, is (by the Pope and that great General Council) promised them. By the Premisses I think it evident, that if any of Queen Elizabeths Subjects (after her Damnati∣on and Excommunication by the Pope) had by raising Arms against her publickly, or by Poyson or Pistol privately taken away her Life, it had nei∣ther been Rebellion, Treason, nor Murder, but an innocent Action; And that not one of those which Aristotle calls , Naturae Mediae, and In∣different, which are morally neither good nor bad; but (in the Judgment of the Church of
Rome, and upon those her approved Principles) it had been an Action Morally Good, nay, (which is far more) Meritorious: For which they should have Remission of All their Sins here, and not only Hea∣ven, but (in it) A higher Degree of Glory hereafter: And if it happened, that any of them miscarried in this their meritorious Act of killing Heretical Kings, and were (according to their desert) hang'd for Treason, then (with the Pope and his Party) they pass for Martyrs, and as such, shall be ho∣nour'd, and highly commended to Posterity. I wrong them not, Ribadeneira the Jesuit (to omit many others) in aCatalogus Scrip∣torum Religionis Socie∣tatis Jesu; Auctore Pet. Ribadeneira, Ejusdem Societ. Theol. Antverp. 1613. Book Licenced by theFerdinandus Lu∣cero in Censura Libro praefixa, Madritif, 17. Sept. 1607. Vice-Provincial of Toledo, approved by the Bishop ofLavin. Torrentius in Oda ad Societatem Libr. praefixa. Antverp, andGravium doctorum∣que hominum Judicio Pro∣batus. Ferd. Lucero indicta Censura. other Grave and Learned Men (as they are there call'd) I say, in this Book he has aDicti Libri. p. 357. 358. &c. Century of Martyrs of his Society; and amongst them, reckonsIbid. p. 366. Campian,Ibid. p. 371. Walpoole,Ibid. p. 372. Southwell,In supplemento addictam Centriam. pag. 375. Garnett,Ibidem. Oldcorne, &c. and calls them Martyrs; who were Legally Con∣vict here, and Justly Executed as Impious Traitors. God Almighty preserve our Gracious King from the Traiterous and Pernicious Conspiracies of those men, who (by a strange delusion) believe such Principles, and call Impious Traitors Holy Martyrs. The Premisses consider'd, there can be little reason to doubt, but the Popish Party (as ever since the Reformation they constantly have, so they) always will indeavour by secret Plots and Conspiracies, by Poyson, Pistols, or (when they have Ability) by open War, to ruin and utterly
extirpate and destroy all the Protestants of this Nation (King and Subjects) who are by the Pope Declared and Excommunicated Hereticks, seeing there are such exceeding great Rewards (afore∣mention'd) assured to them, for doing it; not only by private and fallible persons, but by the Constitutions of their Popes, and the Canons of their greatest and approved General Councils; their Supream Judge and Infallible Guide, which all Papists (by the Principles of their Religion) are bound to obey, and act according to such Canons and Constitutions. And were they indeed (what they pretend to) Infallible, it were great folly and midness not to do so. For he is certainly a Fool, who (having a Journey to go, on which the Eter∣nal misery or felicity of his Soul depends) will not follow an Infallible Guide. And (which is further very considerable) All theirOmnes, quas Cathe∣dralibus & Superioribus Ecclesiis praefici, vel quibus de illarum dignit atibus, Canonicatibus & alis, qui∣buscunque Beneficiis Eccle∣siasticis, Curam Anima∣rum habentibus, providere Contingat, publicam Or∣thodoxae fidei professionem facere, seque in Rom. Ec∣clesiae Obedientiâ perman∣suros, Spondere & Jurare teneantur. Vide Bullam Pij. 4. super forma Juramenti Professionis fidei, in Concilio Trident. Sess. 24. De Reformat. Cap. 12. pag. 450. Edit. Antverp. 1633. Dignitaries in all Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, All who have Cure of Souls, All who are provided for, and pre∣ferr'd to anyEtiam per quoscunque quibus de Monasteriis, Conventibus, Domibus, & aliis quibuscunque locis, Regularium quorumcunque Ordinum, etiam Militiarum, quocunque nomine providebitur, idem Servari. Idem. pag. 451. Extat etiam in Bullario Romano. Edit. Romae, 1638. Tom. 2. pag. 97. Dat. Ibid. Novem. 1564. Pontificatus sui Ann. 5. Monastery, or Religious House what∣soever, be they of whatsoever Order of Regulars. And not only these; butNullus Doctor, Magister, Regens, vel alius cujuscunque Artis & Facultatis Professor, sive Clericus, sive Laicus, ac Secularis, vel cujusvis Ordinis Regularis, sit, in quibusvis Vniversitatibus aut Gymnasiis publicis, aut Alibi Lectoris Cathedram obtinere, aut obtentam re∣tinere, seu alias Theologiam, Canonicam vel Civilem Censuram, Medicinam, Philosophiam, Grammalicam vel alias Artes Liberales, publice vel privatim profiteri, nisi Juramento prius praestito. &c. Bulla Pij. 4. in Bullarij Rom. Tom. 2. p. 96. & cap. In Sacro Sancta. 2. De Magist. & Doctoribus in 7. All Doctors, Masters, Re∣gents, and Professors of any Art or Faculty, whether they be of the Laity or Clergy, or Regulars of any Or∣der
whatsoever, in any Vniversity, publick School, or any where else, in Cities, Vniversities, Towns, Church∣es or Monasteries; whether they profess Divinity, Ca∣non or Civil Law, Physick, Philosophy, Grammar, or any other Liberal Art, publickly or privately, and all who take any Degrees in any Vniversity; All these (that is, almost all the Learned men in the Papacy) by theJuxta dispositic∣nem Conc. Trid. in Con∣stit. 89. Pij. 4. Bullar. Rom. Tom. 2. pag. 97. Disposition and Appointment of the Pope and Council of Trent, are toRomano Pontifici, Petri Apostolorum Princi∣pis Successori, & Christi Vicario veram Obedienti∣am Spondeo, ac Juro. Cae∣tera item Omnia à Sacris Canonibus & Occumenicis Conciliis, Praecipuè à Tri∣dent. Synodo tradita, defi∣nita ac declarata, Indubi∣tanter recipio & profiteor, & ad Vltimum vitae spiri∣tum Constantisstmè retinere ac profiteri, & à meis sub∣ditis, illísque quorum Cura ad me spectat, teneri, quan∣tum in me est, Curaturum. Ego. N. Spondeo, Voveo, Juro, &c. p. 98. §. 2. di∣ctae Bullae. promise, vow, and swear to obey the Pope as Peter's Successor and Christ's Vicar, and to receive, and without All Doubting to Profess all Things deliver'd, defin'd, and declared in the Sacred Canons, and General Councils, Especially in the Council of Trent; and all this they swear to do most constantly so long as they live, and to take care (to the utmost of their Ability) that all under them, or committed to their Charge, shall do so too. And the Pope there further tells us,Deus Omnipotens Patribus (Tridentinis) Divinitus Inspirare Dig∣natus est. Ibidem, in dictae Bullae Initio. That God Almighty did by the Holy Ghost Inspire the Trent Fathers to re∣quire, That this Oath should be taken. Seeing then there are so many thousands in the Church of Rome, who do and must take this cursed Oath, to Obey the Pope, and receive, and without doubting believe all their Rebellious Canons before menti∣on'd, and (to the utmost of their Power) to per∣swade and induce all who are under their Cure and Charge (that is, all the Laity in the whole Roman Church, for all of them are under the Charge and Cure of some of those who take that Oath) to receive and believe them too. Hence it mani∣festly follows, 1. That the Church of Rome approves those impicus and rebellious Doctrines to which so many
thousands swear, by the Command of the Pope and Trent Council. 2. That all their Ecclesiasticks (Se∣cular and Regular) who have any Cure of Souls and Charge over others, are bound, not only by their Papal Constitutions and Decrees of their General Councils; but by a Personal Promise, Vow, and Oath, (in facinus Ju∣rasse putes) to believe and profess, and (as there is opportunity) to practise according to these Principles. 3. And hence it appears, That Queen Elizabeth was (and all Protestant Kings and Princes are, and in the like case, will be) in most eminent Danger of as∣sassination by her Popish Subjects, especially after Pope Pius the fifth had damn'd, and deposed her, absolved all her Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance, and Commanded them (on pain of Excommunication) ne∣ver to obey her, or any of her Laws or Commands; it being also declared, by their Supream Infallible Power, That the killing the Queen, by open War pub∣lickly, or privately by Poyson or Pistol, had neither been Rebellion, Treason, nor Murder, but an Act morally good and meritorious; by which they should merit, not only Heaven, but a higher Degree of Glory in it, and be, as Glorious Martyrs (if they died in that Cause) commended to Posterity; Nay, when their Ecclesi∣asticks (both Secular and Regular) who had any Cure of Souls, or Authority and Charge over o∣thers, had promised, vow'd, and solemnly sworn, That they would obey the Pope as Christs Vicar, &c. I say, those who had such great Promises to allure them, and their Promise, Oath and vow to oblige them to it, would certainly indeavour (as indeed they did, as will appear anon) the ruin and destru∣ction
of that good Queen. Neither is this all. For 6. Lastly; the Pope and his Party have further Inducements, more efficacious and powerful to perswade their Instruments to Assassinate Princes and Extirpate Hereticks, especiallyThey are more affraid of Protestants, then of all others they call Hereticks, and there is good reason for it. For truth (which the Prote∣stants constantly main∣tain) is more destructive of their Popish Errors, then any one Error can be of another. Extrema (Errores & vitia) facile Coexistunt; Media (vir∣tutes & veritates) Extre∣ma destruunt. This ap∣pears, 1. Because they will not permit their I∣talian Papists to live in a∣ny Protestant County. Prohibentur Nunc Itali Catholici habitare, ciu Com∣morari extra Italiam Oc∣casione Mercimonij ads{que} Licentiâ Inquisitorum, si in illis partibus non viget Libertas Religiones Ca∣tholicae. Vide Const. 42. Clement. 8. in Bullario Rom. Tom. 3. pag. 42. 2. They permit no Hereticks (Protestants you may be sure especially) to inhabit in Italy, or the adjacent Isles, on pretense of Merchandize, &c. Gregorius. 15. sub gravissimis poenis vetuit, Haereticos quoscunque etiam sub praetextu Coinmercij habere domum apertam propriam, vel Conductam in Italiâ, vel adjacientibus insulis. Gregorius. 15. in Constitut. 38. In dicto Bullario. Tom. 3. pag. 314. Edit. Romae. 1638. Vide Corp. Jur. Canon. Lugduni. 1661. & ibi Annotationes in Calce Tom. 2. pag. 55. 3. Because 'tis notoriously known, that they permit Jews, (who deny Je∣sus Christ, and the whole Gospel) to live and have Houses, even in Rome it self, and yet they will not permit Protestants. It is a less Crime (it seems) at Rome, to deny Jesus Christ, then to deny (what all Protestants do) that the Pope is his Vicar, and Monarchical Head of the whole Chri∣stian Church. Protestants, the greatest Enemies of their Antichristian Tyran∣ny, and Papal Usurpations. For although to pi∣ous men, (who really desire, and use the just means to obtain it) the promise of Eternal Joys in Heaven, is the greatest Motive and Incourage∣ment imaginable; yet to such Impious and Pro∣digious Villains (who will undertake to kill Kings and murder Innocents) Heaven signifies no more, then the Diamond did to Aesop's Cock in the Fable, who preferr'd a Grain of Barly before it. And therefore, for such, (and none but such will serve them in the Execution of such Execrable Villa∣nies) they have present and more prevailing In∣couragements; I mean Money and great Sums of Gold, or some vast Temporal Advantages to be injoy'd here; which prevails more with such Per∣sons, then the Promise of Heaven hereafter: I shall (out of many) give two or three Instances. As,
1. In the year. 1594.Cambdens Eliz. l. 4. ad Ann. 1594. p. 430. 431. Edit. Lond. 1635. Roderigo Lopez (a Jew and Physician) Stephen Ferriera Gama, and E∣manuel Loisie (two Portugals) by the Roman Arts and Impiety, were hired, and undertook to Poyson Queen Elizabeth. Lopez had a rich Jewel sent him, and was (by Contract) to have Fifty thousand Duckets promised by the Popish Party, for Poysoning Q. Elizabeth.Fifty thousand Duckets; which evidently appeared (at their Trial) by their own Con∣fessions. And though Letters intercepted, and the Good Providence of God (by whom King's Reign) their Villany was detected, and they (as Traitors) justly Executed; yet their Popish Desires and Indeavours were not less mischie∣vous and impious, because the Good Provi∣dence of God graciously prevented the Execu∣tion of their Designs. 2. This, by the Mercy of God not taking Effect, (for there is no Power or Policy can prevail a∣gainst Divine Providence) a little after in the Cambdens Eliz. l. 4. ad Ann. 1594. 1596. p. 440. vide Plura in Sta∣tuto de Ann. 3. Jac. c. 2.same year, Edmund York and Richard Wil∣liams, were (by the same Roman Arts and Im∣piety) hired to Kill the Queen. York (at his Trial) confess'd, That Holt the Jesuit, Hugh Owen, Jacomo de Francisco, and others, had of∣fer'd him an Assignment ofForty thousand Duckets promised for killing Q. Elizabeth. Forty thousand Duckets, if he would Kill the Queen himself, or assist Richard Williams in Killing Her. This York confess'd at his Trial; and that Holt the Jesuit (in whose Hand the Assignment of Forty thou∣sand Duckets was deposited) kissing the Holy Host, swore that the Money should be paid so soon as the Queen was kill'd; and bound York
and Williams by an Oath, and the Sacrament of the Eucharist, To Dispatch it. In short, many others (besides these named) con∣spired the assassination and death of the Queen. For Instance; (to omit others) 1. Dr.Cambdens Eliz. l. 2. p. 144. 145. Story, Ann. 1572. 2.Ibid. l. 3. p. 257. Somervil, Ann. 1583. 3. Dr.Ibid. l. 3. p. 272. Parry, Ann. 1585. by the Approba∣tion and Incouragement of the Pope and Car∣dinal Como. 4. JohnIbid. l. 3. p. 302. Savage, Ann. 1586. 5. Ant.Ibid. p. 303. Babington; and five or six more with him are incouraged and perswaded to Murder the Queen, in the same year, 1586. 6.Ibid. p. 336. Moody, Ann. 1587. 7. PatrichIbid. l. 4. p. 431. Cul∣len, Ann. 1594. 8. EdwardIbid. l. 4. p. 498. Squire, Ann. 1598. 9.Ibid. l. 4. p. 578. Winter and Tesmond the Jesuit, Ann. 1602. &c. We see there were many (too many) desperate Villains, who valued not their own, so that they might take away the Queens life; and yet too few (Divine Providence pre∣venting their Impious Designs) to Effect and Compass that (more then Pagan) Popish Con∣spiracy, which at (so vast an Expence of Money) the Pope and his Party designed and earnestly desired, and indeavour'd to Execute. 3. When all this would not do; and the Pope and his Party plainly saw, that they could not cut off the Queen by Pistol, Poyson, or private As∣sassinations, horrendum & majus machinantur sce∣lus: they design by Fire and Sword, by open War, utterly to destroy that good Queen, and all her Heretical (that is, Loyal) Subjects. And to this end, (besides Plenary Indulgence
and Pardon of all sins here, and the Kingdom of Heaven hereafter) Pius the Fifth promises, and immediately gives two whole Kingdoms (England and Ireland) to Philip the Second, King of Spain; as is notoriously known, and Pius. 5. In Deposi∣tione Eliz. Jus Britanniae, Hiberniaeque ad Philip. 2. Hispaniae Regem transtu∣lit; vi cujus donationis, demandat us postea Sidoni∣us fuit. Ann. 1588. Classe Hispanicâ Instructus, ut Regna Britanniae Posside∣ret. F. R. Caron, Remon∣strant. Hibernorum. Part. c. 3. §. 4. p. 7.confess'd by their own Popish Writers His Successors, Gregory the Thirteenth, and Sixtus the Fifth, renue and confirm the Ex∣communication of Elizabeth, and the donati∣on of her Kingdoms; and accordingly (not with Gods, but) with the PopesSixtus the Fifth was Pope, and it was in the fourth year of his Popedom. Vide Cambd. Eliz. l. 3. ad Ann. 1588. p. 360. 361. Approbati∣on and Blessing, in that memorable year 1588. the (vainly supposed) Invincible Armado was sent to destroy the damn'd Hereticks (the Queen and her Loyal Subjects) and take Pos∣session of her Kingdoms, which the Pope had given him. The Pretences the Pope had to give those Kingdoms, (for they were but mi∣serable Pretences, void of all Reason and Ju∣stice) were Two. 1. King John's Donation andMatth. Paris. ad dictum Ann. 1213. pag. 236. Resignation of his Crown to Pope Inno∣cent the Third, about the year, 1213. when that King and the whole Nation groaned un∣der many Miseries and Papal Oppressions. Which Act of King John was invalid and abso∣lutely Null; he having no just Power to give away his Kingdom. And even then declared to be Null; not only by the English Barons and Nation, but by the King ofRex Francorum re∣spondet, Regnum Angliae Patrimonium Petri nun∣quam fuit; Nec est, Nec erit. Nullus Rex potest dare Regnum suum, sine as∣sensu Baronum suorum, Qui Regnum tenantur defende∣re. Tunc Magnates Omnes Vno Oreclamabant, quod isto Articulo starent usque ad mortem, non Rex vel Princeps per Solm volun∣tatem suam possit Regnum dare, vel tributarium face∣re, unde nobiles regni essent servi. Matth. Paris in Jo∣hanne ad Ann. 1213. France and his Nobility, as Matthew Paris tells us. 2. Nor is it only Matthew Paris who says that the Kings of England and Ireland▪ are (since King John's
time) Tribuiaries to the Pope, (as they pretend) but their Historians, Canonists, and the Popes themselves. SoMatth. Westmin. ad Ann. 1213. p. 271. Jo∣hannes Rex est Papae Tri∣butarius, seu Fedatarius. Matthew Westminster, Hen∣ry Hen. Knighton de Event. Angl. l. 2. c. 15. p. 2420.Knighton, Cardinal Tuscus, &c. The Cardinal tells us, That the Pope is the Supream Card. Tuschus Pract. Conclus. Juris. Tom. 6. Conclus. 41.Judge of All. That he can Depose thePapa potest depone∣re Imperatorem, Reges, Du∣ces, & Omnes qui de facto Superiorem non recognos∣cunt. Ibid. §. 49. Em∣peror, Kings, Dukes, and All who Acknowledge No Superior; and that the Kings of England, and Sicilie areRex Angliae & Si∣ciliae sunt Tributarij Ec∣clesiae Romanae. Ibid. §. 34. Tributaries to the Church of Rome. And he who denies this PapalQui negat potesta∣tem Papae, Negat se Chri∣stianum. Ibid. §. 37. Power, is No Chri∣stian. And for Ireland; Pope John the Two and twentieth, in a Bull to our King Edward the Second, tells him, That his Predecessor, Adrian the Fourth, Gave the Kingdom of Ire∣land to Henry the Second, King of England, up∣on certain Conditions, which Conditions our King had not kept. And this ridiculous Bull we have in Matthew Paris, ad Ann. 1156. pag. 95. where he tells us, That all the Islands in the World, which are Christian, belong to Peter, and so to the Pope. See Archbishop Vsher of the Religi∣on profess'd by the Ancient Irish, pag. 51. 92. 93. 94. &c. And upon these (and such like ridiculous) Pretenses, the Pope required Ed∣ward the Third to do himVid. Const. 4. Jo∣han. Papae, 22. In Bullar. Rom. Tom. 1. p. 172. E∣dit. Rom. 1638. Homage for the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and the Arrears of One thousand Marks per Annum. All the Popes pretences were in a full Popish Parlia∣ment declared vain and evidently null; as ap∣pears by my LordMy Lord Cook▪ Inst. Part. 4. c. 1. p. 13. Cooke, and the Record before mention'd. Besides; 'tis certain that John was an Usurper, and had only Possession
of the Crown, but no just Right and Title to it. For Elinor, Daughter to Jeffery his Elder Brother, was living, and was the true Heir of the Crown; so that King John's Resignation of the Crown to the Pope, was absolutely null; it being impossible he should give a Just Title to another, who had none himself. His second Pretence was, that the Queen being an Excom∣municate and Deposed Heretick, (as he was pleased to miscall her) her Kingdom was forfei∣ted to him, by the Canon of their great Late∣ran Council. Wherein 'tisSignificetur Ponti∣fici, ut Ipse Vasallos à fide∣litate absolvat, & Terram Exponat Catholicis occu∣pandam. Conc. Lateran. 4. Can. 3. De Haereticis. And it now goes for Law. Cap. 13. Extra. de Haereticis. declared, That such obstinate Persons (as they call the Queen) when they stood Excommunicate, and would not give Satisfaction, the Pope was to absolve their Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance, and give their Lands and Kingdoms to Catholicks: who by that Canon, were bound to Exterminate or ExtirpateQui terram illam Exterminatis Haereticis absque ullâ Contradictione possideant, & in fidei puri∣tate conservent. Ibidem. all Hereticks. Upon the afore∣said Sandy Foundations, the Popes successively since King John's time, build their Right to the Crown of England; and believe, (or at least say, and would have others believe) that the Imperial or Royal Power of England and Ire∣land is in them; and our Kings only Benefici∣arij & Feudatarij (as the Civil Law calls them) Feudataries to the Pope, of whom (as their Su∣pream Lord) they hold their Kingdoms. Whence it was, that Pope Innocent the Third, in his Letter to Philip King of France, calls the King of England hisPapa Philippo Fran∣corum Regi Literas mittit, in quibus rogat ut Regem Angliae non Inquiet aret; sed ut Romanae Ecclesiae Vassal∣lum protegeret. Mat. Paris Hist. an Ann. 1216. p. 280. In Johanne. Vassal. And his Suc∣cessor, Pope Innocent the Fourth (with a Prodi∣gious
Antichristian Pride and Impiety) calls our King (Henry the Third was then King) His Vas∣sal, and (which is more) his Slave. What (says he)Papa non se capiens prae ira & indignatione (it was Grostheads Letter had angred him) torvo aspectu, & superbo animo, ait: Non∣ne Rex Anglorum noster est Vasallus, & ut plus dicam Mancipium? Mat. Paris Hist. in Hen. 3. ad Ann. Dom. 1253. p. 872. in E∣dit. G. Watsij. London. 1640. Is not the King of England our Vassal? Nay, that I may say more, our Slave? These are his words, and expressions, of such prodigious Pride, as is absolutely Inconsistent with that great and exemplary Humility, which our blessedMatth. 20. 28. Luc. 22. 27. Saviour practis'd in his own Person, and Commanded all (evenMatth. 20. 45. 46. 47. & Matth. 23. 11. 12. Luc. 22. 24. 25. 26. Peter and his Apostles) to imitate: But yet congruous e∣nough, and consistent with the Hypocrisie of him, who would be call'd Servus Servorum Dei, the Servant of all Gods Servants; and yet as the Man of Sin (mention'd by the2. Thess. 2, 4. Apo∣stle) Exalts himself above all that is called God, and (with Pope Innocent the Fourth, in the place now cited) calls Kings his Slaves and Vassals. 'Tis true, we believe and know, that the Pope indeed had no Power to performe those a∣foresaid Promises; and so in making them was (to all intelligent, sober, and pious Persons) not only impious, but ridiculous; yet to those of his Popish Party, who (having strong delusion to believe a Lye) were perswaded he had Power to make good his Promises; that he was Christs Vicar, Supream Head and Monarch of the Church; that he had the Power of the Keys, and so could shut and open, keep out and let into Heaven whom he pleased, that he could
by this Power DeposeGreg. 7. deposeth Hen. 4. Emperor, by the Power of the Keys. Pote∣stas Ligandi & Solvendi in Coelo & Terrâ, mihi à Dco data. Hac ideo fiducia fretus, Henrico totius Reg∣ni Teutonini & Italiae gu∣bernacula Interdico, & Omnes Christianos, à vin∣cule Juramenti, quod sibi fecere, absolvo. Baronius Annal Tom. 11. ad Ann. 1076. §. 25. 26. Kings, and was Infalli∣ble andEcclesia Rom. Nun∣quam Erravit, nec in per∣petuum (Scripturâ testante) Errabit. Inter Dictatus Papae. Ibid. apud Bar. §. 33. p. 479. Edit. Antv. 1608. never Err'd (for these Erroneous and Impious Positions areDictatus seu Sen∣tentiae Breviores Gregorij Papae, Qu Hactenus in cclesiâ Catholicâ usu re∣ceptae, ut ex his reprimere∣tur audacia Schismatico∣rum Episcoporum & Prin∣cipum. Baron. Ibid. §. 31. p. 479. And Pope Leo. 10. in their General Latera Council, 1513. and in his Bull in Bullario Rom. Romae, 1638. Tom. 1. p. 451. says the same thing, that the Church and Pope of Rome have never err'd. Ibid. in Constit. Leo. 10. 40. §. 3. & 6. approved and received at Rome) I say, such Promises, made by such a Person, were very great. And (to such deluded Persons, who were perswaded of the truth and re∣ality of them) prevailing Incouragements, to make them desperately indeavour to Assassinate and Murder Queen Elizabeth. Forty or Fifty thousand Duckets promised, was great and intic∣ing Wages for doing such a Work, and actually prevail'd with many to endeavour it. But when (what the Pope promised Philip King of Spain) two whole Kingdoms here, and the Kingdom of Heaven hereafter are promised for destroying the Hereticks (the Queen and her Loyal Subjects) this was such an offer, as could not be refused by any who desired (as most do) Wealth or Honour here; or (as all should do) the Joys of Heaven hereafter. These were the Impious Policies, and Bloody Practices of Rome, to destroy Queen Eli∣zabeth and her Protestant Subjects: and as their fear of the Protestant Religion, (destructive of their Superstition and Idolatry) continued, so their hate of it, and their desire and indeavours to destroy all the Professors of it. For the Queen being dead, in the beginning of King James his Reign (upon the aforemention'd, or the like mo∣tives) they undertook the GunpowderVide Stat. 3. Jac. Capp. 1. & 2. A Conspira∣cy undertaken by Malig∣nant and Devilish Jesuits and Priests. Ibid. Cap. ▪ A Design so barbarous and cruel, as the like was never before heard of. Ibidem. The most wicked bar∣barous, execrable, and abominable Treason that ever enter'd into the heart of the most wicked man. Ibid. cap. 2. Conspi∣racy,
(such a horrid and hellish Villany, as no Tur∣kish or Pagan Story can parallel) wherein they in∣deavour'd, and (if the Powerful Providence of Heaven had not hinder'd it) had Assassinated, not not the King only, but the whole Kingdom, in its Representative. And further, (to omit the bloo∣dy and barbarous Assassinations ofVid. Thuani Hist. Tom. 4. lib. 95. ad Ann. 1598. Henry the Third of France, by Jaques Clement, and of Hen∣ry the Fourth, by Raviliac,Vide Anticoton, by Peter Du Moulin. In that Pyramid erected in Paris upon the Murder of Henry the Fourth, the Jesuits are noted as men, Malificae Superstitionis, Quorum Instinctu, piacula∣ris Adolescens (Raviliac) Dirum facinus (the mur∣der of the King) Institu∣erat. incouraged to those Villanies by Jesuitical and Popish Principles and Promises; for Raviliac confess'd, That it was the Book of Mariana the Jesuite, and the Traiterous Po∣sitions maintain'd in it, which induced him to that Pro∣digious Villany, the Murder of the King; for which Cause that Book (Damn'd by the Sentence of the Parliament and Sorbon) was publickly burnt in Pa∣ris. I say, to let these, and such Instances pass, it is too well known and believ'd, that in the late Ann. 1678. & 1679.horrid and hellish Conspiracy (continued and carried on, principally by the Jesuits) to take a∣way the Life of our Gracious King (whom God preserve) one of the Assassins had Fifteen thou∣sand pounds pay'd or promised, and another, Thirty thousand Masses to be said for him, if he miscarried, to Incourage them to that Monstrous Popish Villany. Now their Impiety in this their Ingagement, was equal; both undertaking the Commission of the same Sin, the Murder of their King: But their folly seem'd unequal. For Fif∣teen thousand pounds might possibly (in this World) have been some benefit to him who con∣tracted for it: But the 30000. Masses, were alto∣gether
Insignificant, and could be no way benefi∣cial or profitable to him to whom they were pro∣mised, either in this, or the World to come. The poor Miscreant was cozen'd by his Party, with the noise and number of their Masses. For they knew, and (had he not been a Fool as well as Knave and Villain) so might he too; that those Masses could never do him any good. For even by their own approved and received Principles, killing of Hereticks (especially an Excommnica∣ted Prince) was such a meritorious Work, as (with∣out any Masses) deserved a Plenary Indulgence and pardon of all his Sins, and an higher place in Hea∣ven; and therefore he could not go toCum poenae pro culpis debitae delentur & remit∣tuntur, tum crimina velen∣tur & remittuntur. Quo sensu Ecclesia per Indulgen∣tias concedit peccatorum Omnium plenissimam veni∣am, id est, Poenarum Om∣nium, quas peccando con∣traximus.—Quia non est Plene remissa Culpa, quam∣diu peccator Reus est Sol∣vendae Poenae. Melch. Ca∣nus Locorum Theol. lib. 12. cap. 13. §. Ex quo Am∣brosij pag. 694. Edit. Co∣lon. Agrip. 1605. Purgato∣ry (had there been any such Place) nor could the Devil or the Pope punish him there, for such Sins as were absolutely pardon'd, and all the Punish∣ment due to them remitted; I say, they could not justly do it: or admit the Devil (had he power and permission) might be willing to punish an innocent Soul, which had no Sin to punish; yet sure his Holiness (who as Christs Vicar has the Keys of Purgatory as well as Heaven) would not do, or at least not own (for otherwise he does, and has done as Impious things) the doing of that, which is so evidently injust. So that (if their own Prin∣ciples be true) those Thirty thousand Masses could no way be profitable to that miserable deluded Person, in Purgatory, whither he was never to come; and I suppose, they will not say, that their Masses here, are profitable to the glorify'd Saints and Martyrs in Heaven.
12.Observ. 12. And here, (for a more clear and distinct Explication of their Jesuitical and Popish Assassina∣tions) it will neither be Impertinent nor Improper to observe further, That although since the time of Hildebrand orIt was the saying of this Gregory; Intelligant Omnes, Imperia, Regna, Principatus, & quicquid habere mortales possunt, av∣ferre & dare Nos Posse. Plat. in vitâ Greg. 7. Edit. 1485. And Baronius tells us, that this, and such di∣ctates of that Pope—In Ecclesia Catholica Ha∣ctenùs usurecepti sunt. An∣nal. Tom. 11. ad Ann. 1076. §. 31. Gregory the Seaventh, the Antichristian Pride or Tyranny of the Pope and his Party, has been exceeding great, and pernici∣ous to the Western Part of the World; they both approving and practising the Excommunications and Depositions of Kings and Emperors, Absolu∣tions of their Subjects from all Oaths of Allegi∣ance, with Injunctions (against the Law of Na∣ture and Scripture) never to Obey them: yet I do not find that the Popes or their Party approv'd or practis'd the Assassinations of Princes before Ignatius Loyola, and the unhappy Approbation and Confirmation of his Society, Ann. 1540. Nay, I find it Condemned, as Impious, Inhuman, and Barbarous; not only by their Learned men, (even their Canonists) but by their Popes and Councils. That this may appear, I desire it may be consider'd, 1. That Pope Innocent the Fourth, about the year 1245. or 1246. makes aConstitutio illa extat, in Corpore Juris Can. de Homicidio. cap. pro humani. 1. In. 6. Constitution in the General Council at Lions, (and with theSacri approbatione Concilij Statuimus. Ibid. approbation of that Council) wherein he calls AssassinationsQui Horrenda Im∣pietate Detestandaque Sae∣vitiâ Mortem suiunt ali∣orum, ut Ipsos faciunt per Assassinos occidi, non solum Corporum, sed mortem pro∣curent Animarum—Statuimus, ut quicunque Princeps vel Praelatus quempiam Christianorum per praedictos Assassinos in∣terfici fecerit, vel manda∣verit (quanquam mors non sequatur) Excommunica∣tus & Depositus à Digni∣tate, Honore, & Officio, Ipso facto, sit bonis etiam Mun∣danis Omnibus à toto Christiano populo perpetuo diffidatus. Ibid. & Conc. Tom. 11. Part. 1. p. 672. Edit. per Labbe Paris. 1671. Horrid Inhumanity, and Dete∣stable Cruelty, and an indeavour to kill Body and Soul: and then adds, That if any Prince or Pre∣late, any Person Ecclesiastical or Civil, shall pro∣cure any Assassin to kill any Christian, (though the Effect do not follow) or receive, conceal, or any way
favour such Assassin, then such Person is (Ipso facto) Excommunicate, Deposed, and Deprived of all his Honour, Dignity and Revenue. This was the Judgment of Pope Innocent the Fourth about 435. years since; and although for Antichri∣stian Pride and Tyranny (as in other things, so) in his Impious Excommunication and Deposi∣tion of the Emperor Frederick, he was as bad as his Predecessors; yet neither they nor he, were (as yet) arrived at the height of Impiety to approve Mahometan and Turkish Assassinati∣ons of Kings and Emperors. 2. About Eight and forty years after the making of his Constitution by Innocent the Fourth, Boniface the Eighth (as Impious and Tyranni∣cal as his Predecessors, was made Pope, and ap∣proved this Constitution of Innocent against Assassinations, and referr'd it into the Body of theirCap. pro humani. . De Homicidio, In. 6. Decretalium. Canon Law; where it stillVid. Edit. Juris Canonici, Paris. 1612. & 1618. Lugduni. 1661. &c. re∣mains in all Editions of that Law, even to this Day: and that (to giveVt hujus utilissimi & gravissimi Codicis non vacillaret Authoritas, pla∣cuit Pio. 4. dein Pio. 5. & Greg. 13. ut illi Corri∣gendo Summa opera dare∣tur, &c. Ita admonitio ad Lect. praefixa Corpori Juris Can. Paris. 1612. & Ludg. 1661. Authority to it) with the Approbation and Confirmation of succeeding Popes; particularly of Pius the Fourth, Pius the Fifth, and Gregory the Thir∣teenth. 3. And hence it is, that eminent Writers of the Church of Rome (except the Jesuites and their Party) do, even to this Day, generally Con∣demn all such Assassinations, as Impious, and to the Publick Pernicious. This evidently ap∣pears (to say nothing of the Gloss) by Cardi∣nal Summa de Eccle∣sia, l. 25. 35. & 36. as he is cited (for I have not the Book by me) in the Mar∣gent of the Canon Law; ad Cap. 1. de Homicidio. in. 6.Turrecremata, CardinalIn Summula. verbo Assassinus. Cajetan, Car∣dinal
Conclus. Pract. Ju∣ris, Lit. A. verbo Assassi∣nus. Conclus. 531.Tuschus, HenryContinuat. Annal. Baronij, ad Ann. 1231. §. 3. 4. 5. &c. Spondanus (Bishop of Pamiez in France,) DidacusOperum, Tom. 1. p. 528. De Delict. & Co∣nat. §. 9. Couvarruvias (Bishop of Segobia in Spain, &c.) And here it is further observable, 1. That Pope Innocent the Fourth, in the aforesaid Decretal Constitution, speaks only of those Ancient, and properly so call'd Mahometan-Assassins; and though he cen∣sures their Assassinations as Impious, yet he ap∣points not their Punishment. I know that the Author of the Gloss upon that Constitution (Joh. Andreas Boniensis, was the man) tells us; Papa volens obvia∣re hujusmodi malis, profert plures poenas in istos Assas∣sinos, & illos qui eis man∣dabant. Glossa ad dictum Cap. 1. De Homicidio. In. 6.That the Punishments express'd there, are de∣nounc'd against the Assassins, as well as those who procur'd or hired them to Assassinate any Christians. But the man is miserably mistaken; for 'tis E∣vident, andNon contraipsos Assassinos, utpote Infideles; sed contra Mandantes per Ipsos aliquem occidi; In∣nocentius. 4. Excommuni∣cationem promulgavit. Ca∣jetan. in Summula. verbo Assassinus. Confess'd, That the Punishments contain'd in the Constitution, are denounced only a∣gainst those Christians who hire and imploy those Impious Assassins. Excommunication (and the Consequents of it) is the Punishment menti∣on'd in that Constitution; which neither did, nor possibly could concern those Mahometan Assassins. For although the said Author of the Gloss, elsewhere tells us, That the Pope isPapa cum prius esset Purus Homo, nunc Vices Veri Deigerit. Johan. Andreas, in Glossa ad Prooemium. 6. Decret. verbo Bonifacius. more then a pure man; and Gods Vice-Roy; yet certainly, he cannot do Impossibilities, and Excommunicate Mahometans and Infidels; unless he can turn those out of the Christian Church, who never were, nor would be in it; and deprive them of that Communion, which they never had. But although Pope Innocent the Fourth (in the afore-mention'd Constituti∣on)
speaks only of the Infidel and Mahometan Assassins, and of those Christians who procure or hire them to Murder Princes, and has no∣thing of any other, who are not of that Ma∣hometan Society; though they undertake and act the same Villanies; yet those Great and Learned Canonists and Writers of the Popish Church (before-named) upon proportion and parity of Reason, justly Condemn all Christi∣ans who shall undertake and effect, or indea∣vour such Assassinations. Of these Christian Assassins, Cardinal Cajetan says—Et hi non compre∣henduntur sub Censura di∣cta, quamvis digni sunt & Morte Temporaeli & Ae∣ternâ. Cajetan. Ibidem. That though they be not comprehended under the Censures of that Constitution, yet they Deserve both a Tempo∣ral and Eternal Death. And to the same pur∣pose Covarruvias tells us, (and he says it is the Common Opinion)Qui cum quolibet Christiano aut Infideli, pe∣cuniae data vel promissa pa∣ctionem inierit, de homine Christiano occidendo, in ipso Mandatario, si ad a∣ctum proximum processerit, ut per eum minime steterit; quin scelus peregerit, no∣tant puniendum fore poena Ordinariâ; id est, Morte. D. Covarruvias, Part. 2. Relect. Clem. Si furiosus, de Homicidio, de delictis & Conat. num. 9. Ope∣rum. Tom. 1. p. 258. Col. 1. That whosoever he be (Christian or Mahometan) who for Money given or promised, undertakes the Assassination of any Chri∣stian; in this Case, both the Mandans and Manda∣tarius, both he that hires, and he who is hired to do such Villany, are highly guilty, and under the Cen∣sures, and the Severity of them: though he who is hired, do not actually effect the Assassination, if he really indeavour it. Nor is it only these I have named, who Damn this Impious, Mahometan: and Turkish Doctrine of Assassinating Kings and Princes. I believe, and (from good Au∣thority) know, that many thousands more in the Communion of the Church of Rome do e∣qually abhorr and detest it, especially in France, where their Divines and Parliaments (famous
for Learning and their General Defence of the Liberties of the Gallican Church, against the U∣surpations and Tyranny of Rome) in the year 1594. publickly Condemn'd this Mahometan and Jesuitical Doctrine, and declared it to be (what indeed it is)Hen. Carter. Da∣vila in his Hist. of the Civil Wars of France▪ ad Ann. 1594. in Calce istius Anni. Heretical, Prodigious, and Diabolical. 4. But all this notwithstanding, the Jesuites (and others of their Party and Principles) did, and do approve and practise that Diabolical Doctrine; and when they conceive Princes to be Enemies to their Interest, or the Catholick Cause, (as they call it) indeavour (by Lying Calumnies) to disaffect the People, and to raise Rebellions against those Princes; that so they may cut them off, by Publick War and Seditions; and when this succeeds not, by private Assassinati∣ons. This is (by sad Experience) notoriously known to our Western World; as may appear by the Premisses, and further Testimonies of their own Roman Catholick Historians (in this Case) of Indubitable Truth and Veracity. Thuanus tell us,Accedent ad hoc Sacri ordinis favore & quorundam Religiosorum non segni Opera, & Jesui∣tarum Patrum Imprimis, qui fascinatum per scrupu∣losas in Arcanis Confessio∣nibus quaestiones, lebem sensim à Principis obsequio alienatam, Ad Defectio∣nem Sollicitabant. Thua∣nus Hist. Tom. 3. lib. 75. p. 561. A. B. Edit. 1620. & Tom. 4. l. 86. p. 170. ad Ann. 1587. And the same excellent person (Thua∣nus) gives us this ac∣count of the Society of the Jesuites. Nata Magistratum con∣vellere, nata Ministris Subtrahere obsequium, prae∣sulibusque suum. Et viles Regnantum ani∣mas, ipsosque Necandos Horrenda Regis proditio∣ne docet; Servandamque fidem Ne∣gat, argutisque cavillis Detorquet magni jussa se∣vera Dei. Hi sunt Ampliss. Praesidis Thuani versus de Jesui∣tarum Sectâ, in Elegia sua eleganti in Parricidas, sub finem Sacrae Poeseos. That in those Bloody Wars in France, in the Reign of Henry the Third; it was some of the Religious and Regulars, especially the Jesuites, who by an Industrious, and (I add) Im∣pious Diligence, did first Alienate the People from their Obedience to their Prince, and then sollici∣ted them to Rebellion. I know that those words (Ac Jesuitarum Patrum Imprimis) are not to be found in those Editions of Thuanus we have, being left out by the Arts and Frauds of those who cor∣rupt
all Authors who have any thing against their Errors or Impieties; but we are assured that those words were in theVide Thuanum Restitutum Amstolada∣mi. Ann. 1663. p. 49. Original Copy of Thuanus his History. But when this would not do, and they saw the King could not be cut off by a Rebellious War, and publickly; they perswade and incourage Jaques Clement (a Desperate Villain) to Assassinate his Prince; who August the First, 1589. did the Execrable Act, and Murder'd his King. Thuanus tells us, Thuanus Hist. Tom. 4. l. 95. p. 454. A. Facundis Concionatorum Declama∣tionibus, & Novitiorum, Theologorum, ac praecipuè Jesuitarum disputationi∣bus, qui Tyrannum Impune occidere Licere affirma∣bant, Incitatus Clemens, &c.That Friar Clement was incouraged to Commit that Prodigious Parricide by the furious Sermons and Declamations of their New Divines, Vide Thuanum Restitutum. p. 84.Especially of the Jesuites, who publickly taught them, That it was lawful, nayNon solum inoffen∣sa Conscientiâ facere posse, sed multum apud Deum Meriturum. Thuanus di∣cto Tom. 4. & p. 454. Merito∣rious to kill a Tyrant, and if he outlived the Fact, he should be a Cardinal atHen. Cart. Davila, in his Hist. of the Civil Wars in France, Lib. 10. ad Ann. 1589. Rome; and if he died, aSi in actu Ipso mo∣riatur, proculdubio inter Beatorum choros animam ejus Evolaturam. Thuan. dicto Tom. 4. & p. 454. & Davila, l. 10. ad Ann. 1589. Saint in Heaven. And accordingly when he was dead (by a Death he de∣served) his Party caused hisHistorical Colle∣ctions of the most Me∣morable Accidents, and Tragical Massacres in France, under Hen. 2. Francis. 2. Charles. 9. Hen. 3. and Hen. 4. ad Ann. 1589. in the begin∣ing of Hen. 4. & Thuan. Tom. 4. ad dictum Ann. p. 458. Picture to be cut in Brass, adorned their Churches and Chambers with it, counted him a Saint and Martyr, and (as such) made their Addresses and Prayers to him. Horrid Superstition and Popish blindness, not to put a vast difference between a Martyr of Jesus Christ, and an Impious Traytor and Murtherer of his King. 2. After this, in the year 1594. Johan. Chastell undertakes and indeavours the Assassination of Henry the Fourth of France, struck him in the Mouth, but (the good Providence of Heaven pro∣tecting that Prince) did not effect his Impious
Design. Now if you ask, How any who pre∣tends to be a Christian, could have a Consci∣ence so seared, or a Soul possess'd with so Pro∣digious an Insensibility, as not to tremble at the very thought of Committing such a horrid and inhuman Villany?Hen. Carter. Da∣vilâ, in his History of the Civil wars of France, lib. 14. ad Ann. 1594. sub sinem istius Anni. See to the same purpose the Au∣thor of the Civil Wars of France under Hen. 2. Fran. 2. Charl. 9. Hen. 3. and Hen. 4. In Henry the Fourth, ad Ann. 1594. a little before the end of that year. Davila will tell you, That he was a Disciple of the Jesuites; That he himself freely confessed, that he was bred up in the Schools of the Jesuites, and had often heard it dis∣cours'd, and disputed, That it was not Only Lawful, but Meritorious to Kill Henry of Bourbon, a Relapsed Heretick, and Persecutor of the Holy Church; That Father Gueret a Jesuite, was his Confessor, &c. so that being possess'd with their Im∣pious Principles and Perswasions, he undertook that prodigious and damnable Parricide. In short, it was notoriously known to all France, that the Jesuites both approved and designed the Execrable Assassination of their King. Whence it was, (as Davila goes on) that the Parliament of Paris pass'd this Sentence—That Father Guignard and Gueret (Jesuites) should be Condemned to the Gallows; that the rest of the Jesuites (profess'd or not profess'd) should be ba∣nished out of France, as Enemies to the Crown and publick Tranquility, their Goods and Revenues Jeiz'd and distributed to pious Vses, &c. And it had been well for France had they stood bani∣shed still, and never return'd. For about Six∣teen years after, what Johan. Chastell impiously indeavour'd, that bloody Villain Raviliac, May the Fourteenth, 1610. effected; and with Mon∣strous
Impiety, and a Cursed hand Murder'd his King, Henry the Fourth; And it was the Jesu∣ites, and their Traiterous Principles, which mo∣ved and incouraged him to Commit that Mon∣strous Unchristian and Antichristian Parricide. For (after the Fact was done) Raviliac freely and publickly confessed, That it was the Jesuite Mariana's Book which moved and incouraged him to that Impious Design. I know that the Jesuites did then indeavour toSee Father Cotton, the Jesuites Declaration, with the Bishop of Paris his Preface prefixed to it, to this purpose. free themselves from the Odium of that Impious Fact; as if they had neither approved nor incouraged that Monstrous and Mahometan Assassination. Sed quid verba audiam, cum facta videam? This See Anti-Cotton by Peter Du Moulia.was only a ridiculous indeavour, Aethio∣pem Lavare, to wash a Blackamore, and do Im∣possibilities. It is evident, That their approved Doctrine and Principles in Mariana, (and many o∣thers) was the Motive which induced Raviliac to Murder his Prince. Which Doctrine has never been Condemned by any Publick Act of their Society, nor by the Inquisitors in any Index Expurgatorius; now for them to approve those Traiterous Principles, and deny the Conse∣quents of them, is most irrationally to ap∣prove and grant the Premisses, and yet deny the Conclusion. 5. But this (though bad enough) is not all. For it is not only the Jesuites and their Accompli∣ces, but the Pope too, (their Supream Judge, thom theyChristus Petro & Successoribus Ecclesiae re∣gimen Commisit, & Ean∣dem quam habebat Ipse, In∣fallibilit atem Concessit, quo∣ties è Cathedra Loqueren∣tur. Datur, Ergo, in Rom. Ecclesiâ, Controversiarum Fidei Judex Infallibilis, etiam extra Concilium Ge∣nerale, tum in Quaestioni∣bus Juris, tum Facti. Haec erat Thesis in Coll. Cla∣romontano à Jesuitis proposita & expositâ Decem. 12. Ann. 1661. believe to be Infallible, both in Matters of Faith and Fact) who approved their
Seditious and Traiterous Principles of Rebelli∣on and Assassination of Princes. Thuanus speaking of the Jesuites Practices to stir up the People to Rebellion in the time of Henry the Third of France; he adds—Quae Omnia Conscio Pontifice gerebantur, crebro Commeantibus ad eum E∣missariis, qui Brevia & oc∣culta Diplomata ad partiū Duces adferebant, & indi∣es magis plebem ad seditio∣nem incendebant. Vid. Thuanum Restitutum. p. 49. That these things were well known to the Pope, who sent Breves and Bulls secretly to the Heads of those Rebels, whereby they were incouraged to Rebel. After∣wards, when that Prodigious Villain Jaques Cle∣ment had Murder'd the said King,Sixtus Papa. 5. O∣ratione praemeditata. 3. I∣dus Sept. in Consistorio ha∣bita, factum Clementis O∣peri Assumptae à Domino Carnis, & Resurrectionis, propter magnitudinem, & rei administrationem com∣parat. Tum virtutem homi∣nis, animi Robur, & fer∣ventem Erga Deum Amo∣rem, supra Eleazarum & Juditham, Multis verbis, Extollit, &c. Thuan's Hist. Tom. 4. li. 95. ad Ann. 1589. p. 458. Edit. 1620. Sixtus the Fifth then Pope, did not only approve the Fact, but (in a premediated Oration, publickly spoke in the Consistory) blasphemously compares it (in respect of its greatness and amiableness) to our blessed Saviours Incarnation and Resurrection: and then highly Commends the Murderer (for his Vir∣tue, Courage, and Zealous Love of God) above E∣leazar and Judith, &c. And (to omit the rest) pronounceth the Murder'd King Eternally Damn'd, as having Committed thePeccato in Spiritum Sanctum admisso, quale e∣rat Regis peccatum. Ibid. p. 458. E. Sin against the Holy Ghost. This the Historian (though a Papist) modestly and justly Censures, as a FactThuanus ibidem. Summè Insolens, & Pasto∣ris moderatione indig∣num. Ex∣treamly Insolent and Vnworthy the Moderation of a Pastor, (especially the Supream Pastor of the Church, Christs Vicar, and St. Peter's Successor, as they call him). And then he tells us of Anti-Sixtus, (or the Answer to Pope Sixtus his Ora∣tion) and says, 1. That it had been more for the Supprimi potius quam publieari, famae Sixti & Sanctae Sedis Interfuit. Ibi∣dem.Credit of the Pope and the Holy Apostolick Sea, that his Oration had been suppress'd, then (as it was by those of the League) Published. 2. That Anti-Sixtus (or the Answer to it) though it was something
sharp and bitter,Responsio acerbior, sed fali Oratione prorsus Digna, in qua Multa Ab∣surda & Impia not antur. Ibidem. yet the Popes Oration abun∣dantly deserved it, in which were Many Things Absurd and Impious. This was the Judgment of that Faithful and Excellent Historian, (though a Papist) concerning the Erroneous and Impious Principles of the Pope and Je∣suites. 6. Nor is this all; For although, only privately to approve and incourage Rebellion and Assas∣sination of Kings and Princes, be an Execra∣ble Villany, to be abhorr'd by all men (especi∣ally Christians) as being repugnant to that clear Light of Nature and Scripture, to com∣mon Reason and Religion; yet in Publick Wri∣tings to vindicate and justifie such Actions, to perswade the World, that they are not only mo∣rally good, but meritorious: This argues a high∣er degree of Impiety and Impudence. We know (by sad Experience) that many Pagans and Christians have blasphem'd their Gods, committed Adulteries, Murders, Perjuries, &c. yet we do not find, that any Christians, (the Jesuites and their Accomplices excepted) or any sober Pagan (who acknowledg'd a God) did ever justifie Blasphemy, Adultery, Murder, or Perjury; but when they were Apprehended, Convict and brought to Execution, they would confess the Crime, pray for Par∣don, and desire others to pray for them. But the Jesuites (and those possess'd with their Prin∣ciples) though they be Convict, and Legally Condemn'd for Rebellion and Assassination of
Princes, yet they neither do, nor can repent; believing such Actions not to be any Vices, but Vertues; and themselves (if they suffer for them) not Traytors or Murderers, but Holy Martyrs. That this is their approved and re∣ceived Doctrine, which they publickly defend, and industriously (in their Publick Writings) indeavour to justifie, is evident to the Western World, and may appear by the Premisses. Yet being a thing of such great concern, (omit∣ting Mariana, Emanuel Sa, Sanctarellus, and others before mentioned) I shall only add Two or Three Eminent Testimonies, in further confirmation of it. First then, Fran.Fran. Suarez in De∣fens. Fidei Cathol. adver∣sus Angl. Sectae Errores cum Responsd Apolog. Jacobi Regis, & , Agrip. 1614. l. 6. c. 4. pag. 814. &c. Suarez, Publick and Prime Professor of Divi∣nity in the University of Conimbra in Portugal, handling that Point, how, and in what Cases a Tyrant may, (by any private Person) be Mur∣der'd: And having told us, that a Tyrant was either, 1. TyrannusTyrannus titlo, qui vi, & injustè Regnu occupat, qui Revera Rex non est, sed locum illi occupat. Ibid. §. 1. Titulo; one who, (with∣out any just Title) usurp'd the Government, to the ruine of the Common-weal. 2. Tyrannus Qui licet justo Ti∣tulo Regnum possideat, quo∣ad usum tamen & guberna∣tionem, Tyrannicè regnat. Ibid.Administratione; one who having a just Ti∣tle, ruled Tyrannically. And he there tells us, That all ChristianInter Christianos, Maxime est numerandus in hoc Ordine Princeps, qui Subditos suos in Haeresi, aut aliud Apostasiae genus, aut Schisma inducit. Ibid. §. 2. p. 811. Col. 1. Kings are such Tyrants, who induce their Subjects to Heresie, Apostasie, or Schism. So that all Protestant Princes (we may be sure) are such Tyrants, though he there name only King James of happy Memo∣ry. Having Premised this, he gives the state of the Question: Thus,
1. He does (in the General) give us two Cases, wherein it is Lawful for a Subject to kill his King. 1. In defence of hisSi defensio sit pro∣priae vitae, quam Rex vio∣lentèr auferre aggreditur, tunc quidem Ordinarie li∣cebit Subdito, seipsum de∣fendere, etiamsi Mors Prin∣cipis sequatur, quia jus tu∣endae vitae est Maximum, &c. Ibid. p. 815. B. own Life. If a King invade Sempronius to kill him, he may, in defence of his own life, take away the Kings. 2. In defence of theSt Rex Actu aggre∣diatur Civitatem, ut Cives perdat, &c. tunc certe lice∣bit Principi resistere, Etiam Occidere Illum, si aliter fi∣eri defensio, &c. Ibid. §. 6. C. Tunc enim Civitas ha∣bet justum bellum defensi∣vum, Contra Injustum In∣vasorem, Etiamsi Proprius Rex sit. Ibidem. D. Commonwealth. This in the General. But then 2. For a Tyrant in Title, he absolutely declares it, as a thingCommunitèr asseri∣tur Tyrannum quoad Titu∣lum, Interfici posse, à Qua∣cunque privata Persona, quae sit Membrum Reipubl. quae Tyrannidem patitur, &c. Ibid. §. 7. F. commonly received amongst them; That such a Tyrant may be lawfully kill'd, by Any Private Person, who is a Member of that Commonwealth, if there be no other Means to free it from such a Tyranny. And least it should not be observ'd, 'tis set in theTyrannus in Titulo Licite Occiditur. Ibidem. §. 7. Magine. Margent, That such a Tyrant may Lawfully be kill'd. So that the Case is (with him) out of all doubt, That any private man may kill a Tyrant in Title; and the Pope is Judge who is such a Tyrant. Whence it evidently follows, That no Princes can have any Security (as to the Preservation of their King∣doms or Lives) longer then they please the Pope. For if he declare any of them Tyrants, (as many times, with Execrable Pride and Impiety, he has done) Excommunicate and Depose them; then by this Jesuitical and Papal Doctrine, any Private Person, (any of their Subjects especially) may Assassinate and Mur∣der them. 3. For those Princes who have a just Title to their Dominions, and are (as they call them) Tyrants not in Title, but in their In∣justice and Impious Government: He tells us,
1. ThatInter Christianos Maximè in hoc Ordine (Tyrannorum ex Admini∣stratione Tyrannieâ) nu∣merandus est Princeps, qui Subditos in Haeresia aut aliud Apostaesiae Genus, aut publicum Schisma In∣ducit. Ibid. c. 4. §. 1. all Protestant Princes being Hereticks are such Tyrants. 2. That being Hereticks, they are by theirRex Haereticus Statim per Haeresin ipso Facto privatur, Aliquo Modo, proprietate & Do∣minio Regni sui. Ibid c. 4. §. 14. p. 819. Heresie, Ipso facto, and pre∣sently deprived (aliquo modo) in some manner, of all Right to their Dominions. 3. That the Pope (as theirIn summo Pontisice est haec potestas tanquam In Superiori habente Jurisdi∣ctionem ad Corripiendum Reges, etiam Supremos, tanquam Sibi Subditos, &c. Ibidem. Superior, to whom even Su∣pream Princes are Subjects) may totally and abso∣lutely depose and deprive them of all their Do∣minions and right to Govern. 4. When the Pope has pass'd such Sentence, and deprived them of their Dominions; if afterwards they meddle with the Government, they become everySi Rex post depo∣sitionem Legitimam, in sua pertinacia perseverans, Regnum per vim retineat, incipit esse Tyrannus in Titulo, quia non est Legitimus Rex, nec justo Titulo Regnum possidet. Ibidem. way Tyrants (both Titulo & Administratione). And then, 5. After suchErgo Extunc poterit Rex tanquam Omnino Tyrannus Tractari; & Consequentèr A Quocunque Privato Poterit Inter∣fici. Ibidem. p. 819. B. Sentence pass'd by the Pope, such Kings or Supream Princes may be dealt with, as Altogether, and Every Way Tyrants, and Con∣sequently may be kill'd by Any Private Per∣son. 4. And though these be Prodigious Errors, Un∣christian, and indeed Antichristian Impieties; such as neither ours, nor any Language can fully express; yet this is not all: The Jesuite further declares, That thoughRespubli prout in∣ter Gentiles, & hunc inter Ethnicos) habet potestatem, se defendendi à Rege Ty∣ranno, & illum deponendi si necessarium fuerit, &c. Ibid. §. 17. p. 820. A. Pagans anci∣ently had, and still have Power, to Depose their Tyrannical Kings; yet in Christian Commonwealths, they have such dependence upon theRegna Christiana quoad hoc (scilicet deposi∣tionem Regum suorum) habent dependentiam & subordinationem ad Ponti∣ficem Romanum; qui po∣test Regno praecipere, ut se Inconsulto, Regem non deponat, nisi prius Causa & Ratione Ab Ipso Cognita pro∣pter pericula, & Animarum dispendia, quae in his Tumultibus popularibus Interveniunt. Ibid. A. Pope, that
without his Knowledge and Authority, they should not depose their King: For he may Command and Prohibit the People to do it. And he gives In∣stances, when People have consulted the Popes, and by their Counsel and Consent Deposed their Kings. So (he says)Ibidem. p. 820. C. Chilperick was De∣posed in France, and Sancius Secundus in Portu∣gal. And (to make up their Errors and Impie∣ties full) he further tells us,—Pendet Règnum Christianum à Pontifice in hoc, ut posset Pont. non so∣lum Consulere, aut Consen∣tire, ut Regem sibi pernicio∣sum deponat, sed etiam Praecipere, & Cogere ut id faciat, praesertim cum ad vitandas Haereses & Schis∣mata necessarium esse Ju∣dicaverit. Suarez. Ibid. p. 820. B. C. That all Chri∣stian Kingdoms and Commonwealths do so far de∣pend upon the Pope, that he may not only Counsel the People, and Consent to their Deposition and Assassination of their Tyrannical Princes; But he may Command and Compel them to do it, when he shall think it sit, for avoiding Schisms and Here∣sies: That is indeed, for the rooting out and ruine of the true Protestant Religion, and establish∣ing their Roman Superstition and Idolatry. And to conclude, he further declares, That (in such Cases) the Popes Command (to Murder a Depo∣sed King) is so far from being any Crime, that it isQuia tale praecep∣tum in illo Casu Justissimum est. Idem Ibidem. Superlatively Just. I might here cite Car∣dinal Instruct. Sacerd. l. 5. c. 6. §. 17. p. 738.Tolet, Guliel.G. Rossaeus de Ju∣sta Reipub Christiana in Impios, &c. Authoritate. Cap. 3. Rossaeus, and a hun∣dred such others, who approve, and in their Publicks Writings (Approved and Licenced, ac∣cording to the Decree of theirConc. Trident. Sess. 4. in Decreto de E∣ditione & usu Sacrorum librorum. Trent Coun∣cil, by the Auhority of their Church) justifie this Impious and Antichristian Doctrine of Deposing and Assassinating Heretical Kings: but this I conceive a needless work. For, 1. Suarez himself declares it to be the received Doctrine of their Church, and cites many of
their Eminent Writers to prove it; which, any may see, who is not satisfied with those before cited. 2. The Licencers of Suarez and his Book are (for Dignity in their Church and for Learning) so great, and (for Number) so ma∣ny, and the Commendations they give Suarez and his Work so high, that there neither is, nor can be any just Reason to doubt, but this Doctrine was approved at Rome, and by the Ruling part of that Church (the Pope and his Party) believed and incouraged, as a Do∣ctrine asserting the Popes Extravagant, and (as they call it) SupernaturalFirmis & Incon∣cussis Argumentis Potesta∣tem Summi Pontificis Su∣pernaturalem tuetur. Ita in Censura Illust. D. D. Al∣phon. A Mello, Epis. La∣mecensis, Suaresij Libro praefixa. Power, and so their Common Interest. Let the Reader con∣sult the Censures prefix'd to Suarez his Book, and he will find all these following to Approve and Licence it. First, Three great Bishops, all of them Counsellors to his Catholick Majesty. 2. Two Provincials of the Society; one of the Jesuites in Portugal, the other of those in Ger∣many. 3. Academia, Complutensis, the Univer∣sity of Alcala de Henares approves it too. 4. Last theFacultas Supremi Senatus S. Inquisitionis. Supream Senate (Court or Congregation) of the Inquisitors, do also ap∣prove and licence it, and this they do byEx Commissione Il∣lustrissimi Episcopi, D. Petri de Castillo, Lusit aniae Pro∣regis, & Supremi in rebus Fidei Inquisitoris. In Cen∣sura Alphonsi à Castel∣lo, Episc. Conimbricen∣sis, à Consiliis Catholicae Majestati. Commission from Peter de Castello, Vice-Roy of Portugal, and in Matters of Faith Supream in∣quisitor. The Premisses impartially consider'd, I think we may truly say, That it is not only Suarez, or some particular or private Persons, but the Church of Rome, and her Ruling part, which approves this Impious and Trayterous
Doctrine: Which may further appear (be∣sides their Approbations and Licences) from the great Commendations they give Suarez and his Book and Doctrine. And here 1. For Suarez; They say,Humanarum rerum Religiosus Contemptor, & Vnius Pietatis & Religio∣nis fortissimus Defensor, & propter Eximiam Sapien∣tiam, Communis hujus ae∣tatis Magister, & Alter Augustinus. That he was a Con∣temner of Humane things, and a most Valiant Desender only of Piety and Catholick Religion: And (for his Excellent Wisdom) the Common Master, and another Augustine of that Age.— That for his great Zeal for the Catholick Faith, he was a most Famous Author, and a most Emi∣nent Divine. That he was aReligiosissimus jux∣ta ac Gravissimus Auctor, cujus Ingenii monumenta, Orbis Suspicit, Miratur, Amat. Most Grave, and most Religious Writer; whose Works the World, (the Popish World) does Honour, Admire, and Love, &c. 2. And for his Book, and the Doctrine contain∣ed in it, They say, That allIn qua non Solum S. Scripturae Authoritati Omnia Religiosè Conso∣nant, Apostolicis tradi∣tionibus Pic Correspondent, Oecumenicis Conciliis, sum∣merum Pontificum Decre∣tis erudite consentium. things in his Book, are Religiously Consonant to Sacred Scrip∣ture, to Apostolical Traditions, General Councils, and Papal Decrees; (this last we admit, and they profess it to be true). And hence, if they may be believed, who expresly affirm it themselves, it evidently follows, That this Traiterous Doctrine is approved by the Pope, and is Consonant to his Decrees. And those Publick Censors of Suarez his Book several∣ly add; That they findQuâ in defensione Nihil Planè offendi, quod Fidem Offendat, quae ve∣ro defendant, Inveni Mul∣ta. So it is in the Cen∣sure of Ferdinand Mar∣tinez Counsellor to his Catholick Majesty. Nothing (and therefore not the Assassinations of Kings) in it, against the Orthodox Faith, (the Roman Faith they mean) but many things which do defend the Faith. The University of Alca∣la
deLibrum Suaresij quanta potuimus diligen∣tiâ, evolvimus, in quo ope∣re Nihil veritate Catholi∣cae fidei Alienum, Nihil de∣vium, Nihil dissonum de∣prehenditur: Nihil quod probari loudaríque non de∣beat. Denique Nihil à Nostro Omnium Sensu dis∣cordans, cum hac in re, sit Omnium nostrum Eadem vox, Idem Animus, Ea∣démque Sententia. Henares (to omit the rest) more fully testifies—That they read Suarez his Book with all possible Diligence, and found Nothing in it repug∣nant to the Catholick Faith; nor was there Any Thing in it which ought not to be Approved and Com∣mended. And then add, (that we may be sure they spoke cordially and deliberately) That there was Nothing in that whole Work, which All of them did not approve; so that they were All of the same Mind and Judgment. Nay, we are further told, That he had Composed that Work, byPlusquam Humano Studio. In Censura Alphon. A Castello, Epis. Conimbri∣censis. More then Human Helps; and therefore they Judge itDignissimum ut in Lucem eat, ad Fidei No∣strae Victoriam De Haere∣sibus Insignem, & totius Orbis Christiani Publicam & Communem utilitatem. In Censura Illustris. D. D. Alphons. A Mello. E∣pisc. Lamec. A Consiliis Cathol. Majestati. Most Worthy to be Published, for the Pub∣lick, and Common Benesit of the Whole Christian World, and a Signal Victory of their Faith over Heresies. Such are the Commendations of Suarez his Book and Doctrine; so that we may be sure that it is Approved and Received at Rome. And here let me further add, that when King James had Published his Apology for the Oath of Allegiance, and Sir Henry Savil Translated it into Latin; the Latin Copy was (by the Popish Party) immediately sent to Rome, and (by the Pope) By Pope Paul. 5. who in his damnatory Breve, says—Jura∣mentum illud, salva fide Catholica, & Salute Ani∣marum, praestari non potest; cum Multa Contineat, quae fidei saluti Aperte Adver∣santur. Vide Remon∣strant. Hibernorum, pe R. Caron. 1 p. 9.Condemned there, as Impious and Heretical: From Rome it was sent to Suarez, who (by the Popes Command) was to Confute and Answer it. He undertook and finished the Answer, sent it to Rome, where it was highly approved, and after∣wards Printed and Published with all those Ap∣probations and Commendations before menti∣on'd. But these Positions need no further proof,
that they are own'd and publickly approved by the Pope and his Party. I shall only add; When KingIn Apolog. pro Ju∣ramento fidelitatis. James had charged Bellarmine and the Church of Rome, with this Rebellious and Impi∣ous Doctrine, of deposing Kings, absolving Sub∣jects from all Oaths of Allegiance and Fidelity, &c.In Commentario Exegetico contra Jac. Regem. Ingolstadij, An. 1610. Gretser in his Answer, has these memo∣rable words—Non diffitemur, sed Libere Profitemur, quod Papa, suppetente legitima Causa possit, Principes Ex∣communicare, Deponere, Subditos à Juramento Fi∣delitatis Exsolvere, &c. Gretser Ibid. p. 255. We do not deny, (says he) but free∣ly Profess, that the Pope, upon just cause, (and he is Judge of that) may Excommunicate and Depose Princes, and Absolve their Subjects, from their Oath of Allegiance. And then he adds—Subditi in Consci∣entia tenentur stare Sen∣tentiae Pontificis. Ibidem. That the Sub∣jects are bound in Conscience to Obey the Popes Sentence; not only in the Cases mentioned, But inEt si qui sint Alij Casus Hujus Generis. Ibid. All other of the like Nature. And this impious and traiterous Do∣ctrine of Gretser, is not only approved byIbidem. p. 11. Apo∣log. Jac. Gretseri, Romae, à Deputatis ad id Theo∣logis lectam & approba∣tam, ego quoque Theod. Buaeus Approbo, &c. the Provincial of the Jesuites in Germany, and the Re∣ctor and Vice-Chancellor of the University of In∣golstade; but his whole Book (and so those men∣tioned, and many more such Rebellious and Im∣pious Positions) Was Approved at Rome, by the Suf∣frage of Most Learned Divines. This the said Pro∣vincial of the Jesuites, and theHunc Librum Jac. Gretseri, Doctissimorum Theologorum Suffragiis Romae Approbatum, ego i∣tidem Approbo, ut quampri∣mum, Antipharmaci loco, sparsis ex Britannia Vene∣nis, opponatur, opto ego Pe∣trus Steuartius, Academiae Ingolstadiensis Pro-Cancel∣larius, & hoc tempore Re∣ctor. Ibid. p. 12. Rector of the University of Ingolstade expresly testifie, in their Publick and Printed Approbations of Gretsers Book. The Premisses, and Traiterous Popish Principles consider'd, (which are received and believed at Rome) though men mayRev. 13. 3. wonder at the Beast, (the Pope and his Party) and that any, (who would not only be thought Christians, but the only Ca∣tholicks in the World) should maintain, and pub∣lickly justifie such Principles: yet we need not
wonder, that such Persons should practise and act according to such Principles, and continually in∣deavour (especially after the Anathema of Pius the Fifth) by Rebellions at home, and Invasions from abroad, to rob Queen Elizabeth of her Crown and Kingdoms, and of her Life too, by Roman and Mahometan Assassinations. I say, we need not wonder at this. For let the aforesaid Doctrines (which they approve and constantly contend for) be granted, (That the Pope is Supream Judge and Monarch of the World (directè or indirecte) that all Kings and Emperors are His Subjects, that he has Power to Depose and Deprive them of their King∣doms, that when he has Judicially deprived them, any Private Person may Murder them; that he has Power to Absolve their Subjects from all Obligations and Oaths of Allegiance, and to Command them, upon pain of an Anathema never to obey any of their Princes Laws or Commands; that the People may depose their King, with His Consent and Counsel; and that he may Com∣mand and Compel them to do it; and this soPotest Pontifex non solum Consulere, aut Con∣sentire, ut Regnum Regem suum sibi perniciosum De∣ponat; sed etiam Praecipere, & Cogere, ut id Faciat; quando Saluti Spirituali Regni, & praesertim ad vi∣tandas Haereses necessari∣um esse Papa Judicaverit. Suarez dicto. l. 6. cap. 4. p. 820. B. C. This place is before cited, but that the Reader may not be troubled to look back for it, I have again put it here. Where in the Margent, (which I be∣fore omitted) Suarez cites others, (to shew he was not singular in this Opinion) Azorius, Tom. 3. l. 2. c. 7. Quaest. 30. A Castro, lib. 2. De justa Haereticorum Punitione; cap. 14. vid. Hist. Conciliorum Gene∣ral. per Ed. Richerium Doctorem Sorbonicum, lib. 1. cap. 13. §. 3. p. 398. Colon. 1680. where he acknowledges that Bellarmine, Suarez, Becanus, and the Jesuites maintain this Doctrine of De∣posing and killing Kings—Jesuitae non modo docent, Papam habere potestatem Regum Abdicandorum verum etiam & Capite Puniendorum in Officio Sacrae Inquisitionis, ut vocant, &c. And the same Sor∣bon Doctor, Ibidem. cap. 8. §. 13. pag. 191. tells us, that 'tis the Jesuites Doctrine; Licere Pontifici Reges sibi immorigeros, hand alitèr Abdicare, quam Paster Canes, quos minus habet ad ma∣nus, Occidere. And that it is their Practise, to accuse those Princes who do not please them, to the People, of Tyranny, Schism or Heresie, Hacque viâ Illos tanquam arietes, aut Canes Fu∣riosos, Parricidis mactandos Exponere. oft as he shall Think it Good for the Spiritual Health of the
Kingdom. (Prodigious Error and Impiety! as if Rebellion, Assassinations and Murdering their Kings, conduc'd to the Salvation of the Subjects.) I say, these Erroneous and Impious Doctrines granted, and (as they are at Rome) believ'd, it is certain, that (so far as they have opportunity and ability) they will (as they ever have done) prosecute their Interest, and practise according to those Principles; and all Christian Kings will be in perpetual danger to loose their Crowns, their Kingdoms, and their Lives too; unless they can please the Pope, and become his dutiful Servants, and indeed Slaves to his Anti-Christian Tyranny. I say no Christian King, Tros Tyriusve, Papist or Protestant can be out of eminent Danger, where such Doctrine is, by such Doctors maintain'd. We have sad and certain Instances of this Truth: For, 1. Hen∣ry the Third and Fourth of France were neither Calvinists nor Lutherans, but declared Sons of the Roman Synagogue; yet because they did not Comply with the Popish Interest, in that de∣gree and measure, the Pope and his Party ex∣pected, they fatally fell by the Traiterous and Prodigious Villany of bloody Assassins, Ridente & gaudente Roma; The Pope and his Jesuitical Party, (with an Extasie of Joy) Approving and Commending the Treason, and (in their Wri∣tings and Pictures) Canonizing the Traitors. 2. For Protestants, and (as they call them) He∣retical Princes, their danger (proportionable to Romes hatred of them) is greater. They may
(by the Power and Gracious Providence of God) want ability, but they neither do, nor (unless they renounce their Erroneous and Impious Principles) ever will want a desire and indeavour to ruine those they call Hereticks, either by o∣pen Hostility and Rebellions, or by Poyson, Pi∣stols, and private Assassinations. Their many known Plots and Conspiracies against Queen E∣lizabeth, King James, Charles the Martyr, and his Gracious Majesty now Reigning, (whom God preserve) are undeniable Demonstrations of this Truth. The Ark of God and Dagon, Light and Darkness, Truth and Error, the Bible and Popish Bullary, Protestancy and Popery cannot possibly Consist, and be in Peace. Nothing is (or can be) so destructive of Darkness and Er∣ror, as Truth and Light; And 'tis evidently known to this Western World, That the Evangelical Light and Truth, which the Protestants have hap∣hily and clearly discovered, to the long deluded Church of God, have awakened thousands, to a detestation of that Superstition and Idolatry, un∣der which they formerly lay, to the dishonour of God, and ruine of their Souls, and to a shaking and great diminution of the Papal Monarchy and Tyranny; so many Kingdoms forsaking Rome, and shaking off the Heavy and Intollerable Yoke of Sin and Popish Servitude. Et hinc illae Lacrymae; Hence it is, that the Pope, and his inraged Party, when they cannot, by any probable pretence of Reason confute, what they call Heresie, (the Pro∣testant Religion) they indeavour to Confound and
(by Fire and Sword) Consume the Hereticks— Aeterna bella, pace sublatâ, gerunt, Jurant odium, nec prius hostes esse desinunt, quam esse desinunt. They excite and incourageThis is evident (to omit others) by the Bull of Pope Paul the Third, wherein King Hen. 8. is Excommunicated and Deposed. For in that Bull having declared that King an Heretick and deposed him; he com∣mands all Christian Prin∣ces (Kings or Emperor) to take Arms against K. Henry and his Adherents—Insuper, tam Prin∣cipes, praedictos (quacunque etiam Imperiali aut Regali dignitate fulgentes. §. 15.) quam quoscunque alios, eti∣am ad stipendia quorum∣cunque Christi fidelium mi∣litantes & alias quascunque personas, tam Per Mare quam Per Terras, Armigeros habentes, eis Mandan∣tes, ut contra Henricum Regem, eique adhaerentes, dum in erroribus adversus Sedem praedictum permanserint, Armis Insurgant, eosque & eorum singulos Persequantur, &c. And then (such is his liberality) he gives those Souldiers all the Goods of those Anathematiz'd Hereticks, wherever they can find them—Eorumque Bona, Mobilia, & Immobilia, Mercantias, Navigia, Credita, Res, & Animalia, eti∣am extra territorium Henrici Regis, Vbi Libet Consistentia, Capiant, &c. Vide Pauli Papae. 3. Constit. 7. datum Romae, Decemb. 17. Ann. Dom. 1538. Pontificatus sui, Ann. 5. In Bullario Romano, Romae 1638. Tom. 1. p. 516. Col. 2. §. 16. Princes of their Profession, to persecute and destroy all Protestants in their Dominions; and their barbarous and bloody Po∣et has told us, how they desire it to be done; Vtere Jure Tuo Caesar, Sectámque Lutheri Ense, Rota, Ponto, Funibus, Igne neca. Use thy Power Caesar, let Lutherans be slain, By Fire, Rack, Halter, Sword, or drown'd ith' Maine.
DAMNATIO ET EXCOMMUNICATIO Henrici VIII. REGIS ANGLIAE EJUSQUE FAUTORUM, Cum aliarum ADJECTIONE POENARUM. Paulus Episcopus, Servus Servorum Dei.Aeditae. A. D. 1535. & 1538. Ad futuram Rei Memoriam. EJVS qui immobilis permanens, sua Provi∣dentia, Ordine mirabili dat cuncta moveri, disponente Clementiâ, vices, licet immeri∣ti gentes in Terris, & in Sede Justitiae Con∣stituti, juxta quoque Prophetae Hieremiae vaticinium
Ecce Te Constitui super Gentes,Exordium. & Regna, ut evellas, & destruas, aedisices, plantes, praecipuum su∣per Omnes Reges Vniversae Terrae, cunctosque populos obtinentes Principatum, ac illum qui pius, & miseri∣cors est, & vindictam ei, qui illam praevenit paratam temperat, nec quos Impoenitentes videt severa ultione Castigat, quin prius Comminetur, in assidue autem peccantes, & in peccatis perseverantes, cum Excessus Misericordiae sines praeteriunt, ut saltem metu poenae ad Cor reverti cogantur, Justitiae vires Exercet, imi∣tantes, & Incumbenti Nobis Apostolicae solicitudinis studio perurgemur, ut cunctarum Personarum nostrae Curae Coelitùs Commissarum salubri Statui solertius In∣tèndamus, ac Erroribus, & Scandalis, quae hostis An∣tiqut versutia imminere conspicimus, propensius obvie∣mus, Excessusque, & Enormia, ac scandalosa Crimi∣na congrua severitate Coerceamus, & juxta Apostolum inobedientiam ovium promptius ulciscendo, illorum per∣petratores debitâ Correctione si Compescamus, quod eos Dei iram provocasse poeniteat, & ex hoc aliis Exem∣plum Cautelae salutaris accedat. Sect.Henticus postquam à Leone decimo Titulo Defensoris Fidei dona∣tus fuit, ex Causa hic ex∣pressa, à Catholica side deviavit, & multa enor∣ma commisit. 1. Sane cum Superioribus Diebus nobis rela∣tum fuisset, quod Angliae Rex, licet Tempore Pontisi∣catûs Fel. recor. Leonis Papae decimi Praedecessoris no∣stri diversorum Haereticorum Errores saepe ab Apostoli∣ca Sede, & Sacris Conciliis praeteritis Temporibus damnatos, & novissimè Nostra Aetate per Perditionis Alumnum Martinum Lutherum suscitatos, & inno∣vatos, Zelo Catholicae Fidei, & Erga dictam Sedem, devotionis servore inductus, non minus doctè, quam piè per quendam Librùm per eum desuper Compositum
& eidem Leoni Praedecessori, ut eum Examinaret, approbaret, oblatum Confutasset, ob quod, ab eodem Leone Predecessore, Vltra dicti Libri cum magna Ipsius Henrici Regis Laude & Commendatione, ap∣probationem, Titulum Defensoris Fidei reportaverit, à rectâ Fide & Apostolico tramite devians, ac pro∣priae salutis, famae & honoris immemor, Postquam Carissima in Christo Filia nostra Catherina Angliae Regina, Illustri sua Progenie Conjuge, cum qua pub∣licè in facie Ecclesiae Matrimonium Contraxerat, & per plures Annos Continuaverat, ac ex qua, dicto constante Matrimonio prolem pluries susceperat, nul∣la Legitima subsistente Causa, & contra Ecclesiae Prohibitionem dimissa, cum quadam Anna Bolena, Muliere Anglica, dicta Catherina adhuc vivente, de facto Matrimonium Contraxerat, ad deteriora pro∣siliens, quasdam Leges, seu Generales Constitutiones edere, non erubuit, per quas, subditos suos ad quos∣dam Haereticos, & Schismaticos Articulos tenendos; Inter quos & hoc erat, quod Romanus Pontifex Ca∣put Ecclesiae, & Christi Vicarius non erat, & quod ipse in Anglicâ Ecclesiâ Supremum Caput Existe∣bat, sub Gravibus etiam mortis poenis cogebat. Et his non Contentus, Diabolo Sacrilegij Crimen suaden∣te, quamplures Praelatos etiam Episcopos, aliásque Personas Ecclesiasticas, etiam Regulares, necnon Se∣culares sibi ut Haeretico, & Schismatico adhaerere, ac Articulos praedictos sanctorum Patrum decretis, & sanctorum Conciliorum statutis, immo etiam Ipsi E∣vangelicae veritati contrarios, tanquam tales alios damnaros approbare, & sequi nolentes, & intrepíde recusantès capi, & carceribus mancipari. Hísque
similitèr non Contentus, mala malis accumulando, bonae mem. Jo. H. S. vitalis Presbyter Cardinalis Roffen. quem ob Fidei Constantiam, & vitae sanctimoniam, ad Cardinalatus Dignitatem promoveramus, cum di∣ctis Haersibus & Erroribus consentire nollet, horren∣dà immanite & deterstanda saevitiâ, publicè Miserabili supplicio tradi, & decollari mandaverat, & secerat Excommunicationis, & Anathematis, aliásque gra∣vissimas sententias, censuras, & poenas in Literis, ac Constitutionibus recolendae mem. Bonifacij Octavi, Honorij Tertij, Roman. Pontificum Praedecessorum Nostrorum desuper Editis Contentas, & alias in tales à jure latas damnabilitèr incurrendo ac Regno Angliae, & Dominiis, quae tenebat, necnon Regalis fastigiis Celstudine, ac praefati Tituli praerogativâ, & honore se Indignum reddendo. Sect.emen. 7. (ejus Constit. hic non habes) tandem il∣lum Excommunicavit, quin in Censuris insor∣descendo deterior evasit. 2. Nos licet ex eo, quod prout non Ignoraba∣mus, Idem Henricus Rex in Certis Censuris Ecclesi∣asticis quibus à Piae Memoriae Clemente Papa Septi∣mi etiam Praedecessore nestro, postquam humanissimis literis, & paternis Exhortationibus, multìsque Nun∣ciis, & mediis, Primo & Postremo, etiam Judiciali∣ter, ut praefatam Annam à se dimitteret, & ad Prae∣dictae Catherinae suae verae Conjugis Consortium re∣diret srustra monitus fuerat, innodatus Extiterat, Pha∣raonis duritiam imitando, per Longum Tempus in Clavium Contemptum Insorduerat, & Insordescebat, quod ad Cor rediret vix sperare posse videremus ob Paternam tamen Charitatem, qua in minoribus Consti∣tuti donec in Obedientiâ, & Reverentia Sedis praedictae permansit, eum prosecuti sueramus, útque clarius vi∣dere
dere Possemus, an Clamor qui ad nos delatus fuerat (quam certè etiam Ipsius Henerici Respectum falsum esse disiderabamus) verus esset, statuimus ab ulteriori contra Ipsum Henricum Regem processu ad Tempus abstinendo, hujus Rei veritatem diligentius Inda∣gare. Sect.Ideo Pont. Iste contra Regem, Complices, & Fautores decrevit, proce∣dere, ut hic. 3. Cum autem debitis diligentiis desuper fa∣ctis clamorem ad Nos, ut praefertur, delatum, verum esse, simúlque, quod dolentèr referimus, dictum Hen∣ricum Regem ita in Profundum malorum descendisse, ut de Ejus Recipiscentiâ nulla penitùs videatur spes haberi posse, reperimus. Nos attendentes veteri Lege Crimen Adulterij notatum, lapidari Mandatum, ac Auctores Schismatis hiatu terrae absorptos, eorúmque sequaces Coelesti Igne Consumptos, Elimámque Ma∣gum viis Domini Resistentem per Apostolum Aeterna severitate damnatum suisse, volentesque ne in districto Examine Ipsius Henrici Regis & Subditorum suorum, quos secum in Perditione trahere videmus, Animarum Ratio à Nobis Exposcatur, quantum Nobis ex alto con∣ceditur providere contra Henricum Regem, Ejúsque Complices, Fautores, Adbaerentes & sequaces; & in Praemissis quomodolibet culpabiles, contra quos, ex eo quod Excessus, & delicta praedicta adeo manisesta sunt, notiora, ut nulla possint tergiversatione celari absque ulteriori morâ ad Executionem procedere Possemus, benignius agendo, decrevimus infrascripto modo pro∣cedere.
Sect.Regem itáque hortatur, ut ab hujusmodi errori∣bus desistat. 4. Habita itáque super his cum venerabili∣bus Fatribus Nostris S. R. E. Cardinalibus delibera∣tione maturâ, & de Illorum Consilio, & Assensu prae∣fatum Henricum Regem, Ejusque Complices, Fau∣tores, Adhaerentes, Consultores & Sequaces, ac quos∣cúnque alios in Praemissis, seu eorum aliquo quoquomodo Culpabiles, tam Laicos, quam Clericos, etiam Regu∣lares, cujuscúnque Dignitatis, Status, Gradus, Ordinis, Conditionis, Praeeminentiae, & Excellentiae existant (quorum Nomina, & Cognomina perinde ac si Praesen∣tibus Intersererentur, pro sufficienter expressis haberi volumus) per viscera Misericordiae Dei Nostri horta∣mur, & requirimus in Domino, quatenus Henricus Rex à praedictis Erroribus prorsus abstineat, & Con∣stitutiones, seu Leges praedictas, sicut defacto eas fecit, revocet, Casset, & annullet, & Coactione Subditorum suorum ad eas Servandas, necnon Carceratione, Cap∣tura, & Punitione illorum, qui ipsis Constitutionibus. seu Legibus Adhaerere, aut eas servare noluerint, & ab aliis Erroribus praedictis penitus, & Omnino abstineat, & si quos Praemissorum occasione Captivos habeat, relaxet. Sect.Complices vero & Fau∣tores monet ut abstine∣ant Regi desuper favere, vel adhaerere. 5. Complices verò, Fautores, Adhaerentes, & Sequaces dicti Henrici Regis in praemissis, & circa ea Ipsi Henrico Regi super his de cetero non adsistant, nec adhaereant, vel faveant, nec ei Consilium, Auxilium, vel Favorem, desuper praestent.
Sect.Inobedientésque Majoris Excommunicationis sen∣tentia innodat. 6. Alias si Henricus Rex, ac Fautores, Ad∣haerentes, Consultores, & Sequaces hortationibus, & requisitionibus hujusmodi modi non audiverint cum Effectu, Henricum Regem, Fautores, Adhaerentes, Consultores & Sequaces, ac alios Culpabiles praedi∣ctos, Authoritate Apostolicâ, ac ex certâ nostra Sci∣entiâ, & de Apostolicae Potestatis Plenitudine tenore Praesentium in virtute Sanctae Obedientiae, ac sub Ma∣joris Excommunicationis Latae Setentiae, à quà etiam praetextu cujuscúnque Privilegij, vel facultatis, etiam in forma Confessionalis, cum quibuscúnque efficacissi∣mis Clausulis à Nobis, & Sede praedicta quomodolibet Concessis, etiam iteratis vicibus innovatis, ab alio quam à Romano Pontifice, praeterquam in mortis Ar∣liculo Constituti, ita tamen, quod si aliquem absolvi contingat, qui postmodum Convaluerit, nisi post Con∣valescentiam, Monitioni, & Mandatis nostris hujus∣modi paruerit cum Effectu, in eandem Excommu∣nicationis Sententiam reincidat) absolvi non pos∣sint. Sect.Rebellionis quoque, & Amissionis Regni poe∣nam Imponit. Regémque & Complices monet, uc infra, certum Terminum Compareat alioquin in poenas hic expressas in∣cidisse declarat. 7. Necnon Rebellionis, & quoad Henricum Regem, etiam Perditionis Regni, & Dominiorum Praedictorum, & tam quoad eum, quam quoad alios Monitos supradictos, supra & infra scriptis poenis, quas si dictis Monitione & Mandatis, ut praefertur, non paruerint, eos, & eorum singulos, Ipso facto re∣spectivè incurrere volumus, per Praesentes Monemus; eísque, & eorum cuilibet districtè praecipiendo Man∣damus, quatenus Henricus Rex per se, vel Procura∣torem Legitimum, & sufficienti Mandato suffultum,
Infra Nonaginta, Complices vero, Fautores, Adhae∣rentes, Consultores & Sequaces, ac alij in Praemissis quomodolibet Culpabiles supradicti, Seculares & Ecclesiastici, etiam Regulares, Personaliter, Infra Sexaginta dies Compareant Coram Nobis, ad se super Praemissis legitimè Excusandum, & Defendendum, alias videndum, & Audiendum Contra eos, & eorum singulos etiam Nominatim, quos sic Monemus, quate∣nus expediat, ad Omnes, & singulos Actus, etiam Sen∣tentiam Definitivam, Declaratoriam, Condemnatori∣am, & Privatoriam, ac Mandatum Excusativum procedi. Quod si Henricus Rex, & alij Moniti Praedicti Intra dictos terminos eis, ut praefertur, re∣spectivè praesixos, non Comparuerint, ad Praedictam Excommunicationis Sententiam per tres dies, post Lapsum dictorum Terminorum Animo, quod absit, sustinuerint Indurato, Censuras Ipsas aggravamus, & successive reaggravamus, Henricúmque Regem Pri∣vationis Regni, & Dominicorum praedictorum, & tam eum, quam alios Monitos Praedictos, et eorum singulos, Omnes et singulas alias poenas praedictas In∣currisse, ab omnibúsque Christi Fidelibus, cum eorum bonis, perpetuo diffidatos esse. Et si Interim ab hu∣manis decedat, Ecclesiastica debere carere Sepulturâ, Auctoritate et Potestatis Plenitudine praedictis de∣cernimus, et Declaramus, eósque Anathematis, Ma∣ledictionis, et Damnationis Aeternae mucrone percu∣timus. Sect.Et quascunque Civitates Ecclesias & alica Loca, ad quàe Ipsi declinave∣rint, Interdicto Ecclesi∣astico supponit. 8. Necnon quae praefatus Rex Henricus quo∣modolibet, et ex quavis Causa tenet, habet, aut pos∣sidet, quam diu Henricus Rex, et alij Moniti prae∣dicti,
& eorum singuli in aliis per dictum Henricum Regem non tentis, habitis, aut possessis permanserint, & Triduo post eorum inde recessum, & alia quaecun∣que, ad quae Henricum Regem, & alios monitos praedictos post Lapsum dictorum Terminorum declinare contigerit, Dominia, Civitates, Terras, Castra, Villas, Oppida, Metropolitanásque, & alias Cathedrales, ceterásque Inferiores Ecclesias, necnon Monasteria, Prioratus, Domos, Conventos, & Loca Raligiosa, vel Pia Cujuscunque, etiam S. Benedicti, Clunia∣cen. Cistercien. Praemonstraten. ac Praedicatorum, Minorum, Eremitarum. S. Augustini, Carmelita∣rum, & aliorum Ordinum, ac Congregationum, & Militarium quarumcunque in Ipsis Dominiis, Civitati∣hus, Terris, Castris, Villis, Oppidis, & Locis Ex∣istentiâ, Ecclesiastico supponimus Interdicto; ita ut illo durante in illis etiam praetextu cujuscunque Apo∣stolici Indulti Ecclesiis, Monasteriis, Prioratibus, Do∣mibus, Conventibus, Locis, Ordinibus, aut Perso∣nis, etiam quacunque Dignitate Fulgentibus Con∣cessi, praeterquam in Casibus à jure permissis, ac e∣tiam in illis alias quam Clausis Januis, & Excommu∣nicatis & Interdictis Exclusis, nequeant Missae, aut alia Divina Officia Celebrari. Sect.Filiósque eorum de dig∣nitatibus, gratiis & pri∣vilegiis ac dominiis & bonis omnibus privatos, & ad alia de cetero ob∣tinenda inhabiles esse declarat. 9. Et Henrici Regis, Complicúmque, Fau∣torum, Adhaerentium, Consultorum, Sequacium, et Culpabilium praedictorum Filij, Poenarum ut hic in hoc Casu par est, participes sint, Omnes et singulos ejusdem Henrici Regis ex dictâ Annâ, ac singulorum aliorum praedictorum Filios natos, et nascituros, ali∣osque descendentes, usque in eum gradum, ad quem
Jura poenas in Casibus hujusmodi extendunt (Nemi∣ne excepto, nulláque minoris aetatis, aut Sexus, vel Ignorantiae, vel alterius cujusvis Causae habitâ rati∣one) Dignitatibus et Honoribus in quibus quomodo∣libet Constituti Existunt, seu quibus gaudent, utun∣tur, potiuntur, aut muniti sunt, necnon Privilegiis, Concessionibus, Gratiis, Indulgentiis, Immunitatibus, Re∣missionibus, Libertatibus, et Indultis, ac Dominiis, Civi∣tatibus, Castris, Terris, Villis, Oppidis, et Locis, etiam Com∣mendatis, vel in Gubernium Concessis, et quae in seudum, emphyteusim, vel alias à Romanis, vel a∣liis Ecclesiis, Monasteriis, et Locis Ecclesiasticis, ac Secularibus, Principibus, Dominiis Potentatibus, e∣tiam Regibus et Imperatoribus, aut aliis Privatis, vel publicis Personis quomodolibet habent, tenent, aut Possident, Ceterisque Omnibus bonis, Mobilibus et immobilibus, Juribus et Actionibus, eis quomo∣dolibet Competentibus privatos, dicta bona feudalia, vel emphyteutica, et alia quaecunque, ab aliis quo∣modolibet obtenta, ad directos Dominos, ita ut de illis libere desponere possint, Respectivè devoluta, et eos qui Ecclesiastici fuerint, etiamsi Religiosi ex∣istant, Ecclesiis etiam Cathedralibus, et Metropoli∣tanis, necnon Monasteriis et Prioratibus, Praeposi∣turis, Praepositatibus, Dignitatibus, Personatibus, Officiis, Canonicatibus, et Praebendis, aliísque Bene∣ficiis Ecclesiasticis per eos quomodolibet obtentis, privatos, et ad alia, ac alia in posterum obtinen∣da Inhabiles esse, simplicitèr decernimus, et decla∣ramus; eósque sic respectivè Privatos, ad alia et a∣lia quaecunque similia, ac dignitates, honores, ad∣ministrationes, et officia, jura, ac feuda in Posterum
obtinenda, Auctoritate et Scientia, ac Plenitudine si∣milibus Inhabilitamus. Sect.Subditósque à juramento fidelitatis & subjectione liberat. Et eisdem man∣dat ut ab obedientia om∣nino recedant. 10. Ipsiúsque Henrici Regis, ac Regni omniúmque aliorum Dominiorum, Civitatum, Terra∣rum, Castrorum, Villarum, Fortaliciorum, Arcium, Oppidorum, & Locorum suorum, etiam de facto ob∣tentorum, Magistratus, Judices, Castellanos, Cu∣stodes, & Officiales quoscunque, necnon Communita∣tes, Vniversitates, Collegia, Feudatarios, Vassallos, Subditos, Cives, Incolas, & Inhabitatores etiam Fo∣renses, dicto Regi de facto Obedientes, tam Saecula∣res, quam si qui rationis alicujus temporalitatis Ip∣sum Henricum Regem in Superiorem recognoscant, e∣tiam Ecclesiasticos, à Praefato Rege, seu Ejus Com∣plicibus, Fautoribus, Adhaerentibus, Consultoribus, & Sequacibus supradictis deputatis, à juramento fide∣litatis, jure vassilitico, & omni erga Regem, & ali∣os praedictos subjectione absolvimus, ac penitùs libera∣mus, eis Nihilominùs sub Excommunicationis poena Mandantes, & ab ejusdem Henrici Regis, suorúm∣que Officialium, Judicum, & Magistratuum quo∣rumcúnque. Obedientiâ penitùs, & omnino recedant, nec illos in Superiores recognoscant, néque illorum Mandatis obtemperent. Sect.Henrico & Complicibus alias poenas hic Expres∣sas Imponit. 11. Et ut alij eorum Exemplo perterriti, discant ab hujusmodi Excessibus abstinere, eisdem Auctoritate, Scientiâ & Plenitudine, volumus, & decernimus, quod Henricus Rex, & Complices, Fautores, Adhaerentes, Consultores, Sequaces, & alij in praemissis Culpabiles, Postquam alias poenas
praedictas, ut praefertur respectivè incurrerint, nec∣non Praefati descendentes, extunc Infames existant, & ad Testimonium non admittantur, Testamenta, & Codicillos, aut alias dispositiones, etiam Inter vi∣vos concedere, & facere non possint, & ad alicujus Successionem ex Testamento, vel ab Intestato, necnon ad Jurisdictionem, seu Judicandi Potestatem, & ad Notariatus Ossicium, Omnesque Actus Legitimos quos∣cunque (ita ut eorum Processus, sive Instrumenta at∣que alij Actus quicunque, nullius sint Roboris, vel momenti) Inhabiles existant; & Nulli Ipsis, sed Ipsi aliis super quocunque debito, & Negotio, tam Civili quam Criminali, de jure respondere teneantur. Sect. 12.Christi fidelibus sub poe∣nis hie expressis praeci∣pit, ut Infidelium Com∣mercium evitent. Et Nihilominus Omnes, & singulos Christi sideles, sub Excommunicationis, & aliis Infra∣scriptis poenis, monemus, ut monitos, Excommunica∣tos, aggravatos, interdictos, privatos, maledictos, & damnatos, praedictos evitent, & quantum in eis est, ab aliis evilari faciant, nec cum eisdem, seu Prae∣fati Regis Civitatum, Dominiorum, Terrarum, Ca∣strorum, Comitatuum, Villarum, Fortaliciorum, Op∣pidorum, & Lecorum praedictorum Civibus, Incolis, vel Habitatoribus, aut Subditis, & Vassallis, Emen∣do, Vendendo, Permutando, aut quamcunque Merca∣turam, seu Negotij Exercendo, Commercium, seu a∣liquam Conversationem, seu Communionem habeant, aut vinum, granum, sal, seu alia victualia, arma, pannos, merces, vel quasvis alias Mercantias, vel Res per Mare in eorum Navibus, Triremibus, aut aliis Navigiis, sive per Terram cum Mulis, vel aliis Animalibus deferre, aut Conducere, seu deferri,
aut Conduci facere, vel delata per illos recipere, pulicè vel occultè, aut talia facientibus auxilium, consilium, vel favorem, publicè, vel occultè, vel in∣directè quovis quaesito colore, per se, vel alium, seu alios quoquomodo praestare praesumant, quod si fece∣rint, ultra Excommunicationis praedictae, etiam Nul∣litatis Contractuum, quos inirent, necnon Perditionis Mercium, Victualium, & bonorum omnium delatorum, quae Capientium fiant, poenas similitèr eo Ipso In∣currant. Sect. 13.Praelatis quóque & cete∣ris Personis Ecclesiasti∣cis mandat sub poenis hic contentis quatenus de Regno Angliae discedant, ut hic. Ceterum quia Convenire non videtur, ut cum his qui Ecclesiam Contemnunt, dum praeser∣tìm ex eorum pertinaciâ spes Corrigibilitatis non habetur, hi qui Divinis Obsequiis vacant Conversen∣tur, quod etiam illos tutè facerè non posse dubitan∣dum est, Omnium & singularum Metropolitan: & aliarum Cathedralium, Ceterarúmque Inferiorum Ec∣clesiarum, & Monasteriorum, Domorum, & Locorum Religiosorum & Piorum quorumcunque, etiam S. Augustini, S. Benedicti, Cluniacen. Cistercien. Prae∣monstraten. ac Praedicatorum, Minorum, Carmelita∣rum, alorúmque quorumcúnque Ordinum, & Militi∣arum, etiam Hospitalis Hierosolymitani, Praelati∣bus, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Praeceptoribus, Praeposi∣tis, Ministris, Custodibus, Guardianis, Conventi∣bus, Monachis, & Canonicis, necnon Parochialium Ec∣clesiarum Rectoribus, aliísque quibuscunque Personis Ecclesiasticis in Regno & Dominiis praedictis Com∣morantibus, sub Excommunicationis, ac Privationis administrationum, & Regiminum Monasterirum, Dignitatum, Personatuum, Administrationum, ac
Officiorum, Cannonicatuúmque, & Praebendarum, Parochialium Ecclesiarum, & aliorum Beneficio∣rum Ecclesiasticorum quorumcunque quomodolibet qualificatorum, per eos quomodolibet obtentorum poe∣nis Mandamus, quatenus Infra quinque dies post Omnes & singulos Terminos praedictos Elapsos, de Ipsis Regno, & dominiis, dimissis tamen aliquibus Presbyteris in Ecclesiis, quarum Curam habuerint pro administrando Baptismate parvulis, & in Poeni∣tentia decedentibus, ac aliis Sacramentis Ecclesiasti∣cis, Quae Tempore Interdicti Ministrari permittun∣tur, exeant, & discedant, néque ad Regnum, & Dominia praedicta revertantur, donec Moniti, & Ex∣communincati, aggravati, reaggravati, privati, male∣dicti, & damnati praedicti Monitionibus, & Man∣datis nostris hujusmodi obtemperaverint, & merue∣rint à Censuris hujusmodi absolutionis Benesicium obtinere, seu Interdictum in Regno, & dominiis prae∣dictis fuerit sublatum. Sect. 14.Ducésque & alios mo∣net sub poenis supradi∣ctis, ut Henricum & e∣jus Complices de Regno expellere & expelli pro∣curent. Praeterea si Praemissis non obstantibus Henricus Rex, Complices, Fautores, Adhaerentes, Consultores, & Sequaces praedicti in eorum pertina∣cia perseveraverint, nec Conscientiae stimulus eos ad Cor Reduxerit, in eorum forte Potentia, & armis Considentes, Omnes & singalos Duces, Marchiones, Comites, & alios quoscunque, tam Saeculares, quam Ecclesiasticos, etiam sorenses, de facto dicto, Henrico Regi Obedientes, sub ejusdem Excommunicationis, ac Perditionis bonorum suorum (quae, ut Infra dictus similiter Capientium siant) poenis, requirimus, & monemus, quatenus Omni mora, & Excusatione Post∣posita,
eos & eorum singulos, ac Ipsorum Milites, & Stipendarios, tam Equestres, quam Pedestres, aliósque quoscunque qui eis cum armis faverint, de Regno & Dominiis praedictis, etiam vi armorum, si Opus suerit, expellant, ac quod Henricus Rex, & ejus Complices, Fautores, Adhaerentes, Consulto∣res, & Sequaces Mandatis nostris non obtemperan∣tes Praedicti de Civitatibus, Terris, Castris, Villis, Oppidis, Fortalitiis, aut aliis Locis Regni, & Do∣minij Praedictorum, se non Intromittant, procurent, Eis sub Omnibus & singulis paenis praedictis Inhi∣bentes, ne in favorem Henrici ejúsque Complicum, Fautorum, Adhaerentium, Consultorum & Sequaci∣um, aliorúmque Monitorum Praedictorum Mandatis Nostris non obtemperantium, arma Cujusiibet Gene∣ris offensiva, & defensiva, Machinas quoque bellicas, seu tormenta (artellarias nuncupata) sumant, aut te∣neant, seu illis utantur, aut armatos aliquos, prae∣ter Consuetam familiam parent, aut ab Henrico Rege Complicibus, Fautoribus, Adhaerentibus, Con∣sultoribus, & Sequacibus, vel aliis in Regis Ipsius favorem paratos, quomodolibet, quavis occasione vel Causâ, per se, vel alium, seu alios publicè vel occul∣tè, directè vel indirectè teneant, vel receptent, aut di∣cto Henrico Regi, seu Illius Complicibus, Fautoribus, Adhaerentibus, Consultoribus, & Sequacibus Praedictis, Consilium, Auxilium, vel quomodolibet ex quavis Cau∣sa, vel quovis quaesito Colore sive Ingenio, publicè vel occultè, directè vel indirectè, tacitè vel expressè, per se vel alium seu alios Praemissis, vel aliquo Praemissorum prae∣stent, seu praestari faciant quoquomodo.
Sect. 15.Principum Christia∣norum Confoederatio∣nes, & Obligationes Contractas cum Henri∣co nullas & invalidas de∣clarat. Praeterea ad dictum Henricum Re∣gem facilius ad sanitatem, & praefatae Sedis Obe∣dientiam reducendum, Omnes & singulos, Christia∣nos Principes, quacunque etiam Imperiali & Regali Dignitate fulgentes, per viscera Misericordiae Dei Nostri (Cujus Causa agitur) hortamur & in Domi∣no Requirimus, eis Nihilominùs, qui Imperatore & Rege Inferiores fuerint, quos propter Excellentiam Dignitatis à Censuris Excipimus, sub Excommuni∣cationis poena Mandantes ne Henrico Regi Ejúsque Complicibus, Fautoribus, Adhaerentibus, Consulto∣ribus, & Sequacibus, vel eorum alicui per se vel alium seu alios, publicè vel occultè, directè vel in∣directè, tacitè vel expressè, etiam sub praetextu Con∣foederationum aut Obligationum quarumcunque, eti∣am Juramento, aut quavis aliâ firmitate roborata∣rum, & saepius geminatarum, à quibus quidem Ob∣ligationibus, & Juramentis Omnibus, nos eos, & eorum singulos eisdem Auctoritate & Scientia, ac plenitudine per praesentes absolvimus, Ipsásque Con∣foederationes & Obligationes tam factas, quam in Posteram faciendas, quas tamen (in quantum Hen∣ricus Rex, & Complices, Fautores, Adhaerentes, Consultores, & Sequaces praedicti circa praemissa, vel eorum aliquod se directè vel indirectè Juvare possent sub eadem poena fieri prohibemus, nullius Roboris vel Momenti, nullásque, irritas, Cassas, inanes, ac pro Infectis habendas fore decernimus & declaramus, consilium, auxilium, vel favorem, quo∣modolibet, praestent; quinimo si qui illis, aut eorum alicui ad praesens quomodolibet assistant ab Ipsis om∣nino,
& cum Effectu recedant. Quod si non fece∣rint postquam Praesentes publicatae & Executioni demandatae fuerint, et dicti Termini lapsi fuerint, Omnes & singulas Civitates, Terras, Oppida, Castra, Villas, & a∣lia Loca eis Subjecta, simili Ecclesiastico Interdicto sup∣ponimus, volentes Ipsum Interdictum donec Ipsi Principes à Consilio, Auxilio & Favore Henrico Regi & Com∣plicibus, Fautoribus, Adhaerentibus, Consultoribus, & Sequacibus praedictis praestando, destiterint, perdu∣rare. Sect. 16.Principibus & aliis Ma∣dat, ut contra Henricum & Complices Arma Ca∣piant. Insuper tam Principes praedictos, quam quoscunque alios, etiam ad Stipendia quorumcunque Christi fidelium Militantes, & alias quascunque per∣sonas, tam per Mare, quam per Terras, Armigeros habentes, similitèr hortamur, & requirimus, & nihilominùs eis in virtute Sanctae Obedientiae Man∣dantes, quatenus contra Henricum Regem, Com∣plices, Fautores, Adhaerentes, Consultores, & Se∣quaces praedictos, dum in Erroribus praedictis, ac adversus Sedem praedictam, rebellione permanserint, Armis Insurgant, eosque & eorum singulos, perse∣quantur, ac ad Vnitatem Ecclesiae, & Obedienti∣am dictae Sedis redire cogant, & compellant; & ram eos, quam Ipsorum Subditos, & Vassallos, ac Civitatum, Terrarum, Castrorum, Oppidorum, Vil∣larum, & Locorum suorum Incolas, & habitatores, aliásque Omnes singulas Personas supradictis Manda∣tis nostris, ut praefertur, non obtemperantes, & quae praefatum Henricum Regem Postquam Censuras & Poenas praedictas incurrerit, in Dominum quomodo∣libet etiam de facto recognoverint, vel ei quovis
modo obtemperare praesumpserint, aut qui eum, ac Complices, Fautores, Adhaerentes, Consultores, Se∣quaces, ac alios non obtemperantes praedictos, ex Regno & Dominiis praedictis, ut praefertur, expel∣lere noluerint, ubicúnque eos invenerint, eorúmque bona, mobilia & immobilia, mercantias, pecunias, navigia, credita, res, & Animalia, etiam extra territorium, dicti Henrici Regis ubilibet Consisten∣tià, Capiant. Sect. 17.Infideles & inobedientes capientium servos, & co∣rundem bona occupanti∣um sieri decernit. Nos enim bona, Mercantias, Pecu∣nias Navigia, Res, & Animalia, praedicta sic cap∣ta, In proprios eorum usus convertendi, eisdem Au∣ctoritate, Scientia, & Potestatis Plentudine, Ple∣nariam Licentiam, Facultatem & Auctoritatem concedimus, illa omnia ad eosdem Capientes plena∣riè pertinere, & spectare, & Personas ex Regno, & Dominiis praedictis Originem trahentes, seu in illis Domicilium habentes, aut quomodolibet habi∣tantes, Mandatis nostris praedictis non obtemperan∣tes, ubicúnque eos Capi Contigerit, Capientium ser∣vos fieri decernentes, Praesentésque Literas, quoad hoc, ad omnes alios cujuscúnque Dignitatis, Gra∣dus, Status, Ordinis, vel Conditionis fuerint, qui Ipsi Henrico Regi, vel ejus, Complicibus, Fauto∣ribus, Adhaerentibus, Consultoribus, & Sequacibus, aut aliis Monitionibus, & Mandatis nostris hujus∣modi, quoad Commercium non obtemperantibus, vel eorum alicui victualia, arma, vel pecunias sub∣ministrare, aut cum eis Commercium habere, seu Auxilium, Consilium, vel Favorem per se vel a∣lium, seu alios publicè vel occultè, directè vel in∣directè,
quovis modo contra tenorem Praesentium praesta∣re praesumpserint, extendentes. Sect. 18.Praelatis & aliis Mandat sub poenis de quibus hic, ut in eorum Ecclesiis Henricum & Complices qui supradictas poenas, & Censuras Incurrerint, Excommunicatos publi∣cè enuncient, & evitari faciant. Et ut praemissa facilius iis quos con∣cernunt innotescant, universis & singulis Patriar∣chis, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, & Patriarchalium Metropolitan. & aliarum Cathedralium, & Colle∣giatarum Ecclesiarum Praelatis, Capitulis, aliísque Personis Ecclesiasticis Saecularibus ac quorumvis Ordinum Regularibus, necnon Omnibus, & singu∣lis etiam Mendicantium Ordinum Professoribus Ex∣emptis, & non Exemptis, ubilibet, Constitutis, per easdem Praesentes, sub Excommunicationis, & Pri∣vationis Ecclesiarum, Monasteriorum, ac aliorum Beneficiorum Ecclesiasticorum, Graduum quoque & Officiorum, necnon Privilegiorum, & Indultorum quorumcúnque etiam à Sede praedicta quomodolibet Emanatorum poenis ipso facto Incurrendis, praecipi∣mus, & mandamus, quatenus Ipsi, ac eorum sin∣guli, si, & Postquam vigore Praesentium desuper requisiti fuerint, Infra tres dies Immediatè sequentes praefatum Henricum Regem, Omnesque alios & sin∣gulos, qui supradictas Censuras, & poenas Incurre∣rint, in eorum Ecclesiis Dominicis, & aliis Festi∣vis diebus, dum Major Inibi populi Multitudo, ad divina Convenerit, cum Crucis vexillo, pulsatis Cam∣panis, & accensis, ac demum Extinctis, & in Ter∣am projectis, & Conculcatis Candelis, & aliis in similibus servari solitis Caeremoniis servatis, Excom∣municatos publicè nuncient, & ab aliis nunciari, ac ab Omnibus Arctius evitari faciant, & mandent, necnon sub supradictis▪ Censuris & Poenis, Praesentes
Literas, vel earum transumptum, sub forma Infrascrip∣ta Confectum, Infra Terminum trium Dierum, Post∣quam, ut praefertur requisiti fuerint, in Ecclesiis, Mo∣nasteriis, Conventibus, et aliis eorum Locis, publicari, et assigi faciant. Sect. 19.Publicationem Istis Const. Impedientib. eas∣dem poenas Imponit. Volentes, Omnes, et singulos cujuscún∣que Status, Gradus, Conditionis, Praeeminentiae, Dignitatis, aut Excellentiae fuerint, qui quominus Praesentes Literae, vel earum transumpta, Copiae seu Exemplaria, in suis Civitatibus, Terris, Castris, Op∣pidis, Villis, et Locis Legi, et affigi, ac publicari possint, per se, vel alium, seu alios, publice vel oc∣cultè, directè vel indirectè impediverint, easdem Cen∣suras, et Paenas Ipso facto Incurrere. Et cum fraus et dolus nemini debeant Patrocinari, ne quisquam ex his, qui alicui Regimini, et Administrationi depu∣tati sunt Infra Tempus sui Regiminis, seu Administra∣tionis, Praedictas Sententias, Censuras, et Poenas su∣stineat, quasi pst dictum Tempus Sententiis, Censu∣ris et Poenis praedictis amplius Ligatus non existat, quemcúnque qui dum in Regimine, et Administratione existens, monitioni, et mandato nostris, quoad prae∣missa, vel aliquid eorum obtemperare noluerit, etiam deposito Regimine, et Administratione hujusmodi, nisi paruerit, eisdem Censuris, et Poenis subjicere decer∣nimus. Sect. 20.Publicari Mandat hanc Const. in Locis hic Ex∣pressis. Sed haec forma im∣mutata est, ut hic in fine. Et ne Henricus, Ejusque Complices, et Fautores, Adhaerentes, Consultores, et Sequaces, aliíque quos praemissa Concernunt, Ignorantiam eo∣rundem Praesentium Literarum, et in eis Contento∣rum
praetendere valeant, Literas ipsas (in quibus Omnes et singulos, tam juris, quam facti, etiam so∣lemnitatum, et Processuum, Citationúmque Omissa∣rum defectus, etiamsi Tales sint, de quibus Specia∣lis, et expressa mentio facienda esset, propter Noto∣rietatem facti, Auctoritate, Scientia, et Potestatis plenitudine similibus, supplemus) in Basilicae Prin∣cipis Apostolorum, et Cancellariae Apostolicae de urbe, et in partibus in Collegiatae Beatae Mariae Brugen. Tornacen. et Parochialis de Dunkercae, Oppidorum Moriensis Dioecesis, Ecclesiarum valvis Affigi; et Publicari Mandamus, decernentes quod earundem Li∣terarum Publicatio sic facta, Henricum Regem, E∣júsque Complices, Fautores, Adhaerentes, Consultores et Sequaces Omnesque alios, et singulos, quos Lite∣rae Ipsae quomodolibet Concernunt, perinde eos arctent, ac si Literae Ipsae eis Personalitèr Lectae, et Intima∣tae fuissent, cum non sit verisimile, quod ea, quae tam patentèr fiunt, debeant apud eos incognita re∣manere. Sect. 21.Transumptis credi ju∣bet. Ceterum quia difficile foret Praesentes Literas ad singula quaeque Loca, ad quae necessari∣um esset deferri, volumus, et dictâ Auctoritate de∣cernimus, quod earum transumptis manu publici Notarij Confectis, vel in Almâ Vrbe Impressis, ac Sigillo alicujus Personae in Dignitate Ecclesiastica Constitutae munitis, ubíque eadem fides adhibeatur quae Originalibus adhiberetur si essent exhibitae vel ostensae.
Sect. 22.Sanctionem poenalem Imponit. Nulli ergo Omnino hominum liceat hanc paginam Nostrae Monitionis, Aggravationes, Reaggra∣vationis, Declarationis, Percussionis, Suppositionis, In∣habilitationis, Absolutionis, Liberationis, Requisitionis, Inhibitionis, Hortationis, Exceptionis, Prohibitionis, Concessionis Extensionis, Suppletionis, Mandatorum, Voluntatis, et Decretorum Infringere, vel ei ausu Te∣merario contraire. Si quis autem hoc attentare Prae∣sumpserit, Indignationem Omnipotentis Dei, ac Beato∣rum Petri, et Pauli Apostolorum ejus se noverit Incursu∣rum. Dat. Romae apud S. Marcum,D. P. An. 1. Die 30. Aug. Anno Incarna∣tionis Dom. 1435. 3. Kal. Septemb. Pont. Nostri Anno Primo. FINIS.
A SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK. I. THE Bull of Pope Pius the Fifth (containing the Damnation and Excommunication of Queen Elizabeth) in Latin and English. P. 1. II. The first Observation, that Pius V. was neither the first nor last Pope, who Excommunicated and damn'd Kings and Emperors. For, 1. before him Pope Constantine, Gre∣gory the Second, Greg. the Third, Greg. the Seventh,
Gregory the Ninth, Innocent the Fourth, Paul the Third, &c. did the same thing: And, 2. Gregory the Thirteenth, and Sixtus the Fifth, after him. p. 7. III. The second Observation, concerning the  or Title prefix'd to Pius the Fifth his Bull; that it is Dam∣natio & Excommunicatio Elizabethae. Where it is proved, 1. That not only Pius the Fifth, but other Popes (not short of him in time or impiety) use the same hard word (Damnation) in the Titles prefix'd to their dam∣natory Bulls, wherein they Excommunicate Kings and Emperors. 2. The uncharitable Error, and Invalidi∣ty of their reasons they do, or can pretend for doing so. p. 15. IV. The third Observation, wherein, 1. The notion and significations of the word Damnation are explain'd. 2. That by the word Damnation in their Anathema's and Damnatory Bulls, not only some temporal loss or pu∣nishment (as to their Bodies or Estates) but eternal Dam∣nation of Body and Soul, is meant, by the Pope and his Party; together with the invalidity of their reasons and pretences to justifie them in this particular. p. 20. V. The fourth Observation, wherein we have, 1. The grounds on which Pius the Fifth, and other Popes, build their Power to Excommunicate and Depose Kings; and
that in the Supremacy and Plenitude of Power, which (they pretend) our blessed Saviour gave to Peter, and in him to all his Successors. So that Peter (and so every Successor of his) was constituted a Prince over all Na∣tions and Kingdoms, to pull up, and throw down, to dissipate and destroy, to plant and build, &c. 2. That such Power was (by our blessed Saviour) given to Peter and his Successors, they indeavour to prove out of Scripture, (and in their Bulls, cite the places) Gen. 1. 16. and Jer. 1. 10. 3. The ridiculous inconsequence and impertinence of such Papal reasoning, which shews them rather to be Fools, then Infallible. p. 26. VI. The fifth Observation, against the Pope's pretended Supremacy. 1. That Peter's Supremacy (much less the Popes) cannot be proved from Matth. 10. 2. where he is called , primus (or as in the Latin Fathers) Prin∣ceps Apostolorum. 2. Nor from that place, Matth. 16. 18. 19. 3. That St. Paul in Scripture, hath a far better pretence to the Supremacy and the Bishoprick of Rome, then St. Peter; and yet neither he, nor any for him, ever pretended to any Papal Supremacy. 4. How our blessed Saviour and the Apostles (yet Peter no more then the rest) are in Scripture, said to be Foundations of the Church. 5. That the Power of the Keys was given to e∣very Apostle, as well and as much as to Peter. Nay, 6. To every Bishop and Priest, as is expresly affirm'd in the Authentick Offices of the Roman Church, and in their Trent Council and Catechism. 7. That every Apostle was Christ's Vicar as well as Peter; that the Jesuites pro∣fess,
(and in their Institutions do publish it) that their Superiors are Christ's Vicars. 8. That Pasce Oves, Joh. 21. 15. 16. 17. (though usually) is most impertinently urged to prove Peter's Supremacy. 9. That the 28. Ca∣non of the Council of Chalcedon (which utterly over∣throws the Popes Supremacy) is basely corrupted by Gra∣tian and the Canonists, and (that it might not appear) left out of their old Editions of the Councils. p. 36. 37. &c. VII. The sixth Observation, In which a further examina∣tion and confutation of the Popish pretended grounds for the Popes Supremacy. That they neither do, nor can prove that Peter ever had any such Monarchical Supremacy o∣ver the Apostles and all Christians, with the reasons why they cannot. 2. If it were granted (which is evidently un∣true) that he had such a Power, yet it neither does, nor can appear (by Scripture, or any just Medium) that it was hereditary, and to pass to his Successor, but might be per∣sonal, and (as his Apostleship did) dye with him. 3. And if it were granted (which neither is, nor ever can be pro∣ved) that that Power was hereditary, and to be trans∣ferr'd to his Successor, yet they neither have, nor can have any just grounds to prove, that the Bishop of Rome is that Successor, and not the Bishop of Antioch, where (they say) St. Peter first sate. 4. That 'tis certain from Scripture, that Peter neither was nor could be (as they pretend) 25. years Bishop of Rome. 5. Nor can it (by Scripture) appear that ever he was at Rome, nor can Rome be meant by Babylon, 1. Pet. 5. 13. 6. Nor can it appear by any just Testimonies of Antiquity, that ever
he was at Rome. Papias is the ground and Author on whom they rely for that Fable; and he an ignorant Per∣son, and Arch-Heretick. 7. That to get credit to Papias, they have impiously corrupted Eusebius. 8. If it were granted, that he was at Rome, yet they have no ground or probability for it, that he was Bishop there; seeing there are far greater probabilities grounded on Scripture, that Paul was Bishop there, than Peter (or any for him) can pretend to; and yet they do not say, nor (without con∣tradiction to their own Principles) can say, that he was Bishop there. 9. That those other honorary Titles or Epi∣thites, which their Authors every where use as proper to the Pope, and marks of his Supremacy, or (at least) supe∣riority over all Bishops (such as Apostolicus Pontifex Summus, Papa, Sedes Apostolica, Vicarius Christi, Cathedra Apostolica, Successor Petri, &c.) are im∣pertinently made use of, without any proof or probability. p. 91. 92. &c. VIII. The seventh Observation, concerning the Censures, Punishments and Curses contain'd in this Bull; and the Antichristian impiety of them. 1. He miscalls the Queen, an Heretick, a favourer of Hereticks, a Slave of Im∣piety, and then Anathematizes her, and cuts her off from the Unity of Christ's Body. 2. He deposes and deprives her of her pretended Right to the Crown, and of all manner of Dignity, Dominion and Priviledge. 3. He absolves her Subjects, and all others, who are bound to her by any Oath, from all their Oaths, and all debt of Fidelity and Obedi∣ence, and that for ever. 4. He severely prohibits them
all, to obey any of her Laws or Commands. 5. If any of them do otherwise, he Excommunicates and Curses them, whether they be Papists or Protestants. p. 145. 146. &c. IX. The eighth Observation, That the Pope is the great Antichrist, the Man of Sin, and Son of Perdition, spoken of 2. Thess. 3. 4. That the Opinions of H. Gro∣tius, (that Caius Caligula) and of Dr. Hammond, (that Simon Magus was Antichrist) are inconsistent and contradictory to each other, and to themselves. That they are (both of them) repugnant to Scripture, the Judg∣ment of the primitive Fathers, of Protestants and Pa∣pists, and the sense of Christendom for about 1600. years after our blessed Saviour, &c. p. 151. 152. &c. ad p. 199. X. The ninth Observation, What the Popes Power is, (and whence they pretend to have it) which inables them with Authority to sit Judges, and pass damnatory Senten∣ces against Supream Princes, for Heresie. 2. What that Heresie is, and who the Hereticks, who by the Pope are so severely damn'd. 3. What those punishments are, which they pretend they may, and (when and where they can) actually do inflict on such Hereticks. 4. Of the Wal∣denses, that (by the testimony of their Enemies) 1. They had continued ever since the Apostles times. 2. That there was scarce any Christian Country in which they were not. 3. That they lived justly before men, and believ'd all things well of God, and all the Articles of the Creed:
but their fault was, They said Rome was Babylon, and the Pope Antichrist, &c. p. 199. 200. &c. XI. Observation the Tenth, That Queen Elizabeth stood Excommunicate, before the Damnatory Bull of Pius the Fifth, and by whom, &c. p. 213. XII. Observation the Eleventh, Of the damnable and per∣nicious Doctrines and Conclusions, which evidently fol∣low, upon their approv'd and practised Principles, of De∣posing and Anathematizing Kings and Supream Prin∣ces. That 'tis neither Treason, Murder, or any Sin, for Subjects to Assassinate their King, if he be Excommuni∣cate by the Pope. Nay, that it is a meritorious Act, for which they promise them vast rewards here, and an high∣er degree of glory in Heaven hereafter, &c. p. 219. 220. &c. XIII. The Damnation and Excommunication of Henry the Eighth by Pope Paul the Third, Decemb. 17. Anno 1538. FINIS.
