E3574 13127072 97845
An Exact ACCOUNT Of the Late Engagement Between the French King's Forces, and those of the Grand Seignior before CANDIA, On the 25th of June 1669. As it came in a LETTER from the Duke de Navailles the French General. With a LIST of the SLAIN and WOƲNDED. In the SAVOY, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, 1669.
An Exact Account Of the late Engagement between the French King's Forces, and those of the Grand Seignior before Candia, on the 25th of June, 1669. THe Fleet appointed for the Transportation of the Succors sent by His Most Christian Ma∣jesty for the Relief of Candia, under the Command of the Duke de Navailles Gene∣ral of the Land-Forces, set Sail from Thou∣lon the Fifth of June 1669, about 4 in the Afternoon. The 17th following they were joyned by 14 Venetian Ships having on board them Horses, &c. for that Expedition; and came all to an Anchor in the Bay of this City the 19th, where His Majesties Fleet receiving the usual Salutes from the Town, answered them by the Admiral only. The Duke de Beaufort, the Duke de Navailles, Monsieur Col∣bert (Brother of the Minister of State) and other Offi∣cers of the Army Embarked themselves in a Chaloupe to
discover the Enemies Posts, which, as to the Scituation of their Camp at the Sabionera, and St. Andre, they found to agree with the Draught sent thence to the Cout the April before; Save only that the Enemy had made some advance especially towards the side of the Bastion St. Andre, of which indeed they were now become Masters, and had raised a Battery of two Pieces of Canon, to annoy all Vessels pas∣sing in, or out of the Port. Whil'st they were thus Viewing, and considering the Place, they could perceive a small Barke, with Venetian Colours come from the Port, and make towards the Fleet, which it seems had on board her the Sieur Castellan (Kins∣man to him that Commands a Brigade in the Army, and now employed as an Engineer) especially of late; for the Defence of the Bastion of the Sabionera. He was sent by the Captain General of the Republick to Complement the Admiral the Duke de Navailles, and the rest of the Officers of the Army in the Name of the Garrison, and to inform them of the true state of the Place, and the extremity it was reduced to; bringing also with him a Design of the same for better Demonstration. He freely declared, They had no other hopes of Preserving the Place, but the Expectation of these Succors; and, that he had express Orders from the Captain-General, to desire 3000 Men to Mount the Guard that very night, lest the Enemy, upon their Arrival, should resolve upon a General Assault, and carry the place, before their Forces could come a shore. This did a little surprize the Duke de Navalleis, who was loath to adventure the Landing of part of his Men, and therefore thought best, that himself, and some of the Principal Officers of his Army should first take a view of
the Town that night, and afterwards as he saw occasion take care for the Landing his Men. This he Communicated to the Admirall, and accor∣dingly about 11 of the Clock with Monsieur de Champ and some other Officers went on board the same Barque, that brought Monsieur Castellan, for his more particular infor∣mation. On the Morrow morning being the 21th. The Duke de Navailles having well weighed all things, and finding the State of the Place to be no better then what Monsieur Castellan had reported, The Enemy entrenched, their Can∣non mounted upon the Bastion St. Andre, whence they played continually upon the first Retrenchments which there being little ground left, was not in a Condition to make any considerable defence, and that the second Re∣trenchment which the besieged had begun to cast up be∣hind it could not possibly be finished time enough to pre∣vent their gaining a mine, (which he was assured was un∣derneath the first Retrenchment) of which if the Enemy were once possessed, the whole place would lye open to them, and endanger the loss of the Garrison. This he thought might reflect upon the honor of the Armes of the King his Master, that the place should be taken in sight of the succors without attempting some∣thing towards its relief, (the Admirall concurring with him in the same opinion) they resolved upon a speedy Lan∣ding of all their forces, which they began to put in Execu∣tion that very night, so that in 2 or 3 dayes they had all their men ashore. The 22d 4 of the Kings Musquetiers and a Quarter∣master of Horse, who had orders to goe and provide quar∣ters in the Town, adventuring to enter the Port by day,
3 of the Musquetiers were killed by the Enemies Canon from the Bastion of St. Andre, and the Quartermaster at the same time lost one of his hands. The 23d the Admirall entred the Towne and viewed the Posts, the Generals calling a Councell of Offi∣cers concluded there was no other expedient for the pre∣serving the Town, then by a Generall assault immediate∣ly to be made upon the Enemy, before they could receive any recruits from Morea or fortify themselves in their Tren∣ches. Moreover by this means they might surprize them are they could gather their Cavalry together, which was now dismounted and dispersed up and down the Countrey. These considerations confirmed the resolution of the as∣sault which was to be made upon the Sabionera side, as having a greater convenience of sallying out of that quar∣ter then that of St. Andre, and accordingly on the 24th at night, or the 25th by break of day endeavor to beat the Enemy from their works and to raise them. This was the opinion of our Generall and Officers and approved of by the Venetians. It was thought nevertheless too great an undertaking for our strength alone, being from all hands informed the Enemy had 7 or 8000 men in that quarter, wherefore he required of the Captain Generall to furnish us with all the men he possibly could. The great desire our Generall had to prosecute this de∣signe, in order to the saving of the place, and the confi∣dence he had of his owne Forces, with their promise of a supply, encouraged him to set upon the Sabionera, though it were entrenched, and of greater strength then the body wherewith he intended to attempt it. And therefore de∣sired the Captain Generall to assigne him 5 or 600 Pyoneers
to slight the Enemies workes, and nayle down their Cannon, and that at the same time a brisk sally might be made upon the side of the St. Andre to keep them in play there, that they might not succor the Sabionera. All which the Captain Generall promised punctually to per∣forme. The Admirall also who would needs have a part in this Action, ingaged to land 1500 of his men from his Ships, and to lead them himself though he submitted to receive or∣ders from the Generals (Monsieur Colbert being appoynted his Marshall of the Camp) and to cause his men of war to be brought within Musquet shott of St. Andre and to keep playing upon the Enemies Camp with his Cannon from their Ships, being unwilling to be a witness only to this glorious enterprise without running all the risques that should attend it. But the Venetians who at first promised us 4 or 500 horse and 3000 foot to joyn with ours, shewing the im∣possibility of affording any, took upon them nevertheless to divert the Enemy at St. Andre, and by a stout salley which they would make under the favour of our Cannon from the Ships to enter the Fort it self. The 24th at night the Admirall having landed his sea∣men sent notice thereof to the Duke de Navailles assuring him of their good disposition, each Company being commanded by the Captain of that vessell out of which they were taken, and that now he wanted only orders to draw them out, and to fall upon the Enemy. The Generall returned him answer by the Baron de St. Mark that it was too great a danger for a person of his quality to expose himself to, whom he also desired to use all arguments to disswade him, urging the great impor∣tance
the safety of his person was to his Majesties Service, and the paticular good of the design now in hand, but all his instances could not prevail upon him to alter his resolu∣tion. That night the D. de Navailles went to take a view of the Rere of the Enemies Camp, where he resolved to make his Onset, and in his return visited the Fort Demetrius, by which he intended to issue out his Troops, and having disposed his Battalia, he acquainted the Captain General, the D. of Beaufort, Monsieur S. Andre Montbrun with the Order, desiring they would with all freedom give their opi∣nion upon it, (an affair of so great importance to Christen∣dom, requiring to be well weighed,) which when under∣stood, they unanimously approved it to have been so well laid, that there was nothing to be added or altered. It being now neer day, the D. de Navailles began to draw out his men out of the Town, with the greatest silence imaginable in the Order agreed upon before, which was as follows. Four hundred men were drawn out of each body, 50 Grenadiers placed in the Front of them, and brought up by 3 Troops of horse commanded by Monsieur Dam∣pier. These were followed by the Regiments of Gaures, Saint Valier, Lorrain, and Britany, 4 Troops of horse upon their wings, and brought up by the Regiments of Montague, Jonsac, and Grance. The Regiments of Harcourt, Conti, Lignieres, Mom∣pzat and Vendosme made up the Reserve commanded by Monsieur de Choiseville, 4 Squadrons of horse marching upon their wings, and were Posted between the Enemies two Camps, to cut off all relief that might come from
S. Andre to the Sabionera, they were about to attacque. There were also 50 of the Kings Musquetiers and 100 re∣formed Officers placed between the first and second line to be ready upon any emergency. The Forces that came from on board the Ships were ordered to make their sally on the left side of the Trench of the Sabionera. Whilst the Army was drawing out the D. de Navailles caused two breaches to be made to sally out of the Trench, by one of which 500 men should attacque them in the Front, the rest to divide themselves into two bodies, and flank the two Batteries, but with express Order not to stir till they knew the Camp was engaged, and in case they gained the Batteries, which in all likelihood they would, there to range themselves, and not to advance a foot with∣out fresh Orders. After silence commanded, which was punctually obser∣ved, though in a strange and uneven Countrey, we marched in this excellent order till we came within a very small di∣stance of the Enemy, and ranged our selves in Battalia in a little place leading into their Camp, without ever being discovered. The day was also propitious to our designs, our last Troops being scarce come up to their Lines, when we could discern the enemies Camp. Our commanded men who were then within half Mus∣quet shot of the Enemy were fired upon by their Musquet∣tiers, and our General discovering two Redoubts at the head of the Quarters, caused them to be set upon by the Forces commanded by Monsieur Dampier, who seconded by the Guards immediately carried them with great resolution, putting all to the sword that made any resistance.
At the same time the Enemies Lines were assaulted and taken by the Regiments of S. Valier and Lorrain, whilest the commanded men fell in upon the Rere of the Trench, Monsieur Castellan seconding them in the head of the Com∣pany of Guards under his Command, with infinite execu∣tion and slaughter of the Enemy, possessed themselves of them: here our Troops fell to plundering, though it were prohibited upon pain of death, and entring the ene∣mies Huts slew great numbers, whom they surprized before they could get into a posture of defence. Hitherto every thing succeeded according to our de∣sires, though we had not above 300 men from on board the ships, and few or none of the Venetians, so that this handful of men routed this numerous enemy, amongst whom was so great consternation, that they threw them∣selves head-long into the Sea when they were Masters of the Batteries and Canon. The Enemy thus beaten from their Camp, drew up upon an Ascent on our right hand, whence viewing our small numbers on the left, scarce 300 Seamen advan∣cing, notwithstanding all the importunity of the Admiral and Monsieur Colbert, with a hideous shout, rallied to charge us in those Trenches they had so lately abandoned; but our General perceiving their intent sustained the charge, and forced them twice to a confused retreat, not without a considerable loss; but they being a sort of people that quickly rally, were presently upon us again, with as much eagerness as formerly they fled: Our General then put himself in the head of the Company of Guards, and causing the Squadron of S. Esteve to follow, received them so warmly, that we became Masters of the upper ground they had taken. But then there happened an unlucky accident, the
Powder Granadoes &c. of a Battery possessed by the Guards taking fire, the soldiers fearing there had been a Mine, dispersed the whole Battalion, running to the right and left in that disorder that Monsieur Castellan had much adoe to make them to rally. The 300 from on board the Ships, terrified with this accident, deserted their Posts, and by all the endea∣vors could possibly be used would not be brought back to the fight. The Generall and Monsieur Colbert seeing this disaster came up with our first Battalions in the head of 50 of the Kings Musquetiers on foot, where with this small body they performed things beyond all imagination. This misfortune gave such encouragement to the Turks that they attacqued our men afresh with vigor enough, who were so shken with the violence of the assault and number  Enemy that the greatest part began to retreat with∣out  and had not our General with great resolution in the head of a small troop of horse he had newly rally∣ed together, maintained a Curtaine that favoured our re∣treat, the Enemy had prevailed upon this disorder to our very great disadvantage. In the mean time the body of the Reserve, was sur∣rounded with several Companies, powred in upon them from St. Andre, between whom there was a slight skir∣mish but of no long continuance, which our men not being able to sustaine, though infinitely Encouraged thereunto by the Messieurs le Bret and Choyseul, who had both their horses killed under them, Followed the Example of the Seamen, and made a disorderly retreat. This compleated the loss of that Advantage, we so long had in our hands, and the Enemy fearing our retreat
might betray them into an Ambush, had not Courage e∣nough to pursue, retaining still such a dread of our forces though retreated in disorder, that our Generall assisted on∣ly by the Messieurs Tulladet, and Argellon, and 4 or 5 Gentlemen of his own family that never deserted him, made good so orderly a retreat, that the Enemy durst not attempt this small number, but discharging a great volley of small shot upon them, our Generals horse was hurt in two places, and himself received a shot on his Armor but without hurt to his body. The Admirall the Duke de Beaufort abandoned by all his men fell in this action, without any person about him but what were killed or wounded; among the former was Monsieur Bourgneuf, the later Monsieur Hoquette, who had his Foot shot off at the Ancle by a Musquet bullet. This glorious Action, So happily begun, and carry∣ed on with that excellent conduct, however unfortunate in the disorder, might nevertheless have been esteemed a succesfull and advantagious enterprize, were it not for the invaluable loss of our Admiral, and those other Noble persons that fell with him. The advice from the Enemies Camp speaks the loss on their side to have been very considerable, above 1800 men having been killed, drowned, and taken Prisoners.
A Particular List of the Slain and Wounded. Principal Officers Slain. THe Duke de Beaufort, Admiral of France. The Sieur de Rozan, brother to the Marquiss Blan∣quefort, Master of the Camp. Marquis de Fabert, Master of the Camp. Monsieur de Bourgneuf, Ayde de Camp. Principal Officers and Persons of note wounded. Monsieur Castellan dangerously. Monsieur Lignieres Mareshal of the Camp dangerously. Monsieur Molier Captain of the Cavalry. The Chevalier de Bouillon. Monsieur Montaigue Colonel. Monsieur de Cauuisson. Monsieur le Gaure. Marquiss d'Uxelles Ayde de Camp. Monsieur de la Hoquette, Ayde de Camp. Monsieur de Montbrun, not St. Andre Montbrun. Vicount de Casse 3 wounds on the head with a Cimitar. Du Cles, Captain of the Duke de Navailles Guards, wound∣ed with an Arrow in his head. Mr. de la Moche d'Origni, Engineer.
The Little Chevalier de Vendosme, received 3 shots in his Armor, the Bullets of two pierced to his very Shirt, without hurting him. Officers in the several Regiments killed and Wounded. In Monsieur Castellan's Brigade of Foot. 1 Captain, 1 Lieutenant, Monsieur Guenengau, Vo∣luntier, killed. 1 Ensign wounded. In Mr. de Rozans Regiment. 1 Lieutenant wounded. In Mr. de Grances Regimen 1 Major, 1 Lieutenant, killed. 1 Captain, 1 Lieutenant, hurt. In Monsieur de Jonzac's Regimt 1 Major killed. 1 Lieutenant Colonel, 1 Captain, 3 Lieutenants ut. In Monsieur de Vendosmes Regiment, 1 Lieutenant killed. 1 Major, 1 Captain hurt. In Monsieur St. Valier's Regiment. 2 Captains killed. Monsieur St. Valier, 1 Major, 2 Captains, 2 Lieutenants hurt. In Mr. de Montpeyroux's Regiment. 1 Lieutenant hurt.
In Monsieur Dampiers's Regiment. 4 Captains hurt. In Monsieur de Harcourt's Regiment. 1 Captain, 1 Lieutenant killed. 5 Captains, 2 Lieutenants hurt. In Monsieur de Conty's Regiment. 1 Lieutenant killed. 1 Captain hurt. Reformed Officers. In the Navarre Brigade. 1 Lieutenant killed. In the Lorrain Brigade. 2 Majors  Captain killed. 3 Captains, 2 Lnants hurt. In the Bretagne Brigade. 1 Captain killed. 1 Collonel, 1 Captain, 1 Lieutenant hurt. In the Piedmont Brigade. 2 Captains, 1 Lieutenant killed. In the Brigade of Normandy. 3 Captains, 1 Lieutenant killed. In the Brigade of Picardy. 4 Captains, 5 Lieutenants killed.
Horse. In Monsieur de Choyseul's Brigade. 3 Captains, 3 Lieutenants hurt. In Monsieur de St. Esteue's. 1 Captain, 1 Lieutenant hurt. In Monsieur de Sommieures. 2 Lieutenants killed. 2 Lieutenants hurt. Private Soldiers killed and wounded 5 or 600 Men, besides Prisoners. Of the Enemy were killed, drowned, and taken Priso∣ners, about 1800. FINIS.
