B2841 E986_4 99866803 119089
BIBLIOTHECA MILITƲM: Or the SOULDIERS PUBLICK LIBRARY. Lately Erected For the Benefit of all that love THE GOOD OLD CAUSE, At WALLINGFORD-House: And already furnished with diverse excellent Treatises, herein mentioned. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1659.
Bibliotheca Militum: Or the SOULDIERS PUBLICK LIBRARY. 1. THE City Compliance for gain without conscience, written by Rob. Tychborn. 2. The cares of the world satisfied: Or a Rest from labour, wherein is prov'd a Rest
for such souls as could find no Rest un∣der the, old Government: written by Henr. Da, Executioner. 3. Religion in Bonds: Or the Saints Captivity and Persecution experienc't: by John Barkstead, Lieutenant of the Tower. 4. A new way to make Lords; Or new Lords already made; whereunto is ad∣ded, The other House, their Authority and Institution; also are included their noble Acts and Atchievements, with their fortunes inabling them for their services: written by William Prynne, Esq. 5. Perjury (in Folio) proved to be Jure Div: By His late Highness deceas∣ed. 6. A Common-wealth expounded to be the afe way through this world, and the most certain to that which is to come: whereun∣to is added, that Gain is great Godliness: by Sr. Arthur Haslerig. 7. Verbum Doloris: Or England in mourn∣ing;
Prophetically foretelling the de∣struction of Protectors, as likewise of the succession of their Families; by Rich∣ard Cromwell, Esq. 8. Patience per force: Or a medicine for amad dog; treating of teh infallible virtue of necessity: by the aforesaid Au∣thor. 9. the world in a maze, or wise men run mad: Also is added hereunto an Exhor∣tation, that those who have worn out Religions Cloak would get new ones, or turn the old: written by Hugh Peters, M. of Arts 10. Divide & impera: The art of sup∣planting or compassing ones ends, being a subtil piece dedicated to the Lord Lambert, and written by Peter Talbot, Soc. Jesu. 11. The Art of preaching and pray∣ing, with the right use of Religion: By that incomparable Artist, Sr. Henry Vane. K. 12. Pucana de Scoto: Or Scots directory
for all such as fortune shall hereafter make Secretaries of State, shewing their necessity of being conversant in the se∣crets of both Sexes: most politickly hand∣led, and written by Thomas Scot, Secre∣tacy. 13. Hey te Tyte, or to morrow morning I found in Horse-shoe; being an excellent discourse concerning Go∣vernment, with some sober and practi∣cal expedients, modestly propos'd, and written by James Harrington. 14. Defamatio Regum. Or the History of Ingratitude; I Burdachis experto; an Italian translation: every thing and no∣thing, or the compleat complier: by the Lord Fines. 15. Apuleius in laudem Asini: or a Panegyrick in Commendation of his late Highnes's, singular virtues, and val∣lor: by Pagan Fisher. 16. Well flown Buzard. Or an Ho∣ly Rapture of the court confessor, wherein the made a new and incredible
discovery of his late Highness, since his decease, at the right hand of God: by Peter Sterry. 17. Superstition demolisht. Or the old Dagon puld down and removed from Westminster: by the Committee of safety. 18. A new gag for an old Goose: Or a reply to James Harringtons Oceana: by Mr. Wrenn. 19. Asinus ad liram: Or a new way of improving the Gold finders Office, propos'd to the privy Councel for the ease of the City, by a Person of a good report, and one who petitions to be Duke of the dunghil, because he has much in∣sight into a business of this nature; the first letters of whose name is, Alderman Atkinsd. 20. The rebels Catechisin, translated out of the Scottish directory; by Col. Hewson. 21. Berecynthius Heros: VVherein 'tis demonstrated, that Mr. Row is the fittest Orator for his Auditors oxtended ears, his
voice being as low as his Rhetorick, and both as lean as his Person. 22. An owl in an Ivy-bush: or Gilbert Millington in the Chair; together with the excellent improvement of scandalous Ministers. 23. A Curry-Comb for a Cox-Comb: Or Invisible John discovered: by Col. Over∣ton. These are the Gift of Charles Lord Fleetwood for the better encourage∣ment of future benefactors. FINIS.
