B3092 E293_8 99860965 113092
A more Exact RELATION OF THE GREAT DEFEAT GIVEN to Gorings Army in the West; By the Victorious Sr. Thomas Fairfax. Sent in a Letter from Captain Blackwell, to his father in London. Published according to Order. LONDN, Printed for Henry Overton in Popes-head Alley, 1645.
A more exact relation of the great defeat given to Gorings Army in the West: by the Victorious Sr. Thomas Fairfax, Deare Father. I sent you yesterday a note wherein I ac∣quainted you in generall that Sr. Thomas Fairfax had newly routed the Kings Ar∣my, under the command of Generall Goring. Having now another oppertu∣nity of sending and more time for wri∣ting, I shall give a more large, yet a brief relation too of the particulars. On Munday last we marcht from Crookhorne towards Ilchester, a garison of the Kings, standing upon the ri∣ver, (on the other side of which Gorings Army was drawne up) they having broken downe all the Bridges upon the river from Evill to Bridgewater, and made good the passes by parties of theirs: we faced Ilchester with our Horse about noone, and sent a small party towards the Towne to beate in their horse-guard, whereby we might the better view their workes, for we thought to have forced over the passe, Wee beate their guards in, having wounded some of them, and taken a Lieut. prisoner, but found it difficult to passe that way: whereupon we marched with our foote to Evill, 3 miles thence that night, and found that Bridge
also broke up. But the next morning earely inteli∣gence came the enemy was marched towards Glasseabu∣ry and Bristoll. Whereupon we thought to have fol∣lowed them, but our intelligence being not certaine of the way of their march, because a party of them had marched another way, and finding their garrison. viz. Ilchester quitted and burnt (the strongest part of it,) we marched thither and quartered there on Teusday night till better intelligence. The next morning we understood they were march∣ed to Langport, (another Garrison upon the river) from whence they sent a party of horse towards Il∣mester where Major Generall Massies forces were quartered but being beaten backe and pursued neare Langport, Massie found 3 Regiments of the enemies horse turned out to grtse, which they seized upon and kept: and in the pursuite tooke divers cullours from the enemy, and endangered Gorings person very much, whilest Sr. Tho. Fairfax with his Army was on the o∣ther side the river within 3 miles of Langport, at a place called Sutton viewing the pursuit, having received in∣telligence that night of this defeate given to the enemy by Massy, the next morning the enemy were all drawne out of Langport, on that side of the river where Our quarters were, wee marched forth∣with towards them: with 7 Regiments of horse (which were all the horse on this side the river) and one Company of Dragoons, and 8 Regiments of foote, And drew up against them in a Campania within a mile of Langport upon one hill, they being upon another, and there was betwixt us a smal valley, and only a road way to passe through, the sides of the valley being en∣closed grounds by hedges and a small brooke running
in the bottome betweene us. Here we had some skir∣miging with our horse, till at last the enemy finding it would be much to their dis-advantage to lose, or to suf∣fer us to march up that way, they endeauoured to make it good by lining the hedges with Musquettiers, but we resolved about 10. of tht clocke in the morning to force our way (although they had also placed a peeces of Ordinance on the top of the hill in the roade way) when they perceived what we intended by our draw∣ing towards them, they sent Dragoones to make good the passe, and as we thought, intended to draw off their Musquettiers, but before they could draw them off, we had engaged them by forlorne hopes of Musquettiers, drawn downe to the hedges, both on the right hand and left of that passe, which they with stood a while stoutly; but having drawne up our great Guns, and given them about 50. or 60. great shot, their horse began to retreat, and their foote could not abide so much heat, as they found in our Musquettiers, of both forlorne hopes; whereupon our horse began to advance up the way: then their foote ran from the hedges. The Regiments late Lieut. Gener2l is own Regiment (for it is now de∣vided into two) being in the Van, advanced up the hill, and Major Bethell of one of those Regiments gave the horse such a gallant charge up the hill, that they after a long dispute with him quitted the ground, and gave li∣berty for the rest of our Horse to come up; who found them not resolved for a long dispute, and therefore charging them desparately the enemy all faced about, and ran away both horse and foote most shamefully: The foot most of them into Langport which was with∣in halfe a mile of them, but for hast threw downe all their armes by the way, and the Horse, all that were
on this side the River, towards Bridgewater, our Horse pursuing with the Lieutenant Generall Cromwell, un∣till they came within a mile of Bridgewater, killing many by the way, and taking many prisoners, while they were pursuing the Lieut. Generall gave order for a party of Horse to face Langport, their Garrison to secure the reare, And after his returne finding them marching out of Langport, on the other side of the water, made ready a party of Horse and Dragoons, if it were possible to come at them to pursue them also: when they were all marched out of the Towne, but some of their owne that they killed, who would not march with them: they set the farther end of the Towne on fire in a narrow streee, thinking thereby to have hindred us that we could not come after them: But although the fire burnt very violently on both sides, so that many durst not venture, the Lieut. Gene∣rall himselfe advanced in the head of 6. Troupes of Horse, with about 3. of Dragoons to pursue them, (two Regiments of Foot being commanded to march as fast as they could after: he overtook them within 2. or 3. miles of the Towne: And although their num∣ber was farre greater, yet it pleased the Lord to strike them with such a feare, that 15. Troupes of Horse, and about 2000. Foote, the greatest part of then ran away and hid themselves, but we tooke hundreds of them prisoners, and marched through their owne flame with them back againe into Langport, shewing them their wickednesse. Thus God hath blessed us exceedingly, we have taken many prisoners, I cannot at present know what they are, but we have taken the Lieutenant Generall of their Ordnance, and adjuvant Generall, 3. Colonels, with Lieutenant Colonels and
Majors, and many Captaines and other Offices, about 30. Foote Colours, I have not yet learnt how many Horse Colours, 2. peeces of Ordnance, the rest with their Trayne being sent to Bridgewater, in the morning two waggons of Ammunition, about a 1000. Mus∣quets, I know not how many Horses, above a 1000. prisoners of Foote. All their armes which we tooke not, they threw into the River, and corne ficlds, kill'd about 60. or 80. of them, with the losse of about 4. or 5. men at most: Many of the prisoners have taken up armes, the rest are sent as I thinke for London, wee are now upon our pursuit with the Army, within 2. miles of Bridgewater, both Horse, Foote, and Trayne, intending to fall to worke there next, here are 3000. club-men declared for us, and keepe the passages with musquets between Bridgewater and Bristoll. Sir, wee doe, doe you also blesse God, who hath raised up a poore company of men to do him such service, Men who were by some thought not firt to be tollerated in the Kingdome, but faithfull to God and those who have employed them, without any other ends then Gods glory, and the publique welfare of this poore Kingdome. Sir, I have no more time, pray excuse my hast, this is truth, and all the truth I know at present: I desire all my friends may know what great things God hath done for us, and may blesse his Name for it, with us: Middlesey, Iuly 11. Friday, 1645. Sir, Your most dutifull Sonne, Iohn Blackwell. FINIS.
