B3029 E181_19 99859354 111428
THE BISHOPS MANIFEST: OR, A Comparative Relation of confor∣mitie of the English Prelates to those trea∣cherous and deceitfull ones in the Reign of King Hen. the eighth. Wherein more knavery of theirs is disco∣vered to the world then we think of; in which many of their notorious pranks are made known. Humblie presented to the High Court of PARLIAMENT. English royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE LONDON: Printed for W.R. 1641.
THE BISHOPS MANIFEST. 1. AS the prestigious Priests in their Woolfe-like ravening under Romes crueltie,H. Stalbridge his Epistaprin∣ted at Basill. Ann. 1530. were as deceit∣full as craftie foxes; in whose dens were bred such cruel Adders as have ever since carried stings in their tails to oppresse the Church of God, So are those Foxes whelps now become not onely as subtle as their Dammes, but as cruell as their Sires in their subtilties. 2. In that Reforming Parliament,Rho Mors his Lamentation, title of Ch. 23. B. Hall his Re∣monstrance, & Replies, and a∣ny of them all will now con∣fesse it. the Prelates pre∣tended to be fearfull of the destruction of the Church, and the ceasing of that glory in which this kingdome then was, and therefore pretended to take great care for both. And thus do our Prelates imitate them; if we re∣move them and their Discipline, they traduce us to be∣leeve, there will never be any settlement in the Church of England, and if they be taken from their palaces, and dignities, all the glory of this Nation will be eclipsed. But for all the crueltie of those Romish Woolfes that were then resident in this Island,Hol. Chronicl. Prelates like Satan can transform themselves in∣to Angels of light. yet were they such sub∣tle foxes, that when they saw that the Romane jurisdicti∣on was contemptible, they then put upon them the skins of those Lambes which before they had devoured, as if
they had been those harmlesse ones: they joyned, as if they had been both associates, and assistants in the work; and therefore pretended not onely to write, but to swear solemnly against that Romane jurisdiction; nay they would pretend any thing, and transform themselves into any shape, so they might but hold their livings, and be permitted in their dominions, and dignities, as they did Anno 1534. And just of their disposition are our Prelates now,They are ap∣parant by the Protestation enemies. for whereas (as who will may clearly enough per∣ceive) that they are more cruell now against the poore Protestants, then any woolfes: witnesse their crueltie (to their power) executed in their Courts, their forwardnes against the Protestants in Scotland, to work their over∣throw; their backwardnesse to have the poore distressed Protestants in Ireland relieved,The Prelates were willing to help against Scotland, but have no pity to the poore Protestants in Ireland to help them. H. Sta. Epist. or the Rebels there sub∣dued: they would give great summes to devoure the Protestants in Scotland, or England, or any where indeed; But where is one of them now, that will part with any thing to hasten the expedition against the cruell Adders, and viperous Rebels in Ireland, that have crept from un∣der the Rubish of their heaps, that have been bred in their dwellings: And yet now they see the whole Land to lament for these poore distressed Protestants in Ire∣land, they dare not be so bold as to make a shew of siding with the Rebels, but we may easily perceive what lies at their hearts, when the Scots rose, they soon procured them to be proclaimed Rebels; but now the Devill, and Rome, and Prelates, and Papists, and Rebels, rise in Ire∣land, they never sollicite the King for any such matter (I warrant you.) They sit in Parliament, and they will make a shew to the world to joyn with the Parliament in the great work they are about. But have we not just cause to complain against them, that they are but as knots in the thread that should sew up the Seames and Rents of these Kingdomes, and yet they sit as Agents in the work; And what hath been done there, they (but how unwil∣lingly who doth not know) have assented to? Nay, they
have taken the Oath too,Prelates took the Protestati∣on onely to colour and daube over their Popery and Innova∣tions. in which they have protested against all Popery, and Popish Innovations; they have grown brasen faced ever since, they are hardned now, they have got whores foreheads; and instead of scarlet blush (which they affect well enough too) they have got black and white obstinacy, and will be daunted with no∣thing. And yet indeed now as the case stands, they are willing a while to preach, they will be ruled by the Par∣liament, they will forsake their Canon Law, they will be the Kings Bishops, they will stoop to any thing now, so they may abide in their livings, and enjoy their domi∣nions and dignities; which if they be let alone, they hope in short time to rise up again as high as ever. 4. Now if we do but examine the matter,B. of Martyrs, Rh. Mo. Ch. 23. we shall finde how deceitfull those Prelates were. For after they had thus bound themselves by their own cords, and past it over as before,Foxes Acts and Monu∣ments. which they did to make the King and State beleeve, that the Popes jurisdiction, and all Popery was utterly banished out of England,See Tho. Wals. Ypodigma Neustriae, Ann. 1371.1.132. and that all was now setled for the conforming of the Protestant Church here; But see how both the King and the State was de∣ceived by them; a company of base dissembling Prelates (that they were) for the very same day they both by word and letter, at home, and abroad, took all occasions to draw back King Hen. the 8. his Highnesse from Re∣formation. And are not our Prelates now as false as they? who for all they have passed the Oath, and protested against Po∣pery, and entrey into Covenant with the Lord by the said Protestation, to make the King and State beleeve, that all Poperd was banished from their hearts; yet how have they jugled in the businesse,Prelates are Juglers, even the most mo∣dern of them are faultie herein. B. Hall Arch. B. of York, &c. and dealt deceitfully with us alreadie, even since their Protestation. Them∣selves still maintain their former Popish dominions, and government, and discipline; many and great points of Popish doctrine, labouring to binde mens consciences to observe their Lithergie, and many of their Innovations;
and those of them in whom was the greatest hopes (if any:How notori∣ous is their Protestation against the high and ho∣norable as∣semblie in Parliament, Decemb. 30. 1641. One hath since purchased an Archbishoprick, and what his Adherents be, the exploytes of his Abbey-lub∣bers can testifie: And is it not too apparantly manifest to us all, how active the whole body of the Popish Pre∣lates have been against Reformation: Have not they beene the greatest trouble both to his Majesty, and both the Houses of Parliament hitherto in the great Work they are about. 5. On the other hand,8. Martirs, Epist. of Gr. F. La. Is. Cr. those Prelates, Anno 1540. did procure Injunctions and Articles, with penalties attend∣ed; and themselves sate in Commission, and were the chief prosecutors of such as withstood them. And is not the spirit of our Popish Prelates at this day so qualified also? The Prelates labour to hin∣der Reforma∣tion all they can.Have they not alreadie procured votes in the Vpper House for the strict observance of their Lithergie, and a Proclamation from the Kings Majestie also, have they not taken all the pains, and made all the friends they can, and used all the policy that they can invent, to have Re∣formation broken off, and their tyranny to be brought on foot again; have they not (even at this day) set the Land in a great fear of them? Witnesse Decem. 30. 1641. 6. Their attempts afterward appeared more plain, to be both against the King, the Queen, the State, the Church:Queen Kathe∣rine Parr Earl Cromwel, &c yea and the whole Land too; for all their pre∣tences, and deceitfull boastings: They appeared to be but Woolfes in Fox skins, for they were the chief cause then in attempting of the death of the Queen, of some good Nobles, and many faithfull subjects besides. They by their dealings with us expose both King, Queen, Prince, Parlia∣ment, &c to danger.And our Prelates are their right shapen sons, qualified with as blood thirstie spirits as they; Do they not to this day expose the whole Land to danger for them, sparing neither King, Queen, Prince, States, Parliament, Church, nor the whole land? Do they not more earnestly solicite for seven condemned Jesuites, then for the poore di∣stressed Kingdome of Ireland? nay doth it not easily ap∣peare,
that they had rather expose us all to the mercilesse crueltie of the Popish, then themselves to be bercaft of their Pope-like domineering. They are blood suckers.In a word, how do the Papists Prelates in Ireland suck the English Protestant blood there? And how do the Eng∣lish Prelates labour daily to make England to become a slaughter house to them, that thereby they may share our blood amongst them, and so we become their prey. English Chro. B. Matter.7. King Hen. his Prelates caused divers godly Citizens of London, and other Ministers, and godly people to be imprisoned; cast into the fiery flames, and stirred up the State against them, even at the same time, when others died for executing their office under the Pope, and adhe∣ring to the Bishop of Rome. They are Ie∣suites friend, but Protestants enemies.And at this day when such care is taken against Popish Priests and Jesuites (as God be thanked there is) and some have suffered: and if it were not for the Prelates, doubtlesse the others would also▪ yet how do our Pre∣lates enveigh against the City, and divers godly Mini∣sters, and people of God, witnesse Ireland, who hath been the cause that Kingdom had relief no sooner: Was it not the English Prelates? Who was it that stirred up the Con∣stables about Westminster, to withstand the City, was it not they? Do not they agree in Parliament with the votes of the Popish Lords against Reformation? They would take upon them to settle the Land, a fine way to bring in Po∣pery, if they could obtain it.Oh how they take upon them, how they could settle the Land in quietnesse, when as themselves have been the boy sterous winds that have so disturbed our wayes; yet they boast, that if the Puritans, and Brownists, and some Sectaries, as they call them, were cut off, and some of the Citizens, oh then the Land would be quiet. And this they do to the end that they might gain an opportu∣nitie again to share the Romish government of the Land amongst themselves; which could they obtain, they would so reduce us, that they would soon reduce the Land to Popery, and (we may justly fear) bring us under as much crueltie as ever Queen Maries Prelates, or King
Hen. 8. his Prelates subdued them. Therefore I conclude with Rodericke Morse in his Lamentation, Oh England, England,The Conclu∣sion. if thou wilt banish Antichrist, and the Pope out of this Realm, thou must fell down to the ground those rotten Poasts the Bishops (which be clouds with out moysture) and utterly abolish all and every his un∣godly Laws, Decrees, Traditions, and Ceremonies, without significations;No security can be expect∣ed till they be removed. for they do but wait for a time, to rob some Nobleman of his wit. And this is certain, that as the Pope is enemie to the Gospel, so be his chil∣dren the lesser Bishops; therefore they cannot be suffered thus to reign, except we be partakers of their iniquitie, and spillers with them of the blood of the Righteous. FINIS.
