b3227 e1928_3 99868834 121190
BLOODY BABYLON DISCOVERD. Or, the Mystery of Iniquity Reveal'd, Written long since. And now Published for the In∣struction and Information of Great Brit∣taine in generall; more particularly intended for that once Famous Flourishing, and, for Civill Government, Admired Honourable City of LONDON. By CHRISTIANUS LONDINATUS. Melius est inter Barbaros sub specie Captivitatis esse liber, quàm sub specie liberatis esse Captivus. Salv. de gub. Dei. Quaerendum est mihi apud Barbaros Angliae humanitatem, quia apud Anglos barbaram inhumanitatem ferre non Possum. Salv. If thou warne the Wicked, and he turne not from his wickednesse, nor from his wicked way, he shall dye in his Iniquity, but thou hast delivered thy soul. Ezek. Chap. 3. vers. 19. Printed in the year 1659.
The Mystery of Iniquity REVEAL'D. AS the Compassionate bowells of a tenderly-affecting father toward his Sonnes (though refractorie, in their demea∣nours; un-naturall in their returns of expressive unsonne-like disobedi∣ence, for his dear expressions of a fa∣ther-like affection) still continue woo∣ing, with intermixed sighs and tears, those obstinately wicked Children, (Nature working, as it were against Nature) his naturall affection, as a fa∣ther prevailing over his angry inclina∣tion, by nature as a man; with weep∣ing Rhetorick, perswading their re∣turn from those self-destroying paths: By such winning meanes, inviting them, to the avoiding of approaching
misery, and injoyment of their almost irrecoverably lot felicity. Even so, (Notwithstanding these lines, like that passionately wooing-father, onely aime at the temporall and eternall happinesse, of all those, (whose past and present worst of acti∣ons, so Obvious to the World's eye, need not, argito Monstrari, plainer words to speak the concern'd Persons) because for these lines alone, I cannot but expect, to be met with by Envy (so unwilling, guilty men are to read their Crimes, though but in a silently speaking line); pursued by Malice (ill requitall for really Conferr'd fa∣vours, to return discourteous perse∣quution); and overtaken by bloody re∣venge, though perchance, palliated with that false and cheating veile of new-minted Law and Justice, (strange men to endeavour the ruine of those, whose endeavours tend onely to the preservation of them from Ruine!) My inward thoughts, Notwithstan∣ding all these Contrary perswading dangers; inhumane and un-christian requitalls; inclined me to a passio∣nate Compassion of my dearest Coun∣try,
still (by the prevailing rule-lesse, over-ruling, bloodily-destroying facti∣on of that head-lesse, dismembred thing, falsely styled Parliament, with the additionall treachery of some stu∣pid passivenesse of others) grasping those flames which already have sen∣sibly destroyed their once flourishing peace, consumed their formerly-hap∣py government, into an ashy heap, and ere long unavoidably will render each particular man, abounding in no∣thing, but in the aboundance of mise∣ry; wanting store of all things, but of want; unhappy, even beyond the addition of greater unhappinesse; be∣ing already become Obedientiall slaves to the peremptory Commands, Wills, and Pleasures of irrationall, irreligious, lawless, blood thirsty, and Sacrilegious men; these having, under unjust pretences of freeing them from a former falsely-supposed tyran∣ny, freed them from hopes of being what formerly, (by vertue of the Law's Protection) they were, Free-men in∣deed. To this purpose, by the assistance of the God of Heaven, who is my shield,
buckler, and defence, now even while it is yet day; before the approaching night of darknesse over-spread these three Kingdomes, with a generall Cloud of destruction; I shall, (by drawing the Curtain of errour, which hath overcast the Judgments of the most, even to the visible deprivation of that distinguishing Character be∣tween men and beasts, REASON) endeavour hominem homini ostendere, shew unreasonable man, himselfe in the glasse of reason again; dispelling also that thick Misty veyl of Atheism, (for it is no better, let them give it what seemingThe Cause of God. Saint-like Title they please) which many, with as much boasting Confidence put on, as if it were the white Robes of Christ's Righ∣teousnesse. The Pulpit too often wil∣fully declaring the irregular faction of that Monstrous House, impudently Promulgating Painted Truths, which indeed are no other than reall falsities, and many people (but I hope ignorant∣ly) embracing them instead of Sub∣stantiall verities, being lead by theseIndepen∣dent Prat∣lers. Lights, which like the last blaze of a spent Taper, quickly vanish∣ing,
leaves them as lost men in the dark, in stead of that glorious Sun of Light, (Christ Jesus) whose unmixt pure beams, apparent onely in his re∣vealed will, (the holy Scriptures) are the directing means, able alone to guide them to that celestiall place, where there is eternity of light for evermore. And because these Kingdoms (not∣withstanding those many Recipe's for spirituall diseases, left us by the Phy∣sitian of our souls in the Cabinet of the Scriptures, and these repeated in almost a daily application by true Pro∣testant Divines, his faithfull servants) continue still sick of obstinately pro∣gressive sins, which, like insensibility of a disease in a diseased man, is a sure presage of destruction. I shall, by reviving some medicines proper for our present distemper (for what are truely-Orthodox Books, but like Physick to consuming bo∣dies, as so many restoratives to a lan∣guishing Nation?) endeavour the re∣covery of them to a re-possession of their former peace, now breathing their last: The re-enjoyment of truth,
Gospell-truth, lost almost under a confused heap of Hereticall, Schis∣maticall, and Atheisticall errours; and the return of their not-long since ad∣mired plenty, now declining into a necessitous, and almost unavoidable poverty. But because man is but a dully per∣swading Orator, unlesse the God of spi∣rits speak effectually also to their ob∣durate hearts; Therefore, O thou Omnipotent, Omniscient, All-working Lord God, the fountain from whence streameth every good thing, in whose hands are the hearts of all men, and canst turn and wind them at thy pleasure; Cause all the people of England, Scotland, and Ire∣land to return unto Thee, by an obe∣dientiall subscription to thy everla∣sting truth, and a practicall obedience according to its direction: In ex∣change for their hearts of stone, give them, O Lord, hearts of flesh, molli∣fi'd by thy gently, yet prevalently, malleating Spirit. Throw down all those bulwarks of prejudice, raised against the truth of Reason, and the reason of thy religious Truth. Levell,
O levell, those high-built Forts of per∣verse resolves, wilfully to persist in ill-begun courses, because successe for a time waits upon attempts; as if the commanding bloody Sword had (by its prevalency) power as easie to create new commandements, and evangeli∣call truths, as by treachery, dissimu∣lation, tyranny, and oppression, it hath had, to overthrow an antient Govern∣ment; and, as if a short prosperity in wickednesse were the certain mark of those that travell in the high way to eternal happinesse: When as thou, O Lord, hast said,Psal. 92.7 that though the wicked spring as grass, and the workers of ini∣quity do flourish, yet they shall be destroy∣ed for ever? Summon them by the ef∣fectually sounding Trumpet of thy Spirit, to a condescention to thy bles∣sed will and pleasure, which is but their reasonable service; and cause their return'd answers to speak no∣thing, but, O Lord God most merci∣full, we prostrate our selves at thy feet, and confesse our former number∣lesse number of sins, of rebellion a∣gainst thee our God, in sleighting thy precepts, in fighting against thine A∣noynted
Servant, our Soveraign and supream Governour the King; in de∣stroying our fellow-subjects, their persons and estates, which we should have preserved, offending contrary to the principles of our Religion, the practice and commands of Christ Je∣sus, and the established Laws of Eng∣land. For all which, we repent, we re∣pent, we repent, and cast our selves in∣to thy arms of mercy. Thus do, good Father, to all such, who have erred and gone astray from thy paths; and this even before thy battering decree, for an everlasting destruction both of soul and body, issueth forth. And all this grant for the onely merits of thy Son, our Saviour, Christ Jesus. Because in the originall of this bloo∣dy Rebellion, the plot (like the for∣mer, and, untill now, unparallel'd-Powder-plot)Gunpow∣der-Trea∣son. was laid so deep under ground, covered over with more see∣mingly innocent materialls, to make it thereby more invisible to the eye, That indeed being intentionally this very designe acted; and this, but that conspiracy actually effected. In the first were combining Papists, figh∣ting
under the bloody Banner, and obeying the commands of Antichrist, the Pope. In the second are preten∣ding Protestants, being such onely, nomine, non re, making use of the same Papisticall and Antichristian bloody principles, means, and method; both of them obedient children of the same father of lies, the devill, and enemies to the Gospell of Christ Jesus. In the first, they resolved at one blow, by their suddenly consuming powder, to destroy Rem, Regem, Regimen, Regio∣nem, Religionem; but execution was, by the miraculous mercy of the God of Heaven, prevented. In the second, These, with a kind of unthought-of whiter Powder, (Pretences of a glo∣rious Reformation, and setting Christ upon his Throne, Christi nomine arma∣ti, tamen conra Christum dimicantes) have, by the permission of the same God, now displeased and angry with a sinfull people, actually brought to passe; and accordingly have ruined the King's Majesty, destroyed our Go∣vernment, Religion, Laws, and Liber∣ties. But, How long, Lord, how long? wilt thou be angry for ever? shall thy jea∣lousie
burn like fire? See, O Lord, we are all thy people;Isa. 64.9, 10, 11. thy holy Cities are a wil∣dernesse, Zion and Jerusalem are a deso∣lation. Our holy and our beautifull hou∣ses where our fathers praised thee, are destroyed, and our pleasant things laid waste. O remember not against us former iniquities; let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us, for we are brought very low. Because this Rebellious Designe in the beginning, was, I say, a mystery to most of the common people, I shall now unveil it, that so all such who formerly have been misleadd, or still ig∣norantly persist in such bloody waies, may return, repent, and do their first works, lest God come against them in judgment in this world, and they re∣ceive the reward of Traitors with Faulks, Percy, and their complices, here; or, with Corah and his company, be in an instant swallowed up into an eternal grave. Because former, antient, and meer, or, if you will, Athesticall Polititians, like your Water-men on the Thames, seldome or never directed their faces the same way they steered
their courses, untill they were arriv'd at the pretended end of their short voyage, their primarily resolved ends: And in regard our modern Polititians have walked in the self same paths, trode those very steps, with this ad∣dition onely, that they have gone be∣yond all former Presidents, in their excessive and accumulative wicked∣nesse, themselves being become the onely black and bloody copies, for the imitation of the worst of men in future ages: yet, if it be possible, these times (which cannot easily find place in my belief) can produce a generation of men so impudently bad, that will not look pale, and start at such unparal∣lel'd patterns of superlative villanies, reserving choice of them for their ex∣emplary presidents. For, in respect of comparison, I challenge the whole world, since the reduction of the first rude Chaos into an orderly division, untill this new Chaos of Anarchicall confusion, in these daies of ours; Let the best travelling brain therein, whose busie studies have been onely Historically employ'd, in collecting the successive
vices of all generations; let him sum up all those collections, and out of them abstract the quintessence of Hy∣pocrisie and Ambition, the poyson of Rebellion and Treason, the rancour of Envy and Hatred, the venome of malitious Murderers, and of all other conglomer ata facinora, monstrous sins, hainous crimes that ever were com∣mitted, and let him contract the spi∣rits of all those into one entire heap, nay, let him by his chymicall brain once more distill the quintessence of that hypocriticall and ambitious quin∣tessence, the poyson of that treache∣rous and rebellious poyson, the ve∣nom of that malitiously murdering venom: yet after all this, the com∣parison will not hold in the least pro∣portion. These worst and latest times, by their over-ballancing ponderous weighty crimes, will mount those lighter faults of former ages into the aire. Tam ingeniose sumus literis diabo∣licis diserti; men are grown such pro∣ficients in destructive bloody do∣ctrines, and diabolicall actions. Thus, Lord, are sinners, by addition of sin to sin, and aggravation of that addition
by an obstinately continuance therein, become incomparably sinfull. But, Father of mercies, reward us not ac∣cording to our deserts; but spare us, good Lord, spare thy people whom thou hast redeemed with thy most pre∣tious blood. Now at last, and the better to make a progression in my intended pur∣pose, I shall shew you the method of these latter Polititians, styling them∣selves Christians, agreeing with the former professed Atheisticall ones, with the premised addition, that these titular Christians have out-stripp'd the antiquated Atheists, in their most un∣christian, hypocriticall, and bloody practises. To this end I shall, by a seeming way of propounding questions, give a resolution to all unprejudiced eyes and ears in that respect. Can any age afford a people, pro∣fessing so seemingly well, and acting so really desperately ill? Review the then Petition,Decemb. 1642. accom∣panying that grand Remonstrance, or rather that plotted foundation of se∣dition, laid purposely for other inten∣ded
superstructures, to cheat the common sort of people into an assi∣sting conspiracy; there you shall find them petitioning for the uniting of all loyall and obedient Subjects: Who are these? but Subjects by the Law decla∣red to the supream Governour, the King. Obedient Subjects, that joyn to∣gether in the same fundamentall truths, against a Popish faction, who had (as in the Declaration is pretended) a resolution to alter the Religion of the Kingdom. Who can these be? but true Protestants of England, the onely prevailing parties against the Popish and Jesuitized strongest holds: Yet in their united actions, and doctrinall principles, how do these two factions joyn together against the reall Prote∣stants, who onely maintain truths fundamentall against Jesuiticall, He∣retical, and Schismatical tenents; wit∣nesse the new-coined distinction of these Jesuitized factious persons, be∣tween the Kings Vertuall, and Perso∣nall power. To this purpose, how have they bawled out their pretences, of figh∣ting
for the Kings personall defence, yet brought Armies to fight against his Person; an Argument left onely to be maintain'd by the cruell, yet silly non-distinguishing Bullet, or others, as irrationall as it. How often have they in their Pam∣phlets declared, that they onely took up Armes against his Majestie's evill Councell; when as they could pro∣duce no witnesse, nor example of any Counsell, that was evill, unlesse it were ill for a man to be Rationall, a Christian, or a Loyall Subject? How have they (Notwithstanding their Declarations, of making him a most Glorious King, excelling all his Royall Predecessours,First Col∣lect. Ord. Par. F. 21. Protesting to maintain his Honour Crown and Dig∣nity, yet) baited him with Propositi∣ons altogether destructive to his Honour and Power as a King;19. Prop. the end of their taking up of Armes, appea∣ring nothing lesse then the end of their pretences. Unlesse they intended thereby, (as indeed some of them have done) to make him a Glorious Saint in Heaven. And all this, nay more than this, acted, not by heathens, who knew
no better, nor by profess'd Papists, whose rebelliously-religious Princi∣ples teach no better; but, by Preten∣ding-Protestants! O let not this be told in Gath, nor published in the streets of Askelon; lest the Daughters of the Philistines rejoyce, and the Daughters of the un∣circumcised triumph. How have they rattled out Resolves, to maintain the established Lawes,vid. Collect Ord. Parl. especially, that part thereof, which concerneth the liberty of the Subject? View all their Declarations; not one but speaketh somewhat to that preten∣ded purpose. Neverthelesse, how have they in the beginning, and progression of their de∣signe, trod down all appearance of Law? Witnesse their unjust impri∣sonments, Sequestrations, Taxes, and Excise, and many more illegall squee∣zing Engins; Contracting the liber∣ty of each particular subject by a written Law, his owne Right, into the narrow Compasse of some few mens unwritten Lawlesse Wills; nay Is not the Liberties of Nineteen Parts of the People of Great Brittain, swal∣lowed
up by an One twentieth? who revell it in Libertinism, upon the Ruines of their liberties, and the un∣just possession of the Estates. Hand∣lingEnglands liberties Confirmed. Magna Charta, so absurdly in their furious and hot declarations, that, like Parchment against the fire, it is now shrunck up almost to a Non∣appearance. How have some men of all degrees actively contributed their assistance in Men, Money and Plate, upon invita∣tions literally different from the ends of these Eradicating Conspira∣tours? although, I must acquaint them, upon no reall grounds of Reason, Religion, or Law; but my Charity telleth me, they were abused by such specious pretences, into such ill acti∣ons. Witnesse that Ordinance of the 12th. January, 1641. whereby Skip∣pon was made Serjeant Major Generall of London, who commanded the imployment of the Trained Bands for the reall (they are the words of that Ordinance) good Service of his Maje∣sty, the Parliament and City; accor∣ding to his Duty, Protestation, and
Lawes of the Land. — Fine words truly in appearance! but deeds lurking under, as black as hell. Witnesse the progressive and Conclusive part of their ugly De∣signe. Again,19. Prop. Coll. Ord. Parl. pag. 173. in their Declaration of the 5th. of May, 1642, concerning the Militia; all mens obedience is invited to the Execution of their Commands, ac∣cording to the fundamentall Lawes of the Kingdome; as they tender (saith that Ordinance) the upholding of the True Protestant Religion, The safety of his Majestie's Person — And his Royall Posterity, with the Peace of the Kingdome — Alas! what fundamentall lawes do they mean? Aiery lawes surely! whose existence is no where to be found, but in their meer verball asseverations; and that also in a reall opposition to those Lawes, whose Established foun∣dation (as Lawes indeed should) plainly appear to every Loyall Sub∣ject's Obedientiall eye. True Protestant religion (saith the Or∣dinance) — But more truly, Errone∣ous Protestant religion, falsly by them
styled True; whose practicall princi∣ples, overthrow the principles of all religious truth, and fight against the practicall piety of the true Protestant Religion Established, and the practice of all the primitive Christians, and truly-ChristianMr. John Bradford. advised all to be obe∣dient to the Queen, and by no means to resist. vid. Book Martyr. fol. 1491. 1477. Martyrs. Safety of his Majesties Person, and Royall issue! Dangerous safety of their Royall Persons, whose security must depend on the sure rock of Certain danger, opposing Armies (under pretence of their preservation) with ready-drawn Swords, and surely-destroying bullets, endeavouring their absolute ruine. O strange Paper-protection, vaine and weak! from a pretended hazard, of being untimely deprived of life; thus to expose them to a reall danger, of an unnaturall Death. Peace.) Stranger peace! whose fruits must be a bloody war,Ord. and its effects nothing but murder, perjury, sacri∣ledge, oppression, tyranny, and, in∣deed, a generall poverty. Kingdom. A dumb Kingdom with∣out a speaking King;Ord.) or rather, (to ex∣pound their then intended monstrous
sense, mysticall onely to the com∣mon people) a deformed Anarchy, in place of an unparalle'd Reformed Mo∣narchy. But, O Lord of Hosts, that judgest righteously,Jer. 11.20. and tryest the reins and the heart, grant them suddain repen∣tance, or let thy servants see thy ven∣geance on all such obstinately persi∣sting sinners; for unto Thee I have, and shall, open Great-Brittain's cause. Consider,Isaiah 29.13. O Father, how these people seem to come near to thee, the God of truth, with their mouth, and to ho∣nour thee with their lips, but their hearts are far from thee. Again, In the Propositions and Or∣ders of the Two Houses, (for as yet thePresb. Indep. Factions, like Simeon and Levi, re∣mained united in the bonds of iniqui∣ty) for bringing in of Plate and Mony, to maintain Horse, Horsemen, and Arms, &c. you were all promised, (you, I mean, the contributers upon such quaintly-deceiving invitations) that your mony, so brought in, shall onely be employ'd to maintain the Protestant Religion, the King's autho∣rity, and his person in his royall dig∣nity.
A free course of Justice,Collect Ore. Parl. fol. 343. June 1642. the Laws of the Land, and the Peace of the Kingdom— when as in the prose∣cution of their Rooting designe, the irreligiously religious Turk and Pa∣gans, by their actions, may rather claim them as adherents to their Prin∣ciples; nay, the Jesuite embrace them as his dearest dear obedientiall dar∣lings, than the Protestant Church of England own them as her children. The Kings Authority and Person after a retrograde manner by them maintained; their Ordinances, Decla∣rations, Oaths, and actions, speaking a denyall of their obedience to the one, and but a verball protection one∣ly of the other; themselves not then so much as allowing him the least pro∣tecting assistance from any of his loyall Subjects, whose religious conscienti∣ousnesse onely invited them to the se∣curity of his royall Person. More than this, the Jesuite himself could not have done. Free course of Justice (that Ordinance promiseth.) Good God! what free course of Justice do they mean, when they
themselves obstruct the freedom of all Justice? and amidst their own consul∣tations in publick, will not admit of any negative Reply, (though never so rationall and religious) which oppo∣seth the free course of their bloody designe. What Law is their guide, whose practise opposeth all Law, both Di∣vine and Humane? I need not insert any exemplary particular proof; their own generall and palpably-known a∣ctions, speak themselves sufficiently guilty of opposing the Law of the Land, the current of whose sense run∣neth contrary to their actions; not a line, almost, but enjoyneth the Sub∣jects, not a conditionall, as they pre∣tend, but an absolute indispensable obedience, omnibus licitis, in all law∣full actions, to our Soveraign Lord the King, his Heirs and Successors; not the least tittle therein, though rack'd to a confession by the most ingeniou∣sly-rebellious brain, giving them so much as a supposititious ground for their undertakings. And for the Law of God, How have they sleighted it? the very Pulpits in
many places, thundering out defiance to the morall observation thereof, declaring against his Majestie's defen∣sive Armes, and his loyall Subjects o∣bedience to his just commands, with as much unblushing impudence, as the traiterous Presses did in their black lying Declarations; most blas∣phemously (the better to perswade others to their rebellious assistance) styling their rooting designe, The Cause of God— when as neither Old nor New Testament, Law nor Gospell, Prophets nor Apostles, sub∣stantially or circumstantially, gave the least warrant for such a bloody and re∣bellious Invitation. Lastly— For I will rake no longer in this bloody puddle of Hypocrisie, but refer the Reader to the perusall of all their Ordinances and Declarations, published, Anno 1641, 1642, 1643, 1644. containing asseverations and pretended protestations, to defend his Majestie's royall Person, Honour, Crown, and Dignity, the Protestant Religion, and the established Laws of England. And turn my discoursive Pen in a
more particular manner, by way of expostulation, to you Citizens of London— You, quos natura diligere jubt; quamvis culpare ratio, religioque redar guere, imperat— You, whom naturall affection to your City com∣mandeth my affectionate pitty, it be∣ing the place, ubi primam vitalem haust auram; where I first stepp'd out of the dark, yet quiet, prison of the womb, into this lighter and larger prison of a world of miseries: Although I can∣not but blame you for your irregular, irreligious, rebellious, and bloody pra∣ctises against your Soveraign, and your own Native Country, ripping up the very bowells of your dear Mother with swords and spears. You, I mean, who have danced after the alluring Summons of these paper-Ordinances, or, if you will, abortive Laws; you, who have been ignorant-adherents (for so my charity styleth you) to this root and branch rooting-faction, cheated into a forwardly assistance of their ug∣ly designe, by those specious pretences formerly mentioned. In a pretended prosecution of which, some years pass'd, you Intrenched
your City, rais'd your Bulwarks, con∣sumed both your time and estates, for the better security of your selves, and safety of your City, as relateth the Ordinance to that purpose. But how, my dear Country-men,Collectors. P. hath this been made good by you, or endeavoured by the contrivers of that Ordinance on your behalf? Did your mudd-walls secure your City against a domineering Army of your own raising and paying,July 1647. resol∣ving upon a violent entrance, if deny∣ed conditionall admission? when as some of your Citizens and others, paid too dearly for their forward, yet too late, resistance. Tichburn. Wollasion. Fouk, Eastwick, Andrewes.How was your City secured, when the Independent, rooting, factious Aldermen, and Common-councell∣men, sprung out of the bowells of fa∣ctious Presbyterian-Rooters, betray∣ed you by so dull and stale a stratagem, as any, but such Citizens, expressing your selves witty in nothing but Trea∣son and Rebellion, (as senssesse, I think, as your earthy Bulwarks, though lesse effectually powerfull for opposition) would have resented and prevented.
What piece of treachery could be more obvious to any eye, easier to be read without spectacles, than that? The then-Presbyterian prevailing party within your City, and the two Houses, unitingly declaiming against an insolently-menacing Army with∣out, rais'd by the wealth of the one, and authority, although unjust, of the other. The Presbyterian party, by their thundring Orders and Ordinan∣ces, commanding the Army's obedi∣ence. The Army again, not onely de∣nying obedience to their commands, but commanding them to obey their particular contrary commands. Now amidst this dispute, observe, observe, you Cittizens, how ye were degreeingly cheated into the slavery of the Sword, by Creatures fostered un∣der your own wings. A Commanding Pack of the Inde∣pendent factious Aldermen, and Common-Councell, with some few conjoyned Presbyterians, (who indeed like Ciphers were of no valew) must treat for a reconciliation, between the much abused City, and the absurdly abusing, and doubly died, rebellious
Army, I mean the Independent facti∣on of the Army. — A quaint de∣ceipt! Was it ever known, that a known Thiefe sat Judge upon the bench, to Condemne his fellow, complotting villany? I leave the application to each man's breast. O London, Lon∣don! how wast thou then fool'd into what thou now art too sensible of, but then would'st nor believe, the resigna∣tion of thy Liberty and Honour? The insolent Army the next day after this odde kind of reconciliation (or rather Confirmation of thy servitude) mar∣ching thorough thy streets in Triumph forgetting thy formerly assisting Ri∣ches, and scorning thee for thy Pre∣sent Pusillanimous Condescention. And what accumulations of Taxes, Abuses, Imprisōments, Murders, have succeded this, scribere dolet; or rather, the thought of them grieveth me so much, that grief will not suffer me to mention them, but leave them to the Consideration of the Citie's too too sad experimentall knowledge. But I proceed— The Result of the hot Contestation of these * divi∣ded dividers,Fresh. Inde Concluded in this —
That the Power of Commanding in the Two houses being at first, thus, (as you have read) peremptorily deman∣ded, was at last wrested from them, by that Army whom they first gave onely power to act for them as servants, in prosecution of their first-resolv'd upon Presbyterian designe— Where, by the way, I shall onely glance this Observation to the perusuall of the moderatly-judging readers. Members of the house Commons.That those persons whose obedience would not stoop to the Just Com∣mand of their lawfull Soveraign, the King, though perswaded and ingaged thereunto by the Law of God, the written Law of the Land; Oath upon Oath of Alleagiance, Supreamacy, and their owne Composed and injoyned Protestation, Knowingly, Cordially and Confessedly taken by them; are Commanded obedience to their own Creatures, and of Commanding Mas∣ters become Servants; nay Submissive Slaves to the imperious Propositions of their owne Created Servants. That they who in prosecution of an unchristian, unlawfull, bloody de∣signe of taking away the power of the
King, justly by law and reason de∣clared His; of forcing away his Nega∣tive Voyce in a Lawfull Parliament, depriving him of the Command of the Militia; of bloodily changing the Civill and Ecclesiasticall Goverment from Monarchicall to Aristocraticall, from Episcopall to Presbyterian. Witnesse the transactions (to passe over other Treaties) of that too-late, tedious, and most unfortunate Treaty in the Isle of Wight, in the managing whereof neither Law, Reason, nor Religion, urg'd by our dear Soveraign could work the Commissionated Treatours, or ra∣ther the factious Commissionating, Rooting Traytors in the House, to Condescentions more than what ranne paralell and agreed with their most un∣just demands of all his Regall Power and wholly altering the government of his Kingdomes. Witnesse also, the first insisted-on Proposition; wherein, Good Prince, before they will proceed, He must, contrary to Reason, Religion, and Law, declaratorily Justify their unjust Actions of Rebellion and trea∣son against him, and Condemne his own Just defence as unjust.
The prevaling faction in the Hous∣es still upon Receipt of his Majesty's Concessions and Answers to their de∣manding Propositions,) Voting Not Satisfactory, Not Satisfactory (O fatall Word! Not) untill his Princely ten∣der Care of his Subjects (perceiv∣ing theFirst Plotters. Faction's resolutions to perfect their bloudy designe) and his desire of Peace, reconciliation, and stopping of that issue of blond by themselves first made in his Kingdoms; at last (his own Royal Interest laid aside) condescended so much to their demands that as a King he had nothing more to condes∣cend unto, nor they more of his Regall Power to demand. These men (who thus unlawfully prosecuted and persecuted his Sacred Majesty with distroying Armies, there∣by to wrst away his lawfull power upon Pretences of a Fundamental Law never heard of, never practised before in the Houses, not so much as ground∣ded upon the least imaginary authori∣ty of Common Reason, much lesse the law of the Land and the Protestant Religion, had all their bloudily acqui∣red power. snatched from them by
Army. those I say, whom first they im∣powered to offer bloudy force to his Majesty upon grounds as ayry, groundless, and unlawfull; as, pretences of Common Right, and distribution of Justice: as if Confusion were that Right, and unparalelld injustice were the distribution of Common right and Justice. Some of these Ambitious and Fa∣ctious Members, who by invited tu∣mults of the Citty-rabble forced his Majesty, for the Security of his person, from his royall pallace at Whitehall, and soon after many of their then fellow-members, contrary to the Priviledge of all reasonable par∣liaments, were uncivilly forced out of the House by their menaces and con∣spiring Votes, because they would not be voting Conspirators with them in their Trayterous designes, against their King, Country, & the truly fundamen∣tall Laws of the Land. Some of these, I say,Parl. were as absurdly thrust out of the House by Pride and his Complices, the army's imps, birds of their owne hatching; instruments of their owne framing, upon accusation
of being fomenters of a New War, hinderers of Perfecting an intended Reformation, or, more truly, of Com-pleating a pre-resolved resolution, or rather a Jesuitized independent designe somwhat more bloudy than the Pres∣byterian. Thus, Deus omnipotens in aetennum Ju∣stus, Thy actions, O Lord, are all Justice, & thy deeds Righteousness it self; Thou therefore, the fountain of all wisdome, that dost oftentimes proportion and symbolize, both for quality and quan∣tity, mens punishments to their Sins; thereby, by plain demonstrative signes, inviting them to repentance; — Grant, good Father, that all such guilty per∣sons thus reading their iniquities in their punishment, may repent them of their fo mer Sins, that so thou mayst pardon their transgressions and remem∣ber their offences no more. To this purpose, restore, O Lord, un∣to them, the Purity of reason as men; A Zealous unmoved fixednesse in thy true religion the Christian Protestant faith—; Loyalty and faithfull obe∣dience to their undoubted Soveraign and Lawfull King, Cha.— the Second,
&c. and these not verbally, but really expressed by actions beseeming men, whose reason not humorous opinion is their guide. By deeds befitting Christian Prote∣stants whoseScripture. directing rule is the uner∣ring Word, & not groundlesse faincyed revelations, the Suggestions of the de∣ceiving Angelicall Divell, and not the Perswasions of thee, who art the God of Spirits. By actions becoming Subjects, whose obedience without interruption willingly followeth the smooth Cur∣rent of an Established Law, not hur∣ryed along by the tumultuous Torrents of arbitrary Ordinances, nor Obedi∣entially swimming in the troublesome Waters of mens Corupt wills. O Fa∣ther of mercyes, whatsoever punish∣ments Thou, in thy Just judgment, for our manifold sinnes, shalt inflict upon us— give us not over to a generall infatuation of Spirit, a benummednesse in our Understanding and Reason, lest we degenerating into the nature of beasts with Nebuchadnezzar be design'd to graze in the feilds with beasts that perish.
O everliving God, Deprive us not of thy Candlesticke, thy gospell of truth, lest, for want of true guides, we all become blind; and, like them leading one another, irrecoverably fall into the Ditch of everlasting de∣struction. O Let not my Lord be angry, and thy Servant shall speak but this Once. Father of Mercies, as we desire that thy word may still Continue a Lant∣horn to our feet, and thy Precepts a directing Light to our Paths; so we humbly beseech thee, that out of thy infinit Loving kindnesse thou wouldst look upon us, and not take from us our Established ancient, fundamentall Lawes; That so our Corrupt Natures may still by them be rectified, the extravagant excurrences of our Obsti∣nate perverse Wills and actions may be limitted, lest Ambition, Sedition, Treason, Perjury, Rebellion, Murder, Sacriledge, Regicidism, Envy, Ha∣tred, Tyranny, Oppression, and all man∣ner of wickednesse, becoming particu∣lar Commanding Lawes, we, like Ra∣venous Wolves, devour one another—
And, in order to this great mercy, good God, restore unto us our great Law∣maker, Preserver, and Protectour, thy Servant our Soveraign, the much wronged Princely Son of a more inju∣red Murdered Martyr'd Royal Father, Cha — the Second, of Great Brittaine King &c. Put the Sword and Scepter into his hands; Place the Crown upon his Head, Thou, who art able, and Powerfull in Extremities, in this his extremity shew thy Ability and Pow∣er. O Lord, as thou hast designed him our Supream Governour; so, in order to his possession of thine own designed Government, prepare the hearts of all his Subjects with submissive obedience unto him, as to thy Vice-gerent on earth; work into their spirits a sensible∣nesse of their former erroneous practi∣ses against his Royall father, and let their endeavours (for the restoration of his Princely son to his father's Throne) evidence to the world their unfeigned repentance for their sins, committed against Thee the King of kings, in rebelling against their law∣full Soveraigne, contrary to thy in∣dispensable
Law; the Law of Reason; and the established Lawes of England. What, Lord, although the furious Multitude, like the wild boares of the forrest, have trode down the hedge of our Government, Our Lawes; and like rebellious Waves, with mad rol∣ling actions, locally removed the Roy∣all supporting pillars of our Nation? Yet thou canst in an instance fyle the teeth of the one, — and again raise up our defending and protecting Pales, with a word of thy Mouth; Canst command back these furious Waves to their proper Center of obedience; and again, fixe our removed Pillars in their owne appointed place, there to re∣main like a rock immoveable; O Lord, Grant these petitions to thy poor un∣worthy servants, for thy Sonne Christ Jesus sake; O God of our Salvation, hear us: O thou, the hope of all the ends of the Earth, give us help against our trouble; for without Thee, vain is the help of Man — But to return to my former Me∣thod — I could inlarge in such kind of ex∣emplary additions, and acquaint the
World, how severall others of the first practicall * rooting Faction,Presbyt. Plotters. have met with sinne-speaking Punishment, by the Practises of these secondugly Roo∣ters; how like Pinns, though suppo∣sedly rivetted for a setled Continu∣ance, some Presbyterians have been knock'd out, and others cut off, onely to make way for more bloody Inde∣pendent successours; and in this re∣spect could Patricularize some of all degrees, whose Lives, Reputations, or Estates, have been exposed to the Block, Defamation, and Sequestration, by the Commands of these MonstrousIndep. Faction. Tyrants, who from them received their first Power of Command. Wit∣nesse, — &c. the Pallace-yard, Blood-speaking Scaffolds, and else∣where. But because such kind of discourses may perchance, by the over-angry Judgement of some, be censured, as inclining to an uncharitable Upbrai∣ding; (although my intent herein is onely like the Chirurgeon, who Lan∣ceth his wounded Patients, even to a displeased frown and angry Exclama∣tions, to prevent the festring of his
Wounds within, which would endan∣ger the whole body) thus, by such sharp lines to render the cure more certain, beyond doubt of Relapse) I shall therefore silently passe over such particular Persons, not mentioning their Names at all; for I delight not in such Repetitions; God, the searcher of hearts, knoweth that I write truth, ra∣ther wishing all guilty Conspiratours, and Frontiers, in this rebellion, a se∣rious and suddain repentance, (it be∣ing the sole design of this book) than the death, Ruine, or exemplary punish∣ment of any, either in Estates or Per∣sons — Thus I have laid before you the Religious vizards, the Pious Cheats of these rebellious Designers, and Complotting Rooters; in such plain selfe-confessing and condemning De∣monstrations, that every one that will not obstinately close the eye of his reason, cannot but confesse them un∣deniable truths — Having thus farre proceeded, and at this time being no lesse confident, than charitable in my hopes, that all abused, misleadd, formerly of the Pres∣byterian
Parry, are upon a penitenti∣all return, I shall in the next place an∣swer an Objection, or rather shew the fallacy of a new-invented Propo∣sition, much discoursed of by the pre∣sent Ruling Rule-less Independent Faction, and swallowed down with much ease by many, whose ignorance maketh them insensible of such di∣gestions, or hasty-complying cowar∣dice, altogether carelesse of their Tasts— And it is this. That the present commanding Power exercise, Potestatem dominan∣di— their governing, but more true∣ly tyrannizing, power, over the peo∣ple of England, as having right there∣unto by Conquest, say they, having subdued them by the sword. For the solution of which, it will be pains unnecessary to meddle much with those Argumenta Cardinalia, Ar∣guments primae magnitudinis, of the first ranck; at which their Plea of Conquest, at one touch (like aged tenants of the grave) would fall and moulder into ashes. Therefore although I cannot be al∣together silent, yet I shall be but brief in acquainting you,
That it is against the principles of all Governments, for any Party what∣soever, by force to endeavour an al∣teration of an established Govern∣ment, contrary to the fundamentall practice of that Nation. Now the fundamentall power of any Nation will appear thus. Where the power of making and repealing all kind of Laws, of con∣vening and dismissing Councills of Life and Death, &c. are setled, re∣ceived, and practically acknowledged; there is the fundamentall Power of a Nation. Now that this Power is setled in a free-Parliament, summoned by the King's command (without which, they could not assemble, and without whom,vide J.Jenkens no new Lawes can be ena∣cted, nor Old ones repealed, He being the sole enlivener of all Law, and our supream Governour—) is a truth, which all the Laws of England, recei∣ved and practised, do confirm. Again, that there is an indispensi∣ble necessity of maintaining this Prin∣ciple, That all Governments must re∣main as they are established, untill the
fundamentally practised power of that Nation shall change the same, common reason will plead for me. For consider — In all Govern∣ments there is an impowered Party Governing, and Persons Governed— Now for the upholding and maintai∣ning this Party, governing in security, to act accordingly, and whereby they may be enabled to preserve their Per∣sons governed, in unity, peace, and concord; and for preventing the am∣bitious combinations of seditious and discontented persons, from endea∣vouring any thing, that may tend to the disturbance of the publick peace; that is, both the Power governing, and the Persons governed— Laws are made, and those also Penall, that such disturbers are no lesse than Traitors and Rebells, against such a Constituti∣on of Government— Witnesse the good Laws of Eng∣land against all manner of Sedition,J.Jenkens Treason, and Rebellion. Nay, wit∣nesse those bastard-Laws of these lat∣ter dayes, not that they deserve the title of Laws; for Laws, rightly so en∣tituled, are onely such, which re∣ceive
their immediate direction from the Law of God, or else are Emanant from some circumstantiall branch thereof, not any way standing in op∣position to the substance of the Law Divine; that is, the Ten Commande∣ments, and all Evangelicall Precepts; although such Laws are made and ex∣ecuted by men, as instruments. But these new-minted Laws are rather, Rapacitatis than Pacis, forced-up Bul∣warks to preserve an unjust Power in tyranny and oppression. To this purpose, you had the mi∣litary House of Commons publishing the like, upon the Martyrdom of our dear Soveraign the King. Their Ordinances and Proclamati∣ons, prohibiting all correspondency with, and assistance of, his Royall Son, Now our Soveraign Lord and King. Their erection of that high Court of Ironicall Justice, and their pro∣ceedings therein. Their enjoyning of Subscriptions to their Engagements. All which impli∣citly contain such a confessed Princi∣ple. Nay, were not this a truth essen∣tiall to the fundamentall constitution
of a Government, as it is, and so con∣fessed and maintained to be by all lawfull Powers; nay, made use of by Usurpers themselves; and the worst of such Usurpers, Rebellious Subjects; and the bloudiest of such Rebells, those who, exceeding their cruelty in the Gospell, not onely abuse the Ser∣vants, but have murdered the Lord of England's Vineyard,Mark 12. pursuing his Heir apparent even unto Resolves of his death, that so the Inheritance may be solely in their possession. This, O God, thou hast seen; O keep not silence, O Lord of our salva∣ion. Hide thy servant, our Soveraign, and all his loyall Subjects, from the conspiracy of the wicked, and from the rage of these bloody men, that compasse them about with words of hatred, and fight against them with∣out a cause. Were not, I say, this Principle granted, as it is by all Governments, it would out of necessity follow, that Maxims of Rebellion and Treason, were implicitely contained in such a fundamentall constitution; not main∣tained, I say, that a Government
lawfully established must so remain, untill alteration be made by the self∣same fundamentall Power which established the same. Such a shadowy Government being like an Image, whose head's compos'd of gold, breast of silver, thighes of brasse; but all this supported onely by leggs and feet of clay, easie to be uncontrolla∣bly-shivered in pieces, by the least malitiously-seditious and ambitious touch. Although I must confesse, that when ambitiously-seditious spirits complot the ruine of an established Government; such-like destructive tenents as these, of which I shall give an instance, practised by the rebellious Polititians of our daies, are divulged to deceive the common people, and invite then to their assistance. As, that the two Houses may assume a power, &c. in case of the King's de∣fault in governing. That the two Houses have power to dispose of the Militia, in case the King consent not, although it be to enable the One twentieth part of his Kingdom with power, to destroy the
other Nineteen parts, Himself, and Royall posterity. That the King must consent to whatsoever the two Houses shall pro∣pound, although never so irrationall, irreligious, and prejudiciall to Him∣self and subjects. That, in case his Majesty will not condescend thus, the two Houses may exercise the Regall power, not onely without him, but against him. Pretty Principles indeed! equally de∣structive to people governed, as to Kings and Governours ruling. Neverthelesse it is true, that these, and such like Tenents a these are, are not professedly, nay, not so much as implicitely maintained by any Power whatsoever, either just or unjust; but are onely pretendedly divulged, I say, to catch the lesse-knowing mul∣titude into a Pecuniary and Souldiery assistance, the better to effect the ends of such ambitious Designers. The truth of this being made good, and plainly appearing to every willing eye that will peruse it, and unpreju∣diced judgment that will remain sa∣tisfied with reason.
Let us (with the eyes of our judi∣cious memory, fixed upon what is al∣ready premised) lay theCr. Fact. Arm. Hous. present ru∣ling Power in one scale, and their Actions, Edicts, and Ordinances in another; and then judge, whether or no the actions of these worst of men weigh not down their own judg∣ments, with a self-condemning weight. For, that they have plotted, nay, effected, a forcible destruction of an established Government, contrary to the Principles of all Governments, Law of God, Reason, and of the King∣dom; swimming to their ends in con∣tinuall streams of English Christian blood, untill at last they arrived at the destruction of ourC. R. I. our Royall Foun∣tain, is lachrymabile verum, too too sad a truth, so appearing also by what I have already written. That the same ruling bloody power, since they have had the sole power to Rule, have declared all those to be Traitors and Rebells, in their con∣struction, against them, who shall op∣pose them in this their unjust posses∣sion of the King's Majesty's most
just Rights, and undeniable Power; their own Ordinances, or rather bloody Acts, confirm it true: wit∣nesse that cruell piece of cruelty, murdering massacre of those Martyrs on earth, now glorious Saints in Heaven, Sir Charls Lucas, Sir George Lisle, the Lord Capell, the Earl of Derby, Sir Henry Hiae, Colonel Andrews, and severall others; whose loyall actions onely endeavoured to relieve the oppressed, and restore un∣to us our Religion, Laws, and Li∣berties, the ends of all just Wars. In brief, take both these together in this plain undeniable Syllogism. They are Rebells and Traitors, de∣serving to die an ignominious death upon the Gallows, (this is the sense of their Ordinances, and finall result of their bloodily erected High Court) who shall disturb the * Governours or Government of their Common-wealth,Bloody Fact. say they. These very persons have not onely disturbed, but ruined the whole fa∣brick of out Government, murdered the sup ream Governour the King, de∣stroyed the Kingdom and its Laws, by
bloody Arms, Oppression, and Ty∣ranny. Ergo, these are Rebells and Traitors, deserving to die an ignominious death upon the gallows, by their own con∣fession, practises, and commands. Thus, Reos confitentes habetis; secun∣dum sua ipsorum verba, fiat Justitia. They plead guilty; may justice be done, according to their merits. Yet because, non sanguinis homo,— may they by repentance find mercy, &c. Now consider (my abused Coun∣try-men); Where are the men, who style themselves conquerors? Or, who can be so senssesse, as well as heart∣lesse, to tearm them so, when as, ac∣cording to the construction of reason, they confesse themselves to be but Rebells and Traitors? Indeed, many unjust Conquests there have been in the world, which truly were, as a prudentK. James. King styleth them, but furta regalia, latrocinia spe∣ciosa, Royall robberies, occasion'd by the boundlesse ambitious spirits of some Princes, who many times have been repayed with the losse of their own Kingdoms. But did you ever read
or hear that rebellious Subjects, bloo∣dy Traitors, mounted into a com∣manding power, by the mis-employed wealth, and deceived assistance of their fellow Subjects, were ever styled Conquerors over them? More plainly, for I would not have the people of England swallow such grosse absurdities, supposing them∣selves out of a just necessity ingaged to subscribe to this unjust Power. Therefore, By way of a brief repetition, That there was at first a conspiracy and de∣signe of changing the Government of the three Kingdoms by force, if not willingly condescended unto by his late Majesty,Witnesse 19 Pro∣positions, cum reli∣quis. is so plain, that the mea∣nest capacity cannot but condescend to it as truth. That this designe was veyled with specious pretences, thereby to de∣ceive the judgments of the multi∣tude, and create a military assisting power, I have also made good. That, in common reason, without these pretences, it had been impossi∣ble for these Conspirators to have compassed their ends, any rationall
man will, I am confident, confesse. For, Can any man beleeve that if these rooting-Plotters in the very beginning of this Fatall Parliament (for then it had the face of such a Court) had decla∣red to the World their intentions, to extirpate Episcopacy; abolish the book of Common-Prayer alter the goverment of England; nay to Murder the King and Destroy his Royall off∣spring; infringe the liberties of their Persons and Estates; burden them with Taxes upon taxes; and domineer onely by the Tyrannizing Sword; Can a man be so senselessy Stupid as to Suppose that any one man in England would have contributed the least as∣sistance tending to such destructive ends? — Surely not; Their Plotts had been as abortive-births, dead in the very womb; Like letters written on Sand, invisible at the next windy blast; and themselves had met with the reward of Traytors, in the Originall of their Treason. But I say, they must out of a Poli∣tick necessity by Pretences of a refor∣mation &c. prepare the Common people for a Compliance, and upon
their deceived Compliance, hammer out by degrees their ugly Plot to a perfection. Away then with your most blasphe∣mous entitling God's approbation to your Succeeding Villanies; when as it is not Smiling Providence that waites upon your designes, as you would make the people beleeve, but the Graduall Effects of your politick Knaveries, and methodical Treasons. Indeed, the All-just and wise God hath long suffered you to deceive the people of England, and them to be so deceived. But Gods designe thereby is to Chastise them for their instability, and disobedience, in not valuing, or else lightly esteeming the blessings of Peace; and punish them for their not prizing the Enjoyment of the Gos∣pell of Peace; and that you your selves by your additionall Sinnes, might be left inexcusable at that great day of Account, when the Judg of Heaven and Earth shall pronounce that unrepealable doom, Ite Maledicti; Go, ye Cursed, into Everlasting burn∣ings. Again, to make this appear more
plain, take a further hint of their Re∣bellious Method; which course had they not observ'd, they could have done nothing tending to the acquisiti∣on of their designed Ends. In the first place they, though fals∣ly, suggested into the Multitude's be∣leif, an alteration of our religion on his Majestie's part. And these ungrounded Pretences made way for Jealous and Suspicious thoughts among the Common people: and these, though caussesse, Jealousies occasion the Multitude, constant in nothing but in Inconstancy, to Stag∣ger in their Sworn Alleagiance. In the next Place, following Machi∣avells irreligious rule (Vehementer in∣crepate et aliquid adhaerebit) they back them with lying invectives & ray ling ex∣clamations against his Majesty, & his in∣deed Peaceable Just & Merciful Govern∣ment, whereby the affections of many began to totter & their dutie to shake, & their needlesse fears to encrease. Again, they Publickly cry'd up themselves, though most untruly, as Assertours, Maintainers and Preservers of our Religion) and the Lawes. And
these false allures, attract the Aguish Judgments of too too many to in∣cline to them in their belief, and blin∣ded Obedience. Againe (the more to ingratiate themselves with the Common People and hoodwinck them with Supposi∣tions that they were Persons affecting Justice—) they Presse for Execution of Pretended Justice upon some Sup∣posed Delinquents; who indeed were no other, but immoveable Loyall Rocks, hindering their Progressive Rebellious Plotts. And upon this ac∣count, the incomparable Earl of Strafford, and the unparallel'd Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, (two main sup∣porting pillars of Church and State) were offered, as bloody sacrifices, to the common people's ignorant zeal, and the conspirator's designes. In the next place, they vilifie the honour of the King's person, advising the rabble of the City rudely to press into his Court, bawling for Justice, which never was denyed; and by this means, the respect and honour due to his Majesty was weakened, the ill∣manner'd people, following the
counsell of their teachers, (apt schol∣lars of their black mouth'd master the devill) began to revile the King, de∣spise Dominions, and speak evill of Dignities. With these and such like additio∣nall insolent deportments of the Ci∣ty-scum, his wearied Majesty was en∣forced, for his own safety, to leave London. After which, these rooting-Plotters persecute him with dethro∣ning Propositions, under the notion of Reformation, delivered most com∣monly out of a Cannon's mouth; or mockingly tormenting him withvid Collect Parl. Ord. humble and loyall Petitions of Sub∣jects, presented upon the point of a bloody Sword— Pretty Sub∣jects indeed! Thus, thus, England, thou wast gull'd into a rebellious Army, to bring to passe their Conspirator's de∣signes, upon the score of thy own destruction, the losse of our peace, dishonour of our Religion, ruine of the King's Majesty, and the Laws of England. This done,Blasphemy. the Pulpit-Dragoons must interest the Deity in their quar∣rell;
Rebellion must be styled, The Cause of God— O horrible blasphe∣my! as if the righteous and all-just God gave precepts, for the commissi∣on of the most unrighteous, unjust,Caedem fa∣ciunt Scrip∣tur aum ad materiam suam. and wicked actions that ever were committed. To this bad purpose, they cut and mangle, multiply and dimi∣nish, the holy Scriptures, wresting them to a corrupt sense, proper one∣ly to their designes, notwithstanding that Anathema, Revel. 22. vers. 18, 19, If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book; and if any shall diminish the words of this prophecy, God hall take away his part out of the book of life. And by this means the poor people were seduced in matter of conscience, obeying the politick Pulpit-directions, quite op∣posite to the commands of God, and their own former judgments and pra∣ctises. All this while,Lying. Dissimu∣tion. the rooting Engi∣neers of State, were busily busied in abusing the King, and cheating the people, senslesly in their Declarati∣ons, dividing the power of the King
from the King's person; as if there possibly could be (in a true sense) the exercise of a Kingly power, without the person of a King. But seasonable it was for them so to do, when as they unjustly made use of power without, (nay, contrary to) his commands; and maintained Armies to fight against his Person. Next to this,Perjury. succeed new obli∣ging Oaths and Covenants, correspon∣dent to the sense of their designe, and dissonant from the legall, ratio∣nall, and religious sense of all former lawfull Oaths; witnesse their Nega∣tive Oath, their first and second Vow and Covenant, with their last and worst, the Engagement; all which must be as chains to the people's consci∣ences, with which being once shack∣led, many of the Pulpits speak no∣thing, but a performance of these Oaths and Engagements, in the Roo∣ters destructive sense; as if such poli∣tick State-Engines carried more truth in them, than the Scriptures them∣selves. Thus they made human policy Mistresse of Divinity, nay, to tyran∣nize over her. Indeed, the Scots-Co∣venant,
as it was styled, carried a com∣pound sense; in some Articles spea∣king seemingly-loyall and religious pretences; but they were but seeming ones; although in other, nothing but an enforced change of, both Ecclesi∣asticall and Civill Government. Which, compared with precedent and subsequent actions, even untill his Majesty was snatched away from the Presbyterian Power,Isle Wight maketh me grieve with admiration, and admire with grief, at many, who still conti∣nue adherents to those first begun er∣roneous Principles, of extirpation of Governments by bloody force. Some affirming, strangely and fals∣ly, that they did oppose the tyranny of the late martyr'd King, but never the Title or Office; which, to my mean apprehension, (and I could wish some of the Presbyterian party would otherwise inform my judgment) seemeth to oppugn reason it self; his Majesty having, before ever sword was drawn, granted all things necessary to the well-beeing, quiet, and peaceable living of the lowest, as well as the highest, of his Subjects,
their possession on of their lives,Confessed by them∣selves, Collect. Parl. Ord liber∣ties, and estates, and a just reforma∣tion in Religion: He himself having raised such Bulwarks for us to this purpose, that nothing was left for the people of England to desire, as additionall to their future security and happinesse. And had not thisPresb. Kingly-power rooting-partie step∣ped in, or, in their own irregular demands, been but modestly mode∣rate, these second bloodiest-rooting Independents had never comman∣dingly appeared to the world's eye, but England had still remained the glory of Nations, an earthly Paradie, and not an habitation of Bats and Owles, Foxes and devouring Wolves; blind ignorance, heresie, shism, and Jesuiticall bloody-minded men: Be∣sides, the former, and still wilfully continuing Presbyterians, having nei∣ther reason in Law, nor ground in Religion, for such their a first un∣dertakings, or still continuing inoli∣nations thereunto, as I have already made good— Maketh me to pray, that God would more clearly open
the Eyes of their understandings and in the bowells of Christ Jesus desire them that they would weigh all things by the ballance of the Sanctuary with∣out interjection of the least part of a grain of Private Interest▪ and affect∣onate cleaving to Parties in a∣ny thing unwarrantable by the Ever∣lasting Standard of Gods word— and at last return from whence they were fallen, and do their first workes. But this by the way— However if n this I have displeased any man, I am Confident I have herein neither displeased nor dishonoured the God of ruth, & therefore shall be bold to tell hem that they do not well to be angry with me for speaking the truth. I returne to my former Method— Why, thinke you, were so many Reverend Bishops and other Orthodox Divines as Dr. Featly, Dr. Oldsworth, Mr. Shute, with many others disgraced or imprisoned; not because the Law spake them guilty, but because they were as so many walls of Brasse able to Oppose their Proceedings; and would if suffered to Preach, have informed, the people their better duties and
thereby prevented the progresse of their desigues.— Garraway.Why were so many Lords Imprison∣ed, the Mayor of London, some Alder∣men, outed and dispersed unto Several Confining Castles —? Why were most of the Common Councell men dis∣gracefully thrown out of the Court? But only to make way for the more fa∣ctious Spirits; who would more readily comply in their turnings & windings with the first Moving Wheels of the Rooting-faction. Why did they then, and still do, both admit and tolerate ignorant-Lay∣men to belch out new fangled false Opinions, Hereticall and Schismaticall positions? but thereby to bring the Clergy into dishonour and disrespect with the people, distracting the brains and dividing the affections of the Mul∣titude: well knowing Machiavells rule divide et impera; for rebellion and trea∣son will never harbour in breasts uni∣ted by the bond of true religion: they that conscientiously affect Christ and his Church, will not be wrought upon to destroy his Servants the Pastours, or any Member thereof; nor ever give eare
to such babblers, the Devill's Chap∣laines.— Nay their Present toleration of all in matters of religion;Indep. Fa∣ction. un∣der the Pretence of having a regard to tender Consciences, is only done out of Policy, or, if you will, rebellious Kna∣very; not that they intend you (after that you have been instrumentall to their compass'd Ends) such a liberty out of a conscientious Courtesy. But hear, hear, you deceived people of England! Their Reason is; Lest the Ignorant Rabble (the wal∣king instrumentall feet and active hands of their designe,) like your lesse knowing Papists, taking all things by the hand of an implicit beliefe; should, being denyed any one thing, grow in∣to a discontent, which (seconded with a Serious Repentance and its effects a desertion of these Plotters, manifested by a generall insurrection, their only fears) should occasion these Rooters suddain downfal & utter destruction. For a division in opinions and affecti∣on at first raysed them a Power ena∣bling them to raze down Englands Monarchicall goverment; So a unity in
iniquity; a Linck'd wicked brother∣hood must settle them in this their destructive power. But, O Lord, not∣withstanding thy enemys have taken Crafty counsell against thy people, and have consulted against thy Secret Ones; although they say, Come, let us cut them off from being a Nation, and let not the Name of a Christian Pro∣testant, King or people, be any more in Remembrance; Give not thou the Soule of thy Turtle dove unto the Beast and forget not the Congregation of thy Servants. Consider thy Covenant; for many Places in England, Scotland and Ireland are full of the habitations of Cruell men. Judg the Cause of the fatherlesse and oppressed; Arise, arise, O God, maintain thy owne Cause here, help and deliver us. So we thy People and sheep of thy Pasture shall prayse thee for evermore. Let us descend to examples of a Lower nature. Why, suppose you, is Lilly somuch imployed by these bloudy Statists? but onely to unhindg the faith of the common people from adhearing to the Doctrine of the holy Scriptures,
which like a two-edged sword, would soon cut their designe in pee∣ces; for, had the people's faith been kept to a close dependence on the Word of God, and their actions one∣ly regulated thereby; or, hadPresbyt. others more knowing, or at least pretending to more knowledge, weighed all their undertakings (without the addition of unbridled passion, and irregular, though seemingly zealous, affections) exactly, according to this everlasting∣ly just Standard; so many formerly (now penitentiall men, I hope) had not then been deceived into a rebel∣lious Army; nor would so many con∣tinue their Adherents at this very day. But no wonder if those men (who first rebell against the King of Hea∣ven, and his Son, our Saviour Jesus Christ, fight against his commands, the practice of the whole Army of Martyrs the glorious company of the Apostles and Prophets, the example of the holy Church thorough the whole world) no wonder if such de∣stroy and murder their Soveraign, God's Vice-gerent on earth, and all
true Christians, and faithfull Sub∣jects. No wonder if such men, having thus forsaken the fountain of living waters, (the Scriptures), do frame to themselves new Cisterns, even bro∣ken cisterns of dependence on Lilly's politick discourses, which will nei∣ther hold water upon Scripture-try∣all at present, nor be able to save or satisfie a poor soul at the great day of tryall, of particular persons at the hour of death, or that generall Day of Judgment, when the world shall be no more. But, let me desire of all such Star∣gazers, and Star-believers, seriously to ponder that place of Scripture, in the 47th Chapter of Isaiah, from the first verse to the end, and lean no lon∣ger upon such broken Reeds, which will deceive their dependence into a self-destruction. Babylon there had trusted in the multitude of divina∣tions, and the great abundance of in∣chanters; saying to her self, I am, and none else; I shall not sit as a widow, neither shall I know the losse of chil∣dren, as the Rooters do. We are the onely Saints, we shall prevail. Upon
no other ground, but their own strength, and the trust which they put in their prosperous wickednesse. Now observe God's manner of de∣nouncing his judgments. Therefore, saith the Text, verse the 11th: That is, because you have thus sinned, in punting confidence in these Star-gazers, and forsaken me the God of the Scars, and my unerring precepts, shall destruction come upon thee, and thou shalt not know the morning thereof; Ruine shall fall upon thee, which thou shalt not be able to put away; destruction shall come on thee suddainly unawares— Where, by the way, take notice, that as the Church's extremity is God's opportunity for deliverance, when their hearts are saddest, and in∣deed almost hopelesse, if they consult onely with flesh and blood; So, the destruction of the wicked shall come upon them, when they are at the highest of their hopes, and dream not of a change; then, even then, una∣wares, shall suddain destruction fall upon them— The Text saith, They shall not know the morning thereof;
that is, not the time of their ruine: but after they have slept, as it were, a whose night in security, supposing all to be setled for a continuance, by the prosperity of their wickednesse; then shall God in the morning, unthought-of, unexpected, come against them in judgment, and destroy them in his fury. Further, in the 12th verse, upon their approaching ruine, observe, how God doth upbraid them with their sins: Stand now among thy inchan∣ters, and in the multitude of thy sooth-sayers, with whom thou hast wearied thy self, if so be thou maist have profit or strength. Let the Astro∣logers, the Star-gazers, vers. 13. and Prognosticators now stand up, and save thee from these things that shall come upon thee. That is, see if these your confidents can be a preserving skreen between you and my destroy∣ing anger. No, no, hopes of help from them are but vain, for in-the 14th and 15th verses, see the judgment of hea∣ven denounced against the Star-gazers themselves; Behold, saith the Text, they shall be as stubble, the fire shall
burn them, they shall not deliver their own lives from the power of the flame, &c. Every one shall wander to his own quarter, none shall save them, &c. Thus shall God say, Do you that adhere to the politick spirit of Lilly, and forsake the commands and dire∣ctions of the God of spirits; even in that day, when you have filled full the measure of your sins, when the Harvest of your full-grown iniquities is ripe, then shall God enter in with his sickle of judgment, and cut you off; and even then your consciences shall upbraid you, and bid you go to Lilly, in whom you have trusted, see whether he can save you in that your extremity, try whether or no he can administer the least hopes of comfort to your souls for the future; but all in vain— O my brethren, there will be sad thoughts at such a time, and at the hour of death, when your souls are ready to take their flight from their fleshy cages— Therefore consider of these things betimes, before the hour-glasses of your lives are shivered into pieces. Repent and return, in
your dependence onely upon the God of truth, and his revealed will, the holy Scriptures; lest you exchange this life, for an eternally-continuing death, with those never-dying damned in hell. To what end, think you, were, and still are, your lying Pamphlets, and daily flying Diurnalls sent abroad, but, like so many petty pieces of the same deceiving spirit, thereby to con∣tinue the poor people in a disaffection to the King, and his so just a cause, and working of them into an appro∣bation of the Conspirator's designes▪ casting in them sable lines of disho∣nour, on the white innocence of his Majesty's actions; and covering over the rotten wall of their own black undertakings, with a seeming white∣nesse witnesse that apostatizingPoliticus, alias Ne∣cum. Lu∣cifer, fallen from the heaven-appro∣ving heighth of truth and loyalty, to the deepest hell of perjury, falshood, rebellion, and treason; whose lines are nothing else but lying invectives, murderers of Religion and Reason, as well as of Royalty and Loyalty. What, suppose you, my abused
country-men, is the reason why the Conspirators endeavours tug so much to engage all, if it were possible, to be equally guilty with them, some by perjurious oaths and engagements; others, by sacrilegious barterings for the Churches Lands; some, by unjust possession of his Malesty's Revenues and Royall Estate, with the Lands of his loyall Subjects; and not a few Ju∣dases,Accuser of Col. An∣drews, and many o∣thers. exchanging their souls with the devill by apostacy and treachery, for a pecuniary reward. It is onely that they may be as nu∣merosi proditione, so form dolosi numero; that their number may seem terrible; and what they cannot maintain as just by Reason, Religion, or Law, they may seem to justifie the main∣tenance thereof by the irreligious Sword. But do thou, O Lord God of Hosts, scatter those people that de∣light in war, that speak not peace, but devise deceitfull matters against the quiet of the land—. They smite down thy people, O God, and trouble thine heritage; they slay the widow and the stranger, and murder the fatherlesse. O Lord God the avenger, O God the
avenger, shew thy self clearly. Lord, how long, how long, Lord, shall the wicked triumph, and the workers of iniquity vaunt themselves?— Lastly, I shall contract all these in∣to a narrow compasse; and, as I have already made it appear,Indep. Fa∣ction. that the * pre∣sent ruling Powers are so far from be∣ing entitled Conquerors, that they have confessed themselves to be Re∣bells and Traitors; so all others shall affirm them (as to be such, so also) the bloodiest of Cheaters, and State-jug∣lers. And this I shall do, first, by inser∣ting a sad modern story, and then ta∣king a comparative notice of the par∣ties employed, with the end of their then employment, and these Roo∣ting-cheaters, who would be styled Conquerors. I have been informed, that in Ire∣land, at the first arise of that bloody Rebellion, there were some of the Papisticall faction resolved upon the surprisall of a Protestant Justice of Peace, (where, by the way, take no∣tice, that some of his servants were privy to the conspiracy), the death of
him, ruine of his family, and possessi∣on of his Castle. But they supposing it in vain to attempt it by force, re∣solved upon a more subtle way, (by putting on the vizor of Justice, and of former Acquaintance, upon their deceitfull intentions) thereby to compasse their ends; in this manner. The Combinators bind the hands of some of their fellow-villains, take with them a Constable and other Of∣ficers, insensible of the plot; knock at the Castle-gate, pretend they came for justice against these bound men. Some of the servants, as well of the combination, as others that were ig∣norant of their designe (however, being both acquainted with the Con∣stable, and many of the rest) admit them into the presence of their Ma∣ster. Which was no sooner done, but, after some pretended flourishes for justice, they unbind their fellow-vil∣lains, and all unanimously murder the Justice, his family, faithfull ser∣vants, and the well-meaning Consta∣ble, and keep possession of the Ca∣stle. Now let any rationall man resolve
me. Do these men deserve to be estee∣med as reall Landlords, when as, had they not thus pretended justice, there∣by even deceiving the Justice him∣self, it had been impossible for them to have effected their designes? Or will you not rather confesse, that they were the worst of deceivers, and bloodiest of murderers? Or can any man be so senslesse to affirm, that, because they were actually possest of this Castle, their possession therefore was just? Surely no. Or if any after∣ward shall combine with these vil∣lans, in this Castle so unjustly pos∣sest, will not all rationall men judge them equally guilty? Certainly yes. Now, mutatis nominibus de Anglia fabula narratur. To make good the comparison. Who are these Papisticall bloody Conspirators, but the Rooting-fa∣ction (though different in title) in the House and Army? Who this Protestant Justice of Peace, and faithfull servants? but our late dear Soveraign, and loy all Sub∣jects, whom they have murdered? and the Laws of England, which they have destroyed?
Who those ignorantly assisting Constables and Officers? but the mis∣lead deceived Presbyterian party— mislead, I say, for there were plotters among them too, (whom, in this pa∣rallel I ntend not.) Who are those treacherous ser∣vants?Mildmay. Vanes. but those of his Majesty's own houshold. What is meant by this Ca∣stle? but the three Kingdoms. How and by what means possessed, which otherwise could not have been obtained? but under pretences of de∣siring Justice. Now for the unlawful∣nesse of the act, I leave to every man's nearer application; onely know thus much for truth,— That prospe∣rous villany entitleth nothing to be therefore just and equitable, because successfull. What thoughAs two Fryers tearmed the mur∣der of Hen∣ry the French King, He∣roicum fa∣ctum, & donum Sp∣ritus sancti prosperum scelus Virtus vo catur, yet really it is not so; it is but the corrupt glosse of wicked men, and bloody Tyrants, who would seem to have power to dethrone the Majesty of Religions Reason in man, as some have had to destroy Kings and Governments them∣selves. Thus, thus, England, these Roo∣ting
factious Conspirators have (grada∣tim, step by step) juggled themselves into a Supremacy, and abused you in∣to a slavish subjection. By this time, I presume, all are sa∣tisfied in these Men's deserving titles: and let them receive their due cha∣racters: The unparallel'd Impostours. Unheard of State-cheaters. Bloodiest of Rebellious Tyrannicall Subjects, but not Conquerors. Now let me appeal to all English hearts, and true-hearted Protestants: What ingenious spirit will not blush, after he apprehendeth himself to be consened by the cunning insi∣nuations and actions of any men, though in matters of lesser conse∣quence? What repairings are there to the Lawyers for advice? What earnest endeavours are there employed, either for a Restitution or Vindication. To this purpose, no means are left unattempted, no mo∣ny unexpended, no friends neglected, or un-made use of, that may be pre∣valent to such an end.
And will you, you English-men, being thus cheated, not of toyes and trifles, but of things substantiall and essentiall, both to your temporall and eternall welfares. Your King, the Supream Governour being murdered, and his Royall Son, our surviving So∣veraigne Persecuted, prosecuted with murdering Resolutions, and destroy∣ing Armies. Your Laws, they being abolished; your Religion, that being dishonoured and corrupted with He∣resie, Schism, and all manner of Pro∣fane opinions; your Liberties and Lives, they lying at the beck, and command of these cheating Tyrants: Will you continue further instru∣ments, to the absolute destruction of all these, wherein you are concerned as Christians, and free-born English∣men? Will you subscribe your selves willingly passive slaves to these active impostors? Nay, will you engage your selves in obedientiallEngage∣ment. promises to such an unjust power, enchaining thereby your souls to their monstrous sins;Quos simi∣les culpa coinquinat par quoque paena con∣stringet. and, unlesse repentance prevent, linking your selves to their punish∣ments? For God will be just.
Let me perswade you therefore, my dear brethren and Country-men, in the bowells of our Lord and Sa∣viour Jesus Christ, as you tender your eternall welfare and everlasting happinesse, not to be yoked together with these perfidious creatures; for, what fellowship hath righteousnesse with unrighteousnesse? what commu∣nion hath light with darknesse? what concord hath Christ with Belial? what agreement hath innocent loyalty with bloodily guilty perjury? Separate your selves from their wicked acti∣ons, come out from among them, be no longer partakers of their Sinns least you receive of their plagues. Now at the last stand fast in the faith, quit yourselves like men and bestrong, withstand the Devill and he will fly.Ille Christi miles qui pugnat, non qui fugit. It is your Pusillanimity and Comply∣ing Cowardice that spirits these Rooters to a progression in their ugly defignes — By this only they Worke, Do you ever hope to be freemen again, Free by vertue of a Certainly Protecting and directing Law, so Long as you are possessed with such aguish
spirits? No no, be assured while you retaine this Puny spiritedness, expect nothing but a multiplication of op∣pressive Taxes, like waves upon the Sea shore, tumbling one upon the neck of another, untill you be all over whelm∣ed with irrecoverable poverty. Away then with this slavish fear; why will you rather subscribe to be Compani∣ons in sinne with these men, than to be Champions for the true cause of Je∣sus Christ, the Lawes of England and your owne liberties. Let me per∣swade you to throw away these dull weights, which like Plummets tyed to the feet of flying birds, presse down your winged desires of Restoration and rein joyment of Peace and Truth. It is these Plummets of feare that more keep you under hatches of slavery than their often reiterated tyrannicall oppression.— Indeed it is true that a generall im∣poverishment of all degrees of men (but those of their lincked conspiracy) is the high rode of Policy on their parts. For by this the oppressed (mens spirits many times declining with their E∣states) in continuance of time are de∣prived
of meanes to obtain their free∣dom, and at last through meer neces∣sity enforced, contrary to their owne reason and consciences, to enroll them∣selves as Souldiers in a Rebellious army.— But shall They be so Politick as first to work us into a necessitous condition, and then work upon that necessity, their owne ends, in our Ruine? and shall not We (seeing our selves thus driven into a pitt of de∣struction) endeavour somuch as to struggle for our owne Security and prevention of our enforced ruine—? Nay, shall we become assistants to the destruction of our remaining loyall fellow Subjects, who by such cowar∣dice have our selves only occasioned our owne Ruine—? O Stupid genera∣tion of people, who have bewitched us! Heare oh England, and O London harken; now at last return, return, re∣turn, to the God of heaven by repen∣tance for thy often repeated Sinns to your Soveraigne and the Lawes of England, by a willing and Reall obedi∣ence to your fellow country men in mutuall embraces of unity and cor∣diall affections.
But, me-thinks I hear some whis∣pering a commendation of the Plotters charity; that, notwithstanding they have reduced many into an impover∣ished condition, yet they are carefull in making provision for them in Now erected Hospitalls. For answer, Let me tel you this truth: that their care it express'd to none but such who first have cripled their souls as well as maimed their bodies in their bloudy designe (strange dealing to cut off mens legs purposly to shewtheir charity in the guift of a paire of crut∣ches!) But grant their care were more ge∣nerall and extended to others, whom their cruelty, plunderings, taxes and necessary expences only to buy bread (wanting Suplies through the want of Trade, their only way of Sub∣sisting, lost by their Rebellious warrs) had reduced to Extreamity of Poverty. All though this, I am confident, pro∣ceedeth not from any principle of Christian charity neither, but pure po∣licy; thereby to lull asleep the cryes
of the maymed, the Widdows, and fa∣therlesse; which if too publikly heard, might occasion others to be fearfull, how they become either actively or passively contributary to their assi∣stance, from whom they can after all expect nothing but to be Famished for a Reward. Yet alas, poor England, must thou be first beggered by these Plotters, that they may expresse a cruell kind of charity to thy misery, by them only occasioned? Miserable Charity sure! To Robbe and Spoyl men of their own Estates that they, their wives, and chil∣dren, may become Pensioners in an Hospitall.— But I Proceed. Having thus layed down, the Equi∣ty and Justice on his Majestie's part, the Rebellious method and Trayter∣ous means which these Conspiratours have made use of, as so many ascending stepps assisting the accomplishment of their bloudy designe, hoping that all rationall men are very well satis∣fied how they have been abused by these deceivers into the commission of unlawfull actions, and are resolved
for a Serious repentance and Sud∣dain amendment, that so the God of heaven may Restore unto us our So∣veraigne on his throne; Our religion to its Practicall Purity; and our selves to the enjoyment of our Lawes and Liberties: I shall in the next place, acquaint the world with the unlawfullnesse of that Politick piece of Combinatory villany (the Engagement), that trod upon the heels of other preceding actions, in order to their designe; as naturally as the shaddow of man, on a sunny day, waiteth upon the body. January 1648.To this Purpose therfore take notice that after they had Murdered the King in their rode of Bloudy policy, imme∣diately Issued forth first that Monar∣chy-distroying Ordinance, and an utter extirpation of his Majestie's Royall family, not so much as mentioned in any of their preceding Declarations— Nor indeed was it seasonable they should — But when they had runne through all their Scenes of Hypocri∣ticall Pretences of setting up of Christ Jesus, though Murdering again thereby the Lord of life by their mani∣fold sins; at last most Barbarously they
killed the Lord's Anoynted, the King: He must have his bloody Exit out of this world, to make way for their Re∣turn upon the bloodied stage of his Kingdoms, there to act their conti∣nuing parts of destruction upon the Royall Persons of his Posterity, and to contrive the ruine of all loyall and faithfull Subjects, and true Chri∣stian Protestants. And now having brought them hi∣ther (their first resolved end, thorough all their vain turnings, and politick windings); Take a view, how they be∣gin to settle themselves in their bloo∣dily-acquired Power, endeavouring to lock others in an unjust obedience unto them, by commanding subscrip∣tions to that complication of Trea∣son and Rebellion, the Engagement, and by these commands to distinguish affection, that soRooters. they may more readily make way for the ruine of all true Christians, in their persons and estates, thereby to require those of their more near and bloody faction; as also, that such, and none but such, most desperate villains, may be inte∣ressed in all employments, both in
Church and State. Thus much may be collected very easily, by the Re∣solves of the Parliament (say they; but traitorous Conspirators, say I) en∣joyning subscription thereunto, Yet,Oct. 1649 by the way, let me tell them, that though hereby they seem to distin∣guish persons, yet their hearts and souls they cannot— Alas, this seeming Tye— although for my own part, I disapprove the subscription of any one whomsoever, because hereby, men seem more to fear Man than God, love their golden earth, a little perish∣ing wealth, more than the rich treasurs that are laid up in Heaven, for those that fight the good fight of faith, and persevere unto the end, to whom one∣ly Crowns of everlasting glory are promised as rewards. I am afraid,ugitius nulla Cor∣na. that their sins of subscription will occasi∣on the continuance of our punish∣ments; although, say I, this Tye, in reference to the persons obliged unto, will prove but like sandy ropes, which the alteration of the wind will soon scatter into nothing. Before I come to dissect the Ingage∣ment it self, and lay it open to the
world's eye, that so all that will, or are not as yet given over to a reprobate sense, may therein read the present sin, and future everlasting danger (without repentance) of the subscri∣bers. I must, by way of repetition, pre∣mise these confessed, and already-maintained principles. vid. Judg. Jenkins's Collect.That the King's Majesty, now Charls the second, by the fundamen∣tall law of England, is our Supream Governour. That, as this his Supremacy is incor∣porated in our Laws, so the acknow∣ledgment thereof is imbodied in our Religion, (the true Christian Prote∣stant faith) maintained in the XXXIX Doctrinall Articles of the Church of England, and this consonant to the Word of God. That this acknowledgment is con∣firmed by Precept, Practice, Oath upon Oath of Allegiance and Supre∣macy, was a truth confessed by all English Protestants, untill these lat∣ter times, wherein these bloody and seditious seeds (like those tares in the Gospell, sowen in the night while
others slept) are scattered abroad, as it were, in the night also, by these de∣vilish instruments, when all Ortho∣dox Ministers were forced either to silence, or else cast into dark prisons, like so many shining Suns, by them forced under clowds, the great reason of this our present night of igno∣rance, and hellish errours. However, this truth still remaineth (notwith∣standing so many bloody storms, and rebelliously opposing waves) like a Rock unshaken, being built, not on sandy foundations, but on sure Prin∣ciples of undenyable Reason, pure undefiled Religion, and Laws, like Rivers from their fountains streaming forth, and remaining apparently esta∣blished at this very day; That a bloody and enforced extir∣pation of a Government by Subjects, contrary to the power, & commands, and against the Person of their law∣full Soveraigne, and the fundamen∣tall Law of the Kingdom, is the high∣est degree of Treason and Rebellion, by their own confession. That such practises are against the principles of all Governments, there∣fore
condemnable by the Law of Na∣tions. From all which confessed Positions, we may collect this Truth in generall, That in reference to the oppositi∣on of powers by Law, Reason, and Religion (the Touchstone of all Powers, that is, Governments, what∣soever) maintained just, such as the King's Supremacy and Regall Power is, no obedience active ought to be rendred to Powers, or rather Persons unjustly usurping a Power, such as these rooting-Conspirators are, ha∣ving neither warrant by Religion nor Law to command such an opposing obedience, much lesse to do as they have done, viz. to murder and de∣throne Kings, subvert our Religion and Laws, endeavouring to vassalize us to a submission unto their unlaw∣full commands. For it is better to obey God than man; that is, when our refusall of obedience to mans un∣lawfull commands, are warrantable by his all-commanding Law— But let us examine the Scripture. Every soul must be subject unto the higher power,Rom. 13 saith the Scripture, that
is,There is no power but of God, if they be godly powers. Bad Ru∣lers are by the permissi∣on, not the ordinati∣on of God. those just Powers whom God hath ordained for the good government of his people, and have right and title to be styled Governours, being regular∣ly received, setled, practised, and confirmed in a Nation, as the Go∣vernment of England was by King, Lords, and Commons, all acting or∣derly in their severall Sphears, yet all meeting in an unanimous agreement for the generall good both of Prince and People. And these thus meeting and consulting together, the High Court is rightly entituled a PARLI∣AMENT, a name in it self venerable, and to be greatly esteemed by all true Christian hearts. Such a PARLIA∣MENT, O God of mercies, restore unto poor decaying and dying Eng∣land. Now that this command of sub∣jection must concern onely the law∣full governing Power, and not rebel∣lious Subjects, who, by treachery, blood, and deceit, have snatched a∣way the power of governing from the lawfull Governours, and exercise it by a ryrannicall usurpation, both o∣ver Prince and People, the subse∣quent words of the Text confirmeth.
For, to what end were that advice of the Apostle, That Princes are not to be feared for good works, but for evill? That is, if people governed be obedient, and act in their places things unblamable, the Prince and the Law need not to be feared by them, in a way of condemnation and punishment. But if Subjects (to speak in the words of the Apostle) shall do evill, by infringing the Law of God, by rebelling against the lawfull Govern∣ment and Governour, (as this prevai∣ling faction hath done) then the Prince, he bearth not the sword in vain, for he is the Minister of God to take ven∣geance on such evill doers, that is, to punish them according to their de∣merits. Now do I wonder, how any man can be so unblushingly impudent,needham Politicus. as to make use of this Scripture, con∣scientiously to engage the common people of England's subjection to this present Rule-lesse Ruling Power, when as on the contrary they are hereby obliged to be assisting to their Prince, that so he may be the better enabled
to discharge that duty, which God and the Law requireth from him, and to punish these workers of iniquity. The current of the Text running clearly for subjection to lawfull Go∣vernours, from the people who are to be governed. Nullius prohibitio valet divinis obvi∣ae praeceptis, Gods precepts may not be countermanded by man's prohi∣bitions; nor God's prohibitions pre∣judiced by man's precepts. Again,1 Pet. 2. we are exhorted to sub∣mit our selves to every Ordinance (that is, lawfull Ordinance) of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King, as to the superiour, or un∣to Governours, as unto them that are sent of him, for the punishment of evill doers, and the praise of them that do well. Where, pray take notice, the Apostle's advice is quite opposite to the practice, either of the Conspi∣rator's, or the subjecting Subscribers of these daies; for we are not com∣manded to submit our selves to eve∣ry wicked Ordinance, by which good men are onely injured, and the worst of men commended; nor are we to
obey the nowThe King being Supream in his own Kingdom, the peo∣ple can be but Subjects; and if Subjects have no power to command, but by way of de∣rivation from the King, there∣fore the present ruling Fa∣ction have no just power to command, but fall under the notion of wicked and evill doers, whom the King ought to punish, and all good men should be assisting thereun∣to— This is the do∣ctrine of the Apostle. do∣mineering Power, (but the King as Su∣pream) therefore not these who are but Subjects, nor any of their Agents, whose commands and acti∣ons already have mur∣dered the King, our Supream Governour, and still continue to destroy his Royall Son, and all others, who will not walk in the same bloody paths with them. Is this, think you, to submit to the King as Supream? In brief, the Scripture enjoyneth us to obey the King and his servants; The Faction commandeth us to obey them (sub∣jects) against the Kings commands de∣stroying Him and all his faithfull ser∣vants, O monstrum, horrendum—▪ Are these the good works which the Apostle commandeth us to per∣form, in the 11th verse of the same Chapter, that God may be glorified by us in the day of visitation? And is this our honest conversation, where∣by
we may stop the mouth of evill speakers? Surely no, my dear Coun∣try-men, It were blasphemy onely to suppose so. Is the wilfull sleighting and ne∣glecting of God's precepts, and the dethroning of Kings, the way to obey God and honour the King, as we are commanded in the same Chapter? Did our Saviour Jesus Christ com∣mand,Matth. Mar. that those things which belon∣ged unto Caesar should be given unto him, and shall the Faction not onely command the contrary, but them∣selves plunder all from him, depri∣ving him of his Honour, Regality, Revenues, nay, Life and all? Shall the Preacher advertise us to obey the Kings commands,Eccles. 8. in regard of our Oaths; and shall the Faction command us to disobey his com∣mands? nay, engage us by contrary Oaths, thereby making us guilty of a double perjury? Nay, shall the people of England, upon, as it were, the first invitation of these Conspirators, rush into the sin, and yet think to escape punish∣ment? Surely no. Though God be
mercifull, yet he is also just. Read the 17th of Ezekiel, from the 12th verse to the end of the Chapter; there see how God denounceth his wofull judgment against perjury; and repent before it is too late. Shall the Wise man advise us,Prov. 30. that a∣gainst the King there is no rising up? Shall the Faction perswade us that for the Kings protection there must be no rising at all? Must not we curse the King in our hearts?Eccles. 10 and neverthelesse do these Mur∣der him with their bloudy hands? nay, put him to variety of death with their Pens and Tongues sharper than two edged Swords. Shall the Apostle exhort, that first of all Supplication & Prayers be made for Kings &c. And shall the Prayer-haters, though pretended affecters, command us not to pray for the King at all? Nay shall we obedientially comply with these Scripture-murderers; aswell as King Religion and Law-destroyers? Although the Scripture acquaint∣eth us,Prov. 24. that he which provoketh the King to anger sinneth against his own Soul;— Yet these Conspiratours think it no Sin to imbrue their hands
in the bloud of Kings.—O my God, consider how these men of bloud blas∣pheme thy Name; sinning with an high hand against thee, the all-powerful Lord of heaven and earth, contrary to the Precept and Practise of thy Son Christ Jesus, thy holy Prophets, and Apostles. But, O my soul, partake not thou of their counsells, nor follow thou their rebellious steps. By this time I presume it will be granted,1 Sam. 24.6. that we must submit to all lawfull powers, yielding ready obe∣dience unto them in all things that are lawfull; but must not subject our selves in an active obedience to Pow∣ers unlawfull, (such as these Rooters are) by way of opposition to his Ma∣jesty's lawfull and Scripture-appro∣ved Supremacy. So that, in brief,Fact. Indep * These being neither lawfull Powers, nor commanding lawfull Acts, must not be obeyed, unlesse we resolve to sin against the light of Reason, the Law of God, and all Evangelical Precepts. Now, by the way, let me desire all you Subscribers to the Engagement, seriously to read and consider what you have done, (not that I say, you are obliged thereby to any perfor∣mance;
for, contra Scripturas nulla ob∣ligatio, the Scriptures engage you on∣ly to a repentance.) However, take notice, how you have frolick'd away the innocence and integrity of your conscience, sinning against the God of heaven. Let such also weight these things in the scale of the Sanctuary, forbearing addition of one grain of their self-by-ass'd ends, or private corrupt inte∣rests, who foolishly sooth up them∣selves in their vain conceit, that the Engagement is but a civill thing, and not in a religious sense to be taken notice of. That any man may sub∣scribe it, and accordingly expresse an active obedience to these Rooters, during the time of their command; and when another Power succeedeth this, be obedient to that likewise. A pretty sort of earthly Christians! for assuredly heaven nor heavenly things these mind not. What? Is perjury no sin? Is not a combination to destroy your Religion, your King, the widow, fatherlesse, your fellow-subjects, no sin? Do you make it but a kind of a complement thus to serve the devill, who hath been a murderer and a liar
from the beginning? See,Joh.8.44. my friendly Country-men, with what glassy cords you bind up your eternall happinesse? on what icie bridges you adventure the everlasting welfare of your souls? These things being premised, I shall unravell this bloody-twisted piece of Perjury, Murder, Rebellion,Engagem. and Treason, as it is intentionally meant by the Composers, although I am con∣fident, not so resolvedly taken by most of the Subscribers; although, let them also wrest or mince the sense as they please, they cannot excuse them∣selves from the guilt of sin in sub∣scribing. First, I shall present it you in grosse. I do declare and promise,October, 1649. that I will be faithfull to the Common-wealth of Eng∣land, as the same is now established with∣out a King or House of Lords. And now I shall give it you in its severall pieces; and, with them, a rati∣onall exposition of their most irratio∣nall, irreligious, intentions therein. I— that is, I, a subject bound by the Law of1. Pet. 2. Rom. 12.1 Eccles 8. vid. J. Jen∣kins Col∣lections. God and † Man, and by se∣verall additionallAllegi∣ance. Suprema∣cy. Protesta∣tion. Oaths, to be true and faithfull to my Soveraign Lord King Charls, his Hairs and Successors,
the Kings and Queens of England; to be aiding to Him in my life and for∣tune against all Rebells and Traitors whomsoever;11th. Hen. the 7th. cap. 1. to disclose all conspira∣cies against his Person, Honour, Crown, and Dignity. I being thus conscientiously, reli∣giously, and legally pre-ingaged; ne∣verthelesse, I do declare and promise, that I will be true and faithfull;Engage∣ment. that is, faithfully true in my obedience and subjection, to the Common-wealth, (but more truly, common-Woe-creating Rooters) that is, To an inconsiderable number of bloody perjur'd Traitors, ir∣religious, sacrilegious persons, congrega∣ted (contrary to all Law, Reason, Ju∣stice, and Equity) and met together un∣der the sals veil of Parliament, who, by specious pretences of Reformation, have deceived the common people of England into destructive Arms, by whose ignorantly assisting power, these decei∣ving Conspirators have overthrown our admirably well-composed Govern∣ment, destroy'd our Religion, intro∣duced Atheism, and all manner of damnable Errors and Heresies whatso∣ever ruined our Liberties, comman∣ding, and enforcing the people of Eng∣land,
their fellow-subjects, to kill, slay, and destroy one another, in their persons and estates. Nay, stand ama∣zed all the world (scribere pallesco) at this monstrous relation, murdered their Soveraign, their King, the best and most religiously pious of Princes, endeavouring utterly to destroy root and branch his Royall Posterity; rob∣bing, spoiling, giving, selling away, his Royall Revenues, and Prince-like Palaces: Extirpating the Ecclesiasti∣call and Civill Government, sacri∣legiously plundering the Church of Bishops, Pastors, and Patrimony; the Kingdom of Religion, Liberty, Peace, and Truth, turning the pious and cha∣ritable gifts of former Ages, from the Donor's first religious intents, into irreligious rewards of their fellow-confederates, for their bloody service. Now, my too too forward sinfull Country-men, Do you well, think you, to subscribe your approbation and fu∣ture assistance to these things—? Sure∣ly no. O therefore, if you have (as certainly you have) offended with St. Peter, in denying, not onely your temporall earthly Soveraign, but your heavenly King and Lord; these
lines (like that admonishing Cock) thus giving you notice of your errors, Go out with him, repent, and weep bitterly. I—; that is, I, a free-born English-man; free,Engagem. in respect of my dear So∣veraign's protection of my self, life, and estate, by direction of the written Lawes of the Land; in which, as my native inheritance, I have an undoubt∣ed right and propriety, by which one∣ly I am differenced from a slave. Yet I (notwithstanding these bul∣warks of my freedom) do subject my self, life, and estate, to the arbitrary com∣mands, perverse resolutions, wicked actions, and corrupt affections of these * men, whose will are their Lawes, whose Religion is Rebellion,Faction n ep. whose Faith is Fa∣ction, whose protection is destruction, whose preservation is desolation, whose justice is tyranny and oppression, whose greatest mercy is the extreamity of cru∣elty. And shall I commend you for such your subscriptions? No, I commend you not, but rather advise you to be mindfull, how much herein you have degenerated from the former honour of English-men; earnestly desiring you a last to return to your first pra∣ctised
principles of loyall valour, and Christian fortitude. As the same is now established without a King and House of Lords.Engagem. That is,King, Capell, Canterbury with the rest. Sir. Geor. Lis, &c. Chaloner, Thomson, Alder. Garraway. as they have begun to set∣tle it upon the already-laid foundati∣on of Royall Blood, the murder of not a few Noble-men and Lords, the death and imprisonment of severall reverend Bishops, learned Doctors, and other Pastors of the Church of Christ; the destruction of many Knights and Gentlemen, the ruine of some Aldermen and Citizens of Lon∣don, and severall penitentiall deceived persons, first of their own party, with the losse of many thousand English-men's lives; all whose bloods have been shed to mix with the cursed * Lime of these persons; by which,Designes. with the additionall assistance of their sacrilegious Church-plunderings, they suppose their usurped power wil be the closer cemented. But, good Father, cut them off in the height of their hopes; let not these bloody men prosper any longer, lest the Heathen blaspheme and say, Where is the God of England? As the same is now established withoutEngagent.
a King and House of Lords— with∣out a King and House of Lords? there is the bloody extirpation of England's an∣tient Government. That is, as they resolve, (for as yet, it is not established) to accomplish the establishment thereof; intending (rather than restore the Nation to its former Government, by King, Lords, and Commons) to continue this their bloody building, upon the utter de∣struction of those remaining ruines of the Nobility, Gentry, Clergy, and Commons of England. The corruption of the two once flourishing Academies,Oxford. Cambridge. famous for the purity of doctrine, excellency of discipline; now pestered with heresies, schisms, and factions; that so their Church hereafter (it God shall suffer them, for the punishment of Eng∣lands sins, long to continue) may be as apt to instruct the people in all manner of errours, as they to govern them by all kind of wicked rules of policy. Upon the ruine of all Lear∣ning, destruction of all Arts, over∣throwing of all Schools and Nurse∣ries of good education; that so igno∣rance may be once more famous,
or rather infamous, in this Nation, and we again shake hands with the Papists; concluding Ignorance to be the mother of Devotion, and by de∣grees confirming the common people into a belief of such blind doctrins. Upon the utter extirpation of the purity of the Gospell, and the Or∣thodox preachers thereof, by the ad∣vancing ignorant Lay-men to be directors of others toward heaven; when (too sad a truth it is) they know not how to set one true step forward, leading undoubtedly thither them∣selves; until at last all divine Precepts shall be commanded attendance upon their principles of Policy, and Eng∣land at last, by their means, usher in the Pope, and his whole Antichristian fa∣ction, the only way of his re-enter; for be assured, all the back doors are wide open, ready for his re-admission, no∣thing wanting, but a fit opportunity for his more generally visible appea∣rance; for long he hath, and at this pre∣sent still doth covertly walk; some∣times under a silly Independent long∣wasted doublet, sometimes ruffling it in a long sword, watching his, &c. for entrance upon England's stage.
Again, upon the breach of all the priviledges of Corporations,Protege Londinum Domine. upon which rush in a confusion of Trades, and poverty unawares thereupon stealeth upon City and Country; and, by this,Per scelera semper sce∣leribus tu∣tum estiter. the Faction gain souldiers, their onely supporters. Nay, much I fear, their desperate resolves may extend to the firing of Cities, Towns, Villages; a promis∣cuous destruction of whole Families, not minding the innocent cries of In∣fants, the wooing tears of the Widow and Fatherlesse, the pittifull com∣plaints of the Aged; because they be∣ing men, passed beyond the limits of reconciliation, never resolving upon repentance, will not apprehend them∣selves secure, but by the additionall commission of greater sins. But, O Lord God Almighty, let not these wicked men have their desire. Rescue thy poor distressed flock from these devouring woolves. Protect thine own Vine, the truly Christian Prote∣stant Church of England, and all members thereof, from the rooting Bores of the Antichristian Forrest, & the destroying wiles of subtle Foxes; that so they may live to praise thy
Name from generation to generation, whose mercies endure for forever. Thus having made it plainly appear, that the very act of subscription to the Engagement is absolutely unlawfull, as also, that without a serious repentance, the Subscribers wil pul upon themselves the guilt of a complication of all those monstrous sins, already committed by the Grandees of the bloody Faction. And if they actually persist therein by their actions, adhereing to them, will be liable to give an account for all the innocent English blood, that, for the future shall be shed by these destroy∣ing Rooters. Besides, they will but con∣tinue instrumentall supporters of Eng∣lard's continuing miseries, if not haste∣ning procurers of its utter desolation; Which, may the God of heaven, out of his infinite mercy, prevent. But here I meet with an Objection, or rather a propounded Question. What would you have me do? I am but one. Should I not subscribe the En∣gagement, and swim in the same stream with each successive faction; I fear that I should lose my estare. O my Brethren, a strange Question! That is a cheap Religion sure, of little
esteem, that must rather be parted with than a little pelf to preserve it. Are your souls of no greater value, than thus eternally to be battered away upon grounds of fear, that you shall lose your wealth, which cannot benefit you after death? Remember and weigh well that place, Revel. 21. There, among other sin∣ners, you shall find, that the fearfull are cast into hell; that is, such, who, for fear of men, losse of their estates, will bid adieu to the God of heaven, and his commands. You could, in the beginning of this bloody war, upon no rationall grounds, but vain pretences of Polititians, decei∣ving you for their own ends, One it, and One it freely, in your persons and purses, even untill many united, mul∣tiplyed themselves into severall Armies. And now finding your selves so much abused and deceived by these Rooters, can you not One it in your return, by a serious and fuddain repentance? Do you think the way to pacifie an angry God, is, to add sin to sin? There is no peace to the wicked, faith he by the Prophet Isaiah; and can you expect publick, pri∣vate, externall, or internall peace, if you continue in your wickednesse? It is
too too apparent, that you have all sin∣ned, and you will never be recti in curia, untill you repent; upon which conditi∣on, God hath onely promised pardon and forgivenesse. Do you expect to be restored to the re-injoyment of freedom and liberty in your persons and estates, which you can onely challenge by vertue of the Laws established (your certain-protectors a∣gainst Instruments of tyranny and op∣pression) while you tamely thus sit crouching under their persons, whose studied work it is to tyrannize over all Laws, your estates, liberties, and per∣sons, loading you with successive Taxes, which would crack the patience of the most patient, and cannot but at last ex∣haust the wealth of them, who, as yet, are accounted the most wealthy. Again,161. Witnesse K. March from Scot. to fatall Worcest. me-thinks I hear another sort of people, as Governours of Cities, Forts, Castles, Admiralls, &c. pleading, that they are entrusted by the present Fa∣ction, and we must not betray our trust. For answer, Know thus much, That if the Trustors be justly possessed of what they entrust others with, none are then to betray their trust, by delivery of what they are trusted with, to any man that
hath not right thereunto. But if these Trustors have no right themselves, nor can lay a just claim to the possession of what they entrust others with; but (of right, justice, and equity) the things be∣long to another; then it concerneth any man so trusted, in conscience, justice, and equity, to deliver them to such who have a right title thereunto; otherwise, the trusted will make themselves doubly guilty; of deteining what is not their own, by their own confession, from the just owner; and also of patronizing o∣thers also in their unjust possessions. To apply this. How many, contrary to their own judgments, have kept pos∣session of his Majesty's Ships, Castles, Forts, and Towns, who, being sum∣mon'd to a restoration, of what these imployed Instruments unjustly detained from him,Fatall Worcest. their greatest reason of refusall was, Because they were trusted— and what, shall they betray their trust? Hear, you self deceiving, and soul-destroying Pleaders— let me expo∣stulate with you: Should a man entrust you with stollen goods, could you keep them from the just owners, onely upon this slender plea, because you are en∣trusted? — No, no, the Law, you
know, comprehendeth you, equally guilty of theft. The case is all one, onely admitting this distinction; This is a pri∣vate theft, the other publick, a robbery of an higher nature, because the injur'd concern'd persons are of an higher de∣gree, the King, nay, the whole King∣dom: and condemn'd both by the Law of God and man. The command is po∣sitive, Thou shat not steal. Now theft is nothing else but a taking away, and de∣taining contrary to Law, that which be∣longeth to another, purposely to deprive him of it, contrary to his will and mind. You plead a trust committed; Shew me the established Law, that gave them power to trust you with his Majesty's Castles, Towns, Ships, &c. By the plain Letter and equity of the Law, they belong to the King, upon which ac∣count, his demand of restitution was just. Neither you nor your imployers have a just right or title thereunto by the Law; therefore you are but robbers of the King and Kingdom. By you, his Majesty is detained from his just rights, his subjects from their liberties and
estates; heresie, schism, and prophane∣nesse are continued; perjury, blood, op∣pression; and a connivance at, if not a toleration of, all manner of sins in the Nation, and thereby you are guilty of the breach of all the commande∣ments. Remember that Curse, Deuter. 27. Cursed is he that hindereth the right of the stranger, fatherlesse, and widow. And, Cursed is he that continueth not in all things that are written in the Law to do them. That is, Cursed is he that knowingly, resolvedly, wilfully, brea∣keth all or any of the commande∣ments, as the faction have done, to compasse their ends—. Lord have mercy upon sinfull England, &c. But I will draw towards a conclusi∣on: Therefore by way of a brief recapi∣tulation. It cannot be denyed, but that, ac∣cording to the premised rules of Rea∣son, as a man; Religion, as a Christian, Protestant; and established Laws, both the guide and protection of all sub∣jects: That the Plotters, and continuing adhearers to this designe, are guilty of
all the afore-mentioned fins. Therefore consider further, that out of necessity you must repent, in a ratio∣nall sense, as Men; in a religious sense, as Christians. Confider also the vanity of suppo∣sing, there will be truth, peace, and prosperity in this Nation, without this double repentance. To invite you hereunto, pray seri∣ously ponder the exemplary judgments of God upon Nations, Families, Parti∣cular persons, for their obstinate pro∣gression in known sins; read Jeremiah 7th and 8th chapters; Zephnia the 1st chapter; nay, all the Prophets and Apo∣stles, are full in examples and judg∣ments, executed upon, and threatned against, impenitentiall sinners. Again, consider, that a partiall re∣pentance will not serve the turn, such as hath been the repentance of too many of your leading Presbyterians, who re∣turn not to those Christian Principles from whence they at first did deviate, but to the Covenant,Scot's Co¦venant. in their first be∣gun bloody destructive sense, of alte∣ring a lawfully established Govern∣ment by force; of which sort, the
Prophet complaineth, that many did return, but not to the God of heaven; so they return, but it is onely to their private interests, or publick faction, to which they at first adheared; they would seem to serve God by an out-side repentance, but are really servants to the Beliall of the Presbyterian first De∣signers. Again, consider the vanity of plea∣ding successe as argumentative, to make Good the War on the Faction's part, or Just; therefore entitle not God as an approver of your actions, because of successe— First, in respect of Reason, as men; because a multitude, by united powers, may overcome a lesser number, were their cause never so just. That, in that sense, the Turks and Heathens, in their almost continuall prevalency against the Christians, one∣ly by their numerous Armies, may be supposed to have the better cause— which is no lesse than blasphemy to maintain. To this purpose consider, the ratio∣nall probability of Cromwel's, and the Faction's successe, having, by decei∣ving
policy, as I have already shewed, gained a Power: Inregard that the grea∣test part of their Souldiers (let them pretend what they please) fight not out of an affection to parties, but in a Mer∣cenary way as meer Souldiers (a Cry∣ing sinne of this Nation) as if bloud and murder were a lawfull trade; and the Scripture, like an Almanack out of date, to be lay'd a side in the time of Warre. Again, the Faction alwayes had, and still possesse, all possible means ten∣ding to this end. As at first, in having the Command of London, that Maga∣zin of mony and men, and with them a great part of the Nation, and now all under their power: besides his Majesty's Revenues; Pallaces; Bishops lands; the Estates of many of his loyall-Sub∣jects; Excise, and other Contributi∣ons; by which helps, the Faction hath rather bought victories than really fought for them; the Silver Bullet bu∣rying more of the King's Army alive in prisons, than the Enemy's Cannons did ever wound in the field. Again, consider that his Majestie's par∣ty excepting some few Judasses, did fight
out of a religious Conscienciousnesse, & loyall affection to their God, Sove∣raign, and Country; and not for a pe∣cuniary reward onely. Consider also, that his Majesty wanted those means and wayes of procuring men and mony, which the Faction had alwayes in aboundance. That his armies were but as an hand∣full; the Faction's numerous. However, take serious notice that the King and his party have Scripture, Reason, and Law, on their Side; but the Faction, neither. Therefore look to it, you Continuing Sinfull ad∣herers. Never did National Sinns long escape the heavy hand of an A∣venging God; and if England— Lon∣don, expect to be freed, their hopes will deceive them. Isaiah 30th— 1, 2 &c. Jerem 9th 13, 14, 15. Further, Consider the Vanity of plea∣ding success also; a way of justifica∣tion of the worst of actions. In respect of religion as Christians; The people of God almost in all ages having been worsted in that respect. God's intent in suffering the enemyes of his Church
to prevail being only to try the faith and patience of his children, to make them humble,Acts 14.22. Gal. 6.14. fitting them thereby for Himselfe. In respect of their Eternall well being in heaven, and in reference to his owne honour upon earth, that so his People coming as it were like pure gold out of the furnace of afflicti∣on, they may be as shining and burning lamps for after-ages to walk by. Again, consider that the flock of Christ alwayes was little; therefore to have Sucesse by power of a multitude, is no argument of being Christians. That (as I have already inserted) for the most part the Church was under Persecution and affliction; therefore Prosperity is no ground of Saintship, as the Faction pretend. Hebr. 12 2. Math. 5.4. Be advised, therefore, my dear Country-men; beware of acting and maintaining any thing against right Reason: In it self both a sin and a pu∣nishment. How many men, so contrary to common sense and reason, did, fol∣lowing the deceiving sense of the Fa∣ction, account, and highly cry up,
Cromwel's marching into Scotland? No invasion of that Kingdom; where he could not ground the least pre∣tence of a quarrell,1650. in his own unjust construction; the end of his march being onely in prosecution of his first resolv'd-upon Designe of ruining his Majesty and Royall Family, des∣troying our and their Laws and Li∣berties, only to mount himself into the chair of Supremacy. Neverthelesse, many were posses∣sed with such a sottish kind of stupi∣dity,Futall Worcest. (a sure presager of utter destru∣ction) as to esteem his majesty's last March out of Scotland into England, (with resolves only to Regain his right and that he might restore his subjects to their Religion Laws and Liberties) to be an Invasion of England, O Ang∣lia Anglia, quae vos dementia cepit! Be for the future, therefore, advised, keep closer to the Scriptures and right reason: Approve, follow, and act no∣thing but what they warrant, or is de∣ducible from them: for if you once but slipp from that firm Square, you Tumble from once errour to another, like a man fallen from the top of a
Steep hill, never resting untill you come to the bottom; where, without the Infinitely preserving mercy of God, you will receive the reward of Such your wilfull Neglect, even destruction. Isaiah 30th. 12,th & 13. verses, Again, If God should continue still punishing England, beware of making your selves Instrumentall-scourging Rodds in his hands; which, his will be∣ing performed, he alwaies casteth into the fire. But, O holy blessed and glori∣ous Trinity, have mercy upon us mi∣serable sinners: Remember not, Lord, our offences, nor the offences of our forefathers; neither take thou any fur∣ther vengeance of our sinnes: spare us, good Lord, spare thy people whom thou hast redeem'd with thy precious bloud, and be not angry with us for ever—. To this pupose we beseech thee to give us true repentance, to for∣give us all our Sinnes, negligences, and ignorances; and to endue us with the grace of thy holy Spirit, to amend our lives acording to thy holy Word. For my part, I call heaven and earth to witnesse; I have now sett before you life and death, blessing and cursing;
Choose life; for why will you dy, O England? why will you destroy your selves, O people of Great Brittain? Why will you not turn to the God of heaven, with whom are treasures of mercy? O ye Citizens of London; Turn ye, Turn ye, from your evill wayes by a serious suddain & unfeigned repentance, that so God may return unto us in loving kindnesse, by restoring to us our Governours as in former dayes,K. Charles. and cause us again to fit peace∣ably under our owne vines; That our religion in purity, may practically be revived; That we may enjoy Pastors and Teachers that may again feed us with true knowledge & understanding; That our lawes and liberties may be conti∣nued: That Great Brittain may be pre∣served from this Imminent and Emi∣nent Menacing Ruine— That God may be glorified in our preservation and not in our absolute destruction. That all our Souls at the great day of Account may be everlast∣ingly saved. Amen, Amen, Amen. FINIS
