B3262 E452_1 R204850 99864308 161953
BLOUDY NEVVES FROM Bedford-Shire: Concerning the late Fights on Sunday and Munday last, be∣tween the Forces under the Command of the Duke of Buckingham, and the Forces commanded by Sir Michael Lievesey, and Col. Skroop. LIKEVVISE The number that were slain, wounded, and taken prisoners, and the full particulars of each dayes action. VVith the Declaration of the Counties of Buckingham, Bedford, and Hartford-shire, concerning the Duke of Buckinghams taking up of Arms for the KING, and his further proceedings concerning his Majesty. Together with bloudy Newes from Penbrook and Colchester, communicating the proceedings of Col. John Poyer, Col. Horton, the Lord Generall Fairfax, and Sir Charles Lucas. Printed at London, to prevent mis-information, 1648.
THE DECLARATION OF The Counties of Hartford, Buckingham, and Bedford∣shire, concerning the Duke of Buckingham his raising of new Forces. Honoured Sir, VPon the Duke of Buckinghams raising of new forces about Kingston, Iver, Ux∣bridge and other places, the well-affe∣cted in those parts and other Towns ad∣jacent, had severall meetings, and after some debate and consultation thereup∣on they unanimously declared 'and joyntly resolved, That they would enter into an Engagement, to raise new forces, for the defence, safety, and preservation of those counties of Hartford, Bedford, and Buckingham,
and to oppse all forces whatsoever, that should endea∣vour the obstructing the peace thereof; and thereup∣on resolved to make Proclamation at severall Market-townes within the said Counties, to stir up the hearts of the People to joyn with them in this their Engage∣ment, for the defence of King, Parliament, and King∣dome, against the forces now raised under the Duke of Buckingham, the Earle of Holland, whose pretence and designes tends only to the involving of this King∣dome in a more bloudy and desparate War. Yesterday we received intelligence of the enemies being about St. Albanes, their number consisting of a∣bout six hundred Horse and Foot; from thence wee received information that about one of the clock they marched towards Lewton in Bedford-shire, and from thence they took their circumference towards Bedford town, not daring to stay long in a place, by reason of the close pursuit of the Parliaments Forces, for they were no sooner marched out of Newton, but certaine Scouts belonging to Sir Michael Lievesey entred the town, took six troopers who were drinking at the sign of the Princes Armes, and upon their entring into the Chamer where these Troopers were, found them very merry and drinking of Healths, with their swords drawn, and stuck into the Sealing of the Chamber, their Pistols lying by them, and their Hats upon the Table; but by reason of their sudden surprizall, they soon left their quaffing and drinking, and were forced to cry out (in the chief of their jollity) for mercy, and so yeeld∣ed themselves prisoners. Upon their advance towards Bedford, Sir Michael Lievesey's Forlorn of Horse fell upon the Dukes Rear∣guard
within two miles of Newton Towns-end, and af∣ter the exchange of severall Pistols, and a very hot dis∣pute, the Enemy were forced to retreat with the losse of fifteen men, six slain, and nine wounded, who were taken prisoners: All this were performed with the losse of five men. The Parliaments Forces are now in pursuit of them towards Bedford, and Col-Skroop with his Regiment of Horse are now joyned with Sir Michael Lieveseyes Forces, which makes a very considerable party, and a∣ble to subdue a far greater power then before spoken of. This day a party of Major Gibbons Troop, who were in close pursuit of the Enemy, fell upon some scattering Forces of the Lord Dukes in the towne of Marston, a Village some fourteen miles distant from Newton, in the Road towards Cambridg, & after a sharp conflict took 8 or 9 prisoners, & killed three of them, the rest made good their retreat towards Bedford. The well-affected of this County who assembled them∣selves together in a posture of War, have secured Hat∣field house belonging to the Earl of Salisbury, to pre∣vent the Designs of the Enemy, & have placed a guard of Musquetiers therein. VVe expect a sudden Engagement in these parts, between the Cavaliers and the Parliamentiers, but this County, and others adjacent, have declared, That they will hazard their lives and fortunes for the defence of King, Parliament, and Kingdome, against all opposition whatsiever. From Pembroke we have received intelligence of the pro∣ceedings of Lieu. Gen. Cromwel; the particulars whereof I shall refer you to the inclosed paper.
Worthy Sir, We have made severall attempts a∣gainst the town, and stormed the walls in two or three places, fought with the enemy in the towne, worsted them, and beat them up to the Castle Wals, doing great execution throughout the town, and killing neer upon one hundred of the enemy in the pursuit. But a Major of Lieutenant General Cromwels not following with the Reserve of Pikes and Musquetiers, according to or∣der, Major Generall Laughorn came in the Reare of them with a party of Horse, and forced them to quit the town, out of which they were driven, and about 30 of our men killed, some few wounded, the rest made good their retreat. Of the enemies side it is supposed their losse were as many more, as appears by the confession of divers who have since disserted that service, and come in to the Lieut. Generall. In this conflict Col. Horton behaved himselfe with much gallantry, and Col. Okeyes Dragoones did excee∣ding good service, who pursued the enemy almost to the very walls, and made good their retreat with very little losse. Our Batteries are now finished, and our Ordnance planted against the Town and Castle, and have made severall Breaches, and the Councell of War have re∣solved to storm it again. The reason why the siege continues so long is the want of some great Guns and Mortar-Pieces, which came not untill within these few dayes down Severne, the wind having been long opposite to them. Capt. Flower of Col. Deanes Regiment was lately wounded upon a storme, and Major Grigs Lieutenant and Ensign slain, Captain Burges is wounded and very sick.
All the insurrections about you (I believe will not make us yeeld any other conditions then mercy to those within, and in case before we have done, they chance to get never so great and impregnable an Army, they wil give us leave to have one bout with them before we be disbanded, wee that are here do not intend to give all lost. The Lieutenant Generall is alive and in health, and willing to fight for the liberties of England, as ever he did formerly. Tuesday last we gave the Town another strong al∣larum, 120. of Poyers men laid down their Arms, vow∣ing never to take them up again, but by the importuni∣ty of Poyer and Laughorn, telling them, if reliefe came not within four days, they would yeild, and they should hang them, by which means they ingaged againe. We are informed, that they have not provisions for four∣teen dayes: wee expect every day that most of them come to us through want: they only have a little rain water and Bisket left: But its still feared, that Poyer & Laughorn, when they can hold out the Town no longer will betake themselves to the Castle, and leave the rest to mercy: if we get the Town, we doubt not to carry the Castle suddenly. Our Morter-pieces have plaid hard against the towne and done great execution, and hath batterd down many houses, and killed at the least 30. of the Enemy, as appeares by the confession of two of Poyers men who came over the walls to us. From the Leaguer before Penbroke, July 6. 1648.
Postscript. SIR, VPon the close of these papers, we received an Express from Colchester, which intimates, That upon Friday last the Forces in the town displaid their great Ordnance, which did something annoy the Generals men at the works, whereupon the great Ordnance plaid against the town, & fetched down the Battlements of severall steeples, doing great execution. The Enemy made a salley out, but were forced to retreat with great losse. Sir, by the next, I doubt not but to give you a speedy account of the chief Oc∣currences in these parts, and remain Your devoted Servant, J. Villers. Hartford 10. July, 1648. FINIS.
