B4604A R42665 38875553 152225
A BRIEF. METHOD OF HEARING MASS. WITH Profitable Advantage to such as shall make constant Use and Practice of it. TO WHICH Is added Prayers for the King, &c. in English and Latin. LONDON, Printed for M. T. 1686.
A Prayer before Mass. O Most clement Father of mercy: who hast bestowed not only once thy dearly beloved Son to dye upon the Cross for Man's Redemp∣tion, but wouldest that this Oblation so infinitely acceptable unto thee, should daily be renewed in thy Church, to increase in us the fruit thereof: Grant us, we beseech thee, so attentively, and reverently to be present at this so adorable a mistery of thy Piety, that we may be able to obtain the participa∣tion thereof. Through Christ Jesus our Lord and only Redeemer, Amen. The first Part to the Offertory. In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen.
PSALM. P. I Will enter unto the Altar of God. C. Ʋnto God who rejoyces my youthful Age P. Judge me, O God, and dis∣cern my Cause from an unholy Na∣tion: From an unjust and guileful man deliver me. C. For thou art God my strength, why hast thou cast me off, and why do I walk sad whilst the Enemy af∣flicts me? P. Send out thy light, and thy truth, they have led me out and brought me to thy holy Mountain, and to thy Tabernacles. C. And I will go unto the Altar of God, unto God, who rejoyces my youthful Age. P. I will confess unto thee, O God, my God in a harp: why art thou sad my Soul, and why doest thou trouble me?
C. Hope in God for I will yet confess unto him, the health of Coun∣tenance and my God. P. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost. C. As it was in the begining, and now, and ever, and world with∣out end, Amen. P. I will go vnto the Altar of God. C. Ʋnto God who rejoyces my youthful age. P. Our help is in the name of God. C. Who made Heaven and Earth. At the Confiteor. O My sweet Saviour, seeing it was Sin which made thee take our Flesh upon thee, and suffer a more painful and shameful death, I here humbly crave thee pardon for ha∣ving bin cause of thy bitter Passion by my sinful Life past. I confess my fault unto thee, O Lord,
from the bottom of my heart and be∣ing extreamly sorry for it, purely for the dishonour done unto thee thereby, make here at the foot of thy sacred Al∣tar a firm resolution to dye rather rhen offend thee mortally again. No, no dear Saviour, I will strike no more nailes into thy Hands by the Sins of my uncivil uncharitable and pricking words, I will pierce no more thy sacred side and heart with the wickedness of my thoughts, heart and mind. C. Almighty God have mercy on thee, and pardoning thy Sins, bring thee to everlasting Life. P. Amen. C. I confess unto almig'ty God, to the blessed Virgin Mary, to the B. Archangel, S. Michael, to the B.S. John Baptist, to the holy Apostles S. Peter, and S. Paul, to all the Saints, and to you Father, for that I have sinned exceedingly, in thought, word
and deed, through my fault, through my fault, through my most grievous fault. Therefore I beseech the blessed Virgin Mary, the blessed Archangel S. Michael, the blessed S. John Bapt. the holy Apostles S. Peter, and S. Paul, all the Saints, and you Father to pray for me to our Lord God. P. Allmighty God have mercy on you, and pardoning your sins, bring you to everlasting life. C. Amen. P. The almighty and merciful Lord grant you Pardon, absolution, and remission of your sins. C. Amen. P. O God thou being reconciled unto us wilt give us life. C. And thy people will rejoyce in thee. P. Shew forth unto us O Lord thy mercy.
C. And give unto us thy salvation. P. O Lord hear my prayer. C. And let my cry come unto thee. P. Our Lord be with you. C. And with thy Spirit. Introite. GIve me grace, O Lord, to come unto this holy Sacrifice with the same fervour and devotion that the good Sheapheards had when they went to Bethlehem with diligence, to adore thee in the Manger, or with the same Fervour that the three Kings had who came out of the East to adore thee in the Stable. It is most fitting, O Lord, that all Creatures should adore thee daily, and if the good Shepheards went to adore thee at midnight, I may well do it in the morning, if the three Kings went thirteen days journey only to adore thee in the Stable, I may well go every day unto the Church to adore thee upon the Altar, and there offer unto thee (as I now do) my heart,
my mouth, my hands, my memory, un∣derstanding and will, my soul, body and all my affections. And seeing, O Lord, thou wast born to redeem us from Sin, and to have mercy on us, give me leave sweet Saviour to challenge a part of thy divine Mercy, and to say un∣to thee with a pious Confidence. Kyrie Eleison. P. Lord have mercy upon us. C. Lord have mercy upon us. P. Lord have mercy upon us. C. Christ have mercy upon us. P. Christ have mercy upon us. C. Christ have mercy upon us. P. Lord have mercy upon us. C. Lord have mercy upon us. P. Lord have mercy upon us. Gloria in Excelsis GLory be to God on high, and on Earth, Peace to men of good Will. We praise thee, we bless
thee, we adore thee, we give thee thanks for thy great Glory, O Lord God heavenly King, God the Father Almighty. O God the only begotten Son Jesu Christ, O Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of the Father that takest away the sins of the People, receive our Prayer. Thou that sittest at the right hand of God the Father, have mercy upon us. For thou only art ho∣ly, thou only art the Lord, thou only, O Jesus Christ, with the holy Ghost, art most high in the Glory of God the Father, Amen. Dominus vobiscum. P. Our Lord be with you. C. And with thy spirit. P. Let us pray. Prayers or Presentation in the Temple. O Lord we humbly beseech thy di∣vine Majesty, to hear these pray∣ers of the Priest for us, and by the merits of thy most deare Son, to powre down upon us those graces and blessings, which thou knowest to be most necessary for our Souls health,
Grant us grace, O Lord, to love thee above all things, to do all our actions purely for thy honour and glory; to hate the Pleasures of this World, and its Vanities: to live chast and vertuous Lives: to give good Examples to o∣thers; to pardon and love our Enemies, and so to pass through this temporal Life, that we loose not eternal Life. Through our Lord Jesus Christ, thy Son, who lives and reignes with the unity of the Holy Ghost, world without end. C. Amen. Epistle. REad the Epistle in English (with the leave of thy Ghostly Father) out of the Rheims Testament. But read it with great reverence, as a letter brought unto thee from S. Peter, or S. Paul in Heaven, by the hands of some Angel: and chuse out the most pious Sentences of it to ruminate upon all that day. In the end say. C. God be thanked.
Gradual. O Lord how sweet are these words of this Epistle to my Ears, above all Musick in the World! Let thy Voice and the Words of thy Apost∣les always sound in my ears. P. Our Lord be with you. C. And with thy Spirit. P. The beginning of the Gospel according to S. Matthew, or (S. Mark, Luke, or John.) C. Glory be to thee, O Lord. Gospel. REad the Gospel in the Rheims Testament, with leave, stand up, to shew that thou wilt stand stedfastly in the Faith of the Gospel and Catholick Church. Ponder well the words of the Gospel, seeing they either are our Saviours one words, or else speak of some rare Action of our Savi∣our, worthy of thy attention, and imi∣tation. In the end say. C. Praise be to thee, O Lord.
Creed. P. I believe in one God the Fa∣ther Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth, and of all things visible, and invisible: and in our Lord Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of God, born of his Father before all Worlds, God of God, Light of Light, true God, begotten, not made, consub∣stantial to the Father, by whom all things were made, who for us Men, and for our Salvation came down from Heaven, and was incar∣nated by the Holy Ghost of the Vir∣gin Mary, and was made Man: was crucified also for us under Pon∣tius Pilate, suffred, and was buried, and the third day he arose again ac∣cording to the Scriptures, and as∣cended into Heaven, and sittes on the right hand of the Father. And he shall
me again with glory to judge both the quick and the dead, of whose Kingdome there shall be no end. And in the Holy Ghost, the Lord, and life giver, who proceeds from the Fa∣ther and the Son, who with the Fa∣ther and the Son together is adored, and glorified, who spake by the Prophets. And one Holy Catholick and Apostolick Church. I confess one Baptisme for the remission of sins. And I expect the Resurrection of the dead, and life of the World to come, Amen. P. Our Lord be with you. C. And with thy Spirit. The second Part from the Of∣fertory to the Consecration. Offertory. O Lord, I humbly and firmly be∣lieve all these articles of our ho∣ly Faith, and not only these, but
all the other also, which Holy Church propose; to us to be believed; and am prepared in mind, and most willing to endure loss of lands, fortunes, and of life it self, rather than deny the least point of the Catholick Faith. O heavenly Father, I offer unto thee, together with the Priest, the immacu∣late Sacrifice for my sins, and the sins of the whole World. Accept, I be∣seech thee, of this my offering, and by the vertue of this holy Sacrifice; ap∣ply unto us, O Lord the merits and value of the great Sacrifice of the Cross, which thy dear Son offered unto thee for us; that being freed from Sin, we may serve thee more worthily. Mingle, O my sweet Saviour, (as thou hadst Water and Blood mingled together in thy sacred side) water with my wine: that is, temper, O Lord, my prosperity, and adversity so toge∣ther, that I neither be puffed up with prosperity, nor oppressed with adver∣sity.
I offer unto thee, O Lord, this holy offering of the Chalice; and together with it, I offer unto thy divine honour and glory, my life, my thoughts, and deeds: desiring that they may all be spent this day, and all the days of my life, in thy holy service, the advance∣ment of thy name, and the edifying of others. Grant me grace, O Lord, I beseech thee, to wash my hands amongst In∣nocent men; that is, to seek out and de∣light in innocent, and civil Company, to converse with vertuous people; to detest and wash my hands of those who offend thee in uncil Actions, unclean Discourse, uncharitable Detractions. I am too much a Christian to delight in the company of these WHO DENY THEE BY THEIR DEEDS. I will be as far from them, as they are far from vertue. Thou washedst me once, O Lord, in Baptisme from original Sin, WASH ME YET MORE AND MORE, even from actual Sin it self too, that being purged from all Sin, I may render unto thee a more pure and perfect service.
Orate Fratres. P. Pray Brethren. C. Our Lord, receive this Sacri∣fice from thy hands, to the praise and glory of his Name, to our pro∣fit also, and to the profit of his Ca∣tholick Church. P. Amen. Be merciful, I beseech thee. O Lord, unto us poor sinners. Judge us not ac∣cording to thy Justice, but according to thy mercy. I confess we have failed shamefully, yet consider thy Son is our Advocate, we begg confidently. Grant then, O Lord, that we may live ver∣tuously in this World, and be saved in the next. Have mercy also, I beseech thee, upon our Enemies; turn from them all harm and losses, and give us grace to love them sincerely, visit them kindly, speak of them charitably; that so we may become Children of thee, our heavenly Father; and having imi∣tated thee here below, reign with thee in heaven.
P. World without end. C. Amen. P. Our Lord be with you. C. And with thy spirit. P. Lift up thy heart. C. We have to God. P. Let us give thanks to our Lord God. C. It's meet and sitting. I confess, O Lord, it's fitting, and meet that we should always, and in all places give thee thanks, and praise thy name, seeing we were created only to succeed in the places of the fallen An∣gels, and to inherit their Office, which was to praise thee. I beseech thee then, O Lord, give us grace to imitate the holy Angels in purity of life, and promptness in executing thy holy will. Grant us, dear Father, such circum∣spection in our words, that we may never prophane with idle, and lewd speeches, our mouths, which were created to sing with the holy An∣gels in heaven that sacred and eternal Hymne, Holy, Holy, Holy.
Almighty, and merciful Lord, I be∣seech thee, receive his Holy Sacrifice, which I offer here together with the Priest, for the Necessities of the Holy Catholick Church, which, I beseech thee so to prosper and direct in this age of Errors, that she may reduce all mis∣believers into the way of Verity, and all Believers into the way of Piety, and Salvation. I offer it also, O Lord, for the good of our Holy Father P. N. and our most reverend Bishop N. and all other Superiors, and Pastors, and seeing thy dear Son assured us, that whosoe∣ver hears them, hears him, and whosoe∣ver contemns them, contemns him. I beseech thee, O Lord, take from us all conrempt of these thy Holy substitutes; and grant us grace so to follow their di∣rections here below, that we may en∣joy in the next World the Society of our deare Saviour, the Bishop of our Souls. MEMENTO. I. BE mindful, I beseech thee, O Lord, of thy servants. and of all faithful believers, Grant all Ca∣tholicks grace to abstain from sinful,
and scandalous courses. As their Reli∣gion is holy, so grant that their lives may be holy too. Give them grace often to remember for what end they are here in this World: that it is only to work their Salvation; not to live at ease, fol∣low Pleasures, Pastimes, Company, or to go bravely apparelled. Put them often in mind, of what Head they are Mem∣bers; how unseemly a thing it is to have a good Lord, and yet to be bad Servants, to believe in a crucifyed God, and yet to murmur at Crosses; to be baptised as Christians, and yet to live as Heathens; to have promised in Bap∣tisme to forsake the vain Pomp and Glo∣ry of the World, and yet to thirst after nothing but the Vanities of the World: Grant them often to descend into them∣selves by pious Thoughts, and reflect daily upon these words of the holy Scripture, that, the broad way leadeth to Hell, that no man can serve two Masters, God and the World: that, the bad tree, cannot bring forth good fruit. Send them, O Lord, true and zealous Pastors, who may exhort them, Not to trust in the uncertainty of rich∣es:
not to conform themselves to this wicked World: not to be sollicitous what Cloaths they wear; but rather, To doe the true fruits of Pennance: to enter into the narrow Gate: to affect those things which are of Edifi∣cation: to be cald in modest Appa∣rel: to abstain from all appearance of Evil, and to keep themselves unspot∣ted from this World. The hands over the Chalice. GIve me leave, O merciful Savi∣our, in the acknowledgment of the greatest of thy favours, to ex∣ercise here the greatest of all Christian Vertues, to wit, FAITH, HOPE, and CHARITY. The third part from the Conse∣cration to the Consummation. Elevation. I Believe then firmly, O my sweet Saviour, that after the Words of Consecration thou art really here present upon the Altar, and in the hands of the priest, and because thou, who art almighty and truth it self, hast said THIS IS MY BODY, THIS IS MY
BLOOD. I humbly confess it to be they true Body, and Blood, and as humb∣ly I adore it. And seeing, dear JESƲS, thou offe∣redst thy self to thy Father for me, in recompence of this thy great Favour, I offer unto thee my Body, and Blood, and my very soul it self, as a Sacrifice to thy divine Honout; and renew here my resolutions of living faithful to thy divine Service, and of dying rather then I will commit a mortal sin wil∣lingly. I hope sweet Saviour. thou wilt not deny me thy assistance, and grace to perform these Resolutions. Thou who hast given for me here thy BODY, and BLOOD, wilt not refuse me the rest, to wit, pardon of my sins, and grace to serve thee. And thou, O Father, of my sweet Saviour, I beseech thee remember the bitter sufferings of thy beloved Son. Look down upon his Blood offered here unto thee, and remember, O Lord, the blood offered upon the Cross, by thee when thou wast reconciled unto us. Thou promisedst anciently, O Lord,
that looking upon the Rainbow, thou would'st remember the Covenant made betwixt thee and mankind, and never drown the World again by Water: and canst thou look down upon the Blood of thy dear Son, offered here unto thee in Sacrifice, and not remem∣ber the great Covenant, and League which thou mad'st with us in the death of thy dear Son. I beg of thee then, O Lord, by the Merits of thy Sons death, by his holy name JESƲS (and all obtaining name with thee) that thou would'st vouch∣safe to grant us thy holy Grace, and the guist of perseverance to persevere final∣ly in it. Memento. II. GRant also, O Lord, that the infi∣nite Merits of thy Son's Passion, may be extended unto the Church suffrant in Purgatory: and that one drop of that precious Blood may free from the pains of Purgatory, the Souls of N.N. that they may pass spee∣dily from the Church suffrant, unto the
Church triumphant, and there praise thee for ever. And seeing, O Lord, thou canst not look upon this holy Sacrifice without remembring thy old Mercies: I humbly begg of thee, that thou wouldest by this propitiatory Sacrifice have mercy on us poor sinners, of whom I am the chiefest, and grant us grace, to be heartily sorrowful for our sins past, purely for thy Love sake; and to make a firm resolution to dye rather than commit them again: as also to confess them to our Ghostly Father at the first Opportunity. Short Elevation. BUT because, O Lord, no actions are meritorious in thy sight which are not done to thy honour, and glory. I here dedicate to thy Honour and Glory all my Actions, Words, and Thoughts, desiring to serve thee pure∣ly, that at last I may live with thee. P. World without end. C. Amen. P. Let us Pray.
Being admonished by wholsome pre∣cepts, and taught by divine Institution, we dare confidently say: Our Father, which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy Kingdom come, thy Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven: give us this day our day∣ly Bread, and forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive others their Trespasses against us. And lead us not into Temp∣tation. C. But deliver us from evil. P. Amen. 'Thou hast done all things well, O Lord, All things which thou hast made are very good. Sin onely, which is nothing, and which thou knowest not, is none of thy Inven∣tion, but the Divels: and therefore is Evil, and the only true Evil. Free us but, O Lord, from this Evil, and no o∣ther Evil can hurt us. This is the mo∣ther-evil, the evil of evils, the cause of Death, of Sickness, of Misery, of Pover∣ty. No adversity can dominere over us, if no iniquity dominere in us. Thou, O
Lord, who art the Author of life, canst only free us from this Author of death. Free us then, I beseech thee, O Lord, from the evil of Sin, that we may never dye eternally, but live, and praise thee. P. World without end. C. Amen. P. The peace of our Lord be al∣ways with you. C. And with thy spirit. Agnus Dei. P. Lamb of God who takest away the Sins of the World: have mercy upon us. Lamb of God who takest away the Sins of the World, hear us. Lamb of God who takest away the Sins of the World, Grant us peace. Most Merciful and sweet Saviour, seeing thou art the Mediator betwixt God and Man: the prince of Peace: who pacifyes all things in Heaven, and Earth: pacify, I beseech thee, thy Fa∣ther,
angry against us Sinners. Make also, I beseech thee, our peace with our Adversary upon Earth. Our Adversary, O Lord, is thy Law, it resists our Ap∣petytes, gainsays our Desires, crosses our Wills. When we desire, and covet unlawful things, thy Law opposes us, saying: Thou shalt not covet thy Neighbours Goods: thou shalt not kill, thou shalt not steal, &c. And becomes our Adversary. But seeing, O Lord, it is for our good that thy Law opposes us; and that thy Law is holy and immaculate. Inspire, I beseech thee into our rebellious Wills, a pompt Obedience unto thy sacred Commande∣ments, and grant us grace; to agree with this our Adversary quickly whiles we are in the way with him; least our Adversary deliver us to the Judge, and the Judge deliver us to the Officer, and we be cast into Prison. In fine, grant Peace, I beseech thee, amongst Christian Princes, and faithful Believers; that being in perfect Charity with one another, we may the more worthily come unto the sacred Communion.
Domine non sum dignus. P. O Lord, I am not worthy that thou shouldst enter under my Roofe, but speak the word only, and my Soul shall be cured. O Lord, I am not worthy, &c. O Lord, I am not worthy, &c. The fourth part from the Com∣munion to the end. Consummation. THough I am not worthy, O my sweet Saviour, to receive thee really, as the Priest here doth: yet I have a longing desire to receive thee into my Soul, by Faith, Love, and Devotion. But before I do it, behold me here, O Lord, extreamly sorrowful. for all my Sins past, purely for thy loves sake, with a firm resolution to correct them, and confess them. Come, then,
come my sweet Saviour into my Soul, by thy holy Presence, grace, and Divi∣nity; and dwell there for ever. But as thou passest, O Lord, into my Soul through my Body, I beseech thee, sancti∣fy also my whole Body, and make it a fit Temple for the Holy Ghost. Banish from it, O Lord, all unlawful Motions, and Desires: purge it from all rust, and dust of worldly Vanities: cleanse it from all corruption of Vices: And as at thy entering into Egypt in thy tender Infancy, when thou fleddest the Perse∣cution of Herod, all the Statues there of false Gods fell to the Ground, and were broken. so grant, I beseech thee, O Lord, that at thy entering into my Bo∣dy, and Soul, all my Vices and Imper∣fections may vanish, and give place to thee. I confess, my Body is but too home∣ly a house to lodge so great a PersOn in; but thou who refusest not antiently to lodge in a Srable, wilt not refuse to enter into my house. I am not ignorant how great a sinner I have bin, yet I remember also thou refuest not to enter into the house of the Princ of Publicans, & a prime
sinner Zacheus. Enter then, O Lord, in∣to my House as into the House of ano∣ther Zacheus; upon Condition that thou dost but give a blessing unto my soul, as thou didst unto the House of Zacheus; and say unto me as thou saidest to him: This day Salvation is wrought unto this House. What shall I give to thee, O Lord, for all the favours which thou hast done un∣to me? Behold, sweet Saviour, seeing thou hast done mee the favour to enter into my House, I here offer unto thee the doores and keys thereof, to wit, my five Senses, I consecrate therefore unto thee henceforth my eyes, and purpose to keep them chast and innocent. I will never any more let them gaze curiously, and freely upon dangerous and tempt∣ing Objects, nor let them wander di∣stractedly in Churches, and in time of Prayer. Henceforth also I consecrate un∣to thee my tongue, and resolve never to employ it in swearing, cursing, backbit∣ing, unclean, and lewd jests, or hidden knavish speeches. And seeing it is my tongue by which I receive, and convey
into my stomack the blessed Sacrament of the Altar in the Holy Communion, that tongue that had been so happily employed, and so honoured by God, shall never be employed again in Sin, and be dipped in my Neighbours Blood by detraction. In fine, O Lord, I con∣secrate my whole Body unto thee, as a sacred place dedicated to thy Divine Majesty, and which I purpose firmly ne∣ver to defile with any sin whatsoever. P. Our Lord be with you. C. And with thy Spirit. P. Let us pray. I beseech thee, gracious Lord, to grant me this request, that what here I have promised by words, I may always per∣form by my deeds. Through our Lord JESUS CHRIST thy Son, who lives, and reigns, with thee in the bnity of the Holy Ghost. P. World without end. C. Amen.
P. Our Lord be with you. C. And with thy Spirit. P. Go, the Mass is said. C. Thanks be to God. P. Almingty God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, bless and keep you. C. Amen. P. Our Lord be with you. C. And with thy spirit. P. The beginning of the holy Ghos∣pel according to St. John. C. Glory be to God. The Ghospel of St. John. IN the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and God was the word. This was in the be∣ginning with God. All things were made by him, and without him was made nothing. That which was made in him was life, and the life was the light of men, and the light shines in dark∣ness,
and the darkness did not compre∣hend it. There was a man, sent from God, whose name was John. This man came for testimony, to give testimony of the light, that all might believe through him. He was not the light, but to give testimony of the light. It was the true light which lightnes every man that comes into this world. He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not. He came into his own, and his own receiv∣ed him not. But as many as received him, he gave them power to be made the Sons of God, to those that beleive in his name. Who not of Blood, nor of the will of the Flesh, nor of the will of Man, but of God are born. AND THE WORD WAS MADE FLESH, and dwelt in us, (and we saw the Glory of him, glory as it were of the only begotten of the Father) full of grace and Verity. C. Thanks be to God.
A Prayer to be said after Mass. I Render to thee, O sacred Trinity, most humble thanks, for vouchsafe∣ing me the gracious Favour to assist at this divine Sacrifice of the Mass: whereof so many are deprived, who would have made much better use of it. I humbly crave Pardon, most loving and merciful God, for all the distracti∣ons, irreverences, and dissipasions of my wandring Spirit, committed in the time thereof: And for my dear Saviours sake, most humbly beseech thee, that those infinite Merits of his bitter Passi∣on, and most precious Blood shed for my redemption, and sacrific'd to thee in remission of the sins of the World, may render me worthy to be made partaker of thos divine and adorable Holy Mi∣steries, here so truly represented in this most Holy Sacrifice of the Mass, and that with final repentance I may dye in thy grace, Amen.
An humble Adoration to our Blessed Lord Jesus in the Holy Sacra∣ment of his precious Body. O My most Glorious Lord God, and Saviour CHRIST JESƲS, true god, and true Man; most Holy, worthy, pure, and PRECIOƲS SACRIFICE of the most high God; living Bread, and source of Eternal Life; with all my Heart, Soul, For∣ces, and Affections, I humbly worship, and adore thy SOVERAIGN MAJESTY, in this Divine SACRA∣MENT, with a most earnest desire, an intention, to repair, if I could pos∣sibly, all the Irreverences, Prophana∣tions, Dishonours, and Impieties, that have been committed gainst THEE, in this dreadful MYSTERY, most humbly prostrating my self be∣fore thy SACRED MAJE∣STY, here present, to adore thee, in
supply, for all those that never have; nor peradventure never shall be so hap∣py, as to honour, worship, and adore THEE; such as are all Hereticks, Atheists, Blasphemers, Magitians, Jewes, Turks. Idolaters, and all Infidels, wishing with all my heart, that I alone could as much honour, praise, glorify, and adore THEE, as they altogether would have done, if they had known and faithfully served THEE for all Eternity; and furthermore, from the bottom of my HEART, and with the most fervent af∣fections of my SOUL, I desire to ren∣der thy DIVINE MAJESTY as many adorations, praises, and benedictions, as all the Devils and Damned Souls will utter Blasphemies for ever against THEE; and to sanctifie this Adoration, and make it more pleasing to thy SA∣CRED MAJESTY; I humbly unite it to tall those Adorations, fervent Af∣fections, and Praises of the TRIUM∣PHANT, and MILITANT CHURCH, and all that the glorious VIRGIN MOTHER, and all thy Holy AN∣GELS, and SAINTS have done, do and ever shall render unto THEE,
our most gracious, glorious, dear, sweet, and soveraign Lord, Eternally, Amen. A devout Salutation to our Blessed Saviour in the Holy Sacrament. ALL hayle most sweet LORD JESUS CHRIST, eternal Word and Wisdome of the FA∣THER, Son of the BLESSED VIR∣GIN, Lambe of GOD, Saviour of the World, Sacred Host, the Word made flesh, fountain of Piety. All hayle most sweet LORD JE∣SUS CHRIST, praise of Angels, glo∣ry of Saints, Vision of Peace, Entire Deity, true Man, Flower, and Fruit of the BLESSED VIRGIN MO∣THER All hayle most sweet LORD JE∣SUS CHRIST, splendor of thy Fa∣ther, Prince of Peace, Gate of Hea∣ven,
living Bread, Child of the Virgin, Vessel of the Deity. All hayle most sweet LORD JE∣SƲS CHRIST; light of Heaven, price of the World, our true Joy, Bread of Angels, Jubily of Hearts, King, and Spouse of Virginity. All hayle most sweet LORD JE∣SƲS CHRIST; sweet Way, supream Verity, our eternal Reward, true Cha∣rity, Fountain of Love, Peace, Sweet∣ness, and Life Everlasting. All hayle most sweet, most sacred, and precious Body of CHRIST JE∣SƲS which laid upon the Altar of the Cross for the Worlds Salvation, I beleive with my Heart, and confess with my Mouth, to be a true Host, a holy, pure, and immaculate Host, and most pleasing to God; the Bread of E∣ternal Life, and Chalice of perpetual Salvation. I adore thee in Spirit, and truth, O PIOƲS JESƲ, O SWEET JESƲ, O good and gracious LORD JESƲS, be merciful to me I beseech THEE, and graciously grant, O my God, that as I see THEE here in the form of Bread; so I may happpily see
THEE in Majesty and Glory securely, and joyfully, for ever and ever, Amen. A brief Prayer to obtain a happy Death. O Most sweet Lord JESƲS, by the Merits of thy bitter Death, and Passion, thy sacred Wounds, and all the drops of thy most precious Blood, and by that bitter pain, and anguish thou didst endure, when thy holy Soul de∣parted from thy precious Body, be mer∣ciful to me at the hour of my death, and deliver me from the Pains of Hell and Purgatory, and the power of the Devils, and admit me into the Fruition of thy Eternal Glory, Amen.
PRAYERS For the KING, &c. PSALM XIX. OUR Lord hear thee in the day of Tribulation: the Name of the God of Jacob pro∣tect thee. Send he Aid to thee from the Holy Place: and from Sion de∣fend he thee. Be he mindful of all thy Sa∣crifice: and be thy Holocaust made fat. Give he unto thee according to
thy Heart: and confirm he all thy Counsel. We shall rejoyce in thy Sal∣vation, and in the Name of our God we shall be magnified. Our Lord accomplish all thy Petitions: Now have I known that our Lord has saved his Christ. He shall hear him from his Holy Heaven: the Salvation of his Right Hand is in Powers. These in Chariots, and these in Horses: but we will invocate in the Name of the Lord our God. They are bound, and have fallen: but we have risen and are set upright. Lord, save the KING, and hear us in the Day that we shall invocate thee.
Glory be to the Father, &c. As it was in the begining, &c. Vers. Lord, save JAMES our KING. Resp. And hear us in the day that we shall invocate thee. Let us Pray. WE beseech thee, Almighty God, that thy Servant JAMES our KING, who through thy Mercy, has undertaken the Go∣vernment of the Kingdom; may like∣wise receive the Increase of all Ver∣tues, wherewith being adorned, he may both avoid the Enormity of Sin, vanquish his Enemies, and by thy Grace attain Thee, who art the Way, Truth, and Life, Through Christ our Lord, Amen.
A Prayer for the King, Queen, and Queen Dowager. To be added to the last Collect at the End of Mass. AND defend thy Servant, In∣nocent the Chief Bishop, JAMES our King, MARY our Queen, and Queen Catherine, to∣gether with our selves, and all Christian People, from all adversity always, and in all Places: Grant Peace and Welfare in our Times; and preserve thy Church from all Wickedness. Through our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son, who lives and reigns God with Thee, in the Ʋnity of the Holy Ghost, for e∣vermore, Amen.
PRECES PRO REGE. PSAL. XIX. EXaudiat te Dominus in die Tribulationis protegat te nomen Dei Jacob. * Mittat tibi auxilium de sancto * & de Sion tueatur te. Memor sit omnis sacrificii tui * & holocaustum tuum pingue fiat. Tribuat tibi secundum cor tuum * & omne consilium tu∣um confirmet.
Laetabimur in salutari tuo * & in nomine Dei nostri Mag∣nificabimur. Impleat Dominus omnes pe∣titiones tuas * nunc cognovi quoniam salvum fecit Dominus Christum suum. Exaudiet illum De Coelo sancto suo * in potentatibus sa∣lus Dextrae ejus. Hi in curribus & hi in equis: nos autem in nomine Dei nostri invocabimus. Ipsi obligati sunt & caecide∣runt * nos autem surreximus & erecti sumus. Domine salvum fac Regem & exaudi nos in Die qua invo∣caverimus te. Gloria Patri & Filio & spiri∣tui Sancto. Sicut erat in principio & nunc
& semper & in Secula Seculo∣rum, Amen. Domine salvum fac Regem nostrum Jacobum. Et exandi nos in die qua in∣vocaremus te. Oremus. QƲaesumus omnipotens Deus ut Famulus tuus Rex noster Jacobus, qui tua miseratione sus∣cepit Regni Gubernacula Virtutum, etiam omnium percipiat incrementa quibus decenter ornatus & vitiorum monstra Devitare hostes superare, & ad te qui Via veritas & Vita es gratiosus Valeat pervenire per Christ∣um Dominum Nostrum, Amen. FINIS.
