B5024 E383_19 R201439 99861949 160186
A true and exact RELATION OF Two great VICTORIES obtained in the KINGDOME of IRELAND, by the Protestant Party, against the Rebels: THE FIRST, By the most valiant Souldier, Collonell Mac-Adams, and his Regiment, against a great Body of the Rebels, neer Dingley Castle, where they fell upon the Rebels, stormed their Workes, and took the Castle, routing the whole Body, and pursued them to the Mountaines. THE SECOND, By the said Collonel, against another Body of the Rebels neer Bonrattey, where hee marched up a∣gainst them with 700. men, displaying his Yellow Colours, and immediatly routed 1500. of the Enemy, taking all their Armes and Am∣munition, Bagg and Baggage. By Iohn Brown, Gent. living in Ireland, in the County of CORKE. Printed for generall satisfaction of the Kingdome of England, 1647.
A true and perfect RELATION OF The victorious proceedings of the Prote∣stant Forces in the Kingdome OF IRELAND. SIR, HAving received a Letter from you, da∣ted the 15. of March, 1646. intima∣ting your earnest desire to me, for the im∣parting of such passages and Occurrents, which shall (at any time) happen within
this distressed & most disconsolited King∣dome. Therefore, to satisfie your expectation, & to acquaint you with the state and conditi∣on of this Nation, I shall desire you to per∣ufe these ensuing lines, viz. The Rebels are very strong, having great bodies abroad, making seueral inroades up∣on the Protestants quarters; yet not alto∣gether so often, as formerly, by reason of the gallant motion, and happy successe of the most valiant and renowned Gentleman, Colonell Mac-Adams, who having a Com∣mission from the Parliament of England, to prosecute the Designe againe the Irish Rebels in Ireland, and to further & advance the Cause of the Protestants, joyntly resol∣ved with his whole Regiment (consisting of seven hundred Foot) to try strange ad∣ventures abroad, and to change their Win∣ter Garrisons. And thereupon took shipping at King∣sayle, and set to Sea, being conducted by divers of the Parliament ships; and after few dayes sayle, they landed at a place cal∣led Dingle, a strong place in poffession of
the Rebels, and very well fortified, and im∣mediatly fell upon the Workes, scaled them, and forced their passage into the town, put∣ting many of the Rebels to the sword, and caused the rest to flye, leaving all their arms and ammunition behind them, and great store of money, and other rich booty, and after a hot skirmish, and bloody conflict, be∣came Masters of the Castle, taking divers prisoners; but this renowned Colonel, be∣ing too ventrous, received a dangerous shot from the Castle. Then the said Colonel Mac-Adams with his stout Regiment, marched some 5 miles up into the Country, pursuing the Enemy beating them to the Hills and Mountaines, insomuch, that at the last, great Bodies be∣gan to draw down, which caused the Colo∣nell and his Regiment to retreat down to∣wards the Sea-Coast, and in their way fired the Garrison of Dingle, and the Castle; this being done, they betook themselves to their shipping, and so sayled up the stately River of Limbricke, and being within two or three leagues of Bonrattie, the Souldiers began to prepare themselves for shore, and at the last
rived there in safety. The aforesaid Collonel having landed his Regiment, drew them up in Battalia, and there made a gallant speech unto them, concerning their present Design against the Earl of Thomand, and hie party, boing in number about fifteen hundred: the Colonel had no sooner ended his Oration, but the Souldiers set up such a Halli-looe, that caused all the Irish thereabouts, to leave their own houses, and betake themselves to their Boggs and Woods. The Earl of Thomend were sore amazed to see such a gallant Fleet at Sea, and so brave a Body on Land, that immediatly hee retired to Sixe-mile Budge, where he drew up in a Body, with a resolution to give our Forces battle. But seeing them come on with such a magnanimous courage, and our yellow Co∣lours in the Van, they immediatly threw down their Armes, and betooke themselves to the Mountaines, leaving all their provi∣sion, Bagg and Baggage behind them. Thus it hath pleased God to crown this small party of the protestants with Victo∣ry, giving them tryumphant successe in all
their enterprizes: For (indeed) the Colonel were very perfect in the knowledge of the country, exceeding expert in the Discipline; and most wise and vigilant in all his acti∣ons. Thus (for the present) I shall con∣clude, remaining Your most affectionate friend, John Brown. A true Relation of the gallant entertainment of his Excellency the Lord Lisle, at the City of Cork in Ireland. THE right Honourable the Lord Inchi∣queen having received intelligence of the safe landing of his Excellency the L. Lisle in that Kingdome, made great preparations for the entertainment of his Excellency, and appoin∣ted the most eminent place in the City for his quarters. His Lordship advanced out of the City with divers Troopes of Horse to meet his Excellency
being accompanied with a galtant train of Chi∣valry; and being met, they gave other a friend∣ly greeting, and so marched into the City: the Musquetters were placed on each side the street, giving a volley as his Excellency passed along: the Canoniers were all in readinesse, welcoming his Excellency to the City, with a gallane Eccho from the Castle and Forts. His Excellency hath given great satisfacti∣on since his comming thither to the Officers & Souldiers, both for Recruits and Money from the Parliament of England, and hath now taken the Field, and is advancing towards the Rebels quarters, being in number betweene sixe and se∣ven thousand, Horse and Foot. God grant them a prosperous voyage, and victorious successe a∣gainst their Enemies. FINIS.
