C1669 E980_22 99866814 119100
THE CENSURES of the CHURCH REVIVED. In the defence of a short Paper publish∣ed by the first Classis within the Province of Lanca∣ster, in the severall Congregations belonging to their own Association, but since Printed without their privity or consent, after it had been assaulted by some Gentle∣men and others within their bounds, in certain Pa∣pers presented by them unto the said Classis, and since also Printed together with an Answer of that Clas∣sis unto the first of their Papers, without their know∣ledg also and consent, under the Title of Ex∣communicatio excommunicata, or a Censure of the Presbyterian censures and proceed∣ings, in the Classis at Manchester. WHEREIN 1. The dangerousness of admitting moderate Episcopacy is shewed. 2. The Jus divinum of the Ruling Elders Office is asserted and cleared. 3. The aspersions of Schisme and Perjury are wiped off from those that disown Epis∣copacy. 4. The being of a Church and lawfully Ordained Ministry, are evidenced and secu∣red sufficiently in the want of Episcopacy. 5. The Scriptures asserted and proved to be the sole supreame Judge of all controver∣sies in matters of Religion, and the only sure interpreter of themselves, not Councils, or Fathers, or the universall practice of the Primitive Churches. 6. The Presbyterian Government vindicated from severall aspersions cast upon it, and also the first Classis within the Province of Lancaster and their actings justified, in their making out their claime to the civill sanction, for the establishment of that Church Government and power which they exercise; and likewise a cleare manifestation, that their proceedings have been regular and orderly, according to the forme of Church Government established by Ordinance of Parliament. In three full Answers, given to any thing objected, against their proceedings, by the aforesaid Gentlemen and others, in any of their Papers. Together with a full Narrative, of the occasion and grounds, of publishing in the Congregations, the above mentioned short Paper, and of the whole pro∣ceedings since, from first to last. LONDON, Printed for George Eversden, at the Signe of the Mai∣den-head in Pauls Church-yard. 1659.
TO THE Reverend and Beloved, the Ministers and Elders meeting in the Provinciall Assembly of the Province of London; the Ministers and Elders of the first Classis of the Province of Lancaster, meeting at Manchester, do heartily wish the Crown of perseve∣rance in a judicious and zealous defence, of the Doctrine, Government and Discipline of the Lord Jesus, both theirs, and ours. Reverend and beloved Brethren: WHen the Sun of Righteousnes had first favourably risen to them that fear the Name of God in this Land, after a dark and stormy night of corrup∣tion and persecution; then, even then were the quickning beams of the sun of ci∣vil Authority in this inferionr world caused first to light upon you, to form your renowned City into severall Classes, and afterwards into a Provinciall Assembly: not onely that you might
have the birth-right of Honour (which we cheerfully remember) but also, that being in∣vested with Authority from Jesus Christ, and the civill Magistrate, you might be prepa∣red to stand in the front of opposition, the powers of Hell being startled and enraged at the unex∣pected reviving of Gospel Government and Dis∣cipline, which seemed so long to lye for dead; and, that having your strength united, you might be enabled and encouraged to plead the cause of God against the Divine right of Episcopacy, and for the Divine right of the Ruling-Elder, that the one might not be shut out of the Church, and the other might not recover in the Church; both which have been, and still are un∣der design. VVhat you have already done this way, as a thankfull improvement of Divine favour, and with speciall reference to the respe∣ctive Classes and Congregations within your Province, doth evidently appear in your Vin∣dication
of Presbyterian Govern∣ment, and your Jus Divinum Ministerii Evangelici: which choice fruits of your Provinciall Assembly, are not onely refreshing and satisfying for the present, but do promise fair for time to come; such clusters do shew there is a blessing in the Vine, which the Lord of the Vineyard continue and increase. When you, our Reverend Brethren, had first been shined upon, and made so fruitfull, the Divine grace caused a second enliven∣ing beam of civill Authority to fall upon this remote and despised County, to constitute in it also, severall Classes, and afterwards a Provin∣ciall Assembly; since which time such heavenly influence hath been stayed. As our Lot hath happily fallen to follow you in the favour of God, and civill Authority, so we have unhap∣pily fallen into your Lot, (especially this Classis) to be followed with the anger, opposition,
reproaches and contradiction of men of con∣trary mindes: which though hid in the ashes in great measure formerly, and but sparkling now and then, here and there in a private house or Congregation, yet when we would conscientiously and tenderly have improved the Government, for the instruction of the ignorant, and reformation of the prophane, it brake out into a flame; and no way, but that flame must be hasted to such a Beacon, that it might not be quenched, till the Nation had seen and taken notice, especially the whole opposite party awakened, a very de∣sign. You have pleaded the civil Authority for your acting in the Government, but have setled the Government it self (for the satisfaction of your own consciences, and the consciences of the people of God) upon the firm basis of divine Scripture authority, and so have we: thence you have been authorized to bring into the Church, and keep in it (by the mercifull
intervention of civill Authority) the despised governing Elders; and so shut out of the Church, and keep out of it, that Lordly and self-murthering Episcopacy; and so have we. You have been forced to flie to the testi∣mony of your consciences, concerning your aims, and ends in your publick undertakings, in the cause of God, and so have we. It was scarce pos∣sible for you to wipe off the dirt cast upon you, but some of it would unavoidably fall upon them that cast it; nor can we. Ʋpon these, and other considerations, we knew not in what Name of right, to publish our enforced Vindication in the same common cause, but in your Name, who have gone before us in the work, and have afforded us light and encouragement, whose seasonable and solid Labours, have already found ac∣ceptance in the Church, and blessing from God. And we pray that your Bow may abide in strength, and the armes of your hands may be
made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob, that though the Archers have sorely grieved you, and shot at you, and hated you, yet you may still possess the rich blessing of truth in Doctrine, Government and Discipline, and may foyl the adversaries thereof, till the renewed, and enlarged favour of God hath overspread this Nation with the Reformation, so happily begun; and till that, so much desired, prayed for, and endeavoured accommodation of dissenting Brethren (alas, alas! too hardly attained) may sincerely, edifyingly, and lastingly be effected; that when all our undermining, scorn∣ing and opposing enemies, do hear, and see these things, they may be much cast down in their own eyes, perceiving that this work hath been wrought of our God, in whose arms of mercy and truth we leave you, and the Cause we manage. Manchester Jan. 11. 1658. Signed in the Name and by the appointment of the Class, by John Harrison Moderator.
THE EPISTLE To the READER. IT is no new thing, that such workes as have been most eminently conducing to the glory of God and the Churches greatest wellfare, have met with strong oppositions. When the Ezra Chap. 4. throughout. Neh. 4. 7, 8. Adversaries of Judah and Benjamin heard, that the Children of the captivity builded the Temple unto the Lord God of Israel, they set themselves diverse waies to hinder and obstruct the worke. When San∣ballat, and Tobiah, and the Arabians, and the Ammonites, and the Ashdodites, heard that the walls of Jerusalem were made up, and that the breaches began to be stopped, then they were ve∣ry wroth, and conspired all of them together, to come and to fight against Jerusalem and to hinder it. When Jesus Christ the eternall Son of God, the brightness of his Fathers glo∣ry, and express Image of his Person, appeared in the world cloathed with our nature, though he came about a worke of greatest consequence that ever was, yet his eni∣mies withstood and opposed his Kingdome. Of this the Psalmist prophesied before it came to pass, Psal. 2. 1, 2. Why did the Heathen rage, and the people imagine a vaine thing? The Kings of the Earth set themselves, and the peo∣ple take counsell together, against the Lord, and against his
annointed, saying, Let us breake their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us. And this the Church saw fulfil∣led, who in their Prayer unto God, applied unto the times, wherein they lived, what he, by the mouth of his Servant Act. 4. 27. David had foretold so long before, saying, For of a truth a∣gainst thy holy Childe Jesus, whom thou hast annointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate with the Gentiles and the people of Israel were gathered together for to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsell determined before to be done. It would be here too long to go through the Books of the N. T. and tell what persecutions were raised against the Apostles of our Lord and Saviour for executing that Commission which he had given them, when he commanded them to go teach all Nati∣ons; or to go through the story of the Church, and speak of Mar. 28. 19. the diverse kindes of tortures and torments, which thou∣sands of all rankes endured in the times of the ten Primitive persecutions under the Heathen Emperours; to tell of the Martyrdome of Ignatius, Polycarpus, Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Cyprian, and many others, glorious lights, and worthy Con∣fessors of the truth, for no other reason but because they studied to advance Christs Gospell. We will instance something in latter times. When the Romish Synagogue having most abominably apostatiz'd both in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Governement; Luther and other faithfull Servants of Christ did earnestly bend themselves to endeavour a reformation in Religion, the Antichristian world was mad with fury. To come yet a little nearer home. When Religion was reformed in Scotland in Doctrine and Worship, the Church of Christ there had many conflicts, and the worke was long obstructed, before the Governe∣ment and Discipline of Christ could be fully established a∣mongst them; as it is in fresh remembrance, what troubles they passed through more lately, in their contending against Episcopacy, and the Ceremonies which had been introdu∣ced
amongst them, to the great prejudice of their Ancient Church governement and Discipline. But here it may not be forgotten, how, when the Parliament of famous memory that was convened eighteen yeares agoe, having taken in∣to their pious consideration the condition of our own Church at home, and judging that a further reformation in matters of Religion, then had been made in the daies of Queen Elizabeth, was necessary, and setting upon that work, as also the vindication of the liberties of this English Nati∣on, were forced to take up Armes for their own defence a∣gainst that Partie, that could not brooke the Reformation, which they intended. And to what an height that opposi∣tion grew in after time, and with what difficulties they con∣flicted for many years together, because they would not give up that cause, they had undertaken to defend, is so well known to even such as may be but strangers in our Is∣rael, that we may spare the pains of a full recitall. But yet nothing of all this is to be wondered at; Satan must needs Rev. 12. 12. be like himselfe, and stir the more when he sees his King∣dome begin to shake: And corruption will rage when it is crossed. God also hath a wise hand in these oppositions, not only thereby the more inflaming the zeal and brightning up other graces in his faithfull servants, trying and exercising Dan. 11. 35. Jam. 1. 2, 3. 1 Pet. 1. 6, 7. and 4. 12. Rev. 13. 10. their faith and patience, the purging and purifying and making them white; but also getting himself the greater glory, when his worke is carried on, notwithstanding the greatest opposition of his and his Churches enemies. And here we cannot but with all thankfullness to Almighty God, take notice of this hand, that was most eminently lifted up in the worke of Reformation begun by that late foremen∣tioned Parliament, as there is cause, why also we should to the honour and glory of his great Name, and the praise of that Parliament, unto the generations that may come here∣after, acknowledg their unwearied pains, courage, and con∣stancy
in that worke. Much was done, yea very much by that illustrious and worthy Parliament. By them the foun∣dation of reformation was laid in the solemne League and Covenant, which they not only took themselves, but or∣dained should be solemnely taken in all places throughout the Kingdome of England, and Dominion of Wales. And for the better and more orderly taking thereof appoin∣ted and injoyned certain directions to be strictly follow∣ed. And in pursuance of this League and Covenant (en∣gageing See the Ordi∣nance of Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, with instructi∣ons for the taking the League and Covenant in the Kingdome of England, and Dominion of Wales. every one that tooke it, in their severall places to indeavour the refomation of Religion in England and Ireland in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and governement, according to the word of God, and the example of the best reformed Churches, and to bring the Churches of God in the three King∣domes to the nearest conjunction and uniformity of Religion, Confession of Faith, forme of Church Government, Directory for worship and Catechizing.) After consultation had with the Reverend, Pious, and Learned Assembly of Divines called to∣gether to that purpose, they judged it necessary that the Book of Common Prayer should be abolished, and the Directory for the publick worship of God, and in their Ordinance mentioned, should be established and observed in all the Churches within this Land, as appears by their Ordinance of January the 3. 1644. for that purpose. By them Prelacy, that is, Church Government by Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellors and Commissaries, Deanes, Deanes and Chapters, Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiasticall Officers depending on that Hierar∣chy, was extirpated according to that Covenant, as ap∣pears by the Ordinance they passed October the 9. 1646. for the abolishing Archbishops and Bishops within the King∣dome of England, and Dominion of Wales, By them also after the passing of severall Ordinances for the setling of the Presbyterian Governments by parts before, at length that progress was by them made in that work, that they passed
the Ordinance of 1648. establishing the forme of Church Government to be used in the Church of England after advice had with the Assembly of Divines. By their authority, and according to the rules and directions by them given for that purpose, they setled the Presbyterian Govern∣ment in the Province of London, and in this Province of Lan∣caster, and in some other parts of the Land, whereby they sufficiently awarranted those, that should act therein accord∣ing to their Ordinances, that they are secured against that danger of a Premunire, with which some (as will appear from the following Papers) hath been threatned. What obstructi∣ons this work of reformation so happily begun, did after meet with from severall Parties, or how it came to passe, that this Government was setled throughout the Land, we are not willing here so much as to mention, desiring rather in silence to acknowledge the righteous Hand of God, in bringing us back again into the wildernesse of confusion, to wander there for severall years together, when we had been upon the borders of a just settlement, and thereby correct∣ing an unthankfull people, and unwilling to be reformed ac∣cording to their Covenant, then by making complaints a∣gainst any, to seem to murmur at his just dispensation; es∣pecially considering, that we are not without hope, but that the wise and mercifull God may have reserved the honour of finishing this work and building upon that foundation, which was by them laid in troublous times for a fitter sea∣son, when the people of this Nation, having been convinced of the mischiefs and miseries of an ungoverned Church by the long want of Church Government in it, may be the more ready to give the more chearfull entertainmant to what may be established by some after-Parliament. And who can tell, but the hands of sundry of the same Zerubba∣bels, that laid the foundation of this work, their hands may Zach 4. 9. also finish it? But however thus we see, that the worke
of reformation, and particularly of Churches and Nations, is not a work that goes on easily, it meeteth with opposition, not only often from enemies, but sometimes even from pro∣fessed friends. And if that Parliament that cast out Episco∣pacy, and established the Presbyterian Government in the room thereof, did not carry on that worke so far, but through much difficulty; it is not to be thought strange, if the same spirit of opposition, that they wrestled with, should after they were risen, discover it selfe to the interrupting and hindering of those that acted upon their Ordinances, in the exercise of that Government and Discipline, which they so established. We cannot but imagine, that sundry through∣out the Land have reason to complaine of the like, if not far worse, then we have met with. But as touching our selves it was our publishing a short Paper in our severall Congrega∣tions, and herewith Printed, that was the occasion of those contests betwixt us and the Gentlemen we have to deale with, that are now made publick to the world. What the designe of that Paper was, we leave it to all indifferent persons to consider, nothing doubting but that all equall judges will conclude, it was very honest, and did not merit such unhandsome handling, as it after met with. But how matters after proceeded betwixt us and the Gentlemen that assaulted it, untill without our privity and consent both that and other Papers, that after passed on both sides, were by them Printed, our Narrative following will give a full account; whereby also it will be evident, that we are forced into the field for our own defence, as it will be further ma∣nifest to every Reader from the Papers themselves, which we here publish, we are meerly on the defensive part. And if the Reader be pleased to take notice from our Narrative, that it was in July last that we first met with all the Papers in Print; and further observe thence, that we had been be∣fore that time in a treaty with them, touching a meeting
in order to an accommodation, during which time, we had not any thoughts of returning any Answer in writing to their last Papers; and that notwithstanding our severall other employments in the meane season, our Answer to those Pa∣pers had fully passed the Class November the 23. of this same Year, as appears by the date they beare, according to the subscription of them by the Moderator; we cannot conceive that he will judge, we have neglected any time that could with conveniency have been redeemed for the hastening our Answer abroad in the world. And now untill they see the light, the transcribing them faire for the Press, and the Printing of them, drinkes up the remainder of the time. All that we have now further to acquaint the Reader with; is to give him an account of some things in reference to what we here publish. We have Printed over again all the Papers that formerly passed betwixt them and us, because we could not answer severall things in theirs, without some speciall reference to both their Papers and ours; and we judged it to be the fairest way to present all entirely to the Readers view, that thereby he might be able the better to judg con∣cerning the whole, especially considering what we now pub∣lish, might perhaps come into the hands of sundry, that had never seen what had been before by them Printed. We have not omitted to Print the Title given by them to the Papers, as they were by them published, that by compa∣ring their Papers with their Title, and our examination of them, together with that tast we give in the close, of that spirit they discover in them, the Reader may the better judge, how their discourse doth suit with the Title given to it. We have also therewith again Printed their Preface, that they might not have any occasion to say of us, that we had a mind to suppress any thing of theirs, which they per∣haps might judg materiall; though from our Narrative and Animadversions on this their Preface in the close of that
our Narrative, the weight that is in it will be tried. The Paper which we published in our Congregations, and that followes our Narrative, though approved by the Provin∣ciall, yet being directed only to the Congregations of our own Association, was drawn up short, being for the use of those that were not altogether strangers to the Discipline, it having been practised amongst them for severall yeares before; and the rules whereof, as they are more fully and particularly held forth in the forme of Church Government established by the Parliament, so had been more fully ex∣pounded to them in our publick Ministry, as there hath been occasion. But here we must further acquaint the Reader, that the errours and depravations of this Paper, which we found in it, as it had been by them Printed, we have rectifi∣ed (as we well might) according to the Originall, and now exhibit it to the Readers view, as it was when it passed from us. We have Printed their first Paper, as we found it Printed by themselves, only we have added the rest of the Names that were subscribed to it, when it was presented unto us, that so those that were represented to us as the subscribers of it, may own it or disown it as they see cause. We have divided our Answer to their first Paper into eleaven Secti∣ons, as also the last Paper of theirs (on which we Animad∣vert) into the like number, that so by comparing all toge∣ther, it may be the better discerned, how they have dealt with us, what they reply to and what they omit; and we leave the whole, together with our Animadversions on the severall Sections of theirs, to be judged of by the Reader. We have also Printed their two last Papers, as we found them Printed by themselves, and have noted in the Margents of them both the variations (which yet are not great) from the Copies, that were presented unto us, and whereof the letters Cl. and Cop. prefixed to those variations (and intimating how it was in those Copies, that were exhibited to the Class) are
an indicium or the sign. We confess our Answers to their two last Papers are now grown to a greater bulke then we first intended, or then what some perhaps may judge necessary; but we wish it might be con∣sidered, that if some things that fall into debate be∣twixt them and us, be not of generall concerne∣ment, yet the discussion of them being of use for our vindication, and the discovering unto them their errours and faults, we conceive that in those re∣spects it was requisite; although the Reader may find severall things spoken to, that be of common use, and whereof we give him some account at the end of this Epistle, as also where they may be found; that such as have not either leisure or will to per∣use the whole, may take a view more speedily, of what they may chiefly desire to read. When we were to give our reasons, why we could not con∣sent to admit of Episcopacy moderated, we consi∣dered that the point touching Episcopacy having been so fully discussed by farre abler Pens, we thought it might be the fittest for us to insist chiefly upon the inconveniency and dangerousnesse of that Govern∣ment, and what we in this Land and the Neigh∣bour Nation had experienced in those respects. In another place we urge some Arguments to prove a Bishop and a Presbyter to be, in a Scripture sense of those words, all one. What is spoken touching the Jus divinum of the ruling Elders Office was occasioned from the Texts we had urged (though it was but by the way) in our Answer to their first Paper, and their excepting in their second, against our alledging those Texts for that purpose. But we do here professe, that we do not discusse that point our selves; we only transcribe what is solidly and
fully done concerning it to our hands, by other Reverend and Learned Brethren; and therefore when in our Title we men∣tion the clearing up of the Jus divinum of the ruling Elders Office, the Reader is so to understand that branch of it, as when we come to speak of that point particularly, we there give him our reasons of that transcription. We have now no more to acquaint the Reader with, and therefore shall leave the whole to his perusall, not much mattering the censures of loose and prophane spirits; though we hope with such as are unprejudiced and zealous for reformation, our endeavours shall find some acceptance. And having the Testimonie of our consciences that in the uprightness of our hearts, we have aimed at the Glory of God and the good of his Church, in what we now send abroad into the world, we do not que∣stion, but that God, who is the trier of the hearts and reines, and the God of truth, will not only own that good old cause of his, in the defence whereof so many of his faithfull Ser∣vants have suffered in former times, but us also the meanest and unworthiest of his Servants, in this our standing up for it, and so bless our labours herein, that they may be of some use for the publique good. The Father of Lights, and God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Prince of Peace give unto us all, and to all His, the spirit of wisdome and revelation, in the knowledge of his Will, guide our feet in the waies of Peace, and after our manifold and great shakings, settle the Affairs both of Church and State upon some sure foun∣dations, to the Glory of his own great Name, and the e∣verlasting Comfort, Peace, and Wellfare of all his People. Amen.
AN ACCOUNT Of some of the principall things in the ensuing Discourses. 1. THe dangerousness of admitting mo∣derate Episcopacy shewed. pag. 85. 2. The Jus divinum of the ruling Elders Office is cleared. pag. 103. 3. The nature of Schisme opened, and the imputation thereof, taken off those that disown Episcopacy. pag. 121. 4. The being of a Church and lawfully Or∣dained Ministery, secured in the want of Episcopacy. pag. 130. 5. The imputation of Perjury taken off from such, as do not again admit of Epis∣copacy. pag. 204. 6. The claim of the Presbyterian Govern∣ment
to the civill Sanction made good in the fourth Section of our Answer to the Gentlemens first Paper, and further in our Animadversions on their last, pag. 219. 7. The Scriptures proved to be the sole su∣preme Judg in all matters of Religion. pag. 255. 8. Councils and the unanimous consent of Fathers not to the rule of the interpre∣tation of the Scriptures. pag. 260. 9. Civill penalties not freeing from Eccle∣siasticall censures cleared. pag. 290.
The Title of the Papers, as they were Printed by the Gentlemen, together with their PREFACE. Excommunicatio Excommunicata. OR A CENSURE OF THE PRESBYTERIAN CENSURES. And proceedings of the Classis at Manchester. Wherein is modestly examined what Ecclesiasticall or Civill Sanction they pre∣tend for their new usurped power: In a dis∣course betwixt the Ministers of that Classis, and some dissenting Christians. THE PREFACE. IN such an age as this, when the heat of vaine and unprofitable controversies has bred more Scriblers, than a hot Summer (in the Come∣dians simile) does Flies, it might seem more Plautus. rationall, according to Solomons rule, for prudent men to keep silence, then to vex themselves and disquiet others with such empty discourses, as rather enlarge then compose the differences of Gods Peo∣ple.
It was a sad age, that of Domitian; of which the Hi∣storian affirmeth, that then Inertia pro sapientiâ erat, Igno∣rance Tacitus. was the best knowledge, laziness and servility was the best diligence; and we could wish this age did not too much resemble that. But when we see every Marsyas with an old Pipe of Minerva's, dares contend with Apollo; that men of low and cheap abilities, are too loud and too hard for men of the choicest and best design, certainly Inertia pro sapientia erit. He's the best Orator that dwels in silence, and he's the wisest man, that keeps the privacy and recluse∣ness of his own ville. Hannibal once told Scipio, that it had Appion. been better both for Rome and Carthage, if both of them had been contented within their own bounds; and possibly it had been more honourable both for our Brethren of the Presbytery, and our selves, had we made our lists more pri∣vate, and plaid our prizes only behind the Curtains: for so we had confined and determined our ignorance to our own sphere, and our defects had been visible to no eyes but our own. But as Antalcidas objected to Agesilaus, The Spartans have made the Thebanes fight whether they Plutarch. would or no; the exasperations and bitterness of our Bre∣thren, have lent cowards courage, and provoked us to combate whether we would or no. Miserum est pati, nec licere queri; 'Tis a hard case to be hurt, and to have our Plinie. mouths stopt; to suffer, and to be obleiged not to complain, Qui unam patitur injuriam, invitat aliam; 'Tis a certaine Seneca. rule with the men of this perswasion, if you take a blow from them on one cheek, you cannot be Christians in their Calender, unless you turn the other also. We had well hoped, that what Tully notes to be the eloquence of At∣ticus, Respondere sciat me sibi, dum taceo; our silence and our patience might have been good Orators for us, to have Answered the pretensions of their power, the disguises of their popular discourses, and their harsh proceedings towards
us: but the more we suffered, they triumphed the more; and because it was our judgement and choice to dwell in si∣lence, they thought we either could not, or durst not speak. But nemo nobis amicis uti potest & Adulatoribus. They shall find we are their Friends, but not their Parafites; we will speak that truth which we understand; beseech the good spirit to lead them and us into all truth; and in this mean and inconsiderable service, we appeal to the 1000 witnesses within us, that we speak nothing out of pride or envy, or with unchristian reflections upon our sufferings, but with a hearty desire of peace; that they or we may be convinc'd, and at last meet by a unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. We shall not present the Rooms and modell of the whole house in the Porch, yet we shall preface a recitall of those grievances, which made us open our mouths in this discourse, Ne extorqueretur nobis causa Lucii Cottae patrocinio; lest we Tacitus. might seem to fear the Giant of Presbytery, and to thinke it were only that Palladium that would preserve the City of God. About seavenmonths since, the Classis of Manchester publisht their Breviats or censures, against all that came not in to them for triall and examination; wherein they go to the high waies, and compell all to come in and give submissi∣on to their Government, by subjecting themselves to exa∣mination by the Ministers and Elders; not only such as may be suspected to be ignorant or scandalous, but all of all ele∣vations, of all judgments, must come under the Inquisition; not so much (we fear) to fit them for the Sacrament, as to teach them obedience, that they may know themselves, as Tiberius said of the Senate, that they are homines ad servi∣tutem nati; to owe an obedience to their new Masters, which they must pay under the grand penalties of suspension and excommunication. In answer to these, Bruta fulmina, we with all meeknesse
and humility sent them one single sheet of Paper, desiring satisfaction in some things wherein our reason and Religion obliged us to be of a different judgment from them. This one sheet they return'd in seven, an answer long enough, if it be sound enough. To satisfie us in our scruples, and in their proceedings, they pretend for what they do, both an Ecclesiasticall and civill sanction; a Commission from Christ and the State al∣so. But that maxime of the ancient will here be found true, , Our own Laws built upon passion and interest, are commonly lawless. It is apparent to us, that their new Lights have no light from Antiquity or Pri∣mitive forms; that their new Rules have no establishment, either by the Laws of the Christian Church, or the Laws of this Land. St. Jerome said of Origen, That ingenii sui acumina putat ecclesiae esse Sacramenta; an imagination sure of our Presbyters, that the placita of their own wils must pass for civill and divine constitutions. We wonder that men pretending to Learning and Religion, should not only call in the Lord of truth to abett the the phansies of men, but should also pretend to encouragement and Commissions from the State, to second their prevarications. It hath pleased his Highness in his wisdome and clemen∣cy, to secure all godly and peaceable men professing Jesus Christ, from those Ordinances which the rigour of Presbyte∣ry had mounted against them; but where he gives the least incouragement for this power usurped by them, we find not; and therefore we thinke 'tis friendly advice that they take heed least their unguided zeal, or interest precipitate them into a Premunire, since under colour of authority, they have made Laws and Canons, and published them o∣penly in the Church, for all to obey, upon pain of excommu∣nication; not only against all the ancient known Laws of el∣der date, but also contrary to the present establishment and
the Magistracy under which we now live. 'Tis a trouble to us, to hear them cry out against Prelacy and Episcopacy, as only an artificiall and politicall device to Lord it over Gods inheritance, whereas indeed their lit∣tle fingers are heavier then the Prelates loines; though they tell us their way is friendly, meek, and a sociall way, we find it not; they make us only as Publicans and Heathens; it should seem that all that they intended in the change of Church Government, was only to slice the Diocesan into Parochiall Bishops; and with him in Lucian, To cut out the old useless Moons into fine new Stars, every one of which claime the same influence and dominion over the peo∣ple which the Prelates did. 'Tis a trouble to us, to hear them inveigh against Here∣ticks, and Schismaticks, against the Novatian and Donatists of old, when they walk in their steps, maintain their princi∣ples, and espouse their quarrels. We are told by the Church Historians, That the Doctrine against mixt-communion, was a Brat gotten by Novatus, nurst up by Lucifer and Au∣dius, but it grew not till Donatus became its foster Father: then indeed it flourisht and spread amain, till St. Austin by his judicious and clear opposition did banish it, that, and the subfequent ages; the Anabaptists of the last age called it back into Germany, Quod aruit in se refloruit in ill is; they grafted upon the old stock, and wanted nothing of the Do∣nasticks, but to be called so. Now amongst other of their dangerous and erroneous principles, Bullinger notes this for one of the chief, De Doctrinâ caenae scrupulosè quaerunt Anabaptistae, quorum causâ caena dominica sit instituta? They were nice and scrupulous, and inquisitive concerning the Lords Supper, concluding it was only to be given to the Saints, and concluding the Saints to their own folds. This is the direct practise of the Scottish and English Pres∣byteries;
bytery; because the Parliament formerly, and now his Highness, in their wisdom and prudence have so blunted the edge of their secular power, that they cannot hurt us with that, they flye to their religious shifts, and what Da∣vid said of Goliah's Sword, surely they say of the holy Sa∣crament, Ther's none like unto that; no Engine so likely to teach us obedience, and to give them the soveraignty, as that. They impale the Supper of Christ to their own Inclosures, and as absolute Judges of all Communicants, keep back all persons that have not their Shibboleth ready, that will not fall down and worship that Idol which they have set up. The Aegyptians were hard Taskmasters, to expect the Children of Israel should make Bricks, and make Straw too, to require the same number of Bricks without Materials to make them of: this is something like the severity of our new Masters, they censure for not doing that which they render to us impossible. If we come not to the Lords Supper, we must be excommunicate; and they will not permit us to come, because we are ignorant, or scandalous, or prophane; and 'tis proof enough we are so, be∣cause we are too stout to fall down and worship their ima∣ginations. 'Tis a trouble to us, that men who impropriate to them∣selves the name of Saints, and would have the world to thinke them the only Christians, should be so farre from that , that meekness and sweetnesse of the Gospell, that they are still of the old Legall spirit, to era∣dicate and destroy all that are not of their way: Instead of sweetning and indearing the spirits of men, that they may come to the knowledge of the truth and be saved, they ir∣ritate and imbitter them by their two bold judging in pri∣vate, and by their fierce and severe censures in publick, as if indeed it were their worke to deliver them up unto Satan.
These things have forc'd us contrary to our own disposi∣tions and inclinations, to appear in publick, not only for our own vindication, but in defence of Ecclesiasticall and civill constitutions, well hoping that these mean indeavours will encourage some worthy and learned Champions to take up Arms for the defence of that cause which we love: what we have done, quale quale sit, what ever it be, inasmuch as in the sincerity of our hearts we profess 'tis done, sine ullo studio contentionis, without any pleasure or delight in contention, but only for the love of truth, we hope our good God will give it a more gracious success, and good men will give it a more charitable reception.
A True and Perfect NARRATIVE Of the whole proceedings between the Class and the Gentlemen, with the Animad∣versions of the Class upon their Preface. IT was a witty Etymologie which the Ld. Chancellor St. Albane gave of a Lybell, thatit was derived of a lye forged at home, and a Bell to ring it up and down the Country, the Subscribers to those Papers make the lye, and some private Friend makes the Bell, by commending it to the Presse, and ringing it abroad all over the Nation. The Alterig fa∣mam maledictis laedere. blasphemies wherewith they have blasphemed the Presby∣terian Government, the Government practised in the reform∣ed Churches, and established by the Parliament in this Na∣tion, the reproaches wherewith they have reproached us, that act Presbyterially, we know not what better to returne upon them, then what our Lord and Teacher, and the great pattern of patience and meekness did to the Jews, that Cru∣cified him, Father forgive them, they know not what they do. Prov. 18. 17. He that is first in his own cause seemeth just, but his neighbour cometh and searcheth him. The Presbyteriall Government needs not any support, we can give it, 'tis our honour we sit under the shadow of it: concerning our selves, the present∣ing a true Narrative of the whole business will justifie us to all men, that would not have a tolleration for their sins as for their persons. Of the occasion of this Paper with the Class first publish∣ed, together with all our proceedings upon it, you may receive this faithfull account, which we shall all along con∣firme
by the Records of the Class; which we conceive of bet∣ter force to prove the truth of these matters of fact, at which the publishers of the Papers have taken such occasion to quar∣rell. And for our intentions in what we have done, that they should be otherwise then what became us in our duty, or then we have declared by our words, Our record must remaine on high; though we hope we shall meet with more charity in the most of those that shall read, and impartially consider this Narrative and these Papers, then yet we have done with them. At a Provinciall meeting held at Preston May the 5. 1657. There was an Or∣der drawn up there, which we find recorded in our Book, Classicall Records. At Manchester June the 9th. 1657. from the Provinciall Assembly.—The sense of this Assembly being, that there may be something of duty incumbent upon Mini∣sters, and also upon Congregationall El∣derships, to be done in relation to all the severall persons of ripe years within their respective charges, (who do either volun∣tarily and customarily refuse to communi∣cate with them in the Lords Supper, or to offer themselves to the Eldership or Mini∣ster of the place, to be tryed and admitted to it upon approvall, or upon tryall or knowledg are judged at present unfit for it; or with whose competency in knowledg, or the conscientious walking os them, they are unacquainted or doubtful, for their help in their spirituall state, and bringing them to a capacity of, and willingness unto the publick Communion, which they stand off from,) by way of particular addresse to them, which yet is not ordinarily done: It is therefore resolved, that the question what may be their duty in particular in the said matter? and what the meanes of perform∣ing it? be referred to the serious considera∣tion of every Minister in this Province se∣verally, and of every Classicall Presbytery joyntly; and their judgment therein may be given by themselves, or sent by their re∣spective delegates to the next Provinciall meeting. Edw. Lee. at our Classicall meeting June 9. 1657. next follow∣ing, which putting us upon the considering of some more effectuall meanes for the reform∣ing of the ignorant and scandalous that were in our Congregations Classicall Records. Aug. 11. 1657. the Order from the Provin∣ciall Assembly to be considered the next Classieall meeting.. Having had frequent dis∣courses of the business a∣mongst our selves, we determined to draw up a Classicall Records. Sept. 8. 1657. A representation drawn up up by this Class, to be taken in unto, and submitted to the judgment of the Provin∣ciall Synod (in order to the matter com∣mended by the former Synod, to the con∣sideration of the severall Ministers with∣in this Province) was read and agreed un∣to by this Class. Representation of our desires and intentions herein, aiming chiefly at that end proposed in the said Provinciall Or∣der, as also at taking of that reproach, that is cast upon us from them of the Congregationall way,
that members in our Pa∣rishes are admitted to the priviledges of members, to have their children Bap∣tised, &c. and yet neglect to carry themselves so, as to be capable of communi∣cating at the Lords Sup∣per, and are otherwise some of them notoriously scandalous, as Drunkards, unclean persons, &c. and yet are not dealt with ac∣cording to the rule of Christ, by way of admo∣nition and Church cen∣sure, For the destruction of the flesh, and saving the soul in the day of Christ: a∣gainst which sort of per∣sons both the words of the Paper especially tend, and at our publishing of them we manifestly pro∣fessed our selves to in∣tend.—This Paper thus drawn up; we presented it to the Provinciall As∣sembly at Preston, which was Octob. 6. 1657. where it was allowed and ap∣proved of, as appears un∣der the hands of the Mo∣derator and Scribe of that Assembly. Classicall Records. Novemb. 10. 1657. The exhortation from this Class, approved on by the As∣sembly at Preston, to be published in the se∣verall Congregations belonging to this Class, the 22th of Novemb. Instant. Whereupon we forth∣with agreed to publish the said Paper, on the 22.
day of Novemb. on one and the same day in the severall Congregations within our Class. De∣signing thereby to give the people notice of our in∣tentions for future pro∣ceedings, that especially those that were most scandalous in their lives might take warning, and if it were possible might reforme, and prevent that just severity, which o∣therwise we conceived our selves bound in faith∣fullness to God and their souls to proceed in to∣wards them; at which time also severall of the Ministers declared the said intentions in publish∣ing the same Paper. And did expresly manifest, how far it was from our thoughts hereby to im∣pose upon any mens con∣sciences, what was against their judgments in respect of difference about mat∣ters of Government, but that our intentions were to proceed in all waies of condescention to those that were conscientious, though differing from us, but that our aime was, the discouragement of o∣pen and known wicked∣ness,
which was a disgrace to Christian Religion it self, and that which with∣out controversie, all good men of what judg∣ment soever, should readily joyn with us in. Classicall Records. Jan. 12. 1657. A Paper presented to the Class by Major Prestwich Esq, Ni∣cholas Mosely Esq, Francis Mosely, Tho∣mas Holland, Thomas Simond, Captaine John Byrom, Gentlemen, Subscribed by them and many others, containing some exceptions against the Representation, a∣greed on and published by this Class, to which an Answer is promised the next Class. Mr Harison desired to draw up the An∣swer, and some of the Ministers to meet a weeke before, to consult about the same. In January after, some Gentlemen came to our Class, by name, Major Prestwich, Mr. Mosely, of the Ancoates and others, and presented the first Pa∣per of theirs to the Class, in way of exception to what we had published; which being received and read in the Class, the Gentlemen had an ac∣knowledgment returned to them for their civility, to take that way to de∣sire satisfaction from us (though the Class was sensible of much harshness and bitterness in their Paper towards us) and an Answer was promised to it at the next Class. About which Answer there was no neglect of time, nor delay, that might savour of any slighting of them or their Paper. The Ministers met before to consider of the Answer that was pre∣pared, but it being to pass
the consent of the Class: when they came for the foresaid Answer at the next Class. Classicall Records. Feb. 9. 1657. Mr Harrison according to the request of the Class, had drawn up an Answer to the Paper, which was presen∣ted to this Class, at their last meeting by sundry Gentlemen, which Gentlemen waiting for the said Answer at this time, it was ordered, that this Answer should be returned to them, viz. That if they had directed their Paper to any one single per∣son, the Answer might have been prepa∣red, and punctually delivered at the time: but since they had directed it to the whole Association, there must be a time taken, that the Answer may pass the considerati∣on and approbation of the whole Class: for which reason, and for the transcribing of Copies of it, as was necessary, at present they could not deliver the said Answer, though it was in substance prepared. But the Class promised that it should be sent in to some one of them (whom they should fix on to receive it) sometime before the next Class, without any further trouble to them. They nominated Nicholas Mose∣ly Esq to receive the Paper from this Class. The Class is appointed at Manchester, February 22. to conclude more speedi∣ly about the Answer to be given to the foresaid Paper. The Class did excuse it to them, that they could not just then deli∣ver it, because it was not yet read in the Class; and besides must be written o∣ver again, in respect of alterations the Class might make in it, before it could be delivered; yet that they should not be further troubled about it, it should be sent in to them within a short time; for which purpose the Class met again within one fortnight. Classicall Records. Feb. 22. 1657. The Answer was read and approved; Mr Buxton and Mr Byrom de∣sired to deliver it to Mr Mosely the day after. viz. On Feb. 22. and the next day our Answer was sent in to Mr. Mosely the Gen∣tleman appointed by them to receive it. In which we shewed them that respect, which to in∣genuous persons might have prevailed to have prevented their uncivill complaints of our breach of promise with them, as also might have procured a return of fairer carriage from them in ensuing passages.
Classicall Records. March 9. 1657. Nicholas Mosely Esq with other Gentlemen brought another Paper to the Class, subscribed by Mr Allen, the said Mr Mosely, &c. the which was read; and because in the latter end of it they hinted their unsatisfiedness in what was alledged in our Papers, in Answer to their first, for the proof of our authority for the exercise of the present Govern∣ment, from the Law of the Land now in force, they having charged us before with the danger of a Praemunire: The Class resolved to wave any other matter, tendred in this last Paper, till they made out their exceptions in that thing. And this Answer was returned to the foresaid Gentlemen, viz. That the Class did de∣sire they would make out what they seemed to assert, against the validity of our acting in the Presbyterian Government, by virtue of civill Authority. On March 9. some of the foresaid Gentlemen brought in their second Paper, which was ano∣verture for an accommo∣dation, though with an awfull threat, what they would do at our Paper, if that took not; especially in respect of the civill Sanction for our Govern∣ment; upon which the Class, because they had in their Paper (which they still persist to do, as in their Printed Preface) threatned us with the danger of a Premunire, de∣sired, that they would be∣fore they went any fur∣ther, let us understand what strength they had to bring in against what we had alledged for the civill authority for our government. For all ra∣tionall men may easily conceive, that this thing was fit to be first discus∣sed. For if we had no more authority for our Government, then they had for theirs, the terms of our accommodation might and ought to be much otherwise, then when we conceived ours was setled by express au∣authority,
and theirs un∣der as express an inhibiti∣on and exception. This desire therefore was ten∣dred to them in faire language, and nothing further put upon them in Answer to our Paper, then what they threatned us so much with, viz. that they would impart unto us, what they had (in which they put so much confidence) against what we had brought for our acting by the civill authority. This An∣swer of ours was taken in great indignation by them; and though what they have said in their largest Paper about this thing, might have been held in lesse then a single Sheet, and for ought we can see in some few lines; yet upon this, they draw up an Answer (such an one as they are willing the world should see what it is,) to our whole Paper, as they say. And their spirit was so chang∣ed, because we did not take their first motion, upon the very terms it was tendered by them, that they bring in their
third Paper, wherein for all their dear love profes∣sed in the former Paper, they returned to them more naturall straine of scorn, bitterness, and de∣rision of us, though they were so modest as to leave out their laughing at us in the Copy they Printed. Classicall Records. Aprill 13. 1658. Nicholas Mosely Esq and severall Gentlemen, as before, atten∣ded the Class, with an Answer to the Classe's last Paper. The Class taking into consideration the other contained weigh∣ty businesses that were upon them, where∣by they would not be free to continue this matter in debate by writing; thought fit to referre it to a Committee, to meet a certain number of the Subscribers of the foresaid Paper, to debate the matters fur∣ther therein and in the former Papers con∣teined (if need required) for mutuall sa∣tisfaction; which being consented unto by such of the Gentlemen, as were pre∣sent, the Class appointed, Mr Heyrick, Mr Angier, Mr Harrison, Mr Newcome, Mr Constantine, and the rest of the Ministers within this Class, as also Mr Hide, Captain Ashton, Mr Vrigley, Mr Wickins, Mr Meare, Mr Lancashire, Mr Buxton, Mr Byrom, Mr Wollen, or any six of them to be a Com∣mittee for this purpose, and the Committee to meet the 28th of Aprill instant, and after to meet the aforesaid Gentlemen at such time and place, as may be agreed on by both Parties. This third Paper of theirs was brought in by them Apr. 13. which was read in the Class, and so the Class thought fit to re∣turne Answer to them, that they did judge, this way of writing was not likely to attain the end, which we and they seem∣ed to aime at, viz. some peace and mutuall satis∣faction on both sides, and whereas the Class considered the many o∣ther weighty businesses, that did continually lye upon us, we did not think meet to return Answer to them at present in writing, but if they plea∣sed, we desired a personall meeting between some of them, and some on our part, that might discourse on the matter of accom∣modation, and might give and receive further
satisfaction, for other matters conteined in the Papers, which motion was consented to by the Gentlemen that were there, and a Committee was appointed by the Class to meet on the 28. of Aprill instant, to meet some of the Gentlemen to conclude on some way of proceeding in this bu∣siness. Classicall Records. May 12th 1658. The Committee ap∣pointed by the last Class gave in an ac∣count of their proceedings, on the 28th of Aprill the Committee met according to the Order of the Class, at the time appoin∣ted, there appeared on the behalf of the Gentlemen, Mr Nicholas Mosely only; the Committee understanding that he was at the doore, desired Mr Harrison and Mr Wickins to go forth to him, and to acquaint him that the Committee was ready to no∣minate their men, that might treat about their last Paper, and touching an accom∣modation according to their former Paper, which they did accordingly. He replyed, the last Paper was not any thing to be dis∣cussed, &c. but only the accommodation. Mr Harrison who had brought the Answer of the Class to the Gentlemen, that day they had presented their Paper, Answered that he mentioned both unto them as mat∣ters to be discoursed of. He said indeed, that before their Paper was read he was sent forth unto them by the Class, to sig∣nifie unto them, that the Class was wil∣ling to entertain a treaty with them touch∣ing an accommodation, and that this was the only thing, that at that time was men∣tioned; but when he was sent unto them the second time, after that the Class was risen, and the Class had heard their Pa∣per read, he mentioned both their last Paper, and the accommodation, as the Subject matter about which the persons to be nominated on both sides were to treat howe∣ver he or the rest might have forgotten the same. But Mr Harrison and Mr Wickins told him, they would go in again, and further know the Committees mind; the Committee hereup∣on insisted much on the last Paper, and concei∣ved it was necessary, before they proceeded to treat about an accommodation, satisfaction should be given touching some things in it, and at which they said, they had just reason to be offended; and therefore desired Mr Harrison and Mr Wickins to go forth again and tell Mr Mosely so much; and that if he pleased to nomi∣nate persons that might treat about this, as well as touching the accommodation, they were ready to proceed. To which Mr Mosely reply∣ed, that he was not authorized to meddle with any thing about the last Paper, and that for his part he could wish all the Papers on both sides were burned; and that if the Class was offen∣ded at any thing in their last Paper justly, he should be ready, it being shewed him, to make satisfaction at the Market Cross. They returned Mr Mosely's Answer to the Committee; who taking the matter into further consideration, resolved not to infist on the Method, but that they would give way that the accommodation might be first treated on, provided that at that time the Paper also might be discoursed on; and desired Mr Harrison and Mr Wickins to go forth again, and to tell Mr Mosely what they had resolved on, and to desire him to nomi∣nate persons within the bounds of the Class, (the matter to be debated being before the Class only) that might treat with the like num∣ber to be nominated by them, touching the matter above mentioned. To this Mr Mosely re∣plyed, they had not Ministers within the Class to equallize the number, that the Class might nominate: and that therefore he desired on the behalf of the re, that they might take others, that were not within the bounds of the Class. To which the Committee returned Answer, they might then take Mr Allen and Mr Pollet, that were two Ministers, that had subscribed the first Paper, and the Class would appoint two Ministers only on their behalf to meet these, and some Elders to meet with the like number of Gentlemen to be by them nomina∣ted. But this not being accepted of, and the Committee not being authorized by the Classe to appoint a meeting with those, that were out of their bounds, it was concluded by the Com∣mittee, that they would make report to the Class what was desired by Mr Mosely on the behalf of the Gentlemen, that so the Class might take that proposall of theirs into their consideration. And Mr Mosely said, that he would desire Mr Allen and some others to be at the next Classicall meeting, to receive the Answer of the Class touching the same. And thus the matter betwixt Mr Mosely and the Committee was issued. On which day the Committee meeting, none but Mr. Mosely came on the Gentlemens part. The ful discourse between some employed from the Committee to him, and him, you have at large in the other Columne from the Records of the Class, Mr Mosely would have the matter of the accom∣modation to be the only business of the future meeting; we alledged that we should expect sa∣tisfaction in other mat∣ters in the Papers, as well as that, because we con∣ceived our selves much injured in their last Pa∣per. Mr. Mosely expres∣sed himself very desirous of peace; and if the mat∣ter of accommodation might take place, he
could wish all the Pa∣pers were burned, and that if any wrong was done, he would make satisfaction at the Market Crosse; the Committee then were willing to wave the matter of the Papers to the second place, and if the accommo∣dation did not take place then, that the Paper should be dis∣coursed on. But then we moving that the persons to be nomi∣nated should be with∣in the bounds of the Classe, and we should equalize the number that they could on their part procure Ministers and others for that purpose; and Mr. Mosely mov∣ing for a further li∣berty in that thing; it was referred by the Committee unto the next Classe, and Mr Mosely consented thereunto, promi∣sing that he would desire Mr. Allen and some others of the Gentlemen to be at the next Classe to
conclude about the same. Classicall Records. Mr Allen, Nicholas Mosely Esq and other Gentlemen came again to the Class; the mat∣ter of accommodation was proposed between them and the Class; they desired liberty to choose some persons for their part, that were not within the Class, which was consented unto by the Class; the persons nominated by them were, Mr Allen, Mr Clayton, Mr Light∣foot, Ministers; Mr Nicholas Mosely, Mr Francis Mosely, and Mr Nathaneell Robinson Gentlemen. By the Class were nominated Mr Heyrick, Mr Angier, Mr Harrison, Ministers; Mr Hide, Captain Ashton, Mr Wickins, Ru∣ling Elders: and the time and place of meet∣ing was by mutuall consent to be agreed on, when Mr Heyrich should (by the providence of God) be returned from London. May 11. 1658. Mr Allen, Mr. Mosely and others came accord∣ing to their promise, upon their motion, that they might have liberty to take some out of the bounds of the Class, to treat on their part with us, the Class condescend∣ed thereunto; and be∣fore they departed the men were nomi∣nated on both sides, that should treat of the matters aforesaid; The time & place for the meeting was re∣ferred by their con∣sent, till Mr. Heyrick should return from London, he being one nominated on our part, and they profes∣sing a desire that he should be one in the business. If they had such a report to make of what concerned us, as we have of them, they would not stick to say, that the words of our mouths were peace, while warre was in our hearts, but we
leave God and the Reader to judge, with what hearts they could agree upon an accommodation, and do as they forthwith did. While matters stood just thus be∣tween us, the next Class, (Mr. Heyricke not being returned be∣fore the Class after in July,) we found the Papers in Print. Classicall Records. July 13. 1658. This Class having notice, that the Papers which have passed between this Class and Mr Allen and others were Prin∣ted, with a Preface unto them; it was agreed that Mr Heyricke, Mr Angier; Senior, Mr Har∣rison, Mr Newcome, Mr Constantine, Mr Leigh, Mr Jones, Mr Walker, Ministers; Mr Robert Hyde. Esq Captain Ashton, Mr Strangways, Mr Wickins, Mr Meare, Mr Buxtons, Mr By∣rome, Ruling Elders, they or any five of them, three being Ministers, be a Committee to take this matter into consideration, and to meet as they judg fit, and see occasion to pro∣ceed in this business, and to make report of their proceedings the next Class. Upon this, we ap∣pointed a Committee that time to take the matter into considera∣tion; Classicall Records. Aug. 10. 1658. The Committee appointed by the last Class, to take into consideration the business of the Papers lately Printed as before∣said, gave an account to this present Class of their proceedings, viz. That upon their meet∣ing they agreed to write a Letter to Mr Allen, which was in these words directed. and they sent a Letter to Mr. Allen, to desire to know of him under his hand, whether he owned the Printing or no? The Letter you have in the other Columne: Classicall Records. To his Reverend Brother Mr Allen at Prestwich, These. Sir, At our Classicall meeting in May last, your self, and others with you did agree with us upon a meeting in order to an accommoda∣tion. The time for it was referred by mutuall consent, till Mr Heyricks return from London; your selves promising, upon his return the first Class after, to appoint some to attend the Class, for the appointing the time and place for the said meeting, you were some of you ac∣cording to the said Agreement, expected this day; but instead of that, we meet with all the Papers Printed, and a Preface annexed to them. This is to desire you, that you would be pleased in the behalf of your self and the rest, to certifie us under your hands, whether your self and the rest do own the Printing of the Pa∣pers with the Preface. This I was commanded by the Class to send to you, and to desire your speedy Answer, Your respective Brother W. Leigh, MODERATOR. Be pleased to direct your Answer to Mr Heyricke. This Letter was the next day delivered to Mr Allen; he promised to attend in person on Mr Heyricke the next day after, which he ac∣cordingly did; the account of which their fur∣ther Answer to the Letter is thus given in un∣der Mr Heyrickes hand. Mr Allen came to Mr Heyricke, Mr Mosely of the Ancoats accom∣panying him; he said concerning the Printing of the Papers and the Preface, he knew nothing of them, and therefore he brought Mr Mosely, who could give the account, Mr Heyricke de∣sired the Answer in writing, they both pro∣mised they would speak with the rest of the Subscribers, and they would within a Fort∣night give their Answer in writing; within the time prefixed. Mr Allen came to Mr Heyricke and told him, he had met with them that had Subscribed the Paper, and they denied that he should give any Answer in writing, saying the Class would but take advantage by it; and that now he must own both the Papers and the Preface, that there might be no breach a∣mongst themselves. RICHARD HEYRICKE. Which Letter was taken to him forth∣with. He told the Mes∣senger he would wait upon Mr. Heyricke (to whom the Answer was to be returned) the next day, which he accordingly did, and brought Mr. Mosely with him. He said he knew not of
the Printing of the Papers, and therefore had brought Mr. Mosely, who could give the account of this amicable Office of Printing all the Pa∣pers, whilst an ac∣commodation was on foot. Mr Mosely said something to Mr. Heyricke, that it should be reported that he should say, that he could wish all the Pa∣pers were burnt; and so to vindicate them∣selves, that they di∣strusted not their Pa∣pers, they Printed them to the world.—Which Answer of his, if it had come, or the like from us, it should have been cal∣led silly and poore, if not worse. But for those words which he spake, we know none that ever repeated them, or that com∣monly did it, or that ever took them in the sense he himself puts upon them. We only took notice of them, as a zealous expression of his hearty forward∣ness
for peace (which it seems we wronged him in, and we must desire him to forgive us this wrong) and not as in any distrust on their part of their Papers, for they never wanted confi∣dence and a conceit to the utmost, of the vali∣dity of all they did, and do not yet; so that we could never, knowing their whole carriage in the business, mistake their words so far, to fa∣vour of any retraction on their part, of any thing they had written. But for this to be the oc∣casion of their Printing, we account it a poor shift to alledge it; they might sure have enquired of us, (when upon tearmes of Peace especially) whether any of us would have owned any such words in such a sense, before they had Printed the Papers upon them; and what was the occasion before these words were spoken, that many of their Party did so frequently talke of Printing the Papers, if they had not been Prin∣ted
but for them? But the truth is, these men (the only men ac∣quainted with Religion, Learn∣ing, and Antiquity) conceit some great advantage they have gotten by their Papers a∣gainst the Government, and no∣thing shall perswade them to keep that under though they accommodate never so with the Congregations where it is practised, or rather that it was a meere pretence in them to an accommodation, when they deal thus underhand in open hostility, is but too manifest. But Mr Heyricke moved that he might have their Answer in writing, that he might return it to the Class, as appointed by them to receive it. They promi∣sed they would within a fort∣night: Within that time Mr Allen came, and denied to return any Answer in writing, though he had promised it, and though he did not know of the Printing of the Papers (as he saies) with the Preface: yet now it is done, they must own it, to prevent a breach amongst them∣selves; resolved they are to keep Peace amongst themselves, though with us they deal accor∣ding to the Tenent, of keeping no faith with Hereticks, whilst they cry up themselves as the only Patrons of the Protestant Cause: and all others but as Punies to them.
What iniquity (humane infirmity set aside) can any find in this, or in our actings? If in any thing we have transgressed, it is, that our actings did not succeed our purposes; forgive us this wrong, and for the future we engage our selves, (all Bug∣beares set aside) to act according to our representation, not 2 Cor. 12. 13. spending more time in perswading them, that will not be per∣swaded. Having thus given a faithfull account of the rise and man∣ner of these proceedings, which is all we shall say by way of Preface on our part; we shall take leave, (after a word up∣on the Title under which they have Printed the Papers) to make some brief Animadversions upon some passages in the Preface, which they have prefixed. For the Title they give to the Papers as Printed by them, and what they further say in their Title Page. 1. First they call it Excommunicatio excommunieata; Here is flat Erastianisme in the Front, though it is but a Maske to to cover Prelacy under. For though they seem to be against all excommunication, unless it be the totall excommunica∣tion of that Ordinance out of the Church: yet after we finde them willing that the Diocesan Bishops should excommuni∣cate. Besides this contradiction, it is wonder how this comes to be the Title of the Book; for unless they had done more in their Papers, which might appear to be of unquesti∣onable strength, and directly against that Ordinance (though as Administred according to the Presbyterian Government) they do seem to set up the Gates of Mindas in this great Title. 2. They say, Wherein is modestly examined. Let the Reader judg, whether what they offer, be worthy to be called an examination of what we have at first published, or since Answered to theirs, or to the matter in the whole. For their modesty, sure they either have another notion of modesty, then is ordinary; or else they soon forget what they here assert: if untruths, reproaches, revilings, &c. savour of modesty, let the Reader judg to call our's an usurped power, and to determine so peremptorily upon the matter of the whole Controversie, savours not of over much modesty, in
the very next Lines; and if they have carried the matter like dissenting Christians, we desire the Reader to believe, as he finds reason to judge upon the perusall of the whole. For the Preface, 1. They do first insinuate to the Rea∣der an Apology for their appearing in Print, professiug 1. their own disposition to Peace, and 2. how much a∣gainst their wills they have been forced to this course. For the former of these, while they talke of Solomons rule; for prudent men to keep silence, they shew themselves in the Quotation unacquainted with Scripture, as in their pra∣ctice, with the rule here mentioned, they are afraid to de∣serve the Title of Scripturists; yet sure it would not have been to their dishonour, if among their flourishes with humane Authors, this our poore Text had been truly quo∣ted, when they call it Solomons Rule, and it is writ∣ten in the Prophets, Amos 5. 13. But if they had been touched at all with any tenderness of vexing them∣selves and disquieting others, with such empty discourses, as rather enlarge then compose the differences of Gods Peo∣ple, would they ever (if they think the matter of these Papers to be such) have been so eager for Printing? when they might well have forborne and were, we thinke, by their pretensions of Peace with us, in reason and inge∣nuity bound to have done. They pretend to be about to be at Peace with us, and to what then, but the wide∣ning of Gods Peoples differences, are the Papers Prin∣ted? And indeed we care not for any thing more, (if we know our own hearts,) in this action of theirs, that troubles us, then that the differences of the Church are hereby enlarged, and the mindes of Gods People diverted, by new controversies, and old ones almost silenced, newly drest up, from that study of their own hearts, and the power of godliness, of which there is such a decay in the whole Land at this day. And 2. In that they wovld have the World believe, that they were forced to this course by the severe and injurious
dealings they have met with from their Brethren (as they are here pleased to stile us) of the Presbyte∣ry: And whereas they say, that in this age of Printing, wherein men of low and cheap abilities take as much confi∣dence as any to appeare in publique, and that it had been more honourable for their Brethren and themselves, to have made their lists more private; For so we had determined our ignorance to our own spheare, and our defects had been vi∣sible to no eyes but our own. We must needs herein pro∣fesse our wonder at them. They might have saved themselves the trouble, and so the need of the Apology, for their appearing in publique, when they seemed to embrace an accommodation between us; as when Aulus Albinus made an Apology for writing the Romane Histo∣ry in Greeke, because he was not so well versed in  that tongue. Cato told him he was in love with a fault that he had rather aske pardon, then be innocent: We believe, as they, that it might have been more honou∣rable on both sides to have made our list more private, and we by our Narrative would let the world know how we came in publique: without question they have no ignorance to be determined to their own spheare, nor de∣fects, they feare to be made visible to others eyes, (because not so to their own) or they would never have runne this hazard, when the power was wholly in their own hands to have prevented it. But it is our ignorance and defects, which they are loath to conceale, which makes a necessity of their Printing, the honour of their Brethren being a matter, they are no waies tender of. But they go on to insinuate, what necessity hath begot this vir∣tue in them; a necessity indeed, as much from us to force them to do it, as it is virtue in them in what they have done. Truely while they complaine of ex∣asperations and bitternesse, &c. That hath begot in them this courage, and provok't them to combate whether they will or no; we must needs professe our ignorance of what they meane, being conscious to our selves of no such
carriages towards them, their provocation to com∣bate is just, as he is provok't to set upon his Neigh∣bour, towards whom he pretends friendship, when he apprehends he hath an advantage against him, to do him a mischief; so they, when they had agreed upon a Treaty for accommodation, Print our Papers, upon a conceipt (no doubt) of an advantage they had gotten a∣gainst us, which yet we are not frighted with, and we leave the Reader to discern of; and for the Papers, let the impartiall Reader judge, whether they have forborne us any thing in theirs, that may justly be termed bit∣terness and exasperation; and whether in ours they have Printed, we have rendred railing for railing, or no; what blow we ever gave them on the one cheeke, or what we had prepared for the other, we are yet ignorant in our selves of: But may truely returne their words upon themselves, for our appearing now in publique: It was a thing we intended not, and could for some reasons, have wished had not been, but their exasperations and bitterness, not only privately vented towards us, in their Papers tendered to us, but now published, hath provoked us to this publique combate, whether we will or no. They expect not (we know) that we should be silent, for we have our blow on both cheekes already; first in their Papers, pretty well stuffed (for the bulke of them) with scoffs and bitter revilings, and now again in their publishing, their affronting us to all the world; and we wish that this carriage of theirs from first to last, had been such as might have savoured of the Christian in any Calender. For what Answer their silence might have been to the pretensions of our power, and disguises of our popular dis∣courses, and our harsh proceedings towards them, &c. We know the charge herein against us, to be so unreasona∣sonably groundlesse, that we thinke their silence might have been a sufficient Answer, and all they were neces∣sitated to make, by any provocation we ever gave them, and yet we crave leave to tell them, for any alte∣ration
their confident writing (either since it was first tendered to us, or after Printed) hath begotten in our judgements, for the way we have engaged in, their si∣lence might have serv'd the turne still. For what we thought of their silence, that either it was because they could not, or would not speake, they know (it seems) better then we. If they will leave us our consciences to witness with us, we have our Thousands as well as they, to witness for our thoughts in this thing against what they say of us; unless we had known we had justly provoked them, or had at all entrencht upon them, we need not spend our thoughts about their abilities or for∣wardness for opposition. We have no cause to feare their flattery, unlesse it be when they use us so injuri∣ously, and yet call themselves our Friends; We thinke not much that they speake the truth they understand, and we joyne in the Prayer, that the good spirit would lead them and us into all truth; yet we question the necessity and seasonablenesse of their profession; especially when the thing they contend for, was not in the Paper we publish∣ed, at all oppugned. What their pride and envy, or hear∣ty desire of Peace in this (as they call it) inconsiderable service may be, when they Print to the world our dif∣ference so surreptitiously, nay (as we may call it) perfi∣diously; when a meeting for an accommodation was agreed upon, we leave it to God over their thousand witnesses within them to judg. 2. They go on now to represent their grievances, which made them open their mouths, and tell the world, they will not represent the Roomes and Modell of the whole House in the Porch; though we thinke, the Preface, for confident presuming the ground of the controversies, cen∣soriousnesse, bitternesse, and unfaithfull representing mat∣ters of fact, may well be the Porch to this House; and if not a modell of the whole on their part, yet a conveni∣ent additionall Roome uniforme to the whole pile. They here speake out what made them open their mouths, viz.
that they should not seem to feare the Giant of Presbytery, whereby they acquit us from acting any thing contrary to the Rules of Presbytery, but it is the Governement it selfe they quarrell at. If therefore we have declared nothing but what is suitable to the perswasion of the Brethren of the Presbyteriall way, Why should this be more complained of in us, then they would thinke well we should complaine of them, in what they have said (as they say) according to their judgement in defence of Episcopacy? And what is this, but a desire to revive the quarrell, when so much is said on both sides already by abler hands? And they bring no new thing to light for their way, nor put us to say any thing but what is said already. But for their manner of expressing themselves, and dressing up the controversie, wherein indeed for bitternesse and uncivility, we finde them singular; they are affraid the world should thinke they did not enough undervalue Presbytery; and so they would have it to know, that Presbytery in their thoughts is not the only Palladium to preserve the City of God. We should thinke that men that had any reall zeale for the in∣terest of Christ, should not wish him a King in his Church without a Discipline and Government; and whether this hedge be not so necessary to the preservation of the Vine∣yard, we would wish all sober persons to consider. The City of God hath not long stood in any place, where the Arke of God hath been taken, and the glory of Israell departed from it. A Governement in the Church, if they do not make it the Palladium to the City of God, we know not what is; and for the Government they contend for, it being under an expresse prohibition, by the forme of Go∣vernement and the humble Advice, so that to strive for that, is to strive for none; if they had the judging of us by such a circumstance, they would not stick to say, that we strove for Anarchy in the Church, whilest we refused a Governement setled, with which we might accommo∣date, under pretence for one we more fancied, that was quite abolished, and by the Law expresly excepted. And
we take leave further to tell them, that we know some god∣ly Ministers in some other parts of this Nation, that are of the Episcopall way, that notwithstanding their diffe∣rence in judgement with us, yet would heartily close with the Presbyterian Governement, and would account it a mercy to have it setled with them, as it is with us, and this, rather then any other besides their own, rather then to have the Church of God lye in such Anarchy, as in most part of the Nation it doth at this day. And whether the settlement of Government, and as matters now stand of this very Government, may deservedly be lookt upon, as the Pal∣ladium of the City of God, we wish the suddain experience of the miseries from the want of it, may not turne their scoffe into a sad experiment. 3. In the Narrative they give of our proceedings as the great matter of their grievance; We shall not say much to the scoffes and jeeres, they put upon the thing published by us; whether under the notion of Breviat, or what terme else they please to give it; but that what we published should be chiefly against them, that withdrew from the Sa∣crament, and that it should be intended against them of their judgment especially, we leave the Paper to the impar∣tiall Reader to speake for it selfe. Whether our Paper doth not concerne the ignorant, for their instruction only, which to the Ministers is a matter of great pains, and not for the censuring of them; and the scandalous for their re∣formation, by admonition and (if need require) further just censure (both which sorts we hope they would not ren∣der uncurable, let them be of what judgment they will) let any one judg: And that the Rule that we declared to pro∣ceed in towards those that did not come to the Sacrament, did neither principally much less only, concerne them of their way; we may truly profess they were least in our eye; but the generality of our people, that are no more for their way of government, then for ours, but in generall for none at all; these we desired to exhort to minde their duty about the Sacra∣ment: and though we have met with unhandsome usage
from some of these men that have thus appeared against us, yet we have seen some good fruits of our publication of our intentions, upon many others of our Congregations, who have been kept off, upon their own acknowledgedment, by fears of their own unfitness, without the least scruple at the Discipline, and have by scores at a Sacrament come in since that time in some of our places, and we hope to their own and the Congregations comfort. And for our parts we do not thinke the ground sufficient, that any of their perswasion stands out upon, to excuse the neglect of this Ordinance. And we must take leave to tell them, that we have visited some on their death beds, that have stood out on their grounds, that have been much troubled at their neglect herein; and if they had recovered, have professed their resolution to have joyned as not finding this pretence of scruple at the government, a co∣vering wide enough for the sin of neglect of such a duty; we would wish men would pretend nothing, but what will beare weight on their death bed. We believe, thoughts of death would tame the height of some mens spirits, that ei∣ther they would finde reason to submit to the Disci∣pline, or at least to carry more peaceably towards it, then they do. We cannot but look on it as a sad thing, that so many are so indifferent; that carry the names of Christians, yet care not to be in an incapacity of partaking in the Supper. If they make it a light matter, we do not; and if Christ send us to the high waies and hedges to fetch in his guests, we will not refuse the service, nor be ashamed to beare the re∣proach of more then that phrase signifies, for his sake. 4. And what though we were to exhort persons to ap∣ply themselves to the Eldership, for their coming to the Sa∣crament; doth this follow, that all that can not submit to El∣ders, shall be subject to excommunication, whether scanda∣lous or no? &c. We presume, if they had their Government on foot, whatsoever they would allow to dissenting Bre∣thren (which when time was, was little enough, as some of us well remember) yet they would not betray their Discipline to contempt, by making it indifferent, whether the people
render any submission to it, or no. If men have no scruples against the Government practised, who is so little a friend to peace, or satisfied in the grounds of his own actings, as to cast needless scruples before them? It was time enough for us to manifest, what we could condescend to, in respect of the man∣ner of admission, when there was occasion offered for any such need, which we have not ordinarily met with, in those that have since tendred themselves to the Ordinance. There was enough declared at the Publication of the Paper, to have prevented any such construction, as they made of it in this thing; and therefore we cannot but admire at what we finde next, that our aime should be to bring all sorts to subject them∣selves to Ministers and Elders for examination; and that all persons must come under the inquisition, not so much to fit them for the Sa∣crament, as to teach them Obedience, that they might know themselves to be homines ad servitutem nati, &c. whenas the chief Acter in the Printing of these Papers, could not but heare a solemne profession to the contrary at our publishing of our Paper as a∣foresaid; which he cannot shew to be contradicted by any af∣ter practice; as also when by experience there are severall Communicants in our Congregations, that have scrupled be∣ing examined before the Elders, whom yet we have not re∣fused, but have found out expedients for their admission, without any further trouble to them in the thing they have scrupled; the Eldership consenting, that two Ministers might take an account of their knowledg, and they after be admitted by the Eldership, and of this practice of ours, both before and since upon occasion, there are severall in our Con∣gregations able, and we believe, ready to testifie. 5. Whether our Paper published, for the scope or mat∣ter, deserve to be called brutum fulmen, or whether their An∣swer savoured of all, or any meeknesse and humility, we shall not here speake further of; they best know, with what frame of spirit they tendred it, though we could discerne but little of such a temper in it. For the grounds of their dissatisfaction but in one sheet; and that we put our selves to the trouble of seaven to returne them an Answer in, and whether it be longer
then sound, we leave the Papers themselves to manifest of which (being published by them) the Reader may supply himself with an account, and freely making his own judg∣ment. 6. For what Ecclesiasticall or Civill Sanction we have for our Government, we leave that to be judged by those, that shall peruse our following Papers. And that they wonder that men pretending to Religion and Learning, &c. So we wonder at them, how they dare pretend to Religion or Learn∣ing, and call them mens own Lawes, the Placita of our own wills, fancies of men, nay, praevarications; before they had better made it to appear, that they were such. That mat∣ter is foule indeed, and inconsistent with Religion and Learn∣ing, to call in the God of truth to abett our own fancies, and to pre∣tend to civill authority to second our own prevarications. But we might return to the Laconicke . If to this, If it be so; but that's the great Question. But the Prefator here can dispute and moderate too, and very ingenuously determine on his own side, without any respect at all to our Argu∣ments for the contrary, eg regiae scilieet artis est ridere, quod non potest solvere. 7. What unguided zeale or interest it is, that should precipitate us, we no more are carefull to clear our selves from, then to retort the like upon them in their opposition of us, which we might as well do. But about this danger of a Premunire, we cannot thinke them cordiall in their advice and caution to us, because they would perswade us to return to Canonicall obe∣dience and Episcopacy, &c. which we know is expresly excepted against in the late Laws of the Land, and we foresee it to be a Praemunire to meddle with them; and therefore we have cause to judg, that they would fancy us in a Premunire in the way a∣gainst them, not careing to draw us into a reall Praemunire in a way with them. 8. That what we published is any thing against the Laws, it will speake for it self; they have published it to the view of the world, and if, without their Comment, any thing be justly culpable by the Law, we are not now likely to be concealed.
9. But that what we published should be stiled Laws and Canons, and that for all men to obey upon paine of excommunication, we see no reason for any such construction of our action. We presume our conclusions should not have been sti∣led Canons by them, unless thereby they intended to put some odium upon them. And they know whose practice in Government made that word less pleasing amongst us, which was well received and reverenced in the ancient Church, to set forth the conclusions of Councils and Synods by. 10. They now to the end of their Preface, express their trouble at our self-contradiction in severall things; as first, that we should cry out against the Prelates for Lordliness o∣ver Gods inheritance, and we our selves aspire at the same and much more. If they find not our way more sociall, we are sure, they have felt as little of the burthen of our fingers. If the Prelates had bent their endeavours and authority to informe the grosly ignorant, and to reforme the openly scandalous, it had never by us been cryed out against for Lordly Tyranny. And when we have principally in this cause so bent our selves, we wonder with what face they can fancy us Prelaticall: we should never have com∣plained of the weight of their loynes, if it had been only in these cases; and if in these manifest entrustments of Christs Government, viz. For the information of the ignorant, and reformation of the scandalous, our fingers are heavier then their loines, they say more to ours, and less to the Prelates honour. The Prelates Lording it over the Lords heritage, we frequently declare wherein it was, when we speake of it; and not as they charge us with the same, and tell us not for what. When we enjoyne Ceremonies, bow∣ing at the Name of Jesus, Crosse in Baptisme, wearing the Surplice, &c. by any authority in our Government, they bring in something Prelaticall to our charge, but not when we only press to the utmost against ignorance and scandall, which was the least thing, that Government was ordinarily known by. We take the Parochiall Diocesan
as a meere scoffe, the very Officer they strive against in our Congregations make it apparent, how farre our Go∣vernment is from a Parochiall Prelacy. If they would be understood, besides this flourish, to meane our inforce∣ing our way upon men of other perswasions, we have manifested by what we have said before, and by our frequent practice, how unjust this charge is. 13. The second thing is, That we contradict our selves to inveigh against the Donatists and Schismaticks; and yet espouse their quarrels. And here by the by, the great Diana of this Party is brought in, viz. mixt Communion. A fearfull errour we are guilty of in opposing this, &c. That this was the great errour of the Donatists the world must believe; and yet we Preach against them, and this great∣ly troubles these Gentlemen. We have contended against the Donatists of our times, that pretend to separate from true Churches, as many have done, and we understand not that St Augustine ever strove against Donatus, or his followers in any other sense. But that prophane and scandalous persons should not be debarred the Sacrament, sure is a thing, men so much for antiquity and the Church of England, should never take as Donatisme. The sepa∣ration which we make, is no other then what Chrysostome, Cyprian, and Augustine himselfe, will appeare by their writ∣ings to have led us in; and what our Church of England in the Rubrick of the Common Prayer, did enjoyn and should have practised. 14. We know not any secular power we ever exercised, or desired to do, over any, which any Parliament or his late Highness hath blunted the edge of. If they meane the civill Sanction for our Government, we constantly deny, that either the Parliament or his late Highness hath done any such thing, as by our Papers may ap∣peare. 15. And for the hurt they speake of by our secular power, or by the Goliah's Sword, they jeere to have taken up,
they might do well to consider that of Rom. 13. 3. Eccle∣siasticall as well as civill Rulers, are not a terrour to good workes, but to evill, wilt thou then not be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and thou shalt have praise of the same. For our requiring a Sibboleth for admissi∣on, it is none other then a blamelesse life and compe∣tent knowledge, and this, we are able to shew it, one of the chief of these Subscribers hath consented to under his hand in his own case; we hope they will none of them own it, that they have not this Shibbo∣leth ready. And for our requiring all Men to fall down and worship the Idoll we have set up; we might as well call their endeavouring to set up Episcopacy, to be the fond attempt of rearing of Dagon to his place again, when he fallen and broken before the Arke of God. It is a small matter to make us like the Egyptians, when a little before as bad as Nebuchadnez∣zar: For the Taskmasters dilemma we urge them with; sure it wight have sufficed what was said in our Answer, which they have Printed, to have cleared out Text from that glosse they put upon it; that the mat∣ter of excommunication was to be understood in case of scandall and obstinacy only; If the first construction would not have born it (which that it would and doth, we must, with men that stand upon nicities, endeavour to prove) yet they having our express meaning declared, vve vvonder how yet to fasten an aspersion upon us, they dare in this place take the thing for granted in their own sense: We desire to put men in no other straits, then God himselfe declares them to be in, and yet hath left a sufficient way-out: Men that are scandalous sinne if they come to the Sacrament, and sinne if they come not, in the one for a mission of known duty, in the other, for an undue and sinfull performance of it, men may eate and drinke unworthily, and abstaine from eat∣ing and drinking unworthily too, but they are under a ne∣cessity of mending, that they may both come and come worthily.
16. For the third contradiction they are grieved with, it is, that men that impropriate the name of Saints, &c. should not carry more tenderly then we do; truly to this we may Answer, that they may charge that on us in malice, which we cannot make it our business to vindicate our selves from with modesty; we know nei∣ther when we impropriated the names of Saints, or Christians to our selves; nor yet wherein, in the par∣ticular they mention, we have walked contrary; we presume the thing they charge us with, they acquit themselves from; we will go no further for appeale, then the Papers in hand; let the impartiall Reader view, what he can find savouring of so much sweet∣nesse and candor in their first and last Papers, and what there is of provocation in ours, and by that let the matter be judged (wherever the profession of Saintship is) where the contrary practice is most ap∣parent. We thinke it not strange to be counted le∣gall and bitter for speaking against sinne, when the A∣postle was counted an enemy for telling the truth. It is sadly suspiscious the controversie lies on another prin∣ciple, then yet is in view. We know not any thing we are guilty of, like censoriousnesse; unless it be free speaking upon all occasions against gross wickednesse; we would hope those men would not patronize that cause, which we profess our selves only against. If this be it, that makes us so censorious in private, and severe in publique, we must profess, we dare not be Ministers, to sooth up men in their sinnes, unless they can finde us a Christ, that will save them in their sinnes; yet we hope that such of our people, as have had occasion to be conversant with us even in this bu∣sinesse of the Sacrament, do finde some of that Gos∣pell tendernesse, which these men would perswade the world we are so utterly destitute of, and will Answer more for us herein, then we thinke fit to say for our selves.
17. They now conclude their Preface, which ushers these Papers into the world, and declare how much they were forced against their dispositions to Print; we hope they will not say, we forced them, for they know we knew nothing of it. They protest it is sine ullo studio contentionis, without any pleasure, or delight in con∣tention; whenas they were upon tearmes of accommo∣dation with us, according to our Narrative and the truth, and yet Print the Papers; and they professed∣ly hereby fire their Beacons, to raise up others to the like opposition, or a stronger, where there is ability and occasion. For the success of their cause, we know not what God in his wise judgement may per∣mit it to be; the reception of what they have done, or we may now do amongst men, we know not; but pro captu lectoris, &c. we are well aware of a spirit of prophanenesse and indifferency in the things of God that prevailes sadly in this Nation: and with men of loose lives, it is enough that some have spoken a∣gainst the Government, quale quale sit, vvhatever it is they say, and vvhatever vve may say to the contrary in our Answer, theirs shall go for an un∣answerable Piece, (because it is of a Subject so deare to too many) though ours to the contrary be never read by them. For those that are sober and moderate, we question not but they have seen something in ours already, that is in a good part unanswered, and much vvronged in theirs, vvhich vvould in some measure satisfie them, if vve should have said no more; however stay their appetites till this our further Answer comes. ¶ It may not seem altogether impertinent to the sober and unprejudiced Reader, if in this place vve sub∣joyne, only a briefe Note in vvay of vindication, of the same so much opposed, and despised Presbyterian Government, from an injury (as vve conceive) offer∣ed to it by another hand. And though vve reve∣rence
the Learned Author of the Book vvherein it is done, viz. Dr. Sanderson, a man eminent for his Learning and labours in the Church of God; yet vve conceive the vvorthy Doctor vvill hold us excused, if we take notice of the vvrong he hath done us, since he hath (as vve judge) causelesly aspersed us in Print. And we rather shall do this little in this place (con∣fining our selves to what (as vve judge) doth more particularly concern us) that we may hereby invite some worthy Author, that may have time, and a more convenient occasion of doing it more largely, to take up some other passages in the same Book; vvhich we thinke might easily be cleared, and the Doctors want of moderation (vvhich yet he so much profes∣seth) be much evidenced in those many charges he casts up∣on the Presbyterians, his Anticeremoniall Brethren. But this passage is in his Preface to his fourteen Sermons Printed Ano. 1657. In his eighteenth Paragraph, vvhere he vvould per∣swade the world much, that the Presbyterians (though not purposely, yet) eventually, should be the great promoters of the Roman interest amongst us, and that more waies then one; as by putting to their hands to pull down Episcopacy, &c. but up∣on his second thing he saies, they promote the Roman interest, by opposing it with more violence then reason, &c. And so, as the common fault of all Presbyterians so to do (they being men it seems not dealing with learning and reason in the Doctor's esteem) he confirms this by an observation of some, (vvhich he makes most his own, in that he only publisheth it to the world and subscribes unto it) vvith a particular reference to our County, in these vvords: It hath been observed by some (and I know no reason to question the truth of the observation) that in those Counties (Lancashire for one) where there are the most, and the most rigid Presbyterians, there are also the most, and the most zealous Roman Catholicks. To vvhich vve say, that though vve shall not stand upon vvhat he assert∣eth, that either there are most, or most rigid Presbyterians in this County, the truth of which, in any sense, but vvhat is truly
an honour to us, in vvhich vve thinke he vvould be very spa∣ring, vve might question; as also vvhat he meanes by Papists, and those most, and most zealous; and that in this County they should be such, vve shall not now dispute; but that Presbytery should be the eventuall cause of this, vve do much admite at the Doctors Aslertion. For if it vvere so, that vvhere rigid Pres∣byterians are, there should be rigid Papists; doth it therefore follow that the one is the cause of the other? We should to such a consequence return the Answer, which Bp. Laimer made to the Objection against Preaching, that Preaching vvas the cause of Rebellion; for before Preaching was, there vvas not such Rebellion; vvhich vvas, that this vvas, as Tem∣derton steeple was the cause of the stoppage of Sandwich haven; but that vve judge the consequents of the Doctors observation more absurd. For it doth not so vvell follow, that Presbytery should occasion stifness in Popery, because it cannot be said of the Papists in this County, that they vvere not here, before Presbytery came in. If this be the eventuall cause vvhat vvas it then, before this Government vvas established, that vvas the cause, there vvas so many rigid Papists in Lancashire? If their very rise and breeding had been contemporary with this Government, there had ben more reason for the observation, (though not much in it at the best) but that the prevalency of a more ridgid Popery in this County, which was so evident in the time of Episcopacy, as is notorious to all that are ac∣quainted with these parts, that this should be ascribed to Pres∣bytery so long before it was born here, we admire at the over∣sight of this learned man herein. But its ordinary vvith many men of this way (and we are sorry to see any of this spirit in so Reverend a man) that what is found amiss amongst us, which was truly the fault of the Prelaticall Clergy, or at least much more theirs, is ordinarily laid upon the Presbyteriall Mini∣sters, for but coming in their places after them. We desire to be sensible of what is amiss in our Congregations, and to take to, what we can be truly charged with, in defect of not endea∣vouring to reforme, as we could desire: yet we thinke it strange to be reproached for these things by the Episcopall
men, who led us the vvay (vve may speak vvithout partiali∣ty) in greater neglects, in respect of their ordinary personall care of their places, and laid the foundation of those abuses in our members by their negligence, which we are yet litle a∣ble to remove. And for men of this perswasion to come and view our Congregations and Counties, and to find these faults, to reflect upon this Government thereby, we think it ill chid of them of any. This holds true in this of the Doctors, as of our Gentlemen in their charge of our peoples ignorance to be for want of catechizing and the like. We shall not say much about the number of Papists at present in this County, but this we are confident, they have gotten no ground upon us since Presbytery was setled here. The furthest part of the County hath many in it, as it had ever since Queens Mari's time, the reformation never yet prevailing in those parts, especially for want of a setled Ministery there; and where most Papists are, there the Government is least setled, so that if we were directly chargeable with this thing, it might the more truly be said to those that know this countrey, the want of Church Government should rather be the eventuall cause of Popery to them. And whether it may not be trulier said, that Popery gets more advantage from the want of Government in the Church, then from the Presbyterian Government, which was never so effectually setled, we leave all unprejudic∣ed persons to judg: and if eventuall causes be talkt of, whether severall of the Episcopall men, that bend their strength so a∣gainst Presbytery, and whilst they contend for a Government excepted against, thereby endeavouring anarchy in the Church, do not herein gratifie the Papists, time will shew. We might further say, that in these parts we have had none (that we know of) revolted to Popery since Presbytery was setled. And for some we know very eminent, that turned Papists in the height of Prelacy, and upon some offences and sad acci∣dents that befell some in the Clergy then, which we forbeare particularly to instance; and they do but continue under us as they were before: so that Episcopacy sure was the eventuall cause of their apostacy, by the Argument of this observation
of the Doctors. May we add an observation of a worthy Di∣vine, which we have heard from him, and let it stand by this of the Doctors, and for the truth of it abide the test and strict∣est examination, and it may be still in pursuance of this vindi∣cation of our Government. It was this, that of the three formes in Church Government that are spoken of amongst us, (viz. Presbytery, Episcopacy, and Independency) of all three, the first where it hath prevailed, hath been followed with least errors in Doctrine. For Episcopacy, it is well known, how many of the Divines under that Government were infected with Ar∣minianism, Socinianism, and Popery it self. (* some chief Ce∣remoniall Dr Goffe, Dr Vane, Dr Bayly, &c. See Legen∣da lignea. men turning Papists, which the Doctor cannot ob∣serve of any Presbyterians,) For the Independants, how many of their way turn into Antinomians, Anabaptists, Seekers, Familists, Quakers, Ranters, &c. And for Presbytery, it hath not yet been observed to have bred any such noysome Weeds, where it hath been established. And how far it is eventually the nourisher of Popery, as far as concernes this instance in our County, we leave the Reader to judg.
Distance of place in regard of the Author hath hindred so strict a revisall of the Sheets in Printing as was need∣full, these faults since Collected by him, besides divers li∣terall ones not so materiall, thou art desired thus to mend. ERRATA. IN Epist. to the Reader, page 3. l. 29. for this, read his. In their Preface, p. 5. l. 26. for Donasticks, r. Donatists. In the Narrative, p. 1. l 27. for with, r. which. p 9. l. 4. for to them, r. to their. p. 13. l. 9. these words are to be read as in a Paren∣thesis (the next Class Mr Heyrick not being returned) l. 24. after Printing, these words are left out, of the Papers with the Preface. from p. 17. to the end, instead of Narrative, the Title should have been The Animadversions upon their Preface. Classicall Records, 1. Col. l. 32. for Edw. Gee, r. Edw. Lee, 8. Col. l. 5. for contained, r. continued. l. 7. for would. r. could. In the Answer to the Preface, p. 1. l. 15. note 1. for our poor Text, r. one poor Text. p. 9. l. 3. note 5. for freely making, r. freely make. l. 16. note 6. dele to. r. return the Laconick, p. 11. l. 23. note 13. r. tax as Donatism. l. lt. r. they jeer us. p. 12. l. 15 r. when he is fallen. l. 34. r. omission. In the Gentlemens first Paper, p. 11, 12. the Names from Isa. Allen to Nie. Mosely, are transposed and should have been in the front of all the Names. In the Book p. 89. l. 9. for unconformists, r. nonconformists. l 22. for not more, r. no more. p. 95. l. 36. protest against him, r. against it. p. 99. l. 28. for sober ground, r. other ground. p. 100. l. 7. for season∣able, r. seaseable. l. 18. for offored, r. affoarded. p. 106. l. 30. for , r. , p. 139. l. 22. for civill sunction, r. civill sanction. p. 179. l. 1. dele the Interro∣gation after what. p. 224 l. 12. for concluding r. excluding. p. 247. l. 28. the word as∣sure is left out. read it thus, yt that could not be a rule to assure us. p. 291. l. 30. r. is not against the Rules. p. 301. l. 36. r. normam. p. 322. l. 32. dele the, r. not to the last. p. 324. l. 23. for dissavoured, r. dissavowed. p. 338. l. 17. for admit, r. omit it. l. 33. for presumptuously used, r. promiscuously used. p. 339. l. 6. dele not. l. 27. for giving. r. give your censure. p. 340. l. 2. dele it. p. 341. l. 7, and 22. r. Magistraliter. l. 8. for ours fit, r. was fit. l. 15. for nearest Antecedent. p. 342. the sentence in the Margin should be inserted into the matter at the letter (a.) without which the sense is incompleat. l. 5. for and us that, r. and is that. p. 344. l. 16. r. competent knowledg. l. 36. r. tell us. p. 345. l. 8. dele to. p. 352. l. 26. r. Apage! Sect. 11.
The paper that was published by the first Classis within the Province of Lancaster, in the seve∣rall Congregations belonging to their associa∣tion. Novemb: 22. 1657. At the first Classe at Manchester, Septem: 8th 1657. IN pursuance of an Order of the last Provincial, the first Classe doth humbly represent to this Assembly, their apprehensions in the case to them propounded, in a draught prepared for the several Congregations belon∣ging to their own Association, if it shall be approved of by this Assembly, and which they do wholely submit to their Judgements. It being represented to this Classe, and much complained of, and offence being taken, That in the several Congregations, (if not in all) belonging to this Association, there are many persons of all sorts, that are members of Congregations, and publick∣ly enjoy severall priviledges; as, hearing of the Word, pray∣ers of the Church, and baptizing of their children, and satisfa∣ction for injuries done unto them, That yet live in a total and sinfull neglect of the Lords Supper, that are scandalous and of∣fensive in their lives, drunkards, unclean persons, swearers, Sab∣bath▪ breakers, neglecters of Family-duties, that will not subject themselves to the present government of the Church, but live as lawless persons out of their rank and order, & that there are sundry that are grosly ignorant in the main points of Chri∣stian Religion; These are to give notice, that this Classe, lay∣ing
these things to heart, and much grieved for them, do pub∣lish and make known; 1. That every Minister belonging to this Association, shall set apat one or two, or more of the weeke dayes, in every month, for the catechizing of the several familyes belonging to their respective Congregations; and for the information of the ignorant in those families, and that the families to be catechized on each of such dayes, set apart for that purpose, have notice the Lords day before, to meet the Minister either at the Church, or Chappel, or the Ministers house, or some other house within the Congregation, that may be convenient for the neighboring families to meet at, that shal be appointed for such a day, as may be judged meetest by the severall Ministers. 2. That notice shall be taken of all persons that forsake the publick Assemblies of the Saints, and constantly turn their backs of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. 3. That like notice shall be taken of all scandalous per∣sons. 4. That they shall be privately admonished, according to the order prescribed by Christ, Mat. 18. once or twice, to see if they will reforme, and that the Minister, when he catechizeth the several families, shall exhort such persons in them, as he finds to be of competent knowledge, and are blamelesse in life, that they present themselves to the Eldership, that they may be ad∣mitted to the Lords Supper. 5. That if they will neither hearken to private admonition, nor the admonition of the Eldership, their names shall be pub∣lished openly in the severall Congregations, and they warned before all to reforme. 6. That if after all this they shall continue obstinate, they shall be cast out and excommunicated. These things this Classe thought fit to give publick notice of, being very sensible, that, for the want of the vigorous exercise of Church discipline, ignorance, Atheism, and licentiousnesse growes upon us, to the great dishonour of God, scandall of Religion, hazzard and undoing of many precious souls, and the
laying a blot on our severall Congregations; and therefore they are now resolved (seeing themselves necessitated, to this severity of discipline, for the freeing themselves from the great guilt of neglect of their own duty, that otherwise they shal be under) to make use of that power that Christ hath committed to them, for edification, and not for destruction; although it would be their far greater joy, that there might not be occasion of using sharpnesse; and therefore they doe earnestly in the bowels of Jesus Christ beseech all those that are ignorant, that they would apply themselves diligently to the use of all publick and private means for their information, submitting themselves with all readinesse to be instructed, and to consider, that without know∣ledge the minde cannot be good: and they do also in the name of Jesus Christ, exhort and warn all such as live scandalously, and in the practice of open sins, that they breake off their ini∣quities by repentance, and turn unto God speedily with their whole heart, that they neither incur the censure of being cast out of the Church here, nor by continuing in their sinfull course be kept from ever entering into the kingdome of Heaven here∣after. And as touching such as turne their backs constantly on the Lords Supper, this Classe doth wish them in seriousnes to consi∣der, what an account they will be able one day to give unto Je∣sus Christ, for their living in the dayly neglect of an ordinance that is so exceeding necessary for their own comfort and growth in grace; and that they would lay aside all prejudice, or what∣ever it is that hinders, and submit themselves unto wholesom or∣der for their own good, as this Classe hath been ready on their part, to expresse all tendernesse toward the weak, and a willing∣nesse to condescend to the meanest, for the removing all occa∣sions of stumbling, so far as lies in their power. And yet, consi∣dering the fearfull danger that all such do lay themselves open unto, that shall eat and drink the Body and Blood of the Lord unworthily, they do warn whosoever comes to the Lords Table, to take special care so often as they come to examin themselves, lest they eat and drink their own damnation. But because the exercise of Church discipline must begin at private persons, and that if they neglect their duty of watching
over, and admonishing one another, and bringing complaints to the Eldership as there is occasion, little or nothing can be done for the thorow reformation of the several Congregations; this Classe doth therefore warne all and every of the Members be∣longing unto them, to consider the great guilt they will lye un∣der, if they through their neglect, obstruct so necessary a work, and doth exhort that therefore they would in all faithfulnesse, laying aside all partiality, slavishnesse and self-respects, addresse themselves to the discharge of their duty, that if any walk dis∣orderly, and will not be reclaimed by private admonition, they making complaint thereof to the Eldership, course may be taken for excommunicating of the obstinate, and thereby purging out the old leaven, to the glory of God, the delivering their own souls from that guilt they will otherwise lye under, the preserving the Ordinances from prophanation, and the rest of the lump from being leavened, the stopping of the mouths of such as seek occasion against us, and finally the everlasting wel∣fare and salvation of the souls of those that go astray. By the Provincial Assembly at Preston, Octob: 6. 1657. RICHARD HEYRICKE Moderator pro tempore. This representation is approved by the Pro▪vincial Assembly, THOMAS JOHNSON, Moderator. EDWARD GEE, Scribe.
The Gentlemens first Paper. To the Eldership of the severall Congregations belonging to the Association of the first Classe at Manchester, within the Province of Lan∣caster; These. Give us leave to salute you in your own Terms. WE have seene and seriously weighed that paper draught, Intituled A presentation of the first Classe at Manchester, dated the 8. of Sept. 1657. confirmed by the Pro∣vinciall Assembly at Preston, Octob. 6. and published at Man∣chester Church the 22. of Nov. in the aforesaid yeare: and do publish this our sense, and Apprehension of it, as far as is plain to us, not resting in the Judgement and determination of any Generall Councill contrary thereunto (if any such should be) much less to one of your Provincial Assemblies; Though you seem to submit to your Provincial, what you will hardly grant to a General Council: In which we dissent from you; Though in other things we shall joyn, as first. 1. We joyn with you, in a deep sence of the severall grosse sins and errors of the times, desiring earnestly to mourn, first for our own, next for the sins of others of our Christian Brethren, and fellow members of that Church, whereof Christ is the Head: We are grieved together with you, for the Scandalous and of∣fensive lives of such as live in drunkenesse, uncleanesse, swearing, prophanation of the Sabbath, &c. 2. We are also sensible with you, that there are sundry persons, grossely ignorant in the main points of Christian Religion. 3. You with us again (we hope) are sensible and grieved (though you do not at all mention them) for the grosse errours
in judgement, and the damnable Doctrine of many, who have rent themselves into as many severall heresies, as they have into Sects and Schismes. Thus far we agree, nay more, touching the way of informing the ignorant, and reforming the wicked and erroneous, we shall not much dissent. 1. And first for the information and instruction of the ignorant, by way of Catechizing, before they be admitted to the Sacrament; The course by you published (provided it be in publique) little differeth from the order prescribed by the Church of England, and other reformed Churches abroad, before any be admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. 2. For those who erre so grossely, whether in Doctrinals, or points of disciplin, thereby renting from a true constituted Church: Though you speak nothing either of their sin or punishment, yet we hope, you with us do hold, That the Churches lawful Pa∣stors, have the power of the Keyes committed to them, to ex∣communicate such offenders. 3. For such as are scandalous and wicked in their lives; Ad∣monition, private and publique, is to be observed according to Christs rule, Mat. 18 but if they still continue and will not re∣form, the Churches lawfull Pastors have power to excommuni∣cate such. Thus far we accord in judgement, touching the way of in∣forming the ignorant, and reforming wicked persons, and schis∣maticall; which course is so fully warranted by the Word of God, and the constant practice of the Catholique Church; that we are not so wavering, and unsetled in our apprehensions of the case, as to submit either it or them, either wholly or in part, to the contrary judgement and determination of a Generall Council of the Eastern or Western Churches, much lesse, to a new termed Provincial Assembly at Preston, wherein we not lit∣tle differ from you. Other parts of your Paper are full of darknesse, to which we cannot so fully assent, till further explicated and unfolded by you. For, 1. Whereas you say, That in the several congregations (if not in all) belonging to this Association, there are many persons of
all sorts that are members of Congregations, &c. you seeme to hint, that though your grief may be general (as ours) for all offenders, yet your censures extend onely to those who have admitted themselves members of some Congregation within your Association, and yet live inordinately, and will not be ad∣monished: If so, then we who never were any members or asso∣ciates of yours, are not within the verge and compasse of your Presbyterian discipline; for what have you to do to judge those that are without? 2. But whereas your complaint, and offence taken, is, That many there are of all sorts, who will not submit themselves to the present Government of the Church, but live like lawless persons out of their rank and order. If by the present Government of the Church, you mean your own (as may strongly be conjectured you do) then are we also comprehended therein, and must fall within your censure, and not onely we, but all Papists, Anabaptists, and all other, of what Profession; and Religion soever, who live within the Parish, must be taken for members of some one Congregation within your Association, and so driven into the common fold of Presbytery, and be subject to your Government: And this (as we suppose) is the chief design of you, in this, as in other transactions of yours, to subject all to your Government, which you garnish over with the specious title, of Christs Government, Throne, and Scepter. Presbytery is the main thing driven at here; and however she cometh ushered in with a Godly pretence of sor∣row, for the sins and ignorance of the times, and a duty incum∣bent upon you, to exercise the power which Christ hath com∣mitted to you, for edification, and not for destruction; yet these are but as so many waste papers wherein Presbytery is wrap∣ped, to make it look more handsomly, and pass more currently; but beware we must, for latet anguis in Herbâ. Object. But you say, For want of the vigorous exercise of this Ecclesiastical discipline, ignorance, Atheism, and Licentiousness growes upon us, and men live as lawlesse persons, out of their rank and order, because not subject to your present Governe∣ment. Sol. We pray for the establishment of such Church Govern∣ment,
throughout his Highness Dominions, as is consonant to the will of God; and Universall practice of primitive Churches, that Ecclesiasticall discipline may be exercised, in the hands of them, to whom it was committed by Christ, and left by him, to be transferred from hand to hand to the end of the World; and shall readily joyn with you in humble addresses, to his Highnes, and his great Council, for the establishment of such a Church Government. In the mean time though there may be such, who (as you say) live as lawless persons, out of their rank and order, yet are they subject to law, and therefore subject to punishment, for though your Ecclesiastical sword cannot take hold on them, the civill sword doth reach them. Your Class may do well then not to contemn (as in charity we hope you do not) the authority of the civill Magistrate, but in stead of warning all and every member belonging to them, to complain to the Eldership, of those that walke disorderly, and will not be reclaimed, to the end they may excommunicate them, That they exhort them to complaine to the civill Magi∣strate, whose sword of Justice is sharper and longer, and likely to work a greater reformation in the lives, and manners of men, by a corporal and pecuniary Mulct, then any sword of excom∣munication or other Church censure your Eldership can any way pretend unto; There are other parts of your paper do remain likewise dark, which we desire may be made plain unto us; for whereas you say, There are many persons of all sorts, &c. That will not sub∣mit themselves to the present Government of the Church, but live as lawless persons, out of their rank and order. Our Quaeres there upon are; 1. Why Government in singulari? is there no Ecclesiasticall Government but yours? may not another Church have its Government different from yours, yet not different from that which Christ hath prescribed in his Word? Calvin saith, yea; Scimus enim, unicuique Ecclesiae &c. And accordingly there are other Churches in England different in Government from yours, and as good as yours.
But if you say yours is the Government, () by way of eminency, as Christs own Government more immediat∣ly, and jure divino, which you so much defend, then why (the present) is there no present Government in any Church or Assembly of Saints, but where your discipline is erected? Are all the rest at present without Government? or where hath yours been this 1500. years past till this present? Hath An∣tichristianism so overspread the face of the Church that Christs own Goverment could never get footing till this present? But now subjection is required thereto of all, yet many of all sorts will not subject, but live as lawless persons, out of their rank and order. Our next Quaere is; What? must all those that observe not your ranks and orders, subject not themselves to your present Government, be taken for lawless persons, out of their rank and order? Yea; for so this close connexion of yours seems to import, (viz.) many who do not subject but live, &c. In your paper you further proceed, and make it an order, That notice shall be taken of all persons, that forsake the publick assem∣bly of Saints. We would gladly know how far you extend this Saintship. this Church and assembly of Saints, if to your own Church one∣ly, and such as subject themselves to your Government; then S. Augustines Answer against the Donatists, who would not ac∣knowledge a Church in the World but amongst themselves, may also be yours, O Impudentem Vocem! (saith he) Illa non est, Quia tu in illa non es: Vide ne tu ideo non sis, nam illa erit etsi tu non sis. But if your charity reach further then to your own assem∣blies, then you make lawless persons, such as will not subject themselves to your Government, Saints, and members at least of the invisible Triumphant Church, though none of your pre∣sent visible militant Church; and then your charity over-reach∣eth. Again, we are unsatisfied in the Word (Publique) the publique assemblies of the Saints, What? do not private assemblies please
you? We presume you are not against private meetings, your own practice speaks the contrary: But you will bind all (not∣withstanding your private Assemblies) to frequent your pub∣lique also, other wayes they shall be taken notice of: What? though they cannot submit to your Government? Leave you no room for tender consciences? The Laws of the Land have otherwayes provided: And if you, under colour of authority, will make Laws and Edicts, and publish them openly in the Church, for all to obey, upon pain of excommunication, con∣trary to the Laws in force, whether you do it in contempt of the civil power, or through ignorance of the Laws; which later is rather to be supposed, in a charitable and favourable construction, yet in what sense soever it be taken, we much que∣stion, and it concerns you to look to it, whether you have not run your selves into a praemunire. Again, whereas you say, That like notice shall be taken of all scandalous persons. Our next Quaere is; Whether those that forsake the publique Assemblies of Saints in the second order, may not be taken for scandalous, and so comprehended in this third. If so, Quare oneramini ritibus? why do you lengthen out your paper, and burden us with traditions, in multiplying of or∣ders sine necessitate ad Arthritim usque? After the second and third orders against those that forsake the publique Assemblies of Saints, and such as are scandalous, comes in a fourth, touching the Catechumenists in the first order mentioned; (viz.) That the Minister when he Cateobizeth the seve∣ral Families, shall exhort such persons in them as he finds, be of compe∣tent knowledge, and are blamelesse in life, that they present themselves to the Eldership, that they may be admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper? But what if they will not present themselves before the Eldership? The Minister must exhort and admonish them. What if still they refuse? Their names shall be published openly in the several congregations, and they warned before all to reform. That's the fifth order. Mark! Men of blamelesse life and know∣ledge must be warned before all to reform. But what if after all this they will not reform, but continue obstinate! Then no admission to the Sacrament; that's implyed in the fourth order; There's their Excommunicatio minor:
But that's not all, a higher censure yet; They shall be cast out, and excommunicated; So faith the sixth and last order, the great Excommunication, which casteth out of the Church also, and judgeth them no better, then Heathens, and Publicans, not∣withstanding all their piety and knowledge. So that, in brief, all wilfully ignorant and scandalous are to be excommunicated; and not onely they, but the knowing, and blamelesse of life, if they present not themselves to the Elder∣ship. These things premised, lying sadly on our spirits and consciences, as not sound and orthodox, for which we cannot so readily joyn with you, till further satisfaction be given us, and which the publisher of your Paper promised should be gi∣ven to all that did desire, We therefore thought fit to signifie these our scruples to you, and shall wait earnestly for a speedy satisfaction in the particulars, remaining January the 12. 1657. Your Brethren desirous of Truth, Ʋnity and Peace in the Church. Joshuah Cudworth. John Ogden Sen. John Ogden Junior. Capt. James Buckley. Israel Taylor. John Buckley. Nicholas Walker. Ralph Hall. Edward Newton. Abraham Butterworth. Robert Twyford. William Radclyffe. Jo. Hartley. Ra. Bradshaw. Edward Richardson. Tho. Holland. Fra. Mosley. John Byrom. Alexand. Radclyffe. Robert Hey. Robert Ashton: William Heawood. Alexander Greene. James Marler. George Booth, Richard Symonds. Richard Waite. Richard Halliwell. Isaac Allen. Jo. Pollett. Tho. Prestwich. Leonard Egerton.
Ferdinando Stanley. Humphrey Bulkly. Nichol. Moseley. William Hulme. William Holland. Thomas Symonds. John Scholefield. Ja. Wolstenhulme. Jo. Crompton. John Grover. Tho. Scoles. Theo. Anderson. Abdie Scholfield. Tho. Heap. Sen. William Read. John Buckley. Richard Leach. James Stoales. Robert Wilson.
At Manchester, Feb. 23. 1657. The Answer of the first Classis within the Province of Lancaster, unto the first Paper presented unto them at their Classical meeting, Jan. 12. 1657. by certain Gentlemen, subscribed by them and sundry others within the bounds of this Association. SECT. I. Gentlemen, WE have perused your Paper, and doe finde in it sundry mistakes, and some manifest wrestings of our plain meaning, in that Paper of ours, which was published in our several Congregations: And we are also sensible of the sharp reflections in it, upon the Government, that is committed to our mannage∣ment, and on our selves. But we shall not go about to answer you in that kind: and therefore laying aside animosities, and putting away gall and bitternesse, in the spirit of love and meeknesse, however in faithfulnesse and plainnesse, we shall endeavour to shew you your errors and rectifie your mistakes. And we do thus far acknowledge your fair dealing, (for which we give you hearty thanks) that you addresse your selves unto
us, giving us thereby the opportunity, both to vindicate our selves, and give you a right understanding of the matters where∣in you are mistaken. Our leasure will not permit us to spend time about imperti∣nencies; but yet, that you may not conceive we are destitute of civil Authority, (which you in your Paper minde us not to contemn, and we our selves do professedly testifie all due re∣spects unto, as in duty we are bound) we intreat you to take notice, That the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, having resolved to establish the Presbyterian Government throughout the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, did August 19. 1645. publish their directions, after advice had with the Assembly of Divines, for the electing and chusing of ruling Elders in all the Congregations, and in the Classical As∣semblies for the Cities of London and Westminster, and the se∣veral Counties of the Kingdom, for the speedy settling of the Presbyterian Government. In these directions, (as may be seen pag. 8.) they did ordain, That in the several Counties cer∣tain persons, Ministers and others, should be appointed by authority of Parliament, who should consider, how the several Counties respe∣ctively might be most conveniently divided into distinct Classical Presbyteries; and what Ministers and others were fit to be of each Classis. And that they should accordingly make such division and nomination of persons for each Classical Presbytery. Which divisions and persons so named for every division, the appointed should be cer∣tified up to the Parliament. And they further appointed, That the said several Classes respectively being approved by Parliament, with∣in their several precincts should have power to constitute Congregational Elderships. According to these directions, the persons by them appoint∣ed for this County met, and did consider, how it might be most conveniently divided into distinct Classical Presbyteries, and what Ministers and others were fit to be of each Classis: and also made such a division and nomination accordingly, and cer∣tified the same up to the Parliament: All which being done, ac∣cording to their directions and appointment, It was resolved by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, Oct. 2. 1646. That they did approve of the division of the County of Lancaster
into nine Classical Presbyteries represented from the said County. And it was further resolved, That the said Houses did approve of the Ministers and other persons represented from the County of Lancaster, as fit to be of the several and respective Classes, into which the said County was divided. Which division of this Coun∣ty into nine Classical Presbyteries, and the approval there∣of by the said Lords and Commons was forthwith printed and published. In this division so made and approved, The first Classis is to contain Manchester Parish, Prestwich Parish, Oldham Parish, Flixton Parish, Eccles Parish, and Ashton under-line Parish, as by what was then printed, and is yet extant, is to be seen. Further, we wish you to take notice, That in the fore∣mentioned Directions pag. 3. Direction 6. it is there thus or∣dained, That all Parishes and places whatsoever (as well privi∣ledged places and exempt Jurisdictions, as others) be brought under the Government of Congregational, Classical, and National Assem∣blies. Provided, that the Chappels or places in the houses of the Peers of this Realm should continue free for the exercise of Divine Duties, to be performed according to the Directory. And also, that it was ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, Decemb. 21. 1646. That the several Classes in Lancashire should be one Province, as appears by their Order to that purpose; As there is also another Order of theirs of Octob. 16. 1648. enabling the several Classes within this Pro∣vince to send their Delegates to meet in a Provincial Assembly in Preston, and appointing the time of their first meeting, the number of the Delegates, that were to be sent to the said As∣sembly, and the Quorum of the Assembly, according to the pro∣vision that had been made before by the Parliament, before any Provincial Assembly could by virtue of their Authority be ena∣bled to act Provincially. By which account thus given it is manifest, That the setting up the Presbyterian Government in this County: The division of it into several Classes: The ma∣king of those Classes into a Province, and their Acting Pro∣vincially: As also the appointing this Classis to be the first, (that is, the first in regard of the number onely, the account beginning here) was all done by Authority of Parliament. And that, when we call our selves the first Classis within the
Province of Lancaster, we are awarranted thereto by authori∣ty of Parliament. And so your Saluting us in our own termes, (which we gave not to our selves, till the Parliament had first given them to us) will not seem strange to them, that then did, or now do, acknowledge that Authority and Power, which the Parliament exercised in those times. Especially considering there was nothing done since, either by that Parliament or any other, or by his Highnesse and the late Parliament, that takes from us what was then granted, and as we shall clear further anon. SECT. II. IN your Preface to what in your Paper you have to say unto us, there is in the first place a mistake of that title, which was given by us unto ours; (which you call a Paper draught) for it was not by us intituled a Presentation (as you call it) but a Draught, that represented to the Provincial Assembly our appre∣hensions in a case by them propounded unto us; And was approved by the Provincial, under the Title of a Representation. But this perhaps was but the mistake of the Scribe, and we insist not on it. It is of greater weight and moment, to take notice of what you publish as your sense and apprehensions of it, (not resting in the judge∣ment or determination of any general Council contrary thereunto) if any such should be, much lesse to one of our Provincial Assemblies. Although you tell us, we seem to submit to our Provincial, what we will hardly grant to a general Council; in which you professe to differ from us. We know very well, and have learned better from the Scri∣ptures, then to resolve our Faith into the determination of any company of men on Earth whatsoever, or to build our Faith on the Judgement of Synods, Provincial or National, or of Ge∣neral Councils, that have been heretofore, or that may be here∣after. We are sure all men are fallible; and Faith, that is a
sure and certain Grace, must have a sure and certain foundation, which is onely the infallible and written Word of God. And if this only be your meaning, you have not us differing from you. But yet when we consider, That Synods and Councils, rightly constituted and regularly called, as they may be then of great use for light and guidance, so also that they are the Ordinance of God, and by him invested with authority, and so have an autho∣ritative Judgement belonging to them, and which is not in pri∣vate persons, we dare not contemn them, nor speak sleightly of them. And seeing the higher Assemblies have greater Authori∣ty then the lower, (as there is more power in the whole, then in the part; in the whole body, then in any one, or some few mem∣bers) and that, however we are well enough satisfied, that we have the Authority of a Classe, yet we are under the Authori∣ty of the Provincial Assembly; We see not wherein we of∣fended, that we submitted our apprehensions, in the Case pro∣pounded by that Assembly unto us, unto their Judgment. There is concerning matters of Religion Judicium Privatum, or a Private Judgement; and this belongs to all Christians, who are to see with their own eyes, and judge, concerning what is neces∣sary for them to know and believe in matters of this nature. This Judgement, as there is good reason why we should allow it to our selves, so we should Lord it over mens consciences, if we should deny it to any. There is also Judicium Publicum, & Authoritativum, A Publick and an Authoritative Judgement; and this is either Concional, which belongs to every lawful Minister (to whom the Key of Doctrine is committed) by himself singly: or else it is Juridical, and this belongs to Sy∣nods and Councils, who having the Key of Discipline, are inve∣sted with authority to inquire into, try, examine, censure and judge of matters of Doctrine and Discipline authoritatively, (although they be tyed to the rule of Gods Word in such pro∣ceedings, as Judges to the Law) and likewise to censure offenders according to their merit, when such cases are regularly and or∣derly brought before them. And in this sense it was, that we sub∣mitted our apprehensions in the Paper published, to the Judge∣ment of the Provincial Assembly. And we believe, when the Apostle tels us, 1 Cor. 14. 32. That the spirits os the Prophets are
subject to the Prophets: And our Saviour Christ-saith, Mat. 18. ell the Church; And when we consider what was practised by Paul and Barnabas, and certain others (who upon occasion of a contest that arose in the Church at Antioch about a matter of Doctrine, were sent up from that Church to Jerusalem to the Apostles and Elders about that question) from these and other Scriptural grounds we had sufficient ground for so doing. We are sure also, That Whitaker de Conciliis quaestione quinta, and Chamierus in his Panstratia de oecumenico Pontifice, ubi de Autho∣ritate Papae in Ecclesia, cap. 13. & cap. 14. And generally all our Protestant Divines against the Papists, alledging the Texts above-mentioned and others, do prove abundantly, that in the sense declared, the Pope is to be subject to a general Council, wherein also sundry Papists do concur with them. And questi∣onless, if in the time of Augustine (who was no contemner of Sy∣nods and Councils) any in this sense had declared, that they would not have submitted their apprehensions to their judge∣ment, he would have cried out against them as well as against the Donatists, O impudentem vocem! And we hope, when you have weighed the matter better, you will not in this sense see any reason to refuse to submit either your sense and appre∣hensions of our Paper, or what you may publish as your own private Judgements in other matters about Religion, to the Judgement of a general Council, supposing it might be had. SECT. III. WE have now done with your Preface, and come to the matter it self, wherein you professe, (1.) To joyn with us in a deep sense of the several grosse sins and errors of the times, desiring earnestly to mourn first for your own sins, next for the sixs of others, &c. And here we do hear∣tily pray, that neither we nor you may any of us condemn our selves, either by professing our sorrow, for what sins we may
practise, or by refusing to help forward the good that we pro∣fesse to allow of, but may testifie the truth of our sorrow for our own and other mens sins, by suitable indeavors to reform what is amisse in our selves, and helping forward every one in his place the reformation of others. (2-) In the next place, you say, You are also sensible with us that there are sundry persons grosly ignorant in the mainpoints of Chri∣stian Religion. And if so, we hope you will acknowledge, that where, after the injoying of plenty of Preaching and the pub∣lick Catechizing, that hath been used for many years together, (and much more where there hath been lesse of this meanes) many continue grosly ignorant in the main points of Religion, it is at least not to be condemned in such Ministers, as shall be willing to take the paines by private Catechizing to instruct such persons: This course being to the Ministers a matter of paines onely; and that hereupon, where the publick Ca∣techizing attaines not its desired end, the private may be good and useful, that so poor souls perish not for lack of know∣ledge. (3.) Lastly You hope, That we with you are sensible and grei∣ved, though, you say, we do not mention them, for the grosse errors in judgement and damnable Doctrines of many, who have rent them∣selves into as many several Heresies, as they have into Sects and Schisms. You may perceive by the title of our Paper, that it was a re∣presentation of our apprehensions to the Provincial Assembly, in the Case to us propounded by the said Provincial, and what that was, we shall particularly declare anon, (although by what we say had been complained of, and represented unto us, it might be gathered) and therefore we were chiefly to apply our selves to that, which was therein our main work and busi∣nesse. That the grosse and damnable errors, that the loosness of these times have brought forth, are to be bewailed (if it were possible) with tears of bloud, is most freely to be confessed. And whether we lay them not to heart in some poor measure, God the searcher of all hearts he knows; as what complaints have been made of these by the members of this Classis, both in their prayers and preaching, men can witnesse; and likewise
what testimonies have been given to the truth of Jesus Christ, and against the errors of the times, subscribed with their hands and published to the world, though therein but concurring with the rest of their Reverend Brethren in this Province, in the Province of London, and other Counties of the Land, posteri∣ty may read, when we are in our graves. But as to the most of the Congregations belonging to this Classis, the great business to be looked after was the use of our best indeavors, for the in∣forming of the ignorant, and the reforming of the scandalous, the numbers of these being great, and of those that are so grosly erroneous as to maintain damnable doctrines, and whereof you professe your selves to be so sensible, very inconsi∣derable, in comparison of the former: and in sundry of our Congregations, if not in most, (blessed be God for it) not any at all, that we know of. And therefore there was not that reason to make any such expresse mention of these as of the former, although in our Paper we were not herein neither altogether silent, as will after appear. Having professed your agreement with us thus farre, you go on to declare your selves, That, touching the way of informing the ignorant, and reforming the wicked and erroneous, you shall not much dissent. And (1.) You say, For the Information and instruction of the ignorant by way of Catechizing before they be admitted to the Sacrament, the course by us published (provided, you say, it be in publick) little differ∣eth from the Order prescribed by the Church of England, and other Reformed Churches abroad, before any be admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Sapper. That all Children and others, (so many as it is fit to instruct after that manner) be publickly catechized, is that, which we heartily wish had been and were more generally practised in our own Church at home, as it is practised by the Reformed Churches abroad. And certainly, had the publick catechizing of Children and others been more generally and constantly pra∣ctised, there had not been that cause to complain of the grosse ignorance of sundry persons of ripe years, and some of them Governours of Families, as now there is. We do also understand you by what you do here expresse, that you judge it not meet,
that the grosly ignorant should be admitted to the Lords Sup∣per, in that you seem to approve of the practice of the Re∣formed Churches abroad, (as of our own at home) in taking course to inform the ignorant, before they admit them to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; And therefore we see not how you can in reason deny, but there ought to be an examina∣tion and trial of all persons, before they be admitted to the Lords Supper, that so the grosly ignorant may not be admitted, as they might be, if all promiscuously were admitted without any tryal at all. But whereas, in this concession about catechizing, you have a Proviso, that it be in publick, we doe not see, why you should so limit it, if it be confessed, that it is necessary, that the igno∣rant should be informed, and that catechizing is an useful means to attain that end. You know how it would dash sundry know∣ing persons to be catechized publickly in the Congregation. But as for those that are conscious to themselves, that they are very ignorant, if these should be called forth to publique Catechizing, it were more likely to drive them from the pub∣lique Assembly, and so from the use of all means for their in∣formation, then beavailable to this end. As touching what was propounded by us in our paper, as the way for their infor∣mation (though it was not intended for any such a purpose as to exclude publique Catechizing) it was done in way of con∣descension to the weakest, and to shew our willingness to ap∣ply our selves to any course, so we might be instrumental to bring poor dark and blinde Souls to the knowledge of Christ, and which in our Judgement is more likely to be attained in many, as the case stands with them, in a more private way of Ca∣techizing in any of the wayes propounded by us, then if we should Catechize all the several Families publiquely before the whole Congregation. (2.) Touching those that erre so grosly, whether in Doctri∣nals or points of discipline, thereby renting from a true constituted Church, you say, we speak nothing, either of their sin or punishment, yet you hope, we with you do hold, that the Churches lawful Pastors have the power of the keyes committed to them, to excommunicate such offenders.
We have given you the reason already, why we made not such express mention of these offenders, as of the former, al∣though (as you will hereafter perceive) we are not wholly silent touching either the sin or punishment of these. Onely at present, because you professe to allow of that previous course of admonition prescribed by Christ, in reference to the scan∣dalous Mat. 18. before they be excommunicated, but here say nothing of any such course to be taken with the heretical or schismatical; (though we hope also of you, that you disal∣low it not) we shall briefly declare, what course is to be held by the rules of the Presbyterian Government, before the sen∣tence of excommunication passe against these offenders, and whereof our paper was not silent. This Government, how∣ever it gives no toleration to any such errors, as subvert the faith; or any other errours, which overthrow the power of godli∣nesse; if the party, who holds them, spreads them, seeking to draw others after him, or to any such practises, as in their own nature manifestly subvert that order, Ʋnity and Peace, which Christ hath established in his Church. These being offences censured by this Government, (and of which further after∣ward,) yet this Government prescribes the exercise of pa∣tience and long-suffering (even toward those that do grosly erre in Doctrine as well as toward those that are scandalous in life) in the use of all means for the convincing them of their errours; by reasoning with them out of the Scriptures: as we see was practised in the Synod, that was held at Jerusalem; and as we see the Fathers of the Nicene Council, did not disdain to reason and dispute with Arrius (though he denyed the Deity of Christ) before they condemned him: And as also other Fa∣thers did with other Hereticks in the Synods, although often∣times in vain. That so none might have any just cause to com∣plain, that they were condemned, before they fully heard. And as touching such as run into such practises, as in their own na∣ture tend manifestly to the subverting of that order and unity which Christ hath established in the Church, it labours with these also in the use of all gentle means to reclaim them, and bring them back again to the Church they have rent them∣selves from, before it proceed to censure. As it doth also put a
difference between the seducers, and ring-leaders of a Sect, and those that are misled; having respect not only to the nature of the offence, but also to the quality of the offender; and exerciseth patience and forbearance towards all, so long as there is any hope of reducing them by milder correction: Being ever more desirous to heal, then cut off any member. And thus having declared our selves in this, we goe on with you. (3.) For you say; For such as are scandalous and wicked in their lives, admonition private and publique is to be observed, ac∣cording to Christs rule, Mat. 18. But if they still continue, and will not reform, the Churches lawful Pastors have power to excommunicate such. In this you fully come up to what we hold, as to the meanes, that is to be used for the reformation of these, and we are glad there is an agreement in judgement betwixt you and us thus far. Neither can we see how, upon this concession, you can in reason finde fault with our proceedings, if there should be occasion for our censuring any such persons, as for their notorious offen∣ces and their obstinacy therein, might justly merit the highest censure. For however, perhaps you may say, you stumble chiefly at this, that our ruling Elders (that in your judgement may be but meer Lay-men) do joyn in the Gouernment with us; yet we see not how this can be any just ground of scruple to any of you, who (if we mistake not) were all of you satisfied in your consciences touching the lawfulness of the late Government of Episcopacy as it was then exercised, at least as to submission to it; and wherein High-Commissioners, Chancelors, and Com∣missaries (that were as much Lay-men then, as ruling Elders can be in your judgement now) had so great a share, as to suspend Ministers from the exercise of their Ministry, upon such com∣plaints as, according to the orders, that were appointed in those dayes, they might take cognizance of, and so far, as to decree the sentence of excommunication against them and others, as there was occasion for it. But here we must yet further profess, we do not know, whom you mean by lawful Pastors, to whom you here grant the power
of excommunication. Some we know, there are, that would make the Diocesan Bishops the onely Pastors of the Church, Dr. Hamm. and that other Ministers do but officiate by deputation from them and under them. We hope you are not of the minde of these. For then, as the dissent in judgement betwixt you and us would be farre greater, than as yet we apprehend it is; so hence it would follow, that, till Prelacy should be restored, there must not (if you would provide for the safety of the persons and estates of them that should mannage the Govern∣ment) be the dispensing of any Church censures at all. For you may easily know, that not only by Acts and Ordinances of Parliament before made for the abolishing of Archbishops and Bishops, &c. (and which are confirmed by the late hum∣ble Advice assented unto by his Highnesse sect. 12.) the office and jurisdiction of Diocesan Bishops is taken away; But there is yet a further Barre put in against Prelacy in the 11. sect. of the aforesaid humble Advice; where it is expresly cautioned, (and we judge it was out of a conscientious mindfulness of what had been in those very termes covenanted against) that the liberty, that is granted to some, be not extended to Popery and Pre∣lacy. And therefore if any Diocesan Bishop should exercise his jurisdiction, and excommunicate any person within this Land, wherein by Authority (as you may see afterward) there is also an appointment of another Government, we leave it to those, that are learned in the Law to determine, whether such Diocesan Bishops would not run themselves into a prae∣munire. But if you do not restrain lawful Pastors to these onely, out doubt yet is, Whether you mean not onely such Ministers, as were ordained by Diocesan Bishops, excluding those out of the number, that, since their being taken away, have been ordained by Presbyters only? If this be your sense, we shall onely at present minde you, of what is published, to be the Judgement of Doctor Ʋsher late Primate of Ireland, in a Book lately put forth by Doctor Bernard, Preacher to the Honourable Society of Grayes-Inne; and whom though a stranger to us, and one of a different judgement from us in the point of Episcopacy, yet we reverence for his mode∣ration
and profession of his desires for peace, wishing that such, as do consent in substantials for matter of Doctrine, would consider of some conjunction in point of Discipline. That private interests and circumstantials might  keep them thus far asunder. See pag. 144. of his last Book. In which wish as we do cordially joyn our selves, so we heartily desire, that all godly and moderate spirited men throughout the Land would also close. But the book, which the said Doctor hath lately published, is intituled, The Judgement of the late Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of Ireland &c. In this Book this Do∣ctor tels us, that the late Primate in Answer to a letter of his (sent to him as it should seem for that purpose) declares his Judgement touching the ordination of the Ministry in the Re∣formed Churches in France and Holland. There he saith, that Episcopus & Presbyter gradu tantum differunt, non ordine. And con∣sequently, that in places, where Bishops cannot be had, the or∣dination by Presbyters standeth valid. And in the close of his Answer about this point he saith; That for the testifying of his Communion with the Churches (of the Low-Countryes) of whom he had spoken immediately before: and which he there professeth, He doth love and bonour as true members of the Ʋniversal Church: (not∣withstanding the difference that was betwixt him and them about the point of Episcopacy) he doth professe That with like affection he should receive the blessed Sacrament at the hands of the Dutch Ministers, if he were in Holland, as he should do at the hands of the French Ministers, if he were in Charenton. See pag. 125. and 126. Hence you may perceive, that the Judgement of Dr. Ʋsher was; That the Ordination of Presbyters, where Bishops can∣not be had standeth valid. And consequently, if you be of his opinion, (and you must have stronger reason, then ever yet we have seen, to bear you out there in if you judge otherwise) they ought to bee esteemed lawful Pastors, to whom you grant the power of Excommunication, Bishops being now taken away, and may not therefore ordain according to the present Laws of the Land. The said Doctor Bernard hath some animadvertise∣ments upon this Leteer (in which Doctor Ʋsher doth deliver his judgement as abovesaid) and there shews, that he was not in this judgement of his singular. He alledgeth Doctor Dave∣nant, that pious and learned Bishop of Sarisbury, as consenting
with him in it (in his determinations quaest. 42.) and produ∣ceth the principal of the Schoolmen, Gulielmus Parisiensis, Ger∣son, Durand, &c. and declares it to be the General opinion of the Schoolemen; Episcopatum ut distinguitur a simplie sacerdotio non esse alium ordinem, &c. see pag. 130. of the aforenamed Book, as also pag. 131, 132. Where the concurrence of Doctor Dave∣nant with Doctor Ʋsher in his judgement about this matter is declared more fully. He addes also others, as in special, Doctor Richard Field in his learned Book of the Church, lib. 3. cap. 39. and lib. 5. cap. 27. And also that Book intituled, A de∣fence of the Ordination of the Ministers of the Reformed Churches be∣yond the Seas, maintained by Archdeacon Mason against the Roma∣nists. And further he saith; He hath been assured, it was not onely the Judgement of Bishop Overal, but that he had a principal hand in it. He tels us, that the fore-mentioned Author produceth many te∣stimonies; The Master of the Sentences, and most of the Schoolemen, Bonaventure, Thomas Aquinas, Durand, Dominicus Soto, Richardus Armachanus, Tostatus, Alphonsus a Castro, Gerson, Petrus Canisius, to have affirmed the same; and at last quoteth Medina a principal Bishop of the Council of Trent, who affirmed, That Jerome, Ambrose, Augustine, Sedulius, Primasius, Chry∣sostome, Theodoret, Theophylact were of the same judgement al∣so. But you may see these things your selves in Doctor Bernard, pag. 132, 133, 134. We have been onely at the pains to tran∣scribe them. We could alledge many more Testimonies to prove this: But we count these sufficient; and doe alledge these the rather, be∣cause brought by one that is of the same Judgement with you, as we suppose. But having declared how farre you accord with us in Judge∣ment, touching the way of informing the ignorant, and refor∣ming the wicked persons, and schismatical, &c. you tell us; That you are not therein so wavering and unsettled in your apprehen∣sions of the Case, as to submit either it or them, either wholly or in part, to the contrary Judgement and determination of a general Council of the Eastern and Western Churches, much lesse to a new termed Pro∣vincial Assembly at Preston; wherein you professe no little to differ from us.
That, which we submitted wholly to the Judgement of the Provincial Assembly, was not, whether Catechizing was a way appointed by God in his Word, for the information of the ig∣norant; but in what way of Catechizing (as is expressed in our Paper) the ignorant in our Congregations, who never offered themselves unto the Sacrament, were most like to be brought to some measure of knowledge; and which is not a matter of Doctrine but of Order onely. Neither was it by us submitted to that Assembly; whether the censures of the Church were the meanes appointed by Christ for the reforming of the scan∣dalous? But whether it might not be meet pro hic & nunc, and as the present case stood, to apply the censures? (and so put in practice at this time that, which in the General we were suffi∣ciently assured from the word of Truth, was the way for their reformation) and with which we were both by God and Man intrusted to dispense, unto those that were openly scandalous in our Congregations; However they contented themselves to live in the want of the Lords Supper, nor ever presented them∣selves to the Eldership to be admitted to it. And this (because meerly circumstantial, as to the dispensing of the Censures at this time and to such Persons) we think herein we owed the Provincial Assembly (unto whose Authority we professe our selves to be subject) so much respect and duty, as to submit our apprehensions in a case of this nature (which they had pro∣pounded unto us to be seriously weighed, as they had done to the rest of the Classes within this Province) unto their Judge∣ment, and to take their concurrent approval along with us, be∣fore we proceeded to practise in a matter of this weight. And yet we have declared before, That however we are not so wa∣vering and unsettled in matters of faith, as to resolve our belief into the determination of Synods or Councils, believing no more, nor no otherwise, then as they determine: Yet that it is not out of the compasse of the authority of a Synod to examine, try and authoritatively to censure Doctrines as well as matters of Discipline. And we think (how confident soever you may be of the soundnesse and orthodoxnesse of what in your Paper you propound in way of exception against any thing in ours) you have not such clear and unquestionable grounds from
Scripture for the same, that you were to be accused of wavering or unsettledness, if you had submitted the same to have been examined and tried by a Provincial Assembly: and much lesse if you could have had the opportunity of submitting it to the Censure of a General Council. But whereas mentioning our Provincial Assembly at Preston, you call it a new termed Provincial Assembly; If your meaning be, that the terming it a Provincial Assembly instead of a Pro∣vincial Synod is a new term, then this is but onely a Logo∣machia, and not much to be insisted on. Although we fre∣quently call it a Provincial Synod as well as a Provincial Assem∣bly. But if your meaning be; That it is a new termed Provin∣cial Assembly at Preston; Because Provinciall Synods or Assem∣blies have been held but lately at Preston, we see not (if Pro∣vincial Assemblies be warrantable, and have been of ancient use in the Church) that having been long in dis-use, they began of late to be held at Preston, that can justly incurre your censure. But if the Antiquity of such Assemblies be that you question: Then we referre you to what Doctor Bernard in the Book of his above quoted, shews was the Judgement of Doctor Ʋsher (who is acknowledged by all that knew him, or are acquainted with his works, to have been a great Antiquary; however we alleadge him not, that you should build your faith upon his Testimony) and which we think may be sufficient to vindicate Provincial Assemblies in your thoughts from all suspition of novelty. In that Book you have in the close of it proposals touching the Reduction of Episcopacy unto the form of Sy∣nodical Government received in the ancient Church. And it thus begins. By the Order of the Church of England, all Presby∣ters are charged to administer the Doctrine and Sacraments, and the Discipline of Christ, as the Lord hath commanded, and as this Realm hath received. And that they might the better understand, what the Lord hath commanded herein, The exhortation of Paul to the Elders of Ephesus, Acts 20. 28. is appointed to be read unto them at the time of their Ordination. A little after it is aknowledged, That Ignatius by Presbytery mentioned by Paul, 1 Tim. 4. 14. did understand the Community of the rest of the Presbyters or El∣ders, who then had a hand, not onely in the delivery of the Do∣ctrine
and Sacraments, but also in the administration of the Disci∣pline of Christ. And for further proof, Tertullian is al∣leadged in his Generall Apologie for Christians. Where he saith, that in the Church are used exhortations, chastisements and divine censure; For Judgement is given with great advice, as among those, who are certain, they are in the sight of God. And it is the chiefest foreshewing of the Judgement to come, if any man have so offended, that he be banished from the Communion of Prayer, and of the Assembly, and of all holy Fellowship The Presidents, that bear rule therein, are certain approved Elders, who have obtained this honour, not by reward, but by good report. There also is further shewed, That in matters of Ecclesiastical judicature, Cornelius Bi∣shop of Rome used the received form of gathering together the Pres∣bytery. And that Cyprian sufficiently declares of what Persons that consisted; When he wisheth him to read his Letter to the flourishing Clergy, which there did preside or rule with him. And further, That in the fourth Council of Carthage it was concluded, That the Bishop might hear no mans cause without the presence of the Clergy. And that otherwise the Bishops sentence should be void, unlesse it were confirmed by the Clergy. And yet further. That this is found inserted into the Canons of Egbert (who was Archbishop of York in the Saxon times) and afterwards into the body of the Canon law it self. It is here also acknowledged, That in our Church this kind of Presbyterian Government hath been much disused. Yet that it did professe, that every Pastor hath a right to rule the Church (from whence also the name of Rector was at first given to him) and admi∣nister the Discipline of Christ, as well as to dispense the Doctrine and Sacraments, &c. By all which it is acknowledged, and also proved; That the form of Government by the united suffrages of the Clergy, is ancient: and which is there in express termes asseted; as it might be demonstrated by many more Testimo∣nies, but that we conceive these already mentioned are suffi∣cient, and being alleadged by the aforementioned Author, As also evidencing what his own Judgement was in this point, may be more likely to sway with you (if in that there should be a dissent betwixt you and us) then any thing, that we could our selves produce. But in this reduction of Episcopacy to the form of Synodical Government received in the ancient
Church, there are proposals of Assemblies of Pastors within certain limited bounds, which (saving that they are some of them somewhat larger then ours, which is but a circumstan∣tial difference) doe hold proportion with the Classical, Pro∣vincial, and National Assemblies, mentioned in the form of our Church Government; as also the times propounded there for their meeting, the power of these Assemblies, and what they were to have Cognizance of, and the subordination of the lesser to the greater, with liberty of Appeal, if need should require, and are the same in substance as with us. And all these were propounded, as the way of Government in the ancient Church, and in the year 1641. (after the troubles, that had risen in Scotland about Episcopacy and the Ceremonies, and before the setting up of the Presbyterian Government in this Land, had so much as fallen under debate in the Parliament, so far as ever we heard of) as an expedient to prevent the trou∣bles, that did after arise in this Land about the matter of Church Government, being for the moderating of Episcopacy, that at that time was grown to that height, that it had quite ta∣ken away from the Pastors that rule, that of right did belong unto them; And for the Reduction of it to the ancient form of Synodical Government. And therefore in the Judgement of this learned and reverend Antiquary, our Provincial Assembly at Preston (where the Pastors of the Churches are members, as he acknowledgeth of right they ought to be in such Assemblies) would not have been accounted a new termed Provincial As∣sembly. SECT. IV. BUt you go on and tell us; That other parts of our Paper are full of darknesse, to which you say, you cannot so fully assent, till further explicated and unfolded by us. We cannot apprehend any such darknesse in our Paper, as you speak of. But yet because in yours, you question what au∣thority
we have from the civil Magistrate, for what we doe, and likewise the extent of it: and your mistakes of our meaning may perhaps some of them arise from your unacquaintednesse with the rule we walk by: although we were not to be blamed for any mistakes, that might arise ab ignorantia juris (whether simple or affected, that we determine not, but leave you to exa∣mine;) Before we come to make Answer more particularly to what follows, we are willing to be at some paines, to give you some further account of the power we are awarranted by the civil Authority, for to exercise; to what persons within our bounds it extends it self: and what some of those rules are, that are prescribed unto us by civil Authority, to walk by in the exer∣cise of that power we are betrusted with. It is a general and common mistake amongst many, that the Presbyterian Government, was established by the Parliament but for three years, and that therefore it is now expired and our of date. But if you peruse all that passed in Parliament touch∣ing it, no such matter will appear. The directions of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, after advice had with the As∣sembly of Divines, for the electing and chusing Ruling Elders in all the Congregations, and in the Classical Assemblies, for the Cities of Lon∣don and Westminster, and the several Counties of the Kingdom, for the speedy settling of the Presbyterian Government, bearing date August 19. 1645. Their Ordinance together with Rules and Dire∣ctions, concerning suspension from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, in cases of Ignorance and scandal, dated Octob. 20. 1645: The Votes also of the said Houses for the Choise of Elders throughout the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales in the respective Pa∣rish Churches and Chappels, according to the directions before mention∣ed; And touching the power granted to the Tryers of Elections of Elders, Of the date of Febr. 20. 1645. and Febr. 26. 1645: Their Ordinance for keeping scandalous Persons from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; the inabling of Congregations for the choice of Elders, and supplying of defects in former Ordinances and Directions of Parliament concerning Church Government, bearing date March 14. 1645: The Remedies prescribed by them for removing some ob∣structions in Church Government, dated April 22. 1647: And their Ordinance for the speedy dividing and settling the several Counties
of this Kingdom into distinct Classical Presbyteries and Congregatio∣nall Elderships, dated Jan. 29. 1647; We say, all these were passed absolutely without any proviso's at all, limiting the time of their continuance, that is expressed in any of them. Indeed in the Ordinance of Parliament giving power to all the Classical Presbyteries within their respective bounds, to examine, ap∣prove and ordain Ministers for several Congregations, dated Nov. 10. 1645; It is provided in the Close of it, That it shall stand in force for twelve moneths, and no longer; As it is provided in another Ordinance, for the Ordination of Ministers, by the Classical Presbyters, within their respective bounds, for the se∣veral Congregations in the Kingdom of England, bearing date August 28. 1646, that it shall stand in force for three yeares, and no longer; Which latter might give to some (that took but the matter upon report) an occasion to conceive, that the Pres∣byterian Government was settled but for three yeares; al∣though that was but ill applied to all the several Ordinances that had passed before, which belonged onely to one. But the Ordinance especially, from which chiefly (as we conceive) the mistake arose about settling the Presbyterian Government for three years onely, was the Ordinance that passed June 5. 1646; The title whereof is, An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, for the present settling (without further de∣lay) of the Presbyterial Government in the Church of England: In the Close whereof it is ordained; That this Ordinance shall con∣tinue for the space of three yeares, and no longer, unlesse both Houses think fit to continue it. But if the matter of this Ordinance be con∣sulted, it is manifest it was but touching a Committee of Lords and Commons to adjudge and determine scandalous offences not formerly enumerated, appointed by that Ordinance, in stead and place of Com∣missioners mentioned in the Ordinance of March 14. 1645; And also shewing how the Elderships were to proceed in the examination of such scandalous offences; And touching what power was granted to the said Committee, and in what sort they were to proceed, as is clear to any, that shall but take the pains to peruse that Ordinance; The ground whereof in the preface to it, is made to be this; The Lords and Commons in Parliament holding their former resolution, that all notorious and scandalous offenders shall be kept from the Sacrament,
have thought fit to make a further addition to the scandalous offences formerly enumerated, for which men shall be kept back from the Sa∣crament; And least the stay of the enumeration, and the not naming of Commissioners to judge of Cases not enumerated, should hinder the putting in execution the Presbyterian Government already establish∣ed, They have thought fit, &c. And doe therefore-ordain a Com∣mittee (therein particularly nominated) in stead and place of Com∣missioners. The groundlesnesse of the mistake about settling the Presby∣terial Government for three years onely (that might arise from the proviso in this Ordinance) is so clear to any common understanding, that the bare recital of the sum of the matter of this Ordinance, and the ground of making it, doth make it so fully to appear, that it were but lost labour to use any more words about it. But we have particularly mentioned all that ever passed the Parliament (so farre as we have either seen or heard of) that hitherto concerned Church Government, untill the year 1648; When the form of Church Government to be used in the Church of England and Ireland, was agreed upon by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, after Advice had with the Assembly of Divines, and was ordered by them to be printed Au∣gust 19. of the said year 1648. And this Ordinance (where∣in all that had passed the Parliament before in parts, and at se∣veral times, and what ever was but temporary, by vertue of o∣ther Ordinances (so far as was intended for continuance) are moulded up into a complete body, with a supply of sundry things that had been never mentioned nor published before in other Ordinances) is without any limitation of time for its continuance, and remains unrepealed to this day, for any thing we have seen or heard to the contrary. Nay we think (as we shall touch upon anon) That by the humble Advice, assented to by his Highnesse, this Ordinance (as well as others) receives strength. But by this full account given, we think we have made it sufficiently to appear, that we have had the Authority of the civil Magistrate to bear us out, in what we have acted since the first setting up of the Presbyterian Government untill this pre∣sent; Except there be any, that can come forth, and charge
us to have transgressed the rules, appointed by the Parliament for us to observe in our actings, against which our own inno∣cency onely shall be our defence. It now remaines, for your further satisfaction, and our own vindication, that we recite some things particularly out of the form of Church Government, which we conceive are thereunto subservient. In the very first Words of the Ordinance (according to what we have before recited in the directions for the electing and choosing of ruling Elders, and is there also to be found) you may find it thus; Be it ordered and ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of the same, That all Parishes and Places whatsoever within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, (as well Priviledged Places and exempted jurisdictions as others) be brought under the Government of Congrega∣tional, Classical, Provincial and National Assemblies, &c. Whence it is to us unquestionable, That by vertue of this appointment, such as live within the bounds of our several Congregations and Parishes are under the power of some one or other of the Con∣gregational Elderships, constituted by Authority of Parliament within our several Parishes; And that all those that live within the bounds of our Classis (mentioned before) are under the power of our Classical Assembly, constituted in like manner by the said Authority. What power is given particularly to the congregational El∣derships, you may finde in the aforesaid form of Church Go∣vernment, and unto which we refer you; onely we shall minde you, That by vertue thereof, they have power, as they shall see just oc∣casion, to enquire into the knowledge and spiritual estate of any member of the Congregation, to admonish, and rebuke, to suspend from the Lords Table, those who are found by them, to be ignorant and scandalous, and to excommunicate according to the rules and directions after following. And it is thereby ordained, That the Examination and Judgement of such Persons, as shall for their ignorance in the points of Religion, mentioned in that Ordinance, not be admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, is to be in the power of the Eldership of every Congrega∣tion. All which will appear by the expresse Letter of the said Ordinance, to any, that will consult it, and which not onely
justifies all that is practised, in that case, by the several Elder∣ships, but also shews what grounds this Classis had for that which was mentioned in our Paper, touching both what is therein appointed to the Minister about Catechizing Families, and also concerning the Ministers exhorting such, as in the se∣veral Families he should finde to be of competent knowledge, and know to be of blamelesse life, That they should present themselves to the Eldership; The Trial and Judgement in this case not belonging to any one Minister alone, but to the El∣dership. There are also rules and directions given in this Ordinance to be observed by the several Elderships, concerning suspension from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper in cases of scandal, which may be seen there particularly. But there is no rule gi∣ven, that will allow either the Eldership or Classis, according to the several powers to them therein granted, either to warn before all, or to excommunicate knowing and blamelesse men for their meer not presenting themselves before the Elder∣ship. The rules of this Government prescribe otherwise; as we our selves must also needs professe, that we are not conscious to our selves, that we have given any just occasion by our manage∣ment thereof, That contrary to the expresse rules appointed therein to be observed by us, and to the plain sense of the ex∣pressions used in our Paper (of which afterward,) any such a thing, should have been so much as supposed, to have been in∣tended from any thing there expressed. Give us leave to proceed a little further, to lay open the or∣der that is prescribed in the above mentioned form of Church Government, touching the order of proceeding to excommuni∣cation; which as it will awarrant the publishing of mens names openly in the Congregation, and warning them before all to reform, being such as are justly censurable by the rules there∣of, and particularly where it prescribes, that several publique ad∣monitions shall be given to the offenders, &c. So it will awarrant us in any thing, that is made censurabe by that Paper of ours, that was published. To make this to appear, as also to shew what reason, we had
to make known to the several congregations within our bounds what our paper held forth. We shall here declare, what offences are censurable with this greatest and last censure of Excommu∣nication, according to the order, that is there prescribed, and which, as it requires, that it be inflicted with great and mature deli∣beration, and after all other good means have been essayed; so it ap∣points in these expresse words. That such Errours in practice as subvert the Faith, or any other Errours, which overthrow the power of Godlinesse; if the party who holds them, spread them, seeking to draw others after him; and such sins in practice, as cause the Name and Truth of God to be blas∣phemed, cannot stand with the power of godlinesse; and such practi∣ses, as in their own nature manifestly subvert that order, unity and Peace, which Christ hath established in his Church; and particularly all those scandalous sins, for which any Person is to be suspended from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, obstinately persisted in; these be∣ing publiquely known, to the just scandal of the Church; The sentence of Excommunication may and ought to proceed, according to the directions after following. But the Persons, that hold other Errours in Judgement, about which learned and Godly men possibly may and do differ, and which subvert not the faith, nor are destructive to godliness, or that be guilty of such sins of infirmity, as are commonly found in the Children of God: or being otherwise sound in the faith, and holy in life (and so not falling under censure by the former rules) endeavour to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace; and do yet out of conscience, not come up to the ob∣servation of all those rules, which are or shall be established by Authority, for regulating the outward worship of God, and Government of his Church; The sentence of excommunication for these causes shall not be denounced against them. These things this Classis taking into consideration, together with the power they were betrusted with by God and Man, for the dispensing the censures of the Church, in the cases cen∣surable by the rules here laid down and elsewhere, in the form of Church Government: And there having been in the Provin∣ciall Assembly several debates touching such Persons as in the several Congregations were ignorant and scandalous, who of∣fered not themselves to the Sacrament, nor to the Eldership in
order to their admission to it: and they commending it to the several Classical Presbyteries to be considered of, whether some further course was not to be held, for the information of the one, and the reformation of the other, then yet had been taken, notwithstanding their neglect; and what they judged fittest to be done for the attaining those ends; and to represent their thoughts therein to the next Assembly; This Classis upon the whole concluded, to represent their apprehensions in the Case, as is expressed in the Paper that was published, which was ap∣proved of before by the Provincial Assembly, and which they judge is sufficiently awarranted, in regard of any thing therein contained, by the rules expressed in the above-mentioned form of Church Government. We having thus far shewed what we have been, and are awarranted to practice, by the several Ordinances above men∣tioned, shall now proceed further to declare; That how∣ever we are no Lawyers, and therefore leave the determination of the Case to the learned in the Law to judge of, to whom it belongs: yet if it may be lawful for us to judge of a matter of this nature from the principles of reason; It seems to us, that the above mentioned Ordinances about Church Govern∣ment, as well as other Ordinances of Parliament, are con∣firmed in the humble Advice assented unto by his Highnesse in the 16. section thereof, where we finde these Words: And that nothing contained in this Petition and Advice, nor your Highnesse consent rhereunto, shall be construed to extend to the re∣pealing or making void of any Act or Ordinance, which is not contrary hereunto, or to the matters herein contained. But that the said Acts and Ordinances, not contrary hereunto, shall continue and remain in force, in such manner, as if this present Petition and Advice had not at all been had or made, or your Highnesse consent thereunto given. Whence we gather, that if in the se∣veral Ordinances for Church Government, there be nothing contrary to the humble Advice, or to the matters therein con∣tained, they are not thereby (any more then any other Acts or Ordinances of Parliament) repealed, but left to remain in force. At least, there seems to us to be a plain intimation, that they have a force in them, which is not by this humble Advice
repealed and made void. For it doth not appear to us, That there is any thing in the form of Church Government, or any other Ordinances of Parliament about that matter; that is con∣trary to the humble Advice or matters therein contained. And whereas in the eleventh section, there is mention made of some, that differ in worship and discipline, from the publique profes∣sion of these Nations held forth, to whom some indulgence is granted; It seems to us, there is an acknowledgement and own∣ing of what the late Parliament held forth, in regard of these, by the Directory for worship and form of Church Govern∣ment, which they passed, as the publique profession of these Na∣tions in regard of worship and discipline. And in these apprehen∣sions we are the more confirmed, because here in this section, mention is made of a confession of faith to be agreed on by his Highnesse and the Parliament, there having nothing in that kind passed the late Parliament, that established the Directory for worship and form of Church Government: However there had been a Confession of faith drawn up by the late Assembly of Divines; Whence it seemes to us clear, that they own the Directory for worship, and the form of Church Government, to be that which they hold forth, as the publique profession of the Nation for worship and Government. To the same pur∣pose we finde in the Government of the Common-wealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, &c. As it was publiquely declared at Westminster Decemb. 16 1653. pag. 43. Sect. 37. Where also they expresse a worship and Discipline publiquely held forth, which must needs referre to the Directory and form of Church Go∣vernment by us recited; There being no other worship or disci∣pline, that then had, or now hath, the civil Sanction, in this Na∣tion. We have been large, in what we have here represented in the general, before we come to speak more particularly to the rest, that now follows in your paper. But our pains being the greater, to make this full representation unto you, then it will be for you to read it, we must intreat you to excuse us; consi∣dering it tends as well to rectifie your mistakes, as to vindicate our selves, being also desirous, not to be mistaken any more, as also because it layes a foundation for our briefer and more par∣ticular
Answer unto what follows, and to which (these hings be∣ing thus premised) we now come. SECT. V. IN the things, wherein you professe your selves to dissent, till further explicated and unfolded by us. (1) The first thing we meet with here is; That by the many Persons of all sorts, that are members of Congregations, and mentioned in our Paper, in your sense thereof we seem to hint, that thereby we mean onely such, who have admitted themselves members of some Congregation within your association, and yet live inordinately, &c. And that therefore you, who never were any members or associates of ours, are not within the verge and com∣passe of our Presbyterian discipline, &c. Unto which we say; That we have constantly professed against those of the separa∣tion: That the several Assemblies or Congregations within this Land, that make a profession of the true Christian and A∣postolique Faith, are true Churches of Jesus Christ.: That the several members of these Congregations are by their birth, members, as those that were born in the Jewish Church, are said to be, by the Apostle, Jewes by nature: Gal. 2. That this their membership was sealed to them in their Baptism, that did solemnly admit them, as into the universal Church, so into the particular, wherein they were born. We have also con∣stantly maintained against the afore-mentioned Persons; That the Ministers of these Churches are true Ministers, notwith∣standing that exception of theirs against them, that they were ordained by Bishops, who also themselves were true Ministers in our Judgement (though we cannot acknowledge, that by divine right they were superiour to their fellow brethren, ei∣ther in regard of order or jurisdiction) And that therefore the Word and Sacraments (the most essential marks of a true visible Church, according to the professed Judgement of our Divines against the Papists on the one hand, and those of the
separation on the other) dispensed by these Vinisters, were, and are the true Ordinances of Jesus Christ. And that here∣upon our work was not (when the Presbyterian Government was appointed) to constitute Churches, but to reform them onely. And that therefore none within our bounds, except they shall renounce Christianity and their Baptisme, can be deemed by us to be without, in the Apostles sense; and so there∣fore not within the compass and verge of our Presbyterian Go∣vernment. Neither is it their not associating with us in regard of Government, that doth exempt them from censure by it, if they should be such offenders, as by the rules thereof were just∣ly censurable. It not being a matter arbitrary, for private Per∣sons at their own will and pleasure to exempt themselves from under that Ecclesiastical Government, that is settled by Autho∣rity: And as you know it would not have been allowed of un∣der the former Government. (2) And therefore whether you, and all others within our bounds, be not comprehended within our Government, ac∣cording to the rules laid down in the Ordinance of Parliament above mentioned, appointing the form of Church Government to be used in the Church of England and Ireland, and therein ordaining, as hath been recited before in the first page thereof, and to which we referre you; (Especially considering, that all within the bounds of our several Parishes (that are no other now then formerly) even Papists, and Anabaptists, and other Sectaries, were under the late Prelatical Government) we leave it to you to judge. Onely if so, we wish you to consider, that then you are brought under the Government of Presbytery, not so much by us, as by the Parliament appointing this Govern∣ment. And then we think you, who warn us not to contemn civil power, might well (out of respect to the Authority or∣daining it, but especially considering the word Presbytery is a known Scripture expression, 1 Tim. 4, and interpreted by sundry of the Fathers, as we do, as hath been declared before) have used a more civil expression, then to have called it a com∣mon fold, into which (it should seem) your complains it, that you should be driven. Although Presbytery layes restraint on none, but such as being scandalous in their lives, and so con∣temning
the Laws of God, are therefore truly and indeed the lawless Persons, that we speak of. But whereas (as you suppose?) This is our chief design in this, as in other transactions of ours, to sub∣ject all to our Government: We doe refer our selves to our course of life past, and hope it will witnesse with us, to all that will judge impartially, what our designes have been in our other transactions. And as touching our design in the Paper published, whether it hath been ought but the information of the ignorant, and refor∣mation of the scandalous, to the Glory of God and their salvation, we leave it to be judged by those, that will judge of mens intentions by what is expressed in their words and actions. We know very well, we are charged by some, that we af∣fect Dominion, to Lord it over the People, and to have all sorts of Persons, of what rank soever, to stoop to us. But we do openly professe, that the Government of the Church, that is committed unto men, is not Despotical, but Ministerial. That it is no Dominion, but a Ministery onely. And that the Officers, that are intrusted with it, are themselves to be sub∣ject, both in regard of their bodies and estates, to the Civil power; That by the Ordinance of God, they are appointed to be under, and that in their Government they have nothing to do with the bodies and estates of any Persons, but with their Souls onely. Although here we desire to enquire of you, whe∣ther, if you be indeed for the settling of any Government at all in the Church (as you professe to be) you do not think, that all should be subject to it? We cannot judge you to be so irra∣tional, as to be for a Government, and that yet subiection to it must be denyed. And if the late Government of the Prelacy was not blamed by you, because it required subjection to it; we wish you to consider, whether upon this account you have reason to censure us. But further, whereas you tell us; That we garnish over our Government with the specious title of Christs Go∣vernment, Throne, and Scepter: We wish you to consider, what in your Answer to an objection (that you frame out of our Paper) your selves doe say. You there tell us; You pray for the establishment of such Church Government, as is consonant to the
will of God, and universal practice of primitive Churches: that Ec∣clesiastical Discipline may be exercised in the hands of them, to whom it was committed by Christ, and left by him to be transferred from hand to hand to the end of the World. The expressions, you here use, are as high touching that Government you would have esta∣blished, as any have been, that ever we have used of ours. For your prayer is, That Ecclesiastical Discipline may be exercised in the hands of them, to whom it was committed by Christ, and left by him to be transferred from hand to hand to the end of the world. The Go∣vernment then, that you are for, must be with you, Christs Go∣vernment Throne and Scepter. And why do you then con∣demn us, if we have used such expressions concerning our Go∣vernment, till you have convinced us, that it is not such? When yet you take to your selves the liberty to use the like language, concerning the Government you pray may be esta∣blished. But where as you say, Presbytery is the main thing driven at here, and that however she comes ushered in with a Godly pretence of sorrow for the sins and the ignorance of the times, and the duty incumbent upon us, to exercise the power that Christ hath committed to us, for edification and not for destruction, that these are but so many waste Papers, where∣in Presbytery is wrapped up to make it look more handsomely, and passe more currantly: We do earnestly desire, That in the examination of your consciences, you would seriously consider, whether you have not both transgressed the rules of Charity in passing such hard censures upon us; and also usurped that, which belongs not to you, in making your selves judges of what fals not un∣der your cognizance: The things you mention belonging only to be tried by your and our Master, to whom we must all stand or fall. But we are heartily sorry, that Presbytery (which stands in no need of any painting or cover to make it look more handsomely and passe more currantly) should be accounted by you the anguis in herba, whereof you had need to beware, it having never given that offence to any, as to merit such language.
SECT. VI. BUt now you frame an objection out of our Paper, and re∣turn your Answer, professing, That you pray for the esta∣blishment of such Church Government throughout his Highnesse Domi∣nions, as is consonant to the will of God, and universal practice of primi∣tive Churches, &c. In that you do here joyn the will of God, and the universal practice of primitive Churches together, as you joyned the Word of God, and the constant practise of the Ca∣tholique Church before; you seem to us, to make up the rule (whereby we must judge what Government it is, that you pray might be established) of these two, viz. the will of God and the universal practise of primitive Churches: Or that it is the universal practise of primitive Churches, that must be our sure guide and comment upon the Word of God, to tell us, what is his will revealed there touching Church Government and di∣scipline. If this be your sense (as we apprehend it is) we must needs professe, that herein we greatly differ from you, as not conceiving it to be sound and orthodox. It being the Word of God alone, and the approved practise of the Church recorded there (whether it was the universal and constant practise of the Church or no) that is to be the onely rule to judge by in this, or any other controversies in matters of Religion. But yet admitting for the present the rule you seem to make, we should desire to know from you, what that Church Government is, which is so consonant to the will of God and universal pra∣ctise of primitive Churches. For our own parts, we think it will be very hard for you, or any others, to demonstrate out of any Records of Antiquity, what was the universal practise of primitive Churches for the whole space of the first 300. yeares after Christ, or the greatest part thereof (excepting so much as is left upon record in the Scriptures of the new Testament) the Monuments of Antiquity, that concern those times (for the greatest part of them) being both imperfect, and far from shew∣ing us, what was the universal practise of the Church then (though the practises of some Churches may be mentioned,)
and likewise very questionable. At least it will not be easie to assure us, that some of those, that goe under the names of the most approved Authors of those times, are neither spurious nor corrupted. And hereupon it will unavoidably follow, that we shall be left very doubtful, what Government it is, that is most consonant to the universal and constant practise of primi∣tive Churches for that time. But as touching the rule it self, which you seem here to lay down, we cannot close with it. We do much honour and reverence the Primitive Churches; But yet we believe we owe more reverence to the Scriptures, then to judge them either imperfect, or not to have light enough in themselves, for the resolving all doubts touching matters of faith or practise, except it be first resolved what was either the concurrent interpretation of the Fathers, or the universal and constant practise of the Churches of those times. Besides that admitting this for a rule, that the universal and constant pra∣ctise of the primitive Churches must be that, which must assure us what is the will of God revealed in Scripture concerning the Government which he hath appointed in the Church, our faith is hereupon resolved into a most uncertain ground, and so made fallible and turned into opinion. For what monuments of An∣tiquity, besides the Scriptures, can assure us touching the matters of fact therein contained, that they were such indeed as they are there reported to be? the Authors of them themselves being men that were not infallibly guided by the Spirit. But yet supposing we could be infallibly assured (which yet never can be) what was the universal and constant practise of the primitive Churches, how shall that be a rule to assure us, what is most consonant to the will of God? When as we see not, especially in such matters, as are not absolutely necessary to salvation, but that the universal practise of the Churches might in some things be dissonant to the will of God revealed Even as a Ge∣neral Council it self is subject to errour. in Scriptures. And so the universal practise of primitive Churches can be no certain rule to judge by▪ what Church Go∣vernment is most consonant to the will of God revealed in his Word. We know there are corruptions in the best of men: There was such hot contention betwixt Paul and Barnabas, as Gal. 2. caused them to part asunder. Peter so failed in his practise, as
that though before some came from James, he did eat with the Gentiles, yet when they were come he withdrew himself, fearing them of the Circumcision. And hereupon not only o∣ther Jews likewise dissembled with him, but Barnabas also was carried away with their dissimulation. Whence it's clear, that the examples of the best men even in those things, wherein they went contrary to the rule of Gods Word, are of a spreading nature, and the better the Persons, that give the bad exam∣ples, are, the greater the danger of the more universal lea∣vening. Nay we finde, that not onely some few Apostolical men had their failings, but even Apostolical primitive Churches did, in the very face of the Apostles (they being yet alive) make great defection, both in regard of opinions and practises. As from the examples of the Churches of Corinth, Galatia, and the Churches of Asia is manifest. The Apostle also tels us, that even in his time, the mystery of iniquity began to work: And in after times we know, how the Doctrine was corrupted: what grosse superstition crept into the Church: what domination was striven for amongst the Pastors and Bishops of the Churches; till at length Antichrist was got up into his seat, unto which height yet he came not all at once, but by steps, and degrees. Besides it is of fresh remembrance, that notwith∣standing the reformation happily brought about in our own Church in regard of Doctrine and worship, after those dismal Marian times, yet the corruption, in regard of Government, continued such, during the time of the late Prelacy (which yet was taken away in other reformed Churches) that the Pa∣stors were deprived of that power of rule, that our Church acknowledgeth did belong to them of right; and which did anciently belong to them; however the exercise thereof did after grow into a long disuse, as hath been shewed before. And therefore when we consider on the one hand, that the supe∣riority, which the Bishop obtained at the first above the Pres∣byter in the ancient Church (and which was rather obtained consueudine Ecclesiae then by Divine right) did at the length grow to that height, that the Pastors were spoiled of all power of rule: so we cannot much wonder on the other hand, that the ruling Elder was quite turned out of doors; For the proof
of the being and exercise of whose office in the purer times, there are notwithstanding produced testimonies of the ancients, by Divines both at home and abroad, that have written about that subject, and to which we do therein refer you: As there doe remain some footsteps and shadow of their office in the Church-wardens and Sides-men even to this day. And so upon the whole, the premisses considered, and that we are comman∣ded not to follow a multitude to do evil (though it were of the best of men) and that therefore the examples and practises, though it were of whole Churches, are to be no further a rule for us, then they follow Christ, and as their examples be ap∣proved of in the Word of Christ, notwithstanding the univer∣fality and long continuednesse of such practises; Whereas you say, that you pray for the establishment of such Church Govern∣ment, as is consonant to the will of God and universal practise of primitive Churches; we believe you might cut the matter a great deal shorter, and say, That you are for the establishing of that Government, that is most consonant to the will of God revealed in the Scriptures, and that the Word of God alone (and on which onely Faith must be built, and into which at last be resolved, when other records of Antiquity, that yet are not so ancient, as it is, have been searcht into never so much) shall determine what that is, and so those wearisome and endlesse disputes, about what is the universal and constant practise of primitive Churches (and which if it could be found out in any good measure of probability for the first 300. years after Christ, could never yet be so farre issued, as to be a sure bottom, whereon our faith may safely rest) may be cut off. It being a most certain rule, and especially in matters of faith, that the Factum is not to prescribe against the Jus; The Pra∣ctice against the Right or what ought to be done. And it being out of all question the safest course for all, to bring all doctrines and practices to the sure and infallible Standard and Touch∣stone, the Word of God alone. And after you have more se∣riously weighed the matter, and remember how you professe, that in the matters you propose in your Pper, You rest not in the Judgement or determination of any general Council of the Eastern or Western Churches determining contrary, to what you are perswaded is
so fully warranted by the Word of God, as well as by the constant practice of the Catholick Church; (although what that was, were more likely to be resolved by a general Council then by your selves) the proposal of having the Word of God alone to be the Judge of the Controversie about Church Government, cannot (we think) in reason be deny'd by you. And we with you shall heartily pray, That, that Church-Government, which is most consonant to the will of God re∣vealed in Scriptures, might be established in these Lands. Al∣though we must also professe, that we believe, that that Go∣vernment, which is established by Authority, and which we ex∣ercise, is, for the substantials of it, this Government, and which we judge also to be most consonant to the practice of the pri∣mitive Churches in the purest times. And therefore as there was some entrance made by the late Parliament, in regard of establishing this Government by ordinances, as the Church Government of these Nations: And as to the putting those Ordinances in execution, there hath been some beginning in the Province of London, the Province of this County, and in some other places throughout the Land: So when there shall be the opportunity offered, we shall not be wanting by petitioning or otherwayes to use our best endeavours, that it may be fully set∣tled throughout these Lands; that so we may not, as to Go∣vernment in the Church, any longer continue as a City without wals, and a Vineyard without an hedge, and so (to the undoing of our posterity) endanger Religion to be quite lost. And up∣on which consideration we do earnestly desire, that all consci∣entious and moderate spirited men throughout the Land, though of different principles, whether of the Episcopal or Congregational way, would bend themselves so far as possibly they can to accommodate with us in point of practice: In which there was so good a progresse made by the late Assembly, as to those that were for the Congregational way: And, as we think, also all those that were for the lawfulnesse of submission to the Government of the late Prelacy, as it was then exercised, and that are of the Judgement of the late Primate of Ireland in his reduction of Episcopacy unto the form of Synodical Govern∣ment, (mentioned before) might doe, if they would come up
towards us so far, as we judge their principles would allow them, As we do also professe, that however we cannot consent to part with the Ruling Elder, unlesse we should betray the truth of Christ, Rom. 12. 1 Cor. 12. 1 Tim. 5. (as we judge) and dare not give any like consent to admit of a moderate E∣piscopacy, for fear of encroachments upon the Pastors right, and whereof late sad experience lessons us to beware, as we judge also, that the superiority of a Bishop above a Presbyter in degree (which some maintain) is no Apostolical instituti∣on, and so have the greater reason in that respect to caution against it: Yet we do here professe, we should so farre, as will consist with our principles and the peace of our own conscien∣ces, be ready to abate or tolerate much for peace sake. That so at the length all parties throughout the Land, that have any soundness in them in matters of faith, and that are sober and godly, though of different judgements in lesser matters, being weary of their divisions, might fall in the necks one of another with mutual embraces and kisses, and so at last (through the ten∣der mercy of our God) there might be an happy closure of breaches, and restoring of peace and union in this poor, unset∣tled, rent, and distracted Church, to the glory of God through∣out all the Churches. SECT. VII. BUt now as to you, and what follows in your Paper, (and in the mean season, till this can be accomplished, and for which we shall heartily pray) we cannot but judge, that such as are within our bounds, and live as lawlesse persons contemning the com∣mands of God, and so out of their rank and order, (and of which sort you deny not, but that there may be some among us, how∣ever they be subject to Law, and the punishment of the Civil Sword, as needs they must be) yet▪ being such as are justly censu∣rable; according to the rules of our Government, we do not think they are thereby exempted from being reached by that
Ecclesiastical Sword, as you phrase it, which both God and the Civil Authority hath intrusted us with. And as we are farre from contemning the Authority of the Civil Magistrate, and shall therefore (out of due respect unto it, and that the lawlesse might be curbed) be ready, not onely our selves, as we have a call; but also warn others, as there may be occasion, to make complaint to the Civil Power, that so such offenders, may be punished by corporal and pecuniary mulcts, to the suppression of wickednesse and licentiousnesse, and the Reformation of mens lives and manners; Yet we do not apprehend why this should hinder us from warning the Members of our seve∣ral Congregations to make complaint to the Eldership of those, that walk disorderly and will not be reclaimed, to the end they may be further dealt with, as the nature of their offence may deserve. We being fully assured from the word of truth, That Excommunication is Gods ordinance, appointed for the reformation of the scanda∣lous, and as you your selves acknowledged in the beginning of your Paper: and being a spiritual punishment for the nature and kind of it, through the blessing of God, may be more avail∣able for the destruction of the flesh, and the thorough humilia∣tion of the offender, then any corporal or pecuniary mulct (that reaches but the outward man) can be; And as it was blessed with great successe for this end for many years together, whilest the Church was destitute of Christian Magistrates: Al∣though in a Christian State we see not, why we should divide what God hath joyned together. We having not yet learned either from the Scriptures or sound reason, that the conjuncti∣on of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Sword is not more likely, through the same blessing of God, to work a greater reforma∣tion in mens lives, then either of them alone, remembring that old Maxime, Vis unita fortior. And as touching our selves, and the power we are intrusted to exercise, we shall commit our endeavours unto his blessing, in the use of his own appointed means, who is able, and we doubt not but he will, make the same effectual for the ends for which he hath appointed them,
SECT. VIII. BUt you say, There are other parts of our Paper, that do likewise remain dark, which you desire to be made plain. Although we conceive not so of them, yet we shall as willingly go along with you, to give you further answer, as you to desire the same of us. And therefore whereas we having said in our Paper, That there are many persons of all sorts, that will not submit themselves to the present Government of the Church; Your first Quaere there∣upon is, Why Government in singulari? We answer, because it is the onely Government, that at present is established in this Church by Civil Authority; The Prelatical being put down, and cautioned against in the humble Advice, in regard of any liberty to be extended to it for the exercise thereof: And there being no other Government but the Presbyterian (which is our Government) that is owned (as the Church-Government for the whole Nation) by the Civil Authority. And as it is that, which we judge to be most agreeable to the will of God, so also we conceive, that whatever is of Christs prescribing in any o∣ther different Government (whether Episcopal or Congrega∣tional) is to be found here: As we do apprehend the redun∣dancies of them both, to be taken away in this, and the defects of them both, to be here supplyed. And however there may be differences amongst godly men concerning Church-Govern∣ment, which it is that Christ in particulari hath prescribed in his Word, yet we judge that the Government which Christ hath prescribed in his Word is but one; As all those must say so too, that not being Erastians do hold, That one Church-Government or other is of divine Right. But whereas you bring in Calvin saying, Seimus enim unicuique Ecclesiae, &c. To this we say; The circumstantials of Government, that are but matters of order onely, and which must be suited to the
time, or place, or persons, for whom they are made, and con∣cerning which (if you had quoted the place where Calvin useth these words) we believe it would appear he speaks; these be∣ing variable, and so but the accidentals of Government, may not be one and the same in all Churches. But if Christ have prescribed a Government in his word; for the substantials of it, it must needs be de jure one and the same in every Church. And that the Presbyterian Government is that in particular, which is there prescribed, in Calvins Judgement, is so manifest by his works to the whole Christian world, that it needs no proof. But if the Government, which Christ hath prescribed, for the substantials of it be onely one, then that alone is good, and all other Governments differing substantially from it must needs be bad; and this onely jure divino, and Christs own Govern∣ment, and the rest not. And therefore, whereas in the next place you suppose, We may assert, that our Government, is the Government by way of Eminen∣cy, as Christs own Government, more immediately, and jure divino. To this and to what you further hereupon do inquire, we say, we have declared already: That we call'd it the present Go∣vernment, because it is the onely Government settled in the Church by the Civil Power. But whether it be the Govern∣ment by way of Eminency and jure divino, that was not the thing referred unto in the phrase we used. And as to the resol∣ving of your doubts and scruples, we conceive it is not here material for us to go about the proving of the Jus divinum of it; we having proved, That it is the Government that is esta∣blished by the Civil Magisttate, and which doth lay as good a foundation to evidence the lawfulnesse of your submission to it, as for the lawfulnesse of your submission to the former Go∣vernment, (and touching which we suppose you were satisfied) your exceptions lying as much against the High-Commissio∣ners, Chancellors, and Commissaries then, as they can do now against the office of Ruling Elders, and which is the chief thing we apprehend is stumbled at in our Government. But yet if you desire to have satisfaction given you touch∣ing that which we are not ashamed to professe, viz. the Jus di∣vinum of the Presbyterian Government, we referee you to what
is so fully spoken touching this point, by sundry learned Di∣vines both of our own Church, and the reformed Churches a∣broad, that we know not, what can be added more The Assem¦blies Propsi∣tions about Church Government. The Jus Divinum by London Ministers. The Provincial Synod of London, their vindication of the Presbyterian Government. Rutherfords due right of Presbyteries. Aarons Rod, by Gillaspie.. And yet we do not say, That there is no present Govern∣ment in any Church or Assembly of Saints, but where our Di∣scipline and Government is erected intirely in all the parts of it, no more then we should deny him to be a man, in whom there were a defect of some integral parts, or in whom there were some superfluous members. But as when Antichristianisme so overspead the face of the Church in those dark times before the Reformation, God preserved a Church Ministery and Ordi∣nances, though not without the mixture of many corruptions in doctrine and worship, even amongst the Papists themselves; So there was some of Christs Government and Discipline in the worst times, though not intirely, nor without the mixture of much corruption in that Discipline and Government. And yet if you consult Antiquity, you will not finde, that the Presby∣terian Government hath lyen hid so long, as that for the space of 1500 years it could never be found till this present. You have heard what rule did anciently belong to Presbyters, not∣withstanding that through the corruptions, that crept into the Church in after times, the exercise of that power was long dis∣used. And the like may be said of Ruling Elders, and as hath been shewed by others. But it is what de jure ought to be, and not what de facto is or hath been, which is that, which you and we are chiefly to attend, and concerning which the Scripture must be the onely Judge, as we have said before. But you say, now subjection to our present Government is required by us; and then demand, Whether all that observe not our rank and order, and subject not themselves to our present Govern∣ment, must be taken for lawlesse persons? for so, say you, doth this close connexion of ours seem to import; viz Many who do not subject, but live, &c. But here you do reason fallaciously a bene conjunctis ad male
divisa: For in our Paper we spake of such, as did live in a sin∣ful and total neglect of the Lords Supper: That were scandalous and offensive in their lives, drunkards, unclean persons, and that will no subject themselves to the present Government, but live as lawlesse persons. And therefore the lawlesse persons we meant (and as might plainly have been gathered from our words) were such; who as they subiected not themselves to the present Go∣vernment of the Church, so they were also scandalous, and of∣fensive in their lives, we joyning these together, whom you di∣vide. And whether such as will neither submit themselves to the Laws of God, nor the Government, that is settled in the Church by the Civil Power, be not lawlesse persons, we leave it to you to judge. But yet we do here also minde you, That however we do not judge all those to be lawlesse persons, that do out of conscience not come up to the observation of all those Rules, which are or shall be established by Authority for regulating the outward worship of God, and Government of the Church (being other∣wise blamelesse) yet both you and we may well remember, that such as should have refused to have subjected themselves to the late Prelatical Government, would have been accounted in those times to have been lawlesse persons. SECT. IX. BUt you say, When we make it an order that notice shall be taken of all persons, that forsake the publik Assemblies of the Saints, you would gladly know, how farr we extend this Saintship, this Church, and Assembly of Saints? To which we answer, as farr as the Apostle did, when wri∣ting to the Church of Corinth and the Churches of Galatia he calls them Saints and Churches; notwithstanding there were some in those Churches that were leavened with unsound do∣ctrine and grosly erroneous: In Corinth, some that denied the Resurrection, made rents and schisms and sundry grosly scanda∣lous:
In the Churches of Galatia, such as mixed works with Faith in the point of Justification, and of which the Apostle Paul would have those Churches to take notice, even to the censuring of them, they being spots to those Assemblies; and however Saints by profession, and in regard of outward calling, being in Covenant with God, and having been baptized, yet an∣swered not their profession by suitable conversation. And therefore, however there be sundry of the like stamp in our As∣semblies, we do not therefore unchurch them, or make our As∣semblies not the Assemblies of the Saints, because of the cor∣ruption of such members. And seeing our principles and practises are manifestly known to be utterly against the opinions and practises of the Donatists of old, and those that have of late rent themselves from our Churches, because of the scandalousnesse of the cor∣rupt members, that are found in them, (though the sin of these in our Churches is aggravated by giving that occasion) you might well have spared your pains in transcribing out of Augu∣stine, what he justly said unto those schismaticks, that he had to deal with. Nay, you might rather have gathered from our Paper; That seeing we said, that notice should be taken of all those that should forsake the publick Assemblies of the Saints, our purpose was to have censured such as the Donatists were; That we purposed to observe and censure those that did main∣tain and hold up private meetings in opposition to the publick; That cry down our Churches and publick Assemblies, Ministe∣ry and Ordinances, (as you know several forts do) and who, as they hold sundry grosse errors, that subvert the faith, so in re∣gard of those and other their practises, that in their own na∣ture doe manifestly subvert the order, unity, and peace, that Christ hath established in his Church, doe justly fall under Church censure, according to the rules of our Government above mentioned. And that therefore we were not altogether silent concerning either the sin or punishment of such, as did erre grosly in doctrinals or in discipline, so as to make such dan∣gerous rents from the Church, as the fore-named Sectaries do: Contrary to what you say of us in your Paper. And further, by such as forsake the publick Assemblies of the Saints, of whom
we said notice should be taken, you might have gathered our meaning was, that such (of which sort there are but too many amongst us) who out of a principle of carelesness, sloth, worldli∣ness or manifest prophaneness, do on the Lords day either idle out the time, or else are worse imployed, when they should re∣sort to the publick Assemblies (and who, as they are no friends to any private meetings for the good of their souls, in the use of any private means of conference or prayer for that end; So they doe also Atheistically turn their backs on all the publick Ordinances, forsaking them and the Assemblies, where these are dispensed) should be taken notice of in order to censure, if there was not reformation; and to neither of which sort of persons any indulgence is granted by any Laws of the Land, that we know of. And if you had gathered thus much from our Paper, as your mistake had been far the lesse, so your Charity had been the more, then to have reckoned us in the number of such Per∣son, as the Donatists were. And yet we did not mean, That we intended to take notice in order unto censure of such, who being sound in the faith, and godly in life (though differing from us in point of Discipline and Government) had their di∣stinct Assemblies from ours, they indeavouring to keep the uni∣ty of the Spirit in the bond of Peace: They not being censura∣ble by the rules of our Government, as is manifest, by what we have declared before. Although we remember, how all that sub∣mitted not to the former Government, were counted schisma∣tical. Neither did we reckon these in the number of the lawless Persons, we speak of, who subjected not themselves to our Go∣vernment, and whom we account to be parts of the universal visible Church militant here on earth, however they have also their publique Assemblies distinct from ours, though sundry of them, as there is occasion, resort to ours also. But how we should hereupon make either these or the lawless Persons, that we speak of, members of the invisible Triumphant Church (all which we have reckoned to belong to the visible) they must have eyes quicker then Eagles, that can discern how this follows, and therefore there is no fear our Charity should so far over∣reach, as you supposed it might. But still you are unsatisfied; For you know not, it seems,
what we mean by the word (Publique) the publique Assemblies of the Saints. By our professions and practises in our owning the Publique Assemblies, where the publique Ordinances of the word Sacraments, and Prayer are dispensed, which we our selves do constantly frequent and stir up others to fre∣quent also, it was plain enough, what we meant by publique Assemblies. And we are heartily sorry, that you understanding our meaning, as is clear by what you say anon, should by this but make your way to give a lash at our private meetings, which are none of them such, as we need to be ashamed of. And which, when we meet, either for conference about matters of Religion, or to pray together, and humble our selves for our own sins and the sins of these times; when there is not the op∣portunity of a publique Assemby; or when personal or Family occasions call for a private, is surely as commendable, at the least, as a private meeting upon domestical, civil, or political occasions: and therefore not to be secretly girded at: As on the other hand, we do not meddle with the censuring of those who being godly and sound in the faith, in the main points of Relegion, do yet differ from us in iudgement, in matters of Discipline and Government and have their Assemblies for Gods publique worship distinct from ours, as we are barred from it by the rules of our Government, as we have often said before. And therefore we leave room enough for Consciences that are truely tender. Though we cannot say so much for the Prelatical Government Neither do we transgress any Laws of the Land, which have made no provision to except any persons, that we meddle with, and are made censurable by the rules laid down in the from of Church Government: nor have we under Colour of Authority made any Laws and Edicts; but according to that power, that the civil Authority hath committed to us, have only openly given notice in our several Congregations, of what offences are censurable by the rules of our Government, that the offen∣ders might take heed, they incurre not that censure of Excom∣munication which Authority hath awarranted us to inflict upon the obstinate and otherwise incorrigible. And therefore (ex∣cept to execute what we are appointed to do by the civil power
be to contemn it) we cannot be thought to have done any thing in contempt of the civil power, as it is not our ignorance of the Laws in force (that, we are confident, being grounded in reason, fight not one aganst another, and which is your more charitable and favorable construction) that hath led us into any practises, that are transgressions of them. And therfore though you much question (upon what account soever it be that we have been led into what we have acted) and think it concernes us to look to it, whether we have not run our selves into a premunire: Yet we are assured, we are as sufficiently secured against that danger, as all the Iustices in the Land are, that have acted upon other Ordinances of Parliament, which they have judged to be in force, as we do also those to be, that have been the ground of our proceedings. SECT. X. BUt you have yet further to except, for whereas we said, That like notice should be taken of all scandalous Persons. Your next Quaere is, Whether those, that forsake the publique Assem∣blies of the Saints in the second order; may not be taken for scanda∣lous Persons cemprehended in the third order; Here we perceive you understood, who were ment by those, that did forsake the publique Assemblies of the Saints, viz. Those who forsaking the Assemblies, where the publique Or∣dinances were dispensed, were upon that account really and indeed scandalous, and so being comprehended under the lati∣tude of that expression, might justly merit to be censured as scandalous Persons. And thus conceiving▪ you were not mista∣ken; but yet we (who were to express our selves popularly, and so as we might be understood) considering some of that stamp, though they forsook the publique Assemblies of the Saints, and coustantly turned their backs, as on the Lords Supper, so on all other Ordinances, yet if not drunkards and swearers, whore∣masters, &c. did not take themselves to be scandalous Per∣sons;
Do not think, that in this we are any more to be bla∣med by you (we using variety of expressions onely for this end, that we might be better understood then we blame Lawyers and Attorneys, (and wherein we judge them not tolbe blame worthy) for using variety of expressions and Multiplicity of Synonymous Words to make the matter more clear and out of doubt, where yet one and the same thing is understood by all. But now hereupon your complaint is; That we burden you with Traditions in multiplying of orders fine necessitate ad Ar∣thritim usque; and you cry out, Quare oneramini ritibus; And tell us of lengthning out our Paper; which yet is not by these few words here used made very much longer. But if you had remembred the multitude of Canons and burdensom Ceremonies, that were rigorously pressed, even to the highest censure in Case of refusall and under the burthen whereof sundry truly conscientious Persons under the late Prelacy did sigh and groan: When those, that were scandalous enough in their lives, escaped censure (and which some have cause not so soon to forget) we think you would have seen lit∣tle reason to have complained of our burthening you with tra∣ditions, in multiplying orders unnecessarily. SECT. XI. ANd now we come to your last charg, which as it is very high, so we judge it hath in it as little reason for the bear∣ing it up. You say; After the second and third Orders against those, that forsake the publique Assemblies of the Saints and such as are scandalous, comes in a fourth touching the Catechumeni in the first Order mentioned, viz That the Minister, when he Catechizeth the severall Families, &c. But here in the first place we observe, you omit to mention the first part of this Order, and unto which, that which fol∣lows in the two next Orders, doth refer. And in the next
place you descant upon this latter branch of it only. For you say, But what if they will not present themselves before the El∣dership; The Minister must exhort and admonish them. But that is wholly of your own adding. Yet you go on and say, But what if they still refuse; their names shall be published openly in the several Congregations, and they warned before all to reform. So you affirm that we say, though you prove it not, as we shall shew you anon. But here you call for attention and say. Mark; Men of blameless life and knowledge must be warned before all to reform. If we either had practised any such thing, or any such construction, either from the rules of Grammer or Logick, or common reason, could have been put upon the words, we used in our Paper, you might have called for this attention, that so such a Government as this, and the Persons mannaging it, might have been cast out both together, and no where tolerated in the Christian World. Although we have not forgotten the time, when under the late Prelacy, many godly and orthodox Ministers, and sundry knowing and conscien∣tions Christians, were far worse used, then to have onely their names published in the Congregations, and they warned to conform to the orders then appointed in the Church. The Mi∣nisters being suspended from their Ministery, to the unspeak∣able loss of their congregations, and the undoing of them∣selves and their Families. And they also oftentimes as well as private Christians (that were none of the worst members of the Congregations) cast out as unsavoury salt: And the great Excommunication, which casteth out of the Church, and Iudg∣eth them no better then Heathens and Publicans, notwithstanding all their piety and knowledge (to use your own expressions and we may adde, notwithstanding the very great use-fullness of sundry of such for the Church of God) was inflicted on them, and all because they could not in all points comform them∣selves to the Government and orders then on foot, and which all Godly, moderate, conformable men then thought might have been well spared, and the Church in those times as well governed and ordered, without them, as by the retaining of them If you had had to deal with those Persons, you might well have called for that attention, which here you do.
But yet you go on further still and say. But what if after all this thay will not reform, but continue obstinate; Then, say you, no admission to the Sacrament, for that, you say, is implyed in the fourth order; and that here is our Excommunicatio minor. But yet you drive on your charge higher still; for you adde. But that is not all, an higher censure yet, They shall be cast out and excommunicate. For so, say you, saith the sixth and last or∣der, the great Excommunication, which casteth out of the Church also, and judgeth them no better then Heathens and Publicans, notwithstanding all their piety and knowledge. And when you have driven up your charge to the height, you conclude and tell us, what the upshot of our resolves comes to, which is this, as you say, viz. In brief all willfully ignorant (though we speak not one tittle of their censure at all) and scandalous are to be Excommunicate, and not onely they, but the knowing and blameless of life also, if they persent not themselves to the Eldership. But here we see, partly prejudice against the Elder∣ship, and Persons presenting themselves before it, in order to their Admission to the Sacrament; and partly your unac∣quaintedness with the Rules of the Presbyterian Government, hath imposed upon you, thus far, as to force upon us, such a construction of our words, as never came into our own thoughts. It was an exhortation onely, that was appointed to be given to the Persons Catechized to present themselves to the Eldership, and no more. Not so much as an Admo∣nition in order to any further censure in case not hearkened unto. And here we observe that this is one main ground of your mistake, that you do not distinguish betwixt an Admoni∣tion that is in order to a further censure, if it prevaile not (and which was mentioned in the first part of the fourth Order, and which you wholly omit) and an exhortation; but con∣found these together, taking them for one and the same, and which is here a radical and grand mistake. For doubtless in a thousand cases, that might be instanced in, there may be place for an exhortation, when though ineffectual, there is no place, for an Admonition, that is in order to a further Church cen∣sure in case of obstinacy, as it is taken by us here. Men may
be exhorted to examine and prove themselvs, whether they be in the faith: to self examination before they come to the Lords Table: to grow in Grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ: to keep their hearts with all di∣ligence, and to infinite more things of the like nature, & which are duties, they should apply themselves unto; When yet there is no room for an admonition, in oder to any Church censure, in case it be not obeyed. Nay, when men may per∣ceive, there is not that care that should be in Persons, in regard of some of their Words and carriages, there may be place for an exhortation, and yet for no Admonition in order to any Church censure, in case the exhortation be not hearkned unto: if there be not any further scandalous out breakings of corrup∣tion, that may justly merit it. Church censures are not to pass upon men for every fault; nor against such as be guilty of such sins of infirmity, as are commonly found in the Children of God. As in that case by the rules of our Government it is provided a∣gainst. And yet an exhortation to watchfullness and vigilancy in such cases is not useless. And so it may well be appointed by us, that the Minister should exhort such, as are found by him to be Persons of knowledge, and are in conversation blameless, to present themselves to the Eldership, that so they might be regularly and orderly admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper (an Ordinance that is not to be sleighted, as it is by many, but upon too sleight grounds, as they will be found to be, when they come to be tried in the day of account) and yet no proceedings by Church censures against such Per∣sons, in case such an exhortation prevaile not. And, but that we see you are possessed with too much perjudice against the Eldership, we should much have wondred; that you, (who in the beginning of your Paper tell us, you had seriously weighed ours) should here in the close have run into such a great mistake, as not to have distinguished betwixt the Persons, that were to be admonished in order to further censure, if they hearkened not thereunto, and the Persons that were to be exhorted onely. If that, which led you into this mistake, was the consideration, that they were both joyned together in the same order, and therefore were both to be dealt with after the
same manner, your argument was very weak, there being nothing more frequent in Scripture and all other Authors, then to couple together in one and the same verse and sentence things of a different nature. But if that had been your ground of doubting, yet if you had attended to what presently fol∣lowed, there had been no place for stumbling in so plaine a mat∣ter. For that which follows is so limited, that it could not with any colour be applyed to those, that being exhorted by the Minister to present themselves to the Eldership, should still refuse. For it speaks expressely of such, that should nei∣ther hearken to pritate Admonition nor the Admonition of the Eldership, that their names should be published openly in the Congregation, and therefore of those onely, who had been appointed to be admonished according to Christs rule, Mat. 18. in the fourth Order. Now the Persons, that were to be admonished according to the rule of Christ, Mat. 18. and spoken of in the fourth Order, were onely such, as had been mentioned immediately before, viz. Such as should forsake the publique Assemblies, and such as were scandalous Persons. But yet to make the matter still more plain, let it be considered, that it could not with any shew of reason be construed to be our meaning; that such Per∣sons, who were found to be of competent knowledge and blameless in life, if not harkening to the Minister exhorting them to present themselves before the Eldership, were to have their names published; and if still refusing, then to be ex∣communicated. For the Persons, that were to be thus dealt with, were to be admonished by the Eldershid, and reject that admonition, before there were to be those further proceedings. But how could such Persons, that being exhorted by the Mini∣ster to present themselves to the Eldership and refused to come before them, be admonished by them? But if you say, the Persons, that the Minister is to exhort to present themselves before the Eldership, are mentioned immediately before this order made touching the publishing of mens names, and therefore must needs be included in this or∣der, and the relative (they) be referred to these, as well as to the other. This Argument also is very weak. For those a∣mongst
you, that are Scholers, do well know; That the Re∣lative is often referred to the remoter Antecedent, and must be so of necessity, when the subject matter spoken of doth ne∣cessarily require it, as in this case, it is clear it doth. For the Relative (They) in the fifth order is limited to such, as should neither hearken to private Admonition, nor to the Admoni∣tion of the Eldership, and these were onely the scandalous and the forsakers of poblique Assemblies, that were to be admoni∣shed according to Christs rule, Mat. 18. and which was that, which was appointed by the former branch of the fourth order. But you will parhaps say, if this was our meaning, why is the Ministers exhorting of knowing and blameless Persons to present themselves before the Eldership, mentioned in the same order with those, that are to be admonished in order to further censure, in case the Admonition be not hearkened to, if the same rule be not to be held with them, as with the others in case of refusall? To which we say; The Admonition spoken of in the fourth order (is said expressely) should be according to the rule of Christ, Mat. 18. Now that mentions not onely an Admonition to be given by the Church, when the case is brought thither, but also an Admonition once or twice by pri∣vate Persons. And therefore, as when the fittest opportunity is offered to private Persons to perform this duty of Admonition toward an offending Brother, they are to lay hold upon it and not let it slip; so we judged it a fit opportunity offered to the Minister, when he Catechizeth the Families, to exhort such amongst them, whom he found to be of competent know∣ledg, and were blamless in life, to present themselves be∣fore the Eldership in order to their Admission to the Sacra∣ment. And the rather, because haveing the opportunity of con∣ference with them at this time, if they had any doubts about this matter, or he saw that it was prejudice onely in them against the Elders, that hindered them (and as it is in most) he might indeavour to remove them. And this might have been easily conceived was the reason thereof by any, that had but seriously weighed, what we had expressed in our Paper, if there had been that candor, that we could have desired. And there∣fore we cannot imagine, what there should be in our Paper,
that should give the least just occasion for such a strange sense as you would herein put upon us. And we hope all indifferent and unprejudiced Persons will say, we have given as little oc∣casion by our Carriages, as there is given by our words. We have studied all wayes of condescension for the gaining of all: That neither the weak might be discoraged, nor any that can with any colour pretend to tenderness of Conscience in the matter of presenting themselves before the Eldership have any bar put in the way of their Communicating with us at the Lords Table, in regard of that order, that is observed for their Admission. But we finde, that the Eldership is that great stumbling-block with many. And we are sorry, that we have reason to com∣plain, that; Let, us do what can, yet some will be satisfied with nothing, but pulling down the hedg, and laying all common. But we dare not thus far seek to please men, though we desire to please our neighbour for his good to edification. We have thus far removed all imaginable grounds in our ap∣prehensions for this your groundless charge; That our purpose was to excommunicate all knowing and blameless Persons, if they presented not themselves before the Eldership. We shall now proceed to examine what you produce for the supporting of your selves in it. And that, which we finde in the first place, is (besides your omitting to take any notice of the first branch of this fourth order) something in your comment upon our words, which was not in our Text. For you say; What, if after the Minister hath exhorted them, they shall not present themselves before the Eldership; The Minister, say you must exhort and admonish them. But this, as we have told you, is wholly your own, and none of ours. For first, though we do not deny, But that if upon the first exhortation they do not present themselves to the Eldership (it being in order to their regular and orderly Admission to the Lords Sup∣per) the Minister may exhort, and exhort them again, because they continue in the neglect of that, which is their duty, yet there was no such thing said by us But then to make the ground of your charge something more colourable, you added ano∣ther word; which was not at all used by us. We said the Mi∣nister was to exhort, and that was all. But you adde and say,
He shall exhort and admonish. But we have told you before, to exhort and admonish are different things. And we leave it to indifferent Judges to consider, whether this be a candid and fair wa of arguing even in the Schools; much lesse should it have been made use of, when it is brought in to bear up the weight of so heavy a charge, as you here put up against us. And this is the main foundation, whereupon all the rest is built. But your ground work being so unsure, what you built there∣on must needs fall. Yet you go on to make it good, as far as you can, and therefore do further add and say. But what, if they still refuse? Their names, say you, shall be published, &c. But what's your proof for this? That's, say you, the fifth Order. But here you quite mistake your mark, and therefore when you have considered it, your selves will not wonder, you should shoot so wide. For the fifth Order speaks only of Persons, that have been privately admonished, and also ad∣monished by the Eldership; Of which the former branch of the fourth order speaks. And what sort of Persons that re∣fers to, is manifest from our Paper, and hath been by us shewed before, that it cannot by any good Rules of con∣struction be referred to the Persons, that the Minister is to exhort, and which is the latter branch of the fourth Order. And this link of your chain being thus broken, the rest of it, which follows, must needs of it self fall in sunder. So that we need to add no more. And so we have done with the examination of what you have presented to us in your Paper. But we do not finde, that you have discovered to us any thing in ours, that is not sound and orthodox; and for which therefore there is any just reason, why any thing in it should lye sadly on your spirits and consciences. But do hope, af∣ter you have seriously weighed, what is here presented, you may receive so much satisfaction, as to see you have no just cause to forbear joyning with us upon any grounds you have here made known. We have been willing to put our selves upon some pains in this our large Answer; And if it attain the desired end, we shall not account it ill bestowed. If yet you should rest unsatisfied, we desire you to let us know, what it is
you stumble at; And though in regard of sundry other im∣ployments, that lye upon us, it cannot be expected, that we, who meet but once a moneth in ordinary, and about other matters, should hold on a course of Answering you still by writing. Yet we shall be ready to appoint, some other way (that may be far more speedy, and (we trust) as effectual) to give you that further satisfaction, that is meet and just. And now we shall intreat, that as our only aime in this Anser hath not been victory, but the clearing up of the Truth; the satisfying your scruples, and gi∣ving you a right understanding, in what you were mistaken, and the vindication of the Government and our selves, and hereby the setling of Peace and Unity in our Congregations, to the glory of God and edification of the Church: So you would shew forth that Candor, as not to put any other construction upon what is here offered to you; And as you subscribe your selves our brethren desirous of Truth, Unity and Peace in the Church; So we shall heartily begge of the God of Truth and Peace, that both you and we, may all of us, in all our transacti∣ons, make it to appear, that we are cordial and real in our pro∣fessions of such desires; and that he would bless these and all other our sincere endevours, that they may be effectual for the attaining those ends. Subscribed in the Name, and by the appointment of the Class, by John Angier, Moderator.
THE GENTLEMENS Second Paper. To the first Classis at Manchester, within the Province of Lancaster, These. Dear Friends, (nay more) Brethren, dearly beloved to us in the Lord; WE return you hearty thanks, for your Answer, Cl. Cop. Full of civility toward us, though not of brevity. wherein, we finde your much Civility towards us, but with too much prolixity. We deny not but there may be some errours, and mistakes and some sharp refle∣ctions upon you and your Government, in our Paper, which you charge upon us: In yours also (and that not improbably in one of that bulk) might be discovered so me Impertinencies,
errours, and mistakes, which we forbear to minde you of, but silently pass over, hoping all will be buried, or covered in that true love and Charity of Brethren of one and the same Church and fellowship; In that true love (we say) which covereth a multitude of faults We shall make no further Replication to the several particu∣lars in your Paper, at this time, but only to one Branch, wherein you refer us to Dr. Bernard. In the close of whose Book, we meet with Cl. Cop. another. one intituled, The Reduction of Episcopacy unto the form of Synodical Government received in the Ancient Church, By the most Reverend and Learned Father of our Church Dr. James Ʋsher late Archbishop of Armagh, and Pri∣mate of all Ireland proposed in the year 1641. as an expedient for the prevention of those troubles, which afterwards did arise, about the matter of Church Government, which you say is the same in substance with yours. Your words are these, But if the Antiquity of such Assemblies be that you Question, Then we refer you to what Dr. Bernard in the Book of his above quoted shews, was the judgement of Dr. Usher (who is acknowledged by all that knew him, or are acquainted with his works to have been a great Antiquary (however we alleadge him not, that you should build your faith on his Testimony) And which we think, may be sufficient to vindicate Provinciall Assem∣blies in your thoughts from the Suspicion of Novelty; In that Book you have in the close of it, proposals touching the Reduction of Episcopacy unto the form of Synodical Government received in the Ancient Church. And it thus begins, By the order of the Church of England, &c. And so you go on quoting several Testi∣monies of Fathers, and Councils there alleadged, In which you further proceed, and say; There are Proposals of Assem∣blies of Pastors within certain limited bounds which saving that they are somewhat larger then ours, which is but a circumstan∣tial difference do hold proportion with the Classical, Provincial, and National Assemblies mentioned in the form of our Church Go∣vernment, As also the times propounded there for their meetings the power of these Assemblies, &c. and are the same in substance as with us. And all these were propounded as the way of Go∣vernment in the Ancient Church, and as an Expedient, &c. as abovesad.
And therefore (for so you conclude) in the Judgement of this learned, and Reverend Antiquary, our Provincial Assembly at Preston (where the Pastors of the Church are members, as he acknowledgeth of right they ought to be in such Assemblies) would not have been accounted a new Termed Provincial Assembly. Touching all which we shall close and joyn issue with you: we willingly submit our selves to that order, aud rule therein Expressed which being that which was received in the Ancient Church, In the Judgement of that Reverend, and learned Antiquary Dr. Ʋsher (who was so acknowledged by all that knew him, or are acquainted with his works) And also the Assemblies there expressed, holding proportion with yours, set down in the form of your Church Government, and being the same with yours in substance, and being proposed as an Expedient for prevention of further troubles, &c. We fully expect you should also submit your selves unto, for Peace and Unities sake, and so we close and meet together as in the middle; And this the rather in regard of those full and free expressions of yours to that purpose; saying, We reverence Dr. Bernard for his moderation and profession of his desires for peace, wishing, That such as do consent in Substantials, for matter of Doctrine, would con∣sider of some Conjunction in point of Discipline; That private Interests and Circumstantials might not keep themselves so far asunder. In which wish, as we do cordially joyn our selves, so we heartily desire that all godly and moderate spirited men throughout the Land, would also close. And in another place you say, However we dare not admit of a moderate Episcopacy for fear of encroachings upon the Pastors right, &c. Yet we do here professe we should so far, as will consist with our principles, and the peace of our own Consciences, be ready to abate or tolerate much for peace sake; That so at the length, all parties throughout the Land, that have any soundness in them, in matters of faith, and that are sober and godly, though of different judgements in lesser matters, being weary of their divisions, might fall into the necks of one another, with mutual embraces and kisses, and so at last through the tender mercy of our God, there might be an happy closure of breaches, and restoring of peace and union in this poor, unsetled, rent, and distracted Church, to the glory of God throughout all Churches.
Now who are they that disturbe this our happy closure and conjunction? We wish not (with the Apostle) that they were cut off, but that they were taken away that trouble us, for on∣ly they let that will let untill they be taken out of the way, and Cl. Cop. taken away. those are the Ruling Elders, as you call them; We suppofe you mean those whom you have chosen out of the Laity, and admit∣ted are those. (without further entring into holy Orders) into the whole execise of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, in equal right with the Mi∣nisters of the Gospel, (in which respect your Assemblies, and any Minister. so your Provincial at Preston would be accounted in the judge∣ment of Dr. Ʋsher a new termed Provincial assembly, and stand yet uncleared of suspition of novelty) whom you say, You cannot consent to part with, unlesse you should betray the Truth of Christ, (as you judge) quoting Rom. 12. 1 Cor. 12. 1 Tim. 5. and for further Testimony refer us to some Modern Authors, all of yesterday. Now whereas you say you cannot part with them unless you betray the Truth of Christ (as you judge.) By this Parenthesis, we gather, that you are not so wedded to that opinion but you can, and will submit to better reason, when offered to you; And we do again profess to you, that we will not willfully, and perti∣naciously, hold a contrary Tenent. And in this confidence we proceed to shew to you, that Lay-Elders are not meant nor mentioned in those Texts by you alledged; Briefly thus, but more largely hereafter, if what is comprehended in this paper be not judged satisfactory. Run over all the Expositers of holy writ, whether the Fathers in general, or more particular Councils (And Calvin saith there can be no better, nor surer remedy for deciding ofcontroversies, no better sense, nor Interpretation of Scripture, then what is given by them in such Councils) or whether the Fathers apart. And first for that Text, Rom. 12. here what Dr. Andrews saith, Cl. Cop. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 9. sect. 8. &c 15. and at your leisure examine the Fathers; There is no Epistle (saith he) on which so many of the Fathers have writ. Six on∣ly I will name, Origen, Chrysostome, Theodoret, Ambrose, Jerom, Oecumenius: All which have treated of it; Let their Commentaries be looked on, upon that place, not one of them applyeth it to the Church Government, which by all likelihood could not be
imagined but they would, if that had been the main place for it, nor finde those Offices in those words which they in good earnest tell us of, &c. As much may be said for the other two Texts; Not Dr. And. Serm. upon worship∣ping imagina∣tions. one Father in their Comments upon them giveth such a sense. Finde one Exposition for you and (which is much) we will yield you all. Many there are that apply them to the Bishops. And so one for those many of our Modern Doctors we could give you (to answer those modern you quote in behalf of your Elders) of our English Church, Dr. Fulk by name we instance in, applying these Texts to the Bishops only, whom we quote in regard of the moderate judgement he was supposed to be of, in point of Church-government, and therefore more likely to sway with you than any other we could produce; His words are these: Amongst the Clergy, for Order, and Government, there was al∣wayes one principal, to whom by long use of the Church, the name of Bishop or Super-intendent hath been applyed, which in Scripture is called , quoting these Texts, Rom. 12. 8. 1 Tim. 5. 17. and Heb. 13. 17. And therefore it can be no betraying of the Truth of Christ, if you will seriously weigh it in the ballance of impartial and un∣prejudicate reason, to part with them, and to take in the other, but a strengthening, and a backing of it. Wherefore in the name of God, and in the tender bowels of Christ, we beg again and again, beseeching you not to stand upon circumstantials or private interests, But to apply your selves to this happy con∣juncture and reconcilement of so many poor Christian Souls, in truth, love, and peace, in this our English Church, in these our days; The blessing that may redound to all parties thus recon∣ciled is unconceiveable; The lives and manners of dissolute persons (and how many there are amongst our selves, of that sort, we are but too too conscious) may by this loving accord, with brotherly admonition and exhortation be reclaimed, or by due censures corrected and amended. Amongst your selves also, many (who returned to their Canonical obedience which they have sworn to) may blot out that charge of Schism that lies upon them: The Church of God continued amongst us from age to age to the end of the world in a Succession of a lawfully
ordained Ministry; The word of God (that Candlestick) fix'd firmly amongst us, which otherwise is on tiptoes, ready to remove west-ward; as our reverend Pastor, in this Church very lately did seem to presage: And we shall happily be freed from the trouble of any further Rejoinder, unto your answer, which otherwise we must do amongst other considerable reasons to take off your Government, from that establishment of authori∣ty upon the proof whereof the most considerable part (as to the bulk) of your answer, doth insist. Subscribed by us whose names are underwritten by the consent and on the behalf of many others. Isaac Allen. Ferdinando Stanely. Nicholas Moseley. Francis Moseley. Tho. Symond. John Ogden. Manchester 9. March, 1657.
The Animadvertisement to the Reader annexed by the Gentlemen unto their Second Paper, and prefixed to their Third in their printed Copy. THe Reader must take notice, that upon the Ministers Answer to our first Paper, we re∣plyed only in a second single sheet, conceiving some hopes of an amicable and friendly agreement of these differences by submitting our selves to the Judgment of that Learned Bishop, Dr. Usher, whom they seem'd to quote for a Patron and President of their Government, if not in all circumstantials, yet in the substance and foundation of it; but upon our over∣tures for a friendly treaty in order to such a Com∣posure, they give us some verbal exceptions against the last passage of our Reply, and put us upon that work to invalid their civil Sanction; this is the occa∣sion of a Reply, and a Rejoynder also on our parts, without any further return from them but only in words.
THE ANSWER OF The First Classis Within the Province of Lancaster, UNTO THE GENTLEMENS Second Paper. WE do not question, but it is sufficiently manifest from our Narrative, unto the impartial Reader, that you dealt not fairly with us, either in Prin∣ting our Papers, or your own. For, to say nothing touching this, that what passed betwixt you and us, was private, and should not have been made publique to the world, but by mutual agreement on both sides, you might have remembred,
that in the close of that answer, we gave unto your first Paper, we told you, If notwithstanding tha answer given, you should yet rest unsatisfied, we desired you to let us know, what it was you stumbled at, and that though in regard of sundry other imploy∣ments, that did lie upon us, it could not be expected, that we, who met but once a moneth in ordinary, and about other matters, should hold on a course of answering you still by writing; yet we said, We should be ready to appoint some other way, that might be far more spedy, and (as we trusted) as effectual to give you that further satisfaction, that might be meet and just; and you know our pro∣ceedings afterward were accordingly, as the Reader will fully understand from our Narrative. But it seems either the con∣fidence, you had touching the unanswerablenesse of what you had presented unto us: or the diffidence you apprehended in us to make out publiquely, what we had so far appeared in: or some itching desire you had to be in Print: or some other motive, that you your selves are best acquainted with, hath in∣duced you to print both your papers and ours. And seeing you have chosen to run that course, we must now follow you in your own way. For however we do not question but the in∣telligent and judicious Reader, by comparing only what is said on both sides, will of himself easily perceive, that neither in this, nor your third Paper, you do tender any thing, that can have any shew of satisfactoriness, unto the answer we gave you yet least the weak should be imposed on, by your bold and confident assertions, your scoffes and taunts at our answer) as generally weak, and in some places absurd, and thereby to the prejudice of the truth, and cause we stand for, be induced to conceive (if we should not return some further answer) you had put us to silence, and we had nothing father to say: in the midst of sundry other of our ministeri∣all occasions, we are willing to be at some further pains, for the satisfaction of such, as also for the vindication of the truth, the Presbyterian Government, and our selves and actings, from the many unjust aspersions, that are cast upon us in your papers; hoping also that the Reader will consider, that if our answer to these your two other papers be satisfacto∣ry, it comes out soon enough from us, who are a society, and
many, and must therefore on that account move the more slowly, though (we hope) not the less surely, and who besides the inspection over our families and congregations and our constant and dayly pains amongst them, have other matters also of publique and common concernment to the whole Asso∣ciation, to attend on at our Classical meetings, and which we could not think, were fit to be wholly laid aside, or inter∣rupted, that so our answer might be hastened to what you have printed, we having just cause to fear, least, when we have said that, which will be sufficient to satisfie the unprejudiced Reader, you will not therein acquiesce. But we now come to your Papers, and shall first answer to your Second, and then Animadvert on your last. In the beginning of your second paper, to which we now answer, (though you here causelesly complain of our prolixity) yet you court us with the sweetest compellations, calling us, Your dear Friends (nay more) Brethren dearly beloved to you in the Lord, and further you return us hearty thanks for our answer, which you acknowledge is full of civility toward you; but in your third and last paper, you fall on us with scoffs, and jeires, uncharitable censures, foul aspersions pouring out that too much venom and distemper of spirit, which the godly and wise Readers will soon be aware of, and which whether they be agreeable to those sugared words you here give us, we leave it to your selves in the searching of your con∣sciences to judge of; as we doubt not, but when the impartial Reader shall compare the civility of our answer, with what he may finde in your first paper, he will readily conclude, we merited no such things from you as we meet with in your last. But we do here observe, that you do not deny, but that there might be some errors, and mistakes, and some sharpe reflections upon us, and our government, in that first paper, and with which we had charged you; And hereupon we have reason to tell you, that you had evidenced more sincerity in this confession, if the sence of your former failings, had with∣held you from running into the like and worse again; as
had there not been a further discovery of the distemper of your spirit, we should have been willing to have passed them over, and covered them in love, upon this confession, according to that hope thereof, which you do here pro∣fess. And as touching the impertinencies, errors, and mistakes, which (you say) not improbably might be discovered in ours, and which here you forbear to minde us of; in your next paper you speak out, what here might be in your thoughts, and which we shall forbear to return any answer to, untill we come thither. But thus are we brought to the mat∣ter of this Paper. And here the Reader will perceive, that the main thing you do pitch upon in the first place, is what we had quoted out of Dr. Bernard, showing the judgement of Dr. Ʋsher concerning the antiquity of the Assemblies he mentions, and particularly of Provincial, and which the Reader may see more at large, if he be pleased to per∣use the third Section of our answer toward the latter end of it. Concerning all this you profess, you shall close and joyn issue with us, and that you willingly submit your selves to that order, and rule therein expressed, which being that which was received in the ancient Church, in the judgement of that reverend and learned Antiquary Dr. Ʋsher (who was so acknowledged by all that know him or are acquainted with his workes) And also the Assemblies there expressed, holding proportion with ours set down in the form of our Church Government, and being the same with ours in sub∣stance, and being proposed as an expedient for prevention of further troubles which have arisen about the matter of Church Government; you do hereupon infer that you fully expect we should also submit our selves unto for Peace and Unities sake, and this the rather, in regard of those full and free expressions of ours o that purpose, in the places of our answer, which you do here particularly re∣cite.
Unto all which we ave several and sundry things to say. (1.) And first we desire, it might here be took notice of, what order and rule it is, that is propounded by Dr. Ʋsher in his reduction of Episcopacy to the form of Synodical Govern∣ment, received in the ancient Church; it is Episcopacy some∣thing moderated and limited, it being there propounded. That in every Parish the Rector, or incumbent Pastor toge∣ther with the Churchwardens and Sidesmen, may every week take notice of such as live scandalously in the Con∣gregation who are to receive such several admonitions and reproofes, as the quality of their offence shall deserve; and if by this means they cannot be reclaimed, they may be presented to the next monthly Synod, and in the mean time, be debarred by the Pastor from accesse unto the Lords Table; as is evident from the first proposal. And he then pro∣pounds, that the Suffragans in the several rural Deaneries supplying the place of those, who in the ancient Church were called Chorepiscopi might every moneth assemble a Synod of all the Rectors, or incumbent Pastors within the Precinct, and according to the major part of their voices, conclude all matters that shall be brought into debate be∣fore them, as is manifest from the second Proposal. And then further it is proposed that the Diocesan Synod might be held once or twice in the year, as it should be thought most convenient, and that therein all the Suffragans and the rest of the Rectors or incumbent Pastors (or a certain select number of every Deanery) within the Diocess might meet, or with whose consent or the major part of them, all things might be concluded by the Bishop or Superinten∣dent, &c. This is the sum of the third Proposall. The like is propounded for the Provincial and National Synods, saving that here all the Bishops and Suffragans of every Diocess are to be members in these Assemblies, and only such of the Clergy as should be elected, and the Archbishops to be the Moderators of these Assemblies, as is clear from the fourth Proposal.
Now this is that Order and rule, that you do here professe your selves willing to submit unto. And therefore you would consent; that some Ministers at the least, might for the present, have some power in the governing of the Church: but whether you would by these proposals, take your selves obliged, to submit to be governed, by all the Ministers placed in Chap∣pels, throughout the several Parishes (that yet for sure are equall to the rest of their fellow Presbyters in order and ju∣risdiction) or only to those that are benefic'd men (as they were wont to be called) we do much question; and wheher you would consent, that any other should vote in any of the fore mentioned Assemblies, we do also doubt; as we have also reason, from what you expresse in your next paper, to fear, you would but consent only thus far, because you may perceive, by these proposals (where the Suffragans, Bishops, and Archbishops are to be constant Moderators in the Assemblies mentioned, and without whom (as we appre∣hend) you will understand them, nothing might passe and be concluded, notwithstanding what was concluded, should be done by the major part of the incumbent Pastors, or Rectors present; and when in the Diocesan Synod, all the Suffragans must be members, and in the Provincial and Nati∣onal, all the Suffragans and Bishops) fair way is made to raise up Episcopacy again, to the height to which it had attained of latter times; especially when as you will perhaps further conceive, from these proposals, that all that were to be ad∣mitted into any Benefice, must come in only by the Suffra∣gans, or Bishops, and these likewise come in according as they had been wont to be admitted to these places in for∣mer times. And if this be all you would willingly submit unto (as we have some reason to believe it is) that which you would yeeld unto for peace sake, is not much. (2.) But since you lay great stresse upon what we quoted out of Dr. Ʋsher, we desire the Reader would peruse our answer throughly, in which he shall not finde, that we did e him as approving of all that he had propounded (nay we expresly cautioned against Moderate Episcopacy) much lesse did we quote him as Umpire and composer of diffe∣rences
betwixt you and us, or as our own man (as in your next Paper much forgetting your selves, you do confidently assert) but we quoted him only to prove the Antiquity of See Sect. 5. Provinciall Assemblies, where the Pastors of the severall Con∣gregations (to whom he alloweth a decisive Vote) are Mem∣bers. And we conceived, that if you should be for Episcopacie in the height of it, he was the fittest Person to be quoted by us, to moderate you as to that particular. It's true, we sayd, That the Assemblies, that were by him proposed within cer∣tain limited bounds, saving that they were something larger then ours (which we sayd was but a circumstantiall diffe∣rence) did hold proportion with those set down in the form of Church Government, and were for sustance the same with ours; But here we understood him, and so do still (else he is at a further distance from us, then we apprehended) that he would have all the Incumbent Presbyters or Pastors of the seve∣rall Congregations, meeting in the severall Chappels within the severall Parishes, to have the liberty to be admitted to these Assemblies, as Members of them, and there to have de∣cisive Votes. This we gather from what he grants in his first Proposall. Now these Assemblies thus Constituted, we sayd, are for substance, that is, in regard of the Essence of them, the same with ours, where all the Pastors of the Churches, have liberty to be admitted into them; those that are Unbenefic'd Ministers as well as others. It's true, we, cautioning against mo∣derate Episcopacie, could not but be understood, that we judg∣ed Suffragans, and Bishops mentioned in those Proposals, as superfluous Additaments to those Assemblies; and cautioning against the parting with the Ruling Elder, were to be concei∣ved, that we judged him to have a right to Vote in those As∣semblies, as a Member or integrall part of them. But yet as that man, that hath some superfluous Member, suppose a sixth Finger, or wants an Hand, or Leg, or some other usefull and necessary, or integrall part, or member, is for the substance, or in regard of his essence, the same man in kind, with him, in whom there is neither deficiency nor redundancy, in regard of Members; so it may be said concerning the Assemblies, proposed by Doctor Vsher, though there be both some de∣ficiency
in them, in regard of some integrall parts, and also some redundancy in regard of some superfluous Additaments, that they are for substance, the same with the Assemblies pro∣pounded in the form of Church Government. (3) We sayd also in our Answer, that the Proposalls of the Assemblies above mentioned, were propounded in the yeare one thousand six hundred forty one, by Doctor Vsher, as an Expedient for the prevention of those Troubles, which afterwards did arise, about the matter of Church-Government; but these things were mentioned by us. 1. To shew the wisdome, and moderation of the Propo∣ser, and how far off he was, from the temper of sundry in those times, who so they might preserve Episcopacy, in the height, that it was then grown to, did not matter the enga∣ging of three Kingdomes in a bloody War, which also they did. 2. That he was sensible of the great exorbitancy of Prelacy in those times, and did interpose his endeavours to have re∣duced the Government of the Church, neerer to the Primitive Pattern, and whereunto it is confessed, his Proposalls ten∣ded. 3. But they were never mentioned by us, to intimate, that these Proposalls, were to be the measure, of that Reformation, that was to be endeavoured after in these Nations: not onely in re∣gard of what we have to say against moderate Episcopacy (and of which afterwards anon) but also because they having not been hearkened unto, by the late King, nor by that Party, that adhered to him (who did their utmost to have upheld Epis∣copacy in its height) it is not equall (except what is there propounded, could be proved to be necessary, and by Divine Right) after the effusion of so much blood, for the deliver∣ance of the People of God in these Nations, from the miser∣able Yoke of Bondage they then sighed under, and after the issu∣ing of the War, and the determining of the Controversie a∣gainst that Party, that they should be now admitted of, to the Hazard of our dear-bought Liberty, and the raysing up againe out of its Grave, Episcopacy in the height of it, and thereby the inslaving us again, in as great Servitude, or worse then ever
before, and of which hereafter further. 4. But whereas you fully expect, that for Vnity and Peace sake, we should submit our selves to these Proposalls, and that in re∣gard of those full and free expressions of ours to that purpose; we must here crave leave to declare our selves a little more fully. (1) And first we do openly profess, we are the same still in heart, as we were formerly, in our expressions; neither shall we (we hope) by any provocations offered us by any Parties, we have had to deal with, or any oppositions, we may hereafter meet with from them, so far forget that duty, that lyes upon us, as not to endeavour after Peace, to the utmost, yea, to pursue it even then, when it seems to flye from us. We remember, that that God, in whom we profess to have an Interest, is the God of Peace: that the Lord Jesus our great Master is stiled the Prince of Peace, his precious blood being shed for to purchase it, and that thereby the middle Wall of partition being broken down, and the Enmity, even the Law of Commandments con∣tained in Ordinances, being abolished in his flesh, he might reconcile both Jews and Gentiles, unto God in one body, as we do profess, we our selves were reconciled thereby unto God, when we were Enemies. We further confess, That we are the Ambassadours of the Gospel of Peace, that we are called unto Peace, that a Blessing is promised unto Peace-makers, and that in this juncture of Af∣fairs, when the common Enemies to the Protestant Religion are banding together against us, it concerns all Parties neerly, that have any true measure of soundness in them, as they ten∣der the safety of Religion, their own, and these Nations pre∣servation from utter ruine, to endeavour after Peace, and Union, (which is our strength) and an healing of Brea∣ches. And if we know our own hearts, Peace is so deare to us, that if through the tender mercies of our God it might be restored againe, unto these Churches, upon safe and honest tearmes, we should not count, the purchasing of it with our dearest blood, to be too deare a rate, to be payd for the obtaining of it; considering that by the conti∣nuance of our Breaches and Divisions, the Name of God is dis∣honoured, his Doctrine blasphemed, Scandals do grow & are in∣creased,
the Edification of the Church is hindred, the power of Godliness impaired, occasion of great stumbling is ministred to the weak, and of triumph unto Enemies, besides the advan∣tage that is hereby put into their hands to undo us, if they should have the opportunity: although we must acknowledge, it is no small reviving to our dying hopes, that yet God may so far have mercy on us, as to prevent, what we have just ground to fear, when we consider how many of our reverend Brethren in the Ministry in the severall Countries throughout the Land, have united and associated themselves together, and do pithily and earnestly exhort unto Union, though some of them be of different Principles and Perswasions, and that there is, so far as we understand, a greater inclination, in all that are truly Godly throughout the Land, unto Peace and Union, then in former times, and for which we bless God heartily, as we do earnestly pray, that the God of Peace would hasten to create that happy and desirable Peace among us, that is so thirsted after by all good men. (2.) But yet we cannot dissemble, what we apprehend and is in our thoughts, that there are some sorts of Persons in this Land, that till God change their Judgments, and the frame of their Spirits, though we shall, so far as is possible, and as much as ly∣eth in us, live peaceably with them, and with all others, and shall be ready to requite good for evill; by all Offices and Duties of love toward them: yet we see little hopes, of any reall and hearty Union, and closure with them. And here we must profess, that however we were willing for our own exoneration (if no other end should be thereby attai∣ned) to entertain a Treaty with you, touching an Accommo∣dation (and which was pursued by us with all Cordialness and Sincerity, being desirous to wait on God in the use of the means for that purpose, so far as we saw any hope, not know∣ing what God might work out thereby (as will appeare we doubt not to the Reader, from our Narrative) yet you have now discovered so much bitterness, and distemper of Spirit, and so much unsoundness in your Principles and Opinions, to∣gether with a resolvedness to adhere to them, for ought we can discern to the contrary, that till God do open your Eyes,
and change your hearts, giving you a through sense of, and sud humiliation for, what (to your own shame) you have published to the World in your Papers, we have not any great hopes of accommodating with you, though we shall not in the mean season cease to pray for you, and use the best means we can, to bring you into the right way, from which you have turned aside. But yet we desire we might not be here mistaken: For as for such as are moderate, and godly Episcopall men, That hold Ordination by Presbyters, to be lawfull and valid: that a Bishop and Presbyter are one and the same Order of Ministery (which are not your Tenents, as will appear from both this and your next Pa∣per) and that are Orthodox in doctrinall Truths; though we may differ from them in Judgment, in some Points, touching Church Government, yet they are such as we do heartily desire to accommodate with, and we believe that such tearms might be propounded, that betwixt them and us there might be an happy Union, as we could heartily wish, that all and every of you, with whom we have here to deal, were of this stamp. Al∣though here also we must not conceal, that we have many rea∣sons, why we dare not admit of moderate Episcopacy, as the tearms of accommodation, with those of this sort. And because it is that, which you press us with, fully expecting we should submit unto what is propounded, by Doctor Vsher, in his reduction of Episcopacy unto the form of Synodicall Government re∣ceived in the ancient Church: (although as we have hinted to you, we have reason from your own Papers to judge you aime at more then is there propounded) we shall not here refuse to give you some of our reasons, why we cannot consent to you in these Proposals, as you know moderate Episcopacy was that we expresly cautioned against in our Answer to your first Paper. And (1) First, We shall here mind you, of what is well ob∣served by our reverend Brethren, of the Province of London, Reasons a∣gainst moderate Episcopacy. in their Jus divinum Ministerii Evangelici, Part second, in the Appendix Pag 117, 118, 119. There they lay down their fifth Proposition in these words. That when the distinction between a Bishop and Presbyter, first began in the Church of
Christ, it was not grounded upon a Jus divinum, but upon pru∣dentiall Reasons, and Arguments. And the chief of them was (as Hierome, and divers after him say) In remedium Schismatis, & ut dissentionum plantaria evellerentur: For the remedy of Schisme and that the Seeds of Errour, might be rooted out of the Church. This Proposition thus layd down they add. Now that this prudentiall way (invented no doubt at first upon a good intention) was not the way of God, ap∣pears (as Smectymnus hath well shewn) thus. Because we read in the Apostles dayes, there were Di∣visions, Rom. 16. 17. and Schismes, 1 Cor. 3. 3. and 11. 18. yet the Apostle was not directed by the Holy-ghost, to ordaine Bishops for the taking away of those Schismes. Neither in the Rules he prescribes, for healing of those Brea∣ches, doth he mention Bishops for that end. Neither doth he mention this, in his directions to Timothy and Titus, for the Ordination of Bishops or Elders, as one end of their Ordina∣tion, or one peculiar duty of their Office. And though the Apostle saith, Opportet haereses esse, ut qui probati sunt, manifesti fiant inter vas. Yet the Apostle no where saith, Opportet E∣piscopos esse, ut tollantur haereses, quae manifestae fiunt: There must be Bishops that those Heresies, which are amongst you, may be removed. (2) Because the Holy-ghost, who could foresee, what would ensue thereupon, would never ordain that for a remedy, which would not only be ineffectual to the cutting off of evil, but be∣come a Stirrop for Antichrist to get up into the Saddle. For if there be a necessity of setting up one Bishop over many Pres∣byters, for preventing Schisms, there is as great a necessity for setting up one Archbishop over many Bishops, and one Patri∣arch over many Archbishops, and one Pope over all, unless men will imagine, that there is a danger of Schisme only amongst Presbyters, and not among Bishops and Archbishops, which is contrary to Reason, Truth, History, and our own experience. And then they add, hence it is that Musculus having proved, by Act. 20. Phil 1. 1. Tit. 1. 5. 1 Pet. 5. 1. that in the Apostles times, a Bishop and a Presbyter were all one, he adds. But after the Apostles times, when amongst the Elders of the Church,
(as Hierom sayth) Schisms arose, and as I verily think, they be∣gan to strive for Majority, by little and little, they began to choose one amongst the rest, out of the number of Elders, that should be above the rest in an higher degree, & called Bishop. But whether that device of man profited the Church or no, the times following could better judge, then when it first began. And further addeth, that if Hierom, & others had seen as much, as they that came after, they would have concluded, that it was never brought in by Gods Spirit, to take away Schism, as was pretended; but brought in by Satan to wast & destroy the for∣mer Ministry that fed the Flock. Thus far Musculus. Sadael also hath this memorable passage. The difference between Bi∣shops and other Ministers came in for remedy of Schisme. But they that devised it, little thought what a Gate they opened to the ambition of Bishops. Hence also Dr. Whitakers asking, how came in the inequality between Bishops & Presbyters, answer∣eth out of Hierom, that the Schism and Faction of some occasi∣oned the ancient Government to be changed—which saith he, however devised at first for a remedy against Schisme, yet ma∣ny holy and wise men, have judged it more pernitious, then the Disease it self; and although it did not by and by appear, yet miserable experience afterwards shewed it. First Ambition crept in, which at length begat Antichrist, set him in his Chair, and brought the Yoke of Bondage on the Neck of the Church. The sence of these Mischiefs, made Nazianzen wish, not onely that there were no . No Dignity or tyrannicall Prerogative of place, but also, that there were no , no principall Dignity, to wit, in the Church, of which he is speaking. But now (saith he) conten∣tions about the right hand and the left, about the higher and lower places, &c. have bred many inconveniencies even a∣mong Ministers, that should be Teachers in Israel. Thus far our reverend Brethren of the Province of London, which we thought good to transcribe, that so it might appear to the wise Reader, upon what grounds the Bishop came to have Superiority over Presbyters at the first, and that how∣ever it was given him, upon prudentiall Reasons, and
particularly for the prevention of Schisme, yet it not being a way of God, the device failed, as sad experience in after times shewed, the remedy proving worse then the disease, as not only those reverend and learned Authors quoted by our Brethren shew, but also Church Story makes forth abundantly, and which was reason sufficient, why we should not so readily sub∣mit, to re-admit moderate Episcopacy as you expe∣cted. (2) But as you may perceive by this account given, that the Superiority of a Bishop above a Presbyter, was at the first introduced on prudentiall grounds onely: so we shall here for∣beare at present, to add any other Arguments, but onely pru∣dentiall ones, why we cannot consent to admit of moderate Episcopacy; as we shall referre both you and the Reader, to what hath been solidly and learnedly writ, against Episcopacy in the height, by reverend and godly Mr. Banes, in his Diocesan Tryall, Mr. Parker, Dr. Blondell, Salmasius, Bucerus, and o∣thers: together with our reverend Brethren of the Province of Lon∣don, in their Jus divinum Ministerii Evangelici: And whom we here cite, not for their bare Testimony (though that were not to be sleighted) but because they have learnedly discussed this Point, and may present such things unto you concerning the same, as may be worth your weighing. And so we come to give the Reasons we here insist upon, why we dare not admit of moderate Episcopacy, as the tearms of accommodation with you, according to your proposall. (1) And the first that we shall here urge, is, The sad ex∣perience, 1. Reason. that we of these Nations have had, of the Tyranni∣call Bondage, and wofull Slavery, that thousands of Gods precious Servants were brought under, during the prevalency of Episcopacy. We cannot but remember, how when Prela∣cy was at the height, all the Godly in this Land, Conformists as well as Non-conformists, did grievously sigh under that hea∣vy and intolerable Yoke; Though you in your next Paper tell us, you are not so sensible of the multiplicity of Canons, Sect. 10. and burthensomness of Ceremonies, under which in the time of Episcopacy, any truly conscientious did sigh and groan. But we cannot but be grieved, to heare you express your selves
after this manner. What! to say nothing, of many thousands that were but in a private Capacity, who groaned under the burthensomness of the old Ceremonies (that were rigorously pressed upon pain of Excommunication, if not submitted to) and who (we doubt not) however you judge of them, are by God, many of them, received up into Glory. Shall not artwright, Brightman, Ames, Parker, Baines, Bradshaw, Dod, Clea∣ver, Hildersham, Hooker, Cotton; and in these parts Burne, Midgly, Bate, Langly, Rathband, Paget, Nichols, and sundry other old un∣conformists (that in their times were glorious lights in the Church of God, and such as this Land was not worthy of) that were cast out, suspended, and silenced by the Prelates, for not subscribing, and conforming to the Orders of those times, not be reckoned with you in the number of those that were truly conscientious? Or have you been such strangers in our Israel, that you have not heard what those have suffered under Epis∣copacy? Or if you have heard, did their Sufferings never pierce your hearts? Certainly you do hereby sufficiently discover the temper of your Spirit: but we wish you may be found in a bet∣ter frame before you die, as in the mean season we are sorry, that your own sufferings (we speak of some of you that adhered to the late King) have had not more kindly working on your hearts, to the humbling of them, no not to this very day. But however you judge, we doubt not, but there are many Myriads of people in these Lands, yet alive that will give testimony with us, touching the piety, zeal, faithfulness, conscientiousness of very many Ministers, and thousands of Christians of all sorts, that suffered grievous things at the hands of the Prelaticall Taskmasters, even to the undoing of many Families, the robbing of severall Congregations of their faithfull and painfull Mini∣sters, that were driven from their places & forced into Corners, or out of the Land, meerly for not conforming to such things as were then acknowledged by the most, that did conform, to be but things indifferent & not in their own nature, or by vertue of divine Precept necessary. Nay, it was grievous to the godly Conformists of those times to see their der Brethren thus cru∣elly and unmercifully dealt with, even for very Trifles. But at length (though we deny not, but there have been some god∣ly Bishops) the Pride and Exorbitancy of the major part of the
Prelates grew to that height, that old Conformity not serving the turn, except men would prostitute their Consciences, to be subservient to their base lusts, to cringe, bow at the Altar, read the Book for Dancing and other Sports, on the Lords-day, temporize, and do what ever was appointed. Nay, if Ministers would be faithfull, in the discharging the Duties of their Mini∣steriall Function, in Preaching, Catechising, and the use of con∣ceived Prayer, before and after Sermon, though godly and painfull, they were Wren excom∣municated, sus∣pended, or de∣prived, silen∣ced fifty godly painfull Mini∣sters, in two years, in Nor∣wih Diocess, for not read∣ing the Book for Sports on the Lords-day, for using con∣ceived Prayer, before and af∣ter Sermon, for not reading the Service at the Altar, and such like; ex∣pelled three thousand per∣sons with their Families, into other Lands by such dealings. Bishop Pierce his practises in the like kind, are not forgotten: He put down Ministers, and Preaching, till he thanked God, that he had not a Lecture in his Diocess. He suspended Ministers for preaching on Market-dayes, yea, put the Minister to Penance, that did but explain the Church Catechisme, &c. See Mr. Baxter on these things in his defence of the Worcestershire Agreement, Pag. 51. outed of their places, and thousands of Conformists both Ministers, and Christians were driven out of the Land, till at length the Yoke began to be so heavy, and the Cries of the Oppressed so loud in the Ears of God and men, that the Parliament taking the heavy pressures of the Lords People into their pious and serious thoughts, did cast out of this Church, with these Task-masters, this Tyrannicall and Lordly Government, that suiting with the Pride, Ambition, and Avarice of those that managed it, and backed with the Fa∣vour of the Prince (to the serving of whose will and pleasure, being put into their places by him, but too many of them were wholly devoted; as that was also unto him a strong tempta∣tion, though to his own undoing, to espouse their Quarrell) emboldned them to these intolerable Exorbitances. Now ex∣cept it could be proved that the Superiority of a Bishop above a Presbyter, were an Institution of Jesus Christ, prudence teacheth to fly from that, as far as we may, with a good Con∣science, that heretofore hath proved so burthensome and grie∣vous; Especially considering that, (2.) If moderate Episcopacy, should once have footing in this Land, there is very great danger, it would presently in∣croach 2 Reason. upon the Pastors right, and in time grow up to the full height, that it was in heretofore. Sad experience for Ages toge∣ther, hath shewed how through the Ambition & pride of the Bi∣shops
(that loved with Diotrephes to have the preheminence) the Pastors, as to the governing of their Flocks, were spoiled of all power: Out of what we quoted even now, you might take notice, that moderate Episcopacy (brought in at the first upon prudentiall grounds) yet became a Stirrop for Anti∣christ to get up into the Saddle; that first Ambition crept in, which at length begat Antichrist, set him in his Chair, and brought the Yoke of Bondage upon the Church; for so Dr. Whitaker expressed himself concerning it. And 1. Are there not still in the hearts of the Sons of men, the same Seeds of Pride and Ambition as in former times? And is there not hereupon cause to fear, if there should be a temp∣ting of God so far, as to admit of that, which would cherish and warm those Corruptions, the same bitter Fruit would ap∣pear as heretofore? Is it to be wondred, that the same cause, upon the same occasion, being still like it self, and ever for kind one and the same, should produce the like effects as heretofore it hath done? But 2. Yet further, If moderate Episopacy be no Plant of Gods planting (as if it be not Jure divino, and yet an Officer introduced into Gods House, there is no reason why it should lay claim to him, as to its Author) may it be thought strange, if like unto a wild Vine, it should grow luxuriant? Or like a Weed, that is set in a fat Soil, it should grow as rank as ever? especially if warmed by the Favour of Princes, and great Ones, that might be induced out of respect to their own Interests, to smile upon it, yea, to countenance it so far, as to discounte∣nance the most faithfull Pastors in the Land, that would not dance after their Pipe, even to the outing them of their places, and spoiling them of all Rule, that so the Darling of Episcopy, that might be charmed, might grow the greater. But 3. if yet we should not be so wise as to hearken to rea∣son, should not the experience of those, that thereby purchased their after wisdome, at a dear rate, lesson us sufficiently to be∣ware how we meddle with moderate Episcopacy (that will hardly be moderated) but would be found (to the cost of those, that would be so foolish as to make further triall) to break all Bonds, and limitations, though never so many and
strong, and never so wisely made. Little is propounded for the moderating of Episcopacy by Doctor Vsher, in his Reducti∣on of Episcopacy, to the form of Synodicall Government, re∣ceived in the ancient Church (although we believe his Design in the Proposals there, was very pious, and proceeded as well from a sense of the great Exorbitancy, that Prelacy was grown to of late times, and its great unlikeness to what it was, in the purer times of the Church, when it was first admitted; as out of a desire to tender some expedient for the prevention of those troubles, which did afterwards arise about the matter of Church-government) unto those strickt Bands, nay Shackles and Fetters, that so far as mans wisdome could foresee, were layd upon it by the Church of Scotland, and yet it burst them all and which shews that it is of that nature, that it cannot easily be tamed. In his Proposals, so far as we can discern, the Suffra∣gans that were to be constant Moderators in the Assemblies o rurall Deaneries, as the Bishops, and Archbishops in the highe Assemblies were all of them to have Negative Votes. These (as from the Plat-form it self is manifest) were to do all, and conclude matters according to the major part of Voices in these Assemblies. But it is not said, that if the Suffragan, or Bishop, or Archbishop were dissenting, any thing might pass accord∣ing to the major part of the Voyces in the severall Assemblies notwithwanding. And hereupon if these constant Moderators were corrupt, they might propound matters, or not propound them to the Assemblies, as they pleased. And when they were propounded, yet not concurring with the Assemblies, obstruct all their proceedings. Besides if all persons that were admitted into any Pastorall Charges, and having cure of Soules, were to come in onely at their Doore, how soon might the Ministry be so farre corrupted, as that it were easie for them, to procure the major part, in those Assemblies, to Vote according to their mindes, to over-sway, and over-ballance the rest of the Members of these Assemblies, that though godly and able, yet might not be so favoured by the times, as to be admitted into any Benefi∣ces (as they have been called) of any considerable value, and so might be like to be for outward estate poor, and in that re∣spect
the more contemptible. But yet further, if the Suffra∣gans must come into their places by the Bishops, and the Bi∣shops into theirs, as in former times, if there should be corrup∣tion here (where there is more danger then in any) in the higher Assemblies (which yet should be the freest from cor∣ruption, and should still be the better, the higher we go in re∣gard of the greater number of persons, of the choicest and best Abilities) there were danger of far greater corruption, then in the lower. For all the Suffragans are expresly by these Pro∣posals to be Members of the Diocesan Synod, and of the Re∣ctors, or incumbent Pastors, besides the Suffragans, it is said, the rest, or a select number out of every Deanry, as appears from the third Proposall. And as touching the Provinciall Synod, it is sayd, it might consist of all the Bishops and Suffragans, and such other of the Clergy as should be elected out of every Dio∣cess within the Province, as is clear from the fourth Proposall. And so if the Bishops and Suffragans should be corrupted, that were to be, as constant Moderators in these Assemblies, so con∣stant Members of the highest Assemblies: by their Power and Dignity, and greater port in the World, and through the neg∣lgence of the times, it might easily come to pass, that these might be so biassed, that less good were to be expected from the higher Assemblies (where yet the remedy should lye and whither Appeals were to be made) then in the lower. To say nothing, that through the Favour of great ones, if they should side with the Suffragans, or Bishops (that might be corrupted the meetings of these Assemblies (though appointed by Law as well as Parliaments) might be prevented and hindred, or if they might be easily spoiled of their Freedom. We have taken the li∣berty to suggest, what exceptions the forementioned Proposals, that were made by Dr Vsher are lyable to; and without any in∣tention to reflect in the least measure on so reverend a Person (whom in regard of his Piety and Learning we honour, though herein of a different apprehension from us) we believing he propounded what he did, with an honest inten∣tion, as we have sayd before. And we hope there are no moderate Episcopall Men, that will entertaine any A∣nimosities against us in this respect, wee never intend∣ing
thereby, to set up a Wall of Partition betwixt them and us; as we have used this Freedome, only to shew what danger there is least if moderate Episcopacy should be admitted again, it should within a while grow to that height, that they as well as we, growing weary of it, would be ready to cast it off, as an insufferable Yoke. We are the fuller of Jealousies in this re∣spect, when we consider, how far short, the Proposals menti∣oned, do fall, of the strong Bonds that were layd upon Episco∣pacy in Scotland, and yet it burst them all. And because it may be here of use, to mention them particularly, we shall give the Reader an account of them, as we find them expressed in a short Discourse, going under the Title of the unlawfulness, and danger of limited Prelacy, or perpetuall Presidency in the Church, briefly discovered, Printed in the year 1641. and this the rather, because we do not know (the things now not be∣ing common) that sundry Readers might ever come, to the knowledge of them, if we should not be at some pains to tran∣scibe them thence; but there they may be found, Page 10, 11. by such as have the liberty to peruse that Discourse. And thus they run. In the year 1600. the Church of Scotland being met in a generall Assembly at Montross, these Cautions and Limits were agreed upon, the Kings Majesty consenting; First, That the Minister chosen to this place (speaking of him who, as constant Moderator, was to be in the place of the Bishop) shall not be called Bishop, but Commissioner of such a place. 2. That he shall neither propound to the Parliament, any thing in name of the Church, without their express Warrant, and direction: Nor shall he keep silence, or consent to any thing prejudiciall to the Weale and Liberty of the Church under the pain of Deposition. 3. Under the pain of Infamy, and Excommunication, he shall at every Assembly give account, of the discharging of his Commission, and shall submit himself to their censure, and stand to their determination whatsoever, without Appella∣tion. 4. He shall content himself with that part of the Benefice,
which shall be assigned him, not pre-judging any of the Mi∣nisters in their Livings. 5. He shall not dilapidate his Benefice. 6. He is bound, as any other Minister, to attend his parti∣cular Congregation, and shall be subject to the triall and censure of his own Presbytery and Provinciall Assembly. 7. He shall neither usurp, nor claim to himself, any pow∣er of Jurisdiction, in any point of Church-government, more then any other Minister. 8. In Presbyteries, Provinciall and generall Assemblies, he shall be have himself in all things, and be subject to their censuring, as any of the Brethren of the Presbytery. 9. At his Admission to his Office, he shall swear and sub∣scribe to fulfill all these Points, under the pains aforesaid, o∣therwise not to be admitted. 10. In case he shall be deposed, he shall no more Voice in Parliament, nor enjoy his Benefice. 11. He shall not have Voice in the generall Assembly, unless he be authorised with Commission from his own Pres∣bytery. 12. Crimen ambitus, shall be a sufficient cause of Depri∣vation. 13. The generall Assembly, with the advice of the Synod, shall have power of his Nomination, or Recommendation. 14. He shall lay down his Commission annuatim, at the foot of the generall Assembly, to be continued or changed, as the generall Assembly, with his Majesties consent, shall think fit. 15. Other cautions to be made, as the Church shall find occasion. One would have thought, judging according to the Rules of humane wisdome, that these Bonds had been strong enough, to have shackled, and fettered Episcopacy, if it could have been bounded: but as it follows, in the forementioned Discourse, the godly and sincere Ministers, disliked this course, and some did protest against him; foreseeing what afterward came to pass, and as it is further there declared; for those that did love preheminence above their Brethren, &c. did afterwards
break all those Bonds, and finding themselves unable to give account, according to the counsell given to Pericles, they pro∣cured, that there should be no free generall Assemblies, least they should be called to account, and when they were chal∣lenged of their Perjury, and perfidious dealing, their printed Apology declared their Perfidy to be double, and which is expressed in their own words, to teach us what in this Land might be expected from their Fellows. Conditiones aliae pro tem∣pore magis quo contentiosisrixandi ansa praeriperetur, quam animo in perpetuum observandi, acceptae. Resutat. li∣bel. de Re∣gim. Eccles. Sco∣torum in pag. 89. By this account we may see, what Scotland to their sorrow had experience of, and what we also may expect, would be the Issue here, if after Episcopacy hath been thrown out, there should be a recidivation and a tampering with it again, especially considering that generally the sound and godly Party throughout the Land, were hereto∣fore so deeply sensible of those intolerable Burthens they had groaned under through the exorbitances of the Prelates, that they not onely did remonstrate their grievances to the Parlia∣ment, before the Wars begun; but did also humbly suggest by way of remedy: not the meer clipping of the Bishops Wings, or the lopping of some Branches from Episcopacy, as sufficient, for the redressing of their Grievances, but the taking it away both Root and Branch. And whereupon the Parliament that then was (which will be renowned to all Posterity, for easing of the Church of their intolerable Pressures, and vindicating the Civil Liberty of the English Nation) did proceed to an ut∣ter extirpation of it. And we hope (what ever may be your expectations, with whom we have to do in these Papers) that neither the good People of this Land, nor any succeeding Par∣liaments, will so soon grow weary of their dear-bought liberty, as to admit that which might endanger the bringing of their Necks again under the old Yoke. (3.) But yet further we desire it might be considered, that the admitting of moderate Episcopacy, would breed great dis∣satisfaction 3. Reason. to sundry godly and conscientious Ministers and Christians at home in these three Nations, and occasion much strife and contentious Debates, that were likely to arise about it: some conceiving it to be utterly unlawfull, as being the
Introduction of an Officer into the Church, that is not of Di∣vine Institution. Others that were satisfied touching the law∣fulness of it in it self, and yet judged it not necessary, might have fears, least moderate Episcopacy once admitted, might be a step to introduce that kind of Episcopacy or Prelacy, that had been expresly covenanted against: and upon that account, might judge, they were obliged by their Covenant to foresee, so far as they could, such an occasion, and to shun it. Others again might be much divided amongst themselves (if they got over the former Blocks) touching the Rules, according unto which, Episcopacy should be moderated, some apprehending the Bonds layd upon it to be too straight, and others againe thinking them to be too loose. And these Divisions were like to be amongst persons of all Ranks; Nobles, Knights, Citi∣zens, Commons of all sorts, both of the Gentry, Ministry, and others. Whereupon there were great danger to grow many Debates in the Parliament, when that should assemble in the City, and throughout the Land, Contests of Ministers one a∣against another in the Pulpits, and at the Presses, and amongst private Christians in their private Conferences, as it hath been heretofore, about the Ceremonies and Episcopacy, to the fur∣ther rending and distracting of our already rent and torne Church, and which at this time would be the more dangerous, when as the posture of Affairs doth cry aloud upon the wisest Physitians, both by their Skill and Power, to interpose for the healing of Breaches in England, Scotland, and Ireland, that through our Divisions, we be not made a Prey to the common Enemies of our Religion,; and therefore have no need, that such a dangerous bone of Contention should be cast in amongst us, as moderate Episcopacy might be like to prove, to the sad∣ning of the hearts of Friends, and gratifying onely of those that would rejoyce in our ruine. (4.) It is not also to be sleighted, that by admitting of mo∣derate Episcopacy, great offence might be taken by the best re∣formed 4 Reason. Churches abroad. They have taken notice, that in the solemn Covenant, that was entred into by these Nations, there was not onely an Engagement, to endeavour the extir∣pation of Popery and Prelacy (that is, Church-government
by Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellors, and Commissa∣ries, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiasticall Officers depending on that Hierarchy) accord∣ing to which, the Parliaments that have been, have constantly declared, that no Indulgency should be granted to Popery and Prelacy: and this out of a conscientious respect (as we have hinted before in our answer to your first Paper) unto this so∣lemn engagement, as we judged: But there was also a pro∣mise to endeavour the Reformation of Religion in England, and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Govern∣ment, according to the word of God, and the example of the best reformed Churches. These things have been published to the World, and are known abroad, and however other mat∣ters contained in the Covenant, that are of a civil Concernment may be judged of; they being in their own nature variable, and not of the like necessity in themselves with matters of Religi∣on, and the things of God, and to be endeavoured after, onely in a subordinate way unto Gods matters, and never to be pur∣sued, in the manifest destructiveness of the interest of Religion, that should be looked upon by all, as the greatest and chiefest interest, yet they are not likely to imagine, that moderate E∣piscopacy (that is not by them admitted but disowned) can be of that necessity for us in these Lands (for which they do not judge, there was any rule given in Gods word, requiring the setting of it up at the first) as that after all the learned Debates, touching Church-government, for severall years together, that have been in the reverend Assembly of Divines, that sate by Ordinance of Parliament at Westminster; and after their hum∣ble advice to the Parliament touching the Presbyterian Go∣vernment, as that Government, they conceived, was most a∣greeable to the word of God (as it is evident it is most, accord∣ing to the example of the best reformed Churches) and after the Parliament engaged also in that solemn Covenant, had (as they may conceive) in pursuance thereof, made so great a pro∣gress, in the setting up of this Presbyterian Government, that they passed by Ordinance, the form of Church-government, Anno, 1648 after advice had with the Assembly of Divines, as that Church-government which was to be used in the Church
of England and Ireland, it should be admitted of, to the setting up a partition Wall betwixt us and them, instead of coming neerer to them, so far as we may do, according to Gods word, according to the solemn Engagement. They cannot hereup∣on, but be greatly grieved, when they shall see their hopes so far disappointed, as they may hereupon be brought to fear, least if moderate Episcopacy be entertained, as the Church-Government of these Lands, after a while, that very Prelacy in the height of it, that in the time of our Affliction was vomited up by these Nations as loathsome, may be swallowed down a∣gain. Now we leave it to wise men to judge, whether (espe∣cially at such a time as this, when Popish Enemies are banding themselves together against us, and it is of so great advantage, for our own preservation, and the preservation of the true Re∣ligion, that the Protestant Party throughout Christendome, should endeavour after Union) it be prudential to minister such occasion of grief and jealousie, concerning us to our best Friends abroad, as to admit of that, which would be so much to their dissatisfaction: as it would be occasion of endless strife and debate amongst our selves at home, as hath been said be∣fore; to say nothing of the hatefulness of it unto Scotland, that yet we hope is lookt upon by England and Ireland, as a neer Sister, and Neighbour Church. 5. Lastly, We offer it to the consideration of all judicious and prudent persons, whether there be not more probability of 5. Reason. union, amongst all sound, Orthodox, godly, moderate Spiri∣ted men, by means of some other expedients, and upon some sober ground, then upon the admission of moderate Episcopa∣cy. As touching such that are for it in their Judgments, that are sober and godly, and against Episcopacy in the height of it, they might be accommodated in the Presbyterian way, with far more safety, and far less occasion of Offence; as we gather from the Associations of the Ministers of severall Counties, that are printed, and particularly from that of Vide pag. 13. Of the Essex Agreement. Essex, wherein they profess, that many of them think, according to Scripture, and the way of divers reformed Churches, there should be some adjoyned to the Minister in Government called ruling Elders, yet that divers also of them, are dissatisfied as touch∣ing
such Elders; but all of them also conceive it meet, and a Ministers wisdome to see with more Eyes then his own, and have the best help he can, both to acquaint him with the con∣versation of his people, and to assist him in matters of Con∣cernment, that cannot so safely and conveniently be done by him self alone. Therefore they also agree (as they shall see it fea sonable and fit in respect of their people) to desire the Assistance of some godly and discreet Persons of their respective Congregations, &c. And therefore as touch∣ing ruling Elders (as there was a submission in the dayes of E∣piscopacy, to Chancellours, and Commissaries) we conceive that moderate Episcopall men might admit these upon pru∣dentiall grounds, though they did not acknowledge the Jus divinum, of their Office (and which opinion of them, not∣withstanding our own perswasion, we are far from imposing upon others) and we do also hope, that such as would make tryall of them, would have occasion to bless God, for those great helps, that might be offered unto them, by them: both for the better acquainting them with the Conversations of their people, as also for the guiding and governing of them. As we do also further humbly conceive; there might be such a proportioning of them, for the number of them in the higher Assemblies, that neither it might be burthensome to the El∣ders, that might be delegated to such Assemblies, when they are over many: nor the Assemblies be disappointed for want of a Quorum of ruling Elders, as sometimes they have been; nor any occasion of fear given unto any, that the Ministers might be over-voted by the Elders, in matters of greatest weight and concernment, which yet supposes a division be∣twixt the Ministers and Elders, which in our own experience we have never met with. And as touching a standing Mode∣rator, that some moderate Episcopall men are for, we think their Consciences might he satisfied in the way of Moderators, as they are in use with us: we not discerning, what can be ur∣ged by them, as necessary to be transacted by him from Gods Word, but it may be safely transacted by the Moderators of our Assemblies. And as touching our Brethren of the Con∣gregationall way, we are sure, moderate Episcopacy will be
no expedient, to bring them and us unto neerer Union: but conceive, that as the Assembly of Divines, did long agon en∣ter upon that Work of Accommodation with them: so if that Work were re assumed by the appointment and interposition of the Civil Magistrate, through the blessing of God, we hope it might be brought to such a conclusion, not onely with them, but also with those, that are godly and moderate Spiri∣ted, that are of the Episcopall way, that without admittance of moderate Episcopacy (that would not further it) there might be an happy closure of breaches in this rent and torne Church, all parties that have soundness, and savour in them, seeming to be weary of their Divisions, and to earnestly thirst and pant after Union. But we hope by this time, the sober and judicious Reader is satisfied, that we had some reason to caution against mo∣derate Episcopacy, as we did, even where we profess our selves earnest for peace; and that If you had considered things well, you had no reason fully to expect, that we should admit of that expedient, wch you propounded for an Accommodation; wch we for severall weighty reasons, had expresly cautioned against. But we have now done with what you propounded, as the way wherein you expected fully we should have closed with you, and shall now go on with you unto what follows; wherein you de∣clare your selves, That they who disturb this closure and con∣junction, are the ruling Elders; that yet were not only cho∣sen out of the people, but at the first constitution of the Con∣gregational Elderships, were examined and approved by this Class, as fit to joyn with the Ministers of the Word, in the go∣verning of the Church, and solemnly set a part with exhorta∣tion and Prayer for that Work, although not ordained for to preach the Gospel, or administer the Sacraments, and so not meer Lay-men, as you apprehend them to be. Now of these you say, you wish not (with the Apostle) that they were cut off, but that they were taken away, that trouble you, for you say (speaking of these) onely they let, that will let, untill they be taken out of the away. Indeed the Apostle (unto whose words you allude) speaks of some∣thing, that letted and would let, the revelation of Antichrist,
untill he were taken away, and if after Antichrist, hath been cast out of this Land, the retaining of the ruling Elders were likely to be a let to his setting foot again in it, it would be very ill upon that account to part with them, but we do not discern how the retaining of the ruling Elders should have hindred your closure and conjunction with us, if you had been cordiall for Peace and Union; for though you could not admit them, upon the divine right of their Office, yet you, who excepted not against the lawfulness of retaining of High Commissioners, Chancellours, and Commissaries (and of which we shall speak more fully in our answer to your last Paper) under the Prela∣ticall Government; might have admitted of ruling Elders, on prudentiall grounds, upon the Principles of sundry moderate Episcopall men; and as they have done, of which before: and as you may see one zealous enough against the Jus divinum, of ruling Elders Office, is not against them, as an expedient and behoovefull Order in the Church, and where the right Go∣vernours of State, any where moving upon prudentiall grounds, shall find the conveniency of them. See Velitationes Polemicae by J. D. quaest. 3. Touching Lay-Presbyters, Sect. 30. But you now mind us, of what we had said in our Answer, scil. That we could not consent to part with the ruling El∣ders, except we should betray the truth of Christ, Rom. 12. 1 Cor. 12. 1 Tim. 5. and for further testimony (you say) we refer you to some modern Authors (all of Yesterday.) Here we shall desire you to take notice of two things. (1.) That being the Authors we referred you unto, were re∣verend, learned, and able Divines, such as was the Synod or Assembly of Divines, that met at Westminster, by Authority of Parliament, and the Provinciall Synod of London, besides the Divines, that we did particularly nominate, they should not have been slighted by you (who profess you reverence Sy∣nods and Councels) in regard of their testimony, because they were but of Yesterday. For upon this account, all Synods and Councels, that shall hereafter be convened, must be rejected. (2.) That it was not their meer testimony or authority, that we pressed you with. We referred you to them in regard of their Arguments and Reasons they urged for what they assert.
And we think both you and we may learn much from the learn∣ed and elaborate Labours of modern Authors. And that we are not to disdain to weigh, what they present, because they are but of Yesterday. Else you must neither consult Doctor Vsher, Doctor Andrews, nor Doctor Hammond (whom you mention) nor any other moderate Writers, that yet we judge, are in some esteem with you: but betake your selves to the Fa∣thers onely. And because you took not notice, of what the Authors, we referred you to, have, touching the Jus divinum, of the Presbyterian Government, and which we said, had spoken so fully touching that point, that we knew not what could be added more. We shall give the Reader some short ac∣compt, of what he may find more at large, in the Authors themselves, only mentioning some things, which the London Ministers in their Jus divinum Regiminis Ecclesiastici, and the Pro∣vinciall Assembly of London, in their Vindication of the Pres∣byterian Government, have upon the Texts we urged, to prove from them the Divine right of ruling a Elders Office. (1.) The first Text we urged for the divine right of the ru∣ling The Jus divi∣num of the ru∣ling Elders Office. Elders Office, was Rom. 12. 6, 7, 8. which runs thus. Ha∣ving then Gifts differing, according to the Grace given, whe∣ther Prophesie, let us Prophesie, according to the propor∣tion of Faith; or Ministry, let us wait on our Ministry; or he that teacheth, on teaching; or he that exhorteth, on ex∣hortation. He that giveth, et him do it with simplicity. He that ruleth with diligence: He that sheweth mercy, with cheerfulness. Upon this Text the Provinciall Assembly of London in their Vindication, do thus express themselves. In which words (say they) we have a perfect enumeration of all Pag. 42, 43. the ordinary Offices of the Church. These Offices are redu∣ced, first to two generall heads, Prophesie, and Ministry, and are therefore set down in the Abstract. By Prophesie is meant, the Faculty of right understanding, interpreting, and expoun∣ding the Scriptures. Ministry comprehends all other Employ∣ments in the Church. Then these generals are subdivided into the speciall Offices contained under them, and are therefore put down in the Concrete. Under Prophesie are contained, 1. He that teacheth, that is, the Doctor or Teacher.
2. He that exhorteth, i. e. the Pastor. Under Ministry are comprised. 1. He that giveth, that is the Deacon. 2. He that ruleth, that is, the ruling Elder. 3. He that sheweth mercy, which * Office pertained unto Esthius in Rom. 1. Aliis placet etiam hac parte speciale quod∣dam charisma sive officium sig∣nificari, & mi∣sereri dica iis, qui ab ec∣clesia curandis miseris, postissi∣mum aegrotis, praefectus est, i. is{que} praebet ob∣sequia, velut e∣tiam hodie fit in nosocomiis, qui sensus hand∣quaquam im∣probabils est. them, who in those dayes had care of the sick. So that in these words we have the ruling Elder plainly set down, and contra∣distinguished from the teaching and exhorting Elder (as ap∣pears by the distributive Particles, , , whether he that teacheth, whether he that exhorteth, whether he that ruleth, &c.) And here likewise we have the Divine In∣stitution of the ruling Elder, for so the words hold forth, Ha∣ving then gifts differing according to the Grace that is given unto us. And this also in the third Verse, According as God hath dealt to every man, &c. This Officer is the Gift of Gods free Grace to the Church for the good of it. Thus far the Provinciall Assembly of London. And then they vindicate the Text from what is objected against it. The London Ministers in their Jus divinum Regiminis Ecclesiastici, do urge the Argument drawn hence for the Jus divinum of the ruling Elders Office more ful∣ly. After they had given a view of the scope and contexture of the Chapter, and given the like exposition of the Text, quo∣ting also Paraeus, and Piscator, and Calvin, and Beza, on the place (who give the same exposition, as is manifest to him that will but consult those Interpreters upon the Text) they then do argue thus from this place. Major. Whatsoever (1) Members of Christs organical bo∣dy have an (2) ordinary (3) Office of ruling therein given (4) them of God, (5) distinct from all other ordinary stand∣ing Officers in the Church, (6) together with direction from God, how they are to rule, they are the ruling Elders we seek, and that Jure divino. Minor. But , i. e. He that ruleth, mentioned in Rom. 12. 8. is a (1) Member of Christs Organicall Body, ha∣ving an (2) ordinary (3) Office of ruling therein, (4) given him of God, (5) distinct from all other standing Officers, in the Church, (6) together with direction how he is to rule.
Conclus. Therefore , i. e. He that ruleth mentioned in Rom. 12. 8. is the ruling Elder, we seek, and that Jure divino. The severall particulars noted in the Major and Minor Propositions they do distinctly prove, and are too large here to transcribe, but they may be seen all made good from Pag. 125. to Pag. 131. And to which we refer the Reader. Then they proceed to vindicate this Text, from the severall excepti∣ons made against the alledging of it, for the proof of the Di∣vine right of the ruling Elders Office, by Feild, Sutlive, Bilson, from Pag. 130. to pag. 136. And as touching Dr. Sutlive, they have a remarkable passage, which they note in the Margin, pag. 131. which we think fit to recite in their own words, which are as followeth. As for this Dr. Sutlive (divers times here∣after mentioned) the Reader may please to take notice here once for all, that he told a reverend Minister in London, yet li∣ving, and ready (if need were) to testifie the same upon Oath, (who declared it to one of the Authors of this Treatise, Feb. 16. 1646.) That he was sorry with all his heart, that ever he put Pen to Paper to write against Beza, as he had done, in the behalf of the proud domineering Prelates. And he spoke this with great indignation. It is good for men then to take heed, that they be not too hot for the Prelacy, nor too earnest in contending against the Office of ruling Elders, for we see, they may come to repent hereof, before they die. (2.) In the next place follows 1 Cor. 12. 28. And God hath set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Tea∣chers, after that Miracles, then gifts of healing, helps, Governments, diversities of Tongues. Vide pag. 38, 39, 40. 41, 42. The Provinciall Assembly of London in their Vindication urge this Text thus. Here we have an enumeration of sundry Officers of the Church, and amongst others there are Helps, Governments. Calvin in lo∣cum. Chrysost. upon 1 Cor. 12. 28. Estius upon 1 Cor. 12. 28. By Helps are meant Deacons (as not onely our reformed Di∣vines, but Chrysostome, and Estius, and others observe.) And by Governments are meant the ruling Elders. That this may the better appear, they do here prove six things. 1. That by Governments are meant men exercising Govern∣ment, the Abstract being put for the Concrete; which they shew appears first, by the beginning of the Verse, God hath
set some in his Church, which relates to Persons, not to Offi∣ces. Secondly, By the 29, and 30 Verses, where the Apostle speaks Concretively of those things, which he had spoken of before Abstractively. Are all Workers of Miracles? Have all the gifts of Healing? Do all speak with Tongues? &c. And so by consequence, Are all Helpers? are all Governours? 2. That the Governour here meant, must needs be a Church Governour, not the civil Magistrate, because this is beside the whole scope of the Chapter, treating meerly on Spirituall Church Matters, not at all of Secular or Civil. Be∣cause also it is said expresly, That he is seated in the Church. Now the Magistrate, as such, is not placed by God in the Church, but in the Common-weale. And lastly, Because the Apostle writes of such Governours, that had at that time actuall existence in the Church: whereas neither then, nor some hundred years after, was there any Christian Magistrate. (3.) That this Church-Governour is seated by God in his Church, and so is a Plant of Gods one planting. 4. That this Church Governour, is a Church Officer. For though it be a question amongst the Learned, whether some of the persons here named, as the Workers of Miracles, and those that had the Gift ef Healing, and of Tongues, were seated by God, as Officers in the Church, and not rather only as emi∣nent Members, endued with these eminent Gifts; yet it is most certain, that whosoever is seated by God in his Church, as a Church-Governour, must needs be a Church Officer. For the na∣ture of the Gift doth necessarily imply an Office, which they do further shew from the Greek word , rendred Governments, being a Metaphor taken from Pilots or Ship∣masters governing their Ships. 5. That this Church-Governour is an ordinary and perpe∣tuall Officer in his Church, as they shew does appear from the perpetuall necessity of him in the Church, a Church without Government, being as a Ship without a Pilot, as a Kingdome without a Magistrate, as a World without a Sun.
6. That this Church-governour is an Officer contradi∣stinguished in the Text from the Apostles, Prophets, Tea∣chers, and all other Officers in the Church. This they prove, 1. By the Apostles manner of expressing their Offices in an enumerative form; first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after that Miracles, then Gifts of Healing, &c. 2. By the Recapitulation, V. 29. 30. Are all Apostles? Are all Prophets? Are all Teachers? Are all Workers of Miracles, &c. 3. By the scope of the whole Chapter, which is to set down different Gifts and Offices in different Subjects, as they do more at large shew, answering an Objection, and then shewing, that this Interpretation which they have given, is not onely the Interpretation of reformed Divines, both Lu∣therans and Calvenists, but of the ancient Fathers, and even the Papists themselves. And here they quote Gerhardus de ministerio ecclesiastico. Calvin in locum. P. Martyr in locum. Beza in locum. Piscator in locum. Ambrose in locum. Chrysost. in locum. Salmer. in loc. Septimo loco ponit gubernatores, i. e. eos, qui praesunt aliis & gubernant, plebemque in Offici continent. Et Ecclesia Chri∣sti habet suam politiam & cum pastor per se omnia praestare non posset, adjungebantur duo Presbyteri, de quibus dixit, qui bene praesunt pres∣byteri duplici honore digni habeantur, maxime qui laborant verbo & doctrina, qui una cum pastore deliberabant de ecclesiae cura & instau∣ratione, qui etiam fidei atque honestae vitae consortes erant. Thus far the Provinciall Assembly of London. The London Ministers in their Jus divinum, do urge the Argument hence thus. Major. Whatsoever Officers God himself now under the new Testament hath set in the Church, as Governours there∣in, distinct from all other Church-governours, whether ex∣traordinary or ordinary, they are the ruling Elders we en∣quire after, and that Jure divine. Minor. But the Governments named in 1 Cor. 12. 28. are Officers which God himself now under the new Testament hath set in the Church as Governours therein, distinct from
all other Church-governours whether extraordinary or or∣dinary. The Major being in it self cleer, they prove the Minor in the severall Branches of it. proving, 1. That the Church here spoken of is the Church of Christ now under the N. T. 2. That the Governments here mentioned, are Officers set in this Church (not out of the Church) as Rulers govern∣ing therein. 3. That they are set not by man, but by God him∣self. 4. That these Governments thus set in the Church are distinct, not onely from all Governours out of the Church, but also from all governing Officers within the Church. Whence the Conclusion is inferred. Therefore these Go∣vernments in 1 Cor. 12. 28. are the ruling Elders enquired af∣ter, and that Jure divino. This Argument thus urged is con∣firmed in the severall Branches of it, from Pag. 136. to Pag. 144. And after they vindicate the urging of this Text for this pur∣pose, from the severall exceptions made against the same by Dr. Feild, Sutlive, Whitgift, Mr. Coleman, and Bilson, from Pag. 144. to Pag. 150. (3.) The third and last Text, we urged for the Divine right of ruling Elders Office, was 1 Tim. 5. 17. Let the Elders, that rule well, be counted worthy double honour, especially they who labour in the Word and Doctrine. For the understanding of whichwords, the Provinciall As∣sembly of London lay down this Rule; That every Text of Vide pag. 45, 46, 47. 48. Scripture is to be interpreted according to the literall and Grammaticall construction, unless it be contrary to the A∣nalogy of Faith, or the Rule of Life, or the circumstances of the Text. Otherwise (say they) we shall make a Nose of Wax of the Scriptures, and draw quidlibet ex quolibet. And then they add, Now according to the Grammaticall Constru∣ction, there are plainly held forth two sorts of Elders: The one only ruling, and the other also labouring in the Word and Do∣ctrine. Then they give the true Analysis of the words, thus. (1.) Here is a Genus, a General, and that is Elders.
(2.) Two distinct Species, or kinds of Elders: Those that rule well, and those that labour in Word and Doctrine, as Pastor and Doctor. (3.) We have two Particles expressing these two kinds of Elders, Ruling, Labouring. The first do onely rule, the second do also labour in Word and Doctrine. (4) Here are two distinct Articles, distinctly annexed to these two Participles, , they that rule, they that labour. (5.) Here is an eminent discretive Particle, set before these two kinds of Elders; these two Participles, these two Articles, evidently distinguishing one from the other, Viz. , especially they that labour, &c. They do urge out of Dr. Whitaker, That it is absurd to say, that this Text is to be understood of one and the same Elder. If a man should say, All the Students in the University are worthy of double ho∣nour, especially they that are Professors of Divinity, he must necessarily understand it of two sorts of Students. Or if a man should say, All Gentlemen that do Service for the Kingdomes in their Counties, are worthy of double ho∣nour, especially they that do Service in the Parliament, this must needs be understood of different persons. And however they do take notice, that Archbishop Whilgift, Bishop King, Bishop Bilson, Bishop Downame, and others, labour to fasten di∣vers other Interpretations upon these words, yet they observe, that all other senses that are given of these words, are either such as are disagreeing from the literall and Grammaticall Con∣struction, or such as fall into one of these two absurdities; ei∣ther to maintain a Non preaching Ministry or a lazy preaching Mini∣stry to deserve double honour, and which they make to appear particularly, as the Reader for his more full satisfaction may ee upon his perusall, Pag. 47, 48. The Authors of the Jus divinum regiminis ecclesiastici, do urge the Argument for the Divine right of ruling Elders Office from this Text more fully, and do very learnedly and elaborately vindicate it from twelve severall exceptions that are made a∣gainst it, by those that do oppose it, from Pag. 150. to pag. 169. and whereunto for his more full satisfaction we do refer the Reader.
We shall forbear to mention what is further urged, either by the Provinciall Assembly of London, out of the Old Testament and New, or by the rest of the Authors we have quoted in our former Answer, or by the Author of the Assertion of the Govern∣ment of the Church of Scotland (that fully and learnedly discus∣sed this Point some years before) to prove the Office of ruling Elders to be by divine right. We conceive by this account gi∣ven, it is manifest enough unto the unprejudiced Reader, that the learned Labours of our reverend Brethren in this matter, and their Arguments urged from these very Texts, that we al∣ledged, were not so contemptible, but that they might have merited a better answer (when we referred you to them) then to have been turned off as not worth the weighing, because they are but of Yesterday. And however our pains be accounted of by you in transcribing out of them, what we have done, yet we hope it will not be esteemed useless by judicious and sober per∣sons, such who never have seen the Labours of our Brethren in this kind, having this advantage by it, that they have a tast gi∣ven them, of what is more at large sayd, by feverall reverend, learned, and godly Divines, for the Divine right of that Office, that is so much despised, and hereby have some direction given them, where they may find this truth more fully vindicated; as they also, that are acquainted fully with their Labours, may reap this Fruit by what we have recited, that the memory of what they knew before, will hereby be revived; and hence it may be to both sufficiently manifest, that so much is spoken touching this matter, that it will not be to any great purpose to add any more. But now let us consider, what you oppose unto all that is said, by the Authors we quoted for the Jus divinum of the Pres∣byterian Government, and particularly of the Office of ruling Elders. In the first place we take notice, that when we said, We could not part with the ruling Elders, unless we should betray the truth of Christ (as we judged) by this Parenthesis you gather, that we are not so wedded to the opinion, but that we can, and will submit to better reason, when offered to us. Unto which we say, That we are ready to hear, what you or any others shall present unto us, for the clearing up the mind and will of God, in this, or any
other point in Controversie, amongst such as are godly, sober, and Orthodox, in the main points of Christian Religion. And if you will not wilfully and pertinaciously hold a contrary Tenent, as you profess, or at least a Tenent contrary to what your Princi∣ples might allow you, there would be the greater hopes, that you would cease the debate touching this matter. But before we can be convinced that the ruling Elder is not an Officer of Jesus Christ, held forth in those Texts, that we quoted, we must have far stronger reasons brought, then you urge, al∣though you profess, that you will proceed to shew us that Lay-Elders (as you mistake them) are not meant nor mentioned in those Texts by us alledged. Here is indeed much undertaken, but little per∣formed. And however you promise to do this hereafter more large∣ly, if what is comprehended in this Paper be not judged satisfactory, yet in your next, wherein you would make shew, as if you had gi∣ven in a full reply to our Answer, you perform nothing. So ea∣siea matter is it with you to undertake great things, and fall short in your performances. But we must here needs tell you, that if you will indeed satisfie us, you must perform more, then onely (as here you do) send us to the Fathers in generall, or more particular Councils, or the Fathers apart (and which you will have to be the onely sure rule for the interpretation of Scriptures, though how soundly this is asserted by you will come to be ex∣amined in our answer to your next Paper) neither must you think, that the bare allegation of the exposition of some Fa∣thers (for we are not wholly destitute of the testimony of them touching the matter in controversie, as we shall shew anon) ought to be of that weight with us, as that they should be forth∣with received, as the certain interpretations of these Texts, a∣gainst the Arguments, that are urged from them, by moderne Synods and Assemblies, learned and able Divines, Expositers of the Scriptures, both of our own and other reforned Chur∣ches for that interpretation of them, which we close with, and whereof we have given account already in part. And yet we are far from contemning either Fathers or Councils, but shall give them all that due respect, that our truly Protestant Di∣vines have given them in their Writings against the Papists; as we do heartily wish, that you had not expressed your selves,
especially in your next Paper, to be too Popish, in respect of that Authority, which you profess they are in with you, which yet is an honour given them, that they themselves would have disavowed, and of which afterwards more fully. In the mean season you have not dealt fairly with Calvin in fa∣thering upon him, what he doth not say, though in your Prin∣ted Copy you cover the matter, not quoting the place, where he should assert any such thing, as you alledge him for. The thing you charge upon him in both, is one and the same. Your words are these, Calvin saith, there can be no better, nor surer remedy of deciding of controversies, no better sense nor interpretation of Scripture then what is given by the Fathers in such Councils. The places you quote in that Copy you presented unto us, are those in his In∣stitutions, Lib. 4. cap. 9. Sect. 8. 13. But in these places, there is nothing that can with any colour be alledged to make out what you charge upon him. In the 8. Sect. it is confessed, he would not have all Councils condemned, and the Acts of them all re∣scinded (as we are far from desiring any such thing) but he saith, Quoties concilii alicujus decretum profertur, expendi primum di∣ligentur velim, quo tempore habitum sit, qua de causa habitum, & quo concilio, quales homines interfuerint: deinde illud ipsum, de quo agitur, ad Scripturae amussim examinari; idque in eum modum, ut concilii de∣finitio pondus suum habeat sitque instar praejudicii, neque tamen examen, quod dixi, impediat. You may here perceive, that as he would not have the determinations of all Synods promiscuously to be admitted, so he would have their decrees that are produced, to be examined according to the rule of Scripture, notwithstand∣ing that reverence which he (from whom therein we differ not) doth give them. But you may see, he further goes on and adds, Vtinam eum omnes modum servarent, quem praescribt Augustinus libro adversus Maximinum tertio: Nam cum hunc haereticum, de sync∣dorum decretis litigantem breviter vult compescere; Nec go (inquit) Nicenam Synodum tibi, nec tu mihi Aiminensem debes tanquam prae∣judicaturus objicere. Nec ego hujus authoritate, nec tu illius detineris. Scripturarum authoritatibus, non quorumcunque propriis, sed quae utris{que} sunt communes, res cum re, causa cum causa, ratio cum rotione certet. The intelligent Reader will hereby sufficiently perceive, that however Calvin gives due respect unto Councils, yet both he
and Augustine, whom he cites, would have all Controversies touching matters of Religion to be determined by the Autho∣rities or Testimonies of Scriptures. And however he presently after saith, That those ancient Synods, the Nicene, Constanti∣nopolitan, the first Ephesine and that at Chalcedon, and the like, we do willingly receive and reverence as holy, Quantum atti∣net ad fidei dgmata, So far as concerns the Doctrines of Faith, (let that be marked) and acknowledgeth, that they containe nothing, but the pure Native interpretation of the Scriptures. Yet what is that, to what you would father upon him, Viz. That there can be no better sence nor interpretation of the Scriptures, then what is given by the Fathers in such Councils? All that Calvin saith, is, That he acknowledgeth these Councils, did in Doctrinals rightly in∣terpret the Scriptures, but he would not have their interpreta∣tion of Scripture for to be the rule of its interpretation, as in your next Paper (when there is a difference about interpreta∣tion of Scripture) you assert it ought to be; and which there you alledging this place of Calvin would represent him to pa∣tronize, and for which purpose you do also seem to alledge him here. Although the Reader, by what hath been quoted out of him in this Section, will see the contrary. Besides, that he did not say touching matters of Discipline and Government (which are the things onely in Controversie betwixt you and us) those Councils, he spake of, did containe nothing but the pure and native interpretation of the Scriptures, but limited the same to Doctrinals, as we have shewed. And therefore we leave it to the Reader to judge, whether you have thus far dealt fairely with Calvin, or no. You also quoted the thirteenth Section of this ninth Chap∣ter, lib. 4. But there we find onely, that he expresseth himselfe thus; Nos certe libenter concedimus, si quo de dogmate incidat disceptat nullum esse nec melius, nec certius remedium, quam si verorum Episco∣poum Synodus conveniat, ubi controversum dogma excutiatur. He ac∣knowledgeth then, that when a Controversie doth arise, there is no better, nor surer remedy for the determining it, then by a Synod of true Bishops (which are the Bishops mentioned in Ti∣mthy, and Titus in Calvins sence) but yet he concludes that ve∣ry Section thus; Hoc autem perpetuum esse nego, ut vera & certa
sit scripturae interpretatio, quae conilii suffragiis fuerit recepta, i. e. But this I deny to be perpetuall, that that is a true and cer∣tain interpretation of Scripture, which hath been received by the Suffrages of a Council. And if we should here press you to that, which Calvin saith as touching this point. Seeing it hath been determined by the late Synod or Assembly of Divines, See the Pro∣positions of the Assembly touching Church-go∣vernment, bound up with the Confessi∣on of Faith & Catechisme, pag. 9, 10. that, As there were in the Jewish Church Elders of the people joyned with the Priests & Levites in the Government of the Church (as appeareth in the 2 Chron. 19. 8, 9, 10) so Christ hath instituted a Government and Governors Ecclesi∣asticall in the Church; hath furnished some in his Church, besides the Ministers of the Word, with Gifts for Gover∣ment, and with Commission to execute the same, when cal∣led thereunto, who are to joyn with the Minister in the Go∣vernment of the Church, Rom. 12. 7, 8. 1 Cor. 12. 2. 8. which Of∣ficers reformed Churches commonly call Elders. You ought nor against their determination touching this matter in Con∣troversie betwixt you and us, by your opposition, to trouble and disturb the peace of the Church, and which is that, which seems to be clearly Calvins mind in this Section. This for the Vindication of Calvin, is we hope sufficient. As touching the Fathers, you wish us to consult on Rom. 12. intimating out of Doctor Andrews, That not one of them applyeth it to the Church Government, and as much (you say) may be sayd for the other Texts, not one Father in their Comment giveth such a sense, and which you are so confident of, that you offer, that if we find one exposition for us, you will yeild us all. Unto this we say, (1.) That we believe all wise and sober Readers will easily discern, that your over-much confidence hath put you on to over-shoot a great deal too far. For we can hardly be brought to perswade our selves, that you have any of you, much less all of you, who are the Subscribers of this Paper, consulted all the Fathers upon any, and much less upon all these Texts. And if so, it was a great deal too much presumption to make such an offer, upon the Testimony of Doctor Andrews (that yet is al∣ledged by you to speak but to onely one of the Texts) or any other, having not consulted all the Fathers your selves, and
that upon every Text. For what an hazard do you put your Cause upon? If but one Father be produced against you in this matter, if you should be taken at your word, it is quite lost. And if it be Gods Cause and Truth you stand for, can you be ex∣cused, that you have offered to quit it upon such easie tearms? But we will be more liberall to you, then to take you at such a disadvantage, though you have been too presumpteously li∣berall in making such an offer. (2.) But suppose none of the Fathers could be produced thus to expound any of these Texts; If from the Texts themselves, and what may be urged from other places of the Scriptures both in the Old and New Testament, it may be gathered, that that is the meaning of them, which we with sundry other mo∣derne Authors give, why should this Interpretation be reject∣ed, because not backed with the Testimony of some of the Fa∣thers thus expounding them? Is not the Scripture sufficient to expound it self? This indeed is your opinion, as appeareth plainly from your next Paper, but the Popish unsoundness of it we question not but to discover, when we come to it. (3.) But if the Fathers do not many of them determine the Controversie touching ruling Elders from these Texts (it ha∣ving been started since their time) yet is it not sufficient, if they shall be, severall of them, found to allow of the thing it self, and give testimony to the being of these Officers in the Church in their time? We shall here mention onely some of those that may be alledged touching this particular. And first Ambrose his words on 1 Tim. 5. 1. are full and plain to our purpose. Vnde & synagoga, & postea Ecclesia seniores ha∣buit, quorum sine consilio nihil agebatur in Ecclesia. Quod qua neg∣ligentia obsoleverit, nescio; nisi forte doctorum desidia, aut magis superbia, dum sibi volunt aliquid videri (i. e.) Whence both the Synagogue, and afterwards the Church had Elders, without whose counsell nothing was done in the Church. Which thing by what negligence it grew out of use, I know not, un∣less perhaps through the Teachers sloathfulness, or rather haughtiness, while they alone would be thought some∣what.
In the next place observe what Optatus saith, lib. 1. Adversus Parmen: Eram Ecclesie ex auro & argento quam plurima rna∣menta, quae nec defodere terra, nec secum potare poterat; quare fidel∣bus Ecclesiae senioribus commendavit. i. i. e. The Church had many Ornaments of Gold and Silver, which she could neither hide in the Earth, nor carry away with her, which she committed to the Elders. The Provinciall Assembly of London do ob∣serve, that Albaspinaeus that learned Antiquary, upon the place acknowledgeth, that besides the Clergy, there were certain of the Elders of the people, men of approved life, that did tend the Affaires of the Church, of whom this place is to be understood. To these we may add, That Austine gives frequent intimati∣ons of the ruling Elder in his time. We shall here onely men∣tion some places. In his 137. Epistle to those of his owne Church, he thus directs it. Dilectissimis fratribus, Clero, Seniori∣bus, & universae plebi Ecclesiae Hipponensis (i. e.) To the most be∣loved Brethren, the Clergy, Elders, and all the people of the Church at Hippo. Where we see Elders are mentioned distinctly, and are interposed between the Clergy and the peo∣ple as distinct from both. Again, De verb. Dom. Serm. 19. Cum ob errorem aliquem, as∣nioribus arguuntur, & imputatur alicui de illis, cur ebrius fuerit, &c. When they are reprehended for any errour by the Elders, and its imputed to any of them, why was he drunk, &c. So againe Lib. 3. contra Cresconium cap. 56. Peregrinus Presbyter & seniores Musticanae regionis. Peregrine the Presbyter and the Elders of the Mustican Region. And long before him, Origen. contra Celsum lib. 3. hath this passage. Nonnulli praepositi sunt, qui in vitam & mores eorum, qui admittuntur, inquirant, ut qui turpia committant, iis communi caelu interdicant, &c (i. e.) There are some Rulers appointed, who may enquire concerning the Conversation and manners of those that are admitted, that they may debar from the common Assembly such as commit filthiness. This place of Origen is clear for ruling Elders, whose work it is to enquire into the Conversation and manners of those, that are admitted to communicate with the Congregation at the Lords Table,
and is so understood by others, as well as our selves. We might alledge more Testimonies of the Fathers for the proof of what we are in hand with, but that we judge these suf∣ficient. Even those that do oppose the ruling Elders Office with too much vehemency, are forced to confess, that besides Pastors and Doctors, and besides Magistrates and Elders of the City, there are to be found in Antiquity Seniores ecclesiastici, Ecclesiasticall Elders also. But they will have them to be one∣ly as our Church-wardens, or rather as our Vestry-men, as one of them speaks. See the Author of Episcopacy by divine right, pag. 146. whereas the Testimonies alledged shew, they were Rulers and Judges in Causes Ecclesiasticall, and did assist the Ministers of the Word, in the ruling and governing of the Church, which being very clear from the above mentioned Te∣stimonies, and others of the like kind; another zealous enough against them, would have them to be some or other in chief Rank amongst the rest of the people, taken in occasionally for advice and present assistance, and so an extraordinary kind of Church-Guardians, without any peculiar and setled Jurisdiction. Which is but gratis dictum, sayd without all proof. See Velitatienes polemicae, by I. D. pag. 96 But at last this Author, as not satisfied with former Answers given, and granting that the Fathers in truth do make for them (as in∣deed they do) yet he would not have their Testimonies amount, to so much as to the clearing up of Divine Right, so strongly stood upon by divers, as he speaks. But the matter of Fact then is granted, that there were such Ecclesiastical Officers which the Fathers owned and allowed of. And being the Divine Right of their Office was not then questioned; it is as easie for us to affirm. that as those Fathers did not deny it, so they owned it, as it is for that Author to say, That they were but admitted as an expedient and behoovefull Order in the Church, or on prudentiall grounds; To use his own expressions quoted before, Vide Pag. 96. Sect. 30. Although this being granted will be sufficient to vindicate this Office of the ruling Elder from all suspition of novelty: and to shew, That it was no new fangled device of Cal∣vin at Gevena, as some tauntingly have sayd. And for your admittance of the ruling Elder, this might be sufficient for
your satisfaction, as we think, according to your Principles. But now to return to the Texts alledged by us, to prove the Divine Right of the ruling Elders Office. After you had sent us to the Fathers to consult them, you tell us, Many there are, that apply them to the Bishops, and amongst these you instance Doctor Fulk, applying these Texts to the Bishops onely, whom (you say) you quote in regard of the moderate Judgment, he was supposed to be of in point of Church-go∣vernment, &c. But you having not dealt so fairely with Cal∣vin, as had been meet, you must pardon us, if we cannot take the matter you quote him for, upon trust and from your repre∣sentation of him. You do not here cite the place, but for what reason your selves best know, as we leave it to the Reader for to judge. But the words, that you alledge out of him (though mangled by you) we find in him, in his Answer to the Rhemists on Titus. 1. 5. And we shall give them the Reader in∣tirely and at full length, and they are these. Amongst whom (speaking of the Clergy) for Order and seemly Government, there was alwaies one Principall, to whom by long use of the Church, the name of Bishop or superintendent hath been ap∣plyed. Which Room Titus exercised at Crete, Timothy in E∣phesus, and others in other places. Therefore although in Scripture, a Bishop and an Elder is of one Order and Autho∣rity in preaching the Word and administration of the Sacra∣ments (as Hierome doth often confess) yet in Government by ancient use of Speech he is onely called a Bishop, which is in the Scripture called , , . Rom. 12. 8. 1 Tim. 5. 17. Heb. 13. 17. However it is not reasonable, that we should be obliged, to own every expression here used by this reverend Author, who is produced by you as an Ad∣versary to us in the matter in Controversie; yet here we de∣sire that it might be observed: 1. That he onely saith, for Order and seemly Government there was alwaies one Principall, to whom by long use of the Church the name of Bishop or superintendent hath been ap∣plyed. By which words he seems clearly to intimate, that that superiority, which a Bishop had above the rest of the Clergy or Presbyters, was but an Ecclesiasticall Constitution
onely in that he ascribes it to Order and Decency. 2. He makes a Bishop and an Elder in Scripture to be but of one Order and Autority in preaching the Word and Admini∣stration of the Sacraments (as he saith Hierom doth often con∣fess (all which you leaving out do obscure Doctor Fulk's mean∣ing. For he asserting a Bishop and an Elder in Scripture to be but of one Order and Authority in preaching the Word, and attributing the difference that is betwixt them in regard of Go∣vernment to the ancient use of Speech, sc. That he onely is cal∣led a Bishop, which is in Scripture called , &c. citing the Texts above mentioned, doth intimate a quite different sense, to what you alledge him for. For he doth not say, that the Scripture in these Texts called the Bishop onely , for which purpose you alledge him; but that by ancient use of Speech (which might be different from the use of Scripture, and as in this particular it was) he is called a Bishop, which is in Scripture called , &c. By which we doubt not it is clear to the judicious Reader, that Doctor Fulk is not in the number of those many, that (you say) apply these Texts to the Bishops onely, taking the word Bishops, as you take them. We have now done with that you have produced here to sa∣tisfie us touching Lay-Elders (as you call them) that they are not meant nor mentioned in those Texts by us alledged, which you undertook with some confidence, but have as unsatisfacto∣rily performed, as (we think) ever any did, that did attempt a matter of this nature. Yet you now proceed hereupon to make your inference. That therefore it can be no betraying the truth of Christ to part with the ruling Elders, if we will seriously weigh it in the Ballance of impartiall and unprejudicate reason (which yet you have not produced, that might with any shew, be sufficient to satisfie the Conscience, either of us, or any other men) and to take in the other (i. e. the Bishops) which you say would be but a strengthning and a backing of it, though we see not how: And now you fall upon exhorting and beseeching us in the name of God (which we hope is dear unto us) and in the tender Bowels of Jesus Christ (for whom we are willing to suffer the loss of all things, and to whom we profess to owe our selves, and what∣ever
we are, or can do, as unto the Lord, that bought us, and to whom we must be faithfull, as being his Stewards) not to stand upon circumstantials (though the ruling Elder (whom you exhort us to part with) is not a meer circumstantiall matter, he being a Member of Christs Organicall Body, and an Officer appointed by him in his Church, as hath been already shewed) or private interests (which we see not how is any way advanced by our pleading for the ruling Elder) but to apply our selves to the way of conjuncture and reconcilement of many poor Christian Soules, (whose Welfare we have reason to tender, as we hope we do) propounded by you, and called by you happy (though, as we have shewed, apprehended by us to be both dangerous and in∣deed destructive unto Union) and asserted by you to be a way of reconcilement of them, in truth, love, and peace, and which, if we could discern, we should upon that account embrace with all our hearts, we having already professed enough for peace, (and whether our Professions and Hearts do not go together, is known to the Searcher of the Hearts and Reins) as our ear∣nest contending for the truth, is that which hinders some men from being at peace with us. But after you have propounded the tearms of reconciliation, which you beseech and beg of us, againe and againe to accept of (though we should not need to be so ear∣nestly intreated, if they were safely to be admitted of) you come to urge some Fruits, that would ensue upon our hearkning to your motion. And here we shall not deny, but the blessing that might redound to all parties, in a just way of reconciliation, would be unconceivable, as it is that, we shall be ready to lay out our selves to our utmost for; as we see there is any hope, or probability to attain it. We do also confess, that the lives and manners of dissolute persons (and how many there are amongst your selves of that sort, you say you are but to too conscious, as we do earnest∣ly pray, that both you and we may be so sensible thereof, as that we may more truly and deeply lay it to heart) may, by a true loving accord, which yet is to be in the way of truth, with brotherly admonition and exhortation be reclaimed (and in which way their reformation is most desirable) or by due censures corrected and amended, we not being willing, that such sharp Physick should be applyed for any other end. But here we cannot
but express our feares, least there be some amongst us (and we heartily wish, that you be not found in the number) that are of that temper, that, whatever might be the fruit of bro∣therly admonition and Church censures, and of reconciliation and union amongst all Parties (and hereof you profess to be de∣sirous) they are resolved to be reconciled in no other way, then upon admittance of Episcopacy, and casting out of the ruling Elder, But with those that are of this stamp, we have no hopes of any cordiall Union, till God alter their Judgments and change their hearts. But whereas, to perswade us to accept of the tearms of Uni∣on by you propounded, you now do further add and say; That amongst our selves also, many (who returning to their Canonical Obe∣dience, which they have sworn to) may blot out the charge of Schisme that lies upon them: and the Church of God be continued amongst us, from age to age, to the end of the world, in a succession of a lawfully ordained Ministry. We are far from being convinced by these Argu∣ment, and must take the liberty to speak to them particularly, and fully, that so we may wipe off the Aspersions, that thereby are cast upon us, and the Church of God. The Arguments you here urge, are two; we shall speak unto them both, and in their order. (1.) And here we shall speak in the first place unto the charge of Schisme, that you would fasten upon us; reserving unto an∣other The imput¦tion of Sch¦taken off. place our Answer unto the charge of Perjury, where you do it more plainly and expresly, though here you might intend to insinuate it. But as touching that of Schisme, you plainely declare, That such Ministers (and of this sort, you say, there are many amongst us, though if we should put you to prove this, you would never be able to make it out) as return not to that canonical Obedience (as you call it) which they were sworn to (as you say) lye under the blot of Schisme. But in your next Paper, you charge us with this more then once, and call it a Rent indeed, a Schisme in the highest. See Sect. 9 of their third Pa∣per. We shall not examine that, which you here seem to take for granted, sc. that all Ministers that were ordained by Bishops, did swear Canonicall Obedience to them, (which we are sure is very untrue concerning many) as how far those, that did take any such Oathes, were bound to obey, is not to our purpose now to discuss.
But as to that blot of Schisme, you would bring us, and the Ministers of these Nations under, who return not to that Obe∣dience, they sometimes yielded to their severall Diocesans, we must speak the more fully, because the Charge is foul. (1.) But we shall in the first place speak something of the nature of Schisme. The word , or Schisme, signifies a Rent or Division: So it is used 1 Cor. 12. 25. That there be no , or Schisme in the body. In Js. 7. 43. its sayd, There was , a schisme or division among the people because of Christ. And John 9. 16. Therefore some of the Pharisees said, this man is not of God, be∣cause he keepeth not the Sabbath day: Others said, how can a man that is a sinner, do such Miracles? And there was , a division or schism among them. So John 10. 19. And so we read Acts 4. 4. That the multitude was divided, and part held with the Jews, and part with the Apostles. This acceptation of the word is general, and may comprehend under its Latitude any kind of Dissention. And hereupon Divines, though restraining it to Dissentions or Divi∣sions about matters of Religion, speak of a good Schisme, that is justifiable; which is the dissolution of a bad Union, and that is but a conspiracy against God, as was that Union, that was a∣mongst the Jews, before they heard the Doctrine of Christ, of which John 10. 19. By this kind of Schisme afterwards, the whole World was rent, and of which Christ speaks, Matth. 20. 35. For I am come to set a man at variance against his Father &c. And hereupon Gerhardus Vide loc. theol. tom. 5. cap. 11. Sect. 156. in answer to Bellarmines charge of Schism upon the Protestants, saith; Denique concedimus nos esse sano sensu schismaticos, quia scilicet ab Ecclesia Romana, & ejus capite Pontifice Romano secessionem fecimus, nequaquam vero ab unitate Ecclessiae, & ejus capite Christo Jesu nos separavimus. At beatum schisma! per quod Christo & verae catholicae Ecclesiae uniti sumus. This Schisme is that, which is commanded Come out of her my people, Revel. 18. 4. And of this Schisme Ambrose speaks, Siqua est Ecclesia, quae fidem respuit, deserenda est. 1. e. If there be any Church, that refuseth the faith, it is to be forsaken. But as when we speak of Schisme, it is usually taken in the worse part, so it is the bad and sinfull Shisme, that is here spoken of. But thus also it is sometimes taken generally, for any division in the Church, that is unwar∣rantable; and so it comprehends also Heresie. And so the
words Heresie and Schisme are sometimes used in the same sense, 1 Cor. 11. 19. For there must needs be Heresies, or Schismes, or Sects, that those that are approved, may be made manifest among them. Al∣though strictly Heresie be opposed unto Faith, and Schisme unto Charity. And this leads us to shew, what Schisme is, taken strictly and properly, which in brief may be thus described. Schisme is a dissolution or breach of that union, that ought to be amongst Christians, consenting together in the same Faith. And because this breach of Union doth chiefly appear, in denying or refusing Communion with the Church, in the use of Gods publick Or∣dinances, therefore that kind of separation is by a kind of sin∣gular appropriation, truly and rightly called Schisme. Thus much for the opening the nature of Schisme. Now because you here charge us with it, we must needs tell you, the charge is great. For Schisme truly and properly so called, and as it is taken in the worser part, is a very hurtfull, dangerous, and per∣nicious evil: The Apostle warned to take heed of it, and con∣demned it in the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 1. V. 10. 11, 12, 13. It is a work of the flesh, and therefore the Apostle proves the Co∣rinthians to be carnall, because of the divisions, that were a∣mong them, 1 Cor. 3. 3, 4. It is a great offence against Christs being a rending of the Unity of his mystical Body. It is a wrong unto the Church, whose peace is thereby disturbed: and to the Members of the Church, their edification being thereby hin∣dred. And to conclude, Schisme opens the door unto Heresie, into which it doth oftentimes degenerate, and so makes way to separation from Christ. And therefore you here charging us to lye under the blot of Schisme, untill Episcopacy be againe admitted of, and there be a returning to that Obedience, that formerly hath been given to the Bishops, should have produced some Arguments for the making out your Charge. But here you are wholly silent, and think it sufficient to insinuate this so high a Charge, without giving any reasons to convince us of our guiltinesses. As if we must presently without reason judge our selves, because you accuse us. (2.) Yet because some may be ready to take the matter upon trust, and, except we purge our selves from this Crime, by say∣ing something for our selves, conclude we are guilty, because
you say so; we shall therefore in the second place offer to the Reader these following considerations, that we may thereby clear our selves from this foul aspersion. (1.) That though Episcopacy be never restored and neither we, nor any other Ministers in this Land, return to that Cano∣nicall Obedience, that hath formerly been yielded, yet still both we and they may continue in Communion with the same Church of England, that we held Communion with during the continuance of Episcopacy, and with which we also do hold communion in all the Ordinances of Gods Worship, Word, Sacraments, and Prayer. This in the beginning of this Paper you do not deny, for you there speak of us, as Brethren of one and the same Church and Fellowship. And we know not, what other Church you mean, but the Church of England; some of you, that are the Subscribers of this Paper, not being Members of the particular Church at Manchester, nor any of you acknow∣ledging, or owning our Presbyterian Classicall Church or As∣sociation. And therefore you here take us to be of the same Church of England with your selves, and confess, that we are in fellowship with it, notwithstanding Episcopacy be taken away; and which is that, which we our selves do constantly profess. (2.) That that Episcopacy that was submitted to by the Mi∣nisters of this Land of later times, was burthensome and grie∣vous: It spoyled the Pastors of that power; which of right did belong unto them, and which they did not onely anciently ex∣ercise (as Doctor Ʋsher shews in his Reduction of Episcopacy, to the form of Synodicall Government, received in the ancient Church, Pag. 3, 4 5.) but which also by the order of the Church of England (as the same Author out of the Book of Ordination shews) did belong unto them. For he there saith, By the Order of the Church of England all Presbyters are charged to administer the Page 1. Doctrine and Sacraments, and the Discipline of Christ, as the Lord hath commanded, and as this Realm hath received; and that they might better understand, what the Lord hath commanded them, Ibid. ex Acts 20. 27, 28. the Ex∣hortation of St. Paul to the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, is appoin∣ted to be read unto them, at the time of their Ordination. Take heed , so taken, Mat. 2. 6. Rev. 12. 5. and 19. 15. unto your selves, and to all the Flock, among whom the Holy-ghost hath made you Overseers to rule the Congregation of God which he hath pur∣chased
with his blood. All which power the Pastors were deprived of during the prevalency of Episcopacy, the Keys of the King∣dome of Heaven being taken out of their hands, they having neither power to cast out of the Church the vilest of Offenders, that were often kept in against their minds; nor any power to restore into the Churches Communion, such as had been never so unjustly excommunicated, though of the best of their Flock. And so that Episcopacy, that formerly was submitted unto, was a plain and manifest usurpation upon the Pastors Office and Authority; was very oppressive and grievous unto the Church and injurious to her Communion: and whereupon it will fol∣low, that there is no breach of that Union, which ought to be maintained in the Church; by not admitting of it again, but ra∣ther the Churches peace; the power, that of right belongs un∣to the Pastors, and the Priviledges of the Members, are all bet∣ter secured, in the absence, then in the presence of it. (3.) That however both godly Conformists as well as Non∣conformists, did groan under the burthensomness of it, yet in licitis & honest is, they submitted and yielded Obedience to it, whilst it continued established by the Laws of the Land; And that out of respect to the peace of the Church, although they did not thereby take themselves obliged, to forbeare the use of any lawfull means, for their deliverance from that bondage, as opportunity was offered. And hereupon they petitioned the Parliament of late for an abolition of it, as had been formerly desired in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and King James; as when other Laws have been found to be inconvenient and mis∣chievous, it was never accounted any disturbance of the civil peace, to remonstrate the grievousness of such Laws to the Par∣liament, that they might be abolished. (4.) Let it also be further weighed, that that Episcopacy, to which you would perswade us by this Argument to return, is now abolished and taken away by the Authority of Parliament, as appears by the Acts and Ordinances for that purpose. (See them cited in our Animadversions on your next Paper, Sect. 4.) And therefore both the Bishops as such, and that Superiority, which they challenged and exercised over the Ministers in this Land, are dead in Law; and so there can be no guilt of Schisme
lying on the Ministers in this Land, for not returning to that Canonicall Obedience, that is not hereupon any longer due: or for not submitting themselves to that power and jurisdiction, that is extinct. There is the greater strength in this considera∣tion, if it be observed 1. That whatever Jurisdiction the Diocesan Bishops did ex∣ercise over Presbyters, they did obtain onely by the Law of the Land, and Canon of the Church. 2. That the Parliament did lawfully take away that Jurisdi∣ction from them, and had therein the concurrence of a reve∣rend and learned Assembly of Divines. The first of these Propositions is clear upon this considera∣tion, that the Scripture makes a Bishop and a Presbyter all one. This is clear from Titus, 1. Ver. 5. compared with the seventh; whence it appears, that those, whom the Apostle had called El∣ders, or Presbyters, Ver. 5. he calls Bishops, Ver. 7. And indeed otherwise he had reasoned very inconsequently, when laying down the qualifications of Elders, Ver. 6. he saith Ver. 7. For a Bishop, &c. For a Bishop must be blameless. Whereunto may be added that other known place, Act. 20. 17. compared with Ver. 28. For the Apostle saith to those Elders, that the Holy-ghost had made them Bishops or Overseers of the Church. Besides, what Office the Bishops had, that the Elders had. Both are charged to feed the Flock of Christ, Act. 20. 28. 1 Pet. 5. 12. and which is both by Doctrine and Government. The Keys of the Kingdome of Heaven were committed to them, Mat. 16. 19. both the Key of Doctrine, and the Key of Discipline. The for∣mer is not denyed; and for the other, it is proved from 1 Thes. 5. 12. 1 Tim. 5. 17. Heb. 13. 7, 17, 24. where we see they are called , those that are over them; , those that rule well; , those that rule. And for power to Ordain, we may see its plain from 1 Tim. 4. 14. where Timothy is charged not to neglect the Gift, that was in him, which was given him by Prophesie, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. This Text you your selves tell us, in your next Paper, Sect. 5. is understood by the Greek Fathers, as Ignatius, Chrysostome, Theodoret, Theophylact, Oecumenius, and others, and some few of the Latines also, Of the company of Presbyters, i. e. Bi∣shops,
who lay hands on the new made Bishops, or Priests. But from these several Texts thus urged, it is very manifest, that the Scri∣pture makes a Bishop and a Presbyter both one, or one and the same order of Ministry. And hereupon it follows, that what∣ever Jurisdiction the Diocesan Bishops exercised over Presby∣ters, they had it not by Divine Right, but obtained it onely by the Law of the Land, and Canon of the Church. And thus the first Proposition is clear. We now come to make good the second. And that the Par∣liament did lawfully take away the Jurisdiction and whole Of∣fice of Diocesan Bishops, is proved from the grounds already layd. For this Jurisdiction of theirs above Presbyters, did not belong unto them by Divine Right; we having proved that the Scripture makes a Bishop and a Presbyter to be both one. And therefore the Parliament, that by Law gave them their power, might, seeing just cause for it, by Law take it away. They had also just reason for to take it away, in regard of the oppressiveness and burthensomness of it, both to Ministers and People, to this whole Church and Nation, as hath been proved before. And therefore what they herein did, was justly, yea, piously, and prudently done, and for which the Church of God in this Land, both Ministers and People, do for the present, and will for the future, see great cause to bless God, for many Generations. And that they had the concurrence herein of a reverend and learned Assembly of Divines, is clear from their Exhortation annexed to the Ordinance of Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, with Instructions for taking the League and Cove∣nant in the Kingdome of England, and Dominion of Wales. In this Exhortation of the Assembly of Divines, in answer to some Objections, they apprehended, might be made against the ta∣king of the Covenant, they thus express themselves. If it be sayd, for the extirpation of Prelacy, to wit, the whole Hierar∣chiall Government (standing as yet by the known Laws of the Kingdome) is new and unwarrantable. This will appear to all impartiall understandings (though new) to be not onely warrantable, but necessary; if they consider (to omit what some say, that this Government was never formally
established by any Laws of this Kingdome at all) that the ve∣ry life and soul thereof is already taken from it, by an Act passed this present Parliament, so as (like Jezabels Carkass, of which no more was left but the Skull, the Feet, and the Palmes of her hands) nothing of Jurisdiction remains, but what is precarious in them, and voluntary in those, who sub∣mit unto them: That their whole Government is at best but a humane Constitution, and such as is found and adjudged by both Houses of Parliament (in which the Judgment of the whole Kingdome is involved and declared) not onely very perjudicial to the civil State, but a great hinderance also to the perfect reformation of Religion: Yea, who knoweth it not to be too much an Enemy thereunto, and destructive to the power of Godliness, and pure administration of the Ordi∣nances of Christ; which moved the well-affected, almost throughout this Kingdome, long since to petition this Par∣liament (as hath been desired before in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and King James) for a total abolition of the same: And then a little after. And as for these Clergy-men, who pretend that they (above all other) cannot covenant to ex∣tirpate that Government, because they have (as they say) taken a solemn Oath, to obey the Bishops in licitis & honestis: they can tell, if they please, that they that have sworne Obe∣dience to the Laws of the Land, are not thereby prohibited from endeavouring by all lawfull means the abolition of those Laws, when they prove inconvenient or mischievous. And yet if there should any Oath be found, into which any Ministers, or others have entred, not warranted by the Laws of God and the Land, in this case they must teach themselves and others, that such Oathes call for repentance, not perti∣nacy in them Thus far the Assembly of Divines in their Exhortation, for the taking the solemne League and Covenant, and which we have thought requisite to transcribe, that so it may appear, how fully they concurred with the Parliament in what they did, touching the abolition of Episcopacy, as it doth also confirme by their Testimony, severall things, that have been mentioned by us, wherein the Reader may perceive their concurrence in
Judgment with us. From all which it is clear, that see∣ing Diocesan Bishops did but obtaine that Jurisdiction, they exercised over Presbyters, by the Law of the Land and Canon of the Church: The Parliament finding this Government of Episcopacy to be very oppressive to this Church, A great hinderance to the perfect Refor∣mation of Religion, and prejudiciall to the civill State, they might both lawsully and laudably, being therein also backed with the advice of a reverend and learned Synod, take it away. And hence it will follow, that if the Ministers of this Land, for severing themselves from the Bishops, and with-drawing their Canonicall Obe∣dience from them, as some speake (the Parliament according to the reverend Synod, having before ta∣ken away from them all that Jurisdiction over Pres∣byters, that did belong unto them) must needs be accused of Schisme, It is a good Schisme, yea, a bles∣sed Schisme, (to use the words, that Gerhard did, de∣fending the Protestants with-drawing from the Pope and the Church of Rome) that they will be found to be guilty of. The blot whereof, as it is not to be much regarded, so it is easily wiped off; and as we think it is already done, in the Eyes of all impartiall and unbyassed Readers, by these Considerations, which we have layd down. We have onely one thing more to add, which is the third generall Head we offer to the Reader here, before we leave this first Argument, with which you would perswade us, to returne againe to our former Yoke of Bondag. (3.) For we offer it to the consideration of all impartiall men, whether considering what hath been spoken touching the nature of Schisme in the generall; and how lawfully and laudably the Parliament did a∣bolish Episcopacy, and how they passed by Ordi∣nance the forme of Church-Government, Anno 1648. establishing the Presbyterian in roome of the Episco∣pall,
and that how it was set up in this County by their Authority; If they but observe, what your actings have been, and what your expressions are in your Papers, they will not thereupon see just cause to impute Schisme (ta∣ken in the worst part, and as it is taken most usually) unto you, who have been so forward, though without reason, to fasten this blot upon us? But we are sure, during the prevalency of Episcopacy, those that were not guilty of any such disturbance of the peace of the Church, by any such boisterous Ventings of the Distempers of their Spi∣rits, as you are, were counted and called by the Prelates Schismaticks. And from which Aspersion, though sun∣dry of those (being peaceable and godly, however Non-conformists) were free, yet you being very unlike them, are not thereby quit. But we have now done with the first of those Argu∣ments, we promised to speak to particularly, whereby you would perswade us to admit againe of Episcopacy; and hope we have sayd to it that, which is sufficient. (2.) We therefore now come to the second, wherein The being of the Church & a lawfully Or∣dained Mini∣stry secured in the want of E∣piscopacy. you still rise higher, for therein you insinuate a thing of a farre greater and more dangerous consequence, if Episcopacy be not restored. For you intimate, that it is necessary, That the Church of God may be continued amongst us, from Age to Age, to the end of the World, in a succession of a lawfull ordained Ministry. And in your next Paper, you falling foule upon us, and charging us with a rent indeed, a Schisme in the highest; you add, which is not satisfied but with the utter overthrow of the Church, from whom they rent. Here you lay a great stress upon Episcopacy; and such an one, as none of our true Pro∣testant Divines, that defend the truth of our own and other reformed Churches against the Papists, would ever have layd upon it. But here two things are hin∣ted, which we shall severally examine. 1. You intimate that by the taking away of Epis∣copacy, the Church is overthrowne; it cannot be continued
amongst us from Age to Age, to the end of the World, except Episcopacy be restored. 2. But yet there is a further Implication, sc. That there cannot be a Succession of a lawfull ordained Mi∣nistry (which Succession yet you intimate to be ne∣cessary to the being of the Church) if we have not Bi∣shops againe, that may Ordain. (1.) Unto the first of these we shall answer, after we have premised a distinction touching the word Church. For either the Church of God amongst us (which you here speak of) is taken essentially, for that part of the Catholick visible Church, which in regard of the place of its abode in this Land, is called the Church of England, as the severall parts of the Sea (which yet is but one) receive their Denomination from the Shoares they wash. Or else you take the word Church, for a Ministeriall Church, or for the Church represen∣sative, as it is taken, Matth. 18. 27. This premised we answer; If you take the word Church in the former sense, your Position is very gross, no other then this, that for want of Bishops, the whole Church of England is at present overthrowne; and that there is no way of recovery of it, but by the restoring of them; and so in the mean season it is no Church, with whom we may safely hold Communion: which layes a Founda∣tion for separation from it, and of Apostasie unto Rome, where Bishops may be had. We shall there∣fore to this say no more, but onely mind you of what is well observed by Mr. Baxter out of B. Jewell, in the defence of the Agreement of the Worcestershire Ministers, Page 58. where he hath these words; B. Jewell in his defence of the Apology (Authorised to be kept in all Churches) Part 2. Page 131. [Neither doth the Church of England depend on them, whom you so often call Apostates, as if our Church were no Church without them.
They are no Apostates Mr. H &c. Notwithstand∣ing if there were not one, neither of them, nor of us, left alive, yet would not the whole Church of England flee to Lovaine. Tertullian saith, Nonne & Laici sacerdotes sumus? Scriptum est, regnum quoque & scerdotes Deo & patri suo nos fecit: differentiam inter ordinem & plebem constituit ecclesiae authoritas, & honos per ordinis concessum sanctificatus a Deo. Vbi ecclesiastici ordinis non est concessus, & offert, & tingit sacerdos, qui est ibi solus. Sed & ubi tres sunt, Ecclesia est, licet Laici] But if you take the word Church for a Ministeriall or Organized Church, we oppose your Position with these following Arguments. (1.) That which we have already proved, sc. That a Bishop and a Presbyter are all one in Scripture ac∣ceptation, will necessarily inferre, that the being of a Ministeriall or Organized Church, doth not depend on the continuance or restauration of Bishops, taking them for such, as are superiour to Presbyters, either in regard of Order or Jurisdiction. For though these be never restored, yet Presbyters being continued (that yet are Bishops in Scripture sense) the Organized and Ministeriall Church of Christ is fufficiently secu∣red against the danger of perishing. 2. But by the Tenent, you here hold forth, you do very uncharitably unchurch the best reformed Chur∣ches throughout the World; The Protestant Churches of France, Scotland, the Low countries, and Geneva, must all be pt out of the number of free Organized and Mi∣nisteriall Churches; and their Ministers must (be∣cause they admit not the Bishops; that you are for) be accounted no lawfull Ministers: Yea, you here a∣gaine very undutifully unchurch your Mother the Church of England, if she restore not Episcopacy; and herein gratifie the Papists no little, that vilifie her and other reformed Churches, as no true Churches,
and ry out against their Ministers as no lawfull Mini∣sters. But blessed be God, both the Church of Eng∣land, and other reformed Churches and their Ministers, have had, and still have better Advocates, and more dutifull Sonnes, then you herein approve your selves to be, to plead their Cause. 3. By this Tenent also it will follow, That all the Ordinances, that are dispensed in these Churches, are null and void. Their Baptisme is no Baptisme: The Sacrament of the Lords Supper Administred amongst them, is no Sacrament; and the like must be said of all the Ordinances, that are dispensed in our Church, by such as were not ordained by Bishops; and so it makes them as to outward Church-Priviledges no bet∣ter then meer Heathens; and hereupon it ministers occasion of endless Doubts and Scruples unto the Mem∣bers of those Churches, of questioning the validity of their Baptisme, and whether they ought not to be re∣baptized? which doubts also by your Tenent are occa∣sioned also to all those among your selves, that were baptized by such Ministers, as were not Ordained by Bishops. Thus you see, how you lay the Foundation of Anabaptisme, which yet you would seem to be zea∣lous Opposers of. 4. Add hereunto, that hence it will unavoidably fol∣low; That you must not hold any Communion with these Churches, nor such Congregations in the Church of England, where these Ordinances are dispensed by such, as were not Ordained by Bishops; their Mini∣sters, according to your Doctrine, being not lawfull Ministers; and for the Ordinance dispensed by them null and void. And here is a Rent indeed, a rent in the highest (to use your owne expressions) from which our old Episcopall Divines, that were sound Protestants, would never have excused you, no nor Doctor Vsher, with whom in some things you profess to close. For however he is represented by Doctor Bernard, to have
held, that a Bishop had Superiority in degree above a Presbyter by Apostolicall Institution, Vide pa. 128. of Dr. Bernards late Book. * Vide pa. 126. and had ex∣pressed himselfe sharply enough in his Letter to Doctor Bernard, Touching the Ordination made by such Presbyters, as had severed themselves from Bishops, yet a little after speaking of the Churches of the Low-Countries * he sayth: For the testifying his Communion with these Churches (which he professeth to love and honour as true Members of the Church Universall) he should with like affection receive the blessed Sacrament at the hands of the Dutch Ministers, if he were in Hol∣land, as he should at the hands of the French Mini∣sters if he were in Charenton. By which you may per∣ceive (however he held those Churches defective in Government for want of Bishops) yet he neither up∣on this account doth unchurch them, nor would have refused Communion with them, as you, by what you do here hold forth, must needs do. 5. Nay lastly, hence it will follow, that when all the Bishops in these Lands, and those that were Ordained by them, shall be dead, if there be no Bishops to be found in any other reformed Churches, nor Ministers, that were Ordained by them, a retreat back againe to Rome must be sounded, that so we might have a lawfull Or∣dained Ministry and a Church: which yet cannot be, but by owning the Pope as the Head of the Church and renouncing the Protestant Religion; as in the mean sea∣son great advantage is given to the Popish Emissaries to ensnare the weak by such a dangerous Insinuation, as this is, sc. That for want of Bishops, or that when all the Bishops are dead and those, that were Ordained by them, we have amongst us neither Church nor Ministery, nor Ordinances, and thus must continue to the end of the World, except we returne to Rome, and which they will not be wanting to tell them. But if you had consulted Bishop Jewell, Bishop Downame, Doctor Feild, Bishop Davenant, Mr. Mason, and other Orthodox Episcopall
Divines in this Point, and weighed their Defences of the reformed Churches and Ministry against the Pa∣pists, you would have found, they would never have owned such a dangerous and unsound Position, as the Argument, you here urge us with to admit againe of Episcopacy, doth imply. Neither do we believe, that they, if they were now alive, would judge, that you had here argued well for your Mother the Church of England, that hath her selfe also, ever since the Re∣formation, even during the time of Episcopacy, ac∣knowledged the reformed Churches of France, Scot∣land, Low-countries, Geneva, to be true Churches of Christ, and hath given them the right hand of Fellow∣ship as Sister Churches, and owned their Ministers, Ordained without Bishops by Presbyters onely, to be true Ministers. (2.) We now come to the second thing implyed in this your second Argument, with which you would per∣swade us to admit of Episcopacy, which is, as we have sayd before, that if it be not restored, there cannot be a succession of a lawfully Ordained Ministry. Which suc∣cession yet you seem to judge to be necessary unto the continuance of the Church of God amongst us. Here two things are implyed: (1.) The first whereof is, that a Succession is neces∣sary to the very being of the Church, and of a lawfully Ordained Ministry. And so 1. You do hereby strengthen the hands of the Papists, who make the Succession of Bi∣shops and Pastors without any interruption from the Apostles, to be a Mark of the true Church, although they are therein opposed generally by our Protestant Di∣vines. The Condition of the Church being many times such, that the Succession of publick Teachers and Pastors is interrupted. Doctor Sutlive saith well, In externa Lib. de Ecclesia cap. 18. fo. 123. successione, quam & haeretici saepe habent, & Orthodoxi non ha∣bent, nihil est momenti. 2. You do also hereby Minister occasion of such scruples unto private Christians, as you
will never be able satisfactorily to resolve. For suppose one on this ground questions the truth of his Baptisme, sc. Because he doth not know whether he was baptized by one that was Ordained by a Bishop, who himselfe also was Ordained by a former true Bishop, and he by a for∣mer, untill the Succession be carried on as high, as that we are brought to such a Bishop, that was ordained by one of the Apostles. How will you be able, making this Succession necessary to the continuing of the Church, and a lawfully Ordained Ministry, to resolve the scruples of such an one? What Church-Story shall be able to resolve the doubts that may be moved on this occasion? Or on what grounds (holding the necessity of this Succession for the continuance of the Church, and a lawfully Ordai∣ned Ministry) will you be able to satisfie the Conscience of such, as may be stumbled? 3. Nay, will not this Assertion give occasion to sun∣dry, to question all Churches, Ministry, and Ordinances, and so to turn Seekers; the Grounds you lay down, gi∣ving them occasion to question the truth of our Chur∣ches, Ministry, and Ordinances. 4. Neither shall the best and ablest Ministers, that are already entred into that Calling, or such as are to enter into it, be able on your Principles in this particular, ei∣ther to satisfie their owne Consciences touching the law∣fulness of their calling, or be able to justifie and defend it against those, that shall call it in question But our Pro∣testant Divines have more sure Grounds, on which to justifie our Churches, Ministry, and Ordinances, and to satisfie their own and their peoples Consciences concern∣ing them, then what you insinuate (2.) The second thing that is further implyed in this Argument, is that the Succession of a lawfully Ordained Ministry to the end of the World, doth depend upon Episcopacy, which is not true. There was a time, when Bishops had no Superiority above Presbyters; a Bishop and a Presbyter in Scripture sense being all one, as hath
been proved before. And though this Superiority should never be restored unto them, yet the Succession of a lawfully Ordained Ministry might be by the means of Presbyters Ordaining Presbyters. And thus we say it was continued, not onely in the dayes of Episcopacy, (though not without the mixture of some corruption cleaving to the Ordination then in use) the Bishops (notwithstanding their usurped Superiority above their fellow Brethren) being themselves also Presbyters, and so their Ordination valid in that respect (and which we have constantly maintained against those of the separation) but also in the darkest times of Popery, and that our Ministry descended to us from Christ, through the Apostate Church of Rome, but not from the Apostate Church of Rome; as our reverend Brethren of the Pro∣vince of London do well express it, in their Jus divinum ministerii Evangelici, where they do solidly and learnedly prove, That the Ministry, which is an Institution of Christ passing to us through Rome, is not made null and void, no more then the Scriptures, Sacraments or any other Gospel Ordinance, which we now enjoy, and which do also descend to us from the Apostles, through the Romish Church. And concerning which, if any one do doubt, we referre him unto the Book for his satisfaction Part 2. cap. 3. where (as they well say)—this great truth so necessary to be knowne in these dayes, is fully discussed, and made out. We have now at length done with both those Ar∣guments, we promised to speak to particularly, with which you urged us to accept of the Proposall, touch∣ing the taking in the Bishops: wherein we have been the longer (though perhaps this Discourse may by you be accounted tedious) that so we might wipe off the foule aspersion of Schisme, that we are therein charged with, and likewise shew, that the Church of God and a lawfully Ordained Ministry, are sufficiently secured in the non-admission of Episcopacy; and which
we have also before proved, tends not to secure the Church or Ministry, but to inthrall both, and bring them under bondage. And now as touching the next Argument you use; we are sure there is no need of Episcopacy, that the Word of God might be firmly fixed among us; but rather we say, That the danger of its removall Westward, hin∣ted to you lately by one of the reverend Pastors of the Church of Manchester, would by the admitting of it, be encreased; considering how many godly, painefull Mi∣nisters were silenced by the Prelates, and driven into America of later times; and so hereupon there would be danger, that the Word of God, that is now on the Tiptoes (ready to remove, if God of his infinite mer∣cy prevent it not) should presently take its flight from us and be gone, being sent unto a people, that would bring forth better Fruit, then we have done; or then this will be found to be, to take in Prelacy againe, and that in time of peace, after we had in the dayes of our Affliction, according to our solemne Covenant, cast it forth. Now whereas you add, that you should by our ac∣cepting of your Motions, have been happily freed from the trouble of any further rejoynder unto our Answer. Which otherwise (as you say) you must do, amongst other consi∣derable reasons, to take off our Government, from that establish∣ment of Authority, upon the proof whereof the most considerable part, as to the bulke, of our Answer, doth insist. We shall here onely mind you of some few parti∣culars; 1. Though we shall not take advantage of words, yet when you tell here of a Rejoynder to be made to our Answer, from which you should have been freed, if we had closed with your Proposals, we do not conceive you speak properly. For your first Paper was your Bill of Complaint, which we answered, and to one part whereof you reply in this Paper, in way of tender of
some tearms of agreement; which because not accep∣ted of by us, you reply to our Answer more particularly in you next. This did concerne you to have minded who carp at words; that we used in our Answer, though, as we shall shew, when we come to it, without any cause. 2. You here say, That the most considerable part of our Answer, as to the bulke, doth insist upon the proof of the e∣stablishment of our Government by Authority; and this you say againe and againe in your next Paper, though without any shew of truth: as when we come to examine that Paper, we shall there manifest. 3. You by this close intimating or rather Threatnings, that if we did not come up to your Proposalls, you must be put to the trouble of a Rejoynder (as you speak) amongst other considerable reasons, to take off our Government from the establishment of Authority, that we lay claime to: And ha∣ving told us in your first Paper; That it concerned us to look to it, whether we had not run our selves into a Premunire, gave us sufficient reason (as we believe all candid Rea∣ders will judge) to put you upon the work to unva∣lid our civill Function, and which is all that in your Ad∣vertisement to the Reader you can charge us with, as that which ministred any occasion of provocation: and which it seems was so great, after you had recived that Answer, that in your next Paper, even after you had slept upon it, it breaks forth into a flame. But we should have judged you a great deale more happy, if you had never put your selves upon the trouble of such a Rejoynder (as you call it) considering what unquietness and distemper of Spirit you do there discover, as every Reader may ea∣sily conceive, that if from our Answer to your first Paper, you conceived some hopes of an amicable and friendly agreement of differences, and as you profess in your Advertisement to the Reader, you did; you had no just cause given you to conceive from those verball exceptions against the last passage of your Reply, that we gave you, as you there speak; nor from the
Work we put you on which you there mention; that we intended not any friendly treaty with you in order to such a Composure. Although we must needs confess, that if you conceived hopes of agreement with us, upon the tearmes you here propound, you were therein much mistaken; they being those very things we expresly cautioned a∣gainst in our Answer, as we have said before; having also fully shewed your further great mistake, when you appe∣hended, we quoted Dr. Vsher, as our owne man, or an Vmpire and Composer of differences betwixt us, as likewise hath been declared before: Although we must still say, that Dr. Vsher doth Patronize, whatever we quoted him for: And this may be a sufficient Answer both to the last passage in this Paper, and likewise to what you have in your Adver∣tisement to the Reader, which is subjoyned to it. But we have thus finished our Answer to this Paper; wherein we have been purposely the larger upon some Points; that, they being here more fully discussed, as occasion was offered, when the things you have here hin∣ted, shall come againe to be mentioned in your next Paper, this our Answer to them, once for all, may suffice.
The third and last Paper that was presented to us by certain Gentle∣men and others within the bounds of our Association. To the first Classe at Manchester within the Province of Lancaster, these. SECT. I. Though we could not but take notice of the prolixity of your last answer in writing, yet we gave you an acknowledgment of your civility, so far as it related Cl. cop. to us, and hoped you would have closed with us in a happy, and amicable We have alrea∣dy returned our thanks for your Answer, full of civility (as to us) though not of brevity. union, and composure of all differences amongst us, in the Church of God here; you pretending so cordially to desire it, and we condescend∣ing to come so near, even (as it were) to your own tearms. But oh! that there had been such a heart in you! then had you spared us the pains of this Rejoynder to your long Answer, made longer, through that need∣less and tedious discourse of yours, concerning the civil sanction of the Presbyterian government: And though (in the very Preface) you say your leasure will not permit you to spend time about impertinencies; its wonder to think how quickly you forget your selves: for you no sooner have said it, but straightway fall in hand, to prove this Thesis, viz. That your Church government is established by the Law of this Land, and to stuff your Paper, with the recitall of sundry Orders and Ordinances of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, &c. which takes up many pages throughout your paper: Which as it was no Question of ours, but started now by you, we shall not here take the pains to reply to, but defer it till anon: Though (we crave leave to tell you) you have hereby started more doubts then you can assoyle, and said more, then you have as yet proved, or can make good: but we have not leasure at present to follow you further then our way lies, and therefore come to the matter in hand.
The Animadversions of the first Class within the Province of Lancaster, on this paper. 1. FIrst, There was no reason, why (though our answer was large (which you complain of) seeing it was in order to, and necessary for your satisfaction) that should hinder your acknowledgement of our civillity towards you; especially considering those sharp reflections on us, and on our Government in your first paper, (which in your second you do not deny) and which ministred unto us occasion of provocation; but we were resolved not to answer you in your own kind, as through the grace of God we hope (though we must deal faithfully with you) we shall keep our selves still from returning railing for railing; notwithstanding in this paper you deal farre more uncivilly and unchristianly with us, as the Reader will perceive. Secondly, But whereas you acknowledge our civillity only so farre, as it related unto you, we cannot see any reason for this restriction, we having not dealt uncivilly with any, that we had occasion to mention or quote in our answer. Thirdly, Neither did we give any occasion, by the answer we gave you to your second paper, to conceive that we intended not an amicable union, and composure of differences, according to our profession of our cordial and hearty desires; although (we must needs confess) whatever your hopes were, we did not apprehend any great likelyhood of a closure with you, or that you had reason so to conceive, upon the termes you propounded in your second paper, as we have said already in our an∣swer to it; except you thought we might be courted out of our principles, upon your earnest entreaty, without any grounds and reasons at all. Fourthly, We cannot but wonder that you should say with any qualification, that you condiscend to come to our terms; except it be, as it were, to come to our termes, to
propound in order unto peace, What? in that very place, where we profess our selves so willing and desirous of u∣nion, we had expresly cautioned against, as being things we could not in conscience yeeld unto. But when you speak of your condescension, we cannot but thereby con∣ceive your meaning to be this, that if you grant preaching Presbyters any power in Ecclesiastical matters, and to have decisive votes in Synods (where the Bishops are to be the superintendents and perpetual moderatours, accor∣ding to the proposals of Dr. Ʋsher) you think you con∣discend very farre. And upon this and other grounds, we have cause to fear, if the ruling Elders were removed, and you should come to be censured by the preaching Presbyters, your exceptions then would be as much a∣gainst them in such a case, as against the ruling Elders now; and that then you would cry up the Bishops, as having the solitary power of jurisdiction, and that it be∣longed not to other Ministers to meddle therein at all. Fifthly, When mentioning our professions cordially to desire peace, (which you will have to be but a pretending to it only) you say, Oh that there had been such a heart in us! We must needs tell you, that we can approve our hearts to him that is the searcher of them, that there was then, and is still, a cordial desire of peace and union, with all that are truly godly and orthodox throughout the Land, however differing from us in some points, touching Dis∣cipline and Government; and do heartily wish, that you closed with us in those desires, as cordially and hear∣tily as we do. But we hereby perceive, that except we have an heart for Episcopacy (condescended by you for the present to be moderated) and to throw out the ruling Elders (even to the forcing of our consciences against the Scriptures we urged in our answer, for the divine right of their office, and against the Scriptural arguments thence urged, to which we referred you, (though by you sleighted) and against the reasons also we urged in our answer, where we cautioned against moderate Episcopa∣cy,
never so much as attempted to be answered by you) you judge us to have no hearts for peace. Sixthly, Whereas you say, our discourse concerning the civill sanction of our Presbyterian Government (which pro∣duced the authority that awarranted all that was in that paper, we published in our several Congregations, and whatever we have acted in the exercise of that Govern∣ment from the first to the last, since it was set up) was needless, we leave it to the Reader to judge of, when he shall consider, that in your first paper you told us, of our making Laws and Edicts, and publishing them openly in the Church, for all to obey upon pain of Excommunication, contrary to the Laws in force—and that it concerned us to look unto it, whether we had not run our selves into a praemunire. Seventhly, But it seems you count that discourse also tedious; though it was necessary, both for our own vin∣dincation, and to give you full and particular satisfaction, touching the rules prescribed unto us in the forme of Church-Government to walk by; besides that this fair manner of dealing with you, in bringing to your hand, what we judged you might never have enquired after, gave you the opportunity to have excepted against us, for transgressing our rule, if you had any thing to have al∣leadged against us in that respect: But perhaps the men∣tioning of any Ordinances of Parliament, and rules there∣in expressed for the Presbyterian Government, was that which was tedious to you, and which we have some rea∣son for to think; and therefore afterward you endeavour (though you performe not what you undertake) to take them all away, and utterly to nullifie all Ordinances of Parliament whatsoever. Eightly, You judge also, that we quickly forget our selves, when we said in our answer, our leisure would not permit us to spend time about impertinencies, and yet presently fall upon alleadging of sundry Orders and Ordinances of Parlia∣ment; but these were not produced by us to prove, that the Presbyterian Government was established by the Law of the Land, but to give you some account how the setting up of the
Presbyterian Government in this County, the dividing it into several Classes, the making those Classes into a Pro∣vince, and appointing this Class to be the first, was all done by Authority of Parliament: this being the inference that we made from our recital See the first Section of it to∣wards the close. of the Orders and Ordi∣nances of Parliament, that were mentioned in our answer, and which was occasioned by your selves, who having intituled us in your first paper, The first Class at Manchester, within the Province of Lancaster, then presently added, Give us leave to salute you in your own terms: We judged you might be ignorant of the particular Orders and Ordinan∣ces touching what concerned this Province of Lancaster, and this Class in particular, in the particulars above∣mentioned, though you might have seen some Ordinan∣ces in the general, for the Presbyterian Government, and which we believe any indifferent Reader will discern, are distinct things; as the Parliament also in passing them, distinguished them; and therefore you should not have dealt so disingeniously with us, as to have accounted the discourse impertinent, which was necessary for your in∣formation, if you were ignorant: If you knowing these Orders and Ordinances, would yet have this discourse impertinent, notwithstanding your jerking us, for calling our selves the first Classis within the Province of Lancaster, (which terms we told you we gave not to our selves, till the Parliament had first given them us) we leave it to the Rea∣der what to judge of it. Ninthly, Here is also another strange assertion, when you say, it was no question of yours, whether our Government be established by the Law of the Land; when as in your first paper, in the words thereof recited even now, you told us of our making Laws and Edicts, and publishing them contrary to the Laws in force, and questioning whether we had not run our selves into a praemunire. Doubtless if our Government be established by Ordinance of Parliament, and that Or∣dinance awarrant us for whatever was published by us in the paper, and yet that be asserted by you to be contrary to the Laws in force, it must needs be a question of yours,
whether our Government be established, by the Law of the Land; as it is that which afterward you go about to prove, that it wants the establishment of Authority; and so how∣ever you dare not tell the Justices of the Peace, that have acted on other Ordinances of Parliament (that yet are also null and void, if that we have acted on be) that they are not thereby sufficiently secured against the danger of a praemunire; yet you dare tell us of this once and again, and yet also it be no question of yours, whether our Church-Government be established by the Law of the Land; but how contradictory these things are one unto another, we leave it to be judged of. As touching our starting more doubts, then (as you say) we can assoyl, we shall have leisure hereafter to examine, in the place where you have a mind to encounter us, and now shall follow you in the way you have chosen to go in. And so we come unto the next. The Gentlemens Paper. Sect. II. To that mistake you charge us withall, in the Preface of our Paper, con∣cerning the Title of yours, we answer; We finde in the close of that your aper these words (This presentation is approved by this Provincial Assembly; Tho. Johnson Moderator, Edw. Gee Scribe) So it is approved by the Provincial Assembly under that title of a presentation as we call it, Cl. cop. in all the Copies we have seen: But this (as you say) might be the mistake of your Scribe, and not to be insisted on. It is of greater weight and moment (you say) to take notice of what we publish, as our sense The Scribe. and apprehension of it, viz. The matter contained in your Paper. Not resting in the judgement or determination of any general Council, contrary thereto (If any such should be) much less to one of your Provincial As∣semblies, &c. And here you tell us of a publique, and authoritative Judge∣ment that is in Councils, concerning matters of Doctrine, and Discipline (though tied to the rule of Gods Word in such proceedings, as Judges to the Law) to which we ought to be subject; And how far is that? viz. They have the power of expounding, and explaining the difficult places of Scripture, as the Judges have of the exposition of the Law) And in this sense we ought to subject to the sense, and determination of a general Council. And therefore (you say) Questionless if in the time of S. Augu∣stine, (who was no conemner of Synods and Councils) any in this sense had declared, That they would not have submitted their apprehensions to their Judge∣ment,
he would have cried out against them, as well as against the Donatists, O Impudentem Vocem! And you hope, when we have weighed the matter better, we will not in this sense, see any reason, to refuse to submit either our sense and apprehension of your Paper, or what we may publish as our own private judgements in other matters about Religion to the judgement of a generall Coun∣cil supposing it might be had. God forbid but we should submit; neither need we for this to weigh the matter better, for in this sense we have done, and yet shall submit to any shall come hereafter: Neither had you any reason so to judge your selves, or induce others to that perswasion of us, that we should in this sense re∣fuse to submit our Judgements to the Judgement of any general Council; Our words are plain, We publish this our sense, and apprehension of it, as far as it is plain to us, Which words you omitting, deale not fairely with us. and which words carry another sense with them; For so far as the mat∣ter conteined in your Paper is plain to us, we close, and joyn with you; Being as we explain our selves afterwards so fully warranted thereto by the Word of God, and constant practise of the Catholique Church that therein so far as it is made thus plain unto us, we shall not submit our Ap∣prehensions to the Judgement of a general Council: But by this Aposiopesis of yours, you would make the World believe, we refuse to submit our Judgements to the Judgement of a general Council, not onely touching matters of faith, and such Articles of Religion, which are plainly warranted by Gods Word, and constant practice of the Catholique Church: But also touching matters, which are not so plainly set forth in the word of God: Touching which last we prosess our willing submission to the Judgement of a general Council, and are glad to hear you of the same minde, though we fear (as we shall hear you declaring anon) you will hardly grant that to a general Council, which you seem to grant to your Provincial. In which we dissent from you as we have said. The Animadversions of the Class upon it. FIrst, We perceive you are resolved to stick to what you have once said, though it be only the taking ad∣vantage of some litteral mistake, and which in our an∣swer we had told you was none of ours, when you called our paper by the title of a presentation, but imputed it to the Scribe, (speaking indefinitely, which might be yours as well as ours; though in your printed Copy you will have us to say what we did not, that it was the mistake of our Scribe) and however you say now, that in all the Copies which you have seen (which implies many) you find in the close of that our paper, these words; this presentation is ap∣proved by this Provincial Assembly, Thomas Johnson Moderator,
Edward Gee Scribe: Yet we believe, that if you be put upon the proof, it will be hard for you to produce one Copy that was given forth by the Class, and written by our Scribe, where you find our paper approved by the Provincial Assembly under the title of a presentation, but of a representation only, as we said in our answer. But as in the Preface to these papers that you printed, you in∣sinuate that we are men of low and cheap abilities; and in this paper do afterwards jeer and scoff at us, as persons desti∣tute of all learning, as if you would monopolize (as all power and jurisdiction) so all learning, and make the same proper to your selves and your own party, (though we hope we have so much, as to fathom the depth of that which you would make some shew of) so here we have cause to fear, you had a mind to represent us, (and which is worse, the Provincial Assembly too, and those reve∣rend and learned brethren, the Moderator and Scribe of it also) to be such poor illiterate persons, as did not well know how how to write good English. Secondly, In your representing what we said touch∣ing submitting to Synods and Councils; you do it but by the halfes, (and so deal unfaithfully) never so much as mentioning what we had in our answer in the first place declared, viz. that our faith was not to be resolved into the determination of any company of men on earth whatsoever, or to be built on the judgement of Synods and Councills, &c. for which we gave our reasons. And further we there said, that (when you had said in your first paper, that as touch∣ing what you therein declare as your sense and apprehensions of ours that we published, you did not rest in the judgement and determination of any general Concil contrary thereunto:) if your meaning therein was the same with what we had declared ours to be, you had not us differing from you. After we came to declare, in what respects they were to be reverenced; viz. as they were the ordinances of God, and in respect of their authoritative judgement, and that, in that respect they were to be submitted to; in which re∣spect we said we submitted our apprehensions, in the case
propounded to the judgement of the Provincial Assem∣bly. But to make this more plain, we proceeded to di∣stinguish betwixt a private and publick judgement in matters of Religion, allowing the private to our selves and o∣thers, who (we said) were all of us to see with our own eyes, and judge concerning what is to be believed in mat∣ters of this nature. Again we distinguished the publick and authoritative judgement, into a concional (which be∣longed (we said) to every Minister, to whom the key of Doctrine was committed, by himself singly) and juridi∣cal; which (we said) belonged to Synods and Councils, who having the key of Discipline committed to them, were to enquire into, try, examine, censure, and judge of matters of Doctrine and Discipline authoritatively, (though tyed to the Word in such proceedings) and like∣wise to censure offenders; and then we applyed this to our purpose, and said that it was in this sense, that we submitted our apprehensions, in the paper we published, to the judgement of the Provincial Assembly, and for which we urged our grounds; all which will be clear to the Reader, upon the perusal of the second Section of our answer: But you only mention this last branch, and say, we tell you of an authoritative judgement of Synods and Coun∣cills, and how we hoped when you had weigbed the matter better, you would not in this respect see cause to submit, what you may publish as your own private judgements about matters of Reli∣gion, to the judgement of a general Council, suppose it might be had. But seeing, towards the close of this Section, you profess, you are glad to hear us of the same mind with you, touching this submission to Synods and Councills; you should not thus maimedly have represented out opi∣nion; considering how vastly different ours and yours is in this matter; as will appear from what hath been decla∣red to be ours, and what you declare to be yours in this Section, and which we shall manifest anon to the Reader. Thirdly, You seem here to abhorre the refusal to sub∣mit, what you have published or may publish as your own private
judgement, in matters of Religion, to the judgement of a general Council that hath been, or any that may be hereafter, and do complain, that we should either our selves judge, or induce others to the perswasion of you, that you should refuse to submit your judgement in the sense declared. But here we must mind you, that the sense we declared was, that there was to be a submission to them, in regard of their juridical authori∣ty; not that faith was to be built on their judgement; And in this latter you will be found to submit too much; as if they should determine against you, we fear in the former you would be found to submit too little. We shall give the Reader our Reasons for both, that we may not seem to wrong you, in fastening upon you without ground, what perhaps, as we have expressed the matter, you may be ready to disclaim. For the first; You do in this very Section profess, as touching matters which are not so plainly set forth in the word of God, your willing submission to the judgement of a general Council; and hereafter in the sixth Section of this Paper, you say, where there is a doubt or difficulty, the Church may expound the Scripture; although you grant what we said, soil. that it is tyed to the rule of Gods words in such proceedings, as Judges to the Law; though we do not see, it is lawfull for any private persons to examine, whether in case of such a doubt or difficulty, the Church hath given the right sense of Scripture; but must (notwithstanding any grounds, they may have from that Text, which the Church may expound, or other Texts of Scripture, to the contrary;) submit their faith and belief in the case, to the Churches determination. For you there add and say, we are bund up by that, speaking of the Churches ex∣position, as you say, we are to those cases in the Law, which are the judgement and exposition of the Judges, upon the dark places of the same: the Churches exposition and practice, (as you there further say) is our rule in such cases, and the best rule too—and when there is a difference about interpretation of Scripture, it is to give way to private interpretation, and domi∣nari fidei, to lord it over the faith of others, to utter any
other sense of Scripture (which you there call the uttering of mens own fancies) then hath been delivered by our Forefa∣thers, as you do more fully declare your selves in that place. From all which it follows, that however in this Section you say, in matters of faith, and such articles, as are plainly warranted by Gods word, and constant practice of the Catholique Church, you refuse to submit your judgement to the judgement of a general Council; yet in matters of Religion, that are not so plainly set forth, you do; and to the Churches exposition, where there is a doubt and difficulty, which is your rule, and the best rule too, and by which you are bound up; which what is it else, then to build your faith in such cases, upon their judgement, and so to submit to them, as we said, too much? And seeing, there is almost no point of faith, but it is controverted; if all such points must be judged, such matters, as about which there is doubt and difficulty, and not plainly set forth in Gods word; then in all such cases it must be the Churches exposition of the Scriptures and practice (as you do insi∣sinuate) that must be the rule by which you must be guid∣ed, and that on which in such cases your faith must be built; and which, when we come to the sixth Section, we shall shw to be very unsound, and with the Papists, in whole or in part, to resolve your faith into the determi∣nations of men, the exposition of the Church, or of Synods and Councils, that are the Church representative. The Reader by this account may perceive, that in this respect you submitted too much to Synods and Councils, and a great deal further then ever we submitted, as is manifest from what we have shewed, was in this our declared judgement, in our answer to your first Paper. But we shall now further proceed, to give the Reader our Reason, why if Synods and Councils (and you say of these, you shall submit to any that shall come hereafter) should determine against you, we feared, in regard of their juridical authority, you would submit too little. There is betwixt you and us a controversie touching the superiority of Bishop above Presbyters; we deny it, you
herein are for the affirmative. You assert in the very next Section, that Ae▪rius was condemned for heresie, for asserting this parity of Church-Officers; and it is Bishops and Presbyters only that are there spoken of. There is also another controversie betwixt you and us, touching ruling Elders, whether they be by divine right or no; you herein deny, and we affirme. In these matters then, we shall take it for granted, till you deny it, that you yeild there is a doubt and difficulty, and touching which you will not have the Scripture to be so plain, but that Fathers and Councils must be consulted in these cases; and which was the reason, why in the case of the ruling Elder, you sent us to them for to consult what exposition they gave of the Texts that we alleadged for the divine right of those Officers. Now the Question is, whether you will submit to the determination of Synods and Councils in regard of their juridical authority? As touching the first of these matters in difference, we shall, in our Animadversions on your next Section, shew, that there are Fathers that deter∣mine against you. As touching the other concerning ru∣ling Elders, we have in our Answer to your second Paper, shewed, there are several Fathers that do give in clear evi∣dence touching the being of this Officer in their times; But as touching this Officer, vvhether he be an Officer of the Church by divine right, vve have not read of any general Council, before vvhom this case in controversie vvas brought, much less that they determined against vvhat in this point vve hold: (but vve suppose) that from vvhat you, or vve may alledge out of Fathers or Councils of an∣cienter times, these points vvill not be found to be deter∣mined, but there vvill be a difference betvvixt us still. What then is it, that you vvill submit to? To a general Council that shall come hereafter? If so, and that you vvill give that due respect to Synods and Councils, that may be hereafter, in regard of their juridical Authority; Then untill a general Council may be had, that may be regularly and duely called, and rightly constituted; seeing the mat∣ters in difference betvvixt you and us have been tryed and
examined, judged and determined This is mani∣fest from the ad∣vice of the As∣sembly to the Parliament, touching Church Government. against you, and for us, by a reverend and learned Synod and Assembly of Di∣vines (against vvhom, your exception against our Pro∣vincial Assembly, in regard of the Elders being admitted there as members, lyes not) that was called by the Autho∣rity of the Civil power, of this Nation under which we live; you ought to testifie your submission to that Synod, and not contrary to their resolution of the cases in diffe∣rence, and the Ordinances of Parliament for the Presby∣terian-Government, and against Episcopacy, disturb the peace of the Church, by publishing your own private judg∣ments (if their determinations had been against us, and we had published ours in the cases in difference, you would have called them our fancies) and thereby testifie what little respect you have to their resolutions. Upon this consideration we cannot but think; that if a general Council should hereafter come, and determine these cases against you, you that now submit not, would not submit then: And so the upshot of the matter would be this; that if in these or such like cases in controversie, you were o∣therwise resolved in your judgements, you would not sub∣mit to the determination of a general Council, in regard of their juridical authority; only if they determined ac∣cording to your resolutions, then you would submit; wherein notwithstanding your great professions of sub∣mission, you do not submit much. Fourthly, But now you find your selves agrieved, be∣cause when you said, you did publish this your sense and ap∣prehension of our Paper, as far as it was plain to you, we leav∣ing out the words, as far as it was plain to you, dealt not fair∣ly with you: for you say those words carry another sense with them, then indeed we did understand them in; that is, as here you explain your selves; so far as the matter con∣tained in our Paper was plain to you, you closed and joyned with us, being (as you say) you explain your selves afterward; so fully warranted thereunto by the word of God, and constant pract∣ice of the Catholick Church, that therein so far as it is thus made plain to you, you shall not submit your apprehensions to the judge∣ment
of a general Council; but now your complaint of us is, that by leaving those words out, which you thus explain, we represent you, as if where matters were not so plain, but doubtfull, you refused to submit. The truth is, we took these words referring to our Paper, so far as it is plain to us, in opposition to obscurity and darkness, you after complaining, that other parts of our Paper were full of darkness; and then though we left those words out, yet we could not conceive, we wronged you therein, being you could not profess your closure and joyning with us in any thing in our Paper, any further then you understood our plain meaning. But seeing you here otherwise explain your selves, and say, you did it before; we will be more liberal to you, then you are to us afterwards, and shall al∣low you the liberty to explain your selves; though we do not think, that the sound and orthodox Reader will judge that your opinion thus explained, and which you have here declared, touching your submission to Synods and Councils, is any sounder, then as we understood you to have meant those words; and which we doubt not, but he will discern from what hath been said concerning it, in the Animadversion going before. 5. But by this explication of your selves, you have cre∣ated to us a further scruple; for it apeats to us from thence, (seeing you joyn the word of God, and constant practice of the Catholique Church together, (as that which must make those matters of faith and articles of Religion so plain to you, that you thereupon will refuse to submit such matters, so made plain, and your apprehen∣sions concerning them, to a generall Council) that ex∣cept the plainest matters of faith, and articles of Religion from Gods word be also made plain, to have been the constant practice (rather judgment, as we think you should have expressed it) of the Catholique Church, they are not so plain to you, as not to submit your apprehen∣sions concerning them to a generall Council; and so the word of God alone, even in the matters of faith and ar∣ticles of Religion, that are therein most plainly contained;
shall not be a sufficient foundation, to bottom your faith upon, except it be also evident, what was the constant and universall practice (rather judgment) of the Church in those points; and so your faith, even in the plainest ar∣ticles of Religion, must be resolved into the constant pra∣ctice, or rather declared judgment of the universal Church, and which makes it a meer humane not a divine faith. But touching this, as the rule in any cases of matters of Religion, we shall have further occasion to speak in our animadversions on the sixth Section of this paper. 6. As touching our selves, we have declared, that we did not submit to Synods and Councils, so as to build our faith on their dictates, or resolve it into their determina∣tions; and in this we would be understood touching all matters of faith whatsoever; not only those that are most plainly contained in Gods word, but also such as about which there may be some doubt and difficulty, although we reverence Synods as an Ordinance of God; and in way of means, judg it more likely in doubtfull cases, that what is Gods mind should be boulted forth to our satisfaction, by the learned debates of learned, judicious and godly Di∣vines in such Assemblies, then by the discussion of one Bi∣shop, or some few Ministers. But as touching the juridicall power of Synods, we profess our selves to be ready, to submit to their judgment, and did so submit our Paper wholly to the judgment of our Provinciall, which was a Synod actually in being, and to whom we knowing our selves to be accountable, and judging we ought so to be, thought it not meet to publish the Paper, that was read in our severall Congregations, except it had first been ap∣proved of by them. Now how farre we do, in this decla∣ration of our judgements, touching our submission to Sy∣nods and Councils, concur with what here you declare to be yours, we leave it to your selves, and the Reader to judg of; but we are sure there is herein a great distance betwixt your declared judgment and ours; though you shall not finde afterwards, that we do hardly grant that to a generall Council, rightly constituted and regularly called,
which we either in truth or any shew, do grant to our Pro∣vinciall. The Gentlemens Paper. Sect. III. Having done with our Preface, you come to the matter; and as we said, Cl. cop. Say now. so we finde we much dissent not, onely in the third and last, concerning the Heresie and Schism of those who Erre so grossely, whether in Doctri∣nals, or points of discipline: You give us the reason wherefore you did not so expresly mention them, their sin, and punishment, as the grossely ignorant and scandalous; Which is, because they are very inconsiderable in comparison of the other; and in sundry of your Congregations (if not in most) not any at all, that you know of. But if you will seriously con∣sider the number of those, that have rent themselves, from a true consti∣tuted Church, and of those who have severed themselves, from those Bi∣shops, unto whom they had sworn Canonical obedience, and therefore in the Judgement of that Learned and Rever end Bishop Ʋsher and others, Cl. cop. cannot possibly be excused from being Schismaticall: we say if you consider this, you will finde a considerable number, even within the verge of your own Association. Several Associ∣ations. What we said touching the way of Catechising for Information of the ignorant; we are glad to hear you so heartily wish, for a more generall practise thereof in your Churches at home at (you say) it is practised abroad. It was enjoyned, and practised in the Church of England before your separation; And if you by your pretended Reformation have de∣stroyed that practise, the fault lies at your own doors. You understand us aright in this, That we hold it not fitting, that Per∣sons grossely ignotant should be admitted so the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: But your conclusion thence is not good, viz. That we cannot therefore in reason deny, that there ought to be an Examination and tryall of all Persons (de novo) before they be admitted, &c, Especially by your Elder∣ship, To whom (you say) the power of judgement and examination is com∣mitted, and not to any one Minister, before whom all must come for re-exami∣nation, whatsoever their tryall and examination heretofore hath been. Those Persons who have anciently been Catechized, and have been a long time Commoners at the Lords Table and witnessed a good confession for parts and piety, must these again yeild themselves to the examination of an El∣dership before they can be admitted? Pardon us if herein we pronounce a dissent from you. Concerning the scandalous, and wicked in their lives, you say we fully come up to you, and are glad there is an agreement in judgement betwixt us thus farre, (viz.) That the Churches lawfull Pastors have power to Ex∣communicate such, upon which (you say) you cannot see how we in reason
can finde fault with your proceedings, in such a way, against such Persons though your ruling Elders (which in our judgement ae but meer lay-men) do joyn in the Government with you: Ther's another non sequitur, a conclu∣sion as bad as the former, and the reason of that conclusion as weak as the rest. Because High-Commissioners, Chancellors, and Commissaries, in the time of Episcopacy (to which Government we submitted) that were as much Lay-men, as your ruling Elders, had so great a share as to suspend Mini∣sters, &c. and so farre as to decree the sentence of Excommunication against them, and others, as there was occasion for it: For when you can prove that these Chancellors, Commissaries, &c. did not officiate by deputation, from and under a lawfull Pastor, but in equall right with him, and jure divino, as your ruling Elders do, Then your Comparison of them, and your ruling Elders may hold good: till then it is weak, and frivolous. Now whereas you desire to know, whom we mean by lawfull Pastors; our Answer is, we mean such Persons as have received their Ordination from men lawfully, and truely qualified with a just power of conferring Orders; which you (and we believe 'tis none but you) presume one Presbyter may give another: Whereupon you instance the opinion of Dr Ʋsher, in a late Letter of his, set forth by Dr Bernard, and refer us to Dr Bernards animadversions upon it. We have perused the Papers to which you refer us, and finde that Dr Ʋsher doth not invalidate the Or∣dination by Presbyters, but with a speciall restriction, to such places where Bishops cannot be had: But this we must desire you to consider, is ex necessitate, non ex perjurio & pertinaciâ, which he in the next page clearely dilucidates; his words are these, You may easily judge that the Ordination made by such Presbyters, as have severed themselves from those Bi∣shops, unto whom they had sworne Cannnical obedience, cannot possibly by me be excused from being schismaticall. Examine your selves in this particular, we shall not judge any man. For this Purity amongst Church Officers (an Errour first broacht by Ae▪rius, and for which amongst other things, he was most justly con∣demned of Heresie) and Ordination by Presbyters, otherwise then before expressed, cannot possibly be made out by any instance out of Dr Ʋshers Letter, or Dr Bernards animadversions upon it, since he is clearly against it; and so that Catalogue of Divines, Schoolmen, and Fathers, by you out of him collected, is frustraneously cited. Concerning submission to the judgement of Councils rightly called and constituted, we have said enough before. In which point, if you will hold to what you profess, you shall not have us dissenting from you: But we shall finde you of another minde, before you come to a conclusion. As for your Provinciall Assembly at Preston, or any other elsewhere of that nature, we say it is a new Termed Assembly; Not for the words sake (Assembly) but new both in respect of the word (Provinciall) and place (at Preston.) That this County of Lancaster should be termed the Province of Lancaster, and the Synods and Assemblies therein convened (at Preston or elsewhere) should be termed Provinciall, all new: New also in respect of the Persons constituting this Assembly: Lay-men to pre∣side, to rule, and to have decisive voices, in as ample manner as the high∣est,
and chiefest in holy Orders, is a novelty, no Antiquity can plead for it: Nor doth Dr Bernard, or Bishop Ʋsher, that Learned and reverend Antiquary, or the Fathers, and Councils there alleadged, and by you, out of him so confidently cited, any way make for such an Assembly. And so your Provinciall Assembly at Preston, may in the Judgement of Bishop Ʋsh∣or, be accounted a new termed Provinciall Assembly, and remains as yet uncleared from all suspition of novelty. The Animadversions of the Classe upon it. FIrst, We must desire the Reader to take the pains to peruse the third Section of our Answer, to which you do here reply. You do in the next Section tell us, that the most considerable part of our Answer (as to the bulke) doth insist on the proof of the establishment of our Government by Authority; this you also said in the close of your second Paper: But if the Reader but compare what is contained in this Section, with what is in the next, where we prove this establishment of our Government by authority, he will finde our answer here, in this one Section, is conside∣rably larger, then all that great bulk you complain of in the next; and it will be found to be as much, as all that we have touching this matter throughout our whole answer. And therefore we cannot but wonder, that you should so much forget your selves, and so little consider what you say, as again and again to assert, with no small confi∣dence, what is so farre from truth. But in this Section the Reader may further descern, that you pass over some things in silence, to which you should at the least have made some reply; testifying, either your assent to them, and so your receiving satisfaction, or have given us the grounds of your dissent: but we shall desire that what was answered by us, and is by you replyed unto, might be com∣pared together by the candid Reader, that he may see with his own eyes, wherein you fall short. Secondly, You profess that in some things; you finde we much dissent not, only in the third and last, concerning the heresie and schisme of those, who erre so grosly in Doctrinals or points of Discipline, you mention the reason, we gave you,
why we did not so expresly mention them, their sin and punish∣ment, as the grosly ignorant and scandalous, scil. the inconsider a∣bleness of the number of the former, to the number of these; But First, This was not the only reason we gave, but there was also another mentioned, scil. because we were to give in to the Provincial Assembly, what our apprehensions were, touching the case propounded to us by them, touch∣ing some further meanes to be used, for the in∣formation of the ignorant, and reformation of the scan∣dalous. Secondly, But yet this you pitch upon, because you had a mind to charge us, and all others, that have in our Con∣gregations severed themselves from the Bishops, with schisme, that so you might hereby also invalidate that reason rendered of our not mentioning expresly the he∣retical and schismatical. But we hope we have, in our an∣swer to your second Paper, said that, which will be suffici∣ent to wipe off that aspersion; and you must pardon us, if wherein Dr. Usher, in this point differing from us in judg∣ment, expressed himself too farre, we therein (though we otherwise reverence him both for his piety and learning) look upon him as a man. We cannot as yet be perswa∣ded, that the Bishops were the only true constituted Church of England; from whom because we have severed our selves, you do here (though without any reason) charge us to be schismatical, and to have rent our selves from a true constituted Church. Thirdly, But seeing in this third and last, touching those that are chargeable with heresie and schisme, you profess to diffent from us, you might have testified, either your assent to, or dissent from that previous course, that in our answer we mentioned, was to be taken with these before they were to be excommunicated; especially considering, we had told you, that though you allowed of admonition of the scandalous, before there was process to the censure of them, yet you said nothing of this course to be taken with the other; and wherein therefore we purposely de∣clared
our selves, that if you judged the previous course of admonition necessary to be held with the scandalous, you might not censure us, as indulgent toward any of the o∣ther, that might be in any of our Congregations (though we said the number of them was not considerable to the number of the scandalous) because we took it to be our duty, according to the practice of the Apostles in the Synod at Jerusalem, and the Fathers of the Nicene Council, and o∣thers we instanced in, to endeavour their conviction, in the due use of all good meanes, before there was a process to excommunication. We remembred also, how quick the Prelates were, in thundering out their excommunica∣tions, against such as (though godly and religious) were in those times accounted by them to be schismatical; and we thought it requisite, to bear witness against those manner of proceedings. But of this you take no notice, and we do not much wonder: for we see you count all those, that severed themselves from the Bishops, schismatical; and may be, if they had power again in their hands, you did not much matter (though you are willing the scandalous should be admonished before) if all these, for their great schisme, in your esteem were forthwith excommunica∣ted. Thirdly, As touching publick Catechizing we said, we heartily wished it had been more generally practised in our own Church at home, as it is practised by the refor∣med Churches abroad: But by our own Church, we meant the Church of England, as it is a national Church; and in which, though Catechizing was enjoyned in for∣mer times, yet it was neither so generally and constantly practised, as it should have been; else we should not have had so much cause to have complained of the gross igno∣rance of so many aged persons in our Congregations (who were nor trained up under the Presbyterian, but Prelatical Government) as now we have. And here we observe, that when you profess you are glad, to hear us so heartily wish, that Catechizing had been more generally practised, it is but that you may take occasion to affix the
greater blot upon us; for you would have it to be our Churches in whom this neglect is chiefly or only to be found; and it is we, (that are again by you charged with separation) that have by our pretended reformation, (as you are pleased to speak) destroyed this practice. We wish as heartily in this case, as we did in the other, that you may be sensible how prone you are to revile and slander, and pray to God that it may not be laid to your charge. But you might have remembred, that as we professed our selves to be for publick Catechizing (which blessed be God is practised in our Churches, though you would make the world to believe that we had destroyed it) so we professed to be for private too, that so such as were not like, in regard of age, or timorousness, to be brought to instruction by the publick, might yet by the private gain some knowledge. In the Paper also, that was published in the Congregations, there was some order ap∣pointed, for the better and more convenient practice of it. And doubtless, by how much we were willing to be at the more pains for the information of the ignorant, the greater fault will lie at your doores, and be charged upon you, (if you repent not of it) that by your opposi∣tion, you have not only laboured to obstruct the good courses by us propounded, for the help of poor ignorant souls; but accused us also, that by our pretended refor∣mation we have destroyed Catechizing. Here also we take notice, that however in your first Paper you had a proviso touching Catechizing, that it be publick, and that we thereupon gave you some reason (though briefly) for private Catechizing, yet this you wholly pass over in silence, and say nothing to it; thus you pretend to make a reply to our answer, and yet but speak to what of it you please. But if you had manifested any dissatisfaction, touching private Catechizing, we should here have proceeded, to have given further rea∣sons for it; although this work is so fully done to our hands by Mr. Baxter in his Gildas Salvianus, that it would
have been needless unto those that have read that Book, and whereunto, for his further satisfaction, we referre the Reader, if he desire it. Fourthly, If we understood you aright in this, that you held it not fitting, that persons grosly ignorant should be ad∣mitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the conclusion that we inferred hence, stands good against any thing brought by you to invalidate it. But here we observe, you stretch it beyond its scope, and that in two particulars. 1. In that you would have it referre to examination before the Eldership, which was not that, which we spake of: we only said, there ought to be examination and triall of all persons before they be admitted to the Lords Supper, not de∣termining here, touching the persons by whom this ex∣amination was to be made; but only inferring, that then there ought to be this examination; that so the grosly igno∣rant might not be admitted, as they might be, if all promiscu∣cusly were to be admitted without any triall at all; and which was the reason, that we alleadged in our answer, for the inference we made, and which still stands good, you ur∣ging nothing at all to take away the strength of it. It is true, that the examination and judgement of all such as shall for their ignorance, not be admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, is to be in the power of the Eldership of every Con∣gregation, and not in the power of one Minister only, by the rules of our Government. See forme of Church-govern∣ment, pag. 30. But this was not the thing we there spake of; we only concluded, that there ought to be an examination, and hoped that we had gained from your own concession, this one further step, toward an agreement betwixt you and us, that all such persons, as should be admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Sup∣per, must be examined by some or other, not determi∣ning by whom; there being no way to discover the ig∣norant, but by triall. And as touching our practice, it is well known, that when the Eldership is satified, touch∣ing the knowledge of such as offer themselves to that Sa∣crament, upon the examination of a Minister and one
Elder, or upon the examination of two Ministers (how∣ever none is to b debarred for their ignorance, but by the juridical act of the Eldership, and which is for the better securing of the Church-priveledges to the members, then to have left the power to the Minister alone) such are not required, to be examined before the Eldership, but are upon the testimony of the examiners, (there being nothing to be objected justly against them) admitted by the autho∣rity of the Eldership. 2. There is also another thing, wherein you would make our inference to be that, which indeed it was not; for neither did we speak, concerning any examination de novo, of such persons, as had been formerly admitted; our words recited even now, and to be seen in our an∣swer, do plainly speak, concerning an examination be∣fore admission to the Lords Supper, not concerning an ex∣amination de novo. Indeed we shall neither be ashamed of, nor deny what is our practice, which is to take a triall of all the communicants de novo, before admission of them to the Lords Supper. We well remember how under the Episcopall government, there was a generall admission, and that sundry grosly ignorant did croud in amongst the rest, unto this Ordinance; and therefore that these might be discovered, and kept off from this Sacrament, till fitter for it; we judged it requisite, that, according to that power that is glven to the Eldership in the form of Church-go∣vernment, for this purpose, there should be a triall taken of all the communicants, that so there might be some di∣stinction made, and not be a promiscuous admitting of all as heretofore. And we are sure, that such amongst us, who, having been anciently catechised, and a long while commoners at the Lords Table, (to use your own expressions) have wit∣nessed the best confession for their parts and piety, have been the most forward, to draw on others to be willing to be re∣examined, by their own good example therein; and that the greatest opposers of this course, however they may be some of them persons of parts, yet have been such, as have been either scandalous in their lives, or not so for∣ward
for piety as were to be desired. We have thus given an account, of what is our practice in this matter; but this examination of communicants de novo, was not the thing we here spake of, as why the examination of them be∣fore their admission of them at the first, was here mentio∣ned, we have delared before. But we see you are wil∣ling, to lay hold on any thing, wherein you apprehend you have any advantage against us, though it be never so small. Fifthly, You charge us again with another non sequitur; when we inferre, that if the Churches lawfull Pastors have power to excommunicate the scandalous, we see not in reason, how you can find fault with our proceedings, if there should be occasion for our censuring any such persons; but this inference yet stands good against any thing by you alleadg∣ed to the contrary, and in it self is clear and manifest; being there is no excommunication that passeth with us against any, but by the juridical act of the lawfull Pastors of our several Churches or Congregations; and whose power by you should not be questioned, or the validity of their censures, because of the concurrence of the ruling Elders; as by way of preventing an Objection, we hin∣ted to you in our answer, considering what power was exercised in the time of Episcopacy, by the High Com∣missioners, Chancellors and Commissaries (as much Lay-men then in your judgement, as ruling Elders can be now) to whom yet there was a submission by you; This reason you say is weak, but you do not prove it to be so; Nay here you fall short in two main points, For 1. You misrepresent the matter of fact, and that in two particulars: 1. When you would intimate, that the High-Commissioners, Chancellors and Commissaries, did all of them officiate by deputation from, and under a law∣full Pastor; when as it is manifest, the High-Commis∣sioners had no deputation from the Bishop, but received their Commission from the King, (if not the Chancel∣lors also,) and did act in those Ecclesiasticall censures, that were by them passed, in joynt and equall power with the
Bishop by virtue of their Commission. 2. The Parlia∣ment, that did appoint the ruling-Elders in the form of Church government, did not oblige any, that were to sub∣mit to them, to acknowledg the jus divinum of their Of∣fice, neither do we impose this opinion of them upon any. And therefore, notwithstanding our own judgment con∣cerning them in this respect, the comparison betwixt them and the other, as to what is necessary for your satisfaction, doth still hould good, and is neither weak nor frivolous, as you say. 2. But if the matter of fact should be granted to have been according to your representation, sc. that High-Com∣missioners, Chancellours, &c. did all of them officiate by deputation from, or under a lawfull Pastor, how doth this help the matter, to make your submission to these lawfull, and yet your submission to the ruling Elders unlawfull? For 1. we are as yet to learn (and we think you will never be able to make it good) that a trust committed to one by man See Sr Fran∣cis Bacon., much less reposed by God in an officer in the Church, and particularly in the Pastor may be delega∣ted. If this be so, he might sufficiently discharge his duty by another, preach by another, administer the Sacrament by another, as well as dispense the censures of the Church by another, who yet himself is to give an account of their souls unto God; which he will never be able to make, in the omission of those duties in his own person, though he appoint another unto them. But being the highest offi∣cer in the Church, doth not himself act out of plenitude of power, (for that were to make him a Pope and Anti∣christ; that belonging only to Jesus Christ the King and Matth. 28. ver. 18. Lord of the Church, to whom all power is given in Hea∣ven and earth) and hath no more but a ministry com∣mitted to him, which he hath received of Christ, as his ser∣vant, who hath required him to fulfill it; he may not Col. 4. 17. depute any other as under him, or as his servant, to do that which his Lord and master hath intrusted him with, and appointed him to do himself. 2. But further we do here enquire of you, whether by virtue of that deputation,
which the persons spoken of received from a lawfull Pa∣stor, according to your allegation, you will have them to be Ecclesiasticall officers, or but meer lay-men still? If, not∣withstanding that deputation, they be but meer lay-men, how will you awarrant them to meddle with Ecelesiasti∣call censures? because deputed thereunto by the Bishop? when God hath excluded all those that are but meer lay-men from medling authoritatively with Ecclesiasticall matters? If the High-Priest in the time of the Law, had given to Ʋzziah a Commission, to have gone into the Temple of the Lord, to burn incense upon the Altar of in∣cense, and he had so officiated by deputation from and under him, would that have been sufficient to have born him out in so doing, whenas that work pertained not un∣to him, but unto the Priests the sonnes of Aaron, that were 2 Chr. 26. 18. consecrated to burn incense? If by vertue of that deputa∣tion they had from the Bishops, they were Ecclesiasticall officers, invested with authority, to exercise Ecclesiasti∣call jurisdiction and dispense Church-censures, and so not meer lay-men; we may say much more for the outward call unto that office, that our ruling Elders do execute, they having been elected by the people (that anciently had a vote in the choice, even of the very Bishops, as is clear from the Records of Antiquity) and examined by the Pastors of the Churches, and by them approved as fit, and set apart solemnly to rule in the house of God by exhorta∣tion and Prayer, as hath been said before. 6. But you now go on, and declare whom you mean by lawfull Pastors, sc. such persons as have received their Or∣dination from men lawfully and truely qualified with a just power of conferring Orders. Now these, according to what you have declared in your former Paper, are the Bishops, with∣out whom, you there insinuate, the Church of God cannot be continued amongst us, in a succession of a lawfully ordained Mi∣nistry, and so at once cashier out of the numbet of law-full Pastors, all such Ministers either of our own, or other reformed Churches, that are ordained by Presbyters one∣ly, and to whom you allow not the power of Ordination,
as you here also do plainly declare your selves. But we have in our answer to that clause quoted out of your for∣mer Paper, sufficiently (as we hope the Reader will judg) declared the absurdity of this your opinion: And you your selves (as all men may see) may hereby perceive how vain a thing it is, for you and us to labour in any way of accommodation, whilst you retain these principles, they being destructive to union, and your communion in severall of our Churches, either in Baptisme or the Lords Supper. For how can you have communion in those Or∣dinances dispensed by such Ministers amongst us, as being ordained by Presbyters onely, you on this ground will conclude to be no lawfully ordained Ministers? And there∣fore if you be cordiall for union, we wish you to revise what you have as touching this matter asserted, and weigh what in our former Paper we have opposed unto it. But as touching the power of ordaining Presbyters by Presby∣ters onely, you will have it to be our opinion onely, and that in this we are singular; for you say, we (and you be∣lieve it is none but we) presume one Presbyter may confer or∣ders upon another. And here indeed 1. If we held that one Presbyter might ordain another Presbyter, you had rea∣son to accuse us of singularity: but we are professedly a∣gainst all solitary power in ordination, as well as in ju∣risdiction, by whomsoever this power is, or hath been ex∣ercised. 2. But if your meaning be, that it is we onely that hold, Presbyters alone, without any Bishops, may ordain Presbyters: 1. You might have known, that this was and is the judgment of the reformed Churches abroad, as well as ours. 2. And further you may remember, we alleadged out of Dr. Bernard, the testimony of severall Epis∣copall men, as well as of Dr. Usher, asserting and proving, that in places where Bishops cannot be had, the ordina∣tion of Presbyters standeth valid; which speciall restri∣ction we mentioned in our Answer (as the Reader will finde) and which, though added, would not have hin∣dred (if you had been of the same opinion with them) but you might have acknowledged, that such as are with
us ordained by Presbyters onely, are notwithstanding law∣full Pastors; Bishops being now taken away by the power of the civil Magistrate, and excluded from having any liberty to ordain, by those acts where Prelacy is exempted from that indulgence, that is granted to some others. If also that Catalogue of Divines, Schoolmen and Fathers, that we cited out of Dr. Bernard, (who are cited by him also out of others) be consulted, they will be found to affirm (as we said in our Answer, though you take no notice of it) that Episcopacy non est ordo praecisè distinctus a Sacerdotio simplici; Bishop Davenant (as he is alleadged Vide pag. 130. of their last Book publish∣ed by Dr Ber∣nard. by Dr. Bernard for this purpose) producing the principall of the Schoolmen, Gulielmus Parisiensis, Gerson, Durand, &c. for this opinion. Whence also it is evident, that they are not by us frustraneously cited, though it be an easie matter for you to assert the same without any reason, or ever an∣swering to what they were alleadged for to affirm. We shall not here deny, but Dr. Usher saith, that the ordination made by such Presbyters, as have severed themselves from those Bishops, unto whom they had sworn canicall obedience, could not possibly by him be excused from being schismaticall. But yet he doth not say that the ordination by them is null and void, although in his judgment there was thereby a schisme made. There may be schismes in the Church; yea some particular Churches may be schismaticall, and yet for the substance of them continue true Churches of Jesus Christ; as if it were to our purpose, might be cleared both from Scri∣ptures, and also Fathers. But as touching the aspersion of schisme, that is cast on such Presbyters that have severed themselves from the Bishops, we hope it is sufficiently wi∣ped off, by what we have already spoken in our answer to your second Paper. 7. However it seems that charge was not high enough, The imputa∣tion of perjury taken off. and therefore in this you proceed further, charging us with perjury and obstinacy; for you having mentioned that speciall restriction of Dr. Ushers, of not invalidating the ordi∣nation by Presbyters, where Bishops cannot be had, add and say, but this we must desire you to consider, is ex necessitate non
ex perjurio & pertinacia; and however you would smooth up the matter, by bidding us. examine our selves in this particular, and saying you shall not judge any man; yet it is plain enough to any discerning Reader, who they are that are charged by such expressions. But as touching the thing it self, we shall now examine the justness of the charge. And first we shall begin with that of perjury, unto which we shall need to say the less, considering that the grounds layd in our Answer to your second Paper, (pro∣ving that such Presbyters, as since the Parliaments abo∣lishing Prelacy, have severed themselves from the Bishops, or cast off Episcopacy, are not justly to be charged with schisme) do here also take place, to acquit such Ministers, that did swear Canonicall obedience to the Bishops, from the guilt of perjury. We shall here onely minde you and the Reader of two things; 1. That seeing the superiority which the Bishops chalenged and exercised above Presby∣ters in this Nation, did belong unto them onely by the Law of the Land, (we having proved in our Answer to your second Paper, that a Bishop and Presbyter in Scripture sense are both one) and was taken away from them by the Legislative power of this Nation, (as they might lawfully take it away) that power which they exercised not being due to them by Divine right, nay being an usurpation up∣on the Pastors office, as hath been also shewd) and so their whole Office as Diocesans, together with their jurisdiction, as sundry also of their Persons are all extinct (and as is ma∣nifest in particular, touching him that was the Bishop of this Dioces) we wonder much (and we think every Reader will here wonder with us) that your great heat for Prelacy, should thus farre have transported you, as to charge us with perjury, for which there is not the least colour. Con∣sult Dr. Sanderson de juramenti promissorii obligatione; consult all other Casuists, and you shall finde, that the best and soundest of them, do determine with one consent, that when the matter of an Oath ceaseth, the obligation by ver∣tue of that Oath ceaseth also; and therefore Prelacy being taken away by lawfull authority, there can be no perjury
in such Presbyters, as now disown it, and joyn with other of their Brethren in the ordination of Presbyters, without the concurrence of any Diocesan Bishop, and which is the case here spoken to. 2 But every intelligent Reader will readily discern, how the Parliament is also wounded through our sides; for if we be guilty of perjury for dis∣owning Prelacy, it is easie for to gather, what apprehen∣sions you must needs hereupon have of the Parlia∣ment, that by their authority took it away. But we think we have said that which is sufficient to rowl away the reproach, that is cast either on them or our selves in this respect, and therefore shall for∣bear to add any more. We therefore now come to the second thing, you here charge us with, which is pertinacy; but why should we be charged with this? For no other reason, that we can imagine, but because we cannot force our consciences, to admit of Episcopacy again; which the Parliament, upon many weighry and sound considerations hath removed, and of the necessity whereof you never went about to convince us, either from Scripture or sound reason. But we do not question, but all sober Readers, will here see cause to censure you for great uncharitable∣ness, laying such heavy things to our charge, for which you have not the least shew of proof; as we we do also believe, that what you count pertinacy, they will judg to be con∣stancy in us, in sticking close to our sound and good prin∣ciples, that we must not forgoe on so easie termes, as you would have us. And however you would here make Dr. Usher to patronize you, because he confesseth the ordination by Presbyters to be valid, where Bishops can not be had, & so in case of necessity; yet he hath not a word, touching the imputation, either of perjury or obstinacy to such Presby∣ters, as have severed themselves from the Bishops, as he was of a farre other spirit, then to have been so censorious. 8. As touching Ae▪rius, of whom you say, that he was most justly condemned for heresie, for holding a parity amongst Church-officers; we well know that this is com∣monly said, by some Episcopal men, (from whom we judge you received it) but we also know that it hath been
as often answered by such as were Antiprelatical. Mr. Banes in his Diocesans triall, hath spoken to it satisfactori∣ly; Dr. Whitaker saith in answer to Campians tenth reason, pag. 241. of the second Edition in Octavo; Cum Aërio Hieronymus de Presbyteris omnino sensi; illos enim jure divi∣no Episcopis aequales esse statuit: i. e. With Aërius Hierome did conceive altogether the same thing concerning Presbyters; for he determined that by divine right they were equall unto Bi∣shops. And because Hierome is here said by Dr. Whitaker, to be of the same opinion in this point with Ae▪rius, we shall give you and the Reader an account thereof from Hierome himself. His words in his Commentary upon the Epistle to Titus (making the same inference from the words of the Apostle, Chap. 1. Ver. 5, 6, 7. that in our answer to your second Paper, we have done) are these: Idem est ergo Presbyter qui & Episcopus & antequam¦diaboli instinctu; studia in Religione fierent, & diceretur in populis, ego sum Pauli, ego Apollo, ego autem Cephae, communi Presbyterorum consilio Ecclesiae gubernabantur. And then a little after he saith, Putet aliquis non Scripturarum, sed nostram esse senten∣tiam, Episcopum & Presbyterum unum esse: relegat Apostoli ad Phillippenses verba, dicentis, Paulus & Timotheus servi Jesu Christi, omnibus sancis in Christo Jesu, qui sunt Phillip∣pis, cum Episcopis & Diaconis; gratia vobis & pax, & reliqua Phillipi una est urbs Macedoniae, & certe in uâ civitate plures (ut nuncupantur) Episcopi esse non poterant. Sed quia eosdem Episcopos illo tempore, quos & Prebyteros appellabant; prop∣terea indifferenter de Episcopis quasi de Presbyteris est loquutus. Whence its clear, that he did not only hold Bishops and Presbyters to be all one, but proves this from the Scriptures; and then after addes other Texts to prove the same thing, expounding those Texts he quotes, in the same manner as we have done in our answer to your second Paper. More might be urged out of Hierome, to shew that he was of the same opinion with Aërius, as touching the parity of a Bishop and a Presbyter: and therefore if this opinion was an heresie in Aërius; Hierome, according to your as∣sertion should have been also most justly condemned for
heresie. But if you would but take the pains to peruse David Blondellus, he might perhaps satisfie you, that Hie∣rome was not to be accused of heresie for this opinion; he apologizing for him herein, and proving at large, from the concurrent testimony of the Fathers, that he held not in this any singular opinion, but what was generally re∣ceived amongst the ancients. His Treatise is a large Quar∣to, and the main subject of it is, to apologize for Hierome in this respect, as the title of his Book doth also shew. But it is well observed by the Provincial Assembly of London, See their jus divinum Mini∣sterij evangelici part. 2. pag. 143, 144. that Ae▪rius was never condemned by any Council of he∣resie, for holding the identity of a Bishop and a Presbyter: but that on the contrary, Concil. Aquisgranens. sub Ludo∣vieo pio Imperatore, 10. anno 816. hath approved it for true Divinity out of the Scriptures, that Bishops and Presbyters are equals, bringing the same Texts that Ae▪rius doth. They also well observe, that he is called an Heretique by Epiphanius and Augutine, but this was especially, if not only, because he was an Arrian; and that the same Au∣thours condemne Aërius, as much for reprehending and censuring, prying and offering for the dead, and the per∣forming good works for the benefit of the dead; as for hold∣ing Bishops and Presbyters to be all one, and which opini∣on (as it is commonly thought) they condemned in Ae▪rius. But will you say, that Ae▪rius was most justly condemned for heresie for those opinions also? But this for Ae▪rius his opinion touching a parity amongst Church-Officers, may be sufficient 9. Concerning your submission to the judge∣ment of Councils, you have indeed declared your selves before, and we have shewed, you have submitted therein too farre, as you will further declare your selves to this purpose hereafter. But as touching our selves, you shall not find that we vary, from what we have professed, to be our judgement touching this matter, either in our first answer, or in what we have said in answer to the second Section of this Paper; and whereunto we referre the Rea∣der, that by comparing of what we say there, and what
you charge us with here or hereafter, touching our not holding to what we have professed, he may the better judge, how groundlesly you herein do accuse us. 10. But you will still have our Provincial Assem∣bly at Preston a new tearmed Assembly, not for the words sake (Assembly) but first in regard of the word (Provincial) although that, in the judgement of Dr. Usher (who in his reduction of Episcopacy unto the forme of Synodical Government, received in the ancient Church, doth expresly mention among his proposals (as we said also in our answer) the Provincial Synod) would not have been accused of novelty; but that which you are here offended at, is, that this County of Lancaster should be tearmed the Province of Lancaster, and the Synods and Assemblies therein convened, should be tearmed Provin∣cial; for which yet you have little reason, if you had considered, all this was done by the authority of Parlia∣ment, who had power to bound the Province and the Sy∣nod or Assembly to be held thereih, for the ordering and regulating the affairs of the Church, within the bounds set, as they judged to be most convenient. And seeing that a Synod within the bounds of a County, may meet more frequently with conveniency, for the regulating the affairs of the several Classical Presbyteries within those bounds, then if the bounds had been larger, (especially if so large as to have comprehended within them several Counties, as formerly the two Provinces of York and Can∣erbury comprehended all the Counties within the Land) and which doubtless the Parliament considered, when they ordered, Decemb. 21. 1646. That the several Classes in Luncashire should be one Province; (and of which we had be∣fore given you an account in our answer to your first Pa∣per) if you had acquiesced in the authority of Parliament, as sufficient for the ordering of such a matter, you would not have found fault with this for its novelty; all Laws that are newly made, though for the ease of the sujcts, being as liable to exception in that respect as this. Your
next reason why you charge our Provincial Assembly with novelty is, in regard of the place (at Preston) but this exception was prevented in our answer (unto which here you make no reply) when we said, if Provincial Assem∣blies be warrantable, and have been of ancient use in the Church, that having been long in disuse, they of late began to be held at Preston, that could not justly incurre your censure; and cer∣tainly the most famous Synods and Councils that have been, or that may be hereafter, must be all accused in re∣gard of novelty, if this be a sufficient ground of accusati∣on, even the first four general Councils, of Nice, Constan∣tinople, Ephesus and Chalcedon, those being all as new in regard of their places, where they were assembled at the time of their first meeting (there having been never such Assemblies convened in those places before) as our Pro∣vincial Assembly was or is, that met, and still ordinarily doth at Preston. But perhaps there is more strength in the last reason, why you charge it to be a new termed Provincial Assembly, when you say, it is new in respect of the persons constituting this Assembly, lay-men presiding, and ruleing, and having decisive voyces in as ample a manner, as the highest and chiefest in holy Orders, nor doth Bishop Usher (as you say) or what we alleadge out of him, make for such an As∣sembly. But here 1. We must minde you, that we did not cite Dr. Usher, for to prove the antiquity of Provincial Assemblies, in regard of these members constituting them. Let our an∣swer be perused, it will be found to alleadge him for to prove the antiquity of the Assemblies of the Pastors of the Churches, for the ordering Church affairs, and having the power of ruleing them; and because we did not know, whether you were not so fond on Prelacy, as not to allow of these Assemblies, we quoted Dr. Usher, for to prove their antiquity; neither did we conceive, that Dr. Usher would have judged these Assemblies, where the Pastors of the Churches are members, to have been whol∣ly new, or the Pastors to have lost their authority in them, because the ruling Elders are admitted into them
as members, whatever his own thoughts might be con∣cerning them. 2. But as touching them we must further minde you, of what we have said before, that they are not meer lay-men, but duely and orderly called to an Ecclesiastical Office, although they never praeside in these Assemblies as moderatours. And further that we have proved from antiquity, in our answer to your second Paper, the being of such an Officer in the Church, in the time of Origen, Am∣brose, Augustine, Optatus, and which is so clear, that the adversaries of this Officer cannot deny it; only they would have him to have been as an extraordinary Church-guardian, or admitted on prudential grounds, which yet is but gratis dictum, as we have said. 3. We shall now only further add what is well obser∣ved by the Provincial Assembly of London, that Sutlivius, (a Prelatical Divine, and otherwise an opposer of the Of∣fice of ruling Elders,) de concil. lib. 1. cap. 8. saith, that a∣mong the Jews Seniores Tribuum, the Elders of the Tribes, did sit with the Priests in judging controversies of the Law of God; hence he argues against Bellarmine, that so it ought to be in the Christian Church also, because the priveledge of Christians is no less, then the priveledge of the Jewes. And it is not denyed by other Prelatica! Di∣vines, but by them held and proved, that men of abili∣ties, which are not Ministers, are to be admitted into ge∣neral Councils, (as they have been also anciently, and which is too manifest to be denyed, it appearing to have been so from the ancientest historians, and subscriptions of Councils) and to vote in them as members of these As∣semblies. And therefore, however the ruling Elders be be admitted into our Provincial Assemblies, as members, (whom you account to be but lay-men) and have decisive votes there, the Assembly should not by you have been ac∣cused of novelty in this respect: for you see such as were no Ministers, have been anciently admitted into Synods and Councils, to vote there as members, according to the old rule, Quod tangit omnes, debet tractari ab omnibus.
The Gentlemens Paper. Sect. IV. Well! bt (you say) we go on and tell you, &c. But had your professi∣ons and expressions for Peace, and Unity, been as reall, and as cordiall as ours; we had proceeded no further in this way of Rejoynder, but clo∣sed hands, and hearts together, as in our last humble address appeareth. Which certainly might have found a more ready compliance, and meri∣ted a far more civil and satisfactory Answer, from such cordiall wishers of Peace and Unity, such godly and sober, such moderate spirited men, as you pretend to be. But you have required we should go on, and accordingly we go on to tell you, that other parts of your Paper are full of darkness: To which you thus Answer, We cannot apprehend any such darkness in our Paper as you speak of; but because you question what Authority we have from the civil Ma∣gistrate; and the extent of it; and your mistakes of our meaning, may perhaps some of them arise from your unacquaintedness with the rule we walk by; Although we were not to be blamed for any mistakes that might arise ab ignorantia juris (whether simple or affected, that we determine not, but leave yu to judge) Be∣fore we come to make answer more particularly to what follons, we are willing to be at some pains, to give you some farther account of the power, we are awar∣ranted by the civill Authority for to exercise, To what Persons within our bounds it extends it self, &c. Much pains you have taken, and that willingly, and spent much time, and Paper too, which hath swelled your Answer to so great a bulk, to prove that which was not oppugned, nor so much as quest oned by us, so Impertinent to the business of our Paper: Though you have said you are not willing to spend time about Impertinencies: By which (however we go on yet) you wheel about and are come to the Pole you first start∣ed at, like a Horse in a mill that travels all day, and is no further at night, then he was in the morning. You went about to prove your Go∣vernment established by civil Authority, the first work you took in hand, you are no further yet, but going about to prove, out of your way quite; But since you compell us to follow you a mile, we will walk with you twain, till we have conducted you (if possible) into the good old Way again, by taking of your Government from that establishment of Authority, upon the proof whereof, the most considerable part (as to the bulk of your Answer) doth insist. To prove your Presbyterian Go∣vernment to be established by Law, and to be warranted by the civil Au∣thority, you produce severall Orders, and Ordinances, but one more espe∣cially you instance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament bear∣ing date the 10th August 1648. Which you say is without any limitation of time, and remains unrepealed to this day, nay more by the humble Advice
assented unto by his Highness it receives strength. To which we answer, when you speak of a Government establisht by Law, we hope you mean, such, as hath the force and strength of a Law, to binde the free born People of this Nation, otherwayes you say nothing. If such a Law you mean; then we much question, whether your Ordi∣nance of Lords and Commons, though unrepealed to this day be of that force; and seeing we be no Lawyers, we shall not take upon us the de∣termination of that point: but refer you in that particular, to the Judge∣ment, and resolution of the Sages of the Law; who affirm, that nothing can have the force of a Law to binde the people, without the concurrent consent of the three Estates in Parliament: My Lord Cooke is most full throughout his works, published by the speciall appointment of that long Parliament: Hear you him, For the Parliament, concerning making and en∣acting 2d part Institut. fol. 157, 158. of Laws, consists of the King, the Lords spiritual and temporall, and the Cmmons; and it is no Act unless it be made by the King, the Lords and Com∣mons. Again, If an Act be made by the King and Commons, this binds not, for it is no Act of Parliament. Ibid. Again, It is no Act of Parliament, but an Ordinance, and therefore binds not. 4th part Instit. fol 23. Again, Nothing can pass as a Law, without the Kings ryal assent, and autho∣rity to binde the people. 3d part Inst. fol. 9. See him also again in his Instit. 4th part fol 232. where he cites severall Charters and Ordinances made in the behalf of the Court of Stannries and in the end saith, These things were done de facto; bt let us rn our selves to that, which hath the force of a Law. And in the same 4th part cap. 73. of the Courts of forrests, fol. 293. see there a prescription good against a Statute of Ed. 3. cap. 2. because it was made but in affirmance of the common Law of the Forrest, and against such a Statute a man may prescribe: And good also against the Ordinance of 34. E. 1. and the onely reason given, is, because it was but an Ordi∣nance and no Statute. An Ordinance of both Houses is no Law of the Land by their own confession (meaning the Parliament) saith Judge Jenkins, 1 part Coll. Ordinances, fol. 728. This was the onely Law stood in force and binding, which was made by the concurrent consent of al in the judgement of these Sages, and was called the Law of the Land: None else in old time was judged valid, or to have the force and strength of a Law: Nor at this day will any Ordi∣nance of one or both Houses be judged valid without his Highness assent thereunto, as we humbly conceive. But admitting Ordinances of one, or both Houses of Parliament, with∣out the Kings of old, or his Highness assent of late, to have a great a force and strength in them, and to be as valid to all intents and purposes, as if their assents were given thereto: Yet this we affirm of your Ordinance, setling Presbyterian Government throughout the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, That it is made of little or no force at this day in re∣spect of those severall subsequent Acts granting liberty to all pious and
conscientious Christians throughout this Land, to serve God in their own way of worship and disclpline, notwithstanding any Law or Ordinance to the contrary; which though they amount not to an express, yet at least to an implicite Repeal of your Ordinance, so far as it is contrary to this Liberty; for Leges posteriores priores contrarias abrogant. But stand you upon an express Repeal? Then be pleased to peruse an Act made Anno 1650. for Relief of Religious and peaceable people from the rigour of former Acts of Parliament in matters of Religion. And to peruse a little better the humble Advice by you in your Answer alledged, and you will finde it far otherwise than you say. In the eleventh Section, All Ministers throughout the Land, and their Assemblies professing the true Protestant Christian Religion, though of different judgement in Worship or Discipline, are all of them equally pro∣tected in the liberty of their profession; Have you liberty to exercise your Church Government amongst your selves? They as much. Have you protection? Others as much. What power have you that others have not? Are these within the bounds of your Association, and subject to your Government, unless they will renounce their Baptism, and Chri∣stianity? Nay, they have their way of Worship, and Protection in that way granted them as well as you: And as they may not revile or re∣proach, nor disturb you in your Assemblies; no more may you them in their Assemblies, nor compell any by censures or penalties to submit to your Government. Is there a Presbyterian Government so setled by Or∣dinance, as to compell any contrary to this Liberty? Reade the Act of 1650. abovesaid, and you shall finde an express Repeal: Reade also the close of this Section, and you shall finde an express Repeal of it there also in these words, All Laws, Statutes, Ordinances, and Clauses in any Law, Statute, and Ordinance, so far as they are contrary to the aforesaid Liberty, be repealed. Doth not this take from you what you may conceive was granted by former Ordinances? Doth your Presbyterian Govern∣ment (for all your Glosses upon it) receive strength from hence? Doth the Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament for setling Presbyterian Government throughout the Land, remain yet un∣repealed, for any thing you have seen or heard to the contrary? Yea, so you affirm, and would have us credit you. The Animadversions of the Class upon it. 1 IN the first place you charge us, that our professi∣ons and expressions for peace and unity, were not as cordial and real as yours; but how is this proved? scil. because in that answer we gave to your second Paper, we put you upon the invalidateing the civil sanction for our Government, being before warned by you of not running our selves into a praemunire. But let the Reader judge,
what incivility or unsatisfactoriness there was in this an∣swer; or whether there was any thing, that did not be∣come cordial wishers of peace and unity, godly, sober and mo∣derate spirited men, as we do not only pretend, but hope to approve our selves to be, both to God and men. If it be indeed inconsistent with, either an hearty desire of u∣nity and peace, or with godliness and sobriety, to insist upon the authority of that Parliament, that was instru∣mental for our freedome from Prelatical bondage, and that setled the Government, wherein we have acted, and that doth fully awarrant us for whatever we have acted therein; and to insist upon this authority, when we were challenged as transgressors, in making Laws and Edicts con∣trary to the Laws in force, then we must confess, we pre∣tended only to be for peace and unity, when in our hearts we were not real for it. But as our own consciences ac∣cuse us not of dissembling, (professing that which we ne∣ver intended) so we believe, whatever your censures of us be, others will be more equal judges, then to say, the answer we gave to your first Paper, was any evidence thereof; and such as know what some of you were in time past, will rather conclude that the urging the authority of Parliament for the setling of our Government, and the a∣warranting of our actings, was that indeed which you could not brook. Secondly, But as you judge our answer to your second Paper was uncivill, and not suitable to that moderation we made profession of; so still you will have the answer we gave unto your first to be full of darkness; although, even as you here represent it, it is very plain to any ordi∣nary understanding, to hold forth thus much, that be∣cause the mistakes we saw you had run into, might per∣haps some of them arise, from your unacquaintedness with the rule we walk by (although we said, we were not to be blamed for any mistake, that might arise ab ignorantiâ juris, i. e. in you, as the whole tenour of the discourse shewes; and therefore we added, whether simple or affected, that we determined not, but left it to you to judge of, who were most;
fit, to be judges in a matter of that nature, you therein knowing your own hearts best) we were willing to be at some pains to acquaint you with it. This we desire might be taken notice of, because what is here manifestly our meaning, even from your own representation, is afterwards See Sect. 9. toward the end. most grosly perverted by you; for you would make the world to believe, that we assert such an absurd position as this, that we were not to be blamed, for our ignorance of the Law, and then cry out of it as a strange saying. But you did warily forbear, the imputing any such thing to us here, where our words are too plain, to be so wrested; and reserve this for another place, hoping the Reader would, by that time he came thither, have forgotten, what you had here represented us to have said, and there take the matter wholly upon trust from you, believing us to be so farre devoid of rea∣son, as you would there make us to be. But this is but a small part, in comparison of the injury you do us; yet we desire you might see it, that you might not hereafter be charged with it, by him that is to be the supream Judge betwixt you and us at the great day. Thirdly, As touching the pains that we have taken, and of which you do here again complain, as having swel∣led our answer to so great a bulk, yea so as that the most considerable part thereof (as to the bulk) insists thereon, (as you say) scil. to prove our Presbyterian Government, to be warranted by the civil anthority; and which you say, was not by you oppugned, nor so much as questi∣oned by you; as also touching your judging this discourse to be impertinent, we referre the Reader unto what we have already said, in the sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth Animadversions on the first Section of this Paper; as also to what we mind him of in the first Animadversion on the third Section thereof; by perusal of all which, he will find how much you forgot your selves, when you come over and over again with such assertions, they ha∣ving in them no more shew of truth, then only to evi∣dence, that it is wearisome to you to hear of Ordinances
of Parliament; especially such as are for the setling of the Presbyterian Government, or what makes for our own necessary vindication, and to manifest that our actings in the management of that Government, have been regular and orderly, according to the forme of Church-Govern∣ment appointed by authority; and to see that we took off that Objection, that is commonly made against the Pres∣byterian Government, as being established by the Parlia∣ment but for three yeares only; and unto which purposes, all the Orders, or Ordinances of Parliament, or Rules by them given, and by us recited, tended; and all which in the fourth Section of it (to which the complaint here re∣fers) takes not up above four leafes of our answer, which yet in your Preface, your selves say is seven sheets. Fourthly, But what you cannot make out with any co∣lour of truth, you hope to do by scoffs and jeers; and therefore you say, we wheel about, and are come to the pole we first started at, like an horse in a mill, that travels all day, and is no further at night then he was in the morning, in which also there is as little truth, as in your other assertions; we having already shewed, that our first essay was, to give you some account, how the termes (when we called this, the first Class within the Province of Lancaster, which you had called ours) were no other, then the Parliament had given us by their Order. That which we attempted in the fourth Section of our answer (to which you here reply) was to shew, that the Ordinances of Parliament, for the Presbyterian Government, were still in force, and that those rules laid down in them, awarranted all our actings, and particularly what we had published in our several Congregations in our Paper; and which whoso∣ever doth not so start at, because they are Ordinances of Parliament, but that he keeps in his right mind, he will see to be different things. But you do still go on with your flowts, and will needs have it to be, that we went a∣bout to prove (which is your own phrase and not ours) our Government to be established by civill authority, the first work we took in hand, and that we are no further yet, but going a∣bout
to prove, (your own phrase again) as if the matter must needs be, as you say it is; or therefore true, be∣cause you represent it to be so, after a scoffing manner. Fifthly, And when you have thus pleased your selves with your taunting expressions, you now would profess to do us a kindness, being willing to conduct us (if possible) in∣to the good old way again, by taking off our Government from the establishment of authority, upon the proof whereof (as you say) so great a part of our answer doth insist. But seeing the way you herein go (as will appear anon) doth quite overthrow all other Ordinances of Parliament, as well as those that are for the establishment of the Presby∣terian Government; you must excuse us; though upon your most earnest entreaty, we dare not follow you in this your way, being wll assured we should be then in∣deed out of our way quite. Sixthly, But now you come to answer to the Orders and Ordinances of Parliament by urecited, and so to the Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, Aug 29. 1648 establishing the forme of Church Government, to be used in the Church of England and Ireland, and which re∣maines (as we said) unrepealed to this day, and receives strength by the humble Advice, assented to by his late Highness, and which Ordinance was by us more especi∣ally insisted on. But what is it that you alleadge, to take away the strength of any Ordinance of Parliament, that we made mention of in our answer? In the first place you tell us, that when we speak of a Go∣vernment established by Law, you hope we mean such as hath the strength and force of a Law, to bind the free born people of this Nation, and thereupon you question, whether our Ordinance of the Lords and Commons, though unrepealed to this day, be of that force; and touching this you referre us to the judgement and resolution of the Sages of the Law, affirming, that nothing can have the force of a Law, to bind the people, without the concurrent consent of the three estates in Parliament: and you instance par∣ticularly in the Lord Cook, and several passages in his Institutes. In answer unto all which, we must needs in the first
place (as we did in our answer to your first Paper) apo∣logize The claim for the Presbyterian Government to the civil San∣ction made good. for our selves; that being no Lawyers, we shall not take upon us to determine any Law case; and that our cause in this particular, were fitter to be pleaded by the learned in the Law, that have farre better abilities for it, then we have; only till some of these undertake in this particular to plead for us, we hope we may be allow∣ed, freely to speak for our selves. And here we shall not say all that we could, much less what persons better able to deal in an argument of this nature, might. But that which we shall say is, first something in the general; then we shall proceed to answer more particularly. In the generall we say two things, 1. That if the Ordi∣nances of Parliament for Church Government be of no force, because there was not the concurent consent of three Estates to the making of them, then all Ordinances of Par∣liament (without exception of any) are null and void, and of no force to binde the people, as well as those that concern Church Government: and so it concerns all Com∣mittees that have been throughout the Land, and those that have acted under them, or do yet act, and all Judges and Justices, that have acted or do act, upon any Ordi∣nance of Parliament, to consider what they have to say, to what you do here alledge against their proceedings, as well as against ours. Nay then the Act made Anno 1650, for Relief of Religious and peaceable People, that yet is afterwards much insisted on by you, is of no force; for to that questionless there was not the concurrent consent of three Estates in Parliament. 2. That the Parliament themselves, who made these Ordinances, declared; That, the King having not onely withdrawn himself from the Parliament, but leavied war against it, salus populi was suprema Lex; and thereupon by Ordinance of Parliamēt they proceeded to settle the affairs both of Church and State without his consent; yea and to repeal some former acts; and as they did expresly, when they passed the Ordinance for the Directory for Worship; repealing the Acts of Parliament, that had been passed for∣merly
for the Book of Common Prayer, as appears by their Ordinance for that purpose of Jan. 3d 1644. And also when they passed another Ordinance Octob. 9. 1646. for the abolishing of Arch-Bishops and Bishops within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wles, by which they are expresly disnabled, to use or put in ure any Archi∣episcopall or Episcopall jurisdiction, or authority, by force of any Let∣ters Pattents from the Crown, made or to be made, or by any other authority whatsoever, any Law, Statute, usage or custome to the contrary notwithstanding, as appears from the very words of that Ordinance. And if we forget not, it was by them in those times further declared; That however the King had withdrawn his Person from the Parliament, yet his Royall Authority could not be withdrawn. But we know, that what the Parliament in those dayes acted, in the pas∣sing those and such like Ordinances, was approved by the Sages of the Law, that in those times adhered to the Par∣liament. And this will now lead us to return our more particular answer, to what you present, for to take away the obliging force of Ordinances of Parliament. And therefore, 1. We say, That that long Parliament (as you call it) who did so much honour the Lord Cook, as to publish his Works by their special appointment, did so well understand him, that they were well assured, there was not any thing in them, that condemned their proceedings as illegal: as on the contrary, we do thereupon conceive, that if he had been alive in those times, he would have justifi∣ed them. And further we say (under correction) that all youalledg out of him, was and is to be understood in cases ordinary, not as it was in the times when the Ordi∣nances for Church Government, and other Ordinances for the setling the affairs of the Nation were passed, when the King had withdrawn himself from the Parliament, and levyed war against it. 2. But to add some further confirmation to what we here assert; be pleased to take notice that we meet with a Book printed in this very year, 1658. Entituled, A collection of Acts and Ordinances of general use, made in the Parliament, begun and held at
Westminster, the third day of November 1640. and since unto the adjournment of the Parliament begun and holden the 17th of Septem. Anno 1656. and formerly published in print, which are here printed at large with marginall notes or abreviated; be∣ing a continuation of that Work from the end of Mr. Poltons Collection, by Henry Scobell Esq Clerk of the Parliament; examined by the Original Records, and now printed by speciall Order of Parliament. In this book, as we finde the Ordi∣nance for the Directory of Worship, recited at large, and likewise the Ordinance above mentioned, for the abolish∣ing of Archbishops and Bishops within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, so likewise we meet with the Ordinance of Aug. 29. 1648. establishing the form of Church Government, to be used in the Church of England, and Ireland, after advice had with the Assembly of Divines; and this recited at large, as will appear to any that will peruse that book. And being the design of that book was, to make a continuation of a Collection of Acts and Ordi∣nances of generall use, from the end of Mr. Poltons Colle∣ction, as appears by the Title of it; the Parliament, that ap∣pointed this book to be printed by their speciall Order, and Mr. Scobell the Clerk of the Parliament, who collected these Acts and Ordinances, and examined them by the originall Records, were much mistaken in the putting forth this book, that is also printed in a large black Character, after the manner of the Statutes; if no Ordinances of Parlia∣ment have in them any force to oblige the people of this Nation. 3. We have onely one thing more to add, sc. that in the 16th Section of the Humble Advice, (and where∣of we minded you in our Answer) it is expresly provided, that the Acts and Ordinances not contrary thereunto, shall conti∣nue and remain in force: Now that there is nothing in the form of Church Government contrary to any thing con∣tained in the humble Advice, we shall make out anon: But thus we hope, we have said that which may be suffici∣ent, for answer to your first exception against the Ordi∣nances of Parliament for Church Government, as not ha∣ving the concurrent consent of the three Estates, and to
what you alledge out of the Lord Cooke. As touching what you urge out of Judg Jenkins, saying, an Ordinance of both Houses is no Law of the Land, by their own confession (meaning the Parliament) 1. part Coll. of Ordinances, fol. 728; we cannot give that credit to his representation of the Parliament, (he having been an opposer of it) as to conclude thence, there is no force in any Ordinance of Par∣liament, to oblige the people of this Nation; considering that in some of their Ordinances, they do, as we have said, expresly repeal former Acts of Parliament, made by the concurrent consent of the three Estates; and considering, that if they have any where any expressions to that pur∣pose, they may be understood either of Ordinances of Parliament made in cases ordinary, when the King had not withdrawn himfelf from it, or concerning such as were of no long continuance, but for the present emergency; or of such as were but temporary and long since expired; and which sort of Ordinances, Mr. Scobell in his Preface to the Book above mentioned, saith, he collected not; but one∣ly such whereof there is or may be daily use, as he there speaks. We have now donewith your first exception against the Ordinances by us recited, for the establishing Church Go∣vernment and come to your second; for admitting Ordinan∣ces of Parliament, to have an obligatory force in them; yet those that concern the establishment of the Presbyterian Government, you would have to be repealed. Indeed here you said some∣thing, if you could bring forth any of those subsequent Acts, that you speak of, (granting liberty to pious people in the Land) that did repeal the Ordinances for Church Government, either implicitly or expresly: For we shall not deny, that Leges posteriores priores contrarias abrogant, but in this you fall short, as in the former. There is not any subsequent Act or Ordinance, that we have seen, or that you mention, that grants any liberty to any, which is deni∣ed in the form of Church Government. The Act made 1650, for relief of Religious and peaceable people, from the rigour of former Acts of Parliament in matters of Reli∣gion,
(and which you will have to be an express repeal) doth not make void the Ordinance which we acton: It onely repeals the poenall Statutes, that imposed mulcts and punishments on the offenders against those Laws, in their bodies or estates: It doth not at all refer to the Ecclesiasti∣call censures, nor so much as mention them, as will be clear to him that will peruse it. And so the Ordinance establishing the form of Church Government, stands whole and entire, and untoucht at all by this Act. But here we desire two things might be observed; 1. That if this Act stood good against our proceedings, repealing the Ordinances establishing the Presbyterian Government, so as that the persons mentioned in it, were thereby exempt from all Ecclesiasticall censure, then it must needs much more stand good against all other sorts of persons, that have no such Ordinance awarranting their proceedings, and would be a barr in their way, that they could not cen∣sure with Church censures any of their members. 2. That, being you in your Papers do fully declare your selves for Episcopacy; and that the Acts granting some indulgence to some persons, yet do still provide, that the liberty granted by them, should not be extended to Popery and Prelacy; neither this nor any other Act for the relief of any pious or con∣cientious Christians, can with any colour, be alledged by you, to the purpose for which you urge them. As touching the eleventh Section of the humble Ad∣vice, (to which you referre us) we had throughly peru∣sed it, and seriously weighed it, before you minded us of it: but we never did, neither do we as yet see any con∣trariety betwixt it, and the forme of Church Govern∣ment established by Ordinance of Parliament. We finde still, as we told you in our answer, though you here nei∣ther take notice thereof, nor make any reply thereto) that it seems clearly to own the Directory for worship, and the forme of Church Government, as the publique profession of the Nation for worship and Government; as we also said in our answer, there were the like expressions in the Government of the Commonwealth of England Scotland and Ireland, as it was
publikely declared at Westminster, Decemb. 16. 1653. pag. 43. Sect. 37. And if you had pleased, you might have found, that whatever indulgence, is granted to any in this Sect: it is there expresly provided, that that liberty be not ex∣tended to Popery and Prelacy. And therefore you, and all men may discern, that when you say (speaking of the humble Advice) that in the eleventh Section, all Ministers throughout the Land and their Assemblies, professing the true Protestant Religion, though of different judgments in worship and discipline, are all of them equally protected in the liberty of their profession, that proposition is a great deal larger, then the humble Advice will allow of; it expresly concluding, even from that protection allowed to some others, the way of Prelacy, though it should be set up by some Mi∣nisters and others of the Protestant Religion; and there∣fore all Ministers and their Assemblies, though professing the Protestant Religion, cannot equally lay claim to the protection there spoken of. But for answer to all that you here urge out of this eleventh Section, of the humble Advice, we shall say two things. 1. That as your selves speak only of protection, allowed by it, to some persons of different judgement in worship or discipline, so who∣ever will peruse this Section, shall not find, that it saith one word, touching the restraint of the exercise of Church∣discipline towards any; when it speaks of some (that shall differ in other things (sc. that had been mentioned particu∣larly before) in doctrine, worship or discipline, from the pub∣lick profession held forth, to whom it allows protection from injury, as it grants them a freedom from mulcts and civil penalties; and then after of such Ministers, or publick Preachers, who shall agree with the publick profession in matters of faith, although in their judgement and practice they differ in matters of worship and discipline, whom it makes capable, (being otherwise duely qualified and duely approved) of some special grace and favour, that the former sort are not ca∣pable of; it is plain from those expressions, that it owns a publique discipline, which is not held forth any where, but in the forme of Church Government, established by
Ordinance of Parliament for the Church of England and Ire∣land, Aug. 29. 1648. that hath been often times mentioned. But you will not find, that the exercise of this publick disci∣pline held forth, is any where at all in this Section prohibi∣ted, or that it is restrained in regard of its exercise towards any, or limited only in that respect, to the Ministers and As∣semblies of this or the other perswasion. And yet that this publick discipline held forth, as aforesaid, might be free from all suspition of any undue rigour or harshness towards any; we shall here mention one rule (which we recited, with several other things, in our answer to your first Paper) touching the Order prescribed in the forme of Church Go∣vernment, of proceeding to excommunication, which runs in these words; But the persons who hold other errours in judgment, about points wherein learned and godly men possibly may or do differ, and which subvert not the faith, nor are destructive to godliness, or that be guilty of such sins of infirmity, as are commonly found in the chil∣dren of God, or being otherwise sound in the faith, and holy in life, (and so not falling under censure by the former rules) endeavour to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, and do yet out of conscience, not come up to the observation of all those rules, which are or shall be established by authority, for regulating the outward worship of God, and government of his Church, the sentence of ex∣communication for these causes shall not be denounced against them. By this one rule it is very clear, that as this discipline is not to be accused of undue severity, so there is no repugnan∣cy between the humble Advice and it. 2. That which in the second place we have to say, is, that admitting your pro∣position were fully as large in the humble Advice, in regard of the persons to whom you would have liberty to be extend∣ed, as you have laid it down (which yet we have shewed is not so) yet how inconsequently do you argue? when you will inferre an exemption of persons from Church censures, authorized to be exercised by the forme of Church Govern∣ment, from the humble Advice, because it affords them a protection against civil injuries. As if this proposition were
most certainly true; All those, that according to the humble Advice, are to be protected against civil injuries, are thereby ex∣empted from Church censures; and yet this must be proved, or your consequence is never proved. But to make that out, we shall allow you time, and in the mean season must deny it. And so now all you have, to the conclusion of this Secti∣on, is but meer varnish; although we are able to tell you, as we have told you even now, and often before, what pow∣er is granted unto us (who act by an unrepealed Ordinance of Parliament, and yet in force) that others have not; al∣though when you say, are these within the bounds of our asso∣ciation, subject to our Government, unless they will renounce their Baptism and Christianity? (and which you would repre∣sent us to assert, in that recital you make of our words in the beginning of the next Section) you do therein manifestly offer violence to the words of our answer: for if the Reader peruse the first part of the fifth Section of our answer, he may there find, that we declared our selves in the first place, fully against those of the separation, and concluded that discourse with these words, that hereupon our work was not to constitute Churches, but to reforme them only: And that therefore none within our bounds, except they shall renounce Christianity and their Baptisme, can be deemed by us to be without in the Apostles sense; this being our answer, to what you had pressed us with, in your first Paper, pleading your exemption from under our Governement, from the words of the Apostle, and saying, for what have you to do, to judge those that are without? The conclusion then that we inferd, did answer that argument you urged from the A∣postles words. For its plain from our declaring our selves, we judged none to be without in the Apostles sense, but only Heathens, of whom the Apostle spake; or such, as having for∣merly professed Christianity, did renounce it, and their Bap∣tisme; and that therefore none could be exempted, by those words of the Apostle, from being within the verge of our Presbyterian Governement; which was the inference we thereupon made. By all which it is very clear, in what sense those words were to be taken, that you here mention;
and that we did not say, that except men did renounce Christi∣anity and their Baptisme, they were subject to our Government, (as you would have it to be) but that they could not be judged by us, to be without in the Apostles sense, except they should make so great an apostacy; and wherein we were more li∣beral and charitable toward you, then you were toward your selves. It is one thing, that makes a member of the Catho∣lick visible Church, and another, that makes a member of this or that particular Church; as it is also true, that the censures of the Church, Government, Offices, and Ordinances are first given to the universal visible Church, before they be given to this or that particular Church; although it be true also, that he who is a member of the Catholick Church, must also be a member of some particular Church, under the Discipline and Government thereof. But we did not argue from what made you members of the Catholick Church, to prove you to be members of some one or other of our particular Churches, and so to be under the Government of this Class; this we prove from individu∣ating circumstances, because within the bounds of our Asso∣ciation appointed by authority of Parliament, and other cir∣cumstances. And so we do not say, that except men re∣nounce Christianity and their Baptisme, they are subject to our Government; but we say, we look upon all those with∣in the bounds of our Association, who have not renounced Christianity and their Baptisme (of which sort we know not any amongst us) as persons we have an inspection o∣ver, and appointed by Ordinance of Parliament to be sub∣ject to our Government; which yet we exercise towards all, according to those rules, and that moderation, that is prescri∣bed in the forme of Church Government. And thus we have answered, all that you have here pre∣sented, to take off our Government from its establishment by the civil Sanction; for it is not your coming over again with the Act of 1650. already answered, and bidding us to read it; nor your bidding us to read the close of the Eleventh Section of the humble Advice, and not proving any thing in the form of Church Government to be contrary to it, that will prove
either an expresse or implicit repeal, though pressed with never so much vehemency of expressions; that onely pro∣claim your heat, and earnest desire to have it so; and how gladly you would be believed upon your word, and confi∣dence in this matter, when you want further arguments to make out what you say. The Gentlemens Paper. Sect. V. And thus having proved your Presbyterian Government to have the civil Sanction (just thus and no otherwise) you come now to answer more par∣ticularly to that which follows; And first you explicate (what was before dark unto us) who are meant, by the many persons of all sorts, that are Members of Congregations, &c. And you tell us all persons are within your verge; none with∣out except they will renounce Christianity and their Baptisme, but are within the verge of your Presbyterian Government; their not associating with you in regard of Government, doth not exempt them from censure by it, &c. Independents, Anabap∣tists, and others; all are subject, and censured by your Government, if they should Cl. cop. censurable. be such Offenders as by the Rule thereof are justly censurable; it being not a matter arbitrary, for private persons at their own will and pleasure to exempt themselves from under that Ecclesiasticall Government that is setled by authority. Here Gentlemen you may do well to consider, whether you do not subject your selves to the contempt and scorn of all other parties, who conceit they have as full power by Cl. cop. For this all par∣ties hisse you and laugh you to scorn, having as full, &c. their Rules of Church Discipline to censure you, as you have them (jam sumus ergo pares) yet they dare not censure or punish any out of their Church Member∣ship, contrary to the severall Acts made for Toleration. To the Act of the 27. September 1650. and to the express Article in the humble Advice above mentioned; If you be so bold, we have told you before, and tell you again, an Ordinance of Lords and Commons for setling of your Fresbyterian Go∣vernment, will be no sufficient plea, for your Actings contrary to the known Laws since made, but will prove you Contemners of all Civil power, and may run you upon a Premunire. But here you seem offended at us for calling Presbytery a common fold. What? Presbytery a known Scripture expression, 1 Tim. 4. and interpreted by Object. sundry of the Fathers, as we do (as hath been before declared) to be tearmed a common fold? You might have used a more civil expression. What? Presbytery interpreted by sundry of the Fathers as you do? How is that? We shall tell you the Fathers are different in the sense, and inter∣pretation Answ. of this word Presbytery, in the Scripture expression, 1 Tim. 4. The Latine Fathers generally, as Hierome, Ambrose, Primasius, Anselm, and others, taking this word Presbytery, for the Function, which Timothy received when he was made Bishop or Priest; and thus Calvin takes it in his Institutes. Quod
de impositione manuum Presbyterii dicitur, non ità accipio quasi Paulus de Senio∣rum Lib. 4. cap. 3. Sect. 16. in fine. collegio loquatur, sedhoc nomine ordinationem ipsam intelligo. The Greek Fathers as Ignatius, Chrysostome, Theodoret, Theophilact, Oecumenius, and others, and some few of the Latines also taking it for the company of Pres∣byters (i. e.) Bishops who lay hands on the new made Bishops or Priests; and in this sense likewise in his Comment upon this place it is interpreted by Calvin; saying, Presbyterium, qui hic collectivum nomen esse putant, pro Collegio Presbyterorum positum, rectè sniunt meo judicio. Although he is here as flat opposite to his former Judgement, as high noon, is to midnight: And we fear Cl. cop. wandering. we shall find you as wavering and unsetled in yours, when it comes to scan∣ning. For divers of the Fathers (you say) interpret this word as you do, and as you have before declared. Now how you interpret it, and where to find this place, where it is before declared, That your Interpretation agreeth with sundry of the Fathers, we have not yet discovered. Indeed we find you quoting Dr Ʋsher that Learned and Reverend Antiqua∣ry, to prove the antiquity of Synods and Assemblies, and thereby you think he vindicates your Assemblies, in our thoughts, from all suspition of Novelty. We find also by you out of him, there quoted certain Fathers, as first Igna∣tius, who by Presbytery mentioned by Paul, 1 Tim. 4. 14. did understand the Community of the rest of the Presbyters or Elders; And for further proof Tertullian is alledged in his generall Apologie for Christians, that old-beaten saying by you and your party, praesident probati quique Seniores, &c. Now do these interpret as you do? Is Presbytery such as you pretend to be established by Ordinance of Parliament, and such as you stand for in your sense, is it we say so understood by Dr Ʋsher, and doth he bring in these Fathers speaking in this sense? If we press you to stand to their opinion and sense, you will run back; how may you then for shame assert that their Interpretation is the same with yours? Dr Ʋshers Judgement of Assemblies agreeth with yours? and his proposals of Assemblies are the same in substance with yours? Whom you quote (you say) as more likely to sway with us, in case we do differ from you in this point. And here these Fathers are brought in, giving the same Interpretation as you do: will you thus confidently assert this, and stand to nothing; have you two hearts, and not one forehead? In our last Adress, we offered to stand to Dr Ʋshers Judgement, and you declined your own man: We submit to the Interpretation of those Fathers there alledged by him, touching the word Presbytery, which you say is the same with yours. Can you so cordially joyn your selves in Dr Bernards wish, and heartily recommend it to others to close therein? Can you thus tender the Judgement of Dr Ʋsher, as an Umpire, and composer of differences betwixt us, and alleadge these Fa∣thers on your behalf▪ and when we would close with you, upon your own Tearms, run back and eat your own words? Presbytery in their's, and Scripture Expression we reverence; but yours we still tearm a Common-fold, and those godly pretences of yours as so ma∣ny wast Papers, wherein your Presbytery is wrapped, to make it look more handsomely, and pass more currently. Whereat again you are no little offend∣ed and say, We do earnestly desire, that in the Examination of your Consciences, you would seriously consider whether you have not both transgressed the rules of Charity in passing such hard censures upon us, and also usurped that which belongs not to you,
in making your selves judges of what falls not under your cognizance: To which we Answer; those words are not our own, they are borrowed of another; if you would know the Author, we must tell you, it was the late King in his Cl. cop. He was a Per∣son of known Eminency in his dayes. , who is gone before, and you must follow after. And we leave it to the Tribunal at the great day to be determined, whether he or you, have more transgressed the rules of Charity, in passing such hard censures upon one another, and also usurped that which belongs not to you, in ma∣king your selves judges of what falls not under your cognizance; The things, (as you say) men ioned, belonging onely to be tried by your and our Master, to whom we must all stand or fall. The Animadversions of the Class upon it. 1. ALthough we will neither flout at you, nor triumph over you, as you do over us (as if you had quite ta∣ken away our claime to the civil Sanction, and made all that we had said for it void) yet we doubt not but the Reader will judg, that what you attempted with great confidence, you have performed but so and so, weakly and no otherwise. And as touching what you now recite, out of our Answer, we desire the Reader not to take it upon your representation, but to peruse himself the whole fift Section thereof, you having not dealt fairly with us: your representation being neither full nor candid; we not concluding, as we have already shew∣ed, that except men will renounce Christianity and their Bap∣tisme, they are within the verge of our Presbyterian Govern∣ment; but that except they renounce Christianity and their Baptisme, they are not without in the Apostles sense; al∣though, because they are within our bounds, we look upon all such, as under our Government, according to Ordinance of Parliament, as we have said before. 2. Neither shall we upon this assertion, have any cause to fear the contempt and scorn of any other parties, there being none, but the Presbyterian party onely, that can lay claim to the civil Sanction, for the establishment of that Government which they exercise, as you (who would gladly croud your selves into the number of those, to whom some indulgence is granted, have no liberty granted you by any of the Acts, that have been made since the Ordinance of Aug. 29. 1648. that
established the Presbyterian Government; you not being un∣der the Character of the persons spoken of, either in the Act of the 27. of Septemb. 1650, or the humble Advice, or any other; you being for Prelacy, that is excluded from that indulgence, granted unto others. Nay you might have known, that for reading the Common Prayer book, such persons are punish∣able, by the Act for ejecting of scandalous Ministers; and therefore if you, or any of you (who are members of our se∣verall Congregations, and within the bounds of our Asso∣ciation) shall be found at any time justly censurable by the rules of our Government, it will be no great boldness for us, to proceed to censure you, we being backed with an Ordi∣nance of Parliament, that still stands in force, against any thing you have alledged to the contrary, and therefore do not fear your threatning us again with a Premunire. 3. We were offended at you, for calling Presbytery acommon fold, and instead of removing that offence given, you encrease it. But you first represent in your paraphrase upon our words, after your own manner, the ground of the offence taken, and then return your answer; in which we observe, (that you might with more freedom lash at Presbytery and us) you are here pleased, to enlarge your selves, upon a very few words of ours, brought in by way of a Parenthesis onely, though in other parts of your Reply, you leave whole leaves untoucht; and often say nothing at all, to severall considera∣ble things in our Answer, to which you should have spoken: yea in the fifth Section of this your Reply, you pass over in silence, all that we had said in the beginning of the fifth Section of our Answer; wherein we had declared our selves against those of the Separation, in severall positions, thereby making way to the answer we gave, how we understood the Apostle, when he spake concerning such as were without; which you took no notice of, but rent part of our words from what went before, and wrested them from their proper sense, as we have shewd before. And not only this, but when in your first Paper, you had upbraided us, with the garnishing of our Go∣vernment, with the specious title of Christs Government, Throne and Scepter, and we had answered you out of your own Paper,
and shewed, from the expressions you had therein used con∣cerning the Government, that you are for, that that with you must be Christs Government, Throne and Scepter; and that there∣fore, we were not to be condemned, if we had used such expres∣sions concerning our Government, till you had convinced us that it was not such; yet all this is passed over, without so much as mentioning what we had said, or returning any an∣swer to it; as if it were nothing for you to upbraid us with what, if it were a transgression, you your selves were found guilty of; and when we had so answered it, to say nothing to it; the like whereunto you do also here practice, in saying nothing to what we had answered, when you had told us, that it was the chief design of the Paper, we published in our Congregations, to subject all to our Government. For in our Answer we first apologized for our selvs, professing, that though we were charged by some to affect dominion, &c. yet the Government of the Church was but Ministeriall, and that we acknowledged all subjection to the civil Magistrate; and then we retorted upon you thus, and said, that you being for the setling a Government in the Church, we did not judg you to be so irrationall, as to be for a Government, and yet deny subjection to it; whence also it was clear, that that was not to be condemned in us, which you would justifie in your selves: yet about this also in this your Reply, there is deep silence. But thus we have shewed, how you are pleased to severall things in our Answer to say nothing, as it will be evident to the Reader, you say as good as nothing in sundry places, where you would seem to say something; and yet you would be thought to say, what might be sufficient to give us satisfaction. For in your second Paper, speaking to one head of our Answer. sc. that about ruleing Elders, you said you would proceed to shew us, that lay-Elders (as you call them) are not meant in the Texts by us al∣ledged; briefly thus, but more largely hereafter, if what is com∣prehended in this Paper be not judged satisfactory; and yet when you should come in this Reply in the next Section, to make this appear more fully, you say nothing to the Texts we urg∣ed, but only, that they are too generall, to prove our ruling Presbytery out of; and tell us of wresting the Scriptures, with
such like expressions, suitable to your way of replying all along, and which we doubt not but the wise Reader will of himself observe; onely we thought it requisite, upon the oc∣casion you here give us, to mind him of it, that he might the better observe you through your whole Reply. But we shall now examine, whether we had not just cause to be offended at you, for your calling Presbytery a common fould. One of the reasons, which we gve, you mention, and that indeed which was the chief; yet there was another given in that parenthesis, which you touch not on, sc. That out of respect to the authority ordaining it, you might have used a more ci∣vil expression. But this it seems you had no minde to meddle with, the authority of that Parliament, that setled the Pres∣byterian Government, being of little esteem with those of you, that were either actually engaged with, or friends unto the party that fought against it; and whereupon it is no great wonder, that you omit this reason of our offence. But the other you speak to, and that with some more freedom, then doth become you, as we shall shew anon. This other reason was this, Considering the word Presbytery is a known Scripture expression, 1 Tim. 4. and interpreted by sundry of the Fathers, as we do, as hath been declared before; you might have used a more civil expression. In answer unto this, 1. You tell us, the Fathers are different in the sense and interpretation of this word Pres∣bytery, in the Scripture expression 1 Tim. 4. And we must tell you, that of what low and cheap abilities soever we may be accounted with you, yet this different interpretation of this place (whereof you would seem to inform us, out of the Fa∣thers) we have been long since acquainted with: onely when you alledg the Greek Fathers, as Ignatius, Chrysostome, Theodo∣ret, Theophilac, Oecumenius, and others, and some few of the Latines also, taking the word Presbytery for the company of Pres∣byters, i. e. Bishops, who lay hand on the new made Bishops or Priests; you must hereupon, 1. Acknowledg, that these Fathers held Bishops and Presbyters to be all one, else how could they un∣derstand by Presbyters, the Bishops who lay hands on the new made Bishops or Priests, you do here represent them to explain the word (Presbyters) by Bishops, and the word (Bi∣shops)
by Priests, (which word is the same in sense with Presbyters) which is manifestly to make Bishops and Pres∣byters all one. This we desire to be took notice of, because when you may come hereafter to be pressed with it, we fear you, that are so ready to charge us therewith, will your selve run back and eat your own words. 2. You confess, that they expound this word, touching the company of Presbyters; which is enough for our vindication, when we said that 1 Tim 4 was interpreted by sundry of the Fathers as we do. 3. And whereas you say, they take it for the company of Presby∣ters, i. e. Bishops who lay hands on the new made Bishops or Priests, explaining the word (Presbyters) by Bishops, and again the word (Bishops) by Priests (that is a quipollent to the word Presbyters) you must hence be forced to confess, that these Fathers acknowledged, the Ordination by Presbyters only, to be valid; they by their explication of themselves, by you alleadged, making Bishops and Presbyters (who without controversie laid on hands) all one. And therefore if you here be of the mind of these Fathers, by your selves produced, you must retract your opinion, formerly declared with much con∣fidence, against the Ordination by Presbyters only. There is no place for you here to evade, except you shall say, that the Fathers by you alleadged (and explaining the word Presby∣ters by Bishops, or you expounding them so) by Bishops un∣derstand such Bishops, as were superiour to Presbyters, either in Order and Jurisdiction, or at least in degree; (and whom you will have to concurre at the least, and preside in the Or∣dination, or it is null and void) but this is to say that the Fathers, expounding the Scripture, do make it a nose of wax, and in effect to assert, that quidlibet may be drawn ex quolibet. For if by Presbyters that are expresly mentioned, not Presby∣ters themselves, but another and distinct sort of persons are to be understood, never called in Scripture by that name, may we not by this rule of exposition make the Scripture speak what we please, according to our own fancies, and con∣trary to the express words of the Text? To say nothing, that this evasion (if admitted) would not help the matter at all; feeing you do here represent the Fa∣thers,
not only explaining the word (Presbyters) by Bishops, but again explaining the word (Bshops) by Priests (the same word in sense with Presbyters) and so making them every way one; because they make these words Bishops and Presby∣ters mutually to explain one another. 2. We have done with the different interpretation of the Fathers upon the Text, 1 Tim. 4. and now we come to Cal∣vin, whom you bring in here, as contrary to himself, in that Exposition that he gives upon it. But we see, you have a mind to asperse him, (though he be so farre above you, in regard of that deserved praise, that he hath throughout the Churches, that it is not your biting at him, that can detract any thing from him) else you would not have said, that in his Comment upon this place, he is as farre opposite to his judgement delivered in his institutions, as high noon is to midnight. For how∣ever in his Comment upon this place, he first saith, Presby∣terium qui hic collectivum nomen esse putant, pro collegio Presbytero∣rum positum, recté sentiunt meo judicio, yet he addes; Tametsi omnibus expensis, diversum sensum non malé quadrare fateor, ut sit nomen officij; Ceremoniam pro ipso actu posuit; and which is the sense that in his Institutions he doth adhere to. But Cal∣vin must not have leave from you, first to alledg one inter∣pretation, as that which in his judgement was probably true, and so to approve of it; and afterward, upon consideration of all things, he thought were to be weighed, to conclude with another; if he do, and thus deliver himself in his Comment uon this place, he is flat opposite to himself in his instituti∣ons, as you judge, though we believe, all equall judges, will be more candid toward him, then to approve of your censure of him in this particular. 3. But it may be, this of Calvin was mentioned by you, that thence you might take the occasion to have a fling at us. For after you had aspersed him, you say, you fear you shall find us as wavering and unsetled in our judgments, when it comes to scanning. But wherein? For that we said, divers of the Fa∣thers did interpret this word (Presbytery) as we did, and as we said had been declared before. That which in our an∣swer we said, had been declared before, referd to what we
had before (sc. in the latter part of the third Section of it) alledged out of Dr. Usher, in his reduction of Episcopacy unto the forme of Synodicall Government; where he proves from several of the Fathers, and from the 4th Council of Carthage, that Presbyters had a hand in the administration of the Discipline of Christ. We produced him, alledging the Fathers you here make mention of; and you your selves, even now al∣ledged many more, interpreting the word (Presbytery) used 1 Tim. 4. in the same sense that we concurre with; and which concurrent sense of ours with the Fathers we declared, in that short Parenthesis on which you do thus enlarge, when we said, the Fathers did understand the word (Presbytery) as we do. But now what is it that you lay to our charge? or what is it that is our offence, with which you here upbraid us? You tell us, it is because we said, the Fathers under∣stood the word (Presbytery) as we did, and because we pro∣duce Dr. Usher, speaking in this sense. But as to the preach∣ing Presbyters (and which was all that in the place above∣mentioned in our answer, we alleadged him to bring in the Fathers to speak for) is not this clear and manifest to him that will either peruse what he hath, or what you acknow∣ledg, we alleadge out of him, or shall but consider what Fathers you your selves do say, do expound 1 Tim. 4. touching the company of Presbyters, i. e. the Bishops that lay on hands? And therefore if you press us herein to stand to their sense and in∣terpretation, by us alleadged out of Dr. Usher, we shall not run back, nor have any cause to be ashamed, when we assert, that their interpretation of the word (Presbytery) is the same with ours. Yes say you, we may be ashamed to say so. For that Presbytery, which we say is established by Ordinance of Parliament, and is that which we stand for, and which when we speak of the Government of the Church by Presbytery, do mean by that word, is not the same with that Presbytery, which the Fathers understand. And this we suppose you say, because you judge, the Fathers do not comprehend the ruling Elders under the word (Presbytery) mentioned, 1 Tim. 4. To which we answer, that where we alledged the Fathers out of Dr. Usher, we never produced them for any such pur∣pose,
as to prove, that the ruling Elders were comprehended under the word (Presbytery) 1 Tim. 4. only we thought to gain upon you by steps, and from what Dr. Usher alledged the Fathers for, thence to inferre the antiquity of Assemblies, where the Pastors of the Church are members, have decisive votes, and a right to rule; and unto which if you assented, we judged, then we were so farre agreed; and which was the reason why, mentioning his proposal of Assemblies, we said, they were the same in substance with ours, (and for the reason of which expression, we have in this our answer to this your Paper, given a full account before, and to prevent repetition, do referre the Reader thither) however the ruling Elders be admitted into them as members; although we desire the Rea∣der to take notice, and do mind you thereof, that we have shewed, that it is no novel thing, for to admit such to have decisive votes in Synods and Councils, that were never or∣dained to preach and administer the Sacraments; and that we have alleadged testimonies of the Ancients, for to prove the being of such an Officer, as the ruling Elder in their times; and consequently, that he was a member of the Ecclesiastical consistory. But we have thus shewed, for what sense of the word (Presbytery) we alleadged the Fathers out of Dr. Usher; as it will be manifest to him that will peruse our answer, in that place where we cite them. And now we leave it to the Reader to judge, whether we have for this, merited such lan∣guage from you, as here you give us. Do we confidently as∣sert, that the Fathers give the same interpretation of the word (Pres∣bytery) as we d, and yet stand to nothing? Do we not still own, that very sense of the word (Presbytery) 1 Tim. 4. which you your selves produce sundry of them to give? Where then is our wavering or unsetledness in our judgements, that you charge us with? Or in what do we run back, eating our own words, as you here say we do? But this is but a little matter in com∣parison; for you will have us hereupon, to have two hearts, and not one ferehead. But what? were we in your second Paper; your dear friends; nay more, brethren, dearly beloved to you in the Lord? and are we now become monsters in Christianity, ha∣ving two hearts, and have not that common shamefastness,
that might be found even amongst Heathens, having not one forehead? We leave it to the Reader to judge, how cordial you were, in those sugared words you gave us there, when you do here thus vent the rancor, that was in your hearts, and that upon so sseight an occasion; doubtless the answer we gave in words to your second Paper, could give no just cause, for such unchristian and uncivil censures to pass upon us; nei∣ther was there any thing, in that part of our answer to your first Paper (which your selves acknowledge was full of civil∣lity towards you) unto which you here reply, that gave any such occasion; the Fathers we quoted out of Dr. Usher, being for such a sense of the word (Presbytery) as we cited them for. But your uncharitableness, in passing such hard censures upon us, is not all; for you do also here charge us with sun∣dry manifest untruths. For we never quoted Dr. Usher, who in his proposals is expresly for moderate Episcopacy (which we as expresly cautioned against) as our own man, whom we declined or tendered his judgment, as an umpire and composer of diffe∣rences betwixt us, as you here say; although we reverence him, as a man that was learned and godly, and of a farre different spirit from the generality of those, that dote upon Episcopacy; but for what purpose we quoted him, and how farre we ac∣cord with him, we have, as in answer to this occasionally, so fully declared our slves before, in our answer to your second Paper. And therefore you should not have been thus rash, as to impute such things to us, for which there is not the least shew of truth; as there is not any in what you further adde, saying, that you would have closed with us on our own termes; unto which we have spoken sufficiently, in the beginning of this answer to this Paper, shewing how much you forgot your selves, when you said so before. And we must further tell you, that however you may conceive of us, yet we can still profess with a good conscience, that we can cordially our selves joyn in Dr. Bernards wish, and heartily recommend it to all sober spirited and godly persons, that are sound in the main points of Religion (though of different opinions in some things touching Church Government) that they would close therein; there be nothing more that we long after, then an
happy healing of breaches amongst those that are the children of peace. 4. We having thus vindicated our selves, do now come to what followes, where you say, that Presbytery in the Fa∣thers and Scripture expressions you reverence; but ours you still term a common fold, and thse godly pretences of ours, (as you call them) as so many waste Papers, wherein our Presbytery (you say) is wrapped, to make it look more handsomely, and pass more cur∣rantly. But if you had reverenced Scripture expressions, as it had been meet you should, you would have abstained from terming our Presbytery a common fold; that Presbytery, which you acknowledge to be the Scripture expression, according to the interpretation of the Fathers by you alleadged, being thereby reproached; that being Presbytery still, and part of that, that by you is so ignominiously spoken of, as (seeing it is disputed betwixt you and us, whether ruling Elders be not comprehended under the latitude of the word Presbytery, when speech is touching the Ecclesiastical judicatory) due reverence unto Scriptural institutions would have withheld you, from coming near to the vilifying that, which you are not certain, but may be of God; especially considering, how the reformed Churches abroad, the late reverend, pious, and learned Assembly of Divines at home, the Provincial As∣sembly of London, and the Ministers of the Provincial Assem∣bly of this County (to which you owe respect) do all con∣ceive the ruling Elders to be Officers of the Church, ap∣pointed therein by Christ; and so consequently may be com∣prehended, under the latitude of the word Presbytery. But the truth is, we have cause to fear, that you, or most of you, are so much devoted to Episcopacy, that Presbytery in any sense, is not any further in esteem with you, as any Govern∣ment of the Church to be owned by you, but as you appre∣hend in this juncture of affairs, it being admitted for the pre∣sent, with Prelacy moderated, might be a step to erect again in time, Episcopacy in its full height; and which we judge to be that cause, which in your Preface to these Papers you have printed, you profess to love; as we do also conceive, we may further say, without transgression of any rules of charity, that
if the late King had not been too much bent for the upholding of that kind of Episcopacy, that was on foot in his time (that spoiled the Pastors of the Churches of that rule, which our Church acknowledged, did of right belong to them) and had not been therein backed with the concurrence of some of you, and sundry others throughout the Land, that were therein fully of his mind; the proposals of Dr. Usher, touching the re∣duction of Episcopacy, to the forme of Synodical Govern∣ment, had been more readily complied with, then they were, to the prevention (in likelihood) in a good measure, of those troubles, that afterward did arise about Church Govern∣ment. But however, there was no reason, why either he, or you should have called Presbytery a common fold; or why you should, though you had been backed with the authority of the greatest Prince on earth, have called it the anguis in herbâ, whereof you had need to beware, and to which you here say nothing, though you used that expression concern∣ing it, in your first Paper. And whereas you had also there said, referring to the Paper we published in our several Con∣gregations) that she came ushered in with godly pretence of sorrow for the sins and ignorance of the times, and the duty incumbent on us, to exercise the power that Christ had committed to us, for edi∣fication and not destruction, and then said, that these were but so many wast Papers, wherein Presbytery was wrapped up, to make it look more handsomely and pass more currently, yet that is no pur∣gation of you from your uncharitable censuring of us, and usurp∣ing that which belonged not to you, in making your selves judges of that which fell not under your cognizance, and which was that, which we had charged you with in our answer; but from which you do not here acquit yourselves. But as touching our selves, we are not conscious, that we have so farre trans∣gressed the rules of charity, in passing hard censures either upon him, you, or any others, but that we may approve our selves here to God, touching our innocency herein, and the sincerity of our hearts; and hereafter, stand with boldness, before the Tribunal of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ, at the great day; and we do heartily wish, that nei∣ther any of you, or any others throughout these Nations,
who adhered to the late King, in that war he levyed against the Parliament, had given the occasion, justly to be com∣plained of at that day, as therein his greatest enemies. The Gentlemens Paper. Sect. VI. And now we come (you say) to frame an Objection out of your Paper, and return our Answer, profeising that we pray for the establishment of such a Church Government throughout his Highness Dominions, as is consonant to the will of God, and Universal practise of primitive Churches: By which two (viz.) the will of God, and Uinversal practise of Churches, we seem to Cl. cop. the Church. make up the rule (as you say) for deciding of Controversies of this Nature, or of any other in matters of Religion: In which you profess to differ greatly from us, as not sound and orthodox. For the Word of God is the onely rule to judg of matters of this Nature, or of any other matters of Religion, and therefore away with the constant and Universal practise of the Church. We might have cut the matter a great deal shorter and said, That we are for the establishment of that Government that is most consonant to the will of God, revealed in Scriptures, and that the Word of God alone should determine this controversie, &c. Who can forbear laughter, to see Scripturists under the Gospel (as these under the Law, Templum Domini, Templum Domini.) crie Verbum Domini, Ver∣bum Domiui, nothing but Scripture, the Word of God being there the onely rule of faith and manners? Take to your Bibles then, and burn all other Books, as the Anabaptists of old did, who when they and their Bibles were left together, what strange and Phantastical opinion soever came into their brain? Their usual manner was to say, The spirit taught it them: as Mr Hooker in his preface to his Eccles. Pol. The determination of Councils, and Fathers, and the Churches Universal practise for matters of Church Government, must all be abandoned, and then to that old Question of the Papists, Where was your Church before Lutber? or that of ours to you, Where was your Church before Calvin? (Just like the Arguing of the Samaritanes with the Jes, about the Antiquity of their Church on Mount Gerizim, recorded by Joseplus) per Saltum, by a high Jump over all the Universal practise and successions of the Church, you can make your Church and Church Government as ancient as you list, by saying it is to be found in the Scriptures, referring it to Christ, and the Apostles; nay higher yet, if you please, to the Jewish Sanhedrim 1500. years at least before Christ Mr Henderson will assist you much in ths, who in his dispute with his Majesty, averring that Presbyterian Government was never practised before Calvins time, replyeth; Your Majesty knows the Cammon Objection of the Papists against the Reformed Churches, Where was your Church, your Reformation, your
Doctrine before Luthers time? One part of the Common Answer is; it is to be sound in the Scriptures; the same I affirm of Presbyterian Government. Thus he. Make you such defence in behalf of your Church; but (thanks be to God) the Protestant cause hath not, doth not, nor (we hope) will ever want far abler Disputants and Champions, in her defence against her adversaries, then he or you be. For though we grant, and shall ever pay that reverence to the sacred Scriptures, that it is an unsallible unerring rule, yet may we not . 1 Tim. 3. 15. Cant. 1. 8. crie up Scripture to the contempt and neglect of the Church, which the Scripture it self teacheth men both to honour and obey. We will indeavour therefore to give either their due according to Christs institution, that the Scripture, where it is plain, should guide the Church, and the Church, where there's doubt or difficulty, should expound the Scriptures as saith a Bishop: And you your selves may remember what you affirm of General Councils Bishop Lauds preface against Usher. (the Churches Representative) nay more of your Provincial Assemblies, even in your Answer to that you call the preface to our Paper, That there is in them invested an Authoritative juridicall power (to whose Authority you profess your selves to be subject, and to which all ought to submit, alledging 1 Cor. 14. 32. Matth. 18. and Acts 15. for proof hereof) to Inquire into, Trie, Ex∣amine, Censure and judge of Matters of Doctrine, as well as of Discipline; And tax us, as if we refused to submit in such matters, to the Judgement of a Ge∣neral Council. Though here you retract and eat your own words, casting it out as unsound and Hetrodox, what was before a Christians duty to practise. You still own subjection in matters of Doctrine, and discipline, to the Judge∣ment and determination of your Provincial Assemblies, though you deny the Authority of General Councils, and the Catholique Church; That those should be our guide, and rule, and comment upon the Word of God, to tell us, what is his will revealed there, touching Church Government, and discipline. Said we not truely, that you seem to submit to your Provincial, what you will hard∣ly grant to a General Council? But the Church (as we have said) where there's doubt or difficulty, may expound the Scripture, though it be tied (as you have said) to the rule of Gods Words in such proceedings, as Judges to the Law, and we are conclu∣ded, and bound up by that, as we are to those cases in the Law, which are the Judgement and Exposition of the Judges, upon the dark places of the same. The Churches exposition and practise is our rule in such cases, and the best rule too: As our late King affirmeth, (viz.) Where the Scripture is not so clear, and punctuall in precepts, there the constant and Ʋniversal practise of . Chap. 20. the Church, in things not contrary to reason, faith, good manners, or any positive command, is the best rule that Christians can follow. So when there is a diffe∣rence about nterpretation of Scripture (that we may not seem to abound in our own sense, or give way to private interpretation, Dominari fidei, to Lord it over the faith of others) we are not to utter our own phansies, or desires to be believed upon our bare word, but to deliver that sense which hath been a foretime given by our fore-Fathers, and fore-runners in the Christian saith: and so we necessarily make another Judge and rule for interpretation of Scrip∣ture, or else we prove nothing. Thus have the best and ablest defenders of our Protestant Religion defend∣ed
it against the Papists (out of the Word of God too) but not according to their own but the sense which the Fathers unanimously in the primitive Church, and Councils gave. See Mr Philpot, that glorious Martyr in Queen Maries dayes to the like Que∣stion propounded, viz. How long hath your Church stood? Answereth; from the beginning, from Christ, from the Apostles, and their Immediate Successors; And for proof thereof desires no better rule, then what the Papists many times bring in on their side; to wit, Antiquity, Universality, and Unity. And Calvin acknowledgeth (as in our last Paper we shewed you) there can be no better, nor surer remedy for Interpretation of Scripture, then what the Fathers in the primitive Churches gave, especially in the first four General Councils of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus and Chalcedon, which contain nothing (saith he) but the pure and genuine Interpretation of Scripture, and which he professeth to embrace, and reverence, as hallowed, and inviolable; So they rest not in private interpretation, but willingly submit to a judg and rule besides the Scriptures, even such as the Papists themselves cannot except a∣gainst; (viz.) the primitive Churches practise, and Universal and unani∣mous consent of Fathers, and general Councils. By these our Church is con∣tent to be tryed, and to this rule we bring the Church Government to be tried thereby. And on this score your Presbytery is quite our of doors, being of examples and practise of the Church, and Testimonies of the Fathers wholly destitute,  Chap. 17.  wherein (as the King hath it) the whole stream runs so for Episcopacy, that that there's not the least rivulet for any others. Which you being sensible of, have no way to evade this rule, but una▪ liturâ to blot out all records, and monuments of Antiquity, for the space of three hundred years after Christ, as imperfect, and far from shewing the Universal practise of the Church then; and to brand the most approved Authors of those times, as spurious and cor∣rupt; void of all modesty, and shewing thereby no great store either of judge∣ment or honesty. But suppose the Monuments and Records of Antiquity for the space of three hundred years after Christ, were now (as you say) grown unperfect, and not able to shew what was then the Churches practise; yet come we to the General Councils (which are the best Expositors of Scripture, and of the Churches practise) and we by them shall find the practise of the Church in former time. That famous Council of Nice, which must be, and is of all wise and Learned men, reverenced, esteemed, and imbraced next unto the Scrip∣tures themselves, shews you the practise of the Church in its form of Church Government, by Patriarch, Metropolitan, Arch-Bishop, Bishop, &c. as by the 6th, 7th, 13th, 25th, 26th, and 27th Canons of the same Council appeareth. Not that this Council did constitute, and create, as some falsly conceit, but did onely confirm and strengthen those orders and degrees which were in the Church even from the beginning: so are the words of the Council, Can. 6. The very first words of that Canon (whereby it is ordained, that the whole power of all Aegypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis, should belong to the Patriarch of Alexandria, even as it is also there decreed, that the ancient Customes and Priviledges which belonged to the Bishop of Rome, Antioch, and the Metropo∣litanes of other Provinces should be preserved) are , The
very words which Ignatius useth to express the Apostolical Traditions. An∣riqui mores obtineant in Aegypto, Lybiâ & Pentapoli, &c. i. e. Let the ancient customes in Aegypt, Lybia, and Pntapolis continue, that the Patriarcks of Alexandria should have power over all these: even those Customes which were deduced down to those times, from St Mark the Evangelist, not on∣ly Bishop of Alexandria but of the Churches of Aegypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis also. So Eusebius, lib 2. cap. 15, 16. and others. So that these Canons, here made, gave no new thing; did not de novo, in∣stitute or establish this standing subordination in the Church (viz.) of all inferiour Officers in the Church; to the Bishop in every Diocess; of the Bi∣shop in every Province to the Metropolitan; of the Metropolitane in every Region, to the Patriarch or Primate: but did onely confirm it. These stan∣ding powers, and subjection, being defined and asserted by the ancient Ca∣nons, yea the most Ancient even in memorial Apostolicall Tradition and Cl. cop. cap. 9. 20. cap. 19. Sect. 5. Custome, avouched for it as may appear, Concil Nicen. 1. cap. 4, 6. Con∣cil. Antioch cap. 1, 20. Concil. Chalced. cap. 119. See more of this in Dr Ham∣mond of Schism, Cap. 3. sect. 22. 23, 24, 25. cap. 8. sect. 8. Thus much to shew the practice of the Church, in point of Church Go∣vernment for the first three hundred years, even from generall Councils, the best Expositors of the practice of the Church in those times. And as they are our best Informers of the Churches practise, so are they the best Inter∣preters of the mind and will of God in Scripture touching Church Govern∣ment. Calvin reckoning up the severall orders and degrees of Bishops, Arch-Bishops, Metropolitane and Patriarch, and rendring the reason of such Go∣vernours ordained by the said Council of Nice, though he dislike the name Hierarchie, which some gave unto that Government; yet (saith he) omit∣ting the name, if we look into the thing, we shall find that these ancient Bi∣shops did not frame a form of Church Government, differing from that which Christ hath prescribed in his word. Mark, we pray; the Churches practice, in the form of Church Government, was hitherto according to the prescript of Gods Word, in Calvins judgment. And this was 330. years after Christ: Yea Beza likewise, that earnest atron of Presbyterian discipline, confesseth; That those things which were ordained of the ancient Fathers, concerning the seats of Bishops, Metropolitanes, and Patriarchs, assigning their limits, and attributing to them certain Authority, were appointed optimo zelo, out of a very good zeal; and therefore such sure as was according to knowledg, and the word of God, otherwise it would be far from being optimus, the best zeal. And thus we have found a Church Government agreeable to the will of God, and universall practise of primitive Churches: such a one as we pray for, may be established in this Nation, putting both together, not the word of God alone, nor the Churches practice alone, but both together, and both in their due piaces; not crying up the Church above the Scripture, nor crying up the Scripture to the contempt and neglect of the Church: but restoring the pra∣ctice and customes of the Church into that credit, is due unto them; by inva∣lidating of which, all hereticall and schismaticall persons seek to overthrow the Church. Nay, but yours is that Government which is most consonant to the will of God revealed in Scriptures, and your ruling Elders are jure divino, which you cannot part with, unless you should betray the truth of Christ,
Rom. 12. 1 Cor. 12. 1 Tim. 5. We answer, these Texts are too generall to prove a ruling Presbytery out of; and so you have been often told by many more learned Doctors of our English Church. Yet ruling Elders must be found here, for so you will have it, let Gidens fleece be wet or dry; That is, whether there be dew enough in those Texts to water the sense or no: Therefore being resolyed on it, you wrest the Scriptures (which St Peter complains of) with Expositions, and glosses newly coined, to make them speak what they never meant, giving such new and strange senses to places of Scripture, as the Church of Christ never heard of till of late years. This wre∣sting Cl. cop. this mann wresting. of Scripture, Dr Andrews taxeth the Papists withall, saying, Malus hic Cardinalium mos; and we as truly, Malus hic Presbyterorum mos—rem facias, rem—si possis rectè, si non, quocun{que} modo rem, &c. such a sense you give of these places, which none of the Fathers ave, or heard of; and being a stranger to them, we can but terme it an Imagination of yours, and so leave it and you to what we have in our last Paper further spoken of it. Touching which, no reply hath been as yet sent us from you. The Animadversions of the Class upon it. WE are sure we are now come, to that which is the worst part in all your Paper, your principles here being very corrupt, even in a Doctrinall matter of high concernment, and that distemper which was upon your spirit, breaking out here into railing in an high degree, if not to blasphemie; be∣sides your flandering of us and scoffing at us, which is ordinary with you, of which we shall speak anon particularly. 1. But we shall begin with that Representation, which you first make, of what we answered to that Objection which you made out of our Paper; wherein as you cut it short, so you do manifestly deprave our words; for though, speaking of that, which was to be the rule of deciding controversies, touching Ghurch Government, or of any other matters of Religion, we said, That the Word of God alone, and then ad∣ded (which you here wholly leave out) and the approved practice of the Church recorded there (whether it was the universal and constant practice of the Church or no) is to be the onely rule to judge by, in this or any other controversies in matters of Religon; yet we never said, away therefore with the constant and univer∣sal practice of the hCurch, this being an addition of your own: and which, when you profess to represent what we said, was
no more fair, then your former substraction; especially when such additions, or substractions belonged to the true sta∣ting of the Question betwixt you and us; although, if the uni∣versall and constant practice of the Church, must be added to the will and Word of God, or it is not a sufficient and perfect rule whereby to guide us; we may well then say, away with the constant and Universal practice of the Church, in this sense. And yet in our Answer you might have taken notice; that we said, we did much honour and reverence the Primitive Churches, although we professed, we owed greater reverence to the Scriptures then to them; and whereby we did not judg, they were any whit disparaged, as they themselves would never have thought upon such an expression. But in our Answer, after we had propounded the rule which you seemed to us to make for deciding of the controversie, touching Church Government and other matters of Religion, sc. the Word or will of God, and the constant and Universal practice of the Church (as if the Word of God alone, except confirmed or explained by the constant and Universal practice of the Church when there were any doubt about any matter (as here you speak) were not of it self sufficient to determine it, and which is that rule which here you own, we first (suppo∣sing it were admitted of) put you upon it to prove, what was the Universal prctice of Primitive Churches, in the matter of Church Government; intimating to you, that we thought it would be hard for you, or any others to demonstrate out of any Records of Antiquity, what tha was for the whole space of three hundred years after Christ, or the greatest part thereof (excepting so much as was left upon record in the Scriptures of the new Testament) for which we gave you our reasons, unto which you say something, after you had first vented your distemper against us, for not admitting your rule; but how satisfactory will come after∣ward to be examined. In the next place we came to op∣pose the rule it self, and for this also we gave you our rea∣sons, none of which you do either recite in your representa∣tion of what we had here said, or return any answer to after∣ward; and which is such a kind of replying to our Answer, as we believe, all ingenuous rationall men would have been
ashamed of, who would have conceived, they were obliged either to have returned some answer to our arguments, or to have never replyed at at all, but been silent. But seeing you mention them not, we shall give the Reader a short ac∣count what they were, and referre him to the answer it self, where he may see them more fully. The reasons we gave, why we could not admit of the rule you laid down, were three, although we did not in our answer number them, and which perhaps might be the reason, why you might think, if you took no notice of them, such an escape might the more easily pass. The first reason we urged against your rule was, because thereby the Scriptures were accused as imperfect, or as not having light enough in themselves, for the resolving all doubts touching matters of faith and practice, except it were first known, what was the universal practice of Primitive Churches. 2. The second was, because admitting the constant and universal practice of Primitive Churches, to be that which must assure us, what is the will of God concerning Church Government, our faith is hereupon resolved into a most un∣certain ground, and so made fallible, and turned into opini∣on; there being no monuments of antiquity besides the Scrip∣tures, that could infallibly assure us, touching the matters of fact therein contained. 3. Our third reason was, because if we could be assured what was the universal and constant practice of the Primitive Churches, yet that could not be a rule to us, what is most consonant to the will of God; considering, that in such mat∣ters as are not absolutely necessary to salvation, we did not see, but the universal practice of the Churches, might in some things be dissonant to the will of God revealed in Scriptures. We here shewed, there were corruptions and so failings in practice in the best of men, instancing in the hot contention betwixt Paul and Brnabas, Peters dissimulation, Gal. 2. and not only in these Apostolical men, but also in Apostolical Churches, as of Corinth, Galatia, Asia; and then shewed, how afterward corruptions grew in the Church, in Doctrine
and Government, as the Reader will see more fully upon per∣usall of our answer; and where he will finde all these reasons, though you here were pleased to take no notice of any of them. But we hereupon inferred, that whereas you say, that you pray for the establishment of such Church Government, as is most conso∣nant to the will of God, and universal practice of Primitive Churches; we did believe you might cut the matter a great deal shorter (which you eagerly catch at in the representation you make) and say, that you are for the establishing of that Government, that is most consonant to the will of God revealed in the Scriptures, and that the word of God alone (and on which only faith must be built, and into which at last be resolved, when other records of antiquity, that yet are not so ancient as it is, have been searched into never so much) shall determine what that is; and so those wearisome and endless dis∣putes, about what is the universall and constant practice of Primi∣tive Churches (and which if it could not be found out, in any good measure of probability, for the first three hundred yeares after Christ, could never yet be so far issued, as to be a sure bottome, whereon our faith may safely rest) may be cut off; it being a most certain rule, and especially in matters of faith, that the factum is not to prescribe against the jus, the practice against the right, or what ought to be done. We have been the larger, in making this representation of what we had answered, because yours is here so short; and also because you come not at all afterward, to answer any of our reasons, but fall upon us with foule language, as if that were sufficient to answer an argument; but upon this repre∣sentation that we have made, and the Reader his perusing, what he may find in our answer more fully, and what you here reply unto it; comparing all together, he will be better able to judge concerning the whole matter; as we doubt not, but he will conceive, the arguments we urged, against the rule you had laid down, for the deciding of controversies in matters of Religion, standing still in their full strength, it will not be necessary for us, to urge any more to that purpose, till these, that we have already urged, be an∣swered. 2. Yet because you say something, against what we insi∣nuated,
touching making the word of God alone, the deter∣miner, and so be judge concerning all controversies in Reli∣gion, and particularly concerning that betwixt you and us, touching Church Government, we shall first examine what you oppose thereunto, and then shall give our reasons for this assertion. We cannot call, what you oppose us with, Ar∣guments; but what you say, such as it is, we shall speak to. 1. And first, For our laying down this rule, you cannot (it seems) your selves forbear laughter, and think it strange, if there be any, that can forbear laughing hereat with you; and then you rail upon us, calling us Scripturists, and such as cry, verbum Domini, verbum Domini, nothing but Scripture, the word of God being there, the only rule of faith and man∣ners. If these words had been belched out by some railing Rabshakeh, a stranger to the true God and the true Religion, we should have held our peace, and not answered you a word, according to the Commandment that was given by Hezekiah, say∣ing, answer him not: or had they been uttered by some Papist, or Popish Priest, we should not much have wondered; but when they come out of the mouths of such, as profess them∣selves to be Protestants, and dissenting Christians (though in the principle here laid down, touching the judge of contro∣versies, you are downright Popish, and that Mr. Allen, an ancient Protestant Minister, hath put his hand to such stuff as this, who should not have reproached his fellow brethren upon this account; it being no wayes allowable, that Mi∣nisters should press any thing upon the consciences of their people, but what they do bring verbum Domini, the word of the Lord for. We cannot here be silent, but must needs tell you, that seeing now your Papers are published to the world, we must expect a publike retractation, of what you have thereby so much dishonoured God, and justly offended and grieved the Church of God, and not us onely: and had the intended treaty gone on, we should have insisted on satisfaction (as we hinted to you in discourse) for that distemper of spirit, that you do here and elswhere in your Paper let forth (though then the more private might have served the turn) before we could have closed with you in any way of accommodation. 2. But in
the next place you paralell us with those under the Law, that cried Templum Domini, Templum Domini; though we are sure that you cry the Church, the Church, that is Templum Domini, the Temple of the Lord, to the prejudice of the Scriptures, that are verbum Domini, the word of the Lord. 3. Then you come to compare us with the Anabaptists of old, of whom you say, when they and their Bibles were left together, what strange phantasticall opinion soever came in their brain, their usuall manner was to say, the spirit taught it them, quoting Mr. Hooker. And yet in the beginning of your second Paper, we were your dear friends, (nay more) brethren, dearly beloved to you in the Lord, to whom you returned hearty thanks, for our Answer full of civility towards you; and thus we might have continued in your esteem of us, if we could have come up to your termes, in admitting of Episcopacy, and casting out the ruling Elders. 4. In the next place you proceed to misrepresent our asser∣tion, and to father that upon us which is not true; and whe∣ther that be not slandering, we leave it to you to judge; for, as upon our asserting the Word of God alone, to be the judge of all controversies in matters of Religion, it followes not that then we must take to our Bibles, and burn all other books, as you say; but rather being the Scriptures are the onely judge, and these are profound and deep, we must use the greatest di∣ligence and best helps we can, to come to understand what is the will and mind of God revealed there; so upon this ac∣count, though we dare not build our faith upon such an un∣sure foundation, as the determination of Councils and Fathers, and the Churches practice, for matters of Church Govern∣ment, or any other matter in Religion; yet we are farre from abandoning or despising them, which yet is that, you here charge us with: But it is you (who attribute more unto them, then ever the great Champions for the Protestant cause did) that will be found joyning hands in this point with the Papists, (enquiring where was our Church before Luther? and whom, our Divines answering sufficiently from the Scriptures, do yet ex superabundanti prove the main points of the Prote∣stant Religion, wherein they differ from them, both from Councils and Fathers) and making that plea, for that Church
Government for which you contend, and against that, which we, from the Scriptures argue for, which the Papists did a∣gainst our Protestant Divines, for their unwritten traditions and superstitious ceremonies, and devotion. For you ask of us, where was our Church (you here sure mean, where was our Presbyterian Government? else you take not the Church of England, to which you belong, to be the Church you are mem∣bers of) before Calvin? But we answer you, though we need not take such an high jumpe, over all the practice and successions of the Church, as you talk of; being able, ex superabundanti, to evidence it from antiquity, in the purer times of the Primitive Church after Christ and his Apostles (whereof we have gi∣ven some account already, and shall anon give some further) yet it will be sufficient for us, and all sound Protestants, if we can prove it to be as ancient, not as we list, but as the Scriptures of the old and new Testament, wherein it is to be found, and whereof we have given some account also, out of what we have in our second Paper urged out of the Vindication of the Presbyterian Government by the Provinciall Assembly of London; and the Jus Divinum Regiminis Ecclesiastici, by some London Ministers; and of which the Reader (and you also, if you would take the pains to peruse them) may see more at large, not onely in Mr. Rutherford's works, but also in Aarons Rod blossoming, written by Mr. George Gillespi, and in the Assertions of the Government of Scotland (conceived by some to be penned by the same M. Gillespi, yet therein assisted by Mr. Henderson) wherein the jus Divinum of the ruling Elders office is proved, not onely from the new Testament, but also from the ould; and which books (proving the Presbyterian Government, as from Christ and his Apostles, so also from the Jewish ju∣dicatories, (to which some conceive Christ alludes, Matth. 18. when he saith, tell the Chutch,) which were appointed many hundred years before Christ, and answering the opposers of this Government in all the materiall points, that ever were objected against it, by the greatest Champions for Episcopa∣cy) were never yet answered, that we have seen to this day. And for this assistance (however you contemn it) yet we bless God; neither are we ashamed of Mr. Hendersons answer
to his late Majesty, telling him, that the Presbyterian Govern∣ment was to be found in the Scriptures, as our Divines have answered the Papists sufficiently, after the same manner, touch∣ing other matters; as we are not ashamed neither to make this defence on the behalf of our Church. And though we thank God heartily, for those farre abler disputants and Cham∣pions of the Protestant cause, then we or any of us, have ever pretended to be (not thinking our selves worthy to be men∣tioned for any abilities, amongst them) yet we desire to know which of those Champions (though they refused not to fight against the Papists with their own weapons, sc. the testimo∣nies of Fathers and Councils) did ever refuse the Scriptures, as the sole judge and determiner of controversies in matters of Religion, as you do? or did they not rather stoutly and ir∣refragably maintain and defend this main point of faith, against the adversary? 5. But now you come to tell us, what re∣verence you pay to the sacred Scripture; for you say, you acknow∣ledg it to be an infallible and unerring rule. And will not a Papist say so too? But let us enquire of you, will you acknowledge the Scripture to be the sole supreme judge of controversies in matters of faith? Except you come up to this, you are as yet, in regard of any reverence you pay to the Scriptures, no fur∣ther then a Papist; nay you joyn hands with them; for they say, as you do; we may not cry up Scripture to the contempt and neglect of the Church, which the Scripture it self teacheth men to honour and obey; and sano sensu, in a right and sound sense, we shall say so too. But you further declare your selves touching this matter, and say, that the Scripture where it is plain should guid the Church, and the Church, where there is doubt or difficulty, should expound the Scriptures, as saith a Bishop; and you quote in your margent BP Laud's Preface, that is not against Usher but Fisher *. The Jesuite. But here 1. You mistake the Question, for it is not, Whe∣ther to the Church belongeth not a Ministry, for the expound∣ing of the Scriptures? This is readily granted to her by us, as it is by our Protestant Divines; and that the Texts you cite in the margent will prove. 2. You plainly discover your opinion to be no other, then what in this point is held by the Papists; and is abundantly refuted by our Protestant Divines
in their writings. The matter is plainly thus, and no other∣wise; for when you say, where the Scripture is plain, it must guid the Church, but where there is a doubt or difficulty, the Church is to expound the Scriptures; you plainly insinuate, that the Scriptute is not to be the sole and supreme judge, touching controversies in Religion; for there is no controversie in Re∣ligion, but the Adversaries (be they Antitrinitarians, Ar∣rians, Papists or whomsoever) may say as you here do, in such and such points in controversie, the Scripture is not plain, here is a doubt and difficulty, and we must stand to the Churches determination, who is in such cases to expound the Scripture; neither is the Scripture in such cases, to be the onely sure infallible interpreter of it self, to which all parties are to stand, and in whose determination alone they are to rest, and into which our faith must be resolved; which yet is that which is maintained by our Protestant Divines against the Papists, and of which we shall speak more fully anon. Onely for the present we must mind you, that this assertion is fetcht out of the dreggs of Popery, and is such an opinion as all sound Protestants will disclaim; neither do the Texts you cite in your margent, prove any such a thing, Not 1 Tim. 3. 15. that is usually urged by the Papists, for that very opinion which you maintain, but is sufficiently vindicated by our Divines; shewing, that the Church is there called, the Pillar and ground of Truth, in regard of her Ministry onely, by her preaching, publishing and defending the truth, and thereby transmitting it to posterity; but not to intimate, that the Scripture in any point, where there is doubt or difficulty. did borrow authority from the Church, no more then the Edicts of Princes do from the publishers of them, or from the pillars and posts to which they are affixed, that they might be the more generally known. The other Text, sc. Cant. 1. 8. proves indeed, that the Church hath a Ministry committed to her, for the feeding of babes in Christ, as well as stronger men, which is not denied; but if you will stretch it further, its plain you wrest it. 6. In the last place you urge us, with what we our selves granted unto Synods and Councils, acknowledging, they were invested with an authoritative juridicall power, to en∣quire
into, try, examine, censure and judge of matters of Doctrine, as well as of Discipline, and to whose authority we professed our selves to be subject, and to which all ought to submit; urging Scrip∣ture for it, &c. nothing whereof we do here retract, or eat our own words, casting that out as unsound and hetrodox, as you say we do, which before we acknowledged was a Christians duty to pra∣ctise. For here you do not distinguish, betwixt the submission of our faith to the determination of Synods and Councils, and the submission of our persons to their censure, in regard of any matter of Doctrine, held forth by us, or any practice. This latter submission we still do readily yeeld unto them, and that in regard of the juridicall authority, they are invested with by the Ordinance of God; and this submission was that, we professed before to yeeld unto them; and was that we ar∣gued for. But as touching the submission of our faith to their determinations, or so as to resolve it into any other princi∣ples then the Word of God alone, or to build it on any other foundation, was not that reverence we ever acknowledged was to be paid to Synods and Councils, and is that which here we do professedly deny. And therefore you do here again no less then slander us, when you say, we still own subjection in matters of Doctrine and Discipline, to the judgment and determination of our Provinciall Assembly, and yet deny the Authority of General Councils, and the Catholique Church; whom neither we ever denied to be a guide, or their Expositions of Scripture to be an usefull Comment thereon, for the better helping us to understand, what was Gods will revealed there, touching Church Government and Disci∣pline; but denied them to be our sure guid: and further asserted, the Word of God alone to be the onely rule to judge by in this, or any other controversies in matters of Religion, (and which are the words we used, in that part of our Answer, to which you here reply) as it is a received rule amongst Protestant Divines, that the onely sure rule or guid for the interpreting of Scripture, is not Fathers, Councils, or the practice of the Church (and wherein we must further oppose you anon, giving you our reasons for that also) but the Scripture it self, that is the onely infallible comment or sure guide, or (as we spake) interpreter. And now we leave it to the Reader to judge, how true it was
said by you, that we seemed to submit to our Provinciall, what we will hardly grant to a Generall Council. But you hitherto having no otherwise, then thus, opposed, what we had intimated to you, was to be the onely rule and sole judge of controversies in matters of Religion, sc. the Word of God alone; we shall now proceed to give you our Reasons (according to what we promised) for this asser∣tion. And however, this pains to some may seem needless, considering how full our Divines are in this point in their writings against the Papists, yet we judge it necessary to say something (though it be but what hath been said before) that so we may neither seem to sleight any means, we are ob∣liged to use to reduce you from your errour; nor neglect the souls of those that are committed to our charge; in not laying before them some grounds for the better establishing them in the present truth. Our Reasons then for making the Scriptures the only rule of faith and life, and sole supreme judge of all controversies in matters of Religion are briefly these: Argument 1. Because it is the Scripture onely, or Word of God contained there, that begets divine faith and full assu∣rance The Scriptures the sole su∣preme judge of all matters in Religion. in matters of Religion, so as to remove all doubts and scruples; and hence it is that faith is said to come by hearing, Rom. 10. 17. i. e. from the sense of Scripture truely perceived and rightly understood. Timothy is also said to have gained the assurance of what he had learned from the Scriptures, 2 Tim. 3. 15, 16. neither is there any other firm foundation, whereon we can build, but the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Ephes. 2. 20. and therefore it is the Scripture onely that is the sole judge of controversies, removing all doubts and scruples, and so determining the matters in difference touch∣ing Religion, in whose sentence onely we can rest, and to whose determination we must stand. Argument 2. If the Scriptures must be refused, as the sole and supreme judge and determiner of controversies in matters of Religion; then it is, because they are either imperfect, and so not reaching to all cases and matters in controversie, or else because they are obscure, and so not sufficiently plain for the resolving of all doubts, whereupon there is a necessity supposed of appeal to some other judge.
But the Scriptures are not imperfect; for the Law and Scripture of the Old Testament is said to be perfect, Psal. 19. 7. And therefore there was nothing wanting in it, that was necessary for the instruction of the people of God, under the Old Testament, in matters of Religion that concerned them to know; integrum, or that which is perfect; being that, ac∣cording to the description of the Philosopher, Cui nihil deest, & extra quod nihil eorum quae sunt ejus accipi potest, i. e. that to which nothing is wanting, and without which, nothing of those things that belong unto it, can be taken. And hence it is that God did so strictly prohibit his people of old, that they should not, either adde any thing to, or detract any thing from his Law, Deut. 4. 2. and therefore much more are the Scriptures both of the Old and New Testament perfect; neither is there any case in matters of Religion needfull to be resolved, but the determination thereof is to be found there; especially considering, all Scripture is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished unto all good works, 2 Tim. 3. 16, 17. And as the Scriptures are not to be accused of imperfection, so neither of obscurity. The word of God is a lamp to our feet, and a light to our paths, Psal. 119. 105. and hereupon our only sure guid, as a torch or lanthorne in the night, that so we may be guided in the way we should walk, and thereby be cautioned against errours on all hands. The Apostle Peter also, speaking of the Scripture, calls it a more sure word of pro∣phesie, whereunto we should do well to take heed, as to a light shine∣ing in a dark place, 2 Pet. 1. 19. and therefore the Scripture is sufficiently plain, for the resolving of all doubts, and determi∣ning of all controversies in Religion. Although if in some things the Scripture be obscure, yet this is no sufficient rea∣son for the refusal of it, as the sole determiner of controver∣sies; perspicuity not being of the essence and nature of a rule, but certainty and authority; the Laws of men being often obscure, as Lawyers know, and yet not thereupon ceasing to be a rule. Argument 3. God is the author of Scripture, all Scripture
being given by inspiration from him, 2 Tim. 3. 16. received by im∣mediate divine revelation, 2 Pet. 1. 21. and is the word of Christ, Col. 3. 16. and therefore is the testimony, and sentence of God himself the supreme Judge, and therefore is to be acknow∣ledged by all, to be the only sure guid and determiner of all controversies in Religion. Argument 4. Nothing is to be believed in matters of Re∣ligion, and to be received as from God, or to be taught in the Church, but what is confirmed by the testimony of Scrip∣ture; whence it was, that in the old time, the people were sent to the Law and to the Testimonies, Isa. 8. 20. Paul taught nothing but what was to be found in the Prophets and Moses, Act. 26. 22. and hence it was also, that the Bereans were com∣mended for trying by the touchstone of the Scriptures, what they heard from Paul, Act. 17. 11. And therefore the Scrip∣tures are the only rule and supreme Judge of all controversies in Religion. Argument 5. The people of God are commanded, that they turn not aside, either to the right hand or to the left, from that path that is chalked forth in the Scriptures for them to walk in, Deut. 5. 32. and Chap. 17. 20. Josh. 1. 7. and there∣fore the Scripture is the only sure rule in matters of Religion, to which we must exactly keep, and from which we must not in the least thing turn aside. Many more reasons might be here urged, but we judge these sufficient, and so, having dispatcht what we promised, we shall now proceed. 3. For you, having not urged Arguments, against the rule by us propounded, for the determining controversies in mat∣ters of Religion, but only vented against us the distemper of your spirit for that proposal, do now further declare your selves, touching what you would have to be the judge, and rule for interpretation of the Scripture; and do adde unto the universal ractice of the Church, mentioned in your first Paper, the Churches exposition, meaning the exposition of Councils, and unanimous consent of Fathers, as you here declare your selves: concerning which we shall, 1. Propound the true state of the Question betwixt you and us; 2. And then
urge some Arguments against the rule by you here made; 3. and lastly, We shall answer what you have here to say for your opinion. As touching the first; we do here declare our selves, that we do readily grant, the Church may expound the Scripture, though (as we said in our answer, which you here acknowledge) it be tied to the rule of Gods word in such pro∣ceedings, as Judges to the Law; and so therefore the Churches exposition may and is to be made use of, as a meanes appoint∣ed by God, that we might understand the word, where there is a doubt or difficulty, but we must not allow what you further adde, sc. that we are bound up by the Churches exposition, as we are (according to what you say) to those cases in the Law, which are the judgement and exposition of the Judges upon the dark places of the same: neither must we close with you, when you say, the Churches exposition and practice is our rule in such cases, and the best rule too; or that when there is a difference about interpreta∣tion of Scripture, we must necessarily make another judge and rule for interpretation of Scripture, besides Scripture, as you speak, the Scripture it self being in such a case, the only sure inter∣preter of it self; the doubtfull and hard places thereof being to be expounded by the more plain. Further we do here declare, that we grant, the Church is a judge, touching matters of Religion in controversie, or touching the interpre∣tation of doubtfull or difficult places of Scripture, but a ministe∣rial Judge only; and not the rule for its interpretation, as you speak; or such a judge from which there is no appeal, no not to the Scriptureit self, as you intimate. Again the Church is such a judge, to which all parties ought to submit, in regard of her juridical authority, to be censured by her in regard of opini∣ons or practices; but not such a judge, to whose determina∣tion we must submit our faith, or resolve it into her sentence. In a word, we grant unto the Church a Ministry, but not a dominion over our faith, nor make her interpretation of the Scripture, where there is a doubt or difficulty, the rule of faith or practice. And if you had given to the Church no more, nor had ascribed to the Scriptures in this case too little, we should not have had this for a controversie, that is now a great matter in difference betwixt you and us. For whereas
you reject the rule propounded by us in our answer, touching the determining of controversies in Religion, sc. the word of God alone, and notwithstanding our reasons there urged, a∣gainst your adding the universal and constant practice of the Church, unto the word of God, to make up the rule to judge by in matters of this nature, yet do here professedly adhere, to what you did but seem to insinuate, in your first Paper: and because we had propounded the Scripture only, as the only sure rule to walk by, you hereupon (as hath been said) rail upon us, calling us Scripturists, and scorn and scoff at us, for making the word of God alone the rule of faith and man∣ners; we hereupon cannot but conceive, you ascribe a deal more to the Church, then a meer Ministery, setting up her determination, for the rule of interpreting Scripture, and issuing of controversies, and take away from the Scripture, that which you should yeild unto it, even to be the only sure rule for the interpreting it self: for though you here acknow∣ledge, that the Church in expounding Scripture, is tied to the rule of Gods word in such proceedings, as Judges to the Law, yet you say, we were concluded and bound up by her exposition, and therefore though she be tyed in her expounding of Scripture; according to this concession, yet by this assertion it will fol∣low, that we are bound to believe, she hath rightly expound∣ed the Scripture, according to her duty: for you say, her ex∣position and practice is our rule and best rule too, and that we necessa∣rily make another judge, and rule for interpretation of Scripture, or else we prove nothing, and that else we give way to private interpre∣tation, (which is the Popish false gloss, upon the Text point∣ed at in that expression) and anon you tell of another judge and rule, besides the Scripture, that is to be submitted unto, even such as the Papists themselves cannot ex, viz. the Primitive Churches practice, and universal and nimous consent of Fathers and general Councils, and which though you would father upon Mr. Philpot, and Calvin, yet is that  they, together with all other sound Protestants in their ws against the Papists have unanimously disclaimed;  as the Papists more anciently, seeing if they mu the determinati∣on of Scriptures they were cast, ly to Councils
and the unanimous consent of Fathers, as to the rule, whereby they would be tryed; so you with them, betake your selves to these, and refuse to be tryed by the Scriptures, as the sole judg, because thence it is manifest, that that Episcopacy, that you are for, is quite cashiered, the whole current of the Scripture of the New Testament, making a Bishop and a Presbyter all one. But the Question betwixt us being thus stated; as we gave our reasons even now, why the Scriptures were to be the only judge of controversies, and rule of faith and life; so we shall now give our reasons, why the Churches exposition, the u∣nanimous consent of Fathers and general Councils, are not to be the rule of its interpretation, much less the best rule, where there is a doubt or difficulty, as you assert. Argument, 1. Because it is God only, that is the author of Councils and Fathers not the rule of the Scriptures in∣terpretation. Scripture; all Scripture being given by inspiration of God, 2 Tim. 3. 16. It is he only that is the chief Law-giver and Doctor of the Church, Jam. 4. 12. Mat. 22. 10. and therefore he only, speaking in the Scripture, and in the hearts of his people by his Spirit, is the supream and infallible interpreter of Scrip∣ture, every one being the best interpreter of his own words, and the Law-giver best understanding the meaning of the Law he makes; and being the Scriptures cannot be interpre∣ted and understood, but by that same Spirit whereby they are written, whence that of Bernard, Nunquam Pauli sensum ingredieris, nisi Pauli spiritum imbiberis; and again, Nunquam Davidem intelliges, donec ipsâ experientiâ Psalmorum affectus in∣dueris: and therefore the exposition of the Church, the una∣nimous consent of Fathers and general Councils, are not the best rule for the interpreting of the Scripture. Argument 2. Because no men can be sufficient interpreters of the Scripture, so, as when there is a doubt or difficulty, by the interposition of their authority, they can remove it, and determine the controversie about it; because then they should have a dominion over the soul and over faith, which the A∣postle denies, 2 Cor. 1. 24. yea then faith, which standeth not in the wisdome of men, but in the power of God, 1 Cor. 2. 5. should be resolved into the sentence and judgement of men; and
their sentence be the matter of our faith, or the thing that were to be believed, and whereon our faith were to be built; which were quite to overthrow it, and to bring in an hu∣mane faith in the room of a divine. But on the contrary, when there is any controversie about any matter of Religion, and so about the interpretation of any Text of Scripture, the controversie is to be determined, and the doubt and difficul∣ty to be removed, not by the authority of any men, but by the authority of God, and of the Scriptures. Whence it was, that the Fathers of the Nicene Council, disputing with Arrius, pressed him with the authority of Scriptures, and condemn∣ed him by the testimonies thereof. And therefore not the unanimous consent of the Fathers, and of Councils, is to be the rule for the interpreting of Scriptures. Argument 3. The unanimous consent of Fathers and Councils cannot be the rule for interpreting of the Scriptures, because then this should alwayes have been the rule, it being of the nature of that which is a rule, that it be alwayes one, and that sure, firme, and perpetual: but that this was not al∣wayes a rule is manifest, because there was once a time, when there were no writings of the Fathers extant, nor when there had been any general Councils; the Council of Nice, that was the first general Council of all other, after the death of the Apostles, not having been convened till above three hundred yeares after Christ, and many of the Fathers having written nothings till four hundred yeares after Christ, and some not till five hundred or six hundred yeares after him; and so before that time, the unanimous consent of Fathers and Councils, could not be the rule of interpreting Scrip∣tures. Besides after the Fathers had written, yet there is not in all things an unanimous consent amongst them, in their interpreting of Scripture, as might be evidenced by several and sundry examples. You your selves told us, that the Fa∣thers are different, in the sense and interpretation of the word (Pres∣bytery) in the Scripture expression, 1 Tim. 4. The Latin Fathers generally, as Hierome, Ambrose, Primasius, Anselme and others, taking this word (Presbytery) for the function which Timothy re∣ceived, when he was made Bishop or Priest, as you express it.
The Greek Fathers as Ignatius, Chrysostome, Theodoret, Theophi∣lact, Oecumenius and some others, and some few of the Latines also, taking it for the company of Presbyters. We shall adde only a∣nother example, Origen, Jerome, Athanasius, Ambrose, do so interpret those words of the Apostle, Rom. 7. where he saith, I am carnal, sold under sin, &c. as that they say, Paul doth not there speak concerning himself, but in the person of a man not regenerated, whereas Augustine will have it to be understood (as indeed it ought to be, touching a man, that is regenerated; and so, that Paul there speakes of himself, as he most certain∣ly doth. Many more examples of this kind might be given, but by these we may sufficiently conjecture of the rest. Argument 4. Adde unto the former, that the Fathers have sundry of them erred, which is so manifest to him that is con∣versant in their writings, that it will not be denyed; as if any should be so impudent as to deny it, it is easie to make it good in manifold instances: yea some general Councils have erred, as that Council held at Ariminum, that established the Arrian heresie; and the second Council of Ephesus, that con∣firmed the Eutichian heresie; and the second Council of Nice, that established the worshipping of Images, which is forbid∣den in the Law of God. Whereupon the Fathers have ac∣knowledged, that the authority of Councils was only so far of force, as their determinations are agreeable to Scriptures; and that there lyes an appeal from all unto the Scripture. Whence that of Athanasius, speaking concerning the Arrians of old urging Councils, Frura inquit circumcursitantes prae∣teunt, ob fidem concilia se postulare. Divina enim Scriptura per∣fectior est & sufficientior omnibus Conciliis. We see, he acknow∣ledged the divine Scriptures to be more perfect and sufficient, then all Councils. But hence it is clear, that if both Fathers and Councils have erred, the unanimous consent of Fathers and Councils cannot be the rule; much less the best rule, as you speak, of interpretin Scriptures. Argument 5. Besides, sundry of the Fathers, and of the wri∣tings that go under the names of the most approved Fathers, are doubtfull, others suppositious and spurious, and others
corrupted. This is clear, because there have been many writers heretofore, that have been publikely adorned with the title of the Fathers, that are now rejected as heterodox, and unworthy to be called by the names they go under, and where∣of if you doubt, learned Voetius doth afford you a catalogue. That there are also many suppositious and spurious works attributed to the genuine and true Fathers, and published with their works, which some receive, others reject, others do doubt concerning; is so cleare and manifest, that it will not be questioned by any, that ever saluted the Fathers writings, and had either sound judgement of his own, or would believe the censures of the Learn∣ed concerning them, as of Rivet, Erasmus, Perkins and others; and which is so clear, that the Papists themselves, as Bellar∣mine, Cajetan and others will not deny it; and, as if it were to our purpose might be particularly proved, by instancing in the suppositious writings attributed to Ignatius, Cyprian, Basil, Ambrose, Hierome, Chrysostome, Augustine, and others of the most approved Fathers; and from all which it will follow, that the unanimous consent of the Fathers, cannot be a rule for the interpreting of Scripture; it being that which will be dis∣puted concerning some, whether they be not meer feigned Fathers; and concerning sundry of the works, that are attri∣buted to the genuine Fathers, (and in which such Scriptures may be interpreted, where there is doubt and difficulty) whe∣ther they be not suppositious. Argument 6. To say nothing of the difficulties or obscuri∣ties in the genuine Fathers and their genuine writings, by reason of phrases now grown out of use, Idiotisms, Histories and Antiquities, that make them the more hard to us of these times, and so their interpretations of Scriptures often more difficult to be understood, then the Scriptures that they inter∣pret: this also is very considerable, that it will be out of the compass and reach of the most persons of ordinary rank, to procure all the writings of the Fathers and Councils, that are yet extant: as we do not beleeve, that any of you are so well stored, as that you have such a Library, wherein all the Fa∣thers or most of them might be consulted: which yet were
necessary to be procured, if their unanimous consent must be the rule for interpretation of Scripture, when there is a doubt or difficulty. And if some persons might be found of that a∣bility, as to procure the Works of all the Fathers, yet it is not easie to imagin, how even the Learned, though Divines, much less the simple and ignorant, could ever be able to reade over all their Works, compare all the Fathers together, and their interpretations, that so they might, when there was a doubt or difficulty, gather what was the unanimous consent of the Fathers, touching the interpretation of a Text, the sense where∣of we questioned. And hereupon it will follow, that what you propound as the rule, yea and the best rule too, for inter∣preting of Scripture, is so farre from being such, that it is a very unfit and unmeet rule, being such, as few or none, if any at all, are able in all cases or the most to make use of. But by this time, we doubt not, notwithstanding your great confidence touching the sureness of your rule, that it is ma∣nifest, from the reasons we have given, (unto which we might add many more, if there were need) that your rule for the interpretation of the Scriptures, participates not of the nature, of what is to be a rule: and therefore, however the ex∣position of the Church, Fathers and Councils, is not to be des∣pised, yet it is not to be made a rule; but that the onely sure rule for the interpreting of the Scriptures, is the Scripture it self. But because you alledge something for your assertion, we shall now in the last place, examine it, of what nature and strength it is. And . You quote the late King in the , although his assertion is more limited then yours, as from the words you cite is clear and manifest. And as touching that, which his words are alledged for, we must say, that such a Church Government, as is not found instituted in Scripture, in regard of the substantials of it, is therefore contrary to the commands of Scripture, because not found instituted there: and this we affirm, touching that Episcopall Government that you plead for; that superiority of a Bishop above a Presbyter, in regard of order and jurisdiction, being a meer device of man, without and against Scripturall war∣rant,
as it was that, that was unknown to the primitive Church in the more ancient and purer times, and of which afterward. 2. But you further add and say, that except your rule for interpreting of Scripture, be admitted of, we shall seem to abound in our own sense, and to utter our own fancies or desires, to be believed on our bare word, and so to give way to private inter∣pretation; whereas we should deliver that sense, which hath been a∣foretime given by our forefathers and forerunners in the Christian faith: unto which we say, that whether it be the interpreta∣tion that we ourselves shall give of Scripture, or it be the in∣terpretation of others, however Fathers or Councils, and fore∣runners in the Christian faith; yet if it be an interpretation inferred, or brought to the Scripture, and not found in the Scripture; the uttering of that interpretation, is the uttering our own, or other mens fancies, and so is that private inter∣pretation of Scripture, which the Apostle Peter, 2d Epist. ch. 1. ver. 20. condemns, and to whose words there, you do here point; it being the Holy Ghost the author of Scripture, whose interpretation is that publike interpretation that the whole Church and every member thereof is to give heed to, and is that which is opposed to the private interpretation mentioned, as the Apostle shews, ver. 21. in the words following. But seeing you do here urge the very popish argument, and that text which they quote, touching the rule they make for inter∣pretation of Scripture, in direct opposition to our Protestant Divines; it is hence very clear, that your opinion, touching the rule of interpreting of the Scriptures and judg of controversies in matters of Religion (which you make to be the Churches exposition, and consent of Fathers and Councils) is the very same with theirs, and wherein, you approve not your selves to be either sound Protestants, or to own the Doctrine of the Church of England against the Papists in this particular. 3. Yet you go on, and urge another argument: for when there is a difference about interpretation of Scripture, not to admit for a rule, the exposition of the Church, consent of Fathers and Councils, you say that is dominari fidei, to Lord it over the faith of others: but we say, (as we have shewed before) that to impose a necessity of admitting the interpretation given by
the Church, Fathers, Councils; when it is not evident from the Text so expounded, either the words of it, scope or other cir∣cumstances of it, the things going before, or following after, or from some other Texts, with which it is compared; this is certainly dominari fidei, to Lord it over the faith of Gods peo∣ple: and which Paul, though so great an Apostle, and imme∣diately and infallibly inspired, would not presume to do, 2 Cor. 1. 4. The Church having onely a Ministery committed to her, which is onely to propound that sense of Scripture, which the Scripture it self gives, and no more. 4. But thus say you, the best and ablest defenders of our Protestant Religion defended it against the Papists, though out of the word of God too, giving the sense, which the Fathers unanimously in the Primitive Church and Councils gave. But this is not the question, whether our Di∣vines defended the Protestant Religion against the Papists, not onely out of the Word of God, but from the testimonie also of Fathers and Councils; but whether they did ever make the unanimous consent of the Fathers and Councils, the judg of controversies or rule for interpreting of Scripture? He that shall hold the affirmative here, doth plainly shew, he is a stran∣ger to the writings of the best and ablest defenders of the Pro∣testant Religion. We shall readily grant that our Divines do ex super abundanti defend the truth against the Papists, from the testimony of Fathers and Councils; but did never assert, that the defence of it from the Scriptures alone was not suf∣ficient, as they would never have quarrelled with the Papists, touching the judg of controversies, and the rule for interpreta∣tion of Scripture, if they would have been contented to have stood to its determination. Its true Mr. Philpot that glorious Martyr, might be willing to fight with the Papists, with those weapons they so oten call for, Antiquity, Ʋniversality, Ʋnity; but where did he ever refuse the Scriptures as the sole judge and determiner of controversies, and the onely rule for interpretation of the Scriptures, as you do? Besides it is to be observed, that it was matters of Doctrine that he and other Protestant writers did offer to defend against the Papists, from the testimony of Fathers and Councils, not matters touching Church Government and discipline, which began sooner to be
corrupted; the mystery of iniquity working even in the Apo∣stles dayes, and the godly Fathers in the Primitive times, sundry of them laying a foundation (though unwillingly) for Antichrists getting up into his seat, when the Doctrine was kept pure and inviolable: in respect whereof it is, that Calvin, whom you cite; when he acknowledgeth, that the first four generall Councils did contain nothing, but the pure and native interpretation of the Scriptures, doth expresly limit his words, and saith, quantum attinet ad fdei dogmata, so forre as concerns the doctrines of faith, and as we have noted before in our Answer to your second Paper: where also we have shew∣ed you, how those words of his are to be understood, when he saith, nullum esse nec melius nec certius remedium, quam si vero∣rum Episcoporum Synodus conveniat, ubi controversum dogma ex∣cutiatur: If there be a disputation or difference touching any Doctrine, there is no better nor more certain remed, then if a Synod of true Bishops do convene, where the controvetd Doriae may be discussed: but he concludes, hoc autem perpetuum esse nego, ut vera & certa sit Scripturae interpretatio, quae Concilii suffragiis fu∣erit recepta; i. e. but this I deny to be perpetuall, that that is a true and certain interpretation of Scripture, which hath been received by the suffrages or determination of a Council. And therefore you wrong Calvin and Mr. Philpot, and the best and ablest of our Protestant Divines, when you say, they willingly submit to a judge and rule, besides the Scriptures, however they refuse no, to try the Doctrines of the adversaries, by that which they themselves, sc. the Papists cannot except against; it being their own rule, they propound to be tried by, sc. the exposition of the Fathers and Councils, and whose interpretation is not by them acknowledged, to be that publike interpretation, in oppo∣sition to the private, wherein they professed to rest, any farther then it appeareth to be the true sense of the Scripture, or holy Ghost, the only publike interreter. But it is you, and not they, that are so willing to submit to a judge and rule, besides the Scrip∣tures, sc. the primitive Churches practice, and universall and una∣uimous consent of Fathers, and generall Councils, and to this rule you bring the Church Government, to be tried thereby; because your plea from Scripture, for that kind of Episcopacy, which
you so earnestly contend for, is but weak: and the most you have to say for it, is from Fathers and Councils, and practice of the Church, since the Canon of the Scripture hath been per∣fected: although we must tell you, that that Episcopacy, which the Fathers, you would be tried by, speak of, was no∣thing like that Episcopal Government of later times. Neither will upon this score (as you say) our Presbytery be quite out of doors, or be found to be wholly destitute of Examples and practice of the Church, and testimonies of the Fathers: neither can you prove, that therein the whole stream runs so for Episcopacy, that there is not the least rivulet for any others; and as you from the late King affirm, by which we are now brought unto what we put you upon in the first place to prove, sc. what that Church Government is, which is so consonant to the will God and universall practice of primitive Churches. 4. And therefore having fully discussed, whatever you have urged, against the Scriptures being the rule to judge by in this controversie; we shall now not refuse to try, what strength there is, in what you alleadge for to prove, what was the universal and constant practice of Primitive Churches in this matter. But 1. We must remove that aspersion, that you cast upon us, when you say, that we being sensible, that the whole streame of the examples and practice of the Church, and testimonies of the Fathers, runs for Episcopacy, have not way to evade this rule, but unâ liturâ, to blot out all records and monuments of Antiquity for the space of three hundred yeares after Christ as imperfct. But the words that we used in our answer to your first Paper will speak for us, which we shall here therefore recite, because you do not. Having put you to prove, what that Church Government is, which is so con∣sonant to the will of God, and universal practice of Primitive Churches, we thus declared our selves. For our parts, we said, we think it will be very hard for you, or any others, to demon∣strate out of any records of antiquity, what was the universal pract∣ice of Primitive Churches, for the whole space of the first three hun∣dred yeares after Christ, or the greatest part thereof, (excepting so much as is left upon record, in the Scriptures of the new Testament) the monuments of Antiquity that concerne these times, (for the great∣est
part of them) being both imperfect, and far from shewing us what was the universal practice of the Church then, (though the practices of some Churches may be mentioned) and likewise very questionable. At least it will not be easie to assure us, that some of those that go under the names of the most approved Authors of those times, are nei∣ther spurious nor corrupted. From the words of our answer thus recited, it is manifest, we did not unâ liturâ, blot out all records and monuments of Antiquity, for the space of three hundred yeares after Christ: we only said, they were imper∣fect; and said it would be hard for you, or any others, to de∣monstrate out of any records of Antiquity, what was the u∣niversal practice of Primitive Churches, for the whole space of the first three hundred yeares after Christ, or the greatest part thereof. And is not this manifest to him that is conver∣sant in Ecclesiastical story? Doth not Baronius himself despair of making up any perfect story of a good part of this time next unto the Apostles dayes? And if it had been easie for you to have demonstrated, what was the universal practice of the Church for the whole or greatest part of this time, why did you not begin your demonstration hereof sooner, then from the Council of Nice? Again we said, that it would not be easie for to assure us, that some of the works, that go under the names of the most approved Authors of those times, are neither spurious nor corrupted; but we did not, as you charge u, brand the most approved Authors of those times, as spurious and corrupted. The workes that may be attributed to some approved Authors, may be spurious or corrupted, when yet the Authors them∣selves are not branded. And therefore this is but another of your wonted slanders, and which through out your Paper are but too common with you. But as to the thing it self, who knowes not, but in the Primitive times there were many spu∣rious works put forth, under the names even of the Apostles, (as appears from 2 Thes. 2. 2.) and blessed Martyrs, that yet are generally rejected, as none of theirs, and of which sort were those many false Gospels, that we read of, as of Thomas, Andrew, Nicodemus, and St Peter, and St Markes Mass: of this sort also are, the Apostles constitutions, held for Apocry∣phal
(as Mr. Perkins shewes) in the Decretals, and were con∣demned by the sixth Council of Constantinople. The works al∣so of Dionysius Areopagita, are by many learned men absolute∣ly denyed to be the works of that Dionysius, mentioned, Act. 17. for which they do in their Comments upon that Chapter and elsewhere, give many reasons. We might instance in many others, as we shall come anon to speak, touching the Epistles that go under the name of Ignatius, and unto which we had special reference in the passages we used, that you here except against, but yet without the least reflection upon so glorious a Confessor of the faith of Christ, as he was. And such as are equal judges, and who know, what were the practices of Impostors in the Primitive times, in putting out their own corrupt writings, under the names of the Apostles and blessed Martyrs of those times, that thereby they might gain belief to their errors, will be farre from censuring us, to be void of all modesty, and shewing thereby no great store either of judgement or honesty, as you here do, because we said some of the workes, that go under the names of the most approved Authors of those times, were spurious or corrupted, considering what Rivet, Cocus in his censur a patrum, and Perkins in his preparatives to the demonstration of the probleme, and other learned men do say touching this matter: and we may here well say to you, that you had shewed more judgement and honesty your selves, if you had not censured us, as persons destitute of both, and also all modesty, for that, which all those, that read the Fathers with any measure of judgement, will readily ac∣knowledge. 2. Having vindicated our selves from what you aspersed us with, we now come to examine, what you cite for the antiquity of Episcopacy, which is the Government you plead for. And here we observe you take a very high jumpe (to use your own expression) over all that is to be found in the wri∣tings of the Fathers, who lived in the three first Centuries of the Church; and only pitch upon the Council of Nice, that which you find there, making (as you apprehend) most for your purpose, and (as you say) shewing the practice of the Church in its forme of Church Government, by Patriarch, Metropolitan,
Archbishop, Bishop, &c. Although you having a little before insisted upon the exposition and practice of the Church, and the unanimous consent of Fathers, as well as general Councils, as the rule, to which you would bring Church Governement to be tried; and in your first Paper and this also, telling of the universal and constant practice of the Church, should not so quickly have forgot your own rule, and mentioned nothing at all before the Council of Nice, out of the writings of the Fathers, to evidence what was the universal and constant practice of the Church, for the whole space of the first three hundred yeares after Christ, or the greatest part thereof, touching Church Government; especially considering that this was that, which in our answer to your first Paper, we had put you to prove But you think (may be) this you do sufficiently by citing the Council of Nice, generall Councils shewing us (as you say) what the Churches practice was, considering also that this Coun∣cil did ratifie and confirme, what had been anciently practi∣sed by the Church before, the sixth Canon mentioning an an∣cient custome, which by it is established. Unto this and what further you do here urge, for the proving from this Council, that which you cite it for, we have severall things to say. 1. And first, though we do most readily yeild, all due re∣verence and esteem unto this Council, that was and will be famous for the condemning of Arrius, together with his dam∣nable heresie, yet we shall mind you, of what Augustine (quoted by Calvin and alleadged in our answer to your second Paper) saith touching insisting on the testimony of this Coun∣cil. He in his Book against Maximinius, when he would silence that Heretick, contending with him touching the de∣crees of Synods, saith; that neither he would object to him the Synod of Nice, nor he ought to object to him the Synod of Ariminum, but would have them both to contend, not by the authority of either of these Synods, but by the authority of Scriptures. It is also clear from Ecclesiastical story, that Constantine did admonish this Council after they were assembled, that in the determining and judging of heavenly Doctrine (seeing they had in readiness the Evan∣gelical, Apostolical, and Prophetical Bookes) they should fetch from
thence their formes of censure, and so determine controversies of Religion from the Scriptures; and according unto which religious and worthy counsel they proceeded, disputing with Arrius from the Scriptures, and by the testimonies thereof condemning his heresie. 2. Seeing you will have it, that the forme of Church Go∣vernement by Patriarch, Metropolitan, Archbishop, Bishop, &c. was established by this Council, and that this Council esta∣blished nothing herein, but what had been defined and asserted (as you say afterward) by the ancient Canons, yea the most ancient, even immemorial Apostolical tradition, and custome, and that the customes which this Council speakes of, were deduced down to those times from St Mark the Evangelist; We do here enquire of you, whether the Church Governement that you would prove from this Council, be jure divino, or by divine right? If it be (as we suppose, you will and must say it is, for which purpose you say it is defined and asserted by immemorial A∣postolical tradition, and deduced from Mark the Evange∣list) we do then again enquire of you, whether the Governe∣ment of the Church by Patriarch, Metropolitan, Archbishop, &c. be to be found in Scripture? If you say it be, we desire you to prove it, and make it to appear, that it is there found. If you say, it is not to be found in Scripture, it is in vain to urge the authority of the Council of Nice, or any other Coun∣cils, for to prove the divine right of that, which is not to be found in Scripture. Further you should consider, that you alleadging for it immemorial Apostolical traditions and customes, (of which the Scripture is silent) do again joyn hands with the Papists, pleading for the authority of unwritten traditions, and customes not to be found mentioned or awarranted by the Scriptures, making with them the Scriptures imperfect, and that their imperfection must be supplyed by these unwrit∣ten traditions; but wherein they are opposed by our Protest∣ant Divines, to whom we send you, touching this mat∣ter. 3. But that we may come to speak to the Canons them∣selves, that you cite out of this Council particularly. 1. First, We do not find in that sixth Canon, that you do
chiefly insist on any of the words, Patriarch, Primate, or Archbishop, at all there used; only it is decreed, that the Bi∣shop of Alexandria (he is not called the Patriarch, as you call him) have power over Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis. We con∣fess the word (Metropolitane) is used in this Canon, but not any of the other above-mentioned; the like whereunto is to be observed, touching the seventh Canon by you cited. And yet we lay no great stress on this, that these words are not there found, but hint only thus much to you by the way, who take advantage at us in regard of words, though with∣out reason; but shall grant unto you, that the things under∣stood by those words, may be there found. As touching the thirteenth, which you here quote, that speakes nothing at all touching the business, but wholly concernes the lapsed Ca∣techumeni. And whereas you cite the twenty fifth, twenty sixth, and twenty seventh Canons of this Council, you do therein both wrong this Council, and your selves, in father∣ing upon them supposititious Canons, there being not above twenty Canons that are genuine. Indeed it is well observed by Lucas Osiander (after he had recited in his Epitome of Ec∣clesiastical History, Centur. 4. lib. 2. Chap. 10. the twenty Ca∣nons of this Council, and which only he judged to be genuine) that there are other besides these, that are read in some sup∣posititious writings of the Fathers, (under the names of Athana∣sius and Ambrose) but he judges them, and that rightly, to be falsly ascribed to the Synod of Nice. Perhaps you judged us to be so little conversant in the Fathers and Councils, as that we should have let all these things pass for currant; if other∣wise, we see you are so addicted to the Episcopall cause, that you matter not, so you can make it out, though it be out of supposititious writings. 2. As to the main thing you cite this Council for, and that which indeed is chiefly to be here insisted on, sc. the ancient custome that the sixth Canon speakes of, touching the power and dignity of the Metropoli∣tanes, (which yet was not such as you imagine, at the first ap∣pointing them, and of which more anon.) Let it be granted, as you would have it, that this Council did not constitute and create those Metropolitans, but confirme them, and what
power and dignity they had before, according to an ancient custome, yet we say, that ancient custome is to be limited in in regard of its Antiquity. And 1. It cannot referre so high as to the times of the Apostles, there being then no Me∣tropolitan Bishops, they being never at all mentioned in the New Testament, either by that name, or the thing thereby signified. 2. Neither can it referre to the age next unto the Apostles, because in that age, and a good while after, a Bi∣shop and Presbyter were all one. We shall for the proof of this, first mention a very observable passage in a Letter, writ∣ten by the Lord Digby unto Sir Kenelmne Digby, and which, for the observableness of it is cited by others See the Pro∣vincial Assem∣bly of London in their Jus di∣vinum Ministe∣rij Evangelici, part 2. pag. 107. See also Mr. Baxter in his desence of the Worcesteshire a∣greement, pag. 61, 62., and with good reason, considering how much he was for that kind of Epis∣copacy that you contend for. His words are these; He that will reduce the Church now, to the forme of Govern∣ment in the most Primitive times, should not take in my opinion the best nor wisest course; I am sure not the safest: for he would be found pecking toward the Presbytery of Scotland, which for my part I believe, in point of Govern∣ment, hath a greater resemblance, then either yours or ours, to the first age of Christs Church; and yet it is never a whit the better for it, since it was a forme not chosen for the best, but imposed by adversity under oppression, which in the beginning forced the Church from what it wisht, to what it might; not suffering the dignity and State Eccle∣siastical, which rightly belonged unto it, and which soon afterward, upon the least lucida intervâlla, shone forth so gloriously in the happier, as well as more Monarchical condition of Episcopacy, &c. You see this Gentleman, who was firme for Monarchical Episcopacy, doth yet ac∣knowledge, that in the most Primitive times, and first age of the Church, that kind of Episcopacy had no footing; and that the Presbyterian Government, as it is in Scotland, and so consequently as it is in other reformed Churches, and with us, is nearer to the Primitive patterne of the Church, then that Episcopal Governement, which you would prove from the Council of Nice. And therefore in those times there was no such superiority of a Bishop over a Presbyter, no Arch∣bishops
and Metropolitans, or Primates and Patriarehs, as you speak of, and for which you quote this sixth Canon of the Council of Nice. But if you would peruse Blondellus his A∣pologia pro sententiâ Hieronymi de Episcopis & Presbyteris, he would give you a particular and large account, touching this matter; he undertaking to prove (as he is a man of vast reading) that untill the year 140. or thereabout, there was not any Bishop over Presbyters. And in the dayes of Poly∣carpe, we find in his Epistle to the Philippians, but two orders of Ministery mentioned, sc. Bishops and Deacons, according to what Paul in his Epistle to the Church had signified more anciently. Hear his own words, , i. e. therefore you ought to abstain from all these things, being subject to the Presbyters and Deacons, as unto God and Christ. And there∣fore this ancient custome, mentioned in this sixth Canon of the Council of Nice, which you quote, must hereupon be li∣mited and restrained, in regard of ancientness, and is not to be understood, so as to referre to the whole space of 327. years after Christ, or thereabout, before its assembling; although the custome of appointing Metropolitans before, might be cal∣led ancient comparatively with those customes, which were but sprung up more lately, or were very new. And though we shall not undertake to shew, what was the univer∣sal and constant practice of the Church, for either the whole space of the first three hundred yeares after Christ, or the greatest part thereof, (though it concerned you, who are so confident, that the whole stream of testimonies to be produced, shewing the unanimous consent of Fathers, and the univer∣sal and constant practice of the Church, even up to the A∣postles dayes, runs so for Episcopacy, that there is not the least rivulet for any others, to have made this out) yet this we may say, that Episcopacy did not grow up to that height, that it was in, at that time when the Council of Nice assembled, all at once, but by steps and degrees; and that it was then no∣thing like to what it grew up to afterward; and further, that however those godly Fathers, that did first set it up, and af∣terwards upheld it, did so out of a good intention; yet that
therein they were but subservient, to what afterward, was effected in the Bishop of Rome, to lift up Antichrist into his seat; and which is not much to be wondred at, whenas the Apostle tells us, that in his dayes the mystery of iniquity did then already work; and that good men may be instrumental, though unwittingly, to promote and advance a very ill and bad designe; God therein leaving them to themselves, and he thereby in his secret and unsearchable providence, though just, holy, and wise, bringing that about, which he had before appointed in his eternal counsel. And yet for all this, we do averre, that however, as Hierome See his Com∣mentary upon the Epistle to Titus. doth well observe, at the first, a Bishop and a Presbyter were the same, and that be∣fore by the instinct of the Devil, there were contentions in Religion, and it was said amongst the people, I am of Paul, I of Apollo, I of Cephas, the Churches were governed by the common counsell of the Presbyters; but that after every one thought, that those were his, which he did baptize, not Christs; it was decreed throughout the whole world, that one of the Presbyters should be chosen, and set over the rest, unto whom all the care of the Church should belong, and the seeds of schismes taken away. Yet not only in that age, but long afterward, as also long before the assembling of the Council of Nice, (that speakes of Metropolitans, and confirming their power) a Bishop and Presbyter were acknowledged to be one order of Ministery; as they did also joyn with the Bi∣shops, after their setting up in the Governement of the Church, as is acknowledged and proved by Dr. Usher, in his reduction of Episcopacy to the forme of Synodical Governement in the ancient Church; and which indeed, is that, which is ac∣knowledged by your selves. For you confessed before, that Ignatius, Chrysostome, Theodoret, Theophilact, Oecumenius, and o∣thers of the Greek Fathers, with some of the Latines also, did take the word (Presbytery) 1 Tim. 4. for the company of Presbyters, i. e. Bishops who lay hands on the new made Bishops or Priests, (as you express it) making Bishops and Presbyters mutually to expound each other, as hath been already observed. And herein you are not alone, as hath been partly shewed before, and is abundantly shewed by others, and particularly by our reverend Brethren of the Province of London, who in their part. 2. cap 4. Jus
divinum Ministerij Evangelici, prove not only from the Scriptures, that a Bishop and Presbyter are all one, but do urge also sundry other testimonies for the proof thereof; not only out of Hierome and Augustine, but likewise do alleadg Dr. Reynolds in his Epistle to Sir Francis Knowles, shewing the same thing out of Chrysostome, Hierome, Ambrose, Augustine, Theodoret, Primasius, Sedulius, Theophilact; and do further urge, that Michael Medina affirmes lib. 1. de Sacris originibus, that not only Hierome, but also that Ambrose, Augustine, Se∣dulius, Primasius, Chrysostome, Theodoret, Oecumenius, Theophi∣lact, were of the same judgement with Ae▪rius, and held that there was no difference between a Bishop and a Presbyter by Scripture, besides other testimonies, which they do there urge. But David Blondellus, in his Apologia pro sententiâ Hiero∣nymi, doth clear this up so fully, in that his large Treatise, penned on purpose, to shew what concurrence of Antiquity there is for this opinion of Hierome; that we believe those that are unprejudiced, that will but take the paines to read and weigh what he there presents, will readily grant, that long before the Council of Nice, and long after, it was ac∣knowledged, that a Bishop and Presbyter are one order of Ministery. We have thus said, that which we judge suffi∣cient unto the Canons themselves, that you cite out of the Council of Nice, and particularly to the sixth Canon of that Council, on which you lay the greatest weight, and shall now proceed to examine what follows 4. For you will have the words , that we used in the 6th Canon of the Council of Nice, to be the very words, which Ignatius useth, to express the Apostolicall tra∣ditions, Antiqui mores obtineant in Egypto, Lybia, Pentapoli, &c. i. e. Let the ancient customes of Egypt, Lybia and Pentapoli con∣tinue, that the Patriarch of Alexandria should have power over all these. But concerning the Epistles, that go under the name of Ignatius, you might know, there are different opinions of the Learned about them. Salmasius conceives they were writ∣ten by a pseudo-Ignatius, to bring into credit that Episcopall Government, that deviated from the primitive institution; and that they were written, at that very time, when that was
set up. Others that conceive any of them to be genuine, yet do not receive them all. Mr. Perkins in his Preparatives to the demonstration of the Probleme, observes that seaven Epistles of his, Hierome and Eusebius, lib. 3. cap. 35, & 36. rec∣kon for true; but now they are increased unto twelve; five whereof he judges to be counterfeit, and these to be, 1. ad Ma∣riam; 2. ad Tarsenses; 3. ad Hieron; 4. ad Antiochenos; 5. ad Philippenses. Dr. Usher, that Reverend and Learned Antiqua∣ry, acknowledgeth onely six of these Epistles to be genuine, and saith, the other six are spurious; and of those six that he acknowledgeth, he saith, they are depraved and corrupted. Nay Mr. Perkins observes, that Bellarmine himself confesseth of these Epistles, that the Greek copies are corrupted. And to evidence this, we wish you to consider two passages onely, that we shall instance in. In his Epistle to the Trallians, he boasteth of his knowledg; for he saith,  &c. I am able to understand heavenly things, the orders of Angels, the differences of Archangels, and of the hea∣venly Hoast: the differences between powers and dominations: the distances of thrones and powers:—yea as followes a little after, the Kingdom of the Lord, and the incomparable Divinity of the Lord God Almighty. These expressions savour not of that humility that was in that faithfull servant of Christ, the true Ignatius. And in his Epistle ad Smyrnenses, he takes upon him to correct, if not to contradict Solomon: , &c. He saith, my son honour God and the King, but I say, honour God as the Author and Lord of all things, and the Bishop as the Prince of Priests, &c. and after him it behoveth you to honour the King. More here might be urged: but these and other passages, that might be instanced in, do shew plainly, that these Epistles are either counterfeit, or corrupted. And this was the reason of those expressions, we used in our Answer, when we said, it would not be easie to assure us, that some Works, that go under the Names of the most approved Authors of the Primitive times (referring there∣in after a more especiall manner to the Epistles of Ignatius) are neither spurious nor corrupted. But hence it will follow, that what is alleadged by you out of Ignatius, for the support of the Episcopall cause, is not of that waight, as to prove, what
was the practice of the Church in the time of the true Igna∣tius; much less to prove, what was the universall practice of the Primitive Church, long before the assembling of the Council of Nice, or to evidence that that Council in the 6th Canon, had any reference to the words of Ignatius, which you cite, and which might as well be foysted into his works afterwards, as other things; and so nothing thence to be con∣cluded, either with the shew of any certainty, or of any good measure of probability. 5. Now whereas you will have these ancient customes touching the power and priviledges of the Metrapolitans, and Patriarchs, to be deduced from St. Marke the Evangelist, who, you say, was not onely Bishop of Alexandria, but of the Churches of Egipt, Lybia and Pentapolis, and will have the subordination of all inferiour Officers in the Church to the Bishop in every Diocess, of the Bishop in every Province to the Metropolitan, of the Me∣tropolitan in every region to the Patriarch or Primate; these stand∣ing Powers (as you call them) and subjection, to be defined and asserted by the ancient Canons, yea the most ancient, even immemo∣riall Apostolicall tradition and custome: you must either prove that the customes, standing Powers, and subjection, that you speak of, are warranted, defined, and asserted by the Canon of Scripture, which you will never be able to do: or else you do hereby intimate, that you would have it to be believed, that there are some customes and traditions, that are Apostolicall, and to be received as such, that are not found written in the Canon of the Scripture. But by this assertion you gratifie the Papists,, and open a door to let into the Church, the ma∣ny unwritten traditions, they would obtrude upon it, under the specious name and title of Apostolicall traditions: though you might have known, they are abundantly therein con∣suted by our Divines, that yet were never answered by them, or any other patrons of unwritten traditions. And up∣on this account we hope we shall be sufficiently excused, though we forbear to either examin, or say any thing parti∣cularly to the Councils, and Dr. Hammond, that you cite for this purpose. But as touching Marke the Evangelist, whom you will have to be, not onely Bishop of Alexandria, but also of
Egypt, Lybia and Pent apolis also; you do herein assert things inconsistent, sc. that he was an Evangelist, and yet an ordinary Bishop. For Evangelists properly were extraordinary Of∣ficers, extraordinarily employd in Preaching of the Gospel, without any setled residence upon any one charge; were com∣panions of the Apostles, and under the Apostles had the care of all Churches, and in which sense Mark was an Evangelist, as well as in regard of the Gospel which he wrote. But Bi∣shops were Officers that were ordinary, and fixed to one par∣ticular charge, neither did they ordinarily travell with the Apostles from place to place, as the Evangelists did: Neither could Evangelists be any more called Bishops properly, then the Apostles could be so called; who were not such formally, but onely eminently and virtually. But as touching Eusebius, whom you cite, Scaliger saith concerning him, that he read ancient Histories parum attentè. But further you are to con∣sider, that the Apostles themselves were called Bishops in those times: and yet they could not be so called properly, as is proved by Mr. Banes in his Diocesan Triall See quest. 2. p. 29., who there gives reasons, why Apostles neither were, nor might be both Apo∣stles and Bishops properly. We shall onely urge one of the reasons there mentioned, which also doth strongly prove, that Mark the Evangelist, neither was, nor could be an ordi∣nary Bishop; for then he is made liable to errour, as all ordi∣nary Bishops were, and are; and then in writing of his Gos∣pel, as well as in his teaching he might erre: and hereupon, occasion is given, to call that part of Canonical Scripture in question; as the asserting the Apostles to be Bishops proper∣ly, gives the like occasion to call all their writings in question, which is dangerous, and no wayes to be admitted of. And hence it will follow, in what sense soever you call Mark an Evangelist, yet he could not be a Bishop properly, although it should be granted, he had an inspection under the Apostles, of all those parts you mention. 6. But thus farre, we hope it is manifest unto the Reader, that as yet you are to shew, what the practice of the Church was in point of Church-Government, for the space of the first three hundred years after Christ, that which you have alleadg∣ed
out of the Council of Nice, not manifesting it, either for the whole space or the greatest part thereof; as appears by what we have said touching this matter. Neither must we allow, what again you here further assert, sc. that General Councils are the best enterpreters of the mind and wil of God in Scripture, touch∣ing Church Government, the Scripture it self being a farre more sure and safe interpreter of Gods will and minde therein re∣vealed, in the plain places thereof, when there is a doubt and difficulty, arising from the darkness of some other places, and as hath been fully shewed; as also considering, that there was some swerving in point of Church Government from Scripture rule, before the first general Council met or assem∣bled, when yet there was more purity, as to that matter, then there was afterward. 7. Neither must we suffer that to pass for currant, which you here say of Calvin, sc. that though he disliked the name Hie∣rarchy, yet he allowed the thing. The place you here chiefly referre to is, as we judge, that place in his Institutions, lib. 4. cap. 4. Sect. 1, 2, 3. but especially what we find, Sect. 4. where we grant, having mentioned Bishops, Archbishops, and Patri∣archs, and having given the reason of the first institution of them, in that fourth Section, he hath these words, Guber∣nationem sic constitutam, nonnulli Hierarchiam vocarunt, nomine (ut mihi videtur) improprie; certè Scripturis inusitato, &c. Verum si rem omisso vocabulo intuemur, reperiemus veteres Episcopos, non aliam regendae Ecclesiae formam voluisse fingere, ab ea quam Deus verbo suo praescripsit: i. e. the Governement of the Church so consti∣tuted, some called the Hierarchie, by an improper name (as it seems unto me) certainly by a name not used in the Scriptures, &c. But if omitting the Word, we look upon the thing, we shall find, that the ancient Bishops would not frame another forme of governing the Church, from that which God hath prescribed in his Word. He speaks then here, of what was in their intention, not as ap∣proving every thing they did. He saith, they would not, they had not any such a will, purpose or intention; he doth not say, as you say, that they did not frame a forme of Church Go∣vernment, differing from that which Christ hath prescribed in his Word. He had intimated in the first Section, that many of
the Canons that were made in those times, sc. of the ancient Church, did seem to express more, then was to be found in sacred Scripture; and though in regard of that good measure of purity of Governement and Discipline, that did remain in those times, he doth seem to extenuate, what deviation there was from the word of God; yet he doth not allow of every thing, that was then appointed. In the second Secti∣on he comes to shew, how Bishop came up at the first, sc. that for the prevention of Schisme, the Presbyters chose out of their number, in every City one, to whom they gave the title of Bishop, and that upon this reason, lest dissentions should arise from equality. But withall, there shewes, that the Bishop, thus superiour to the rest of the Presbyters in ho∣nour and dignity, had not any dominion over the Presby∣ters, whom he calls his Colleagues; but only had that office, as the Consul in the Senate, and as indeed the Moderatour hath in our Assemblies, as from that which he there instan∣eeth in, that did at the first belong to him, is clear and ma∣nifest. And then he addes, and saith, even this it self, the Ancients themselves confess, was at the first brought in, Pro temporum necessitate, in regard of the necessity of the times, and humano consensu, by the consent and agreement of men; as he proves out of Hierome. And in the fourth Section (which you chiefly here referre to) he saith, whereas every Province had amongst the Bishops one Archbishop, and whereas also, in the Synod of Nice, there were constituted Patriarchs, who were above the Archbishops in regard of dignity that did belong (as he there saith) to the conservation of the discipline But yet addes, Quanquam in hâe disputatione praeteriri non potest, quod arissimi rat usus, i e. although in this disputation it may not be omitted, that it was of most seldome or rare use. And then he shews, that the use of the Archbishop was, for the cal∣ling a Provincial Synod, as there might be occasion, when the matter requiring it, could not be determined by fewer, and so by a lesser Assembly; and in case the cause was more weighty or difficult, that then the Patriarch was to call a more general Synod, from which there was to be no appeal, but to a general Council. And thus Calvin shewes, what
was the reason of the first institution of Bishops, Archbishops, and Patriarchs; but from that account given by him of this their first appointment, it is manifest, that their superiority above their fellow Brethren, was not from the beginning, it being but an humane constitution only; and that at the first, yea even in the time of the Nicene Council, it was nothing like to what it grew to be afterward; And that that power, even of the Patriarchs, and Metropolitans, that was appointed or con∣firmed by the Nicene Council, was nothing like unto that power, that was exercised by the Bishops and Archbishops in this Land, whilest Episcopacy stood; their power at that time being chiefly, if not only, for the calling of Synods, sc. Pro∣vinciall, or of a larger circuit, as there might be need; and they having therein only a presidency, or moderatorship, and not exercising any dominion over their Colleagues, accor∣ding to that representation of the matter of fact, that Calvin truely makes. And because the appointment of them was done out of a good intent, without any will or purpose, to appoint any forme of Government in the Church, differing, from that, which God had appointed in his word; and as an Ecclesiastical constitution only, which the godly Fathers in those times thought might be of use, (though afterward, as we have before shewed, it proved otherwise) and conside∣ring what a good measure of the ancient discipline, remain∣ed entire in those times, Calvin did therefore speak moderate∣ly of what they did, though he did not (as is manifest) ap∣prove of all they did. But thus the Reader may discerne, that you have not dealt any more fairly with Calvin here, (whom in this place you would make to be a justifier and pa∣tron of Prelacy) then you have dealt with him elsewhere; though by what we have said, we hope he is sufficiently vindicated, and the contrary, to what you alleadge him for, fully evidenced. And this that hath been said concerning Calvin, will likewise shew, how Beza is to be understood, if he any where say, what the ancient Fathers appointed touching the Hierarchy, was done optimo zel, out of a very good zeal. For by that expression he only approves of their pious and good intent in what they did, but not of all that was done; and
when you call him that earnest patron of Presbyterian discipline, you should not, by stretching his words beyond their scope, have represented him, to have approved of that, which the Presbyterian discipline doth not own. 8. And thus having answered fully to what you have said, for that Government which you are for, and pray might be esta∣blished in this Nation; we must still mind you, that, what∣ever you here again say to the contrary, as yet you have not proved this Church Government to be agreeable, either to the will of God (which was not as yet attempted to be made out by you) or to the universal practice of Primitive Churches, your proof for this falling far short; and that however now you would mince the matter (speaking of the rule, whereby we are to judge, touching Church Government, or other mat∣ters of Religion) in saying, you put both together, not the word of God alone, nor the Churches practice alone, but both together, (and which is not to be disallowed of, when it is clear, that the Churches practice is agreeable to the word of God) yet by what you have discovered to be your opinion in this Section (and of which we have fully spoken) it is manifest, you have given that to the Church, Councils and Fathers, and their exposition, which is proper to the Scripture, sc. to be the only sure interpreter of it self, and judge in all contro∣versies of Religion; and which is that, which we have assert∣ed and defended against you in this answer, and by giving of which unto the Scripture, we have detracted nothing from the credit, that is due unto the Church, or her lawfull and lauda∣ble customes; which we are so farre from any wayes invalida∣ting, that we do assert and defend the same, as also her au∣thority against all heretical and schismatical persons, that seek her overthrow; although we see no reason to count those he∣retical and schismatical persons, that seek to overthrow the Church, that cannot either believe, that the Church is the only iudge of coutroversies in matters of Religion, or her ex∣position the best and surest rule for interpreting of Scripture, or that judging the Government of the Church by Patriarchs, Metropolitans, Archbishops, Bishops, then Chancellours, and Commissaries, Deanes, Deanes and Chapters, Arcadeacns, and
other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that Hierarchie, not to be a Government agreeable o the will of God, and uni∣versall practice of Primitive Churches, do therefore cast it off, which yet w fear are Articles in fome mens Creeds. 5. But having spoken, what we judge sufficient, unto what you have alleadged out of the Council of Nice, and to what you further have urged, for the proving of that, which you do here cite it for; we shall now proceed, to consider what you have to say against our Government, as not being that, which is most consonant to the will of God revealed in Scripture; and to prove, that the ruling Elders are not jure divino, nor any such Officers appointed by Christ in his word, but that they may be parted with, without any danger of betraying the truth of Christ, Rom. 12. 1 Cor. 12. 1 Tim. 5. Now here we might have reasonably expected, that you should have urged some arguments, to have proved, that ruling Elders are not meant in these Texts, considering what more large satisfaction you promised in your second Paper afterward, if what was comprehended therein was not judg∣ed satisfactory. But we find that (notwistanding your large promises and confident and high undertakings) you discover barrenness in arguing, though what is wanting in reasons, you make out in foul language; yet we shall consider the ut∣most that you say. First in answer to these Texts you say, they are too generall to prove a ruling Presbytery out of; But this you should have made good, and not magisterially have asserted it, as you do, without all proof. But you think it is enough that we have been often told so, by many more learned Doctors of our Church. And we must tell you (who it seems reckon your selves in the number of these learned Doctors) that it is a greater part of learning, to prove these Texts to be too general to prove a ruling Presbytery out of, then only to say so much; as by that account which we have given you, in our second Paper, we have there shewed, that both the Provincial Assembly of London, in their vindication of the Presby∣terian Government, and the London Ministers, in their Jus divi∣num regiminis Ecclesiastici, do more then say, that these Texts do hold forth such an Officer in the Church, as the ru∣ling
Elder; for they do also prove it, yea and that he is there particularly mentioned, and distinguished from all other Officers of the Church; they also, together with the Asser∣tors of the Government of the Church of Scotland (to whom with other reverend and learned men of our own and other re∣formed Churches, we have referred you) do answer what∣ever we have heard alleadged by those many more learned Doctors of our English Church, that you here speak of, to prove these Texts to be too generall, to prove a ruling Pres∣bytery out of. And therefore it is not according to our will, or what we are resolved on, that the ruling Elders are found there, but according to the clear evidence of strong and good reason, shewing (notwithstanding your scoff) that the sense we have given of these Texts, is the true sense and meaning of them. But though you urge no argument to convince us of so great a fault, yet you can readily enough accuse us of wresting the Scriptures with expositions and glosses, to make them speak what they never meant; and which you think is sufficient∣ly made forth by telling us, that we put such strange senses to places of Scripture, as the Church of Christ never heard of till of late yeares; as if nothing were to be received, that is contain∣ed in Scripture, as the true sense and meaning thereof, but what can be confirmed to be so, by the testimony of Fathers and Councils; or as if all the expositions that had been given of these and other Texts of Scripture, by the Church of Christ till of late yeares, were now to be made evident from the writings of the Fathers, that are extant, shewing what the expositions given by the Church were; or as if the expositi∣ons of reverend and learned Synods and Assemblies of Di∣vines, of our own or other reformed Churches (having had the help of all the labours of those, that had been in the Church of Christ before them) backed with the evidence of Scripture reason, and the circumstances of the Texts, were all to be sleighted, and to be had in no account, both by us and you, who yet profess (though in your practice you shew but little of it) to reverence Synods, and to be ready to sub∣mit to their determination, although we have also told you in our answer to your second Paper, that (however it being
no controversie in the purest Primitive times of the Church, whether ruling Elders were understood in those Texts, nor this case brought before the Synods of those times, that ever we have read of; and so not that occasion given to the Fa∣thers, to discuss this matter upon their expositions of those Texts) we are not wholly destitute of the testimony of the Fathers, for the being of such an Officer, as the ruling Elder in the Church; and do herein referre you and the Reader, to what we have said to this purpose, in our answer to your se∣cond Paper. But yet for all this, we must with you be esteemed wresters of the Scriptures; and to brand us the more, you apply unto us (yea to all Presbyters) what Dr. Andrews taxed the Papists withall, whereby you shew the esteem we are in with you, in that you herein parallel us with the Po∣pish Cardinals; which is also the charity you have towards us, who in your second Paper, whilest you had hopes by courting us, to have brought us on to a compliance with you, were your dear friends (nay more) brethren, dearly beloved to you in the Lord; and this also is that more large satisfaction that you now give us, in performance of your promise there made, if what was comprehended in that Paper, was not sufficient. But having here said nothing, that can have any shew of this promised satisfaction; you do well to referre us, to what in your second Paper, you say, you had further spoken of it; for the Reader hence may be ready to think, though he find here little but flouts and uncharitable censures; yet there you had said something to the purpose, which yet when it is summed up, will be found to be only this, sc. your sending us to the Fa∣thers, to consult what interpretation they gave, and telling us none of them expound these Texts as we do; which yet is that you say over again here, and to which there is no need to return any further answer, then what hath been already made: only we cannot but take notice, that your way of gi∣ving satisfaction is very easie, sc. by ridding your hands quickly of the work, and it is only in one way, which is briefly this, sc. what exposition the Fathers unanimously give of any Text of Scripture, that must be received; and what exposiition cannot be backed with their concurrent testi∣mony,
that is to be rejected, and this ought to satisfie. But unto this, one answer doth serve the turn, sc. that your prin∣ciple is unsound and very corrupt; and which hath been al∣ready in our answer to this Section so fully evidenced, that it is needless here to add any more. And this for answer to what you present in this Section, may be sufficient. The Gentlemens Paper. Sect. VII. But now as to you, and what followes, say you, and so go on min∣taining your power of excommunication, and the extent of it, being as you pretend, backt by the Authoritie of the civil Magistrate, which Authoritie is taken off by severall subsequent Acts of Parliament, and so your Church-Go∣vernment, and Church-censures are of no force upon any, but such as are willingly (and no longer then they are willingly) subject thereto, as we have shewed before. The Civil Sword doth and can reach others, your Ecclesiastical cannot: The Act inflicts a civill punishment, whether corporall or pecuniarie, upon all lawless persons, whether such as contemn Gods Laws or Mans, and not a spirituall, and therefore not censurable by you. And this is a mistake of yours to think, that notwithstanding the punishment inflicted upon the offen∣der by the civill Magistrate, you may for the same offence proceed to exe∣cute Church-censures also; so a man may come to be punished twice for one offence, which is against the Law; and therefore in such Statutes (as in Cl. cop. cap: 2. 1 Mar. cap. 3. and 1 Eliz. cap. 12.) where there is a punishment prescribed to be inflicted by the Civill Magistrate upon the transgressors of that Act, and also another to be inflicted by the Church; yet there is a speciall Proviso immediately follows, That whatsoever person offending the premises, shall for any the offences afore-recited, receive punishment of the Ordinarie, ha∣ving testimoniall thereof under the said Ordinaries Seal, shall not for the same offence eftsoon be convicted before the Justice, nor in likewise receiving for the said offence, punishment by the Justice he shall not receive for the said offence punishment of the Ordinary. Now these latter Acts and Ordinances, against drunkennesse, swearing, prophanation of the Sabbath, &c. enjoyning punishment by the Civill Ma∣gistrate only, hath utterly taken off all power of excommunication: And therefore our advice to you, to complain to the Civill Magistrate of such law∣lesse persons was not amiss, because that Sword is sharper and longer then any you have, or can pretend to.
The Animadversions of the Class upon it. 1. IF we went on to maintain our power of censuring the scandalous, according to what (as we told you) both God and the civil Authority had entrusted us with, it con∣cerned you the more to have made good what you undertook. But herein you have fallen short, as we have sufficiently pro∣ved, by what we have said in answer to the fourth Section of this Paper, whereby also we doubt not, but it will appear, that we are backt by the Authority of the civil Magistrate, and that this Authority is not taken off by any subsequent Acts of Parliament, that you have instanced in; and that therefore our Church Government and censures are still of force, and that it doth not depend on the voluntariness of the members of our severall Congregations being subject thereunto, but upon the Parliaments appointing them to this subjection, that any persons within the bounds of this Association are sub∣ject to this Government. 2. We do readily grant the Civil Sword, doth and can reach, as those offendors against the Laws of the Lands, that submit to the Churches censures; so also those, that are un∣willing to be subject thereunto. But your Argument is very inconsequent, when you would inferre, that the Act or Acts of Parliament inflict a civil punishment, whether corporall or pecuniary, upon all lawless persons, whether such as con∣temn Gods Laws or mans, and not a spirituall, therefore such offenders are not censurable by us. For except there had been some late Act, that had repealed the Ordinance of 1648, for Church Government, that appoints the inflicting of spirituall censures; such offendors, as are justly censurable by that Ordi∣nance, are still censurable by us. Neither do we yet see, how it is our mistake, to think, that, notwithstanding the pu∣nishment inflicted upon the offendor by the Civil Magistrate, we may, for the same offence, proceed, to execute Church cen∣sures also: or that it is either sound Divinity, or good Law, that a man may not be punished twice for one offence; which
yet is the argument whereby you would prove us therein for to mistake. Indeed we hold it not just, that one and the same person, should be punished twice for one and the same offence, with one and the same kinde of punishment; but that such offendors, as are punishable by the civil Magistrate with civil punishments, may be proceeded against by the Church with Church censures, is manifest, 1. From your Civil penalties do not free from Ecclesi∣astical cen∣sure. own concessions. You had granted in your first Paper, that such as are scandalous and wicked in their lives, were to be admonished, both publikely and privately; and that if not∣withstanding, they continue still in their scandalous courses, and would not reform, the Churches lawfull Pastors had power to excommunicate such. And in your second Paper, it was one of the Arguments you urged to bring us to a com∣pliance with your Proposals there, that, by that means the lives and manners of dissolute persons, might with brotherly admonition and exhortation be reclaimed, or by due censures be corrected and amended. But now you eat your own words, and flatly contra∣dict what there you had granted: for now you say, such of∣fendors as are punishable by the civil Magisttate, according to the Acts, that inflict civil punishment, are not censurable at all by the Churches lawfull Pastors; nor by us, since we have refused to comply with your Proposals; for then a man may come to be punished twice for one offence. 2. From the ju∣stice and equity that is in so doing, considering the different nature of Civil punishments, and Ecclesiasticall censures; the one being only corporall, or respecting the outward man, the other being spirituall and respecting the soul. And therefore seeing men consist not only of bodies, but have souls also; such as are offenders against the Laws both of God and men, may and ought to be punished, as with civil punishment, appointed by the civl Magistrate, to be inflicted on the outward man; so also with Ecclesiasticall censures, appointed by Jesus Christ, to be inflicted on the soul, in case of impenitency. 3. This also further appears, by the necessity and usefullness that there may be of this double punishment. The Magistrate may have punished the offendor in his purse or body, and yet he conti∣nue in an insensible and impenitent state, in which respect
there may be a necessity, why he should be noted with the censure of Excommunication, that he might be ashamed, 2 Thes. 3. 14. be delivered unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Je∣sus, 1 Cor. 5. 5. The Magistrate also may have punished him to the satisfaction of the Law, and yet the Church remain unsatisfied, and there be danger also of leavening others by his unreformedness, except this old leaven be purged out, 1 Cor. 5. 6. Civil punishments are necessary to be inflicted, for the restraining from publike disorders, not fit to be tolerated in a Christian state: But if there be not repentance for such offences, the souls of such offenders, notwithstanding the Law be satisfied, may be damned for their impeniteney; for the preventing whereof Church censures are necessary and use∣full. Both Magistracy and Ministry are Ordinances of God, the power of both are necessary and usefull, a blessing from God may be expected on the due punishment and censures that are inflicted by both. And therefore the asserting of the one doth not take away or destroy the other. But if your do∣ctrine be good; if there be an appointment of civil punish∣ments, to be inflicted by the civil Magistrate, and the civil Magistrate proceed to do his duty, all the power of the Church is vacated, neither must she inflict any censures or spi∣rituall punishments, that she is intrusted with the dispensing of, though she see her members to be incorrigible, impenitent and in danger to perish (if her physick, that is for the soul, be not applied, after the civil Magistrate hath gone as farre as he can) because then one and the same person should be punish∣ed twice for one offence; which you say, is against Law, but we are sure, is against the rules of sound and good Divinity. 3. But seeing you say, that for a man to be punished twice for one offence is against Law, and to make this out do urge two Statutes, 1. Mar. chap. 3. 1. Eliz. cap. 2. unto this we say, that however it doth not properly belong to us to expound the Laws of the Land, we hope we may have leave to say, what upon the perusall of those Statutes, common reason doth di∣ctate to us. And therefore we answer, 1. Your assertion is too generall to be made out by these Statutes. That of the
first of Mary, speaking only of the penalties to be infficted on those that should disturb by word or deed Preachers in their Sermons, or should molest a Priest, preparing or ce∣lebrating Masse, or other Service; or abuse the Sacrament of the body and bloud of Christ, or should break any Altar or Crucifix: and providing in the close of it, that the per∣sons offending in the premises, should be but once punished for one offence: as there had been reason, for some of those things, that are there mentioned as offences, why the trans∣gressors of that Act, should not have been so much as once pu∣nished. The other Statute of the first of Elizabeth, cap. 2. (for so your quotation is, in the Copy you presented unto us, and which we judg to be the Statute you here mean, there be∣ing nothing to this purpose to be found cap. 12.) is likewise as expresly limited, as the former. For it entreats only of the penalties to be inflicted on those, that should use any other Service then the Book of Common Prayer, or should de∣prave the same Book; or should do any thing, or speak in the derogation of it, or cause other Prayer to be said or sung, or should not resort to the Church on the Sundays, or other Holy days: and then after the appointment of the punish∣ment to be inflicted by the civil Magistrate in such cases, and the other punishment to be inflicted by the Ordinary, doth provide, that whatsoever persons shall offend in the premises, shall be but once punished for one offence, provid∣ing particularly as you mention. But you might have taken notice, that the book of Common Prayer is taken away, and so are Holy dayes, by the Ordinance appointing the Dire∣ctory; and we could never see, there was reason for that severi∣ty, either of Ecclesiasticall censures, or civil punishments to be inflicted upon all those that might be found punishable at any time by this Act. However, the provisions mentioned in these Acts, refering only to the particular cases mentioned in them, your proof from them falls short, to make out your assertion, that is generall, that it is against Law for a man to be punished twice for one offence. 2. But yet we further an∣swer, that when the Parliament passed the Ordinance of 1648, whereby the offendors there mentioned, are made censurable
by us with the Church censures, as there may be occasion, according to the rules layd down in the form of Church Go∣vernment, there were sundry penall Statutes in force, in∣flicting civil punishments on severall of the offendors, men∣tioned in that Ordinance, and yet there is no proviso in this Ordinance (that was passed after those Statutes) to the purpose you speak of, and restraining the Church from in∣flicting Church censures, in case the civil Magistrate had pu∣nished them by civil punishments; but it gives the Church full liberty to proceed, without the least hint of any such a limitation. 3. You also (who pretend to be so expert in the Laws) might have taken notice, that in the Statute of the 5th of Eliz. cap. 23. there is an appointment of the order of awarding and returning the Writ de Excommunicato capien∣do: See the ction Statut Fardin Pulton. and also what was to be done upon the appearance of the offeudor, and what if he could not be found: and by which Statute, it is most clear, that the civil Magistrate was to inflict a civil punishment upon the same offendor, that had been excommunicated by the Ordinary; as it is there provided, that upon the Bishops receiving the submission and satisfacti∣on of the person excommunicated, and certifying the same, the party was to be released from the Sheriffs custody or pri∣son. By which, we think, it is manifest, that you (who would appear to be men so well skilled in all Laws, both of God and men) have laid down such a generall assertion, as can be made out by neither; it being cleer by that Act, that a civil punishment was to be inflicted on the person, that by his offence had incurred the censure of Excommunication. Further you might have observed, that by the Statute See C on of t tutes  dinana¦ton. 10 Caroli, cap. 1. there is a forfeiture appointed, to be levyed on every person using any unlawfull pastimes on the Lords day, and yet in the close thereof, there is a proviso in these words; that the Ecclesiasticall jurisdiction within this Realm, or any the dominions thereof, by vertue of this Act, or any thing therein con∣tained, shall not be abridged, but that the Ecclesiasticall Court may punish the said offences, as if this Act had not been made. The like proviso we also find, in the Statute 30 Caroli, cap. 1. which yet appoints fofeitures, in case of prophanation of the Lords
day by Carriers, &c. that travel on the Lords day, or by Butch∣ers that sell or kill victuass on that day. By all which you may plainly see, if you will not shut your eyes, that it is not against Law, that a man may come to be punished twice for one offence. Nay what hath been heretofore more ordinary, then the High-Commissioners imprisoning, fining and excom∣municating for one and the same offence? But yet you will have the latter Acts and Ordinances against drunkenness, swearing, prophanation of the Sabbath, &c. enjoyning punishment by the Civil Magistrate onely, (though they do not speak one word, that tends to the repealing of the Ordinance for Church Government) to have utterly taken off all power of Excommunication. But this we must not so easily grant; and yet we shall not be unready, as there may be occasion, to com∣plain to the civil Magistrate of any lawless persons, that are justly censurable with the censure of Excommunication, the conjunction of the Civil and Ecclesiasticall Sword, being sharp∣er and longer, then either of them alone. The Gentlemens Paper. Sect. VIII. And you further proceed to make answer to our severall ensuing Quaeries, but how fully and satisfactorily all may judge, that have perused what hath formerly been said touching the civil sanction of your Government. Our first Quaerie is, Why Government in singulari? Your answer is, Because it is the onely Government that is established in this Church by Civill Authority. This Answer hath been confuted before, we shall say no more here to that. But we are unsatisfied, what you mean by (this Church) whether you mean this Church at Manehester, where your Classis is; or you mean the Church of Eng∣land. If you mean this Church of Manchester of your association, it is esta∣blisht not so much by Ordinance of Lords and Commons in Parliament, as by later Acts, grauting the free exercise of Religion in Doctrine and Worship to all Churches and Congregations in their own way, to all, and all alike, but such as are particularly cautioned against. And so you in your Presbytery in your Church at Manchester are protected, because you have possessed your selves of that Church. But then others in other Churches and Congregations, to wit, Prestwich, Burie, Middleton, and the like, may say of their way of worship, it is the onely Government which is establisht in this Church. But if your meaning be of the Church of England, (and so we conceive by the
subsequent words, viz. That there is no other Government but yours own∣ed as the Church Government throughout the whole Nation) You are certainly mistaken, and dare not maintain it, that his Highness, or his Coun∣cil owns Presbytery, and none but that Government. But leaving the Civill Sanction, you come to the divine right of Presbytery, and prove it to be the onely Government in singulari; because it is that onely Government which Christ hath prescribed in his word; and what Christ hath thus prescribed, must needs be de jure, one and the same in every Church. And Calvins judgement (you say) in this particular is so manifest by his works, to the whole world, that it needs no proof. We have told you before of the form and order of Church Government appointed by the Council of Nice, by Patriarch, Arch-Bishop, Bishop, &c. How this Go∣vernment (which we suppose you will not say is Presbyterian) is in Calvins judgement, not differing from that which Christ hath prescribed in his word. And in his first Section of this Chapter, he tells us of Bishops, (not one word of Elders, chosen out of the people who should rule in the Church) but Bishops that did all, viz. make and publish Canons (a note certainly of rule and jurisdiction in the Church) in which (saith he) they so ordered all things after the rule of Gods word, that a man may see they had in a manner nothing differing from the word of God. And this form of Government did represent a certain Image of divine Institution. Can Calvin say more for your Presbytery? nay, can he say so much? then how manifest is his judgement for the jus divinum of your Presbytery, that it is that Government in particu∣lar, which Christ hath prescribed in his word? Thus have we taken off your Calvin and Beza (as above) your modern Doctors, for Fathers you have none; and now you descend to the Assembly of Divines. The jus divinum, by London Ministers, the provincial Synod at London, Rutherford, Gyllaspie, to prove your divine right of Presbytery, mo∣dern Authors of yesterday, with whom you paint your Margent in abundance, and may serve your turn amongst the ignorant and vulgar sort; who measure all by tale, and not by weight; when others that know what, and who many of them are, will conclude you draw very near the dregs. As for such as are lawless persons, and who those be, whether drunkards, swearers, unclean persons, prophaners of the Sabbath, such as will not sub∣ject themselves to the present Government, &c. all together or a part, conjun∣ctim seu divisim, whether you will, they are onely punishable by the Civil Magistrate, you cannot exclude them the Church by any of your censures, as we have said before. The Animadversions of the Class upon it. 1. WE did indeed proceed to make answer to your se∣veral Queries, and desire the Reader to peruse the Queries, you propounded to us in your first Paper, and the answer we gave unto them, and then to judge how sa∣tisfactorily
we did it, after he had fully weighed our answer, and what you have said to take off the establishing of our Government by the civil Sanction. But whereas your first Query was, why Government in singulari? and our answer given thereunto was, because it is the only Government, that is established in this Church by civil Authority; you say this answer hath been confuted before; but how strongly, we shall leave it to the Reader for to judge. But it seems, this answer hath raised another scruple in your mindes; for you are unsatisfied, what we mean by this Church; although in our answer we had sufficiently explained it, it being that Church, wherein the Prelatical Government formerly had been set up, and where∣in, that being put down, the Presbyterian was set up, in its stead, as the only Government that was owned, as the Church Government for the whole Nation, as we had told you; and which words did sufficiently declare, that by (this Church) we meant the Church of England. This you confess is that which you conceive to be our meaning; yet you quar∣rell at the word, that so upon supposal, that the Church of Manchester, of our Association, and where our Classis meets, might thereby be understood, you might take ye liberty to tell us, that our Church Government is not so much established by the Or∣dinance of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, as by later Acts, (granting (as you say) the free exercise of Religion in doctrine and worship to all Churches & Congregations in their own way) to all, and all alike; though you might have observed, that the way of Prelacy was ever in the number of those wayes particularly cautioned against; and that those of the Presbyterian way have that prerogative, above all those of other wayes, to whom any indulgence is granted; that their way of Govern∣ment is owned and established by the Parliament, as the Go∣vernment of the Nation, which is not to be said for any of the other. And therefore neither the Church at Manchester, nor our Classical Presbytery meeting there, are protected meer∣ly upon the account of possession of that place, as you imagine, but because being awarranted thereunto by Authority of Par∣liament, they set up that Government, which the Parlia∣ment appointed and established as the Government of the
Nation; and who also in their approval of the division of this County into nine Classical Presbyteryes, appointed Prest∣wich (wherein the Government was set up and exercised for along while, although since Mr. Allen's return thither, the Eldership of that Congregation could do little) to be within the bounds of this Classical Association; and Middleton and Burie (in the latter of which Congregations, the Presbyterian Government according to Ordinance of Parliament was also set up, though the present Minister joyn not in it) are appoint∣ed to be within the bounds of the second Class. And so these Congregations, that you would suggest, have a liberty for some way of worship and different Government from the Presbyterian, granted unto them and exercised by them, (though they are not any of them under any character of in∣dulgence granted to others other wayes) are all of them under the power of the Provincial Assembly of this County, and one of them under the power of this; and two of them under the power of the neighbour Classical Association. And here∣upon we are certain, we are not mistaken, when we say, that there is no other Government but the Presbyterian, that was owned by the Parliament, they establishing this Government only, as the Government of the Nation; and which we do not see, but is also acknowledged by the humble Advice, assent∣ed unto by his Late Highness, as we have said before. 2. But now (you say) leaving the civil Sanction, we come to the divine right of Pres ytery, and prove it to be the only Govern∣ment in singulari, because it is that only Government, which Christ hath preser bed in his Word. But here we have cause to complain, you do us manifest wrong, in that you would re∣present us either absurdly proving idem per idem, or that Pres∣bytery is of divine right, because it is so; or to argue very weakly in saying it is of divine right, because it is prescribed by Christ in his Word, and so leave the matter without any further proof, nothing whereof at all, is any where to be found in our answer; only we find the same in that chime∣rical fancy, which you had first conceivd your selves, and then were pleased to impute unto us. Then you adde, and what Christ hath thus prescribed, must needs be de jure, one and the
same in every Church, which words did not here follow, where∣by you render, what we had plainly expressed, not intelligi∣ble to what purpose it was uttered. But because we desire the matter might be judged of, neither according to your re∣presentation of it, or what we say of it, we shall give the Reader a full account, of all that was here expressed by us, and which he will find upon the perusal of our answer, where∣by he will perceive, that we were not at all reasoning (as you represent us) but only declaring our judgement, and that in plain expressions, without any ambiguity. Our words speaking of the Presbyterian Government were these. And as it is that which we judge to be most agreeable to the will of God, so also we conceive, that whatever is of Christs prescribing in any other different Government (whether Episeopal or Congregational) is to be found here, as we do apprehend the redundancies of them both, to be taken away in this, and the defects of them both to be bere supplied; and however there may be differences amongst godly ment, concerning Church Government, which it is in particular, that Christ hath prescribed in his Word, yet we judg that the Govern∣ment which Christ hath prescribed in his Word is but one, as all those must say so too, that not being Erastians, do bold that one Church Go∣vernment or other is of divine right. The Reader will hereby perceive, that we did without any manner of reasoning at all, only declare our judgements; but you represent us as argu∣ing, and that absurdly; and then you mangle our words, breaking them off, from what they had immediate and ne∣cessary dependance on, and reference to; for having thus farre declared our selves, we came to answer to what you had urged in your first Paper, out of Calvin, saying, Scimus¦enim unicuique Ecclesiae, &c. to which we said, the circum∣stantials of Government (of which we told you, we did be∣lieve, if you had quoted the place, where Calvin used those words, it would appear he speakes) being variable, and so but the accidentals of Government, may not be one and the same in all Churches. And then we added the words, you in part mention; but if Christ have prescribed a Government in his Word, for the substantials of it, it must be de jure, one and the same in every Church. And then further said; and that the
Presbyterian Government is that in particular, which is there pre∣scribed, in Calvin's judgement, is so manifest by his workes, to the whole Christian world, that it needs no proof. Whereby it is very manifest to any ordinary understanding, that the ex∣pressions we here use (and which you mention) have reference to what you had cited out of Calvin, in your first Paper, shew∣ing, that however he might say, that every Church might have their different formes of Government, in regard of the circumstantials of it, yet seeing the Government prescribed by Christ in his Word, for the substantials of it, is but one, and in Calvin's judgement the Presbyterian Government is that Government; when Calvin saith, Scimus enim unieuique Ecclesiae, &c. he was to be understood, to speak concerning the circumstantials of Government only, and not of the sub∣stantials thereof. Hence also it is clear, that we were not here neither, arguing for the divine right of Presbytery; but only declaring and proving, how Calvin was to be under∣stood in the expressions you quoted. But as we have said, you mangle our words, and break them off from what im∣mediately went before; whereby from your representation, it is not conceivable to what they referred; but then, you joyning them to other words going before, to which they had no reference, represent them to have been used by us, to have patched up such a poor argument for the Jus divinum of the Presbyterian Government, as before hath been declared; but whether this be either sincere or ingenuous dealing, we leave it to the Reader to judge. 3. But as touching Calvin's being in his judgement for the Presbyterian Government, as that which Christ hath in par∣ticular prescribed in his Word, (though here again you would make him a patronizer of the Government by Patriareh, Archbishop, Bishop, &c. in our answer we said, was manifest from his works to the whole Christian world. And is not this clear to any that will but consult what he hath written touching this matter? Consult his Expositions and Commentaries, Rom. 12. 7, 8. 1 Cor. 12. 28. 1 Tim. 5. 17. and you will find him there to be downright for the Jus divinum of the ruling Elders Office. Consult his Institutions, you will there find, Lib. 4.
Chap. 3. Sect. 8. expresly, that he takes Bishops, Presbyters and Pastors for one and the same, and that according to the use of Scripture, as he there speakes, and argues for that purpose, Tit. 1. 5. Phil. 1. 1. Act. 20. 17. and having reckoned up the preaching Officers, he then comes in the very same Section, and mentions the ruling Elders, shewing that they are men∣tioned by Paul, Rom. 12. 7, 8. 1 Cor. 12. 28. We will but cite only one passage, that he here hath concerning his quo∣ting these Texts. Guhernatores fuisse existimo seniores de plebe electos, qui censurae. morum, & exercendae disciplinae unà cum Episcopis praeessent. Neque enim secus interpretari queas, quod dicit, qui praeejt, id faciat in solicitudine. Habuit igitur ab i∣nitio unaquae{que} Ecclesia suum Senatum conscriptum ex viris piis, gravibus & sanctis; penes quem er at illa, de quâ posteà lo∣quemur, jurisdictio in corrigendis vitiis. Porro eusmodi ordinem non unius saeculi fuisse, experientia ipsa declarat. Est igitur hoc gubernationis munus saecuis omnibus necessarium. Whence it is very clear, that Calvin's judgement is so full for the Office of the ruling Elders, that otherwise he saith, we shall not be able to interpret that of the Apostle, He that ruleth, let him do it with diligence. And hence he concludes, that every Church had from the beginning its Senate or Consistory, that consisted of men that were godly, grave, and holy, to whom did belong the jurisdiction, in correcting of vices, of which after he saith he will speak. Further he saith, that experience it self declares, that this was not an order of one age; and thence inferres, that therefore the ruling Elders Office, whom he undestands by the Office of Government, is necessary for all ages. Is it possible for any man to declare himself more fully and plainly for the Presbyterian Government, then Calvin here doth? We forbear to cite any other parts of his works; we doubt not but the Reader by this will be sufficiently satis∣fied, and will presently hereupon conclude, that you but ga∣ther out of Calvin, what you think makes for your purpose; and when we cite him for that which he is so full for, matter not much how you misrepresent him to the world, that so you might make him to appear otherwise. But we wish you to consider, that it is not safe for any to make lies their re∣fuge.
But you have, notwithstanding all this, the boldness to alleadge Calvin, as a Patronizer of Episcopal Government, as you did before. And because you come over again with the same thing, we shall be forced for his vindication, to make some repetition of what we have in part already said. That in Calvin which you here referre us to, is the place in his Institutions which was before quoted, sc. Lib. 4. Chap. 4. Sect. 1. But in the Chapter immediately going before, we have even now shewed, that he declares himself fully for the Presbyterian Government; but this you wholly conceal, in which you deal not honestly with him. Nay in the very first words of this Section, which you cite, he tells you, he had been hitherto speaking of that order of governing the Church, as it is delivered to us out of the pure word of God, and con∣cerning the Ministeryes, as they were instituted of Christ. And then he addes, now that all these things might appear more clearly and familiarly, it will be profitable in those things, to take a view of the forme of the ancient Church, which (as he there saith) will represent unto us, a certain i∣mage of divine institution; which are part of the words, that you cite. But hence it is clear, that seeing it is Calvin's scope in this Chapter, to compare the forme of Government in the ancient Church, with that forme of Government, that he had held forth, in the Chapter going before, from the Scrip∣tures, he judged (whatever construction you put upon him to the contrary) that that very Government, in the substance of it (which he had before proved was held forth in the Scrip∣tures, and which, as we have already shewed, from what we have cited out of him, out of the third Chapter goin gbe∣fore, was the Presbyterian) was to be found in the ancient Church, in the purer times of it. But in the next place he comes to prevent an Objection, in these words, Tametsi enim multos Canones ediderunt illorum temporum Episcopi, quibusplus viderentur exprimere, quam sacris literis expressum esset, eâ tamen cautione totam suam Oeconomiam composuerunt ad unicom illom verbi Dei normami, ut facile videas nihil fere hâc parte habuisse à verbo Dei alienum. Hence it is yet further plain, that however he confess, that the Bishops
of those times did seem to express in many of their Canons something more, then was expressed in Scripture, yet that he saith, they did compose their whole Oeconomy unto the only rule of Gods word, that one might easily see, they had in this particular, nothing almost differing from the word; he here∣by declares his judgement yet further, that for the substance, the Government of these times was the same with the Go∣vernment, he had held forth from the Scriptures in the for∣mer Chapter. But hence it is also clear, that (as we observed before) he did not approve of every thing in those Canons; as also he presently after confesseth, there was something de∣ficient and wanting in them. For however he excuse them, in regard they endeavoured to keep the institution of God with a sincere endeavour, yet he acknowledges, that in some∣thing they erred, although he saith, not much; as is clear from his own words, which are as followes, Verumetiam si quid posset in ipsorum institutis desiderari, quia tamen sincero studio conati sunt Dei institutionem conservare, & ab ea non multum ab∣erraverunt, plurimum conducet hic breviter colligere, qualem ob∣servationem habuerint. And then he shewes, what the Mini∣sters of the ancient Church were. Thus we have given a full and particular account of what Calvin hath in this Section, and that in the very order which he himself observes there, which you doing but partially, and catching only at some passages, that you think makes for your purpose, do most grosly wrong him, by your misrepresentation. And if we should deal by other Authors, even such as are for the Epis∣copal Government, as you deal by Calvin, which of them al∣most, but we might make to appear Patronizers of the Pres∣byterian Government? But you will have Calvin to say, that in the ancient Church, the Bishops did all, viz. make and publish Canons, a note certainly of rule and jurisdiction in the Church. Thus you represent him, to hold forth the Bishops exercising solitary power of jurisdiction in those times, which as it is in it self as contrary to truth, as light is to darkeness, so it is ex∣presly contrary to what Calvin saith in the very next Section to that which you cite. For in the former Section he saith, that they to whom the Office of preaching was enjoyned,
(speaking still of the ancient Church) they called all those Pres∣byters. These (saith he) did in every City chcose out one out of their own number, to whom they gave more specially the title of Bishop, lest dissentions should arise from equality, as oft it comes to pass. But yet he presently adds, and saith, Neque tamen honore & dignitate superior er at Episcopus, ut domi∣nium in Collegas haberet; sed quas partes habet Consul in Sena∣tu, ut referret de negotijs, sententtias roget; consulendo, monendo, hor∣tando, alijs praeeat, authoritate suâ totam actionem regat, & quod de∣cretum communi consilio fuerit, exequatur: id muneris sustinebat Episcopus in Presbyterorum caetu; atque id ipsum pro temporum necessitate fuisse humano consensu inductum fatentur ipsi veteres. And then he quotes Hierome, asserting a Bishop and a Presby∣ter to be all one. We wonder very much, where your modesty and ingenuity, nay common honesty was, when (being you could not but take notice of these things in Calvin in this se∣cond Section, else you read him very negligently) yet you say, as you here do, that according to Calvin's representation of the Government of the ancient Church, the Bishops did all; make and publish Canons, a note certainly of rule and jurisdiction in the Church. Whereas you see Calvin saith; the Bishop had no dominion over the rest of the Presbyters, whom he here calls his Colleagues; that he had but only that Office, which the Consul had in the Senate, and is no more then what the Mo∣derators have in our Assemblies, as is clear from what he here particularly recites, and further shews, that he was only to execute what was decreed by common counsell: and fur∣ther saith, that even this that did belong unto him, the An∣cients themselves confess was introduced by humane consent, and that in regard of the necessity of the times. And as touch∣ing what was appointed by the Council of Nice, touching Archbishops and Patriarchs, and whereof he makes mention in Section fourth, we have told you before, what you may find in Calvin himself in that place, where he saith, they were rarissimi usus, of very seldome use, and that their use was chiefly for the assembling of Synods. But thus we be∣lieve all men will see, that Calvin is so express and full for the Presbyterian Government, and no patronizer of the Epis∣copall,
that they will conclude, such as represent him other∣wise, are either very weak, or make little conscience of falsi∣fying the Authors which they cite; and that you have taken off our Calvin no otherwise, then by misinterpreting and grosly wronging him, as after the same manner you took off Beza before; and both whom, however you in scorn call Mo∣dern Doctors, yet are such Doctors as both you and we may learn much from. 4. And thus we are brought to the Authors, which we quo∣ted; for Fathers (you say) we have none, though that also is not true; we having, in our Answer to your second Paper, produced clear testimonies out of Origen, Ambrose, Augustine, Optatus, giving in clear evidence for the being of the ruling Elders office in their times. But as touching our modern Au∣thors, the Assembly of Divines, the London Ministers in their Jus divinum, the Provinciall Synod of London in their Vindi∣cation, Mr. Rutherford and Mr. Gillespie, however you despise them again, as before, as being but of yesterday; yet they are such, who as in regard of their known and approved piety and learning, as they are deservedly in high esteem in the Church, so they are such as we reverence, and are not ashamed to cite, though this you count but a painting of our margent with them; and further say of them, they may serve our turn amongst the ignorant and vulgar sort, who measure all by tale and not by weight: whereby you pour forth such scorn and contempt upon so many reverend and glorious lights, as we beleeve all moderate spirited men, though in their judgments for the cause which you profess to love, will be ashamed of, and will disown in you. And however you say, that others, that know what, and who, many of them are, will (sc. for our referring you to them) conclude, we draw very near the dreggs; yet you had approved your selves to have been farre more profound per∣sons, if, being sent by us, to consider what arguments they urged for the Jus divinum of the Presbyterian Government, you had in your reply to our Answer answered them, and so rather discovered their weakness, then by such expressions as you here use, to have branded, either us, for referring you to them; or them, by saying, that others know what, and who they
are; who yet, do neither know any thing by them, nor can by their detracting pens, publish any thing touching them to the world, that will ever lessen their esteem with learned, godly, sober and judicious persons, that are acquainted with their learned Labours. And however you may please your selves in your vlifying them, and us for referring you to them, yet this is that, which you should have remembred, must be ac∣counted for one day. But why did not you (who tell us of drawing very near the dregs) here take notice, of what in our an∣swer immediately followed, you having in your first Paper enquired of us, why we had called our Government, the present Government; and then demanded, is there no present Govern∣ment in any Church or assembly of Saints, but where our dis∣cipline is erected? are all the rest at present without Government? or where hath ours been this fifteen hundred years past till this pre∣sent? &c. unto all which, and that which followed there in your Paper, we returned you our Answer: yet you take not notice of it: though if we had dealt thus by you, and yet had made a shew to have answered you, as you do pretend to an∣swer us, we should not have thought you had wronged us, in your telling us here of drawing near the dreggs. 5. And now to conclude this Section: whereas you here again tell us, that as for such lawless persons, whether drunkards, swearers, &c. as will not subject themselves to the present Govern∣ment of the Church, they are onely punishable by the civil Magi∣strate; and that we cannot exclude them the Church by any of our censures, this is as easily by us denied, as it is by you asserted; and we leave it to be judged of by the Reader, upon his per∣usall of what hath been said by both, whether you or we have the better reason for what is herein maintained by us. But we must again mind you, that notwithstanding in our answer we had here told you, that however we did not judg all those to be lawless persons, that do out of conscience not come up to the observa∣tion of all those rules, which are or shall be established by Authority for regulating the outward worship of God, and Government of his Church; yet both you and we might well remember, that such as should have refused, to have subjected themselves to the late Prela∣ticall Government, would have been accounted in those times law∣less
persons: yet to this also you do here say nothing, although it was one of your queries in your first Paper, whether all that subjected not themselves to our present Government, must be taken for lawless persons? and which was a matter more considerable to have replied to, then to have put us off, as you do, with that which is not at all here to the purpose: your querie to which we answered, not being about our power to censure the persons, that we counted lawless, but who those lawless persons were. The Gentlemens Paper. Sect. IX. To our next Quaere (viz.) How farre you extend this Saintship, this Church and Assembly of Saints: You answer, As farre as the Apostle did, when writing to the Church of Corinth and Galatia, he calls them Saints, and Churches, notwithstanding the gross errours of many members in them; and therefore though there may be sundry of the like stamp in your Assemblies, you do not un-church them; or make your Assemblies not Assemblies of Saints, because of the corruption of such Members, &c. But by your leave, you answer not our question, which was not, Whether all your Assemblies were called assemblies of Saints? for no question, you will not un-church your selves, or un-saint your Assemblies, notwithstanding the corruptions in them. But whether none else but you were accounted Saints, none Bretheren and Sisters in Christ, but such as stand for your pretended discipline? If so, then the Do∣natists crime may be imputed to you; and we say with St. Augustin, O Im∣pudentem Vocem! Nay, but this cannot be laid in your dish, whose principles and practises are so manifestly against the practises and opinions of the Donatists of old, it may more fitly be charged upon such as have rent themselves from your Churches. But who are they that have rent from your Church? we hear but of few that ever admitted themselves members, or prosessed themselves of your association, that ever rent from it. Those that are out, say, they were never of you, never had sworn obedience to, or subscribed any Ar∣ticles of yours, as you or many of you had sworn Canonicall obedience to the Government by Bishops, and subscribed the 39 Articles of the Church of England: Here is a rent indeed, a Schism in the highest, which is not satis∣fied, but with the utter overthrow of that Church, from whom they rent and rasing out those Articles of Religion, they had formerly confirmed by their own subscription, saying, Illa non est, &c. O Impudentem Vocem! this saying doth not concern you. But still we are unsatisfied in the word (Publique) what you mean there∣by, to which you Answer, Such as you by your profession and practise do own for publique, such as you do constantly frequent, and stir up others to frequent also
where are also the publique Ordinances of the word, Sacraments and Prayer dispens∣ed. But here again you come not home to our Question, Whether none are publique Assemblies, nay publique Assemblies of Saints, but such as you constantly frequent, or whose discipline you own; however publique yours are. And then your Order is, Notice shall be taken of all Persons that forsake the publique Assemblies. Notice of all Persons in order to censure; so is your meaning, and purpose, as a little before you have said we may gather from your Paper, to censure all Persons, that maintain private meetings in oppo∣sition to publique, whether out of conscience, or out of a principle of care∣lesness, sloth, worldliness, &c. All Persons that crie down your Churches, Ministry, &c. is your purpose and meaning by that order. And you say further, Neither do we transgress any Laws of the Land, which have made no Proviso to exempt any man, that we meddle with, &c. Here sure you are mistaken; for you can no more proceed to censure such as forsake the publique Assemblies, by virtue of any Ordinance of Parliament, or rule laid down in your form of Church Government, then you, or any other Minister, or Magistrate civill or Ecclesiastical can punish them by an Act of 1. Eliza. intituled, An Act for Ʋniformity of Prayer, and Administra∣tion of Sacraments; or by an Act of 35. Eliza. Intituled, An Act, for punish∣ing of Persons, obstinately refusing to come to Church, &c. Or an Act of 23. Eliza. against such as refuse to come to Church: All which with your Ordi∣nance, are repealed by an Act made Septemb. 27. 1650. Intituled, An Act for relief of Religious and peaceable pcople from the rigor of former Acts of Par∣liament in matters of Religion. By which these are not only repealed, but it is enacted further, That all and every the branches, clauses, Articles, and Proviso's Expressed, and contained in any other Act or Ordinance of Parliament whereby, or wherein any penalty or punishment is imposed, or mentioned to be im∣posed on any Person, for not repayring to their respective Parish Churches, &c. shall be, and are by the Authority aforesaid wholly repealed and made void. None by this Act shall be censured or punished by virtue of any former, Act or Ordi∣nance, for refusing to come to their Parish Church, &c. though they obsti∣nately refuse; And if by no former, then not by that you pretend to. Now to the end no prophane and licentious Person may take occasion by the repeal∣ing of the said Laws (intended onely for relief of pious and peaceable mind∣ed people from the rigor of them) o neglect the performance of Religious duties: It is further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every Person and Persons, within this Commonwealth, and the territories thereof, shall (having no reasonable excuse for their absence) upon every Lords day, dayes of publique thanksgiving and humiliation, diligently resort to some publique place, where the service and worship of God is Exercised: or shall be present at some other place, in the practise of some Religious duty, either of Prayer, Preaching, reading or Expounding the Scriptures, or conferring upon the same. And be it fur∣ther declared by the Authority aforesaid, That every Person, and Persons that shall not diligently perform the duties aforesaid, according to the true meaning thereof (not having reasonable excuse to the cootrary) shall be deemed, and taken to be offenders against this Law, and shall be proceeded against accordingly. Can you say now that you have power to censure such as forsake the pub∣lique Assemblies, by any Ordinance of Parliament, or rules (as you call
them) of your Church Government, when not only the pious and peaceable minded people, but the obstinate also are exempted from the rigor of former Laws and onely taken to be offenders against this Law, and no other, and shall be proceeded against accordingly? Dare you yet proceed to censure notwithstanding this Act? If you do you are very bold, and may run in∣to a Praemunire; Though you say you are not to be blamed for any mistakes, Cl. cop, is that may arise ab ignorantia juris, whether simple or effected: A strange say∣ing, we have heard it said Ignorantia facti excusat, but Ignorantia juris non excus∣at, no not a simple ignorance much less an affected one. The Animadversions of the Class upon it. 1. IF you had weighed what we had answered, you could not with any colour have said, that we answered not your question: you might have observed, that we spake of our Assemblies, as they were parts of the Church of England, and of the same constitution with her; and whom, though those of the separation do un-church, in regard of the mixture, or the scandalous persons in them, denying our Church in that re∣spect to be true, or our assemblies to be the assemblies of Saints, yet we justified in our Answer, from the examples of the Church of Corinth, and the Churches of Galatia, to whom the Apostle writes as to Saints, and calls Churches, notwith∣standing such corruptions in them: though we did not deny, but the scandalous in our Church and assemblies were the spots thereof. And seeing we acknowledged such assemblies were true Churches, notwithstanding those scandalous persons that were found in them, you had no reason to imagin, that none else besides our selves were by us accounted Saints, none brethren and sisters in Christ, but such as stand for our discipline: which you cannot mention, but you must brand, in calling it pretended: you might from our answer have gathered, that all other as∣semblies in our Land, where the word of God and Sacraments are dispensed, were taken into the number of those assemblies we spake of, they being parts also of the Church of England, as well as our own; however they may some of them differ from us in point of discipline. We told you in our Answer particularly, that in the Church of Corinth there were some that denied the resurrection, others made rents and schismes, and sundry grosly scandalous, and yet it was a true Church. And therefore
how should we be conceived, to have denied such assemblies in our Land, that are parts of the Church of England, and of the same constitution with her, for the substance, not to be the assemblies of the Saints, if they stand not for our Disci∣pline? Yet you would make the world to beleeve, we meant no further in that Answer we gave you, then not to un-Church or un-Saint our selves or assemblies, because of the corruptions of them; which yet we must tell you, might have been the fewer, if you and others, who are members of these assem∣blies, had shewed your selves more pliable to good order and discipline, and to have been furtherers and not hinderers of their reformation. 2. We spake in our Answer of some, that had of late rent themselves from our Churches, because of the scandalousness of the corrupt members, and said, that seeing our principles and practises are manifestly known to be utterly against them, as against the opi∣nions and practises of the Douatists of old, you had no reason to apply that of Augustine unto us, when he cried out against them, ô impudentem vocem! But now you will not have any to have rent themselves from our Church, excepting such, who having admitted themselves members, or professed themselves of our Association, have rent themselves from us; and who, you say, are but a few, so farre as you have heard. But here you do not approve your selves good disputants, against those of the separation, who being by their birth members of the Church of England (whereof our assemblies are but parts, and of the same constitution with her (as we said before) and have rent themselves from it, or from our Assemblies, that are parts of it, are justly chargeable with schisme; they having hereby rent themselves from a true Church, wherof they were mem∣bers, and whose membership is argued from their being born in gremio Ecclesiae, not from their admitting themselves mem∣bers of it afterward, or their professing of themselves to be thereof members. We had in our Answer to your first Pa∣per, hinted to you this ground of their membership; when in Answer to what you had to the like purpose there suggest∣ed, as you do here, we told you that the severall Congregations See S toward te rend within this Land, that make a profession of the true Christian
and Apostolike faith, are true Churches of Jesus Christ: that the severall members of these Congregations are by their birth members, as those that were born in the Jewish Church are said to be by the Apostle, Jews by nature, Gal. 2. that this their membership was sealed to them in their baptisme, that did solemnly admit them, as into the universall Church, so into the particular wherein they were born. But as in this Paper, where you should have replied to these propositions, if you approved not of them, you answered nothing to them: though in your first Paper you would have exempted your selves from being subject to our Government, because you had not admitted your selves members of some one or other of our Congregations, or were any associates of ours, as you there expressed your selves; so here you come over again with the same unsound principle, and yet say no∣thing to make it out: intimating, that none are to be account∣ed, to have rent themselves from us, but such as have admit∣ted themselves members, or professed themselves of our asso∣ciation: whereas if being members by their birth of the Church of England, they after rend themselves from any of our assemblies, or others that are parts and members of it, and of the same constitution with it, they are guilty of schisme; and which you must say, or whatever you cry out against it, you do not upon any sure principle, oppose it. 3. But this blot of schisme you would fasten upon us how∣ever, though it be neither upon your own principles here laid down, or any other whereby you can prove us guilty. And to make this out you say, that, we or many of us had sworn Ca∣nonical obedience to the Government by Bishops, and subscribed the 39 Articles of the Church of England, and hereupon, because we are not now for Episcopacy, you conclude us guilty of a rent indeed, a schisme in the highest. But herein you were contra∣dicted by Mr. Allen himself, in the presence of others of you, that subscribed this Paper, in a full Class, to which he and se∣verall of you resorted (which makes us the more to wonder, how he could subscribe this Paper) who looking about him upon the Ministers that were present, said they were free from that, with which we are here charged, there being none there, that had sworn Canonicall obedience, &c. although here you
say, we or many of us did so: as hereupon it will follow from your own principle laid down, that we, who according to Mr. Allens own confession, never associated with the Episco∣pall Hierarchy, or swore any obedience to them, are quit from that guilt of schisme, with which you here charge us. But be∣cause we have already hinted, that you do not argue well against those of the separation; to acquit our selves and all the Ministers of this Land, who now disown Episcopacy, to which they formerly submitted, or to which any of them might have sworne Canonicall obedience, from the guilt of schisme in this respect, we referre the Reader to the grounds we have laid down for that purpose, in our Answer to your second Paper; and which, whosoever will but impartially consider, he will finde, that it is not we, but your selves that do make the rent; although to heighten the charge against us, you here tell us, that our schisme is so great, that it is not satisfied but with the overthrow of the Church (which yet in our Answer to your second Paper we have sufficiently refuted) and rasing out those Articles of Religion, we had formerly confirmed by our own subscription: as if it were an Article of the faith of the Church of England, which all the Ministers thereof had subscribed, that the Prelaticall Government by Archbishops, Bishops, &c. must stand for ever; or if it were at any time ta∣ken away by the Parliament, and disowned by the Ministers of England, they had rased out those Articles of Religion, that they had once confirmed by their own subscription. But you must pardon us, if we be not so credulous, as to conclude the same with you, who in your great heat for Episcopacy do so farre overshoot. 4. Unto that wherein you were unsatisfied, sc. what we meant by the word publick, our answer was full and home; but either you minded it not, or though you saw your doubt was resolved, yet being desirous to quarrell, you would not take any notice of it: for we did not only tell you, that by pub∣lick Assemblies we understood the Assemblies, where the publick Ordinances were dispensed, which we our selves did own, and constantly frequent; but also said expresly (as is to be seen in our answer) that we do not meddle with the censu∣ring
of those, who, being godly and sound in the faith, in the main points of Religion, do yet differ from us in judgement in matters of Discipline and Government, and have their Assemblies for Gods publick worship distinct from ours; as we are barred from it by the rules of our Government, as we have often said before. These were the very words of our answer, and therefore, but that we see you are resolved to be satisfied with nothing, and find fault with that which is expressed never so plainly, we should have wondred, that you should here have said, that we come not home to your question; whenas it is manifest from the words of our answer, that though these Assemblies own∣ed not our Discipline, or we their, yet we denyed them not to be the publick Assemblies, or the Assemblies of the Saints; as we expresly professed, we never medled with the censu∣ring of them, or to take notice of their members (being sound in the faith and godly) in order unto censure, as the forsa∣kers of the publick Assemblies of the Saints. But we here told you, we were heartily sorry, that you understanding our meaning, as was manifest from what you after said, should only move this doubt, to give a lash at our private meetings, which in our answer we justified; but notwithstanding the lash you gave us, you do neither acknowledge your fault, nor reply one word to what we had said for our own defence. 5. Whereas we said in our answer, that seeing in the Paper which we had published in our Congregations, we said notice should be taken of all those that should forsake the publick Assemblies of the Saints, you might thence have gathered, our purpose was to observe and censure, those that did maintain and hold up piate meetings in opposition to the publick, that did cry down Ministery and Ordinan∣ces, and which we shewed were censurable by the rules of our Go∣vernment, and that therefore we were not altogether silen, concern∣ing either the sin or punishment, of those that did erre in Doctrinals or Discipline, so as to make dangerous rents from the Church, and for which silence you seemed to tax and blame us in your first Paper; yet now you mention this our declared purpose, to take notice of such forsakers of the Assemblies of the Saints, thus characterized, as a fault: and so with you we are worthy of blame, if we be silent touching either the sin, or punishment of
such, and censure them not; and we are also worthy of blame and punishment too, as transgressors of the Laws of the Land, (as you will have us to be here) if we shall proceed to censure such. And so let us neglect our duty or performe it, we are either way (as you will have it) blame worthy. Yes and which were yet the more to be wondered at, were it not ma∣nifest from what principle it proceeds, you that crie out of schisme and separation, and blame us for our silence, touch∣ing either the sin or punishment of those that erre in Doctrinals, or rend themselves from the Church; yet here are become advo∣cates to plead the cause of those, that cry down our Church, publick Assemblies, Ministers and Ordinances. For you will have these to do all this out of conscience, these being your own expressions and not ours, we declaring our selves plainly con∣cerning those only, that cry down our Churches and publick Assemblies, Ministery and Ordinances, as meant by those persons, that we said, held up private meetings in oppofition to publick, and whom we purposed to observe and censure. But these you will have also to be exempted from being cen∣sured by us; as also all those, who out of a principle of careles∣ness, sloth, worldliness, or manifest prophaness, do on the Lords day, either idle out the time, or else are worse employed, when they should be at the publick Assemblies, and whom in our answer we said we purposed to take notice of, as such as did forsake the publick Assemblies of the Saints. 6. But seeing you have undertaken to plead the cause of both these sorts, and will have us to be sure mistaken, when we said, we did not transgress any Laws of the Land, which had made no proviso to exempt any of these from being censured by us; we are willing to examine the utmost you have to say for them; which is but only this, that we can no more proceed tocensure such as forsake the publick Assemblies, by vertue of any Ordinance of Parliament, or rule laid down in our forme of Church Government, then they may be punished by an Act of 1. Elizabeth, or an Act of 35. Elizabeth, or an Act of 23. of Elizabeth; all which, with our Ordinance, (as you say) are repealed by an Act made Sep∣temb. 37. 1650. The title whereof you give us, as you had done before: By which (you say) the former are not only re∣pealed,
but tell us what is further enacted. But the strength of this allegation hath been tried before, and found to be as weak as water. This Act of 1650. that you insist on, re∣pealing only the Statutes or Ordinance, that inflict civil punishment, upon those that repair not to their respective Parish Churches, &c. and meddles not at all, with repealing of the Ordinance, authorizing the censuring of offendors with Church censures; and which we have in our answer to the fourth Section of this Paper sufficiently demonstrated. And therefore all that you say for those, you here undertook to exempt from being censured by us, is but what hath been discovered before to have no strength, and so therefore is of no force at all; except we must believe, that by your repeat∣ing it, and coming over with it again, and paraphrasing upon it, it had gained some new strength, that it never had. And so all that follows now, to the conclusion of this Section, is of no weight. For we cannot, against manifest reason to the contrary, judge it to be any great boldness in us to censure those, as forsakers of the publick Assemblies of the Saints, who falling under the character that we have given of them, are made censurable by the Ordinance, establishing the form of Church Government. Neither can we hereupon be brought, to fear any danger of running thereby into a praemu∣nire, which you again mind us of. There are only two things more we desire might be taken notice of, before we pass from this Section. 1. That the Act of 1650. which you quote, doth so farre discountenance those, who out of a prin∣ciple of sloth, worldliness, or prophaneness, frequent not the publick Assemblies, that it leaves them to be punished with civil punishments, as offendors against the Law, notwith∣standing its taking off the civil penalties from some, that are mentioned in it, and as is manifest from what you recite out of it; and it not speaking one syllable, that may carry any shew of a repeal of the Ordinance for Church Government, doth both leave these, and all other offendors against that Or∣dinance, to be censured by the censures of the Church, as there may be cause. 2. That you, having told us, if notwithstand∣ing this Act, we should proceed to censure, and might run
our selves into a praemunire, and then imputing to us such a gross assertion, as if we should have said, we were not to be blamed, for any mistakes that might arise ab ignorantiâ juris, whether simple or affected, do hereby plainly discover, you matter not much with what you charge us, so you can but render us absurd enough. For our sense is clear, from the whole tenour of our discourse, where we used any such expressions, that we said, we were not to be blamed, for any mistakes in you, that might arise, ab ignorantiâ juris; whether simple or affected we determined not, but left you to examine; and which is so plain, that when you your selves recite our words in the beginning of the fourth Section of this Paper, you re∣present that; which doth plainly shew, that there you under∣stood us as we have declared, and of which we minded the Reader in our second Animadversion on that Section. But now we are the persons that affirm a thing so absurd, as if we were not to be blamed for our ignorance of the Law, whe∣ther simple or affected; and then you cry out, a strange saying, and tell us, that you have heard it said, that ignorantia facti ex∣cusat, but ignorantia juris non excusat, &c. But how faith∣fully and sincerely you have herein dealt with us, the Reader may judge, and we wish you in the examination of your con∣sciences to consider. The Gentlemens Paper. Sect. X. To our next Quaere, Whether those that forsake the publique Assemblies of the Saints in the 2d, Order may not be taken for scandalous Persons, and so compre∣hended in the 3d? You Answer, We, conceiving your meaning to be such, are not mistaken. For they are really, and indeed scandalous, and so justly merit to be censured by you. And although we be not mistaken in our con∣ceits of you, yet we must tell you, you are mistaken in your own, to think you may bring in any that forsake your publique Assemblies, under that no∣tion of a scandalous Person, and so proceed to censure accordingly, for the reasons we have given before. Nay, nor yet can you proceed to censure the more known scandalous in life, such as you instance of Drunkards, swear∣ers, and whore-masters, they being all punishable by the civill Magistrate, as by the several Acts made for that purpose appeareth; And not by any
Ecclesiastical, much less by your Elderships short and blunt sword of Excom∣munication, by any Laws now in force. We are not so sensible of the Multiplicity of Canons, and burdensomness of Ceremonies, under which, in the time of Episcopacy, any truely conscientious did sigh or groan, but if we may judg, ex pede Herculem, by the number of Ca∣nons already made in your Provincial Assemblies, and elsewhere in this short usurpation of Presbytery (many urged necessary de fide) what they would amount to, had you lived the Age of Episcopacy 1600. years, and upwards we might well crie out, Quare oneramini ritibus? and censure you as Dr An∣drews doth Bellarmine in behalf of our English Church. Nobis non tam Ar∣ticulosa fides quàm vestris hominibus, qui ad singulas Theses crepant est de fide. Vobis, quibus datum est vestra omnia in eodem lumine videre, quibus vestra omnia ab eodem proponente infallibili habere, abundare licet Articulis ad Arthritim us∣que, &c. The Animadversions of the Class upon it. 1. HEre, you having nothing to object against the reason we had given you in our answer, why, though such as forsake the publick Assemblies of the Saints, being indeed scandalous (and so such as might be comprehended under the latitude of that expression) we did notwithstanding mention them distinctly, in a distinct order, from that wherein the scandalous were mentioned, have no further thing to tell us, but what you had said before, that we were mistaken to think, we might proceed to censure under the notion of scandalous persons, such as forsake the Assemblies of the Saints, for the reasons which, you say, you had before given: whereas all the reasons you gave us (and which here the Reader, if he will take the mat∣ter upon trust from you, must think had been several, you telling him here of the reasons you had before given) were but only one, sc. in regard of what you recited out of the Act of 1650. (and which was the only thing insisted on in the fore∣going Section) which yet in the examination thereof, we have discovered to be none at all. 2. But it is not sufficient for you to be advocates for those, that forsake the solemn Assemblies of the Saints; but also for such as are the more known scandalous in life, as Drunkards, Swea∣rers and Whore-masters. For you would exempt these also, from being censured▪ by any Ecclesiastical censure, whereby
you contradict what you had granted, both in your first and second Paper, as we before have noted; and overthrow all Church censures quite, by whomsoever inflicted; and that upon this ground, because these offendors are punishable by the civil Magistrate; the weakness though whereof, we have also fully discovered, as the Reader may see in our Animadver∣sions on the seventh Section of this Paper. But hereupon you will much less allow us any power to censure these offendors, with the censure of Excommunication, which in a disgrace∣full manner you call ur blunt and sharp sword, though through the blessing of God, a meanes to recover and bring home the lapsed offendors, and which we hope, would not be without its eficacy, if there should be occasion for us to make use thereof, for the recovery of any obstinate sin∣ner. 3. You are not (you say) sensible of the multiplicity of Ca∣nons, and burdensome Ceremonies, under which, in the time of E∣piscopacy, any truly conscientious did sigh and groan. But herein you suficiently discover your spirit, and that your great zeal for Prelacy hath taken away that sense, that should have been in you, not only as Christians, but as men. For what though you were perswaded in your consciences, touching the lawfullness of all the Canons that were made, and all the Ceremonies that were enjoyned by the Bishops? Yet you might have known, that even the old Ceremonies, the Cross in Baptisme, the Surplice, and kneeling at the Lords Supper, were born as a burden by sundry godly conformable men, Ministers and private Christians, however they judged they might submit unto them, being otherwise not to enjoy their liberty. But as touching the new Ceremonies that vvere imposed, as bowing at the Altar, and at the name of Jesus, if you vvere so unsensible that you savv no evil in them, yet you could not (one vvould think) be ignorant, that some The of Irela Bishop colne, th of Carli Bishops, and generally the godly conformable men through∣out the Land, vvere so startled at them, that they chose ra∣ther to run the utmost hazards, then to swallow down those things: Besides, the Canon for the taking the Oath to uphold the Government by Archbishops, Bishops, &c. did
so awaken the Ministers generally throughout the Land (and vve think Mr. Allen vvas in the number of such at that time, and are sorry he should be less sensible of the burdensomenesse of that Canon now, then he vvas then) that they not only complained of it, but appeared against it. And as touching the sufferings of the old Non-conformists, because they could not subscribe, and submit to the old Ceremonies, being for those things suspended, silenced, and excommunicated many of them; it seemes you never had hearts to pity them; else you would have been sensible on their behalf, of the bur∣densomenesse of the Canons and Ceremonies, that vvere im∣posed on them, during the continuance of Episcopacy, vvhich yet vvere never attempted to be proved by any (that vve have seen or heard of) to be in themselves necessary, (however the lawfullnesse of them vvas defended by sundry) and to vvhich they could not yeeld vvith peace of their consciences, though others could not. But here vve observe, you are guilty of double uncharitablenesse. First, In that you rase out of the number of persons that are truely conscientious, all those that did sigh and groan under the burdensomenesse of the Cere∣monies, that vvere imposed in the time of Episcopacy, vvhe∣ther new or old. Secondly, In that you expresse your un∣sensiblenesse of their sufferings, because they could not yeeld unto those Ceremonies. And by this vve may gather, vvhat might be expected from you, if Episcopacy vvere up again, and it vvere in your power to have all on foot, that vvas im∣posed on the Church of God in former times. But you here∣by sufficiently lesson, not only us, but all throughout the Land, into vvhose hands your Papers come, for to be∣vvare 4. You that here speak of the number of Canons, already made in our Provinciall Assemblies and elsewhere, in that short space since Presbytery hath been set up in the room of Episcopacy, (though you cannot mention Presbytery, but you must give a blow at it, calling it an usurpation, though yet you have not proved it to be so) and many urged necessary de fide, might have done well to have mentioned particularly what those Canons are, that the Reader might have judged, both of the number
and burdensomeness of them, if there had been cause of com∣plaint in either respect. But because this you could not do, you thought to make a strong accusation, some blot, at the least, being likely to adhere by that meanes (as you might think) though you proved nothing. But it is well known whose rule it was, Fortiter calumniare, aliquid adhaerebit. You should have also told the Reader, what those many Ca∣nons are, that you here speak of, that have been urged necessary de fide, we knowing of none that have been so urged, that were Canons, only made by our Provincial Assembly, and not held forth in the Canon of the sacred Scripture. And there∣fore till you acquaint the Reader particularly, what these are, we hope he will number this amongst the rest of the slanders, that you have raised of us in this Paper. He may discerne from what we have declared fully to this purpose, that, not∣withstanding our own perswasion touching the divine right of the ruling Elders Office, yet we are farre from imposing the necessity of this opinion touching them upon others; and therefore how we should urge any things, as necessary de fide, that are but Ecclesiastical Orders and Constitutions, we leave it to the Reader for to judge; who will hence easily gather, what likelyness there is of any truth in such a charge: whenas he may also further observe, that we have declared our selves concerning these, that they are changeable, and in their own nature variable. But yet you say, if you may judge ex pede Hereulem, (others that had spoken of the multiplicity of Ca∣nons and burdensome Ceremonies, imposed in the times of Episcopacy, might have better said, if they might have judg∣ed ex ungue Leonem) by the number of Canons already made in our Provincial Assemblies, (you yet particularizing none) since Presbytery was set up, what they would amount to, had we lived the age of Episcopacy, 100. yeares and upwards; (though the raign of Episcopacy is, as we have shewed, of a farre younger date, and especially Episcopacy in the height of it) hereby intimating, that they would have farre exceeded in number, all the Canons that ever were made, during the whole space of time, wherein Episcopacy hath been on foot. For answer unto this, we shall here only mind you, of what
you, (who are well acquainted with the Book of Common Prayer) may find therein, after the Preface of it, entreating of Ceremonies, why some be abolished, and some retained, where you have these words. Some (speaking of Ceremonies) are put away, because the great excess and multitude of them hath so encreased in these latter dayes, that the burden of them was intollera∣ble, whereof St. Augustine in his time complained, that they were grown to such a number, that the state of Chri∣stian people was in worse case concerning that matter, then were the Jewes. And he counselled that such yoke and bur∣den should be taken away, as time would serve quietly to do it. But what would St. Augustine have said, if he had seen the Ceremonies of late dayes used amongst us? whereunto the multitude used in his time, was not to be compared? This our excessive multitude of Ceremonies was so great, and many of them so dark, that they did more confound and darken, then declare and set forth Christs benefits to us. And yet all this that is here spoken of, your selves will say, must needs have been during the standing of Episcopacy. When you can bring forth such a testimony as this, complain∣ing touching the number and burdensomeness of Canons and Ceremonies, whilest Presbytery hath been on foot any where, by either the friends or enemies to it, (if they will but speak the truth) there may be then some reason to give credit to what you would here suggest; but on this we shall give you leave to breath. And in the mean season we cannot but take notice, that such is the charity that you have towards us, that you compare us with the Papists, for the burdensomenesse of Rites and Ceremonies, imposed by us on the Church (though your first Paper wherein you cried out, Quare oneramini Ri∣tibus, referred only to those few orders mentioned in that of ours, that was published in our Congregations, some where∣of your selves acknowledge there, to be the orders of Christ) and censure us as Dr. Andrews doth Bellarmine in behalf of our English Church. Nobis non tam articulosa fides, &c. Though if Dr. Andrews had been now alive, he would have been
ashamed of those, that should have made use of his words, with such an application of them, as you do here make. The Gentlemens Paper. Sect. XI. And now we are come to our last charge (as you call it) which as it is high, so (you judg) it hath little reason in it for the bearing it up. But how take you it off? Why first you observe, That we omit to mention the first part of this Order, and unto which that which follows in the two next Orders doth refer. We grant it doth, but we say not that onely, but to the latter branch of that Order also touching the Catechized Persons, and therefore we say if they refuse to present themselves before the Eldership, by this your Order the Minister must exhort and admonish them. But that is wholly of our adding, you say, and say it again, Is wholly our own, and none of yours. Why will you thus boldly averr so manifest an untruth? Is not the Order express, That the Minister, when he Catechiseth the sever∣all families, shall exhort such persons in them, as he finds to be of compe∣tent knowledge, and are blameless of life; that they present themselves to the Eldership, &c? And do not your selves confesse, that you said the Mi∣nister was to exhort, and that was all? But we adde, and say, He shall exhort and admonish. How can these words then be wholly our own, and none of yours? Because we adde the word Admonish, therefore must the rest be none of yours, but wholly ours? But oh the learned Criticks of our age! To exhort and to admonish, are two different things which we confound together, taking them for one and the same, which is in us a radicall, and grand mistake. What? every admonition a kind of Church censure, or in order (as you call it) thereto, no exhortation so? We confess our ignorance of such a di∣stinction, not having as yet learned it either from Scripture, Fathers, Coun∣cils, School-men, or any known approved Author: find it us in Scripture, you that are for the word of God alone. But in the the mean time we must tell you, (if our Translators erre not) they are promiscuously used in Scrip∣ture; Read Acts 20. 32. I ceased not to admonish every one of you with tears; Is this more then to exhort? Was it in order to Church censure? Again, Rom. 15. 14. , i. e. able to admonish one another, say some Translations, able to exhort one another, say others; is this a radical and grand mistake in them? Again, Col. 3. 16. , i. e. admonishing your own selves. Is this in order to Church-censure? Is it more then exhort∣ing? Again, Titus 3. 1. Admone illos, saith Hierom, Admone illos saith Calvin, upon the place: Our English Bibles, some render it Admonish o∣thers (Warne) them to be subject, &c. Is this in order to Church censure?
is it more then an Exhortation? Again, Titus 2. 14. These things speak, and exhort, and rebuke with all authority, Is to exhort, Cum omni imperio, with all Rule and Authority, less then to admonish? Nay more, Is private admonition a part of, or in order to Church censure according to Christ's rule, Mat. 18. or St Pauls, Titus 2. 10. Post unam & alteram admonitionem, Is that private admonition (we say) mentioned in the first part of your 4th Order, against onely the scandalous, and forsakers of publique Assemblies; (and not the exhortation of the Mi∣nister, to such as are of competent knowledge, and blameless of life, that they present themselves before the Eldership) in order to Church censure? Censure? to which only the Relative (They) in the 5th Order is li∣mited? Apage! Apage! Calvin is clear against you upon that text of Titus 3. 10. saying, Ad∣monitionem Cl. cop. Intelligit, (nempe Paulus) non quamlibet vel privati Hominis, sed quae fit à Ministro public â Ecclesiae authoritate. So not every private admonition is in order to excommunication in Calvins judgement: then what more then an exhortation? thus have not Scripture, nor Calvin noted this dif∣ference 'twixt an exhortation and admonition, nor can you (we believe) produce Fathers or Schoolmen, those Criticks speaking for you; nor hath Mr. Leigh in his Critica Sacra noted such a difference, nor any we have read of; and yet it is in us a radical and grand mistake. Yes, and the Relative (They) is as grand a mistake and errour in us to apply it to the nearer, when as it must of necessity be referred to the remoter Antecedent; when the subject matter spoken of doth necessarily require it, as Cl. cop. in this case it is clear it doth Ha, ha, hae.. The fourth Order runs thus (viz.) That they shall be privately admonished according to the order prescribed by Christ, Mat. 18. once or twice to see if they will reform (thus far is in order to Church censure.) And the Minister when he Cate∣chiseth the severall families, shall exhort [The Ministers exhortation is not so much as private admonition] such persons in them as he finds to be of competent knowledge, and blamelesse in life, that they present themselves to the Eldership, that they may be admitted to the Lords Supper. The 5th Order runs thus, viz. (That if they will neither hearken to pri∣vate admonition, nor, &c.) The question is now, to whom this Relative (They) refers. Your answer is; Not the to the last [they,] nor last but one: not to the blamelesse in life, or competent of knowledg; but to two other [They's,] in two Orders mentioned long before: It's not to the nearest, or earest but one, but to the remoter, yea to the remotest Antecedent: And those amongst us that are Schol∣lars, know this well enough. This must be the construction, nor can any other be made of it, either from the rules of Grammer, Logick, or common reason. Satis hoc Magisteraliter, We understood (as we do still) that the Relative (they) may refer to the remotest (viz.) to those that forsake the publick Assemblies in the 2d Order, and the scandalous in the 3d Order mentioned, but not excluding the nearest Antecedent (viz.) men of competent knowledge, and blameless life in the 4th Order mentioned. And then our note of Attention (as you call it) stands good. Marke, men of competent knowledge, and blamelesse in life, must be warned before all to reform. But here your Critiscism failes you in calling (Marke) a note of attention not distinguishing so accurately betwixt Marke and Hark, as in the former businesse betwixt Exhortation and Admonition. For Hark, is of attention properly, Marke, rather a note of observation; But this by the way; We
return to the Relative (they) and to whom it refers in your construction; that is to those that forsake the publick assemblies of Saints, and turn their backs on the Sacrament of the Lords Supper in the 2d Order mentioned, and to the scandalous persons mentioned in the 3d; to these, and none but these, your censures extend. Such as the Minister finds knowing and blamlesse in life, shall not be debarred the Sacrament; though they present not themselves to the Eldership. This you say, because very shame will not suffer you to affirm the contray. But wher's your practise all the while? or how observe you the rules you walk by? laid down as you tell us in the form of Church Go∣vernment, to which you refer us for further Information; wherein is given power to the Congregationall Eldership, as they shall see just occasion to in∣quire into the knowledge and spirituall estate of any member of the Congrega∣tion, to admonish, rebuke, suspend, excommunicate, &c. And you tell us this power of judgment and examination, of such as are knowing, and blamelesse in life, is not to any one Minister, but in the Eldership, by virtue of this Ordinance, or form of Church Government, which not onely justifies (you say) all that is practised in that case by the severall Elderships, but al∣so shewes what ground you had for that was mentioned in your Paper, touch∣ing both what is therin appointed to the Minister about Catechising families; and also concerning the Ministers exhorting such as in the several families he should find to be of competent knowledge, and knew to be of blameless life, that they should present themselves to the Eldership; the triall and judgment in this case, not belonging to any one Minister alone, but to the Eldership. Must they not present themselves by virtue of this Ordinance before the El∣dership (who have onely the power of judging, who are knowing and blamelesse in life, and not any one Minister) before they can be admitted to the Sacrament, notwithstanding the Minister finds them, and approves them as knowing and blamelesse? and is not your practice accordingly? why the do you thus mince your matter, and seeke to colour over your actions with a seeming deniall of all, with so many weak sensless and unheard of descants upon nouns and pronouns, to evade what still you practice, but are ashamed to own? either speak out and say (as the truth is) that all knowing and blame∣lesse in life, as well as the ignorant and scandalous, are to be debarred the Sacrament, unless they present themselves before the Eldership, who onely have the power to inquire into the knowledge and spirituall estate of all, to ad∣monish, to suspend, &c. by virtue of the Ordinance aforesaid, which is the rule you walk by, or else wave it (as we do) as repealed, and of no force and strength at this day: and then must you say with us, all you have here∣tofore said concerning the civill Sanction of your Church-Government, is no∣thing at all to purpose. And this our Charge, as it is high, so it is weighty, to the depressing of the Presbyterian Government, and well may be called the last, being the Summa Totalis, and upshot of all. Subscribed by us whose names are underwritten, by the consent and on the behalf of many others, Ferdinando Stanley, Nicho. Moseley, Isaac Allen, Thomas Prestwich, Leonard Egerton. Manchester the 13th of April, 1658.
The Animadversions of the Class upon it. 1. WE said your charge was very high; and it is manifest from what you concluded with, when in your first Paper, you had driven it up to the height, and squeezed our words to the drawing of blood, you made your inference from all your severall descants, upon that part of our order in our Paper, that there you pitcht on, and said; So that in brief, all wilfully ignorant (though we spake nothing in our Paper at all of their censure) and scandalous are to be excommunicated; and not onely they, but the knowing and blameless in life, if they present not themselves to the Eldership. This is that, you would make us to have declared in our Paper, that was published in our Congregations; which as it is a severity which we ab∣horred, so it is that which malice it self cannot charge us with to have practised. Though we told you what was exercised in this kinde toward such in the times of the Prelates, for whom you have not one word here to say, in way of justifi∣cation of them in that respect; and for which we blame you not, as we had reason to do before, touching that little sense you expressed touching the sufferings of those, that did sigh and groane under the burdensomeness of the Bishops Ceremo∣nies. But why do you here go about, to fasten that upon us still, with which you had charged us before, after we had dissavoured such a sense as you had put upon us, and after we had been at some pains, to evidence to you the grosseness of that mistake, as well as the heaviness of the charge? Common ingenuity would have prompted you otherwise, if that might have taken place. But you thought at the first you had some great advantage against us, when in your first Paper you en∣deavoured to have rendred us so odious. And notwithstand∣ing our Answer given, you apprehended you could make out your charge, and therefore you were resolved to adhere unto it, and do the utmost you could for that purpose. And so it seems if we have need of it, we must not find any mercy at your hands; and seeing it is thus we shall try what justice you
here discover, and what you have to say to prove us guilty, or that our Paper held forth any such a matter, as you have stri∣ven tooth and nail to fasten upon it. 2. We said, as your charge was high, so it had as little rea∣son in it for the bearing it up: and this we say again. But you hereupon demand; but how do we take it off? your selves return the answer to it, and say, that first we observe, that you omit to mention the first part of this Order, and unto which that which followes in the two next Orders doth referre. This indeed we said, and with this we begun; but our work here in the first place, was chiefly to give an account, how you had re∣presented us, and to note by the way briefly, what was true in it, and what was false, and wherein it was defective; and the deficiency which we took notice of, was that which you mention. And this however it tended to take off your charge, (as sc. it served to clear up our meaning) yet we proceeded farther, and gave you our reasons, why that could not be our sense, which you had put upon our words. We told you, our practice did speak the contrary; that neither from the rules of Grammar, Logick, or common reason, such a construction could be put on our words, as you had given; that it was an exhortation only that was to be given to the persons catechised, to present themselves before the Elder∣ship, and no more: not so much as an admonition in order to further censure, in case not hearkned to, and which two we proved unto you were different things: we also told you, that that which followes this order which you thus wrest, is so limited, that it could not with any colour be ap∣plied to those, that being exhorted by the Minister to present themselves to the Eldership, should still refuse. For we said, it spake expresly of such, that should neither hearken to pri∣vate admonition nor the admonition of the Eldership, that their Names should be published openly in the Congrega∣tion; and therefore of those onely, who had been appointed to be admonished, according to Christs rule, Matth. 18. in the fourth Order, and which were onely such, as did forsake the publick Assemblies, and the scandalous, who had been mentioned in the foregoing order. And yet to make the
matter more plain, we added, that the persons that were to have their Names published, and upon obstinacy to be pro∣ceeded against unto excommunication, were such as were sit to be admonished by the Eldership, and reject that admo∣nition, before they were further to be proceeded against; which could not be conceived from any thing in our Paper, to be the case of those, who being exhorted by the Minister to present themselves to the Eldership, refused to come be∣fore them. These severall reasons the Reader may finde in the last Section of our Answer, however not laid down al∣together in this very forme and manner, unto which yet you answer not, (according to your usual practice in this Paper, passing over the arguments that we urged, and saying nothing to them) and hereby it was that we endeavoured chiefly to take off your charge, and thought it was the fairest way to do it, the rendring you our reasons to clear it up unto you, what the true sense of our words was, being the most rational way we could take therein. We likewise, on these and other grounds mentioned in our answer, proceeded to answer the reasons, that we apprehended might induce you, to put that construction upon our expressions which you did, and which the Reader in our answer may see particularly, and to some of which you here say something, the strength whereof we shall examine anon. And then in the close of all, we said, we had thus farre removed all imaginable grounds in our ap∣prehension, for this your groundless charge, that our pur∣pose was to excommunicate all knowing and blameless per∣sons, if they presented not themselves before the Eldership. And then we further added, and said, that we should now proceed to examine what you produced for the supporting of your selves in it, and which we did accordingly, as the Rea∣der may observe. And thus we endeavoured to take off your charge, and of which we give the Reader an account, that so he may discern the better how groundless it was. But now as to what you here begin with, hence it is clear, that upon what account soever it was, that we mentioned your omitting of the first part of our Order, unto which we said, that which followed in the two next Orders did referre, it
was not any fair way in you to do so; that your omission, being of what tended to clear up our sense and meaning, which was thereby darkened and obscured. But this though we had complained of in our answer, and that justly, yet herein you answer nothing for your selves, and so still remain unacquitted from that blame, we had in this respect laid upon you. 3. And now whereas you grant, that, that which followes in the two next Orders, refers to the former part of the fourth Order, which you omitted, but then say, not to that only, but to the latter branch of that Order also, touching the catechised per∣sons, This is that which we must constantly deny. And how∣ever you assert it, yet seeing you neither answer our reasons to the contrary, which we gave you, and have here briefly recited, nor bring forth here any thing to make good your assertion, you cannot reasonably expect, that all men will believe, what you affirm in this particular, although you your selves, notwithstanding all that hath been or shall be said, should still have such a faith. And therefore it will not fol∣low, by that our Order, that if the catechised persons refused to present themselves before the Eldership, the Minister must exhort and admonish them in order to the publishing of their Names in the Congregation, and excommunication in case they should persist in such refusall, and which is the sense that you put upon, that which was appointed to be done by the Minister toward catechised persons; all that was appointed to be done by the Minister, being onely to exhort them, that were found to be competent in knowledg, and blameless in life, to present them∣selves to the Eldership; without the least hint of any further process that was to be against them, in case they hearkned not unto that exhortation. 4. In your first Paper (as we have told you) you recited (omitting the former part of our fourth Order) only the latter, and that in these words, viz. That the Minister when he catechiseth the severall families, shall exhort such persons in them, as he findes of competent knowledg, and blameless in life, that they present themselves to the Eldership, that they may be admitted to the Lords Supper. Then you come in with your comment upon
it, and say; But what if they will not present themselves before the Eldership? the Minister (say you) must exhort and admontsh. This, we said in our Answer, was wholly of your adding, and after we had rendred our reasons, why that part of our Order could not be understood, as you represented it in your Paper, and had answered all imaginable objections, in our apprehen∣sions: we said this again. And here we desire it might be took notice of, that we did not only say this, but gave our rea∣sons for it; and must, after so long time of consideration, say so still. But that it might here appear upon what ground we said this, though the Reader might of himself find it in our Answer, we will recite so much out of it, as may make this evident. We coming to examine, what you produced for the supporting of your selves in what you had charged us with, said; we found something in your comment upon our words, which was not in our text. For you said, what if after the Minister hath exhorted them, they shall not present themselves before the El∣dership? the Minister, say you, must exhort and admonish them. But this (we said) as we told you, was wholly your own and none of ours. And then we added our reasons, in these words; For first, though we do not deny, that if upon the first exhortation they do not present themselves to the Eldership, it being in order to their regular and orderly admission to the Lords Supper, the Mini∣ster may exhort, and exhort them again, because they continue in the neglect of that, which is their duty, yet there was no such thing said by us. But then to make the ground of your charge something more co∣lourable, you added another word, which was not at all used by us. We said the Minister was to exhort, and that was all. But you add and say, He shall exhort and admonish. But (we said) we had told you before, to exhort and admonish were different things. But here without ever so much as attempting to say any thing to these reasons, you fall foul upon us and say; why will you thus so boldly averre so manifest an untruth? But if you had considered how many untruths, you had your selves boldly asserted in this Paper, you would have been more sparing, then here again thus groundlesly to have charged us with asserting of untruth. We do not deny, but the Order is express (as you say,) That
the Minister, when he catechizeth the severall families, shall exhort such persons in them, as he finds to be of competent knowledg, and are blameless in life, to present themselves to the Eldership, &c. as we do also grant, as you do also here hint, that we did confess that the Minister was to exhort, and that was all (and which is all the reason you here bring to make out the charge against us of asserting a manifest untruth) But yet we must still say, that the comment upon our words by you made, both the question moved by you (sc. what if after the Minister hath exhorted them, they shall not present them∣selves before the Eldership) and your Answer by your selves given to it (sc. The Minister must exhort and admonish) is wholly your own and none of ours; both because there was no such a Question moved by us, or any such an Answer given to it; and also because you adding in your Answer made to that Question, the word [admonish] to the word [exhort] saying, He must exhort and admonish, did deprave and corrupt the sense of the word [exhort] in which it was taken by us; and by that addition made it equivalent to an admonition in order to further censure, which was spoken of in the begin∣ning of the fourth Order; and to which the two following Orders touching publishing Names, and excommunication in point of obstinacie did referre. These reasons (to which you here make no reply) we gave you in our Answer (as by what we have recited out of it the Reader may perceive) whence it is manifest, that that comment you made upon our words (however the word [exhort] be found therein, which is perverted by you from the sense, in which it was taken by us) is wholly your own and none of ours. 5. But upon this you return your wonted flouts, and say; But oh the learned Criticks of our age! to exhort and admonish are two different things, which we confound together, taking them for one and the same, which is in us a radical and grand mistake. Unto which we say: You had approved your selves to have been the more learned men, if you had replied, to what we had presented to you in our Answer, proving the difference be∣twixt an admonition in order to further censure, if not heark∣ned to, and an exhortation onely. But according to your
ordinary practice in matters of this nature, when you should return your answer to an argument, you come not to this at all, but pass it over, putting it off with a scoff. And here, that it may appear to the Reader, that we did not without some reason distinguish betwixt an admonition in order to further censure, and an exhortation onely, and that therefore your scoffs are reasonless, we are forced to recite something further out of our Answer. Having told you, That it was an exhortation onely, that was appointed to be given to the persons cate∣chized, to present themselves to the Eldership, and no more; not so much as an admonition in order to any further censure, if not hearkned unto: we added and said. And here we observe, that this is one main ground of your mistake; that you do not distinguish betwixt an admonition that is in order to a further censure, if it pre∣vail not (and which was mentioned in the first part of the fourth Order, and which you wholly omit) and an exhortation; but con∣found these together taking them for one and the same, and which is here a radicall and grand mistake. For doubtless in a thousand cases, that might be instanced in, there may be place for an exhor∣tation, when (though ineffectuall) there is not place for an ad∣monition, that is in order to a further Church censure, in case of obstinacy, as it is taken by us here. Men may be exhorted to ex∣amine and prove themselves, whether they he in the faith: to self-examination, before they come to the Lords Table: to grow in grace and in the knowledg of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ: to keep their hearts with all diligence: and to infinite more things of the like nature; and which are duties they should apply themselves unto, when yet there is no room for an admonition, in order to any Church censure, in case it be not obeyed. Nay when men may perceive, there is not that care, that should be in persons, in regard of some of their words and carriages, there may be place for an exhortation, and yet for no admonition in order to any Church censure, in case the exhortation be not hearkned unto: if there be not any further scan∣dalous outbreakings of corruption, that may merit it. Church censures are not to passe upon men for every fault, nor against such as be guilty of such sins of infirmity, as are commonly found in the children of God; as in that case by the rule, of our Government it is provided against. And yet an exhortation to righteousness and watch full∣ness
in such cases is not useless. And so it may be well appointed by us, that the Minister should exhort such, as are found by him to be persons of knowledg, and are in conversation blameless, to pre∣sent themselves to the Eldership, that so they might be regularly and orderly admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper (an Ord∣nance that is not to be sleighted, as it is by many, but upon too sleight grounds, as they will be found to be, when they are to be tried in the day of account) and yet no proceedings by Church censures against such persons, in case an exhortation prevail not. Thus far we have recited, what we answered; but now what is it, that is replied to all this? not one word, but only a bitter scoff, as if that were sufficient to answer every argument. But we beleeve all sober persons will see, you have not therein very learnedly answered us; however scornfull men (whose censures we matter not) may therein applaud you. But yet to clear up the matter further, (however we judg all inge∣nuous persons will be fully satisfied with the bare recitall of the Answer, that had been given) because we see, you have put our words upon the rack and stretcht them upon the ten∣ters, till they have quite lost their sense, in which we used them, and that you are resolved to deal as strictly with us as you can, where you apprehend you have any advantage. We must here open this matter a little more fully. And first, We shall not deny, that the word [admonish] is sometimes ta∣ken so largely, as that it is the same with the word [exhort,] and so some of the Texts you urge, may prove, &c. Acts 20. 31. Rom. 15. 14. Col. 3. 16. in which Texts the greek word , that doth properly signifie to admonish, is used. And yet we shall not contend, but the sense of it there may be the same with the word, that doth properly signifie to exhort: as also when the Apostle in another of the Texts cited by you, viz. Titus 3. 1. saith, using another word , put them in mind, though it should be rendred [admone illos,] that word may imply an exhortation. And again we shall as readily grant, that the word [exhort] is sometimes taken so largely, as that it may comprehend, under the latitude of it, that, which is usually understood by the word [admonish] strictly taken, as in Rom. 12. 8. , he that exhorteth on
exhortation. In which words the whole office of the Pastor is held forth, who was not only to exhort, but to admonish, re∣prove and comfort also, as there might be occasion. But yet though these words are sometimes used thus promiscuously, they are also distinguished. To admonish taken strictly and especially in an Ecclasiasticall sense, is to reprehend in regard of some fault, and so it is taken 1 Thes. 5. 14. , i. e, warne or admonish them, that are unruly; and is there distin∣guished from the word [admonish] taken in a more large sense, as appears from ver. 13. immediately going before: Know them that are over you in the Lord and admonish you, : and likewise from the word [exhort] taken strictly, as appears from the same ver. 14.  &c. we exhort you brethren; and yet doubtless the Apostle did not by that exhortation ad∣monish those he writes unto, to warne or admonish the unru∣ly in that sense, as he would have those unruly ones to be ad∣monished. But to make the matter more plain, we may here distinguish concerning admonition. There is a meer charitative admonition; and an admonition in order unto further censure if not hearkned unto. This latter, as we have told you, is not to be given for such infirmities, as are commonly found in the children of God, no nor yet for smaller faults or injuries, which Christian prudence, love and peaceableness require an overlooking and passing by; and of which Mat. 18. 15. is not to be understood: but the offence there grounding the admonition is a greater evil, endangering the soul of the doer, scandalizing the brother seeing it, and lying as a stumbling stone in his Christian course; and such a sin, that for the nature of it, is fit, in case of insuccessefullness of admonition, to be brought before the Church, as herein our reverend brethren, the associated Ministers of the County of Essex, do very well deliver themselves in their late Agreement, pag. 14. n. 5. This admoni∣tion, that is in order to Church censure, is either of private mem∣bers, and which may be also called brotherly and charitative; or else it is of the Officers of the Church; and which is either given by any one, or more of the Officers severally, which yet in them is authoritative; or else by them all joyntly, and which is the admonition of the Church spoken of Mat. 18. ver. 17. (which is another of the Texts you here mention) although
it is most orderly that this admonition be given by the Mini∣ster, (or one of them, where there be two or more) in the name of the rest of the Church-Officers, that give the offender this admonition. But besides this admonition, that is in order to Church censure, in case it prevail not, there is also a meer charitative admonition, that may be for lesser faults, that yet are not to be censured with Church censures in case there be not reformation. Although there are to be endeavours to redress such offences; and which kind of meer charitative admoni∣tions may be comprehended under the latitude of that rule laid down Gal. 6. 1. You your selves do not here deny, but there may be a private admonition, that is not in order to Church censure, when upon your quoting Calvins words on Titus 3. 10. you say (seeming to approve of what you take to be his mean∣ing, though you misinterpret him, as we shall shew anon) not every private admonition is in order to excommunication in Cal∣vins judgement. And this was necessarily implied in the words we used in our Answer, when we opposed an admonition in order to further censure unto that, which is but an exhortation only; intimating plainly enough thereby, that there was be∣sides an admonition in order to further censure, a meer charitative admonition, which was not to be followed with any Church censure in case it prevailed not. This is that likewise, which our forementioned Reverend Brethren of Essex, in their Agree∣ment do also speak of, having given their sense upon Mat. 18. 15. they further say in their Agreement pag. 15. n. 6. Besides this Ecclesiasticall admonition, we yeeld there may be other charitative admonitions, which must not preceed to Ecclesiasticall censure. But from all that hath been thus far spoken touching ad∣monition, its very clear, that admonition taken strictly and properly, is a reprehension in regard of some evill, or fault done. Though we do not deny, but there may be an admo∣nition by way of caution, warning to take heed of some sin, that one may be in danger to commit. We shall now pro∣ceed to shew what exhortation is taken in a strict acceptation. To exhort strictly is to excite or perswade, and stir up unto that, which is good, and is distinguished from admonition taken properly, as is manifest from the Text before quoted,
1 Thes. 5. 14. Now we exhort you brethren ▪ warne them that are unruly, &c. The Thessalonians are here exhorted only or stird up to perform their duty towards the unruly, &c. and are not at all blamed by the Apostle: but the unruly that were to be warned or admonished, were to be reproved and blamed by the Thessalonians for their unruliness. And there is place fre∣quently for an exhortation, when there is not to be any repre∣hension or admonition given in regard of any thing amiss. But to make this matter yet more plain, we may here distin∣guish of exhortation, as before of admonition. For exhortation also is either charitative or of private Christians, and of which Heb. 3. 13. Exhort one another daily, while it is called to day: and Heb. 10. 25. Not forsaking the assembling of your selves together, as the manner of some is, but exhorting one another, &c. or authorita∣tive and of the Minister; and which may be either publick or private; and of which there is often speech in the new Testa∣ment: As 1 Tim. 2. 1. I exhort therefore that first of all suppli∣cations and prayers, &c. be made for all men. 2 Cor. 9. 5. There∣fore I thought it necessary to exhort the brethren. 1 Tim. 6. 21. These things teach and exhort. So in one of the Texts alleadged by you, Titus 2. 15. These things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all authority. Where exhortation may well be distinguished from rebuke, though both be authoritative, and are to be joyn∣ed with Doctrine, such applications of Doctrine being very usefull and necessary. So 1 Pet. 5. 1. The Elders which are a∣mong you I exhort, who am also an Elder. By these Texts it is clear, that as an exhortation properly is an excitation, or perswasion unto something that is good, so it is distinguished from admonition taken strictly, and which is a reprehension for something amiss; and that in many cases it may be use∣full, when there is not the least intimation of any neglect or sin committed, for which the parties so exhorted are repro∣ved. Unto which we may further adde, Acts 27. 22. where Paul saish to those in the ship with him, And now I exhort you to be of good chear. This exhortation was not doubtless in order to any Church censure, and therefore must needs be distin∣guished from such an admonition. So when it is said of Bar∣nabas, that when he had seen the grace of God, he was glad, and
exhorted them all, that with purpose of heart they would cleave to the Lord, Acts 11. 23. This cannot be with any co∣lour understood of any admonition in order to Church cen∣sure: The best of men, that walk never so blamelesly, may be exhorted, when yet there is no reason, why they should be ad∣monished in order to Church censure, except men must be ad∣monished and censured for such common infirmities, from which no men on earth are wholly free. But by this that we have said, it is sufficiently evidenced, that in Scripture language an exhortation taken strictly and properly, is, notwithstanding your scoff, a different thing from an admonition in order to further censure, if it prevail not. And we think, however you may account of us, you had shewed your selves to have been more learned, if you had not so causelesly quarrelled with that, which is so manifest to any, that are versed either in Scripture, or any other approved Au∣thors. But we shall not examin what you oppose to what we had herein asserted. 1. And first you begin with us sharply, and say; What? every admonition a kind of Church censure, or in order (as we call it) thereunt, not exhortation so? You confess your ignorance of such a distinction, not having as yet learned t either from Scripture, Fathers, &c. But here you charge us with what we never said, &c. That every admonition is a kind of Church censure, or in order to it, and no exhortation so. Our distinction intimated, that besides the admonition, that was in order to Church Censure, there might be a charitative admonition, as there may be a charitative exhortation, yea an authoritative by the Minister, when yet there is no place for censure, in case the exhortation be successeless. This we have shewed you from Scripture, though you twit us again with being for the word of God alone, for which we are not ashamed to profess our selves to be. And thus you have very learnedly in the first place opposed us, by imputing to us, what we never said. 2. But it may be your next is of greater strength; and there∣fore we shall hearken to what you have to tell us, sc. That the words admonish and exhort, are promiscuously used. And who ever denied this? Here therefore you have put your selves upon the pains to prove what we never gainsayed: nay you prove by
could not be the catechized persons mentioned immediately before, who were to be exhorted only: But these only, in the beginning of the fourth Order, that were to be privately admo∣nished according to the Order prescribed Mat. 18. once or twice, to see if they would reforme; But this reason, because you could not answer, you do warily passe it over, and never meddle with it. 2. But notwithstanding this reason rendred, you hope to bfnde us to your absurd and uncharitable constru∣ction, you had put upon us. But when we examine with what Arguments you do it, you again discover therein your wonted deficiency. And therefore, 1. In your reply, as it was presented unto us, for want of reason, wherewith to oppose us, the first thing, that we meet with, in answer to our assertion and thereason of it, was a scornfull laughter, ha, ha, he. But this answer was so light, that when you Printed your Papers, it seems you were ashamed of it, and therefore thought good to admit it. 2. In the next place you write our Orders, and having mention∣ed the former part of the fourth, that speakes of the admoni∣tion, that was to be given to the forsakers of publick Assem∣blies and the scandalous; you express that, which indeed was our sense there, and say thus farre is in order to Church censures, which we grant was our meaning. Then you come to men∣tion the other part touching the Ministers exhorting of the Catechized persons and say of this, as if we had therein asser∣ted some absurd thing. The Ministers Exhortation is not so much as private Admonition. But we are not ashamed of this Assertion, it being that we still own. And here it had be∣come you to have opposed it with some Arguments; but this (it may be) you thought you had done sufficiently before, when you had told us, and took the pains to prove that, which we never denied, viz. That to admonish and exhort are presumptuously used. But we have proved unto you, that these two taken properly are distinguished; Admonition properly being a reprehension in regard of some fault; where∣as an exhortation is a more gentle way of proceeding, and u∣sed in the exciting or perswading unto duty; and for which there may be place as (we have told you) in a thousand Ca∣ses,
where there is not to any admonition in order unto cen∣sure in case of unsuccessfullness, and in which sense admoniti∣on is taken here. And now we go on to what follows, Though here we ob∣serve, that you having recited the fourth Order at large, when you should come to recite the fifth, do it not only in part, and therefore that the matter here may be the more clearly understood (that though your imperfect recitall of it may be darkned to an undiscerning Reader) we shall mention it ful∣ly. The Order was thus. That if they will neither hearken to private adminition, nor the admonition of the Eldership, their names shall be published openly in the severall Congregations, and they warn∣ed before all to reforme. The Question now is (as you here say) to whom this Rela∣tive [they] refers. It is indeed now a question, because you have made it one; though it was at first cleare enough to any ordinary understanding, where there was not a spirit of op∣position, and a desire to cavill; but if there had been any doubt, yet in our Answer we cleared it, by declaring our sense, and giving our reasons, why our words were to be so constru∣ed. But notwithstanding we had so done, because you are not willing to be satisfied, you will have it to be a question still. And seeing with you it must be so, let us see, what you can make of it. 1. You would seem to returne what our Answer to this question was, but you deface it, and when you have done giving your censure of it. But here we desire the Reader to observe. 1. That you would by this answer, which you say we give, make the persons diverse, that are spoken of in the latter part of the fourth Order, (viz. Such as being found competent in knowledge and blameless in life, were to be ex∣horted by the Minister, to present themselves to the Eldership in Order to their admission to the Lords Supper) because of the double qualification there mentioned, as requisite to make them capable of the Ordinance; which is here your first errour. 2. Having distinguished the persons, that we made one, and expressed that disjunctively (not to the last [they] as you are pleased
to express it, nor last but one; not to the blameless in life, or compe∣tent in knowledge) which we expressed it copulatively (such as are of a competent knowledge and blameless in life.) You in the next place tell of Persons mentioned in two Orders long before, to whom (as you would have us to say) the Relative [they] referres, and not to the nearest, or nearest but one. Whereas the Persons, to whom we say, this Relative [they] in this fifth Or∣der referres, are those mentioned in the former part of the fourth Order immediately before, viz. Those who were to be privately admonished according to Christs order, Mat. 18. And who were either the scandalous or forsakers of publick As∣semblies; and which though they had been mentioned in the second and third Orders, yet were the same persons, that were still spoken of in the beginning of the fourth Order, and to which the Relative [they] by us there used, did referre Here then is another error. And yet we denied, and do still, that the Relative [they] in this fifth Order, did referre to the nearest Persons mentioned in the fourth Order. (which yet you will stil have in regard of their two-fold qualification to be diverse Persons, which errour we noted before) viz. the Catechized Persons, but to the Persons mentioned in the beginning of the fourth Order only. 3. When you tell of this Relative [they] mentioned in that fifth Order, referring not to the last [they] but to two other [they's] these expressions being your own and none of ours; you do not herein approve your selves to be very good Grammarians; the Relative not referring at any time to another Relative, but to an Antecedent, if men will speake properly; however the Antecedent, to which it refers, may be spoken of, and implyed in a Relative going before, and as in this place it is. Here then is your third errour. It is a wonder to thinke that wittie men, and such as had triumph∣ed over us as poore illiterate Persons but a little before, should in so few words have erred so much. And yet we cannot judge, that the Reader will imagine, you have in any of your Papers discovered any such depth in other Learning. As that (if you had been so wholly taken up therein, that you had thereby forgot your Rudiments) you were to be thereupon excused. 4. When we said the Relative [they] must re∣ferre
not to the next, but the remoter Antecedent (and which was that only, that was asserted by us) we did not Magisteri∣ally assert this, but gave our reasons for this Assertion; though you indeed Magisterially reject it, not returning any answer to the Argument we gave you for that construction given of our words. And therefore your censure of us (Satis haec magisteraliter) may well by us be sleighted, being without all reason. 2. We have noted, what we thought ours fit to be observed in the answer, you would represent us to have given to the question; we shall now see, what it is, where∣with you oppose our Assertion. 1. And first you tell us, You understood (as you do still) that the Relative [they] may referre to the remotest, viz. to those that for∣sake the publick Assemblies in the second Order, and the scanaalous in the third Order mentioned, but not excluding the meanest Antece∣dent, viz. men of competent knowledge and blameless in life (Here you express your selves, as we did, Copulatively, and take these persons for one and the same, though considered under this two-fold qualification, and to be one Antecedent, which even now you would have had to be two.) in the fourth Or∣der mentioned. Thus you assert, Satis magisteraliter, as we may say for sure; for you answer not to the rule, we had laid down, viz. That the Relative is often referred to the remoter Antecedent, and must be so of necessity, when the subject matter spoken of doth necessarily require it, as in the case, it is cleare it doth. We here al∣so said, that those of you, that were Scholars, did well know thus much; but seeing you do here deny this rule, and upbraide us anon, with senseless and unheard of descants upon Nouns and Pronouns, for no other reason, but in regard of what is there∣in Asserted by us, we must confess, we looked on you to have been better Scholars, then in this we have found you to be. But we shall first make good the rule by us laid down, and then leave it to the Reader to judge, whither it be not fitly by us applied to the Case in hand. That the Relative not on∣ly may, but must of necessity, referre to the remoter Antece∣dent, and not to the next, when the Subject matter requires it, is manifest from these examples. It is said Gen. 10. 11, 12. Out of the Land went forth Ashur, and builded Nineveh, and the
City Rehoboth and Caelah, and Resen between Nineveh and Calah, The same,  viz. Ni∣neveh not Ca∣lah, is a great City, where the Relative, &c.  (that or the same) is refered not to the nearer Antece∣dent, [Calah] but to the remoter Nineveh, that being the great City there spoken of, being so called by God himselfe, Jonah 1. 2. & 3. 2. & 4. 11. and us that; which is here understood by Interpreters on this Text. So also Psal. 99. 6, 7. Moses and Aaron among his Priests, and Samuell among them that call upon his name, they called upon the Lord and he answered them, he spake un∣to them  in the cloudy Pillar. Which words, viz. he spake to them in the cloudy Pillar, as Junius in his parallels doth well observe, may be rightly expounded of Moses and Aaron; but of Samuell, Non nisi praeter veritatem fidem{que} Histori∣ae. i. e. Not but besides the truth and faith of the History. And therefore the Relative [them] in the seaventh Verse must referre not to Samuell, which is the nearer Antecedent, but to Moses and Aaron, which are remoter. More instances might be gi∣ven out of the old Testament, concerning which the learned may be consulted; we shall instance in some in the new. In 2 Thes. 2. 8, 9. It is said, And then shall that wicked be revealed, wom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming: whose coming &c. . Where the Relative must of necessity be refered, not to the Lord, who was the person spoken of immediately before, and so the nearer Antecedent, but to the remoter, unlesse we will confound Christ and Anti-christ. And therefore our Translators, to make the matter more clear, adde in the begin∣ning of the ninth Verse, [even him] which words are not in the Originall. But from this Text our rule is undeniably made good. We shall only give one instance more. It is said Heb. 9. 3, 4. And after the second vaile, the Tabernacle which is called the holiest of all, which had the golden censuer, and the Arke of the Covenant, overlaide round about with Gold, wherein , was the Golden Pot, that had Manna, and Aarons rod that budded. Where the Relative, being Feminine, as it cannot with any good sense refer to gold, that is the next Antecedent, and of a diffe∣rent gender, so neither to , the Arke, though of the same gender, and the nearer, but to , Tabernacle, the remo∣ter Antecedent. We confess Interpreters do here vary, but
when we consider, that it is said expresly, 1 Kings 8. 9. and 2 Chron: 5. 10. that there was nothing in the Arke, but the two Tables, we do with sundry others upon this Text conceive, that the Relative must here referre not to the nearer, but to the remoter Antecedent. This interpretation of this Text, which we have given, is followed by Junius in his paral∣lels, who there laies down this very rule, that we gave in our Answer: Haec autem omnis dubitatio tolli evidentissime potest, (nisi me animus fallit) unica observatione Grammaticâ, quod Re∣lativum Pronomen, in utro{que} Testamento, pro ratione locorum, modo ad proximum nomen, modo ad longinquius pertinet: quod ex argu∣menti & Historiae veritate demum dignoscitur. And then he gives instances hereof, and mentions some of the places, that we have instanced in. See also Mr. Palmer, and Mr. Cawdry, See part 1. page 51, 52. vindi∣cating this Text in their Sabbathum re divivum, where they in∣terpret it as we do, and do also expresly approve of our rule. Our large English Annotations differ from us some thing in the expounding the word [wherein,] but yet upon this Text they approve our rule, when they say; Some referre [wherein] to Tabernacle v. 3. and it is true, that sometimes the Relative hath relation unto the more remote Antecedent. But by this time we hope it is cleare, that you had little reason to make such an out-cry against us, as you do anon, telling us of senseless and unheard of descants upon Nouns and Pronouns, because we said the Relative [they] in the fifth Order refered not to the next, but the remoter Antecedent, mentioned in the Order imme∣diately before; the Subject matter here spoken of necessa∣rily requiring it, being it is limited to such, as should neither hearken to private admonition, nor to the ad∣monition of the Eldership, which were only the scanda∣lous and forsakers of publick Assemblies, appointed to be admonished in the beginning of the fourth Order: and not the persons catechized by the Minister, to whom no admonition was appointed to be given, but an Ex∣hortation only to present themselves to the Eldership in order to their regular admission to the Lords Supper; and for which Exhortation to be given by the Minister, we judged there might be a fit reason, when he catechized
the Families, and tho rather (as we had told you in our Answer) because having the opportunity of conference with them at this time, if they had any doubts about this matter, or he saw that it was prejudice only in them against the Elders, that hindred them (and as it is in most) he might endeavour to remove them. With this we judge all ingenu∣ous and impartiall Readers will be satisfied, and will not conceive, that the rule, we laid down, touching the Relative , being referred to the remoter Antecedent, where the Subject matter required it, was misapplied by us; there being plaine reason from the expressions we used, why it ought to be thus referred. But you having on∣ly opposed our rule by laying down a contrary assertion, without any reason, do now make your inference, that then your note of attention (as you say, we called it) stands good. Marke men of contempt knowledge and blame∣lesse life, must be warned before all to reforme. But all Candid Readers, by what hath been said, will see this was a forced and uncharitable construction put upon us by your selves, only to render us odious, and yet still, after we had in our Answer declared our selves to the contrary by you imputed to us, without and against rea∣son; and of which, however you may judge your selves, we thinke others will count it to proceed from too much will and pertinacy. But here you have a profound ground of quarrelling with us, for that we distinguished not be∣twixt [marke] and [harke,] harke as you say being a note of attention properly; marke rather a note of observation; as if the attention and observation of the minde were two different things; or as if Schoole-Boyes (who are ne∣ver blamed by their learned Masters for calling en & ecce, notes of attention) would not be ready hereupon to tell you, that according to your learned distinction betwixt [mareke and harke] these must not be notes of attention, but observation properly, because they are rendred behold. But you till us this is but by the way; though all serious per∣sons will see, you were here out of the way in being so light in a serious businesse. And now you returne to the
Relative [they] and to whom it refers in our constructi∣on, that is, to those, that forsake the publick Assem∣blies of Saints, and turne their backs on the Sacrament of the Lords Supper in the second Order mentioned, and to the scandalous persons mentioned in the third, to these and none but these our censures extend. And this we say still; neither have you urged any thing, that can have any colour of making good against us to the contra∣ry; you having hitherto not argued, but only without reason laid down your opposite assertion, the groundles∣nesse whereof hath been sufficiently discovered by what hath been said. 2. But perhaps you would be thought to performe this in the next, when you further represent us to say, that such as the Minister findes knowing and blamelesse in life, shall not be debarred the Sacrament, though they present not themselves to the Eldership, and that this we say, because shame will not suffer us to affirme the contrary; and then do aske us, but where's our practice all the while, or how observe we the rules, we walke by, laid down, as we had told you, in the forme of Church Government? But for answer here we say; 1. That you have lost your Question, which was not, whether such as the Minister finds knowing and blamelesse in life, shall be debarred of the Sacrament, though they present not themselves to the Eldership. But whether the Relative [they] in the fifth Order re∣fer'd not to these; and which was the Question your selves had propounded to be discussed; and so therefore, whether those, whom the Minister having catechized and exhorted to present themselves to the Eldership, ought not to have their names published, and they warned be∣fore all to reforme, if they harkened not to the Exhor∣tation? where we must deny, that ever any such a thing was held forth by us in any of the Orders, we published (how∣ever it was that which was by you imputed to us, but have not proved, though to make the matter somewhat more colourable, you alter the state of the Question) nor can a∣ny such a thing be made out against us, either from our pra∣ctice,
or the rule we walke by. And further we say, that if ever we had practised any such a thing, or had professed to walke by any such a rule, there had been reason, why we should have been ashamed. 2. But vve must further adde, what we have formerly asserted, that we do not re∣fuse to admit any to the Sacrament, meerly upon this ground, because they present not themselves to the Eldership, if they be such as are of competent knowledge and blame∣lesse life, the Eldership condescending (as hath been said) to admit upon the Testimony of the Minister and one El∣der, or of two Ministers, such as have been by them exa∣mined and approved. Neither is this practice repugnant to any rule laid down in the forme of Church Governement. For however it give a power to the Eldership to inquire into the spirituall estate of any member, as they shall see occasi∣on, yet it doth not strictly oblige them, to debarre or re∣ject every one, that present not themselves before them; although if it be out of meere obstinacy of spirit, that they refuse, and a desire to overturne the Governement by their opposition, there is the greater reason, why Ministers and Elders are in such Cases to beware, as it is requisite for the securing of the Elderships just power, and to prevent the dan∣ger and irregularity of the exercise of solitary jurisdiction, that none be admitted but by the juridicall act of the Elder∣ship, and which, as it is that which we practice, so it is that power which is granted to the Eldership, by the Ordinance appointing the forme of Church Governement; The examina∣tion and judgement of such persons, as shall for their ignorance not be admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, being by that Ordinance to be in the power, not of any one Mini∣ster, but of the Eldership of every Congregation; and which as it justifies (as we told you) what is in that kinde practised by the severall Elderships, so it also shews, what ground we had for that, which was mentioned in our Paper, touching both what is therein appointed to the Minister about catechizing Families, and also concerning the Ministers exhorting such, as in the severall families he should finde to be of competent knowledge, and knew to be of blamelesse life, that they should pre∣sent
themselves to the Eldership. And therefore that we may Answer to what you here urge us with, out of the Ordinance, we say, it is one thing not to admit any to the Sacrament, but by the juridicall act of the Eldership; and another thing to say, that none is to be admitted, except they present themselves before the Eldership. The power mentioned in the former is granted by the Ordinance unto the Eldership, and is that which by us is constantly practised. In the latter there is a liberty to do, as the Eldership shall see occasion, and which is in severall Cases with us dispensed with, where the El∣derships are otherwise satisfied touching the fitness of the persons, that are to be by them admitted. And yet not∣withstanding this, it is not the Question (as we have al∣ready said) that is now discussed betwixt you and us, whe∣ther the knowing and blamelesse be to be kept off from the Sacrament by any Order of ours, except they shall present themselves to the Eldership. And hereupon your urging us with the Ordinance for Church government, or our own practice, is not at all to your purpose; neither doth it (if it had been as you represented, which yet we have shewed you is otherwise) prove what it concerned you to have made good, viz. That those that present not themselves to the Eldership, upon the Exhortation given by the Mini∣ster to that purpose, were according to our Order to have had their names published in the Congregations, and they warned before all to reforme. Which yet was your high charge, and ac∣cusation of us, but wanting support of it self falls to the ground. And hereupon it is manifest, that it is not we, that go about to mince the matter, or that seek to colour over our actions with a seeming deniall of all; or to evade, what we still practice, but are ashamed to own, as you here without the least shadow of proofe affirme of us; neither is there any thing to be found in our Answer, that hath any tendency this way, we there professedly defending and justifying all that we practi∣sed. But it is you, who having laid grevious things to our charge, which you could not prove, would now repre∣sent us, as if we did, as you say; that so you might seem to say some thing, though when it comes to be scan'd, it is no∣thing,
but a plaine discovery that though your accusation was loud and strong, your proof is low; weake, and empty, and such as vanisheth into Aire. For all the descants (as you call them) that we made on either Nounes or Pronouns, was to shew, that the Relative [they] in the fifth Order could not refer to the Catechized persons, who being found know∣ing and blamelesse by the Minister, though they should not according to the Exhortation of the Minister present them∣selves to the Eldership, yet were not to have had their names published to the Congregation, nor for that warned before all to reforme; and which because you saw you could not make out, do therefore (having changed the state of the Question) fall upon our practice, and tell us, we mince it; or are asha∣med of it; though this be also untrue, and that which you do not prove against us neither, and so are doubly guilty in this one particular of false accusation. But when to cleare up the sense of our words, we had told you in our Answer, that the Relative did often referre to the remoter, and not the near∣er Antecedent, and must do so, when the matter spoken of did require it, and this you here call a weake, senselesse and unheard of descanting on Nounes and Pronouns. You do here∣by proclaime your own ignorance; the like descanting (if it must be so called) on Nounes and Pronounes being observed by the Learned, (as we have shewed you) to open and expound the sense of Scripture, and which you your selves must ac∣knowledge, or you shall never be able rightly in some places to understand them, as from the instances we have given, is manifest. And you do hereby further discover your impo∣tent passions, else you would not have given us such language as we here (as but too often throughout your Paper) meet with. As touching what follows to the conclusion, we have already said, what is sufficient for our own vindication. We have spoken out and owned what is in truth our pactice, and which we have told you is to admit of none to the Sacrament, but by the juridicall act of the Eldership; this being that which is requisite and necessary to be observed (as we have told you) or the Governement is indangered to be quite over∣thrown. And yet none are debarred by us from the Sacrament,
that are knowing and blamelesse, because they present not themselves before the Eldership, (which is that you would gladly fasten up∣on us, though herein you labour in vain) but the ignorant and scandalous only. Although we here must minde you, of what we told you even now, viz. That this is not the Question that is now disputed betwixt us. Neither do vve need upon any practice of ours, or any other account whatsoever, wave the Ordinance we act upon as repealed; and vvhich however you do, yet we must not, nor be perswaded thereunto, either by your threats or intreaties, having proved sufficiently, that this Ordinance is of force and strength to this very day, that and what we have heretofore said concerning the civill sanction of our Governe∣ment, is so much to the purpose, that it makes this forth. And so to conclude, we do not question, but whatever your conceits may be to the contrary, others will determine, that your high charge having not been supported by reason, is of no vveight to the depressing of us, much lesse the Presbyterian go∣vernement, and vvhich (though vve had fallen not having been able to have vindicated our selves from vvhat vve had been accused vvith) vvould notwithstanding have been far above any depression of yours. However vve believe it vvas the summa totalis, and the ushot of all, that you chiefly aimed at in all your Papers; though how you have therein acquitted your selves will be manifest enough to the attentive and im∣partiall Reader, vvho vvill easily discerne by vvhat hath been said, that you have no otherwise indeavoured to depresse this Governement, but by aspersing it, vvhen you vvanted Argu∣ments, vvherewith to oppose it; by taking no notice of the rea∣sons vve urged, vvhen you could not Answer them; and pas∣sing over many things in our Answer in silence saying no∣thing to them; by betaking your selves to the Popish princi∣ples and practices, refusing to have the controversie touching Church governement determined by the Scriptures, and rail∣ing on us as Scripturists, for contending to have the matter tri∣ed by this Judge; by asserting severall manifest untruths, and sometimes palpably contradictng your selves; by falsifying and abusing approved Protestant Authors, vvho favoured not the cause you plead for; and aspersing others, by perverting our
words and mangling them, vvhen you had a minde to render us absurd; by many uncivill and unchristian expressions, which you have used toward us, to the reproaching of us; by your severall bitter and reasonless scoffes, jeeres, uncharitable cen∣sures and slanders, laying to our charge severall things, for which you bring no proof, and venting your distempered passions against us only, because we are for Presbyterian and against Episcopall governement; and to summe up all in a word, by hard words, but soft and weake Arguments. But all wise and sober persons will conclude, you fighting against us and the Presbyterians governement, with such weapons as these, tooke not the way either to depress it or us; but have greatly hereby depressed your selves; and which we mind you of, that you seeing your manifold errours herein, might be humbled for them, and prevent that, by unfeigned repentance, which otherwise you have cause to feare, and whereof we have all along in faithfullness warned you, as there hath been occa∣sion offered throughout your Papers, though thereby what is now presented to the publick view, is swelled to the greater bulke. If this our pains, that hath been designed for the ends even now mentioned, as well as for the necessary vindicati∣on of our selves and the Governement, the truth and waies of Christ, shall be so farre blessed by God, as to bring you to a sense of what you have much offended God and the Church in, and to be ashamed thereof, we shall much rejoyce. But if otherwise, we shall yet have comfort in this, that we have discharged our duty toward you in labouring to reduce you, and shall commit what further worke may be called for from us, unto Him, who will own his servants in the management of whatsoever he sets them about. And thus having finished our Answer to your two last Papers, and been at the pains once more to spread before you, what (however you esteem thereof) others we hope will judge sufficient for the satisfaction of those, that are willing to be satisfied: we shall now apply our selves to what concerns us to practice in pursuance of what we published in our Con∣gregations, and is now made known to the world; not questioning but all wise and sober persons will judge, that if to
take us off our worke and businesse, you should assault us a∣gain after the same manner, as hitherto you have done, it will not be fit we should hereafter interrupt our more necessary and profitable imployments, in the returning any further An∣swer to you, vvho may perhaps be ambitious to have the last vvord; but that rather it will be prudence in us, to slight that which having no weight in it, vvill of it self vanish away. Signed in the name and by the appointment of the Class by Robert Constantine Moderator. At the first Class within the Province of Lancaster, at Manchester, Novemb. the 23. 1658. A brief tast of the spirit the Gentlemen discover in their Papers, in these following expressions, amongst many others. In the Preface. QUi unam patitur injuriam, invitat novam; 'Tis a certain rule with the men of this perswasion, if you take a blow from them on one cheek, you cannot be Christians in their Calendar, unles you turn the other also. The Gyant of Presbytery—The Palladium that would preserve the City of God. 'Tis a trouble to us, that men who impropriate to themselves the name of Saints, and would have the world to think them the only Christians. They are still of the old legall spirit, to radicate and destroy all that are not of their way. In their third Paper. Such godly and sober, such moderate spirited men, as you pretend to be. Sect. 4.
You wheel about and are come to the pole you started at, like a Horse in a Mill, that traviles all day, and is no further at night, then he was in the morning. Ibid. For this all parties hiss you, and laugh you to scorne. Sect. 5. Have you two hearts, and not one forhead? Ibid. Who can forbeare laughter, to see Scripturists under the Gospell, (as those under the Law, Templum Domini, Templum Domini,) cry verbum Domini, verbum Domini, nothing but Scripture, the word of God being there the only rule of Faith and manners. Sect. 6. —Void of all modesty, and shewing thereby no great store, either of learning or honesty. Ibid. You wrest the Scriptures (which St Peter complaines of) with expo∣sitions and glosses newly coyned, to make them speake what they never meant—This wresting of Scripture Dr. Andrews taxeth the Papists withall, saying, Malus hic Cardinalium mos, and we as truely, Malus hic Presbyterorum mos—rem facias rem, si possis rectè, si non quo cun{que} moderem. Sect. Ibid. 6. The London Ministers, the Provinciall Synod at London, Rutherford and Gillespie, they call moderne Authors of yesterday, and adde, they may serve your turnes amongst the ignorant and vulgar sort, wbo measure all by tale and not by weight, when others, that know what and who many of them are, will conclude you draw very neare the dreggs. Sect. 8. Your Elderships short and blunt sword of excommunication. Sect. 10. But oh the learned Criticks of our age! Sect. 11. Apage! Sect. 16. Ha, ha, he. Ibid. Thus you say, because very shame will not suffer you to affirme the contrary. Ibid. Why do you seek to colour over your actions—with so many weake, sensless and unheard of descants upon Nouns and Pronouns, to evade what still you practice, but are ashamed to own. Ibid. This (even this) is the modest examination of the dissenting Chri∣stians mentioned in their Title Page. FINIS.
