C2194 E405_25 99862384 114542
THE KINGS MAJESTIES DECLARATION CONCERNING The High and Honourable Court of Parliament; together with His Protestation, for a firme settlement of the true Protestant Religion, the Law, Peace, and prosperity of this Kingdome. As also, two Letters from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax to the Right Honourable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the Honourable House of Commons. C R depiction of King Charles I 7ber: 6 LONDON, Printed for R. WOOD, 1647.
THE KINGS MAJESTIES DECLARATION To all His Loyall Subjects; Concerning the High and Honourable Court of Parliament. The Preface. WHereas there hath (of late) many Copies of great consequence, (and worthy of the King∣domes observation and acceptation) happened to my hands, who after perusall of the same, found them ve∣ry necessary and requisite, to present to the view of the whole Kingdome, for generall satisfaction to all, and through the earnestnesse of my desire to make the said Papers visible, I thought it not amisse to pre∣sent these ensuing particulars, to all those who desires
to be satisfied concerning the present affaires of the King, Parliament, and Army. (VIZ.) First, His Majesties gracious Declaration, concer∣ning the High and Honourable Court of Parliament, with His Protestation, disavowing any preparations in Him to resist his two Houses of Parliament, but that all His endeavours tends to the firme and constant set∣tlement of the true Protestant Religion, the just privi∣ledges of Parliaments, the liberty of the Subject, and the peace and prosperity of this Kingdome; as appea∣reth more fully, in His Majesties Declaration, a Copy whereof followeth: The Kings Majesties Declaration, concerning His Two Houses of Parliament. Charles Rex. WHereas there having been many Ru∣mours spread, and informations given, which may have induced many to believe that we intend to make was against our Parliament, Wee professe before God, and declare to all the world, that we alwayes have, and do abhor all such De∣signes, and desire all our Nobility and Commons, who are here upon the place, to declare whether they have not been witnesses of our frequent and earnest Declaratio and professions to this pur∣pose; Whither they see any colour of preparati∣ons or Councels, that might reasonably beget a be∣liefe of any such designe. And whither they be not fully perswaded, that
we have no such intention, but that all our endea∣vours (according to our many professions) tend to the firme and constant settlement of the true pro∣testant Religion, the iust priviledges of Parlia∣ments, the liberty of the Subiect, the law, peace and prosperity of this Kingdome. His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax hath lately sent two severall Letters to William Lenthal Esq; (Speaker of the House of Common) touching the Lord Lau∣derdail, and the Scottish Nation, as followeth: SIR, I Received your Letter, and another inclosed from the Commissioners of Scotland, expressing their sence of injuries offered to them by some of the Ar∣my. First, to my L. Lauderdail, in denying him accesse to the King. And 2. to Mr. Cheisly, in detaining him at New-castle in his passage to Scotland: To both which I thought sit to returne this answer; That no man is more unwillieg to suffer any thing to be done by any under my command, that may be dis-satisfaction to that Nation then my selfe; nor any shall be more willing to do all things which rend to keepe a right understanding, and to preserve the happy Union be∣tween the two Kingdomes, then I. But I hope, the rude∣nesse of Souldiers disavowed will not be made of Nationall reflection, which is all of the case of the Earle of Lauderdail; And as to that of Mr. Chiefly, I have sent to the Governour of New-castle to give him a free passage into Scotland, which (I hope) is done already; for hearing of it, I sent to him to that purpose, and shall in all things be ready to observe your comands, and rest, Your humble servant, T. Fairfax.
M. Speaker, VPon consideration of the present advantage that may be made (through the goodnesse of God of this late successe which it hath pleased the Lord to give the Forces in Ireland, I have there upon advised with my Councell of warre how the forces in this Kingdome might be improved on for that service: and I finde that there will be in readinesse for that service to the number of 6000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, which if the may have encouragement will be ready to goe as soon as you shall be plleased to command them. I doe therefore desire you would move the houses to take some effectuall course for the pro∣viding of moneys and other necessaries. And for the removing of obstructions, and the more cleare and quick proceedings in this so important a worke, I shall appoint a certain number of Officers to wait such as the House shall appoint to consult upon the whole businesse, if you shall think fit I remain Kingston, Aug. 27. 1647. Your most humble servant, Thomas Fairfax. For the honourable William Lenthall Esq; Speaker of the House of Com∣mons. The proceedings of both Houses of Parliament, touching the Kings coming to London. THe House of Peers were acquainted from the Commissioners of the Kingdome of Scotland, (to whom the Commissioners of both Houses of the Committee of both Kingdomes at Derby House, had
communicated the Votes of both Houses in passing the Propositions for Peace to be sent to the Kings Majesty desiring their concurrence) that they had concurred in the said Propositions, with the Amend∣ments as they were presented to them, by the said Members, which their Lordships taking into con∣sideration, made this Vote. Resolved upon the question, by the Lords in Par∣liament Assembled, That a Message be sent to the Commons to acquaint them with the concurrence of the States Commissioners to the Propositions to be sent to the Kings Majesty for Peace. Die Mercurii Septem. 1. 1647. Both Houses of Parliament taking into considera∣tion, the great weight of dispatching the Propositions to be sent to the Kings Majesty, to be passed, and made into Acts, for the setling of the Kingdome, and that his Majesty may come to London, and sit with his Par∣liament, that so the Kingdome may be setled in Peace, The Houses of Parliament desiring that it may be done withall convenient speed, made these insuing Votes. 1. Resolved upon the question, by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, That a day be appointed, for the delivering of the Propositions of both Kingdomes to the Kings Majesty for a safe and well grounded peace. 2. Resolved upon the question, by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, That on Tues∣day next the said Propositions be presented from both Kingdomes to the Kings Majesty. 3, Resolved upon the question, by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, That the Com∣missioners of both Houses appointed to attend his
Majesty shall deliver the said Propositions to the Kings Majesty. 4. Resolved upon the question, by the Lords and in parliament Assembled, That the Commissioners of the Kingdome of Scotland joyne with the Com∣missioners of both Houses of the Parliament of Eng∣land in the delivery of the Propositions to the Kings Majesty on Tuesday next. 5. Resolved upon the question, by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, That notice be given to the Commissioners of the Kingdome of Scot∣land, at Worcester House, to meet the Commissioners of both Houses to deliver the Propositions to the Kings Majesty for a safe and well grounded Peace. From Putney thus. His Excellency being very much wearyed and his Spirits spent in his constant labours in the Publique affaires of the Kingdome hath bin a day or 2 to refresh himself at Chiswick and Turnam green but comes hither again this night to his quarters at the high Sherffes house, the Lieutenant Generall quarters at Mr. Goodwyns and the Committee sit at Mr. Huberts Satturday last the Earle of Ormond was with his Majesty and had some conference with him, and from thence came on Monday to visite the General at our head quarters who gave him the civil respect due to a person of Honour. A Letter was Ordered to be sent to the Commis∣sioners with the generall requiring them to give the Parliament a further account concerning the 6 thou∣sand Foot and 2 thousand Horse which his Excel∣lency propounds to go for Ireland as also what Reg. they are and under whose conduct they should go and what money and other necessaryes of provisions they require. FINIS.
