C2427 E371_11 R201307 99861831 113976
THE KINGS MAIESTIES MANIFESTO To the Kingdome of IRELAND. Undertaken and published By the Marquesse of Clanrickard. Assuring them of the Kings hand, the Queen and Prince of Wales their engagements, and the assurance of the Crown of France for performance thereof. And that the Marquesse of Ormond shall punctually observe (during the Kings want of freedome) such commands from the Queene and Prince of Wales, as shall be signified unto him by the Lord Digby (as principall Secretary of State;) and not obey what is commanded by his Majesty in any Restraint. As also for the calling a free Parliament, procuring Acts of Oblivion, and other desires of the Catholickes of that Kingdome. Signed by the Marquesse of Clanrickard. January 19. 1646. These Papers of the Marquesse of Clanrickards undertakings between his Majesty and the Kingdome of Ireland, are exa∣mined and printed according to ORDER of PARLI∣MENT. Printed by I. G. 1647.
THE MARQVES OF CLANRICKARD His undertaking for the King, Of the 19, of November, 1646. UPon the Ingagements and Protestations of the Generals, Nobilitie, and Officers of the Confederate Catholique Forces, I
Ʋllick, Marquesse of Clanrickard, doe on my part solemnly binde and engage my selfe unto them, by the Reputation and Honour of a Peere, and by sacred Protestations upon the Faith of a Catholicque, in the presence of Almighty GOD, That I will procure the ensuing undertakings to be made good unto them, within such con∣venient time, as Securities of that which are to bee fettched from beyond Sea, can well bee procured: or failing therein, to unite my selfe to their par∣ties, and never to sever from them, and these their interest, till I have secu∣red them unto them. I. First, that there be a Revocation by Act of Parli∣ment of all the Lawes in force within this King∣dome,
in as much of them as shall concern any pe∣nalty, inhibition, or restraint on the Catholiques of the free exercise of their religion. II. Secondly, that they shall not be disturbed in the enjoyment of their Churches, or any other Ecclesia∣asticall possessions, which were in their hands at the publication of the late PEACE, untill that matter, with other referred already, receive a settlement up∣on a Declaration of his M jesties gracious Instru∣ctions in a free Parliament, held in this Kingdom, his Majesty being in a free condition himselfe. III. And I doe further engage my selfe, never to con∣sent to any thing that may bring them in hazard of being dispossessed, and never to sever my selfe from them, untill I see them so secured therein by Com∣mission, or by their Trust, or Power from his Maje∣sty in the prime Garrisons in this Kingdom, to put them out of all danger of being dispossessed. IV. And I doe further engage my self, that forthwith there shall be a Catholick Lieutenant Generall of all the Frces of this Kingdome, by his Majesties Authority, and that the Generals, or either of them, signed to the said engagements, shall forthwith bee invested by the Kings Majesties Authoritie, with principall commands worthy of them in the standing Army in this Kingdome. And likewise
in some important Garrisons now under his Maje∣sties obedience, and that a considerable number of the confederate Catholicke Forces, shall immediatly be drawn into all the chiefe Garrisons under his Ma∣jesties obedience. V. And I doe further assure proportionable advanta∣ges to such of any other Armies in this Kingdome, as shall in like manner submit unto the Peace, and his Majesties Authority, and for the security of as many of thse particulars as shall not be forthwith per∣formed and made good unto them, by the fore∣said Marquesse of Ormond, his Majesties Lieutenant Generall of this Kingdome, I will procure them the Kings hand, the Queene and Prince of Wales ingage∣ments, and an ingagement of the Crown of France, to see the same performed unto them. And further, for their assurance that the Lord Lieutenant shall en∣gage himselfe punctually to observe such free com∣mands as he shall receive from his Majesty to the furtherance and advantage of the Catholiques of this Kingdome, or (during the Kings want of freedome) from the Queen and Prince of Wales, as shall be signi∣fied unto him (as the Kings positive pleasure) by the Lord Digby, as principall Secretary of State. And fur∣ther, that whilst the King shall be in an unfree con∣dition, hee will not obey any Orders that shall bee procured from his Majesty, by advantage of his Ma∣jesties want of freedome, to the prejudice of what is undertaken.
VI. And lastly I do protest that I shall never esteeme my selfe discharged from this ingagement by any power or authoritie whatsoever, provided on both parts that this engagement and undertaking be not understood or intended to debarre or hinder His Majesties Catholick Subjects of this Kingdome from the benefit of any further grace, and favours which His Majestie may be graciously induced to conferr unto them, upon the Queenes Majesties me∣dication, or any other Treatie abroad, with his ho∣linesse. I. And I do further engage my selfe to im∣ploy my utmost endeavours and power by way of Petition and perswasion unto His Majestie, to afford all the subjects of this Kingdome that shall appeare to have been injured in their Estate, redresses in the next free Parliament. II. And I do also further undertake, that all persons joyning, or that shall joyne with the present ingagement, shall be included in the Act of oblivion, promised in the Ar∣ticles of peace for Acts done by them since
the publication of the said peace, unto the date of the said ingagement. Dated Novemb. 19. 1646. Signed CLANRJCKARD. FINIS.
