C3818 E371_7 R27874 99872176 160126
TRUTH TRIUMPHING OVER Errour and Heresie. OR, A Relation of a Publike Disputa∣tion at Oxford in S. Maries Church, on Munday last, Jan. 11. 1646. between Ma∣ster Cheynell a Member of the Assembly, and Master Erbury the Seeker and Socinian. Wherein the Socinian Tenents maintained by Master Erbury are laid down, and Master Cheynels clear Confutation of them, to the joy and satisfaction of many hundreds there present, is declared. 1 Joh. 7.9, 10. For many deceivers are entred into the world, who confesse not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. This is a deceiver and an Anrichrist. Whosoever transgresseth, and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not God: he that abideth in the doctrine of Christ, hath both the Father and the Son. PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY. London, Printed for E. B. and S.G. 1646.
Truth triumphing OVER ERROUR AND HERESIE. GOod Reader, divers Letters of godly Ministers and Citizens of Oxford, ear and eye-wit∣nesses, written from thence, coming to my hand, of a publike Confe∣rence and Disputation in Saint Maries, the University-Church, between Master Chey∣nell
a Member of the Assembly, and Master Erbury a great Sectary, on Munday the eleventh of January, 1646. I thought it good for thy benefit, to publish the sum and substance of them, that thou maist see how God hath left the Independents and Sectaries (this man being within these few yeers a famous Independent) and to what a height they advance, both for damnable Errours, and of confidence to maintain o∣penly in one of the Universities, in the most publike place, before many hundreds, such damnable Heresies, and that in the time of a Parliament sitting, and to the faces of such Ministers as were sent down by them to prepare the way for the Reformation of that University. Master Cheynell being chalenged by some of Master Erbury's fol∣lowers to meet him at Saint Maries on Munday, Jan. 11. could do no lesse (for many Reasons) then come; where Ma∣ster Erbury maintained these Ten follow∣ing Positions.
I. That all the fulnesse of the Godhead, the same fulnesse of the Godhead which is in Christ, dwells in the Saints in the same measure, though not in the same manifesta∣tion as it doth in Christ; and that the God∣head shall be manifested in the same man∣ner and measure in the Saints, as it is in Christ. II. The Saints have a more glorious power then Christ, Joh. 14.12. and do greater works then ever Christ did. III. The manifestation of God the Fa∣ther in our flesh, is God the Son. IIII. The holy Ghost is the power of God, or rather the coming forth of this power. V. The Father is the Godhead. VI. The Prophets spake more clearly of Christ then the Apostles; only the Prophets did not understand what they delivered. VII. John the Divine spoke cleerly, but the Book was sealed, which contained the mysterie of Christ, and no man could open it; yet Master Erbury presumed to tell us what was in it: but it did appear that his
Revelation was not from heaven, but Po∣land; that hee took the Scriptures in the same sense, and cited them in the same or∣der as they were taken and cited in Volke∣lius, and the Socinian Chatechisme. VIII. God the Father is God of him∣self the true God, greater then all, High∣est of all. IX. The Saints have the same Worship, Honour and Glory given to them that is given unto Jesus Christ: Ergo The Saints are the onely Preachers. God speaks on∣ly in them, because God dwels onely in them. X. That when Christ came to take flesh of the Virgin, hee did not take the Humane nature. Hee dreams that Christ was man before the world was; and so, though hee came to be made of a woman, hee came not to be made man, but to be made Flesh. The contrary truths were maintained, explained, and cleerly proved by Master Cheynell against him, and that before a
great Audience. The Dispute continu∣ed at least four hours; Master Cheynell had generall approbation: and the truth was readily embraced with shouting and ac∣clamations, for which let God have all the glory. 'Tis hoped the Honourable Houses of Parliament will not suffer a man to draw away the people, as he hath done (under the specious name of Saints and san∣ctitie, and with strange mysterious Exposi∣tions of Scripture) already very many, e∣specially women; but will proceed effe∣ctually against him, and make him an ex∣ample to all other Sectaries, both for his damnable errours, and unparallell'd bold∣nesse, in so open a manner and place main∣taining them. Januray 14. 1646. Imprimatur. JAMES CRANFORD.
