c5207 e239_12 99872525 158245
A COLLECTION OF THE RIGHTS AND PRIVILEDGES OF PARLIAMENT. TOGETHER, With the true and just Prerogatives of the Kings of ENGLAND. Collected out of Ancient Writers, both Divine and Morrall. Informing the willing Man, Convincing the flatterer, and vindicating those that pray for the Tranquillitie of this our Syon. Written by a Gentleman that wishes all happinesse and peace, to this Distracted Kingdome. LONDON, Printed for Laurence Chapman, and are to be sold at his shop, at Chancerie-lane end, neare Holborne. 1642.
Some few briefe Cellections out of Iewels defence against Harding the Iesuite, the booke of Martyrs by Fox, Calvins Inst and others, published by the autho∣rity of this kingdome, which may somewhat informe the willing man, convince the flatterer, and vindicate those who desire, only that Caesar may have his due, that Meum & tuum may be duly distributed, our enemies frustrated, we settled in peace, and God glorified. SYmmachus, Celsus, Iulianus, and others, old foes of the Gospell, did attempt in times past to accuse all Christians of sedition, and treason, before that either Prince or people were able to know, who those Christians were, what they professed, what they beleeved, or what was their meaning. Iew. Def. Fol. 443. They adde also, which they enlarge with all kind of spight, that they be men of trouble, that they plucke the Sword and Scepter out of the Kings hands, that they arme the people, that they overthrow judgement places, destroy the Lawes, make havock of possessions, seeke to make the people Princes, turne all things upside downe; and to be short, that they would have nothing in good frame and order in a Common-wealth. They have often set on fire Princes hearts with these words; to the end, that they might quench the light of the Gospell in the very first appearing of it, and that men might begin to hate the same, ere ever they were able to know it, and to the end, that every Magistrate might thinke he saw his deadly enemie as often as he saw any of them. Ibid. Fo 440. But Christ himselfe, the Apostles, and other good Christians, were in times past blamed and reviled in like sort; for although Christ taught, to give unto Caesar, that which was Caesars; yet was he charged with sedi∣tion, and accused to devise some conspiracie, and to seeke wayes to get the kingdome: and thereupon they cryed with open mouth against him: If thou let this man escape, thou art not Caesars friend. The like blame was charged upon the Apostles, that they did disquiet the people, and stirred up the multitude to rebell: Thus did Hamon bring the Nation of the Iewes into the hatred of the King, because said he, they were a rebellious and stubborne people, and despised the Ordinances and Commandements of Princes. Tertullian saith that in his time it was the generall accusati∣on of all Christians, whilst be lived that they were Traytors, Rebells &c.
Wherefore if now a dayes the truth be evill spoken of, and being the same truth it was then; and like dispitefully vsed as it was in time past, it cannot seeme a new or an unwonted matter Ibid: Fol. 440.441. It is not impertinent, to take notice of the plots and designes used by the Bishops against the Mernidolians in the 2 volume of the booke of Martyrs, we must goe about (say they) with all our endea∣vour, power and pollicie &c. sparing no charges but spending goods, wealth and treasure to make such a slaughter of the Mernidolians that none shall be so bold hereafter, whatsoever they be, although of the bloud Royall once to open their mouths against us, and our Ecclesiasticall state. Against the Nobilitie we must attempt nothing rashly, but we must seeke all the meanes we can to please them, for they are our sheild, fortresse &c. many of them doe both thinke and speake evill of us, and are of these new Gos∣pellers, we must not exasperate them against us in any case, but seeke to winne them, and make them our friends, so we may be in safety under their protexion; else we may be compelled to forsake our dignities, pos∣sessions, and livings, which we now wealthily enjoy, so we shall come to be contemned and dispised of all men, even of these Pesants, and we should be counted no true Pastors of the Church. The storme commeth from the North, the winds blow and beate upon our house, our estimation, and authoritie is abased; our jurisdiction decayed, the ordinances of the Church dispised, wherefore are we set over Nations, and Kingdomes, but to roote out and destroy, subuert, and overthrow whatsoever is against us. Let us therefore now awake, and stand stoutly to the right of our posses∣sions, to roote out the memorie of these wicked Lutherans for ever; we have already procured a terrible arrest against them, there wants nothing but to be put in execution, Let not our gold and silver witnesse against us at the day of judgement, if we refuse to bestow the same in so good a sacri∣fice unto God. For my part I will furnish at my owne charges one hundred men well horsed, with furniture thereto belonging to the utter distruction and subversion of these wicked and cursed caitiffs. That prerogative and cheiftie, that is, and ever hath beene dew to a Prince by the ordinance, & word of God is, to be the nurse of Gods true Religion, to make Lawes for the good, and peace of Church, and Common-wealth, to see them dewly executed to punish such as be offenders, and to cherish the good. Iew: def: Fol. 15. The King because he is the Vicar of the highest King, is appointed for this purpose to rule the earthly kingdome, and the Lords people, to governe the Church and defend it from injuries, to plucke away the wicked doers and utterly to destroy them: which unlesse he doe, the name of a King agreeth not to him; but he looseth the name of a King. It is conuenient to call them Kings, who vigillantly defend, and governe the Church of God, and his people. A King ought to set up good Lawes and customes, such as be wholesome, and approoved; such as be otherwise to repeale them, and thrust them out of his kingdome. All these things ought a king in his owne person
to do, taking his oath upon the Evangelists, swearing in the presence of the whole State of the Realme, as well of the temporality as spiritualtie, be∣fore he be Crowned. Fox. voll. I. Fol. 214. In every well ordered Common-wealth it ought specially to be desired that the whole Realme should be of more authority then the King: which if it happen contrary, it were not to be called a kingdome, but a tyranny. A king is not of more authoritie then his kingdome. A king to be of more au∣thority then his kingdom were too absurd. For oftentimes kings who do wickedly governe the Common-wealth and exercise cruelty are deprived of their kingdomes. Ibid: Fol: 879. For if we doe see a King so to dispise and contemne the Lawes, violent∣ly spoyle and rob his subjects &c. do not the Nobles of the kingdom assem∣ble together deposing him from his kingdome, set up another in his place, which shall sweare to rule and governe uprightly and to be obedient to his Lawes? Ibid: Fol. 880. The Brittish Nobilitie combine themselves, depose Vertigerne for his improvident admission of the Saxons, & elect Vertimer his son. Dan: Fol. 7 See the lives and raignes of king John Hen. 3. Edw. 2. Ibid. Dan. I allow not them who attribute so ample and large authority unto Kings, that they will not have them bound under any Lawes, for such as do so say, are but flatterers, which do talke otherwise then they thinke: for albeit they say the moderation of the Law is alwayes in the Kings power: that doe I thus understand; that when as reason shall perswade he ought to digresse from the rigour of the Law, for he is called a king which careth and provi∣deth for the Common-wealth, taketh pleasure in the commoditie and pro∣fit of his subjects, and in all his doings hath respect to the commodity of those over whom he ruleth, which if he doe not, he is not to be counted a King, but a tyrant, whose propertie it is onely to seeke his owne profit: for in this point a King differeth from a tyrant, that the one seeketh the com∣moditie and profit of those whom he ruleth, and the other only his owne. The which to make more manifest the cause is also to be alledged, where∣fore kings were ordained: at the beginning (Cicero saith) it is certaine there was a time when as the people lived without kings, but afterwards, when lands and possessions began to be divided, according to the custome of every Nation: then were kings ordained for none other cause, but onely to exercise justice; for when as the common people were oppressed, by rich and mighty men, they ranne by and by to some good and vertuous man which should defend the poore from injurie, and ordaine lawes, whereby the poore and rich might dwell together: but when as yet under the rule of kings, the people were often times oppressed, Lawes were ordained, & instituted, the which should judge, neither for hatred nor favour, and give like eare unto the poore, and unto the rich, wherby we understand and know that not onely the people, but also the King to be subject to the Lawes, Fox voll: 1. Fol. 880. The Lawes are Iuracoronae or Iura Regia because saith Braston a learned
Iudge in the time of Hen. 3. the King is under no man, but God, and the Law: for the Law makes the King, therefore let the King attribute that to the Law, which from the law he hath received (to wit) power, and domi∣nion, for where, will, and not law doth sway, there is no King. The Crowne of England, descends to the next of bloud, onely by the custome, and Law of Kingdome; for the Successor is not said proper∣ly to be the heyre of the King, but of the Kingdome, which makes him so. Dan: Fol. 29. Its a harsh thing to a power, that hath once gotten out into the wide liberty of its will, to heare of any reducing, to its circle, not considering, how they who inherit offices, succeed in the obligation of them, and that the most cer∣taine meanes to preserve unto a King his Kingdome, is to possesse them with the same conditions that he hath inherited them. Ibid: Fol. 121. Such of the Pylots Royall of this Land as have made use of, and relyed upon the ancient Lawes, and long settled Customes of this nation, for their Card and Compasse, for the guiding of the Barke of this Common-wealth, have most honourably, and prospercusly sayled through all the most diffi∣cult, and dangerous passages, and roughest billowes, in the most boisterous stormes: and at length have atived at their desired haven, with infinite glory to themselves, and the nation. And such who willfully, or seducedly re∣jected, and contemned those Lawes, and customs, were during all, or the most part of their Reignes, tost, and turmoyled, both they, and the whole Kingdome in most wofull sort, to the very period of iminent, and jrrevo∣cable destruction of themselves, and the losse of the state. The excellent fruite of Parliaments in this state, at all times, and that those Princes, who were most conversant in them, were alwayes most happy in their government, is best observed in the histories at large. And the cause why Facitus did ascribe so much to the prosperous proceedings of the Ro∣mans, was, quodnon in communi cousuelerint; and the Scripture saith, By wise counsell thou shalt make thy war, & that in the multitude of Councellours there is safetie. And as Sir Walter Raleigh spake it, shall ever be my prayer, that our King embrace the Councell of honour and safetie, and let other Princes embrace that of force. Our King (saith Commines) is the King in the world, who hath least cause to alledge, that he hath privilidges to leavie what he listeth upon the sub∣jects, seeing that neither he nor any other Prince hath power so to do, and those that say he hath, do him no honour, nor make him to be esteemed, but cause him to be hated, and feared of his neighbours, who for no thing would live under such a government. How ever the very doings of men be judged, yet the Lord did as well execute his work by them, when he did break the bloudy Septers of proud kings, and overthrow their intollerable governments. Let Princes heare and be afraid; but we, in the meane time, must take great heed that we do not despise, or offend, that the authority of Magistrates ful of reverend Majesty, which God hath established with most weighty decrees, although it re∣maine
with most unworthy men; and which do with their wickednesse so fat as in them is, defile it: For though the correcting of unbridled government be the revengment of the Lord, Let us not thinke by and by, that it is committed to us, to whom is given no other commandement but to obey and suffer: I speake alway of private men, for if there be at this time any Magi∣strats for the behalfe of the people, such as in the old time, were the Ephori that were set against the kings of Lacedemonia, or the Tribunes of the people a∣gainst the Roman Consuls, or the Demarchy against the Senate of Athens: And the same power also, which peradventure, as things are now, the three estates have in every Realme, when they hold their principal assemblies (Parliaments) I do so, not forbid them, according to their Office, to withstand the outraging licensciousnesse of Kings; that I affirme, that if they winke at Kings wilfully, raging over, and treading downe the poore communalty; their dissembling is not without breach of faith; because they deceitfully betray the liberty of the people, whereof they know themselves to be appointed Protectors, by the or∣dinance of God. Thus Calvin in his Inst. lib. 4. Chap. 20. Sect. 31. And in that obedience which we have determined to be due to the authoritie of Governors, this is alwayes to be excepted, yea chiefly to be observed, that it doe not lead us away from obeying him, to whose will the desires of all Kings ought to be subject, to whose decrees all the commandements ought to yeeld, to whose Majestie their maces ought to be submitted. And truly, how unorderly were it for the satisfying of men, to runne into his displeasure for whom men themselves are obeyed. The Lord therefore is the King of Kings, who when he hath opened his holy mouth is to be heard alone; for altogether and above all, next to him, we be subject to that authoritie which he hath set over us, but no otherwise then in him. If they command any thing against him, let it have no place, and let no accompt be made of it, neither let us herein any thing stay upon all that dignity wherewith the Magistrates excell, to which there is no wrong done, when it is brought into order of subjection, in comparison of that singular, and truly Soveraigne power of God. Daniell de∣nied that he had any thing offended the King when he obeyed not his wicked Proclamation, because the King had passed his bounds; The Israelites were condemned because they were too much obedient to the wicked commande∣ment of their King. So far is it off, that the pretence of obedience may deserve praise, wherewith the flatterers of the Court do cover themselves, and deceive the simple, while they say, it is not lawfull forthem to refuse any thing that is commanded them of their Princes; As though God had resigned his power to mortall men, giving them the rule of man kind, or as though the earthly power were minished when it is made subject to the author of it: we then performe that obedience which the Lord requireth when we suffer any thing, rather then swerne from Godlines, for we were therefore redeemed of Christ, with so great a price as our redemption cost him, that we should not yeeld our selves in thraledome to obey the perverse desires of men. Ibid. Sect. 32. Some will be apt to say, as formerly others have done, that the assemblies of Parliaments are dangerous for the Kings estate, and diverse of meane calling
and lesse honesty say its treason to make mention of the assembling of estates, and a thing tending to the dimunition of the Kings authority: but they them∣selves worke treason against God, the King, and the Common-wealth; neither doe any use those speeches, but such as are in authoritie without desert, and un∣worthy thereof; or such as, feare great assemblies, lest their doings should be ripped up and reprehended, thus Comines. But if the strength of the King be in the heart of his people as said King Iames; If the Court of Parliament compounded according to the anciently accustomed course, be the most stately, honourable, Magnificent, assured com∣pleate, absolute, and approoved Councell, that the Kings of this Land can as∣semble for their safest advise and most constant resolution not onely for the supportation, & preservation of the Laws, but therwith also of the Soveraigne honour, Majesty and dignity royall, & of all other affaires concerning the state both of Church and Common-wealth, what shall we then say of such persons who having by favour, fate, or otherwise crept into the bosome and eares of Princes: or others being trusted in their Soveraignes intimate, or more remote counsels, have applyed themselves, or hereafter for their owne private and sinister ends, and purposes; shall apply themselves by their suggestions, or adulations, to overthrow and frustrate those Lawes and customes, and frame of government of this nation so long since, so solemnly, so sacredly established; Surely we must needs censure them to be guiltie of the violation, first of the holy Commands of God, next of the Lawes of nature, then of order & rule, and lastly, Of their fidelity to their sacred Prince, and dearest Country, and therefore to be spewed out of the Common-wealth, being first branded with the infamous name of the most apparent enemies both of Church, and State. Thus another. Plutarch saith, he who corrupteth, or seduceth a Prince, deserveth no lesse to be abhorred of all men, then he that should poyson a fountaine whereof all men should drinke; and that the punishment of a wicked Councellour is a debt due to the Common-wealth, which hath beene duly required by the peo∣ple, & as duly paid by the hand of justice, nay some such have taken vengeance upon themselves, as of both sorts in diverse Histories do appeare. We never armed the people, nor taught them to rebell against their Prince, we teach them as Saint Paul doth, to be subject to the higher Powers, not only for feare but for conscience sake. We teach them, that who so striketh with the Sword, by private authority, shall perish with the Sword, we teach the people onely to defend themselves by all lawfull meanes, against oppression as did David against King Saul, and as the Nobles in France did; they sought not to kill, but to save their owne lives. Iew. Def. Fol. 18. The Kingdomes and States of the world, have their severall compositions & agresements; the subject may Arme himselfe against his Prince by the common advice, and by the publike authoritie of the Realme. The Nobles in Scotland in the time of the Queene, neither drew the sword, nor attempted force against the Prince, they sought onely the continuance of Gods undoubted truth, & the defence of their own lives, against your Batharous and Cruell invasions. Is it
Lawfull to draw the Sword in defence of the Pope, and not lawfull for them to defend themselves in the Defence of Christ? The subject is bound to obey his Prince, howbeit not in all things without exception, but only so far as Gods Glory is not touched. These Nobles had learned of Saint Peter, it is better to obey God then man, Neither may a godly Prince take it as any dishonour to his State, to see God obeyed before him for he is not God, but the Minister of God; Christ commanded, that is due unto God, to be given to God, that is due unto Caesar, to be given to Caesar. And this is not to rebell against, but to helpe Caesar. Ibid. Fol. 20. The limits both of the Magistrates Commanding and our obeying, are these two. Piety and Charitie, contrary to these, must neither they command, nor we do; when the Kings Commandement passed these limits, the Midwives would not obey, and the Lord blessed them for it: heere are limits, or as that of Daniel in Calvin, bounds, to a Prince and here is resisting, or opposition, they would not obey, and the approbation of it too, the Lord blessed them for it. Bab: on the Comm: Fol 52.54. There being a bloudy & cruell arrest procured against the Walldoes, by the Bishops of that time from their Soveraigne the Duke, against man, woman, & child, to roote, utterly out them and their posteritie, and that only for the profession of the truth, the Gospell of Christ, and their close walking with it, they at the first scrupuled, whether or no they might take up armes for their own defence against that cruell arrest, and the exe∣cutioners of it, holding at the first that it was their part and dutie to be only as sufferers under their enemies crueltie: but when the busines came into consultation amongst them and their divines; having undergone many of their cruelties, at the length they resolved it was, and might be Lawfull for them by the word of God to defend them∣selves, wives, and children, and their estates from this cruell arrest prosecuted against them, by the authority of their Prince and governour, and so by the helpe and blessing of Almighty God did defend and free themselves in a marvailous manner of those their enemies, and yet continued their supplications to the Duke for the stay of such his pro∣ceedings as in the story may be seene at large. Fox. Voll. 2. The Princes of Germany being wrongfully and contrarie to the Law of Armes inva∣ded by the Emperous, were forced, being free Princes, by the Law of Nature to draw the sword in their own defence. Iew: Deff. Fol. 442. In inWard band and obedience to God, their is no King, nor Prince indeed, nor may be any. In civill government, a King is a King, and so hath God commanded him to be known, but after that we come once to there verence and obedience of Gods will, there God is only the King, and the King be he never so mighty is but a subject Ib: Fol. 446. Iulius Caesar a Heathen Prince saith of himselfe, touching all other affaires that ought to be taken in hand, for your sakes I am both your Consull and your Dictator, but as touching any wrong to be done to any man I am as a private man without Office Ibid. Fol. 447. Sir Walter Raleigh sayes, the King is to beleeve the generall Counsel of the King∣dome and to prefer it before his own affection, or other sinister Councell, for singular Authority begets but generall oppression, and if Princes may be unhappy in any thing, to tainely they are unhappy in nothing more then in suffering themselves to be thus in∣dosed; and where any man shall give a King perillous advice, as may either cause a re∣bellion, or draw the peoples love from the King, that King ought to banish such a man.
Those Parliaments wherein the Kings of this Land, have satisfied the people, as they have beene ever prosperous, so where the King hath restrained the house, the con∣trarie hath happened: For the Kings atchivements in his Parliament were the ready preparations to his ruine. And when such things fall out, the Kings judgement is not examined, but their Knaverie that abused the King: shall it be called a dis∣honour for the King to yeeld to the honest desires of his subjects. Those that tell the King these tales, feares their owne dishonour, and not the Kings; for the honour of the King is Supreame, and being guarded by Iustice and Piety, it cannot receive neither wound nor staine: Great Officers being generally hated for abusing both the King and the subject, at the request of the States were discharged, and others put in their Roomes. When the King leaves himselfe to his people, they assure themselves that they are trusted and beloved of their King▪ and there was yet never any assembly so Barbarous, as not to answer the love and trust of their King. Is it a losse to the King to be beloved of the Commons, Certainly its farre more happy for a Soveraigne Prince, that a subject open his Purse willingly, then that the same be opened with violence. Thus he in his Dialogue. Betweene Counc. and Inst. But by the way it is to be noted, that tyrants are to be resisted two manner of wayes, one is when subjects doe improove wicked decrees, as those three young men of whom Daniell speaketh refused to adore the Image erected by the Tyrant. &c. The other way to resist Tyrants is when subjects fly unto their weapons, where∣by they remoove away wicked Commandements. Here a question is mooved, whether it be Lawfull for the maintenance of Religion, to resist Tyrants, and by sword to hinder wicked and ungodly decrees. In this place I distinguish between them that arounder one cheife head, whether King, or Em∣perour or any other Monarch. For some are subject simply, some are Magistrates, next to the cheife Magistrate, and these are called popular Magistrates, such were in times past at Lacedemonia, the Ephors: at Athens; the Demarches &c. These for so much as they are placed of God, first to be the keepers of the first and second Tables. That is to see that true Religion be professed, and honest discipline in use: then to moderate, and if neede required, to bridle the Raging desires of Kings, and Monarchs, when they set downe any thing against the Lawes and Religion, these I say, both may, yea and are bound, first by Councell, so much as may be to set themselves against Tyrants, and by their wisedome stop their foolish enterprises: But if by their wise Councell they prevaile nothing with the Tyrants, then are they bound, yea with weapons to defend godly subjects, remoove away idolatry, and restore true Religion, which things if they do not, they discharge their duties but fraudulently. And although the Church doth not encrease by warres, yet outward violence, which is offered to Religion by Tyrants, may by the Magistrate, placed beweene the cheife heads, and private men, be repelled by force, which thing, both nature teacheth, and the Office of the popular Magistrates requireth, and the examples of holy men doe confirme, wherefore let the Magistrates, and Moderatours of the cheife heads have this saying of the Lord before their eyes. Give unto Caesar. &c. Nich. Hem: in his ex∣position of the 84. Ps. Fol 431. 432. In all that prescription and ordinance, ordeyned and set downe by God concerning
the Office of Kings, there is no mention made of any liberty that he giveth them to live after their own lusts, and to doe every thing that seemeth them good in their owne eyes, but he enjoyneth them expresly to have alwayes with them, the booke of this Law, &c. As for Civill and Naturall Lawes, in so much as they are founded upon equity and right, they are agreeable to, and (as it were) dependants on the Law of God. If then Princes be subject to the Law of God they are likewise subject to those Civil Lawes by reason of their Equitie and Iustice: And if (as Plato saith) the Lawes ought to be above the Prince, not the Prince above the Lawes, it is most manifest that the Prince is tyed unto the Lawes, otherwise the Government which he swayeth cannot be Lawfull or Commendable. And if the Magistrate is, or ought to be a speaking Law, and ought to maintaine the Authoritie, and Credit thereof by dew and upright Administration of Iustice, for if he did not this he were a dumb Law and without life, how is it possible that he should make it of authoritie and force with others, if he despised and transgresseth it himselfe? David did never assume so much to himselfe, as to desire to have liberty to doe what him listed in his Kingdome, but willingly submitted himselfe to that which his Office and duty required, making then even when he was installed and established King over the whole land, a Covenant of peace with the Princes and De∣puties of the people; and we know that in every Covenant and Bargaine both parties are bound to each other by a mutuall bond, to performe the conditions which they are agreed upon, the like is used at the Coronation of Christian Kings, whereas the people are bound to do their Allegiance to their Kings: so the Kings are also solemn∣ly sworne to maintaine and defend true Religion, the Estate of Iustice, the Peace and Tranquilitie of their Subjects, and the Rights and Priviledges of the Realme. Whereas David was by the Prophet Nathan reprooved for his Adultrie and murther he nei∣ther used any excuse, nor alledged any priviledge whereby, he was exempted from the rigour of the Law to justifie his fact! But freely confessed without any cloake, that he had sinned. Theatre of Gods judgements Fol. 13. Where we also may see in divers examples the Vengeance of God upon such Princes as have not walked in the way of justice and equitie towards their people. The Holy and Iust Commandements of God are, Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not steale, thou shalt not Covet, nor desire, &c. And Christ came not to destroy but to fulfill the Law, as appeares by that, Give unto Caesar, the things that are Caesars, then all things are not at Caesars will, that which the people have is not his, there is a due and a right to them, and but a due and a right to him. The Prince shall not take of the peoples inheritance; nor thrust them out of their possession, but he shall cause his sonnes to inherit of his owne possession; that my people be not scattered every man from his possession: Ezek. 46.18. If the Law then be glorious, how much more the Gospel? As Saint Paul speakes. And yet, that the Prince may Command or De∣mand our Purses, Persons, and Cattle at pleasure, and that the People must neither shun nor shrinck from either, is good Bishops doctrine now a dayes. Now God spake these words and said: Thou &c, and is there any exceptions of Persons with God? What man is exempted, or priviledged from giving obedience thereunto: Surely none that I know. If any be let the man be pointed out. And as the
Commandements of Almightie God are Negative Commands; Thou shalt not: So also do they on the contrarie include an affirmative Precept. Thou shalt preserve from Killing, and Destruction, against all wilfull and unlawfull Acts of man, what ever he be, thy Estate and Life. For the Body is more worth then Rayment. And all may know that our Lawes do hold that Man guiltlesse, who thus standing in his owne defence, may happily be a meanes of taking away his life, who gave the offence. And thus sure∣ly is the Law of Nature too. Yet such hath lately bin the Develish policie, of those who would be accompted the holy fathers of our Church, that our Godly Ministers must not expound the Catichis∣me, and so not the Ten Commandements of God. Blind ignorance must still be the Mo∣ther of our Devorions, But if the blind, lead the blind, both shall fall into the Ditch: Read them indeed they might, as under their Graces elbowes, and then what might some judge in respect of their, and their favourers practice to be the exposition of them: but thus? Thou shalt have none other Gods but me, &c. But I may. Thou shalt not Kill, Steale, Slander, Backbite, and Covet, but I may, and such, and such a man may. Such is their Protestant Doctrine and profession. Rome was not built in one day, nor could be repaired on a sudaine; they brought Bricks and Morter a pace, but God confounded their language, and will still confound their enterptises to their confusion, Maugre all their subtile insinuations and malicious Councels and undertakings. For every plant that he hath not planted, shalibe rooted up. And who hath resisted the Lord and Pro∣spered? Baalam the false Prophet for but teaching the people to offend God, was withstood by an Angell, reprooved by his Asse, and slaine by the sword, as appeares by his story. These Peeces were gleaned for private use, and to give an account to friends of my thoughts and resolutions concerning this busines, so much at this time questioned: by which we may see, that they are not new things, as some would make us beleeve, but that they are the old received truths of our best Divines, and Historians. That they come into publicke is because I have met with some Collections dedicated to all duti∣full subjects by D. O. Who spareth not to Stigmatize and brand with Puritane, Iesui∣isme-puritan, breakers downe of the wall of Sion, batterers of the Courts of Princes, seditious, and the like, Calvin, Iewell, Fox, and others of Reverend, and Grave esteeme, as appeares by their workes and writings, which have beene generally well approved of, and allowed by the authority of this our Kingdome: a part of which the fore∣going Collections are as may be seene: whose goverment I shall ever preferre, before such Headie, Rash, Childish and Scandalously beguiling lines as those of D. O. are. For by his quotations in that part, to the dutifull Subjects, he would make the world beleeve, that Iewell, Rabington, and Fox, with others speake with him, which if true in these three, Let the Readers judge; the others I have not, nor thinke it worth my time to examine; seeing his sencere dealing, which he there professeth, is so grosse and shamefull in these. And that, in his 27.28. & 29. Pag. Where he first confesseth that Calvin doth very Learnedly and Christianly intreate of the Authority of Princes, and the dutie of Subjects: yet when Calvin and others there quoted by himselfe speake contrarie unto him, then its a Puritane dangerous errour, harsh and delivered in obscure and doubtfull termes, a seditious gangreene, derived from Rome, Lacedemon, and Athens, whereby the Kings of Christendome are dayly crucified (as Christ their
Lord was) betweene two Theeves, the Papist, and the Puritan, and a deadly poyson prepared for Princes whom they in their owne irreligious, and Traiterous hearts shall condemne for Tyranny. I shall here give you an account of some, whom himselfe hath done us the favour to take notice of, Truth will be discovered though by the enemies of it. In his 21. Pag. Thomas Aquinas (saith he) makes three sorts of Kings. Kings by Election, Kings by Subordination, and Kings by Succession: For the first he saith, that they which did establish, may abolish. You may read the rest there. In the same Page he produceth Gratianus thus: whosoever besides the Prince, and without his Authoritie, that hath Lawfull power, as the Apostle teacheth, beareth not the Sword in vaine, to whom every Soule must be subject, but whosoever I say, sayes D. O. without and beside▪ the Princes Authoritie beareth the sword shall perish by the sword. Christopher Goodman sayes he Pag. 28. Published a Treatise of obedience at Geneva, not without the very good liking and approbation of the best learned of that Citie Wherein he affirmeth that if Magistrates offend Gods Law themselves, and Com∣mand others to do the like, they loose that honor, and obedience which otherwise is due unto them, and ought no more to be taken for Magistrates; but to be examined and punished as private transgressors. 1577 Sayes he came forth, the Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, with this resolution, that Princes are chosen by God, established by the people, every private man is subject to the Prince, the multitude, and Officers of the State which represent the multitude, are Superiours to the Prince, yea they may judge his actions, and if he make resistance, punish him by forceable meanes. Bucanus (whose booke was published at the request and with the approbation of Beza, and Goulartius, maine Pillars of the Church of Geneva) saith, that they who beare any part of Office in the publike Administration of the Common-wealth, as the Overseers, Senators, Consulls, Peeres, or Tribunes, may restraine the insolency of evill Kings. In his 29. Pag. Inferiour Magistrates (saith Iohannes Baptista Ficklerus, are the de∣fendors and Protectors of the Lawes, and Rights of the State, and have Authoritie, if need require, to Correct, and punish the Supreame King. An English Fugitive (saith he) who was the Author of the Booke De justa abdica∣tione Henrici Tertij. Affirmeth, that all the Majesty o the Kingdome is in the assembly of Statesmen, to whom it belongeth to make Covenants with God, to dispose of the affaires of the Kingdome, to appoint matters pertayning to warre, and peace, to bridle the Kingly power, and settle all things that belong to publike Government. And the most seditious Dolemon (as he stiles him) saith, that all humane Law and order Naturall, Nationall, and Possitive, doe teach that the Common-wealth which gave Kings their Authoritie for the Common good, may restraine, and take the same from them (if they abuse it to the Common ill, who with many more of his opinion (as he saith) are discovered and refuted by D. Mourton, but till he tels me where I may finde it in D. Mourton, and that it prove so, I dare not give him so much credit; because he appeares to be faultie by what he hath already spoken. I presume rather to give credit to Calvin, Iewell, Fox, and the rest, who are of the same opinion with these he hath quoted, their opinions being allowed of, and published by the authority
of our owne Kingdome, which (till better satisfaction) must beare sway with me. He sayes this Puritan dangerous error (as he calls it) is directly repugnant to the Law, the Gospel, the Precepts of the Apostles, the practice of Martyrs, and the Doctrine of the Fathers, Councells, and other writers, as he hath prooved in the six former Chapters: wherein the holy Texts of Scripture, which the Papists and the Puritans doe damnably abuse against the Ecclesiasticall, and civill authority of Kings, shall be answered by the Godly Protestants. Her's a great cry, yet but little Wooll, if he had, or could doe that which he heere professes, he hath done, to proove what he sayes, as he should do, it were somewhat: but he showes not, neither against what Law, what Gospell, what Precept of the Apostles, or Practice of the Martyrs these things are; and when they shall be answered by the Godly Protestants we may expect, for he doth not, nor can tell us when it will be. The substance of his whole leafes is. That God hath inseperably annexed to the Crowne of Majestie an absolute immunitie from judiciall sentence, and Martiall vio∣lence. And that Kings are freed from bonds, and cannot be drawne to punishment even by the power of Government, and the Etymologie of their names. And although no earthly man can be found that is not subject to the lawes of the world, & in respect of subjection liable to correction: Yet Kings as it were placed over lawes are not restrai∣ned by them, but reserved to the examination of God, according to the Words of the King and Prophets: against thee only have I finned. It becommeth a King, both in respect of the Noble disposition of his mind, & the Spirituall illumination of his Soule, &c. And who shall say unto the King what doest thou? And that all Persons within the Kings Dominions stand bound in Law, Allegiance, and Conscience to obey their pleasure, or to abide their punishment, and that Kings are not subject to the controle of man, but by speciall Prerogative reserved only to the judgment of God. These are his generall positions and also the substance of his proofes as upon exami∣nation may be seene. How raw, childish, and scandalously beguiling they are, let the in∣different judge. He forgets that Iosua flew and hanged five Kings in one day, And I know he hath read of severall others who have also beene taken and put to the sword in a Martiall way, and the Actors not charged with Sedition, Treason, or sinne for doing it, where then was the absolute immunitie he speakes off, or why did not the Etymo∣logie of their names reserve them from the judgement of God, executed by the hand of man, but Ʋerbum sat sapienti, Judgments are prepared for scorners and stripes for the backs of Fooles. Contra verbosos (and men maliciously bent against the truth,) Nolo contendere verhis. We may see by this little the disposition and spirit of the man, by his fruits we may know him, he is one of them, who labour to have the persons and titles of men in admiration, deceiving, and being deceived, Touch not mine Annointed is one of their high theames. King, the Title of a man and an earthly Magistrate must now be the name above all names (which they once ascribed to the name Jesus) to be bowed unto & ado∣red, yea indeed to be made a God off, if shame would let them speak out these are their nointed letters, Priviledged, and having speciall Prerogative in them, when besprincled with their holy water; that the man whose tittle they shall be, needs nothing else to fit him for heaven; his Soule is presently thereupon Spiritually illuminated, and such a Noble disposition put into his minde, that he can never after be faulty or be subject to question.
He would seeme to be of a middle sort, betweene Papist and Puritan, as he is pleased to style him: but if he and a Papist were put into a sack together and the Pope had the shaking of them out, he would not feare to shake out a Protestant, unlesse one of our new Protestant professors, such an one as is now observed in many Romanists who go to Church with the Protestant sometimes, but like Birds of a feather runne and joyne with the Papist, and the Papist with them, sheltring themselves among such Protestant professors, and Universitie Doctors, who now, as all the world may see, joyne hand to hand, purse to purse, and all that they can make or do (as did those Bishops and Doctors before spoken of) to roote out, and to destroy, all that stands in their way of Pompe, and Greatnesse; And as they did; have set our Kings heart on fire against his best sub∣jects, presenting them to his Majesty under no other Notion or style; but Traytors, Puritants, Rebells, and the like, and that they seeke to take both Sword and Scepter from him, and that they would not live in order, and under Government. Cuius con∣trarium verum est, as will one day be manifest. So loath is the Pope and his party to be thrust quite out of the doores of our King∣dome; they would faine keepe one foot at least in still, for then there would be hopes to get in more. The great assembly and wisedome of our State, must now be limmited by them. They need not alter any of our Predecessors Lawes and Customes, it shall be enough to confirme them as they stand. But we doubt not, but that God will still be the wisdome, and strength of our great Assembly, to do and establish such things as shall be for our Kings Honour, the Kingdomes peace, and the confusion of their enemies. That is the Ordinance and power which God hath set over us, and we chosen for our pro∣tection and safety which we ought to sticke too and maintaine, least we againe en∣thrall our Soules, Persons, and Estates to the bondage we were lately in, and did groane, under, which by some seemes too soone to be forgotten. That which we sow, that shall we also Reape. FINIS.
