C5960 E117_14 99861327 156072
A CONTINVATION Of our weekly INTELLIGENCE From His Majesties Army. Dated Septemb. 12. Printed, September 16. 1642.
Northampton, Septem. 12. My good Friend, I Sent fuller, but it was intercepted in the way; In breefe, the King wants mony, the pay is nothing but Dol∣lars, the towne is forced to take that for 6. s. wch is not worth 5. s. besides the King called the Gentry of that Shire toge∣ther, to desire of them 500. li. a relique of Ship-money left in the then high Sheriffes hands, the beginning of Parliament, the middle-sized Gen∣try, though they made appearance, were not cal∣led up, did not give their consent (being discon∣tented) however the 500. li was taken; many of the Kings servants goe away for want of pay; for Ordnance there is no more noise of any, only I heare an inckling, as if they were making some Iron ones: for foote they have some more: The King desired to see them compleate, there were of them nigh 3000. men and boyes, but not above halfe armed, and 80. of them were hired for i. s. a man for a day, and to mend the matter, to de∣ceive to the full, they gave up in a List to the
King 5000. The Parliament Army disquiets Not∣tingham, and so they are resolved to goe further off, to Darby first, and then Westward, or per∣haps Northwest too therfrom, I do beleeve it is yet to be resolved, it is sure two peeces of Ordnance went to Darby on Wendsday last, some Armes and Ammunition, on Saturday it was exspected more should goe, and this day the King was to goe, whether to returne, it is not yet resolved, but its most probable they will leave Nottingham, they threaten to pillage it before they take their leaves, and some Rascals talke of worse, but sure they dare not doe it. The King summoned the trained bands of Nottingham shire, the appearance was thin, they told him, he never received so much loyalty and affection from any County; and though he called them to appeare in person with their Armes, yet because of Harvest, and be∣cause of their Wives and Children, it should suf∣fice to send him their Armes, and in the Word of a King to returne them when he had setled His Kingdom in peace: They cryed out, They would goe with him: However their Armes were com∣manded to the Castle for that night, and next morning they were forced to return disarmed; so they served Leicester shire: I guesse, his Councels vary, and did he know how to bestow His Ord∣nance, he would be altogether in a flying posture, and turne his Foote into Dragooneers, which yet he may doe, if Foote come in no faster; they will
incline Westward, or Northwest, and in the way, get up what Armes they can, by speeches, and perforce. Darby was forced to resigne some, that Shire is righter then most: wee get nothing in the Counties by this deliberation, and I finde, if they were not seeing people, they would to the Cava∣liers, as Nottingham, and such Townes, when pro∣mises have been made in vaine. Here are Letters come this day from Scotland, that tells us of a defeate given by Generall Lesly to 4000. Irish, who had raised a Fort neare Charl∣mount, which he beat them from, notwithstand∣ing it was a great advantage to them, and was maintained with indifferent courage, he went not forward against Charlemount for want of Ord∣nance: The Letters speake likewise of the resem∣bling of the Counsell of Scotland, which will be the 21. of this instant, at which time most believe here, somewhat will be agreed for the furthering the peace of England: Here is Letters also, that 5000. Armes are come to Newcastle for His Ma∣jesty: Here are divers dangerous Bookes come, Printed at London, I wonder no more care is ta∣ken, some of them are enough to put the world into a combustion.
Hence is dispatcht a third Message to the House, you will see large expressions for the defence of the Lawes and Liberties of the Kingdome, and of the true Protestant Religion: Sir, the Kings Ma∣jesty hath not a Subject that wishes him more happinesse than my selfe, nor is willinger to be∣lieve he meanes as he saith, but when I consider what I have heard my Lord Keeper Coventry of∣ten say in Star-Chamber, That his Majesty had commanded him to say, that he would lose his life rather then leave his Religion, and yet all those times none were in favour about him for the trans∣acting his affaires, but such as were agents for Spaine and Rome, and none were preferred, but such as were Popish, and done somewhat by way of Innovation: And likewise for Lawes the like Declarations have been made, and yet nothing hath been countenanced but that which was de∣structive to the Law: and now Sir, the principall transactors of his Majesties affaires, and that Byas him, are such as are Popish, and enemies to Laws and Law-makers: I shall leave the application to your selfe, and conclude with this secret; Here is much whispering of Massacring the Puritan par∣ty, yea, some great ones have put it forward with much violence, but others have rejected it, not as barbarous, but as not advantagious to his Maje∣sties designes, things standing as they doe. FINIS.
