D16A R223234 99897406 135587
The pretended High Court of Justice VNBOWELLED: Being a Caveat for TRAYTORS, OR, TREASON CONDEMNED AND Truth Vindicated. With severall Reasons presented to Oliver Cromwell, four days before the Massacring of his Majesty proving the sad sentence passed upon his late Sacred Majesty, the 27 of Ianuary 1648. unjust and contrary both to the Law of GOD and these Nations. Together with his Majesties SPEECH to a precious Jewel then sitting as one of his Judges, though formerly a servant to His Sacred Majestie. Never Publish'd till this day of England's Redemption. London, Printed for Thomas Hairman, 1660.
The pretended High Court of Justice unbowelled, and their iniustice laid open to publck view. THis Court called the High Court of Justice, was erected in 48. and the better to carry on their design in cutting of the most loyal subjects, they began with the Head of the People his sa∣cred Majesty, in the scarlet dy of whose blood they first dipt their cruel hands and hardened their hearts. The manner of his Tryal was as followeth. viz. The Court being erected, the Counsellours were appointed to draw up the Charge against his Majesty, was Dr. Dorislaus, Mr. Aske, Mr. Iohn Cook Solicitor. Serj. Danby, Serj. at Arms. Mr. Brougton and Mr. Phelps Clerks to the Court. Col. Humphrey Sword-Bearer. There were produced 35 Witnesses who were sworn in this preten∣ded Court, to give evidence against the King, most of which were per∣sons of small estimation, as a Cobler, a Tyler, a Painter, a Husbandman a Barber, a Feltmaker, a Weaver, a Glover, a Smith &c. not above 3 or 4 Gentlemen amongst them. The sentence against the said King January 27 1648, which was read by the said Mr. Braugton aforesaid Clerk. Whereas the Commons of England in Parliament, have appointed them an High Court of Justice for the Tryal of Charles Stuart King of England before whom he had been three times convented, atnd at the first time a Charge of high Treason, and other crimes and misdemeanors was read in the behalf of the Kingdom of England, &c. as in the  which was read throughout.
To which Charge, he the said Charls Stuart was required to give his Answer, but he refused so to do; and so exprest several passages at his Tryal in refusing to answer. For all which Treasons and Crimes, this Court doth adjudge, That the said Charls Stuart, as a Tyrant, Traytor, Murtherer, and Publick enemy, shall be put to death, by severing his head from his body. This Sentence (sayes Bradshaw the President) now read and published is the Act, Sentence, Judgement and Resolution of the whole Court. To which the Members of the Court stood up and assented to what he said by holding up their hands. The King offered to speak, but he was instantly commanded to be taken away, and the Court broke up. One thing worth observation is, that his Majesty (being in the Court and) taking notice of Sir Henry Mildmay, said, O you are a precious Jewell, he being formerly a servant to his Majesty. The true manner of proceeding to take off the Kings Head, accord∣ing to the Sentence given as aforesaid. Sir Hadress Waller, Colonel Dean, and Colonel Okey, were appointed to consider of the Time and Place for the Execution of the King, according to his Sentence, given by the (pretended) High Court of Justice. Painted Chamber, Monday January the 29th 1648. Upon Report made from the Committee for Considering of the Executing of the Judgement against the King, that the said Committee have Resolved, That the open street before Whitehal is a fit place: And the said Com∣mitee conceive it fit, That the King be there executed the morrow, the King having already notice thereof. The Court approved thereof, and ordered a Warrent to be drawn to that purpose, which Warrent was according drawn and agreed to, and Ordered to be ingrossed, which was done, and signed and sealed accord∣ingly, as followeth. At the High Court of Justice for the Trying and Judging of Charls Stuart King of England, Jan. 29. 2648. Whereas Charls Stuart King of England, is and standeth convicted, Attained and Condemned of High Treason, and other Crimes, and Sentence on Saturday last was pronounced against him by this Court, to be put to Death, by the severing his head from his body, of which ce Execution yet remaineth to be done. These are therefore  require you, to see the said Sentence Executed in the open  re Whitehall upon the morrow, being the 30. day of this in∣stant
Moneth of January, between the hours of Ten in the morning, and Five in the afternoon of the same day, with full effect; and for so doing, This shall be your sufficient Warrant: and these are to require all Officers and Souldiers and other the good People of this Nation of England to be assistant unto you in this service. Given under our hands and Seals. To Colonel Francis Hacker, Colonel Hunks, and Lieutenant Colonel Phray, and to every of them. Sealed and Subscribed by, John Bradshaw President. Thomas Gray. Oliver Cromwell. Edward Whaley. John Danvers. Mich. Livesay. John Boucher. Hen. Ireton. Tho. Maleverer. John Blackeston. John Hutchison. William Goffe Tho. Pride. Henry Smith. Vincent Potter. William Constable. Rich. Ingoldsby. Will. Cawley. John Bark stead. Isaac Ewer. Va. Walton. Peter Temple. Tho. Harrison. Joh. Hewson. Per. Pelham. Richard Dean. Rob. Tichburn. Hump. Edwsard. Dan. Blagrave. Owen Roe. Will. Purifoye. Adrian Scroop James Templer. Aug. Garland. Edmon. Ludlow. Hen. Martin. Joh. Alured. Rob. Lilburn. Will. Say. Anthony Stapley. Gregory Nor∣ton. Tho. Chaloner. Tho. Wogan. Simon Meyne. Tho. Horton. Ioh. Jones. Ioh. Mor. Hadress Waller. Gilbert Millington. Ch. Fleetwood. Iohn Venn. Greg. Clement. Ioh. Downs. Tho. Waite. Tho. Scot. Iohn Carew. Miles Corbet. In all Fifty eight, Ordered, That the Scaffold on which the King is to be executed, be covered with black. The Warrant for executing the King being accordingly delivered to those parties to whom the same was directed, Execution was done up∣on him according to the Tenour thereof about two a clock in the after∣noon, of the said 30. of January 1648. The Fatall day of the said Execution, being Tuesday January the 30. 1648. His Majesty continued in Prayer all the morning, and receives the Sacrament. Just at ten a Clock before noon, he was conveyed on foot on foot from St. James's Palace to Whitehall, guarded by a Regi∣ment of Foot Souldiers, part before, part behinde, with Colours fly∣ing, and Drums beating, his private guard of Partizans about him, and Dr. Juxon Bishop of London, next to him on one side, and Colonel Tomlinson on the other; being come to Whitehall, he continued in his Cabinet Chamber at his Devotions, refusing to dine, onely about 12 a clock he eat a bit of Bread, and drank a glasse of Claret wine; from from thence he was conveyed into the Banquetting house, and the great window inlarged, out of which he ascends the Scaffold, the rails
being hung round, and the floor covered with black; His Executioners disguised with Vizards, yet was his Majesty not affrighted: He shewed more care of the people living, then of himself dying: for looking round about upon the people, whom the thick Guards of Souldiers kept a distance off, and seeing he could not be heard by them, omitting (probably) what he purposed to have spoken to them, therefore turn∣ing to the Officers and Actors by him, he delivered himself in a short (but excellent) Speech, which being ended, he meekly went to Pray∣ers, and after some heavenly discourse between him and the Bishop, having prepared himself, he lifted up his eyes to heaven, mildly pray∣ing to himself, he stooping down to the block as to a Prayer-deske, and most humbly bowed his generous Neck to God, to be cut of by the Vzarded Executioner, which was sodainly done at one blow. Thus fell King Charls, and thus all Britain with him. The true Copy of a Letter sent by Ed. Barber Freeman of England and Clothworker of London to Gen. Crumwel after his Majesty had re∣ceived the sentence of Death, for the saving of his Life. Directed to the Right honorable Oliver Crumwel L. Gen. of the Forces raysed by the Parl. of the Common-wralth of England, &c. My Lord, MAy it please your honour, I cannot but write these few lines unto you, concerning the Parliaments dealing with the Kings Maje∣sty, whom although they have condemned to death, yet I hope will ne∣ver put their Judgment to execution, but look back to their former pro∣mises and Engagements, which they have made to God, his Majesty and this Nation, with their hands lift up to the most high God, that all the world should see that they intended nothing against his Majesty, but his evil Counsel, for the Liberty of the Gospel and the freedom of the people, and that they would make him a glorious King, &c. Now I be∣seech you consider the practise of Joshua (that glorious type of Christ) to the Gibeonites Ioshua 9.14, 15, 18, 19, 20. And the men took of their victuals, and asked not counsel at the mouth of the Lord, And Jo∣shua made peace with them, and made a League with them to let them live, And the Princes of the Congregation, swear unto them, &c. And
the children of Israel smote them not, because the Princes of the congre∣gation had sworn unto them by the Lord God of Israel; And all the con∣gregation murmured against the Princes, But all the Princes said unto all the congregation, We have sworn unto them by the Lord God of Israel, Now therefore we may not touch them, this will we do to them, we will even let them live, least wrath be upon us, because of the Oath which we swore unto them. And the Princes said unto them, let them live; but let them be hewers of wood and drawers of water unto all the Congrega∣tion, &c, Yet the Lord had commanded that they should be utterly cut off and destroyed, as Deut. 7.1.2.16. When the Lord thy God shall bring thee into the Land whether thou goest to possesse it, and hath cast out many Nations before thee &c. seven Nations greater and mightier then thou. And when the Lord thy God shall deliver them before thee, thou shalt smite them and utterly destroy them, thou shalt make no Covenant with them nor shew mercy unto them and thou shalt consume all the people which the Lord thy God shall deliver thee, thine eye shall have no pitty upon them, neither shalt thou serve their gods, for that will be a snare unto thee, &c. Yet durst not Joshua destroy them because of his oath, &c. And after∣wards the Lord brought three years samine in the dayes of David for Sauls Bloody house. In slaying the Gibeonites; And would not be appeased but by sarisfying the Gibeonites which was done by hanging seven of Sauls Sons, 2 Sam. 21.1. to the 6. And King. 2.6.13. to the 23. there is a Remarkable passage of mercy Captives in time of misery where the King of Israel said unto Elisha the Prophet concerning the Syreans taken pisoners, my father shall I smite them, shall I smite them, And be answered thou shalt not smite them, wouldst thou smite them, whom thou hast taken captive with thy sword. And with thy bow, set bread and water before them that they may eat & drink. And go to their master, & he prepared great provision for them, and when they had eaten and drank he sent them Away, and they went to their master, I could have wisht it had been so done to the poor Scots that were brought here to London, see the Armies of Syria came no more into the Land of Israel, see what kindness, and mercy wrought upon them, this is the way to please God and purchase peace and love, and unite the Nations, And not to render evil for evil but to follow that which is good, Deut. 32.35. to me saith the Lord be∣longeth vengeance and recompence, and Prov. 25.21. If thine enemy be hungry give him bread to eat, and if he be thirsty give him water to
drink for thou shalt heap up coals of fire upon his head, and the Lord shall reward thee; compare with Rom. 12.17. to the 21. Recompence to no man evil for evil provide things honest in the sight of all men if it be possible as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men, dearly be∣loved, avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath, for it is written vengeance is mine. I will repay it saith the Lord, therefore if thine enemy hunger feed him, if he thirst give him drink for in so doing thou shall heap coals of fire on his head, be not overcome of evil but over∣come evil with good, &c. Again when the Lord saith, Ecol. 5.4.5. when thou vowest a vow un∣to God, as you have done many times, defer not to pay it for he hath no pleasure in fools, pay that which thou hast vowed; Better is it that thou wouldst not vow, then that thou shouldst vow and not pay, &c. Con∣sider these things I could not but commit to your honours considera∣tion, and the Lord give you understanding and a heart to do according to the engagements, that the wrath of the Lord break not forth a∣gainst this poor bleeding Nation to the utter ruine and destruction thereof, for breach of vows and Covenants, for I fear because of oathes the Land mourneth, And Jer. 48.10. cursed be he that doth the work of the Lord deceitfully, And Nehemiah 5.9. to the 15. the Prophet re∣buked the Nobles and the Rulers for their usury oppression exhorting them to restore their evil gotten goods, as vers. 11. which they promised to do, verse 12. upon which the Prophet shook his lap and said so God shake out every man from his house, and from his Labour that per∣formeth this promise, even thus be he shaken out, and emptied and all the Congregation said Amen, and praised the Lord, and the people did according to this promise, &c. But so have not you come short of this to the dishonour to God, and the shame and reproach of this Nation, and instead of performing that promises you flew upon the spoil like Saul-Sam. 1.15.13. to the 19. &c. And I believe God hath, and will shake many of you until ye repent for the Lord is overturning, As Eze. 21.27. I will overturn overturn, overturn it, and it shall he no more until he come whose right it is, and I will give it him, thus committing you to the most blessed guidance of the Almighty God I rest your honours and the Nations faithful Servant. E.D. This lettet was delivered to the Lord Gen. Cromwel but never any an∣swer given. FINIS.
