E1858 E40_21 99858784 155096
AN ORDINANCE OF THE Lords and Commons, Assembled in PARLIAMENT, For appointing a solemne Day of Thanksgiving, for the happy Successe of the Forces under Sir William Waller and Sir William Balfore, against the Forces under the Command of Sir Ralph Hopton, who were totally routed on the 29. of March last, 1644. Together with an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, to enable the Merchants of Levant Company, to Import in English Bot∣tomes any CURRANS, and to land them within any Port within the power of the Parliament. Ordered by the Commons in Parliament, that these Ordinances be forthwith printed and published. Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. Printed for Edward Husbands, April 4. 1644.
Die Lunae, 1. April: 1644. An Ordinance of the Lords and Com∣mons in Parliament assembled, appointing a solemn day of Thanksgiving, &c. THe Lords and Commons in Parlia∣ment assembled, having certain In∣formation of the great mercy of our good God, in the happy successe of the Forces of the Parliament, under the command of Sir William Waller and Sir William Bal∣fore, on Friday last the 29 of March, 1644. Do in their acknowledgement of Gods mercy herein Order, That upon
the Lords day, which will be on the 14. of this instant April, publique Thanksgiving be given in all churches and chappels on the South side of Trent, within the power of the Parliament, unto the Lord of hosts that giveth all Victory, for the seasonable and extraordinary blessing, whereby the Army under the command of Sir Ralph Hopton was totally routed, with the losse of very few of the Parliaments Forces; And all Ministers in their respective churches and chappels, are hereby dire∣cted and commanded to give notice ther∣of, and to exhort and excite their people to acknowledge and improve this great blessing in a spirituall way, that as this mercy was bestowed in return of our prayers and humiliation, upon the late and solemn Fast the VVednesday before this Victory, so God may have the sole
honour and glory of it in our praises and Thanksgivings, and that the like Thanks∣giving shall be made on the North side of Trent fourteen dayes after, which will be on the 28. of this instant April. Ordered that this Ordinance for Publique Thanksgiving be forthwith Printed and published; And that the Printer of the House do bring in a convenient number to the Members of the House, to be sent into the severall Counties. H: ELSYNGE, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
Die Martis 19. Martii, 1643. An Ordinance of the Lord and Com∣mons in Parliament, concerning CVRRANS. VVHereas by an Ordinance of both hou∣ses of Parliament dated 26 Augusti, 1642 It is Ordained for the reasons therein expressed, that from and after the last day of September, 1642 no Currans should be imported into the King∣dom of England, or Dominion of Wales, by any Merchants or others, by way of Merchandize, or otherwise from any Ports beyond the Seas, but the Importation thereof is thereby utterly prohibited and forbidden. Now forasmuch as since the making of the said Ordinance, the Enemy is poffessed of divers Havens and Port townes of the said Kingdom, where Currans are daily imported, whereby the benefit of the said Ordinance cannot be made usefull for the publike good of the Kingdom, as was intended;
The Lords and Commons now Assembled in Parliament, do Order, Ordain, and Declare, that from and after the Twelfth day of February last it shall and may bee lawfull, to and for all Mer∣chants of the Levant company, by way of Mer∣chandize or otherwise, to Import in English bot∣toms any Currans of the growth of Zant and Cepholonia, and to land them into the Port of Lon∣don, or any other Port within the power of the Parliament, within Twelve moneths next after the publication of this Ordinance, from any Ports beyond the Seas, paying six shillins per cent: for every hundred weight of the said Cur∣rans, over and above the Customes and Excise due for the same: The said Ordinance of pro∣hibition to the contrary in any wise notwith∣standing: And the Commissioners of the Customes are hereby required to take Entries for the said Currans, and to receive of the said Merchants the said six shillings per cent: for every hundred weight over and above the custome and Excise as aforesaid, and the proceed of the said six shillings per cent: the said Commissi∣oners are hereby required to pay over to Natha∣niel Stevens, Thomas Hodges and Thomas Pury Es∣quires, Members of the House of Commons,
for the use of the Garrison of Gloucester upon accompt, taking their receipt for the same, which shall be to the said Commissioners and every of them a sufficient Discharge in that be∣halfe. H: Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com. 25 Martii. 1644. IT is this day ordered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, that the Ordinance concerning Currans be Printed forthwith, and that the Commissioners of the Customes do send Coppies of them, to∣gether with their Letters to the severall Ports, with directions unto them, to put the said Ordinance in execution, and to bee accomptable for this. Ordinance, and the Payments thereupon arising, eswell as of any other duties payable upon any other Ordinance, and monethly to send up the monies hereupon received, and the account thereof. H. ELSTNGE, Cler. Parl. D. Com. FINIS.
