E2137A 99897579 132854
THE PARLIAMENTS INSTRUCTIONS Agreed on by the Lords and Commons for to be observed by their severall Committees, now Residing in the severall Counties, and those to be imployed. LIKEWISE, The Message and Order of both Houses of Par∣liament to the Alderman of the City of London, August the 12. 1642. Wherein is Declared their Desires to the said Aldermen, for to appear on monday next at the time and place herein prefixed. Ordered that this be forthwith printed and published John. Brown. Cler. Parl. C R LONDON: Printed for J. Hansott. August 16. 16
Die Veneris Augusti 1642. Instructions agreed on by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, for to be observed by their severall Committees. I. YOu shall observe and execute the Ordi∣nance of both Houses of Parliament the eighth of this month, for the suppression of the Rebellion and Commotion, raised by the Marquesse of Hartford in the County of Somerset, and other Western Counties; and by the Earle of Northampton and others in the County of Leicester Northampton, Warwick, and other adjoyning parts. II. You shall conduct and leade all such Forces of Horse and Foot as shall be appointed by the Lord Generall (the Earle of Essex) for this service, and shall fight with, kill, and slay all such as shall by force oppose you in the execution of that Ordi∣nance, and all their Assistants, Ayders, and Abet∣tors, and you shall levie such other Forces of horse and foot, as his Excellence shall by his Commissi∣on give you power to leavie, under such Colonels,
Commanders, and other Officers, as shall bee by him appointed or directed? And you shall pursue the said Rebels and Traytors, in the said Counties, or in any other Counties, or parts of the Kingdome into which they shall retyre themselves. All which Forces so to be raised shall have the same pay as the rest of the Army is to have. And you shall defend and protect his Majesties Sub∣jects from violence and oppression by the illegall Commission of Array, or otherwise; And you shall hinder and forbid the execution of that ille∣gall Commission, and in all places to the uttermost of your power, indeavour to preserve and restore the peace of the Kingdome. III. You are hereby authorized and required to dis∣arme all popish Recusants, and all such other dan∣gerous and ill-affected persons, as well Clergy men as others, as have testified or shall testifie their ill-disposition to the peace of the Kingdom. IV. You shall indeavour to cleere the proceedings of Parliament from all imputations and Aspersions, and shall from time to time certifie us of all things necessary for the publique service, and that wee may have a speedy account of it, and directions to you, aswell as your advertisements to us may have a cleer and ready passage, you shall lay a strict charg upon all post-masters, that they doe not suffer any Letters, or other Dispatches, to or from the Parlia∣ment, to be intercepted or stayed: or if any shall
presume to make such stay of those Dispatches, you shall direct the Postmasters to repaire to the Justices of the Peace, Constables, and all other Of∣ficers, for their Aid and Assistance, who are hereby required to take speciall care that there may not be no such interruption. V. If you shall find any disaffected persons, raising any parties against the Parliament, spreading scan∣dals or aspersions on their proceedings, like to di∣sturbe the peace of the Kingdom; you shall cause all such persons (upon good proofes of their Mis∣demeanours) to be Arrested and sent up to answer such their Offences, as to Law and Justice shall appertain. VI. You shall take from the said Rebels and Tray∣tors all such Arms, Ordinance, and Ammunition, as they have taken from his Majesties Subjects, and restore the same to the Owner. VII. Whereas his Majesty seduced by wicked Coun∣cels hath raised Warre against his Parliament, and other his good subjects, and hath drawn together great troops of Papists and ill affected persons, and sent out Commission for the levying of others, to the great hazzard of Religion, and the publique peace of the Kingdome.
You are therfore required to suppresse all per∣sons whatsoever, who shall leavie any Souldiers, or draw together any of the Trayned Bands, by colour or pretence of any Commission from his Majesty, under the great Seal or otherwise; And you shall ceize upon all Horses, Arms, Ammunition, money, Plate, or other Provision whatsoever, raised or pro∣vided under pretence of his Majesties service, for the fomenting or maintaining any such unnaturall and unlawfull warre against his people. VIII. You shall observe and execute all such further Directions and Instructions as you shall from time to time receive from both Houses of Parliament; As likewise, such Instructions and Directions as you shal from time to time receive from the Com∣mittees of the Lords and Commons appointed to take Care of the safety of the Kingdom, and what∣soever you shall do therein, or any other person in Aid or Assistance of you, it shall be accepted as a good and necessary service to the Kingdom, and for their and your so doing, they and you shall bee de∣fended and protected by the Authority of Parlia∣ment. And this Resolution of the Lords and Com∣mons, to protect those that shall obey and further their Commands, you shal publish and declare up∣on all occasions, for the better encouragement of the Subjects of this Kingdom in that behalfe.
Die Veneris 12. Augusti. 1642. IT is this Day Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That every Alderman in every Ward within the City of London, or in his ab∣sence his Deputy, shall summon every Sub∣sidy man dwelling in his said Ward to appear on Monday next, at their usuall place of meeting by 8. of the clock in the morning, where some members of the House of Commons will be present to ac∣quaint them with the present state and condition of the Kingdom, and City of London, and to consider further what is fit for the safety of both. And to that end you are to require all Inhabitants setting all excuses aside, not to fail of giving their personall presence at the time and place appointed by you. And every Alderman or Deputy is like∣wise hereby further required, upon the
day and time above-specified, to make re∣turn of the subscriptions of all strangers in their particular Wards. Ordered by the Lords and Commons assem∣bled in Parliament, that this be forthwith printed and published. Iohn Brown Cler. Parl.
