G1640 E554_20 99865055 165092
A GREAT AND Bloudy Fight at Sea, BETWEEN The Parliaments Fleet, and the Princes Navy, on Thursday last, neer the Coast of Plymouth; the great James, the Royall Fame, and five other ships taken, together with one hundred and fifty pieces of Ordnance, five hundred Captains and Ma∣riners, and great store of powder match, and bullet; As also, the full particulars of the said Fight, the manner of their boarding each other, and the number killed and wounded on both sides. Likewise, prince Maurice his Letter to the prince of Wales, concerning the Navy, and prince Charles his Reso∣lution. With a Letter to be sent from the parliament of Eng∣land to the Embassadours of forraign princes, touching His Hinesse. May 9th depictiion of battle between the Parliament's fleet and the Prince's navy London, printed for G. Wharton, Anno Dom. 1649
Another great FIGHT AT SEA Between the Parliaments Navy, and the Princes Fleet, The great ship called the James taken, and many others, with above one hundred and fifty pieces of Ordnance. Right Honoured, THe Princes Fleet being divided into three Squadrons, Captain Moulton took Time by the fore-top, and embraced an opportunity to dispute the Western point with a Squadron of the said ships, commanded by Prince Maurice, the manner thus, viz.
The said Capt. Moulten Vice-Admiral of the Irith Seas for the Parliament of England, having received certain intelligence of the present motion of the afore said Squadron, immediatly hoysted sayl, and with the Leopard, and five more ships hastned towards them, who coming within two leagues one of the other, both parties hung forth their colours opened the Port holes, and when they came within musket shot, severall great vollies were exchanged, and a hot conflict bogan, which continued for the space of an hour, the fight being dis∣puted with great gallantry on both sides; but the Priu∣ces having not long before their engagement, posses∣sed themselves of rich Prizes, invited our Mariners to a bold attempt; insomuch, that the Leopard boarded the James, but were the first and second time repulsed and beaten off, by reason of the enemies small shot which flew so violently from the Morter pieces above Decks; but the third time, they assayled so far, that after a short dispute with their half pikes, and other weapons, they forced the enemy under Decks, where the Captain of the said ship desired a parley, other∣wise they were resolved to sink the ship, and sacrifice their lives in the mercilesse Seas; which being gran∣ted, they desired quarter, and freely resigned themselvs up to the mercy of Parliament. During which conflict between the Leopard and the James, the rest of the ships were not idle, each party striving for victory, but so soon as they perceived that the James was taken, im∣mediatly hung forth a white flag, and sounded a par∣ley, which being likewise granted, they also bequeathed themselves to the mercy of Parliament: so that with the losse of about 50 men, they possessed themselves
of the whole Squadron, being seven in number, wher∣in was above 150 pieces of Ordnance, and about 500. Mariners, with great store of provision, ammunition, march and bullet, with other rich prizes which they had taken at Sea. These ships are now all brought into this Harbour, and the Captains, and others, committed to safe custody. Many of the Princes men are sore woun∣ded, so are divers of ours; but in the engagement they lost above 100 men. Prince Maurice escaped narrow∣ly, but by the swift sayling of the Charls got safe to the Isle of Scilley; from whence he wrote a Letter to the prince of Wales, intimating, That if speedy supplies of men, money, and shipping be not sent vnto him, the Royall Game will be soon lost at Sea. Plymouth 5 May, 1649. By an Expresse from the Hague in Holland, May 2. it is advertized, That Prince Charles hath absolutely declared against the high Demands of the Kingdome or Scotland, resolving to expedito a Message and De∣claration to his Subjects of that Nation, for the clee∣ring of all misunderstandings and false suggestions, and to intimate upon what tearms and conditions he is willing to unite and comply with them; but the Re∣sults of his Councell are very dangerous to the well∣being peace and tranquility of a free people, and their daily buzzings into his attentive ears, will suddenly (its feared) rrupt and putrifie his Princely head, which if effuall, great are the troubles that He is to undergoe. And the chief motive which inciteth vs unto this con∣jecturation is, by reason that His Highnesse hath given his finall non-complying answer to the Scommissio∣ners, and that he intends suddenly for Ireland, and to be convoyed by the Dutch Admirall.
Honoured Sir, PRince Charles, the declared King of Scotland, hath given audience to the Scots Commissio∣ners, and upon the representing of their Mes∣sage (in the name of the whole Kirk and Kingdome of Scotland) after mature deliberation thereon, his High∣nesse rose out of the Chair of State, and made this en∣suing Speech, at the Councel Table, in the presence of many English Peers. My Lords, SEeing that the Kirk and Kingdom of Scotland, have acknowledgedUs to be their true and lawfull King, according to Bithright and Succession, We shall there∣fore endeavour to discharge the trust reposed in Us, with all faithfulnesse and integrity, and in order thereunto, shall leave no meanes untmpted for the satisfying of all Interests but speedily declare Our gracious will and plea∣sure, in giving such Directions and Orders for the peace and Government of that Kingdome, which shall prove sa∣tisfactory, to all Our loyal Subjects, within the Territories thereof. But notwithstanding all these affable and declarato∣ry expressions, his Highnesse seems to be very averse in his condescensions to treat with them privately; but by the advice of his Councell, hath expresly declared, That he will not treat upon matters concerning that Kingdom, but in the presence of some of his Councel∣lours. And his Highnesse doth more and more adhere to the Earl of Montrosse, but yet with so much policy and art, that upon discourse with the Earl of Lanerick (who is now called by the name of Dke mbleton)
he so far complemented with him, that he protested to adhere to his Majesty in all Commands, I will try that sayes Prince Charles, the Scots King, within three or four dayes; and some three dayes after the Prince got them both private, taxed the Duke with his pro∣mise, and thereupon commanded him to shake hands, and be friends with Montrosse. The Duke replyed, that the difference was great between them, and so vast, that it required many dayes debate: but upon the Prin∣ces further pressing of it, they shaked hands, protesting to unite really in affection. The Scots Commissioners are not satisfied with the Demurs at Court, but have some addresses to the States, to move the King in their behalf to hearken to them, and condiscend to what is propounded for the peace and settlement of his Kingdom. For the facilia∣ting whereof, the States have tendered a Representati∣on to his Highnesse, inciting him to a reconciliation, a perfect union, and seriously to weigh and consider of what they offer to him. Whereupon the Prince resolved, that the substance of their Desires should be drawn up into form, and in reference to a paper which he had formerly received from the Commissioners, communicated the same to the Estates, to the end, they might cleerly discerne and be sensible of what high things they demanded of him, which being urged by them to the Scots commissio∣ner, they denied the tender of any such paper: How∣ever, the Prince hath declared a great willingnesse to a concurrence with his Subjects of Scotland, and saith, that he is resolved to give his condescension to such things, that may tend to his honour and safety, and the liberty and freedom of his people; but the Royall
Courtiers disswade him, from signing to any thing, but that which may advance their own design and in∣terest. Hague 4 May, 1649. May 8. By an Expresse from the North it is adver∣tized, that the Gourdens, Oglebies, and Middletons are gathered to a great head, and have great Bodies toge∣gether; and whereas formerly they did intend a parley now they reject and cast all aside they begun or in∣tended with Lesley, they are grown to such a height, that Lesley is enforced to withdraw his number of for∣ces in any measure not able to engage with theirs. The parliament of England have ordered that a let∣ter be forthwith drawn up, to be sent to the severall and respective Embassadors and Agents from forraine States, signifying, That they are resolved to seize on all ships whatsoever, belonging to any King or State that have prince Charles his Commission, or shall be desig∣ned against the Common-wealth or England, and in or∣der thereunto, are drawing up an Act for the sme purpose, which may prove instrumentall for  pre∣venting of forraign Engagements against this Nation. FINIS.
