G1590 E566_26 99865395 117635
A Cure of deadly Doctrine; Which is death in the Pot: OR Mr. Royles Light proved to be Darknesse. By J. G. a lover and a Member of the holy Army of God, although the most unworthy. SIR; YOur Glimps of some truths, as you call it, is a mysting and darkening of the cleere light of the Scriptures; an ad∣ding to and taking from the testimo∣nies and Books of the Prophesies of God, which whosoever doth is to bring upon him all the plagues that are written therein, and to deprive himselfe of his part in the booke of life, and in the holy City, and of all the precious things that are written in Gods Records. And first for the generall title of your Paper, it is palpably false, to ascribe to your particular matters the name of truths, and to be made knowne in these last times; when as many in London know them all to be old Germane errours. The first publisher wee reade of, who plainly & openly profest them, was David George, & one Henry Nicholls, sometimes a tradesman in Holland, who through pride fell to grosse and strange delusions of Satan, and printed many blasphemons tenents in divers small books, knowne by severall titles, As the Gospel of the Kingdome; The Prophesie of the Spirit of love; the Pro∣verbs of H. N. The glasse of Righteousnesse; and divers o∣thers; many of them being lately reprinted; as, The Re∣velation of God; The spirituall King of P; and the Pro∣phesie of the Spirit of Love; in all of them setting forth
himselfe to be greater then Jesus Christ our Lord: ha∣ving these expressions in one of his books; There is eight through breakings of the light, and each one exceeding the o∣ther, and the last the greatest; in which number he makes Jesus Christ the seventh, and himselfe the eight: and as Jesus of Nazareth was greater then all, or any before him, so himselfe H. N. to excell, in all manner of gifts and graces, our Saviour Christ; for he saith, Christ is no other in the Scripture then Anointing, and in that he himselfe exceeded. And the Names also that are given in Scripture to Christ onely, by them he calls himselfe; as, the Son of God, the holy One of Israel, &c. And now to your three particulars; and first of the first; how you can prove your affirmation by Scripture or reason, that all the offices, gifts, and ordinances gi∣ven to the Apostles were figurative; these are your own words, and I shall keep you close to them; for he that makes error his Proposition, can make no better of his Conclusion: I confesse, the terme Ordinances, as you ex∣pound them to be the Supper of the Lord, and Ele∣ments Baptisme, are figurative; but how you will prove the other two terms, offices and gifts figurative, it is ve∣ry doubtfull to conceive; for if you meane the office of an Apostle, Deacon, Evangelist, Bishop, Elder, Over∣seer, or any other office mentioned in the New Testa∣ment, then how are they figurative. And by gifts, if you meane, as the Apostle doth, 1 Cor. 1 2. the manifold gifts of the Spirit, some peculiar to the Saints alone, who are spirituall, & others common to all beleevers, although carnall; then how in either respect are they figurative? for in right reason of ordinary expression, a figure can∣not be the thing it selfe, but some other thing that hath in it the resemblance of the substance it signifies; as in Circumcision, the Passeover, the Brazen Serpent, the
Manna, the Sacrifices, the Priesthood, the washing away the filth of the flesh, and the Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper. Againe, I require of you to shew in right distinction and sound understanding,  what respect the Apostles gif▪ and those with them that had received the gifts of he Holy Ghost, descending on them at Jerusalem, Acts 2. that thse should be weake in their gifts and dispensations, compared with those after them in St Pauls me, and now in our time▪  you seems to prove it by Rom. 8. 18. If you have not a new way to cleare this, the Scriptures will make it very soule against you. Againe, where doe you read, that the coming of Christ in the flesh, put an end to all the Ceremonies of the Law, to them of whom they were required? And how can you prove, that the promise of his coming againe is fulfilled, in the sending, giving, or powring forth of his Spirit; I hope you hold the distinction of the persons in the God-head, Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost, neither con∣founding the persons▪ Excellencies, or Offices of either, so that these Appellations are onely proper to the Sonne, and not to the Father, or Spirit▪ Thy o, this day have I begotten thee: Againe, The Lord hath sworne, and wil not repent, thou art a Priest for ever, &c. Againe, The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou a my right hand, &c. Againe, Whom ts must containe, or receive▪ till the restitution of all things, &c. And againe▪ As you have see him goe, so shall you see him come. Now observe, it is said, he shall come,  is no said, the Fa∣ther, or the Spirit; wherefore doe you straine the Text? And whereas the Lord saith▪  will send the Spirit, he doth not say nor meant, he will send himselfe; for as he hath assumed the humane nature, and exalted it  Gods right hand, even so there he i to a∣bide and continue till the time appointed of his returne. Likewise other Scriptures speaks properly of the Father, and not of the Son, nor Spirit; as this is properly spoken of the Spirit, and not of the Father, nor the Sonne; therefore vaine and incredulous is it to af∣firme, that Christs sending his Spirit to his Church, is his second coming, or coming againe to them according to the Scriptures, Joh. 14. 2, 3. Heb. 9. 28. Matth. 16. 27. Luk. 19. 11, 12. &c. Friend, if I may call you so, take heed how you expound Scrip∣tures; for th to affirme, as you have done, is to abuse the Scrip∣tures; and to force, violate, injure, wound and kill the Witnesses of God, which whosoever doth, shall perish and be slaine by them,
Rev. 11. 5. For fie proceedeth out of their mouth, and devoureth, saith the Text such enemies: The truth is, when a Christian wants his principles and beginnings of Christ, and yet will take upon him∣selfe to be a Teacher in Christianitie; he is like the Martiner that takes upon him the office of a Pilot, and yet understands not the Art of Navigation; for to know the common tearmes, without the perfect skill in the mystery, by the theorick or by the practick, the more he acts, the farther he ingages the Ship to destruction, not∣withstanding all his pretences to the contrary. Sir, Blame mee not thus to charge you, for you prove your selfe to be the unskilfull Christian, as in what is past, so in that which is to come; for you using the tearme Baptisme, and not rightly di∣stinguishing in the different acceptation thereof; you make that ob∣scue in your reasonings, which otherwise were plaine in the holy Scriptures, comparing Scripture with Scripture; for there is a Bap∣tisme of Water in the Element, and a Baptisme of Water in the Mystery; and John the Baptist and St Paul with all the Apostles and servants of God were more conversant in this last signification of Water, then in the first; and this last hath differing meanings also; as sometimes repentance, sometimes remission of sinnes, and sometimes the gifts of the Holy Ghost, as I have elsewhere proved largely; therefore well saith he that is Worthy, It is the definiti∣on, not the names of things by which they are rightly knowne: and you being not skilfull to define, to distinguish, and divide be∣tween things that differ, make as false constructions in the second part of your Paper, as in the first; for although therein you have a seeming pretence of a Christians spirituall death and resurrection, which rightly understood, is a truth, yet the thing you ayme and drive at to reveale under these specious pretences, is to deny the re∣surrection of the naturall body; for these are your own words, I deny that to be a truth, speaking of the resurrection of the naturall body, page the ninth. To which error of the Sadduces and Familists, I say thus much, that the Scriptures affirme plainly, that the naturall body is sowne, that is, buried in the earth; which naturall body at the resurrecti∣on shall be raised a spirituall body, 1 Cor. 15. 44. And if there be no resurrection of the dead, saith the Apostle, then is Christ not risen, that is, his body is not risen, and if Christ be not risen, saith he, then is our preaching vaine, and your faith also vaine, Vers. 13, 14. Now to wave
your Allegory of Christs Sepulchre, as also of his death and resur∣rection, making it a phansie; for although there be a spirituall death and resurrection in the regenerate, daily to dye to, and arise from sinne, and live to righteousnesse, yet there was no such thing in Jesus Christ, which was, and is, the King of life and righteous∣nesse, the Author and giver of life, the brightnesse and glory, the expresse image of the Father, from all eternity, and to all eternity. And notwithstanding the Saints spirituall death and resurrection, which is in, by, and through Christ, Col. 2. 12. yet this doth not nullifie and take away their naturall death, nor bodily resurrecti∣on to life and perfection at the last day; for as the first is by the power and voyce of God spirituall in our regeneration, through the operation of God, so the resurrection of our bodies out of the graves, is by the same power and voyce, to incorruption, life, and salvation, Joh. 5. 25, 26. and vers. 28, 29. This your allegorizng Doctrine doth not onely destroy the Faith of some in particular, but it overthrows the whole Doctrine of faith it selfe, which was once delivered unto the Saints, and turns the true and faithfull witnesse, who once was dead, but now is alive, and liveth for evermore, into a lye, a phansie, or conceit, imagining another meaning then what is reall and substantiall, of his conception, birth, child-hood, full age, temptations, fastings, preaching miracles, his being accused and apprehended by the Jews, his being adjudged and condemned by Pilate, his crucifixion, his death and buriall, his lying three dayes in the grave, his resurrecti∣on and ascension, and now his sitting at the right hand of the Fa∣ther; to deny the literall sense and substance of all these things, and to turne them to allegories, and other meanings, as they shall severally imagine or phansie, is to deny the Lord that bought them, whatsoever glosses and faire pretences soever they make. I proceed now to the third part of your Paper, the day of Judge∣ment, as you call it, what it is, and when it shall be: and here you say, you will lay open such a mystery as hath been hid from many ages, but hath shewed it selfe to you within these few dayes, which is as false as the former I condemned; for these depths of Satan are not of yesterdayes birth and manifestation, but are ancient and of long continuance; and their Books are extant, although those of your delusion have endeavoured to buy up all they could me withall heretofore, that they might have the more credit to af∣firme
a lye, in calling these visions of their own hearts, new Lights, as if never heard of, nor knowne before: And therefore you much mistooke to speake of your selfe as the onely man to be acquainted with this Revelation; for what thinke you of Doctor Everit, D. G. Master Dell, Master Saltmarsh, Master Prdig, Master Randall, Ma∣ster Denne, and Master Galtorne, and many more preachers tha maintaine the same delusion and mistake with your selfe; besides Lords and Ladies, and many thousands amongst the common people. But to your present matter, you boldly affirme to your friends, as you call them, that the coming and day of Christ is spirituall; And for proofe hereof, you say that Eliah the Prophet, spoken of by Malachi, Chap. 3. 1. is that spirituall Appearance of Christ in us, and that Eliah is he that shall suddenly come to his Temple, even the Messenger of the Covenant, his coming being now in the Spirit, as he saith; and the Spirits presence is the dreadfull day of the Lord, consuming and burning up all fleshly excellency in us, destroying the sonne of the bond-woman, which he expounds to be creature-wisdome and darknesse in us: Here's his relation of the Scripture, and his exposition also. Now how contrary he is to the truth of the Text, let all that heare, judge; for he makes Eliah, and the Messenger of the Gove∣nant to be one and the same, whereas the Spirit of God shews the contrary, prooving thereby that Mr Royles spirit is a spirit of con∣tradiction to Gods holy Spirit; for thus saith the Lord of truth himselfe; If you will receive it, this is Elias that was to com, Matth. 1. Prooving it was John the Baptist of whom the Prophet Malachi spake, both of Person and Office, to prepare the way of the Lord, which Lord is called the Messenger of the Covenant; for although there be many Messengers, yet there is but one that can be said to be the Messenger, who indeed is the onely Auhor and bringer of light and salvation. Now for this Impostor to turne the Offi∣ces and Persons of our Lord, and his forerunner John the Bap∣tist, that great Prophet, whom none before him amongst all the holy Prophets of God since the world began, exceeded in spiritu∣all power and efficacy: I say, to turne this Almightie God, and this great and extraordinary servant, into spirituall appearances of a fancied conceit, is to crosse, ruinate, and destroy, both the body and spirit, the letter and meaning of the Text of Scriptures,
and what a cursed thing it is, the Records of God declare. But as a man dstracted doth no sooner passe one danger but presently uns into another, so this blind Leader proceeds to far∣ther error, for he falsifies the seventh Verse of the 114. Psalm, in making that an allegoricall mystry, that is a plaine literall histo∣ry, by bringing Israel out of Egypt through Gods wonderfull and almightie power, in dividing the great Sea, and the swelling Ri∣ver Jordn, that the hil and mountaines removed, melted▪ and fled away, the massi and huge Earth trembled a the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob. And further he shmes not to affirme contrary to the consent of Scriptures, that before this earthly Tabernacle be put off which wee beare abut u, when Christ saith he comes in the Spirit to reigne within u, then all his enemies are made his footstoole: which notwith∣standing his fancy, it shall not be truly so, as faith the Prophet and Apostle, till the end of this world, when Christs Mediatorship shall be finished, not il the Lords returne in the Clouds of Hea∣ven, with ten thousands of his San, for the Lord himselfe shall descend from Heaven with the voyce of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God; and then, and not before, shall the dead in Christ arise u of the Erth, & then shall the Lord execue judge∣ment upon all ungodly sinners, of all their hrd speeches where∣with they have spoken against him. And Mr Roylie, I spake seri∣riously to you, and desire you would let my words take place in your heart, except you repent of this writing, which you seeme to glory in, you wil be found an enemy to Christ, and guil∣tie of hard false, and evill speeches against him; to turne all the holy history of him, his person, office, reigne, and kingdome, with the reality of all of them, into a deceitfull mystery. And those reall truths of his incarnation, death, resurrection▪ ascension, and intercession, to turne these aso into saigned alle∣gories of your own devifing, even imagining all things, past and to come, to be present, and to be uid in our bodies before or dissolution, all things that are written from the beginning of the world unto the end; and that wee, that is, the first Adam, becom Abel, and Enoch, and a, and Abraham, and Moses: And so Christ the second Adam, and all things of him and them, in us fulfild from his conception to his ascension, to be st at the right hand of the Father: Ny, which is more, that his coming againe in the Clouds,
the generall resurrection, and great day of Judgement, and the world to come, also that all these things should be in this life here, and fulfild in u▪ i a blasphemy beyond comparison; for in setting up your Idoll-phansie, of wicked invented Allegories, never heard of, nor taught by the Word of God, for these inventions of you and your generation, as it doth deny the Messiah in the true under∣standing of him, and also it doth obscure and exclude all the hea∣venly benefit by him, as the cleare Doctrine of the Gospel of re∣pentance and remission of sinnes, with the hope of salvation, pur∣chased by his own bloud, and to be preached in his Name; and al∣so you shew your selfe to be wholly ignorant of the estate of a true Christian in his spirituall birth and heire-ship, and of the hope of glory in him to be entred into, and possessed at the Resurrection, called in Scriptures the inheritance, the purchased possession and salvation. The more you give credit to these delusions, the more impossible is it for you to come to see the truth, the straight way of the Lord: for your wod of light and truth, as you call it, is grosse blasphemy against God, blaspheming his Name and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven: Wherefore never write nor speake any more for it; and finally, remember what is written: Add tho not to Gods Word, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a lyer, Pro. 30. 6. And as Gods Word binds me o dsswade you from your error, so it doth likewise command mee to perswade all my Christian friends to take heed and beware of the great deceit of this dange∣rous doctrine, of which there is no the like in the world; for in tearms it grants unto you all the substantiall truths that are; as God and man, Nature and grace, the new man and the old, thi lif and that to come, the spirituall resurrection and that of the body, mor∣tification and vivificaion, repentance and remission of sinnes, the present time and that hereafter, suffering and triumphing: which in the tryall will prove but a dreame, as it is indeed. That man is cheated with  shadow for the substance, that dreames he hath rich and costly food▪ when it is nothing but a phansie, and when he awakes he feels it to be so by his hunger. Now there is no cheae to the cheae of the understanding; for a man to be cheated of his meate, he may get more for his money, if of his horse, he may goe aooe, or buy one, if of his money, he may labour for more; but that man that is cheated of his understanding, is wholly left without all manner of remedy, so is he that is cheated of the true knowledge of the way of life, and mystery of salvation. By John Graunt. London; Printed by M. S. for John Handcock in Popes-head-alley, 1649.
