G2171 E1851_1 99871986 170463
THE HISTORY. OF THE Sacred and Royal Majesty OF CHRISTINA ALESSANDRA QUEEN OF SWEDLAND With the Reasons of her late Conversion to the Roman Catholique Religion. As also a Relation of the severall enter∣tainments given her by divers Prin∣ces in her Journey to Rome, with her magnificent Reception into that City. LONDON, Printed for T. W. and are to be sold at the Signe of the Bell in St. Pauls Church-yard, 1658.
To the glory of the Age, and Compendium of Honour and Nobility, her Grace the Dutchess of RICH∣MOND and LENOX. May it please your Grace, THE golden-Apple, on which was this Inscri∣ption, be it given to the fairest, Paris presented to Venus, as surpassing the others in beauty. The same condition is annexed to this History, which belonging of right to the fairest,
most justly is presented to your Grace, as surpassing all others in the beauty of the body, and mind. And whom should a Queen so renown'd for her vertues, and e∣minent qualities, make her addres∣ses to, if not to your Grace, who like the glorious Sun among the lesser lights, out-shines all other Ladies with the rayes of your Graces rare vertues, and admirable parts. These reflections (Madam) in∣vited this great Princess to recurre to your Grace, who like the River Nilus, disdains to mix the waters she brings from a Paradise, with any other streame. Since the offer∣ing then (Madam) is no waies unworthy of your Graces noble
Altar, where Hecatombs are only to be sacrificed, be pleased not to lessen it in your Graces esteem, be∣cause presented by, Madam Your Graces most humble and most devoted Servant, IOHN BURBERY.
TO THE READER. IN the Catastrophe of the ac∣cidents, which still are redu∣cing this Age, into a large a∣bridgment of all that are past, the resolutions and talents of Christina Alessandra, Queen of Swedland, have an eminent place. That a Queen by birth, of a spirit so sublime, and the Epilogue of all vertues, should depose her Scepter voluntarily, and fall at the feet of the Vicar of Christ, to receive there in his blessings—a crown of Paradise, in such a resolution, as too much surpasses the capacity of man, and not only custome. The World perad∣venture hath not seen any other, that to purchase the true Faith, hath abandoned his own Kingdoms, and to be enriched
with the Jewels of Heaven, hath dive∣sted himself of the treasures of the earth. I therefore have begun to compose a particular History of it, and hitherto have gone on with delight, for it con∣tains not only a great Princesses rare qualities, and Prerogatives, but likewise the entertainments, she hath till now re∣ceived of the greatest Princes, and Mo∣narchs of Christendom, so as it may truely be said, Christina the great in her resolutions, and receptions, could meet with nothing equall to her great desert, but the mind, and piety of a Philip, and an Alexander. Some perhaps may think, I have em∣ployed my Pen in certain little things not suitable to the Majesty of the Histo∣ry, but let them remember, the know∣ledge of individuums, and the memo∣ries of particular men, provided they deserved well of fame, encrease still in credit, and delight with Posterity. In
case they persist in the rigour of their scruples, they will easily be satisfied, if they read alone that part, which pleases them most, Farewell.
WE, the Reformers of the study at Padoua, having seen by the testi∣mony of our Secretary, that in the book intituled the History of the sacred Maje∣stie of Christina Alessandra Queen of Swedland, by Count Galeazzo Gualdo Priorato, printed in quarto in Rome, there is nothing repugnant to good manners, nor the interests of Princes, grant licence to Francis Baba to print it, he observing the Laws in this case, and presenting a Copy for the publick Library of Venice, and another for that of Padoua. In Witness whereof, &c. Anno Domini the 24. of May, 1656. John Donado Reformer. Andrew Pisani Procurator and Reformer. FRANCIS VERDIZZOTTI SECRETARY.
AN INDEX Of the most remarkable things contained in this present HISTORY. A DOn Antonio Pimentell goes into Swedland by order of his Catholique Majesty. Advertisments given by the Queen to the new King of Swedland. The affliction of the people for the Queens re∣nouncing her Kingdoms. The arrivall of the Queen of Swedland in Ham∣bourg. The arrivall of the Queen of Swedland in Ant∣werp. The applauses, with which she is received in Flandres.
The Arch Duke sends to complement the Queen, and goes afterwards thither in Person. Don Antonio Pimentel extraordinary Em∣bassadour of his Catholique Majestie with the Queen of Swedland. The assumption of Cardinall Fabius Chigi to the Papacie, and the generall applauses for his exaltation. The Marquis of Anspach visits her Majesty. Auspurge, and its description. The absolution given her Majesty by my Lord Holstenius. The Marquis Andreasi complements the Queen in the name of the Duke of Mantoua. The arrivall of the Queen in Rome, who went presently to kss his Holinesses feet. The affability of the Queen. Academies instituted by her Majesty in her own Palace. The answer of Don Antonio Pimentel to the Queen. B. THe Briefs of his Holiness consigned to my Lord Holstenius. The Briefs for the Prince of Trent.
The Brief for the Arch-Duke of Inspruch. The Brief of his Holiness to the Queen of Swed∣land. The Brief of his Holiness to the Queen presen∣ted to her by the Nuntii at her entrance into the Churches Dominions. The Brief of his Holiness to the Cardinall Le∣gates a Latere. Count Bucquoy complements the Queen in the name of his Catholick Majesty. C. CHristina succeeds in the Kingdom of Swed∣land. Her education, and admirable wit. She learns divers Languages, makes great pro∣gress in learning, begins to assist at the Coun∣cell, and afterwards takes upon her the Govern∣ment. She herself administers the affairs, and is beloved and feared. She is a great lover of vertue, despises all delicacie. She makes War, and then Peace with the King of Denmark. She is respected by all the Princes of the World. She hath divers inspirations. She discovers the er∣rours of the Lutherans. The reasons which move her to the knowledge of the truth. With her own vertue she makes herself capable of the
truth. She examins the life and condition of Luther. She perceives the falsitie and lies spread by him. She fortifies herself with some impor∣tant examples. She abhors heresie. She thinks to turn Catholick. She imparts her designe to Don Antonio Pimentel. She trusts wholy in God. She resolves to quit her Kingdoms. Her generous Act. She goes privately to see Bruxels. The ceremonies in receiving the Queen in the Church. The Cavaliers of Verona which met her Ma∣jestie. The Cavalcata of the Cardinal Legates in their going to Olgiata. The complements of several Gentlemen to the Queen at the Vineyard of Pope Julius. The Castle of St. Angelo is seen by the Queen. The Colledge of Sapienza. The Church of the Greeks. The Roman Colledge. The rare things in the said Roman Colledge. The Comedy intituled the Triumph of piety acted in the Palace of the Prince of Pelle∣strina. The Colledge of the English. The noble Church of Minerva. The great Conquests of Gustavus King of Swed∣land.
D. THe Queens discourse with Father Macedo the Jesuits. Her Majesties demand of the Generall of the Jesuits. The deliberation of the States of Swedland in substituting Count Charles Gustavus Pala∣tine, King, after the Queen of Swedland. Politick discourses. The King of Denmark endeavours to meet, and receive the Queen of Swedland. The differences between the Crown of Swedland, and the City of Bremen. The description of Munster. The discourse of the Queen of Swedland with my Lord Holstenius. Donavert, and the quality of the Place. The description of some Towns in Tirole. The discourse of the Queen at a publick dinner in Ferrara. The description of Ferrara. The description of Bologna. The description of Faenza. The description of Rimini. The description of Pesaro.
The description of Fano. The description of Ancona. The devotion of her Majestie at Loretto. The description of Loretto. The description of Recanati. The description of Macerata. The description of Tolentino. The description of Camerino. The description of Foligno. The description of Assisi. The description of Spoleto. The description of Terni. The description of Gallese. The Duke of Terranuova Embassadour of Spain in Rome, goes to complement the Queen in Caprarola. The description of Caprarola. The description of Bracciano. The dispatching of the Nuntii, and Baldocchi. E. THe education of the Queen of Swedland. The entrance of the Queen of Swedland in∣to Bruxels. The Elector Palatine waits on her Majestie, and invites her to Heydelberg. Her entrance into Inspruch.
The weighty examples, with which the Queen of Swedland gives nourishment to her good inclinations. Her Majesties entrance into Tyrole. Her Majesties publick entrance into Rome with a solemne Cavalcata. Her Majesties entrance into the Ecclesiasti∣cal state. The great esteem all the Princes of Europe have of the Queen of Swedland. F. FRanckfort, and its description. The forme of the subscription of the pub∣lick Act of the profession of the Faith made by the Queen of Swedland. Figarolo, and the quality of the place. S. Francis of Assisi visited by the Queen. The sumptuous Fountain in Piazza Navona. G. THe Generall of the Jesuits sends two Fa∣thers of the Society into Swedland. Father Francis John Baptist Guemes a Do∣minican.
arrives in Swedland. The Queen imparts to him her motives to be a Catholick, and sends him to the Court of Spain. The Duke of Glocester visits her Majestie. Baron Ghirardi chief Minister of the Arch-Duke of Inspruch visited by my Lord Hol∣stenius. The wonderfull generosity of the Queen of Swedland. The generosity of the Prince of Trent. The Prince of St. Gregory. complements the Queen. H HAmbourg, and its description. The Honours done to the Queen by the Landgrave of Hessen. The Honours done her Majesty by the Duke of Bavaria. The Honours done her Majestie by the Arch-Dukes of Inspruch. My Lord Holstenius goes to Mantoua and Trent. The Honours done her Majesty by the Bishop of Bressanon.
The Honours done her Majesty by the Duke of Mantoua in his state. The Honours done her Majesty in Bologna. The Honours done her Majesty in Pesaro. The Honours done her Majesty in Ancona. The Honours done her Majesty by the Pope. The Honours done her Majesty as she passed by the Castle of St. Angelo. I. THe holy inspirations of her Majesty of Swedland. The instances made by the States of Swedland to the Queen. The Island of Oland, and the quality of the place. Inspruch the residence of the Arch-Dukes of Austria. The invitation made the Queen by the Baron of Fermiano in the name of the Prince of Trent. The invitation made her Majesty by the Duke of Mantoua. The joy in Inspruch for the profession made by the Queen of Swedland. The death of Pope Innocent the tenth.
K. THe King of Spain writes to the Pope. The King of Spain hears with great joy, the pious resolutions of the Queen of Swedland, and furthers them affectionately. The King of Scotland visits the Queen. The life and qualities of King Gustavus of Swedland, his stature, his remarkable say∣ings and conquests. L. HEr Majesties letter to Pope Alexander the seventh. Limbourg and its description. Her Majesties letter to the Arch-Duke of In∣spruch. Landsperg and its Sctuation. My Lord Luke Holstenius dispatcht from his Holiness to Inspruch. My Lord Luke Holstenius communicates to the Embassadour Pimentel the intention of his Holyness. Her Majesties letter written from Inspruch to
the King of Swedland. Her Majesties Letter to the Prince of Trent. Cardinall Barberines letter to Cardinal Ros∣setti. The Legates a Latere dispatcht from the Pope to receive her Majesty. The famous Library in the Roman Colledge. M. HEr Majestie of Swedland is met by the Of∣ficers of the Duke of Bavaria. Her Majestie is met by the Prince of Trent. Her Majesty is met by the Duke of Mantoua. Her Majesty is met by Cardinal Donghi. Her Majesty is met by Cardinal Rossetti. Her Majesty is met by Cardinal Acquaviva Legate of Romagna. Her Majesty is met, and royally received by Cardinal Homoei Legate of Urbin. Her Majesty is met by my Lord Visconte Go∣vernour of Patrimony. Her Majesty is met by the Duke of Bracciano. Her Majesty is met at Porta del Popolo by the sacred Colledge of the Cardinals. Her Majesty is met solemnely at Bruxels. Father Macedo the Jesuit is dispatcht by her Majesty to Rome.
Father Malines dispatcht by her Majesty to the Court of Spain. The marriage of the Queen of Swedland with the Princess of Holstein. The manner observed by her Majesty in her government. Minden, and its description. Count Montecuccoli dispatcht from the Empe∣rour into Flandres to complement her Ma∣jesty. The death of Maria Eleonora Queen of Swed∣land. Count Montecuccoli dispatcht from her Maje∣sty to Rome. Father Malines the Jesuit dispatcht to discover the inclination of the Queen. Madam della Cueva remains sick in Ussu∣lengo. Count Montecuccoli returns from Rome to the Queen. The manner of the Queens sitting at table with the Cardinals. The Monastery of St. Catharine of Siena. The musical Playes acted before her Majesty in Inspruch. The musical Play acted in the German Col∣ledge.
N NOrdlinghen, and its description. The Nuntii elected by the Pope to receive the Queeen of Swedland on the Con∣fines of the Churches Dominions. The names of the Cavaliers, that were the tilters in Bologna. The names of the Cavaliers in the Cavalcata of the Queen. The names of the Gentlemen of the Queens Academy in Rome. O OBservations of importance. The order of the Cavalcata of the Cardinal Legates. The order of the Cavalcata of the Governour of Rome. The order of the Cavalcata from the Capitol to the Bridge Molle. The Order of her Majesties Cavalcata from the Vatican to the Bridge Molle. The order of her Majesties Cavalcata from the Bridge Molle to the Vineyard of Pope Ju∣lius. The Order of the Queens solemne Cavalcata from the Bridge Molle to the Vatican.
P THe progress of the Queen in learning. The great piety of his Catholick Majesty. The Princes of Germany, which visit her Majesty in Hambourg. The pretences of the Prince of Conde to the Queen of Swedland, who visits her Majesty. The Princes and Cavaliers who waited on her Majesty in Antwerp. Count Pontus della Garda waits on her Ma∣jesty. The profession of the Catholick Faith made se∣cretly by the Queen of Swedland'n Bruxels. Ponte del lac, and its description. The passage of the Queen of Swedland through Cullen. The passage of her Majesty through Franckfort. The passage of her Majesty through Auspurge. The Palace of Ambre, and ts Stuation. The profession of the Catholick Faith made pub∣lickly by the Queen of Swedland in Inspruch. The passage of the Queen through the state of Venie. The passage at Ponte Felice. The preparations made for the solemne Caval∣cata of the Queen. The Palace Farnese the lodging of her Ma∣jesty, when she went from the Vatican. The Persons which depart with the Queen from Flandres towards Italy.
The Persons appointed to wait on the Queen in her lodgngs at the Vatican. The parly of her Majesty with the Prince of Holstein. The publick Act of Profession made by the Queen of Swedland in Inspruch. The sumptuous Preparation in the Church of Giesu, with what store of people King Gustavus past into Germany. The presents made by her Majesty to the Arch-Duke and others in Bruxels. The presents of a Coach, Litter, Chair, and an ambling Nag made by the Pope to the Queen. The presents made to her Majesty by his Holi∣ness in the Palace Farnese. The presents made to the Queen by Prince Pan∣filio. Q THe qualities of Cardinal Pio Bishop of Fer∣rara. The qualities of Cardinal John Baptist Spada Legat of Ferrara. The qualities of Cardinal Donghi. The qualities of Cardinal Rossetti. The qualities of Cardinal Acquaviva. The quality of the Family Martinozzi of Fano. The qualities of Cardinal Homodei Legate of Urbin.
The qualities of Cardinal Rondinino. The rare qualities of the Queen of Swedland. The eminent qualities of the Princess of Rossano. The Queen goes to the publick Consistory to kiss the Popes feet. The Queens admirable wit. The revenues reserved to herself by the Queen of Swedland. The Queen writes to the General of the Jesuits. The Queen dispatches to Rome Father Casati. The Queens departure towards Flandres. The Queens sudden departure from Hambourg. The Queens departure from Bruxels. The Queens departure from Inspruch. The Queens departure from Bologna. The Queens readiness to comply with the Popes desires. The Queen dines publickly with the Arch-Duke of Inspruch. The Queen treats with the Jesuits. The Queen is visited by Count Todt. The Queens royal entertainment at Landsperg by the Ministers of the Duke of Bavaria. The Queens entertainment in Inspruch. The Queens entertainment by the Prince of Trent. The Queens entertainment by Cardinal Spada Legate of Ferrara.
The Queens entertainment in Imola by Cardi∣nal Donghi the Bishop of the Place. The Queens entertainment in Forli. The Queens entertainment in Cesena. The Queens entertainment in Rimini. The Queens entertainment in Sinigaglia. The Queens entertainment in Ancona. The Queens entertainment in Loretto. The Queens entertainment in Macerata. The Queens entertainment in Tolentino. The Queens entertainment in Camerino. The Queens entertainment in Foligno. The Queens entertainment in Assisi by Cardinal Rondinini. The Queens entertainment in Terni. The Queens entertainment in Gallese. The Queens entertainment in Cprarola. The Queens satisfaction in Pesaro. The Queen presents her Scepter and Crown at Loretto. The Queen visits her Mother. The Queens journey through Denmark. The Queens journey from Hambourg into Flan∣dres. The Queens Aparel. The Queens eminent vertues. The Queens visits the Church of St. Peter. The Queen goes to the Church of St. James of the Spaniards.
The Queen goes to the Church of Giesu. The Queen visits the Monastery of Torre de Specchi. The Queen goes to St. John Lateran. The Queen sees the famous reliques of S. Peters. The Queen visits the Nuns of Campus Mar∣tius. The Queens answer to the States of Swedland. R THe Reasons and motives which incline the Queen of Swedland to change her Reli∣gion. The resolutions of the Queen of Swedland to turn Catholique. The resolution of the Queen of Swedland to support her resolutions by the Catholick King. The renouncing made by the Queen of Swedland. The return of the Queen from Upsalia to Stock∣holme. The return of the Arch-Duke to Antwerp to complement the Queen, and invite her to Bruxels. The reception of the Queen of Swedland in Rutemond. Prince Robert Palatine visits her Majesty. The noble reception of the Queen in Rotem∣bourg.
The return of Count Montecuccoli to the Queen. The recreations of her Majesty in Inspruch. The recreations of her Majesty in Ferrara. The reception of her Majesty by Cardinal Lo∣mellino Legate of Bologna. The return of her Majesty from Assisi to Fo∣ligno. The reception of the Queen in Spoleto by Car∣dinal Fachenetti. The recreations of her Majesty in Spoleto. The reception of the Queen at the Gate of St. Peters. The recreations of her Majesty in the Palace of Prince Panfilio. The royal lodgings in Revere. S THe straight of the Sound, and its description. Count Stemberg sent into Swedland by the Queen. The sumptuous Bridge ore the Po. The noble Scaffold erected in the Palace of the Prince Panfilio. T. The noble Tilting in Bologna.
V. THe voyage of Father Malines, and Casati Jesuits into Swedland. The noble Vineyard of Prince Panfilio. W WIrtzbourge, and the quality of the place. The Wars made by the Crown of Swedland under Queen Christina. Z. Zibbery and its description. FINIS.
The History of the sacred, and Royal Majestie of Christina Alessandra, Queen of Swedland, &c. The First Book. The Argument. IN this Book e described the qualities of Gusta∣vus Adolphus, King of Swedland; The educati∣on of the Princess Chri∣stina his onely Daughter. Her Assumption to the Crowns The form of her Government. The mo∣tives and true Causes of her conver∣sion to the Roman Catholique re∣ligion, and what hath occur'd in her Majesties renouncing of her King∣dm.
I Write in my History, the end of the life of Gustavus Adolphus, King of Swedland, who dy'd in the height of his fortunes, in the bloody bat∣tell of Lutzen, a Prince, who with the fame of his valour, had chain'd the affections of his subjects; drawn after him the attendance of strang∣ers, and purchased veneration and respect, among his enemies them∣selves. The life and quali∣ties of Gu∣stavus A∣dolphus of Swedland.Never any Prince was beloved so well, nor so faithfully serv'd. They, who could not see him, desir'd at least his Picture, to reverence it, as the Idea of Military valour. His stature.He was tall of stature, and of a Majestique aspect, which induced in all admiration and reverence, love and fear together. The hue of his flesh was white, and well colour'd, and his hair and yellow beard, render'd him so resplendent, he was stiled by many the King of Gold, but he hardly arriv'd to the thirty eighth year of his age. His first inclination to Arms was promoted by a Genius, as noble as
generous, which made him desirous of glory, and ambitious of greatness. Prudence was still his companion, eloquence and sagacity accompany∣ing his discourses, vivacity and affa∣bility his treaties, and resolution, and courage his enterprizes. In great affairs he wanted not Providence, readinesse, and Constancy, and the force of his wit, and strength of his mind, was still most resplendent in difficulties; he nobly contemning the Lawrells, and Palms, which were not augmented by labours, and water'd with pains. Before the Battell, he appear'd not so terrible, and dreadfull, as gen∣tle, mild, and mercifull, when he had obtain'd the victory, being un∣daunted in dangers, vigilant in occa∣sions, and wife in each affair. A Prince, in fine of great understand∣ing, and knowledge in all things. He was followed with a greater affection, and applause, than any Commander before him. He gave satisfaction to all, with his praises, hopes, or mildnesse, and especially
his sincerity, actions of vertue being written by him with indeleble Cha∣racters. He never forgat services, whether little, or great, but reward∣ed, and valu'd them. He was very wittie in his sayings, and most affa∣ble in company, still treating, and speaking to all without pride, and frequently asking when he pass'd by his People, and Souldiers, how they did, what they would, and de∣sired. To his Table and Court, while he was in the field, he admitted all Gentlemen, and private Comman∣ders, he usually saying, a table is the torment of a secret, and a net to catch friendship, and affection. He could not abide ceremonies, and complements affected, and to those unacquainted with his Genius, hee said, or caused others to say, they should reserve their Courtship for the Queens minds of honour, for he was in the field, to teach how to fight, and not to lead a dance. He was most severe in punishing the Souldiers offences, and exact in providing for the peoples security.
He, like a true souldier, to give an essay of the greatness of his mind, undertook not any enterprize, which was without danger, he that exhort∣ed him, to a care of his life, acqui∣ring his displeasure. It seem'd to him undecent, for a Prince of a war∣like constitution, to have the thoughts of death, he thinking the counsell proceeded from fear, which advis'd him to take heed of himself. He called him happy, that dy'd in his trade, the volunteer death taking pay under him, that feareth him not. His designs were alwaies great, but greater after the battell of Lipswick, he aspiring to the Empire of Ger∣many. Even the Ottoman power began to reflect on the fortune and valour of this King, who used to say,The Turk was jealous of his for∣tune. he wondred the Ancients so easily ob∣tain'd their victories,His re∣markable sayings. and those of his time with such difficulty, to whom when represented, it proceed∣ed from the difference in waring, and now the expugnations of Ci∣ties, and fortresses are harder, he re∣ply'd,
he did not value the diffe∣rence of arms, nor of times, but that of the courage. That the world was the same, each age had it's Mines, and Countermines, offen∣ces and defences, and that he could war like Alexander, be victorious with Hanibal, and equall Caesars Progresses, who had the mind of Alexander, the skilfulnesse of Hani∣bal, and Caesars undauntednesse. In the space of two years, he drew to his party, either by the force of arms, or the motives of his pow∣er and reputation, of Fortresses, Ci∣ties, and wall'd Town, to the num∣ber of a hundred and ninety. He won many battels in the field, but crown'd with that of Lipswick,His Con∣quests. his triumph having conquer'd the most experienc'd, and most fortunate Commander of his age, and an Ar∣my old in battels. With what Army he pass'd the Sea.He passed the Seas, and enter'd into Germany, with a very little Ar∣my, but as a small snowball rowl∣ing down a high Mountain, be∣comes a great globe, so he passing
from one enterprise to another, could number at his death, above 100000 foot, and 80000 horse, which made up ten Armies, toge∣ther with other bodies, all under his colours. Nothing but the heresy of Luther eclipsed his high qualities, who, if he had follow'd the steps of his Ancestors, not swerving from the path of the true faith, would have been the Heroe of Kings. He left no other Progeny,Christina his only daughter succeeds in the King∣dom. than Christina his only Daughter, born on the 16. of December, in the year 1626, a Princesse of so noble en∣endowments, and so elevated a spi∣rit, that 'tis not any wonder, if she representing in part, the living image of her great Fathers vertues, give cause to believe; Gustavus yet re∣maines to the world in his specie, although not in his individuo. Now as their good education,The educa∣tion of this Princesse. who are to have succession in King∣doms, and principalities, is the chiefest foundation of the peoples felicity, this Princesse us'd a dili∣gent
manuring of her mind, be∣queathing her self to the exercises of vertue, to be afterwards able, to outstrip with her years, the duty of age. 'Twas therefore observ'd, that from the first moments, as it were, of her life, and understanding, she began, though a child, to procure the enlightning of her intellect, a command ore her reason, limits to her will, a curb to her affections, a rule to her actions, and strength o her body. Her won∣derfull wit.She was not seven years old, when instructed in the elements of the Latin tongue, and letters, and having now discover'd, what pro∣mise she could make to her self, in the Progresses of her studies, by the quicknesse of her spirit, and most singular judgement, she fell to the cultivating her mind, with the most sublime sciences, as those, which ad∣minister the true lights, not to erre in the Pilgrimage of the world, and the gaining of Heaven. In her minority, five Ministers and Officers of the Crown, which
were the most conspicuous, had the government of the Kingdom, to wit,On whom the Govern∣ment of the Kingdom depended on her mi∣nority. the great Admirall, bastar'd Brother co Gustavus her Father, the great Chancellour Axellius Oxestern, the great President Gabriel Oxestern, the great Constable James of the Garde, and the great Treasurer, ano∣ther Gabriel Oxestern. In the mean time, to her other applications aforesaid, she added the instructing of her self, in the knowledge of different tongues, to make her self the fitter, and more capaple, for the manage∣ment of the Kingdom,She learnt diverse tongues. in which she made most eminent Progresses. And as the best books are incorrupt Counsellours, and Oracles, which, without the least request, even an∣swer to our thoughts, so she in read∣ing there, employing her best hours, endeavour'd to learn there, the way to govern well. This Princesse advancing with her years, in Vertues and Sciences,She makes great Pro∣gresse in learning. mea∣sur'd every ones ability so well, with the subtlety of her judgement, that
though a girle, she penetrated the hidden designes of her principall Mi∣nisters, of whom she made use, to draw to her self, the totall direction of the affairs of the Kingdom, so as she gain'd great veneration, free'd her self from the subjection, in which some pretended to hold her, and beginning to rule, shew'd she had not any need, to lay the King∣doms weight on any others head, than her own,She begins to assist at the Council of State, and after∣wards takes the Govern∣ment upon her. insomuch that she be∣gan, when seventeen years old, to assist at the Council of the State, and in the eighteenth year, being out of her minority, took upon her the Go∣vernment, on the very same day, the War against Denmark, was hy the Crown of Swedland declar'd, not∣withstanding that against the Em∣perour, together with his confede∣rates, was most vigorously prosecu∣ted. She alwaies made use of know∣ing and able persons, and when any one assum'd to himself, more au∣thority, than was fitting; she found out a way to moderate his animosi∣ty.
She alone did administer all the publique affairs, and determin'd them with much ease, and satisfa∣ction: She alone would treat with Ambassadours, and the Ministers of Princes,She admi∣nisters her self the greatest affairs. giving audience without the Secretaries of State, or any of her Councellours, she her self giving an∣swer, to the propositions made her, as well by her subjects, as forraign Princes. This Queen, though young, knew at the same time, how to make her self feared, and belov'd, by her peo∣ple, and strangers. She secretly soun∣ding the genius, and thoughts of e∣very one, so us'd them to the bridle of obedience, and respect, that she saw her most formidable Comman∣ders, though accustom'd at the head of their Armies,She makes her self be∣lov'd and fear'd. to make the world affraid, to conserve still in her pre∣sence, a reverence accompany'd with a fearfull obsequiouness. On the other side, with the no∣bleness of her mind, she still so ob∣lig'd them, with offices of such love and affability, that she animating
their affections, encreas'd still to∣wards her self their respect and obe∣dience, the true props of a Kingdom. She beheld every writing present∣ed her, and quickly, and with a clear voice, recited it in it's language, and with her own hand wrote usually the Orders of importance, being as shy and heedy, in imparting the se∣crets of her mind, as curious and cunning in penetrating those of others. She generally affected all Nati∣tions, vertue alone being only the object of her love. She sought to mend the bad with severity, and make the good better with favours and rewards; so as 'tis no wonder, that honour, and the rarest conditi∣ons that sute with worthy men, were seen to flourish more in her Palace, than in any other Court. No Prince ever favour'd more lo∣vers of vertue, than this Queen; her Majesty taking very great delight, to discourse with knowing Persons, and endeavouring to have near her, the learnedst of each Nation, whom she highly rewarded.
She had her maids of honour in the Court for decorum, and her own entertainment; but they never with∣drew her from her studies, and exer∣cises of vertue. No extreamity of weather, nor heat of the Sun, nor Snow, Wind, Tempests, and Rains, nor any other injuries of the season, or accidents, could induce her to that care of her self, which was due to her royal condition. She supposed great acti∣ons walk'd not well with delights, and the Soul had no greater impe∣diment, in the gaining of vertues,She con∣temns all delicacy. than the body bred up and foster'd in them, labour, exercise, sobriety, and vigilance, she counting as parts, of her strong and vigorous mind. The glorious enterprizes, which seconded the felicity of her Ma∣jesties invincible arms, are already eternall in Histories.She makes war, and then peace with Den∣mark to her advantage. After eight months cruell War, and the famous success of her arms; she concluded a peace with his Majestie of Den∣mark, to her great gain, and ho∣nour, and afterwards establisht that
of Germany, not without great ad∣vantages to Swedland, and then too; when she thought it convenient for the ends, which she aim'd at in her mind. She hath made renoun'd and fa∣mous, the City of Stockholm, with the rule of her directions, and the happy remembrance of her govern∣ment; she having nothing more in her thoughts, than the causing her Kingdom to abound with arts, and wealth. Her Throne was the Theater of Glory, and Justice; no Princess be∣ing ever beheld of so free a mind, and a courage so undaunted. But she thought in the mean time, of her great retreat towards Heaven, that she might not repent, she had been in the World. As her great and no∣ble parts did charm the hearts of all, that treated with her, to the fame of them flying with speed, to the most remote Nations; produc'd soon the usuall effects of curiosity, calling many of the curious, and most knowing, out of Italy and France,
to admire her. 'Tis impossible to ex∣press the Civility, and Courtesie, with which she received every one, and particularly, her great liberali∣ty, in gratifying, caressing, and re∣warding the vertuous. All the Princes in Europe amaz'd at her famous prerogatives,She is ho∣nour'd by all the Prin∣ces of the world. either in their own Persons, or else by their Agents, endeavour'd to reverence, and serve her. To her great and conspicuous en∣dowments, nothing was wanting, but the light of true Religion; but Heaven not suffering so beautifull a soul, and so good a mind, to wander in the darkness of falsehood,Heavens is propitious to her. was so kind to her in his influence, to cause great and wonderfull effects. Divine grace awaken'd her search∣ing understanding, and Heavenly in∣spirations began to alarum in her mind, the Survay of the dissonan∣cies, falshoods, and untruhs, of the Sect she profess'd. But the business was nice, and she thought it not good, to trust her motives to those Ministers credit, whose knowledge
she had formerly measur'd, with more accurateness, and wariness: She consider'd with her self, that as God was still the same, so his faith was the same, and the foundation of all truth: insomuch, that with rea∣son, he could not suffer any thing to be alter'd, and dissonant in the knowledge of that Individuum, which should be only one, and still uniform to it self. She therefore began, to discover the weakness of the reasons, which Luther, and o∣thers sustain'd their new opinions, and fallacie with, and began to dis∣cern that the sacred Scripture under∣stood, and respected, with that Pu∣rity and Candour, with which 'tis received and taught in the Catho∣lique Church; furnisht her with clearest arguments, to convince their untruths. She perceiv'd some sacred books were refus'd by the followers of Luther, for no other cause, but their own meer capticiousness, and only for condemning their errours. That of those they retain, and have in such esteem, the greatest part they
alter, adulterate, and falsifie, and so variously interpret, that 'tis not any wonder, amongst such dissentions & confusions, resembling so many Hydra's head, innumerable Sects are multiply'd and produc'd; yet all disagreeing, and contrary to one a∣nother. Nay, that now the word of God was so vilify'd, that each fool∣ish tradesman, or ignorant woman, durst shamelesly interpret the highest mysteries of the faith, which hard∣ly the most knowing, and most sub∣lime wits understand. That the Sects did encrease, or decrease, as assisted, and fomented here on earth; yet faith is a rare gift of Heaven, inso∣much as the followers of novelties, having nothing of assurance; nor probably the true sense; twas surer to rely on the uniform, and agree∣ing interpretation of so many Saints, the Catholique Church hath had in all ages, for doctrine and integrity of life, so renowned and eminent. 'Twas therefore too evident a mad∣ness, to depart from their common consent, and adhere unto those,
who, without the reputation of goodness, and vertue, have for their own passion, and private advantage, endeavoured to darken the world, to confound it, and vizard it, with many chimeras, and malignities. The reasons which give motives to the true knowledge.To these her reflections, the wise Queen added diverse other weighty considerations; and amongst them, this seem'd to have force, that by the continu'd succession of Popes, and uniformity in Rights, and Do∣ctrine, the Church of Rome, though tost by fierce tempests, invaded by her enemies armes, and molested with contrary Doctrines, had all∣waies like the Palmtree, grown higher, and been still more resplen∣dent, and glorious. Her Majestie observed, that the very same Nations, and particular∣ly the Septentrional, which now do live out of the lap of the Roman Church,Important observations have more than any others, for many ages past, had the Catho∣lique faith in veneration, and pro∣duc'd many men; who, with their holy lives, have enobled the world,
and with their souls beautify'd Hea∣ven. That the writings esteem'd the most learned, the famousest actions, the conspicuousest vertues, and most refin'd wits, have been the perseveres in the Catholique faith, insomuch that as examples more forcibly per∣swade us, than precepts; it seem'd to her impossible, so many good men, so intelligent, and so learned, should have been blind, to follow so tenaciously, and so long, the opi∣nions and doctrines, which hereti∣call Ministers represent to the sim∣ple and Ideot, for falsities, and er∣rours. Besides she consider'd, the very same Protestants confess'd, the Spa∣niards, the French, and Italians were of a more elevated spirit, and more compos'd mind; of more pro∣found Knowledge, and a civiller, and soberer behaviour, than all other people of the world; and that a∣mongst these of the Northern Inha∣bitants themselves; he was most va∣lued, that was best acquainted with the customs, and dictates of the Na∣tions
aforesaid, insomuch that though Arius had in Spain spread the poyson of his heresie; and France had both open'd her bosom, and arms, to the errours of the neighbou∣ring Countries; yet those great Kings, and most of the Nobility, without ever changing their opini∣ons, among, so many accidents, had continu'd in the obedience of the Catholique Church, and the Vicar of Christ, which afforded a strong argument, for the goodness and truth of his faith. Her own vertue makes her see the truth.Her Majesty received an additional force in her mind, that the Authors of heresies could never yet shew; when, how, or why, the Catholique Church did prevaricate in her faith nor where, and in whom perpetua∣ted, and conserv'd, it being very necessary, the true Church should alwaies have endur'd in some part. But, the consideration of the qualities, of the Authors of heresies, made a very strong breach in this Princesses heart; her Majestie being now well inform'd, that interest a∣lone,
and the pleasures of the flesh, not the benefit of the publique, nor integrity of the mind, were the Councellours and Promoters of these novelties. She examin'd Mar∣tin Luthers condition,She exa∣mines the life, and conditions of Martin Lu∣ther. and the o∣ther opposers of the Catholique Church, and found they were men of an ill life, sensual, and extreamly am∣bitious; whereupon like seditious persons, who in a State-Govern∣ment, do cloak their pretences with the zeal of the publique good, and the service of the Prince, against whom they fight, they never had o∣ther design, than the ruine of the State, and Monarchy of the Church, in revenge of the wrong, they pre∣tended to receive in their minds; in that the Popes of Rome comply'd not with their boundless desires; so as she foresaw in the end, that when Luther began to impugne the value of indulgences, by depressing the authority of the Pope, he did it out of envy and anger, that the care of delivering them in Sermons, was committed to others, and not to
himself, as he had desir'd. That when Purgatory was condemned by him, he being unwilling to admit a∣ny pain did remain to the souls, which dy'd in the state of grace; 'twas meerly his invention, either to discredit more the said indulgen∣ces, or let loose the reins to sensu∣ality, since the contumacy is the greater,She per∣ceives the falsities, and untruths spread by him. when the punishment is represented the less. That when he deny'd fastings, Pennance, Confessi∣on, the single life of Priests, the in∣tercession of Saints, the Mass, the Ornaments, and Images of the Church, and the like; it onely pro∣ceeded from his inward design, to make the people follow him, who are apt to believe, what allureth the senses, and furthers the appetite of nature; as likewise his principall mo∣tives for promoting his wickedness, had their rise from his unplacable ha∣tred of the Pope, as one that con∣demned his errours. To this pious Queen, the resolu∣tion of Henry the eigth King of England, seem'd too sacrilegious and
wicked; who withdrew from the o∣bedience of the holy Church, a Ca∣tholique, and well compos'd King∣dom, and onely for the pleasing of his humours, and abandoning, and debasing himself in the loves of Anne Bullen.She fortifies them with some impor∣tant exam∣ples. She dislik'd the un∣worthy actions of those Princes of Germany, who spoiling the Churches, had seized the revenues of so many Orders of Religious, who in honour of our Saviour, and the Heavenly Court, had employ'd them in sacred Temples, to glorifie, and exalt him. But more than all the rest, she came to the Knowlege of the truth, by considering, how unseemly it was to believe, the Holy Ghost would use such men, that were viti∣ous, and unworthy, for reforming of his Church, while there were so ma∣ny others, renown'd for their Do∣ctrine and sanctity. With these speculations, and the guide of the holy Fathers, exactly perpended by her; she saw a great light before her eyes, whereupon as in the way long chosen by her, she
discover'd great stumblings, and disturbances; so among these new lights, she walking in the best, and readiest paths, began to examine particularly the substance and foun∣dation of the truest religion. With great rewards she invited to her, the famousest men in the Lutheran pro∣fession, and under the colour of learning what they knew, extracted with admirable dexterity, the sum of their belief and understanding: Truth, the only Catholique,She detests heresie. and Roman religion, among the black darkness of so many opinions, and contrary doctrines, began to shew her clean∣ness, and beget in her mind, a great loathing of the manifest falsities, and immoderate absurdities, which usu∣ally by the malice of hereticall Mi∣nisters, with great industry are in∣still'd into the minds, of unwary and simple people. She resolves to turn Ca∣tholique.In the mean time, Don Joseph Pinto Parera, the Portugall Am∣bassadour arrived in Swedland, ma∣king his entrance into Stockholm a∣bout the end of July, with whom as
his confessour, was Father Anthony Macedo a Portugess, together with his Companion, Father John Ar∣drada, both Jesuits. The Queen in∣form'd of all, was glad of that en∣counter, by her so desir'd, insomuch as concealing in her mind, a resolute inclination to the Catholique faith, she began in her discourses, and treaties, to shew some esteem and affection to Father Macedo. He on the contrary side, observing the Queen, when she spake of the Pope, to shew much respect and venera∣tion, discover'd, her Majestie had a good disposition towards Catho∣liques, and therefore with dexterity, by opening, and enlarging the way, so wrought, that every day her satis∣faction and confidence of him, re∣ceiv'd augmentation. When the Ambassy was finisht,She sends a Jesuit to Rome. & Parera prepar'd to be gone in Sep∣tember, 1651. het Majesty more fre∣quently than before, began to send for the Father aforesaid; In the end, on the 12th of August, retyring with him into her inwardest lodgings, and
saying, she would tell him a business of consequence; said thus in his ear, Father Macedo, you are the first Je∣suit I knew, and as by the pra∣ctice, and relation I have of your vertue, I sppose I may be confident of your faithfulness, and prudence; so now since you are to depart, I de∣sire by all means, you'l procure me sent hither two Italians of your So∣ciety, expert in all Knowledge, who under the colour of Gentlemen, than desire to see the world, may stay in my Court, that I without suspiti∣on, may make use of them, to which effect I'le write too by you to your Generall.In her letter to the Fa∣ther General of the Socie∣ty. The Father comply'd wih her Majestie, with expressions, and a sense peculiar to news of that consequence, and giving her due thanks for her confidence of him, and offering to serve her with fideli∣ty, he swore to be secret. Macedo come home full of joy, and consolation, and beginning to consider of the manner, how to execute diligently her Majesties de∣sire, resolved to ask leave, as he did,
of the Ambassadour, to go see, for his own curiosity, the fair and great Ci∣ty of Hamburg, but could not obtain it; so as he return'd to the Queen, and told her of the difficulties he hid met with. Her Majestie hearing him of a setled resolution to serve her, reply'd, you may go, and say nothing. The Father inform'd, that the Vessell,She desires two Fathers of the Socie∣ty may be sent to her. which should carry him was then in the Haven of Balen, 35 miles distant, and ready to set sayl towards Lubeck; went to take his last leave of the Queen, who gave him a letter of credence, written, and subscrib'd with her own hand, and directed to the General of the com∣pany of Jesus, who then was Father Francis Piccolomini. Father Macedo concluded his ex∣pressions, with humbly beseeching her, to consummate her holy inspira∣tions, to which she reply'd , that if she had known, the Roman religion, had been best, she would have em∣braced it, and that he should cause the two Fathers, she desir'd to be sent, with whom she might freely
discourse, and without all suspition, having nothing else to say, but en∣treat him again, to be secret and quick. The Father being licenc'd to de∣part, went out of the gate behind the Court, which looks towards the Sea, and pass'd in a Feluca to a Rock, where he remained that night, since he could not reach the Vessell by day. The day after he arrived at Ba∣lem, whether one was now come, dispatcht by the Queen, at the in∣stance of the foresaid Ambassadour, to arrest him, and carry him to pri∣son; but as he had secret order from her Majestie, to let him escape, if he found him, he fain'd he could not find him, and took horse and return∣ed to Stockholm, and the Father embarqued himself, and sayled to∣wads Lubeck on the 2d. of Septem∣ber, where twelve daies after he arriv'd. The Ambassadour soon gave out, the Father was a Knave, by his fly∣ing away in that manner, and others divulged, he was become a Luthe∣ran,
and married. From thence he arriving in Hamburg, steer'd his course towards Nurenberg, and fi∣nally having run many dangers, came to Rome on the 18. of October, 1651. Father Piccolomini the Generall of the Society, dyed a little before, so as he delivered the letter to Fa∣ther Goswin Nikel, who was then Vicar-Generall, and afterwards Ge∣nerall; a man of great parts, and born in the City of Cullen.The Father Generall re∣ceives her letters▪ very gladly. He em∣brac'd with great zeal, a business of that consequence, and as 'tis the particular profession of the Society aforesaid, to search all the parts of the world, to convert to the holy faith, both Heretiques and Infidells, in which they employ very freely whatsoever is given them in charity, and quickly made choice of Father Francis Malines,He sends two Fathers into Swed∣land. a Reader of Divini∣ty in Turin his Country, and Fa∣ther Paul Casate of Piacenza, a pro∣fessour of Mathematicks in' the Ro∣man Colledge at Rome; men, be∣sides integrity of life, of most exqui∣site
understanding, and great know∣ledge, that as persons desirous to tra∣vell, and see the world, they might without delay, take their journey for Swedland. They arrived in Venice on the se∣cond of December. 1651, the one comming out of Piemont, and the other from Rome. On the twelfth of the said month, they departed, and prosecuted their journey;Their jour∣ney. notwith∣stnnding the extremity of the wea∣ther, and only in the beginning of March got ro Stockholm, being hinder'd on the way, by reason that Father Malines hurt his foot, by the fall of his horse, which made him keep his bed many daies. In the mean time, Father Godfrey Franchenius, a Jesuit, and a man, that was truly Apostolicall, and of excellent parts, was brought by a Tempest from Denmark into Swed∣land, who had frequently treated with the Queen, and not without profit, but not being able to stay there without being known, he be∣fore was departed, and gone into Flanders.
These two Fathers, arriving in Stockholm, were presently conduct∣ed to the Queen,Their arri∣vall. as Italian Gen∣tlemen, and Passengers. And albeit her Majestie dissembled in the be∣ginnning, they so soon perceiv'd her good disposition, and admir'd too in her, then 25. years old, a soul undeceived, and exempt from vanity, and the greatness of the world, and filled with so equall a Knowledge of all things, that she seem'd onely nourisht with the marrow of morall Philosophy. Not long after,They are courteously receiv'd. she de∣clared her self, resolv'd by a holy in∣spiration, to embrace the Catholick faith, and renounce for it her King∣doms, and all humane greatness, though there she was not onely esteemed, but ador'd with a fuller, and more absolute authority, than a∣ny of her time. There's no doubt, but she would very gladly have resetled in Swed∣land the Catholique faith, if she could have overcome the great, and many difficulties, that lay in the way. Too evident was the danger of
spoyling the consort of her resoluti∣ons, if they had smelt the least in that kind. Besides too, the uncertainty of the end, much time was required, and hazard of her conscience, in which she was impatient to continue, with∣out the profession of the Catholique religion, and she could by no means profess it occultly. She treats secretly with them, and determines to inform the Pope of her resoluti∣on.When she had with the said Fa∣thers, long discussed the means, that were fittest, for the compassing of her Majesties intentions; she deter∣mined to let the Pope know her re∣solution, and to send unto him with her letters; the said Father Casati, who was to inform himself particu∣larly, of all that was necessary for her future stay in Rome, which then was her design; she supposing the said City most fit for her abode, not so much for the honour of her per∣son, as because she being there inde∣pendent, of any other Potentate whatsoever in Christendom, might employ the endowments of her mind, in the service of God, and his Church, by her Majesties interpo∣sing
in many affairs of Christendom, for the which without doubt, there was no want at all of ability in her Majestie. She sent then the Father to Rome, in the Month of May of the year a∣foresaid, but omitted at that time, to make any motion to the Pope, be∣cause she was not able to renounce so soon her Kingdom, and in the mean time, they had no suspition at all, of those resolutions, with which Pope Innocent was assistent to the business. But Father Malines re∣mained in Swedland, well treated by the Queen, while her Majesty disposed, and so ordered her affairs, that by the States of Swedland, Charles Prince Palatine (deputed before to the Crown after her) was after her renouncing it, admitted to the King∣dom, which done, she might securely depart. In fine, when she was to discover her mind, and compleat her resolu∣tions, she began then, by declaring her intentions to Monsieur Bordolot, a French man, and now Abbot of
Massay, her trusty Physitian, to the end, he repayring to the Court of France, and making no mention at all of the business of religion, might onely treat there, if, after her renoun∣cing the Kingdom, she might so∣journ in France, as likewise she had thoughts of dispatching Father Ma∣lines to Rome, with her letters to the Pope. Don Anto∣nio Pimen∣tel is in Swedland for his Ca∣tholique Majesty.While Bordolot and Malines prepared to be gone, the Queen ha∣ving made a discovery of the exqui∣site judgement, and great prudence of Don Antonio Pimentel; who, with the Title of Gentleman, sent from the Catholique King, to com∣plement the Queen, and procure be∣tween their Majesties a good corre∣spondence, had been some Months before in that Court, where he had with his rare parts, purchas'd very great credit, and fame, resolv'd to trust him with her thoughts, and make use of his assistance and counsell, in a business of that conse∣quence. This Gentleman heard at∣tentitively the Queen, and was as
much comforted, as astonisht,The Queen imparts to him her thoughts. at the strangeness of the news. And when he had considered, how meritorious in Heaven, how famous in the world, and beneficiall to Christianity, so glorious an action would be, he re∣presented to the Queen, the necessi∣ty of supporting it, by a Prince no less powerfull, than pious, that he ac∣companying with her dispatches, the letter she sent to the Pope, might make authentick the credit of so great, and so heroique an act, for the compassing of which, the Catho∣lique King seem'd fit to her Ma∣jesty. The Queen therefore consign∣ed to Father Malines,And re∣solves to re∣ly on the Ca∣tholique King. letters for his Holiness, Cardinall Chigi, then Secretary of State to the Pope, and for Father Nikei the Generall of the Jesuits, and likewise gave him order, that as secretly as he could, he should go into Spain, to procure the dispatches of his Catholique Majesty to the Pope, in order to which, she gave the said Father, let∣ters for the Catholique King, and Don Lewes de Aro, supposing be∣sides,
besides, that Don Antonio Pimentel being come to Madrid, whither he was called, might adde credit to her letters, and solicit the effecting their Contents. And as the greatest thing, that troubled her Majestie, consisted in secresy, to remove every shadow of suspition;Father Ma∣lines the Jesuit is dispatcht to the Court of Spain for that effect. she desir'd, that the Father might go another way, and not embarque himself with Pimentel. For the very same reason, it seemed not good to the Queen, that Father Casati returned to Ham∣burg from Rome; should repass into Swedland, to avoid the renewing of the jealousies, and suspitions had formerly of them; especially she knowing, some letters had been in∣tercepted, which Casati had written to Malines, by which they under∣stood, that they were both engag'd, in the very same business, and had common interests. Father Malines departed from Stockholm, on the 3d. of May, 1653. having stayed there something more than a year and two months. The length of his voyage from Swedland to Lubeck, occasio∣ned
by the contrary winds, and his not finding suddenly shipping in England, whither he went for that purpose out of Flanders, were the cause he arrived not at Madrid till the second of August, where he stayd certain months, without ha∣ving any news of Pimentel, or ne∣gotiating any thing, since his order was not to begin, till he had first received her Majesties letters, which were to be sent after. Don Antonio aforesaid, departed from Stockholm in the following August, and em∣barquing at Gottembourg, advanced not far, when the Ship, that sprang a leak, constrain'd him back thither; while the Vessell was repairing, he went to the Court, which then was removed to Vesten, where he recei∣ved order from Spain, to stay there yet a while. The Queen hinder'd by that acci∣dent, to make use of Pimentel,Father Gu∣emes a Do∣minican, ar∣rives in Swedland, and her Ma∣jesty makes use of him. sub∣stituted in his place, Father John Baptist Guemes a Dominican, who was in Denmark with the Earl of Rebogliedo the Spanish Ambassadour
to that King, and being to negoti∣ate some business appertaining unto the said Earl, in the Court of Ma∣drid, was to have, and expect the conveniency of embarquing himself with Pimentel, to which end, in the month of July, 1653, he arrived at Gottembourg; but the Ship, as afore∣said, coming back, and he being commanded by Pimentel to conti∣nue with him; went thence with him to Vesten. The Queen knowing, he was a man of great prudence, and other rare qualities; and considering she could give no suspition by his going into Spain, since they knew long before, he went for the affairs of Rebogliedo, she lost not the con∣juncture of making use of him; for the treating of that in Madrid, which she had design'd should be done by Pimentel.She informs him of the business, and sends him into Spain. She therefore informed him of the matter, and wrote to Fa∣ther Malines, whom before she had order'd, to make no attempt of any thing, without new advice, which he was to expect, before he promoted any busness.
Father Guemes departed with her Majesties dispatches, and Pimentel's, on the ninth of October, and after many troubles, and impediments, arriving in the Catholique Court, in the month of March, 1654, very earnestly sollicited there, the Kings letters to the Pope, to accompany the Queens, and so honourably, & so faithfully proceeded in this business of consequence, that her Majestie afterwards declaring, she was infi∣nitely satisfied; was most confident of him, by making him her Confessour, and using him in her hardest, and most scrupulous resolutions. Though not onely by the mouths of the fore∣said two Fathers Malines, and Ca∣sati, together with the Dominican,Her negoti∣ations. and the letters of Pimentel himself, his Majestie was fully inform'd, and assured of all things; yet he could do no less, than remain surpriz'd a while, at the news of so great, and so strange a resolution; it seeming to him a difficult thing,The King of Spains sense of the news. that a Princess of that spirit, and of so sublime a judgement, could abandon her
Kingdoms, her Country, and sub∣jects, whom she loved so tenderly, and protected, to lead a private life, without that great Command; for this only reason, to live quietly in the Catholique religion; his Majesty discoursing with himself, that though the said Queen was not able in pub∣lique, at least she could have exer∣cis'd in private, the true faith in her own Kingdom, and perhaps with more advantages to the Catholique religion, especially since surrendring the Scepter unto a new King, who might be of a turbulent, and warlike disposition, was to open peradventure the way, to some of those enterpri∣zes, which in the afflictions of Chri∣stianity, might cause greater dam∣mages to the interests of Catholiques than among the applauses of the world, get glory, and repose to the Queen. He consider'd too wisely, that the things of the world, have no∣thing that is constant but inconstan∣cy, and that women particularly, notwithstanding they have cou∣rage, and spirit, are subject to
change, so as he was not able with his solid Intellect,The King of Spain's per∣plexity. to judge securely of a single appearance; nor thought he it agreeable to his gravity and de∣corum, to engage himself in any thing, without sounding more fully the business, and reaching the bot∣tom of the motives, from which a resolution so great, and so little in use, was deriv'd. But afterwards assur'd, that many heroicall vertues, and eminent parts abounded in the Queen, with the motive of which, she knew, the world was one of those enemies, that is conquer'd by flying, and albeit a woman had strength to trample under her feet, its forces, allurements, and charms, and conquer her self. The King was so taken with her Majesties magna∣nimous action, that out of his most pious zeal to the honour of God,With great piety he un∣dertakes the business, and writes to the Pope. and the Catholique Church, he not one∣ly with great fervour accompanied her Majesties letter to the Pope; but exhibited all his protection, for the journey, and entire satisfaction
of so noble, and so vertuous a Prin∣cesse. After the peace of Germany, the States of Swedland, having soon bent their thoughts for the settlement of the Kingdom; had likewise found it necessary to provide, that the Masculine succession fayling in the blood Royall, some one might a∣scend the Throne quietly and peace∣ably, and the rather, since the re∣calling the suffrages of the ancient elections, did not seem good to them, they knowing by experience, that kind of dominion, as not very durable, and unsafe, had often been replenisht with tumults and calami∣ties; whereupon they unanimously agreed, that her Majesty pleasing her self with a husband, that was not of a different religion, nor sus∣pected by the States, should esta∣blish in her Progeny the security of succession.The States of Swed∣land make instance to the Queen. They therefore made se∣verall instances to the Queen, and often sollicited the effect of their desires. The Queen, who in her mind had
greater designs, making use of the pretence of being unwilling by mar∣riage, to subject her own liberty to any, declar'd, that as she had been born free,Her Ma∣jesties an∣swer. so she likewise would live, and die free. She boastingly said, all the Kingdoms of the world were a price below the value of li∣berty, which onely was the preti∣ousest Gem in her Crown. That she knew, the chast wits were still the most vigilant, most lively, and the fittest for all things, which re∣quire understanding, spirit, and pru∣dence. The States seeing her firm in re∣solving not to marry; pretended at least to appoint her a Successour, to the end, that she fayling, there might be no difficulty in a new Kings election. And because what∣soever we can most of all wish for in a Prince, consists in his valour, his prudence, and goodness, in the meet∣ing of all the four Orders of the Kingdom, the qualities and parts of the most conspicuous personage be∣ing maturely examin'd, all gave
their votes and applauses, to the fore∣said Prince Charles Gustavus, Pala∣latine, as one, who descending by Birth from Emperours and Kings, and having till that time comman∣ded the Swedish Amies, had given in all occasions great experiments of his valour and prudence. Besides he being passionately belov'd by the people and souldiers; could desire no clearer arguments of his merit,Charles Gstavus Pa∣latine is de∣clared, and substi∣tuted in the Kingdom after the death of the Queen. for his exaltation to the Crown, establisht in his Person, by his sub∣stitution in the Kingdom, if Christi∣na should fail. Some Polititians divulged (to med∣dle in their discourses with so great an affair) the Queen was not plea∣sed, the gate of dominion should be opend to this Princes desire, since this being the most sensible of humane affections, and that which soonest toucheth the quick, they might see again acted on the Stage, the offen∣ces of those times, in which many men, thinking nothing to be villa∣nous, and wicked; have trampled under foot, to compasse soon their
ends, all respects, obligations, ho∣nour and conscience. But the said Polititians have fail'd in the conceit, which perhaps they imagin'd their discourses would have rais'd, while that they measur'd her Majesties thoughts, and resolutions, with their own ordinary rule of the inter∣est of State. The Queen's designs had solider motives, and deeper foundations. She sought to gain a Kingdom, where Angells inhabit, and therefore lost that willingly where men have their residence.She trusts wholly in God. The Queen could not erre in the reason of State, who secur'd to her selfe that of God. She labour'd to know God in true greatnesse, and felicity; and God made himself known to her, by giving her judgement, and vigour, to seek what few did desire, and to despise that which all covet after. For what concern'd humane reputation, and glory, she had learnt; she could not better make happy and prolong the short periods of her life, than with the report of one of the most glorious resoluti∣ons,
that had ever been heard. She therefore very charitably and freely, agreeing to surrender her Scepter to the foresaid Prince Palatine, con∣trived a way with which, without discovering her thoughts, she frankly might renounce the possession of those States, which were no long∣er hers, because by her Majesty ex∣chang'd for those of Heaven. She thought, that she had not the lustre of any vertue, while she sate on that Throne, which was not illustra∣ted with the splendour of true faith. The Queen lov'd God, and there∣fore could no longer love the world. To mount to the greatnesse of Hea∣ven, 'twas necessary she should fall from the height of terrestriall felici∣ty. This her Majesties resolution dis∣covered to some she most trusted, it seem'd strange to them, she would abandon voluntarily the dominion of a Kingdom, than which there is not any thing more desired on the earth: & as in the change of a Prince, both the Cities, and Inhabitants, are
oftentimes subject to hurtfull alte∣rations, so with the apprehension of future events, and the want of the happinesse they enjoy'd,She resolves to forgoe her Kingdoms. they parti∣cularly were troubled, and discon∣tented, and labour'd to remove her from that her opinion, with very strong reasons, and resembling the quality of the matter, of which they discours'd. They knew the new Kings enius, and the martiall inclinati∣ons of his Captains, so as they were ffraid, it might prove one of those punishments, which with the appea∣rance of a blessing, is cast upon them, whom God will chastise. They doubted,She is dis∣swaded, but without effect. though the Queen loved peace, and a good correspon∣dence with the neighbouring Prin∣ces, that the Genius and Interest of her Majesties Successour, would not be the same, who probably at his entrance into his principality, would have the ambition, to make ostenta∣tion of his valour, and foment his Commanders desires. To convince her understanding, and divert her from so great a reso∣lution,
many of the knowing'st and zealousest Ministers, whom her Ma∣jestie did the honour, to trust with her design of renouncing her King∣dom, but not with her change of re∣ligion, advanced so far, to presage unto her unlucky events, but no∣thing could retain her in her moti∣on, which she urged with all speed. Now all things appertaining to that renunciation were in readiness; and nothing was wanting, but to so∣lemnize it,The renoun∣cing follows. with those publique fun∣ctions, requir'd in such Cases. Many Feasts being therefore now made, together with tiltings, for a happy prediction of the new Kings Coro∣nation, in the end on the 17th of January 1654, they brought it to a period. The Prince Palatine would have had it deferr'd, till the follow∣ing July, while his cloaths, and o∣ther things becoming the magnifi∣cence of this unusuall spectacle, were prepar'd. But the Queen admitting no delay; prevented these demurs with all diligence, while each little mi∣nute
seem'd too long to her, for the the finishing her secret intenti∣ons. She therefore came out of her lodgings that day, about nine of the clock in the morning, and appear'd in the great open gallery of the Court, accompany'd by the Senate, and the Grandees of the Palace. She wore a stately robe embroyder'd with Crowns of gold, and with a comly gravity walking up and down among a great company of Gentle∣men, and other, who out of curiosi∣ty, came to see so renown'd, and unusuall a function,The ceremo∣nies of this action. sate down in a chair, under a Canopy of Silver no∣bly wrought, and adorn'd. Here the Lord Zchering Rosemhain a Sena∣tour of the Kingdom, read with a loud voice the instrument of donati∣on, which her Majestie made to the said Prince Charles Gustavus Pala∣tine, and a Patent; in which the new King engag'd to the said Queen, three Islands, and diverse revenues issuing out of Pomerania, with other, regalities, to the yearly value of two
hundred thousand crowns. Her Ma∣jestie accepting the writings, rose up, and taking the Crown from her head, deliver'd it to the Earl, Peter Bracch great Praefect, and principall Senatour of the Kingdom. The Scepter, Sword, Globe of gold, and a Key, she consign'd to four great Personages, and Ministers of the Kingdom: to wit, to Count Gusta∣vus Horn Generall of the Militia, to Count Gabriel Oxerstern, to Count Oxerstern great Chancellour, and Count Magnus Gabriel de la Gardie great Treasurer. The Queen had no∣thing left to put off, but the royall Robe, and she seeing that those, to whom it belonged, deferr'd to unty it, unty'd it her self, and in throwing it down, sported with her maids of Honour, and was pleasant with them, while there was not any one, in so great a number of persons,A generous act of her Majesty. that could forbear weeping, to see this so generous action of the Queen, to whom the hearts of all paid the tri∣bute of duty and affection. The roy∣all robe being depos'd, she was be∣girt
with a very white garment, and here with a majestique affability, turning towards the Nobility and people, with a loud, and clear voice, and great freenesse of mind, pray'd a quartern of an hour with such effi∣cacy and sweetnesse, that all remain∣ing equally dazled, with the splen∣dour of so much vertue, and soften'd with the pleasantness of the manner, had such an affection, as admits not of comfort, nor receives modera∣tion. After this, with a long and most prudent discourse,She gives some adver∣tisements to the King her Suc∣cessour. she advertis'd the new King of many things appertain∣ing to the Kingdoms good Govern∣ment, and affectionately recom∣mended to him the Queen her Mo∣ther, her Friends, and all her Sub∣jects, whom she loved so firmly; and so she return'd to the very same room whence she came, leaving all the people, in the darknesse of con∣fusion, and bitternesse of sorrow, for the losse of that Sun, which so long had govern'd them, with the influ∣ence of his rayes.
The Prince Palatine is anointed King of Swedland.The Prince Palatine two hours after, was conducted to the Cathe∣drall, by the Arch-Bishop of Upsalia, where he was anointed King, and receiv'd the royall ensignes, and the next day after, the solemn oath was given him by all the four Orders of the Kingdom. In these solemnities, severall sorts of money, of gold and silver, ere scatter'd up and down, as well by the Queen, as the King. Those by the King had his Picture on the one side, and the words Carolus Gu¦stavus, and on the other, a regal-Crown, with these words, a Deo & Christina. Those by the Queen had her Picture on the one side, and on the other a Crown, with these words, Et sine Te. The day after the usuall Oath of loyalty being perform'd to the King by the States, the Queen visited, and honour'd by all;The Queens return to Stock∣holm, and her depar∣ture. departed from Up∣salia towards Stockholm. The King accompany'd her to the Mannour of Merstad, which is half the way, and all the Senatours, Gentlemen,
and chief Ladies of the Court, waited on her to Stokholm, where she stay'd three daies. Here all desi∣red to see her, and to be seen by her, who receiv'd them with such courte∣sie and kindnesse, that they there made discovery, of the pleasure she took, to leave them all mindfull of her vertues, and government. She had made them believe,She makes them be∣lieve she will go into the Island of Holland she would go live in the Island of Holland, fifty leagues distant from Stockholm, in the fair Castle there, with a great Park of Deere, where the Kings were accustom'd to retire for their pleasure. With this report she departed from Stockholm, three hours after the setting of the Sun. She would depart by night, not to see their af∣fections, and tears, who apprehen∣ded the want of so great a Queen, and so good a Mother. Yet from the royall Palace to the gate of the City,The afflicti∣on of the people for her depar∣ture. the concourse of the people was great, but the afflicti∣on much greater, which oppressed their senses; every one, as immove∣able
and mute, with their eyes cast down on the earth, giving to under∣stand a weighty sorrow hath neither tears, nor sighs sufficient to ex∣presse it. The King had sent the greatest part of the Court to accompany, and attend her; among whom were the Lord Charles Soop, a person of great quality, with the charge of high Steward, the Lord Tersen Gentle∣man of the Chamber, and of much desert and vertue with six other Gentlemen of his Majestie, all of noble families and merit; the Lord Ʋlifeldt great Master of Denmark, retyr'd long since into Swedland, un∣der his Majesties protection, the Se∣natours Earl Todt, and Baron Lind, with Eal Donoau, Lievetenant Colo∣nell, all three personages of high worth, and eminent parts, with seve∣rall others. In her going out of the City, she was saluted with the Artillery from the walls, and the ships, and as she past along, the Governours of Forts, and Provinces waited on her with
their Souldiers.Her Ma∣jesties jour∣ney. She travail'd all night, and the next day in the eve∣ning arriv'd at Nikopin, the resi∣dence of Queen Mary Eleanora her Mother, a Princesse of most admi∣rable qualities, where she onely stay'd so long to embrace her, and give her the last farewell,She visits the Queen her Mother. the separa∣tion from whom, was as sensible peradventure to her, as that of her Kingdom. In this she went volunta∣rily far off, from the fruition of a very great happinesse, and in that went from her; who had bequeath'd to her, her own blood. The same night, without taking any other repose, she continu'd her journey towards Norkopin, a City, and Port of the Sea, eight leagues di∣stant from Nicopin, which was one of the Forts, her Majestie had reserved to her self; Here she stay'd a day to repose, she having not yet slept since her departure from Stockholm. The next day she went to Linkopin, five leagues farther, where she stayed a day; and from thence to Junkopin, a fortresse fourteen leagues off, where
she rested that night. The day fol∣lowing she advanced to a house, of a Swedish Gentleman, call'd Gior∣nornotte, eight leagues off, and here taken with a Plurisy,She gives out she will change her journey. or stitch in her breast, she was forc'd to stay eight daies. As soon as she was well, she gave out, she would go another way, and instead of advancing towards the foresaid Island of Holland, she went towards Alstat, a Town situated in Aland, a Province which ten years before the Sweeds had taken from the King of Denmark. This City is indifferently hand∣some, encompast with strong walls, and from the said house some fifteen leagues distant.She dimisses divrse of the Court. Here she stay'd two daies, and dismissed not only the officers of the King, who were to wait upon her to the foresaid Castle of Holland, but Brodin too the Lu∣theran Minister, who had accompa∣ny'd her from Stockholm, retaining with her the Senatour Soop, and the Earl of Donoau. Arriving at Laolin, a Castle in the said Province, five miles from Alm∣stat,
she caus'd the same night her hair to be cut,She puts on mans cloaths, to pass un∣known. and putting on mans cloaths, took the way the next mor∣ning, towards Ingilholm, a little Town of the Province of Blekin∣gem belonging to the King of Den∣mark, taking no body with her, but the foresaid Lords, Soop and Donoau, the Earl of Stemberg, a Swedish Gentleman of eminent esteem, and her great Master of the horse, the Lord Wolfe, Gentleman of her Chamber, and Mr. Apelman her Secretary, with three Grooms of the Chamber, about nine in all, giving out she was the Earl of Donoau a Swede, who went to see the world, which she did to passe through Den∣mark, without being subject to in∣vitations, and entertainment. From Ingelhom she came the same night to Helsingbourg a Port of the Sound, which is an arm of the Sea about a league in breadth,She passes the straight of the Sound. through which passe all the Ships, which from the Baltique Sea, do sail towards the West, where the Danes search usually the Vessells, and receive a
certain tole, She pass'd it in little boats, and arriving at Helsenor on th 7th of July, when she had refresht her self a little while, continu'd her journey with diligence; yet omitted not to visit the noble Castle at Fe∣derichbaug,, seated in a very fine prospect, three leagues onely distant from Helsenor; which, as the place of the delights of the Kings of Den∣mark, was sumptuously adorned. She came at three hours in the night to Rotschilt a little City seated on the side of a Lake, and from thence went to Korsor a Port on the Baltique Sea, and the same night pass'd the Bect, a branch of the Sea about four leagues broad, which divides the Province of Zeland from Funen, which belong all to Denmark. On the 9th of July at the rising of the Sun, she arrived at Nibork, which was o're against Korsor, a Port of the Sea. Here she entertained her self, till the Waggons were prepared for travailing, which are all cover'd, and very commodious, like the Ca∣roches in France, and the Coaches
in Italy. She went then to Obensee, the Metropolitan City of the said Province of Funen, a wall'd Town, and full of old Turrets, indifferently handsom and civill, where the Court of Denmark resides a certain month of the year, two leagues near the said Port. She stay'd there that night, and passing the next day through Kol∣ding, a Towre on an narrow arm of the Sea, which serves for a Haven, though it be between the land, where the King uses somtimes to sojourn; she arrived at Hadversleve a little place, and encompast with old walls. She continu'd thence her journey, and the following night came to Flensbourg, the chief City, and a Port of the Sea, of the Province of Jutland, renown'd for the great traffique it holds with the North, and the West. On the tenth, she pass'd through, Rensbourg a wall'd Town, and lay that night at Jetzcho an open place. By break of day the next morning, she advanced towards Altennau, a City belonging to the Earl of Ol∣dembourg,
between whom and the City of Hambourg there is an anci∣ent quarrell;She comes to Ham∣bourg. that Earl pretending to greater jurisdiction over a bridge of Hambourg, where he receives a lit∣tle tribute from Altennan, near two little leagues, the Queen came to Hambourg, on the very same day a good while before the setting of the Sun; yet she enter'd the Town, and remain'd there unknown till the following day, and then putting on womans apparell, she was seen and known by all. She speaks with the Prince of Holsteria, and con∣cludes the marriage of his daugh∣ter with the King of Sweden.Having stay'd there a day, she went to Neummunster, a City re∣mote a daies journey, to see Prince Frederick of Holstein, with whom she remained a day, treating and concluding the marriage of the King of Swedland, with the Princesse Hedvyck Eleonora his Daughter. The King of Swedland had disco∣ver'd to the Queen, his inclination to this match, and entreated her fa∣vour in the businesse, provided her Majesties consent went with his. The Queen, who could not chose
but be glad, after giving him a King∣dom, to give him too a wife, conclu∣ded it quickly to the equall obliga∣tion of both parties to her. She after∣wards returning to Hambourg, stay'd there till the 30th of July. Five daies after her Majesties ar∣rivall, the Court which stay'd be∣hind, as aforesaid, overtook her at Hambourg, It consisted of about fif∣ty persons, besides the Coaches, di∣verse horses and the baggage, with whom were sigre Gustavus di Lilie∣cron a Gentleman of eminent worth, and most excellent parts, the wife of the foresaid Earl of Stemberg, with three of her women, Sigre John Wrangell, Sigre Silvekron her Stew∣ard, Doctor Wenleu her Physitian, and some Musitians, all which took the very same way through Den∣mark. This King, having had private no∣tice, of her Majesties passage through his Country, and ambitious to ex∣presse his devotions to her, went pre∣sently with his wife, and all the Court to Kolding, and under the pre∣tence
of going a hunting, met on purpose her retinue, and hearing that her Majestie was there, came out of his Coach, to look into those of the Swedes; but for all his sollicitude, and earnestnesse, not finding the Queen and assur'd she was gone by, he was much displeased, he had been prevented by her Majesties great di∣ligence; it troubling him extreamly, he could not comply with his duty towards a Princesse, of so great de∣sert and condition, and so cordially respected by him. The end of the first BOOK.
The History of the sacred and Royall Majestie of Christina Alessandra, Queen of Swedland, &c. The Second Book. The Argument. THe Queen goes into Flan∣ders, and comes to Antwerp. There she staies. The Arch-Duke and others send to comple∣ment her. The Earl of Buquoy goes thither in the name of his Ca∣tholique Majesty. After the retreat of the Spanish Camp from the Siege of Arras, the Arch-Duke comes to Antwerp to visit her, the Prince of
Conde doth the same, the Duke of Lorraine, the Earle of Fuensaldagna, and the Grandees of the Court, and Army, together wth other Princes. Earle Raymund monte Cuccoli dis∣patcht from the Emperour, comes for the same Purpose. Don Antho∣ny Pimentel is sent unto her by the Catholque King with the title of ex∣traordinary Ambassadour, and stayes with her Majestie. The Arch-Duke invites the Queen to Bruxells, where she is royally received; she makes se∣cret profession of the Catholique re∣ligion. She received advice of the death of the Queen her mother. Pope Innocent the tenth dyes: Alexander the seventh is assur'd to the Papacy with an universall applause. The Queen soone imparts unto him her resolutions and designes. She depart∣eth from Bruxells, Her Majesties journey to Inspruch. While her Majesty stayd at Hambourg diverse Princes and great Lords of the Countreys thereabouts came thither to visit
her, and with others,She is Visi∣ted in Hambourg by diverse Princes of Germany. Prince Christi∣an of Mechelbourg, the Duke of Brunswick, the three Brothers, the Dukes of Lunebourg, whose Sister is Queen of Denmark, Frederick Landgrave of Hessen, with the Prin∣cess his Wife, sister to Charles the now King of Swedland, together with the two Princes Francis Albert, and Gregory John of Saxony Lavenbourg. The Queen received them all with great courtesy, yet privately treated with them as conceal'd. Earl Bene∣dict Oxensterne came likewise from Wismar, the place of his government, to waite upon her Majesty, and Ge∣nerall Koningsmark from Staden, in the Bishoprick of Bremen, where he was Commander in chief. The Landgrave of Hessen,She is feast∣ed abroad by the Landgrace of Hessen. on the thirtieth of Iuly, gave the Queen a stately feast without the City, in a Villa call'd Vanspek. All the Princes then in Hambourge, were invited thither likewise, where they were very merry, after supper the Queen returned to Hambourg, the gate be∣ing open'd for her, by order of the
senate, for the guarding of which till her Majestie was entred, the princi∣pall Citizens stood in armes, and there finding all things convenient for her journey, without taking leave of any one, she desiring to go more concealed than ever, she departed after midnight, accompa∣ny'd by the Earle of Stemberg,She departs on the sud∣daine from Ham∣bourg. Sig∣nior Wolfe Gentleman of the Cham∣ber, and three Groomes, reapparall∣ing herself in mans cloathes. She remanded into Swedland the senatour Soop, and Earle of Dono∣au, the Countess of Shemberg, and the rest remained in the City, with order to follow her the next day after, and to be at a set time in Amsterdam, every one having li∣berty to take what way he found most convenient; for the passages at that time were unsafe, by reason of the war between the City of Bremen, and the Swedes, whom they of the said City endeavoured to ex∣pell out of the lands, they had seiz'd, and possessed in these parts. That senate pretended the said
holds, as members of their juridicti∣on, were unjustly detained by the Crowne of Swedland. The Swedes refused to quitt them, alleadging they were in the province of Bre∣men, but not of the Diocess of that City. In the meane time the Citi∣zens of Bremen being armed on the suddaine, and assailing the said lands, obliged the Swedes to retreat,Differences between the Crown of Swedland and the Ci∣ty of Bre∣men. but the King of Sweden afterwards send∣ing thither with his forces, the Ge∣nerally Strangel, and Stemboth, they not onely recovered the said holds, but reduced those of Bremen to surrender them free to Swedland, and repaire their losses with a great summe of money. On the first day of August at night, her Majestie departed from Hambourg, and lodged in a Village call'd Bardwick in Westphalia, in the jurisdiction of the Duke of Lune∣bourg. She tooke this unfrequented way, though there were two other more commodious, and more bea∣ten, to passe the more secure, and unknowne.
Her Maje∣sties journey from Ham∣bourg to Antwerp.On the second she lay in Ro∣dembourg, a little Towne of the said Duke of Lunebourg, on the third at the Village of Barembourg, and on the fourth at Mindem, a strong and considerable City, seat∣ed on the river Wesser the chiefe of that Province. The day after she went to Osnabruck, a great and fa∣mous City for the meeting there lately of the plenipotentiaryes, and ministers of the Protestant Princes, for the treatyes of the generall peace of Germany, belonging to the Bishop, the soveraigne Prince of that place. On the sixth she Came to Mun∣ster, a City renown'd for the con∣ference, and peace aforesaid, esta∣blished there by the mediatours, and plenipotentiaryes of all the Christian Princes. The next morning her Majesty before she departed, desir'd to see the Colledge of the Iesuits esteem'd and lov'd by her, as persons of great vertue and learning, and here while her Majesty went veiwing the things of greatest Curiosity, although she
was knowne by one of that Com∣pany, who had her picture by him,She is known in Munster. which was not ill done, and resem∣bled her, he observing too in her, the countersignes given him by a Brother of the Society, yet he made no matter of it, not to hinder the pleasure she took in not being dis∣cover'd. Her Majestie departing from Munster on the seventh day, lay that night in the village of Ensened, and on the eighth at Deventer, a principall fortress of the dominion of the Republique of Holland, where she saw, as she pass'd by, one Mr. Granovius, a man for his great learning, much estemed by her. On the ninth she went to Amesfort, where arriv'd too the same day, the traine of her Majestie, to whom she gave order, by one of the Groomes of her Chamber, that without making shew of knowing her Majestie, they should keep on their journey, and instead of bending towards Amsterdam, according to the first order, go directly to Antwerp.
The States of Holland receiving advice, that the Queen gone from Swedland, came towards the low Countryes, gave order throughout all their Dominions, they should stand on their guardes, and be ready to receive her with due honours. Bun her Majestie pass'd through De∣venter, Amesfort, Vtrecht, and other places; without being knowne, though, she was expected every where there. On the tenth at night she lay in a Village near Gorcum, and passing the next day through the towne, indifferently strong, on the river Wahal, she came to Breda, a for∣tresse as famous in Brabant, as re∣nown'd in the warres past, on the twelfth of August she ended her journey in Antwerp, entering there privately, and lodging in the house of Don Garzia Doyliano, a Portugese, one of the richest and cheifest of that famous, City. She arrives in An∣twerp.The day after overtaken by her traine, she put on womens cloathes, and received the visit of Don Bal∣thasar
Marcadero, the Comman∣der of the Citadell, a person of cleare fame, and great valour, afterwards in order by the Magistrates of the City, and the rest or the principal Gentlemen of that noble Coun∣trey. All flock'd to see her with equall Curiosity and respect,The ap∣plauses, with which she is seen in that City. and dazled with the splendour of her rare endowments and prerogatives, were not able to veiw her with greater applause, than that of an affectio∣nate, and reverent admiration. The throngs of the Cityzens were for some dayes so great, that they could hardly passe up and downe in the streets, that were neare to her Court. In the meane time the Arch-Duke, the Prince of Conde, the Duke of Lorraine, and the Earle of Fuensaledagna, with the rest of the Princes, and Grandees, design'd for the direction and Command of the Army in Flanders, were all in the field, beseiging the most impor∣tant City of Arres, very valiantly
defended by the French, and invaded by the Spaniards with great earnest∣ness and vigour.The Arch-Duke sends to comple∣ment her. And though Car∣dinall Mazarine was most diligent & intent to supply it with all neces∣saryes, yet so great was the confi∣dence of the Spanish Commanders, that they verily believed, to wel∣come this great Qeen, with so glo∣rious a victory. With thoughts of this kind, continuing that seige, all the said three Princes, sent persons expressly to assure her, that they within few dayes, disengag'd from that fortress would come and waire upon her with their presence, as they did then with their hearts, replenisht with joy for the happy arrivall of her Ma∣jestie. The Earle of Ruquoy, a Grandee of Spaine and a Gentleman of much worth, design'd by his Catholique Majestie, extraordinary Ambassa∣dour to complement the Queen, eight dayes after her arrivall in An∣twerp, gave a very good account to her Majestie of his Commission, and
was receiv'd by her, with many de∣monstrations of esteem proportiona∣ble to his merit, and the greatness of the sender, But in the meane time, the Car∣dinall having gather'd together the French Army, and disposed the or∣ders, where no less his refined un∣derstanding, and conduct, than good fortune appear'd, the circumvallation being broken, and gain'd, which by all was thought impenetrable, free'd the tottering City, to the very great glory, and benefit of the Crowne of France. His imperiall Highness re∣tur'd then to Bruxelles, on the eighth of September, and the next day went to Antwerp, to complement her Majestie in his person, as he had done before with his letters. The Queen receiv'd him, at the foot of the staires, conducted him to her lodgings, made him sit downe o against her, in such anoher chaire, gave him alwayes the title of High∣ness, and accompany'd him to the bottome of the same staires, with reciprocal satisfaction, still speaking
in Italian. The Arch-Duke stay'd in Antwerp one day, and return'd the next to Bruxells. When the Army was retyr'd into the garrisons, the Prince of Conde, likewise went to wait on her Ma∣jestie,The Prince of Condes pretences not admited. who, as the first Prince of the royall blood of France, pretended the Queen should receive, and treat him, with the formes and preroga∣tives, she had us'd with the Arch-Duke. He therefore sent before, the President Viola, one of the cheife slingers of the Parliament of Paris, and the constantest follower of his party, to visit her, and discover her intention about his reception, who related her Majestie would treat him,He visits the Queen as a pri∣vate Gen∣tlemen. in the forme due to Princes of his quality. Viola was not satis∣fi'd with these generall words, but would sound her farther, insisting to pretend the same honours done to the Arch-Duke. Whereupon the Queen offended, perhaps at the diffidence, he seemed to have of her warie, and generous discreetness, resolv'd to hold her owne, refusing
the Prince those acts of Civility, of which, as she afterwards declar'd, she would have been liberall, if he had not pretended to them, as his due. Viola then unable to compass the business, in the manner preten∣ded by the Prince, found at last this expedient, that his Highness should go visit her privately, as he did, being treated like a private Ca∣valier. Francis Duke of Lorraine came afterwards (received too privately by her Majestie) the Earle of Fu∣ensaldagna,Many Iri∣cys and great Lods come to i∣sit the Queen. and diverse other Gran∣dees of Spaine, who had their recep∣tion, in the forme us'd to them by the Catholique King, causing them to be covered. The tamburet, which is a less seat, granted usually by Queenes to Princesses of great qua∣lity, was given to the Dutchesses of Ascot, of Auray, and the Princess of Ligni, all Ladyes of Flanders, who went to waite upon her, being marri∣ed to Grandees of Spaine. The King of Scots sent likewise the Earle of Norwich, to congratu∣late
her arrivall, and the Elector of Brandembourg, Count Maurice, of Nassau, and others. The Princess too of Conde sent her Gentleman, to passe all due complements with her Majestie. While the Queen stayd in An∣twerp, she still employ'd her selfe in noble entertainements, sometimes passing her time in seing some mo∣rall representations, and cheifly in taking notice of many vertuous per∣sons, who flockt from all parts, to waite upon her Majestie, and be knowne to her. From the Hague came conceal'd the Queen of Bohemia, marry'd here∣tofore to the Prince Elector Pala∣tine, and sister to Charles the first King of England, with Princess Eli∣zabeth her daughter, and the prin∣cess of Orange, and onely to see her, as they did, at a Comedy, they be∣ing unwilling to be knowne, not to be oblig'd perhaps, to give her a visit, without a returne of the recep∣tion, they pretended. Her Majestie went often to see the house of the,
Professed, and the Colledge of the Iesuits, where she saw represented Thyestes in Seneca, as she had desir'd, and another play intituled Manasses. During her stay in Antwerp, the Emperour sent to complement her,The Empe∣rour sends Earle Montecu∣coli to complement her Majesty Earle Raymund Montecucoli, his Generall of the Horse, a person of rare parts, & eminent fame. The said Earle had been in Swedland, a little before, with the title of Gentle∣man sent thither by the Emperour, to ratisfy the good correspondence of his Imperiall Majestie with that Crowne, as likewise the freedom of a reciprocall commerce. She receiv'd Montecucoli kindly, declaring her selfe much oblig'd to the goodness of Cesar, for the honuor he did her, whose letters she answer'd with all due respect, remanding this Gentle∣man to Vienna, with all satisfacti∣on. On the seventeenth of August her Majestie went concealed to Bruxells,She goes conceal'd to Bruxells. and lay in the house of Madame Pimentel. She not onely saw the palace, but twice too the Col∣ledge
of the Iesuits, and thei' faire and great library, where she shewd her great learning, and the very great knowledge she had of rare bookes, and grave sciences. She stai'd foure dayes in Bruxells, and visited there the Monastery, of the Carmelite dis∣calceat Nunns, of the order of St. Te∣resa, the Ladyes, or religious of Berlaymont, the principall Monastery of Flanders, and the most noble Col∣ledge of the Canonesses of Nivelles. When she was return'd to Antwerp, Mounsieur De Chenut, the then French Ambassadour to the States of Holland, came thence to waite upon her. He had been before, as we said Ambassadour of the most Christi∣an King to her Majestie in Swed∣land, so as he was treated by her; with the greatest demonstrations of affection, and esteeme being knowne by her Majestie to be of great abili∣tyes, and experience, in affaires of greatest moment. The Catholique King now in∣form'd, the Queen was gone towards Flanders, with the thoughts of stay∣ing
there some little time,The King of Spaine sends Don Antony Pimentel extraordi∣nary Am∣bassadour to the Queen. remanded into the low Countreys, Don An∣tony Pimentel Diprado, master of the camp of the Spanish foot, and Go∣vernour of Newport, with the title of extraordinary Ambassadour to this Princess to assist her in all things, as likewise to honour, with such a de∣monstration, her heroique resoluti∣ons Don Antony, departed from Brux∣ells for Spaine, on the eighth of June. 1654. going thither to give an ac∣count of his negotiations in Swed∣land, and pass'd with a passeport through France, being mett, defray'd, lodged, and all his charges borne, by order of Cardinall Mazarine, not so much in regard of his merits, though he was much esteemed in France, as in token of the said Car∣dinalls gratitude, who in his retreat out of France into Germany, was honourably treated in the Spanish Dominions. The care of accompany∣ing him, was committed to Moun∣sieur De Touchanpre, The said Pimentel, embarquing at
Biscaglia, arriv'd at Mardick on the twenty ninth of October, and from thence went towards Antwerp, whi∣ther he came on the fourth of De∣cember. He went to his first audience with a most noble traine, being a Gentleman very splendid and gene∣rous, and naturally affable and cour∣teous. Here the Queen stay'd▪ till all things were prepar'd for her recep∣tion in Bruxells, which was to be sumptuous, according to the orders the Catholique King had given ex∣pressly unto the Arch-Duke, and the rest of his minsters, who fayl'd not of punctually fulfilling the gene∣rous minde of his Majestie. While the Queen remained in Antwerp, Earle Todt pass'd by there, sent by the King of Swedland to the Court of France, who by order of his King, was to complement her Majestie, which he did with expres∣sions, corresponding with the grati∣tude, that was due from his master, for so great, and extraordinary a be∣nefit. In the meane time Count Pontus
Della Garda arriv'd too from Paris in Antwerp, and going to wait on her Majestie, was detain'd awhile by her, as likewise Monsieur Pal∣pitzky, who resident in France for the Crown of Swedland, had order from his King, to assist her and serve her; she remanded into Swedland the Earle of Shemberg, to return the Kings complement, and come to some agreement about the lands appointed for her maintenance. When all things in fine were in readiness for her Majesties reception in Bruxells on the 13. of December,The Ach-Duke re∣turns to Antwerp, to invite the Queen to Brux∣ells. the Arch-Duke came to Antwerp, to invite her to Bruxells, in the name of the King of Spaine, he himself re∣turning thither the day after, where 'twas appointed, the Queen leaving Antwerp on the 23. should arrive the same Evening, as she did. Her Majestie departed that day ve∣ry privately by Coach, being atten∣ded and accompany'd by the foresaid Earle Pontus, and Palpitzky by Messieurs di Lillicerou, Wolfe and Wrangel, Gentlemen of her Chamber,
Monsieur Silvekron her Steward, Ba∣ron Carock Messieurs d'Eberling, Bukoven, Varenne, and other Gen∣tlemen, with six Pages, eight Grooms, and others of her Court. Being come half way she was wel∣com'd by all the Canons and Mus∣ketts in Wibrouch, a Castle indiffe∣rently strong, seated on the Channell that runs to Bruxells, where the Arch-Duke met her, who came with his Guards, and a Noble and numerous attendance, as well of his Court, as the principall Gentlemen of the Countrey. He represented to her Majestie, with much Courtesie and respect, the great satisfaction he receiv'd for her arrivall, conducting her into a house, where a very sumptuous dinner was provided, and they sate down to the Table, the Queen at the upper end under a cloth of state, the Arch-Duke on her right hand; a little below on the other side of the Table, but un∣der the same Cloth of state, the Mar∣quest Mattei being her Cup-bearer, and the Marquess of Beralau a Flem∣ming her Carver.
Some two hours after her Majestie continu'd her journey, on the Chan∣nell towardes Bruxells in a Bucentoro most richly adorn'd, and guilded with∣in and without, which carry'd twelve peices of Canon, and was drawn by twelve horses, of which was the Cap∣taine the Admirall of Antwerp. In this ship there went none but the Queen, the Arch-Duke, and the cheife of their Courts, the remain∣der being carry'd in oher Barques, which staying now and then in the sluces, which keep up the water, did satisfie in part the Curiosity of the people, which flockt in hge throngs for beholding this Princess, all the bankes of the Channell, all the houses and the neighbouring fields abounding with Persons of all kinds. From Wilbrouch they advancing to the bridge called Lac, which was a league forward, here the City of Bruxells began to appear in a very fine prospect, for the Countrey be∣ing open, they so freely saw the Towers, that the aire now being dusky by the absence of the Sun, and
they full of great lights, it seem'd a new Sun was risen again in the night, and really the light was so great, which with artificiall mixtures, illu∣minated all the barks of the Chan∣nell, that they saw as in the day. All along the said banks stood the Soul∣diers in armes, who now & anon, with reiterated volleys saluted her Majestie. Being come near the City, about three hours in the Night, all the Ca∣non, Mortarpeices and Muskets, sa∣luted her Majestie with a tuneable noyse; and when she arriv'd at the gate,Her Ma∣jesties, en∣trance into Bruxells she saw it adorn'd with a fine artificiall fire-work, representing two Angels, which held the name of Chri∣stina, crowned with lawrell, with di∣verse inscriptions above and below. On the bridge, where her Majestie was to land, stood the Earle of Fuensaldagna, a Gentleman of most eminent qualitie, as high Steward to his Catholick Majestie, accompany'd by the senatours of the City and all the Nobilitie, and Officers of that Court, with above 200. Coaches, and an incredible multitude of people.
Her Majestie being enter'd her Coach, took in the Arch-Duke,The rejoy∣cings with which she is publickly received in Bruxells. and she sitting in the end, and his Impe∣riall Highnesse in the boote, they went towards the Town-house, which was proudly adorn'd with va∣rious Armes, Mottos, and Inscripti∣ons, in praise of her Majestie, and illuminated with above three thou∣sand lights, and likewise the streets, through which they passed, were all full of lights, and hung with tapistry, with so great a concourse of Ladies, Gentlemen, Citizens, and People, that Bruxells never saw such a num∣ber drawn by curiousity to see a Princesse of so great same; and such vertuous and eminent parts. All the City contributed to her happy arrivall, with the sensiblest ex∣pressions, a reall and reverent heart is capable of; with Bonefires, dis∣charging of Canons, Mortarpeices, and ringing of the Bells, which being in that Countrey well tun'd, use to make a gratefull harmony. Her Majestie lighting at the Pa∣lace, the Arch-Duke accompany'd
her, to the lodgings assign'd her, which she found hung with the most excel∣lent, and pretiousest Tapestries, that are made in that Countrey. And be∣cause 'twas somewhat late, the Arch-Duke soon dismissed himself, leaving her to her repose; and so they all did. The rest of the night, and the two other following, many Bonefires were made, with discharging of the Ordinance, and ringing of the Bells. The same Evening the Prince of Conde, Francis Duke of Lorraine, and the greatest of the Court came to waite uppon her privately, and be∣cause, twas Christmas Eve, they sus∣pended other Ceremonies, to give no disturbance to devotion.She makes secretly pro∣fession of the Catho∣lick faith. On the said 24. of December towards the Evening, the Queen accompany'd by his imperiall Highnesse went into the Arch-Dukes farthest Chamber, and there in the presence of him, of Earle Fuensaldagna, the Ambassadour Pi∣mentel, the Earle of Montecuccol, and Don Agostino Boreno Navarra, the Secretary of State, made secretly
profession of the Roman Catholick Faith, before Father Guemes a Domi∣nican. This Religious man came from Spain into Flanders, with the Am∣bassadour Pimentel in the quality of his Secretary, and as he before had been privy to the businesse, so was chosen for this function, to keep it the more secret, since occasion so re∣quir'd. In the foresaid action a thing of some reflection succeeded which was, as the Queen had made an end of professing her Faith, while Father Guemes said the word, I absolve, &c. all the Ordinance of the City were discharg'd, to the wonder of all that assisted at the Function, without no∣tice given to the Magistrates, who onely had order, to have them shot off indeterminately neare the time. On Christmas day the Queen ac∣company'd by the Arch-Duke, and all the Grandees of the Court went to the Chapell, where there was most rare Musick, and an excellent Ser∣mon. Her Majestie past afterwards in∣to a great hall, where she dined in
Publick, together with the Arch-Duke, where the order held at Wil∣brouch was observed in sitting. The Earle of Castelmendo a Portugese, and Gentleman of the Chamber to his imperiall Highnesse, was Cup-bearer to the Queen, and Count Atemis a Dutchman Sewer. The ambassadour Pi∣mentel, & the Grandees of Spain assisted standing at the Table, but with their hats on. All the rest, which were ma∣ny, and the chief of the City, stood uncover'd. She eats in publick.On St. Stephens day the Queen likewise dined in publick, and after∣wards went in Coach to the Court, where the Princesses and Ladies of qualitie were proudly adorned for the purpose. In her Majesties return to the Palace, all the Coaches waited on her one by one in a row, and the greatest part alighted to attend her, who receiv'd them with courtesie, and singular affability, to answer the esteeme very highly deserv'd by those Ladies, who usually intermeddle with Masculine spirits, in the manage∣ment of the greatest affaires.
That evening an extraordinary fire∣worke being to play,She is al∣waeis in∣clin'd to Noble and worthy en∣tertain∣ments. the Queen went to see it, invited thither by the Arch-Duke, Seven weeks together she re∣mained in the Palace, treated with all magnificence by his Highness, nor was there any want of entertainments of various exercises, and vertuous and noble Passetimes; among which, in the last dayes of Carneval, a Play was recited in Musick, which was the noblest thing could be seen. On the Tenth of February she went from the Arch-Dukes Palace, to lodge in the Duke of Egmonts, at her Majesties own charge, where she was some time employ'd in receiving the visits, not onely of the Princes, Princesses, Ladies and Gentlemen, but of many learned Persons, which came from all parts, either as lines to the centre, or as rivers to the Sea. Here her Majestie twice a week used some vertuous exercises, for the entertainment of her noble and ele∣vated mind, which she did continue till the death of Queen Mary Eleo∣nora
her Mother,The Queen her Mother dies. which happen'd on the twelfth of March 1655. in Stockholm. This so sad news she re∣ceiv'd by the Baron of Spaur, a Gen∣tleman formerly of her Chamber and Resident in France, dispatched to her by the King of Swedland. At this sorrowfull advice she quickly retir'd to a house without Bruxells call'd Tervoren, and remain'd there three weeks, to divert her affli∣ctions, returning thence afterwards to the City, where all did condole with her Majestie; she likewise put on Mourning in her mind, depriving it of all recreation and Passetime. Now Father Malines was return'd from Spain to Rome, with the Letters of the Catholick King, to Pope Inno∣cent; to accompany the Queens, but it being thought afterwards, the con∣junctures then were not altogether proportionable to the quality, and convenience of so weighty and impor∣tant a businesse, they deferr'd the pre∣senting them; for the reasons we shall register more diffusely in its place in the universall History.
Things pass'd in this manner for some months, the Queen entertaining still her self in Flanders; in the mean time Innocent the tenth, having reigned ten years, three months and twenty two daies, gave up his soul to God in the age of eighty and one year, on the 7. of January 1655.The death of Pope In∣nocent. The sacred Colledge after the obse∣quies, and usuall congregations, went into the Conclave on the 18th. of the foresaid Month, and at last came out gloriously on the 7. of the following Aprill,Cardinall Chigi is assum'd to the Papacy. with having assum'd to the Papaly Cardinal Fabius Chigi of Si∣enna, who with the name he took, re∣new'd the immortall, and still more happy memory of Pope Alexander the third his Countreyman and Kinsman. I cannot expresse the joy,With the applause of all Christi∣anity. and ap∣plause; with which by all Christianity his election was receiv'd, as made with quietnesse, liberty, and an exact balance of his merits. The Heretiques themselves, who by reason of the length of the Conclave occasion'd by the power, ana discord of the facti∣ons
were not wanting to murmur, when they heard of so worthy an e∣lection, commended it with opinions of esteem, respect and reverence, and all was but due to the merit of a Person and name, so plausible and Majestick, who with the fame of great, presag'd a Principality full of Zeal and Christian edification, and there∣fore most sutable to the necessities of Christianity, The Queen was glad of this so hap∣py newes, justly hoping to find in the new shepheard of Christs flock, that charity and resolution, her ne∣cessities could promise themselves, from a heart remov'd from all pri∣vate interest, and wholly intent to the honour alone of God, the exalta∣tation of his Church, and the happi∣nesse, security and repose of all Chri∣stendome. The Queen gives an account to the Pope of her desire to come to Rome.The Queen then determining to give an account out of hand to his Holinesse, of all that had succeeded, as well of the profession she had made, as the reasons that had mov'd her to conceale it, of her desire to goe to
Rome, to give him all obedience, and kisse his Holinesses foot, quickly wrote to the foresaid Father Malines, now remaining in Rome, and sent him the fresh Letters for his Holinesse, to the end he should present them, as he did on the first day of July. The Pope at that advice, representing in his countenance, and testifying in his words the joy and content, news so good and so great did deserve; call'd happy his Papacy for bringing a Queen to his feet, with motives and resolu∣tions so worthy and unparalell'd; whereupon he reply'd, twas necessary her Majestie, ere she came into Italy, or at least ere she enter'd the domini∣ons of the Church, should publickly make Profession of the Catholick Faith, she before had made privately; for if at her entrance into the said do∣minions it appear'd not she was now a Catholick, she could not there be receiv'd with those demonstrations of honour, his Holinesse had design'd her, All things were easily reconcil'd, and in the mean time, fresh Letters
came likewise out of Spain from that King to the Pope,Letters from the King of Spaine to his Holi∣ness. to whom they were presented by the Duke of Ter∣ranova Ambassadour for his Catho∣lick Majestie in Rome. The Queen having caused all things to be povided for her journey, with expressions of Kindness and gratitude, gave all thanks to the Arch-Duke and the Mi∣niters of the Catholick King, for her noble entertainment;Presents made by her Maje∣stie to the Arch-Duke in Flan∣ders and others. and here, as in each other place she had done, she made her unexpressible magnificence, and splendour appear by presenting his imperiall Highnesse, with a proud and generous Swedish horse, with a Sadle, Bridle, and Pistols, enricht all with Diamonds, to the value of above thirty thousand Crowns, the Earl of Fuensaldagna with a horse like the o∣ther, and Furniture worth above Ten thousand Crowns, and all the other Officers and Servants with Donatives, to the value of above ten thousand Pistolls to their admiration: who conceived this Princesse as provident, as generous, had cause to reflect on the future necessities, into which she
might easily fall, but they were de∣ceiv'd, for the same generosity and freedome, with which she had parted with her Kingdoms, made her more liberall than ever. On the 22. of September in the year 1655. she departed from Bru∣xels,Her depar∣ture from Bruxells. accompany'd by the Arch-Duke and all the Nobility, as well the Gen∣tlemen as Ladies, two leagues with∣out the City, and at her going out was saluted by all the Canon on the walls, and the Musketeers placed in order e∣very where as she pass'd. Her Majestie departed highly satisfy'd with the ho∣nours received from his imperiall Highness, a Prince indeed of so No∣ble a spirit, and so great a mind, that he shews, he conserves in his heart, the ancient and still stronger impressi∣ons of the valour and vertue peculiar to his most royall House, being wor∣thy in fine of the love, veneration applauses, and obsequiousness of all. That night she lay in Lorrain, some seven leagues distant, a great City encompass'd with strong and ancient
walls, fill'd up with earth and fa∣mous for the Military successes, of which it hath been the Theater in our time. Those Senatours had offer'd and prepared her a lodging, but her Ma∣jestie refusing it, was content to be receiv'd by the Magistrates at the gate, with the inhabitants in Armes, and the discharging of the Canon, & a Present of 24. great bottles of wine, presen∣ted to her in the name of the City, ac∣cording to the custome in that Coun∣trey. The quality of her Ma∣jesties Traine.The Queen had with her of her own domesticks, about fifty Persons, a∣mong whom was Monsieur Liliecron, Gentleman of her Chamber, Monsi∣eur Apelgren her Taster, four Grooms of the Chamber, two maids of Ho∣nour, the one a Swede, the other a Fleming, Sigre Retius a Spaniard her Treasurer, Monsieur Gillbert a French∣man, her Secretary, three Italians Mu∣sitians, Father Guemes the Dominican, who went in a secular habit, to serve there the better and more easily the Queen, in saying Masse privately, six Pages, six Groomes, and diverse other
servants, together with thirty soul∣diers of her Guard, three Coach∣es, and foure Waggons of bag∣gage. To these was joyn'd Don Antho∣ny della Cuera di Silva, a Spanish Gentleman of eminent quality, of a very great spirit, and most courteous and affable, Lieutenant General of the Cavalry of Flanders, and Serjeant major General of the battle. He waited on the Queen with the title of her Majesties great Master of the Horse, accompanied with the Lady his wife, Madam de Broy, of a very Noble family in Flanders, and the chief Maid of Ho∣nour to the Queen, a Lady of much vertue, and noble deportment, who carried with them eighteen servants of their own. Don Anthony Pimentel follow'd likewise the Queen, as extraordina∣ry Embassadour of his Catholick Majesty to her, to assist her, and serve her in the journey, with a train of twenty men for the purpose. Diverse other persons afterwards
of quality accompanyed her, among whom was Don Francis Dessa of Portugal, a Gentleman nobly born, and of very great valour, in recom∣pence of his merits, design'd to the command of General of the Artille∣ry of the Kingdom of Naples, who had ten persons with him. The young Earl of Buquoy formerly Page to the Arch-Duke,The persons of quality that accom∣panied the Queen. who went to Rome with the Eearl of Trassigny his camrade, both Gentlemen of Flan∣ders. Don Romano Montero a Spa∣nish Serjant Major, no lesse famous in war with his sword, than renown∣ed in peace for his pen. Don Ber∣nardino di Liepa of Sivill, a youth of much spirit, and great expectation. Messieurs de Gans brothers, and Monsieur Pos Hollanders, Monsieur Levit a Fleming, with many other persons of Honour and Civility, so as the Queens Court was grown ve∣ry numerous, being about two hun∣dred persons in all, who were all at the Queens charge, except the reti∣nue of the Embassadour Pimentel, who travelled by himself, and at his own cost.
On the 23 of September her Maje∣stie din'd at Louvaine, a chief town in Brabant, and one of the greatest in the low Countreys, being re∣nown'd for the wars past. When the University had waited upon her, she went that evening to Montaga, some five leagues remote, where she visited a miraculous Image of our Lady. The next day she passing through Bering, din'd there, and came that night to Becht, a village eight leagues distant. In the mor∣ning betimes she dined in Steinbruch a village three leagues farther. The Earle of Isenghien Prince of Ma∣mines,Her recep∣tion in Ru∣remond. a Spanish Gentleman of a very noble family, and Most eminent parts, Governor of Gelders, and the town of Rurmond overtook the Queen here with a regiment of foot, & a re∣giment of horse, to invite her to this City, where her Majesty was recei∣ved by the souldiers in armes, and discharging all the Canon, being royally treated and defray'd by the said Prince. Here she saw a rare firework, and her Majesty din'd
publiquely alone waited on at table by the foresaid Prince and the most conspicuous Officers of war. As soon as her Majesty arrived in Ruremond, the Bishop, the supream Senate of of that Province, and the chamber of accounts came to wait upon her. All the night they made fireworks in the place, and the Queen went to see them in the house of Counsellor Blitterwich, where her Majesty saw diverse curiosities, collected by that vertuous and well qualifi'd Gentle∣man. Ruremond is distant seven leagues from the said village of Steinbruch, seated on the banks of the river Mose, strong in moderne bulwarks, large ditches, and exteriour fortifica∣tions and regular, with a very good Garrison, it standing on the confines of the Holland dominion, very fa∣mous in times past, and particularly for the mutiny there of a part of the Spanish Army, in the beginning of those wars. The Princesse of Mamines went beyond the river Mose, and met her
Majesty with a numerous train. Be∣fore she departed, she was comple∣mented by the Magistrates, and pre∣sented with the usual wine. That evening she went to Arquellens, a little City with an old fashion wall, some six leagues remote, belonging to the said Princes Government, who waited on her thither, and log'd her. He afterwards dismis∣sing himself on the confines of his jurisdiction, the Queen with all her traine, advanc'd towards the Abby of Castre, a countrey of the Duke of Giuliers, where albeit the Abbot, the Lord of the place, was not present. she had the conveniencie of lodging in his Palace, six leagues distant from Arquellens, where a Gentle∣man of the Duke of Newbourg ar∣riv'd to complement her Majesty in his name, who receiv'd the civility, with her usual kindnesse and courte∣sie. On the 28 she removed from Ca∣stre to Cullen, distant five leagues,She passes through Cullen. a City renowun'd, as well for its greatnesse, as for its great commerce,
being one of the cheifest of Germa∣ny, seated on the Rhyne, and en∣compassed with a large circuite of walls, and old fashion Towers. Here, although she was expected by the Senate, and the Citizens in armes, and with sumptuous preparation, yet refusing all invitation, except the commodity and pleasure of pas∣sage, shee made with expedition through the City, she passed the ri∣ver, and went and din'd in the Bo∣rough of Hof which is o're against the City, lodging in an Inne. At her entrance into Cullen, she was wel∣com'd by all the Canon on the walls, and in her said passage, found the streets full of souldiers in armes. The Magistrates sent afterwards to complement her Majestie, and gave her the accustomed present of 25 greeat bottles of wine, which the Queen caus'd to be given to the Carmelite discalceat Nuns, together with other almes, the effects of her generous piety. After dinner she departed from Hof, and went and lay that night,
some four leagues farther,The conti∣nuation of her journey. in a very fine Castle call'd Siebourg, or Zibery, very strong, and well fortifi'd, seated on an arme of the Rhine. The said Castle belongs to an Abbot, who is a Dutch Prince, and came out to meet her, and treated her splendidly, not onely that night, but the other two following dayes, she stayed there for her repose. Departing from thence on the first of October, the Abbot accompanied her to the confines with two compa∣nies of foot, and as well at her depar∣ture, as arrival, all the Canon, in the fortresse saluted her. That night, 4 leagues off, she lay in a poor village called Virembous, where all her attendance endured as much as they had been feasted the forego∣ing dayes. From Virembous she went, and dined in Aldem Kircken, and lay that night in Hackbourgh a town five leagues distant. The next morning her Majestie arriving in Valmerode a village three leagues farther, with in∣tention alone to dine there, was sur∣prized
with a little feaver, which made her stay there the remainder of that day, and the following night, but having let blood, and ta∣ken some rest, she the next day con∣tinu'd her journey, advancing six leagues, and arriving on the fourth in the evening at Lembourgh, a little walled town of the Elector of Triers, in a manner wholly ruined by the former wars, as all the rest were in the country thereabouts, in having been more than any other infested by souldiers, now of this, now that party, or perhaps for its unfortunate scituation, or because peradventure that territory is one of the fruitful∣est and pleasantest of Germany, the fields, and the hills abounding with fruit, and the plains watered every where with great quantity of brooks. She breakfasted in Lambourg, and when she was advanced towards Koningstein, a little City with a ve∣ry strong Castle, belonging to the Elector of Mentz she arrived there a good while before the setting of
the sun, being received with dis∣charging all the Ordinance, and invi∣ted by the Governour, who comple∣mented her Majestie in the name of the Elector his Master, but her Ma∣jestie refusing his offer, would needs lodge in the Inne, and defray too her selfe, staying there all the sixth of Octber. The Resident of Charles the second King of Scotland,She is visited by the King of Scotland. came hither from Franckfort to visit her, and desire audience in the behalf of his Master, who arrived there after dinner, and was, though privately, received with all courtesie, they re∣maining and discoursing together a∣bove two houres. With the King was the Duke of Glocester his Brother, a youth full of spirit, together with other Gentlemen who waited on the Queen, and were received by her with great demon∣strations of esteem & affection. Her Majesty met the King on the top of the staires, accompanying him from thence. Being come into the cham∣ber, they sate down, and 'twas ob∣served, the King being covered at
first, took off his hat presently after, and alwayes stood bare, shewing ve∣ry much respect, who taking his leave the same day, returned thence to Franckfort. And by the Elector Pa∣latine.After the King Scotland, came Charles the Prince Elector Palatine, who likewise was privately received, but with all tearms of love and e∣steem. His Electoral Highnesse had intention to receive and treat her Majesty in Heydelberg, the City of his residence, and therefore invi∣ted her thither, but she excused it, that way being out of the line of her journey. Prince Robert the said Electors brother came afterwards,Afterwards by Prince Robert. who com∣plemented the Queen, and the like did a Gentleman, sent expresly by the Princesse Electresse Palatine, si∣ster to the Prince of Taranto, a french woman, of the ancient and noble house of Tremoglia. This great Lady being a little indisposed in Frankfort, whither she came to see the Faire, which is usually four times the year with a very great concours of
Merchants, and merchandize, sent to excuse her self, she could not wait upon her in person, to expresse the devotions and affections of her heart. The Queen received them all with great kindnesse, and reman∣ded them well satisfied. The day after on the seventh of October she passed through the City of Franckfort, three leagues onely distant from Koningstien, and with∣out making any stay there, went and lay three leagues farther, at a little walled Town called Steinhain, where her Majesty was received, and met by the Brother of the Elector of Mentz, dispatched expresly by his Electoral Eminence, with a troup of horse, to the end they might attend her through his jurisdiction. Here like∣wise Monsieur Wambolt, Coronel of a Regiment to the foresaid Elector, arrived, to invite her Majesty into Asschaffemburg. The Queen would perhaps have been willing to have staid a little while in Franckfort, a free City, great and renowned.
seated on the banks of the river Main, and among other things, very full of copious Libraries, and abound∣ing with the curiousest volumes, that have been yet printed, but she thought it better to continue her journey, as she did, to avoid incom∣moding that Senate, with those en∣tertainments, with which more than others, they would have endeavour∣ed to manifest their gratitude to∣wards the glorious name of King Gustavus Adolphus, her Majesties Fa∣ther, who was the particular Protector of that City, and who, entering there with his Army, preserved it from the anger and severity, with which it was threatned by the Imperial troups. She therefore was saluted by all the Artillery, and the peoples acclama∣tions, who flockt in extraordinary throngs to behold her, with the grea∣test curiosity, and veneration. From Steinhaim she went to Ass∣chaffemburg,She goes from Stein∣haim. a City washt by the said river Main, and belonging to the dominion of the foresaid Ele∣ctor of Mentz, whose Castle is
strong, beautiful, of a moderne stru∣cture, and one of the magnificentest fabriques of Europe. This City re∣nowned for the accidents of the for∣mer wars, is seven leagues distant from Steinhaim. There she was re∣ceived with great joy by all the Ci∣tizens, who as mindful of the chan∣ces, that were past, gave clear demon∣strations of their well affected minds, by discharging all the Canon, the Musquets, and an infinite num∣ber of Mortarpieces. She was lodg'd and defrayed by the Elector, not onely that evening of the eighth, but all the ninth day she staid there, to let her horses rest. Departing from that place on the 10th. of October, she went and lay at Mitelmbourg, a little City with an old fashion wall, which likewise belonged to the Elector of Mentz, where her Majestie had the same en∣tertainments, and the said Electors confines here ending, his Eminences Officers dismissed themselves with the horse, that had accompany'd, and serv'd her; on the said tenth day
her Majestie advancing five leagues further to a village of Franconia call'd Kulsai, and thence the next day to Simmering, whither came the Prince Palatine, with his Prin∣cesse, and two Sisters, to waite on her Majesty, who arrived the same day at Aub, a little City on the fron∣tires of the Bishoprick of Wirtz∣burgh, called commonly Herbipolis, four leagues farther from Mitelm∣bourg, where her Majestie was recei∣ved, and splendidly treated, by order of the said Elector of Mentz, as Bi∣shop of that City. That Countrey is good and fruitful, but very much spoyled by the former wars, in which Herbipolis hath occasioned much matter for History, for the various successes, that happened near it, Her Majesty staid in Aub all the thirteenth of October, and lay the night following in Rottemburg, distant five leagues,She arrives in Rotem∣burg. an Imperial Town, encompassed with strong and old walls, and washt by the river Nechar, famous likewise for the wars past. The Magistrates of the
place presented the Queen with fish, wine, and oats, presents usually made to all Princes and great persons, by the Imperial Cities of Germany. She was welcomed by the Canon, and received by all the Citizens in armes. The Marques of Anspach of the house of Brandemburg, came thither that day to wait on her Majesty, who having been received with the shew of much respect, took his leave the same night, but returned the next morning before the Queen departed, and brought with him the Countesse of Olac his Kinswoman, who would needs wait on her Majesty, as one much devoted and obsequious to the Crown of Swedland, the Earl of Olac her husband having the said Crown, as Governor of Auspurge, when that City was taken, and held by the Swedes. From Rottembourg she went to the village of Waitvang, three leagues farther, and of the jurisdiction of the Marques aforesaid, where she was received, and sumptuously treated
by a Gentleman sent thither by the Marquis. But this noble entertain∣ment was the next day disgested in Donhausen, a poor Mannor-house, where there being no other houses fit for lodging, but the Curates, they were much incommoded and di∣strest. On the seventeenth, she went to Nordlinguen an Imperial City,She comes to Nordlin∣guen. and re∣nowned for the two famous battles fought heretofore in those ample plaines, the one glorious to the Spa∣niards, who with a full and memora∣ble victory, preserved the Empire, and the other unfortunate to Bava∣ria, since by losing the day, all that flourishing countrey was made in a manner a prey to the fury of the French, and anger of the Swedes. There she was received with all ob∣sequiousnesse, and respect, the peo∣ple arming themselves, and the walls, which are strong and bituminous, and abound with ancient towers. They stood all in ranks in the streets, and every where as wel with the noyse of of the Artillery, the Mortar-pieces,
and Musquets, as the light of the Bonefires, her Majesties arrival was sollemnized. The Magistrates would have splendidly entertained her, and her train, if she would have accepted their kindnesse, but she having refu∣sed it, as she had done before in the other imperial Cities, through which she had past, the usual presents were made her of fish, wine, and oats. The day following having dined in the village of Arbourg,To Dona∣vert. she went five leagues farther that evening, to the City of Donavert, appertaining to the Elector of Bavaria, with a bridge o're the Danube, renowned in our History for the accidents past. All the Canon were discharged at her arrival. The Governor of the Castle went quickly to visit her Majesty, excusing himself, that she found not all things ready for her entertainment, he not knowing of her coming, insomuch as she lay in an Inne. The same even∣ing the Duke of Neuburgs chief Gen∣tleman of the Chamber came thi∣ther, and informed the Queen, his
Master was coming to visit her, who arriving the next morning was re∣ceived by her Majesty with all kind∣nesse and courtesie. She departing after dinner from Donavert, went that night to the vil∣lage of Visemdorp, distant three leagues, and as, the day following, she was travelling towards Oberhau∣sen, a village on the river Veder, of the jurisdiction of the City Auspurge,Earle Mon∣tecuccoli returnes dispatcht again to the Queen from the Emperour. Earl Raymund Mon∣tecuccoli arrived, sent again by the Emperor to her Majesty to ac∣company, and wait on her to Rome. The Queen received him with ex∣traordinary satisfaction and courte∣sie, took him into her Coach, and went and lay that night in the fore∣said village of Oberhausen, distant onely a league from Auspurge, where she staid all the following day, being the 21 of October, and a person of quality arrived from the Duke of Bavaria, with a letter from his Highnesse, to complement, and invite her to Monaco. Here likewise her Majesty was presented by the
Magistrates of Auspurge with fish, wine and oates, sent expresly to her by their Deputies, who complemen∣ted her Majesty in the name of the publique, inviting her to their City with particular ambition, to give her all due honour. Her Majesty dis∣patcht from this place the foresaid Don Romano Montero di Spinosa to Inspruch,The Queens letter to the Arch-Duke of In∣spruch. to complement his High∣nesse the Arch-Duke Charles Ferdi∣nand, and inform him of her motion towards that place. Don Antony Pi∣mentel sent likewise the Captain Don Emanuel de Benavides, a Gentleman his Camrade, to passe the same of∣fice in his name with his Highnesse, which was punctually performed by them, they bringing back expressions of much content and joy, for her Majesties approach, so as for the ho∣nour of so great a Princesses arrival in his Countrey, he commanded the preparations should be hastened, be∣gun before on the hopes of that hap∣py successe, his Highnesse having sent for from Venice, and other parts, Musitians and artificers for that pur∣pose.
The Letter the Queen wrote to the Arch-Duke was as followeth. Dear Cosen, I approaching to your Highnesses Dominion, have thought it be∣coming me to advise you of my arri∣val, and entreat you to take in good part, that I passe through your Coun∣try to go finish the rest of my journey to∣wards Rome. I send you a Gentle∣man, the Bearer of this, to tell more particularly my minde to your High∣nesse, and beseech you to believe him, when he shall inform you, that I am more than any other person, Dear Cosen, Your most affectio∣nate Cosen and Friend CHRISTINA. Auspurge, Octob. 20. 1655.
The same day the Queen went privately to see the most remarkable things of that most noble City,She goes privately to Auspurge to see the most remar∣kable things but it being then late, she deferred it till the following day, and albeit her Majesty was private, she was carried every where by the chief of the Ma∣gistrates, and being returned after∣wards to the village aforesaid, dined before she departed, passing through Auspurge without staying there, be∣ing received by the Citizens in armes, and discharging of the Canon from the walls, which are very strong, and filled up with earth, with great Towers, Curtins, and old fashi∣on Bulwarks. Auspurge is one of the fairest, most noble and famous Cities of Germany, seated in a very pleasant plain, abundantly watered with streams which make the ground most fertile. The structures are great and magnificent, the streets large and long, and the traffique ve∣ry great, 'Tis replenisht with Mer∣chants, and opulent Citizens, the Town-house is one of the beauti∣fullest
Fabriques of Germany, and and the rest are noble and majestick. She advanced thence towards Land∣sperg, a City six leagues farther, be∣longing to the Elector of Bavaria, encompassed with strong and old walls, seated on the river Loch, and in my last History much mentioned. On the confines of this territory, and that of Auspurge,The Queen is met by the Officers of the Ele∣ctor of Ba∣varia. at a Church called Kircle, two troops of Horse of the Electors stood to meet and accom∣pany her to the City, where her Ma∣jestie was received by Baron Has∣stang, Marshal of the Court, and a Counsellor, and by Baron Leinlig Gentleman of the Privy Chamber to his Highnesse, persons of great quality, sent expresly from Monaco to wait upon her Majesty; with these two Lords were nine Gentlemen of his Highnesse, and the Count of Maischbraun Cupbearer, the Baron of Gersheim Carver, Monsieur Welser Sewer, and Doctor Vidman Steward, with other officers, six Pages, and as many Grooms, all in good order. Her Majesty with all her retinue was
treated most nobly, and with extra∣ordinary magnificence and sumptu∣ousnesse, and in the Electors name, lay in Monsieur Maxdels Palace. Here she staid two days,She is trea∣ted sumptu∣ously in Landsperg: expecting Coaches from Monaco fit to passe the streight wayes of the mountains of Tyrole, where she could not possi∣bly passe with her own, and they quickly arriving, carryed her on the 25 to the village of Welaim distant four leagues, the next day to Morna, which was as far again, and on the 27 to Parkircken, being al∣wayes attended by the horse afore∣said, and Officers of Bavaria. As she went to Landsperg, the Baron of Spaur, Gentleman of the Chamber to the Arch-Duke, arrived with a letter from his Highnesse in answer of that her Majesty had sent by the foresaid Don Romano Monte∣ro, returning with equal courtesie her Majesties civility. On St. Simon and Judes day, be∣ing gone a league farther than Par∣kircken, where Bavaria ends its con∣fines on that side, with the Bishop∣rick
of Freissing, the Officers afore∣said and Cavalry took their leaves of her Majesty, who omitted not to shew her regal liberality towards them, as she always had abundantly done, in the places she passed through. She went thence that e∣vening to Mittewal, a place at the foot of the mountains, remote five leagues more from Parkircken. The day following she entering the Arch-Dukes dominions,She enters Tyrole. was met and re∣ceived on the confines at the Castle of Scernitz, by the Baron of Frei∣berg, Gentleman of the Chamber, and Captain of the Guard, sent thi∣ther as Commissary by his Highness, accompanied with the Baron of O∣stein Cupbearer, Count Belognim Carver, four Gentlemen, eight Pa∣ges, eight Footmen, and forty Ar∣chers of the Arch-Dukes Guard. The foresaid Castle of Scernitz is seated on a mountain, at the foot of which runs the river Inne, which falling from the top of the mountain called Odelberg, made navigable below In∣spruch, with a swift and copious
stream, joynes at Passau with the fa∣mous river Danube, which on the o∣ther side does run between Suevia and Bavaria, and crossing below Au∣stria and Hungary, and afterwards diverse Provinces of the Turkish Domions, payes the tribute of his waters to the Sea, near Ardrinopo∣lis. That night she lay at Seefelt, a ve∣ry famous Monastery, and went the next morning to Zirle, a little City seated on Inne, two leagues distant from Inspurch.The Arch-Dukes of Inspruch go to visit the Queen privately in Seefelt. Hither the Arch-Duke with his brother came private∣ly to visit her, and after some com∣plements had passed with reciprocal demonstration of affection and e∣steem, his Highnesse returned thence to Inspruch, in the mean time cau∣sing all things to be ready, for the solemn reception of her Majesty, which the next day was to be, as it happened. The Queen was met by both the Brothers the Arch-Dukes, the Arch-Dutchesse, and all the chief Lords and Gentlemen of the Court, and the
Countrey, and with the following order entered stately into In∣spruch. Five trumpets went before, and a tabour,Her Maje∣sties en∣trance into Inspruch. with eight other trumpets, all clad in rich Cassocks of red velvet trimmed with gold, behind whom went his Highnesses Pages, and af∣terwards all the Ministers, and chief∣est Cavaliers of that Court on fine horses most gorgeously apparrelled. Afterwards came the Queen in a ve∣ry stately litter in the middle of the Arch-Dukes, who rode the one on her right hand, the other on the left, and the Arch-Dutchess in a chair; on the side of her Majesty went thirty of the Souldiers of his Highnesses Guard by themselves,The ho∣nours done her by their Highnesses the Arch-Dukes. her Majesties retinue following after, with her Guard all on horseback, with red Cassokcs trimmed with gold. Behind these were led eighteen horses of va∣lue. Five other trumpets with a ta∣bour followed after, at the head of sixty firelocks of the Guard, with gay and well trimmed Cassocks of the Arch-Dukes livery, 9 Coaches with
six horses a piece, shutting up the horsemen, full of chief Ladies, and the rest of the Queens Court. At the entrance into the City she was welcomed with the discharging of fifty pieces of Ordinance, many Mortarpieces, and thick Squadrons of Musqueteers, who wih many o∣ther Souldiers stood in ranks in the streets, the houses being adorned wih rich furniture, and the concourse of people very great. Her Majesty was lodged in the Arch-Dukes Palace, his Highnesse accompanying her to the lodgings designed her, where he presently left her to her rest. But the Citizens in the darknesse of the night, made e∣very where resplendent with bone∣fires, the joy and content of their hearts for having with them a Prin∣cesse of so high a condition. The End of the Second Book.
The History of the sacred, and Royal Majestie of Christina Alessandra, Queen of Swedland, &c. The Third Book. The Argument. THe Pope receiving advice of the Queens departure from Bruxells towards Italy, declares foure Nuntii to receive her on the confines of the Churches Domini∣ons. His Beatitude dispatches to her my Lord Luke Holstenius. She con∣tinues her journey through Germany. Holstenius arrives in Inspruch, where her Majestie is royally received.
There she makes publick profession of the Catholick faith, performed with great solemnity. She departs from Inspruch with great satisfaction. She arrives at Trent, and is magnificently served by the Prince the Bishop. She passes through the State of Venice, and is regally received in the Territory of the Duke of Manrova. She departs thence, and enters the Churches domi∣nions. His Holi∣nesse re∣solves to dispatch to Inspruch my Lord Luke Hol∣stenius.AS soon as the Pope had advice of the Queens departure from Bruxells, his Holinesse on the sixth of October, sent for my Lord Luke Holstenius, principal Apostolical No∣tary, Canon of St. Peters Church; and Keeper of the Vatican Library, a person very famous for his learn∣ing, and erudition, and a Gentleman of the City of Hembourg. To him he imparted the purpose he had of sending him to be assistant at the pro∣fession of Faith, his Holinesse under∣stood should be made by the Queen, ere she came into Italy, or at least into the Churches Dominions. He
therefore gave him order to prepare with all diligence for his journey, and when his Beatitude had declared four extraordinary Nuntii, to receive her on the confines of the Ecclesia∣stical State, to wit,He elects four Nuntii to receive the Queen on the Con∣fines of the State Ec∣clesiastical. my Lord Hani∣bal Bentivogli Arch-Bishop of Thebes, my Lord Torreggiani Arch-Bishop of Ravenna, my Lord Carraccioli Dean of the Clark of the Chamber, and my Lord Cesarini Clark of the Chamber, persons of great vertue and nobility, he consigned them their instructions, and two briefs, each of which was to them of the following tenor. To the Reverend Bretheren Ha∣nibal of Thebes, and Luke of Ravenna, Arch-Bishops, as also to our beloved Sonnes Mr. In∣nico Carraccioli, and Philip Cesa∣rini, Clarkes of our Apostolicall Chamber. Alexander the VIIth. Pope. REverend Brethren, and belo∣ved Sons, Greeting and Apostoli∣call benediction: Your approved wis∣dom
in acting affairs, and singular faithfulnesse and devotion to us, and the Apostolicall Sea, with other deser∣ving vertues, accompanied with the noblenesse of your Families, with which we know you manifoldly adorn∣ed by the Lord, are the cause, we use gladly your help in a businesse of great weight, firmly hoping in the Lord, that in the execution thereof, you abundantly will satisfie our expectati∣on: Wherefore through our Apostoli∣call authority, by vertue of these pre∣sents, we create, constitute, and depute you extraordinary Nuntii of us, and the Sea Apostolcall aforesaid, to re∣ceive in the name both of us and the same Apostolicall Sea, our most dear Daughter in Christ Christina the Il∣lustrious Queen of Swedland, in her journey to this our renowned City, any thing to the contrary in any wise not∣withstanding. Dated at Rome at St. Maries the greater, under the ring of the fisher, on the XXIXth. day of October 1655. In the first year of our Papacy. G. Gualterius.
On the 10th of October.Breifes consignd to my Lord Holstenius in the evening, the Breifs with the letters and instructions were consignd'd to my Lord Luke Holstenius by my Lord Julius Rospigliosi, Arch-Bishop of Tarsus, Secretary of state to his Holiness. One of the Breifs was for the Queens Majestie, which by us shall be register'd in it's place, the other for their Highnesses the Arch-Duke Charles Ferdinand, the Arch-Duchess, Charles the second Duke of Mantoua, the Prince the Bishop of Trent, and the Bishop of Bessa∣non. On the 10th then of October the foresaid Holstenius departed from Rome with all secresy,Father Malines the Jusuit goes with the said Holstenius to Inspruch accompany'd by order of the Pope, with Father Mlines the Jusuit, a man of great ability, and withall well inform'd of the Genius, as well of the Queen, as her Court, he haveing been in Swedland, as aforesaid, for a while, with particular satisfaction to her Majestie. He arriving in Bologna on the 19th of October, had advice that the
Queen was at Franckfort on the 6th, so as fearing she might get to In∣spruch before him, he resolv'd to send before him by post, as he did, the said Father Malines, to the end at all adventures, he might beseech the Queen, to be pleas'd to stay in In∣spruch till he came. The Breife to his Emi∣nence Lo¦mellino Cardinall Legate of Bologna.Conferring in Bologna with Car∣dinall Lomellino the Legate, he con∣signed to him the Popes Breif of the following tenor. To our beloved Son Cardinal Lo∣mellino of the holy Church of Rome, Legate of Bologna. OUr beloved Son greeting, and Apostolicall benediction, Our be∣loved Son Luke Holstenius of our houshould, principall Apostolicall No∣tary, Canon of the Church of St. Pe∣ter, and Keeper of our Vatican Li∣brary, is going into Germany, to act by our command, affairs of high concern appertaining to this holy Sea; whom, as famous for his piety, as his various, and solid learning, and estee∣med
by us for his faithfulnesse, if you shall with all courtesie receive, you will do a thing worthy of our love to∣wards you, and becomming your own inclination to such men. And we im∣part to you our Apostolicall benedicti∣on. Given at Rome at Saint Maries the greater, under the ring of the fisher on the 10th. of October, 1655. in the first year of our Papacy. Natalis Rondininus. He went afterwards to Mantoua on the 21th.My Lord Holstenius arrives at Mantoua. but found not there his Highness, who was gone to Casal, The same evening he visited her Highness the Dutchess Mary in the Monastery of S. Vrsula, but told her not the business, that carry'd him in∣to Germany, for her Highness have∣ing many Nunns about her, and be∣ing thick of hearing, he could not tell her of it without speaking loud, and discovering it to many other persons there present. Here the Marquis Oct∣avius Gonzaga gave him a particular relation, of what had past in Franck∣fort
about the Queens journey, and her traine, and he quickly sent the newes of it to Rome, and to the Cardinall Legates. He going thence to Trent, arriv'd on the 24th. and waited on the Prince, the Bishop, presenting to him the Apostolicall Breife, the contents of which were. To our Reverend Brother the Bishop of Trent, Alexander the VIIth. Pope. REverend Brother greeting and Apostolicall benediction. The Popes Breif to the Prince of Trent. There are many rare things in our beloved Son Luke Holstenius, of our houshold, principall Apostolicall Notary, Canon of the Church of Saint Peter, and Keeper of our Vatican Library, to wet, excellent vertue, singular learn∣ing, and accomplisht behaviour; for which, though of your own accord, you will shew him all civility, and re∣spect; yet this is to be added, that we send him into Germany, to negotiate high affairs, and of greatest concern, in which regard, whatsoever shall be
done by you for him, by you will be conferr'd on this holy Sea, and on the whole Church, whose cause he now acts. 'Tis onely your part, to acquit your self so, in receiving him, that neither your piety, nor civility to∣wards so excellent a man, be required of us. You shall know more by him of our affection to you, who will too in our name impart unto you our Aposto∣licall benediction. Given at Rome the 10th of October, 1655. in the first year of our Papacy. Natalis Rondininus. He afterwards arriving on the 28th. in Inspruch, did treat the next morning with Court Piccolomini, principall Gentleman in his High∣nesses Court, and father Christopher Mendler a Jusuit his Confessor, to have audience of the Arch-Duke, which he had the same evening, to whome he presented the Popes Breif of the following tenor.
To our beloved Son the noble Charles Ferdinand Arch-Duke of Austria, Alexander VII. Pope. BEloved Son, and noble Prince, Greeting and Apostolicall bene∣diction. The Breife to the Arch-Duke Charles FerdinandThe pastor all care, the bur∣then impos'd on us lately requires, hath forc'd us to send into Germany, for the compassing of a difficult, and most weighty affair, our beloved Son Luke Holstenius of our houshold, principall Apostonicall Notary, Canon of the Church of Saint Peter, and Keeper of our Vatican Library, a man, in whom, besides his great learning, which hath very well deserv'd of the dignity of the Romane Church, this age admires a singular faith, and honesty, together with a like conduct, in the management of business. It would in a manner be an injury to your noble∣nesse, if we should use many words, to desire you, to receive him with courtesie and kindness, while he greets you in our name, since you dayly teach
posterity, in the Patrimony of your Ancestors glory; you have nothing dearer to you, than the praise of defend∣ing, whom both their own vertue and pontificall affection, the honourablest testimony of vertue, doth commend. But how we are affected to your no∣blenesse, and how earnestly desire the prosperity of your affairs, you will clearly know of him. And we send you very lovingly our Apostolicall bene∣diction. Given at Rome at Saint Ma∣ries the greater, under the Ring of the fisher, on the 10th day of October 1655. and in the first year of our Papacy. Natalis Rondininus. That Prince receiv'd the Brief with great humility,My Lord Holstenius is received by the Arch-Duke with much Cour∣tesie. and treated my Lord Holstenius very courteously, hear∣ing him with much attention. When he heard of the motive of his com∣ing, and the function, he was to per∣form in that place, for the sollemn profession of the Queen, he remain'd full of wonder, and unspeakable joy,
that the City of his residence, by or∣der of the Pope should be honour∣ed with so glorious and conspicuous an action. Holstenius then enlar∣ged himself in assuring his Highnesse of his Holinesses fatherly affection, and the confidence he had in his ge∣nerous piety, telling him 'twas need∣lesse, he should acquaint him with his Holinesses desire and satisfaction, in order to the honouring of that action, with some publique demon∣stration of joy, while he at his arri∣val, found so splendid a preparation, for the entrance, and reception of her Majesty. The ho∣nours done to my Lord HolsteniusHolstenius was carried from the Inne, where he lighted, & conducted to a lodging appointed for him within another house, being attended by the Baron of Waitmanstorf, one of the four Chaplains of his Highness, and Commissary General of the Mines in Tysole, who with other attendance, had the care to provide him two Groomes, and a Coach of the Court, he treating him very splendidly, and failing in nothing that became a
punctual Minister.Father Ma∣lines is sent to discover the will of the Queen. The day after Halstenius thought it good to send Father Malines to meet the Queen, to discover her sense about the manner, and forme of the Profession of the Catholick religion, which she was to make publickly, since neither she, nor any one else till that time, knew such was the pleasure of the Pope. The Father departed, saw the Queen, and Don Anthony Pimentel, and brought word she was absolute∣ly disposed to performe very punctu∣ally his Holinesses Orders. On the 31 of October in the mor∣ning, Holstenius received expresse order from Rome, by a Courier sent to him, to procure, that her Majestie should retard▪ as much as she could, her journey, to give time for provi∣ding all things fit for her reception, the Popes great and generous minde desiring it should be in the most Ma∣jestique forme, and most honourable, that could be desired, and that above all, the four Nuntii elected to receive her, and serve her in the Churches
dominions, should prepare for their journey, & be ready on the confines with that traine, and decorum, which the quality of their charge, and con∣dition required. After dinner my Lord Holstenius had audience of the Arch-Dutches Anne of Medices, and the Arch-Duke Sigismond Francis, to whom he presented the Pontificall Breifes of the following tenor. To our beloved Daughter in Christ, the noble Arch-Dutch∣esse of Austria, Alexander VII. Pope. BEloved Daughter in Christ, and noble Princesse, Greeting and A∣postolicall benediction; The Popes Breife to the Arch-Dutchness of Inspruchwith other commands given to our beloved Son Luke Holstenius of our houshold, principall Apostolicall Notary, Canon of the Church of St. Peter, and Keep∣er of our Vatican Library, by the oc∣casion of great affairs to be manag'd by him in Germany; 'tis given him in charge in a principall manner to vi∣sit
your nobleness in our name, and clearly inform you of our affection to you. That this our advertisement is va∣lued by you; we both constantly believe and your noblenesse will abundantly make good, if you gratiously enter∣tain the Bearer hereof, and with your authority, and favours, where need shall require, defend and assist him; he being a person of singular faith and honesty, and polished exactly with all good arts. Which that you will do, we again and again request of your no∣blenesse, to whom we very lovingly impart our Apostolicall benediction. Given at Rome, at St. Maries the greater, under the seal of the fisher, on the 10th of October, 1655, and in the first year of our Papacy. And he was received by them, with all the most affectionate expres∣sions of a reverend obsequiousness to the holy Sea, & particular respect. On the 30th. in the evening, my Lord Holstenius having preunder∣stood, that the Baron Ghirargi, cheif Counseller and minister to his High∣ness,
had thoughts of conferring with her,My Lord Holstenius visits the Baron Ghi∣rardi. deem'd it good to prevent him, by going to visit him in his lodgings at the Pallace, who received him with civilitie peculiar to the nobleness of his birth, assuring him of his High∣nesses great joy, and content for his arrivall. He afterwards heard most gladly, and with due attention, the perfect relation Holstenius gave him, in order to the conduct of this most weighty business, of which till that time, he had had no notice, telling him in reality, that all things were prepar'd in that state, for the honour alone of her Majesties passage,The ex∣pressions of the said Baron. and therefore it displeas'd much his High∣nesse, than he had not had some knowledge of the business of her Profession, since the subject of the Comedies & entertainments, should not have been profane, but sacred, and agreeable to the quality of the function. On the first of November divine Office was celebrated in the Arch-Dukes church by a mitered Abbot, where their Highnesses were present,
together with all the Court, and ex∣cellent musick was sweetly accom∣panied with so tunable a consort and harmony of trumpets, tabours and drums, that as a new thing, and un∣heard of before, it pleased their curi∣osity extreamly, The Queen was to hear it at an open & publique win∣dow, and was very well satisfied and delighted. After dinner Holstenius went to visit Don Antony Pimentel Ambas∣sadour of Spain and discours'd long with him on the points of his Com∣mission.My Lord Holsténius visits the Ambassa∣dor Pi∣mentel. The Ambassadour reply'd with the Courtesy and prudence of a very able minister, and Compleat Cavalier, that there would be no dif∣ficulty, in order to the publique pro∣fession, which troubl'd him most, nor concerning the rest. Holstenius shew'd him a Coppy of the said pro∣fession which was printed on purpose in Inspruch with great characters, that the Queen might have no trou∣ble to read it, as also he communi∣cated to him the form of the absolu∣tion, which was printed, and the ne∣cessary
interlocutions for this act.He imparts to him his Holinesses intention. The Ambassadour read all the write∣ings, and carri'd them speedily to the Queen, to consult them with her Majestie.And he to the Queen who sub∣mits to the Popes plea∣sure. He returned soone after, & told him, the Queen found not any opposition in them, but was rather ready, to perform whatsoever should be pleasing to his Holiness, as likewise she acknowled'd it for a singular favour, that his Highness had sent him for this function, whom she wisht to see and hear, offering him audience at that very instant. My Lord Holstenius was cloath'd then in black, & down to his heeles, to distinguish this visit from that to the Arch-Dukes, which he made to them cloathed in purple, so as he de∣sired the conveniency of a quarter of an hour, to go back to his lodging, and change, as he did, his cloathes: So quickly returning,My Lord Holstenius hath audi∣ence of her Majestie. he was soon introduced to her Majesty, who at the second reverence, Holstenius made to her in the middle of the roome, between the door, and a little table, on which the Queen
stood leaning, her Majesty went towards him some two or three pa∣ces, receiving him with a smile, and a cheerful and pleasing countenance. My Lord Holstenius spake to her in order to his instructions, and when she had replyed to the congra∣tulation, and expression of his Holi∣nesses fatherly affection, she said, a∣bout the principal businesse of her profession, the Embassadour without doubt had assured him before of her readinesse to do all things, which by order of his Holinesse, were com∣manded him, and seeming impatient to performe them out of hand, she resolved of her selfe, the said functi∣on should be on the following Wed∣nesday the third of November. When her Majesty had answered to the heads proposed to her by Hol∣stenius,Her Ma∣jestie dis∣course with my Lord Holsteni∣us. he confirmed the pleasure she took, in seeing he was sent unto her for this purpose by his Holiness. She discoursed with him with much affability, shewing she was particu∣larly informed of his qualities, his eminent learning, and singular eru∣dition
in the Sciences. She spake with much praise, and great esteem of his vertuous labours, as well sa∣cred as prophane. She curiously inquired of the rare books that are kept in the Vatican, of the learned men in Rome, and particularly of the Cardinals and Prelates, shewing, she was very well informed, as well in the general, as particularly of the Court of Rome, and going on in tell∣ing him, she thought it her good for∣tune, to be able to make use of a per∣son of his quality at Rome, for the seeing of the Libraries, Antiquities, and other curious things. Holstenius presented her his Holi∣nesses Brief of the following tenor. To our most dear Daughter in Christ, Christina the illustrious Queen of Swedland, Alexander VII Pope. Our most dear Daughter in Christ, Greeting and Apostoli∣call benedection. His Holi∣neses Breif to the QueenAs soon as we heard your Majesty embracing in Bruxels, though not openly, the integrity of the
Romane, to wit, the Catholique faith, had risen out of the filth of old errrs, and that the holy Ghost had created new wisdom in you; what joy over flow∣ed our soul, no force, or strength of words can expresse. This our great∣nest gladnesse, to which hardly any thing could be added in appearance, was in a high manner encreas'd by your journey, begun towards this place, to the end you might reverence the Trophyes of the Apostles the faith, which was commended by the Apostles own mouth, and us, whom though un∣worthy, Christ would have, in Peters stead, and his own, to bear rule o're his Church upon Earth. In doing of which, you not onely will equall the never dying praises of the famousest Princes, who thought it a glory to them, to depose their trium∣phall Ornaments and Laurells, at the feet of the Fisher, and the Bishops of Rome; but likewise from the City it self, the Mistris of rightly believing, and teaching, draw the precepts of true and heavenly learning. Yet be∣cause, not without some hurt unto
them, who assume to themselves a vain opinion of knowledge, and onely are wise among themselves, so much light lyes yet hidden under the bushel, at ought at length to shine out to all from an eminent place, that they by these examples and foot steps may like∣wise come in. We send to your Ma∣jesty, our beloved son Luke Holsteni∣us of our Houshold, principal Aposto∣lical Notary, Canon of the Church of St. Peter, and Keeper of our Vatican Library, a man for his knowledge in all learning and singular piety, very dear unto us, who may be assistant to you in your publique profession of the Catholick faith, according to the an∣cient and accustomed manner of the Roman Church, and by whom our great love to you, and the joy we have received, may more fully be declared. But we firmely hope in him, who hath wrought in you so mercifully salvation, your Majesty will be wanting in no∣thing that may shew you not unworthy of this most ample benefit, and that by your ready obsequiousnesse, and hearty obedience, you will testifie to
all, you have earnestly sought, and most ardently received the Catholick faith. By the sad Luke, our father∣ly and most loving benediction, & more to this purpose, your Majestie will receive, for whom we most earnestly begg all happinesse of God, and that he would strengthen the power, his right hand hath wrought marvellous∣ly in you. Given at Rome at St. Maries the greater, under the ring of the Fisher, on the 10th day of Octo∣ber 1655. in the First year of our Papacy. Natalis Rondinnius. And the Queen very reverently received it, and read it all pre∣sently. She with a modest blush shewed the evident signes of the joy in her heart, for the fatherly and lo∣ving expressions of his Holinesse, her Majesty apprehending the forcible sense of the Vicar of Christ, to whom she had given long since, the liberty of her thoughts and affections, and
concluded, she would by her letters, as soon as the could, thank his Holi∣ness for it. Her Majesty supt privately on the first of November, but was waited on by some Ladies, who desired that honour for their own satisfaction. A∣mong whom was the Princess Mary Clada Hundbissin of Schaumbourg, who presented the water for her hands, and the Countess Piccolo∣mini, the little Arch-Dutchesses, La∣dy of Honour, the Napkin. Princess Catherine Countess of Spaur, was the Cupbearer and Sewer. There were too besides Princess Mary Fuggerin Countess of Weisen∣horth, the Princess of Trocbenpach, the Princesse Mary Brigit Countesse of Artzh, the Princess Malaspina, and the Princess Anne Teresa of Stoplar. Her Majesty was publickly feasted on Tuesday by their Highnesses the Arch Dukes, with regal magnifi∣cence, and sumptuousnesse. The Queen sate alone at the upper end of the Table under a cloath of Stare,
with a very great carpet on the ground. The Arch-Dukes were on her right side, a little way off from her Majesty, but under the same Canopy,The Queen dines pub∣lickly with their High∣nsses the Arch-Dukes the Arch-Dutchess alone on her left side o're against the Arch-Duke, and Pimentel the Spanish Em∣bassador below the Arch-Dukes. The Marquis Lonati, and the Lord George Olstein gave the water for her Maje∣sties hands, and the Arch-Duke him∣self presented her the Napkin, taking it from the Lord Witkunight chief Gentleman of his chamber. Baron Sigsmond of Welsberg, Gntleman of the Chamber to his Highness, was her Cupbearer, and the Baron of Stakel-bourg, likewise Gentleman of his chamber, was Sewer. Her Majesty accompanied by their Highnesses,Her Maje∣sty visits the Palace of Ambre. together with all the Court, wnt after dinner to a Palace called D' Ambre without Inspruch, where she saw with much delight, a great quantity of ancient medalls of gold and silver, together with o∣ther metalls, collected long since by Arch-Duke Ferdinand, as like∣wise
many very ancient manuscripts, and other fine curiosities conserved in that place. In the mean time my Lord Hol∣stenius attended to the ordering of the necessary things, for the function of the following day, He instructed the Notary, the Master of the cere∣monies, the Priests, and other Clerks, which were to be assistent, as well at the act of Profession, as at the solemne Masse, Holstenius was to sing, to the end that each doing his part, the function might go on with order, quietness, and decorum, as it happily succeeded. She goes in∣to the Church pub∣lickly.The Queen desired, this action might be as pblick as could be, and conspicuous to the World, and therefore instead of going into the Church, by the gallery within, she resolved to go thither through the publick street, which goes between the one and the other, to which purpose in the morning, the said street was covered over with boards, as well for honour as conve∣niencie.
The Queen cloathed in a gown of black silk, very plain, and without a∣ny ornament but a crosse of five faire and rich diamonds at her breast, lead by the Arch-Duke, was met at the gate of the Church with a solemne Procession of all the Priests, and Clerks of the Court, and by the two Benedictin Abbots of that Province, the one of Tegernsee, and the other of Marieberg, both with the Miter, Rochet, and Crosier staffe. The one gave her holy water, and the other presented her to kisse a very fine Cross of Christal of the Moun∣tain. My Lord Holstenius followed af∣ter the Abbots, who after a low con∣gee to her Majesty, and their High∣nesses the Arch-Dukes, caused one of the Abbots to begin, Come O Ho∣ly Ghost, &c. which was sung with most excellent Musick.The Order of the Church for performing the function of the Ca∣tholick pro∣fession. The Queen following the Procession went into the Quire of the Church, where a chair was prepared with a kneeling place before it, covered with cloath of gold. A cushion of the same cloth of gold
was laid too upon the last step of the Altar below, and a chair of velvet for Holstenius, o're against the place of the Epistle. Here then Holstenius stood up be∣fore the chaire, expecting when the Queen, the Arch-Dkes, and all the Cavaliers would sit down in their places. Then he, beheld by all with silence and attention, began with a loud voice to declare his Commission by the Pops express Brief of the fol∣lowing tenor. To our beloved son Luke Holste∣nius, Priest of Hambug, Canon of St. Peters in Rome, one of our family and continual at∣tendance at our table. Alex∣ander the VIIth Pope, BEloved son, Greeting and Aposto∣lical Benediction, The con∣tents of the Popes Brief to my Lord Holsteniuswhereas we have received, not without the spiritual joy of our mind, that Christina the noble Queen of Swedland, born of heretical parents, and bred up, and instruct∣ed in heresies, illuminated by heavenly
light, and knowing the way of truth, desires to renounce the same heresies, and returne, by the blessing of God, into the bosome of the holy Roman Church, we, who by our Pastoral function, are chiefly obliged to attend unto this, that if any Sheep wander from the path of the truth, they may be brought back into the way of salvation, being very much confident in our Lord, of your sin∣gular piety, prudence, zeal of the Ca∣tholick relgion, and the honour of Gods house, of our own free motion, sure knowledge, mature delberation, and out of the fulnesse of our Apostolical power, by vertue of these presents, do grant and impart to you, the free and full power of absolving by our authori∣ty in both Courts, the said Queen Chri∣stina from these heresies, all excom∣munication, suspension, interdict, and other ecclesiastical sentences, censures, and punishments howsoever incurred by her for the same, whether any juri∣dical, or extra-juridical abjuration, or any at all pred, but in place of abju∣ration, her Profession of the Catholick Faith, according to the Articles long
propounded by the Apostolical Sea, some healthful pennance being enjoyned her, and other things you shall know to be expedient for the good of her soul, and we grant and impart the same pow∣er of reconciling and receiving the said Queen into the bosome of the holy Roman Church, some publick Notary beng used about the Acts aforesaid, we willing, to your sole attestation, without any any witnesses, your subscription onely added, full and absolute belief should be given. Notwithstanding the Aposto∣lical, universal, or special constitutions, published in general, provincial, or o∣ther Councills, the decrees, use, and stile of the Office of the holy and gene∣ral inquisition and all other things to the contrary. Given at Rome at St. Maries the greater, under the Ring of the Fisher on the tenth of October, 1655. in the fist year of our Pa¦pacie. G. Gualterius.
After this he gave the Original Briefe to the Master of the ceremo∣nies of his Highness,The Act of the Catho∣lick Profes∣sion made by the Queen. who was Signi∣or Carlo Pompeati Canon of the Ca∣thedral Church of Trent, a person fa∣mous for his birth and education, who read it with a lowd and clear voice, and then gave it into the hand of the Notary there present. My Lord Hosterius added some latine words, which began, Though this thing in open view, &c. He sate down and was covered according to instru∣ction. And here then the cushi∣on being brought before him, which as we said before, was laid on the last step of the Altar, the Queen con∣ducted thither by the Arch-Dukes, quickly and freely kneeled down up∣on it. Holstenius presented her the printed forme of the Profession, say∣ing to her the following words. This is the solemn and usual form of Professing the Catholick faith, the ho∣ly Church of Rome useth, and her Maesty is to read before me and the witnesses here present, with a clear and distinct voice, and afterwards with
her own hand subscribe. And both the Arch-Dukes standing about the Queen, together with Don Antonio Pimentel, as witnesses desired; her Majesty with a clear, distinct, and lowd voice, read the following Pro∣fession. I Christina believe with a firme faith, and professe all and every thing contained in the Creed of Faith, the holy Roman Church usth, namely, I believe in one God, the Fathe Al∣mighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, of all things visible, and invisible; and in one Lord Jesus Christ, the onely begotten Son of God, and borne of his Father before all times: God of God, Light of Light, true God of true God: begotten, not made, consubstantial to the Father, by whom all things are made, who for us men, and our salva∣tion descended from the Heavens, and was incarnate by the Holy Ghost, of the Virgin Mary, and made man: cru∣cifid also for us, and suffered under Pontius Pilate, and was buried. And arose the third day accordng to the
Scriptures, and ascended into Heaven, sits at the right hand of his father, and is to come again with glory, to judge the quick and the dead, of whose Kingdom there shall be no end. And I believe in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and giver of life, who proceeds from the Father and the Son, who together with the Father and the Son, is adored and glorified, who spake by the Pro∣phets: and in one holy Catholick and Apostolical Church. I confesse one Baptisme in the remission of sinnes, and expect the resurrection of the dead, and the life to come, Amen. I firmly ad∣mit, and embrace the Apostolical and Ecclesiastical Traditions, and the other observances and constitutions of the same Church. I likewise admit the sacred Scripture according to the sense our holy Mother the Church hath held, and holds, to whom it belongs to judge of the sense, and interpretation of the holy Scriptures: neither will I ever receive and interpret it, but according to the unanimous consent of the Fathers. I likewise professe seven true and proper Sacraments of the new Law, instituted
by Christ Jesus our Lord, and to the salvation of mankind, though al to every one are not necessary, namely Baptisme, Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance, extream Unction, Order, and Matri∣mony, and these to conferre grace; and of these, Baptisme, Confirmation, and Order cannot be reiterated without Sacriledge. I receive and admit the received and approved rites of the Catholick Church in the solemn administration of these Sacraments. I embrace and receive all and every thing, which have been designed and declared in the holy Council of Trent, concerning Original sin and justification. I also professe that in the Masse, there is offered up to God, a true, proper, and propitiatory sacrifice for the living and the dead, and that in the most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, there are truly, really, and substantially, the body and blood, with the soul and divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ, and a conversion made of the whole substance of the bread into the body, and of the whole substance of the wine into the blood of Christ, which
conversion the Catholick Church calls Transubstantiation. I likewise confess that under each kind, Christ is whole and entire, and a true Sacrament to be received. I constantly hold there is Purgatory, and the souls there detained, are helpt by the suffrages of the faith∣full. And that in like manner the Saints raigning together with Christ, are to be honoured, and invocated, and that they offer up to God prayers for us, and their reliques to be held in veneration. I firmely assert, the images of Christ, and of the blessed Virgin, as also of other Saints, are to be had and retained, and due honour and reverence to be given to them. I likewise affirm the power of indulgences is left by Christ in his Church, and their use very healthfull to Christian people. I acknowledge the holy Catholick, and Apostolical Roman Church to be the Mother and Mistress of all Churches; And I promise and swear true obedience to the Bishop of Rome, the successor of Saint Peter the chief of the Apostles, and Vicar of Jesus Christ. And all other things delivered, defined and declared
by the sacred Canons, general Councils, and especially by the holy Council of Trent, I undoubtedly receive and pro∣fesse, and the contrary, and all heresies whatsoever condemned, rejected, and anathematiz'd by the Church, I also condemne, reject, and anathematize: This true Catholick faith, without which none can be saved, which I here professe willingly, and do truly hold the same entire and inviolable, I will by Gods assistance most constantly re∣tain and confesse, and as much as in me lies endeavour that the same may be held, taught and preacht by my sub∣jects and those under my command. I the said Christina doe promise, vow, and swear, so help me God, and these holy Evangelists, CHRISTINA. The Queens great gene∣rosity.Her Majesty read the said Pro∣fession with such forcible expression, that all remained no less astonisht, than toucht with compunction, at such an heroick resolution, and here 'twas observed, that at every new pe∣riod,
or parcell of the Scripture afore∣said, her Majesty lifting up her head, and fixing her eyes in the counte∣nance of Holstenius, with the freedom of her sight, shew'd, what resolution, and affection her heart labour'd with, so as this generous action so soften'd the minds of the assistants, that from the eyes of many, the teares out of tenderness, trickel'd down in abundance. The said Hol∣stenius was not able to suppress them, without difficulty and violence, while he thought with what melting affection, the mind of his Beatitude would have been mov'd, if he had seen that action, the noblest, and most memorable of all, to be seen in the world. Her profession being ended, and the oath, contain'd in it, taken, Hol∣stenius stood up, and recited the following Verses and Prayers. O Lord God of vertues, convert us; and shew thy face, and we shall be safe. Arise O Christ, and help us, and deliver us for thy name sake.
Let thy mercy, O Lord, be upon us, as we have hoped in thee. O Lord hear my Prayer, and let my cry come unto thee. Our Lord be with you. And with thy spirit. Let us Pray. O God, who shewest the light of thy truth to the erring, to the end they may return into the way of justice, grant to all of the Christian profession, to reject those things that are contrary to this name, and correctest those, and dispersed, gatherest them together, and gathered together preservest them: We beseech thee mercifully to pour on Chrstian people the grace of thy union, that all division rejected, vniting them∣selves to the true pastor of thy Church, they may be able worthily to serve thee. OMnipotent eternall God, receive this thy sheep with thy fatherly piety, withdrawn by thy power from the jawes of the wolfe, and renew her to thy flock by thy mercifull bengnity, that the enemy rejoyce not at the dammage of thy family, but that in her conversion,
and delivery, thy Church, as a pious mother, may congratulate a daughter that is found. O od, who man wonderfully created according to thy image, dost mer∣cifully repair, propitiously behold this thy servant, and what is stolne from her by the hostile blindness of ignorance, and deceit of the Devill, pardon and absolve through the clemency of thy piety, that receiv'd by the communion of thy truth, shee may be united to thy holy Church, through our Lord Jesus Christ thy sonne, who liveth and raig∣eth God with thee, in the Vnity of the holy Ghost world without end, Amen. He afterwards sate down,The abso∣lution gi∣ven to the Queen by my Lord Holstenius and was cover'd, giving her absolution in the following forme. God forgive thee, and absolve thee from all thy sinnes, and bring thee to life everlasting. And I by Apostoli∣call authority, wherewith I am im∣power'd to this purpose, by the speciall Commission of our holy Lord the Pope Alexander the Seventh, absolve thee from all tye of excommunication, and interdict, and other ecclesiasticall sen∣tences,
censures, and punishments howsoever incurr'd, and receive thee into the bosome of our holy mother the Roman Church, and restore thee to the holy Sacraments of the same, and to the Communion and unity of the faithfull, in the name of the Father, and the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, Amen. After this hee arose up again, and gave her the benediction in the fol∣lowing words. Confirme, O God, that thou hast wrought in us. From thy holy Temple which is in Hierusa∣lem. Behold thus shall the man bee blessed, that feares the Lord. Our Lord bless thee from Sion. Who hath made Heaven and Earth. The bles∣sing of God Almighty, the Father, and Sonne, and holy Ghost descend vpon thee, and remaine alwayes with thee Amen. Then the Queen stood up and was by their Highnesses conducted to her first place, whither Holstenius repairing, in a very low posture con∣gratulated her Majestie, and inconti∣nently caus'd the Psalme to bee
sung. Make yee jubilation to God all the earth. &c. with musique of exquisite voyces, of Organs, Trum∣pets, Tabours, and Drums. And while the said Prelate going into the sacristy prepared himself to sing the solomne Mass, father Staudacter a Jesuit, Preacher to the Arch-Duke, made a Sermon in Dutch, so elegant, learned, and so fit for that action, that it ravisht the affections, and applauses of all. After Mass,The joy for this profes∣sion. which was celebrated with the greatest sollemnity, Holste∣nius stay'd on the last step of the Al∣tar, and began the Te Deum, which was sung with the same harmony, accompany'd by the roaring of above 50. Peices of artillary, many Mor∣tar-peices, and an infinite number of muskets, as likewise with the ringing of the bells. The Mass was sayd after the Roman fashion, as they do in Saint Peters, and all were well satisfy'd with it. The day after my Lord Holstenius sent to Rome an ac∣count of all that had succeeded. The Queen wrote to the Pope,
and consigned the letter to Holsteni∣us, in which giving his Holiness in∣formation of that she had done, she declared her self his most obedient daughter, with expressions of much duty, and very great respect. These letters, with others written by the said Holstenius to the Legates and Nuntii, with the advice of all, and with the Calculation, that the Queen would arrive in Ferrara on the 22. of November, on the fifth of the said month, were sent by an ex∣traordinary Courier, who comming out of Poland, past in hast towards Rome. In the discourses Holstenius had with the Queen, in order to her re∣conciliation to the Catholique Church, he giving a hint, that after the profession of faith, she should receive the Sacrament of Confirmati∣on, and then the most holy Eucha∣rist, her Majesty said, her desire was to communicate the first time in pub∣lique, by the hands of his Holiness himself, and asking him diverse par∣ticulars about confirmation, said she
heard, in that function she might change her name, or adde another to it, and therefore would gladly to the name of Chrstna adde that of Ales∣sandra in honour of his Holiness. Holstenius reply'd the Pope himselfe at her coming to Rome, would much better counsell her than any one else. The Evening of the day, in which the Queen made her profession, was solemniz'd with diverse Bonfires of joy, the ringing of the bells, and roaring of the Canon, and with a most noble, and most excellent play represented in musique, with very sumptuous machins, and scenes, which succeeded extreamly delight∣full. The subsequent night they like∣wise represented in musique,The Recre∣ations and plays reci∣ted before her Maje∣stie. a play called Argia, a musicall tragicome∣dy with admirable prospects of scenes, and of greatest curiosity. The cloaths of the Actors were most noble, and most splendid, and the musique very exquisite, his Highness having neither spar'd paines, nor
charges, to get the best musitians of Jtaly. It lasted six whole hours, and her Majesty with the rest of the assistants, beheld it with great plea∣sure, and attention. The other three dayes her Majesty stay'd in Inspruch, she was allwayes entertained with vertuous recreati∣ons, and both the said Playes were reacted, since, the tast being never orecharg'd, while the appetite lasts, they saw the Queen and the rest, not yet cloy'd with that pleasure. The day before their departure, appointed on the 8th. of December, my Lord Holstenius visited Count Raymond Montecuccoli, dispatcht from the Emperour, not onely to assist at the possession, but to waite on her Majesty to Rome, and he was by this courteous Cavalier, received with geat demonstrations of esteem. On the 8th. of December in the morning, the Arch-Dukes, and Don Antonio Pimentel the Spanish Ambas∣sadour, together with Holstenius, subscribed 4 Copies of the originall of the foresaid Profession, confirmed
before by her Majesties own hand, to the end that one of them should remain with the Queen, one in In∣spruch in the place of Records, one in the Records of the Vatican Libra∣ry, and the other be sent to the Pope. The Signature and Subscriptions under the over-written Profession,The forme of the sub∣scription of the act of profession. were these, Christina. I Ferdinand Charles Arch-Duke of Austria, have been a witnesse and subscribed. I Sgsmond Francis Arch-Duke of Austria, Bishop of Auspurge, &c. have been a witnesse and subscri∣bed. I Don Antonio Pimentel de Prado Embassador of the Catholick King, have been a witnesse and subscri∣bed. I Luke Holstenius Canon of Saint Peters in Rome, have received this Profession and sbscribed. Which were likewise afterwards authenticated with the Act of a pub∣lick Notary, and with the legality of
the Arch Dukes Records in the fol∣lowing form. In the name of Christ Amen. In the year of our Lord 1655. and the eighth indiction, on the third of No∣vember, in the first year of the Papa∣ce of our most holy Father in Christ, Alexander the seventh, at Inspruch in the Dioces of Brixia, about noone, in the Arch-Dukes Church of the holy Crosse, before the high Altar, the most noble Lady Christina Queen of Swed∣land personally there present, freely and delberately on her knees, with a clear voice, before the above-written witnes∣ses required thereunto in the face of the Church and touching the holy Gospells, pronounced this subscribed profession of the Catholick faith. Which Profession of faith being ended, the most illustrious Queen, and Right Honourable and most reverend Lord Luke Holsienius, Canon of Saint Peters in Rome? and one of the houshold and continual attendance at the table of our most holy Father in Christ, very favourably re∣quired of me the Notary under-written, that in order to this businesse, I would
make one, or more publick instruments, in perpetual remembrance of the thing. And because I undernamed publick Notary, was present with the witnesses, at the publick profession of the Catho∣lick faith, made by the most illustrious Queen Christina, &c. and received by the most Reverend Lord Holsteni∣us, in the name and stead of the Roman Apostolical Sea, according to the order appointed by the holy Council of Trent, by vertue of his Apostolical delegation, both it and the subscriptions to set dwn, I have both seen and heard. In testimony therefore of this, I have made this present publick instrument, have written it with my own hand, subscribed and published it, and with the usual seal of my Office of Notary, being thereunto required, have confirm∣ed it. Dated as above. Nicholas Zerzer the Arch-Dukes Counsellor, Secretary, and publick Notary, by Pa∣pal and Imperial authority. We N. N. President, Chancellor, Regents, and Counsellors of the Pro∣vinces of the upper Austria, belonging to the most Illustrious Prince Ferdi∣dinand
Charles Arch-Duke of Austria, &c. do witnesse, the above named Nicholas Zerzer, the Arch-Dukes Counsellor, and also Secretary of the Provinces of the higher Austria, is a legal and authentical Notary, as abovesaid, and therefore to his writings, and publick instruments, in judgments, and out, here, and every where, a full and undoubted faith may and ought to be given. In testimony whereof, we here present have confirmed it with the Arch-Dukes Seale. Dated at Inspruch the 8th day of November, 1655. John Christopher Castner of Castenstein, Counsellor to the Arch-Duke, and President of the Ar∣ches. Her Majesty remaining in In∣spruch, thought it good to write this following letter to the King of Swedland, the contents of which were,
Dear Brother, I Am happily arrived here, where I found the Permission and Order of his Holinesse, to declare my self what I am, and have been long ago. I think my self fortunate in obeying him, and have preferred this glory before that of reigning o're the potent Dominions you possesse. You should like my resolu∣ton, though you thought it not good, since to you 'tis so profitable and so glorious. However I protest unto you, I have not at all changed the sense of the friendship I have ever had for you, nor the love I owe Swedland, which I will preserve as long as I live, and eternally be Dear Brother, Your most affectionate Sister and Friend CHRISTINA. Inspruch, Novemb. 4. 1655.
Two houres after dinner the Queen went from Inspruch with all her attendance, accompanied by their Highnesses some part of the way, and waited on by the Baron of Frey∣berg, together with all the Officers, and the same train, that went to meet her, being alwaies very generously defrayed by that Prince, to the very last confines of his state. Her Maje∣sties depar∣ture from Inspruch.The same evening the Queen went from Inspruch, Holstenius di∣spatcht a Courier to the Cardinal Legat of Ferrara, advising him of her Majesties advance towards that place, and that he might be sure she would be in the Churches domini∣ons on the two and twentieth fol∣lowing. In the mean time he con∣tinued in Inspruch, to perfect the publick instrument of the act of Pro∣fession in the Notaries acts, and here on that account, he being necessita∣ted to expect till the next day after noone, he departed then likewise, and overtook the Queen just as she was going out of Stersen after dinner on the tenth.
On the eighth at night, her Majesty lay at Motera, a little town of Ty∣role, between Inspuch and the mountain Prainer, and the follow∣ing morning arrived there from In∣spruch,The Arch-Duke sends a Gentle∣man to visit the Queen. the Baron John George Clinig Gentleman of the Chamber to his Highnesse, and Count Francis di Lo∣drone Gentleman of the Chamber to Prince Sigismond, to visit her Maje∣sty in the name of their Masters, to enquire of her health, to wish her a good journey, and see if she want∣ed any thing, Complements used by Princes among one another in like cases.Her Maje∣sty returnes the Arch-Dukes Com∣plement. The Queen dispatcht pre∣sently the Lord Lilliecron Gentle∣man of her Chamber to Inspruch, to return their Highnesses complement, and thence pursued her journey, go∣ing that night to Stersen, a little town seated not far from the foresaid mountain of Prainer, in a large space of a very fertile plain, shut up on all sides by high mountains. From Stersen her Majesty went to Bressanon,The honors done her Majesty by the Bishop of Bressanon. whom the Bishop and Prince of the City, my Lord Antho∣ny
Crolino, met with a noble traine, and lodged with all magnificence that night. The day after, on the eleventh, having dined at Colmar, a place that was halfway, her Majesty arrived that evening at Bolgiano, a very great Town between the moun∣tains, in the spatiousest place of the plain, where the clear river Adice made navigable, carries with a rapid current all the Merchandize sent into Italy, from those noble Faires, which are usually kept foure times a year. A little before they arrived at Bol∣giano, a Courier came to Holstenius, dispatcht from the Legat of Ferrara, and the Nuntii, to have an assurance of the way, by which her Majesty would come into the Countrey of Ferrara, to wit, if through the state of Venice, or of Mantoua, but he be∣ing unable to give them any answer of that, the Venetians having then not declared by what place they would give her leave to passe, he de∣tained the Courier till he knew their resolution.
The four Nuntii were departed now from Rome, with Signior Fulvie Servanzii, one of the Masters of the Ceremonies, and Signior Nuntiato Baldocci, one of the Computists of the Apostolical Chamber, and with a great retinue and baggage, answer∣able to the greatnesse of their charge, who going easie journeys through Umbria, Marca, and Romagna, were come to Ferrara. His Holinesse made choice of this Officer of the Chamber, that he by his conduct and integrity, might look to the charges of the lodgings, which were to be defrayed by the Chamber, and see that all things were in very good order, as indeed they were al∣waies, when directed by him. And because his Beatitude was extreamly concerned that every thing should be done very splendidly and pun∣ctually, his Holinesse with a Note of his hand directed to my Lord Fran∣zoni, Treasurer general, gave order on the 23 of October of the year 1655 that to the said Baldocci he should cause to be paid without any limita∣tion,
what money he should use, and to the said Baldocci, he likewise gave authority to make the reckonings e∣ven of himself, without the accusto∣med Congregation of accounts. And because the charge of Com∣putist of the Chamber, is an Office of great weight; in the absence of Sig∣nior Nuntiato Baldocci aforesaid, Signiore Giovanni his Brother had the place, who had given many ho∣nourable and very worthy proofes of his experience in the employment of Computist of his Holinesses Soul∣diers in the siege of Castro, and like∣wise in Dalmatia in that of Collate∣ral for the souldiers, which warred for the Republick of Venice against the Turke, where he was four years exercising, besides for two years to∣gether the Paymasters place, in the absence of the other. The said Baldocci, as a Minister very zealous for his Holinesses good service, arriving at Civita Castallana, took Post, and rode in great haste to speak with all the Legates, and Go∣vernors of the places appointed for
her Majesties lodgings, presenting to them the Popes note aforesaid, as likewise the letters of the Secretary of State, and the Lord Treasurer ge∣neral, with leaving money every where, according to their need, and adding by word of mouth, what seemed to him fit for a businesse of that nature, and wholly agreeable to his Holinesses intention, and thus he did all along to Ferrara, whither he came six dayes before the arrival of the Nuntii, and just in a time, when they had not the least information that the Queen was departed from Inspruch, insomuch as the time was commodious for preparing of all things for her Majesties reception. To Ferrara came likewise opportune∣ly the Coach sent by his Holinesse, the Litter, and Chaire, with the Quartermasters, and Harbenger, for ordering of the lodgings, with two noble beds, both alike, with Chaires of the same, to the end that her Ma∣jestie should lye all the journey in her usual beds, and one might go before unto the other lodging. The
cloath of state, the carpet, and many other things were sent from Rome, even the table to eat on, the gilt fur∣niture of the Cup-board, with divers other Officers, all under the command of Baldocci. The Baron of Fermia∣no comes to Inspruch to comple∣ment the Queen in the name of the Prince of Trent.While the Queen staid in Inspruch, there arrived the Baron Giovanni Georgio di Fermiano, a Gentleman of great spirit and parts, dispatcht from the Prince Charles Emanuel Ma∣druzzi, the Bishop of Trent, and Count of Chiullant, to invite her to that City, with expressions of obse∣quiousnesse and respect. Her Ma∣jesty seeming to like the invitation, replyed with her accustomed civility, that her passage was granted her by the Republick of Venice, with this expresse condition, that she should not stay in Trent, nor Roveredo, and therefore she could not have the ho∣nour of his invitation. The Baron soon informed the Prince of all, who very desirous to serve her in his state,He invites her Majesty to Trent. sent back with∣out delay a Courier, with letters to the Embassadour Pimentel, to Don
Antonio della Cueva, to Count Mon∣tecuccoli, and my Lord Holstenius, entreating them to use their authori∣ty with her Majesty for obtaining his desire in order to her lodging in Trent, since the supposition of the plague was most false, they enjoy∣ing perfect health in that City. These Gentlemen employed them∣selves joyntly to comply with the said Princes desire, and the Baron of Fermiano had a very courteous audi∣ence of the Queen in Bolgiano, where he reinvited her, receiving this an∣swer from her Majesty,The Queens answer to the Baron of Fermiano. that out of the confidence she promised her self she could have in the kindnesse of the Prince, though she had not been invited by him, she would have invited her self, but that the foremen∣tioned oppositions, to her great dis∣pleasure, were her hinderance, yet that howsoever she was much obli∣ged to the courtesie of the Prince. The Baron advised him of all, and he with greater vigour persisting in his courteous earnestness, the short∣ness of the time not permitting him
to write unto Venice, wrote inconti∣nently to the Governours of Verona, to have leave to lodge her Majesty in Trent; But doubting in the mean time he should not have a favourable answer, or if it were favourable, it would come too late, he gave order again to the Baron aforesaid, if he could not have the honour of receiv∣ing her Majesty in Trent, to procure she would be pleased at least to accept of some refreshing in the town of Lavis, the last of the Dioces of Trent, and which divides the confines of Italy, from those of Germany. The Baron performed every thing with his powerful endeavours, and the Queen was contented to accept the oblation.The invita∣tion made her in the name of the Duke of Mantoua. The Queen departing from Bolgia∣no on the thirteenth of the month, lay at Egna that night, a town not long before, with another place called Salorno, bought by Signior Zenobi di Verona a Nobleman of Venice. Here arrived a Courier from the Duke of Mantoua, with letters to her Majesty to invite her to that City. His
Highness had sent to that end the Marquess Andreasi Captain of his guard, but because the passages were shut, he had been constrained to stay at Volargna, a village belonging to Verona, a little way distant from Chiusa, which is a narrow passage, and strong, where there is a constant Garrison of souldiers, and albeit the Queen refused his invitation, excu∣sing her self, that she could not go out of the way, she going directly to Rome, and was not then certain where she should have leave to passe by the Venetians, yet she reserved her self to accept of his favour, in case she should passe through his High∣nesses dominions. On the fourteenth her Majesty came to Lavis before fifteen houres,She is splen∣didly treat∣ed at Trent and there in the name of the said Prince of Trent, she was again invited to stay, at least, and dine in that City, since they had gotten leave from Verona to receive her. The Queen then resolved to accept the invitation,She resolve to dine at Trent. and went the next morning to Masse in the
Cathedral Church, and dined in the Palace Madruzzo, a very pleasant place called Belvedere, which was a Musquet shot without the town. At four houres in the night she re∣solved to dine there the next day, so as they immediately sent the Prince notice of it, who, to his great con∣tent, understanding the good news, caused all things to be presently pre∣pared for the splendid reception of so noble a Princesse. In the mean time her Majesty was presented at Lavis with a noble and most plentiful treatment, which con∣sisted of great store of excelent sweet-meats, pasts of Genoua, wilde fowle, all sorts of venison, and poultry, sea∣fish, and fresh-water fish of extraor∣dinary greatnesse, and in fine, most rare fruits, and sallads of all kindes. The genero∣sity of the Prince of Trent.All that were there, not onely ex∣tolled, but wondered at this splen∣did and magnificent entertainment: The Queen was much pleased and observed it with particular satisfacti∣on, expressing her self much obliged
to this generous Prince, and admi∣ring as much the punctuality and good order, with which its perfection and exquisitnesse appeared. Lavis is a little open town,The descri∣ption of La∣vis. situa∣ted in the plain, between the entrance of those most high Mountaines, and washt by the river Lavis, from which it takes the name, which fal∣ling from the Alpes, into a narrow vally on the left hand, with a very rapid current joynes it self to the ri∣ver Adige, which dividing all the length of the plain, is a little below Bolgiano, still navigable to the sea, on which they traffique greatly out of Germany into Italy. On this river Lavis, there is a great bridge some∣what long, and covered over, where usually stands a guard, to collect some little tribute of the passengers, which is called passage-money. This town appertaines to the principality of Trent, and here end the confines of Italy with Germany, for not far from thence, they begin to speak Dutch. 'Tis distant three Dutch leagues from the City of Trent, and
for the continual concourse of peo∣ple and merchandize, passing through it, is full of inhabitants, and very commodious houses, with many rich families, made very advantagious by their industry, as they are almost e∣very where in the Country of Tyrole, where though the scituation be nar∣row and barren, yet all things that are necessary for mans life, as flesh, and wilde game, are there in great abundance and perfection, with very noble hunting, fit and proper for their pleasure, who are delighted with it. The End of the Third Book.
The History of the sacred, and Royal Majestie of Christina Alessandra, Queen of Swedland, &c. The Fourth Book. The Argument. THe Queen continues her journey through Tyrole towards Italy, and is invited, and royally treat∣ed by the Prince the Bi∣shop of Trent. From Tyrole she passes concealed through the State of Venice. She enters into the Territory of Man∣toua, and is courteously received by that Duke. She is received on the
Confines of the Churches Dominions by the Nuntii of his Holinesse, where she is splendidly entertained. She re∣ceives the same entertainments in Bo∣logna, Imola, and Faenza, by the Cardinals Lomellino, Donghi, and Rossetti. The Prince of Trent meets the Queen.THe next morning her Majesty advanced towards Trent, whence the Prince came and met her on horseback, accompanied by above two hundred and fifty Gentlemen, all persons of quality, among whom, besides the Baron of Fermiano afore∣said, the hereditary Marshal of the Principality of Trent, and Lord Chamberlain of the golden Key, to his Highnesse the Arch-Duke, there was the Vicar General Alberti, Dean Guelfi, the Arch-Deacon, Count John Baptist di Lodrone, Ber∣nard Malanotte, and Charles Pompe∣ati Canons of Trent. The Counts Philip di Lodrone, Paris di Lodrone, Colico di Arco. The Signiori Wal∣sperghieri, Gaudentio de Wolchestain, Christopher Mattirli, and others well
born, and of ancient and conspicuous Nobility. At the village of Gardolo, three miles distant from Trent, the Prince alighting, and approaching to her Majesties Litter, gave her a short Complement, inviting her to dinner at his house, which her Majesty ac∣cepting with a very pleasant counte∣nance, he complemented likewise the Embassador Pimentel, Don An∣tonio della Cueva, Count Montecucco∣li, and my Lord Holstenius. After this they went towards the City, the Prince riding on the right hand of Count Montecuccoli, before the Queens Litter. Her Majesty alighted at the gate of the Dome,She alights at the Church. and was there received by all the Clergy, the Canons intervening and assisting, under a Canopy carried by the Gentlemen of the Colledge of Trent. She kneeled on a cushion of cloth of gold, kissed the Crosse, and received holy water from my Lord Joseph Guelfi Dean of the Cathedral, going into the Church, where they sung the Hymne, She is beautiful, &c.
and kneeling at the Altar of the Crucifix, before which were publisht long since the decrees of the holy Council of Trent. Here on a royal Carpet raised from the ground, covered likewise with a cloath of state, shee heard with particular devotion the holy Masse, celebrated by the Vicar, after which, under the same Canopy, carryed as before, she went on foot to the Church of Saint Mary the greater, attended by many Ladies, and there hearing the famous Organ of that Church, renowned for the Council aforesaid held there, having likewise viewed the picture of the Sessions of the Council aforesaid, she went into her litter, giving order to be carried to the Church of Saint Peter, where she saw the uncorrupted and famous body of the glorious Martyr, and Childe, Simon of Trents going aftervards to dinner, to the Palace of Madruzzo. The table was royally furnisht with every thing the season would yeild,She ob∣serves the most remar∣kable things as well wild game as tame, with all other sorts of rare meats, fish of all kindes, sweet-meats,
and fruits, and in fine, with each thing that was excellent and noble, where the magnificence and punctuality of that generous and valorous Prince, most abundantly appeared. The Queen dined alone attended by the principal Cava∣liers. At the same time, at another table with the Prince din'd the Embassador Pimentel, Don Antonio della Cueva, Count Montecuccoli, my Lord Hol∣stenius, and others of the chiefest of her Majesties Court, being exquisit∣ly treated, as were all the Officers and Gentlemen of her train. Afer dinner the Queen retired a little while into her Chamber,The Prince Comple∣ments the Queen and presently after the Prince waited on her, and after a short, but very cor∣dial Complement, her Majesty be∣gan again her journey, accompanied in the very same manner by the Prince and his train to the plain of Lidorno, which is distant three miles, where the said Prince alighting from his horse, paid again his respects to the Queen, and took his leave of her,
whose hand the Cavaliers and Gen∣tlemen of Trent kissed all one by one, she extending it courteously to them, and declaring her self much obliged for the honours and civilities received of them. So her Majesty continued her journey, arriving that evening at Calliano, where the Barons Troppi, Lords of the place, and Gentlemen of very high esteem, made a most splendid feast, and the Castle of Be∣sen, a little way distant from thence, seated on a craggy mountain, which renders it inexpugnable, seconded it with discharging many Canon and Musquets. She departed thence the following morning, being the six∣teenth of November, and passing through Roveredo, was saluted by that Castle, with the noyse of the Artillery, the Mortar-pieces, and Musquets, going thence to Hall, a little town, but full of traffique, where she wrote to the Prince of Trent the following letter.
Dear Cosen, YOur civilities and the noble enter∣tainment you gave me,The Queen her letter to the Prince of Trent. have obli∣ged me in that manner, that I would not let the Arch-Dukes men return without again thanking you for them, and assuring you how much I desire the occasion to be able to acknowledge my gratitude to you, and give you some testimony of the sincerity, with which I am Dear Cosen, Your most affectionate Cosen and Friend, Christina. From Hall the 17th of No∣vember 1655. The day after, she passing through Borghetto, came out of the Arch-Dukes dominions, whose Officers and Train, which alwayes had at∣tended and defrayed her through that
State, took their leaves of her Maje∣sty. She enters into the state of Ve∣nice.At the news of her Majesties ad∣vance towards the State of Venice, the Counts Giovanni Battista Allegri, and Marc Antonio Chiodo, both Of∣ficers to take care for the health of the City of Verona, and Gentlemen of great quality, and eminent birth, stood ready on the confines, to know of Don Antonio Pimentel what com∣pany he had in his train, to the end none but they might be suffered to passe, since every thing was done in his name, the Queen not desiring to be known, nor to be met by any, as 'twas punctually observed. Her Majesty next to Hall, was to lye in the Village of Dolce above Chiusa, whereupon by his Excellen∣cies order, Signior Paolo Contarini the then Captain of Verona and a Sena∣tour of great quality, her lodgings were prepared as well as the narrow∣nesse and littlenesse of the incommo∣dious place would permit for receiving so numerous a train, where they wanted not any thing, the
season and occasion would afford, the charge of the reception being committed to the Marquis Sagramo∣so Sagramosi, and Count Giovanni Paolo Pompei, principal Cavaliers of Verona, well acquainted, and versed in the businesse. They went with a noble retinue of Gentlemen their Camrades, with servants, and coaches with six horses apiece, to receive Pimentel aforesaid at the barrs of the passage, which were ih the village of Peri,The Cava∣liers of Ve∣rona com∣plement Don Antonio Pimentel. and here they presented a letter from the Senatour Contareno to the Embassador Pimen∣tel, accompanying it with excuses, and expressions of good will which are usually observed in occurrences of that nature. The Embassadour accepted their relation with terms of much courtesie, and affectionate thanks. When they arrived at Dolce, they did all they could to accomo∣date them in their lodgings, where the treatment consisted of fish of the lake of Garda, of wilde game, shell∣fish, sweet meats, and most excellent wines, as well of that Countrey to
wit, Muskadine, and Garganicho esteemed the best, as of other Greek wines, and others brought from Ve∣nice, and was very splendid and agreeable to the Venetian great∣nesse. In Dolce they resolve; to go tho∣rough the Countrey of Mantoua.In Dolce the way was resolved on, which her Majesty should hold through Ussulengo, and the Island of Scala, towards the Countrey of Mantoua. On the eighteenth in the morning having passed the river Adige on a great bridge brought thi∣ther for the purpose, she went to Ussulengo that evening, being alwayes, though under the colour of the Em∣bassadour Pimentel served by Sagra∣moso and Pompei aforesaid, with the same entertainments. My Lord Holsteni∣us gives in∣formation to the Legate of Ferrara.From Ussulengo at four houres in the night, my Lord Holstenius sent back the Courier, dispatcht to him before by the Legate of Ferrara, and the Nuntii, giving them advice of the way resolved on through the Coun∣treys of Verona and Mantoua to come into that of Ferrara. On the nineteenth in the morning the
Queen went from thence, and lay that night in the Island of Scala, a place belonging to the territory of Verona, where she had the same lodging and treatment. In Ussulen∣go Madam de Cueva was surprized with a gentle feaver, occasioned by a defluxion of rhume, so as she and the Signior della Cueva her husband were forced to remain there some dayes, but she was soon after well, and they pursued their journey, over∣taking her Majesty at Loretto. In the mean time the Marquis An∣dreasi a compleat Cavalier appeared,The Mar∣quiss An∣dreasi com∣plementeth the Queen in the name of the Duke of Montoua and complemented personally her Majesty, inviting her in the name of the Duke of Mantoua, a little before returned from Casal to lodge in Reuere, a place beyond the Po, over against Ostia a Town of the territory of Mantoua, which her Majesty ac∣cordingly accepted. His Highnesse so informed by Couriers sent expres∣ly to him, gave order the lodgings should with all celerity be prepared, calling together in all haste the Mili∣tia, as well the foot as horse of the
Mantouan state, to attend her Maje∣sty with the magnificence, the place and the time would afford. He then with her Highnesse his wife came to Revere, whence he caused to advance to the confines of his Countrey, all the troups of horse, putting into Ponte Molino an ancient Castle, where they passe from the Countrey of Verona into that of Mantoua, a good guard of foot. The day the Queen moved from the I∣sland of Scala, the Marquis Andreasi, who after the ceremony of inviting her Majesty in Dolce, as we said before, was returned to Mantoua, was sent by his Highnesse with a nu∣merous and noble retinue to the con∣fines, to receive there her Majesty, representing to her, the Duke would be presently there to wait upon her: nor omitted he to expresse his High∣nesses discontent,The Duke goes to meet the Queen. for her Majesties incommodity occasioned by the rain, which falling then abundantly, con∣tinued all the following day, inso∣much as the ways were very ill, and the shew in the meeting was hin∣dered
extreamly, since the Duke, who had designed to appear a horseback, accompanied by the Nobility, which attended him very splendidly appar∣relled, was constrained by that acci∣dent, to make use of his Coaches. Sending therefore before him his guards of light Horsemen, and Launciers in a very good livery, all appointed for the service of her Ma∣jesty; his Highnesse passed the Po with very many principal Cavaliers, and went in his coach to Ponte Moli∣no, causing likewise to be led along with him, the horses richly fadled and adorned, with intention to use them in waiting on the Queen, but the rain spoiled all his de∣signes. When the Duke had discovered her Majesties Coach,He wait on her Ma∣jesty. he quickly a∣lighted out of his to wait upon her, whereupon she informed the Duke was in the company, causing her Coach to be stopt in an instant, leapt out of it hastily, not regarding the rain nor the durt, whom his Highness approaching, did complement in a
way as obsequious, as sprightly and gracious. Who recei∣ved him with great courtesie.The Queen received him as com∣pleatly, and entreated him often to be covered, but he refused to do it, seeming very much troubled, her Majesty had incommoded her self, to come out of her coach in that so soul weather to do him that honour, who was with such devotion her servant. Their complements ended, the Duke went again into his coach, and passed before to Ostia, to expect the Queen, and attend her passage o're the Po. When the Duke was gone, her Highnesse the Arch-Dutchess arrived, accompanied by many coaches,The Arch-Dutchesse complemen∣teth the Queen. and attended by great store of Ladies, all sumptuously adorned. Her High∣nesse alighted in a convenient place to pay her respects to the Queen, who would use her Highnesse in the very same fashion, she had done the Duke, coming out of her Coach, though in the durt, and receiving her with a sweetness full of Majesty, and the greatestaffability. After their reciprocal Complements, the Queen
her into the Coach, advanced to the Po, whose banks on both sides were all beset, as far as they could see, with souldiers on foot and a horseback, the harmony of Trumpets and Drums, which were seconded with the noyse of the Canon, and Musquets, and because now the night did approach, many fires were lighted along the banks of the river, and divided into very fit spaces, which made in the dark, with their well ordered splen∣dour, the prospect delightfull to their great admiration, and curiosity. Here her Majesty passed the Po to the opposite bank of Revere,She passeth the Po, and is royalty re∣ceived in Revere. on three ferry-boates joyned together, which by reason the river was low, served instead of a bridge, three others re∣maining apart, for the greater con∣veniency of their train. The Port was illuminated with 24 great torch∣es carried by 24 Pages of his High∣nesse, with very rich liveris. In their alighting out of the coach, and en∣tering into the Port, the Duke led the Queen, who was carried from the banks to the water side in a sum∣ptuous
chaire, being followed by the Arch-Dutches, who leaned on the arme of the Embassador Pimentel. In this manner all the Ladies passed over one after another, as likewise the Cavaliers of the Court, with the rest of both trains. The town of Revere hath one long street among the rest, extended along the Po, with houses on both sides. Through this, which was beau∣tified with lights, the Queen was carried in her chair to the Palace of the Duke, the 24 Pages aforesaid preceding with torches in their hands, and a company of the Guard, another company like that, following the Arch-Dutchesse, and the Ladies in the coach; The Duke with his Cavaliers, went through a shorter way to the Palace, which besides be∣ing furnisht most richly, was kept by the foot-guards of his Highnesse in their livey, and adorned with a most noble and most beautifull row of La∣dies, who with the lustre of the jew∣ells and gold, with which they were docked, augmented the splendour of
the infinite number of lights, which were burning every where. Her Majesty alighted out of her chaire in the great hall of the Palace,The enter∣tainments, given to her Majesty by the Duke of Mantoua. being led by the Duke, who carried her to her lodgings. Her Highnesse the Arch-Dutchesse followed her, and the Ladies staying in the anti-chamber a little while after introdu∣cted to wait on her Majesty, who received them all with her usual civi∣lity. They returning into the anti-chamber, her Majesty remained alone with the Duke and Arch-Dutchesse, discoursing with them for some time. His Highnesses Musitians being af∣terwards brought into that roome, entertained them most nobly at the portalls rowled up, with several songs, now with one, now more voyces, intermingling divers harmo∣nies of Instruments, with which her Majesty was very highly pleased. In the mean time they made rea∣dy the table in the same antichamber abounding with Nobility, which filld too the great Hall, that was perit, many Gentlemen of the
neighbouring Cities, besides the Cavaliers of the Countrey, flocking thither in great numbers, attracted not only by a laudable curiosity, but out of their own inclination to wait on that Prince, who with the atraction of his most sweet carriage, comman∣ded the obsequiousnesse of the most remote persons, not onely of his neighbours. Her Majesty sate at table under a cloath of state in perspective, on a carpet raised four fingers from the ground, and over against her the Duke and Arch-Dutchesse. Don Antonio Pimentel, though invited, was not there, he finding himself not very well. The table was adorned so artificially, that the eye was not satisfied with seeing, nor the mind in admiring that natural beauty. The quantity and delicacy of the meats, shewed the greatest imagina∣ble magnificence and generosity. Yet all was observed without wonder, for every one that knows what a mind that Prince hath, which even in little things, is still great, to be an∣swerable
to the greatness of the house of Gonzaga, admired it not at all. Her Majesties Cupbearer was Count Luigi Canossa,She eats in publick. brother to the Marquis Horatio, both Cavaliers of high quality, & of greatest esteem, but this Cavalier had no great trouble given him in choosing the wines, which there were very pretious and exquisite, since this vertuous Princess was so temperate, that she drank on∣ly two draughts of wine, to drink to his Highnesses health, she after∣wards quenching her thirst with pure water. The Musick continued as long as the supper, and every thing was most pleasing to her Majesty, who after∣wards retired to her lodgings, as the Princess and all the rest did, On the following day,She departs from Revere with great satisfaction. which was the 21, when her Majesty had dined, in the very same order and magnifi∣cence, she passed again the Po, and went into her Coach, and the Arch-Dutchess with her, who would wait upon her to the confines. The Duke
went a horseback with all his Cava∣liers, notwithstanding the ill weather, the troops of the Mantouan horse, and the Guards of his Highnesse, preceding and following her Maje∣sties Coach. In this manner they marched very near to Melara, where alighting, after some courteous com∣plements, they dispersed themselves, those Princes returning thence to∣wards Mantoua, and the Queen continuing her journey towards Fi∣garolo. The Nuntii of his Holy∣nesse go to meet the  Queen.The four Nunii, with the Master of the Ceremonies, and Don Inno∣centio Conti de Duchi de Poli a Ro∣man. Campmaster general of the souldiers of the Ecclesiastical state, and Commander in Ferrara, depart∣ed on the twentieth in the morning betimes with same troops of horse, one of which of the Guard was com∣manded by the Marquis Carlo Theo∣doli, a person of eminent quality, with the Coach, Litter, and chaire, which his Holinesse had sent for the meeting of her Majestie, on the confines, but by reason of the
shortnesse of the time, and the ill way, they could only advance two miles farther than Calto, where dis∣covering her Majesties Coach, they alighted, and the Queen did the same, when she was near to them. The Nuntii here complemented her in the name of his Holiness, and pre∣sented her the Brief, which her Ma∣jesty with great reverence receiv∣ed, kissing it, and opened it in the o∣pen fields, though it rained, which was of the following tenor. To our dearest Daughter in Christ, Christina, the illustrious Queen of Swedland. Alexander the VIIth Pope. OUr most dear Daughter in Christ, Greeting and Apostolical bene∣diction. In what great expectation we are of your Majesties arrival, our venerable Brothers, Hannibal of The∣bes, and Luke of Ravenna, Arch-Bishops, and our beloved sons Mr. Inico Caraccioli, Dean of the Apo∣stolical Chamber, and Philip Cesarini
Clerk of the same, our extraordinary Nuntii to your Majesty will evident∣ly declare. For in this excesse of joy we could scarce contain our selves, that the interpreters of it might be kept within the limit of the Churches Domi∣nions, and expresse at your entrance the summe of our gladnesse and great charity towards you. But because we suppose you as sensible of this joy and content, we doubt not but this intima∣tion of our paternal love, and earnest good will, will likewise be most grate∣full to you. In the mean time 'tis a sweet thing to us, to think of the No small or light portion of the pleasure of that day, when Rome shall receive you with the glad congratulations of all. and you finde the true fountains of wis∣dom, which you formerly have learned, not from the doctrine of Christ, But in the schoole of Philosophers, amongst the foolish things of this world, and the interdicted, and ignoble, and behold at the shrines of the Apostles, the monu∣ments of Princes and Kings, the Disci∣ples of the Crosse triumphing, as it were 'ore the pride and pomp of the World.
For the rest, so well are they descend∣ed whom we send to your Majesty, and such praises have they purchased, be∣sides, a noble family, that it will be a hard thing for you to determine what you in each of them shall most like. Now God, whose Word the winds, and the tempests obey, be with you in your journy, and confer on your Majesty the blessings wee most lovingly impart. Given at Rome at Saint Maries, the greater, under the Ring of the Fisher the 24 of October 1655, in the first year of our Papacy. Natalis Rondininus. Going afterwards into his Holi∣nesses Coach,She arrives at Figaro∣lo, and the Nuntii follow∣ing her with all the retinue, she arri∣ved at Fgarolo at half an houre in the night, where after a little repose, she was visited by the Nuntii, whom she met in the midst of the roome, and accompanied to the door. Figarolo is a Town built scatter∣ingly on the banks of the Po. 'ore a∣gainst
Stellata, another place resem∣bling it, seated in an angle, which is made by the river Panaro in discharg∣ing it self into the said Po. Every thing convenient for the lodging of so great a train could not be had in time, for computing that the Queen, by reason of the ill weather, could not arrive there untill the 21 as Hol∣stenius had written, things were not observed with that punctuality and necessary sollicitude, to which may be added, that the river grown tem∣pestuous with the wind, suffered not to passe, till the twentieth at evening, certain Officers and goods designed for the lodging. However the things were well ordered, for though there were that night in that little place about eight hundred horse of her Majesties train, and the souldi∣ers of the Militia, and albeit the great rains were a hindrance to every thing, the well ordered commands of Don Innocentio Conti facilitated the en∣deavours of the Ministers subordi∣nate to Baldocchi, who had sent them thither from Ferrara, he by his assi∣duous
applications in this, and that place, more deserving still the name of an accurate and diligent Of∣ficer. On the 22 of November her Ma∣jesty dined in Figarolo,She advan∣ced towards Ferrara. and after∣wards taking coach, advanced to∣wards Ferrara, which is fifteen miles off, all along on the banks of the ri∣ver Po, which there are very strong, as a fence against its dangerous in∣undations. A great number of souldiers were distributed in all the wayes, for Don Innocentio Conti, a Gentleman of great valour and con∣duct, having commanded five thou∣sand foot, and a thousand horse, had divided them with that order on those banks, that he made them seeme more numerous to the won∣der of all. My Lord Bssi, a nobleman of Vi∣terbo, and a Prelate of great parts, the Vice-Legate of Ferrara, with a very great attendance of Gentlemen of Ferrara a horseback, came near Fi∣garolo to complement the Queen, informing her the Cardinal Legate
would presently be there to wait on her Majesty. His Eminence issuing out of the City, advanced to Occhio∣bello distant six miles, to meet her with a very good train of Coaches, with six horses apiece, full of princi∣pal Cavaliers of that countrey. His Eminence discovering the Queen 25 paces off, who was alone in his Holinesses Coach, alighted and met her. The Queen causing her Coach to be stopt ten paces from the Car∣dinal, did likewise alight, and here began the Complement, in which still her Majesty gave the title of Eminence. Then the Queen went again into her Coach, helpt thither by the Cardinal, who likewise went in∣to his own, and followed her Maje∣sty, who had on a mans Hungerlin of plain black velvet, with a band, and an upper safegard for women of a dark grey colour, without which she would have lookt like a man. A splendid bridge o're the Po.She arriving at the bridge of the black lake three miles distant from Ferrara, a place much renowned for the Fort, which built some years be∣fore
by the Pope, on the opposite bank, was assaulted by the forces of Venice, found built a very fine and commodious bridge, designed by the admirable architecture of the Mar∣quis Girolamo Ressetti, Cavalier of Ferrara, of very great spirit, and emi∣nent parts. It was made of 46 great and thick barques, with a floore so broad, four coaches could go over it in a breast. It reacht fom one side to the other, not simply from the brink of the wa∣ter, to the opposite part, but from the bank it self, on which it stood. The construction of the bridge was most rare, and the finest, peradven∣ture, that hath been seen in Europe. The Queen would needs go o're it, though for her there was prepared a most splendid Bucintoro, adorned with the Popes and her Majesties armes, and another noble barque somwhat lesse. When her Majesty was passed, though the bridge was so full of Coaches, horses, and souldi∣ers, that it could hold no more, yet it stood alwayes firme, and very
strong without the least disjoynt∣ing. She is met at the gate of Ferrara.At the gate of the City her Ma∣jesty was met by the Marquis Fran∣cesso Calcagnini the chief Cavalier of the place, and a person endued with extraordinary parts. He was Presi∣dent of the Councel, and afterwards with the Magistrates, the Colledge of Doctors, and his guard of halbar∣diers in the usual livery of the City, and great strore of servants advanced to complement the Queen, who re∣ceived him with her accustomed affa∣bility. When his complement was ended, he waited on the Queen riding be∣fore her with his train, among which were 24 Pages nobly born, and clo∣thed in plain black velvet, designed for the attendance on her Majesty. The City spared no cost, nor appli∣cation, for Count Julius Caesar Ni∣grelli, Embassadour in Rome for that Town, a charge he had exercised with great praise and attention, had in or∣der thereunto, advertised the Magi∣strates of his Holinesses minde. At
the first she was welcomed with six great Cannons with bullets, all dis∣charged at the same time, and after∣wards by the artillery from the walls, with an infinite number of mortar-pieces intermingled. All the gates, streets, and breast-works were man∣ned with souldiers, with lights in the streets, and torches at the Palaces of the Cardinals, the Legate and Bi∣shop, the Town-house, the Vice-Legates, and other particular Cava∣liers. She came in her Litter to the Pil∣lars before the Cathedral,She alights at the Cathe∣dral, being received by the Cardi∣nal Bishop. and there did alight. His Eminence Cardinal Pio the Bishop, adorned with his A∣mice, his Rochet, and rich Mitre, in the midst of two Canons in their Coaps, going before the Crosse, the Clergy, and Chapter met her, and she kneeling on the even ground within the chains, on a cushion of cloath of gold, laid on a great carpet, kissed devoutly the Crosse presented to her by the Cardinal Bishop, and then going before the said Crosse, the Clergy and Chapter following
her, and last of all the Cardinal in the midst of the Canons aforesaid, her Majesty went under a Canopy of silver, and conducted to the gate of the Church by the secular Magi∣strates, at what time they sang the Anthem, She is beautifull, &c. The Cardinal Legate coming out of his coach, and making a low reverence to the Queen, went into the Sacristy to put off his travelling cloaths, and put on his long under-garment, his Rotchet, &c. expecting there the Cardinal Bishop. At the entrance into the Church, the Cardinal Bishop with the Mitre on his head, taking the sprinkling brush from the Dean, besprinkled the Queeen, and the other there pre∣sent, then made a reverence to the Queen, and took off the Mitre, while in the mean time the Musitians be∣gan to sing the Hymne, Te Deum. When the first was ended, the Bishop put on again his Mitre, and going be∣fore the crosse in like manner, and the Chapter went towards the high Altar, on which was exposed the
most holy Sacrament. Then his E∣minence went to the Epistle side, and laying aside his Mitre, and kneeling at the verse, We threfore beseech thee, &c. stood up again, and turning to the Queen, as soon as Te Deum was ended, recited the verses and prayers, Save thy Handmaid, &c. Lord God, by whose providence, &c. and finally standing in the middle of the Altar, gave the solemne benediction, and bowing to the Queen, went thence into the Sacristy to put off his Orna∣ments, and cloathing himselfe like the Cardinal Legate, they came out of the Sacristy together, and went both to the Queen, who went alone into her coach, and the two Cardi∣nals, the Nuntii, and the Embassa∣dour Pimentel in another, who wai∣ted on her Majesty to the Castle, and to her own lodgings. The Church had the frontispiece all resplendent with torches, and within was hung richly with tape∣stries, with a kneeling place for the Queen, and cushions for the Nuntii, who alwayes attended on her Maje∣sty.
From the Church she goes to the Castle.At the gate of the hall of the Ca∣stle, they found very many noble Ladies of the City most splendidly apparrelled, who paid their respects, and complemented the Queen, who affectionately received them, and af∣terwards retired into her lodgings, where she was accompanied by the two Cardinals, the Nuntii, and all the retinue. That night little else was effected, but that all the Offi∣cers designed to look after the lodg∣ings, were not idle, being employed in distributing, without the least con∣fusion, to every one his chamber, they whom the Castle could not hold, being quartered in Palaces and particular houses in the town. That night the Queen supp'd privately, and was entertained with most excellent musique. Couriers were then di∣spatched to Rome, to informe the Pope of all, as they did from time to time, in all other places where she staid, not onely in obedience to his Holinesses commands, who would know what they did, but likewise to receive from his Beatitude, oppor∣tune
informations, in order to what they should do, for a compleat and regal reception. Her Majesty staid two dayes in Ferrara, where she visited diverse Monasteries of Nuns, and the re∣markablest things of the City, being alwayes accompanied by the two Cardinals in her Coach, their Emi∣nences sitting before, and the Queen alone behinde. The four Nuntii followed after, as they alwayes had done, in another coach, and all the other Gentlemens coaches of the traine, continued in a row, one after another. She desired to see the for∣tresse so famed, and was much plea∣sed with it, and here she her self was assistent in discharging some pieces of artillery. During these two dayes, the City onely feasted and rejoyced, every one endeavouring to demon∣strate their gladnesse, fine maskings being seen, and other rare shews, for the pleasing of the eys, and divertise∣ment of the senses. The Queen at her entrance into the Church-dominions, sent by Post
from Ferrara to Rome,Count Montecuc∣coli sent by the Queen to Rome. Count Ray∣mund Montecuccoli, to complement his Holiness in her name, and thanks him for all the honours, his beati∣tude had been pleased to do her, and particularly for them she had begun to receive in the state Ecclesiastical, to whom she consigned affectionate letters for his Holinesse. This Ca∣valier with the usuall vivacity of his noble and eminent parts, gave a very good account of his employment, and leaving the Pope highly satisfied with his function, returned from thence within a few dayes, to finde out the Queen in her journey, and go back with her to Rome. The day after her Majesty being willing to dine in publick, a table was prepared with a single covering, under the cloth of state, but because she would honour the Cardinal Le∣gate and Bishop, by taking them to dinner with her, two other coverings were brought, one at the right hand, and the other at the left of the table, a little way distant from the upper end, where the Queen was to sit,
each of them being under a little of the Canopy. All the three coverings were in gilt baskets, the Cardinal Legate sitting on the right hand, the Bishop on the left, and the Legate saying grace. Don Luigi Pio of Savoy, Prince of St. Gregory, Brother to the Cardinal Bishop, gave the water for her Maje∣sties hands, and assisted at the table, changing the dishes after the man∣ner of Germany. Don Innocentio Conti presented her the napkin, and the Marquis Hippolitus Bentivoglio was her Cupbearer and Sewer. The said Prince of St. Gregory came by post from Rome to Ferrara, to wait on the Queen, as one who be∣ing curious of seeing the world, when he had been at the Courts of Spain, France, Flanders, Holland and Den∣mark, passing likewise into Swedland, had received there many honours of her Majesty, and among other things was accompanied to Danzich by a Swedish man of war, and besides had her Majesties picture set with a hun∣dred faire diamonds, a favour that
generous Princesse was accustomed to shew to Embassadours of Kings, and Cavaliers of eminent condition. He therefore had waited upon her on the confines of Ferrara, and had been received with all courtesie, so as ha∣ving paid her his respects,The quali∣ties of the Prince of St. Grego∣ry. he took his leave of her, and returned by post to Rome, to serve there her Majesty. The said Prince, as he is endued with a vivacity of spirit, a mind truly splen∣did, and abounding especially with the vertues and qualities; which be∣come a Cavalier of great birth, so in all things, and even in his younger years, followed worthily the glory of his Eminence the Cardinal his Brother,And of Car∣dinal Pio. who to the integrity of his e∣xempalr life, hath joyn'd the greatest prudence, & an exquisite knowledge of all things, deserving the nobleness of his thoughts, he shewing to all the highest generosity and cour∣tesie. But returning to what was obser∣ved at the table, the bibbs were pre∣sented to the Queen and the Cardi∣nalls. Their Eminences were in
their rotchets, and forbare very strict∣ly to touch any meat, till they saw what her Majesty liked, and had ea∣ten first of it. The first discourse began here by the Queen was of the Painters at Rome,The Queens discourse at the Table. she concluding in favour of Peter di Cortona, and Cavalier Ber∣nino. She then spake of the Musiti∣ans, and seemed well informed of all the treble voyces, or Eunuchs, say∣ing, Bonaventura was the best at that time, and that Cavalier Loreto of Spoleti had taught to sing handsomly, continuing a while in the praises of musick, and calling it the ornament of Princes, and delight of the chambers. At the first draught the Queen drank, three great pieces of artillery were discharged. She discoursed then of the Temples of Europe, and said three were great, to wit, St. Peter in Rome, St. Paul in London, and the Dome in Millan, but that St. Peters was the fairest and greatest, adding likewise, as it were with a sigh, St. Pauls Church in London was now be∣come a stable, and here she discours∣ed
awhile of the English affaires. Then feeling it grew hot, she caused the glasse of the windows to be o∣pened from the top to the botome, and the people which stood about the table, retired then a little. When her Majesty had drank the second time, she said she had never drank so much wine as in Italy, where it was very excellent. The Cardinal Bishop replyed, your Majesty hath drank little of it, for you put much water to it, and we see you carry with you the vertue of the North, which the Queen was pleased with. In fine, new dishes of meat still appearing, her Majesty praised Italy, as having every thing within it selfe except druggs, the Cardinal Legate replyed, what, sugars? Her Majesty answered, you have them in Sicily. And with these, and such like discourses, which use to be the pastimes of great per∣sons, in their recreations at table and feasts, the meat was taken off, and the Queen in the midst of the two Cardinals aforesaid, retyred to her chamber, where their Eminences
stayed with her, entertaining them∣selves with several discourses. Her Majesty in her speeches shewed a great esteem, of France, and to be well informed of all the affaires of the world, and especially of the Court of Rome, and of the last Con∣clave. That night they saw a Comedy at the charge of the Marquis Corne∣lius Bentivoglio, a Cavalier of one of the chiefest families in Italy, and who may deservingly be called a true lover of the vertuous. This play, where the honours of Boreas with Orithia were represented, suc∣ceeded very well, especially for the admirable beauty and finenesse of the machins. Her Majesty very worthily esteeming so conspicuous a family, honoured with the title of Gentleman of her Chamber, and her Cupbearer the Marquis Hippoli∣tus aforesaid, who together with the Marquis Cornelus his father, waited afterwards upon her to Rome; as Donna Constanza Sforza likewise did, a Lady of rare parts, and great
quality, and wife to the said Marquis Cornelius, who instead of Madam Cueva, who staid behind sick, as we said, supplyed with equal spirit and decorum, the charge of chief Lady of the chamber to the Queen, at∣tending on her all the rest of the journey to Rome. The remainder of the night was solemnized with va∣riety of artificial fireworks, & all the demonstrations of gladnesse and re∣joycing, which could proceed from hearts ambitious of conforming themselves to the generous and no∣ble inclination of their Prince. While the Queen staid in Ferrara, the Count St. Vitale came thither, a Cavalier of great quality, sent by the Duke of Parma, with the title of extraordinary Embassador to com∣plement her Majesty. The descri∣ption of Fer∣rara.Ferrara is a great and spacious City, adorned with splendid and beautiful structures, and many piazze inhabited by divers great families, and washt on the East and South side with a branch of the river Po. It lyes in a plain, low, and humid soyle,
and therefore the aire is supposed a little unwholsome. 'Tis fortified with strong walls, bastions, and well flankt with very large and deep ditches, being guarded by a cittadel of great strength, and very regular, in some parts inaccessible to the ap∣proaches, by reason of the marish scituation on one side. The Castle, the habitation of the Cardinal Le∣gate, is magnificent and sumptuous, and was the royal residence of the Dukes of Este, the splendour of Ita∣ly for the greatnesse of their minds, and eminent valour. The Cardinal John Baptist Spada a Noble man of Lucca,The noble qualities of the Cardinal John Bap∣tist Spada. a person of great worth and rare parts, preferred for his long services to the holy Sea of Rome, to the purple on the second of March, 1654. with the title of holy Susanna, performed this legati∣on to his very great glory, and in this conjuncture acted nobly and abun∣dantly his part. On the 25. her Majesty departed from Ferrara,She departs from Ferra∣ra. being saluted by the Canon from the walls, and the for∣tresse,
as at her coming thither, and they saw all the streets full of souldi∣ers. The two Cardinals, the Le∣gate and Bishop accompanied her Majesty to the confines of their Le∣gation, which end at the river Reno, a little way off from the Villa of Poggio, appertaining to the Marquis Lambertini, an ancient and noble fa∣mily of Bologna. Here at the en∣trance into the territory of Bologna,She is re∣ceived on the con∣fines by the Vice-Le∣gate of Bo∣logna. she was met by my Lord Ranuccio Ricci the Vice-Legate, with the traine of many Gentlemen all on horseback, who complemented her Majesty in the name of his Eminence Cardinal John Jerome Lomellino the Legate, and returned to Bologna, leaving the troop of horse that had accompanied him thither, to wait on the Queen. Her Majesty lay that night in the Villa of St. Benedict, in the Palace of the Senatour, the Mar∣quis John Nicholas Tanara, then President of the Justice, and a per∣son highly qualified, her train with the four Nuntii being lodged in the Palaces and neighbouring houses,
where they were treated splendid∣ly. The day after she continued her journey toward Bologna,Cardinall Lomelli∣no goes out to meet the Queen whence the Cardinal Legate issuing forth with above 40 coaches with six hor∣ses a piece, which were filled with the Nobility, and three troups of Horse went to meet her at the Villa of Funo distant five miles, all the wayes being lined with souldiers, and a numerous concourse of people to see this great Princesse. She ar∣riving ten paces near his Eminence, who allighting before, expected her in the midst of the way, came out of her coach, and received very affably and courteously the complement the Cardinal made her. His Eminence after this, was constrained to go back with all speed, to get before her Ma∣jesty, and receive her at the Dome in the absence of Boncompagno the Archbishop. When she was near the City, they began to hear the noyse of the Ar∣tillery, which continued till she got to the Palace. At the gate she was
received by all the Magistrates on horseback, who were in their solemne robes. After the like complements she had had in Ferrara, she went to the Church of St. Peter, which is the Cathedral, and there alighting, was received with the same ceremonies used to her in the Church of Ferrara,Her recep∣tion at her entrance in∣to Bologna. after which she was carried in a chair to the Palace, accompanied by all the retinue. The Cardinal Legate, who made such haste thither, receiv∣ed her at the foot of the staires, and in passing through the Hall of Far∣nese, they found there in ranks on both sides, above an hundred Ladies, most splendidly adorned, who all made low reverences to her. Arri∣ving at her lodging, she a little while after saw the fires, which were op∣posite to her chamber, on a long and fine stand which was made for that purpose with Pyramids, and a great figure signifying Faith, with the Armes of the Pope, of her Majesty, and his Eminence, among which were distributed several images of Lyons, the Armes of Bologna. The fires
were extraordinarily fine, and at the same time six thousand squibs of wilde-fire were seen flying from the summit of two towers. After this the Queen went into the Hall of Hercules, where sitting under the cloth of state on a throne prepared for her, she saw the dancing, where there were above a hundred faire Ladies most nobly apparrel∣ed. The day following she went to see the Church of St. Dominique,She visits the Church & fine Con∣vent of St. Dominique and there reverenced his body, ex∣pressing a particular devotion to him, and an equal esteem to this ancient and very noble Order. Here at the Altar of the reliques, she beheld the five books of Moses, written in He∣brew in thin leather by the Prophet Esdras, and her Majesty read some of the words. She desired then to see the publick Schooles, in which she heard an eloquent Oration in her honour, by the Abbot Certani, a per∣son of great learning and vertue. The Duke of Modena hearing the Queen was arrived in Bologna, sent
the Marqis Silvio Molza, a Cavalier of great spirit, and extraordinary parts, in the quality of his Embassadour to wait on the Queen, but it had no ef∣fect, they could not agree of the pre∣tensions he had. The ho∣nours her Majesty re∣ceived in Bologna.Her Majesty staid two days in Bo∣logna, as she had done in Ferrara, and the second day went to Masse to St. Michael in the wood, without the gate of Saint Mamolo, the famous convent of the Fathers of mount O∣livet, where her Majesty was much pleased in seeing that Cloyster paint∣ed by the most renowned Painters of Bologna, Caracci and Reno, and in the Sacristy the Saint Michael of Brasse, the excellent workmanship of Albargi. She visited likewise at her entrance into the Church, the body of blessed Katherine of Bologna, which is kept still by those all entire, palpable, and sitting without any help to hold it up. Her Majesty being returned to the Palace, the Colledge of Bologna presented her with the works in ten Volumes of Doctor Aldrovandi
which she very much esteemed. The same day the Queen dined in publick with the Cardinal,She dines in publick. they observing the same order, as was held in Ferrara. Many Ladies came masked to see the feast, which was as sumptuous as can be imagined, for the Legates noble minde omitted not any thing, that was great and majestique. The cheif Standard-bea∣rer gave the napkin to her Majestie, and Count Francis Charls Caprara, nephew to Duke Piccolomini the General, was both Carver and Cup-bearer, both persons of high worth. After dinner she visited the great Colledge of Spain, founded long since by the famous Cardinal Gyles Albernozzi, and about three houres in the night, she went to the lodg∣ings of the Colledge, and thence to the Theater. This was built for that pur∣pose, in the forme of a great ship, the extremities of which arrived to the frontispiece o're the fish-market,
and o're part of the Palace, through a great window of which, her Maje∣sty accompanied by the Cardinal, passed o're a bridge very splendidly adorned, where there were above 140 Ladies, all equally resplendnt with the lustre of their beauty, and a rich mine of pearls, and of jewels, of inestimable value. The Theater, which was covered, had certain great lights on the top, and above 300 torches were regular∣ly distributed here and there round about it, together with other lesser lights, which made it most resplen∣dent. The battlements of the Pa∣lace were deckt with several Carpets, some of arras, and others of silk of diverse colours. After the appearance of the Ma∣sters of the Camp, which were the Marquis Angelelli, and Count Ed∣ward Pepoli both Senatours, they be∣held a great guilded Charriot come forth, with 24 groomes apparrelled in cloath of silver with torches in their hands, drawn by twelve horses most splendidly set out, on which
sat cloathed like Pallas, Felsina repre∣senting Bologna, for so it was called long since, when it was the royal Ci∣ty of Toscany. Somewhat lower stood Peace, Fame, and War, which inter∣laced the song of Felsina, who when she had walked up and down in the field, stood still before the Queen, to introduce the tilting. She sing∣ing then, said, to applaud so great a Majesty the Triumviri who divided the World on the river Lavino,The manner of the said Tilting. not far from Bologna, brought three squadrons of Cavaliers, which run∣ning at the Ring, and one against another, might shew their re∣spects to so deserving a Queen. Then Felsina was silent, and de∣parting with her train, by the Masters of the Camp, three squadrons were brought in, the one lead by Octav∣us Augustus, the second by Lepi∣dus, and the third by Marcus Anto∣nius, each being composed of six Ca∣valiers, Trumpets, Pages, and Grooms going before with lighted torches in their hands: every one of them extravagantly attired, walk∣ed
softly o're the field, accompanied by two sticklers, and two Cavaliers all in armour for the tilting to follow of one against another. Their plumes, and the crests of their hel∣mets were high, made of several pre∣tious feathers, which augmented the beauty and pompe of the shew. The first squadron contained be∣sides the two sticklers aforesaid, the Counts Luigi Bentivoglio, Marc' Antonio Sampieri, Hercules Malvez∣zi, Philip Maria Bentivoglio, the Marquis Hippolitus Bevilaqua, the Marquis Caesar Tanara, the Counts Lodovick Albergati, Anthony Orsi, and Alexander Fava, all Cavaliers of great valour and birth. In the second were the Counts Francis Charles Caprara, Constance Maria Zambeccari, Alphonsus, Er∣colani, Jerome Caprara, Hercules Isolani, Anthony Gabrielli, Anthony Joseph Zambeccari, Felix Montecuc∣coli, and Rinald Bovio, whose sticklers were the Counts John Baptist Alber∣ti, and Hannibal Ranucci, persons of great merit and vertue.
In the third were the Marquisses Andrew Paleotti and Guido Anthoni Lambertoni, the Counts Henry, Her∣colani, and Francis Maria, Ghislieri, and the Gentlemen Octavius Casoli, Iohn Baptist Sampieri, Alexander Rffeni, Ierome Pini and Tabus Gui∣dotti, whose sticklers were the Counts Vincent Marescotti, and Caesar Hani∣bal, Marsilli, and which Cavaliers were of the most noble and most e∣minent Families of that City. These three Spectators having se∣verally reverenc't the Queen, ran at the ring, breaking above 130. lances with a generall acclamation of the people. This operation being ended, they began the encounter of two Cavali∣ers of each squadron; of the first were the Counts Lewis Bentivoglio and Marcus Antonius Sapieri, of the second the Counts Francis Charles Caprara, and Constance Maria Zambeccari, and of the third signior Octavius Casalo and Sigre Giollanni Battista Sampieri, every one of which ran five lances a piece
with such courage and sprightlinesse, that all the spectators commended them extreamly. After this all the the Squadrons reduced themselves into a semicircle, made low reve∣rences to her Majesty, and gave her many thankes, for the honour she had done them with her presence, who seemed to be highly contented. In her Majesties returne to her lodg∣ings, she passing that night through the publick roomes of the Magi∣strates of the City, who are called the Regiment, saw he picture of Pollio done by the famous Painter Guido Reni of Bologna, with the pi∣cture of the Protectors of the City, which pleased her so much, she desi∣red to see them again. The honours done her Majesty by the Legate, and all those Cavaliers, were very remarkable, as well for the order, as magnificence. The best wits of the City, omitted not to contribute abundantly to that en∣tertainment. The Cardinal Legate discoursed very seriously with her Majesty, who seemed highly satisfi∣ed
with him, and among other things represented to her, that in Rome, as a great City, and abounding with all Nations, she might see different persons, and given as well to vertue, as to vice, for as the first are apt to make use of the means, which they think will most advance their pretensions, so on the other side, the number is so great of the good, and exemplary in their holy operations, that her Majesty might have her minde disposed both for pity and edification. Bologna lyes at the bottoms of the mountaine Appenninus,The descri∣ption of Bologna. in the midst of the Emilian way, being of a form somewhat long, and almost like a ship. It hath twelve gates, which shew how big it is. The river Save∣na runs on the side of it, and through the middle, a branch of Reno, navi∣gable to Malalbergo about twenty miles distant from Ferrara, where afterwards it falls into the valley of St. Martina, which leads to Ferrara. The buildings are ample, commodi∣ous, and within more majestique
then without. All the streets have spatious Portices, so as you may go through the City without being touch't by the rain or the sun. Tis full of a vertuous, splendid, and cour∣teous Nobility, and abounds with all things, being rich and populus, with a territory as pleasant and fruitfull, as any is in Italy: There is a most noble University, in which flourish eminent Persons in all kind of learning.The wor∣thy quali∣ties of the Bolognesi. The Bolognesi are fit for any exercise, arms, letters, and commerce being there in great perfection. The gen∣try in particular is active, and con∣tinually gets renown in the exexcises of glory and honour. This so rich, so fine and so fortunate Countrey,The emi∣nent condi∣tion of Car∣dinal Lo∣mellino. is govern'd at present by the foresaid Cardinall John Jerome Lomellino of the title of S. Onofrius, a gentleman of the noblest and most eminent Fami∣lies of Genoua, who having perfor∣med the Offices of Referendarius, of Clerke of the Chamber, Treasurer Generall, Governour of Rome, &c. was preferr'd to the purple on the 19. of February, 1652. a person ex∣pert
in the mannagement of affairs, quick in the execution, and exem∣plary in justice and equity, loving greatly the vertuous, and hating ex∣treamly the vicious, insomuch as his just government hath providently been prorogued for three years more in that his Legation. On the 29. after Masse,She departs from Bo∣logna. and a sumptuous Collation, her Majestie departed from Bologna, accompa∣ny'd and attended by the Cardinall Legate with the traine of the Nobili∣ty and Souldiers to the confines of that Territory. Her Majestie con∣tinu'd her journey towards Imola, passing the rivers Indice and Savena, between Bologna and St. Nicholas, and between this and Imola, the Gia∣no, Solerino, and Senio, by reason of the torrents which fall from Appen∣ninus, and often want water, as they did that dry year. Near Dzza a Town appertaining to the Marquis Campeggi which is on the Confines of Imola, and consequently the be∣ginning of the Province of Romag∣na, the Cardinall Acquaviva the Le∣gate
should have met her,She is met on the Con∣fines by the Vice Le∣gate Ro∣magna. but did not, he reserving himself to meet her at Forli the following evening, and the rather to fulfill his Holynesses minde, who would not defraud the Cardinalls Donghi and Rossetti, of the honour of receiving her. He only sent thither my Lord Francis Cennini the Vice-Legate, a Prelate of great spirit & civility; Nephew to Cardinall Con∣nini of happy memory, who com∣plemented her Majestie in his name, and caused the Troope of Curiassers of his guard to be there, which serv'd for her guide through the Province. He caused there likewise to be ready a squadron of four thousand Sol∣diers, commanded by the Camp∣master Capelletti, a Gentleman of courage, who in all the state of the Province observed the orders given him by the Cardinall aforesaid, cau∣sing each City to send two thousand men, which he form'd into great squadrons, consisting of two thou∣sand Souldiers, one after the other so the Confines of the Province. Be∣sides that, the Vice-Legate was ac∣company'd
by many Gentlemen of Romagna, and 300. chosen Horse, all in good order, as well for their cloaths, as furniture and Arms. As soone as he had complemented the Queen in the name of the said Car∣dinall Acquaviva, the Legate of Ro∣magna, he returned thence to Imola, leaving the care of her reception, to Cardinall John Stephen Donghi the Bishop of that City, who according to his instructions from Rome,She is met by Cardinal Donghi the Bishop of Imola. went in Coach to meet her Majestie with∣out the Town at our Lady's of Pra∣dello, accompany'd by many Gen∣tlemen of the City: They came out of their Coaches, and complemented each other, in the manner observed by the Cardinalls of Ferrara and Bo∣logna. As soon as her Majesty was re∣turn'd into her Coach, his Eminence went before to the City, to be ready to receive her: In the Plain without Imola were divers squadrons of foot, who continually with volleys of shot saluted her Majesty as she passed a∣long. At the Gate she was received by the Magistrates, the chief of which
were Count Francis Maria Sassa∣telli, Signior Thadeus Dalla Volpe, Signior Giouanni Battista Borghesi, and Captain Thomas Mazzi, who accompany'd by many Gentlemen with fine Liveries, did their dutyes to her Majesty. The gates and streets abounded with Souldiers standing in rankes, but the old fashion'd walls were uncapable of Artillery, and could not be arm'd: She alighted not at the Cathedrall, as she had done in Ferrara and Bologna, because it was darke, so as she went directly to the Palace of the Bishop, her lodg∣ings, the Frontispice of which had a∣bundance of Torches. The Cardi∣nall receiv'd and accompany'd her to her lodgings,Her rece∣ption in I∣mola. as all the chief Lady's of the Countrey likewise did, who stood in rankes at the bottome of the stairs. The Furniture for the Chambers as well as the preparation for the Tables was sumptuous and rich, for the naturall generosity of the Cardinall omitted not any thing becoming a regall entertainment. Her Majestie supp'd in publick with the
Cardinall, the same order in sitting, and ceremony at the table being ob∣serv'd, as at Ferrara, and Bologna. Count Alexander Sassatelli was her Majesties Cupbearer, and Signior Thadius Dalla Volpe her Sewer. Be∣sides, a great number of Persons well qualify'd, twelve Pages, the sons of the chief Gentlemen of the City, assisted at the table. The figures a∣dorning the table, were so finely contriv'd, and with such mysterious Hieroglyphicks, that the Queen looking earnestly upon them, nou∣rish't more her mind than her body.The emi∣nent quali∣tyes of Cardinall Donghi. Cardinall Donghi was Clerke of the Chamber, and had other vacant Offices, on the track of which he had a large field, to shew his great parts, which with his deserts encreas'd by his intense applications towards the service of the Apostolicall Sea, in the stirrs of the wars of Castro, preferr'd him to the purple. He is a Gentle∣man of great integrity and freeness, which he vigorously shew'd in the Legations of Ferrara and Romagna, administred by him with much praise
and advantage to the good, and ex∣emplary punishment of the bad. His mind is generous and free, and his intellect capable of the mannage∣ment of the greatest affairs. She departs from Imo∣la.On St. Andrews day after Masse, the Queen went from Imola, atten∣ded and accompany'd by the Cardi∣nall aforesaid to the confines of the territory Faenza,And is met by the Go∣vernour of Faenza. where she met with my Lord Castelli a horseback, a Gentleman of much worth, and Governour of the City, accompa∣ny'd by many Gentlemen, and two troopes of Horse. As soone as he had ended his complement with the Queen, he rode forward, insomuch as the Queen continuing diligently her journey in those waies which are plaine and good, some miles without the City was met by Cardinall Charles Rossetti the Bishop of the Place,And after∣wards by Cardinall Rosstt the Bishop of the place. who with a fine livery of thir∣ty groom's, and a traine of many travailing Coaches, full of Gentry, alighting, as the Queen likewise did, made the usuall complement, being received with equall kindness and courtesie.
Her Majesty approaching to the City, saw the neighbouring plaine all cover'd with people, flock't thi∣ther to behold this great Princess, and with Souldiers in squadrons to honour her arrivall; some Pieces of Artillery plac't on the Walls, though slight, and without rampards, were discharg'd, and their roaring was seconded by the noyse of the Drums, Trumpets, Mortar-pieces, and Mus∣kets. All the streets of the City a∣bounded with people in arms, and gay ornaments hanging from the window's and balcone.The honors dne her Majesty in Faenza. At her en∣trance into the gate, she was reve∣renc't by the publick Magistrates, who on horseback, and with their robes of Velvet attended her Majesty to the Palace of the Bishop, design'd for her lodging, and very richly fur∣nish't, with a double guard of Soul∣diers. The Queen alighting out of her Coach, in which she came alone, and receiv'd by the Cardinall; who ha∣stened before her, ascended the staires of the Palace, on the top of which
she met the cheif Ladies of the City, who after a short complement wai∣ted on her to the lodgings prepared for her with all splendour and magni∣ficence. While her Majesty reposed a little, with very good order, the quarters were assigned to all of her numerous traine, by Gentlemen appointed for that function, who contended to shew their punctuality. She after∣wards comming forth of her lodgings, went thence to dinner very splendidly prepared, with such admirable, work∣manship of Statues, representing Rome, the four parts of the world, the wordly Monarchy, and other carved things, gilt and coloured so to the life, that they onely wanted motion. Her Majesty sate at the table with the Cardinall, in the manner observed before. She dines in publique.The Marquis Francis Rosseti, ne∣phew to his Eminence, gave the water for her Majesties hands, and the Mar∣quis Grolamo his Brorher presented the Napkin, and was Cupbearer. Count Laderchi, and Cavalier Pasi,
both Knights of St. Stephen, were Sewers, receiving the meat from the hands of twelve Gentlemen that as∣sisted at the table. At dinner her Majesty had continuall discourse with the Cardinall, which was mixed with such a Carriage and gravity, that she swerving not at all from the State of a Queen, shewed evidently, how much she was pleased with his Emi∣nences behaviour, an Academy in the mean time being prepared, to enter∣tain her Majesty in the exercises, which as more peculiar to her most refined understanding, might with a more relishing change, make her pass from the food of her body to the ali∣ment of her minde. In this Academy,The vertu∣ous prepa∣rations de∣signed for her Majesty in Faenza. besides the cheif discourse made in praise of the Church of Rome, by father Zenobi the Dom∣can, a Person of great vertue, and parts, above 30. Compositions were to be recited by others, as well Ec∣clesiasticall, as Secular, eminent in severall languages, Latine, Spanish, Greeke, low Dutch, and Italian, and amongst these, one in musique, the
fruite of the invention of the said Marquis Francis Rossetti, who with a rare phancy introducing musique, si∣lence, and poesy, to sing the Queenes glories, was no less harmonious to the eare, than delightfull to the intel∣lect, but it was not effected, for in∣stead of abiding there that night, the Queen would continue her journey, so as she rising from the table, after a short stay in her Chamber, went to visit the Cathedrall with a singular example of piety, which, thowgh it might well appear naked, even in the fight of so great a Princess, in being the designe of the famous Architect Bramante, yet was all adorned with silke, with such a rare mixture of co∣lours, that it cleerly shewed its joy, in receiving within the compass of its walls, whom the vastness of a King∣dome was not able to containe. The Descri∣ption of Fa∣enza,Faenza is an ancient and noble City, fortified with walls, and tow∣ers, and seated in the middle of most fertile Plains, famous for the art, pe∣culiar to it selfe, of making most white, and light vases of earth. 'Tis
divided by the river Lamone, which passing through the suburbs, and the town, leaves them afterwards united with a fair bridge of stone, and two towers on the Emilian way. The air is very healthfull, the inhabitants in∣dustrious, civil, and lovers of their Countrey, and the Gentry Courte∣ous, punctuall, and very generous. The Queen coming out of the Cathedrall, went again into his Holi∣nesses Coach, carrying with her the Cardinall to the confines of that Ter∣ritory, towards which she advanced in pursuance of her journey, about two houres before night, having left im∣printed in the minds of each one, high conceits of her most excellent quali∣ties. The Queen seemed highly pleased with this Cardinall, who had, besides his learning, and knowledg, in the af∣faires of the world, all the preroga∣tives peculiar to a Gentleman well bred. He is of Ferrara,The quali∣ties of Car∣dinall Ros∣setti. of the ancient and noble family of the Counts Ros∣setti, now Marquisses, who aboun∣ding more in vertue, than yeares, by
the glorious Pope Vrban the eighth, the lover of the learned, and vertu∣ous, was sent as an Apostolicall Mini∣ster into the Kingdom of England to that Queen. There he did all he could for the advantage, and good of the Catholique Religion, and ran there great dangers in those persecuti∣ons, as more plainly may appear by a letter to him of the 13th. of July, 1643. from his Eminence Cardinall Francis Barberino, nephew to Vrban, in order to his preferment, of the fol∣lowing tenor. The troubles of our Countrey, and of Christendome will have a short truce, that I among so many disgusts, may have some time to breath, seeing your Eminences great labours rewardd with the Purple, God be pleased with the tranquillity of Italy, to open to the way, that by your continuall paines, he may grant the same to all of the Catho∣lique Religion, and that by your endea∣vours, your toylings, and dangers, not unknown to the world, it may again flourish in the land of great Brittaine,
to the end this dgnity deserved so well by you, may not be deprived of the happy effects your Eminence hath desired, and cooperated on your part for the publique good. And I humbly Kiss your hands, &c. Your Eminences most humble and most affectionate Ser∣vant. Cardinall Barberino. The end of the fourth Booke.
The History of the sacred, and Royal Majestie of Christina Alessandra, Queen of Swedland, &c. The Fifth Book. The Argument. THE Queen advances from Faenza to Forli, Cesena, and Rimini, accompanied by the foresaid Cardinall Legat of Romagna. On the confines of the state of Urbin, She is met by that Vice-Legate, and Cardinall Legate, and enters Pesaro, where she is treated, and royally entertained. She passes from Fano, and Ancona.
She arrives at the holy house of Loret∣to, and consecrates devoutly her Scep∣ter, and Crown to that glorious Virgin. She goes to Macerata, thence to Tolen∣tino, and afterwards to Camerino. She comes to Foligno, goes to Assisi, there visits the famous temple of Saint Francis, and is splendidly entertained by Cardinall Rondinino, then returnes to Foligno. THe foresaid Cardinall Rossettti taking leave of the Queen, Sig∣nior Fulvius Petrocci da Arieti, Go∣vernour of Forli, appeared with a nu∣merous retinue of Gentlemen of Ro∣magna, come expresly with excessive rich cloaths, and fine liveries, to ho∣nour their Legate, and augment the splendour of this Princesses recepti∣on. The foresaid Prelate, when he had humbly waited on her Majesty, being very well satisfied with the courteous correspondence he found in the Queen,The meeting she had in Forli. went before to Forli, whence advancing some miles, the said Legate with the train, not onely of six Coaches of his own full of
Gentlemen of his family, with which he waited on her in all his Legation, but likewise came with 25 more with 6 horses apeice, set forth by the Gen∣tlemen of the Province, who flockt to attend him in her first reception. The gate without and within, as likewise the walls, though weak in that City, were garnished with soul∣diers, partly divided into squadrons, and partly ranked in files. The Magistrate, there called il nu∣mero, met her at the entrance with a troupe of the City, and having presen∣ted her with their dutifull respects, waited on her to the place, very regu∣larly beautified with lights. The Or∣nament of the fire, with which was re∣presented the Majesty of so great a Princess, by so much the more spread its light with greater splendour, by how much the more the night was the darker. Hieroglyphicks disposed in various manners, were seen there to flame,The honors done her in Forli. alluding to the joy of the people for her fortunate arrivall. The Queen being enterd her lodgings, and breath∣ing
there a little, was invited to ho∣nour an Academy with her presence, in which severall compositions in Ita∣lian and Latine were recited, among which took greatly a discourse, made by Signior Ridolfus his Eminences Nephew, and an Ode of Pindarus by Signior Lodovick Tingoli, a Person as conspicuous for his birth, as famous for the vertuous, and rare qualities of his minde, and who is indeed the cheife ornament of Rimini his Coun∣trey, with other Compositions of the most esteem'd Poets of the Province. Her Majesty supp'd privately, and ha∣ving the next morning heard Mass in the Dome, din'd in publique with the said Cardinall Legate, with the order observed in other places. The fore∣said Signior Ridolphus was her Cup∣bearer, & the Governors brother the Sewer, twelve principall Gentlemen of the City, assisting at the service of the table. The Town is seated in an open Countrey very fertile and plea∣sant, & inhabited by people of Cou∣rage and Spirit, who retain the mar∣tiall nature of their first founders.
After dinner her Majesty departed from Forli,She depart, from Forli carrying with her in his Holinesses Coach, the Cardinall Le∣gat, being attended by all the train. She passed the famous Rubicon, but with greater glory than Caesar, since he advanced thither, to seize on the li∣berty of his Countrey, and she after the renouncing of her paternall King∣dome, came thither to arrive to the Empire of Christ. Her Majesty continued her jour∣ney towards Cesena, passing through Forlimpopoli, a little Town, where her Majesty was welcomed by the squa∣drons of foot, being received between the souldiers standing in rowes through all the Countrey as she went. In approaching to Cesena she found set in array diverse Batalions of foot,Her recep∣tion in Ce∣sena. & was met by Signior Richard Han∣niball Romano the Governour, accom∣panied with many Gentlemen a horseback, who alighting did com∣plement the Queen, and congratu∣late her arrivall. The same thing was done by the cheif Standard-bearer,
Count Joseph Fantaguzzi, with the Magistrate, who all rode together before her to her lodging, prepared in the palace of Count Lelius Roverelli, a noble, ancient family, and cheif of that City, where some Gentlemen in armour tilted one against another in the place. Here her Majesty supp't pri∣vtely, and because it was late, went to her repose without other enter∣tainment. The descri∣ption of Cesena.Cesena is one of the chiefest Cities in Romagna, of very great com∣merce, and populous enough in re∣gard of its bigness. It lies at the foot of a mountaine, the lower part of which is washt by the river Savius. It hath a Castle on the hill, with some fair and strong old fashion towers▪ built long agoe by the Emperour Frederick the Second. Her depar∣ture from Cesena.On the 2. of December the Queen went out of Cesena on horseback, ac∣companied by the Legate, who was likewise mounted on a Neopolitan courser of an Ermine colour, which being observed by the Queen for his goodness, and she seeming to like
him extreamly, was presented her by him. He had likewise given her in Forli two globes of silver, the one re∣presenting the earth, and the other the sphaere, most diligently engraven, and supported by two statues of silver, done by Algarbi, of great value. My Lord Joseph Bologna, a Neopolitan Cavalier, and the generous Gover∣nour of Rimini,She is met by the Go∣vernour of Rimini. came out with a nu∣merous Company of Gentlemen ve∣ry richly apparrelled, and well moun∣ted, before whom went 400. Soul∣diers on horseback, and presented his respects on the confines. She entring the City on horseback, was met with the Magistrate at the gate, accompanied by many Gentlemen with fine liveries. Doctor Hanni∣bal Nanni the Principall Person, did Complement her Majesty, and in every place about them, they saw squadrons and rankes of Souldiers, with whom all the walls did abound, as likewise the streets, through which she passed, werehung with rich ta∣pestries. The Queen travers'd the City on
horseback,She enters Rimini on horseback. and alighted at the pub∣lick Palace prepared for her in the great Piazza, which was beautify'd and illuminated with fine artificiall fire-workes, succeeding with great wonder and praise. At the gate of the Palace stood twelve Pages nobly cloath'd, and with Torches in their hands. Her Majesty ascended the stairs, accompany'd by the Legate to her lodgings. A numerous company of faire and sprightly Ladies very finely adorn'd, complemented her Majesty at the top of the stairs, and a little while after made a very so∣lemne musick, with regular and fine dances.The vertu∣ous enter∣tainments she had in Rimini. A fine Academy was held likewise there, and among the vari∣ety of compositions, Signior Philip Marchesselli, and Signior Lodowick Tingoli aforesaid, made their fruit∣full wit appeare. The Queen with Majestick gravity, and sweet affabili∣ty, was highly pleas'd with every thing. Her Majesty sup't privately, and retiring to her rest, left the night to enjoy the splendour of the lights, and the bone-fires that beautifull
City had kindled in Testimony of their joy. This City is ancient,The descri∣ption of Rimini. though now not very great. Towards the Sea some remains of a great Theater may be seen, which was there long ago. Towards the gate that goes to Pesa∣ro, stands an arch of marble erected in honour of Augustus Caesar, and without the said gate is the river Arimino now called the Marecchia, ore which is a Bridge 200. paces long, & fifteen broad, with five arches, the sides of which are of thick mar∣ble-stones of Dorick work, which joyned the City to the Borough, built in honor of Octavian Augustus. There are likewise some markes of the old Port, now only of use for lit∣tle Boats, the greatest part thereof being fill'd up with earth. The said City is adorn'd with commodi∣ous Fabricks, among which appear no∣bly some Palaces built by the family of Malatista, who sway'd there ma∣ny years, and the Church of St. Fran∣cis, all of marble within and without with noble statues, embossed works,
and infinite cuts of Greeke marble, built by Sigismond Pandolphus of the said Family of Malatista, many o∣ther noble Families do likewise there conserve their antient splen∣dour. The place of this City is remarka∣ble now, with a very faire remem∣brance of her Majesties passage, e∣rected in marble, with the Arms of Pope Alexander the 7. and the Queens, by Doctor Angelino Angelni of the following tenor. In the reign of Pope Alexander the seventh, Christina Queen of Swedland, em∣bracing the Catholick Religion of her owne accord, and devesting her∣self of her Kingdoms, in her journey to Rome, to yield obedience to the Pope, passed through Rimini, in the year of our Lord, 1655 in the month of December, in perpetuall memo∣ry of the thing, Angelinus de Ange∣linis I. C. Arim. Her depar∣ture from Rimini.The next morning, though it rain∣ed, her Majesty departed from Ri∣mini, accompanied, as she alwayes had been, by the Cardinall Legate to
Cattolica, a place on the confines, between Romagna, and the Duke∣dome of Ʋrbin, where she staid, and here the said Cardinall gave her Ma∣jesty a collation of sweet meats, and took leave of her, who left him high∣ly satisfied of her courteous accep∣tance. Cardinal Acquaviva is of very no∣ble birth, and one of the cheif fami∣lies in Naples, who as he is compo∣sed of honour, and a sweet dispositi∣on, so abounds with all courtesy,The worthy qualities of Cardinall Acquaviva Legate of Romagna. and generosity. After severall Prelaticall dignities, and Governments perfor∣med with much praise, he was wor∣thily advanced to the purple on the 2. of March. 1654. The Queen was met at Cattolica by my Lord Gaspan Lascari,She was met by my Lord the vice-Legal of Pesaro. a Gen∣tleman of Nizza, full of honour and courtesy, nephew to the great Master of Malta, & vice-Legat of Urbin. He appeared attended by a Company of Curiassers, commanded by Count Alphonsus Santinelli, the Principall Cavalier of the City of Pesaro, who afterwards waited on her through all
that state. Here a good body of souldi∣ers reduc'd into order, gave her Maje∣sty many voleys of shot in her passage. From hence she advancing to Sa∣licata,And after∣wards by Cardinall Homodei. was met by his Eminence Cardinall Lewis Homodei of Millan, the Legat of Urbin, with 12. Coaches with 6. Horses a peice, full of princi∣pall Gentlemen, fifty Switzers a∣foot of his guard, and above a hun∣dred eminent Gentlemen a horseback, with rich and splendid cloathes, & fine liveries. Among these were Count Hanibal Thiene a Cavalier of Vienna, Count Hippolitus Santinelli Cosen to the said Count Alphonsus, the Counts Francis Maria, and Lodovick Santi∣nelli, brothers, and in fine the Counts Bernardino Ubardni, Francis Maria Lunardi, & Luti, as likewise Signior Francis Maria Bonamini, all persons very nobly descended, sprightly, ge∣nerous, and lively. The Cardinall alighting out of his Coach, did complement her Majesty, who likewise coming out of her own, received him with great courtesy, and affection. Every one returning to
their Coaches, they continued their journey towards the City. At the gate they found Signior Gi∣ulius Caesar Vattielli,Her recep∣tion in Pe∣saro. and Iohn An∣drew Olivieri Gentlemen of good grace, and both cheif Standard-bea∣rers, with six other Seniors of the Ma∣gistrates, who came on horseback in their usuall long robes of black velvet like Consuls, accompani'd by twenty Gentlemen clothed likewise very ho∣nourably in black, with 4 trumpets, and 24. Groomes with very fine li∣veries of Carnation Cloath, trimm'd with great gards of white velvet. When the Queen approached, they alighted from their horses, advanced to the Coach, and complemented her Majesty, who stood up, and answered them very courteously. The Queen entered into Pesaro about the eve∣ning, and welcomed with many vol∣lies of Ordnance and Muskets, alight∣ed at the Dome, where the Legat ex∣pected her, who in hast went the shortest way before her. She descended at the chaines be∣fore the Church, and Kneeling on a
cushion prepared for her, Kissed reve∣rently the Cross presented to her by the Bishop, and thence went into the Church, under a Canopy carried by the principall Gentlemen of the Ci∣ty, while the clergy, that went before, began the usuall Anthem, She is beautifull &c. Which ended, the Musitians sang Te Deum with a very rare consort of voyces and instru∣ments, which her Majesty heard knee∣ling, near whom on a great Cushion the Cardinall Legate was kneeling, and a little more distant from him, the four Nuntij and Spanish Embassa∣dour. When the Te Deum was en∣ded, the Cardinall descended the steps of the Altar, and gave the sol∣lemn blessing, after which the Legate putting off his cope waited on the Queen, leading her by the arme to her chair, in which she was carried to the Palace, his Eminence with the Nuntij aforesaid going before her in his Coach. At the staires stood eight Pages with lighted torches, and on the top at the entrance into the hall, a very
fair Company of the principall La∣dies met, and paid their respects to her Majesty who encompassing her, did reverence, and attend her to her lodgings, whither the Cardinall con∣ducted them, who taking his leave, she was left to her repose. In the mean time the artificiall fire∣workes began to Play in the Piazza, which with admirable order, was light all the night, and the streets too aboun∣ded with lights. The same evening the Gentlemen and Ladies had a ball in the Queens Chamber, where the foresaid Counts Francis Maria, and Lodowick Santi∣nelli Brothers, danced a galliard with the Lady Mary Camilla Disploratatii, but because they danced with their Cloakes, and their swords, the Queen desir'd them, for her greater satisfacti∣on, to lay them aside, to the end she might the better observe them, which accordingly they did, & danced a gal∣liard, which so pleased her Majesty, that she seemed desirous to see them Dance the Canaries, so as they with the Lady Emilia Ʋrbani, performed
it smoothly, and with admirable grace. Before they began the said ball, the Cardinall Legate presented to the Queen (to whom it was dedicated) a Printed booke of severall verses composed by Count Francis Maria Santinelli, the greatest part of which were in praise of her Majesty, who was much taken with it, and kindly accepted it, commending it as the birth of a great spirit, and eminent wit, as it generally was held: Her Majesty sup't afterwards pri∣vately in her Chamber, where she heard most rare consorts of instru∣ments, among which was a violin, and arch-lute, which delighted her ex∣treamly, whereupon she received one of them into her service, called An∣thony Maria Ciacchi of Sienna. The next Morning she went to the Monastery of St. Catharine, & heard Mass in that Church, where she heard the rare Musique of those Nunns, two of which are reputed very exqui∣site. The went afterwards into the Monastery, to the great consolation,
and extraordinary content of the Nuns, who could not praise enough her Majestyes affability and cour∣tesie. That day she din'd in publick with the Cardinall,She dines in publick. sitting under a cloth of State, & in the same manner they had us'd in other places, Count Fran∣cis Maria Santinelli was her Sewer of honour, after the fashion of Ger∣many, as the Prince of St. Gregory had been in Ferrara, and Count Ber∣nardin Ubaldini her Cupbearer. Count Hanibal Thiene presented her the napkin, and Signior Francesco Maria Bonamini chang'd her plates. After dinner her Majesty took pleasure in beholding a Spanish Ci∣aeona, which was danc'd with a grace, agility, and incomparable dexterity, by Count Lodowick Santinelli, and she was likewise pleas'd to like certain Playes, call'd the forces of Hercules, perform'd by some persons most nimbly and handsomely. Ha∣ving afterwards been abroad to see some other Churches, and Monaste∣ryes of Nuns, in her return to the
Palace, she was introduced to be∣hold some Academical and Comi∣call representations, the extravagan∣cy and novelty of which pleas'd won∣derfully the Genius and gust of her Majesty,Her Maje∣sty is highly satisfyed with the demonstra∣tions she re∣ceiv'd in Pesaro. so as 'tis no wonder, this Princess said afterwards in publick at Rome, that of all the great honours she receiv'd in the places where she pass'd, none arriv'd to the excess of her satisfaction, but those that were done her in Pesaro, All the compositions were the fruits of the wit, and the Pen of the foresaid Count Francesco Maria Santinelli, a Cavalier, as conspicuous for his ancient Nobility, as esteem'd for the vivacity of his spirit and rare parts. These actions were ended about seven hours in the night, at what time her Majesty supp'd privately, and went to her rest. On the fol∣lowing morning the fifth of the month, the Queen, with her accu∣stomed civility, honoured the Nuns of St. Mary Magdalen with her presence, hearing Mass in their
Church, and the excellent Musick they made her.She departs from Pesa∣ro highly satisfied with the honours she received. After dinner she de∣parted to Sinigaglia, attended by the Cardinall in Coach, with the same traine of Coaches, Gentlemen on horseback, and guards of the Switzers, the foot Souldiers standing within, and without the City in squadrons and files, and discharging from the walls many Canon, Morter-pieces, and Muskets, as they had done at her Majesties entrance. Pesaro is a noble City, populous,The descri∣ption of Pe∣saro. full of Traffick, and abounding with Gentlemen of great worth and civili∣ty. 'Tis seated on the Sea in a chear∣full Scituation, and very pleasant Prospect, all in a plain, and for ma∣ny miles severed from the Hills and the Mountains. The walls are good, with rampards and strong Bullwarks, besides a fine rock built by Giouanni Sforza long since, who at other times was Master of the Place. The Port though decay'd, is of use to little Boats carrying Merchandize to Ve∣nice and other parts. This City was last of all possest by the noble Family
of Rovere, but it fayling in our dayes of male issue, return'd to the Church, as feudatory to it. Here for 9. months in the year the Dukes us'd to dwell, who had for that purpose built a Palace truly royall. The Queen took the way of Fano, on the Confines of which she found my Lord Bargellini of Bologna, a Person of great worth, and Gover∣nour of the City, accompany'd by Signior Luigi Rixadducci, and Count Hanibal Montevecchio the principal Gentlemen. The other stay'd be∣hind to waite on the Magistrates, of which Signior Scipio Forastieri was chief, and the Prior Alexander Ca∣stracani, and Cavalier Peter Soldati. To receive her with more honour, a Gate wall'd up, was open'd, and beautify'd with severall Ornaments, and among other things, they saw under his Holynesses arms, the fol∣lowing inscription.
D. T. V. His Holyness Alexander the se∣venth ruling. P. O. M. Peter Bar∣gellinus the Governour in the year 1655. that Chrstina Queen of Swedland in her passage through the City, might have a nobler entrance, caus'd the Gate to be open'd for her Majesties reception. Here she was receiv'd by the Ma∣gistrates, accompany'd by a noble and numerous traine, and attended to the Palace of the Governour, where the Coaches standing round in the Court, her Majesty not alight∣ing, rare sweet meats were presented her in many silver Basons, of which she tasting some, gave two Basons to Count Hanibal Thiene, giving order the rest should be distributed among the Cavaliers that accompany'd her. Fano is a little City encompass'd with strong walls, partly antique,The descri∣ption of Fa∣no. and partly moderne towards the Seas, with a Bulwark erected by Pope Ju∣lius
the third in a plain Scituation on the shore, famous for the Temple of Fortune, who there was ador'd, and for the remains of the Arch of Au∣gustus. Not far off runs the river Metaurus, and there are yet the re∣licks of some memorable places for the accidents occurr'd in times past. There Asdruball the brother of Hanibal of Carthage was kill'd, and Totila King of the Gothes overcome, and wounded by Narsetes, dying af∣terwards in the Mountains of Ap∣penninus near the Fountains, where the noble river Tyber hath its source. This City abounds with a sprightly Nobility, and very faire structures, and here the two Countesses Mar∣tinozzi, were borne, neeces to his Eminence Cardinall Mazarine, Ann and Mary the wife of his Highness Prince Armand of Conty of the royal blood of France, and Laura marry'd to the Pince of Este eldest Son to the Duke of Modena. The Family of Martnozzi is ancient and noble, having formerly been one of the four noble Families of Sienna, renown'd in
history, as it hath likewise been for the space of 300. years esteem'd the principal in Fano. 'Tis evident in writings, and publick inscriptions in marble seen by me, that in the year 1364. Julius Martonozzi as chief of his Countrey, accompany'd in the name of the publick to Rimini, the Nephew of the Emperour of Con∣stantinople, as it likewise more parti∣cularly appears in the proofs of no∣bility made by Vincent Rinalducci of that City, a Cavalier of Malta, al∣ly'd to the said Family of Marti∣nozzi in the person of Laura, sister to Count Vincent Martonozzi, Grand∣father on the Fathers side to the said Princesses, and Grandmother to the said Cavalier. The Queen leaving Fano, and sa∣luted by the Canon, Mortar-pieces, and Muskets, and reveren▪t by all the Militia, continu'd her journey towards Sinigaglia, where she arriv'd after the setting of the Sun, in such rainy and windy weather, that in hinder'd the volley's of Shot for her welcome to the City. whose Gates,
Walls and Streets abounded with armes. She went directly to the Palace of the Signior Bavieri, the principal Gentlemen there prepar'd for her lodgings, the traine being quarter'd in other neighbouring hou∣ses. Here she was met by the La∣dyes of the City, among whom was a Neece of his Eminence Cardinall Chembini, who being unable to wait on her Majestie, by reason he was sick in Montalbotto his Countrey, gave seasonable orders for accom∣modating that lodging. Here be∣sides the bonfires and lights, which that evening were seen for her Ma∣jesties entertainment, a ridiculous short Comedy was acted in her Chamber by the Count Francis Ma∣ria Santinelli and Lodowick his Brother, which was order'd in one night by Count Francis Maria, for the pleasure of her Majestie who seem'd desirous of it. After the Comedy she likewise desired to see the agility of these two Cavaliers, which they shewed in vaulting, and their skilfulness in fen∣cing
insomuch that as vertue accom∣pany'd with nobility , not on∣ly disposes, but forces the minds of great Personages to affection, so this Princess with her generosity, and re∣fin'd understanding, reflected on these Gentlemens qualityes, and a∣bilityes to serve her. Having there∣fore had full information by the Car∣dinall, of the antient nobility of their Family, in which in each age, they have had men of eminent valour, as Count Sforza Santinelli, Kt. of Michael under Charles the 8. King of France, which was then the first order, and Count Julius Caesar San∣tinelli great Prior of Mssia for the noble Knights of Malta: she first by Holstenius and afterwards by the Ambassadour Pimentel, desir'd them to serve her, whereupon they glorying in the honour of her Majesties ser∣vice, shew'd a readines to obey her, & a little while after overtook her in her journey. Sinigaglia is a City of small com∣pass, but fortify'd with strong Bul∣warks, ditches and breast-works on
the side towards Fano having a chanel which divides it, and serves for a ha∣ven to little barkes. It hath likewise an old rock towards the Sea, forti∣fy'd with thick and strong Towers for its greater security. The Queen departing hence in her Coach with the Cardinall Le∣gate, and attended by all the foresaid traine, arriv'd at the Confines of the legation, where she found Signior Giorgi of Fano, master of the Camp of Pesaro, with a very good body of foot in array, who welcom'd her Ma∣jesty with a very faire volley of shot, where she thank'd the said Legate for her noble entertainment, declare∣ing herself highly satisfy'd with him. The re∣markable qualities of Cardinall Homodei.We may truly say, this Cardi∣nall is the Idea of valour and good∣ness it self. He is of a joviall pre∣sence, of a noble behaviour, most courteous and sincere, and justly re∣puted for his wisdom, prudence and experience in business, very ca∣pable of any great employment. He is called by the title of St. Alexius, was Clerke, and Deane of the Cham∣ber,
had many offices under Pope Urbane, and in that of Commissary Generall of the Army in the Eccle∣siasticall state, gave great testimonie of his zeale and his valour. In the Reign of Pope Innocent, he exercis'd his qualityes with that vertue and freeness, that compassing the ends of his great undertakings; without suffering a sword to be drawne, he deservedly was preferr'd to the pur∣ple oh the 19. of February, 1652. This eminent dignity hath illustrated his Person, but he with his candid behaviour, hath very well answer'd its greatness. In his Legation of Ur∣bin, he acted entirely the parts of a good Prince. He every where hath scatter'd the treasures of his genero∣sity, and being Protector of the Church of St. Charles in the place call'd the Course, hath been at great charge in beautifying and adorning it most splendidly. Between the burnt houses, and Flumicino, the Confines of the mar∣ches with the state of Urbin, they met with the Marquis Tassoni, Go∣vernour
of that Province, a Cavalier of Ferrara of try'd valour, who had with him many Officers of War, and Gentlemen his friends richly cloth'd, together with a troop of horse for his guard, whose souldiers, besides be∣ing very well arm'd & mounted, had Cassocks with four wings of fine blue cloath, with four white Crosses hemm'd with Gold-lace. Here likewise they found my Lord Francis Lucini of Millan,Her Maje∣sties rece∣ption by the Governour of Ancona. the Gover∣nor of Ancona, with a traine of many Gentlemen a horseback, with sutable rich clothes. Both the one and the other alighting with the Gentlemen their Camrades did their duties to the Queen, Lucini was receiv'd into the Coach of the Nuntii, and the Mar∣quis rode before towards the City. As the Queen pass'd along, she was welcom'd by a body of four thou∣sand foot, set in array by the Marquis aforesaid, with five troops of horse flancking them in a fine and martiall manner. The rock of Flumicino sa∣luted her Majestie with many tires of Mortar-pieces, Captain Anthony
Fasat with a troop of horse of the City of Ancona, and Captain Ma∣gagnini with the troop of Jest prece∣ding all the traine. The Queen arriving at the Gate, the artillery of the fortress, and the walls of the City began to be dis∣charg'd, which continu'd till her Majestie was alighted at the Palace. The Magistrates on horseback met her at the Gate, and complemented her Majesty in their black Velvet Gowns, & with their foot cloaths of the same richly trimmed with Gold, being follow'd by a traine of many Gentlemen on horseback, with twelve Pages all Gentlemen of Ancona very finely adorn'd, and 24. Groomes in the livery of the City, and twelve other Footmen in several liveries of the Magistrates, and three Trumpets. The Magistrates at that time were Count Iohn Baptist Ferretti,Her rece∣ption in Ancona. Signior Tomaso Tomasi, Beladino Galli Knight of James, Signior Flamineo Scalamonte, Captain Ierome Bompia∣ri, and Signior Vincent Balestrieri both
Commenders of the order of St. Ste∣phen. All these alighting from their horses, in the name of the City did complement her Majesty, the said Count Feretti speaking to her as their Prior. The Queen standing up recei∣ved their complement, with her usual and Majestique Civility. The twelve Pages were left with her Majesties Coach to attend her, the Magistrates remounting, and con∣tinuing their journey towards the Apostolicall Palace. The souldiers stood in rankes along the streets, and the houses were adorned with fine tapistries. Being come to the Palace, she found in the first hall near the gate, the Principall Ladies of the City, standing in a stately circle, who hand∣somly paid her their respects, waiting on her to the door of her Chamber, whom her Majesty received, and treated with all Kindnesse, and affabi∣lity. Having stai'd a little while in her Chamber, it wanting then an howre to night, she resolved to go see the
famous Arch of Trajan the Empe∣rour, all wrought with fine Marble. The Senate and People of Rome erected it in honour of him, of Ploti∣na his wife, and Martiana his Sister, who were held in veneration as Dei∣ties in that time, as by the inscripti∣ons read there, may be gather'd. Her Majesty went thither in a Chaire, attended by the Nuntii, and the Governour in Coach, with others of quality. She was welcomed with many tires of artillery from Rivelli∣no, which is in the mouth of the Ha∣ven, from the Ships and other Partes towards the Sea. In her Majesties re∣turn she observed two Arches of the Apostolicall Palace, to wit, the first towards the place repolisht of late, and with an old inscription which said. 'Tis made Celestiall, while the Princely Sun beholdes the Arche. And two great Arms, one of the Pope now raigning, and the other of the Queen with the Motto in the midst of them.
The Starr's and Wind favouring. In the second they read. The immortall vertue of Christina Queen of Swedland raises me to a ve∣neration of her Majesty. This Arch of stone reduc'd into the forme of marble of Verona, was on the superficies of the Pillars, Bases, Chapiters, and great medalls wrought in Gold, and upon it were erected the arms of her Majesty between two great statues, one representing the heroicall vertue, and the other liberality, and under that was writ∣ten. By yielding she o'recomes, by fly∣ing quells her enemyes. And under the other, By parting with her Kingdom, she her Empire hath extended. And over the arms in a great thick Pastboard,
By going it encreases. That evening about an houre in the night, all the Piazze, and streets being resplendent with the fires and the lights, her Majesty went from her lodgings, to those that look't in∣to the Piazza. There near the stairs stood a painted machine of wood 36. hands breadths high, which with six Mountains, a starre, and two Oakes, represented the arms of his Holyness. At the foot of these Mountains was the Tyber, which under one hand held a great armes, out of which in∣stead of water, it actually cast wine, with the other supporting the arms of the Queen, on which a Lyon lean'd. On the one side there was a Virgin, which had recourse to the Tyber, and on the other a statue, which sustaining in her hand Trajans Arch, represented the City of Ancona, this Motto being at the foot of the Virgin, I return safe. This machine was full of fire∣workes, which took very handsomly.
The compo∣sitions made in Ancona. in honour of her Ma∣jesty.Many compositions were made in honour of her Majesty, among which were certain verses of Count Paul Ferretti a Cavalier of much ver∣tue, and of an anient Family and Noble, he descending from Ulderick Ferretti Lord of the County of Fer∣retta, above Basil towards the Coun∣ty of Burgundy, who had a daughter marry'd to Albert the second Duke of Austria. The Queen afterwards supp'd in publick in the roome before the Chapell, with the Nuntii and Spanish Ambassadour, they taking place of him. Signior Stefano Renincasa pre∣sented the water for her hands, and the Marquis Francis Tassoni the nap∣kin. The Commender Alexander Fa∣nelli was Sewer, and Cavalier Caesar Nappi her Cupbearer, and every time her Majestie dranke, the signes being given before, the Canon of the For∣tress were discharg'd. My Lord Lewis Gallo Bishop of Ancona, the principall Cavalier of Osimo a person of try'd prudence in the charges and mannagement of
affairs, sustained by him for the holy Sea, supposing the Queen, in order to his instructions from Rome, should quickly have come to his Ca∣thedrall, which is the Church of St. Ciriack, seated on one of those Pro∣montoryes, caused it to be hung with rich Tapistrye, and caused too the Al∣tars to be deck'd with the pretiousest Ornaments. But he could not have that honour, for the said Church be∣ing far off from the Palace, and on a craggy Mountain, the Queen went not thither, but instead of going thither, the day following, when she had heard Mass in the Chapell of the Palace, she seeming desirous to see the famous Reliques kept there, the Nuntii by the Popes authority, gave order that to the said Chapell of the Palace, two Canons should bring them with assistance of other Gen∣tlemen, and one was the tip of the iron of the lance, which open'd the side of our Lord Jesus Christ, left in Ancona by the Ambassadour of Ba∣jazet the Emperour of the Turkes in the year 1492, when he passed
through that place towards Rome, where he gave to Innocent the eighth the head of the speare of the same iron, the other the right foot of St. Anne the Mother of the most glo∣rious Virgin Mary, with the flesh and the bones, given likewise to the said City by the Patriarch of Con∣stantinople Paul Paleolgus in the year 1380. the Queen kneel'd before them, and kissed them with great devotion. My lord Holstenius, who as Canon of the Church of St. Peter had many times handled the relique of the said head of the speare, not only assured her Majesty 'twas true, but likewise affirm'd the colour of the rust was the same, as also Pope Cle∣ment the eighth passing through An∣cona towards Ferrara, had that of Ancona confronted with the other of Rome. The Bishop of Ancona visits her Majesty.This function being ended, the Bishop went to wait on her Majesty, who received him most courteously. After breakfast she continu'd her journey towards Loretto, accompa∣ny'd by the said Governour with all
the retinue to the bridge of Arciato the Confines of Ancona. The Ma∣gistrates waited not upon her, as at her arrivall, because the Master of the Ceremonies told them 'twas not necessary. At her going away she was salu∣ted by all the Artillery, and departed highly satisfy'd with her reception, and the honours done her by that noble City. Ancona is seated on the side of a Mountain which extending it self in∣to the Sea,The descri∣ption of Ancona. makes a kind of Amphi∣theater. It hath a great Haven, and defended as well from the South-east-winds, as exposed to the Nor∣thern, at the head of which is a Rave∣lin founded in the Sea, within which there is the space of above a thousand feet, and the way thither is under the said Arch of Trajan This City is fortify'd with strong walls, which are very well flank't, and a Castle well built, which seated on the Mountain, commands the haven. The houses and streets are somewhat narrow, but of very good
architecture, and industriously or∣der'd, which make it fine and beau∣tifull. The Citizens are courteous and kinde, particularly to Strangers, the commodity of the Sea bringing thither good traffique, and all sorts of merchandize. The Queen was met on the con∣fines by my Lord Gentile the Gover∣nour of Loretto,My Lord Gentile Governour of Loretto meets the Queen. who when he had complemented the Queen in his Holynesses name, returned thence diligently, to receive her at the gate of the City: As soone as the Queen had discovered the top of the holy house, she alighting out of her litter, and kneeling, with very great devo∣tion, kiss'd often the ground, then return'd into her litter,The devo∣tion of her Majestie to∣wards the holy house going on to the bending of the Mountain, where afterwards she alighted again, and walk'd to the Church. The Queen arriving at the Gate of the City, was receiv'd by the said Governor and the Magistrates, all the Artillery being discharg'd from the walls, and the Muskets which were all in rowes in the streets. At the
gate of the Church she was after the usuall manner receiv'd by the Chap∣ter, the Clergy and Bishop,Her arrival at Loret∣to. where her Majestie remained about half an hour, praying with great humility, and afterwards went to the Palace, where having supp'd privately, she re∣tyr'd to her repose. On the 8. of December in the morning she arising betimes went to Confession, and heard Mass, being afterwards present at high Mass, sung at the high Altar with exquisite mu∣sick. As soone as it was ended,The Queen makes a present of her Scepter and Crown at Loretto. she presented at the feet of the holy Image a Crown and royal Scepter empailed with Jewels of great va∣lue. This Princess could not perform the vowes of her Christian genero∣sity, with more proper, and more sig∣nificant representations. 'Twas fit, that if she, be sure of the true and weighty Kingdom of Heaven, had renounced those on Earth, should leave a rare remembrance of it in those tokens of royalty, of which she
had divested her self. And since she had done all for Christs sake, it was likewise necessary, she should leave to his mother, a dear and pretious me∣mory of it. After this she returned to her lodg∣ings, and dined in publique, to satisfy the curiosity of the people, flock't thither in great throngs out of the Mark, and the neighbouring Coun∣tries. Count Ferretti of Ancona pre∣sented the water for her hands, and the Lord Bernard Spada, Cardinall Spadas nephew, the napkin. Count Bonarelli of Ancona was her Sewer, and Signior Urbane Rocci, Nephew to Cardinall Rocci deceased, her Cup∣bearer. Don Anto∣nia della Cueva ar∣rived at Loretto.After dinner Don Antonia della Cueva, with the Lady his wife, arri∣v'd there, who as we said before stai'd behind in Ussulengo, by reason of her sickness, being seen by the Queen with a joy, and content, correspon∣dent to the love she bare them Her Majesty went afterwards to the Sa∣cristy, where she admired the treasure kept there of the rich Presents made
to that house by the religious Piety of severall Princes, and Gentlemen. As she pass'd by the great cupboord, in which were the Scepter and Crown presented by her, t'was open'd for her to behold them, but with her usuall generous modesty, she desir'd it might be shut, she saying those trifles were unworthy to be seen. When she had seen the treasure, and the rest of the curious things there, she retur∣n'd thence to her lodgings, where she was entertained with Musique, and the Conversation of the Nuntij, sup∣ping privately afterwards. The content, joy and tenderness, which her Majesty felt in that Sanctu∣ary, are incapable of expression. These are gifts reserv'd by Heaven, to let vs understand, that God alone with his gracious mercies can give vs in this world, a tast, though it be lit∣tle, of the sweetness, he instills into a soul enamoured of him. In the mean time his Holinesse had received the letter, she had written from Inspruch, as was said before, so as it being after∣wards
seconded, with the news of the Acts of Piety, performed in that place by the Queen, his Beatitude was very much edified with those de∣monstrations. The said letter was as followes. Most Blessed Father, Being arrived in the end, to what I desired so much, my reception into the lap of our holy mother,The Queens letter from Inspruch to his Holiness. the Roman Catholique Church, I would not be wanting to impart it to your Holiness, humbly thanking you for the honour I receiv'd of your loving Commands, which are observ'd by me, with all due respect to your Holiness, I have manifested to the world, that to obey your Holiness, I have left with great gladness that Kingdome, where to honour you, is held an irremissible sin, and have laid by all humane respect, to make it appear, I value more the glo∣ry of obeying your Holiness, than that
of the most deserving throne. I beseech your Holiness to receive me thus de∣vested as I am of all greatness, with the fatherly and accustomed Kindness, you have hitherto been pleased to shew me. I have here nothing else, to sacri∣fice to the holy feet of your Holiness, but my selfe, together with my blood, and my life, which I offer to your Holiness with that blind obedience, that is due, beseeching you to be pleased to dispose so of me, as you shall judge best for the Publique good of our holy Church, to which and to your Holiness, as the onely and true head of the same, I have dedi∣cated the remainder of my life, with a most ardent desire to imploy, and spend it wholy to Gods greater glory. To this end I wish your Holiness many fortu∣nate yeares, which are so necessary for the good, and Common repose of Christi∣anity, beseeching our Lord to conserve in your Holiness, the great gifts he hath given you, and to make me so hap∣py, I may see the long'd for day, in which I may fall at the holy feet of your Holi∣ness, which I humbly doe Kiss, entrea∣ting
you to impart unto me your holy, and paternall benediction &c. Your Holynesses most obe∣dient Daughter, CHRISTINA. Inspruch the 5. of No∣vember, 1655. The descrip∣tion of Lo∣retto.The City of Loretto reduc'd into the Compass of a little Borough, on the edge of a mountain, is fruitfull. It's forme is somewhat long, at the head of which towards the Sea, is the Church nobly painted, and in the midst of it the holy house of the Vir∣gin Mary, the most glorious Mother of Christ the redeemer of the world. Before the gate of the said Temple is a handsome Piazza, and in the mid∣dle of it a fountain, which throwes up store of water. On the right hand are the Governours Palace, and their ha∣bitations, who officiat in the Church. 'Tis three miles from the Sea, and
chearfully seated, being fortified with regular walls, and strong rampards, and flankt with great towers and bul∣warkes. Without the gate is a little Borough, full of Inns and Chambers to be hired, for the lodging of great store of people, who flock to this de∣votion continually, the most vene∣rable and miraculous of all Christen∣dome. From the top of this holy Moun∣tain, the Queen was delighted in be∣holding, in a very fine prospect, the Sea, many Castles, and Townes built here and there on those Mountaines and hills. She was pleas'd too in see∣ing towards Ancona, the Promonto∣ry Camero, under which lies Sirolo, a place much renowned for the famous Crucifix. She observ'd too the scitua∣tions of Osimo, and Urbin, and the Castle of Cincolo built by Titus La∣bienus, of whom Cicero speakes bi∣tingly. On the 11th. in the Morning ha∣ving break-fasted a little,She departs from Lo∣retto. she depar∣ted from Loretto about 16 houres, being saluted by the Artillery, and
Muskets, and accompani'd by the Governour to the confines of Re∣canati, where she found some Coaches with six horses, full of the Gentry, my Lord Gallio Sonne to the Duke of Alvito of Mollan, Gover∣nour of the Marke, a Person of high quality, who when he had comple∣mented the Queen, went into his Coach, and return'd to Macerata the Metropolis of that Province, and his residence, to wait uppon her there. The descri∣ption of Re∣canati.The Queen pass'd through Recana∣ti, a little City three miles distant from Loretto, and seated on the ridge of a high Mountain, encompass'd with hills and little Mountaines very plea∣sant, and fruitfull, and begirt with old walls with some ancient towers. She was receiv'd at the gate by Sig∣nior Luigi Bighi the Governour, and the Magistrates, the cheif of which were Signior Marius Massucci Bon∣francesco Vulpiani, and James Ange∣lelli the principall Gentlemen. The streets not onely abounded with Souldiers standing in rankes, but were finely hung with tapistries, though it
rained very hard, and in that manner her Majesty was accompanied to the other gate. She would have staid a little in this place, to see in the great Church the Sepulcher of Pope Grego∣ry the 12th. who in the Councell of Constance renounced the Papacy, but the weather being ill she continu'd her journey. Four miles farther in a very spaci∣ous feild they saw by the order of the Marquiss Tassoni aforesaid, above 8000. Souldiers of horse and foot re∣duced into squadrons, who with fre∣quent volleys saluted her Majesty. She passing the river Potenza, which divides and waters a fine and pleasant valley, bordering on Mountaines, and fruitfull hills, arrived in the end at the Arch of Pio near the gate of the City.The Arch Pio. The foresaid Arch is so call'd as long since erected by the Cardinall Charles Emanuel Pio of happy memory, who for his glorious Government of that Province, was generally applauded and commended by the People. By the said Governour Gallio,She is met at Macera∣ta. and the Magistrates, her Majesty was met
with many Gentlemen on horseback, and the said Magistrates complemen∣ted her with all due respect. The Arch was beautified with Pictures, Figures, Mottos, Hierogly∣phicks, and Inscriptions, in the praise and honour of her Majesties arrivall, the streets being richly adorned, and the Souldiers standing in rankes. Twelve Pages of the principall fami∣lies were nobly attir'd to attend on her Majesty. She is com∣plemented by the La∣dies.The Queen went in her litter to the Palace her lodging, where many handsome Ladies, most splendidly apparrelled, waited on her, on of them called Sigra Girolama Cicceli∣ni complementing her Majesty in the name of the rest, which the Queen very courteously returning, they went to their houses, and her Majesty supp'd privately. On the 12th. in the Morning she arose betimes, and according to her custome, went to the Church of St. Julian, which is the Cathedrall, where the Bishop my Lord Silvestri had erected a fine Arch with various
Figures, Mottos, and Inscriptions in praise of her Majesty. At her en∣trance into the Church, she was re∣ceiv'd at the gate with the usuall ce∣remony of the Chapter and Clergy, and Te Deum was Sung with most ex∣cellent musique. Afterwards she heard Mass, and returned to the Pa∣lace, where when she had breakfasted,Her depar∣ture from Macerata. she advanced towards Tolentino ten miles remote. At her going away, she was accompanied by the said Go∣vernour to the confines of that Dioces, and saluted by the Souldiers with Morter-peices and Muskets, her Majesty being very well satisfied with the honours that City had done her, the most noble and most famous of the Marck, which is indifferently big, and seated on a Mountain, but not steepy, and large, where the Go∣vernour of the Province resides. From Macerata her Majesty ad∣vanced towards Tolentino,She advan∣ces to To∣lentino. on the con∣fines of which they found three thou∣sand Souldiers by order of the Mar∣quiss Tassoni, reduced into squadrons by the Sergant Major Mutius Cam∣pani.
Being arriv'd at the gate of the Ci∣ty, my Lord Francis Maria Monaldi the Governour waited on her, as like∣wise the cheif standard-bearer, Doct∣or Nicholas Rotilini, and the Priors Signior Joseph Gualtieri, Signior An∣thony Capiccioni, and Bartholmew Martini, with the rest of the Magi∣strates, and the principall Persons of the Town. Her Majesty passing af∣terwards through the streets, which abounded with Souldiers, and were hung with tapistries, alighted at the Church of St. Nicholas, where she was received with the accustomed ce∣remonies, and saw both the arms and the hands of the said Saint,She visits the Church of St. Ni∣cholas. the Por∣renger he used to eat in, and his mira∣culous blood, which as 'tis affirmed, hath often been seen to melt, and to move, when some sinister accident befell Christianity, as it happened, when the Turk got the Kingdome of Cyprus, and lately Canea in the King∣dome of Candia. This relique is held in great veneration, and kep't in the Altar of the Chapell of the Saint aforesaid, and when it is shewed, the
Magistrates are by, who keep the keyes of it. Her Majesty went from the Church to her lodging in the Pal∣lace of Duke Sanesio, which was splendidly furnish'd, where she did eate privately, and was entertained by the Nuntii till supper was ready. On the 11. of December when her Majesty had heard Mass,The descri∣ption of Tolentino. and break∣fasted, she departed from Tolentino with the traine of my Lord Gallio the Governour of the Province. This City encompass'd with old fashion Walls and slight Towers, is seated in the bottom of the said val∣ley, watered by the River Chianti, whose Bishop is likewise the Bishop of Macerata, the two Bishopricks being united together. The Queen advancing towards Camerino, went the way of Valci∣marra, and Saravalle, and arriving at Belforte a wall'd Towne on a Moun∣tain three miles distant from Tolen∣tino, found my Lord Casanatta the Governour of the City, a horseback, accompany'd by many Gentlemen and Cavaliers, and a troop of horse
in good equipage, who came to the Confines of his Government to re∣ceive her. As soone as her Majestie appeared, he alighted and complemented her, waiting on her all the way.Her recepti∣on in Ca∣merino. At Val∣cmarra they found 300. foot, and as, many more near the City, where she was receiv'd at the gate by the Magistrates, the chief of which was Signior Fulvius Magalotti, and by the Colledge of the Doctors and Counsellors, all very well apparrel∣led, and attended with the principall Gentlemen of the City, with Trum∣pets, Drumms, and many Souldiers standing in rankes in the streets, which were hung with Tapistries, though it was rainy weather. Being arrived at the gate of the Cathedrall, she was by my Lord Emilius Altieri the Bishop, the Chapter, and Cler∣gie, received with the accustomed Ceremonies, and excellent musick, she went afterwards to the Bishops Palace, her lodging, and after a little repose sent for the Musitians, whose singing entertained her till supper
time, which was private. All the streets and windowes a∣bounded with bon-fires and lights, but the weather being ill, cold, snowy and rainy, her Majestie her self pro∣hibited the discharging of the Ca∣non. In the Hall of the Palace were fif∣teen of the principall Ladyes,Count Montecuc∣coli re∣turnes from Rome to her Majesty. Sigra Margherita Morelli complementing her Majestie in the name of all the others. That evening Count Mon∣tecuccoli returned from Rome to her Majestie, who as we said before, had dispatch't him from Ferrara to the Pope. In the Piazza was erected an Arch triumphall with two great Pillars, over which appeared a rain∣bow. The said Arch was adorn'd with various Figures and many In∣scriptions, and Mottos. The Queen lay in Camerino with part of her train, the rest going by the valley to Valcimarra, to avoid that uneasie ascent. On Sunday the 14. of De∣cember her Majestie arose before day, and went to hear Mass, then re∣turning to her lodging, and break∣fasting,
she departed accompany'd, and alwaies attended by my Lord the Governour,She departs from Ca∣merino. and the Souldiers a horseback to the Confines, 300. foot being reduc'd into squadrons at Muccia, as she passed along. The descrip∣tion of Ca∣merino,The City of Camerino is seated on a hill in the midd'st of Appenninus, being encompassed with old walls, and almost wholly ruinous. Towards the South it is guarded by an ancient rock, the then Commander of which was Signior Giouanni Maria Benigni of that City, in the roome of the Cavalier his Brother, the Artillery of which was taken away by Pope Ur∣bane the eighth of happy memory in the time of the War. The Palace, where the Governour and Treasurer reside, is somewhat ancient, but that of the Bishop modern and handsom. This City in times past was govern'd perpetually by the Family of Varani, and in the year 1518. erected into a Dutchy, and given to Giouanni Maria Varani the last of this Family, who left but one daughter call'd Ju∣lia, borne of Catherine Cibo neice to
Innocent the eighth, and marryed to the Duke of Urbin, who being master of it, resigned it to the Apostolical Sea, by exchange for Sin gaglia. Af∣terwards another of the Family of Varani pretending to it by inheri∣tance, as included in the former Con∣cession, it was granted by Pope Paul the 3. to Pier Luigi Farnese his kins∣man, who was invested Duke of the Place, and finally in the year 1344. changed it for the states of Parma and Piacenza. My Lord Marazzani the Gover∣nour of Umbria, coming from Peru∣gia, the place of his residence, to those Confines, appeared at Collefiorito, accompanyed by a very noble traine of Cavaliers, and attendance, and complemented her Majesty who was saluted by 300. foot Souldiers, and dined at the new houses, where by the good order of Signior Baldocci, she was royally entertained,She arrives at Foligno. and ar∣riv'd about an hour in the night at Foligno. At the Gate of the City she was met by my Lord Cuccni Romano the
Governour, and the Magistrates who receiv'd, and waited on her, being accompany'd by twelve Pages very splendidly apparrell'd, with lighted Torches in their hands, appointed for her Majesties service. She lay in the Palace of the Ven∣turini, but at the charges of the A∣postolical Chamber, and by order of my Lord Marazzani aforesaid. Be∣fore the gate of the Palace was an Arch supported by four Pillars with severall Figures, Mottos and Hie∣roglyphicks explained in intilligible inscriptions. That City had prepared severall bon-fires, and things of that kind, to make their respects to her Majesty more splendidly appear, & the like too the said Cities of Ma∣cerata and Camerino had done, but the very ill weather, which continued still rainy, hindered their effects. The Queen at her entrance into the Hall, was received by many La∣dies, one of which complemented her in the name of the rest, all of them afterwards waiting on her Ma∣jesty to her lodgings, where she
courteously dismissed them. The content and concourse of the neigh∣bouring Cities was great, and particu∣larly of Perugia, for having the con∣veniency of seeing so worthy and so vertuous a Queen, where she supped betimes and privately. Foligno is a City of little com∣pass, with old fashion walls,The scitu∣ation of Fo∣ligno. being pleasant, full of traffique, and very much frequented, especially in the times of the Fair, which is very fa∣mous. Here they see that renowned gate, out of which the Citizens ex∣pelled the Lumbards. 'Tis chearfully seated in the plain of a valley, which is one of the fruitfullest, and best cul∣tivated of any, it bordering on both sides on hills abounding with olive trees, vines, fruites, and habitations, insomuch as it lookes like a beauti∣full scene. Her Majesty determining to go see the City of Assisi,She goes to Assisi. to honour there the Temple of the seraphiall Father Saint Francis, on the 13th. in the Morning after Mass, departed from Foligno, accompanied by the Gover∣nour
aforesaid, and all the attendance: At Spello she was met by two troops of Launciers,She is met by Cardi∣nall Ron∣dinino. and two others of light horsemen, and on the confines by Cardinall Paul Emilius Rondinino the Bishop of that City, with severall Coaches full of Gentry, and many Pages, and Grooms in rich liveries of velvet, where they met two other troops of horse, one of Launciers, and the other of Cuiraciers of the City of Assisi, with others of the Province. The said Cardinall alighting out of his Coach, when her Majesty was in sight, advanced towards her, but she discovering him, caused suddenly her litter to stop, and alighting on a car∣pet brought thither, and spread on the ground by the order of the Cardinall, receiv'd his complement with signes of great esteem and affection. His Eminence returning to his Coach a∣nother way, advanced to the City, to bee ready to receive her at the Church. The Queen continued her jour∣ney, being saluted from time to time by the Musketiers, reduced into
squadrons in the most conspicuous places, and particularly at St. Mary of the Angells. Thence approaching to the City, where there were two other Companies like them, she was recei∣v'd at the gate by Signior Granella Granella da Gualdo the Governour, & the Magistrates, who complemented her. She advanced to the Church of Saint Francis,She visits the Church of Saint Francis. at her entrance into which, the Cardinall and Clergy per∣forming the accustomed ceremonies, she past to the high Altar, and having heard Mass, which was solemnely Sung by my Lord Forreggiani, one of the four Nuntij, with exquisite Mu∣sique, went into the secret sacristy to reverence the holy veile of our Savi∣our, and the other famous reliques, which are kept o're the Altar of the said Chappell. Her Majesty saw likewise the fa∣mousest records of that most holy Church, and being afterwards saluted again, with discharging of the Canon & Mortar-peices, she went in her lit∣ter to the Palace of the Signior Giaco∣billi, appointed for her lodging, where
with her great, and royall affability, she kindly received the dutifull tri∣bute paid devoutly to her by the La∣dies,She is roy∣ally enter∣tained. who there were very numerous, and splendidly attir'd, and waited on her Majesty to her Chamber. The said palace was furnisht with fine and rich tapistries, and on the top of the staires was erected a fair lodg with a prospect enrich't with many Figures, Mottos, and Inscriptions. In the mean time the table was furnish't with transparent workes of jellys, and statues of Sugar, which were so well design'd, so mysterious, and remarka∣ble, that they gave both pleasant nou∣rishment to the body and mind. Her Majesty din'd in publique with the Cardinall, Signior Marcello Ron∣dinini, the Cardinalls Brother being her Cupbearer, and Count Francis de gli Odoli, Count Angelos Sonne the no∣ble Cavalier of Peruga, her Sewer, and Count Sforza Fiumi of Assisi, presenting the napkin. To express the dainty meats, and exquisite feast, it may suffice to say, they had what the earth, the air, and the waters could
afford, that was excellent good, and pretious. While her Majesty was at table, the Nuntij, the Spanish Am∣bassadour, with the rest of the great Cavaliers, and eminent Courtiers, were splendidly feasted in the Con∣vent of Saint Francis, where ten ap∣partaments richly furnish't were pre∣pared. When dinner was ended, her Ma∣jesty retir'd into her Chamber, and calling for my Lord Holstenius, who was then return'd from Saint Francis his convent, told him, she desired to see once again one by one the tri∣umphs, or statues of Sugar, with which they had adorned the table, which were brought in all hast to her Majesty, who admired the workmans invention and wit. And since they were so liked by her, who with her re∣fin'd understanding, can discerne in each thing what is beautifull and good, it will not peradventure be displeasing to the reader, to have a short description of it, without preju∣dicing other feasts, where tables set out in this manner, we omitted to
describe, as a thing too long, and te∣dious peradventure. The quality of some sta∣tues which set out, and adorned the table.In one were represented the four Cardinall vertues, which supported in the right hand on a Pillar adorned with embossed works a royall Crown, at the corners of which Pillar sate four boyes each holding up a Crown, and a Scepter, and before the said Pillar were four meddalls adorned with embossed works, with Chaplets of gold. In another on a round Pillar the Goddess Pallas, who giving her spear and helmet to a boy, stood presen∣ting with her right hand in a reverent posture, a Crown to the Queen, see∣ming to yeild to her the superiority in the Sciences. The said Pillar was adorned with embossed works cove∣red with gold, among which were distributed four Harpies of counter∣feit brass. They saw afterwards a square pe∣destall adorned with gilt medalls in embossed works, and Time lying along, on which in a little Pillar stood Fame, who holding in her left hand a
trumpet, held with the right o're her head, a meddall representing the Queen. She held Time bound with a chain of gold, who covered with his robe many meddalls of Heros, and being so bound, seem'd subject to the fame of her Majesty. At the corners of the pedestall four flowers sprowted up in the forme of a Pinetree, which budded our of feillage worke of gold, whose artificiall posture shew'd art had emulated nature. In the midst of the front of the pillar was a meddal of the colour of a rose limn'd with gold, with ornaments about it of severall flowers distributed with proportiona∣ble simmetry. Then a clow'd was discover'd in another, all resplendent with gold, on which was extended the Chariot of the Sunne, which drawn by four hor∣ses, was guided by Apollo, who carried in his right hand a bundle of gilt eares of corn, or'e which a little Angell sup∣ported a Crown of gold, and with the left hand held the reyns of the horses finely barded with ribbands of gold and silver, a little boy going before
them in the air with a torch in his hand denoting the dawning of the day. There was besides another round Pillar, on which a silver cliffe squezed his locks wreathed with lawrell, the extremity of the Figure ending in a rock, on which grew a palm tree dila∣ting it's boughs over it, and was with the left hand embraced by the same, the right hand pointing to the herbes it produces for the service of Kings. About the Pillar were carved four lit∣tle ones, where were as many little boyes with Coronets of Cedar, within which they discovered the leaves of the flowers sustained by the round Pillar, four Harpies of brass with gilt Spanish olives, and a Chaplet of gold in their hands, presenting each a dish of Pomegranates, which afterwards was intermixed with Pine-apple ker∣nells in a little guilded Chaplet joy∣n'd to the feillage work of other fruites the earth does produce, with carvings adorned with gold. When her Majesty had seen and attentively gaz'd on the said tri∣umphs,
she said one of them was wanting, which the Cardinall had sent to my Lord Sarvantij one of the Ma∣sters of the ceremonies to his Holi∣ness, who lodged without the palace, but her Majesty desiring to see it, it was quickly brought to her. This represented Immortality, which on a square Pillar adorned with antique faces of gold, held up with her hands o're her head a gilt circle, within which was a meddall with the Picture of her Majesty, as one that had no confines, but what were as∣signed her by eternity. Three boyes stood distributed on the brims of the dish, one of which representing pain∣ting on a table of gold, made her Picture with the pensill, the other signifying sculpture carv'd her in mar∣ble, and the third denoting history with the pen, made characters on a book, all three shewing joyntly, they were busie in perpetuating the name of her Majesty. Among them were three little vases, adorn'd with antique faces cover'd over with gold, which held gilt eares of corn, and in the space
between the boyes, and the vases, flowers of Sugar budded forth of ad∣mirable workmanship, all resting on candid Sugar, which ended in a very fine Chaplet. The Queen took great pleasure in beholding these rare peices, not be∣cause they contained her prayses, whose modesty and generosity con∣temnes all applause and Commenda∣tion, but onely for the invention, and excellency of the workmanship. She visits the Church of the An∣gells.These things being ended, her Ma∣jesty accompanied by the Cardinall went to visit the Church of the An∣gells, and permitting not his Emi∣nence to go farther, it being then late, went into her litter, and advanced to∣wards Foligno, being very well satis∣fied in having beheld that famous de∣votion, and known the civility, and eminent qualities of the Cardinall,The quali∣ties of Car∣dinall Ron∣dinino. a Person abounding with the vertues, sutable to an Ecclesiasticall magnani∣mous, and accomplished Prince. This Gentleman nephew to Cardi∣nall Lodowick Zacchia of happy me∣mory, was born in Rome, and finish't
there his studies in humanity, and philosophy in the Roman Colledg, under the fortunate discipline of the Jesuits, accomplishing those of the law in Perugia, where he was in the mean time made Clerk of the Cham∣ber by Pope Vrbane the eight. When he had administred many offices of that Tribunall, he likewise performed with Cardinall Raggi, the charge of Treasurer in the place of Cardinall Rapaccioli, who was Commissary of the Souldiers, after which on the 12th. of July, 1643. he was preferred to the Purple with the title of Saint George, and Pope Innocent the tenth conferred on him the Bishopprick of Assisi. This City is seated on the side of the Mountain Asius,The descrip∣tion of Assi∣si. which in a bending line by the side of a high hill, derived from the said Mountain Asius, extendeth it self a mile long from the East to the West, lying whol∣ly towards the South, and though at the head, and the shoulders, 'tis en∣vironned with Mountains not uneasy, and rich in fruitfull Pastures, it hath
fertil hills at the slanke, and finely arayed and a most pleasant plain at the feet, which no less for it's great∣ness, than fertility, is one of the most beautifull, and best parts of Jta∣ly. She re∣turnes to Foligno.Her Majesty returned to Foligno about three howres in the night, be∣ing met by the Governour, the Ma∣gistrates, and part of her own train, which staid there, the night being resplendent with many fireworks, and her Majesty Supping privately. The Morning after the 14th. of the month▪ she went to the Dome, at the gate of which she was received in the usuall forme by my Lord Montecatini the Bishop of that City. That Church was very splendidly adorned, where her Majesty heard Mass, then vi∣siting the said Church of the Nunns, where she heard a little Musique, she returned to the Palace, and dined there in publique, for their satisfaction, who desired to see her at dinner. The end of the Fifth Book.
The History of the sacred, and Royal Majestie of Christina Alessandra, Queen of Swedland, &c. The Sixth Book. The Argument. FRom Foligno the Queen goes to Spoleto, where she is roy∣ally treated, by Cardinall Fachenetti. She goes to Ter∣ni where she is waited on by my Lord Bonfiglioli the Governour of that City, she passes to Gallese, and is met by my Lord Visconte Governour of the Patrimony, she advances to Ca∣prarola, where she receives the comple∣ments
of the Spanish Ambassadour, and thence goes to Bracciano, and finally to Olgiata, whither the Cardinall Legates a latere come to complement her Majestie, & conduct her to Rome, where she makes her private entrance, and is received by the Pope with all courtesie. She makes her solemn en∣trance into Rome. AFter dinner her Majesty de∣parted from Foligno to the Con∣fines, being accompany'd by my Lord Marazzani,She departs towards Spoleto. and all his retinue, and waited on to the gate by the Magistrates of the City, and saluted by the Canon, Mortar-pieces and Muskets, the Souldiers standing in squadrons and rankes in severall pla∣ces. Then continuing her journey through that fruitfull Valley, she dismissed on the Confines the Pre∣late aforesaid, seeming very highly satisfyed with him. And here she was met by my Lord Capecelatro a Neopolitan, brother to the Duke of Sejano, Governour of Spoleto, who having with him a great traine of
Gentlemen, and two troops of horse, complemented her Majesty. Three miles without Spoleto, Car∣dinall Caesar Fachenetti the Bishop of the City,Cardinal Fachenetti meets her. came out to meet the Queen, accompanyed by my Lord Faustus Poli of Spleto the Bishop of Amelia, the Governour of Orvieto, the Prince of Gallicano, and many Gentlemen. The two Prelates a∣foresaid were there expresly to assist in this service the Cardinall. The Prince came from Rome on the 11. in the evening, on purpose to waite on her Majesty, and being himself lodged in the Palace of the Bishop, gave place to her Majesties traine, and retiring into the house of a Gen∣tleman his friend met with the oppor∣tunity of paying his respects to the Queen, who received him very cour∣teously, having known long before his deserving, and eminent quali∣ties. The Cardinall having comple∣mented her Majesty returned into his Coach, and went before, to be ready to receive her in his Bishoprick,
who before she arrived at the gate, found many thousand Souldiers in squadrons, who saluted her with volleys of shot. The Magistrates ap∣pearing with the Pompe peculiar to the sprightly inhabitants of Spoleto, presented her Majesty with their humble respects at the gate of the City, who caused the Coach to be stop't, and kindly received them. Diverse Arch triumphalls were ere∣cted in the streets, which were all adorned with Figures, Inscriptions, and other sprightly Mottos. Among all the foresaid Arches, the remarka∣blest was that, which was repaired o're an ancient gate of the City, where besides the Inscription set there, in honour of the Queen, there was another alluding to the place where Haniball of Carthage after the battail won at Thrasymenus, desiring to advance towards Rome, was put to flight, whereupon the same gate retains to this day the name of the gate of the flight. The Queen passed through the Piazza reduced into the form of a
Theater. The circuite of the late∣rall Portici was enclosed with two great gates, in each of which were Inscriptions, Mottos, & fine Figures. This Theater was made at the charge of the Gentlemen of the City, in∣cited by the generous example of the Cardinall, who first of all contribu∣ted to the worke. They did it sup∣posing the Queen would have come thither by night, the better to see the fireworkes, which were plac't up∣on it, and played the same evening. On the great gates of the Theater were the Arms of the Queen, with severall Mottos of the Kingdom of Swedland, on the one side her Ma∣jesty, and on the other the King her Father, both on horseback. The Queen being entered the Palace of the Bishop,She is waited on by the La∣dies of the City. met a very noble company of Ladies, who ha∣ving had before of the Cardinall, a splendid collation of sweet-meats, were assembled together to wait on her Majesty. At her entrance in∣to the Hall, they all kissed her hands, and were received by her with the
greatest affability, her Majesty being pleased they should be present, and sit at a musicall consort, which was in her own Chamber, and served for her Majesties entertainment that night. The subject represented Faith tri∣umphing, which having sent three Persons to Sing the Queens Prayses, appeared at last inviting her to enter into the little ship of St. Peter. The Queen with some of her Do∣mestiques, lay in the Bishops Palace, the Nuntij, the Ambassadour Pimen∣tel, Count Montecuccoli, and the other cheife Gentlemen, being distri∣buted in severall private houses, in every one of which were Gentlemen of the City deputed to their service. The direction of these lodgings was committed to the care of Signior Jo∣seph Pallettonio, a Gentleman of much spirit and active, with the assistance of whom, and the Signior Vincent Pian∣ciani Treasurer of Perugia, and Ni∣cholas Benedetti Treasurer of Spoleto, all things were performed with good order, and punctuality. On the 15th. in the Morning her
Majesty attended by the Cardinall, the Nuntij, the Ambassadours, Pre∣lates, Princes, and all the Nobility, went to the Cathedrall to hear Mass,She goes to the Cathe∣drall. the Souldiers standing in rankes all along in the streets. The porch of the Church was beautified with Figures, Inscriptions, Mottos, and other orna∣ments, done by the Cardinall in the name of the clergy of Spoleto. When Mass was ended, she retur∣ned to the Palace, and dined in pub∣lique with the Cardinall Signior Maffeo Rosari Master of the Camp of the Province, and Gentleman of the City, presented her the napkin,She dines in publique. and the ancientest Magistrate in his habit, the water for her hands. The Nuntij, the Spanish Ambassadour, Count Montecuccoli, and the other cheif per∣sons of the Court, dined at the same time in Gentlemens houses, where they were well attended, and had every thing in order. Her Majesty resolved to goe after dinner to the Church of the Domini∣cans, to see many reliques, and parti∣cularly the holy naile of our Saviour,
but the great snow hindered all. On Wednesday in the evening her Majesty was pleased to goe to the Town-house and hear there a play Sung in musique by some young Gentlemen of the City, with severall machines & chan∣ges of Scenes. She departs from Spo∣leto.On the 16th. after dinner her Ma∣jesty departed from Spoleto, being at∣tended by the Cardinall some miles without the City, and the Governour to the confines of the Dioces of Ter∣ni. When the Cardinall took his leave of the Queen, hee told him, she not onely was highly satisfied With the honours he had done her, but extreamly well edified with the very great knowledg, she discovered in his discourses with her. The eminent qualities of Cardinall FachenettiThis Cardinall is of Bologna, and of the noble family of the Marquisses Fachenetti, being Pope Innocent the ninth's nephew's sonne. He was first Referendarius, then Nuntio in Spain, where he gave a great testimony of his understanding, and capacity. At his return to Rome, he was for his eminent goodness and worth a little
while after preferred to the purple on the 13th. of July, 1643. He is one of those Cardinalls, which hold up the glory of the Sacred Colledg, and the honour of the Church. He hath a quick intellect, a solid discourse, a setled judgment, and a refined pru∣dence in the management of great affaires. He hath a grace and sweet∣ness in all his entertainments, with which he attracts the encomiums, and praises of all those that know him, he having especially the generous mind of an Emperour. The Citizens of Spoleto endeavour'd to welcome this great Queen, with all the expressions of gladness and joy, and though to comply with the genius of the Prince, the subjects sometimes use to turn the sincerest, and purest affection into flattery, yet in this occasion, the people of Spoleto very fully corresponded with their naturall ingenuity, as well with a du∣tifull respect, to second the good in∣tention of his Holiness, as to shew the partiality of their ancient inclina∣tions towards this Princesses great
name. Those of Spoleto, as the histo∣ries of greatest credit, report, are no∣bly descended, and happily propaga∣ted of the reliques of the Goths, who after the fall of their Kingdome in Italy remained in Spoleto, as a City very nobly adorned, and augmented by Theodorick their King. And albeit the hostility of Totilas may diminish, much less renew afterwards, the least sense of gratitude, yet the piety, and other sublime qualities of this Queen, are advantagiously sufficient to repair very fully whatsoever, the deadly re∣membrance of the cruelties of that King, had demolished, and restore with ample recompence the memory of the benefits, this Countrey so glo∣ries to have had from the North. The descrip∣tion of Spo∣leto.Spoleto is a famous City, and abounds with all things, being seated at the head of a Plain towards the East, partly at the foot of the Moun∣taines, and for the greatest part on the Mountaines themselves. It was in former times the residence of the Princes of Lumbardy, and is now esteemed among the most conspicu∣ous
provinces of Vmbria. Here they see the vast Palace of Theodorick the King of the Gothes, as likewise the foundation of a very fair Theater, and of the Temple of concord, and without the City high and strong forms of aqueducts, partly cut from the sides of Apenninus, and partly rais∣ed from the bottome of the valley with arches of brick. The high roofes of the Cathedrall are remarkable there, the walls of marble the rock built in the Amphitheater, and like∣wise the stone-bridg, which supported with great art, by 24. great pillars, joyned the highest part of the City to the rock, or to the Amphitheater sea∣ted on another hill. Here her Majesty was entertained with musique, and particularly being pleased with the skill of Francis Joseph Tomasini, who plaid on the Violin, received him into her service. On the confines of Terni her Ma∣jesty was received by my Lord Bon∣figlioli of Bologna,Her recep∣tion at Terni. the Governour of the City, who came thither accompa∣nied by forty Gentlemen on horse∣back,
with many Servants a foot in fine liveries, he having with him many troops of horse, and Compa∣nies of foot. The Queen being come to the gate call'd Spoletana, was met by the Nobility, and among the rest by six Gentlemen, who repre∣senting the Magistrates, complemen∣ted her in the name of the publick, and waited on her through the City, all along as she passed the streets, and windows being beautified with ornaments and lights. At her ar∣rivall at the Dome, she saw erected before that Piazza a triumphall Arch, with very fine Inscriptions, and Figures in her praise. The Frontis∣piece of the Church annexed to the Seminary, and the Palace of the Bishop, resembles a Theater, and is beautify'd with thirty windowes, which were splendidly adorn'd, and most of them had two torches a∣piece with other lights. At the gate of the said Cathedrall her Majestie was received as usually by the chief of the Clergie in the absence of the Cardinal Bishop, the
Church being richly set forth, and illuminated with great store of torches and candles, with quires of rare musick, and a young man of the house of Sciamanna reciting a Sermon very handsomly. The Functions of the Church be∣ing ended, the Queen by the fore∣said my Lord Bonfiglioli the Gover∣nour, was conducted to the Palace of the Bishop, very sumptuously furnish't by the Officers of the Car∣dinall Bishop, her Majestie being pleas'd to heare in that fine Oratory a spirituall play recited to her with excellent musick. Don Antonio della Cueva with the Lady his wife, and their train, were lodged too in that Palace. The Nuntii with their retinue were ac∣commodated in the Palace of Signi∣or or Ferdinand Sciamanna, the Spanish Ambassadour Pimentel in my Lord Ferentillis, Count Montecuccoli in Count Jerome Spadas, and the Mar∣quis Bentivogli in Signior Antonio Manasseis: Besides diverse Gen∣tlemen were distributed in the
houses of the Marquisses Castelli, and so from hand to hand; all the rest of the meaner sort were orderly lodged after 3. hours in the night, the Nuntii informed the Governour of the necessity of her Majesties dining on the following Friday in Otricoli, a Town remote 15. miles, and though the place was very in∣commodious, and wanted all sorts of Provision; the Governour sent presently thither eight loaded mules, with Cooks Sewers, Cup boord-keepers, Butlers, and all other ne∣cessary Servants, who travailling all the night, arrived there betimes in the morning, to get all things ready that were needfull. The ho∣nours done her in Ter∣ni.The Queen sup'd privately in Ter∣ni, that night being attended by her owne Domesticks. However the entertainment was regall, and aboun∣ded with exquisite meats. The table was deck'd with severall statues, and triumphs, which shew'd in the beau∣ty of the work and designe, the ex∣cellency of the Roman spirit, and gust. The Souldiers stood in rankes,
all along, and gave her frequent volleys with their muskets and mortal-pieces, all the City being resplendent with the bon-fires and lights. This City is little, but handsome,The descri∣ption of Terni. The circuit of which is not modern. The Territory is narrow, but fruit∣full, by reason of the goodness of the soyle, and abundance of waters, and being exposed to the south, produces store of fruit, and excel∣lent fowle. The medows are curthrice and four times a year, and af∣terwards serve for Pasture. Here are seen many Inscriptions in marble, which shew it was a free City of the Romans, and retains still some re∣mains of the septentrional Nations. Cardinal Rapaccioli is Bishop of the place, Who though confin'd Rome by his indisposition, was not wan∣ting though far off, to demonstrate large heart, his great spirit, and na∣tural generosity, in the fruits of his happy invention and expressions of obsequious respects to her Majesty. The Queen departed from TerniHer depar∣ture.
on the 17. in the morning, attended by my Lord Bonfiglioli, with some Souldiers, and the traine of the Gen∣tlemen. But he went before to pro∣vide all things fitting at Otricoli, so as because the straightness of the place was not capable of so great a retinue, he with an ingenious shift, caused the people to dine quickly by course, as they came, and sent them immediately away, to make roome for the rest, and avoid confusion. A∣bout twenty hours her Majesty ar∣rived, being received by the said Prelate, and many Souldiers, who standing in their rankes,She dines in Otricoli gave her volleys of shot, her Majestie alight∣ing at the Inne, the narrowness of which place afforded not that plenty and delicacie of meats, a noble en∣tertainment required. The quality of this Place.Otricoli at this time is a little Borough compos'd of severall houses built together on a Mountain a little above a mile distant from Tybur, which flowing from those Moun∣tains, dilates it self afterwards here, in a spatious and open Countrey.
After dinner her Majesty remov'd from Otricoli, and descending into the plain, still keeping along the river, at six miles end, arrived at a bridge call'd Filice,The Bridge Filice. o're which she passing the Tybur, came to a little Town nam'd Borghetto, appertaining to the Dutchy of Ronciglione. Here my Lord Bonfiglioli took his leave,She is met by my Lord Visconte. and my Lord Vitellianus Viscont, the Governour of Patrimo∣ny met her Majestie accompanied by a noble troop of Gentlemen, and many Souldiers a foot, and on horse∣back reduced into squadrons, who when he had complemented her Ma∣jesty, advanced to the foresaid bridge Filice, to receive her afterwards at Bracciano, a Town appointed for her lodging that night, Collonel Tofano the Governour of the arms of Pa∣trimony, ranking the Souldiers in the places he thought fittest for a nobler reception. Part of the Court remained in Borghetto, where they were very orderly and commodiously treated. From the walls, and the Castle of
this place, she was welcom'd with many volleys of shot, and some mortar-pieces. The said bridge Filice is very fine∣ly built, large and long, in order to the breadth of the Tybur, being made by Pope Sixtus the fifth, who from his first name call'd it Filice. She arrives at Gallese.The Queen arriv'd late at Gallese, and alighted at the beautifull Palace of the Duke of Altemps, the Lord of that Town, who royally received her. The Frontispiece was resplen∣dent with lights, as likewise all the streets, where the Souldiers stood in rankes, and welcom'd her with vol∣leys of shot, which were seconded with many mortar-pieces. Her Ma∣jesty sup'd privately, yet was seen and admir'd by diverse Persons of quality,Her rece∣ption in Gallese. who came from Rome thither to satisfie their impatient curiosity, where her Majesty was served as nobly, as in any other place. The descri∣ption of Gallese.Gallese is encompassed with old walls, and on the one side built on high, where there is a deep ditch, with a rock on the other side, like∣wise
walld, and great Towers, and Ditches. The Tybur runs near it, some two miles onely distant, where there is a Port to carry Goods and Victualls to Rome. This City by Pope Sixtus the fifth was erected into a Dutchy, where there formerly was a Bishop, but now 'tis united to Civita Castellana.She lodges in Capra∣rola. The next morning after Mass she went to Caprarola appointed for her lodging on the 18. of December, where she was re∣ceived in the sumptuous Palace of the Duke of Parma, the pleasure and curiosity of all, being wonderfully entertained, as well with the strange architecture of the famous Vignola, as the Pictures and rich Furni∣ture. In the Piazza before the Palace, was erected on a great pedestall, a high arch supported by eight Pillars, which rested on another pedestall somewhat less than the first. In the middle was a great statue with a bundle of ears of Corne in its hand, the arms of her Majesty, and on the other side a crowned Lyon, un∣der
whom were diverse Mottos and Inscriptions in Italian verses, but nothing succeeded very well, the continuall raine, which fell in great abundance all that day, and that night interrupting many other de∣monstrations of honour and joy, which were prepared there. The Spa∣nish Am∣bassadour goes to Ca∣prarola to visit the Queen.The Duke of Terranuova the Em∣bassadour in ordinary in Rome for his Catholick Majesty came hither expresly to wait on her Majesty, who received him with her usuall affability and kindness, after which he taking his leave, return'd the next morning to Rome. Her Majesty sup'd privately, being attended by her Domestick Cavaliers, but ex∣quisitely well treated, my Lord Visconte using all diligence and means, peculiar to his singular abili∣ty. The foresaid Count Santinelli arrived here, who received by her Majesty with her usuall kindness and courtesie, were declared Gen∣tlemen of her Chamber. Caprarola is an open Town, well built, and handsome, at the head of
which is the Palace of the Duke of Parma in an eminent Scituation, of admirable architecture and beauty. It hath five fronts, and yet all the Chambers are compleatly square, of which there is one very great, and contrived in that manner, that one standing in one of the four corners, hears what another speaks in all the other, though he speak very softly. 'Tis enricht with delicious Gardens, and noble Fountains, and in fine is as sumptuous as any whatsoever in Italy. The same day her Majesty de∣parted from Caprarola accompany'd and attended by all the retinue.She is met by the Duke of Bracciano. Don Parlo Giord ino Orsino the Duke of Bracciano, and the Dutchess his wife, with 4. Coaches with six horses apiece full of Gentry, and 200. Cuirassiers came to wait on her Ma∣jesty, as they had done at Oriolo a Town appertaining to their jurisdiction, and after their complement advanced towards Bracciano, to be ready to attend her in that beauti∣full Palace. The Queen at her ar∣rivall,
found the Souldiers in their rankes, who welcom'd her with volleys of shot, as she likewise was saluted with some pieces of Canon, and severall mortar-pieces. A little way off from the City were 18. Archers, and 18. Dutch men of the Dukes guard, which accompany'd her Majesty to the Castle, and al∣waies attended her. At the Gate of the Palace, the nobleness of which was augmented with the riches of the most sumptuous Fur∣niture, stood the Duke, who cover'd, lead her Majestie as she walked. Her Majestie was entertained that evening, with a very gratefull har∣mony of Musitians, with which she was extreamly delighted, as being very pleasing to her Genius. She sup'd afterwards in private, and re∣tired. The morning after, as she went from her lodgings to the Chapell to hear Mass, she was lead by the Duke, and afterwards carryed in the Dutchesses chair to the Piazza, where her Majesty taking Coach,
went directly to Casale in Polzetta, called Olgiata, a Vlla of Signior Fi∣lippo Franceschi a Florentine, where her Majesty was to dine. Bracciano is encompassed with Ditches, Walls, and Bulwarks, the greatest part of wich were made by Bartholmew d' Alviano when the City opposed the Army of Alexan∣der the .6. commanded by Duke Valentino. The fortress bearing the name of the Castle of St. James, hath regular Fortifications, but is of an old forme, being furnisht with all necessary artillery and arms, with a Garrison of Dutch men, two royal Appartaments, Gardens and other delights. The Scituation is pleasant on a Hill, and the Castle stands on a flinty Cliffe, which is hard to be mined: On the one side 'tis washt with the lake Sebeto, on the bankes of which there are other Towns of the Dutchy aforesaid. The Duke and the Dutchess by the way of Anguillara, advanc't be∣fore the Queen a quarter of a mile from Olgiata, where alighting, they
gain paid their respect to the Queen, who causing her coach to be stopt, received their complement, and seeming to be highly pleased with it, told the Duke, they should meet again at Rome. His Holiness on the 29. of No∣vember declared in the Consistory two Legates a latere to meet, and receive her Majesty, who were the Cardinall John Charles de Medici, Brother to the great Duke of Tosca∣ny, and the Cardinal of Hessen, who to the royall splendour of their births, have joyned great and emi∣nent qualities, in the lustre of their purple, representing the endow∣ments, which Heaven hath so liberal∣ly given them. They were both ap∣pointed for that function with his Holinesses Brief of the following tenor. [Alexander the 7. Pope. Beloved Sons, greeting, and Apostolical bene∣diction. Since the day is near, that that our beloved daughter in Christ Christina Queen of Swedland, by the blessing of God, is approaching
to Rome, we out of the singular affe∣ction of our fatherly love & charity to the said Queen Christina, desiring she may be received with greater solem∣nity, do with the mature deliberati∣on of our venerable brothers the Car∣dinalls of the holy Roman Church, and by their Counsell, and consent, with our Apostolicall authority by vertue of these presents, make, consti∣tute, and depute you (whom the splendour of your Families, and the approved qualities of your minds in diverse sorts adorn) our Legates de latere, and of the Apostolicall Sea, to go meet the said Queen Christina, any thing to the contrary notwith∣standing. Given at Rome at Saint Peters vnder the ring of the fisher the 29th. of November, 1655. in the first year of our Papacy. The en∣dorsement was: To our beloved Sonnes &c.] When the Legates had advice the Queen was arrived at Bracciano, and would be at Olgiata on the 19th. of December, they hastened their depar∣ture from Rome, to execute their
office, whereupon at the Palace of the Medici in the Piazza Madama, all the train of both the Legates being assembled together, the Cardinall of Toscani gave them so splendid a colla∣tion, and abounding with such exqui∣site meats, that it might have been compared to a sumptuous and royall dinner. He kep't open house, and profusely distributed bread, wine, flesh, and sweet meats, to all that were there, though they were not of the train. After that, the Civalcata of the Legates advanced, which for the great quality, and condition of the Persons there present, and the rich cloathes, and liveries, with which they appear'd, was extreamly remarkable, and com∣mendable. It reached from the Pa∣lace of the Medici aforesaid, 200. paces without the gate of the people, where they leaving, their horses took Coach. Three trumpets, and a tabour pre∣ceded, with the led horses of Captain Corradino, at the head of a hundred Cuirassiers well mounted and armed, with his sword in his hand.
Five trumpets followed after, and a tabour of the Cardinall Landgrave, with Cassocks of Scarlet fringed with thick broad lists of azure velvet bor∣der'd on both sides with rich trimming of silver, which in that mixture of the red and skie colour made the shew very handsome, especially by the wa∣ving of the thick plumes on their heads, which enriched their haire, and their shoulders. After these came the trumpets of the Cardinall de Medici, who had likewise Cassocks of fine cloth of Cinnamon colour, all trimmed with thick twists of gold, which about twi∣light cast a mervellous lustre. The eyes of the spectators were greatly allured, with the appearance of a numerous, and noble Company of Pages on high metalled coursers, trapped with rich furniture of gold and silver, and sutable valizes. The pages, besides their cloths trimmed all over with gold, had either their doub∣lets of cloth of gold, or embroyder'd with rich branched work. Four trumpets of his Holiness fol∣lowed
after, with red Casocks listed with gold, and about seventy Knights of the train of the Cardinall Legates, who with their sumptuous cloaths, and noble aspects, gave lustre to all the retinue. Among these were con∣fusedly mingled, without any order of precedence, the Dukes Salviati, Lanti, and Mattei, the Marquisses Nari, Corsini, Tarquinius Santa Croce, and Patricii. The Lords Paul Francis Falconteri, Baron Mattei, the Counts Prainer, Slavata, Sciaffcutz, and Tilli, and Cavalier Passionei, these particular camerads of the Cardinall Legates, with many servants richly apparrelled. Near these, on two generous steeds came the Legates, with their usuall Cardinalls habits, of Purple waved tabby, and red hats on their heads, who gracefull, and most affa∣ble, with a seriousness and sweetness in their faces, made their Majestique gravity resplendent, which indu∣ced every one to a reverence, and ob∣sequiousness. The Marquiss Rinuncini, and Cava∣lier
Baldeschi the masters of their Chambers, with Sgnior Carlo Carca∣rasio the Second master of the cere∣monies to the Pope, went before them, in the midst of whom was Ca∣valier Bellarmini the Captain of the guard to his Holiness. After the Le∣gates came the troop of light horse∣men of his Holiness, armed with cuirasses, but without lances, with Cassocks of red cloth fringed with gold. The Legates coming out of the gate of the people, took Coach, as the Cavaliers likewise did that were with them, the Pages, and footmen, and pursued their journey. Each of the Cardinalls had five sumptuous Coaches with six horses a∣peice, the Coachmen and grooms which were many, having liveries like the Pages, and trumpetters. Before the Legates Coach, went a Coach with the masters of the Chambers, and another came after them full of noble Prelates, being followed by thirty others with six horses a peice, all rich and splendid, belonging to
the Princes, Cavaliers, Prelates, and Gentlemen with forty others with 4 horses a peice. At the Inne called la Storta eight mile off, they found Don Antonio della Cueva, her Majesties great Ma∣ster of the horse, accompanied by many Gentlemen, with the Coaches of the Queen. He complemented the Legates, who went into her Majesties Coach made after the Dutch fashion, covered with crimson velvet fringed with gold, in which they arrived at Olgiata, a mile beyond the said Inne. The Queen at the entrance into the gate, came down to the foot of the staires, with wonderfull courtesy and kindness, receiving the Legates, and with so much honour, than it may well be said, this was a true argument of her piety, and veneration towards the Vicar of Christ, the holy Sea, and the Sacred Apostolicall Colledg. In the midst of the said Legates she ascended to her lodgings, where they complemented her in the name of his Holiness, in order to their instructi∣ons. Her Majesty accepted the fa∣vour,
with all the terms of reverence and esteem towards his Holiness, by declaring herself most highly obliged to the Pope, for the many great ho∣nours he had done her. It was somewhat late, and there∣fore without further stay, the Queen, and the Legates descended, and went all three into his Holinesses Coach, sent thither for that purpose, her Majesty sitting alone, and the Legates together. The Queen was clad plainly in grey, with a hongerlin, and black scarfe on her shoulders, instead of a band, without any ornament of Gold, Silver, Jewells, Ribbonds, or Flowers which she alwaies had abhor'd, as a vain and idle thing, one little Ring on her Finger, being all the adorning she had. But with her sprightly carriage, and masculine and majestick aspect, she discovered the greatness of her birth, and the quali∣ties of her rare and vertuous Prero∣gatives. She hath a very quick and nimble body, and is in her gestures and motion most comely and graci∣ous,
of a proportionable stature, a fresh colour, and royall features. And since her cheekes are careless of the deckings of roses and lilies, her most comely face darts lightning from her eyes, as which, never na∣ture made any so lively and resplen∣dent. She hath a high forehead, and spatious, with a fine and pleasing mouth, her haire seeming curled and browne. Her Majesty is supported with modesty, and her sprightliness and smiling with gravity, she having above all things a grace so attractive, which together with the heart, forces praises, and applauses. She eats not much, drinkes little, and almost con∣tinually water. She sleeps but five hours, and studies for the most part, the books of Plato, ancient Histo∣ries, good Latine Poets, and the sa∣cred Scriptures being the Soul of her Majesties entertainments. She hates mortally idleness, and is adorned with so many vertues, that every Queen may easily envie her, but very hardly imitate her. She is of a great and generous minde, but
her solid goodness hath nothing else to equall it, but the glory of her great thoughts, and incomparable resolutions. She arrived in Rome after two hours in the night, accompanyed by the light of an infinite number of Torches. She came in at the gate Pertusa, where she was met by the Captain of the Dutch-men, with many of the Switzers of his Holi∣nesses Guard, who attended on her afterwards. She alighted at the Va∣tican on the side of the Garden of Belvedere, where by my Lord Far∣nese the Popes Steward, and his Ho∣linesses domestick Prelates, she was met and received at the foot of the stairs in the plain of the Garden, whence her Majesty was conducted to her appartament, which was most richly furnisht with all things. The people flockt thither in such throngs, that they filled the very rooms that were above, and the Queen beholding such a multitude, said pleasantly jesting, Use they thus, to enter privately into Rome,
She no sooner had rested a little, but she sent Don Antonio della Cueva to desire audience of his Holiness, who speedily dispatched to her my Lord Bonvili the Master of his Chamber, a Prelate of great quality, attended by all of the Privy Cham∣ber, and severall other Gentlemen. At the head of the Gregorian Gallery he met the Queen, who was coming in hast between the two Cardinall Legates, where he complemented her Majesty in the name of the Pope, who returning the civility with all due respect, went on towards his Holinesses lodgings, many of the Popes train going before. As she passed along through so many Lodgings, Chambers and Galleries, all illuminated with Tor∣ches, she admiring the vastness of that great habitation, said, that short delay was more troublesome to her, than all the journey she had gone, since her Majesty desired nothing more, than the time to see his Ho∣liness. When she came to the Popes
anti-Chamber, the door was set wide open, and stood in that manner, all the while she remained with his Ho∣liness. At the entrance into the Chamber, where his Holiness ex∣pected her (my Lord Fibei the chief Master of the Ceremonies in∣structing her so to do) She kneeled the first time, then the second, and the third time with her hands a∣crosse on her breast, and her eyes on the ground, kissed first the foot, and afterwards the hand of his Holiness, who intimating with a smile an act of the kindest reception, becken'd quickly to her with his hand she should rise, which no sooner she had done, but she sate down on a royall Chaire, the Cushion and Lea∣ner being of Crimson Velvet, and sumptuously adorned with Gold. They discoursed but little, for his Holiness supposing she was weary with her journey, cut off the enter∣tainment, and her Majesty returned to her appartament. His Holiness afterwards to shew her the greater respect, assigned her
four Cavaliers, all his Chamberlains of honour, to the end they might continually be assistant in her Ma∣jesties anti Chamber, which were Signior Dominick Jacovacci a Gen∣tleman of Rome of known prudence, and excellent behaviour, Horatius Marquis Spada the deserving nephew of Cardinall Bernard Spada Bishop of Altano, James Mignanelli a Gen∣tleman likewise of Rome, and the Marquis Bevilacqua of Ferrara, whose nobility is equall to the qualities of his minde. Besides these his Holinesse likewise ordered, that five of his demy-lance men should e∣very day wait by turns on her Ma∣jesty, to wit, Captain John Leo of Piperno, Guido Baldo Ponti of Pe∣rugia, the Sergeant Major Andrew Paolini of Vterbo, and the Captains Anthony Fracassi of Cesena, and Marcus Chifa of Candia, all Per∣sons of worth and valour, who exe∣cuted their places very well. The following morning the Queen arose betimes, as she used to do, and went into the Garden, where
she walked with my Lord Acarigi his Holinesses Cupbearer, still speak∣ing French to him. She desired to see the Coach, the litter, and chaire the Pope had given her, which were soone brought to her, and with them came Cavalier Bernino the inventour of the designe of the figures adorn∣ing them. Count Raymund Mon∣tecuccoli there present, desired the Queen to take notice of the Figures which supported the Coach-box, adding that they were the designe of Cavalier Bernino. The Queen turn'd about to contemplate them, and the Cavalier very modestly told her Majesty, if there was any thing that was amiss, 'twas his doing. The Queen at these words turning about, very gracefully replyed, then you have done nothing there. Then causing the horse to be brought, which his Holiness had given her, she rode him with a foot-cloth, and without, and turning and winding him here and there, made every one admire her dexterity and comeliness, she making all good,
which fame had delivered before, that there was none in Swedland could mannage a Steed better than her, nor sit him better in his full Carrieer, of which the King of Spain being curious, desired to see her pain∣ted in that action. And indeed she is so franck, and dexterous in this, that if she had another Bucephalus, she would tame him as well as an Alexander. Her Majesty went af∣terwards with my Lord Holstenius to see the Vatican Library, and like∣wise his owne, which was fine and rare, and gave her great content. The day after about 23. hours she went again in a chaire to the Pope, with whom she remained (the dores standing open) above an hour. On Wednesday in the morning, the solemn Cavalcata should have been, but it was deferred till the following day, all the things not be∣ing in order. In the mean time his Holiness went in a chaire, to see her in her appartament, who no sooner heard of it, but ran a great pace through some Chambers to meet
him, at whose feet she soone fell downe with great humility, but he causing her to rise, and they going into the Chamber, they walked up and downe discoursing together, the Portalls being up. When his Holi∣ness departed, her Majesty accom∣panied him to his chaire, into which he being entered, the Queen with her owne hands endeavoured to shut it, as she did other acts of humility, and obsequiousness, though his Ho∣liness had often dismissed her with his blessing, she freely confessing, she never had felt herself awaken'd to more reverence, than in seeing the Majesty of the Pope. The two dayes they spent in musick, singing, and other royall entertainments, in which no cost was spared by the magnanimous Pope. The said solemn Cavalcata was ordered on Thursday after dinner, of which the Masters of the Cere∣monies had the direction. The shops were shut that day, and the Trades∣men commanded not to worke, which every one obeyed very wil∣lingly,
veneration and curiosity cal∣ling all to so noble a spectacle. And as a Princes actions should still be great, and elevated, so the Pope o∣mitted nothing, that might make this Function remarkable. Count David Vidman, a Noble∣man of Venice, brother to the Cardi∣nall of this name, and Sergeant Ma∣jor Generall of the battaile, had the charge to give the orders, which he thought in his prudence most con∣venient, to honour this reception, with disposing of his Holinesses Souldiers. On the day aforesaid at 17. hours her Majesty took Coach in the Court of Belvedere, and went out of the Gate Angelica toward the bridg Molle, The Courtiers of the Car∣dinal Legates, and of the Queen went before, with the Trumpetters of the Cardinalls, and the 26. horses of her Majesties guard, being fol∣low'd by the led-horses, the Pages, Camerades, and Prelates of the train, of the Legates, the led-horses of the Queen, her Pages, the Trum∣petters,
Cavaliers, Princes, and Gen∣tlemen of the Company of the Le∣gates, the Gentlemen of the Queen, the Master of the Ceremonies, her Majestie in his Holinesses Coach, with the two Cardinal Legates, be∣hind the Prelates of the Legation, the Queens Coaches, the said troop of Cuirassiers, the led-horses, the Coaches of the Legates, and others of severall Princes, Prelates, and Cavaliers, which Cavalcata marching along the river advanc'd towards the bridge called Molle. An hour before departed from his Palace my Lord Bonelli the Gover∣nour of Rome, and Vice-Chamber∣lain, Pope Pius Quintus Nephews Son, the troope of light horsemen preceding, and his Page with the Batton and his Hat. He himself came afterwards a horseback on a very fine Nag, attended by eighty Halbardiers of his guard with red Cassocks, and great store of grooms, and followed by the Officers of his Tribunall. In this order going to the foot of the Cordon of the Capitoll, he joyned
with the Signior Faustus Gallucci Se∣natour of Rome, Honofrius Margani, Giacinthus del Buffalo, Caesar Colon∣na, Achilles Maffei, and many other Roman Cavaliers, which waited on the Magistrates, and with the follow∣ing order they marched all together towards the Bridge Molle, this fun∣ction belonging to Signior Christo∣pher Faccialveta, another Master of the Ceremonies. All the Trumpetters and light horsemen marched before, then the Trumpetters of the people, and the Noblemen of Rome, part accom∣panying the Senate by order of the Pope, which were those, who in the year 1655. had some Office in the Capitol, and part voluntarily coming thither for the greater decorum of their Countrey. They went all without order of Precedence, and confusedly, as the Marshall of the Campe, and the forty Gentle∣men elected before by the Coun∣cell to attend the new Pope in the Cavalcata of his Possession, and the presidents of Justice, and Over-seers
of the waies. I would gladly here register the names of each one, as honouring the Senatours of a City, the head of the World, but because they were not all known to me at that time, and would be a hard thing how to do it; and perhaps I might miss of the truth, I will only name them (I first of all declaring, I in∣tend not to lessen the worth of the rest, who were then most known unto me, which are John Rnald Mo∣naldeschi of the Signiory of Monte∣calvello. Vicino Orsino, the Marquis Marcellus Crescentii, Bartholmew Capranica, Cavalier Antonio Griffo∣ni, Francis Pallombara, Count Mu∣sius Carpegna, Marius Millino, Fabius Celsi, the Marquis John Peter del Drago, the Marquis Lewes Mas∣semi, Serafino Cenci, Francis Gotti∣fredo, Charles Rapaccioli, Cavalier Stephen Alli, Joseph Degli Annibali, the Marquis Angelo Pallucci, Ca∣valier Jerome Muti. The Pages of the Governour followed after, and the Senatours, with the Batton, a short Sword, and Hat. The Gover∣nour
on the right hand, and the Se∣natour on the left, and the Conser∣vers, and Prior in the same ranke in their Gowns of cloth of Gold, and then behind came the gown Officers of the Governor and Capitol, on the side the Governours Halbardiers, his two grooms preceding a foot a∣mong those of the Magistrates of Rome, called Fedeli. Before her Majesty arrived at the bridge Molle, she was met in the meadows without the Gate Angelica by a company of Carabines com∣manded by Captain Grassi. The foresaid Count Vidman came o're against the bridge, who had caused Rochetta to be armed, and the bridg on both sides with choice foot, and in the plain beyond the River in a very fine prospect, had reduced into squadrons a great body of a thousand foot, at the head of which was the Sergeant Major Molinari, with six pieces of Artillery, and other Soul∣diers, which counting the guard of the bridge, were two thousand, who when the Queen was past, gave her
very handsome volleys of shot, which were seconded by the dis∣charging of the Canon. Her Majesties Coach stopt, and the Governour, the Senatour, Con∣servers, and Prior, complemented her in the name of the people of Rome, representing the joy of the Ci∣ty for her Majesties arrival. The com∣plement was short, for it rained very hard, and the Queens answer short in returning them thanks, after which they continued the Cavalcata march∣ing together in the following maner. The Couriers of the Legates and the Queen, a troop of light horsemen with their Captain, and the Trumpet∣ters, and Carabines of her Majesties guard, the Trumpetters of the people of Rome, the led-horses of the Legates the drummers of the Capitol, the Pa∣ges of their Camerades, of the Pre∣lates, the Senatour, Governour, & of the Cardinals. The Drummers of the Governour, the led-horses of the Queen, her Pages, the Trumpets of the Legates, the Officers of the Go∣vernour, and of the Capitol, the
Cavaliers, or Camerades of the Car∣dinall Legates, the Gentlemen and Knights of the Queen mixt together, the Conservers, the Senatour, Go∣vernour, and Master of the Cere∣monies, his Holinesses Coach, with the Queen in it, riding forward a∣lone, and the two Cardinalls back∣ward, the Prelates of the Legation a horse-back, the Coaches of her Majesty, a Troop of Cuirassiers with their Captain the Trumpets and led-horses, the Coaches of the Legates, and others of the Dukes and Cava∣liers of the traine, and the Halbar∣diers of the Governour, with a great number of Grooms. Being come to the Vineyard of Pope Julius, which is a Palace with a Vineyard, Garden, Courts, Foun∣tains, Walkes, and Allies, scituate between the Gate of the peo∣ple, and the foresaid Bridge Molle, the Governour, the Sena∣tour, Conservers, and Marshalls of the Campe, with the rest of the peo∣ple of Rome, there complemented her Majesty again, who received
them graciously, the serenity of her countenance, and civility to all, especially to Signior Bonelli the Go∣vernour, bearing witness of her esteem of the vertue and integrity of this Prelate. 'Twas past 18. hours when her Majesty arrived at this Vineyard, where alighting out of the Popes sumptuous Coach, which was all of rich Velvet and Gold, she went into the higher rooms of the Palace, where a Table was nobly furnished with variety of meats, wines, wa∣ters, and store of sweet-meats, her Majesty staying there above an hour and a half, till the rain might be over, which hindered the Function very much. But as they were consulting to deferre it till a more propitious season, the Heaven, as if ashamed not to give place to so splendid a Triumph, dispersed the clowds in a moment, chased away the darkness, and brought back the Sun, that he might be likewise assistant to the train of so rare, and so renowned a show.
With the Queen came four of her Coaches of the German fashion, driven by Coach-men in a livery of fine Scarlet, trimmed with great Gardes of black Velvet border'd with Gold-lace, with many servants and attendance in the same. On the Gate of the Palace were three In∣scriptions with the arms of her Ma∣jesty, which are a sheafe of Wheat traversed by two white Bars in an azure Field, since the three Crowns, and the rest of the empress, which are the proper arms of the Kingdom of Swedland, were voluntarily de∣posed by her with the said King∣dom, she only retaining the ancient and glorious Ensigne of her Maje∣sties Progenitors. In the Court before the Palace, on the left hand towards the City, were squadron'd 300. Foot of the free Company of the foresaid Count Vidman, all in good order, with red and yellow Colours, by whom at her entrance she was wel∣com'd with a volley of shot. Many persons of quality came to
waite on her Majesty, who sweetning the gravity of her Majestick aspect, with her courteous entertainment, received them with all terms of ci∣vility. All said, they were obliged to the courtesie of this so great Prin∣cess, who scattering like the Sun, the light of her favours, makes all that behold her, pay tribute to her affability. In the mean time the present, given her by his Holiness, was brought, to wit, a Coach, a Litter, a Chair, and an ambling Nagge; the Coach was all of silver, with sta∣tues, little figures, cut-works, and mysterious devises of the invention of Cavalier Bernino. The lining, and covering were of azure Velvet, and the fringes of the broad Gardes inter-woven with sutable twists, and buttons and loops of Silver, em∣pailed with large, and rich massy studs. 'Twas drawn by six dapple Cour∣sers, with Furniture of Velvet of the same colour twisted with Silver, with
buckles, bridles, and head-strains of the same metall, and Coach-men in the same Livery. The Litter and Chaire were sutable to the Coach, the Mules covered with the same, and had the same furniture, and the dapple ambling nagge with a wo∣mans riding foot-cloth of the same Velvet, all bespread with little fi∣gures finely wrought. This Present was given the Queen in the name of the Pope, by my Lord Farnese his Holinesses stew∣ard. All the traine of the Princes, Prelates, Cavaliers, and others, meet∣ing after 20. hours in this place, by the diligence and good order of the Masters of the Ceremonies, the Ca∣valcata began to march without any order of precedence, but carelesly rather in the following forme. Before all went the troope of Cuirassiers of the foresaid Captain Corradino, in the very same manner, as he met the Queen before at Ol∣giata. The light horse-men of the Guard of the Queen followed after, with Cassocks of Scarlet, each having
four great Crosses of black velvet, bordered with large twists of gold. The led horses of the Cardinall Le∣gates with furniture of the livery aforesaid. The Couriers of the Le∣gates, and the Queen. Twelve Mules with Carriages of Crimson vel∣vet, with lace and fringes of gold, studs, and bosses of massy Silver, and bridles of silk and gold. The Grooms of the Chamber of the Legates with coates embroyder'd with gold. The others rode after them without the least observance of Precedence, which they did to avoid the distur∣bance, that might happen, disorder being thought the best order in this case. The Prince of Gallicano fol∣low'd after the Prince of Carbognano, both of the family of Colonna, behind whom diverse Gentlemen marched, being attended by their Grooms. The Duke of Onano of the house of Sforza, the Prince of Nerula, and Don Lelio his Brother of the house of Orsini, the Duke of Bassanello, Duke Savelli, Duke Altemps, Duke Caffarelli, Sig∣nior Mutius Mareri with severall
Gentlemen confusedly together. Duke Salviato, Duke Strozzi, Duke Lante, Duke Cesi, the two Sonnes of the Duke Salviati, the Marquiss Cor∣sino, the Marquiss Patritij, the Prince of Saint Gregory, Duke Muti, Duke Matte, the Baron Matte, the Mar∣quiss Neri, the Marquiss Spada, the Marquiss Pallucci, the Marquiss del Drago, the Marquiss Astalli, the Marquiss Tassi, each one with his Grooms, among which there were di∣verse that had fair and splendid live∣ries. Signior Antonio Gozi a noble man of Venice, Count Medici of Ve∣rona, Signior Bonmartini a Gentle∣man of Padoua, with diverse other Gentlemen. The Cavalier of Saint James Don Iohn Baptist Jacquetti des Brunes, eight tabours of the people of Rom, and of the Governour, the Pa∣ges of the Cardinall Legates, 24 wardrobe keepers of the Cardinalls, who met the Queen, each one with a valose embroydered with sumptu∣ous embossed work in gold, 24. Bar∣bers of the said Cardinalls with Silver gilt Maces in their hands, 24. train∣bearers
of the same in purple appar∣rell, the Prior Lomellino, the Sena∣tour Charles Imperiale of Genoua, the Prince Don Camillus Panfilio, who appeared in a black sute of satten most admirably embroydered with Silver, shadowed with another thinne embroydery of black silk, all be∣spread and empailed vere richly with diamonds, valued above a hundred thousand Crownes. Besides these he had in his hat three other great peices of inestimable valew at the foot of a rare heron. His Excellence was ac∣companied by many Cavaliers his Camerades, twelve Pages encom∣passing him in liveries of black velvet, trimmed all o're with gold, and their cloakes and sleeves of rich cloath of gold, with chaines adorned with jew∣ells about their necks. He was like∣wise attended by six demy launce men all Officers reformed, and in very good equipage, and in fine by thirty Grooms, and four footmen in the said velvet livery, and with the pompe and riches of the same trimming. All these cloaths, and liveries were
wrought in the space of six daies, the Masters of the ceremonies not re∣solving before, if it were convenient, the said Prince should be present at this function, in respect of the mour∣ning he then wore for the death of Pope Innocent his Unckle. The Mar∣quiss Bevilacqua came afterwards, diverse Gentlemen, ten sheild-bea∣rors, and ten Groomes of the Cham∣ber, in the midst of which came the Litter, and Coach presented by the Pope to the Queen, with the little ladder of Silver to get up, which was carried by a servant. The Trumpets, and tabours of the Cardinall Legates, four Advocates of the Consistory, 24 of the Chamber belonging to the Chancery, the Gentlemen of the train of the Legates in riding cloaths richly trimmed, the Marquiss del Monte, the Marquiss Valerius Santa Croce, the Marquiss Malvezzi, Signior Marianus Vecchiarelli, with diverse other noblemen among them, Signior Paul Francis Falconiere, the Marquiss Cesi, Count Ripa, Count Manes∣cotti, the Count of Fistemberg, Cava∣lier
Passionei, the Marquiss Targuini∣us Santa Croce, Cavalier Baldeschi, fifty Gentlemen confusedly together of severall Nations, of the train of the Cardinalls and the Ministers of Princes, Count Raymuud Montecuc∣coli, Count Francis Maria, and Count Lodovick Santinelli, Signior Lilliecron, all three Gentlemen of the Chamber to her Majesty, with other Gentlemen of the retinue of the Queen; Don Nicholas Barberino Prior of Rome, the Prince of Pallestina with cloaths extravagantly embroy∣dered with bugles, with button-holes, with diamonds of great worth, and a hatband of great diamonds, with eight Pages all clad with black velvet trim∣ted with gold, whose Cloakes were lin'd with cloath of gold, and the sleeves of their doublets embroyder'd with gold, twenty Groomes in the same livery, with Cloakes of black cloath, with broad gardes of velvet twisted with gold, and the sleeves of cloath of gold, four footmen, a dog-keeper, a wardrobe-keeper, and ano∣ther, all cloathed like the rest, eight
trumpets of his Holiness, four of the Popes Mace-bearers, the Masters of the Ceremonies, 24 Cardi∣nalls in purple habits on mules richly barded, at the head of which were their Eminences Francis Cardinall Barberino, and Julius Cardinall Sac∣chetti, the others following after, in order to their seniority, the Cardinalls Palota, Franciotti, Lodovisio, Cibo, Savelli, Astalli, Retz, Corrado, Im∣periale Borromeo, Santa Croce, Aldo∣brandino Charles Barberino, Azzoli∣no, Odescalch, Vidman, Sforza, Orsi∣no, and Cossaguti. These Cardinalls met the Queen a little way out of the gate of the people, and Cardinall Barberino the Sub-dean, Cardinall Charles di Me∣dici the Dean being absent, comple∣mented the Queen as cheif, in the name of all the Sacred Colledg, who was afterwards reverenced by the rest of the Cardinalls, who went two together in order in the Cavalcata. The two Cardinall Legates (their Legation being ended, which exten∣ded not within the walls of Rome)
consigned the Queen to the two Car∣dinall Deacons, who as first in this order, were the Cardinalls Orsino, and Costaguti, the said Legates ad∣vancing with the rest of the Cardi∣nalls, in the places belonging to them. Her Majesty was clad in grey cloath called the love of France, em∣broydered with gold round the bot∣tome, with a stomacher embroyder'd all over, and a black Scarfe on her shoulders ty'd behind, a black hat on her head with a little gold hatband, without any other ornament of jew∣ells, or flowers, a true mark of the masculine mind of this Princess, who as she does not captivate it to the flatteries of effeminate vanities, so makes it appear, great Princes are not famous for the lustre of their brave∣ry, but the splendour of their acti∣ons. This great Queen went in the midst of her guard of Swissers all co∣vered with white arms, with such a grace, and daringnes, that like a victorious Generall of Armies, and
conquered Provinces, she seem'd, among so great a multitude of peo∣ple, to go to a glorious and magnifi∣cent triumph. A great troop of Grooms of her train, and the Cardinalls, preceded. The Marquiss Hippoltus Bentivogli, Gentleman of her Chamber, went by her stirrop a foot, and uncovered, being honoured now and then to dis∣course with her Majesty, who with her grace in speaking, and her gesture subdued the minds of all that beheld, her. The chair given her by his Holiness came after, and my Lord Farnese the Steward, then the Bishops that assis∣ted, the Apostolicall cheif Notaries, the Auditours d Ruota, the Master of the Sacred Palace, the Clerkes of the Chamber, and other Prelates, all cloathed in purple, in whom appeared the Majesty and decorum of the Court of Rome. The light horsemen of his Holi∣nesses guard, arm'd with breast∣plates, and having red Casocks trim∣ed with gold twist, and lances in their
hands, with colours at the points, shut up the Cavalcata. Behind the horses, which shut up this royall Cavalcata, came the tra∣vailing Coaches, and the Coaches of the City of all the great Persons, which were all noble, sumptuous, and enricht with rare furniture, and most sprightly Coursers. After her Majesties Coaches, came three of Prince Panfilio, which were very splendid, and one among the rest as noble and Majestique, as could be devised, it being all of gold, and em∣broydery, with admirable metals, and the armes of his family. Two likewise appeared of the Prince of Pallestrina, one of which was rich, and stately, of black velvet with gol∣den fringe, and lin'd with cloth of gold, the Carvings, Figures, Nayle-work, Iron-work, and furniture of the horses, being gilt most splendid and magnificent. The gate of the people, by order of the Pope, was finisht before by Cavalier Bernino, on the ancient de∣sign of Michael Angelo Bonaruota,
with some embellishments of the said Cavaliers own invention, and an Inscription representing the happy and fortunate entrance of this Queen into Rome: on the top of the gate aforesaid, they saw appear in a great embossed work, six Mountains, and a starre on the top, the Armes of his Holiness. The order of the Caval∣cataAt all the ends of the streets of the course, St. Mark, Giesu, della Valle, Mount Jordan, di Banchi, the bridg of St. Angelo, and the Suburbe, through which the Cavalcata was to pass, stood Souldiers in rankes, and all Coaches were forbidden to stirre up and down, and stand in those streets after 18. houres. All the win∣dows were hung with rich tapestries, and full of Ladies and Cavaliers, all the way being covered with a very great number of people. At her Ma∣jesties entrance through the gate of the People, she was welcomed by many Mortar-peices, and Canon brought into the Garden of that con∣vent, the roaring of which was an∣swered by all▪ with an Echo of Pray∣ses, and blessings.
As she passed through, so many peopl who were more desirous to see her, than curious to contemplate the pompe of the Cavalcata, she saluted every one with so cheerfull a counte∣nance, and a carriage so tempered with decorum, and courtesy, that she made it appear, she could not stirre a foot, but 'twas measured with the compass of her vertue. She often turn'd her self to speak with their Eminences, Orsini, and Costaguti, and all her words breathed a gravity and sweetness. As her Majesty pass'd the bridge of St. Angelo,The honors done her at the Castle of St. Angelo. Count Jerome Gabrielli the Vice Governour of the Castle, stood at the door of the grate of the fortress, at the head of a hundred Musquetiers in array, who took up all the drawbridges to the gate of the Castle, Captain Decius Laurentini arm'd with a corselet and pike, stan∣ding a little behind him towards the left hand, and on the right Captain Rutilius Ferraccioli the Adjutant of the Fortress. The Souldiers of the Garrison displayed their colours from
the walls, and as the Queen passed along, she heard first from the Castle a pleasing harmony of fifes and Sack∣buts, which was afterwards seconded by a volley of Muskets, accompanied immediately by the roaring of a hun∣dred and fifty Mortar-peices, and sixty peices of artillery. On the top of the great Tower hung the arms of his Holiness, and the Queen, where likewise were prepa∣red many squibs, and great store of fireworkes, which in the beginning of the night had admirable success, the Mottos, and Arms being handsomly seen and illuminated. On the Piazza of St. Peter on this, and that side of the Guglia, two battalions of a thousand foot apeice, stood in rankes with two other squa∣drons of cuirassiers. 'Ore against the same Piazza near the fountain was squadroned the free Company of Dutchmen of Count Vidman afore∣said, in the midst of two squadrons of Carabines. The said Count Vidman was like∣wise a horseback with severall his
Camerades, at the head of the said Souldiers, by whose good order, and experienced understanding, every thing was regular. This Cavalier was assisted by Ser∣geant Major Molinati, Captain Cor∣radino, and Grassi, Count Baschi, Buonfanti, Captain Alphonsus Barto∣i with the Militia of Frascati, Castell Gandolfo, and Rocca Priora, Captain Anthony Torazzi with the Souldiers of Velletri, and others, commanders of that people, who, the Queen being alighted at the staires of St. Peter, gave their last volley of shot, which was seconded by twelve peices of Ar∣tillery brought to the said Piazza. The end of the Sixth Book.
The History of the sacred, and Royal Majestie of Christina Alessandra, Queen of Swedland, &c. The Seventh Book. The Argument. THe Queen after the Ca∣valcata, is received in St. Peters Church by that Clergy, and afterwards in the Consistory by the Pope. She visits the Church of St. Mary the greater. She dines with the Pope. From the Vatican she goes to the Pa∣lace Farnese, and is there visited by the sacred Colledg, and the Grandees of the
City. She visits the Churches of Saint Iohn Lateran, St. James of the Spa∣niards, Giesu, and the Monasteries di Torre de Specchi, and St. Sixtus; she sees the Castle of St. Angelo, la Sapi∣enza, the Monastery of St. Catharine of Siena, the Greeks Church, the Ro∣man Colledg, and that of Urban, for the propagation of the Faith. She is pre∣sent at Academies, and entertained with severall Musicall Comedies. She arrives at St. Pe∣ters.THE Queen come to St. Peters, while the Cardinalls were dis∣monted before, to goe, and assist the Pope in the publique Consistory, did likewise alight, and their Eminen∣ces Orsini and Costaguti committed her to the Cardinalls Medici and Sforza, they themselves going thence, as the first Deacons, to vest and serve his Holiness. Her recepti∣on in the Church of St. Peter.Being ascended the first steps, and come through all that space, to the last which arrive at the Portico of the Church, she saw on the last step my Lord Scanarola the Bishop of Sido∣ma, Vcar to his Eminence, Cardinall
Barberino the Arch Priest of St. Peter, together with all the Chapter of the said Church, which stood attending her. The said Scanarola presented her the Cross to be kiss'd, and she kissed it kneeling on a cushion of cloth of gold, vnder which was spread a great carpet of the same. In the mean time, while a great quire of Musitians Sang the Anthem, she is beautifull &c. The Queen entred into the Church in the midst of the said Cardinalls, Medici and Sforza. The said Bishop gave her holy wa∣ter, and by all the quires of the Musi∣tians was begun the hymne of Te De∣um. This sumptuous Temple was all hung with tapistries out of the ward∣robe of Cardinall Barberino,The Ma∣jestique or∣naments in St. Peters. among which were fifty eight hangings for doores very splendidly embroydered with gold, with the Armes of her Ma∣jesty in the middle, ten of which were embellished with severall Mot∣tos, alluding to the glories of this re∣nowned Princess. So being preceded by the Clergy,
with the Cross, and the foresaid Bishop the Vicar, she was conducted in the midst of the said Cardinalls, before the most holy Sacrament, ex∣posed on the high Altar under the great Cupola, where her Majesty pray∣ed kneeling on a Cushion of cloth of gold, with a carpet, and the two Cardinalls on Cushions of crimson Velvet. Having ended her Prayers, she was carried to the Chappell of the most holy Sacrament, and thence by the secret staires, she went up, being met at the foot of the staires of the royall hall by the two said Cardinalls the first Deacons, to wit Orsini, and Costaguti, and eigh Bishops assistents, as likewise by the Duke of Poli of the family of Conti, Master of the Sacred lodgings, and conducted to the con∣sistory in the said royall hall. She goes in to the Con∣cistory, and ksses the feet of his Holiness.Her Majesty advancing in the said royall hall, and entring the consistory, after kneeling three times, kist the foot, and then the hand of the Pope, his Holiness receiving her in a very courteous manner. Her Majesties
words expressed her joy, for her con∣version to the Catholique Faith, as likewise to see her self honoured with such demonstrations of his Holiness. The Pope reply'd, her conversion was of that great importance, that in Hea∣ven they feasted and rejoyced at it, and expressed more joy, than that she saw on earth, after which the function being ended, the Pope went to his appartament, through the Du∣cal hall, attended by all the Cardi∣nalls, the six Deacons excepted which staid to accompany the Queen, who entring into the chappell of Sixtus, and passing through the old apparta∣ment, went to her own lodgings. The Cardinalls were Medci, Sforza, Odescalchi, Raggi, the Landgrave, and Charles Barberini. On Friday in the evening, the Vi∣gil of our Saviours Nativity, her Ma∣jesty went privately in her Chaire, to see the Collation, the Pope uses yearly to give at that time to the Cardinalls, and she thought too that night to goe down into the Chappell, to observe the functions of the Mat∣tins
celebrated by the Pope, but being a little ill, she forbare going out of her lodgings. She is pre∣sent at his Holinesses Mass.The following Morning she was publiquely present at the Mass Sung likewise by his Holiness. Her Ma∣jesties place was without the circuit, where his Holiness sits with the Sa∣cred Colledg, on the right hand a lit∣tle way off from the steps of the high Altar, within a kind of closet adorned without with crimson velvet, with trimming of buttons and sloops of gold, and within with cloth of gold, with a chaire on a carpet three steps high from the ground. The Pope with the Cardinalls, and Prelates, being come into the Church, and ascending his throne behind the high Altar, which was covered with a great pavillion of severall tapistries of silk and gold, first prayed, and then vesting himselfe, went to the Altar, and there sate down in a Chaire. In the mean time the Queen left her place, and was brought by the Cardi∣nalls Medici and Sforza, with four Bishops their assistents, before his
Beatitude, where she kneeling on a Cushion of cloth of gold,She receives the Sacra∣ment of con∣firmation. received by the hands of his Beatitude the Sacra∣ment of holy confirmation. The Cardinall of Medici was her Godfa∣ther in the name of the King of Spain, and added to the name of Christina, that likewise of Alessandra. From thence she returned to her place, ac∣companied by the Cardinalls afore∣said, and the Bishops the assistents, and the Pope began the Mass. After the Communion of the Ministers of the Sacrifice,She com∣municates. the Queen did commu∣nicate before the Cardinall Deacons, being brought to the feet of his Holi∣ness by the foresaid Cardinalls Medi∣ci and Sforza, with the four Bishops their assistents, who carried her back. After dinner her Majesty went in her Chaire to the Church St. Mary the greater,She visits the Church of St. Mary the greater. attended by the guards of the Switzers, the curiassiers, and launciers of his Holiness, with a nu∣merous train of Princes, Cavaliers, and other Gentlemen, among whom Don Anthonio della Cueva, as her
Majesties cheif Gentleman of her horse, waited on her a foot near the Chair. She was received at the door by Cardinall Bragadino, in the place of Cardinall Anthony Barberino the Arch-Priest of the said Church, where when she had adored the most holy Sacrament, she was con∣ducted to the Chappell of Sixtus Quintus to see the holy Cradle of the redeemer of the world, which was with much devotion observed, and honoured by her Majesty. Thence after she had seen the other splendid Chappell of Paulus Quintus, the Altar of which was richly adorned, she re∣turned to the Vatican, She dines with his Holiness.The following Sunday she dined with his Holiness, and the order there observed, was as followes. Two tables stood, the one from the other about two hands breadth, that for the Pope being four fingers higher than the Queens. The Pope sate in the midst in a Chaire of red velvet, with a great footstoole half a span high. The Queen had a royall seate made on purpose, on the right side
under the cloth of state, on the even floore on a Carpet. Don Antonio della Cueva presented her Majesty the Napkin, the Marquiss Hippolitus Ben∣tivogli was her Cup-bearer, and Count Francis Maria Santinelli her taster. The dinner was sutable to the greatness of so great a Prince, to∣wards a Princess so great. Father Oliva a Jesuit made a Ser∣mon peculiar to his spirit and parts. Her Majesty with her usuall eruditi∣on, having observed that the Father could have brought in a certain place, a passage of St Paul, motioned it to his Holiness, who was extreamly edi∣fied with the readiness, and learned vivacity of so great a woman, and the Father was likewise astonished when he heard it, who highly commended this vertuous Queens wonderfull understanding. After dinner her Majesty was di∣verted with a play represented in most excellent Musique, and being the day following entertained a great while by the Pope, she took her leave of him, returning in the evening from
the Vatican, to her own habitation in the Palace Farnese, and being highly satisfied, and astonisht at the royall, and well ordered entertainment she had there, where she was well atten∣ded, by the very good conduct of the officers, with the direction of Signior Horatius Magalotti a Cavalier of Florence, and Cosen to the deceased Cardinall Magalotti Bishop of Fer∣rara, Brother to Donna Costanza, Barberina Sister in Law to Pope Vr∣bane the eighth. He had in this occa∣sion the superintendency of all the said house, by the orders of my Lord Farnese his Holinesses Steward, under whom was the Abbot Alexander Magalotti Sonne to the said Signior Horato, appointed to attend Don Antonio Pimentel the Spanish Am∣bassadour, Captain John Baptist Massi, who waited on Don Antonio della Cueva, and Signior Giovanni Battista Minetti, who attended Count Montecuccoli, with many other Gentlemen deputed to the ser∣vice of the other Cavaliers of her Ma∣jesties train. At her arrivall there,
she was pleased to look on the front of the said Palace, which abounded with torches, was adorned, and gilt, with the Armes of her Majesty in the midst, those of the Kingdome of Swedland on the right hand, and the others of the Quèen on the left with severall Mottos, Hieroglyphicks, and Inscriptions. All the charges of this Frontispice amounting to three thousand Crownes, as likewise the royall fur∣niture of the Palace, belonged to the magnificent, and generous Duke of Parma, whose order the Marquiss of Maria his Highnesses Resident, observed very punctually and exact∣ly. Her Majesty was attended from the Vatican to the Palace aforesaid,From the Vatican she goes to the Palace Far∣nese. with a numerous Cavalcata of Prin∣ces, Prelates, and Gentlemen, the windowes, and streets, through which they passed, being hung with rich ta∣pistries, and resplendent with an infi∣nite number of lights; and the con∣course of people so great, that they could hardly pass with the said Caval∣cata.
The presents given her by the Pope.His Holiness, in the honours he did this great Princess, made his courtesy, and civility very evidently appear to her Majesty, which he se∣conded with expressions of his gene∣rosity and greatness, in the Presents before mentioned of eight noble coursers, a Coch, Saddle, & furniture, a Chaire, and a Litter, valued about two and twenty thousand Crownes. In fine, before her Majesty went to the said Palace of Farnese, his Holi∣ness commanded his officers should make her an abundant provision of all sorts of meats, for the maintenance of her Majesty and train for many dayes. A little before the Queen arrived in Rome, the four Nuntii, sent to meet, and waite on her through the Churches Dominions, came thither, and incontinently fell at his Holi∣nesses feet, to inform him of their journey, and functions, whom the Pope with great kindness received, and expressions of much satisfaction for what they had done. The foresaid Baldocchi repaired likewise thither a
little while after, to give him an ac∣count of the monies disburst accor∣ding to the orders he received, which the Pope liking well, declared he was fully content with his faithfull em∣ployment. The Queen highly pleas'd with her commodious and royall habitati∣on, began to receive there the visits of the Cardinalls, the Residents of Princes, of the Prelates, and other Grandees of the Court, still giving to all clearer proofes of her rare, and ver∣tuous endowments. She likewise omitted not, to give abundant testi∣monies of her Piety, by visiting the Principall Churches,The Queen visits St. Peters. of which she went first to St. Peters, though vately, doing there her devotions. She went afterwards to St. John Lateran, and went in at the great gate, where his Eminence Cardinall Colonna the Arch Priest, and all the Chapter in their habits, received her, her Majesty kneeling down before the most holy Sacrament, and hearing there Mass, which was said by my Lord Serlupi, after which she went to see the heads
of St. Peter and St. Paul. Her Ma∣jesty coming out of the sacristy, went into San Giovanni in Fonte, where Constantine the Emperour was bapti∣zed, and thence went away, accom∣panied and attended by the Cardinall aforesaid. Afterward St. James of the Spa∣niards.The Morning before, her Majesty had been at the Church of St. James of the Spaniards in Piazza Navona, where the feast was kept of the said Saints translation. At the staires of the Church they found the two Spa∣nish Abassadours, the Duke of Ter∣ranuova and Don Antonio Pimentell, who received and accompanied her to the high Altar, which was richly adorned. Don Francesco de Vides, and Don Diego di Caravachal Overseers of the said Church, and Persons of great quality, met her Majesty at the gate, which was decked with cloth of gold of great value. In the great chap∣pell was erected a Pavilion in the forme of a little Chamber, which served for a cloth of state, where her Majesty heard Mass, which was cele∣brated by my Lord Sersale, the Bishop
of Bari, a Neopolitan Gentleman, after which she went round the Church, observing the remarkablest things. She taking Coach afterwards with Don Antonio Pimentel, and Don Antonio della Cueva, being followed by the Duke of Terranuova, and the train, went round the Piazza Navo∣na, to see the fine fountain built there by Pope Innocent the tenth of happy memory. The greatness and beauty of this structure exceeds all in Rome of this kind. It represents a very craggy rock, on the summit of which is erected a fair pyramid. At the four corners sit four Colóssusses re∣presenting the principall rivers of the four parts of the world. From these cliffes flow divers streams of water, which fall into a great marble ci∣sterne, in the midst of which all the Machine is seated. The design of the work is of the renowned Cavalier Sir Laurence Bernini, whose Carving Iron gives life to the marbles themselves, which return him the eternall applau∣ses of glory. The water brought thi∣ther, is part of that which comes from
the great fountain of Trevi, the most wholesome of Rome, which emula∣ting the happiness of this, sighs one day to see finisht the designs begun by the artificer himself. Her Maje∣sty saw likewise the beautifull Palace with the Church in the form of the Rotonda, erected by the foresaid Pope Innocent the tenth. Her Majesty visits the Church of Giesu.Her Majesty then continuing to make still her vertue more conspi∣cuous with devotion, the true orna∣ment of great minds, desired on new-yeares-day to visit the Church of Gie∣su, and to doe it with the greater so∣lemnity, went thither after dinner with a noble Cavalcata, being ac∣companied by many Cavaliers, and Gentlemen of Rome. She thought to have entered at the Principall gate of the Church, but the concourse of the people, flockt thither to see her, was so great, that she miss'd of her de∣signe, so as she went in at the door of the house where she met with some difficulty for the multitude of the people. She was received by the fa∣ther Generall Gosviri Nickel, who
was accompanied by the fathers the Assistents, and all the gravest fathers, not onely of the house of the pro∣fessed, but of the other places, which they have in Rome. Being entered the house, she first of all went up into the Domestique Chappell of St. Ignatius, which is the same roome, where he lived, and died, where she honoured the remembrance of that Saint, and saw the riches, and beauti∣full ornaments answearable to that place. From thence she was conducted to the closet, towards the high Altar, whence she might see all the Church, and the very great multitude of peo∣ple, that were there, but because from that place she could not hear very well the Musique, with which they then sollemnly Sung the Vespers, she went to another place, more commo∣dious and capacious, which had been adorned before with rich Damasks & Velvets, and accommodated in that manner, that before the place, where the Queen stood with some few, there was a little quire somewhat big∣ger,
which served for an anti-cham∣ber. The Queen remained here till Vespers were done, feeding both her eyes, with the noble and splendid furniture, with which the high Altar was adorned, and her eares with the excellent Musique, which was made in severall quires, composed by Sig∣nior Bonifacio Graziani the Master of the Chappell of that Church, and a Person renowned for his workes which are in print. When Vespers were ended, her Majesty having highly been pleased with the dutifull attendance of those Fathers, and tasted of the feast, went away, and repaired some dayes after to the Monastery of Torre de Specchi, where her Majesty arriving, was re∣ceived at the gate of the Monastery by the Marquiss Valerius Santa Croce, Signior Agostino Maffei, and Signior Paola Maccarani the Deputies of the place, and Mother Donna Maria Giacinta Cesi the President, with many other of the eldest Gentlewo∣men of that Monastery. Her Majesty went up into the Church, where
while she was at Prayer, was Sung a Moletto made on purpose, with a sweet and pleasing melody, with the Queeen were the Arch-Bishops Co∣lonna and Torregiani, Don Antonio della Cueva with the Lady his wife, the Prince of St. Gregory, the Mar∣quiss Bentivogli, the Counts Santi∣nelli, the Pages, and other Gentle∣men of her Majesties train. Being come out of the Church, she went to see, and reverence the habi∣tation of St. Frances of Rome, and diverse bodies of the Saints kept there with other reliques. Before she arrived at this place, she went into a roome, in which was prepared a noble collation of sweet-meats, those La∣dies use to make, which much plea∣sed the Queen. Having afterwards seen the rest of the remarkablest things, she departed highly satisfied with the honours done her by those Gentlewomen, who presented her the next Morning with many pretty devises, and particularly with most rare flowers of silk, surpassing as it were, the naturall flowers them∣selves.
This Monastery of Torre de Specchi, hath a singular priviledg con∣ferred on it by the Popes, that the Ladies may goe out when they please, and receive others in, a favour not granted to any other Nunns. On the Vigill of the Epiphany her Majesty returned after dinner to the Church of St. John Lateran afore∣said, accompanied by my Lord Far∣nese his Holinesses Steward, and at∣tended by her own retinue, where she was present at Vespers, after which being followed by the Chapter to the holy staires, she went up them on her knees. When she was at the top, having leave for herself, and Ma∣dame de Cueva, by his Holinesses Breif, to goe into the Sancta Sancto∣rum, she was conducted thither, and saw our Saviours face, and other in∣numerable reliques. Going thence she went into St. Iohns at the great gate, and past into the Sacristy, where on a fair Altar, stood exposed many reliques within many tabernacles, which were shewed to her, one after the other, by two Canons, to wit my
Lord Antaldi, and Angelo Peraccia∣no with others their assistents. She saw the Cross of Constantine the Em∣perour, and that of St. Silvester the Pope, as likewise the Coape which he used, when he consecrated that Church. When her Majesty came out of the Sacristy, they shewed her the rod of Moses, the pastorall of Aaron, Arca Foederis, and an Altar, where St. Iohn Evangelist preached, which within is full of reliques; the table, where our Saviour made his last Supper, and instituted the most holy Sacra∣ment. She saw too the Altar where St. Peter did celebrate, on which none can celebrate but the Pope. Going thence she was accompanied by the said Chapter to the gate, and returned to the Palace of Farne∣se. On the 7th. of January,She goes to see the Ca∣stle es St. Angelo. she passing along the great gallery, which uniteth the Vatican to the Castle of St. An∣gelo, went to see the said Castle, ac∣companied by the Spanish Ambassa∣dours, the Duke of Serranuova and
Don Antonio Pimentel, my Lord Far∣nese, and Paluzzi Clerk of the Cham∣ber, and superintendent generall of the Arms and Fortresses in the Churches Dominions, Don Antonio della Cueva her cheif Master of the horse, and Cavalier Jacquetti, the Marquiss Hippolitus Bentivogli, Sig∣nior di Lilliecron, the Counts Fran∣cis Maria, and Lodovick Santinelli Gentlemen of her Chamber, and other Gentlemen of her Court. At the last grate, which does divide the Fortress, she was met by the Vice-Governour Count Jerome Gabrielli, accompanied by his Principall offi∣cers, who waited on her all along. As soon as she came within sight of the place of Arms, where the Souldiers of the Garrison stood in rankes, she was welcomed by a vol∣ley of shot, which was seconded with two hundred tire of Mortar-peices, and a hundred of Canon. When her Majesty had seen the most curious and remarkable things, she was plea∣sed to goe into the Vice-Governours appartament, where she had a colla∣tion
of fifty basons of most exquisite sweet-meats of all sorts, each one containing threescore pounds, which immediately after her Majesty had tasted a little of the past of pistachos, were plundered in a Moment. There were most rare wines, with lemmon, and cinnamon waters, of which when her Majesty dranke, the Marquiss Rentivogli was her Cup-bearer, and the Duke of Terranuova presented her the Napkin. This Collation, for the plenty and daintines, was sutable to the Counts generosity, who to his noble birth hath joyned the true ex∣perience of military valour. Her Ma∣jesty was well pleased with this Cava∣liers entertainment, and highly con∣tended she had seen such a beauti∣full, and regular Fortress, returned from thence to her Palace, being sa∣luted at her going away, first by the Muskets of the squadron aforesaid, and afterwards by all the Mortar-pei∣ces, and Artillerie, at her entrance into the Castle. The first Court of this Castle is quadrangular, and built with much
industry, in the midst of which is a machine, or round mole of great height and largeness. This Fabrick is very ancient, being built by Elius Adrianus the Emperour, and there∣fore it was alwaies call'd Adrians mole, till it was chang'd into the ti∣tle of St. Angelo, by reason the Arck-Angell Michaell was seen on the top of it, to put his bloody sword into the scabberd, just as St. Gregory, accompany'd by the Clergie and people of Rome, passed by there to go to St. Peters. Pope Urbane the eighth of glorious memory, forti∣fy'd it with several regular bulwarks, ditches, and rampards, and divers commodious Fabricks for the Soul∣diers of the Garrison, having besides erected there a store-house for Arms, and Artillery. In the Tower of this Castle is the old treasurie, in which Pope Sixtus Quintus kept his trea∣sure, and is never opened, being seal'd with the Popes Seale. Above there is another treasurie, in which the triple Crown of his Holiness is kept, which is seen in solemn processions,
being richly empail'd with Jewels of inestimable value. Thee is too the treasurie of monuments, where the writings of the holy Church, of great∣est consequence, are kept, of which at present Signior Carlo Cartari ad∣vocate of the Consistory, hath the keeping. There is a covered walke from the Vatican to this Castle, built by Pope Alexander the sixth, and now for the quality of the Sci∣tuation and VValls, may be said to be one of the best Fortresses of I∣taly. The rest of the time was spent by her Majesty in receiving of visits, and other noble entertainments, be∣coming her vertuous prerogatives, and especially her great talents in literature. This learned Princess had therefore a particular desire to go see the Sapienza,She sees the Colledge of Sapienza. which is a noble Palace, or Lyceum design'd for pub∣lick studies. She was met at the Gate, and attended by Cardinall Rapaccioli the Vice-Chamberlain in the place of Cardinall Anthony Bar∣berino, who as Chamberlain is the
head of that University, being ac∣company'd by my Lord Richi Au∣ditor di Rota, as Lieutenant of the Cardinall Chamberlain, and all the Advocates of the Consistory. The great Hall, and the less, the antece∣dent▪ were very richly furnish't; o're the door of the first stood her Ma∣jesties picture at length, and in the said Hall was erected a cloth of state, in the midst of which sate the Queen, and the Cardinall on her left hand. The Advocates stood on one side, and at the bottom of the royall seat all the Professors in a ring, and the Bedells with maces of Silver in their hands. On the right hand was prepared a chair for the Professors, whom her Majesty would hear speak. First she desired to hear a Divine, which place was performed by Doctor Peter Maria Pas∣sarino of Modena, Procurator Gene∣ral of the Order of St Dominique, who made his rare parts, and deep learning appear, after whom a Phi∣sitian was desired by her Majesty, so as Signior Giouanni Benedetto Sini∣baldi,
most learnedly, and to his great praise, discharged his part. Then Signior Henrico Chifellio a Hu∣manist was call'd, who though a long time blind, shew'd he hâd seen much in the knowledge of Humanity. Her Majesty seem'd afterwards desirous to hear a Philosopher, and Dr. John Baptist di Lezana a Carmelite, was not wanting to give laudable testi∣monies of his knowledge, whom Signior Giacomo Cincio a Canonist succeeded, who rarely performed his part, and gave the Queen great sa∣tisfaction. The Mathematician Don Antonio Santini did the like, who in his demonstration on paper, came down from the chair to satisfie her Majesties curiosity, who desired to see it nearer her. The Queen was askt afterwards, if she pleased to hear the Professors of tongues, and she seeming content, severall of them went into the chaire one after the other, fully satisfying the genius of her Majesty. The first was Signior Giouanni Battista Giona Galileo, who in the Hebrew tongue,
explained a passage in Genesis, the se∣cond Signior Gulielmo Artio, who discoursed in Greeke of Philosophy, the third Signior Abramo Ecchlensio, who in the Syriaqé tongue, dis∣played some points relating to the knowledge of it, and the fourth Don Philippo Guaagnolo, who in the Ara∣bick and Chaldean tongue, disputed against some points of the Alcoran of Mahomet. This royall entertainment being ended, the Advocates of the Con∣sistory presented her Majesty in a hundred and twelve volumes, the works in print of the Professors of that study, as well of those now li∣ving, as the others lately dead, which volumes were all bound richly in Gold, with the Arms of her Ma∣jesty, she had too a Catalogue in print of the works aforesaid, with an elogie composed by Count Charles Emanuel Vizzani, one of the Ad∣vocates of the Consistory, and a person of great fame. Thus ended the visit with extraordinary satisfa∣ction to her Majesty for the nou∣rishment,
which with her rare un∣derstanding, she had found in the qualities of such eminent Persons, this Princess being likewise asto∣nisht, as well at the various, and solid literature, and learning, as the other great parts, which with her refined judgement, she disco∣vered in the said Cardinall Rapac∣cioli. Her Majesty had likewise a de∣sire to see the noble Monasterie of the Nuns of St. Catharine of Sienna,She visits the Mona∣stery of St. Catharine of Sienna. of the order of St. Dominick, seated on the Mountain Magnanapoli, in which they receive only Ladies of great quality. At the Gate of the said Monasterie, she was re∣ceived by the Prioress, sister Emilia Cenci, with other Nuns, which stood in rankes on both sides, with the Queen went in the Father Generall of the Dominicans of the Family of the Marquisses Marini of Geno∣va, a person much esteem'd for the nobleness of his birth, his good life, and great learning; Father Guemes her Majesties Confessor, the Arch-Bishop
Forregiani, and four others of the most eminent Fathers of the Order of St. Dominique. She went presently into the Quire, where she was welcomed with a consort of se∣verall musical instruments, and heard with much pleasure a Moletto sung most exquisitely. From thence she was conducted under a Canopie to the Hall, where two tables were furnisht with a noble collation. Here staying a little, she afterwards went up into the Tower, from which she discovering not only all Rome, but much of the Countrey there abouts, was so pleased with the prospect, that she staid there two hours with great satisfaction, coming afterwards down into the Church, and hearing there Mass, she return'd from thence to her Palace, whither the Nuns sent her Majesty many pretty devi∣ses, with a little Cofer of Carnation sattin embroydered with Gold, in which was a relique of St. Catharine, and another of San Romano, with a relique of St. Nicholas da Bari in christall, and six viols of Manna of
the said Saint, all embroydered with Silver, with severall flowers of am∣bre, and silke, which her Majesty most kindly accepted, as a testimony of the generous respect of those Ladies towards her person. She was pleased too to visit the Convent of the Nuns of St. Sixtus, of the most noble order of St. Domi∣nick, seated in Quirinale on the Mountain Magnanapoli, for noble∣ness and beauty equall to the other there contiguous, of St. Catharine of Sienna of the same order. Her Ma∣jestie went in, accompany'd by my Lord Forregiani, the Father Gene∣rall, the Father Procurator, and her Majesties Confessour, all Domini∣cans. The Prioress sister Raimonda Colonna, assisted by the rest of the Nuns, received her at the Gate, and waited on her, throughout all the Monastery and Garden, the fineness and neatness of which buildings, to∣gether with the beauty of the seat, pleased highly her Majesty, who had there a noble Collation. On the 16. of January her Maje∣sty
going into the Coach,And the Church of the Greci∣ans. which his Holiness gave her, accompanyed by the Princes, Prelates, and other Ca∣valiers, went to the Greeks Church, which was adorned with very rich Hangings, especially the Cloyster called Sancta Sanctorum, as also the door of the Sacristy, where a throne was erected for her Majestie, to the end she might see the better the Ce∣remonies they did within the Sancta Sanctorum. She was received in the Church by Father John Rho, Provin∣ciall of the Society of Jesus, and Father Octavius Massa Rector of the Greeke Colledge. At her Ma∣jesties arrivall they began the Greek Mass, which was sung by my Lord Laurence Constantino Arch-Bishop of Cassandra, with three Priests, a Deacon and Subdeacon, they using the same ceremonies the Greek Church is accustomed to do, when the Bishop does solemnly celebrate, the said Prelate vesting himself in a pontifical habit, in the midst of the Quire on a little throne. Her Majestie was much pleased
with this ceremony, and shewing, she understood well those rites, discoursed of them with Signior Al∣latio of the City of Scio, a person of great learning, who was expresly there to satisfie her Majesties de∣mands. The Queen saw their com∣munion, and when the Masse was done, a Priest, bringing to her the bread that was blessed, she tasted some of it. The said ceremonies being ended, she arose up very glad∣ly, having satisfied in that her curio∣sity, which desired to understand, and know all things, and was accom∣pany'd out of the Church, by the Fathers aforesaid, and other Cava∣liers. As she was never idle, so to ex∣ercise continually her mind, and en∣tertain it in noble and vertuous ha∣bits, besides musicall Consorts, which from time to time she had in the evenings, in her lodgings,She desires to hold an Academy in her own Palace. at which great Personages were present, she gave order to Count Francis Maria Santinelli Gentleman of her Cham∣ber, to bring her a list of the persons
fam'd for learning, and experienced in the Academies of Rome, and ac∣quaint them with her Majesties de∣sire, to have them hold their Acade∣mies in her Palace. And as every one justly sought, to shew her a du∣tifull respect, not only with the tri∣bute of reverence, but with their parts, and talents, so they were most ready to comply with her desires, which no sooner were made known unto them, but many fruitfull wits, with which the Court of Rome still abounds, were employed in her praises. The Fathers of the Society, who justly may be called the Oracles of the Sciences, not permitting their sublime wits to sleep, nor their for∣tunate Pens to be idle, as they knew, that the Queen, so great a lover of learning,She sees the Roman Colledge. would see their Roman Colledge, the most happy schools of the Sciences, and piety, so they put those compositions together, which they thought not so much to be su∣table to the ornament of the place, as meet for the reception of a wo∣man,
who exceeded the capacity of men in the knowledg of the most pro∣found literature. And indeed in the rich mine of their sublime wits, they found so much matter, that all that beheld it, were astonisht and amazed at the numerous, and proper appli∣cations of so many images, Mottos, Hieroglyphicks, and Emblems, all alluding to the Person alone of this renowned Princess. On the 18th. of January after din∣ner her Majesty came to the said Colledg with her usuall attendance, accompanied by so many Persons, that she could hardly get in her self, though the gate was well lookt to by the Guards of the Switzers, set ex∣presly there to hinder the disorders, which usually occurre in the like crowds and throngs. At the entrance into the said Col∣ledg was a great quadrangle, with walkes round about supported by Pillars, under which in three parts the Schooles are extended. All the Pillars were adorned with the pictures of women remarkable in
learning, with their medalls of em∣bossed work coloured like brass, and under two thick pastboords of the like embossed work. In the first they read the elogy of each one, which was still applied to the qualities of the Queen, and in the second they saw a Motto on the same subject. In the semicircles of the Arches, the Univer∣sities and Colledges, in which those Fathers teach, were painted with their Inscriptions. Between the Pillars, and each door of the Schooles were re∣presented the particular donatives of each City offered to the Queen, and displaied underneath with an Epigram written within a wreath supported by an Angell. The descri∣ption of the Roman Colledg which was adorned to receive her.The second place was the room of the gate, through which they goe into the Colledg. In this they represen∣ted the statues of the Queenes re∣nowned for their raignes, expressed in darkish colours, and standing on their bases, under which in severall past∣boords hung their Elogies, all appli∣ed to her Majesty. Between one statue and another on a great gilt pastboord
were the Emblems relating to the vertues required in Princes, and un∣der the Epigrams of the Emblem. All these roomes seemed adorned with red damaske with twisted gold, being so naturally painted, that they cozened the eyes, in case they were not toucht. The leaf-workes had in∣terchangeably on them the Armes of her Majesty, and the Mottos alluded to the vertues aforesaid. In the third place were extended the little walkes, which are behind this roome, in the which as contigu∣ous to the garden, was painted most excellently a beautifull garden, with a prospect of various Pillars, in which were written elogies and odes on the Empresses and Queens renowned for their vertues and piety, on the doores four Emblems with their Epi∣grams being delineated. The fourth and last place was the space between the sacristy and the Church, and there they saw painted the Empresses and Queens come to Rome, to honour there the Vicars of Christ. The pain∣ting represented a plain, in which
were erected great Pyramides, in e∣very one of which was imprinted an Elogie in praise of that picture, which still had relation to her Ma∣jesty, between the one Pyramide and the other, was a fained bound of brass, which held up an ode on the same subject, and on the other between these, hung a paper with an Epigramme. The ho∣nours done her Maje∣sty.The Church of the said Colledge, dedicated to St, Ignatius the foun∣der of the Society of Jesus, albeit not yet finished, was most beauti∣fully adorned. As her Majesty went in at the great gate, she saw on the first arch within, an inscription con∣taining the argument of all the pre∣paration, and in the space between the great gate, and the walkes of the Court on the right hand was painted the heavenly wisdom desired by So∣lomon, and preferred before riches, and Kingdoms, on the left hand Pal∣las, the wisdom of the ancient Gen∣tiles, who with her speare made an Olive-tree grow up in opposition to Neptune, who caused a horse to
appear. All this was display'd in 4. odes, written on thick past-boards, supported by the bounds in four pil∣lars, and in four others the Sybills and Muses, who with their predicti∣ons, and verses alluded to her Ma∣jesty. She went afterwards up into the roome o're the Gate, where a throne being prepar'd, she was com∣plemented by Father Lodowick Bom∣piani the Rector of the said Univer∣sity, with a Latin oration. Being come without the Court, she went up and down all the Schooles, in every one of which, she was welcom'd by one of the most eminent Scholars, with a short Epigramme. Being afterwards re∣turned into the said roome, o're the gate, she was by Father Rho the Pro∣vinciall, informed of the contents of that noble preparation, and heard him read the names of those re∣nowned Princesses. Thence she went into the Church, where she heard a motetto with most exqui∣site musick, and afterwards depar∣ted.
This vertuous preparation was most curious, and noble, and there∣fore the concourse of the people, to see, and admire it, was great. She goes to the Colledg of Urbane for the pro∣pagation of the Faith.On the first of February her Ma∣jesty went to see the Colledge of Urbane for the propagation of the Faith, where Cardinall Capponi, as Vice-prefect of that Congregation, in the absence of Cardinal Anthony Barberino the Prefect, was ready to receive her. She was first conducted into the printing-house, where they print two and twenty severall tongues, and she saw in an instant some sheets printed in eight lan∣guages, in which were the following words, May Christina live for ever. The languages were Latin, Greek, Syriaque, Arabick, Hebrew, Caldean, Coptick, and Armenian. She went afterwards into the great Hall, which was hung with crimson damask with twisted Gold, where her Majesty sate under a cloth of state, in a chair raised two steps from the ground, the Cardinall sitting on her left hand in a lower chair. On the four corners
of the said Hall, were fastned four Epigramms on the four parts of the VVorld. At her entrance she was welcom'd by the Scholars in two and twenty languages, none of them ex∣ceeding two periods, which were afterwards presented her in print in a book with this title.The curi¦osities seen in the said Colledg. The agree∣ment of tongues in celebrating the praises of Christina Queen of Swed∣land. This action ended with an in∣vitation of one of the Scholars to the rest, to contract in the Latin tongue alone, what could be ex∣pressed in the rest by all the Col∣ledge, to wit the said words, that were printed; may Christina live for ever, which were seconded, not only by the Scholars, but all the standers by to her Majesties great content. She then accompanyed by the said Cardinall, went into the Li∣brary, in which all the printed books are kept, and here they found six Scholars, with six great basons of Silver, in which, in stead of sweet-meats, seventy two volumes of se∣verall works, in two and twenty lan∣guages,
were presented to her, which pleased her extreamly. At her Majesties going out of the Library, she had some compositions presented her likewise in print in se∣verall tongues in her praise, to whom they also shewed a great store-house full of volumes printed for the ser∣vice of the apostolical missionaries, all in severall languages, her Maje∣stie confessing, that in no other part of the World, there was the like printing-house for variety of tongues. All the order aforesaid was by the direction of my Lord Dionysius Massari the Secretary of the said Congregation. She goes a∣gain to the Roman Colledg.Her Majesty unable, for the great throngs of people, to see at her ease, and as she desired, the ma∣ny Compositions, Pictures, Mottos, and Inscriptions set out in the said Roman Colledge, resolved to go thither again, and privately entered there at the back door, being recei∣ved by the General, Father Rho the Provincial, and Father Lodovick
Bompiani the Rector, and many o∣thers of the Society. She quickly went into the Libra∣ry, which besides a vast number of choyce volumes, is beautifully a∣dorned with the Pictures of all the Cardinalls of the Society, & others, that are famous for their writings, as likewise of their noble benefactors, among which was more remarkable than the rest,The splen∣did Libra∣ry of the deceased my Lord Coccino: the Picture of the de∣ceased my Lord John Baptist Cocci∣no a Venetian, who thought he could not better establish the memorie of his glories, his immortall pains, and incomparable deserts, as well to∣wards the service of the apostolicall Sea, as all learned men, than by lea∣ving to the said Roman Colledge his most pretious and copious Li∣brary, with all his choice Manu∣scripts. Here her Majesty entertaining her self for some time, The re∣markable things she saw in the Roman Colledg. in viewing the many volumes, took pleasure too in looking on the Modell and Plat∣forme of the City of Jerusalem, which was left by Father Villal-pando,
with the description of the streets, and holy places, consecrated by the journeys and passions of our Lord Jesus Christ. She then going about the other sides, discovered some Greek and Latin Manuscripts lying open on a Table, and could judge of the Authors, shewing very great learning. She went thence into the gallery, that was near, where Fa∣ther Athanasius Nircherius the great Mathematician had prepared many curious and remarkable things, as well in nature, as art, which were in so great a number, that her Majesty said, more time was required, and less company to consider them with due attention. However she stayed some time to consider the herb called Phoenix, which resembling the Phoenix grew up in the waters perpetually out of its own ashes. She saw the foun∣tains, and clocks, which by vertue of the load stone turn about with secret force. Then passing through the Hall, where she looked on some Pictures well done, she went
through the walkes and the garden, into the Apothecaries shop, where she saw the preparation of the in∣gredients of herbs, plants, metalls, gemms, and other rare things, for the making of treacle, and balsome of life. She saw them distill with the fire of the same furnace sixty five sorts of herbs in as many di∣stinct limbecks. She saw the philo∣sophical calcination of ivorie, and the like. She saw extracted the spi∣rits of Vitriol, Salt, and Aqua-fortis, as likewise a jarre of pure water, which with two single drops of the quintessence of milke, was turned into true milk, the only medicine for the shortness of the breath, and affections of the breast. In fine being presented with treacle, and pretious oyles, she went into the sacristy, where they opened all the presses, vvhere they keep the Plate, and reliques of the Church, vvith the great candlesticks, and vases given them by the deceased Cardi∣nall Lodowick Lodovisio the foun∣der of the Church. She honoured
particularly the blood of St. Esuper∣antia a Virgin and Martyr, which, after a thousand and three hundred years, is as liquid as if newly shed. Then going into the Church she heard Mass, and at her departure, gave testimonies to the Fathers of her great satisfaction and content. She insti∣tutes an Academy in her own Palace.Among these entertainments, whither sacred, or curious, the Queen forgat not those of her mind, in the recreations of learning. Some principal Gentlemen of the Academy of Rome invited to com∣ply with her Majesties desire, very willingly concurr'd with their ver∣tuous attendance, and talents to o∣bey her,The names of the A∣cademi∣ans. holding once a week an Academy before her. They were Don Pompeo Colonna Prince of Galli∣cano, the Prince of St. Gregory, Marquis Scipio Santa Croce, the Marquis Frederick Miroli, Count Lodowick Santinelli, Count Vlderick Fiumi, Count Francis Maria Santi∣nelli, Signior Carlo Rapaccioli, Signior Ottavio Falconieri, the Mar∣quis Francis Ricci, the Abbot Fran∣cis
Cesis, Signior Giouanni Lotti, Sig∣nior Sebastiano Baldini, Signior Gio. Francesco Melosio, Signior Antonio Abbati, Signior Camillo Rubiera, Sig∣nior Tiberio Cevoli, the Abbot Vin∣cenzo Maculani, Cavalier Marke Antonio Meniconi, Don Caesare Colon∣na, and Signior Gio. Francesco Sini∣baldi. The first Academy began in the evening on the 24. of January, in which the Prince of Gallicano made appear his solid learning, and wit, with a lecture in honor of the Pope, Alex∣ander the 7th. the other Academians seconding with their compositions, the applauses due to him, who for the fair union of piety and learning, makes the Vatican throne resplendent.The con∣tents of divers A∣cademies held before her Maje∣sty. In the second Academy the Prince of St. Gregory discoursed, sprightly proving, that the rigour and discourtesies of Ladies, are sometimes the argu∣ments, and subtilties of love. In the third the Marquis Frederick Miroli made the problem, who gave abundant testimonies, he was no less conspicuous in the knowledge of the
sciences, than in valour, and armes. He argued whither the day, or the night were more proper for a poetical furie, and on the same subject, Sig∣nior Gio. Francesco Sinibaldi spake learnedly, who made his vertuous qualities appear. The conclusion was in favour of the night, which appear'd with the twelve hours before her, who were persons most beautifully a∣dorned, with lighted torches in their hands, and followed by four starres artificially, dress'd, which were the two Brothers, the Counts Santinelli, and two others, their friends. The Night sang some verses in thanks to the Academians, for the honour done her in making her the theater of their wits, and the four starres danc'd the Ganaryes most gracefully. This was the invention of Count Francis Ma∣ria Santinelli, who being to make the problem in the fourth Academie, made his vertuous parts appear in an Academical lotterye, in which every one recited something on his chance. The last problem, which ended the Academie, was concluded by the
Abbot, Francis Cesis, and Signior Francesco Melosi, and 'twas, whither the love was more durable, and pow∣erfull, that comes on a suddain, or that which is bred by conversa∣tion. 'Twas fit that some martiall en∣tertainments should second those of learning, and therefore the Prince of Palestrina with a company of Cava∣liers, 24. in number, to shew his re∣spects to her Majesty (he imagining, to her eyes, accustomed to the harsh∣ness, and wars of the North, martiall objects might likewise be gratefull and pleasing, but much more the sweeter, and calmer of Italy) resol∣ved, di fare una festa de Carosselli. To these recreations, the great and generous Barberines added three mu∣sicall Playes, most splendidly recited in their Palace at the four Foun∣tains. On the last of January in the even∣ing they recited first a musical Play intituled the triumph of piety, or the life of man. The matter was all morall, and becoming the beauty of
the scenes,The Come∣dy intitled the tri∣umph of piety reci∣ted to her Majesty in the Palace of the Prince of Pallestri∣na. which were very hand∣some, as well for the learned compo∣sition, as the sweet and most exqui∣site musick. The composition repre∣sented the arts and deceits, with vvhich pleasure, and guilt seek still to overvvhelme the understanding and innocence; the remorse of conscience in pursuing them, constancie in reje∣cting them, and frailty in complying vvith them. A curtain being dravvn, the Night appeared in a shady scene. The davv∣ning of the day began to be seen, and afterwards a little by little the summ, which with wonderful art made the Theater all resplendent. The morn∣ning from her silver Chariot, strewing many sweet flowers, and awaking the Shepherds to their businesse, was the prologue, after vvhich in a very fine prospect, vvas a City vvith tvvo op∣posite rocks, the one of the under∣standing, and the other of pleasure, vvho disputed very earnestly together, each one endeavouring to beat dovvn the reasons of the other.
Humane life coming aftervvards forth betvveen innocence and guilt,The morall contents of the Come∣dy. each of them endeavoured to van∣quish the senses, pleasure and guilt insinuating delight, the most fit ma∣chine for the moving of the will, and with this they provoked her, some∣times to lasciviousness, which is an excess of desire without reason, some∣times to idleness the Father of all vice, now to gourmandizing the mo∣ther of luxurie, now to avarice, which destroyes faith and goodness, some∣times to pride, the ruine of all vertue, sometimes to anger the beginning of madness, and sometimes to envye, which spoyles all friendship, and de∣files anothers glory. The understanding, and innocence on the other side represented to life, in opposition to lasciviousness, the beauty of temperance, which is the foundation of a mans happy life. I∣dleness they opposed with exercise and study, the Fathers of vertues and glory, and gourmandizing with absti∣nence, the true armes to vanquish
the sensuall temptations. Against a∣varice they set liberality, the soul of reputation, and guide to Paradise. A∣gainst pride humility, which makes us worthy of compassion with men, and of mercy with God. Against anger patience, which o'recomes and con∣quers all difficulties, and in fine a∣gainst envie the contempt of earthly things, one of the greatest parts of generosity. Life invaded by goods, and provo∣cations, now yielded to the allure∣ments of pleasure and guilt, now re∣collected it self, and adher'd to the admonitions of the understanding and innocence, and contending thus with morall discourses, very learned, and most excellently sung, they en∣ded severall acts, and changed the scene the seond time which with ad∣mirable beauty represented a deliti∣ous, and well severed Garden, ador∣ned with statues, and such rare par∣titions, that with the addition of the fountains, and a most strange fall of water, made it one of the most beau∣tifull prospects, that could possibly
be seen. In fine in the third scene, in which they saw a most pleasant meadow full of trees, fruit, and flow∣ers, and a distance of place, where the Vatican appeared, the Frontispiece and Cupola of St. Peters, the new Suburbes, and Castle of St Angelo, guile and pleasure disguised like the understanding and innocence, endea∣vour to cosen life, with the provoca∣tions and artifices proper to malice, and the cunning of the wicked, but the understanding and innocence, coming forth in their own true ap∣pearance, and finding life in those am∣buscados, discovering to her the de∣ceits, with which pleasure and guilt seek to lull her asleep, and betray her, make her see her own errour and frailty, and to fortifie and defend her from all other surprizes and am∣bushes, give her a ring of Gold, with a deaths-head in stead of a Jewell, admonishing her, that if she shall still think of death, after which the greatest thing is reduced to nothing, she shall finde whosoever thinks of death, never ceases to live well. In
this manner they ended the Play, in which follow'd several intermediums of dances, and musical consorts, with instruments sutable to the plea∣sure of so vertuous a recreation, they afterwards concluding with a dance admirably performed by two excel∣lent dancers, and with the appearance of a squib full of fire-works, accom∣panyed with the noise of many mor∣tar pieces. When the Queen had taken plea∣sure in beholding the noble apparta∣ments, and rich furniture of that roy∣all Palace, which was adorned with excellent Pictures, she went down the private stairs to the Theater, in the middle of which within a parti∣tion, and under a cloth of state, she heard with such attention and con∣tent, the morality of that action, that judging it very sutable to her rare understanding she desired to be present twice there, she praysing much the subject,The Au∣thor of the Composi∣tion. and composition, the fruit of the rare wit of the Ab∣bot Rospigliosi, a person as eminent in learning, as remarkable for his noble
condition, it being enough to say, he is the deserving Nephew of my Lord Rospigliosi Secretary of state to his Holiness, whose capacity of the great∣est affairs, is accompanied with good∣ness, and literature in the highest de∣gree. The musick was ordered by Signior Marco Marazzoli the fa∣mous Musitian of his Holinesses Chappell, and the Actors were Sig∣nior Bonaventura Argenti, who acted mans life, Signior Domenico Rodo∣monte who represented innocence, Signior Domenico del Pane the Actor of guilt, Signior Lodowick Lenzi of the understanding, Signior Francesco de Rossi of pleasure, and Signior Gio∣seppe Sorilli of the prologue, all ex∣quisite Musitians, and very fine Actors. In the mean time the Queen on the 18. of February visited the Church of St. Peter, all the Clergie receiving her at the Gate.She visits the famous reliques kept in St. Peters. Thirty Canons in their rotchets, coaps and white skins, with 38. Priests, and 26. benefic'd Clerks, waited on her Majesty, who when she had ador'd the most holy
Sacrament, went down into the grots below the Church, where her Majesty heard Mass in a Chappell near the bo∣dies of St. Peter and St. Paul; she saw afterwards the records that are there of the shrines of the ancient Popes, and in her return was conducted by my Lord Farnese, my Lord Fibei, and my Lord Marescotti, all three Ca∣nons of St. Peter, to see the famous reliques of the lance which pierc'd the side of Christ, a part of the Cross, on which he was crucifyed, and the print of our Saviours face on a hand∣kerchief, the Volto Santo, reliques so highly esteem'd, and kept with such care, that they cannot be seen near at hand by any one, albeit he were a Cardinall, unless he be a Canon of the said Church, without the speciall leave of the Pope, who issues forth a Brief in such cases, as he did to the Queen with this clause, let her alone see them. Her Majesty admired the said reliques vvith particular devotion, and vvent thence to see all the rest of the things, kept there for the greater decorum within a Chappell of the Sacristy.
Two dayes after her Majesty went to the Church of the Conventualls of St. Francis dedicated to the holy A∣postles, where she was met and at∣tended by Father Felx d' Ascoli the Generall of that Order, and the most qualifyed Fathers of the Convent. At her Majesties entrance into the Church, they gave signes of joy with ringing the Bells, and playing on the Organs, and Musick, and the Father aforesaid gave her the holy water when she had ador'd the blessed Sa∣crament, and visited the two Altars of St. Francis and St. Anthony of Pa∣doua, in the arch-confraternity of which she desired to be register'd, she heard Mass and departed. On the following Sunday her Ma∣jesty went the second time to the Be∣nedictine Nuns of the conception of St. Mary in Campo Martio,She goes to the Church of the Nuns in Campo Martio. and as the first time she saw only the Church, she now would see the mo∣nasterie, into which she entered ac∣companyed by the Deputy, and re∣ceived and attended at the Gate by Dame Tecla Rotolante the Abbesse,
Dame Deodata Baccini the Prioress, and the rest of the Nuns. Her Ma∣jesty was conducted into the quire, and heard Mass, a motetto being sung by the angelical voyce of Dame Ma∣ria Alessandro Galvani, she went af∣terwards into a great roome, furnisht with crimson damask fringed with Gold, with her state, chair, and foot∣stool of the same, where she heard, without offence to her modesty, a very fine motetto, which was sung in her praise, though she was better pleased, when she heard divers o∣thers, the sweetness of which dimi∣nished the bitterness instilled into her by the first. After this they gave her Majes a noble collation, which was seconded with a present of seven basons full of severall fine devises, sent her to her lodging, which her Ma∣jesty most kindly accepted. On the fifteenth of February, her Majesty extreamly desirous,She goes to the Vine∣yard of Prince Panfilio. to see the most remarkable things of the great City of Rome, went to view the Vineyard of the Prince Don Ca∣millo Panfilio, called Belrespiro near
San Pancratio, where she found the said Prince accompanyed by my Lord Torreggiani, and many Cava∣liers the Camrades of his Excellence, who waited on her all about the Gar∣den, and the appartaments of the Palace, putting into her hand a stick all gilt, and beset with pretious stones. When her Majesty accompanyed by the Prince, whom she would ne∣ver suffer to be uncovered, had with great content, walked all about the Garden, which is one of the fairest, and most lovely of Rome, and the Prince had caused to be made with designe and vast charge, she went into the Palace adorn'd with the preti∣ousest furniture, giving lustre and mag∣nificence to a house, where she found prepared a royall collation of most exquisite sweet-meats,The pre∣sents made by the said Prince to her Maje∣sty. and remained some time, the Prince presenting her the Cup, and the Duke of Ceri the napkin. Then observing the pictures, which are there in great abundance, and most excellent, she liked, amongst others, a Danae done by Hanibal
Caracci, which the Prince perceiving, without speaking any thing caused to be presented to her, with another of his best Pieces, just as she returned to her Palace, having at her departure from the Vineyard given her the said stick beset with Jewels. The Prince some dayes before, having heard she would make a little Coach for her own use, sent her one of crimson Velvet, and Silver, wrought maje∣stickly and artificially in the gallery of the great Duke of Florence. The Carneval afterwards approach∣ing, which in Rome begins only ten dayes before Lent, the Queen some few dayes before had intimated to the Prince, she would come to his house, to see the maskings and horseraces used at that time. His Excellency very glad of the honour, the night before the Saturday, on which they begin, caused a handsome long scaf∣fold to be reared before his Palace in all hast. It represented a long pulpet sup∣ported by Pillars, and on the sides had two arms bending inwards a lit∣tle,
the one for the Cavaliers of her Majesties traine, and the other for the Ladies. In the middle with a fine row of pillars, and little chapters of Gold, and cornishes of mettall, the history of Alexander the great was epito∣mized in fine and noble painting. The box appointed for her Majesty, had gilt parapets of iron with the arms of Swedland, and was defended from the aire with long windowes of fine glass wrought with gold, with the arms of her Majesty. Within it was hung with embroy∣dery in Gold on blew Velvet, with a throne, and royall state, and the arms of her Majesty, and her Kingdoms, in the richest purled twist. This as each thing else, that was done in such an occasion, was by the designe and architecture of his Excellence him∣self, a Prince of a sprightly and ad∣mirable understanding in all things. Every time her Majesty repaired to the Palace of this Prince, she, with her train, had a noble collation of sweet-meats, and he kept open house. Every evening the boxes abounded
with Torches of white wax, and the first three nights they made very fine bon-fires. The entertainment the Queen had the first evening was a musicall Play,The ho∣nours done her Maje∣sty by Prince Panfilio. acted by three waiting women of the Princess of Rossano his Excellences wife, which pleased so her Majesty, she desired to see it again the next night, though the Princess had prepa∣red another divertisment like it, which was deferred till the third evening, and liked by her Majesty, with the same good fortune to be acted several times. The composition of the words was by Signior Giouanni Lotti, and the musick by Tenalia, both persons very famous. With such recreations the Prince entertained her Majesty till the last night of Carneval, in which he made wonderfully appear his own wit and generosity, for after a royal collation, and abounding with all the new fruits they could get in despight of the harshness of the season, he condu∣cted the Queen into a great roome, adorned with most splendid, and in∣estimable
furniture, where she saw, sitting under a state, the furniture in a moment vanish out of the Cham∣ber, a fair Sea there appearing in a beautifull prospect, and ingeniously contrived within that narrow place:The Queens recreations in the house of the said Prince. she saw then immediately Venus and Cupid descend from above, in a Cha∣riot drawn by two Pigeons, without seeing what supported it in the aire, insomuch as the Queen, and all that were there, were amazed and asto∣nisht. Venus being come to the earth with her Son, heard Cupids com∣plaints, who accused the Ladies of Tybur for being too rigid, and the authority of his Mother not appea∣sing his anger, he shot some arrowes towards the Ladies, and together with Venus returned to the Chariot, both of them singing joyntly the praises of her Majesty. As they vanished they sang a lit∣tle song, inviting some Ladies, who formerly were followers of Cupid, to give with a dance some refresh∣ment to them he had subdued. The
machine vanishing away, from the sides of the maritime scene issued forth eight Ladies of the Princess aforesaid, most splendidly apparrel'd, with lighted Torches in their hands, and danced a rare dance, establishing love with those unstable motions, and securing the motions of the will with the measure of short distan∣ces. After this the room was refurnisht as before, and her Majesty was so highly contented, that she publickly declared, she had not seen any thing in Rome, to her greater satisfaction. The words were composed by the said Prince Don Camillo, who pre∣sented her Majesty with a song made by him on her renouncing of her Kingdoms, which was much com∣mended by her, she celebrating the Prince for a very vertuous person, and deserving all praise and ap∣plause. Still in all these actions, the Prin∣cess of Rossano was accompanyed by many Princesses and Ladies, and severall Princes and Cavaliers were
with the Prince, who had every day rich cloaths, with strange and new inventions. The same did the Prin∣cess, who had Jewels of inestima∣ble value. This Princess with her prudence, and most noble carriage,The emi∣nent quali∣ties of the Princess of Rossano. made it evidently appear, her mind is as illustrious and generous, as her family is great, she being the Niece of many Popes, and allyed to many Potentates in Italy. The Abbot Caesar Malvicino, and Signior Carlo Centosiorini, the for∣mer the Secretary, and the latter the chief Gentleman of the horse to the Prince aforesaid, still assisted at these functions, as likewise Signior Mario Raviera his Excellences do∣mestick Gentleman, who applyed himself to it very earnestly. In Carneval-time notwithstanding these vertuous entertainments, her Majesty shewed her piety in visiting severall Churches, and particularly that of Giesu, where with a most splendid preparation, the forty hours were exposed. On a scaffold in fine order ap∣peared
six mountains the arms of his Holiness,The noble prepara∣tion in the Church of Giesu. on the top of which, according to the prophecie of Isaiah they saw the Church sitting in a beautifull manner, who, while with her left hand she supported the cross, with the other pointed at the sub∣lime throne of glory, on which they discovered the Saviour of the VVorld. On the two contiguous mountains were erected two figures representing Religion, and contem∣plation, while the theological ver∣tues plac't on the three mountains below, did court and attend her. At the feet of the mountains they saw come from all parts throngs of people to do homage to that great Monarchess, and captivate their un∣derstandings convinced in obedience to the Catholick Faith. Those per∣sonages afterwards appeared, who thought it a thing of glory, and de∣sert to preferre the reproach of the cross before worldly greatness. They represented too the Princes, Kings, and Emperours, who shewed they regarded not their titles, but to have
some worthy argument, to make known to the VVorld their esteem of the true Religion, while for the love of it, they despised those dig∣nities. There were likewise Prin∣cesses and Queens, whose piety was as generous; and as the famous Pain∣ters had given life and eloquence with their pensills, to the Pictures, so they were all contented with their state, but in a certain manner confessed, they were conquered with the modern miracle of a couragious and masculine woman, who remark∣able in the midst of the rest, with a countenance breathing majestick, as well as devotion, the more she endeavoured to obscure the titles of a Queen, acquired them the more. The three Crowns and Scepters, the victimes offered up by her to the Catholick Faith, she did not now behold, but every one admired them, and it seemed she would plant them in that mountain, she judging it worthy to have Scepters for trees, and Diadems for flowers, where
Monarchs, and Princes excited by her singular example, might, instead of birds, build their nests. To this great Lady, the supream Commandress of the mountain bowed her face, as if she had said, many daughters have heaped up riches, and thou exceedest them all; You would have thought, in so plea∣sing a sight, the holy Church sucking consolations with her eyes, and milk as it were from so many breasts, as there were triumphant soules, en∣creased to the eyes of the beholders, and with those mountains quickened with some invisible breath, was rai∣sed much higher. Behind the Mountains and Per∣sonages, they discovered severall fine distances, which was all in the low region. But the eye looking upwards, en∣tered into a Paradise, which being wide open, while it would be a Spe∣ctator of what was done on earth, became a delitious, and fortunate spectacle to way-faring men. It ex∣tended it self in many circles propor∣tionably
still greater, and abounding with beautifull figures of knots, Se∣raphins, Cherubins, Angels, and Saints, even to the top of the Arch, and profundity of the royal Court, the receptacle of glory, which could not be bounded with limits, fine knots, appearing without the Arch. The most holy Sacrament the As∣cendent, and Horoscope of the holy Church, was in the midst of Heaven as it were, nor could they discern how, or where it reposed, and yet it stood fast. The blessed soules ado∣ring it, as they shewed, they enjoy∣ed its glories, so likewise presaged, by vertue of its influences, greater happiness to the Catholick VVorld, and it seemed they heard them say to those mountains, enjoy peace O Mountains, at which tidings, they shall skip for joy like Ramms, for the hope, they saw they had. The Father eternall was Specta∣tor of all, whom we there represent, as when he had finish'd the VVorld, and said all was good; so there he appeared supported in himself, and
joyning together the high with the low, the Earth with the Hea∣ven made one single Region, as it were. How then that noble machine was illuminated, we may guess by the starres, that are still resplendent, though the Sun, the Fountain of light, be not seen in the scene of Heaven. The machine was every where bright, but they could not dis∣cover from whence the light came, nor tell if it was in the Pictures, or borrowed from some Sun, assembled by art; so with many very pleasing deceits of near distances, and distant nearness, fixed flights, and endings without end, they sweetly lost their curiosity, and had their devotion free, so as they might employ themselves wholy in those holy exercises. The noble Comedies acted in the Palace of the Prince of Pel∣lestrina.At that time on the Theater a∣foresaid of the Signior Barberini, two other fine musical Playes vvere represented, vvith rare changes of scenes, intermediums of dances, and most exquisite musick, the sub∣ject of both being handsomly trans∣lated
out of Spanish. The one was intituled Armes and Love, contain∣ing the many amorous and warlike events, which usually accompany by turnes the fortunes of the fol∣lowers of Mars and Venus. The o∣ther called, the good of evill, con∣tained too a knot of various amo∣rous accidents, in which vertue, and love intermixing by chance, made appear oftentimes, out of evill comes good, and frequently from disasters better fortune proceeds, allowing the saying, we should have been in danger, if we had not been in dan∣ger. The Queen was still present at these actions, entertaining and de∣lighting her mind, which was given, and applyed to vertuous and noble things. The German Colledge desired too the occasion of paying their dutifull respects to the Queen in a musical Play called the sacrifice of Isaack,The Play acted in the Ger∣man Col∣ledge. the contents of which were, that God the supream King of victories, and fountain of all power, loves a∣bove all victimes the rationall, and
above all sacrifices the unbloody of obedience, where there is a contri∣tion of the heart, a captivating of a faithfull understanding, and a pious will subjected to his pleasure. The intermedium was the valorous, and fortunate act of Judith, and all did allude to the glories of the Queen, for renouncing her Kingdoms, and professing the Catholique Faith. A Father of the Society composed the words, and the musick was done by Signior Carissimi, master formerly of the Chappell of that Church of A∣pollnare. On the 28. of February in the evening, in the foresaid Palace of the Signior Barberini at the four fountains. Si fece la festa d' Carroselli.Which as for the appearances, and machines deserved an universall ap∣plause, so obliges me to relate it succinctly, I leaving the severall particulars to be published by a lear∣neder penne, and more happy. The great Court of the said Palace, which is long and spatious, was de∣signed for the Theater. These Gen∣tlemen
by demolishing some houses of their own, that were con∣tiguous, caused two large, and com∣modious ascents of degrees, to be erected on the left side capable of a∣bout 3000. Persons, in the midst of which, a magnificent great gate was built o're against the Queens place, adorned with various figures, which being about the Queens armes, made a very fine prospect. On the top of the said great Gate in four great windowes with lettises before them, was the Quire for the Musi∣tians, who with various instruments, made most exquisite musick. In the side of the Palace, two rowes of scaffolds were erected, the one o're the other, covered with rich tapistries, and so with propor∣tionable symmetrie, from both the sides two other ranges answerable, were extended, so as by an ingenious industry, that Court was reduced in∣to the forme of a beautifull Thea∣ter. To give light to the field, besides the thick Torches of white wax, and
artificiall materialls, which burnt on severall rowes of the Pillars, on the ascents of the degrees, and at the head of the lists, there were six∣teen great starres artificially com∣posed of iron wire, each of which being set up very high in the aire, with a new invention not seen be∣fore in the middle of the field held sixteen great Torches, so as by com∣mutation, the lights alone cost above a thousand Crowns. In the midst of the side aforesaid, on the first floore of the apparta∣ments, a very capacious box was e∣rected for her Majesty, adorned within and without with most rich cloth of Gold, with her state of crimson velvet, bordered and fringed with Gold. All those royall appar∣taments were very richly furnished, and altogether answerable to the greatness, and generosity of the minds of the Barberini. Near her Majesty were four Car∣dinalls, to wit Retz, Imperiale, Bor∣romeo, and Azzolino, and all the Gentlemen of her Court. The o∣ther
Cardinalls had their places somewhat higher than the Queens, and likewise all the windowes were nobly adorned, and abounded with other eminent Persons. On the se∣cond scaffolds were the Princesses and Ladies, most finely attired, and resplendent, to augment with the splendour of their beauty and orna∣ments, the lustre, and Jewels of so handsome a spectacle. The pompe and majesty of this shew, made all Rome curious to be∣hold it, together with the neigh∣bouring Countreys, so as though the concourse of the people to get in, was very great, yet all civill per∣sons were let in without confusion, by the excellent order of Cardinall Barberin, with whose good direction all things were regulated. After 3. hours in the night, they began. The 24. Cavaliers, each one of which was most splendidly set out, were divided into two squa∣drons. In the first appearance were Signior Lorenzo Roberti, the Mar∣quiss Tarquinius Santa Croce, Cap∣tain
Giuseppe Marino Rasponi, Baron Augustine del Nero, Signior Fabio de Massimi, Colonel Lodovick Casale, Signior Carlo Rapaccioli, the Mar∣quis John Peter del Drago, Signior Guido Rasponi, Signior Mar. Antonio Verospi, Signior Ferdinando Vecchia∣relli a Knight of Malta, and Signior Paola Francesco Falconieri, all which were on generous steeds barded with blew furniture embroydered with Silver, to which their sutes were an∣swerable, and cloakes of the same colour with very rich embroyderies, representing shining Pearls, with plumes of feathers▪ so large and stately, that 'tis hard to say, how they could with the waving of the aire, support on their heads so spatious and heavy a machine, the feathers costing each of them above two hundred Crowns. Eight Trumpetters went before, and a hundred and twenty grooms, all cloath'd in a Livery embroyder'd with Silver on blew, and great blew and white feathers on their heads, each of them carrying a great lighted
Torch in their hands, which greatly augmented the lustre and splendour, all marching very orderly. After the twelve Cavaliers came at last a most beautifull Chariot most rarely designed, which was of blew and silver adorn'd with figures, and admirable devises of embossed work. It was so high, it reached to the box of the Queen, and was drawn by three Musitians habited like Goddesses, and representing the three Graces, one concealed within it, moving it secretly, and with great agility. In it sate joyfull Rome in a most majestick manner, who desi∣rous to discover her joy for the arri∣val of a Princess so great, seemed to look like love, which being the Soul of the World, elected her heart for his unchangeable throne, as a City the head of the VVorld. The Cha∣riot come before the Queen stood still, and the three Graces, who seemed to draw it, seconded singing sweetly the musical sense of love, ending all in the praises of her Ma∣jesty.
After this from the opposite side, came forth the other twelve Cava∣liers, who fained themselves to be Amazons, and they were Don Maf∣feo Barberini Prince of Pellestrina, Signior Urbano Rocci, the Marquis Ferdinand Torres, Signior Gasparo Alveri, Ferrante Count of Massa in the roome of the Marquis Patritii, who fell sick, Signior Stefano Pig∣natelli, the Marquis Fabritius Mari, the Marquis Cintius Silvestri, Sig∣nior Giouanni Battista Costaguti, Count Marc. Antonio Monte Marte della Corbara, Signior Paola Mig∣nanelli, and Signior Angelo Leonini, all cloathed in red, and Gold, with high plumes of feathers, very rich cloaks, noble trappings, and sprightly horses, eight Trumpetters, and a hundred and twenty grooms going before them, all cloathed in red, em∣broydered with Gold, with great and thick feathers on their heads, and lighted Torches in their hands, who were all, like the first, Souldiers of fortune chosen out of good compa∣nies, that their marching, and rankes
might be regular, as they were, they being conducted by a very expert Officer who supplyed that place. Another Chariot like the first, followed after, disagreeing in no∣thing but the colours, this being of red and Gold, and varied with not inferiour ornaments, drawn likewise by three Musitians in the likeness of three furies. In it with a dreadfull aspect, and menacing posture sate another Musitian representing Dis∣dain. This after a handsome, and order∣ly motion, his Champions preceding, stood opposite to the other of the God of love, who stopt before the Queen. There between the Graces, and the Furyes, was a pleasant and curious dialogue in musick, each of the parties calling in the end their own warriers to arms, for the deci∣sion of the business. The same contention had Love and Disdain, each one concluding for the bat∣tail. The Amazons with much courage and generosity, moved from the o∣ther
side of the field, and stood in array at the head of the Theater to∣wards the Garden. The Cavaliers, as fierce and hardy, did the same, and went to the opposite side in their rankes. Each of these squadrons was fol∣lowed by their own Chariot, which moved in good order. The Cava∣liers putting off their high plumes of feathers, and long Cloakes for the shew, were more fit for the fight, and putting on their Helmets, that were easy and light, were armed on the brest and the back, with brachals and gauntlets. The Chariots retired aside, to give no impediment to the field, and the Grooms attending there, filled all the circumference of the Theater, making a very fine prospect, which from the light of the Torches, and the glittering of their clothes, received much beauty. The Quire of the Musitians on the arch aforesaid, just against her Majesty, as it did from time to time make most exquisite musick, so gave place to the sound of the Trumpets,
with which they were awaked to the battail, so as three of the Cavaliers with pistolls in their hands rode a gallop towards the Amazons. The said pistolls were charged by Colo∣nell Vaini, who being a person no∣bly borne, and very valorous, was honoured with that charge, much esteemed and used in Germany. At the motion of the foresaid Cavaliers, three of the Amazons rode against them, and meeting them in the midst of the Careere of the Theater enterchangeably discharged their pistolls, turning twice quickly about to meet the second time, which succeeded very well, they afterwards retiring in good order. Four after∣wards on a side issued forth, and did the same thing, then five, afterwards six, and lastly all twelve, they ming∣ling themselves the one with the o∣ther in order, so as between the smoake, the fire, and the noise of their arms, they saw a seeming fray, and pleasant contention. This no sooner was ended, but a curtain being drawn, from the arch,
or great Gate aforesaid, came a great machine representing a monstrous Dragon, which vomited flames of fire, and like a great Chariot, car∣ried on his back another Musitian, who seemed the famous Hercules. He with a shrill, and grave voice, suspending the fight, offered, instead of it, two golden apples, taken vio∣lently by him out of the orchard of the Hesperides, the renowned acqui∣sition of his glorious labours. At those words three of the said Hespe∣rides very finely attired, issued forth, and bewailing with lamentable ac∣cents the prodigall concession of that treasure, obtained the favours they themselves might distribute those apples, which they gave to the Ca∣valiers, and to the Amazons. This act being ended, which was boldly performed, and with excel∣lent musick, the Dragon walked by course o'e the field, and returned to his first station in the great Gate. In the mean time two Cavaliers brake from their troope, brandishing their shields in their left hands, and car∣rying
the apples in their right, and riding a gallop towards the front of the Amazons, assailed them fiercely, and endeavoured to seize on their apples, turning swiftly on the right hand, but two Amazons pursued them closely, and charging them home, followed them to their own squadron. Then three Cavaliers issuing forth, put the Amazons to flight, and returned to their own par∣tie, of which sometimes four in a Company coming forth, then five, and six, and at last, all together, made so handsome a mixture, so well led, and so dexterous, that the eyes of the Spectators could not see it enough. This skirmish being ended, which was no less strange, than delightfull, they came all in rankes, with their swords in their hands before the Queen. Then from the left side came forth another great Charior, all guilded, and adorned with vari∣ous ornaments, representing that of the Sun, on which sate glittering a Musitian in the habit of Phoebus,
who was attended by the four sea∣sons of the year, with 24. Virgins waiting on him, which related to the hours. The said Chariot was drawn by four horses, of a right mur∣rey colour very well matcht, and barded with Gold. This, stopping before the Queen, reconcil'd the hostile troops, and having sung some verses, to express the love of Rome towards her ho∣noured Majesty, the Cavaliers and Amazons united themselves to∣gether three by three, and preceded by all their train, and followed by the mchins, they passing before the Queen, retired into their quarters, the shew ending in this manner, af∣ter which the Prince gave a splendid collation of most excellent sweet-meats to the Ladies. The Queen ended afterwards the recreations of Carneval, with hearing in the Palace Mazarino at Quirinale a French Play, intituled Heraclius, done by Cornelius the fa∣mous Poet of France, whither her Majesty was invited by Signior di
Lionne the French Embassadour to the Princess of Italy, who then was at Rome for the affairs of his Master. This Minister in all his great em∣ployments for the service of that Crown, as well within, as without the Kingdom, hath sufficiently made known the vivacity of his Spirit, the readiness of his wit, and constant fi∣delity. He is of a most affable be∣haviour, a vigorous judgement, great foresight, and rare capacity in every affair. His wit is refined with ex∣perience, his mind very sprightly, and his thoughts aime only at glory, and an excellent report. He is full of solidity in his discourses, of wari∣ness, and dexterity in affairs, and sin∣cerity, and sweetness in his carriage, being especially a friend unto vertue, with which he deservedly attracts to himself, the encomiums and praises of every one that know; him. Besides the said Comedy, he pre∣sented her Majesty with a stately collation, of most excellent sweet-meats, and in extraordinary abun∣dance, and gave her a fine Ball, danc'd
after the French fashion, by some nimble and agile Savoyards, with which the Queen was very highly satisfied. On the first day of Lent her Ma∣jesty went to the house of the Prince of St. Gregory,The Caval∣cata of his Holiness to St. Sabina. to behold the sol∣lemne Cavalcata, with which the Pope accompanyed by the sacred Colledge, and the rest of the Court, went from the Vatican to Aventino, to visit there St. Sabina, the Church of the Dominicans. This Convent is famous for severall memorialls of the residence there, of the glorious St. Dominick. After dinner she went likewise to that station, where the Father Generall received and atten∣ded her, as likewise the chief Fathers of that order, which met there that day. On the second of March, her Majesty went to the Church of Ma∣donna della Scala the discalceate Car∣inelites, an order she loved well. At the Gate of the Church the was re∣ceived by Father Joachim di Giesu Maria the Generall, accompanyed
by the most eminent Friars of that order. While she prayed before the most holy Sacrament, a very fine Motetto was sung. Thence passing into the Convent, she went into the Oratory, which she found richly hung, and adorned with Pictures, Mottos, and Emblems. Here she heard Mass, at which the devotion of her mind was augmented with exquisite Musick. She then honoured a pretious relique of a foot of St. Teresia, the foundress of that order, and heard a Latin oration recited by one of those Fathers. The day after, which was the first Friday in March, she visited St. Peters, as she did all the Fridayes of the moneth aforesaid, for the gain∣ing the treasures of that famous in∣dulgence. She was pleased afterwards to vi∣sit the Colledge of the English,She visits the English Colledge. where the good and generous zeale of Pope Gregory the thirteenth, e∣rected under the instruction of the Jesuits, a place of refuge for the English youth, who retaining the
true seeds of the Catholick Religion, should recurre to this City, the com∣mon Country of all, to be the better setled in their Faith, with the Scien∣ces, and Piety, they learn there. This Colledge had desired, ever since her arrivall in Rome, to testifie to her their dutifull respects, and Father Edward Courtney the Rector, employed soone his parts in compo∣sing a book, in which are contained the Elogies of above fifty Saint, the Queens, or daughters of the Kings of England, he adding to each Elogie some verses very hand∣somly applyed to this Princesses rare qualities. She came thither ac∣companyed by divers Princes and Cavaliers, and particularly by my Lord Torreggani, who had invited thither her Majesty, she going into the Church, dedicated to the glori∣ous English Martyr St. Thomas Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, found it finely adorned, and abounding with the Pictures of Saints the Kings of England, lent them by my Lord Somerset, Chamberlain of Honour
to the Pope, and a Gentleman no∣bly borne, who was likewise there. Her Majesties prayers were accom∣panyed with most admirable musick, and a harmony of Viols, in which the English excell. She sitting down afterwards under a state, had recited to her a short Latin oration, with some verses by two of those young Scholars, they presenting to her the said book of printed Elogies, which her Majesty most courteously ac∣cepted. On the day of St. Thomas of A∣quin, the solemne Feast of the or∣der of St. Dominick, her Majesty went to the Church of Minerva, of the Fathers aforesaid, one of the chiefest of Rome, as well for the service of the Church, as the sacred Congregation of the Cardinalls, held in that Convent every Wednes∣day in the morning, of the holy of∣fice of the greatest importance in Rome. The rooms where they hold the said Congregation, were seen by the Queen, as likewise all the Con∣vent, her Majesty remaining highly
pleased with the magnificence both of the one and the other. She was received and attended by the Father Generall, and Father Raymund Ca∣pisucchi Master of the Sacred Palace, and one of the examiners of the Bishops, a Prelate of much vertue, and rare parts, which are the more remarkable by the ancient Family of the Capisucchi, which as appears by authentick writings, and is ga∣thered from the very same arms, is a branch sprowted out of the most noble stock of the Counts of Tunn in Germany, the head of which now, is the Prince Arch-Bishop of Saltz∣bourgh, a Gentleman of most emi∣nent qualities. Her Majesty had likewise some thoughts of seeing the curious study of the Knight of St. Stephen Sir Fran∣cis Gualdo of Rimini, a Gentleman well deserving of the learnedest of the ancients, which he gave to his most Christian Majesty, but the ill weather, and the greater affairs of this Princess, have not yet permitted her to behold it. I therefore forbear
to speak of the said study, till a fit∣ter opportunity be presented me. The Queen then continuing her vertuous entertainments, at the be∣ginning of Lent, introduced the spirituall exercise of a devout orato∣ry in her Palace every Wednesday, which was ordered by the Prince of Gallicano. They began the second Wednesday in March, and the history of Daniell was recited in musick, a composition well becoming the said Prince. In the second Oratory Fa∣ther Rho, the famous Preacher, made a Sermon, in the third Father Spino∣la, in the fourth Father Nicholas Zucchi all Jesuits, in the fifth Father Spinelli a Celestine, and in the sixth Father Don Carlo di Palma a Thea∣tine, all Persons of great learning, and worth. But behold us at the end of these our relations. The sincerity of my Penne, which cannot deliver truly to Posterity, the glorious name of Christina great without the true Characters of a perpetuall Panegi∣rique, concludes, that as 'tis doubt∣less,
this great Princess deserves for a thousand respects, the greatest ob∣sequiousness, and complyance in order to her eminent qualities, and parts, so 'tis to be hoped, the fortu∣nate Climate of Rome, the Epilogue of Celestiall, and humane felicities, will deserve the good fortune to en∣joy, and serve her long. 'Tis cer∣tain, as this Queen, with the incom∣parable endowments of her mind, and the franke resolutions of her heart, like the Sun among the Starrs, may justly pretend to be singular in the World, so Rome the sacred, the great and majestick Phoenix, among the Metropolitan Cities of Christi∣anity, may best of all others, give a happy, long, and fit entertainment to her Majesties glorious fortunes. FINIS.
