H2031 E110_13 99873535 126012
Die Mercurii 27. Iuly. 1642. IT is this day Ordered by the House of Commons now Assembled in Parlia∣ment, That Sir Christoper Yelverton doe returne thanks to Mr. Hill from this House, for the great pains he took in his Sermon this Day, Preached at the Intrea∣tie of this House, being the Day of Pub∣lique Fast, at Saint Margarets Westmin∣ster; And that he doe likewise intreat him from this House to print his Sermon And that no man presume to print it, till the House shall take further Order, but whom he shall appoint. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com. I appoint Iohn Bellamie, Philemon Stephens, and Ralph Smith, to Print my Sermon. THOMAS HILL.
THE TRADE OF TRUTH ADVANCED. IN A SERMON PREACHED to the Honourable House of COMMONS, at their Solemne Fast, Iuly 27. 1642. By THOMAS HILL, B. D. Pastor of the Church at Tychmersh in the Countie of Northampton. Published by Order of that House. IOHN 17. 17. Sanctifie them through thy Truth; thy word is Truth. 2 COR. 13. 8. For we can doe nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth. LONDON, Printed by I. L. for Iohn Bellamie, Philemon Stephens, and Ralph Smith. 1642.
TO THE HONOVRABLE HOVSE OF COMMONS, NOW ASSEMBLED in PARLIAMENT. WHen I first heard that I was designed for this solemne service, being conscious of my own in∣sufficiencie to Preach to so awfull an Assembly, I couldnot entertaine it without trouble; yet resolved with Luther, rather to undergoe others Inveniar sanè suberbus &c. modò impit silcu∣tii non arguar dum Dominus patititur. Luth. Ep. ad Staup. censures, then to be reproved for ungodly silence, in such times when the Lord suffereth. And now I have as much reason to be full of blushings, to thinke that this plaine Dis∣course should be exposed to more publique view; but herein I must resigne up my self unto your disposings, to whom I owe, & quod possum, & quod non possum, much more then my meanenesse can performe. This Sermon, such an one as it is, I humbly tender to your Gracious Acceptance, who have adopted it; I put it into your Honourable Protection, who have listed it; I commend it to your Practicall observation, for whom I intended it; heartily desiring Gods Blessing upon your spirits in the perusall of it; that you may read and act it, turning words into works, that you may repeate it over in your lives, which is the best repeti∣tion of Sermons. Our present breaches, call for a contribution from every
one, for the repairing of them; but much is expected from you, who are called to be publique Counsellors, and thereby ob∣liged to expresse a publique frame of spirit (which is the beau∣tie and strength of a Great Councell), swallowing up your private interests, in the publique Welfare. Not with Baruch, seeking great things for your selves, which is most incongru∣ous to Stormy times, but rather resembling Melancthon, who Ier. 45▪ 5. professed, though he had many Domesticall troubles, yet the publique wounds of the Church most deeply afflicted him. England is more bemoaned, by many with that language in Austin over the poore man. Quomodo huc cecidisti? Alas how camest thou into these distractions? She may answer as Aug. Ep. 129. the poore man there, standing in more need of reliefe then dis∣course. Obsecro cogita quomodo hinc me liberes. Thinke how I may be rescued out of thse troubles. Towards this blessed Worke, I have cast in my two mites, moving in the proper sphaere of a Divine, as an Agent for the Truth, per∣swading you, who are betrusted by others, and have farre en∣gaged your selves in the Reformation of Religion, that with all your might, you would promote The Trade of Truth. It is not for me to suggest a Methode in the execution of your counsels. He whose name is Counsellour guide you; yet I shall still pray that in your Intention, the purging, the set∣ling, Isa. 9. 6. the advancing of True Religion may be most Dear un∣to you. It is one maine end, and a pretious fruit of govern∣ment, that wee may lead peaceable and quiet lives in All Godlinesse and honestie. This is well worth peoples wrast∣ling prayers, and your most active endeavours. The sta∣billity 1 Tim. 2. 2. of all our blessings must come by the True Religi∣on, Gods presence is the best security, who is most power∣fully present where there is most power and purity of Re∣ligion. Would you have a flourishing Kingdome, advance the Kingdome of Christ in it. Let the State maintaine Religion, and Religion will blesse the State, could you settle all our State liberties, yet if the Arke of Truth bee taken from us, Our glory is departed, we may write these mourning chara∣cters upon all our Comforts, ICHABOD, where is the glory? 1 Sam. 4. 21, 22.
It is too high a complement in the Lord Cordes, a French Commander, who often said, that he would willingly lie Hollinsh. in Hen. 7. seven yeeres in Hell, so that Callice were in the possession of the French againe. We blesse God for that reall selfe-deny all and activity ye have expressed, abating so many personall and fa∣mily contentments, in your long attendance upon publike affaires. Be not weary of well doing, in due season ye shall reape if you faint not. Gal. 6. 9. Never had any PARLIAMENT more work to do; Ire∣land still bleeds, the affaires thereof find unhappy obstructi∣ons. To subdue Rebellion, to plant Religion there, are great matters. England is very much out of frame. The Church cals for Truth; the State cryes for Peace, they who sowed in hope, reape in feare, out sickles are turning into swords. Now to effect an happy correspondence betwixt our Soveraigne and his people, a blessed compliance betwixt England and Religion, heres work for the strongest should∣ers. Never had any PARLIAMENT greater opposition. As Nehem. 4. 17. our builders worke with one hand, and hold a weapon with the other. Achitophels plot, Rabshekahs raile, Sanballats mocke. Yea since councels of Reformation, there is a more malignant antipathy appears against truth in many places. As 2 Tim. 3. 13. evill men and seducers waxe worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived. Yet be encouraged Worthy Sirs. Never had any PARLIAMENT so many Thundring Legions of praying Christians, to assist them. when others insult and blaspheme, Iacobs posterity are wrestling with God for you, resolving not to let him goe till he blesse you. And whilst you are pursuing peace, allow this plaine Sermon that humble boldnesse as to whisper you in the eare, beseeching you still to maintain your former zeale in the cause of Truth. When did your counsels prosper more, then when you were most active about religion. When you were building the Lords House. For hee builded yours as Hag. 2. 19. from this day I will blesse you. Be pleased therfore more and more to engage your selves
for the Truth, so shal you engage God for you; let your cause be His cause then his Attributes will be yours, his providence will work for you, his spirit wil work in you; then will you 2 King. 6. 16. have more with you then against you, though the Devill and the Pope combine. Do your owne work, trust God with his; duty is ours, Events, successe are his. Commit the keeping of your soules, of the Church, of the state, to him in well doe∣ing as unto a faithfull creator. Truth will yet Triumph, Ba∣bylon 1 Pet. 4. 19. and all her Crutches must downe; the fight of faith is a good fight, because such souldiers are sure of the victory. 1 Tim. 6. 12. The kingdome of Christ shall prevaile, though second causes be impotent, yet the zeale of the Lord of Hoasts will perform this. Isa. 9. 7. When Hierusalem is restored it will be a city of Truth Zach. 8. 3. O that all our Parliament worthyes, might bee so valiant for the Truth that England might become a king∣dome of Truth; following Chronicles will then give you a share in that Honour of being the Churches Saviours, as O∣bad. v. 21. and God will put Zerubbabels high dignity upon you, making you as Signets. Hag. 2. 23. The Good Lord guide, unite, act and blesse your counsels, And think upon you for good, according to all you have done, or shall doe for his people. So prayes He who desires to be found, Your faithfull servant for the Truth: THOMAS HILL.
A SERMON PREACHED AT the Fast before the Honourable House of Commons. PROVERBS 23. 23. Buy the truth, and sell it not. THE eternall Happinesse of our immortall souls is to be found only in union and communion with Iesus Christ; Religion is that which gathers and binds up the spirit to close fellowship with Him; This bond is twist∣ed out of those materials, which the severall pen-men of Holy Scriptures have prepared; Wise Solomon hath contributed a good share to this blessed work in his three Books, Proverbs, Eccle∣siastes, Canticles. I will not confidently with Hierome and others, entitle Salomons three books, to his three Names; Hierom. in Ec∣cles. Cornel. a Lp. in Prov. Argum. As he was Salomon peaceable (say they) he scatter∣ed
Proverbiall sentences among young men, to dis∣cipline them in wayes of righteousnesse and peace; As he was , Ecclesiastes, the Preacher, he wrote the book of Ecclesiastes, a pithy Ser∣mon, teaching men of riper yeers, the vanitie of vanities in all worldly excellencies. As he was Iedidiah, 2 Sam. 12. 25. Beloved of the Lord, he acquainted greatest proficients, with the sweet communion betwixt Christ and his Spouse in the Song of Songs. But of this I am sure; The book of Proverbs is sutable to its Title, worthy of Wise Salomon the sonne of David king of Israel, Prov. 1. 1. In the first book of Kings, Chap. 3. vers. 9. 11. Salomon was an earnest suiter unto God for understanding; and because he sought it from God and for God, (so much doth the Lord love to see a publike spirit in our private prayers.) He gave him a large portion of wisdome, with an overplus of other rich advantages; he obtained both the wisdome of a Prophet and of a King, whereby he spake both Propheticall and Kingly sentences. So much the Originall word  rendred, Pro∣verbs seemes to import; raiguing commanding sentences, being so full of wisdome gravity and authoritie; and that stile of being Master of the , sive dignitates, hae doctrinae quae suo merito vitae nostrae ve∣luti dominae & moderatrices esse debent, Cartwr. Sentences, may well be translated from Peter Lumbard, unto King Salomon, who was the Au∣thor of so many Master-sentences. Much of the wisdome of a Nation, is oft found in their Proverbs; and much of Salomons in this book of his Proverbs, it being a cabinet of such Jewels, as is fit for the closet, of so wise a King,
full of short and pithy sentences, like Jewels indeed, containing magnum in parvo, much value, vertue, and lustre in a little roome. And for the better discovery of their excellencie, it is observable, that herein they differ from most o∣ther Scripture; Their Harmony is in discord, their beautie in a kinde of contrarietie. If you would under∣stand our Saviours parables, minde the scope; if you would reach many other places of Scripture, attend the dependance, but if you desire distinctly to apprehend the Proverbs in them, consider the opposition; which though it appeare not so full in this my Text, as in many other of these Proverbiall sentences, yet here you may finde two disagreeing parts. First an Injunction, Buy the Truth. Parts of the Text. Secondly, a Prohibition, Sell it not. This opposition, such as it is, begets two Propo∣sitions. 1. All the sons of wisdome, must be carefull to buy the Truth. 2. Though all must be buying, yet none may sell the Truth. I will follow the method of the words, beginning with the first proposition. All the sonnes of wisdome, must be carefull to buy the 1. Propositi∣on. Truth. Herein by Gods gracious assistance, I will take a view of severall branches, enquiring by way of expli∣cation and confirmation. 1. What is the commoditie it self, this Truth that must be bought? 2. Into the nature of the purchase, with the price of it.
3. What Reasons may engage us to trade in this commoditie. And then ioyntly shake them altogether in the application, trying what seasonable fruit they will af∣foord this grave Assembly on this solemne Day. Every one will be euquisitive concerning the com∣moditie Explication. it self: What is this Truth? I answer, Not a Metaphysicall Truth, thats for Speculation only, not a Logicall Truth, thats chiefely for disputation; nor a Morall Ethicall Truth, thats but one sprig of speaking; [veracitas rather then veritas] Salomons Truth here must needs be Theologicall. And that not veritas 1o prima, God himself, no creature can compasse so great a purchase, if God were willing to sell it, but veritas 2o prima, derived from that first Truth, this may, and must be bought. This is veritas objectiva, as it lyes in the Scriptures, both in the principles of it, and conclu∣sions deduced from it; Truth Originall and Truth Derived. And veritas subjectiva seated in us, which we sucke from the word of Truth. Indeed Truth of Religion in us, grounded upon the Holy Scriptures the Rule of Truth; which comprizeth Truth in our Iudgements, when soundly informed; Truth in our wils and affections, when obedientially conformed; Truth in our conversation, when seriously reformed accord∣ing to the word of Truth. There are things in Truth well worth our Buying, first libertie of Truth, that the True Religion may have 1. Libertie of Truth must be bought. free passage, and not be imprisoned in corners or clogged with difficulties. Veritas nihil erubescit prae∣terquam abscondi. Truth blusheth at nothing so much as to be concealed. Paul desireth the Thessalonians to pray for him, Sylvanus and Timotheus, that the word of
God may run and be glorified. It is a disparagement 2 Thess. 3. 1. to Christ and his Gospel, when that hath so much adoe to creepe, which should run and ride in triumph from congregation to congregation, from kingdome to kingdome. But a most beautifull and honourable sight to see Christ at the opening of the first Seale, Revel. 6. 2. with a bow and a crowne, going forth conquering and to conquer, subduing the Heathenish world to the obe∣dience of his Gospel by the preaching of the Apo∣stles. What though a river be full of good water, yet if frozen, if not an open passage, men may die for thirst. It is the motion of the Sun of righteousnesse, that disperses both light and heat. Libertie of the Gospel makes it a Gospel to us. The Church in the Acts Acts 12. 5. knew how to value this libertie of Truth, and there∣fore when Peter was imprisoned instant and earnest prayer was made; the answer was as effectuall. Peter released, Herod confounded, and truth set at libertie. Of all famines, the Soul-famine, Gospel-famine is the most grievous, threatned as an heavy Judge∣ment, Amos 8. 11, 12. But a most sweet mercy to feel and taste the accomplishment of that promise, Isa. 30. 20. Though the Lord give you the bread of adversitie, and the water of affliction, yet shall not thy teachers be re∣moved into a corner any more, but thine eyes shall see thy teachers. Secondly, Puritie of true Religion, is a good pur∣chase as well as libertie. That we may have an incor∣rupt 2. Puritie of Truth must be bought. Religion, without sinfull, without guilefull mix∣tures; not a linsey-woolsey Religion. All new borne babes will desire , 1 Pet. 2. 2. Word-milke, Purum est ple∣num sui & im∣mixtum alieni. Sermon-milke without guile, without adulte∣rating
Sophistication of it, of which Paul glories, 2 Cor. 2. 17. For we are not as many, which corrupt the word of God: but as of sinceritie, but as of God, in the sight of God speake we in Christ. Whose zealous care it was, 2 Cor. 11. 2. to espouse the Church of Corinth to one Husband (no polygamy in the second marriage) that he might present them as a chaste virgin unto Christ. This he endeavoured by pure Gospel means, and by perswading to puritie and singlenesse of heart in the use of those means. The Devill is as busie vers. 3. to corrupt peoples minds from the simplicitie that is in Christ; well knowing the simplicitie that is in Christ, is the best Rule for the Churches conformitie, to this we may subscribe without any checke of con∣science. Quot supererunt mixturae ex ho∣minum ingenio prolatae, toridem extabunt pollu∣tiones quae homi∣nes distrabant à certo eorum usu, quae Dominus in corum salutem instituerat. Calv. Ep. Prot. Angl. Totalis & adaequata regula est scriptura & tra∣ditio simul. Traditio parem habet autorita∣tem scripturae, Becan. And indeed, what are false Religions, but Humane compositions. The Alcoran compounds Mahomets fond devices with some fragments of Gods word. Popery compounds unwritten Traditions most pre∣sumptuously with Holy Scripture; yea it rakes up Hea∣thenish customes, revives old Jewish Ceremonies which are now mortuae & mortiferae dead and deadly, compounding them with the institutions of Christ. You may discerne such mixtures in many errors, about the great mysteries of the Gospel, even in eve∣ry linke of the golden chaine of Salvation, Rom. 8. 30. Arminians in the Decree of Election compound fore∣seene faith, with the Soveraigntie of Gods will. In vocation, so compounding mans Free-will with Gods Free Grace, that with them in the act of conversion prima causa depends upon secunda, the power of Gods grace must wayte upon the concurrence of our good nature.
Popish Doctors doe strangely compound works with faith in the act of justification; and in glorifica∣tion, so compound the merits of the Saints with the merits of Christ, that by a condignitie they become meritorious of eternall life▪ let the Devill affect vaine compositions; the whore of Babylon must paint her wrinckled face with some borrowed beautie, to cover her inward deformities; Christ and his Truth, will glory in no vernish so much as native simplicitie and puritie. Thirdly, Truth must be purchased as well in the 3. Power of Truth must be bought. power, as in the libertie and puritie of it. There should be such a streame as runs purely without mud, and that in a strong torrent. Hypocrites will swarve in the last age, when most Gospel-light breaks out, many paint∣ed professions will borrow some lustre from it; This Paul foretels, 2 Tim. 3. 5. In the last dayes together with many streames of wickednesse, there will be a generation of men having a forme of Godlinesse, but denying the power of it; a good description of hypocri∣sie. Hypocrisis est signum sine sig∣nato. But the Lord bespeaks power, both in the dis∣pensing and the professing of Truth. Paul desired to preach in the demonstration of the spirit, and of power, 1 Cor. 2. 4. as well knowing that the kingdome of God is not in word, but in power, 1 Cor. 4. 20. It is not word∣ing, but working the power, that will evidence to spea∣ker or hearers, that they are subjects in the kingdome of Grace and heires to the kingdome of glory. This Paul made an argument of their election, 1 Thess. 1. 5. that the Gospel came not to them in word only, but in power and in the Holy Ghost; much power appearing in the dispensation of it, and the Thessalonians hearts so fully possessed with the power of the Truth, that their car∣nall
principles were confuted, their passions modera∣ted, their lusts mortified, and their self-ends con∣founded. Most men affect in Religion, either a dull moderation, or an outside pompe, both enemies to the power of Truth. Moderation doth better in other things, then in the practise of Religion, where there cannot be a nimium. God requires totum cor and totum cordis, the whole heart, and the totalitie of it; that we should love him with all our heart, with all our soul, and with our strength, Luk. 10. 27. Indeed moderation hath its season, but with Calvins caution; I confesse (saith he) there ought to be moderation, yet this I constantly af∣firme, Fateor quidem moderation o∣cum esse oporte∣re, sed non mius constanter offir∣mo videndum esse ne sub illo praetextu tolere∣tur qcquam quod à Satanâ vel Antichristo prefectum sit. Calv. ep. Prot. Angl. care must be had, that under pretence of moderation, nothing be tolerated, which proceedeth from the Devill or Antichrist. Neither must we so affect the outward pompe of Reli∣gion, as to neglect the power of it. Hilary his counsell was good, who writing against Auxentius Bishop of Mil∣laine, complained that the Arrian faction had con∣founded all, and therefore admonished all men to take heed, how they suffered themselves to be led with outward appearances. It is not well (saith he) that Hilarius contra Auxntium. Male vos parie∣tum amor cepit; malè ecclesiam Dei in tectis ae∣dificusque vene∣ramini; malè sub his pacis nomen ingeatur; annè ambiguum est in iis Antichristum Sessurum? you are in love with walls, that you esteeme the Church in respect of houses and buildings, and in, and under those shewes and appearances pretend and urge the name of peace. Is there any doubt of Antichrists sitting in these places? This makes Popery such a Religion as pleases mens eyes, and humours their eares, rather then rectify their mindes, and heale their hearts, because they seeke not so much to purchase the power, as the pompe of Religion. Having layed open before you the Commoditie it self to be purchased; Truth in the libertie, puritie, and
power of it; Its necessary further to enquire in∣to the nature of the purchase, with its price. As all other markets, ordinarily begin at home; so indeed our trading for Truth. The spirit of Purchase of Truth. 1. Begins in Desires after it. God, having convinced the heart, how farre it is come short of the glory of God by sin, Rom. 3. 23. and that men are alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, Ephes. 4. 18. withall, giving the soule an hint and taste of the excellen∣cie and sweetnesse of Divine Truth, the only So∣veraigne Scientia visut, and gustus. means of its recovery, it groanes most se∣riously, and pants most affectionately after ac∣quaintance with the truth and possession of it. And that not only by some cold velleitie, by some dull wishing and woulding; but by a peremptorie Isa. 55. 1.. Luk. 18. 1. 7. Prov. 26. 15. choice; not by wandring and flashy, but constant and fixed desires; not by lazie and slothfull, but operative and busie desires; Truth I would have, yea Truth I must have, els I am everlastingly un∣done. Affectionate desires, as they live and move in opinions; so they produce actions, inclining 2. Promoted by Diligence. us to take pains for the obtaining of that we would possesse. They adde wings to the soule, making us to flie like busie Bees from flower to flower, from ordinance to ordinance, that we may sucke the sweetnesse of Truth, which is swee∣ter then honey, and the droppings of honey combs. Psal. 19. 10. The purchase of Truth, is carryed on by such an active disposition, as the Spouse in the Canticles had to enjoy her Beloved; I will rise now and goe Cant. 3. 2. about the streets, and in the broad wayes, I will seeke him whom my soule loveth. Every buyer of truth,
must be willing with little Zacheus to get up into Luk. 19. 3, 4. any Sycomare tree, to take all Gospel advantages, to gaine a sight of his Saviour, to behold Christ who is Truth it selfe. Truth is an hidden trea∣sure, Matth. 13. 44. sometimes hidden from us by the difficultie of Scripture wherein it is con∣tained, God thereby putting a value upon it, and an edge upon our studies and prayers; some∣times hidden by differences amongst learned men. Law may be clouded by a multitude of booke Cases; and Divinitie obscured by a multitude of Schoole utrums. Many times truth is hidden by the scandalous lives of such as professe it. Carnall spectators be∣ing much more quick-sighted to apprehend the deformity of Religious men, then the beauty of Religion it selfe. And too often hidden under great disgrace in the world, being stiled, Here∣sy, Schisme, Faction. Yea Religion it selfe ac∣counted C. Sejs Bonus vir, sed Christia∣nus. the greatest Crime. This Treasure lies often so deep, you must be content to sweat in digging for it before you can obtaine it. All they who would purchase Truth, must not onely be like Merchant men seeking goodly 3. Managed by Prudence. Pearles; Matth. 13. 45. but withall, be able to discerne when they have found a pearle of great price, vers. 46. to know whether it be a pearle or pibble; that it is not drosse, but gold bearing the stamp of truth. There is much doubtlesse in that of the Apo∣stle Paul, Col. 4. 5. Walke in wisdome toward them that are without, redeeming the time. All good Mer∣chants must be redeeming time, improving all
hints of doing good, of enjoying Gods ordi∣nances, wherein you may trade for truth. Ob∣serve the connexion; walke wisely towards them that are without, redeeming the time. The Church was then under persecuting Governors, and vexed with bad neighbours, both enemies to the trade of truth; yet you must be purcha∣sing; only wherein walke so wisely towards them without. 1. That you violate not the peace and puritie of your owne conscience. 2. That you deface not the stamp of Divinitie upon Autho∣thoritie. 3. That by a rigid austeritie you alie∣nate not others from truth. 4. Nor by a comply∣ing familiaritie with them in their sins, harden them against the truth. The Soule that thirsts after Truth, having ta∣ken 4. Transacted by paction. paines, how according to the rules of godly providence, it may be possessed of that it so deare∣ly loves, is now willing to conclude the bargaine by paying the price. Solomon here mentions no price, Haec optima commutatio, da res tuas ut ac∣quiras verita∣tem; non alie∣nabis à te veri∣tatem, ut acqui∣ras res altas. Cajet. because he would have us buy it at any price. Sometimes it may cost us credit, and libertie, as it did the Apostles, Acts 5. 41. Sometimes it may cost us the losse of goods, as it did those Christi∣ans, Hebr. 10. 34. Yea, sometimes life it self, must be the price of Truth. We must be content to fol∣low that cloud of witnesses, which appears in that little booke of Martyrs, the 11th Chapter to the He∣brews, we must write after that heroicall copie which our owne Worthies have set us, who sacri∣ficed their dearest lives, to the crueltie of Bonners flames, that they might possesse the Truth.
Truth is so precious a Jewell, you must never Truth seldom bought upon cheap tearmes. expect to have the markets cheape. The Devill at first laid siege against the Truths, which were most Fundamentall, that so he might have rui∣ned all the buildings; he would by the subtil∣tie of ancient Hereticks have huckstered up those Truths, which concerned the Natures and Per∣son of Christ, this cost very deare, before the foure first Councells could settle Truth against the Hereticks of those times. Afterwards, when Poperie invaded all the Offices of Christ (such a dangerous gangreen is it) undermining him, as the Prophet, as the Priest, and as the King of his Church, it cost no little blood in England and Germanie, to vindicate the Doctrine of Divine worship, and of the Holy Sacraments, from such errors as opposed the Propheticall and Priestly Office of Christ. That branch of Truth about Church Government and Disci∣pline, so much concerning the Kingly Office of Christ, is of rich value, if the Markets should rise, we must drive on the bargaine what ever it cost. No price too great for the obtain∣ing such a Purchase, to see our Deare Saviour advanced in all his Offices; as the Churches Pro∣phet, without being beholden to unwritten tra∣ditions; as the Priest of his Church, without the satisfactions of any Meritmangers, without any Purgatorie, any Bridewell of the Popes ma∣king; as the King of his Church, above Mi∣ters, above Canon-laws, or any Church usurpa∣tions whatsoever.
After the discovery of the nature of this purchase and the price of Truth, its fit to con∣sider Confirmation. what Reasons may engage you all to trade herein; which are divers, according to the va∣rious reference▪ Truth hath to things of high con∣cernment. Never expect to have the spirituall and eter∣nall good of your owne immortall souls effectu∣ally 1. Reason. promoted, unlesse you buy and be possessed of Truth. 1. The Word of Truth, is the seed by which we are begotten againe, Iam. 1. 18. Yea incor∣ruptible Seed, which liveth and abideth for ever, 1 Peter 1. 23. untill the Truth hath delivered us, what are we poore sinners, but an heape of dry bones, so many dead carkases rotting in the grave of corruption. 2. It is the Milke, by which new borne babes are nourished, 1 Peter 2. 2. by this they grow in the habits, in the degrees, in the exercise of Grace. Strangers to the Truth, like the Prodigall, live upon husks, and lay out their money for that which is not bread, Isa. 55. 2. 3. Naturally, as the sonnes and daughters of Adam, we are stained with many spots, steeped in corruption, polluted with filthinesse of flesh and spirit, 2 Corinth. 7. 1. Truth is the water by which we are cleansed, Ioh. 15. 3. 4. When we goe groping up and downe in in the darke, exposed to errors, besieged with terrors, Truth affoords us direction and consolation, Psal. 119. 105.
5. Truth is the Armour, by which you are de∣fended against your spirituall Enemies, and en∣abled for offensive warre. Amongst the sixe peeces of our spirituall Armour, three of these have speciall dependance upon the Truth. You must have the girdle of Truth, Ephes. 6. vers. 14. beshod with the preparation of the Gospell of peace, vers. 15. and take the sword of the spirit, vers. 17. 6. And indeed the word of Truth, is the Gos∣pell of your Salvation, Ephesians 1. 13. The Char∣ter by which the Corporation of Saints, chal∣lengeth such rich priviledges; the Articles of that Covenant, which doth entitle them to such blessed hopes. You cannot hope to finde Gods gracious ac∣ceptance 2. Reason. of your service, nor enjoy any Soule-refreshing communion with him in the duties of his worship, unlesse Truth direct and animate your spirits therein. When David was engaged in a pious and plausible service, in fetching the Arke from Kiriath-jearim, 1 Chronicles 13. he consulted, vers. 1, 2. the people consented, vers. 3, 4. there was much confluence and triumph, vers. 8. The Oxen stumbling, Vzzah upon a faire pretence, put forth his hand to uphold the Arke, yet God would not accept of his faire in∣tention, but smote him that he dyed, vers. 10. the reason is rendred, 1 Chronicles 15. vers. 13. because God was not sought after the due order, his Truth was not observed, in the carrying of the Arke, as vers. 14. with reference to this
Story, Peter Martyr commends it, to the care of Queene ELIZABETH, that Church Gover∣nors P. Martyr. Ep. 36. Regni. Eliz. endeavour not to carry the Arke of the Gos∣pell into England, upon the Cart of needlesse Cere∣monies. There are two flyes which marre the most precious pots of oyntment. Hypocrisie and Su∣perstition, as Isaiah 29. 13. Wherefore the Lord said, forasmuch as this people draw neere to me with their mouth, and with their lips doe honour me, but have remooved their heart farre from me, and their feare toward mee is taught by the precept of men. In both a great defect of Truth. Hypocrisie is lip-labour, and lip-labour is lost labour; no du∣tie acceptable without truth of heart in it; Su∣perstitious worship, taught by mens precepts, may be devout enough, yet because it wants the Au∣thoritie of Gods Truth to Steere it, how marvel∣lously doth God curse it, vers. 14. Therefore behold, I proceed to doe a marvellous worke amongst this people, a marvellous worke and a wonder: the wisdome of their Wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their Prudent men shall bee hid. When the Devill hath made men Superstitious, God will make them foolish, he takes no plea∣sure in them. The best of our Practicall Christianitie, even our most solemne addresses to God (upon such a day as this) Ioose their vigour and blessing, if custome only or formality act us herein, and not conscience to Gods Truth. What are good Chri∣stians, but Rules of Truth, become examples,
yea living, walking pictures of Divine Truth. When the wantonnesse of humane wisdome, will multiply Will-worship, and Wit-worship, thinking to please God with better devises then his owne, it turnes to grosse folly, and ends in much mischiefe, rather then acceptation. Wit∣nesse Gideons Ephod, Iudges 8. vers. 27. Yea, such men take much paines to loose their la∣bour, and Matthew 15. vers. 9. In vaine doe they worship God, teaching for Doctrine, the commande∣ments of men. Never expect the gracious presence of Christ in his Churches, unlesse you purchase Truth, 3. Reason. and set it upon the Throne, Revel. 2. 1. He walk∣eth in the middest of the golden Candlesticks, whose office it is to hold forth the Truth. The beautie and efficacie of Church Govern∣ment and Discipline, depend upon their Con∣formitie unto Divine Truth. It must Regulate Church Power, and Discipline Church Admi∣nistrations, else they will soone loose their Lu∣stre and Authoritie; Degenerating either into emptie Formalitie, or into Church Tyranny, which of all other is most grievous, because so oppressive to the Conscience. Hence such un∣couth Catalogues of Church Officers amongst the Papists: Pope, Cardinals, &c. Hence such swelling Volumes of their Canon Law, because not Divine Truth, but carnall wisdome drew the platforme. Hence so many of our Temples, made houses of Merchandize, wherein, as in the darknesse of Popery, Indulgences were, Absolutions
are bought and sold. Yea, hence the sword of ex∣communication which was wont to be formidable, Gladius Eccle∣siae venerandâ raritate formida∣bilis. Petr. de Alliaco. because drawne with so much solemnitie, is now made contemptible, because so familiarly abu∣sed upon trifles; and all this, because Divine Truth hath had no more power in our Con∣sistories. And this doubtlesse doth much foment the present distractions of the Church, that ei∣ther fancie or affection should put such high claimes upon things, as suddenly to style them Institutions of Christ, or usurpations of Antichrist, not sufficiently consulting with Divine Truth. If our Prelaticall Power, and Cathedrall Pompe, be of Divine Right, let us see a Divine word for it; what need we such violent arguments to maintaine them, oath upon oath, subscription up∣on subscription? Let Christ himselfe be acknowledged as King in his Church, as Lord in his house, let the word of Truth be our Booke of Canons, our Books of Discipline, and then if. Paul were our visitour, he would rejoyce to behold our order, as Colossians 2. vers. 5. Yea, then we shall undoubtedly find the Broad-Seale of Heaven, confirming what is done, when we follow the guidance of Christ in his owne Truth, Matth. 18. 15, 16, 17, 18. The best way to promote the most publique good of all the Churches, is by advancing the 4. Reason. trade of Truth. This publique counsell should move in the most publique sphaere, seeking good for themselves and others, both at home and a∣broad. The eyes of all the three Kingdomes, yea,
of the Protestant world are now upon you, ex∣pecting much from your influence. You can never contribute fully to the worke, of Reforma∣tion here, unlesse you set Truth at libertie; nei∣ther shall you be so effectually helpfull to all the Protestant Churches, though you should recover their lands and regaine their territories, unlesse you re-establish their Religion, by opening a free trade of Truth amongst them. Truths advancement is one of Gods great de∣signes; Kingdomes are for Churches, and Chur∣ches golden Candlesticks to hold forth Truth, that therein Christ may appeare in his most glorious lustre; when the banners of Truth are universally and victoriously displayed, The Kingdomes of this world shall become the Kingdomes of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reigne for ever and ever, Revel. 11. 15. How came Popery to be advanced to so great height, but by suppressing Truth; The mystery of 2 Thess. 2. 7. iniquitie wrought in the Apostles times; It went on by steps; the Pope was first Antichrist nas∣cent, then Antichrist crescent, after Antichrist regnant, but when he was made Lord of the Ca∣tholike Faith, so that none must beleeve more, nor lesse, nor otherwise then he prescribed, he became Autichrist triumphant. The Pope is guiltie of the grossest theevery, he robs the See Crakan∣thorp of the fift Generall Councell, chap. 13. Sacrament of the Cup, the Scriptures of their Au∣thoritie, and the Church of the Scriptures; as theeves blow out the candles, the better to con∣ceale themselves, and carry on their designes; so He suppresseth, as much as he can, the light of
Truth, that with more advantage, he may play his pranks, and creepe undiscerned in the darke. If you would lay siege to the Devill or Popes kingdome, and undermine all the crutches and supporters of it, set Truth at libertie. Zachary 4. vers. 6. the great mountaine of opposition must be moved, not by humane power and might, but by the spirit of the Lord of Hoasts, not only by his power but by his spirit, because Church works must be carryed on in a way of enlightning and revealing the Truth. Thus the wise providence of God wrought formerly, when a Generall Coun∣cell (though by many groaned after) could not be obtained with the consent of the Clergy and Court of Rome, to whom Reformation would be a certaine Ruine, He stirred up divers He∣roicall Worthies, Waldus in France, Wickliffe in England, Luther in Germany, Knoxe in Scot∣land, to despise the light of Truth; And Revel. 14. vers. 6. After the flying Angell, having the everlasting Gospell to preach unto all that dwell on the earth, then vers. 8. there follows another Angell saying, Babylon is fallen. Doubtlesse the Pope must fall not only by the Sword of Princes, but by the Sword of the Spirit, 2 Thessalonians 2. vers. 8. That wicked One must be revealed, and consumed with the Spirit of the Lords mouth. If you would have the mystery of iniquitie un∣masked, see the Popes Triple Crowne tumble, and the thicke mist of Popery vanish, help for∣ward the bright Sun-shine of Gods Word, pro∣mote the libertie, puritie, and power of Truth.
You have had a discovery of some few sprigs, growing upon this first Proposition, let us in the Application. Application, gather the wholesome fruit which hangs upon them. It is the good hand of God upon us, when so many of our brethren in Ireland, are still 1. Vse. Self-examina∣tion. bleeding under their enemies crueltie, that we are at libertie in this solemne Ordinance, to plead with our God for mercie. Oh that this day of Self-humbling, might be to us in the use of it, according to its nature, a self-searching, or soul-purging day. My Commission is, to hold forth the Glasse of Gods Truth before your eyes, that you may may discover your spots and defects. Let it be your worke, to reade over your selves, as well as your Bibles; to speake and write retractations of your former errors, and confessions of your mis∣carriages (I wish we could all be Augustines here∣in.) The Lord knoweth what Volumes many of us might fill, if we were but well studyed in our selves. And together with the long Catalogue of all our other sins, our neglect of Truth must come in, as having a great influence into the rest: for this we may blush and bleed, yea rivers of teares are too little to bewaile this, that in all our designes, we have so little minded to pur∣chase the Libertie, the Puritie and Power of true Religion. Adam and Eve began to make very bad mar∣kets, to sell themselves and posteritie, for the for∣bidden fruit. Prophane Esau, sold his Birth-right
for a Messe of pottage, Heb. 12. 16. How many with Absalom, to humour their vain-glory, will set the Peace of a Kingdome to sale? How ma∣ny with Haman, to gratifie proud revenge, will set a whole Church to sale? Some with Iudas, will set up their Saviour to sale for thirtie pieces. O∣thers with Diotrephes (the first Cocke of the game) that they may fill their sailes with Church-pompe, and Church-power, will set the Keyes of Church and Ordinances of Christ to sale. Lay your hands upon your hearts. To be purveyours for your lusts, as the prophane, Romanes 13. vers. 14. To be Merchants for the Pope, as the superstiti∣ous Innovators. To be Proctors for the Devill, as Gospell-opposers, what saith conscience? Is this to buy the Truth. Give me leave (Honourable and beloved) to come neerer you, with three plaine Queres. I study not alta but apta proferre. Have you gotten your owne hearts possessed 1. Quere. Concerning the persons. with the power of the Truth? Hath Gods word a throne in your Consciences, Colossians 3. 16. Let the word of God dwell richly in you. If it dwell there. First, it must intrare, then residere: it must dwell and abide there, exercising a sove∣raigntie over you, ever drawing open into an humble familiaritie with it. What fruitfull know∣ledge have you gotten in the mysterie of Do∣ctrinall and Practicall Godlinesse. They who know the Grace of God in Truth, will bring forth fruit, Colossians 1. vers. 6. Doth the Truth of your Religion appeare in your relations, in the
uniformitie of a Gospell conversation? as Phil. 1. vers. 27. Aske your hearts, whether in all your undertakings you move upon Religious grounds, and for Religious ends. God doth not onely number, but weigh our actions, and observes not onely what is done, but why it is done. The The word of Truth must be our judge; there∣fore now let it be our Counsellor. It is Philpots Glosse upon Iohn 12. vers. 48 (The word that I have spoken shall judge him in the last day) if the word shall judge us, then much more ought it to be a judge of our doings now. Have you set up Truth in your owne families? 2. Quere. Concerning your Families. It is most odious for a Minister of Christ to flat∣ter, to dawbe with untempered morter at any time; but most abominable upon a Day of Hu∣miliation. You reckon your house, your little Common-wealth; by what law is it governed? Doth the word of Truth, the Scepter of righ∣teousnesse beare sway there? Whence then so much licentiousnesse tolerated in the servants? so much dissolutenesse in the children? so much oppression, tyranny, and (too often) other wickednesse in your selves, and such distem∣pers in family relations? Psal. 101. vers. 2. Da∣vid would walke in his house with a perfect heart. Such as served him, he would either finde them, or make them Gods servants. You would have others thinke your houses are Churches. What thy house a Church to God, and thou a covetous idolater? Thy house a Church to God, and thou Ephes. 5. 5. an uncleane sonne of Belial? What concord hath
Christ with Belial? what agreement hath the Tem∣ple of God with idols? The argument is as strong 2 Cor. 6. 15, 16. for Magistrates as for Ministers, 1 Tim. 3. 5. If a man know not how to rule his owne house, how shall hee take care of the Church of God? How can you be good Reformers both of State and Church, unlesse you be first Reformers of your selves, and your owne Families? Light is a great advantage to an house, especially the light of Truth. The Father of Lights, is not pleased to dwell in a darke habitation, such a corner is fit∣ter Delicata res est spiritus Dei. for Satan, the Prince of darknesse. It was a very honourable report, which Melancthon gi∣veth of Prince Anhalt, Cubiculum ejus erat, Aca∣demia, curia, Templum; His Bed-chamber was an Academie, a Court, a Temple. The Lord gives you a share in this honour. Let not your Chambers be Academies onely, for the advanoc∣ment of learning; or Courts, for the daily dis∣patch of publique affaires; but Temples for the worship of God, and calling upon his name. Give the people not onely Rules, but examples of Reformation. Let Religion be first advan∣ced in you, it will the sooner bee setled by you. Have you imployed and improved your pub∣lique 3. Quaere. Concerning the publique. interests to help forward the trade of Truth, to promote Religion in the Libertie, Puritie, and Power of it? Never was any Parliament the sonne of so many prayers and teares. Never had any a larger share in that blessing of the Lord upon Ioseph, Deut. 33. vers. 16. feeling the good
will of Him that dwelt in the bush, so often burn∣ing, yet not consumed. What reciprocall reall love have you expressed unto God, and the Cause of his Truth. When Moses proposed that question, Exod. 32. vers. 26. Who is on the Lords side? The sons of Levi gathered themselves together, vers. 27. and by their zeale, obtained a blessing in Moses his Catalogue, when their brother Simeon was left out, Deut. 33. vers. 9. We live in shedding, dis∣criminating times, it is a frequent question, quarum partium? On what side are you? If this be the question, who is on Truths side, what eccho, what answer will you returne, oh you great Counsellors? Suppose this day, God and thy Conscience held a Closet Committee, the Lord saith, I have put such a rich price into thy hand; I have betrusted thee with an influence in the Grand Affaires of the Church? what saith Conscience? What hast thou done? what wilt thou doe, by speaking, voting, by hand, heart, purse, for the Truth? Davids question is most season∣able, 1 Chron. 29. vers. 5. Who is willing to conse∣crate his service this day unto the Lord? Oh that you might returne the same pious answer, with the chiefe of the Fathers, and Princes of the Tribes; who all offered willingly, vers. 6. Could you finde this fruit upon your Self-examina∣tion, Doubtlesse though you may serve this day in sorrow (as you ought to doe upon a Soul-afflicting day (in sighes, in groanes, in teares) yet you shall reape in joy.
To engage and quicken your utmost endeavours for the happy purchase of truth. Use 2. Exhortation. You may please to looke upon your selves (Ho∣nourable and Beloved) in a double capacity. First, as Merchants, trading for your owne ever∣lasting good. Then as Publique Factors, betrusted with the best good of many hundred thousands. In a Merchant or Factor there are some speciall Requisites, 1. Wisdome. Three Requi∣sites in a Factor 2. Activity. 3. Resolution. First, Wisedome, to discerne both the Commodi∣ties 1 Requisite, Wisdome. themselves, and opportunities of trading. The first use of Wisdome is to discerne the Com∣modities themselves. Religion must not be taken 1. upon trust. Faith is Gods way to save us, credulity the devils method to undoe us. 1 Thess. 5. 21. Try all things, hold fast that which is good. And by sound knowledge possesse your selves most carefully of such truthes, as are most necessary. Those that are Fundamentalia in fide, or in Praxi, buy them at any rate, but sell them at no rate. There are Magnalia, and minutula legis. It will argue much hypocrisie to be substantiall in circumstantiall truthes, and circum∣stantiall in the substantials of Faith and Repentance. Maximis dissi∣diis non sunt minores istae redimendae ve∣ritates. Acon∣tius de St. Sat. Let us wisely proportion our zeale, according to the nature of the truths themselves. This Counsell Paul giveth his Titus. Matters of consequence, he must affirme constantly, but, avoid needlesse questions, Tit. 3. 8.
It were a seasonable improvement of your Wise∣dome and Power, to hinder the Devils or Popes Chapmen, from opening their packes of adulterate wares, and to put an high value upon such precious parcels of Truth, as have a great influence both into Doctrinall and practicall Religion. Give me leave here in the behalfe of Truth, to suggest some briefe hints. First, Put in caveats against Arminian errours, 1. which doe so extenuate originall sinne, and magni∣fie the power of nature, that they feed our heredita∣ry disease of pride, and eclipse the glory of Gods grace. Oh trade for the doctrine of free grace. Maintaine the King of Heavens Prerogative. In the spirituall building, grace laid the first foundation, in Gods free, eternall purpose. Grace erecteth the wals, yea and addeth the top-stone. Eternity will be little e∣nough to admire, to adore, to cry grace, grace; Therefore carefully possesse your selves of this truth against the enemies of grace. Secondly, Minde the promoting of those Truthes which justifie The purity of Divine Worship, according 2. to Gods owne will, against Popish and superstiti∣ous innovators. There is a bewitching pompe in the out side of popery, which intangleth some. Ancient Writers used many wanton Metaphors, and such a liberty of expression, before the mystery of iniqui∣ty was discovered, which deluded others. There is a disposition in all corrupt natures, no lesse to spiri∣tuall then bodily fornication. Vindicate therefore the second Commandement, which Papists have expunged, and others so much clouded. Where
God hath professed himselfe jealous, let us be zea∣lous, of trading for such Truthes. Thirdly, Put a value upon such Truthes as disco∣ver the dangerous errours of Socinianisme, which is 3. no better then a Complication of many antient heresies, condemned by ancient Councels. A Doctrine that undermineth the merit and satisfaction of our Savi∣ours death; that will scarce allow faith to swimme, where reason cannot wade; that will so farre bring downe Religion to reason, that we must beleeve lit∣tle more in Divinity, then we can see in reason. Ar∣minianisme gratifieth the pride of will; Popery the pride of outward sense, and Socinianisme the pride of carnall reason. Fourthly, Let Truthes for the sanctification of the Lords day, be pretious truthes. Gods institution 4. of that day, bringeth with it a speciall Character of holinesse, and an influence of a peculiar blessing, God hath sanctifyed and blessed it. Yea, in the primi∣tive times it was a badge of Christianity. When the Exod. 20. 11. question was propounded, Servasti Dominicum? Hast thou kept the Lords day? The answer was, Chri∣stianus sum, intermittere non possum; I am a Christian, I cannot neglect it. There was no little danger in the Anti-sabbatarian doctrine; seeing upon Gods owne day, we professe publiquely our communion with God in his Ordinances. Then we expect to enjoy the richest influence from him. And if men could dispute away our Christian Sabbath, we should soone lose the vigour of our practicall Religion. God ha∣ving Ezek. 20. 10. made it holy by Institution, by Ordination, let us keepe it holy by Observation.
The second use of Wisdome in Factors, is to know and consider their opportunities. Ephes. 5. 15, 2. Opportunitas est maximum talentum. 16. See that ye walke circumspectly not as fooles but as wise, redeeming the time. Hierusalem in this was, as unwise, as unhappy, that she knew not the day of her visitation, Luk. 19. 41, 42. Who did expect such nutus providentiae, hints of divine providence, as God hath afforded to unworthy England in these two last yeares, to repossesse her of that Truth which many thought departing? The Philistins had almost taken our Arke. Our friends, our enemies, our selves, our owne guiltinesse passed a sentence of death upon us. We discovered so many leakes in ships of Church and State, as if both were sinking. The tempest was great, our Saviour seemed to be asleepe, our onely refuge was to cry, Lord save us, we perish, Mat. 8. 25. The sword hath rid circuit for above twenty yeares in Germany; many Candlestickes of Truth thence removed; that Paradise almost turned into a Wildernesse. Poore Ireland is in danger to lose that Religion they had, with their estates and lives, Preachers hanged, Professors murdered, Bibles burnt, and all with prodigious cruelty and blasphe∣my, &c. Yet sinfull England, like Gideons fleece, dry in comparison, when others sleeped in their owne blood. Observe, I beseech you, like wise Factors, the seasons to trade for the setling true Religion. It Judg. 6. 40. is true, we are now full of sad distractions; blacke and bloody clouds beginne to gather; yet, may not Faith (through them) spy out the Sunne of righte∣ousnesse shining graciously upon unworthy England? As Hag. 2. 7. I will shake all Nations, and the desire of
all Nations shall come; and I will fill this House with glory, saith the Lord of Hosts. Historians report, that about the yeare 1517. when Leò the tenth was making some thirty Cardinals, there was such a ter∣rible tempest in the Church, that shaked the Babe out of the Virgin Maries armes, and the Keyes out of Saint Peters hands, which they interpreted as o∣minous, and indeed so it proved; shortly after Lu∣ther arose, who so much battered the Popes power. The sword is already shaken out of our great Church-mens hand, by Parliamentall power, the keyes doe not hang so fast under their girdle, as they did, &c. We dare not but hope, these are enga∣ging providences of God, earnest-pennies of some great payment yet behinde. Oh therefore know, and redeeme your Opportunities to Trade for Truth. Activity, to pursue occasions, and follow all ad∣vantages. 2 Requisite, Activity. If you would be fully possessed of the knowledge of the Truth; you must seeke for her as for Silver, and search for her as for hid Treasure, Prov. 2. 4. By a most unwearyed industry, search every Mine. Plato calleth Merchants, Planets, that wan∣der from City to City. You will never trade for Truth in good earnest, till you expresse an inquisi∣tive, active disposition, in the cause of Religion, knocking at every doore, plying every Mket, where you may purchase any acquaintance with the Truth. First, Goe not onely to the shop of Nature, or the Schoole of Philosophy. The candle which Nature affordeth us, is good; but it will be burnt out before
we come to our journeyes end. Philosophy may seeke Truth, Theology findeth it, Religion doth Veritatem Phi∣losophia quaerit, Theologia inve∣nit, Religio possidet. P. Mi∣rand. possesse it. Philosophy is not the field wherein the pearle of Truth lyeth, but rather a hedge and ditch about the field, to defend it, from the invasion of subtill Disputants. Clem. Alexand. Licet Christus post caenam in∣stitue rit & suis Discipulis ad∣ministraverit sub utraque spe∣cie panis et vini hoc venerabile Sacramentum; tamen hoc non obstante Sacro∣rum canonum autoritas, & ap∣probata consue∣tudo Ecclesiae servavit & ser∣vat. Caranza sum. Concil. Sess. 13. Secondly, Neither must we seeke Truth, onely in the decrees of Councells, in the Traditions and te∣stimonies of the Church. Councells are like Rivers of water, very profitable, so long as they hold them∣selves within the compasse of the banckes, but if they swell and overflow (as too often they have done) they prove very hurtfull to the field of the Church, even to Truth it selfe. The Councell of Con∣stance commeth in with a non obstante against Christs institution, with-holding the Cup from the Sacra∣ment. Our Faith and Truth was at first delivered to the Saints, Jude ver. 3. And we hold it still per Ecclesiam, though not propter Ecclesiam; by the Ministery of the Church, though not for the Authority of the Autoritas Ec∣clesiae est auto∣ritas numeris, non jurisdicti∣onis. Camer. Church, John 4. 42. All they who are genuine chil∣dren of the Church, not onely by the Mothers side, but by the Fathers also, will not onely beleeve as the Church beleeveth, but as their Heavenly Fa∣ther teacheth them, and because he teacheth them. Thirdly, But in searching out for the Truth, goe to Christ himselfe, who is Truth it selfe, John 14. 6. Ego sum via, quae ad verita∣tem duco; ego sum veritas, quae vitam promitto; ego sum vita, quam do. Ber∣nard. Jesus saith unto him, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life. Attend upon Christ in the use of his Word, which is a Word of Truth, Prov. 8. 34. Blessed is the man that heaneth me, watching daily at my
gates, Waiting at the posts of my doores. If ever God ripen your Councells about a Synod, we hope to receive the same direction from you, that Constantine the Great gave the Councell of Nice. Take  the Resolution of things in question, out of Divine∣ly inspired writings. Doe not onely bid us enquire what Reformation was in our▪ Josiahs time, King Edward the sixth; nor what in our Deborahs dayes, Queene Elizabeths, (though we must for ever blesse God for the light that appeared in those times) Doe not onely put us upon inquiry what Ignatius said, or what Cyprian did; they must be very wise Children who know their Fathers faces and wri∣tings, after so many of their adversaries scratches. Rather bid us give you an account, what Luke hold∣eth forth in his story of the Acts of the Apostles, what Paul intimates in his Epistles, that so divine Truth may triumph, and we enjoy a Scripture Re∣formation. In divine things we may attribute some∣what to antiquity, yet in matters that concerne Church pompe, and Church power, we must be jealous how we trust the Ancient Fathers, because (good men) they saw the mystery of iniquity but darkely, and at a distance, which wrought strongly, not one∣ly in corrupting Doctrine with errours, but Divine Worship with Ceremonies and Church Government with tyrannicall usurpations. Then, and then onely, is Truth like to triumph in Church-Assemblies, when Gods Word is there advanced. Cyrill saith, in a Synod at Ephesus, upon a high Throne in the Temple, there lay, Sanctum Evangelium, the holy Gospell, to shew that Christ was both present and president there.
Resolution, to backe a publique Factors wise Acti∣vity▪ 3 Requisite, Resolution. This would make you willing to grapple with difficulties, to expose your selves to troubles and hazzards, and to be at any cost and charges, that you may possesse your selves and the Kingdome of the true Religion. Poore England hath long beene in a travelling condition, felt many bitterpangs, findeth now twins in her wombe, Jacobs and Esaus, wrastling for the birth-right, high contestations betwixt Eliah and Baalls Priests; now it is a day of trouble and astonish∣ment: 2 Chron. 29. 8. Great things are come to the birth, onely there wanteth strength to bring forth. What will you resolve to lay out to possesse this dis-joynted Kingdome of the Truth? Imagine the casting of the ballance, the composing of all Church difference depended upon thee alone, what wouldest thou con∣tribute to purchase Truth? Nazianzen put this price upon his Athenian, learning (wherein he was very fa∣mous) that he had something of value to part with∣all for Christ; Oh that you could say the same of your Honours and Estates, reckoning this the good∣nesse of all your good things, that you are enabled to doe good with them in the cause of Christ and his Truth. It was Heroicall zeale in Basill, who for his constant and bold defending of the Truth against the Arian heresie, being threatned death by Valens the Emperour, answered, , Oh that I might dye for the truth! I beseech you (Noble Worthies) by the many Petitions you have had from men, by the solemne Protestations you have made to God, by his wonder∣working
Providence about you, and by the depen∣dance the Protestant cause abroad hath upon you, stirre up your Resolution in the behalfe of Truth. Would you have the name of this Parliament em∣balmed with everlasting perfume? Improve your power for the true Religion. Justifie our Magna Charta, the grand Charter of Scripture truthes, that doth entitle us to Salvation. Confirme unto us our Petition of Right, establish upon Pastors and Chur∣ches, so much interest in the power and use of the Keyes, as the Word of Truth doth allow them. Maintaine amongst us a free course of trading for eternall happinesse, set and keepe open those shops, such Pulpits, such mouthes, as any Prelaticall usur∣pations have, or would have, shut up. Secure to us not onely liberty of person and estate, but also li∣berty of Conscience from Church tyranny, that we be not pinched with ensnaring oathes, clogged with multiplyed subscriptions, or needlesse impositions, which will rather increase then compose distractions. Together with Priviledges of Parliament, let us have Church-priviledges vindicated, helpe us to purge out that old leaven, whether of Doctrine, of Disposition, or Persons, that we may have Sacraments more purely administred, according to the rule of Truth; let us be sure of this Militia, inviolably setled, the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, Ephes. 6. 17. Guard that Magazine, wherein are laid up the weapons of our warfare, that are mighty through God, to the pulling downe of strong holds, 2 Cor. 10. 4. So shall we be put into a good posture for Refor∣mation.
Act undaunted resolution, in the prosecution of these religious Designes, then may you confidently ex∣pect Christs glorious and gracious presence amongst you. Luther would assure you thereof, Where the Word of Christ doth raigne, saith he, there are the eyes Luher de abrog. miss. privat. of Christ fixed on the holy Professors of Truth, but where the Word of man reigneth, although there were as many Popes, as there be leaves in the wood, and as many Car∣dnals, as graines of Corne, &c. As many Bishops, as drops of water in the Sea, and all of them glittering in Gold and Jewels, Gemmati, purpurati, mulati, & asi∣nati, to maintaine their owne Lawes, yet are Christs eyes turned away from them. Truth, though it must be bought; yet it may not be 2 Proposition. sold. The Wisedome of Scripture directs us to severall purchases, Isai. 55. 1. Every thirsty soule is invited to Come and buy Waters, Wine, and Milke; Seeke to Christ upon his termes, for variety of sweet Soule∣mercies; Rev. 3. 18. We are counselled to buy of Christ, Gold tryed in the fire, the pure graces of Gods Spirit, and the purity of Ordinances; Ephes. 5. 16. We must be redeeming the time, not only taking opportunities of doing and receiving good when they are offered, and seeking them when they are wanting, but buying them at any price. And in∣deed Christians should be Chapmen to buy, rather then Salemen to sell. We are commanded to buy, that we may possesse, the end of this possession is use; what Spirituall commodities we have purchased, we
must Improve for God and our Soules, but not ali∣enate them from our selves. There are three sorts of Hucksters will be ready to Three sorts of of Hucksters. engrosse the Truth from you, if you be willing to sell it. Malignant persecutors, are engrossing Huckesters, 1. Sort of hucksters of Truth. who watch to interrupt the liberty of the Truth. These, even as Jannes and Jambres withstood Mo∣ses, resist the Truth, men of corrupt mindes, Reprobates concerning the Faith, 2 Tim. 3. 8. And indeed, there∣fore resist the Truth, because their mindes are so corrupt. Such the Apostle cals , absurd, men, Qui  fa∣ciunt, quae mi∣nime convent∣unt. Pisc. 2 Thess. 3. 2. Men compact of meere incongruities, solaecising in opinion, speeches, actions, and whole life, yea unreasonable men, For all men have not Faith, ver. 2. Religion is the highest Reason, nothing more irrationall then irreligion. From such spirits arose those conspiracies against the Apostle, endevouring Acts 4. & 5. ch. to scotch the Charriot-wheeles of Truth, when they began first to move. No sooner did Steven plead for Truth, but some were suborned against him▪ Act. 6. 11. No sooner did Saul beginne to Preach the Truth, but opposers began to consult to kill him, Act. 9. 23. Though not long before he had beene a busie Apparitor and Pursevant, to Arrest the Saints, and dragge them to their High-Commission, Act. 9. 1. [A strange and suddaine change in them, as well Origen, Num. hom. 27. in hoc corum omnis flamma est, in hoc uruntur in∣cendio. as in him.] Origen saith of the Devils; No greater torment to them, then to see men addicted to the Scrip∣tures. The same temper of spirit appeares in the
devils agents upon the killing of the witnesses, Rev. 11. 10. They that dwelt upon the earth shall rejoyce o∣ver them, and make merry, and shall send gifts one to another, because these two Prophets tormented them that dwell on the earth; And therefore they will ad∣venture peace of Conscience, and hope of Heaven, yea, the whole stocke upon it, that they may buy up Truth out of the Churches hands; and some∣times malice rises to such an height, that even in England the Bible must be burnt, as strange Doctrine. Tanquan Do∣ctrina peregri∣na. Seducing Heretickes, whose endevour is to corrupt the purity of Truth. The great Apostasy from the 2 Sort of Hucksters of Truth. Faith, 1 Tim. 4. 1. is brought about by giving heed to seducing spirits. The Pope hath many Emissaries abroad, who joyne with the Devill, studying a me∣thod of Soule-deceiving, and Truth-betraying. Compare Ephe. 4. 14. , with Ephes. 6. 11. , you shall find the devill and de∣ceivers artificially methodizing their snares to draw us from the Truth, 2 Pet. 2. 1▪ False teachers have alwayes practised to bring in damnable heresies. The beginnings of grosse errours may be modest; yea, the foulest Heresies may at first appeare with faire faces. The Serpent creepes into the Paradise of the Church by degrees: as 2 Cor. 11. 3. his plot is to corrupt peoples mindes, From the simplicity that is in Christ; First, he will puzzle them with a question, as he did Eve, put a command of God, a knowne Truth to be disputed, then helpe them to mint some distinctions, (which are not alwayes so happy in Divinity as in Philosophy) thereby to relieve and helpe in an error.
And here it may be observed, though these men have the same designe with malignant persecutors, to engrosse the Truth, yet cunningly they will buy it up by parcels, that they may be the lesse discern∣ed. They will trade first in names, then in things, first habituate us to call our Ministers Priests, our Com∣munion Tables, Altars, before they impose supersti∣tious gestures. This was the Rhemists straine of po∣licy. Rhem. Test. 1 Tim. 6. 20. Let us keepe our old words, and wee shall easily keepe our old Faith. This graduall Huckstering up the purity of truth, is most cleare in Image worship. At first, Images and pictures of Saints were used in private, for Me∣mory, History, or Ornament onely; Afterwards with like colour of pretence brought into the Church in Gregories dayes, yet with expresse prohibition of worshipping them; Afterward the second Synod of Nice enjoynes it, though more modestly, and re∣spectively onely in regard of that which they represent; But since the councell of Trent, it's risen to grosse I∣dolatry. Bellarm. de Imag. Sanct. l. 2. c. 21. Neutrall Politicians, who will be buying Truth out of our hands, by formalizing and enervating 3 Sort of Hucksters of Truth. Plut. in vita Solon the power of it, till at last they leave us an heartlesse and saplesse Religion. Among the Lawes of Solon, there was one which thundred against such, who in a civill uproare amongst the Citizens, sit still as neu∣trall spectators. It were happy for the Church, if there were a more strict course taken against all luke∣warme Machivillians, who by their neutrality un∣dermine Religion; of this straine was Jeroboam, that grand Politician, who created to himselfe a State
Religion; out of Love to his Crowne, he set up gol∣den Calves, he hindred the people from going to worship God at Jerusalem, lest they should turne againe unto their Lord, unto Rehoboam King of Ju∣dah. 1 King. 12. 27 28. Worldly wise men, as they are time-servers, so they are selfe-servers, and whatsoever become of Christ and his truth, selfe shall be advanced into the Throne; such mens heads over-match their hearts, their policy out-runneth their Religion; when the glory of Christ and his Gospell come in compe∣tition with their selfe ends, selfe shall first be grati∣fyed; most unlike to Paul, who Phil. 1. 20. , stood as it were on up-to, looking ear∣nestly after the magnifying of Christ, what-ever be∣came of himselfe, Whether in his life, or in  death. I may produce three Reasons to fortify you against felling Truth to any Hucksters. Truth is in it selfe a precious Jewell, of most in∣comparable worth, gained into the possession of the 1. Reason. Churches, not without much difficulty; and there∣fore cannot without great disparagement to its ex∣cellency, and to the zeale of others, be alienated and chaffered away. Gospell Truth at first cost the blood of Christ, then watered with the blood of many Martyrs, which made it throng up so plentifully. It is ob∣serveable, the Church hath beene seldome fully pos∣sessed of any Grand Truth, without much debate, Niltam certum quam quod post dubium certum. without some bloody sufferings. How deare did it cost Athanasius to justifie the Divinity of Christ, a∣gainst the Arians? and shall we suffer any of that
kindred to buy it againe out of our hands▪ How couragiously did Augustine rescue the Doctrine of Grace, from the Pelagians hands, whom he cals the Enemies of Grace? and shall we suffer it to be betray∣ed to their Brethren the Arminians! How farre did Luther hazzard himselfe, to ad∣vance Justification by Faith in Christ? It is a grosse shame that sweete Truth should be lost in the lan∣guage of any Innovators, who will have workes to concurre in eodem genere cause, to share equally with Faith in the very act of justifying. Many of our ancient Worthies, like Wisedomes Children, Matth. 11. 19. set themselves to justifie Wisedome; they have endevoured with much sweat, and many teares, yea, with their dearest lives, to set∣tle the Churches Land-markes by evidence of Scrip∣ture Arguments, and to bound the Truth by Decrees of Councels; we must not prodigally dispossesse our selves of such a Treasure. We reape the fruite of our Reformers zeale, who bestirred themselves so much against Popish Altars, and other Church usurpations for the purging of Religion in England. God forbid, that we should sell for trifles, what they possessed us of with so much difficulty. It con∣cernes us rather to concurre with them, yea, to pro∣mote their beginnings with all our might, that we may have such Churches, such Officers, such electi∣on and ordination, such jurisdiction, such exercise of Church power, and all such administrations as are most agreeable to the Truth. Truth is the Churches Talent; committed to her
trust, and therefore must not be sold. Trust being a strong obligation to fidelity. Upon this ground 2 Reason. Rom. 3. 2. the Apostle, Jude ver. 3. Exhorts Christians to Con∣tend earnestly for the Faith, once delivered to the Saints. You must never expect another edition of the Faith, (God reserved that solemne change from Jewish to Evangelicall worship, for the Inauguration of his Sonne) zealously strive for this Faith you have, a∣gainst all opposition. In that knowne place, so much abused by Papists, 1 Tim. 3. 15. The Church of E∣phesus (this cannot be appropriated to the Church of Rome) is the pillar and ground of Truth. Not a pil∣lar  not sensu archi∣tectonico but forensi. to uphold, but to hold forth Truth, not so much , the seate of Truth; every pure Church being a depository of Truth, where it is to be found, as the candle in the Candlesticke. All the fonnes of Wisedome have a share in that of Paul to Timothy, 1 Tim. 6. 20. O Timothy keepe that which is committed to thy Trust. This made the primitive Worthies so conscienti∣ously zealous in the cause of Truth; and that not onely of many Truthes, but even of formes of spee∣ches, of syllables, yea of Letters. The difference betwixt the Councell of Nice and Arius, was but in a Letter, whether . The contro∣versie whereupon the Greeke and Latine Churches broke, touching the proceeding of the Holy Ghost, depended upon two prepositions,  and . The monstrous heresie of Nestorius lay but in one poore letter, , when he would not gratifie the Church therein, as Cyrill desired him, many Bi∣shops rose up against him, so religious were they, that
that they would not exchange a letter, or syllable of the Faith, wherewith their Saviour had betrusted them. Selling Truth is the worst, the most undoing 3 Reason. Selling Truth opens a doore, Trade; it sets to sale both Gods glory, and your owne Salvation, being it opens a doore to both ex∣treames in Religion, to Prophanenesse, and to Su∣perstition. The Schoole of Christ is indeed a Schoole of af∣fection, 1 To Pro∣phanenesse. and of action, but first of knowledge; we must have science before we shall make conscience of our wayes. This makes the god of this world, the Devill, bestirre himselfe to blinde peoples mindes, Lest the Light of the glorious Gospell of Christ should shine into them: he well knew that darknesse of mind, betrayes us to workes of darknesse. When men walke in the darke, They know not at what they stum∣ble, Prov. 4. 19. They will stumble at Christ himselfe, at the strictnesse and purity of his wayes, and soone plunge themselves into the grossest wickednesse. In a Synod at London Anselme forbad Priests Marri∣age Alsted. An. 1102. in England, and in the next yeare were discovered a great company of Sodomites amongst them. Such is the wofull fruit of selling Truth, which would be a spur, quickning to good, and a bridle restraining from e∣vill. It is no wonder to find such treacherous pra∣ctices amongst the Papists, their erroneous doctrines open the sluces unto them. Upon a sleight confessi∣on of sinne, they may receive a cheape absolution, and thereby are emboldned to renue the commis∣sion of it. That Taxa poenitentiaria, amongst the Pa∣pists,
that low rate which is put upon the greatest sinnes in the Popes Custome house; so contrary to the word of Truth, Rom. 6. 23. The wages of sinne is Death, encourages people to the greatest prophan∣nesse. Ignorance of the Truth is a fruitefull mother and helpefull nurse, both to prophanenesse of practice, 2 To Supersti∣tion. and to superstition in devotion. See it at Athens, Act. 17. 22, 23. There they were fondly superstitious, where their Altar had this inscription, To the un∣knowne God. Aquinas attributes the inchoation of I∣dolatry it selfe, To the inordiacy of our affection, and our Ignorance of the true God. Whence came super∣stition so much to swarme in the darke ages of the Traditiones pontificiorum sunt pandectae errorum et Su∣perstitionum. Chemnit. Church? because they neglected the word of Truth, and followed Tradiions. Hence it is observed that Learning and Religion have falne and risen together. When the light of Truth hath beene eclipsed, by the decay of learning; the heate of Religion hath much declined. The weedes of superstition, sponte nascuntur, will grow of their owne accord in darke corners; as having advantage of the soile, so much connaturallnesse to peoples corrupt hearts. The Popes Chaplaines need not take much pains to teach ignorant soules to be superstitious; If Orthodoxe Preachers of the Truth be but suspended, we shall soone have reason to complaine with that great man in the Councell of Lateran; Piety is almost sunke into Superstition. Beware of expressing any indulgence unto such, or 1 Ue of cau∣tion. holding any complyance with them that sell the Truth. The whole Tribe of Benjamin came to be
extinguished, except about sixe hundred, onely for countenancing a few sonnes of Beliall in Gibeah, who had abused a Levites Wife, Judg. 19. and 20. chap. Christ was angry with some of the Churches, not onely for being active in evill, but passive of evill, Rev. 2. 14. 20. The Wisedome of this great Councell hath beene inquisitive after monopolists, or any that encroach upon the Common-wealth. Give me leave to discover an unhappy Church-confederacy, whereby Truth hath beene shamefully sold in many places. There are foure sorts of persons, herein deepely engaged. 4 Sorts accessa∣ry to the sell∣ing of Truth. 1 Scandalous professors. First, Scandalous apostate Professors of the Truth, who alienate the Truth from themselves, and alie∣nate the mindes of others from the Truth. They make the word of God blasphemed, Tit. 3. 5. Such are described with blacke Characters by Jude verse 12, 13. These are spots in your feasts of Charity, when they feast with you, feeding themselves without feare; clouds they are without water, carryed about of windes; trees whose fruite withereth, without fruite, twice dead, plucked up by the rootes; Raging waves of the Sea, fo∣ming out their owne shame, wandring starres, to whom is reserved the blacknesse of darkenesse for ever. They are employed in evill workes, and they receive an∣swerable wages. What unhappy markets such car∣nall Gospellers make for the Truth, you may read in many stories; amongst the rest, an American No∣ble-man, being perswaded to embrace the Christian Religion, demanded, First, what place was or∣dained for such as were Baptized? Answer was
made, Heaven, and its joyes. Secondly, what place for them who were not Baptized; Answer was re∣turned, Hell, and its torments. Thirdly, which of these places was allotted for the Spanyards, it was answered Heaven; whereupon he renounced his in∣tended Baptisme, protesting he would rather goe to Hell with the unbaptized, then be in Heaven with the Spaniards. Many fall out implacably with the Truth, because they finde many professors such un∣savory salt. Secondly, Ignorant and vicious Ministers. Some 2 Ignorant and vitious Mini∣ste even idoll Priests, like the Idols of the heathen, The worke of mens hands, they have mouthes but they speake not; eyes have they but they see not; they have eares but they heare not, neither is there any breath in their mouthes; they that make them are like unto them, so is every one that trusteth in them, Psalm. 135. 15, 16, 17, 18. And indeed it is too often true, like Priest, like People, Ier. 5. 31. Such a creature is not to be found in Christs catalogue, who gave some Apostles, Pro∣phets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers. No Prince ever sent dumbe Embassadors. Bernard reckoneth Ephe. 4. 11. Bernard. up these foure as strange things, Speculator caecus, prae∣cursor claudus, praeco mutus, doctor inscius; a blinde Watchman, a lame Harbinger, a dumbe Cryer, an ignorant Teacher; And indeed a Minister of a vi∣cious life, though not grossely ignorant, is as dan∣gerous an enemy to true Religion, if not sometimes worse, as not barely with-holding, but corrupting and perverting Truth, like Elymas the Sorcerer, Act. 13. 10. Yea like Eli his Sonnes, 1 Sam. 2. 17. who made the Offerings of the Lord to be abhorred; their
ungodly lives are often such confutations of their owne and other mens Sermons, that many thereby are hardned against the Truth, Ezek. 9. 6. the de∣stroying Angell was to beginne at the Sanctuary, and there, too often, beginnes prophanenesse. There hath beene long expectation, as there is indeed great need, of a Parliament visitation; to finde out those Chapmen, who will sell Gods Truth, peoples soules, Church-purity with State-liberty, for the satisfacti∣on of their lusts. Thirdly, Such Prelates as ordaine or support these 3 Prelates sup∣porting Igno∣rant & vitious Ministers. ignorant and vicious Ministers, I appeale to you, what grosse betrayers of Truth they are. How hap∣py had it beene for the Church in England, if they who pretend to succeed Timothy, had walked by that rule which Paul commended to him, 1 Tim. 5. 22. Lay hands suddenly on no man? but alas! many are aposcopi, rather then Episcopi, as Espencaeas, by-seers, rather then over-seers; hence such swarmes in the Church of backe-friends unto truth. If you enquire when so many grosse deformities crept into the Church, Damasus will tell you; even Field. on chap. l. 5. c. 9. then when the Bishops put over the care and perfor∣mance of Church affaires to others, that they might take their owne ease; like Harlots that put out their owne children to be nursed by others, that them∣selves in the meane time might satisfie their lusts; by such remissenesse Truth was much smothered, with a multitude of weedes, that overgrew the Church. Fourthly, Selfe-seeking Patrons are many times 4 Selfe-seeking Pations. deepely accessary to the betraying of Truth, in pre∣senting
most unworthy Ministers. The Lord know∣eth how many are so farre from considering the concurring consent of judicious Christians (which was much valued in primitive times) that they neg∣lect Plebs ipsa maxime habet potestatem, vel eligendi dignos Sacerdotes, vel recusandi indig∣nos: quod & ip∣sum videmus de divina autori∣tate descendere. Cyp. ep. 63 their trust for the good of others, and their own soules. They will obtrude, too often, one of Je∣roboams Priests, one of the lowest of the people, 1 Kings 13. 33. They would not chuse a Cooke to dresse their meate, that were like to poyson them; nor a Physitian (though a Kinsman) which would pro∣bably kill them; but, too often, preferre a dawbing Chaplaine, that will comply with their covetous, or licentious humour, though in the meane time the people be betrayed, and the Truth be sold. Will you please to consider what a sad meeting this un∣happy fraternity will have at the day of Judgment, if still they persist in truth-betraying. Scandalous pro∣fessors, will curse their wicked Ministers, whose ex∣amples poysoned them. Wicked Ministers, will cry woe, woe upon such Prelates, who were indul∣gent to their unworthinesse; and doubtlesse the Prelates will be as ready to complaine of many Pa∣trons, who first made the livings scandalous by with∣holding maintenance, and then by importunity thrust a scandalous Minister upon them. Oh let it now appeare, that you will not suffer Religion to be betrayed by the least indulgence to any of these evils. Consider what Sigismond the Emperour said in the Councell of Constance, where the Councell pretended to make a Reformation; one stood up and said the Reformation must beginne at the Fryer Minorites; No, said the Emperour, Non à
Minoritis, sed à Majoritis incipiendum est, Let Refor∣mation reach Patron, and Prelate, as well as Minister and People. If you would discourage scandalous livers, sup∣presse scandalous Ministers; if you would prevent a succession of them, regulate the power of the keyes, tooke to ordination and jurisdiction: though your Bill against scandalons Ministers were ripened and executed, yet if the doore of admission in∣to the Church, continue as large as now it is, the next age will swarme againe with the like Drones. And for the Truthes sake, that you may silence all clamours, as if Reformation would discourage lear∣ning, and undoe the Church, make good your owne Orders. For the support of an able Ministery; let Patrons and others deny themselves, to raise a suffi∣cient and certaine maintenance, at least open a vent to others Pietie and Charity, who will concurre with you, to afford oyle for burning and shining lampes, by reviving the hopeful designe of the Feoffes, or what other wayes, your zealous wisdome shall suggest. A great Civilian telleth us how Church∣maintenance Sir Tho. Rid. View of Civill Law. part 3. c. 4. Sect. 3. came to be appropriated to the Cloysters of Monkes, and how such lands as they held, in sun∣dry Parishes, were freed from the payment of tithes to the Ministers thereof; namely, it sprang from this roote, they insinuated that Preaching was not so ne∣cessary for the salvation of mens soules, as their Pray∣ing, in their Religious Houses; Preaching, they said, breedeth Schisme, Disputes in Religion, &c. It lyeth as a blot upon them, That by their undervaluing Preaching, many Congregations were robbed of
their Ministers maintenance, Let it be Your Honour, who have expressed such a high esteeme of Preach∣ing, to endevour the re-endowing those places with such meanes, as may encourage faithfull witnesses unto the Truth. To awaken Your compassionate affection towards many persons and places, where truth is chaffered a∣way; 2 Vse of dire∣ction. Religion is a riddle, a paradox, yea, a reproach among them. We should appeare this day, as pub∣lique mourners, laying to heart, not onely personall, but State evills, even Parliament sinnes. Is not this just matter of griefe, that in so many former Parlia∣ments, the liberty, the purity, and the power of Re∣ligion hath beene so much neglected? Ancient Lawes have established Church pompe, Power, Dig∣nity, and Revenues; these are twisted into the seve∣rall Statutes, as if they would put in a politicke ca∣veat against after alterations, without shaking the very Foundation, which is now one of the great ob∣jections against Reformation. Yea, how much hath Truth suffered by the indulgence that Old Parlia∣ment Lawes have expressed to Non-residency, Plu∣ralities, and Insufficiency of Ministers. It hath beene enough if Legit ut, Clericus; if he can say the Confessi∣on in Latine, he must be betrusted with soules. Al∣low something to the necessity of these darker times; yet now the very reason of such being altered, God forbid that truth should any longer be betrayed by an unwarrantable latitude. Oh pity your many thou∣sands of expecting Petitioners, who have had many yeares of sad Sabbaths, and sit downe still in much sorrow, complaining for want of Truth. You may
heare their groanings in the words of the Prophet Jeremiah, chap. 8. 22. Is there no balme in Gilead? Is there no Physitian there? Why then is not the health of the daughter of my people recovered? What? cannot, will not, the Parliament heale us? It was a strange and dolefull vision that Ezekiel had from God at Hierusalem, when he saw so many sinfull spectacles; an image of jealousy, Baals Idoll, Ezek. 8. v. 5. then, a company of grave ancient men, every one in the Chamber of his Imagery, ver. 11, 12. Ezek. . the Jewish High-Commission, according to some, in those times deepely corrupted; poore Women weep∣ing for Tammuz, ver. 14. weeping for the death of Polan in locum. Osiris, King of Egypt, and idolatrously adoring his image, which Isis his wife had advanced; and wor∣ships towards the Sunne, ver. 16. Would it please you in your serious thoughts, to runne over this Church, this Kingdome, you might see in many places such objects, that Your eyes would much affect your hearts. Though in all abominations, wee doe not runne parallell with Hierusalem, in Ezekiels Vi∣sion, yet such wofull fruites of truth-selling, and truth-betraying, as may stirre up your affection, and awaken your Parliament actions. First, Cast your compassionate eyes upon the Schooles of the Prophets, the Churches Nurseries. Doe 1. not petitions informe you that divers have there chaffered away Truth for errors; were Whitaker and Reinolds then in vivis, doubtlesse they would blush to see Bellarmine and Arminius justified by many, ra∣ther then confuted. If no Chambers of imagery be there, yet are there not some Chappels, polluted ra∣ther
then adorned with Images, Altars, and Cruci∣fixes. If no worshipping of the Sunne there, yet doe not too many pleade for, and practise, an ungroun∣ded worshiping toward the East? It cannot be thought unnaturalnesse in a Sonne to represent the distempers of his Mother, to a Colledge of Physiti∣ans especially when the experience of the deepe infection, which some of your beloved Sonnes got there, of the corruption of judgements, prophane∣nesse and superstition of practise, which many of your Ministers brought thence, will witnesse the same, that Truth hath beene shamefully betrayed, by too many in the Universities. Munster reporteth, That the Jewes were banished out of many Countryes of Christendome, principally for poysoning Springs and Fountaines. All Friends to Truth had need pray that God would either remove or heale such as have poysoned the Schooles of the Prophets, the Fountaines of the Land. Our hopes are that God will put upon you (Noble Senators) the spirit of Elisha, and helpe you to cast into those waters, such salt, that the Waters be healed, that there be not from thence any more barrennesse, or causing to miscarry, 2 King. 2. 19, 20. In Exod. 15. 23, 24, 25. when the people were come to Marah, They could not drinke the waters, for they were bitter, and murmured aganst Moses, saying, what shall we drinke? ver. 25. The Lord shewed him a tree, which when he had cast into the waters, the waters were made sweete, Plant, and up∣hold wholesome Lectures, in the Pulpit, as well as in the Chaire, (A Service worthy of the Wisdome and Power of a Parliament.) Such Trees will sweeten the
waters there, and drop such fruite, as will much promote the trade of Truth abroad. How many living stones, yea how many Builders did famous Perkins hew, by Preaching a Lecture in Cambridge? many Children and Fathers begotten by his Mini∣stery in a few yeares, to the great advancement of the Truth. Secondly, Behold with the same compassion, Ca∣thedrall Churches, and the wofull effects of selling the Truth in too many of them; The strange Ve∣stures and Gestures, Images, &c. in some of their Quires, intimating too much affinity with those Chambers of Imagery, in their abominations, menti∣oned Ezek. 8. 10, 11, 12. Former Reformations left such nettles growing there, that have since unhappi∣ly seeded many other Churches; yea, left so much dust, not onely behinde the doore, but even in the very Quire, as hath beene easily blowne about into many corners. They glory in being called the Mo∣ther Churches, but they have too often proved Step∣dames to their Daughters, engrossing the mainte∣nance, that should provide the word of Truth for their Soules. What pity is it that Cathedrall Socie∣ties, which might have beene Colledges of learned Presbyters, for the feeding and ruling City Chur∣ches, and petty Academies, to prepare Pastours for neighbour places, should be so often Sanctuaries for non-residents, and be made Nurceries to many such Multitudine le∣vissimarum se∣remoniarum pe∣ne est extincta pietas et vis spi∣ritus Sancti. Gerson. Drones, who can neither Preach nor Pray, other∣wise then reade, say, or sing their Prayers; and in the meane time Truth much obscured in a Non-edifying pompe of ceremonious service. It was a notable designe
of those Bishops at Bononia, that gave Pope Julius the third this very Counsell, how to establish the Roman Religion; Let the people (say they) have pompous Prayers, Images, Tapers, Organs, and divers musicall instruments in their Temples; These are things with which the people are much delighted, and be∣ing taken up with these, they almost forget that do∣ctrine Hae uus quibus vulgus praeci∣pue delctatus, et quo gratia doctrinam llam quae ols  est fere ob∣livitu. p. 4. which is so destructive to us. Let your com∣passion move you to counter-worke all such plots; as Church-deformers sought to corrupt Cities, and places of confluence; so let those that professe them∣selves Church-Reformers, when the Harvest is grea∣test, expresse the greatest care to send forth most faithfull Labourers for the Truth, Matth. 9. 36, 37. This were to resemble your Saviour. Thirdly, Behold with weeping eyes the many hundreds of Congregations, in the Kingdome, where 3. millions of Soules are like to perish for want of Vi∣sion; Truth is sold from amongst them, either by Soule-betraying-non-residents, Soule-poysoning-innova∣tors, or Soule-pining-dry-nurses. In too many places the very Image of jealousie, the Idoll of the Masse is set up, yea, the Comedy of the Masse acted, because there Missae Comoedia in P. Martyr. wanteth the light of Truth to discover the wicked∣nesse and folly of it. Do not some of you that live on the Welch coasts; cry out with your Neighbours, Woe is me that I so∣journe in Meseck, and that I dwell in the tents of Kedar, Psalm. 120. 5. Doe not some of you inhabit the North parts, where you may complaine (in the word of Nicholas Clemang. pag. 15.) How many Priests came to their Benefices, not from the Schooles,
and their study, but from the Ploughes, and servile Occupations, which could neither Reade, nor Under∣stand Latine? Where in many miles, not a Minister that can , and , Preach, and live, Ser∣mons. I wish every Parliament-man had a map of the Soule-misery of the most of the Ten thousand Chur∣ches and Chappels in England; I hope it would draw forth your compassions, and stirre up your endevours to rescue Truth out of their hands, who would sell it, and set up the trade of Truth in poore darke Countries. Had I the favour to preferre a Petition unto You in the name of Universities, Chiefe Cities, Country Congregations, yea, the whole Kingdome, and were sure of a propitious eare from you, I would summe up all in this clause, in this one breath: Improve Your Power to helpe forward the Word of Truth, that it may 2 Thes. 3. 1. runne and be glorifyed. This would maintaine love and loyalty to our Soveraigne. Where hath he most hearty Prayers, but where Truth most prevailes? This would teach men to justifie the power, and com∣ply with the Authority of Parliaments. Who have more undermined and maligned Parliaments, then such Ministers as first betrayed Truth? This is the way (if any) to reduce seduced Papists. Humane Contra Pontifi∣cies paum ∣gibus aut libris profici, quous∣que firmum eti∣doneum ministe∣rium in ecclesi∣is constitutum fuerit. Whitak. Lawes will pinch their purses. Send divine Truth amongst them, that may satisfie their consciences. This is the most Soveraigne meanes to compose Church-differences. Why doe we contend? (saith Augustine) are we not Brethren? Our Father dyed not intestate, let his Will be publiquely produced, and all men will be quiet. This is the best way to make the
Reformation thorow and lasting, because this would engage the peoples hearts. 2 Chron. 20. 32, 33. Je∣hosaphat did that which was right in the sight of the Lord; Howbeit the high places were not taken away; for as yet the people had not prepared their hearts unto the God of their Fathers. Josiah, a good King, did much, yet because the peoples spirits were not wrought to concurre with him, the worke soone vanished, and Gods Judgements brake in upon them. Goe on, therefore (Honourable Worthies) improving your influence to prevent the selling of Truth. First, Provide that every Congregation may have an able Trumpet of Truth. 1. Secondly, Especially let great Townes, places of confluence, have Lectures, Markets of Truth. 2. Thirdly, Afford any faithfull Paul and Barnabas incouragement, yea, Power, if Sergius Paulus de∣sire 3. to heare the Word of God, to goe and Preach, Act. 13. 7. 8 though Elymas the Sorcerer should be unwilling; such ambulatory exercises have brought both light and heate into darke and cold corners. Fourthly, What if there were some Evangelicall, Itinerant Preachers, sent abroad upon a publique 4. stocke to enlighten darke Countries? Thus might you reape glorious fruits of all your Counsels, teares, prayers, and paines, in seeing Dagon fall downe be∣fore the Arke of truth. I have endevoured, (though in much weaknesse) 3 Vse of De∣hortation. with words of Truth and sobernesse, to plead the cause of Truth. I must end as an importunate Sollicitor: O sell not the true Religion upon any termes. Much of my Rhetoricke to perswade you is within you. I
speake to your selfe-love, as you are Men; to your conscience, as you are Christians; to your Wisedome, as you are States-men; to your Honours, as you are Noble: Be alwayes buying, but never selling the Truth. England hath had an happy taste of your zeale for Truth, and against the corrupters and betrayers of the true Religion. The Lord from Heaven hath ap∣peared mightily for you, when you appeared much for him in the cause of Truth. God forbid that ever this Parliament should lose any of it's first love to Religion, and the Reformation of it, then may you expect to drinke of Solomons bitter cup, The Lord was angry with Solomon, because his heart was turned from the Lord God of Israel, which had appeared to him twice. God forbid that Rhehum the Chancellor and Shim∣shai the Scribe, should outstrip Zerubbabel; That 1 Kings. 11 9 Tobiah and Sanballat, should outbid Nehemiah in any cause of God. Rather let the malignancy of ma∣lignant opposers enflame your zeale for the Truth. O that we could now all close this day of humiliati∣on, with the proper worke of the day, covenanting with our God, making it our sealing day; Nehem. 9. 38. At a solemne Fast, Princes, Priests and Levites, did make a sure covenant, write and seale unto it. Let us this Day, not onely give earnest, for the purcha∣sing of Truth, by the fixed purposes of our hearts, but even give as it were hands and seales, that we will never sell the liberty, purity, or power, of Reli∣gion upon any termes. Wll you please to these particulars? First, That you will not sell Truth out of carnall feares; you have a good  it, Rev. 21. 7, 8. , he
that is over-comming, not he that hath overcome, shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my sonne, But the fearefull and unbeleeving shall have their part in the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone. Read over the story of Francis Spira with trembling, who out of such feare betrayed the Truth. After he had gon to Venice to the Popes Legate, with whom, out of carnall feare, he complyed, craving pardon of him, and yeelding to recant that religi∣on he had publickely prosessed; when he returned to his house, he could not rest an houre, no not a minute, nor feele any ease of his continuall anguish; from that night he was much terrifyed with horror, and as he con∣fesseth, He saw plainely before his eyes all the torments of hell and the damned; and in his foule did heare the fearefull sentence, being drawne before the Judgement seate of Christ. Hold fast the Truth, let faith triumph over feares. If Peter will deny and forsweare his Master, at best he must returne by weeping crosse: many are irrecoverably smitten with that Thunder∣bolt Matth. 26. 74, from the Lord, Heb. 10. 38. If any one draw backe, my soule shall have no pleasure in him. Secondly, That you will not sell Truth for your own private advantages. It was a wretched carriage in Demetrius, and his fraternity, who out of love to Act. 19. 24, 25. their owne gaine, did combine and consult how they might undermine and betray the Truth. Sirs, ye know that by this craft we have our wealth; This made them so zealous for their Diana; and so fierce against the Gospell; If Truth doe prevaile, Diana must downe, and then farewell their profit. Resolve rather to re∣semble Moses then Demetrius, who, Heb. 11. 25. Chose
rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. His Faith did so rightly enforme his Judgement, that he counted the Reproaches of Christ, (which seeme the bitterest thing in Christianity) greater riches then the treasures in Egypt, ver. 26. How much did he then preferre the Consolations, which come by Religion, before all worldly excellencies? Such a spirit was in Lu∣ther, who when he was offered to be Cardinall, if he would be quiet, replyed, no, Not if I might be Pope. He had an holy scorne to be put off from his Religious designes, by such withering petty things. Thirdly, Sell not Truth for politicke State ends. When you come to settle Religion doe not deale onely like politicians, but like Christians. Worldly wisedome in the things of God is a rule too short, too 1 Cor. 3. 19. crooked, too partiall, yea foolishnesse with God. Ie∣roboam would play the politician in Religion, he sold the true worship of God for his State ends, and for ever inherits this as a blot upon his name, 1 King. 15. 30. Because of the sins of Jerohoam which he sinned, and which he made Israel to sin, by his provocation wher∣with he provoked the Lord God of Israel to anger. Most renowned was the zeale of King Edward the sixth for the Truth, when upon reasons of State he was pressed by Cranmer and Ridley, to give way to the Masse; he refused it with so much resolution, with so many teares, that they acknowledged he had more divinity in his little finger then both they. In things about meum & tuum, that concerne our owne interest, we may be more liberall, but in Church af∣faires the word of truth must guide us. It is not in
our power quicquam hic aliis dare, aut in aliorum gra∣tiam Calv. Epist. prot. Angl. deflectere; we may not therein gratify one ano∣ther. Fourthly, Sell not Truth for pretences of Church peace▪ I confesse the name of peace smels very sweete; and now especially (in the midst of such Church distra∣ctions and such wantonnesse of opinions) were to be purchased at any rate, except with the losse of Eph 4 3. 13. Truth; It is a most lovely sight to see unity of peace imbrace unity of faith; to behold the household of faith, the family of love; O that we could all ob∣serve the present breaches with the same affectons He nth, qui vos  simul inventre non possum. Aug. Ep. 15. that Augustine did the differences betwixt Hierome and Ruffine. Woe is me that I cannot find you both together, I would fall downe at your feete, with much love and many teares I would beseech you for your selves, and for one another, and for weake Christians for whom Christ dyed, that you suffer not these dissen∣tions 2 King. 17 33. to spread, &c. But, in the meane time, we must not be such reconcilers, as to bring in a Samaritan Religion, an Interim, an uncomfortable mixture. We must not receive Babylonish inmates into the Lords House. Light and darknesse, Truth and er∣ror, will never long dwell quietly together. Fifthly, Sell not Truth for the pompe of humane Ce∣remonies. Admit that Ceremonies were first let into the Church, with the faire intention of the guiders and leaders; and entertayned by the credulity of well-meaning people, before the mystery of iniqui∣ty was much knowne; yet since, being so superstiti∣ously abused by the Pope and his party, and so rigid∣ly pressed, for the upholding the pompe of Prelacy,
with no small disadvantage to the Truth; let us part with them, rather then sell any sparke of Truth for them. Never say they are ancient. Jesus Christ is my anti∣quity, . Ignat. epi. ad Philad. saith Ignatius. We must look for antiquity of In∣stitution not onely of Custome. Never say, they are indifferent. If indifferent onely, and not expedient, they may the better be spared. Others will say, our Doctrine takes off the Scandall of the Ceremonies. However, better have the stumbling blocke remo∣ved Quid si vel pi∣gri vel non satis attenti sint mo∣nitores, vel fru∣stra plerosque moneant? Beza, ep. 8. Grindal. Anno 1548. out of the way, then to have a monitor appoin∣ted to give you warning of it, he may fall asleepe, and then you are in danger. Many tender conscien∣ces wish the same successe about our Ceremonies, that was in King Edward the sixth his dayes, about the Images. Some people contending for one Image, others for another, gave occasion, that the King tooke downe all. Who knoweth whether God hath called Ester 4. 14▪ you to this Parliament to accomplish this amongst other services? If you doe fully come off, to give in your hands, your hearts, yoursealing actions, that you will not upon any termes sell the Truth, as you tread in good Hezekiahs steps, I doubt not but the Lord will Crowne your piety and paines with his Diadem, 2 Chron. 31. 20, 21. Thus did Hezekiah throughout all Judah, and wrought that which was good and right, and Truth before the Lord his God, and in every worke that he began in the service of the house of God, and in the Law, and in the commandements to seeke his God, he did it with all his heart and prospered. FINIS.
