H2128A 38875690 152282
ERRATA. ITal. Song line 10. read periglioso. l. 15. r. pauroso. l. 16. r. potè Sforzò. page 2. l. 6. r. brothers and companions. p. 15. l. 15. r. at T. p. 22. l. 21. r. to her rest. p. 27. l. 10. r. oft. p. 44. l. 18. for was, r. is. p. 45. l. 9. after you put, l. 10. after Nobility put a full point. p. 56. l. 1. del. to. p. 59. l. 1, 2. r. publish'd. p. 60. l. 21. r. comforted. p. 83. l. 26. for covered, r. carved. p. 96. l. 15. r. their. p. 99. l. 9. r. Trumpets. l. 23. af∣ter. Armour. del.; p. 100. l. 14. r. bath'd. p. 112. l. 19. after fashion put, p. 118. l. 9. r. Kings. p. 124. l. 17. r. had happy. p. 128. l. 8. r. Kings. p. 130. l. 13. for Son, r. Sun. p. 135. l. 19. r. so to. p. 140. l. 6. after Orna∣ments. put, and after Votes put a full point. p. 148. l. 8. for he, r. they. p. 154. l. 9. for Sharp, r. Smart. p. 155. l. 4. del. 2d. and. p. 158. l. 1. r. and gave. p. 161. l. 3. r. in the mean. p. 171. l. 3. r. ris. p. 173. l. 22. r. and. p. 179. l. 21. r. him to. p. 180. l. 5. del.; p. 190. l. 3. af∣ter land put a full point. p. 195. l. 8. for would, r. will. p. 209. l. 22. aftér weeping del.; p. 209. l. 20. del. Ser∣vice. p. 213. l. 25. del. 1st. have p. 216. l. 17. r. you.
THE HISTORY OF OLIVAIRES of Castile, AND ARTHUR of Dalgarve. Translated out of the Spanish into the Italian Tongue, by Francesco Portonari: And from the Italian made English. By Mark Micklethwait, M. A. LICENS'D, Feb. 1. 1694/5. LONDON: Printed for A. and I. Churchill, and Fra. Hildyard Bookseller in York. MDCXCV.
A LETTER OF Francesco Portonari, Relating to the Ensuing BOOK. To the most Noble Lord S. Odoardo Gomez, my ever Honoured Lord. MANY years ago two Writers, searching into Ancient Histories, made choice of two Noble Cavaliers, and their Deeds, on that Subject, to compose a small Manual. Some time after which a Chronicler of France, for the satisfaction of a Friend (who begged of him that he would give him to read some War∣like
Exploits, and Amorous Intrigues and Adventures) translated this Sto∣ry of Olivaires of Castile, and Ar∣thur of Dalgarve, from the Ori∣ginal Latine into his own Native Language the French: And as all better Writ Books are wont, it generally took: Wherefore disper∣sing all over, it got also into Spain, and was received as a Choice and Delicate Novel. So from the French Tongue it was taught to speak the Castilian, and that most elegantly; and there ob∣tain'd withal additional Bulk, by many new, fine, and curious things inserted. And for as much as we who breathe Italian Air, have there∣with suck'd in from our Infancy a natural inclination to such sort of smooth and shining Composures of
whatever Climate; I did, for the pleasure of those who are most de∣lighted with them, undertake the Task to turn this into the Stile of Tusca∣ny: And with the light of such kind Stars I writ, that, by reason of an Ancient Original of a Third Edition which came, though with difficulty, to my hands, I had opportunity of a tho∣row view, whence such Adventures, and Exploits, and Amours, were ex∣tracted, and well enough discern'd, how those Excellent Writers had se∣parated the best and fairest of the History. From that Old Story then, from the Latine, the French, and the Spanish, I also have deduced, and compiled, and so methodiz'd this Work, that it appears to me (with∣out flattering my self, or it) to equal, if not excel all the other. Wherefore
knowing Your Lordship has oft read over the Spanish Original of Mine, I the willinger present this to Your view, which has more of the Truth, according to the Relation of the Hi∣story, and less of the Additional Lyes and Fictions that Transcribers have mix'd therewith. I shall be highly proud if Your Lordship's Incomparable Judgment can give Approbation to what I have done; and my Self, and Service, do I intirely dedicate to Your Lordship's Acceptance and Favour. From Venice, March 3. 1552. My LORD, Your Lordship's most hum∣bly devoted Servant, Francesco Portonari.
SONETTO DI BOSCAN, In Lingua Spagnola. PAssando el mar Leandro è l'ani∣moso An amoroso fuego todo ardiendo Esforço el viento y fuesse embrave∣ciendo El aqua, con un impetu furioso Vencido del trabaio presuroso Contrastar à las ondas no pudiendo Y mas del bieu que alli perdia mu∣riendo, Che de la propria vida pauroso Como pudo Esforço su boz cousada Valas oudas ablo desta manera Mas nunca fue su boz dellas oyda Ondas pues no se escusa que yo muera Dexadme allallegar y alla fornada Vuestro furor executa eu mi vida.
SONETTO DI BOSCAN, Tradotto in Lingua Toscana. PAssando il mar Leandro corrag∣gioso In amoroso fuoco tutto ardendo Fe forza al vento, & se n'ando rom∣pendo Quell'onde con uno impetu orgo∣glioso: Ma vinto dal travaglio penglioso, A l'acqua contrastar piu non po∣tendo: Et piu del ben, ch'iui perdea mo∣rendo, Che de la propria vita panroso; Come potesforzo sua voce irata: Et con l'acque parlò di tal maniera; Ne mai da lor fu sua favella udita: Acque, poi non si puo farch'io non pera, Lasciatemi arrivar, è à la tornata Vostro furor s'appaghe di mia vita.
WHen the Gallant Leander Swam the Main; Whose Waters cou'd not cool his ardent Love; He made the Winds to spend their spight in vain, And curling Waves did bravely from him shove. But when at length it him had con∣quer'd now, Who cou'd not with its fury further strife Maintain, for that he must his bliss forgo; He much more grieved than for loss of Life.
Then the despairing Lover silence brake, And to the Billows thus did parly make; Nor was e're after by them heard to speak. You Waters since I see I perish must, Only give leave t' Embrace my Mistress First, And at return against me do your worst.
THE HISTORY OF THE Noble CAVALIERS, &c. CHAP. I. The Birth of Olivaires, and of the Death of his Mother. ACcording as my Abilities will permit, and as an Inclinati∣on natural unto me for high and noble Deeds of Great and Valorous Knights, whom Fame deservedly transmits to far Posterity, shall give us Assistance, my purpose is to make a Relation of uncommon and marvellous Exploits; to the end that by hearing such honourable Feats
done of others, brave Souls may the eagerlier be incited to an impetuous thirst after the acquist of Glory; and still the more so, when particularly they take for their Mirrour and Pat∣tern the Two Valiant Brothers, for Arms so famous; from whom our present Story has its origin, and by the favour of him, upon whom all Conduct depends, shall have its suc∣cessful period. I am informed by History, That after the Valiant Emperour Charle∣main, King of France, returned from Spain into his own Kingdom, within a short while Heaven put an end to his days; at which time a Prince rul'd in Castile, who for his excellent Virtues, and winning Behaviour, both of his Nobles and Commonalty was much Beloved and Rever'd. He Married the King of Galitia's Daughter, a Virtuous and Beautiful Lady. But having no Issue by her, this made her very Melancholy; and the whole
Kingdom was much Discontented, seeing one Realm remain destitute of an Heir, and other deprived of their Lawful Sovereign; which must needs in time produce many Troubles, Dis∣orders, and Wars. The Queen there∣fore hearing oft of these things, and by some words which fell from the King, perceiving that he was much dissatisfi'd, made her Application by Prayer unto God, who never fails those who rightly put confidence in him: And beginning with Alms, En∣dowing of Orphan Maids, Redempti∣on of Slaves, and other good Christian offices; she implor'd Mercy and Favour of our Lord, and his Virgin Mother in∣treating them to grant her a Son, for the preservation of the Kingdom. And for that her request was equitable, and her Prayers issued from a sincere heart, it pleased God in pity to hear their Cry; and she conceived and brought forth a most beautiful Boy; which caused great Exultation, Tri∣umph, and Festivity throughout the
whole Kingdom. But she had not lived four days, when 'twas the Will of the Almighty that she should ren∣der up her devout Soul unto him that gave it; which caused a Lamentation as general, as had been the Joy. But the King was the principal Mourner; who bore an extream affection to her, knowing so well her Beauty, Pru∣dence, Chastity, Compassionateness unto men, Piety towards God, and how in all things to his will and plea∣sure she was conform and agreeable. CHAP. II. Of the Baptism of Olivaires, and the Obsequies of the Queen his Mother; and some procedures toward the King's Marrying again for the Kingdoms Welfare. AFter all things were prepared for the Funeral, they carried the deceased Queen to her Burial; and it
was ordered that her Child should at the same time be brought to his Bap∣tism; so both were in the Church to∣gether. The Queen was lamented with floods of Tears, and the young Infant was Baptized with fitting So∣lemnities, and to him they gave the Name of Olivaires. As soon as the Funeral and Baptism were over, the King returned to his Palace, and every one to their own homes. This so sudden Death caused the King ex∣tremely to lament; and so infinite was his sorrow, that his Life begun to be much despaired of. Wherefore his Nobles used all endeavours to di∣vert his Melancholy by whatever they conceived might be most likely to give him any pleasing Entertainment: And for this end, among others, they brought unto him his little Son Olivai∣res; whom taking and Embracing in his Arms, with heavy Sighs he mixed these Words, bearing a kind of delight even in their dolorousness; O my lit∣tle
Son! all my remaining Comfort, and the Crown of my Kingdom; thy Birth hath raised me to Heaven, and sunk me to Hell; for by giving me an Heir, it has lifted me up on high; but by robbing me of my Queen, it has cast me down as low again. And addressing himself unto God, he beg∣ged of him that he would assume into Heaven the Mother's happy Soul: And on the little Babe (looking in his Face, said he) may it please him to bestow such Grace, that thou mayest live in constant Obedience to all his Holy Commandments. After this manner the Afflicted King spent his time day by day, and would receive no Consolation. Therefore the chief Lords of his Court seeing his Griefs rather increase than abate, met toge∣ther in private to consult which might be the best means to bring their Sove∣reign out of his heavy Melancholy; for that if he persisted in this conditi∣on, he must of necessity very shortly put an end to his days, which would
prove a grand publick detriment; and therefore they concluded on what would be every way better than that he should do so, viz. the Matching him with Queen Dalgarve, Dowager; agreeable enough for years, Fair and of good and gentle Disposition; where∣fore if he were so inclin'd, it might turn to good effect: So they were de∣termined to make the Proposal to him. Coming then into his presence, and having first paid those respects due to Sovereignty, they communicated un∣to him the issue of their Consultation, shewing him what good would follow, and how much to their own, and the general satisfaction and advantage his Marrying would be; and particular∣ly displayed before him the excellent Qualities, and rare Virtues of Queen Dalgarve; so that this Match (as was said before) would be fortunate and happy for himself, content to them, and cause the publick rejoy∣cing of the whole Kingdom. The King giving ear to them, and re∣maining
a little in suspence, and considering withal the reasonable∣ness of the thing, and that it was his Subjects Affection to him that urged them so to speak, re∣turns them answer after this man∣ner. My own Temper and Inclinati∣on for certain is not to marry any more, nor ever to know Woman again. Notwithstanding, I shall de∣clare unto you, that since in what you move, you seek the publick welfare, and yours, and mine, and do so ten∣derly and affectionately request this of me, I am willing to forsake the Path I had with resolution made choice of, and follow the duct of your Desires and Counsels, and yield unto you to pitch upon what will be for the best, and may tend to your happiness, the Kingdom's, and my own. When the Lords saw such generosity in their Prince, and had received so gracious an Answer from him, they were much pleased, and gave him infinite Thanks for such Goodness. And now Ho∣nourable
Ambassadors were quickly dispatch'd away to make their Com∣plements, to Queen Dalgarve, who upon their Arrival were entertain'd with great kindness and respect, al∣though the Occasion of their Embassy was not at all known. The next day they made their Ascent into her Pa∣lace, where they delivered unto her the Mind and Inclinations of their King: And their Discourse did not offend her Majesty's Ear, and so by her Courtiers were honourably accom∣panied to their Apartments. CHAP. III. The Treaty about the Marriage of Queen Dalgarve to the King of Castile. THE Day following, about Three, the Queen sent to convene all the Grandees, Sages, and most Noble Barons of her Kingdom, with whom she discoursed and de∣clar'd
the King of Castile's mind. And as for her Answer, and the whole Af∣fair, she referr'd it to them, yielding up her self intirely to what they should advise, and to their disposal: That whether they thought it fit she should marry or no, she would wholly be at their devoire, and most willingly comply with their Resolutions. The matter being discuss'd, they deter∣min'd (to speak in short) that she should not reject the motion; telling her, That she could not match into a nobler or better State, and that her Son Arthur was too young for Go∣vernment. Thus they counsell'd her to accept of the King of Castile for her Husband. To which she repli'd; I told you before, and now repeat it, That your pleasure shall be mine. And therefore to you I leave it to form an Answer to the Ambassadors, in what manner you shall best approve of. After then they had returned the Queen thanks, Six Barons were ap∣pointed to go and inform the King's
Ambassadors their Pleasure, and that it was also their Queen's, who had Authoriz'd them so to say; and these also told them, That they questioned not, but from such an Auspicious Conjunction, happy Effects, and uni∣versal good Influences and Advantages would proceed: So the Affinity was lest to the Liberty of the King of Ca∣stile; for his Proposal she was not al∣together averse from. Go then, and tell your Master to order the Marriage as shall please him; and in this Point we only request one Favour of him, That he would please to come himself for her (since all the Coasts are clear and safe) for this will look more de∣cent, and come also with as little Re∣tinue and Pomp, as an Affair of that kind and quality may possibly allow.
CHAP. IV. The Espousals of the King of Castile, and Queen Dalgarve, and how he conducted her into his Kingdom, with her little Son Arthur. THE Ambassadors having dis∣patch'd their Business, and re∣ceived noble Presents from the Queen and Court, returned back to their own Country, where the King with great impatience was expecting them, and Answer: Who having heard it, and how she was inclin'd, prepared for his Journey; and gave his Courtiers a Month's space for fitting themselves to attend him: And when that was ex∣pired, he, with his Court, departed, and in a little time finished their Jour∣ney; and upon their arrival were re∣ceived with great civility and respect, and then they ordered all things for the Marriage, which with great di∣spatch was nobly consummated. So
they passed many days in feasting, and then prepared for a departure. The King could never have his Eye off Arthur, who bore so extream resem∣blance to his Son Olivaires, that many were mistaken in thinking him the same. After the Feasting was over, the King appointed his Deputy, to whom he committed the care of the Kingdom; and within few days re∣turned with the Queen to his own Do∣minions, with her little Son Arthur, who was equally loved and caressed as Olivaires. Now when they were ar∣rived at the Kingdom, and come to the City of their Residence, the Feast∣ings were renewed with all expressions of Joy and Merriment; and the two young Sons immediately contracted extream affection and kindness one for the other, and were never asunder; who were so perfectly alike, that not any difference could be perceived, as we shall find in the sequel.
CHAP. V. Olivaires and Arthur were taught the Art of, and exercised in Arms, by a Valiant Cavalier, and had noble Dis∣cipline and Education. WHEN Olivaires and Arthur were come to years (which they arrived at sooner than ordinary) that fitted them to bear Arms, they were by the King committed to the Education and management of a No∣ble and Valorous Knight, who instruct∣ed them in Virtue, and exercised them in Arms: So that as they advanced in stature, their love likewise to each other increased, and, as much as was possible, every way grew greater; insomuch, that, besides the tye of Alliance, they enter'd into an Obligation, That no∣thing but Death (if even that had a power to do it) should separate their Affection and Friendship: The sight of which mutual kindness betwixt
them caused wonderful satisfaction and joy in the Breasts of the King and Queen, and of the whole Court, especially as they beheld them dili∣gent in accomplishing themselves in every laudable Acquirement. Nor did any shine with any sort of Vertues and Excellencies, whose lustre they did not transmit on themselves by imita∣tion, if not improve to a greater splen∣dor, by exceeding and out-acting those whom first they made their Examples: Whether these were intellectual or moral Indowments; or Feats of acti∣vity of Body, as the playing of Tennis, Dancing, Justing, Throwing the Bar, Wrestling, and such like Exercises; in which they never came behind any, but often outstript others. The King and Queen having observed, and be∣ing well assured of their Valour and Stoutheartedness, as well as Skill at Arms, had a mind to appoint a publick Turnament, and try them thereat, though but Youths: Where∣fore they proclaimed a Feast, unto
which, at the day assigned, repaired many Knights and Barons from divers places, all of honourable Repute, and famous for Chivalry; many Scaffolds and Balconies were made about the Piazza, and Seats for the Judges well scituated for fair view, that they might justly bestow the Prize: In Eminent Stations were also made Tri∣umphal Seats for the King and Queen: And now the appointed day being come, they took their Places, as also the Ladies and Nobility, to behold so brave and valorous Combat: Then the Trumpets begun to sound; at which appeared forth three Knights Errant, with their Targets of Scar∣let, Sable, and Purple Colour; and having enter'd the Lists, they stood in expectation of any would come to oppose them: And combating coura∣giously, they broke many Lances to their great honour, until Olivaires and Arthur shewed themselves in the Field: And now one of the Knights Errant had with a brisk push thrown
out of the Saddle, and cast to the ground a Courtier, a very Valourous Knight, and stood ready in expecta∣tion of a New Combatant. The Va∣liant Young Olivaires seeing this, takes a Massy Lance, and turns his Horse opposite to the stout Cavalier, who accepting the Challenge, runs full against Olivaires, and broke his Lance; but so great was the blow that he re∣ceived from the Valiant Youth Oli∣vaires, that it brought both himself and's Horse to the ground: And when he had got another Lance, the second Knight Errant comes against him in revenge of bis foil'd Companion; but with the touch of Olivaires Lance, the Knight tumbles back out of his Saddle, and in a woful condition lies stretched on the ground; and he tra∣verst about from place to place with such air and Gallantry, that he seem∣ed to be every-where in an instant. The like proof of his Valour made Arthur also. So that it was judged that these two Companions carried
away the Honour of that day. Go∣ing off then to rest themselves till the next, they returned to the Feast; and likewise on the following day, as on the first, they were much admired, and the Third bore the whole Ap∣plause away: And the Judges con∣ferring together, gave judgment of their Valour; the two Brothers, above all the rest, were extoll'd; yet to Oli∣vaires, as the Principal Victor, the Prize was adjudged; then with ma∣ny forts of Musical Instruments they marched to the Palace, and there Oli∣vaires spent some time in talk with the King and Queen, who also made him a Present; which much surprized the Valiant Knight, who seemed to himself not to have done any thing.
CHAP. VI. The Queen is enamoured of her Son-in-Law Olivaires. SO nobly those three days of the Tilting did Olivaires behave him∣self, that he got the favour and love of all; but chiefly of the Queen, who was wonderfully inamour'd of his Heroical Courage, and charmed with his Come∣ly and Noble Aspect; which made her sit much revolving in her thoughts the Feats and Bravery of this Extraordina∣ry Knight, and say within her self; O! under happy Stars was that Lady born, whose Beauty shall have the power to make Olivaires her glorious Captive; and, as she must be some divine Creature, so shall her Tran∣sports be more than humane; but sure I think that no Lady can look on this wonderful Youth, either with the Eye of Vertue, or the Sensitive one, but must immediately become and re∣main
his Prisoner; insomuch, that from day to day no other than such kind of thoughts entertained the Queen; which produced in her heart a most violent and ardent Passion for him, that miserably afflicted her, and put her by both her necessary Food and rest: And now was the Day dedi∣cated to St. John, come, which was celebrated with feasting both in the Court and City; on which the Queen gave order that various sorts of Musick should be brought into the great Hall of her Palace, and invited the Ladies and Court Gallants to a splendid Ball, who met together in all their fine Vestments, New Modes, and rich Dress, both to delight the Queen, and to shew their Affection to the Airy and Complaisant Laidies: But amongst them all the most Comely Olivaires, and the much to be admi∣red Arthur, did so excel in boon Grace, fine Dress, all manner of behaviour and deportment, and every thing, that the rest neglected, the Ladies
unanimously had their Eyes ever upon these. But the Queen's Heart above all was ravished with the Beauty of one of them, having for many days con∣tinuance nourished in her Breast a vio∣lent passion for Olivaires; so that in∣cessantly fixing her Eyes on him, her Spirits to an excess became agitated and inflam'd; which presently caused a change in her Countenance, and a swimming in her Head, so that from her Royal Seat she fell down as dead on the ground; which as the Ladies beheld (though not suspecting the oc∣casion) they hastily run to her, and snatching her up in their Arms, car∣ried her into her Chamber: And now the Dancing and Merriment were at an end, and all the care was to bring the Queen out of her Swoon; who being at length recovered from it, dismist all that stood about her, and desired them to retire, and leave her alone, the better to take some re∣pose; wherefore they every one went
to their own Apartments. Now after a little while, her Sons, Arthur and Olivaires, came to give her a Visit, and they were gladly received, by her shewing more kindness and affection to them than ever she had done before; embracing first one, and then the other, many times: And among her Caresses these words forced themselves out (spoken with much passionate∣ness) toward Olivaires; You know you are looked upon with admiration above all men: Which words made the Valiant Youth Olivaires much to marvail what they meant; but for that he could not suddenly conceive whether they were to be interpreted into a good or dishonest sense, he shewed no concern, nor gave any An∣swer; and taking their leave, they left the Queen to rest with her La∣dies.
CHAP. VII. The Queen discovers her love to Oli∣vaires, and shews her Pain; and Olivaires returns her honourable An∣swer. MAny days passed in which Oli∣vaires held not any Conference with the Queen, but directed by his good Genius, cautiously declin'd all; and spent his time with Arthur in the Exercises of Arms, and at Justing, and Turnament, and other valorous Feats and Enterprizes; at which the Queen contrived to be always a pre∣sent Spectatress; which did not give any satisfaction to Olivaires mind: The King enjoy'd full content to have two such brave Cavaliers his Sons, and used to say he was the happiest Prince in the World; nor, for their sake, did stand in fear of any Enemy; and for so great a Blessing was conti∣nually praising and adoring his, and
the Universe's Soveraign: But For∣tune, the Parent of Misery, and Ene∣my to Humane Content, quickly turn∣ed these Sweets into bitter: For the Queen being bewitched, and hurried by her Amorous Fancy, could take no rest; and the unhappy Creature, whose In∣considerateness made her so, spent her time alone in her Chamber, sobbing, and uttering words of piteous com∣plaint, and thus talking low to her∣self. Olivaires, the perfection of Crea∣ted Nature! O my Star, O my Sun! O! whom I hoor'd up in my passionate Thoughts as my chiefest Treasure! For whom, perhaps, I am forced to do that which never Queen did before, being compelled by thy Beauty to cast off my Affections for the King, on whom in duty and reason they ought to be fixed, and place them on Thee, which is dishonest and unjust! O un∣happy Queen! (said she then confound∣ed with shame) who thus renderst thy self worthy of an Eternal Punishment.  were the Expostulations and Ar∣guings
with her self of this Miserable Lady, when at any time she found her self alone, and so her Love-fits came more violent upon her. One day Arthur and Olivaires went to give her a Visit, which she received ex∣tream kindly at them; and after a little while she took Olivaires's Hand, much caressing it; which notwith∣standing he looked on as no more than Expressions of a Maternal Affection: And entering into various Discourses, yet all relating to the disorder of her Love-sick Mind, her trembling Voice so falter'd, that she could scarce bring out her words; however, with some difficulty said, (sitting near to him;) Olivaires, was never Lady so happy as to triumph for having made a con∣quest over your Heart? Was you ne∣ver inamour'd of any of the fair Sex, as you are pleas'd to complement us? Did you never, Olivaires, think Lady worthy of more than your ordinary Affection? I do assure you, Illustri∣ous Queen, I am no Captive of Cupid's
(replied Olivaires) and your Maje∣sty's self can witness for me, that I never hitherto have been observed to cast on Lady any Wanton Glances, or Amorous Eye: And I do assure your Majesty, that I do not intend to ingage in that Passion, till I have performed some Signal and Noble Actions, which then may incourage me to attempt al∣so a conquest over some fair Ladies soft, though, perhaps, at the same time, obdurate Breast: And because I am conscious to my self of having done no Feats of that merit as yet; I fancy your Majesty is pleased to incite and spur me on (by thus questioning) to some difficult and honourable Ex∣ploits: And truly 'tis my Design, if so it shall please the Almighty, to give such proof of my Prowess and Valour, that both your Majesties will be infi∣nitely satisfy'd and content with my Performances: These last words were like so many blazing Firebrands to in∣flame the Queen's heart, who laying hold on him, knowing otherwise he
was upon departure, set her self to utter these words, which put her into great confusion, as they came from her. But, tell me, if some Lady of high desert should chance to bestow her love upon you, as one who well knew your Valour worthy to be re∣warded with so rich a Prize, should voluntarily, having regard to your youthful Modesty, and that out of a most generous and deserving Mind, offer her self a fair Present unto you, could you then be so modest and time∣rous to refuse a compliance with the lovely Suitress? For certain, Illustri∣ous Queen, my Virtues, Accomplish∣ments and Graces, are not so potent to fetter Ladies after the rate you speak of: But grant they were, and the bountiful Creator had conferr'd upon me such, I truly should look upon that Lady as very indiscreet, and to act much out of want of wit, who should throw her self upon any Man, unsolicited, or, at least, without having some Assurances of mutual Affe∣ction
from her beloved One: And such a passion I should reject, nor could ever entertain an hearty value for such a coming kind Creature. Thus he took leave of the Queen, as cautious against any bad thing; who (though not shewing it by her looks) remained discontented, and not less afflicted than inrag'd, both for Oli∣vaires's departure, and his cruel An∣swer, which in the least was not plea∣sing to her. CHAP. VIII. Olivaires begs of God to erace such a thought out of the Queen's heart; himself contriving a way to expel so vain a desire out of the breast of so great a Majesty. OLIVAIRES desiring to take honourable leave of his Mother-in-law, the Queen, made signs to Ar∣thur, and said, it was time now to ac∣company
the Knights to the Field for the Turnament. Whereupon she in parting with his hands, squeez'd his fingers close; a certain secret token of Love: Which thing much afflicted the Valiant Olivaires; yet he kept it to himself, nor would suffer any change of Countenance to appear to Arthur, not to give him any occasion of wondering what might cause it. The Queen being left alone in her Chamber, returned to her former complaints, saying, O! Olivaires, the very center of my Soul, unto which all its motions tend, and where∣on they all lean, yet cannot rest. I very well know that you are Master of much more Wit than is needful easily to make you discern what an Affection I have contracted for you; resolving with her self, the day following, to make, without reserve, an open de∣claration of it to him. He, on the other side, kept the thing deep in his mind, and contrived some way to can∣cel this vain hope out of the Lady's
heart, propounding certain death to himself, rather than the least compli∣ance of thought for so damnable a Wickedness: And turning his corpo∣real Eyes up to Heaven, and those of his mind to the Divine Author and Creator of it, he said; Thou Sove∣raign Lord, who hast formed me after thy own similitude, and bestowed those Graces and Favours upon me which I never was in a capacity to de∣serve; I beseech thee of thy Com∣passion, great Father, and Source of all, that thou wouldest deliver me from such spiritual destruction, and preserve, my Soveraign and Father, from so great dishonour, by eracing out of the mind of this Illustrious La∣dy these unrighteous Thoughts; and I shall ascribe nothing to my own Vir∣tue, but freely and intirely all to thy Infinite Mercy and Goodness.
CHAP. IX. Olivaires is courted by the Queen; and his Answer. OLivaires coming to the Palace the next Morning, that he might occasion no suspicion, according to his wonted custom, paid his humble Re∣spects to the Queen, waiting the op∣portunity when many Ladies were in company together with her: But she laying aside both Fear and Honour, made towards Olivaires, and taking him by the hand, conducted him into her Chamber: And Olivaires, know∣ing this would tend more to his Fa∣ther's advantage, suffered himself to be drawn aside; wherefore, they be∣ing alone, and sitting together, the Queen, after divers times having look∣ed earnestly on him, said thus. Do you call to mind, Sir, our late Dis∣course? Truly, Madam, replied Oli∣vaires, I remember nothing at all of
it, and am utterly ignorant of your meaning. Indeed you have, I must confess, a very short memory, if so soon you can forget a Conference and Affair of so concerning import. Cer∣tainly you dissemble to pretend igno∣rance of my torment; and your Eye may perceive it better than my words can express it to your Ear. It much troubles me, Madam, that I can no better understand your Majesty. Dear, Sir, (said the Lady) know then, that I have a desire to make my self yours, and do give my heart unto you; and although before this hour you was Lord over me, and might have used your Slave as you had pleas'd; yet partly out of fear, and partly shame, I durst not declare so much to you: And if now (being compell'd to reveal it by those Ardors of love that intolle∣rably inflame my heart and fancy) Fortune will be my Adversary, and also your self, in thinking me unwor∣thy of your Affections, I will un∣doubtedly with these hands procure
my own death. Wherefore, dear Sir, for me to dye, or to live, are either of them in your power. When these dishonest and harsh words grated on Olivaires Ear, they summon'd, and made stand an ocean of tears in his Eyes, which yet quickly were dried up by the heat of the blushes his mo∣desty forced into his Face. Where∣fore, without shew of being troubled (hoping to draw her from so vile a thought) he said; Madam, your Majesty says that you love me, and desire return of affection from me again. By my Loyalty, I love none better than my Soveraign Lord the King, and do desire to serve your Ma∣jesty as a Mother, and to obey you in all things you shall command me, as far as my duty shall require; and eve∣ry time that I do not execute the Com∣mands of my King as a Father's, and your Majesty's as a Mother's, I shall with hatred look upon my self as one most unworthy to have been born in∣to the World.
CHAP. X. The Queen's Parley with Olivaires, and how she discharges him her presence. THen, all in a rage, and full of immoderate grief, the Queen turns to Olivaires! uttering these pas∣sionate words. O Olivaires, a Curse light on your Beauty, if 'tis it has made you so proud, and so inhumane a Creature: 'Tis high ingratitude this in you to despise the offer'd Affe∣ction of a Crowned Lady: Would you then that should perish by your Cruelty so mighty a Queen? Ah! see to whom I have trusted my great∣est Secret, my Heart, and my Life! Shall I therefore of a Friend now be∣come your Foe? In lieu of the Life which I give you, will you procure my death? It shall never be that he who seeks me mischief, shall go unre∣quited: and one discourtesie shall not fail to find return of another. God
pardon thee the Evils which may fol∣low upon thy Injustice; get thee hence out of my sight, and never ap∣pear in my presence more. For I shall not long be able to conceal my grief, so infinitely am I afflicted. Olivaires all amazed, rose up, and withdrew, taking leave after his wonted respect∣ful and humble manner. She remain∣ing alone, and going into her Closet, begun so strange a complaint and be∣wailing, as is impossible for Tongue to utter, or Pen in any measure to describe. She thought the Torments of the damned were but Flea-bitings to what she felt, and 10000 real Hells but painted Fire to her imaginary One. Olivaires then went to his Fa∣ther; and a little after with his Bro∣ther Arthur to his own Lodgings. Arthur perceiv'd his Brother had some trouble upon him, and therefore de∣manded the occasion: But he having no mind to declare it, told him, to conceal his grievance, that he found himself not very well; for which Ar∣thur
was much afflicted, and stay'd with him till Evening, about the time they were wont to go to the Pa∣lace. Wherefore Olivaires said to him; My dear Sir, and Brother, I desire you would be pleased to go to Court, and, if you love me, shew∣ing your self very chearful, that the King and Queen may have no occasion to enquire after my welfare: But, if they shall ask of me, tell them, that to morrow I will come to the Palace; for I would very gladly have them not to know any thing of my disorder. Arthur perceived that Olivaires had a mind to be alone, and so left him after he had said, Dear Brother, I have no mind at all to part from you: But, since 'tis your request, I am content; and I shall discharge that which you have enjoin'd me. I desire you to keep in a good mind, and act nothing to your prejudice: And embracing him, he kiss'd him, giving him to un∣derstand his return would be slow, and that he should not disturb him for that
night; which words pierced Olivaires to the very heart, by reason of his resolv'd-on secret Design, which he was determin'd to put into act. So he left him with tears in his eyes, and broken words, which he had not power to utter perfectly; which Ar∣thur mightily marvail'd at, knowing it must needs be some extraordinary chance, dolor, or cause, that could produce such heavy and dismal effects. But, to trouble him no further, he seemed to take no notice, and depart∣ed: But much otherwise had the sor∣rows and parting of them both been, had Arthur known what was to fol∣low: But Olivaires at his going away was now the more pensive.
CHAP. XI. Olivaires remaining alone in his Cham∣ber, writes a Letter to his Brother Arthur, and leaves it with a Vial of Water, and prepares for departing the Kingdom. WHEN Olivaires saw himself alone, he began to think of the sad mishap had befall'n him; and, considering he could not follow his Friend, he cursed his unfortunate Stars; and grieved that the Queen had conceiv'd such inormity in her mind; so of the two Evils, he elected that which, as appear'd to him, had the less danger in it. He saw for cer∣tain that the King would be extreamly troubled at his departure; but greater grief would it be to him, should he chance to have intelligence of the lewd importunity of his Consort: Nor ever went out of his thoughts what power an evil Woman might have
(tho he were guiltless) to bring him in as liable to the heaviest punishment; and he chose to pursue the paths of Vertue, and shun those of Vice: Therefore calling to his Page, he ask'd for Ink and Paper to write, which were brought him; then or∣dering every one away, and that none should come at him till he call'd, he bolted his Chamber door; and throw∣ing himself on the Bed, being over∣whelmed with grief, he lamented his ill fortune, sorrowing to leave his Country, Friends, Father, Arthur, and many other whose lov'd Idea's presented themselves to his mind; yet at last corroborates himself with saying, Tho fortune will not in this Realm, perhaps in another she may smile on me; and so resolves for flight, and to wean himself as much as possible of's molesting Affections for all; and taking Pen in hand, he puts himself in a posture to write a Letter to his Brother Arthur in these or the like words. Fortune, the Pro∣secutress
of those that excel, enemy to friendship, by her continual revo∣lution of miseries, is ever venting her malicious spight against those she ought not; and those she takes a fan∣cy for, without any respected merit, she often delights to set on the highest pinacle of her State; so that one day we are exalted, the next brought low; lately we swom in wealth, and now are reduced to necessity. Hence when Historians record and describe our Virtues, they praise our Deeds as no∣ble, and disparage them as base, ac∣cording as they think good. If then the great Lady Governess of these Accidents, and History infringe the worth of such grand Accomplish∣ments, what wonder is it, dearest Brother, if she thwart my Will, the which being disturbed by various Ca∣sualties, causes my departure. And let it not displease you that I did not make you a partaker of my grief, nor gave the least intimation to you of my going away. For considering the
great mutual love betwixt us, I knew for certain you would either have ac∣companied, or detained me; which should not have been, for I am too much afflicted by ill fortune. I can∣not communicate unto you an account of my Disaster, for I have oft endea∣vour'd to tell my case, but cannot get out my words, so imprisoned and fet∣ter'd are they in my Breast: And for this cause, and that I would not give you so great trouble, I say, for that I am hinder'd, I keep the secret to my self; nor am I obliged to reveal it. Now whilst I write, reflecting on the sorrow I shall occasion among you, my heart does tear in pieces; where∣fore I beseech you to pay my infinite respects to the King and Queen, and of both in my name beg pardon for my afflicting departure. I leave you, dear Sir, and Brother, a Vial of Wa∣ter which is of rare virtue, on which by our near relationship let me oblige you to cast your eye once every day; and this you will gain to know, That
whenever the water is troubled, I am in some great extremity, and have ex∣traordinary need of your assistance, and that will be in case of danger of life, or some evil equivalent: To what place I shall go, Province, or City, to make my abode, I cannot at all inform you, having wholly re∣sign'd my self up to the conduct of Destiny. I give to you all the Ser∣vices I can possibly pay you, and put up my Prayers unto God, the Infinite Potentate, that he would please to make you prosperous in all things, and elevate your mind to all virtuous and noble Enterprizes, and continu∣ally raise you more and more, nor ever suffer you to sink from your high Station.
CHAP. XII. Olivaires arriving at a Port-Town, takes Ship, and associates with a Ca∣valier. WHEN Olivaires had writ the Letter, he laid it so as Arthur might not fail of finding it, and also the Vial; and took a large Sum of Gold, and Jewels of great value, and lock'd them up in his Mail, which he placed behind him on the best Horse in his Stable; and having mounted, he left the City with deep sighing, and grievous lamentation; and ha∣ving gone some little distance, he turns his Horse, and faces the City, saying. O Lord of Truth, who hast formed the Heaven and the Earth, and of thy goodness hast fashioned me after thy own image and likeness, I beseech thee by that most sacred Passion, whereby thou didst redeem our Hu∣mane kind, suffering a most bitter
death for it, that thou would'st be plea∣sed of thy Divine Pity to comfort my afflicted Sovereign and Father, who without any his rigour, and also knowledge of my departure, loses the Heir of his Illustrious Kingdom; and of thy favour consolate Arthur, who hath lost the dearest and most faithful Friend he had in the world by my be∣ing forced to wander up and down in it; and support the hearts of the whole Court, that they may be able to sustain the being deprived of such a Friend. All his Acquaintance of the Court seem'd to be present at these words, who in dolorous accents made the like complaint. O brave Cava∣liers, whose dear delight was the no∣ble Art of War; see you have lost Olivaires the Invincible Prince of the same; hang up your Armour now to rust; leave off the breaking of Lances, where the Valiant are exercised at Tilting; where the Trumpets and Clarions sounded loud to inspire Cou∣rage for Victory. O you who walk
the paths of amorous Fancy, who shall be your Pattern now for comely Ha∣bit, good Dress, and new-invented Modes to make you more acceptable to the fair Ones? The Ravishing Se∣renades that were heard before the blushing Aurora was seen, will now be neglected, since Harmony it self has expir'd to us and you. Virgins of Nobility, To day you have lost the Gallantry of the Court, and the fair Mirror, wherein you beheld your own sweet resemblance. In a word, All that is good, all that is desirable and lovely, is vanished: The Balls are now at an end; delicate Airs and charming Songs are silenc'd; and all the Instruments of Musick are out of tune, upon the departure of Olivaires. Lo! he has turn'd his Palfrey into a rougher Path. Whilst the Noble Knight prayed with much ardency, his Eyes became a Fountain of flowing Tears. So riding on for some days, he arrived at length at a Sea-port Town, where he found a Ship bound
for Constantinople; and in it was a great Lord of Africa, who had hired her for himself, and for whom her Sails were now hoised. Olivaires de∣siring the Master to go on Board, was denied; but a Knight belonging to this Lord, observing the temper of Olivaires, begged of him, and so he was admitted; and together they went up into the Ship; and his Horse also was taken in. Upon this account Olivaires and the Knight contracted an intimate friendship; and for the comeliness of his Person, his Mien, and virtuous Modesty, he was re∣spectfully look'd upon, and honoura∣bly entertain'd by all. But let us leave the Ship to the disposal and con∣duct of the Winds, of Fortune, and of Fate; and turn our discourse to Ar∣thur, left alone, afflicted, and grie∣ving, when he did not find his dearly beloved Brother, and then re-visit the wavy Ocean, and her perilous Rocks.
CHAP. XIII. How Arthur Dalgarve enter'd his Cham∣ber, and read the Letter. THE next morning Arthur came to Olivaires's Chamber, and finding his Page waiting at the Door, he ask'd him why he went not in; to whom the other answer'd, because Olivaires had ordered him so. But Arthur seeing the Sun was pretty high advanc'd, bid his Page open; and he entering in, quickly shut the Door to upon him, and run to the Bed to find his dear Brother; but missing him, he was much amazed. And looking up and down the Chamber, he found the Letter and the Vial; and taking it up, and reading, he was immediately so fill'd with sorrow, that he was forc'd to cast himself upon the Bed, exhaling and spending more spirits out of his Body, than were left behind; and
he that had heard the mourning of Arthur, would have thought he was just a-going to die of Grief; and truly he would rather have chosen to have done so, than have lost the company of Olivaires. O my dear Olivaires, cry'd he; O my true Friend! I could never have forsaken your Company, as you have mine. Surely some great occa∣sion has brought thee to this; yet my faithful observance of you, with our strict friendship, might have embolden'd you to trust me with your whole Case; that I partici∣pating of your Affliction, might have taken a share of it upon my self; but you was too kind to give me so much trouble. O Father, O Sovereign, what a sad misfortune has fall'n upon thee! How will thy poor heart sustain so vast a dolor? How wilt thou be able to live one hour longer, when thou shalt know all the words Olivaires has written? And saying thus, Arthur proceeded to read the Letter; which did so
mightily increase his sorrow, that his Spirits failing, and his Colour vanishing, he fell as dead upon Oli∣vaires Bed, and long time remain∣ed as dead.
CHAP. XIV. The King goes into Olivaires's Chamber to look for him, and finds Arthur in a Swoon. THE Gentlemen that stood ex∣pecting at the Door, seeing none come forth, nor knowing what was become of Arthur or Olivaires, sent to let the King understand as much, who quickly came, and knock∣ing and calling, could get no Answer; whereupon he hastily order'd the door to be broke open, and entring, he found Arthur for dead upon the Bed; but his Olivaires no where; and calling to Arthur, and having no answer, he laid his hands on him, and turning him over, he saw plainly 'twas a Swoon; and bid bring cold Water, and strong Scents, and so restor'd him to himself: Then Arthur suddenly finding his Spi∣rits to recover, gave a great sigh, say∣ing, Ah! Death, why dost thou suf∣fer
me to live? Why dost thou not fi∣nish thy Office on me, according as I long for it? Why dost thou raise me into Life, who through excess of Grief can but a little while continue in it? And having the Letter in his hand, with a heavy groan he delivered it to the King, who took it, and began to read; but no sooner looked he on the first line, than paternal Affection rai∣sed his Blood into mighty agitation and disorder, and again, fear quickly made him turn pale; so that between the one Passion and the other, he was seiz'd on by extremity of Sorrow, and renting his Garment, and tearing off the Hair from his Head and Beard, he appear'd as one Distracted; now smiting his Breasts, now his Face, and nowcrying out aloud, he begins to vent himself in some words directed to the great Lords of his Court, who stood astonished at so horrible and unexpect∣ed an Accident; Help me to Lament, you invincible Cavaliers; let your hearts bear a share in my Affliction,
for my Dolour redounds to the whole Realm: Lo! my so much Beloved Olivaires is lost, he is gone, and a sad and hard Fate hath sent him away in∣to Foreign Realms, to deprive me both of my State and Life. His Lord's moved by their Sovereign's Misery, and afflicted for so fresh and unvalued a loss, felt within their own breasts so poignant a Dolour, that the stoutest heart among them was overcome and sail'd; so that instead of Consolating their Sovereign, their Sorrow made them also imitate his frantick Actions, in beating their Breasts, making terri∣ble Lamentations, and tearing their Hair; and even distracted through Love and Grief; with their Cries they pierced the Heavens: Oh! the Crown of my Kingdom, said the King, in what sadness hast thou left me! was not enough the first stab of thy Nativi∣ty, which Launced my heart with thy Mother's Death? Surely that was enough without the addition of this, which has transfixed my very
Soul: Where shall my old Age find repose, which beholding thy Virtue, was delighted and happy? My King∣dom subject unto thee, which was so well satisfied, so much affected thee, whither will it be reduc'd? Under what hope hath it now to live? One Arm of thy Virtue did lovingly em∣brace it, the other, with the Sword of thy daring Valour, defended it. But the hopes are become frustrate, the imaginations vain, and designs de∣feated, bottom'd on thy admirable Soul. Oh! my Olivaires! How art thou lost? Where wanderest thou, O my Son! Where art thou, O the hope and end of all my thinking! The Merciful Almighty grant by thy re∣turn to this so much-afflicted State, Consolation; and by thy appearing again, clear up that darkness has overspread and put this honourable Court into deep Mourning: But if in destiny it be not that thou must re∣turn, that it would please him to ga∣ther up thy Spirit in Peace, and at the
same time set me at Liberty from the Prison of this wretched and dolorous Life. CHAP. XV. Through all parts of the world Courters are dispatched in search of the King's Son; and of the Queen's Lamenta∣tion. THE King as distracted aban∣doning the whole Court, at∣tended of but by a few, so afflicted was he and distressed, runs to find out the Queen, and crying out and beat∣ing his Bosom, throws his Arms about her Neck, who was surpriz'd and astonish'd, not understanding the mat∣ter: But when she heard proceed from the King's mouth these words, The Victor at our Festivals, and the Delight of the Kingdom is gone, a pointed torment struck her to the heart; let us lament (pursued the
King) let us lament, unfortunate Queen, the great good we are depri∣ved of; our Consolation is vanished, the remedy of our evils is stolen from us by Fortune; you shall no more see that Valiant Son whom you so much commended, the Victor Invincible; well understood the Queen that the Afflicted King spoke of her Beloved Olivaires, although he never mention∣ed his Name, and she conceived to herself the cause of his departure; and she assur'd herself of the loss of so Noble a Cavalier, knowing she had given occasion of lament to the whole Court; wherefore her heart was se∣cretly prick'd with remorse, she re∣pented of her Error; and what by one passion, what the other, fell into a Swoon in the King's Arms; who was so infeebled that he could scarce su∣stain her Weight; and the Queen's Affliction joining with the Grief for his Son, made their conditions alike; and moving to where he thought better to have supported himself, he
also Swooned to. In this juncture, the Court who followed him with his Son Arthur, arrived, being resolved in diligent search after Olivaires, to send through the whole World; and seeing the Royal Pair lye extended on the floor in a Swoon through Grief, they did certainly conclude that the Souls of those Crowned Heads had taken their farewel flight; and not without great complaints and infinite lamentation, did approach to the King and Queen, the Lords, and chiefly Arthur, seeing what necessity there was, did boldly come close up to them saying, with as loud a voice as he was able, O King! O Queen! (some helps being used to recover their Spirits) this is not a time to die, but withal, endeavour to seek after my Royal Brother, according as we have order∣ed. The King (a little come to him∣self) hearing Arthur's words, by stretching forth his Arms gave signs of his being better, and the Queen the like; who at the sight of her Son
Arthur was a little comforted, and the Ladies lifting her up, lead her to her Chamber; the King placed on a Seat, heard all their Consultation, which was resolutely to make enquiry after Olivaires; and Arthur was the first who desired the King's Favour to be one of those who should go after him; to whom the King returned answer, Son, if your presence was substract∣ed from our sight, there would need no other cause of Death, for our Life would quickly have a period; be it your charge to send away fit men, and take you the management of this important Affair; wherefore the soon∣er you dispatch Messengers over all the Provinces of the Earth, the more you will study our Content, and effect an alleviation of our Grief: 'Tis much my pleasure, dread Sovereign, to per∣form your Majesty's Commands, and I am ready to Obey you in whatever you enjoyn; although willingly I would be one of those should go in quest after him, because no man can
have a greater love for, or desire of re∣gaining him than myself. Arthur provi∣ded Messengers, and writ Letters, and Authorized them with the Subscripti∣on of the King's own Name, and sent them into all parts, according as was judged expedient. In the time of this expedition, the Queen finding herself deprived of her hearts desire, caused her Ladies to withdraw, and remain∣ed alone for some small time; in which solitary opportunity she began to take revenge upon herself for the injury she had committed, and with rude hands seizing on her Vail, Vest∣ments, and Hair, she imagined there∣by she had pretty well punished her∣self, accompanying that Cruelty with such Accents as these; Cursed was the hour of my Nativity! I am a Woman rightly accursed of Heaven, because I have not been ashamed to be an Enemy to Virtue! my Wickedness was the only occasion of the self-Ba∣nishment of him, whose Body was the Temple of Goodness: Say, Un∣happy
Queen! were thy Offence pu∣nished, what punishment would be answerable to thy deserts! O Olivai∣res! the Idea and Mirrour of all our Nobility, how shall I ever be able to render satisfaction for the injury I have done thee! O Righteous God, and just Judge! how canst thou long permit that such sacred Blood should suffer Affliction for the Wickedness of so Criminal a Woman! let thy Wrath showre down upon the sinful Dame, and restore to the highest station of Honour her innocent Son. O Olivai∣res! how much better had it been that thou hadst taken away my Life that hour when I secretly enticed thee to rob both thy self and me of our Virtuous Fame! and not to have suffer'd me, by injuring both thee and the Publick, to put both thy Life and theirs into so bitter hazard! I repent from the shame which I conceive in my Breast. I do repent, I acknow∣ledge my fault, I see my error, and apparent is the Ruin occasioned by
my odious immodesty. The offer was very grating to thy delicate Ear, tho I had not the power to govern my self in a necessity: Oh! how shall I ever be able to endure the punishment of my fault! let Mirth be for ever ba∣nished from my heart, and all the days of my life spent in Lamentation! Great God, the Sovereign Good, and Righteous Lord, be pleased to accept of my Prayers, for I am purposed to treasure up all my wealth in the bosom of the poor, and in holy uses; for his sake whom I have so much offended, for the sake of that best and most flou∣rishing flower of Youth. Preserve him, O Lord, in all dangers he may light into by the way of his Travel, and of thy infinite pity pardon me my great Offence. The King and Queen both comforting themselves with hopes of news of Olivaires; but fortune crossed their intent who went in pursuit after him, for they could not get the least intelligence of him; wherefore at their return they put the
Court into second Mourning: But Arthur upon it fell into a Sickness, and likewise the King; the Lamentation was renewed through the Realm, and among the Lords. But let us leave the Kingdom to its sorrow, and turn our Discourse to Olivaires, whom we shall find quickly toss'd in a Tempest at Sea. CHAP. XVI. The Ship which stood for Constantino∣ple by a great misfortune perishes in the Main, and all are cast away save Olivaires and his Friend the Cava∣lier. YOU have heard how the Ship spread her Sails before the Wind. On Board of which was a great Lord, who admitted of, by means of his Knight, the Honourable Olivaires. Now you must understand that being arrived within three days
Sail of their designed Haven, a great Tempest arose to thwart them, whereby the Sea became turbulent about a Month's space, so that they knew not which way to steer; in which time the Tempest, Waves, and Wind tore the Sails, broke the Ropes, threw down the Masts and Sail-Yards; the Rudder was lost, the Anchors were cast away, and the Pilot, through his ill fortune, was tired out, and no longer able to go∣vern; therefore the Ship deprived of her Tackling, was left at random, and exposed to the guidance of the enra∣ged Ocean; whereby she was cast upon a Rock, and from the hind Deck to the fore, split in two. Now the Sailers, by this mishap, being redu∣ced to extream peril of their lives, betook them to Swimming, and those that could not, necessity taught; some on Boards, others on Tables, and whatever light matter they could lay hold of to help them. Olivaires at the first seized on a large Plank for
his support, and taking the Cavalier whom he loved on it in company with him, they fastened themselves thereto, nor was he disheartened to put his Mail betwixt them, binding it fast, so to provide himself for whatever streights he might be brought to, and to make all the provision for life was possible; and after recommendation to the God of Mercy, they exposed themselves a prey to the Waves, Swimming as long as their strengths would endure, which was but for a small time; for it being no warm Season, and the Water frigid, their Arms and Legs were benumm'd and made insen∣sible by the Cold. So that if they had not been as close fastened as the Ivy to the Oak, the sporting Billows had many a time dismounted them from their Wooden Horse. So a whole Night, and the following Morning, they remained in this unparallell'd danger: Olivaires, who was endued with greater stoutness of mind, and also strength of body, than the other
Cavalier, bid him, Courage; but he was so dismayed that he could scarce get out a word, and begun to faint; then Olivaires lifting up his eyes and thoughts to Heaven, and also a sincere heart, said, O Lord, who prepared'st a way for the Sons of Israel thorough the Red Sea, and delivered'st the Three Children from out of the blazing Furnace; who even in thy Flesh could'st walk upon the Waters, and saved'st St. Peter when he began to sink, only by thy word; I beseech thee, that as thou extendedst thy pity and favour unto them, so thou would now also be pleased to succour and save us. Lo! this short Prayer pierced the Heaven; and two Harts appeared upon the Water, which running Mi∣raculously there, came up to salute these distressed Companions: Give speedy Glory to God, cry'd Olivaires; and having leap'd upon the one, and helped the Cavalier to mount the o∣ther, they Swom with that Swiftness, as if in chace they had run on the
land, and set the half dead couple a shore, and left them there, and took their way to the Woody Mountains: the warmth of the Sun now having thaw'd and cherish'd their congeal'd Limbs; and having taken some heart, being got out of danger, in the first place they returned thanks unto God, and then with slow pace (Olivaires supporting the Cavalier, who was full of Water, and sore shatter'd by the Waves) they arrived at a little Cabin and poor Lodging, where with a good fire, and other necessaries they were forc'd to send far for, he cheer'd up his Companion; and having got him to bed, he after took care of himself, as also was needful; and there they re∣cruited themselves some days.
CHAP. XVII. How Olivaires, the Cavalier growing worse, orders him to be carried to the place of his Nativity, where he dies; and of various Accidents that be∣fell. HAving rested a while at this small Cottage, and the Cavalier's Malady increasing upon him, there chanced to come there a Noble Man of those Parts, with whom Olivaires enter'd into much discourse, finding him a Person had been conversant in the world, and was able to talk of the various occurrences and risques of fortune that happen in, and attend it: So as they discoursed now of one thing, now of another; the sick Knight could gather that they were on English ground, in which Kingdom he breathed his first Air, being born in the City of Canterbury, and quickly inquir'd after the place of his Nati∣vity,
and understood he was but three∣score miles distant from it; then he turned toward him to question him further, If he knew such a Cavalier, (naming himself); The Nobleman replied, No; but he had heard him well spoken of for a brave and worthy Gentleman, and that he was highly esteemed of in that City; and having so said, he departed, and left Olivaires to pursue his own Journey. I am Master John Talbot, and this is my Country; in that City I have a good Estate, my admirable Friend, and therefore be pleased to let me be car∣ried thither, since it is not far off, and I will repay you whatever charges you shall be at; for I perceive my strength to waste every day more and more, and if it had not been for your virtue and goodness, I had certainly perished in the Water, or here on the Land, if not before. Olivaires comforted him up, and told him he had hopes of his recovery; however, for the other, he needed not trouble himself, and he
made him a promise; but when he saw there were no hopes of his life, he order'd him to be carried, because he was too weak to sit on Horseback; and having bought for himself an ex∣cellent good Palfrey, he went along with him, and Men bearing by turns from place to place, brought him at length into his own City; where the Cavalier being arrived, and heartily receiv'd by his Friends and Acquain∣tance, he suddenly became speechless, and after a few days changed this life for a better. It happened that a Citi∣zen, many years before, was to have received a Sum of Monies of the Ca∣valier that was dead, and he made a distrain in his House, and would not suffer his Body to be interr'd till he was paid of, which he could main∣tain by Writings, and he had stood ex∣communicate many years. This bad News troubled his Parents, for that it would oblige them to sell their Goods and Estate, neither could the price of them reach it; therefore they resolved
rather to let him remain excommuni∣cate, than satisfy the Debt; but the generous Prince Olivaires would no less be his Friend in death, than Bro∣ther in life, as you shall hear. CHAP. XVIII. Olivaires causes the Cavalier to be bu∣ried, and discharges the Debt; and of some Justings proclaimed in the Court of the King of England. OLivaires seeing the great Cove∣tousness of the Knight's Parents, was much offended at it; and used all the endeavour he could to accord the matter betwixt the Parties: At length, being neither able to persuade the one, nor bring the other to a com∣position-agreement, he demanded of the Creditor, how much the total Sum came to; and when he was an∣swer'd 2000 Nobles, he like a Prince, and Mirror of Princes, paid with Gold
and Jewels the Debt for his deceased Friend, retaining their late friendship fresh in his memory, and so procured for him Christian Burial. After few days he heard a Report that the King of England had given command for proclaiming a Turnament to continue three days, and that he who should get the victory, should have for re∣ward his Daughter to Wife, and the Kingdom for her Dowry; and this Royal Maid was the most beautiful and admirable young Creature that ever was born, or ever appear'd on the Earth: Nor would her Father be∣stow her in marriage on any King, or any other, unless he was the most va∣liant and bravest of the Age, to the end that by Arms he might maintain her in her Dominions, and the State in peace. There were 400 Knights appointed to maintain the Justing and Combat against whatever Cavalier had a mind to present himself on the Field for Encounter; and now Nine Months had passed since the Feast and
Turnament were published, and the allotted term was to expire within 15 days. The Valiant Olivaires made it his business to understand well the Fashion and Customs there; and by a very Experienc'd Cavalier, got Instru∣ctions as to every thing; and, that which delighted him most, he was credibly informed that the King's Daughter did much exceed the high Character and Fame that went abroad of her; therefore Olivaires fell in love with the very Idea he had conceived from report; thinking with himself, that if he should come off Victor at such a Turnament, the Prize would be an abundant reward of all his Fa∣tigues and Affliction: And now he is on his way for going to the Justing, and London, for the Court resided at that City, and there was the place appointed for this famous Turnament.
CHAP. XIX. What Fortune Olivaires has by the way, leaving Canterbury to go for the Tilting. THE time being now but short before the Feast was to begin, the Valiant Knight is on his Journey, ever having in his mind the delightful thoughts of Victory, and of seeing so many Kings, Dukes, and great Lords make proof of their Valour; thus thinking he went on till he came to a Wood not far from the City of Lon∣don, when lo! from one corner of it sallied out 15 High-way men, Assassi∣nates of Travellers, one whereof with Lance in hand advanced up, put∣ting himself in the front of the rest, and with villanous words said, Lay down your Arms, Knight Errant, if you desire to live. Olivaires, before he made answer, put up a secret Prayer unto God, and his Answer to
the Assassinate was immediately to draw his Sword; and sencing off the thrusts of his Spear, and making his Horse give back, he brings him down and kills him; and taking his Lance, he turns himself against the other Rob∣bers, who made very gallant defence; but in little time the Valorous Oli∣vaires slew the greater part of them; whereupon the rest fled away wound∣ed, and, as fast as they could, reco∣ver'd the Wood, amazed at the migh∣ty valour they beheld in him; and if they had been double or treble the number, I truly believe he would have conquer'd and kill'd them all. Olivaires having free'd himself of them, paid his gratitude to God; and riding forward, he spies a Spring as clear as Chrystal, to which he makes, and alights from his Horse to refresh him∣self with its water, being extream thirsty and hot, and also to wash some Ripples he had got in the Assassinates Assault; wherefore being intent up∣on these, his Horse had step by step
wandered a good way off, and being now at liberty began to run and caper about, before Olivaires was aware; and with great haste he goes with de∣sign to catch him, when out of the thick Wood came one of those villa∣nous Highway-men, and prevents him, seizes on the Bridle, mounts him, and flies away with the Mail was fastned to the Saddle-bow: What Mortal can imagine Olivaires's grief at this Accident, finding himself de∣prived of his Horse, and Jewels which were of great value! but his chief trouble of all was, that he could not go to the Tilting, being void of all hope, and means, both for the Com∣bat and Attire. Whereupon he begins a Complaint able to rend the Rocks, and soften them into tenderness and compassi∣on: O! was not my Mother's Death enough to satiate the spight of For∣tune? was not enough my Father's Grief, was not enough the Affliction of my Kingdom? Not content to have
hurried me into infinite perils of life, when in the height of my desire to re∣cover my Losses, she brings a Cloud over my little glimsing Joy, and dawning Happiness. But thou, Lord, whose Essence is goodness it self, reach forth unto me thy Right hand in this Wood; Let thy Sun dispel my new darkness that surrounds me; and laying his Face on the ground in a po∣sture for dying, after sobs and tears he was silent. CHAP. XX. Of a Cavalier that appears to Olivaires, and puts him into hope; and of some Covenants betwixt them. OLivaires being in so melancholly a Mood, a Cavalier came unto him, certainly a Messenger from God for his comfort, and with a loud voice call'd to him, O Olivaires of Castile, rouse up, and hate me not for termi∣nating thy Doubts; rouse up, and sleep not; whereupon he quickly
raised his head, being surpriz'd to be called on by name, yet not resolved whether to sleep or awake, thinking it might be some Phantasy which his Melancholy had presented to his Ima∣gination; but looking earnestly, he was assured by his Aspect, that it was some very honourable Knight; and observing the black Vesture on his back, he was the more astonished; then signing himself with the Cross, after the manner of the Christians, he said: I adjure thee by the Maker of the Heaven, and the Earth, and the Merits of his Son Jesus, to tell me how thou camest by the knowledge of my Name, and whether thou art a Man, or a good Genius? Be not afraid of me, said the Black Knight, for that I am a Christian, and believe in God as thy self; enquire not now why I have called on thee; it is enough that thou art heard as to the losing thy Horse, Jewels and Gold; and thy trouble (for not being able to go to the Tur∣nament) hath penetrated where it
will have the best relief; for thou hast obliged me by many Kindnesses, and signal received Services, and there∣fore lo! I am ready to oblige you a∣gain in whatever shall be requisite for the Turnament (for I will not dis∣charge Benefits with Ingratitude); and in a word, thou shalt have every thing becoming a King not thy Supe∣rior. I am willing in recompence of thy courtesy, that thou shouldst par∣take with me in all the Acquist that thou shalt procure by me; and thou shalt give me the half of all whatever thy Gains, when I demand it of thee; altho I will have liberty to take it to my self, or leave it to thee. Olivaires, who had a burning desire to be at the Tilting, hearing the Cavalier's Offer, without heeding the Conditions, or the Covenant, answered him after this manner: If my Fortune shall not dissent from thy doing me so great pretended Service, of furnishing me with Arms, Horses, Attendants, and Money, so as shall be sufficient for
me; I swear to thee by the Power Omnipotent, and promise by the trust which I put in him, that thou shalt share in all the Reward, Gain, and Treasure, by receiving the half, or more if thou desire it, in case I shall be Victor at the Feast, and win the Day. The Knight accepted of it up∣on his Royal Paroll, and renew'd his Promise that he should be so honoura∣bly served, and so furnished in all re∣spects for whatever might make him appear brave at the Turnament, as any Knight in the World could wish to be; and taking him by the hand, he led him into a Grove, where ha∣ving shew'd a strait path would carry him to a Sacred Hermit's Cell, he told him he must remain there till he could return with all necessary Provisions for his purpose. O Olivaires, thy true Friend so assuring thee, willingly wait for him, who shall quickly re∣joice thy heart; and Olivaires taking leave of him with much expression of gratitude, went to the Hermitage,
and the Knight vanish'd, and left him alone on the way. CHAP. XXI. Olivaires comes to the Hermit; and of some Discourses betwixt them. THE holy Hermit was at his De∣votions when Olivaires knock'd at the Dore of his Cell; and being afraid, not any one for many years before having come at him, he would not open it; but when Olivaires said he was a Christian, and no Evil Spi∣rit, or Apparition, having first sign'd himself with the sign of the Cross, he let him in, and led him to the Altar, there to worship his Saviour; then making him sit down, the Hermit went and finished his Devotions. Af∣ter that he brought him a red Earthen Dish of dry'd Fruits, Bread and Wa∣ter, mustering up for the entertain∣ment of the Valiant Knight all his forces, and bid him to take good heart, for that just now by Divine Re∣velation
he had seen who he was, and the occasion of his departure from his Kingdom, and how the Cavalier had in∣vited him to his Cabin, and many other particulars the Holy Father told him. Olivaires, well satisfied of the sanctity of the Personage, paid him exceeding great reverence, and praised Almigh∣ty God for his goodness unto him. The Hermit, after this, open'd to him the Sacred Law, and expounded it with much fervency of spirit, and gave him many good Instructions; then he made a Bed with Leaves and Straw for him to repose on, and de∣sired him for God's sake to take pa∣tiently this penance, for that 'twas necessary to pass this miserable Life with pain and sorrow, having confi∣dence in the Lord, that after he had gone thorough the Waters of Misery, and the Flames of Purgatory, God would place him in a Paradise of re∣freshment, and perfect Joys. And after he had given Olivaires his Bles∣sing, he left him to rest. When the
Morning was come, the Sacred Her∣mit celebrated the Holy Mass; and Olivaires having confess'd his Sins to the Reverend Father, received the Eucharist with mighty devotion and contrition for his Faults. After, he continually instructed him in the Holy Scriptures; making it manifest unto him, that it was a good Spirit, who by the Grace of God had brought him thither; and continually com∣forted him, and exhorted him quietly to support these his present Tribula∣tions, and indure many other also which were to succeed them. CHAP. XXII. Olivaires is overjoy'd, seeing come in his behalf, Men, Horses and Arms. OLivaires was four days in expe∣ctation of the Assistance that was promised him; after which he begun to be a little moved, knowing
that the last day before the Turnament was come, and he grew to be much afflicted at the delay of the Cavalier▪ and if the Hermit had not assured him that he would not fail him, he had perhaps despair'd; wherefore he de∣liberated often of going to London. He beheld from rising ground (whi∣ther he went to see if he could spy the Cavalier coming) many Horses and armed Troops which were going to the Tilting, which vexed him to the very heart; and when at night he re∣tired into the Cell to the holy Fa∣ther, he fell into an extream great pas∣sion, and could eat nothing; so now the whole term was past, therefore Olivaires resolved to go alone to Court, but the Hermit with much intreaty persuaded him to stay till the next day; so that now all the days were past, and the hour of the Tilting was come; wherefore the valiant Knight despairing, went to prayer; and after he was beginning his Jour∣ney, lamenting his mishap; but as
soon as he had opened the Hermitage Dore, and had scarce gone four steps forward, he heard a loud neighing of Horses, and clink of Armour, and they seemed to draw near to the Her∣mitage; and presently he saw six Ca∣valiers advance before the rest, all armed in bright Corsalets, and all the Horses with Trappings, and covered with Black, but without Lance and Shields; after these followed ten other Cavaliers clothed in Black Velvet, and also all Furniture for Horse; fifteen Pages likewise on fifteen beautiful Black Horses came after, and fifty men on foot all in the same Sable Li∣very; and the two first led by the Bri∣dle a sprightly and wonderful finely shap'd Horse covered and adorn'd with Black Trappings; and on his Saddle-bow he bore a gilded Hel∣met, garnished around with precious Stones, which enlight'ned the gloomy Grove, and every one carried some part of Olivaires Armour, which was made of the finest Metal, covered
with Damask work, and a Tuck of purer and better temper than ever Artist in the World wrought, Sword, Lances, Dagger, Shields, and Crests. CHAP. XXIII. The Pleasure and Transport Olivaires was in at such Preparations; and of the Beauty of the King of England's Daughter. THE Knights being habited af∣ter this manner, as you have heard, came up to the Hermitage, paying that Reverence which was agreeable to so great a King; quickly the Knight of the Grove, who had made him the Promise, as their Chief, alights from his Horse, and embraces Olivaires, who remembring him, was exceedingly transported with joy, and was amazed at so pompous Prepara∣tion, and gave him infinite thanks: This Retinue that thou seest, said the
Knight, I have brought, that thou mayst be well served; and assure thy self thou shalt want for nothing that in any kind may be requisite for thee. I beg of you that you will behave your self bravely, that we may not spend our Service and Fatigue in vain, and I will accompany you at the Tilting, give you your Lances, and spur on your Horse; dear Sir, reply'd Olivaires, The kindness you shew me is not in the power of any Treasure to reward, or make the least suitable correspon∣dence to; wherefore I look on my self as bound to you by an eternal obliga∣tion; for I have great confidence in that Celestial Goodness who has deli∣vered me from so many, and so extra∣ordinary dangers, that he will grant us the favour to obtain the glory of this Turnament: The Cavalier re∣ply'd, God give you all that assistance and favour that I do heartily wish un∣to you: But, continued he, the hour is now come, wherefore sit down at the Table I have prepared, and take
repast, and after arm, and go for the Turnament. The Hermit, after he had given Olivaires his Benediction, left him, and went to his Devotions; and he being placed in a Golden Chair at a sumptuous and Royal Table, did eat, and after (every hour seeming a thousand years to him) was decked in his wonderful Armour, and mount∣ing his Horse, he marches away to the Court with his honourable and comely Train: Just at the very time that Olivaires was eating, and decking for the Turnament, Helena the King's Daughter was conducted out of the City to the Piazza prepared for the Tilting; she was attended on by two hundred most beautiful young Dam∣sels richly adorn'd with Gold, and il∣lustrious for Blood; and with these ascending a Scaffold, covered all round about with the most rich and glorious Tissue and Broccade the World could afford, with Ornaments of Crimson Velvet above and below, her Beauty created stupor in all Eyes that beheld
her: Under the Canopy, where her Seat was, Steps jetted out behind all of Massy Gold, and she sate on a Tri∣umphal Chair of Elecorn garnished with Jewels and Carved Work of Gold, amounting to the value of a thousand Cities: And for the shelter of the young Ladies of quality num∣berless Pavillions were erected, richly embroyder'd with great labour and art: Then as to the upper part of the Scaffold, or Canopy for a Heaven, it was all of Azure Velvet full of such sparkling precious Stones, that they out-brav'd the day, and appear'd like so many bright Stars of the Firma∣ment. Over the King's Daughter hung a Stone about the bigness of one's Fist of such transcendant splen∣dor, that the most glorious Rays of the Sun could not drown its light, or eclipse or diminish its lustre: Where∣fore the Canopy, the Ornaments, and Pavillions, seemed to present one vast burning pure flame: But above all, the divine Eyes of the fair Daughter
of England shot scorching beams into the hearts of all that looked on her, and her most beautiful Shape and Fea∣tures, and celestial Dress, fetter'd up and stounded the Senses of those vali∣ant Cavaliers, who had prepared themselves for such a dazling Spe∣ctacle: The divine Helena then ha∣ving taken her place, with all the Ladies, four Judges of the Gran∣dees of the Kingdom, appeared forth, and having kissed the ground where her Foot trod, in a lower place they also sat down; around on every side were Scaffolds and Stages all fill'd with Lords, Gentlemen, and Ladies, enno∣bled both by Birth and Beauty; who all gave out with one consent, and, as it were, one mouth, O thrice hap∣py Cavalier, who shalt by thy Valour gain for thy self such an inestimable Prize.
CHAP. XXIV. Of the great Feats of Olivaires; and how much he surpast all the Justers and Kings. WHEN Olivaires had put on his Armour, and was all rea∣dy for taking Horse, he went to kiss the holy Hermit's hand, beseeching him that he would supplicate our Lord, that of his good favour he would grant him the Victory; and he promised him as much. Wherefore taking leave, and lacing on his Hel∣mit, he begun his Journey, which was very short. Arrived then at the Piazza, they found all the four hun∣dred Knights prepared for the defence of the Turnament on one part; on the other, the King of Ireland, the King of Scotland's Son, and many more well adorned, accouter'd, and fitted to give demonstration of their great Valour and Prowess; and at the
sound of the Trumpets divers Lances were broken; every one was amazed and stupify'd, looking on the mar∣vailous unknown Black Knight, who exprest in his Actions unordinary cou∣rage of Mind, and strength of Body; who with mighty respect and most humble reverence bowed himself be∣fore that Heaven of Beauty, and alight∣ed on to his Feet to contemplate her; and being perfectly conquered by her Angelical Aspect, he became almost forgetful of what he was about; and had it not been an Affair thus nearly relating to her, he had been intirely so. And now there had been a Skir∣mish; and the King of Ireland's Son had hitherto the better, and stood with his Lance in Rest, expecting an Ad∣versary; when Olivaires's Knight, sha∣king a Lance, cry'd; Lo, here de∣pends the Victory! and reaches him it: The valiant and hardy Youth quickly took it, and went toward, where Maquenor of Ireland was turn∣ing about; and he expected him, and
turn'd opposite to him; whereupon they gave two brisk Encounters, and the great Cry was for the Valour of the King of Ireland's Son; but when they saw the movement and fierce blows of the Black Knight, their shouts pierced the Sky in applause of such stupendious Courage. Maquenor broke his Lance upon Olivaires, who remain'd fixed as a Tower; but the push which the other received was such, that it brought his Horse to the ground, and he, as if he had flown, was cast ten yards out of the Lists; and presently the Black Knight had another Lance given him, who run against a second that expected him with couched Lance, a very stout and nimble Champion; but in Encounter Olivaires gave him such a push, that the Cavalier's Horse's Girths, Breast∣plate, and Reins, all were burst, so that by the blow he made the other Horse recede, and in his flying back the valiant Olivaires Lance seated him on his Horses Crupper, and quickly
down he fell for dead on the ground; whence great amazement seized all the Court on account of the fierceness of the Black Knight, who never by any blow was put out of his Saddle, being stable and firm like a Rock a∣gainst the Billows: Thus he acted in the whole Tilting; all whoever came against him he lay on the ground, and the last he combated with was the King of Scotland's Son, whom in like manner he shatter'd and con∣quer'd by one of the briskest Thrusts that Olivaires ever made; for which the fair Virgin was much inamour'd of the Black Knight, and said; If that Cavalier were as comely with∣out Armour, as he does appear (and more so upon account of his Valour) in it, he would be the first and chiefest of the World. So, Olivaires, the first day's Victor, gallopt to and fro over the Field, now all his. The second day he was to combat, after one Lance broken, with Faucheons; and the third day with Sword and
Poynard: The first day then Oli∣vaires was judged the Prince of all the Combatants, and he stayed on the Field till all the Knights were gone off: And as Helena was going away, Olivaires 'lighting from his Horse, made his humble obeysance, and then having mounted another admirable Steed, he performed such handsome Feats, as might have be∣come the bravest King, the best Ri∣der, and chiefest man at Arms in the World. Helena was delighted with the Valour, Gallantry, and Activeness of the Cavalier, and was much satisfy'd in her mind with him. The Judges affirmed that he was the Stupor of Chivalry, and the whole Court went off amazed at his Valour.
CHAP. XXV. Olivaires returns to the Hermit; and his Retinue leave him. THE King and his Daughter, with the Lords and Ladies, re∣turned to the Palace, ever discoursing of the valiant Black Knight; and eve∣ry one wished to see him without Ar∣mour, that they might pass their sen∣timents on him, whether that would detract from his Comeliness. It was the custom, that after Supper all the Knights should repair to Court, and with much complasance and gallan∣try dance with the Ladies; where∣fore many Lords came to see the Black Knight; and the King and He∣lena much desired the same happiness: But Olivaires, by advice of the Cava∣lier who was his Conducter, did not go, but retired to the Hermit, where a most plentiful Supper was prepared, to refresh him after so great toil, and
a good Bed to rest his weary Limbs; and when he was got to this sacred Lodging, and set down to Table, his whole Court and Attendance vanish'd. So Olivaires was left alone with the Hermit, to whom he related the Trans∣actions of that day, and told of the rich dress, and splendid appearance of the most beautiful Helena. After ha∣ving prayed, and paid thanks unto God, he went to take his repose; the mean while that Olivaires was at the Hermitage, the King made all the Company sit down in a large Hall, and entertain'd them with all sorts of Musical Instruments; but the little time seemed to every one of them an Eternity, whilst they expected the Black Knight's Appearance at the Feast; so in Dancing they passed half of the Night: Then Helena seeing that the Black Cavalier would not be so kind as to make them happy with his presence, caused Supper to be brought up, where was wonderful plenty of all sorts of the richest Wines,
Sweet-meats, and whatever Dainties and Good-cheer were requisite for ma∣king up a most sumptuous and unpa∣rallell'd Feast; then she retir'd with her Ladies to her Chamber, and the King and all the Knights went to rest, and fit themselves for the second Day's Turnament. CHAP. XXVI. Of Olivaires coming to the Turnament, and of the Dresses, and of his Victory. NExt Morning, when day appear∣ed, Olivaires rise from his Bed, and went to prayers with the Hermit; and when the Devotions were over, he opened the Door, and saw his Knight coming towards him with a Vesture of Crimson Velvet, which reached down to his Feet, and his Retinue clad in Red, with high mettl'd Steeds deck'd with Trappings of Cloth of Gold, with golden Bridles and Orna∣ments
of beaten Gold admirable to look upon; two Pages led by the Bri∣dle a most gallant and Warlike Horse, Blood-speckled, and on his Saddle∣bow he bore a Helmet much more beautiful and strong than the former, and also other noble Armour which Olivaires in a trice was armed with: And having left the holy Father to the Divine Protection, they went to the Turnament; when they were ar∣rived at the Piazza, they found that Helena, with the King and the La∣dies had already got into their Seats to behold the Justing, and give the glo∣ry to the Victor. He, having first paid low respects unto them, began to gallop about, and make trial of his new-made Steed, and he appeared as if it had been the God of Battel des∣cended from above to subdue the World: And after he had shew'd his dexterity in managing, leaping, and coursing his Horse, he broke a strong Lance against the ground, whose Splin∣ters were burnt to Ashes in the Ele∣ment
of Fire, so far they flew aloft; every one became astonished to see the Red Knight do such amasing things as he performed; yet known by all to be the same who the day before was Vi∣ctor at the Tilting: These admired Preludes being ended, the King of Scotland's Son enter'd the Lists attend∣ed on by many armed Knights, the King of Ireland, the Duke of Britany, the Duke of Borbon, the Earl of Flan∣ders, with an innumerable Company of lusty and honourable Cavaliers. All the Combatants and Maintainers of the Fray having enter'd the Field, 't was judged three thousand had passed on either side; the Standard of Victory was defended by sixty Knights; and he who would have the honour of that day was to take it by force after the Combating: All the Combatants had only one Lance apiece, and that being broken, they were with Fauche∣ons to determine the Victory. So from that part where the King was, proclamation was given. Olivaires,
as Victor of the Field, took his Stand before the fair Helena, and ravish'd with the splendor of her beauteous Eyes, as much as was sufficient to continue him Victor, made a Chal∣lenge with motion of his Lance to combat whatever Champion would come against him. Suddenly the Trumpet and Military Instruments began to sound, which caused the highest Heavens to re-eccho: King Maquenor would be the first to make proof of his Lance, because he hated Olivaires, for that he had got the bet∣ter of him the day before; and spur∣ring on his Horse, he came furiously up to smite him; but Olivaires struck him into the Breast, and having past his Armour, stabb'd him to the Heart, so that down he falls dead on the ground; and also two other Cava∣liers came to incounter him in po∣lish'd shining Armour; he dealt like hasty Death, or laid them wounded flat on the Plain; so the Fray was spread from one part to the other,
and Olivaires appeared like a Lion among so many Herds, wounding and tearing Heads, Limbs, Bones, Flesh and Nerves; dismounting ma∣ny, and breaking the Horses Necks, or dashing their Brains out against the ground by a rapid overthrowing them: And when it came afresh into his mind, that for a divine Lady he was acting all this, it inspir'd double strength, and gave increase to his daring hardiness: His Sword was dy'd red with Blood, and his Arm was bath to his Elbow, and his Gantlet was full of, and all steep'd in Blood; his blows were more vio∣lent at the latter end, than in the beginning of the Battel; he cours'd about the Field from one side to the other, smiting, and laying prostrate all that offer'd to oppose him; so he made such way before him by his Valour, that he could easily gain the Standard without Blood, all scamper∣ing away; wherefore with great vi∣gor, and fierce aspect, he spurs for∣ward,
and press'd into the midst of the Sixty Knights, alone, without aid from any part; and laying hold on the shaft, wrests it out of the hand of the strongest man amongst them: This brave Exploit did above all the rest please the Judges, the King, and He∣lena, who was troubled at so much Blood being shed upon her account; but with great difficulty he broke forth from the crowd of the Horses and Men, holding fast the Standard in his Hand, and well commanding his Horse, and defending himself, and repulsing the Knights came on him to redeem their Honour; then not being able to make any defence, and seeing the Standard born away, all the Knights fled, and the Combatants, as worsted and overcome, retired. Now Olivaires's Knight came to sa∣lute him with all his Train, and em∣brac'd him, and gave him much joy and honour of his Conquest.
CHAP. XXVII. After his Victory at the Turnament, the Valiant Olivaires returns to the Her∣mit; and of Helena's compassion to∣wards the slain and wounded Cavaliers. OLivaires was the last went out of the Piazza, for all the Cava∣liers were gone to their Quarters, as was said, and the Dead were carried forth to be buried; and Helena offer∣ing to go away with the Judges and Ladies, Olivaires call'd for another Horse, and having mounted him, he perform'd such Feats, that the Judges thought him some infernal Daemon, and not a Man; and every one ad∣mir'd how the Saddle could keep on, much more the Rider: Then said the King, If the Turnament had conti∣nued three days longer, he would have extinguished our whole State, and also those of his Encounterers; and he had a very peculiar kindness for
him. He, staying his Horse, with a re∣verend bow took leave, and then went off, and return'd to his Hermit; and his Cavalier vanish'd, and went to make provision for the next day: At Evening Helena had a mind to sup with the King, and at Table began to say to him after this manner. My Soveraign and Father, whom above all things I love, stand in awe of, and venerate; I beseech you that you would put a period to so great Cru∣elty, and no further give leave that such brave and honourable Cavaliers should be slain as we have seen to day; wherefore if your Majesty has any af∣fection for me, be pleased to end the Turnament, or so order it, that the Combatants may not die; for if I had imagined I should have occasion'd so much blood-shedding, I would rather have made a most solemn Vow never to have married; and, if it lay in my power, to hinder it, I would not con∣sent to any further Contest. The King very kindly thus return'd an∣swer.
Daughter, the true Retainer and Upholder of my Blood, do not think that I have past the time of this Festival, with its Appendages, with∣out great trouble; and that the death of so many Knights and Kings does not yet continue to afflict me; but in such Encounters it cannot be help'd; and it is customary and ordinary for them to be slain, as in all other Com∣bats 'tis wont to happen. However, to morrow I will so order it, that they shall not so easily hurt one another, and a safer way and method shall be given them; and this I do promise you upon my Royal Word. Helena with this took leave (the Repast end∣ed) and retir'd with her Ladies into her Chamber, and would not stay the Ball, being a little indispos'd, and weary.
CHAP. XXVIII. Olivaires is Victor at the Torney the third day; and is conducted by the King's Order, and by the Grandees of the Court is lookt upon as a wonder and prodigy. THE King the next morning had a desire to know the number of the Slain, and the Qualities and Ranks both of the Cavaliers and Kings; and having known too much, he was ex∣ceedingly grieved; for on each side in∣finite numbers were kill'd: Then he order'd some of his Kingdom and Court to succeed in the places of those Champions who were wounded and dead; but if his Majesty had been rightly sensible what duty he put them upon, he would rather have sent them on any other Adventure than this, whither they would have gone with much greater alacrity and willingness; for the dread of Olivaires
Blows struck terror into the very gods, much more into Mortal Composi∣tions: The hour being now come, and the Combatants marching up in their Ranks, as was the custom, they order'd a Battel on foot; and Olivaires appear'd all in White in his upper Ve∣sture, which was beautiful and ama∣zing; then suddenly procalamation was made, That every one should alight from his Horse, and lay down his Sword, and arm himself defen∣sively as he pleased; and, for offen∣sive Weapons, Arms were given to every one, such as might not so easily kill; and every one that broke his Weapon, or chanc'd to fall, was to have no advantage taken of him; all this was so ordered for the Lady's sake; and after that the Reward should be render'd to the Victor; the Trumpets then sounding, Flutes play∣ing, Drums beating, the Combat be∣gun. Olivaires was quickly discover'd by his strewing the ground with men, shattering of Helmets, tearing Coats
of Mail, crumbling Bracelets like bro∣ken Glass; and his Weapon was so hard labour'd, that it flew in pieces; wherefore a Knight thirsting for re∣venge, thought to have reach'd him a Blow not very soft; but Olivaires nim∣bly slipt aside, and the stroke hit upon the ground; but when he had got arm'd again, he quickly made a clear road through them all. The King of Ireland, with the other Kings, and Ba∣rons, seeing that the Black, Red, and White Knight got all the Victory, five of them combin'd together, and all of them with the utmost effort of their strength came up against him to kill him; but Olivaires observing their Fury, did with great hardiness await them; and to the first he gave such a blow, as made the rest fly back, and him recoil as far as under the Scaffold where fair Helena sat. The King see∣ing that Olivaires would have destroy∣ed them every one, so mightily was he enraged at their foul Play, quickly threw down the Baston for concluding
the Turnament; and so the third Day's Combat ended to the great honour, and immortal fame of the White Knight. CHAP. XXIX. Olivaires, the Turnament endēd, is con∣ducted into a Palace: And of various Accidents all tending to his Advantage and Honour. THE King order'd an hundred armed Lords to wait upon the Black, Red, and White Knight, at his coming out of the Piazza, who therefore were in expectation of Oli∣vaires. Now when the Turnament was ended, he found himself alone, without his Knight, and without any Page, or Horse, which marvelously surprized him; and, looking up to∣ward Heaven, he said within himself: What anvantage is my Valour unto me? for what end do I expose my
Life? why was I born into this unhappy World? why, when on the pinnacle of my Honours, am I so harrassed by, and made the mark of spightful Fortune? And being thus alone, he was going away for the Hermitage; but when he was near the Passage, out from the Piazza, he saw Knights who came toward him; at which he was surprized, and took it for the Irish King coming to assault him for the hatred he bore him for his mighty Prowess; but he resol∣ved not to die without revenge; so, laying hold on his Sword, he boldly made up to them; but their Chieftain dismounting, threw his Arms away; saying, That by the King's Order they came to shew their respect; and that his Majesty desired to reward him according to the merit of his Valour. Olivaires kindly received their Ambassage, and courteously answered, that he was intirely at their King's service; so
was conducted by them into a most stately and glorious Palace, and by Noble Attendance was brought into a Chamber furnished and adorn'd for the entertainment of a King. Olivaires finding himself alone, was almost in despair, and grieved sore on account of the Cavalier, who had relinquished him in his greatest necessity. What, said he, must I appear in this Garb before Helena? Must I be presented to so August a Monarch in so mean and forlorn a Condition? but no sooner had he spoke this within himself, but his Cavalier came in with vast store of rich Vestures, Ornaments, Silver and Gold.
CHAP. XXX. Of Olivaires rich Vestments his Cava∣lier gave him, Horses, Pages, and other Attires of great Persons. THE Airy Cavalier brought with him twenty Squires with Vest∣ments for him all of Damask and white Silk, and forty Pages with Sil∣ver, Furniture, and Gold: Two Black Slaves carried a Mail on their Shoulders with ten thousand double Duckets of Silver, and twenty thou∣sand Duckets of Gold, with Jewels of more value than two hundred Shields: And the Knight said to him, These are all your Servants, and these Vest∣ments are yours, and I will further add to them forty men loaden with all sorts of Utensils requisite to furnish a sumptuous House; and give these your Servants such Places and Offices as you shall think fit. Olivaires, re∣member your Promise, said he, and
disappear'd; great variety of Suits and Dresses he found, which much delighted him; and a wonderful Sup∣per being prepared, he dofft his Ar∣mour, and refreshed himself; in that juncture came the hundred Knights to cheer him, and attend on him, by the King's Commandment; who after meat, stayed in the Hall expecting the Victor of the Turnament. Then Oli∣vaires put on a Wastcoat all richly em∣broyder'd with Gold, and Stockings of fine Scarlet, curiously wrought by the hand of Art, with Shooes of Crim∣son Velvet, and then an upper Vesture of Cloth of Gold, with a Bonnet of Red Velvet, within which was a Jewel of the value of a Kingdom, with a Plume, according to the Royal fashion of Carnation Feathers; and, having buckled on his Sword, he went down stairs for Court; where he found a delicate white Steed with a Saddle of Cloth of Gold, and Stirrops of Massy Gold, and for every thing else richly furnished. He had fifty Horses in his
Court admirably adorn'd; and he ha∣ving mounted, they went to the Pa∣lace; and every Page bore two Torches; wherefore the sight of such a beauteous approaching Court, with all the gay Retinue, seemed one of the bravest pieces of Grandeur that ever eye beheld. CHAP. XXXI. Olivaires being arrived at the Palace, is honourably received of the King, the Lords, and Ladies. GReat concourse there was to see Olivaires; and when they had taken thorough notice of him, they said, Truly this Cavalier has all the Perfections and Graces can be desir'd in a Prince; he was comely in Armour, yet more comely without it; in the one Dress he exhibited the air and mien of Valour, in the other of No∣bility; his Aspect, Deportment, and
Presence, declared him of the highest Extraction and Lineage in the World: The Ladies all hast'ned to Helena, to tell her, they had never beheld a more comely Cavalier, and that they never expected to see a more lovely Youth. Helena discreetly kept secret her flames, neither could they discern by any discovery of her self, whether this Character delighted her or no. Oli∣vaires having enter'd the Royal Hall, was with great complacency received by the King; and all the Cavaliers paid him high respects; and though many there were who had bore him hatred out of envy to his Valour, yet when they look'd on his gracious Countenance, and heard his wise Discourses, became his sincere Friends as well as Admirers; the King, ha∣ving taken him by the hand, and made him sit down by himself, talk'd of divers things with him, and with all Olivaires's, whether Questions or Answers, was extremely satisfy'd. Helena put on Claoths which had never
been seen before, and richly adorned, and loaden'd with Precious Stones, and Oriental Pearls, (according as the King had commanded) she came into the Hall; whose appearance shew'd like that of rising Aurora with an infinite number of Stars about her; two hundred Ladies attended her, and a hundred Knights with golden Spurs marched before her; two Dutchesses bore up her Train, and two Dukes led her on each side: Surely if that He∣lena, whose Beauty was so fatal to the Trojan State, had been by her, she would have appear'd like Cynthia be∣fore the rays of the Sun. When she was come into the midst, the Dukes returned her Hands; then she kissed her Father's Hand, and her Father took hers and gave it to Olivaires; who kneeling kissed it, and spoke very high Expressions to her, yet not Comple∣ments, which were not ungrateful only because he said them: So the one was fetter'd, and fast Prisoner in Venus's Tramels, and the other
was deep smitten with the Darts of Cupid. CHAP. XXXII. Olivaires has the first place by the King, for the love he bore him for his Com∣bating, according to the judgment of the King, and the Overseers of the Turnament. THE King taking Helena with the one hand, and Olivaires with the other, made them sit down, placing himself betwixt them; im∣mediately the Musick struck up, and a brisk and gallant Dancing there was, but not long. After which, lo! the Judges of the Turnament coming to know of the King if they must give Sentence, and the reward to him most merited it; to whom he gave order to do so; then they retired, and went for the honourable Prize of the Tilt∣ing: The mean while the King turn∣ing
to his Daughter Helena, spoke plainly enough to her; Who, dear Child, appeared to you the most Va∣lorous in this Combat? Helena re∣ply'd, I minded them, Sir, all alike, and every one seemed to perform well. Understand, Governess of my Soul, said the King, that the Present will quickly be brought, and given to him whom the Judges shall sentence the most deserving; and that he is also to be your Husband, and the Heir of the Kingdom: Wherefore I desire to know how your Inclications are? Him whom your Majesty shall think of, and whom your Royal Judgment shall most approve, and him (in short) whom you shall name and recommend to me, I shall willing accept of for my Spouse, Lord, and Guardian of my Life. If the Black, Red, and White Cavalier (subjoin'd the King) we should make choice of for his Merits, would you be so satisfy'd; although we yet be ignorant who he is? If, my Sovereign and Father, the Judges
shall think him worthy of the Prize, to defraud him of it would be high injustice; however, your Majesty's Will and Pleasure shall intirely be mine. CHAP. XXXIII. Of the words the King spoke, and the Reward that was given to Olivaires. THE King of Ireland, of Scot∣land, and of other Dominions, with the Dukes, Princes, and Barons of their Realms, were set down, when the King order'd silence, and then thus said: Signories, High Empires, States, and Kingdoms; presently will the Judges and Lords be here with the Reward of the Turnament; and to whom my small Present shall be gi∣ven, the same also shall espouse my Daughter and only Child, and have all England for her Dowry; but I will that that Prince, Lord, or King, re∣main
some time in my Court, that I may have experience of his Valour in all Exploits, and after understand his Lineage and Descent, and then may he enjoy the Crown. Let now then the Prize be brought and adjudged to him who got the greatest Honour, and was Victor of the Turnament. First came 30 Pages with lighted Torches in their hands, and after 30 most noble Cavaliers; then followed 10 Pages in gold Embroidery, with Torches also, in midst of which were 6 Knights clad in Cloth of Gold, and in the midst of them a Duke all in Armour, who car∣ried a golden Bason, and in it a Neck∣chain of Gold, interwoven with Jewels, and so wonderfully wrought, that the very sight of it alone was a transport for all Humane kind; and it might be said to have been one of the Wonders of the World; nor could the value of those Jewels be estimated; and after followed the Judges with an infinite number of Knights and Gentlemen; and, being so placed that every one
might conveniently be a Spectator, they came before the King speaking to this effect. CHAP. XXXIV. The rich Neck-chain is given to the Vali∣ant Olivaires, at which many of the Kings are filled with disdain, it ap∣pearing to them that an unknown Knight was not worthy of such a Present. MAY it please your Majesty, Dread Sovereign, we were ap∣pointed by your Majesty to be Judges for the Victor at Tilting, and at the Combats on Horseback, and on foot; which Province we willingly accepted of, and have diligently observed ac∣cording to our skill, the Blows, the Hardiness, the Valour and Force of every King, Duke, Prince, and Lord, and we freely give witness that every one of them has made honourable
proof of right Chivalry; but, to our thinking, the Flower of all, and he who has merited your Majesty's peculiar Favour and Present, is that Cavalier who was clad the first day in Black, the second in Red, and the third in White; which valorous Knight is the same that sits by your Majesty, the deservedly designed Heir of your Kingdom; and although we be ignorant of his Country, and Name, yet we are ascertain'd he is come of a Royal Race, and has Illustrious Blood in his Veins, because such kind of Va∣lour does not lodge in any other Perso∣nages, save those who by such Extra∣ction can appear thus worthy of a Crown; wherefore, with your Ma∣jesty's leave, and good liking, we will present the Gift to him: The King being well contented, made sign to them to do so; the Duke then turn∣ing to Olivaires, took the Chain and put it about his Neck, saying unto him, Your Valour which has con∣quered so many Couragious Knights,
adorns you with this Gift, a Testi∣mony of the King of England's Kind∣ness; and, when his Majesty shall think convenient time, you are to es∣pouse Helena, his only Daughter, and be crown'd King of the Realm: Be∣lieve me, reply'd Olivaires, I do not seem to my self to have done any thing to merit this; but since it is the King's Bounty, I am very well pleased. So he accepted of the Present and Pro∣mise; and bowing low to the King, and Helena, in a most eloquent Speech he returned them large thanks for their Liberality. And to the Judges, and to the whole Hall, he also gave infinite Thanks; and 'twas judged by all that heard him, that he was the finest Courtier of the World; and every one considering his comely Re∣gal Aspect, his Martial Valour, Boon Grace, Deportment, Mein, and Elo∣quence, even wept for very joy; the King taking him by the Hand, and kissing his Forehead, set him in his place again; then a thousand Instru∣ments
began again to play, making infinite delight and festivity. CHAP. XXXV. The Cavalier who was Olivaires so great Friend, and furnished him with Arms at the Justing, appears in a Dream to Helena, and of a Vision the King had. THE morning after, about break of day, the King had this Vi∣sion. He dream'd he saw Olivaires crown'd King of his Realm, and that he had given him his Daughter; then he beheld another Crown come over his Head, and settle upon that, much greater than the former he had given him, and it doubled his Court, Re∣tinue, and Riches; and it appeared to him so August, that he himself bow'd to it: Therefore, seeing Fortune had been so extraordinary kind unto him, to send him such a Cavalier for his Son,
he was mightily overjoy'd, and the transport awak'd him; and revolving this Vision in his mind, he was ima∣gining with himself what it might signify: And musing earnestly, he fell asleep again; and other Kings ap∣peared to come upon him with design to take that Crown from off his head, saying, It was not fit he should wear two Crowns; but he being moved at their Presumption, seemed by force to bind their Hands behind them, and to take the Crown off the Head of every one of them; to whom, after they had humbled themselves unto him, Olivaires gave every one their own again; and at this he awaken'd. The King did admire at the Vision, and assur'd himself 'twas a Divine one, and no natural play of Fancy, and happy Mystery in it; so he treasur'd it up in his memory, and was fill'd with great joy. When the Morning was further advanc'd, he went to visit his Daughter Helena, whom he found more than ordinary pleasant, and de∣lighted;
and inquiring the occasion of it, she said she had had about break of day a most pleasing Dream, which was, That she seemed to be walking in a Garden of fine Flowers; whence were many gay delightful and odori∣ferous ones, cast as if they had flown into her Bosom, and Lap; and that a Cavalier, whom she knew not, clad all in white, pluck'd one, and gave it into her Hand; that smelling to it, she thought she never scented a more ravishing flavour; and having a mind to put it into her Bosom, it turn'd to a Ring, the most curious one that ever she beheld; and the Cavalier va∣nish'd, with telling her that was the Spanish King's: Whereupon she awak'd out of her sleep, and found the Ring in truth in her hand, and she shewed it to her Father; the King being stupify'd at so amazing a thing, said, Certainly some grand Effect will follow upon our new Alliance; and taking it into his hand, he was more astonished still, knowing it to
be of inestimable value; and said, that a more precious thing he never saw. She subjoin'd, The Cavalier who gave it me, said that it was a King's, but I cannot remember the rest, I was so over-master'd with transport that moment; the King with her leave put it on his Finger, and injoin'd her to speak nothing at all of it, and parted from her.
CHAP. XXXVI. How Olivaires seeing the Ring on the King's Finger, knew it to be his Fa∣ther's, and marvelled extreamly; but for that it was not known, he made as if he saw it not, and was ignorant of the Matter. THE King being at Table, and having the Ring on his Finger, every one cast their Eyes upon it; for that, from the Stone was in it, issued out Rays so bright, that they resem∣bled a Flame; so that the sight could not long sustain the dazzle. When Olivaries saw it, he quickly knew it to be his Fathers; and often dubious in his Mind, and revolving things to and fro, he at last concluded to be silent. The King enter'd into various Discourses with Olivaires, and in in∣offensive manner enquired after his Name and Blood; who replied my Name is Olivaires; and for my Blood
it is as noble as your Majesty shall please to make it. The King pro∣ceeded no further for that time; and was well satisfy'd, and so likewise was Helena. The King sought not after his Nation, for his Speech ma∣nifestly enough declared that. After Dinner the King of Ireland, the King of Scotland's Son, and other Dukes, Lords, Counts and Knights, came to take leave of the King: And kindly embracing every one of them, he made them many Royal Presents; and doing them the Honour to accom∣pany them a little way, he dismiss'd them. When these Potentates were gone, they enter'd into a Combina∣tion by Oath, to bring a vast Army against England to destroy it; think∣ing the King had put an affront on their Crowns, in preferring before them an unknown Knight. Also they further discours'd, among themselves, whence Olivaires might have such honorable Attendance, with Cloaths, Arms, Horses and Pages. One said
he was the King of England in dis∣guise; other, that he was a Spanish Cavalier, whom Love had drawn thither, which they judg'd by his Speech, and for that his Dress and Garb were after the Fashion of that Province; other, that the King by Art Magic had made him prostrate, and kill without any their ill Manage∣ment. Wherefore they were all una∣nimously resolved to have Revenge, taking to Heart the Death of so many of their Cavaliers: And with this Dis∣position they returned to their Can∣tons, States, and Kingdoms. CHAP. XXXVII. The King of England sends secretly, in∣to diverse parts of his Kingdom, for the interpretation of his Dream, and he has it. THE Dream was interpreted after this manner, That the King that should by him be Crown'd
King of the Realm, should also be King of another, and wear a greater Crown than his, and that he should pay him Reverence. Then the Second Dream signify'd, That those other Kings would attempt to extort from him the Realm of England; that the Second Crown would take away their State and Kingdom; and after cour∣teously restore them again. His Daughter's Dream was likewise ex∣pounded, That she should be espous'd to a King, the Son, as it were, among other Princes, as that Ring intimated; and if she could tell from what part the Ring came, the King of that State should be her Husband. By the White Cavalier, who gave the Ring, could be understood no other than that Ca∣valier, who was Victor at the Turna∣ment, was clad the third Day in White, and who would give her a∣gain the Ring. The King was plea∣sed with the interpretation, and kept it secret in his Breast; and the rather, because the Effects of all would quick∣ly
appear, as he was assured by those who opened to him the Vision. CHAP. XXXVIII. A sad Accident befalling Olivaires, who was brought to himself only by the means of Helena. OLivaires having remained some time in the Court, and being in continual expectation of the King's Promise, that he would give him the fair Helena to Wife, pass'd Nights and Days in imagining to himself the Hour, the Moment, the Manner, the Joy, and his intire Happiness. But yet for all his ruminating, he could not see any effect answer his Thoughts, nor could perceive any act or sign of Love express'd to him; so that on the other hand, he was afflicted and tor∣mented incessantly, and could get no rest nor comfort. At length a violent amorous Accident befel him: For be∣ing in a deep and fixed Musing, in
Presence of the King, with many No∣bles, he fainted, and fell down as dead. Whereupon he was immedi∣ately carried to his Chamber, and the Physicians were brought, and many Remedies prepared; but they could not with any recover him out of his Swoon. This dire Accident of Olivaires came to Helena's Ear; and she, as knowing his Malady, and who secretly loved him, with various con∣trivances, and great caution, convey'd her self where her Olivaires lay in this Deliquium, and calling loud to him, for she would try all means; she ap∣proached near unto him, and laid her hand upon his Forehead; which he begun to be sensible of, and look'd up as one awak'd out of sleep. And truly, I think, he would never have come to himself and life again, had not He∣lena's Spirits revived his, whose very touch did emit enough to cure him. Wherefore being recover'd of this Ac∣cident, he was very thankful to the King and Helena, for the care they
had taken of him: And leaving him to rest, the King and Helena depar∣ted. At Night, in the beginning of her sleep, the White Cavalier appear∣ed to Helena, and begg'd of her to tamper with the King to give her to Olivaires for his Consort, in as much as she would have for a Husband the bravest Hero in the World; telling her, that for this cause, he had given her the Ring, which quickly she should see on Olivaires Hand: And so vanish'd. Helena, keeping the Vision in her Mind, in the Morning deck'd her self in the richest Cloaths and Dresses that she had, and design'd to reveal the Matter to the King her Father, in the presence of Olivaires. So she procured of the King to go and dine with Olivaires in his Chamber, who after invited him to come and eat with him. Thus having got her End; as they were at Table many pleasant Discourses passed between them. At length, in the height of the King's Mirth, two Couriers came
to interrupt it, accompanying some Ambassadors from the Kings of Ire∣land, and Scotland, with the follow∣ing Speech. CHAP. XXXIX. The Challenge made by the Irish Kings to the King of England; and the King's Answer, and that of Oli∣vaires. AFter they had pay'd their due Obeisance to the King, they made a surprising Oration of the Mo∣tives their Sovereigns had to wage War against his Majesty. And after this manner was their Speech, That Great Sovereign of Sovereigns, the all Wise Creator of Heaven and Earth, protect and prosper the Potent Kings of Ireland, who challenge to battel the sacred Crown of England, and say you are not worthy of it; where∣fore they are prepared to take from
you your State and Kingdom, and will come with Arms to shed your Blood, and with Fire to destroy your Palaces: And thus much I am Com∣missioned to say of my Sovereigns the Kings of Ireland, worthy of all Pow∣er and Empire. When the King of England had heard these proud Words, conscious of his Innocency, and the good will he always bore their Royal Majesties, he took it in so high dis∣dain, that it stopt his Speech, that he could not get a word out. And sud∣denly he call'd to mind his Dream, and the interpretation of it; and turn∣ing his Eyes this way, and that way, on his Nobles, Dukes, and Knights, and seeing none answer any thing, or say a word, nor himself being able to speak as he had a desire, he rises on his Feet, with intention to commit the task to Olivaires; and, at the same time make him espouse his Daughter. Upon which Olivaires, rising from his Seat, spoke these words: Puissant Prince, with all Re∣verence
and Humility, I beg of your sacred Majesty to do me the favour, to let me be the Man who shall re∣turn answer to the Ambassadors of the unworthy Kings of Ireland. At this the King spies his Ring on Olivaire's Finger, and much marvelled: Where∣fore the answer the King gave him was, Thou art my Son. And taking Helena's hand and his, and joyning 'em together, he said, This is your Con∣sort; and in token thereof he kiss'd them both, and made him kiss Helena; which fill'd all the Court with ex∣ceeding Joy; and they were much delighted to hear the News of a War. Now, said the King to Olivaires, Take upon you to give answer, and to fight for, and defend your Kingdom. Olivaires after he had apply'd himself to the King, and spoke what he thought suitable on such an occasion; turn'd to the Ambassadors, and said, Tell your Masters that Olivaires of Castile (the humblest of the King of England's Servants) and legitimate
King of Spain, and the Crown'd Suc∣cessor of the Realm of England, will come and make them sensible of the Error they are in, and give them cause to repent of their Insolence. When the King and Helena understood that Olivaires was the King of Spain, they were so filled with Amazement and Joy, as the like was never heard, or can be conceiv'd. Wherefore they began to entertain for him a vast re∣spect; and the whole Court for this great News was transported, trium∣phed, and looked big. CHAP. XL. The departure of the Ambassadors; and what Olivaires said to them. OLivaires did much Compliment and Caress the Ambassadors, and retain'd them a Day longer than they design'd to stay: Then spoke thus to them at their departure; Our
most Christian Sovereign and Virtu∣ous Father has been pleased of his bounteous Goodness to accomplish his Promise upon me. Therefore acquaint your Masters how I have sworn not to return back from this Enterprize to my Father's Court, until I have taken from them all their Cities, and made every one of them Prisoners; to ma∣nifest to the World what Tyrants they are, and Usurpers of their unde∣served Thrones: So, having present∣ed 'em with fine Horses, he dismissed them. Olivaires had made plain dis∣covery of himself to the King; and Helena had understood a great part of his Secrets, and had seen the Visions were come to pass, and that the mat∣ter of the Ring was clearly apparent. Wherefore the King judging by what had already happened, also of that which was to come, and hopefully foreseeing all would prosperously suc∣ceed, ordered a mighty Army to be made ready, of more than Ten thou∣sand
well armed Horsemen, and bravely mounted; and Infantry in∣numerable, with Pikes, Javelins, and other Weapons suitable to those times; and made Olivaires Generalissimo of all. Who having accepted of so ho∣nourable Preferment and Command, said, I do not intend, till I return a∣gain, to make Helena may Wife; till by my Valour in Exploits at Arms I may, in some degree, have shown my self not altogether unworthy of her Favour. The Affection Helena bore Olivaires was so great, that his depar∣ture was death to her; the separation of him, the Soul, from her the Body. But being well assured of his Cou∣rage, she bore her Grief moderately, through good hopes of Conquest; and comforted her self with the Visions. In few Days he, with his well-arm∣ed Forces, were on their march: And the Kings were arrived for the over∣throw of England with a vast Army, Valorous and Strong; so they went on ruinating and burning the Villages,
and ravaging the Countrey. At Oli∣vaire's departure, his Spouse, Helena, put a rich Necklace about his Arm, which she had always worn about her Neck; and for his Neck making also Ornaments. She utter'd these Votes, May he who delivered Jonas from out of the Deep, of his Mercy and Good∣ness preserve my noble Spouse, and worthy of universal Reign, Olivaires, in all Perils which may happen unto him; and may he be pleased to give him Victory, as he did to David a∣gainst the Giant Goliah. Then she embracing, kissed him; and also the King embraced him, and with the blessing of God he left the Palace, and went to his Army.
CHAP. XLI. Of the Battel Olivaires had with the Kings of Ireland; and of their Army. THE Irish Kings were incamped round a City containing Ten thousand Families; and in five Days journey Olivaires arrived within half a League of them; and Marshalling his Army in right order, he made them to understand he was come to give them Battel. The Sight and Presence of Olivaires struck mighty Terror into the Kings; nor did they think of so sudden Engagement: Wherefore they raised the Siege from before the Town, and drew out their Camp into more convenient Method for fight. Olivaires had got good In∣telligence of the Enemy's Forces, was informed of their Number, which a third part exceeded his; knew the places of the Countrey the Enemy
might fly to, and save themselves. Wherefore having accommodated and provided every thing, and given all his Soldiers Arms, and ranked 'em in fit posture for Combat, he made unto them this short Oration; Valo∣rous Lords, worthy Knights, my Bre∣thren and Companions, I believe you are well satisfi'd of the good Nature of our Sovereign, the King of Eng∣land, my Father, and King of Eng∣land, my Father, and of the great Li∣berality he hath expressed toward you in Gifts, Presents, and fair Promises: And, I believe, that you have a Cou∣rage lodged in your Breasts ready to requite, as much as you are capable, what he has deserved of you. But this I am most sure of, as a shining Truth, that the Glory of an honoura∣ble Death, is far rather to be elected than the living with more ease (and perhaps not so, even to the most faint∣hearted) under the brand of Cowar∣dise, and consequently the disgrace of Scorn and Affronts. This Day there∣fore offers a fair Opportunity to make
honourable Proof of our Valours, and to dilate the Soul of our King, to har∣bour still greater Kindness and Affecti∣on (if it be possible) for us all. And I can plainly behold in all your looks Hardiness, and a rising Courage, and a longing after Battel and Fame, and for the rendering more honourable and noble your Blood. Summon up then all your Strength and Vigour, and con∣tract them into a stout Heart, to ex∣pel out of your Dominions such arro∣gant, haughty and proud Invaders, and spread abroad their Infamy and Disgrace, whilst you procure to your selves a happy Memory, and leave the inheritance of a valorous Name upon your Families; and whosoever is of another temper, is a reproach and shame to his native Countrey. Here they all with one consent cry'd aloud, We are ready to undergo a thousand Deaths for our King, for your High∣ness, and for our own Honour, and we will follow you wheresoever you shall lead; and we will give such demon∣strations
both of our Fidelity and Cou∣rage, as to make you plainly under∣stand how much we think our selves engaged to our Sovereign, and how mindful we are of our Allegiance. Olivaires having drawn out his Men, divided them into three Parts; on the right Wing he set 3000 Horse, and 4000 Foot, under the Command of Edward the noble English Cavalier; on the left he gave to Robert, his Lieutenant, the Command of 6000. Horse, and 2000 Foot; ordering him not to assault the Enemy's Army, be∣fore Edward had joyn'd his Battalions. In the Night, with all the silence pos∣sible, he approach'd the Camp; and in the Morning he bid the Drums beat, and the Trumpets sound; and heading the main Body himself, he gave the Adversary Battel. The first that advanced to encounter Olivaires, was a fierce Irish Captain, Stout and Gallant; and engaging with him, two such grand Blows were given, that the very Earth shook; both their
Horses fell, and their thick Launces were broken into a thousand splinters. Olivaires quickly, without any harm received, rose up on his Feet: But the dismay'd Captain, with a piece of Launce sticking in his Breast, re∣main'd on the ground half dead. And suddenly did begin a sharp and terri∣ble Fight, every one valiantly labour∣ing his Sword, and slashing round about him; mean time Edward on the right Wing made but a bad Encoun∣ter of it: Whereupon he begun to square his Ranks. And they of the City beholding an Army favourable to 'em, did great damage to their Reer, putting them in mighty Confusion. This Assault being made in little time, Robert, during it, was in the Flank; and so violent was the Onset, and so briskly did they bear up to them, that the Enemy constrained by Olivaires's Valour (who having re∣mounted like a Lion, made a vast Shammels) and fresh Assistances coming in from all Parts, being able
to make small Opposition to their Fu∣ry, fled: Whereupon the Kings ran to catch their Bridles; and having ob∣tained a Port, enter'd a Ship for sail. Great was the Mortality of that day's Action; about Four thousand English having been slain; and, we may ven∣ture to affirm it, near Twenty thou∣sand of the Irish King's Forces. So Olivaires, after Victory, dispos'd him∣self to resettle the Army, to take care of the Wounded, to bury the Dead, and to celebrate with Encomiums and Triumphs the valorous Deceased; acknowledging himself eternally ob∣liged to the Living, for their admira∣ble. Fortitude and Courage, and, in a word, for the Victory.
CHAP. XLII. Of the News which the King receiv'd of the Victory; and of Olivaires, who resolves to pursue the Enemy. COuriers were quickly dispatch'd away to Court, with Olivaires's Letters, signifying the Victory unto the King; and having in a short time arrived at the Palace, and the News presented, the City and Kingdom were fill'd with great rejoycing; and with Bonefires, Feasts, and Tri∣umphs, they gave mighty demonstra∣tions of their gladness. Helena was much comforted, and a thousand times read over her dear Olivaires's Letter, whom she lodged in her heart day and night: And another thousand by day discours'd with her Father of him in that respectful and decent manner as was agreeable, repeating to one ano∣ther their Dreams, and had great sa∣tisfaction betwixt themselves. On
the other part, Olivaires seemed not to himself to have performed any thing in putting the Enemy to flight, and was resolved to make a total de∣struction of, and perfect conquest over them. Wherefore, considering the slaughter he had made among them, he perceived they could not readily re∣cruit their Army, fortify their Cities, act defensively and offensively, and so he resolved to follow them: His Sol∣diers therefore being refreshed, he caus'd them with quick dispatch to make a great many Ships; and having set his Army all in Order in a large Campaign, he went on Horseback into the midst of 'em, and thus spake: Most Noble Cavaliers, Valiant Comba∣tants, my Brethren and Friends! I think my self very happy for having been Spectator of your Valours, and that the Enemy has felt your hands, how rough they are, and for this ac∣knowledge kind Stars have shed their benign influence on me: But ah! what have we done in banishing them
out of our Territories? We must expel them their own; if it be a right Victory, there will be seen our Pu∣issance in such an enterprize; there will your Hardiness, Valour, and Vertue appear. Are you pleased, Brethren and dear Friends, that we pursue them, and banish them out of their own Dominions? Are you pleas∣ed that we should revenge our selves on so great an Affront? their pre∣sumption to have driven us from our State, will it not be a just recom∣pence to expel them theirs, to take from them their Kingdoms, their Ci∣ties, and Life? Whom would you have to take vengeance for this Inso∣lence offer'd? if we our selves have not resentment enough to do it, how can you imagine our Posterity should have a warmth for it? Our Sovereign the King, seeing our brave and victo∣rious Courage, will know how much we are the loving Children of the Fa∣ther of our Country, and will be very grateful to, and abundantly reward
us. Which of you, my Lords, Knights, and Brethren, will follow me in this Enterprize, for gaining that which indeed hitherto we have not obtained? Then all with one voice answer'd they would follow him, and would lay down a thousand lives for the Crown of their Sovereign. Olivaires seeing their willingness, gave them many thanks, and told them, that by this Adventure they should surprize and come upon the Kings unawares; and that he feared not by their Fortitude and Valour o acquire a glorious Con∣quest.
CHAP. XLIII. Olivaires leaves England, and enters the Dominions of the Kings of Ire∣land, and lays siege to a strong City; and of his other Sieges and Fights. THE Ships and every thing be∣ing fitted, and all things what∣ever were needful, in readiness, car∣rying Tents and Pavilions for the Camp, the next morning Olivaires departed, and imbarqu'd his whole Army; wherefore with a prosperous Gale he arrived in few days at an Irish Port, and got on Land sooner than he could have expected: A fair Town stood upon the Haven compassed with Walls; and when the Inhabitants perceived that such an Armado was coming upon them, they shut and barr'd their Gates, and put themselves in posture of defence; but quickly was the Town taken, and they put to the Sword; the same did Olivaires to two more, as also to a third, all large
Towns; so that he struck fear into the hearts of all the Country, and many Cities surrendered themselves without resistance; and many of the Kingdom beholding the brave Valour of Olivaires, and contracting a love for him, went over to his side, and fought against their own Sovereigns. Olivaires in his march came unto a strongly fortifi'd Pass, where 'twas necessary for him to take a strong and well-garrison'd City, in which was the Son of the King who was kill'd at the Turnament; therefore he lay siege round it, and gave it a brisk Assault, but could not conquer it; and many were slain on both sides: Mean while News flew all over the Kingdom, and came to the Ear of the Kings, that Olivaires was come, to the great damage of their Crowns; and that he had taken many places, that he would also take this City: Therefore giving order instantly for refitting the Soldiery, Foot and Horse, and marching away with those they
had in readiness, the Kings went to relieve the City, and engage with the Enemy. Olivaires having put his Army in good posture, and ordered his Battalions in his Campaign, expected the Adversary's Assault, being well prepared, in right method, and full of courage; 'twas in the morning when the Kings came upon them, and now the Armies confront each other; so the Drums beat, and to Arms. Olivaires confiding in God's Assistance, and also in derived Valour, thought fit to present himself before them, and to challenge the Kings to single Combat one after another; judging it most certain, that after he had defeated their Chiefs, 'twould be easie to give a great blow to their vast Army with his little One. So he commanded 'em to leave off pitching their Tents; and when he had fought one or two of the Kings, the Army moved to engage the Enemy; and taking a strong Launce, and flourish∣ing it, he exposed himself to publick
view. One of the Kings more fool-hardy than truly valorous, yet in his own Conceit stouter than the rest, hastily mounted his Horse, and with his Launce on his Thigh went to meet Olivaires turning a∣bout; and in the strokes they gave each other, the King received a sharp blow, whereby both Man and Horse were cast to the ground; so he was quickly taken Prisoner. Then a second King suddenly assaulted Oli∣vaires, and he was laid wounded on the ground. And now a cruel Battel was joyn'd; and for divers Hours the mad contest lasted. Olivaires's Cap∣tains seemed so many Thunderbolts, which terrifi'd and struck down the Enemy: And Olivaires by his migh∣ty strength, made a wide lane be∣fore him, infusing Courage into his Soldiers, reducing them into Order; and running about here and there, as was need. The Noon time of Day being past, and the Armies being wearied, the Kings betook themselves
to flight, seeing Olivaires making a large Shammels of their Army: So they gave their Horses the Reins, and Routed and Conquered, and with all speed fled away. All the Field run with Blood, and all the Victor's Sol∣diers were smeared with humane Gore: So the one Party fled, and the other withdrew; and Night com∣ing on, the Battel ceased. Olivaires, before he would sleep, caused the Wounded to be taken care of; and put in Order the remainder of his Soldiers, and made them refresh them∣selves, and take some repose. After, having bid the Trumpet sound, he said, Invincible Cavaliers, now is the time to compleat the Victory, and pursue the Foe, who unexpectedly flies before us: Therefore whoever among you either loveth Me, or is solicitous of his own Honour, let him follow Me. And so early in the Morn∣ing he came upon the timerous Ene∣my; and having dexterously drawn his to a head, he entered among 'em;
ever as he went on encouraging his Forces. Whereupon the Kings and their Army being surprised at the sud∣den sounding of the Trumpet, were mightily afraid: And those fighting Manfully, and these defending them∣selves Cowardly, they were almost all slain and discomfited. But the Kings being made Prisoners, and some principal Persons besides, remained a∣live. Thus they became Masters of their State and Kingdom; wherein much Treasure was found; but all was distributed among the Soldiers; for Olivaires, like a noble General, kept nothing to himself. CHAP. XLIV. The other King being in a strong City, the same is besieged by Olivaires, and surrenders to his Favor and Mercy. THE Army having taken some repose, and being refresh'd and enliven'd, Olivaires gave Order to
pitch their Tents and Pavilions round the City, wherein was that other King with many Guards. So put∣ting fire to the Gates, scaling the Walls, making Engines of portable Wood to annoy those which were within, they made assault against it for two Days, and on the third took it, putting all to the Sword that had not yielded themselves up to them. Olivaires suddenly commanded a Pro∣clamation, That the Churches and the Ladies they should not violate or dis∣order; which accordingly was obey'd. The King, when he saw the City ta∣ken, and his Captains slain, and Sol∣diers, retired into a strongly fortify'd Castle, and seemingly inexpugnable. But the indefatigable diligence of Oli∣vaires, and couragiousness of his Sol∣diers, gave many Batteries against it, which wearied out the King; who finding no way for escape, yielded himself to Olivaires, craving his Par∣don for his refractoriness. Olivaires received him kindly, embraced him,
gave him his Life; and him he made Prisoner, together with the other Kings, under strong and well-armed Guards. However Olivaires order∣ed those Royal Captives to be more waited and attended on than his own Person; and he continually entertain∣ed them with Feasts honorably, and at his own Table. The City being spoi∣led, and every poor Soldier enriched with the Prey, they rested and refresh'd themselves, until Olivaires bid Ed∣ward, his Captain, refit the Fleet, and repair the Ships whereever there was need. After, when they were well Victualled, he caused him to dispose the Army into good order for tran∣sport to their own Kingdom. So in a short time, all things being in a rea∣diness, he is now for departing with his Captive Kings, to the great Glad∣ness and Rejoycing of all his Noble and Valiant Crew, that had attended and gone along with him.
CHAP. XLV. Olivaires parts from Ireland for Eng∣land; and of the honour was shown him. THE English loaden with rich Spoils, with many Carriages and Horses burthened with things of great value, now marched with their Sovereign Olivaires on their way; and the Kings rode on most beautiful Mules, without Spurs, and so travail∣ed before the Valiant Olivaires; and, arrived at the Port, they found the Ships prepared for them, and all things necessary provided in abun∣dance for them by the prudent care of Captain Edward. Having enter'd the Ships with all their Trophies, in few days with a fair wind they touch'd at the Port whence they parted when they came from England: And Oli∣vaires having come a-land, and taken Lodgings, dispatch'd. Edward away to
the King, and order'd him to inform him of the whole Success of the War: Edward being gone Post with some other Knights, came to Court, and, having kissed the King's hand, and paid low respects unto Helena (for it happened that they were at Table to∣gether) begun, after the Ceremonies of Salutation, to relate the Success of the War; and to give account, in order, of the Valour, Strength, Acti∣vity, Wit, and great Vertues that so eminently appear'd in Olivaires; whereat the King dropt tears for joy; and Helena kept a Jubilee in her Breast, and her heart melted with pleasure: The Valiant Captain assur'd the King, that Olivaires was the finest Knight that ever bore Lance; and he told him with what courage he had taken the King's of Ireland Prisoners; and how with a handful, in compari∣son, he had foil'd and conquer'd them; and that he had brought them Cap∣tives with him to his Majesty. Then the King caused to be given to Edward
a Present of Gold, and Helena another of Jewels, for the good News he had brought: Mean time Olivaires made great days Journies; and being arri∣ved near the Royal City, the King with three hundred Knights with gol∣den Spurs, Dukes, Counts, and Mar∣quesses, and the whole City, with all sorts of Musick, and Feastings, made the Heavens to re-eccho again the Applauses of the Victory: The King rid a white Nag, habited in rich Tissue, and had the Royal Crown on his head; and when he came near Olivaires, Oli∣vaires hastily alighted from his Horse, and so likewise the King; and em∣bracing him with Paternal kindness, he kissed him many times: The Kings of Ireland stood aside, for they were not worthy to look on the sacred Crown of England; and every one paid their reverence to Olivaires, the Archbishops, the Bishops, and Pre∣lates; and they followed them on their way toward the City: The King gave thanks unto, and praised God; and
thanked Olivaires, and expressed how much he was obliged to him, both for the defence of his Kingdom, and for having acquired a-new so great a State: And Olivaires attributing the honour to God, and to his Knights, desired the King that he would be grateful to them for their Valour; and also to the other Soldiers; forasmuch as they all had behaved themselves gal∣lantly▪ When they were arrived at the City, all with loud Voices, Bone∣fires, and Instruments of all sorts, ex∣pressed their Joys; and when they were come into the Palace, Helena, like a descended Sun, came toward O∣livaires, who bowing himself low, was supported by the King; and Helena gave him a Kiss, which struck an in∣effable sweetness and delight on Oli∣vaires's Heart-strings; and all the Evening, till time for rest, was spent in extraordinary demonstrations of Mirth and Joyfulness.
CHAP. XLVI. The Captive Kings, and other Princes, are presented to the King. IN the morning the Kings and Pri∣soners were conducted to the Pa∣lace. Olivaires gladly beheld them; and, a while after, when he thought it convenient, he brought them be∣fore the King and Helena; who was well enough pleased to see their condi∣tion, for the love she bore her Oli∣vaires: Then all the Prisoners bended the knee to the King; and Olivaires made a Present of them to his Maje∣sty; but he delivered them over into Olivaires's power to dispose of them as he thought good. Olivaires then ge∣nerously gave them their Lives; and ordering a Table to be placed over∣against that of the King, Helena, and Olivaires, he caused them to be as ho∣nourably attended and waited on as his own Person; the Kings were tran∣sported
with this Courtesy, and it well pleased the Court also. After Dinner great Merriment began, and the Kings had fair liberty given them under Guards, and other things that were convenient. These afterward accompanying them to their Apart∣ments, they left the King of England and Olivaires together to treat of the Marriage, and what related to it. CHAP. XLVII. The King's Discourse, and what he be∣stow'd on Olivaires. BEing left then to discourse by themselves alone, the King asked Olivaires if he might be worthy of, and so happy to have his constant pre∣sence and stay in England: Or if he designed to return to his Kingdom of Spain; to whom he made answer, he would never leave England without a King; and this he promised him on
his Royal Word. The same night after Supper they had Musick, and a great Ball. After a little Dancing, the King said to his Nobles, who were present, My Son Olivaires intends to morrow to take my Daughter to wife, (and she him for her Husband) and the Kingdom for her Dowry, which I desire Olivaires to accept of as part of the reward of his Valour; and I think my self, and us all happy, in bestow∣ing my Realm upon him, who is the bravest Cavalier of the World, and the chief King that sways a Scepter. Olivaires making humble reverence to so honourable Age, with great expressi∣ons of gratitude, said, that he did not deserve such a Reward; and that he should ever have reason to thank Hea∣ven, and his Majesty, for promoting him to, and thinking him worthy of so great honour; and begged of God to prosper him, and prolong his days, and fill him with all content and satis∣faction: On account of this Munifi∣cence, and the Espousals, Olivaires
gave all the Prisoners, and the Kings, their Liberty; who receiving such a favour, made their Acknowledgment after this manner. CHAP. XLVIII. The Kings are made Tributaries of the Crown of England, and promise Fealty. THE next day the Irish Kings came to the Palace, and deli∣vered their mind to an Ancient No∣bleman, who was a famous Cavalier; and he engaged, and gave his faith for them (and they confirmed it with their own Promises) that their Crowns should for ever pay homage to his Majesty's Royal State. So in the King's presence they made them∣selves Tributary, and gave vow once a year to present themselves before him, and in Peace and War to be al∣ways ready to serve and obey the King,
and his Son Olivaires; then they kis∣sed the King's Hand. After that, they were presented with Horses of all sorts, Pages, Vestments, and all things they had occasion for, and liberty to go or stay, as they had a mind; the Kings with low reverence thanked his Majesty, and desired of Olivaires they might tarry to see the Solemnity; and reiterated, that their Crowns should be ever subservient to so illustrious Worth and Vertue; and as to this al∣so they had their satisfaction; so they prepared for Feasts, Justs, and other Combats, to honour the Espousals; but for the present all went to rest. CHAP. XLIX. Olivaires gives the Ring to Helena, and espouses her with great pomp and feasting. THE King's Sergeants prepared New Vestments, Liveries, Or∣naments of Gold, and of Jewels; and
all the Palace was hung with Tissue, smooth Velvet, and other rich Hang∣ings, for celebrating and solemnizing the Marriage; they ordered twelve Bishops, and one Archbishop, for performing the sacred Ceremonies: All the Kings had their Royal Robes on; and the Dukes, Knights, Counts, and all the Barons were in their pro∣per habits; so they made a show with their rich and splendid Pomp and Attire that stupify'd the Spectators; two Kings were elected to lead Hele∣na to the Altar, and the rest attended on Olivaires: The King was admira∣bly attired, with all his Court; and so Helena with all her Ladies; and Olivaires also flourished in much grandezza: The Musick was of infi∣nite and most rare and admirable kinds: The day appointed being come, every one was ready to perform his Office, and they went with the King to get Olivaires up, and conduct him to the Chappel; and with him were four Bishops, and other four with
Helena; and all were to meet those other with the Archbishop; who took the Ring, which was brought invisi∣bly to Helena; and giving it to Oli∣vaires, the previous Ceremonies being duly performed, made him espouse her; at which the rejoycings of the People, the gladness of the Court, the noise of the Military Musick, and the sweet Melody of the Sacred and Ci∣vil, with a thousand other things that conduced to the celebrabing and great pomp of this Divine Solemnity, cannot be expressed. Afterward the Host was administer'd by the hand of the Archbishop; and, when Mass was done, they went into the Hall, where such a choice and sumptuous Dinner attended them, that I think Jove him∣self, with all his Divine Retinue, would not have disdain'd to have been invited to, and have been present to grace these Nuptials: And, all the Dishes being placed on the Table, new Liveries appeared, and new In∣struments sounded; and it was ama∣zing
to see sit at one Table seven Kings, and one Queen. After Dinner orders were given for Dancing; and after that for a noble Tilting, where the Kings, for the honour of the Es∣pousals, clad in choice Habit and Ar∣mour, and on their best Horses, justed against each other with laudable de∣monstrations of their Prowess; but it was not agreeable for Olivaires to just that time. When the Tilting was ended, the two Kings received a most rich Present from the hands of Helena, and she thanked them for so great a favour; and they also bowed them∣selves to her, and humbly thanked her for her Gift. And now the time for Supper approached; wherefore, after a little respite, they sat down to rich, sumptuous, and splendid Tables. He who could penetrate into the secret thoughts of Lovers, and, as it were, see Olivaires mind and desires, and the ardent love Helena bore her new Spouse, might safely say, that that Day seemed to them both a very long
one, and even every hour a Year. Sup∣per being ended, and the Dancing over, the King rises from his Seat, and embracing Helena, and kissing her, recommended her to her Hus∣band; then every one retired with much content to their several Apart∣ments; and the happy licens'd Couple went to taste that free bliss which no∣thing but Youth and Beauty, and deeply inamour'd hearts, is capable of, or has any possibility to conceive: It pleased Almighty God that the fair Helena conceived that night, and bles∣sed shall her Travail be, for that of her shall be born a grand Champion for, and Pillar of the Christian Reli∣gion, as the English Chronicles fully and faithfully relate.
CHAP. L. The King goes in the morning to visit Olivaires; and the Irish Kings take their leave; and of other things. OLivaires and Helena turn'd night into day, and day into night, the custom of all new married Cou∣ples, especially such passionate Lovers as they; so that after Dinner the King went into their Chamber, and was ve∣ry glad to find his Son in Bed, and used some pleasant raillery to him for a while. After Olivaires had got up, and was drest, the Irish Kings came before them, and they took their leaves of them all, and by Olivaires and the King they were presented with Horses for all uses, and other things suitable to such a joyful time, and such a Crown and Royal Majesty: The Archbishop came and blessed that Fruit which was hoped to spring from them; and all the Bishops gave them their benedi∣ction; and, the Feastings and Rejoy∣cings
being renewed, they past many days in ease and jollity; and the Kings of Ireland at their departure did assure them they would never forget such re∣spect shewn, and such Presents receiv'd. After a just time Helena was delivered of a Boy; and baptizing it with infinite pomp and splendor, they gave it the name of Henry, which as he advanc'd in years, so did he in vertue and good∣ness, supporting and diffusing the Ca∣tholick Faith; and the Lord was most gracious unto them, so that from that time, at other nine months end she was in travel again, and brought forth a Daughter, whom they named Claritia, who when come to years was not her admired Mother's inferior, either for corporeal shape and beauty, or endow∣ments of mind. Olivaires enjoy'd a quiet state, and liv'd in all manner of peace, ever together with his fair ver∣tuous Consort, praising, thanking, and adoring the infinite Goodness of Al∣mighty God for his so great and in∣estimable Benefits: And his Recrea∣tion-hours
he spent in the Chace, Gun∣ning, Hawking, and other Princely Diversions. When one day Envious Fortune watch'd an opportunity to disturb his happiness, and obtain'd it, as you shall read in the sequel of our Story. CHAP. LI. Helena Dreams a Melancholy Dream, her Lord being out at the Chace, and sends him notice of it. WITH what kind eyes Oli∣vaires was look'd on, and how much beloved of the Court and the whole Kingdom, tongue cannot utter. And all his pass-time he spent in finding out wild Beasts, in chacing, and taking them: Wherefore some of his Subjects, neighbours to a rough and craggy Mountain, about Two days Journey distant, came to give him notice how Two most fierce and
overgrown old wild Boars did much destroy and lay waste their Country, so that they obtain'd but little Fruits or good from their ground. At the hearing of which news, Olivaires (upon his own account, and also in prospect of their future advantage) was hugely pleased, and also gave them presents for the same; and im∣mediately he ordered his Hunters to make themselves ready, their Toils, and all things else that were necessa∣ty for such sort of Game. So after Dinner Olivaires mounts his Horse, and goes for the place, and lodged that night at a homely Village; the night following Helena lying alone, saw in a Dream the White Knight ap∣pear to her, that gave her the Ring, who presented to her fancy a fierce Lioness Assaulting Olivaires in the Chace, and so hurting him, that he remained Wounded on the spot, then vanished. Whereupon suddenly with shrill screeches she awak'd, and wa∣ken'd also the Ladies that lay by her,
and having told them her Dream, she also after related it to the King, assuring her self it was over-true some sinister Accident would befal Olivai∣res; and therefore dispatched Cou∣riers away to give Olivaires intelli∣gence of it, that he might proceed no further toward the Chace; who quickly, as swift as the wind, went after him to overtake him; and over∣joy'd they were when they found him safe and cheerful; and the whole ac∣count they gave him both by Letters and word of Mouth. The advice pleased Olivaires, who yet went on for the Chace, as one who feared not any thing, being within his own Realm, and among People that loved and were observant of him. Then he dismiss'd the Messengers, and bid them let Helena know, That he would be with her the following Evening. So she rested well content, for that he would take care of himself, and was at present in safe condi∣tion.
CHAP. LII. One of the Irish Kings coming to pay Tribute to the King of England, finds Olivaires alone in a dismal grove; who transported with desire of catching his Prey, is severed from his Company, and taken Prisoner. THE Hunters by break of day went with Olivaires to the place, where were shewed them the lodges of those great and fierce Boars; and the Hunters, as need required, being separated to their particular stands and passes, the Dogs went into the thick of the Grove to fetch them forth from their Dens. Olivaires stood in a more common and trodden path in expectation of the Boar; and Fortune, which took a pleasure in exercising and putting on hardships the bravest Knight of the world, sent the Savage his way; and he smiting him, and that flying, and he pursuing,
it happened that the other Boar sal∣lied out of the Grove, and took a con∣trary rode; wherefore the Hunters having not spied that which Olivaires Chac'd, all went after the other; and although some followed their Master, so swift a race the wild Animal led them (and Olivaires was much the foremost in pursuit) they lost their way; but lighting on a track, they re∣turned back, having lost that of their Master by reason of the large fallen leaves that had strew'd the ground. Olivaires still pursued the Savage, and so far got engag'd in the Grove, that he quite lost his way, not knowing in what place, what ground, or where∣about he was; here then comes to his mind Helena's Dream, and he knew not what to think; but night hasting on, he traverses this way and that way, and at length frees himself of the Grove, but far enough he was from any dwellings; and he saw coming far off a great many Horse, which much cheer'd him, thinking
they were his own company; but when they came near (for 'twas be∣ginning to be dark) he found it to be one of the Irish Kings, King Maque∣nor's Son, who was slain at the Tilt∣ing; and knowing Olivaires, he cry'd, Lo! this is he who kill'd the King my Father; wherefore let him be seiz'd, since Fortune has offer'd me so fair an opportunity. Olivaires, having only his Javelin, puts himself (yet weary) in posture of defence; but it breaking (after he had slain some of them) he was taken, and bound, and under a strong Guard conducted all the night toward the Realm of Ireland; and in a well-fortified and lofty Tower, was committed to the Governor's custody, having charge to keep him strict Prisoner till the King's return, neither suffering to talk with, nor see any body; and the Irish King held on his Journey to the King of England's Court; and having done his Homage, he stayed a little, for that he saw the Court in mighty Afflicti∣on
on and Grief, because Olivaires could no where be found, and then he re∣turned home. Olivaires was in a bottom room of a most high Tower, and much afflicted; he prayed unto God that he would consolate his Lady, and the King, and also aid him in his miserable condition. One time the Governor of the Fortress carrying him Meat himself, took great notice of him, and was amazed at his admi∣rable Aspect; and moved with Com∣passion, said, Sir, you be some noble Cavalier? I am so, replied Olivaires: Then subjoin'd the other, Make me Promise that you will not endeavour escape out of the Fortress, and I will free you from this close Confinement: Olivaires told him he would not on his Royal word; for, said he, I am Oli∣vaires; then he brought him out, and gave him the whole Castle for his spa∣cious Prison, with infinite Caresses. Had I well Chastiz'd my Enemy, said Fortune's harass'd Knight, and been more severe with him for his Auda∣city,
I should not for life given have received a death; but since it so plea∣ses the grand disposer, Lo! I patiently bear it. Mean while the King and Helena made search through the whole Kingdom, through all the sha∣dy Groves and remote Woods, among the obscure Caverns, Recesses, and Valleys, and o're all the high Moun∣tains for Olivaires. One time fearing he might be fallen into a swoon, ano∣ther lest some wild Beast might have devoured him; sometime thinking that Highway-men might have light∣ed on him and slain him: At length not getting any news of him, they gave themselves up wholly to Grief and Lamentations; and those that had seen Helena, would rather have thought her a wild Beast than a Wo∣man, whilst she pluck'd off her Hair, scratch'd her Face, rent her Gar∣ments, screek'd out aloud, and would not take either any Meat or Rest. The King was astonished, and struck al∣most dead with this Accident; and all
Fashion and good Order neglected, the Court became a melancholy, heed∣less, and confused Crew; for every one much feared the life both of He∣lena and the King, so excessive was their Affliction; and the dolors and sighs that proceeded from their breasts did so affect and trouble the Lords and Knights, as almost to break their hearts. He who had heard the praises Olivaires had given him of the King, and seen what a blow of discontent this Accident had given the Crown, would have been very sensible his Ma∣jesty had felt both the utmost extre∣mities of happiness and misery: But leaving Helena, the King, and the whole Court, to their Sorrows, let us now proceed to look for Arthur, who so long saw the water clear, but of a sudden beheld it turn'd cloudy; and understanding what it meant, ha∣stily sets forward in search after Oli∣vaires, being fully resolved to find him out; and on the one hand hurried away with a violent desire of seeing
him; and on the other stimulated with grief, knowing some great peril had behapned him, he as it were flew with Wings. CHAP. LIII. Arthur prepares to go in search after Olivaires, by signal of the Water, which shews his Calamity. I Related before the manner of Oli∣vaires's departure from Castile, and the grief that it caused his Father, the Court, and the Queen the prin∣cipal occasion of so great an Evil: But the King's Affliction was the heaviest, and in a short time cost him his life: Upon his death then Arthur was made Ruler of the Kingdom, by those Dukes, Barons, and Knights, and had the Government until they should hear of King Olivaires: And Arthur willingly accepted of it, for the love he bore to his Brother; and every day
he looked on the Vial of Water. At length, One morning, a while after he had rise, he was for going out a Hunting, but would before see the Water, which he found troubled, and of a bloudy colour: Whereupon he cry'd out, O noble and virtuous Cava∣lier, my faithful Brother! where shall I find thee to free me from so great dangers? Whither shall I go, which way must I steer to succour thee? O that I knew the Province, the King∣dom, the City, nay that Heaven that could inform me of thee! And instead of going a Hunting (unless in another kind) he appointed his Vicegerent, and on a brisk Courser, with a Sum of Mo∣ney and Jewels, with all possible dis∣patch he is mounted for his Journey: Having to all his Barons deliver'd up the Government, and beseeched them to administer all things for the best, in as much as he hoped that they might shortly have Olivaires with them; and desir'd them they would not marvail at his departure, since it was of great im∣portance
for the good of the whole State. Accompanied then with those few he had a mind to, he first takes his way thorough his own Kingdom, and so orders the Affairs of the Go∣vernment, declaring all along he was going about a matter of grand con∣cern, as indeed it was. Arthur's go∣ing away, was a great trouble to the Lords of Castile first, and after to those of Dalgarve; for his behaviour and carriage to them were such, that eve∣ry one was in love with his noble and generous Temper; and his Vertues made him the Darling of Mankind: So all lamented his departure. CHAP. LIV. Arthur's Voyage through divers Coun∣tries, in search of Olivaires. ARrthur being got out of his King∣dom, recommends himself unto God, and his good Providence. And
first he makes search through all the Kingdom of Portugal, in all the Cities, and in all places of the Realm; nor desists his inquest till he goes into the remotest Woods. Now in his bu∣sy inquiry that way, he hears tell, that not far off a fierce Lyon haunted a Mountain; and whoever went into those places, was sure either to be kill'd, or at least be wofully shatter'd by the savage; and that many Knights, for proof of their Prowess, and to ob∣lige the Country with a publick bene∣fit, had made attempts upon him, but with the loss of their lives. Arthur hearing this, deliberated with himself whether Olivaires might not perhaps have gone on this enterprize: And, having fitted his Armour, he makes for the Mountain; and when he had got half way, he meets the Lion, who had come far, was lean, hum∣ble, and by chance lame of a Paw. Arthur seeing him, wondered he was so gentle, thinking with himself it was easy to kill him; and for that end,
without fear, goes toward him: The Lion reaches out himself a length, as Dogs are wont to do, and with a la∣mentable Roine expressed that he re∣commended himself to his favour, and shew'd him his Paw, which was swell'd, and had rotted, because a piece of the Splinter of a Spear re∣mained in it. Arthur then drew him the Shiver out, and forth run a great deal of corrupt matter: Whereupon the Lion perceiving it to be better with him, with many more Caresses and wantoner play than a Dog can make, gratefully fawns upon him. Arthur goes for the Mountain, and the Lion follows him; and having sought, but not found any humane footsteps, he returns to his own Road, accom∣panied by the Lion; all the Country fled before them, beholding the Ani∣mal: But Arthur put them out of fear, making 'em to see how tame the Lion was; and he gave him a piece of fat Veal, and it refreshed him; and in a short time, by attending on him, the
Animal became sound and hearty, and went continually at Arthur's Stirrup as a Page when he rode; and when he slept a-nights, lay Centinel at his Chamber-door like a Mastiff. Arthur accompanied of this Lion, made search thorough many, and many Realms, Catalonia, Languedoc, Spain, Norman∣dy, France, Piccardy, Burgundy, and spent many a day in travail, yet could never hear any news at all of Olivaires. One night melancholly and fatigu'd with his Journy (having arrived at the Port of Cales) he argued to himself, and having no other in company with him in his Chamber but the Lion on∣ly, he thus complained: Oh! why may not my dolors have an end as well as thine, most loving Animal? Ah! that at the least I could inform thee how excelling a Knight he is I wander in quest of; how noble, how admirable, and how he bears away, and easily deserves the Palm of all the valiant Knights of Chivalry! The Li∣on was sensible of Arthur's meaning,
and wept. And next morning the Ani∣mal took the way before him, and went to the Port, and enter'd into a Ship; but the Mariners were affright∣ed, and cry'd out aloud; and Arthur also entering, let them see how tame and gentle he was; so they hois'd Sail, and Arthur took good Augury from the Lion, and made no enquiry what Coast the Ship was bound for. CHAP. LV. Of an horrible Monster which Arthur kill'd in the Kingdom of Ireland; and of a Vision that he had. THE Wind swelling the Sails, the Mariners with a prosperous Voyage pursued their Navigation; and Arthur was ever asking where about they were; and being on the Coasts of Ireland, and in the Evening having touched at the Shore in a Port, the Lion went out of the Ship, nor
would return into it again any more: Wherefore Arthur was obliged to stay in that Land, and searching about all the Country, he could not get any in∣telligence of Olivaires; so he was re∣solved to make search in a vast Wood: The Lion never forsook him, and en∣tering into the thick of lofty Trees, whose leafy Boughs excluded the light of the Noon-day's Sun, the Cavalier began to be afraid of such a place; and his Lion running about over it all, happened to put up from his dark Den, a terrible, foul, and horrid Monster, of the size of a Buffle; but by reason of his great bulk, he walk∣ed with his Belly on the ground like a Serpent. He had four Feet, with short Legs, like a Lizzard or Croco∣dile; and on the tips of these he rear'd himself about an Ell from the ground with long Claws like Eagles Talons; his Case, or Skin, resembled that of the bristled Bore, which the Italians call Riccio & Spinoso; full of these Sharps like a Porcupine, excepting all
the Neck from the Chine-bone, and the Head, which part was like the spunginess of a Rock, but hard, and of diverse mingled colours: His Neck was like that of a Bull; and a vast Head like an Elephant's, but without his cloudy Brow, and also such Teeth; however his were large enough, and sharp: When he open'd his Mouth, it look'd like a Furnace, Smoak issuing out of it; and the red of his Jaws was so hot, that it seem'd a fire: His Taile was four ells long; the extremity of it was hard and horny, and with that he smote as with a Javelin, or his Sting: out of his Flanks grew four Wings like a Dragon's, and other four he spread abroad, which proceeded from the ridge of his Back; so that he was all covered with these. When the Lion beheld this new Animal full before his face, he roar'd out so strong∣ly, that all the Wood re▪eccho'd a∣gain; and the Monster turned about as if he was mad: The Lion, as afraid, went near to Arthur; at this the
strange kind of Animal stretched forth himself, and flapping with his Wings, came towards Arthur, and smote him on the Thigh with the horn of his Tail, and with the end of his Wing he gave the Lion a brush on the Head, and opening his Mouth, it smoak'd like a Furnace. Arthur leapt aside, and, laying hold on his Sword, gave him so fierce a blow on the Neck, that he made him hiss; and so sharp was his hiss, that it dismayed the other; but so hard was that Rock, that the Sword could not pierce it; wherefore Arthur look'd on himself as a dead man. The Lion fetching a brisk skip, leaps upon his Chine-point, and fast'n∣ing his hind Paws on his Shoulders, and his fore on his Head, and in his Eyes, he made him through anguish of his Visage, fall on one side on the ground: Arthur seeing his Paunch lay expos'd, run to smite him in the Belly, and with few strokes he opens it, and through that aperture his life flies away: Beholding the Monster dead,
and considering all the Parts of him, he much thanked God who had given him such a Lion for his Companion, and had delivered him from so great a danger. Then viewing the Wound he had received, it appear'd very deep; and when it cool'd, it begun to be ex∣tream painful; but such quantity of Blood had run out, as so weakned his Spirits, that he could scarce stand on his Feet: At this noise of the Beast, and the roaring of the Lion, a great mul∣titude of Country People and Shep∣herds came down from the Mountains, and seeing the fierce Monster dead, they were amazed; and after wonder∣ed at the familiarity of the Lion: And Arthur assuring them of his gentleness, begun to talk with them, and told them the particulars of the Accident; whereupon they much caressed him, and conducted him to their Cottages, and the Lion was continually by his side: And after he had taken some re∣freshment, they left him to his night's repose.
CHAP. LVI. The White Cavalier appears in a Dream to Arthur, and heals his Wound. WHen on his first sleep, the door being shut, the White Cava∣lier appears unto him, and wakens him; saying, Arthur, I am come to comfort thee. Arthur seeing such a Person, and so accompanied, and then that he should call him by his Name, wondered greatly. Do not marvel; for I will instruct thee concerning Oli∣vaires. Good God! Am I in a Dream, or am I awake? Thou art awake, said the Knight; and for a sign, shew me thy wounded Thigh, that I may heal it. And having dressed it, he took precious Balsams, which he had ordered to be brought with him, and quickly anointing it, and binding it up, said, To morrow you shall be well. You then do me a mighty be∣nefit; and you promise to inform me of Olivaires; Oh, to whom must I ren∣der
my infinite Thanks? Tell me, Dear Sir, who you are that do me such Kindnesses? Oh! how shall I ever be able to requite them? It is not so convenient that you learn my Name at this time: See here is a Root for you, which you should eat, said the Cavalier; for it would make you new Blood, and recover your lost Strength. How am I obliged to you, admirable Knight, and what shall I do for you? No other thing than go into England, and consolate the King and Helena, who are in great afflicti∣on, and almost spent with sorrow; for Olivaires is her Husband, and she the King's Daughter. And here the Cavalier told Arthur all the Journey, Accidents, Deeds, Feats, Behaviour, Disgraces, Fortunes, and every Mi∣nutest thing concerning Olivaires; and how he was taken, and that he was in Prison: Forther, thou shalt say, that thou art Olivaires, and shalt sleep together with Helena (but touch her not.) After thou shalt return in∣to
this place, that I may set thee on thy way for getting Olivaires out of Prison: And he told him and instru∣cted him in every thing that was ne∣cessary. Then he gave him a little Electuary; which when Arthur had put in his Mouth, he suddenly fell a∣sleep. CHAP. LVII. Arthur does all that the White Cava∣lier ordered him; and how he is be∣lieved of every one to be Olivaires. ARthur resembled Olivaires in eve∣ry thing, in Speech, in Shape, in Visage, and in all his Manner and Ways; and they differed in nothing, save a Mark in one Arm; for Olivai∣res had three Moles at the setting on of his Shoulder, with some slender Hairs which appeared like the finest Wire-drawn Gold; and Arthur had not such. When Arthur waked in the
Morning, he thought he had been in a Dream, and that of the Cavalier but a Vision of Fancy: But desirous to be assured, he begun to handle his Wound; and not making it smart, when he had unwrapped it, he found it healed; then his Joyfulness return∣ed again, and he no further doubted. And suddenly was on his way for En∣gland, and spurring on, and also ha∣ving crossed the Sea, he came to a Town, walled about, whose Inhabi∣tants very well knew Olivaires. And seeing Arthur, they all forthwith run into him to make their Obeisance, and Congratulate his return; and they made an extraordinary great Feast. Then diverse of them took Post for London, to tell the News at Court. And himself, a little after, with an honourable Attendance of the Chief of the Countrey, rode to London. When the Posters had told the News, the King so recovered himself of a sudden, that he rose from his Couch, and honourably rewarded those that
brought it; and gave order for Feasts, Triumphs, and great Rejoycings. And understanding his entry into the City was to be the next Day, great Multitudes went out to meet him; and the King himself: And when he was near, he run to embrace him, and clung fast to him, but could not speak for Joy. But he, moved with com∣passion for his Brother Olivaires, was inwardly much troubled. All the Knights and Lords kissed his Hands; and the World kept a Jubilee; every place re-ecchoed with rare Voices, and musical Instruments, both Civil and Military. The King having ta∣ken a little breath, embraced him a∣gain, and said; O my Son, Olivaires, your coming has lengthened my Days. Sir, my departure was forced; and I have undergon great affliction on ac∣count of the Love which I know your Majesty always entertains for me; but I hope in God to make a∣mends for all the Evil my absence has caused: And the Bounty and Kind∣nesses
I have received from you, I will never forget. CHAP. LVIII. Arthur's entry into London; and the visit he gave Helena, who is ravi∣shed with Joy. WHen the King and Arthur came to the City, such multitudes of People so throng'd in the Streets, that they could scarce pass through them; all the Ladies stood in the Windows singing pleasant Songs suit∣ing the Occasion; all the Streets were adorned with fine Hangings; and all the Clergy met them, firmly belie∣ving it was their King; all the Bells rung merrily, and wonderful Bonfires were made on the tops of the Palaces. Helena inquired the meaning of all this Festivity, and what was the reason of such Solemnity; but she could not learn, for the Physicians had
given charge against too sudden a com∣munication of the News unto her, that the over eager Joy might not produce ill, not to say fatal, Effects: Where∣fore warily, and by degrees, they hin∣ted it to her that Olivaires was come. She assuredly gathering as much, lift up her Hands to Heaven, blessing and praising God for so great a Mercy: May the hour of my Death come when it shall please him, for I shall not fear it after having had once more a sight of my dearest Consort. And she would have raised her self up (making indeavour) from her Bed, but her weakness would not permit. Oh, what ravishment gave to her Soul the thoughts of seeing her Hus∣band Olivaires! The King clome up the Stairs, having Arthur by the Hand; nor would let go till he had brought him to Helena's Bed-side, who threw her Arms about his Neck; every one of them Weeping; she for Joy, be∣lieving 'twas Olivaires; he out of Pi∣ty and Compassion for the true Oli∣vaires.
So being undiscovered, he invented agreeable things to discourse of with Helena till time of Supper. Then the King sent for him, but He∣lena detained him to sup with her. The Physicians ordered that he should not sleep with Helena; she would not consent unto it: Then Arthur went into her Bed, but lay as if he had not been there; for Arthur said, I am ob∣liged by a Vow against all Lascivious∣ness, either in Thought or Deed, un∣til first (as I have promised unto God) I pay Reverence and Homage to the holy Apostle James: Therefore I desire you would excuse me, for it is an Ordinance of God; and in that time you will recover your Health. She was very well contented; and asked him how his departure was, and where he spent so long time without her? and said, she fully be∣lieved 'twas a forced thing. He told her it was so, and that he could not have endured so long an absence, but that it was necessary he might not
appear, before the time for accompli∣shing his Vow. CHAP. LIX. Arthur feigning to go to discharge his Vow, goes for freeing Olivaires out of Prison. ARthur remained a few days at the Court, (and all the Cour∣tiers were amazed at the gentleness and beauty of his Lion;) but then urged by his love for Olivaires, he dis∣creetly imparted to the King and He∣lena his intentions of going to dis∣charge his Vow; and said, he after would immediately return. The King commended his devotion; and his Train having all made ready, leave taken, and promise made of a speedy return, he departed. When he was gone on his way some days Journies, he ordered his Attendance to make a stop, and to stay where they then
were, till his coming back; for that he would go alone unto this Duty, without pomp, in a plain and humble manner, (wherefore they were wil∣ling to stay behind, and observe his pleasure) and he said he would re∣turn back to them, and go together with them unto his Kingdom. In the morning then Arthur departs for a time, accompanied with his Lion alone, and he cross'd the Sea, and en∣ter'd Ireland, and arrived at the place he parted from; and they remem∣bring him, expressed great joy at the seeing him again. At night when he slept, the white Cavalier came and instructed him where Olivaires was, and how he should go immediately and release him out of Prison, for that the Lion was sent him of God for his Companion, and that he ought to follow his conduct, who would bring him to the City, and the place he had in Vision represented unto him. Ar∣thur gave him thanks for his obliging cure, and also for his now much more
obliging information concerning his Friend Olivaires; then he disappeared. Arthur waking, saw the Sun was well advanc'd, and rising from his Bed, he followed the Lion, who by secret and unknown ways conducted him in short time unto the City; and when he was at the entrance, he found the white Cavalier, who said, Ply thy Sword, and my service to Olivaires; and vanish'd. The Lion then running into the City, Arthur followed him on Horse-back; after he enter'd a Garden where was the King and all his Nobles, who see∣ing the fierce Animal, were affrighted; then Arthur laid his hand on his Sword, and said, Wicked King, thou shalt not escape the just vengeance of Heaven. At this all those Cavaliers were dismai'd, and in so great fear, that they could scarce draw their Swords; in this jun∣cture the white Knight with a great Army seiz'd the Piazza, and gallop'd about the City as his own; wherefore the King being depriv'd of his reli'd-on succor, was all in despair and confusion.
CHAP. LX. Arthur takes the King Prisoner, and sets Olivaires at Liberty. THE Lion ran to make havock among those Cavaliers, and slew many. And Arthur smiting and making a large shammels of them, opened himself a wide Lane, and run after the King, who endeavoured to get into the Fortress; but Arthur overtook him with a cleaving stroke on his Head, which would certainly have divided it, had it hit fair; but it glanced and brought him only to the Ground, where he begs of Arthur, for God's sake, to save his Life. Ah! unfaithful Man, said Arthur, Is this the reward of that Mercy and Generosi∣ty thou hadst shown thee by Olivaires, to detain him in Prison? And making him rise, he pricks him on with the point of his Sword to trip to the Castle, and open to Olivaires; then lets him
go, knowing that he could not get out of the Yard. The Lion having glutted himself with Slaughter, not finding now any remaining, followed Arthur; and Arthur could not keep him from killing the Governour, and the Soldiers that were in the Fort. Lo! Olivaires coming out of the Pri∣son all pallid, meager, and miserably afflicted; who throwing himself at Arthur's Feet, not knowing him, but thinking he was one of the King's Ser∣vants, said these words: Wherefore does the King suffer me to languish thus? Why does he not kill me? What better revenge than to take his Life away, whom thou holdst for thine Enemy? I beseech thee that thou wouldst kill me, or make some endeavours for me, that I may no longer have so hard and cruel Usage. Arthur seeing and hearing him speak these piteous words, was inwardly extreamly afflicted, and his Wrath glowed hot against the King. I am thy Brother Arthur, said he, O my
Olivaires. At which voice his Spirits revived, which were sadly sunk and dead before; and they ran together and embrac'd one another. And search∣ing about the place, they found Meat, and also wherewith to recruit, every way help, and Royally habit Olivai∣res. The mean time that they rook some Refreshment, Discoursed, and provided for themselves, every body in the City locked themselves up in their Houses. And the King could not find any to make him help; wherefore oppressed with Grief, and in fear of his Life, he said, 'Tis the best for me to yield my self up into Olivaires's Hands, for I know he is so Pitiful, Courteous, Noble, Good and Gentle, that he will give me my Life. And returning, all besmeered with Blood, into the Fortress, he found on the Stairs, and in the Halls and Chambers, all his Vassals slain, which troubled him infinitely. At length being come before Arthur and Olivai∣res, he falls down on his Knees, wo∣fully
lamenting, and begging of Oli∣vaires, that, for the sake of God, he would pardon him; and craved Mer∣cy with hideous Sighings. Here Ar∣thur would have made an end of him, but Olivaires holds his Arm; and says to him, Take heart; for, for the love of God a greater thing than this ought to be given; and bidding him rise, they caused some men they spied to come and help him; who, with great fear and trembling, de∣scended from high Places whither they had fled for refuge. Here the King being made Prisoner, and the fortifi'd Places taken, he renounced the King∣dom to Olivaires; who was by them acknowledged and accepted of for their Sovereign. Words cannot ex∣press the Lamentations Olivaires and Arthur made betwixt each other, the Moans, and the Weeping; also Re∣joycings. But to have told him the News of the Death of the King of Castile, his Father, and all the ill Ac∣cidents had happened those many
Years they had been separated from one another, would have been too too Melancholy a Theme, and the hear∣ing would almost have broke his Heart. That Night the City was de∣livered up, by means of the White Cavalier: And many Days after they remained in the Town, till Olivaires might recover more Cheerfulness and Strength; he judging it equal Bal∣lance, either to return and see Helena, the King, and his Children, or to have in his Sight, and the Company of his Arthur alone. CHAP. LXI. The departure of Olivaires and Arthur from Ireland; and how Olivaires would have slain Arthur. IT appearing to Olivaires that he had done but small service for the sake of God; therefore when he left the City, he gave back, and restored the
Kingdom to the King; telling him, That he ought to become a Man more worthy of such a Crown, and that he should learn to fear God; so they depart∣ed with great Honour and Joy. By the way Arthur began to tell of his Jour∣ney which he had undertaken for him; he told him of his Lion's Malady; of the danger he had scaped by the Mon∣ster's Death; and of all that Kindness shewed him of the White Cavalier, for saving his Life by the Cure; and how by his Counsel he went into En∣gland, and was received as Olivaires, and not as Arthur; and that for He∣lena's Recovery, and the saving her languishing Life, he had slept toge∣ther with her. Here Olivaires, as weak as he was, suddenly drew out his Sword, and smote Arthur on the Head, hearing he had slept with He∣lena; not expecting till he had told the remainder: Whereupon he fell stounded to the Ground; and he would have killed him out, but that the White Cavalier appeared and re∣strained
him. Olivaires seeing his Knight, of whom he had received so many Benefits, cast himself from his Horse on the Ground, and rever'd him as a Father; and he told him all the Matter of Arthur, and gave Oli∣vaires a reprimand: Wherefore grie∣ving, he begged Pardon of the swoon∣ing Arthur, and desired of the Cava∣lier to forgive him; who quickly ap∣plied his Hand for the Cure of Arthur, and healed him: And when he was come to himself, he made them as good Friends as ever. Then he took some certain Roots of Herbs, and gave Olivaires them to feed upon; by which means, in a few Days, he was reco∣vered, refreshed and brisk, equal to, and so like Arthur, that every one be∣lieved that it was some design of Hea∣ven, that two should so strangely re∣semble each other. The Knight, af∣ter he had done all, turning to Oli∣vaires, said; Recollect your self, I can no longer attend you, and you will have no further need of me:
When will the time be for my Share, according to your Promise? and va∣nished. Arthur hearing the Knight, proceeded to tell Olivaires the whole Success; and he found that every thing had fallen out agreeably to what he had said to him in a Vision: And so he was ascertained that this was some Divine Spirit. CHAP. LXII. How Arthur returns by the same way; and when he finds his Cavaliers, they stand amazed, not knowing which of the two is Olivaires; and the great delight this produces. THE valiant Brothers being ar∣rived where the Cavaliers were ordered to stay, those could not tell, at the sight of them, unto which they should pay their Obeisance, even al∣though the Lion was ever by Arthur's side, and knew his: Therefore pay∣ing
Reverence to them both (for that they were continually together, and gave mutual Respect) they also at∣tended on them both, and honoured them equally alike. And one of 'em said to these Noble Knights, I am Oli∣vaires who brought you such a way, and said, and did so and so. And the other said, in English, the same thing, and how he did it. So they both made every one marvel; and it was referred to Helena to determine which was the true Olivaires. And they staied some Days in that City for the making of Feasts and Triumphs, be∣ing detained of the People, to express their Joyfulness for having regained their Sovereign. They dispatched Messengers up and down with the News, so Feastings were every where prepared; and as they passed from City to City, all honoured their So∣vereign; and every one took a great pleasure in saying, For one Sovereign which we have lost, we have gained two. And the Fame hereof had got
to Court; and it was so confidently affirmed, that many Lords went ma∣ny Days Journey to meet them out of curiosity of seeing such a Rarity; and were still more eager of it, for that 't was said, they were equals, and alike in Turnament, at Justing, at mana∣ging Horses, at Arms, at Dexteri∣ty, in Age, Size, Speech, Tone; and that to please their Fancy they dres∣sed alike, and wore the same Habit; and loved so intirely, that they seem∣ed one Soul animating two Bodies. CHAP. LXIII. Olivaires and Arthur arrive at the Court, and are equally received of the King, and of Helena; and how Oli∣vaires is known; and Helena well sa∣tisfies her self by seeing the Moles on his Arm. BEING arrived at London, they were received of the King and Helena with unspeakable Joy; and
they were amaz'd, not knowing which to take for Olivaires. But Arthur re∣vealed the Secret: And Helena be∣holding Olivaires's Moles, which she had seen before, embraced him, and printed a Kiss on his Lips. And, after having rested a while, Arthur began to relate all that had happened; and Oli∣vaires to tell what Misery he had un∣dergone. And as they made relation of one thing after another, from greater to less, they caused the King's Heart-strings to tremble, and his Pulse beat in great disorder; and his main Vexation was (for the present) that he could not take revenge of such ex∣ecrable Injuriousness, for that Olivai∣res had pardoned the King of Ireland. But lo! just now Couriers come over, who bring Letters, that give Olivai∣res Intelligence how the King had re∣belled. Arthur was glad to hear o such Insolence, since it would give him occasion to revenge the old as well as this new Affront. He having Courage and Ability enough, with
the help only of his Lion, to lay wast a thousand Realms, much more Ire∣land alone. The King having heard of the Prowess of Arthur, and the Fa∣teague he had undergone, gave order for his being Honoured and Attended on as his own Person. And he was presented by Helena with rich Orna∣ments, and precious Stones; and by the King with a large sum of Gold; and he remained in the Court loved and respected of all; and every Day they Justed, Feasted, and went to the Chace. And Olivaires remembring the Day on which he was taken, said to Arthur, It seems to me to be full time that your ungrateful King should be made know his Error; wherefore let us go and reduce the revolted Realm. No, said Arthur, Let that alone to me, and remain in your King∣dom, for you have been enough in Ireland. And being returned from the Chace, they ordered a vast Army to be made ready; and then they be∣gan their March for Ireland. The
King having made him his General, gave him his Blessing; and so he took his leave. Arthur having got into Ire∣land, and the King Intelligence of his arrival, he goes against him with his Army to give him Battel; and he sent a Trumpet to him to put him in mind, (thinking it was Olivaires) that his old Prison waited for him, and to tell him he hoped to take him. Arthur laughed, and said; Go and tell your King that 't would be too great an Ho∣nour for him to make my Lion devour him; but that I will give him for Food to the Crows, and other Fowls of the Air. And, dispersing his Army, he burnt, ruinated and slew every where; and without all pity and compassion destroy'd and laid wast the whole Countrey; so inraged was he at the King's Insolence. And he soon arriv'd to where the King had posted himself; who hearing of his exorbitant Fury, fled into a strong City, nor would ex∣pect him at his Campaign.
CHAP. LXIV. The Assault that Arthur gave to the City, and took it; in which Battery the King dies. IN the Evening Arthur put his Ar∣my in order, made his Squadrons, and placed them in their first, second, and third ranks, to give assault to the Gates, and sent to the Walls those who should scale them; and he gave them fierce battel, when night came on, with the one part, and at midnight be caused the other to make an Assault; and early in the morning with the re∣mainder, who had taken repose, he did great execution; whence those within were overcome through want of sleep, and weariness; then Arthur divided all his Camp into three places, and begun a sharp Fight; and burst∣ing ope a Gate, he enter'd in with Lance upon his Thigh; and those who came upon him he run thorough, pas∣sing
their Armour as if it had been of Wax; and his Lion enter'd into the Battel, and made in the City that ha∣vock and Massacre among the Men, as if they had been Herds of Cattle: They remembred Arthur: And the King seeing him, would have made resistance, but Arthur kill'd him; up∣on which the People were all terrify'd, dispers'd, and fled away. Some threw themselves down to the ground from tops of Houses, rather than they would fall into the hands of the Enemy; and others drowned themselves in Pools: So he cours'd about the City as his own; and constituted Governors of, and put a Garison in the place, a part of his own Army; and with the rest he returned victoriously to London, ha∣ving placed Garisons where ever else was thought needful to keep the King∣dom in subjection to the Crown of his great Majesty of England. The King of England having understanding of the Victory, caused universal Rejoy∣cing to be made; and when he came,
Olivaires went with great triumph and exultation to meet him; and the King gave him many Caresses, freely bestowing on him all he had got. So the two Brothers continued together, every day feasting, making merry, Hunting, Justing, and diverting them∣selves with other noble Exercises. CHAP. LXV. Of an Infirmity which hapned to Arthur; and how by some Dreams they see the remedy for his Cure. AMong these Sweets, Fortune must needs be mixing her Bitters; and so severe she was, as to bring upon Arthur an incurable Disease; and 'twas after this sort. Arthur's Body was all corrupted within, whence proceeded out of all parts of it an infinity of Vermin; and they would certainly have devoured him, but that he ever hastened to kill them: Not a Physi∣cian
but disgusted the sight, nor a Servant that could indure the stench. He had half lost the sight of his Eyes, and his Speech falter'd, and he was become a perfect Skeleton: Yet his Body was inwardly swell'd, all the li∣gaments of his Joints were dissolved and lax, like a Paralitick; he could not raise his Head from his Pillow, nor turn him in his Bed; whatever he eat gave him no nourishment; and in a word, so strange was his Malady, that the Doctors could not find any remedy for it. None but Olivaires had courage to look on him, and he continually attended him: And when Arthur wish'd and begg'd for death a thousand times in an hour, he com∣forted him, and pray'd him to bear his condition patiently; telling him, He did not think it the least trouble to wait on him, but did it freely, and with great satisfaction. One night Arthur dream'd he saw Olivaires's Daughter breathe a Vein; and that, she sprinkling some of the Blood is∣sued
from it on his Visage, and giving him more to drink, he was cured by the virtue of it. Whereupon he waken'd for joy; but then finding it only a Dream, he said nothing of it to Oli∣vatres: The Virgin was of competent stature, and she also dream'd the same night she saw Arthur drinking of Blood out of a Bowl, and to be cur'd thereby; and she told it to her Mo∣ther. Olivaires one morning 'bout break of day see in a Dream a Lady drawing blood out of her Vein, and with it bathing Arthur, and also gi∣ving him of it to drink, and that he was cur'd thereby: The sight whereof wonderfully rejovc'd him; and the same morning told the Vision to Ar∣thur. Helena from her Soul loving Arthur, as if he had been her own Brother, declareed also her Daughters Dream. Arthur, though secretly, had made his Vision known to the Doctor, who did assure him that Blood was his only remedy.
CHAP. LXVI. The Consult of the King, Olivaires, He∣lena, and the Physicians, upon Ar∣thur's Infirmity. WHen the King heard of every one's Dream, he knew for certain that Clarisa's Blood was to be the Medicine whereby Arthur must have relief. On the one hand he was dubious, on the other he was resolv'd; and having called Olivaires, Helena, and the Physicians, desirous he should recover, he enquired of them which was the most facil way to perform the Operation. On the one part Olivaires consented to the doing of it, for that he was his Brother; but was afflicted on the other, fearing it might en∣danger his Daughter's Life. Helena lamented the mishap. Arthur would rather have dy'd, than any hand should spill the least drop of his Neece's Blood; the Physicians knew not any way to take Blood from her without great hazard, and fear of harm to the
Damsel: The King was sorry he could not shed his own to serve him. Oli∣vaires likewise would freely have bled; and Helena was troubled ex∣treamly. Under these Difficulties his Royal Friends labour'd a whole day, and earnestly recommended with Prayers themselves, and their Case, unto God: At night, when Helena was about going to bed, she with all humility kneel'd down on the Floor, and with a most sincere heart made her application unto God, begging of him to instruct them how, without danger, or pain, to extract Blood from her young Daughter, inasmuch as they were resolved to free him of his Disease by that Remedy: Lo in the night a Lady arrayed all in pure white Silk, with a Crown of Gold upon her head, appear'd to the Royal Damsel, and with saying things that delighted her, and with winning Smiles and sweetness, made gentle application, and lanced a vein of her right arm, and having saved the blood in a bason
of Alabaster, and healed the little ori∣fice, said to her, you shall give this to Arthur to drink, and bathe also his Face with it. In the morning the thing being understood, the King and they all render'd thanks unto God, and published the Miracle, and Solemn Sa∣crifice was appointed. The Damsel in the morning, accompanied of her Mother, and also her Father, with all the Ladies, went unto Arthur, and bathed him with that same blood, and gave him thereof to drink, whereby in a moment he was seen to admira∣tion to recover, and in a short time was perfectly cured. CHAP. LXVII. After the restoring of Arthur to his health, Cavaliers came out of Spain to compliment Olivaires as their So∣vereign. WHen Arthur was well again, the rejoicing was no less than if he had strictly risen from the dead,
and the world kept a Jubilee; his Subjects of Ireland came to compli∣ment him upon, and with great joy congratulate his recovery. The same time also many Embassadors arrived from the Kingdom of Spain, to make demonstration of their mighty glad∣ness for having found again their King, but withal expressing sorrow for the Queen's death, so that there was a necessity of declarations of sad∣ness for Arthur's sake; but when the Court was out of mourning, there came many Dukes, Lords and Knights, and begged of their Sovereign, King Olivaires, that he would be pleased to make happy with his presence his own Dominions; wherefore they all supplicated the King of England to give consent that Olivaires, Helena, and Arthur, might go for some days to their Realm. The King was pleased, and proffer'd to accompany them also himself; and having order'd the Car∣riages, Attendance, Treasure, and all other things to be in readiness, they
took their progress for Spain. He who could relate the number of the Guards those three Kings had, the Pages, Knights, and infinite Train that at∣tended them, and also the Ladies, would be able to make the most stu∣pendious Narrative that was ever heard. Only the Queen and her Daughter had two Courts of Knights and Ladies that equall'd the Stars of Heaven both for their number and their brightness. Castile having no∣tice of the coming of so belov'd a So∣vereign, and of his People so much desired, made great Jubilee and Exul∣tation; and the more, for that they understood they had for their Queen the Daughter of England; and that she had also a Son and Daughter. The Feasts, the Pomps, the Rejoicings, the Triumphs, the Justings and Turna∣ments were infinite; every where as they passed were such great Feasts and Entertainments made for them, as was possible to be prepared among such hurry of joy and rapture.
CHAP. LXVIII. Olivaires and Helena having enter'd Castile, are crowned. THese potent Princes were re∣ceiv'd in Castile with Pomp and Expences inestimable; and the third day, according as was before ordered, Olivaires and Helena were crowned King and Queen of that Kingdom. Olivaires was obliged to stay for some time in his Dominion, and Arthur al∣so to go to his of Dalgarve; so the King of England was to return alone, which was something melancholy to him, especially he leaving also behind his Daughter. He returned then for England, however accompanied a good part of his way by many Dukes, Counts, Lords and Knights, and some went thorow with him into England. After that, Arthur being gone to his Kingdom to redress and put in order what ever he found amiss; Olivaires
likewise gave great diligence to re∣form his State, to reward his Subjects, and caress all; and for the establish∣ment of his Kingdom, and to demon∣strate his great affection to King Dal∣garve, he determin'd to make Alliance with him, and that so strict, as the knot might be Gordian and indissolvable; so he and the Queen resolved to give him their Daughter Clarissia to Wife; the only seeming Obstacle was, that her years did not well suit his. In that pleasing thought then, and in other honourable Affairs and Diversions pas∣sing the time, at length one morning Olivaires and Helena in their Chamber, having bolted the door too, begun to take a view of all the Treasure that they had brought, and also that which they had found in the Kingdom; so having laid the Jewels to one side, and the Gold to another; and having put the Vestments of great value that way, and the to-be-admired heaps of Silver this: upon this they heard a violent thumping at the door, which on a sud∣den
unbarr'd it, and made it fly open; and the White Knight who gave Oli∣vaires the Victory at the Turnament, and who had delivered him out of so many troubles and distresses, appear'd in the middle of the Room in the twinkling of an eye; Helena knew it to be him of whom she had received the Ring; wherefore Olivaires and she most joyfully welcom'd him, and ran to embrace him, who then spoke in this manner. CHAP. LXIX. The Discourse of the White Cavalier; and what Olivaires and Helena did. MOST Invincible King Olivai∣res, and you most Sacred Queen, I am come for that which upon your Royal Word you promised me, that is, the full half of all your Gains through my aid and assistance; and I came now, because you are going to
gather together all your separated Treasures. Olivaires made answer, It was but just, and very reasonable it should be so: Wherefore taking Ca∣binets of precious Stones, Vessels of Gold, Silver, Raiment, he said; I ac∣knowledge to have had this Treasure from you; lo! divide it as you please, for your Deserts challenge as much. The Cavalier setting some things a∣part, said, Of these I shall desire no more; but of your remaining Acqui∣sition I must. Olivaires answered, And what further is your pleasure, dear Sir? To have one of your Children, answered he; for to me appertains the half of whatever you have got. Ah me! said Helena, Take all the Treasure before you for reward, and leave me my Son. I shall not do it, subjoined the Knight. Then said Oli∣vaires, I put so much confidence in this honourable Personage, that my Son shall be his; for he is able better to educate and gratify him than I could do, though his own Father. I
do not know what I shall do, said the Cavalier; but let him come, for he is mine. Olivaires, though his Heart swelled as was fit to break, for having promised, yet would not he recede from his Duty; and causing his Hen∣ry to come, he took him by the Hand, and gave him as a Booty to the Cavalier. When Helena beheld her self robbed of her Son, she set up a loud Cry, and a violent and extream Lamentation. Then the Cavalier tur∣ning to Olivaires, said, I who have so faithfully served you, have inriched you, and saved your life; Am I for this so discourteously rewarded with the share, that according to compact belongs unto me? But now go, for I further require, and will also have, either for Love or by Force, the half of the Queen; and quickly take thy Sword and divide her, and give me my Right; for I shall demand of thee no other than just and reasonable Things; otherwise thou shalt ex∣perience my Strength and Valour,
and what Ability and Prowess I can exert. CHAP. LXX. The Intreaties of Olivaires; and the An∣swer the White Cavalier gives him. THE big Words of the Cava∣lier created mighty dread in the Breast of Olivaires; and Helena was ready to fall down in a swoon for Grief about her Son; and greatly trembled also by reason of his threats, for fear of Death. Wherefore Olivai∣res, turning to the Knight, said, Dear Sir, It is true that I promised you the half of my Acquists, but not so of what I should Procreate: However, for that I know you faithful, I have not replied one word for the having my Son again. But she whom the God of Heaven hath ordained for my Wife, and hath joyned us to∣gether, Ought she to be divided from
me, and her self too, with the Sword? Is it not written, Whom God hath join∣ed together, let not man put asunder? I tell thee, Olivaires, thou oughtest not to diminish my share: For had not I made thee Conqueror, by furnishing thee with Horses, Men and Arms, thou hadst never got the Lady. I will have it so, and make no more re∣ply, that I turn not thy happy state into a sad one; quickly give me half. Olivaires seeing his resolvedness, turn'd to Helena, and said; Alas! my dear Life, how shall I be able to sustain such a sorrow? how shall I wound her who is my very heart? why hath Fortune brought me to this Dilemma? On the other part, Helena, as if besides her self, remain'd half dead, nor heard Olivaires's words; and she run tho∣rough all the sad Accidents had hap∣pen'd in her life-time, and with dolo∣rous complaint gave most hideous sob∣bings: Set me at liberty quickly, said the Cavalier, and detain me not in this place: You should have considered of
it before you promised, and not now seek delays to augment your sorrow; you give me nothing but what is my own. Olivaires embracing and kissing his Lady nigh dead already, purposing to observe his Word, of a sudden draws forth his Sword, and raises high his Arm for a terrible cleaving stroke over the Head of the fair and divine Helena, the splendor of the World, that inno∣cent Blood, and pure Soul: But the Cavalier hastily held his Arm, and cry'd out, I have enough of thee, my dearest Brother, no more, I am satis∣fi'd; and would not indure he should slay the Flower and Queen of all Beau∣ties of the World: At which awful Cry Helena look'd up, as from a Trance, and seeing the Cavalier cares∣sing Olivaires, she took comfort: What followed you shall hear in short, and the Conclusion, according to Ancient Histories.
CHAP. LXXI. The Gift the Cavalier gave Olivaires. YOU have given me however, happy Couple, your Son, and your Treasure; lo, I restore you him again: For over-insupportable are the dolours which are felt for Children, and the nine months grievings of a Mother, while she bears her Infant in the Womb. I very well know what powerful influence Fidelity has on thy breast, since thou hast not shunn'd to wound thy Soul, to maintain thy faith∣ful Promise. O Olivaires, the Deity prosper thee, the Deity bless thee, the Deity increase thy State, thy King∣dom, and propagate thy Seed eternal∣ly. Surely thou art worthy of Univer∣sal Empire, thou art full of all good∣ness, and all noble indowments of mind do appear, and are resplendant in all thy Actions. Olivaires taking assurance by reason of the Gift re∣ceiv'd,
and Helena having recover'd her fainting Spirits, seeing her Son before her face return'd to her desire, they undertook to demand of the Ca∣valier, that of love he would be pleas∣ed to manifest himself unto them: And by that Power that created the Heavens and the Earth, they begged of him, he would permit them to know to whom they were so strangely obliged. O Olivaires, I am that Ma∣ster John Talbot, I am that Cavalier whom thou didst conduct to his Na∣tive Country; that Gentleman I am, whom being excommunicated for a large Debt, thou didst at thy own Expences, discharging the Sum, cause to be re-blessed, and have Christian bu∣rial. God, for such Charity, Bro∣therly love, and thy goodness, did command me to do such kindnesses for the Possessor of so honest an heart. He delivered thee in all thy Distresses; he at length hath tried, and fully known that precious Soul which he has given thee: That Elemosinary
Pity which thou shew'd unto me, shall also prepare thee a Mansion in the Heavens. My giving the Black Habit, signify'd my being in the state of dam∣nation; the Red Livery intimated the ardent Fire of Purgatory, which hath purged away my sins; the White Vestment manifested the Celestial Country which was opened unto me. I served thee therefore with Arms, Horses, and Men; I directed Arthur to the place, and made him take thee out of Prison: At that instant I seized the City; I gave the Lion for a Com∣panion to Arthur, who killed the Mon∣ster, and who fought like an Army in the Campaign. I healed his Wound, I gave the Ring of the King thy Fa∣ther to Helena, and I begged of the Lady to act with hers for giving thee her to Wife: Therefore thou hast had every thing through me; but acknow∣ledge all from God as the Author; And let each of you render infinite thanks unto him, who hath delivered you out of so great Afflictions, and
who for the future will fill your hearts with joy and gladness. All these words spoke the Cavalier; and at last being surrounded with a Divine Splen∣dor, said, Peace be with you, fare you well; for I mount to Eternal Life; and vanished. CHAP. LXXII. The King and Queen pay their gratitude unto God; and of the coming of the King of Dalgarve, with the Espousals of Clarisia. THE King and Queen rendered infinite thanks to Almighty God, ever amazed and admiring at so strange a matter, and terrible Accident as had befall'n them; and they order∣ed that a solemn Thanksgiving should be made throughout the whole King∣dom unto the Lord Jesus Christ. Ar∣thur having in this time setled his Realm of Dalgarve, went to the
Court of Olivaires, his Brother-in-Law, where he could never enough satisfy himself with looking on Clari∣sia, both for her Beauty and Behaviour; and in consideration that it was her Blood out of her own Veins that had cur'd him, for which he every day gave thanks unto God. One day Olivaires call'd to him, and said, My Brother, who art ever in my heart, and who hast done so much for me, I much de∣sire that you should marry, if you fancy such a state. I like your Ma∣jesty's Proposal very well, reply'd Arthur; but whom may you bestow upon me? whom might it be conveni∣ent that you should give me? my Cla∣risia, who hath saved your life; she shall be your right Eye, your Soul, and dear Companion; for by your good deeds and carriages towards me, you have deserved her. And as they were designing to make this Alliance, four Lords came post from England to sig∣nify to Olivaires, that the King had been seiz'd with an Apoplexy, whereof
he died in a day's time; which news made a melancholy Court, and they all went into mourning: The Funeral was ordered, and the solemn Ceremo∣nies duly performed. After some time the Nuptials of Arthur and Clarisia were concluded on, and all things pre∣pared and fitted for the celebration; and Arthur was crowned King of Eng∣land by Olivaires: The report where∣of spread suddenly all over the Realm. Whereupon Counts, Knights, and Barons came to the Feasts, and Justs, and all the Cities sent to make con∣gratulation; then after a convenient time's stay, Arthur went to England, and gave the Government of Dalgarve to his Natural Son, and constituted him Vice-roy, a person of a gentle, virtuous, valiant, and admirable Ge∣nius.
CHAP. LXXIII. Arthur King of England goes to Lon∣don, and Henry is made Commander of an Army against the Infidels. HE who would have taken a true estimate of the love between Oli∣vaires and Arthur, should have been present to see their parting when he went from Spain. For I believe his heart was well nigh burst with sor∣row; and Helena seeing her Daughter go away, was fill'd with extream grief; at last they took leave, and departed with a great, comely, and honoura∣ble Train. A few days after, an Em∣bassy from the King of Cyprus arrived to Olivaires to demand Aid of him a∣gainst the Enemies of the Catholick Faith; and Olivaires designed to go suddenly himself in person for such an Enterprize: But his young Son Henry hearing of it, begged of his Father to leave the conduct and management of
his Forces to him, for that he desired to get a name, and honourable repute among famous Cavaliers; which fa∣vour, though with difficulty, he ob∣tained. Having made him then Ge∣neral Royal, he gave him Twenty five thousand well armed Men: and when he had put them all in right order, and had made ready their Ammuni∣tion, and all things necessary for the War, and their March, he departed for Cyprus: 'Twas a grand affliction to Helena to see her self deprived of both her Children at once: At his going away, a great number of Spanish Ca∣valiers accompanied him, and some went with him to Cyprus; others join∣ed with him in battel, and assisted him. When Prince Henry was arri∣ved in the Kingdom of Cyprus, he uni∣ted his with the other Army, and with mighty fury fell on the Enemy, and got a glorious Victory. Where∣fore all following and adhering to him as a prudent and valorous Prince, he resolved to give them a total rout, and
destroy them all, and take many Countries before he made his return into Spain. The news of this his so successful first Attempt was brought to Olivaires and Hena, which won∣derfully pleased them, and rejoyced the whole Kingdom. CHAP. LXXIV. Arthur's Entry into England; and of the Feasts, Triumphs, and other Just∣ings made for the Nuptials; and of a Rebellion of the Kingdom. WHEN King Arthur made his Entry into England, a thou∣sand Lances, and a thousand Men on Horseback all clad in Silk, came to meet him. Cavaliers, Counts, Mar∣quesses, and an infinite number of Knights and Gentlemen received and attended on him with his Consort Cla∣risia; and they admired her for being the Daughter of so beautiful a Lady,
the Daughter of one of their Kings; and fancied they had got Helena again, so much she resembled her: Thither to the Nuptials, was concourse of all the most valiant Knights that were in the whole Kingdom, and infinite Tur∣ney and Justing they made; and ma∣ny days the Court was abroad. After that, Arthur was publickly inaugu∣rated; and with the assistance of Ex∣cellent Counsellors he put in good or∣der his whole state, and disposed every thing for the best; it pleased God that Clarisia conceived, and at the due time brought forth a lovely Boy, and they gave him the name of the late King of England. Now the fame of this Fo∣reign Heir of the Kingdom beginning to spread wide, certain Princes were moved with envy at his great Felicity; and inviting the Irish Kings to their assistance, they caused a part of the State to rise in rebellion. Wherefore Arthur was forced upon a new Adven∣ture, who thought he enjoy'd the Kingdom in perfect peace. Fitting
then as many Forces as he judged sufficient to repress the insolence of his Subjects, he went on the Design. The Duke of Glocester headed the Re∣bels; for being Cousin to the old King, he imagin'd he had so some Title to the Crown. Arthur engaging Battel with him, in few days space destroyed the whole Army; and taking the Duke Prisoner, he would have slain him; but he begging of him for the Lineage sake of which he was descended, he gave him his Life, and set him at li∣berty; and he renounced all his Pre∣tences to the Realm of England; but within a few days died of grief. Ar∣thur returning, after lived in peace and quietness; and was blessed with a Daughter, who prov'd an occasion of an Illustrious Alliance, for main∣taining the Tranquillity of the State.
CHAP. LXXV. The Alliance Arthur made with his Daughter by the Counsel of Olivai∣res, and of his Son Henry. OLivaires having understood of Arthur's Journey, proffered him supply of Men and Horses; but Ar∣thur had no need of any. Hearing af∣terward of his Victory, he made great Rejoicing: And having knowledge of the Nativity of his Daughter, he writ to him to seek to contract Alli∣ance with some potent Prince, that his State might not be in fear of War, or Rebellion any more. Wherefore calling together his Council, he read to them Olivaires's Letter; who all approved of his Advice, and so de∣signed to make trial on the King of Portugal. And when some Months had passed, Ambassadors were sent to treat of the Match; and it was con∣cluded that Arthur's Daughter should
be given to the King of Portugal's El∣dest Son, who was a few Years elder than her; and the Dowry was re∣ferred to Olivaires's Determining. Now Arthur's Son being dead, who governed for him the State of Dal∣garve, Olivaires Arbitrated that the Kingdom of Dalgarve should be given in Dowry to the King of Portugal: Wherefore that State hath ever since continued under the Jurisdiction of the Portuguese Crown. Arthur was much troubled for the loss of his Son; but bore it the better, for that his Legiti∣mate Daughter succeeded him. So in fit time, according as Histories write, she went to her Husband. Ar∣thur's Son growing up, imitated his Father's Valour and all his Vertues; which gave mighty Content and Sa∣tisfaction to Olivaires also, who was continually inquiring after him. Hen∣ry, Olivaires's Son, gave also consent to this Alliance, to whom Messen∣gers were ordered, who found him in his Camp before a strongly fortified
City; and he had already conquered and taken many; and he kindly re∣ceived them; and they returned satis∣fied. Arthur understanding the great Soul and Prowess of Henry, was in∣finitely delighted; and did by Letters much Congratulate, on his account, his Brother Olivaires; who lived in great Pleasure by continual hearing of his Son's brave and honourable Ex∣ploits. CHAP. LXXVI. Of an infirmity happening to Olivaires; and of Henry who was assaulted, and almost slain, whom Arthur goes to re∣cover. OLivaires by reason of uninterrup∣ted Harrassings and Fatigues in his Youth, and also his so many Months Imprisonment in Ireland, in Age became more sensible of his be∣fore better supported Mishaps and Af∣flictions,
and their sculking Effects, and waiting an Advantage, proved over-match for his infirm Years, and so he must truckle under their severe Pressure. His Stomach then is be∣come so infeebled, that nothing that he eats will Digest with him; and he is tormented with continual and into∣lerable pain in his Head; and unto his Malady, and to increase his Grief, an unlucky Accident was added; which was, That his Son Henry push∣ing forward with some Cavaliers, more couragiously than their Strength and Ability to come off well could se∣cond, was thrust into the throng and main of his Enemies; from whence it was impossible, without great diffi∣culty and hazard, to save himself, and get back to his Army again; so that, as was thought, he was mor∣tally Wounded. When Olivaires heard this ill News, he writ to Ar∣thur to desire him to go and relieve his Nephew; who did not stand to make much Preparation, but with a
Choice and Valiant Detachment march'd away. This gave some sa∣tisfaction to Olivaires, reckoning him∣self was there in Person if Arthur were. When Arthur arrived, he found Henry very bad; however he gave notice to Olivaires, that it was much better with him; and taking extra∣ordinary care of him, he in a few days see him well again. In the mean time the Enemy-Army felt the Forces of Arthur, who oft vigorously assaulted them, and with a vast De∣struction made Mountains of the slain. When Henry was recovered, Arthur returned and went speedily to give his Olivaires a Visit, who was much af∣flicted with his infirmity. Helena was mightily overjoy'd at his com∣ing; and she perceived that Arthur's presence did somewhat recruit Olivai∣res. Arthur discoursed to him the whole Matter concerning Henry; spoke of the Beauty of his Daughter, and by degrees gave him an account of his Son, how as he grew up he
imitated Olivaires in all Noble and Virtuous Indowments of Mind. And having rested for some Days, with his honourable Cavaliers, he return'd into England to enjoy his Rich and Beautiful State and Nation. CHAP. LXXVII. What is Recorded by English Historians, Spanish, and others, concerning these Kings. HEnry conquered many and many Countries, and at last died Fighting for Holy Mother Church; a true doubly Militant Son and Mem∣ber thereof. The same foresaid infir∣mity, after a long Life, brought Oli∣vaires to his Grave: When he died Helena took on so sadly, that she also Expired on Olivaires's Face; and they were both Buried together. Arthur was Crowned King of Castile; and his Son Married, and had Children;
and so likewise had his Daughter: So for many Years flourished the Fame of all these mighty Kings. But the Heavens, which give an end to every thing, not to the Grandees only, but to us who have writ this present Hi∣story, and also shall to all the Readers thereof, bring our destined Periods about, that after the Fatigue of a mi∣serable Pilgrimage we may find some Quietude; and that leaving behind them for a time, but not long, the (yet) mortal Garments Nature ac∣commodated them with, our Spirits may return into the Hands of the Lord who gave them, of him to re∣ceive Good or Evil, Rewards or Pu∣nishments, according as we have de∣served and behaved our selves. Let us therefore make humble request unto the Almighty, with sincere and cordial Affections, that he would please to look on his Mercy, not our Merit, his Grace, not our Works; and that for those he would bring us unto, and make us Partakers of his
Kingdom, that which is not Transi∣tory, that which no Tyrant, how po∣tent soever, can usurp or molest; that wherein no Vice dwells, which none can enter or approach, wherein no wicked Persons have share, place or residence, which they may not (unless to increase their Torment) behold; but where have their Source and Origin, where for ever are Nou∣rished, where for evermore Inhabit, are Secure and Established, Goodness, Vertue, Wisdom, Peace and Felicity, through him who is all these Su∣preamly and Essentially: And that he would bestow these also upon us whilst in this World; to the end, that washed and purified from the pollu∣tion of Sin, we may joyfully go hence to enjoy, revere and adore Him, and Face to Face eternally gaze on the Be∣atifick Vision. Amen. FINIS.
