H3505 e154_44 R20745 99866499 118774
THE HUMBLE PETITION OF THE GENTRY and Inhabitants of HOLDERNES: WITH His Majesties Answer July 6. 1642. LONDON: Printed by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majestie: And by the Assignes of JOHN BILL. 1642.
To the Kings most Ex∣cellent Majestie, The humble Petition of the Gentry and Inha∣bitants of Holdernes. WE your Majesties most loyall and oppressed Subjects, having for the space of four Moneths (with much patience and pre∣judice) endured great and insupportable Losse by Sir Iohn Hothams taking into Hull (a distinct Countie from us) part of the Trained Bands of Yorkshire, contrary to Law, your Sacred Majesties right, and ex∣presse Command, by detaining our Arms, destroying our Trade and Markets, with many more Pressures upon us, then we are willing to repeat. Howbeit this last at∣tempt of cutting our Banks, Drowning part, and indangering the rest of the Levell
of Holdernes, is a Presumption higher then was ever yet attempted by any Subject to our knowledges; As if Sir Iohn Hotham at once intended to destroy our Free-holds and Proprieties; And for no other Cause, as we conceive, but for serving your Ma∣jestie, according to our Allegiance and the known Laws of the Land. Our most humble Prayer there∣fore is, That Your Maje∣stie will vouchsafe speedily to take the premisses into your gracious and tender considera∣tion for securing our Fears. And your Majesties Petitioners, as in duty bound, shall ever pray for your happy and glorious Reign over us, &c.
Subscribed by Rob. Hilliard, Christopher Holme, Matthew Wentworth, Francis Cobb, Leonard Robinson, James Cane, Christopher Hilliard, Gilbert Gower, and neer three hundred others, and delivered to His Majestie at Be∣verley, the sixth of July, 1642.
arms of Charles I C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT At the Court at York, the sixth of July, 1642. His Majestie hath commanded me to give this Answer to this Petition. THat He with just Com∣miseration and all pos∣sible Compassion consi∣ders the miserable con∣dition of the Petition∣ers, And will both by publishing His
Proclamations, and by drawing such Forces together as He shall be able to leavie, endeavour the Petiti∣oners Relief in their present suffer∣ings, and prevention of their future, with any hazard that may befall His own Person. In the mean time His Majestie hopes all His good Subjects do plainly discern, how impossible it is for their Interests to be preserved, when His just Rights and Power are taken from Him. Falkland. FINIS.
