H572 E1627_1 R202267 99862616 114781
A PARAENESIS. OR, Seasonable Exhortatory TO ALL TRUE SONS OF THE Church of England. Wherein is inserted a Discourse Of HAERESY in defence of our Church against the Romanist. By H. HAMMOND. D.D. LONDON, Printed by R. N. for Richard Royston, at the Angel in Ivie-Lane. M.DC.LVI.
A Paraenesis, OR, Seasonable Exhortatory to all true Sons of the Church of England. CHAP. I. An Introductive reflection on our present condition. §. 1. IN this sad conjuncture of affairs, when those, whose Office it is to speak to the People from God, and to God from the People, are solemnly forbidden all publick discharge of these, and all other Branches of that Sacred Function; so useful to make up the breach, to reconcile the enmity betwixt an angry God, and a sinful Land; It may not, I presume, and I hope it will not, be
deemed by any, either impertinent, or unseasonable, to make some at∣tempt to supply those wants, and remove those pressures, which may otherwise lie too heavily unsuppor∣table on those our weak Brethrens soules, towards whom the example of Christs bowels, and bloodshedding may reasonably expect to be an∣swered with our utmost compassion. §. 2. In obedience therefore to opportunity, which may possibly be a duty incumbent on us, (since Rom. 12.11. the Greek Copies of greatest authority read  serving the season, instead of  the Lord) I shall now, though the unworthiest of all my many Brethren, assume this venerable Of∣fice of being a Remembrancer to the people of God, even to all those who have been brought forth unto Christ by our precious dear perse∣cuted Mother, the Church of Eng∣land, and remain still constant to that faith, which from her breasts they have suck, and are not yet scandalized in her. §. 3. And for the first step of
my addresse, it cannot be more regular, than by beholding and re∣presenting a while the peculiarity of our present condition, considered only in the sad matter of it (with∣out any unkinde reflection on the inflicters) that no one of us may misse to discern the nature of that judgement, that by Gods just ven∣geance, and all-wise Providence is permitted to fall, and lie upon us, even the saddest addition to the former weight that our unparallel'd sins and provocations could solli∣cite God to tolerate, or suggest to others to inflict, or to the patients to fear, or expect in this life. §. 4. Some images we have of it in Sacred Writ. As first the expul∣sing of our first Parents, and in them of all Gods people, at one in∣terdict, out of the Garden of God, that lively embleme of a pure Re∣formed Church, & a flaming Sword, sent to back that interdict, to guard the way of the tree of life, to keep those, who most desired, from ta∣sting of it: And the sad positive penalties, which attended that, the
swet and agony of their combat with the Briers and Thorns, were nothing in comparison with the vast dismal privation, and intercision of all those blessed advantages, which were designed the daily fruits and enjoyments of that Parad se. 5. §. Add to this the captive Ark, with Ichabod inscribed on it, the departure of the Schechina, the Majestatick presence of the Lord, and with it the glory from Israel; the very newes whereof was, in Gods own judgement, such, as that the ears of every one that heard it should tingle, and the effect yet more direful to old Eli, whose but mildnesse and want of due severity had somewhat contributed toward it: The greatnesse of which pu∣nishment to the discomfied Israe∣lites, is much more agreeable, and usefull matter of meditation to us at this time, then the inauspicious consequens thereof to those who took it captive, the Emerods and the ruinous prostration of their Dagon, and the weight of Gods hand on the men of Ashdod, and Gah, and
Ekron, who were any way guilty of taking, or accessary to the with∣holding it. §. 6. Beside these, the Prophets both of the Old and New Testa∣ment have yeelded us many dismal adumbrations, their Pencils advan∣cing as high as to the Sun's being turned into darknesse, and the Moon into blood, the casting down of the Host, & of the Stars to the ground; some in calmer style to represent the deportation of the worshippers into a strange Countrey, from the Garden of Eden into a desolate Wil∣dernesse, from Sion unto Babylon; others in the sharper accent of the threefold woe inSee Euseb. l. 3. c. 13. Josephus and theRev. 8.13. Apocalyps, to set out the captivity of the very worship and Temple it self; destroying the San∣ctuary, causing the Sacrifice and Oblation to cease, banishing even their eyes and thoughts from the wonted joy and delight of both (the  the holy convocation, and the beauty of that holinesse) and of this the conclusion is but equitable, this is a lamentation, and it shall be for a lamentation.
§. 7. Lastly, to come nearer home, to the most flourishing, once purest, Christian Assemblies, we have in vision from S. John in his exile, predictions of Churches, and their Angels, both threatned a deportation, of removing Ephesus her Candlestick out of the place, put∣ting the Lamp thereof (fitly quali∣fied to have inlightned the whole room) under the narrow bounds of a Bed or Bushel, of delivering up whole Assemblies to Satan, that he may cast them into prison, senten∣cing them to black, and dark re∣streints, the sins of Professors being the Forges or Moulds of such more than iron Fetters, whereby even the Word of God is taught to bee bound, when the free use of it hath been abused by them. §. 8. That these are the very lines, that make up the face of sorrow, that is at present on this Church, is none of the advertise∣ments, that we can stand in need of at this time, the matter it self speaks too loud, to be news to any of us.
§. 9. The doubts that are more apt to exercise mens thoughts are founded in the acknowledgement of it, and every one hath borrowed his Objection or Argument from one of Jobs friends, to adde some weight of sorrow to her whom God hath afflicted. A few of these it may be pertinent to examine a while, in∣stead of farther inlarging on our .
CHAP. II. A first Objection, or Argument of our guilt, drawn from our present condition; answered in the former branch of it; The judgement ap∣portioned to our sins. §. 1. IT is first made matter of Argument against our Church, and establishment, that God hath found us out, that it is becaus of transgressions, that an host hath been given against the daily Sacrifice, and therein hath practised and pro∣spered, and that prosperousnesse in∣terpreted to be Gods own decision, as signal, as any response from the Ephod, a sentence by Ʋrim and Thummim, that it is no other then the quarel of God, which he hath thus signally managed against us. §. 2. This Argument thus pro∣posed hath somewhat which must be granted, and by no means denied by us; and for the other part, wherein it is fallacious, it brings sufficient light with it, to assist us in the discovery of the Paralogisme.
And it may be worth the while di∣stinctly to consider it, in these two branches of it. §. 3. First I say, it must not be denyed, but that our sins have found us out, all the punishments we have undergone, being but the just, and withal merciful reward of our sins. §. 4. For although we are by our Saviours answer, S. Luke 13.3. re∣strain'd from making such inferen∣ces of other men, to conclude their guilts by their sufferings, though Jobs friends are rebuked for this kinde of Logick, arguing his un∣sincerity from the pressures that fell upon him, yet such methods are ve∣ry safe to be used by our selves to∣ward our selves. We are now ob∣liged, and never more loudly cal∣led on to judge our selves, though it be not allowed to any man else to judge us upon these premisses. §. 5. It is, I say, true beyond all contradiction, and never more ap∣plicable to any, then to us, that all Gods punishments, especially his spi∣ritual, and heaviest sort of them, are brought upon men by their
sins. The lover of soules, the pati∣ent and long-suffering Father of all consolations and mercies, never puts on the guise, or armature of an enemy, but when our methods have suggested this, and our unreform∣ed sins made it doubly necessary, to vindicate himself, and to chastise us. And herein how bitter so ever our portion prove, though to have our lot with Admah and Zeboim, to be thrown away as straw to the Dunghil, or unprofitable servants into utter darknesse, yet our hands are on our mouthes, the honour of a most perfect righteousnesse belongeth unto our Judge, and to us confusion of face, as at this day. §, 6. And we shall be foully to blame, if these so generous medica∣ments do not, in some proportion to the wisdom and designe of our great Physician, prove effectually operative, beyond all the former gentler methods, if the sins that have lain disguised in their closest concealments, kept so strictly from the eyes of men, and, in our de∣signe, of God himself, that they
have even been unknown to our selves, do not now, upon this scru∣tiny, give God the honour, come forth, and offer themselves to justice. §. 7. This is indeed but our just return to our sins finding us out, for us to finde out our sins, to act this one revenge on them, to deliver those up to wrath, which have so signally delivered up us. And in∣stead of shaking off, or taking leave of this part of the argument too ha∣stily, I shall desire to give it its full scope, to reap as much benefit by it, as we may, and take notice of some (at least) of those guilts, which the signatures we discern in the judgement, the lines in this hand of God, do, according to the rules of the steadyest augurie, point out and discover to us. §. 8. And 1. The deep, though most causelesse d spleasure, under which the Liturgie of our Church is fallen, is a shrewd indication of the great coldnesse and indevotion, so scandalously frequent among us, of the formal perfunctory perform∣ance
of our offices, nay, of the many foul profane mixtures, which have so frequently interposed, and by a kinde of fascination converted the most spotlesse Sacrifice into the very lame and the sick,Mal. 1.8.7.10. the purest unlea∣vened offering into bitter polluted bread upon Gods Altar, and then no marvel that God should have no pleasure, and at length refuse to accept an offering from such mystae. §. 9. We know the unwasht-hands that brought it, defamed the Sa∣crifice of Gods own ordaining, bla∣sted the very incense and fat of fed beasts,Isai. 1.13.11.14. the Sabbaths and calling of Assemblies, and turned them into meer abominations; and then what wonder that what he detests and cannot away with, he should per∣mit to bee destroyed? lay down that weight, which he is weary to bear? suffer that to be deemed an a∣bomination, and used accordingly, which our unsanctified usage hath made such? §. 10. To descend to some par∣ticulars; Our continued obstinate unreformed sinnes have made
formes of confession and contrition unfit to be taken into our mouths; those cannot be repeated by such, without grosse hypocrisie and bely∣ing our selves before God and Men, and then what possibility is there, that the Ministerial Absolution should with any justice be applied to us? §. 11. And for that sacred form of words, which Christ comman∣ded us to use in our addresses to our Father, [When ye pray, say, Our Father—] there needs no other argument for the discountenancing of it (and Hell it self can yeeld no other, though search hath been made into all Topicks to finde some) this one is sufficient for the rending it from us, our unqualifi∣ednesse for the rehearsing the seve∣ral petitions of it. §. 12. We that are so far from our due charity to others, that we are not at unity within our selves, that live so unlike children, that we have not so much as the livery of the servants of God, with what face can we hourly and solemnly invoke
our Father? We that do actually with horrid oathes defile, and re∣proach the name of God, cannot be thought to be in earnest, when we require it may be hallowed. We that like Rebels have dethroned God out of our hearts,John 19.3. cannot without the same mockery that the Souldiers were guilty of in the crown of thornes and purple-robe, and ironi∣cal salutation, instile him King, or pray for that coming of his King∣dom. And as long as we mutine, and repine at the execution of Gods will in Heaven, it is not possible we should heartily beg that ho∣nour of transcribing the Angels pa∣tern of cheerful diligent obedience to his will on earth. Our wants may seem indeed to qualifie us for an ardent addresse of the fourth Peti∣tion; but our surfetting of Manna makes us of all others the least fit to go out to gather it: And the bread that came down from Heaven being so neglected by us, with what face can we ask that other, which wee mean but to consume upon our lusts? But beyond all, we are most
unqualified for that Petition where∣in we set our forgiving of trespassers, as the pattern for God to copie out in forgiving us. 'Tis but just that they which are implacable to ene∣mies, should be excluded from, if they will not voluntarily renounce all part in this prayer, this Legacie of Christs to the merciful: Why should they be inclinable to use a form, which is so ill fitted to their constitutions, an imprecation on those whom they tender most dearly? And yet those which are most unwilling to lose their right in this donative, have not been, to that degree they ought, mindful of the condition, without which they do but call for vengeance up∣on their own heads, when they are most importunate for mercy and for∣givenesse. In a word, they that so∣licite and even court temptations, invade sin and Satan in his own ter∣ritories, not to subdue, but to be subdued by him, how can they pray not to be lead into temptation, or be reconciled to themselves for hoping deliverance from those evils, which
themselves have brought down up∣on themselves? §. 13. As for the Sacraments, they also may deserve to be reflected on a while by us. § 14. The Baptisme of Infants is well known to have of late found great opposition among us, many with some earnestnesse, as if it were their solid concernment, denying their tender years the enjoyment of this priviledge, whereby the be∣nefits of the death of Christ (of which the Catholick Church against the Pelagians defined all that are born in sin, to stand in need) are, according to his institution, sealed unto them. §. 15. And for others which re∣taining kindnesse to the Directory, do in obedience thereto, maintain Infant Baptisme, yet have they ta∣ken away the form of abrenuntiati∣on, though such as hath been uni∣versally practised in the Church ofTertul. de Co∣ron. Mil. c. 3. A∣quam adituri ibi∣dem, sed & ali∣quanto priùs (viz. in the preparing the Catechumenus for Baptisme) in Ecclesiâ sub an∣tistitis manu con∣testamur, nos re∣nuntiare Diabolo & pompae & Angelis ejus, amplius aliquid re∣spondentes quàm Dominus in Evangelio determinavit. So the Author de Eccles. Hierarch. very ancien, cap. 2. Edit. Par. ap. Morel. p. 116. . So Chrysost. Edit. Eton. T. 6. p. 606. c. 31. , and p. 609. l. 41. ; adding p. 610. l. 2.  (making it the covenant on our part) — So Augustine de Nuptiis & Concupiscent. l. 1. c. 20. (in Basil. Froben. Ed. T. 7. p. 822.) Potestas diabolica exorcizatur in par∣vulis, eique renunciant, quia per sûa non possunt, per corda & ora gestantium. So Ambrose in Col. 2. and l. de iis qui Myster. initiantur c. 2. Repote quid interrogatus sis, Recognosce quid responderis, Renuntiasti Diabol & operibus ejus. And Hexaem. l. 1. c. 4. Deserit qui abluitur— Principem istius mundi dicens, Abrenuntio tibi, Diabole, & angelis tuis & operibus tuis, & im∣periis tuis. And Hierome ad Mat. 5. Renuntio tibi & pomp tuae & vitiis tuis, & mundo qui in maligno positus est. all Ages, and that as delivered to
them by theS. Basil. de Spiritu Sanct. ad Amphiloch. c 27. T. 2 p. 210. B. Giving many instances. . p. 210 c. mentions his among them, , saith he, ; And before him Origen. Hom. 5. in Num. Eorum quae geruntur in baptismo verborum— atque in∣terrogationum & responsionum quis facilè explicet rationem? Et tamen omnia haec operta & velata portamus super humeros no∣stros, cùm ita implemus ea & exequimur, ut à magn Pontifice at∣que ejus filiis tradita & commendata suscepimus. And so Ter∣tullian ubi supra. Hanc si nulla scriptura determinavit, certè consuetudo roboravit quae sine dubi de traditione manavit. Quae∣ramus an & traditio non Scripta non debeat recipi— ut à baptis∣mate ingrediamur— Apostles them∣selves, and in every word almost of that form which is retained in ourSo Cyril of Jerusalem in his , or — Liturgie, and that extended to theThe Author de Eccl. Hierarch. c. 2. . So Augustin. ubi supra. tenderest Infants: Onely
instead of this the people are ap∣pointed to be taught,Direct. of Bapt. p. 42. That all that are baptized do renounce, and by their baptisme are bound to fight against the Devil, the World, and the Flesh,] Which yet cannot with any truth be affirmed of those, that
neither do it by themselves, nor by their proxeyes. And 'tis not suffici∣ent to say, they do it interpreta∣tively, for unlesse it have been the constant custome of the Church, that they who are baptized should use formes of abrenuntiation, they that are baptized, without using them, cannot be pretended to do it interpretatively, and if it have been the constant custome, then how can they be excused, that have resol∣vedly omitted it. And besides, the condition of Covenants (such is ab∣renuntiation here) ought to be ex∣prest, and so the Church from the Apostles hath alwayes exacted the expressing it, before the sealing of this Covenant. And yet, I say, this, though it be such an Apostolical rite, containing no unconsiderable, supervacaneous condition, and quali∣fication in the person baptized, is by interdicting the administration of baptisme according to the ancient order of our Church, or by those which have continued constant to that order, endeavored to be su∣perseded
and removed from among us. §. 16. And the wisdom and ju∣stice and mercy of God is remarkable in this, thereby branding our infa∣mous repeated innumerable breaches of this vow, our perjurious acting of all those sins, with confidence and without regrets, which we did so solemnly renounce and defie in our baptism. §. 17. The greatnesse of that crime of rescinding oathes, and re∣nouncing abrenuntiations, was that which made the ancient discipline of the Church so severe against eve∣ry presumptuous act of sinne after baptism, in respect of the hightning circumstances of such, drawn from the solemnity of that vow against which they were committed, and of that presence in which that vow was made, and of. Cy∣ril. Hieros. . a. p. 510. that weight, wch is set upon it by God, & of that judge∣ment which attends every breach of it. And our scandalous negli∣gence in this kinde is by this inter∣dict, signally pointed out to us; 'tis
pity we should ever want any more admonitions, or venture again up∣on one such provocation, lest a worse thing yet happen to us, this being, if rightly considered, bad enough already. §. 18. In like manner and upon the same grounds of our unrefor∣med sins, it is, that the Sacrament of Christs body and blood should be in all justice withdrawn from those, who have no way approved them∣selves for the eating of that bread and drinking that cup, this greatest severity being by our unprepared hearts converted into the only sea∣sonable mercy; it being little for the advantage (or even the sensua∣lity) of the Swine, to have the trampling of Pearles under their feet, and as little for the unworthy receivers to deal after the same manner with the blood of the Cove∣nant. §. 19. And why should the Sa∣cramentals escape better, then the Sacraments? Mariage we know is become so deformed among us, so
extreamly unlike the union betwixt Christ and his Church, by which S. Paul thought meet to resemble it, the band is so frequently and so scandalously torn asunder, the de∣signes of it ordinarily so very un∣like, what they ought to be, so more then polluted by either earthy, or sensual considerations; that the mysterious band is in danger to be∣come  all flesh, nothing but luxury and bruitishnesse, and in pro∣portion thereto the very rites of it so wholly transformed from the  or nuptial Feasts in Scripture (honoured by Christs presence) into the Saturnalia or Heathen Riots in Macrobius, that it were even a re∣proach to the Churches Service, es∣pecially to the offertory, and Sacra∣ment of Christs body (which our Ru∣brick exacts indispensably from the married couple at the time of their espousals) to bear part in such kind of solemnities. And to these, & the like provocations we may reasonably impute it, that the binding & blessing those bands, and rendring them
truly sacred, to which the Bishops or Presbyters hands were. Ignat. ep. ad Polycarp. Quod Ecclesia conciliat, & confirmat oblatio, & obsignat benedictio, Angeli re∣nunciant, &c. Tert. ad Ʋxor. l. 2. c. ult. Conjunctiones non prius apud Ecclesiam professae juxta maechiam—judicari pericli∣tantur. Idem de pudic. c. 4. Sponsus & sponsa cum benedicendi sunt à Sacerdote, Concil. Carthag. 4. Can. 13. Qui in tot orbe sunt Sacerdotes, Nuptiarum initia benedicentes, consecrantes, et in mysteriis sociantes. De haer. Praedestinat. alwayes thought necessary from the Apostles dayes, though all ages of the Church over all the World, is now solemn∣ly laid aside, and no image of it resevred to the Church, the Pres∣byterian Minister, as well as the Prelatist (which in other particu∣lars have not the like fellowship) not only the Liturgie but the Directo∣ry deemed supersluous, and equally impertinent in this matter. §. 18. And so the office for Bu∣rial, which is now under the like proscription, may well be our seaso∣nable admonition, and memora∣tive of the sublime and sacred uses, to which our living bodies were by God designed, even to be the , the animate walking tem∣ples
of his Spirit, and to bear their parts with the soul in all the devo∣tions it offers up (the eye, the hand, the knee, the tongue, being thus obliged, as well as the heart) but are commonly so obstinately with∣drawn from all holy offices, and so profaned and polluted with our unsanctified practices, that as to so many felo's de se, so many sa∣crilegious, anathematized persons, the burial of an Asse or Dog is but fitly apportion'd, and upon that account all more decent cere∣monies or regard, all offerings for the dead, though but for a joyful resurrection, withdrawn from us. §. 19. And even the Creeds of the Catholick Church, that great depositum, which the Apostles in their several plantations left as the summary of all that was to be be∣lieved to our soules health, and foun∣dation of all Christian practice, and reformation, together with the Ni∣cene (or Constantinopolitan) and A∣thanasian inlargements of that, for the securing that depositum, and for the expulsing all Heresies, risen up
against it. All these now being fallen under the same ostracisme, with the other parts of the inheri∣tance of the Church, must serve to advertise us, that a pure faith at∣tended with impure lives, foundati∣ons of reformation laid by God, with∣out any conformable superstructures of ours, are like the Talent laid up in a Napkin, , testifi∣cations and self-confessions of an un∣profitable, wicked servant, and so very fit to be taken away from them, who have made such un∣christian uses of them. §. 20. The Solifidian that must bee saved by his Faith without works, and hath found out artifi∣ces to elude S. James's exhortati∣on, and resolution, that such a faith will never save or justifie any, well deserves to have his amulet taken away from him, to be de∣prived of the instrument of his de∣structive security, as the Jewes were of the Temple of the Lord, when that was become the great Sanctu∣ary, and reserve of safety for all their unsanctified practises.
§. 21. As for the contempt of the persons of those that have been set apart to that venerable office of waiting on Gods Altars, and at length the interdict that is fallen upon them, there be many matters of seasonable admonition, which seem to be designed us thereby. First, It may minde us of a consi∣derable defect. §. 22. For though the four Em∣ber weeks were according to anci∣ent custome preserved for fasting and praying, and that in order to that businesse of greatest weight, Praying to the Lord of the harvest that he would send forth fit labourers into the harvest (therein transcri∣bing the example of the Aposto∣lick Church, Acts 13.3.) yet there being no special service appointed in our Liturgie for those times, 'tis too probable, that duty being left to every mans voluntary, private devotions, hath been very much neglected, which neglect was there∣fore thus to receive its chastisement from God. §. 23. Secondly, the admission of
some men into that calling which were not duly qualified for it; and the negligent and unworthy performances of the offices of so sa∣cred a function, and the many profane mixtures, the seeking our own wealth, and ease, and praise, &c. qualifying us for that contempt, and ruine, which is now fallen upon us; and lastly the unprofitablenesse of the people in the midst of very plentiful means of instruction, were all fit to be thus disciplin'd with a famine of the word, or unwholesome food in exchange for that , sincere and unmixt, which be∣gan to be nauseated. And many other sad reflexions this may seaso∣nably suggest to us. §. 24. And so in like manner for holy times, and places, which are fallen under so great displeasure, and contempt, even those that have been consecrated not only to the honourable memory and imita∣tion of the Apostles and Saints and Martyrs of God, but even to the commemoration of the most glori∣ous mysteries of our redemption, the
most signal mercies of Christ him∣self, the deprivation of these bles∣sed seasons and advantages cannot but minde us how they have been formerly neglected, and even dispi∣sed, and so either way profaned, and sacrilegiously handled by us, instead of being instrumental to the inciting and advancing (as they were sure designed) the works of holinesse in us. §. 25. In a word (to cut off, and omit many particulars in this large, and vast field of useful meditation, beseeching every man to examine his guilts by such reflections as these) when the characters, or dis∣criminative markes of the English Reformation are principally two, one the conforming all our doctrines to the Primitive Antiquity, recei∣ving all genuine Apostolical tradi∣tions for our rule both in matters of faith and government; the other in uniting that  fair, beautiful pair of Faith and Works, in the same degree of necessity and conditionality both to our justifica∣tion, and salvation, and to all the
good works of justice and mercy, which the Romanist speaks of, ad∣joyning that other most eminent one of humility, attributing no∣thing to our selves, when we have done all, but all to the glory of the mercy, and grace of God, purcha∣sed for us by Christ, 'tis but just that they which have walkt un∣worthy of such guides and rules as these, lived so contrary to our pro∣fession, should at length be depri∣ved of both, not only to have our two staves broken, Beauty & Bands, the symbols of order and unity, both which have now for some years taken their leaves of us, but even to have the whole Fabrick de∣molished, the house to follow the pillars fate, and so to be left; and abide without a Sacrifice,Hos. 3.4. and with∣out an Image, and without an Ephod, and without Teraphim, deprived of all our ornaments, left naked and bare, when we had so misused our beauty unto wantonnesse. Thus when the Devil was turned out of his ha∣bitation, and nothing followed but the sweeping and garnishing the
house, and keeping it empty of any better guest; the issue is, the De∣vil soon returns again, from whence he came out, and brings seven spi∣rits worse then himself, and the end of that state is worse then the beginning. §. 26. And so still the taking of the Ark, and the breaking the High Priests neck, and the slaying his Sons, and many more, in that discomfiture, are all far from new, or strange, being but the proper natural effects of the profanations, which not the Ark it self (that was built every pin of it according to Gods direction) but the Sacrifi∣cers, not the religion, but the wor∣shippers were so scandalously guilty of. §. 27. Thus we that are taught by Christ to love our enemies, and by Nature, and natural kindnesse to our selves, to re∣ceive all profit we may, by their oppositions, must make our advan∣tage of the first part of the objecti∣on, distinguishing betwixt the in∣nocence or guiltiness (nay more then
so, fruitfulnesse and goodnesse) of the land, and the barrennesse and wickedness and provocations of them that dwell therein, for whose sake it is regular with God, to make that fruitful land barren, to convert the Milk and Honey of Canaan into Gall and Wormwood, to leave it to imitate, and copie out the temper of the inhabitants (whom yet his own hand of transcendent special mercy had once planted there) to suffer it to petrifie and degenerate (as Geographers tell us of that once good Land) into Rock and Mine, at once to punish & reproach their obdurate impenitent hearts: And yet still discerning the blessednesse of that Canaan, both in it self and to us, as long as we were thought worthy to enjoy it, and indeed judging by this one  if we wanted all others) that it was a most precious establishment, because such provokers could not in the ju∣stice and wisdom of God, be longer allow'd the fruition of it. §. 28. Herein our punishment con∣sists, that that which we are depri∣ved
of, was truly valuable: 'Tis not a vengeance but a boon to have poysonous drugs snatcht from us, and cast out into the sink, Ordinances that are not good, abolished and nailed to the crosse; and in like manner 'tis but proportionable to our merits to have even the king∣dom of heaven taken from us, that initial part, the Suburbs and Con∣fines of it here, and bestowed on them that are more worthy, and so capable of receiving benefit by such jewels. §. 29. Let us therefore here stop a while to do our duty upon our knees to this first part of the Obje∣ction, by reflecting on those sins which have thus found us out. A Prayer. Fitted for a day of Humiliation. O Just and righteous Judge, who didst once for the iniquity of thy people Israel give up thy Ark into
the hand of the Philistines, we sinful creatures that are now under as great a degree both of guilt and punishment, do here cast our selves down before thee, acknowledging that we are not worthy any longer to receive the ho∣nour of Christian profession, that have so long defamed it by enormous pra∣ctises; and that we who loved dark∣nesse more than light, deserve to have our Candlestick removed, and to be given up to that inundation of Atheisme and profanenesse, which now invades the gasping Church. Yet O Lord, deal not with us after our sins, but turn thee again, thou God of hosts, look down from heaven, be∣hold and visit this vine, do not abhor us for thy Names sake, do not dis∣grace the throne of thy glory: Be∣hold, see, we beseech thee, we are all thy people; though a rebellious and stiffenecked generation, yet thy Name is called upon us, leave us not, nei∣ther forsake us, O God of our salva∣tion; but though thou feed us with bread of adversity, and water of af∣fliction, yet let not our teachers be removed into a corner, but let our
eyes still see our teachers, let not Sion complain that she hath none to lead her by the hand among all the sons that she hath brought up, but provide her such supports in this her declining condition, that she may still have a seed and a remnant left, and in what degree soever thou shalt permit this storm to increase upon this poor church; be pleased proportiona∣bly to fortifie and confirm all those, that are members of it, that no man may be shaken or moved with these afflictions, nor pervert that glorious advantage of suffering for thee, into an occasion of apostatizing from thee, but that we may all run with patience the race that is set before us, and chearfully partake of the afflictions of the Gospel, that suffering for Christ here, we may reign with him for ever hereafter, and all this for Jesus Christ his sake our onely Lord and Saviour. Amen.
Another. O Thou King of Nations who dost according to thy will in all the kingdoms of the Earth, who hast made us drink deep of that cup of trembling, and yet seemest to have bitter dregs behinde for us, we thy wretched creatures that have highly contributed to that common weight of sin under which the land sinks, hum∣bly prostrate our selves at thy feet; desiring with all sincere contrition to confesse that thou art righteous in all that is hitherto come upon us, all that we have yet suffered, being but the sad arrear of the sins of our peace, when we waxed fat, and kicked; and that thou shalt likewise be most just in the utmost of thy future inflictions, which whatsoever they prove cannot exceed the sinnes of our calamitous dayes, who in the time of our distresse have sinned yet more against the Lord, who have even passed through the fire to Molech, with an undaun∣ted
obstinacy suffered all the flamings of thy wrath, rather then we would renounce any of our detestable things. Nay, as if our old were too infirm, we have made new leagues with Death, new agreements with Hell, proceeding from evil to worse, and making every new calamity thou sendest to reclaim us, the occasion of some fresh impiety. And now, O Lord, wilt thou not visit for these things, shall not thy soul be avenged on such a nation as this? We are they, O Lord, that have perverted all thy dispensations toward us, grown wanton under thy mercies, and despe∣rate under thy judgements, and is there yet any third method left for those that have frustrated both these? Behold, O Lord, these desperate, these gasping patients at thy feet, who have lost sense and motion to all things but the rosistance of their remedy. O give us not utterly over, but continue to administer to us, what ever may re∣move this stupefaction; and bring us to to a feeling of our condition, and what sharpnesse and severity soever thou discernest necessary for that pur∣pose,
forbear not, O Lord, to give us those wounds of a friend. O say not concerning us, why should ye be smit∣ten any more? But rather cast us in∣to the place of Dragons, and cover us with the shadow of death, if by so do∣ing we may be brougbt to remember the name of the Lord our God. Lord this is the one great necessary where∣in we are principally concerned to so∣licite thee, that our eyes may be ope∣ned, that we may see every man the plague of his own heart; that so in∣stead of those Atheistical disputes we make of thy providence, we may all joyn in an humble adoration of thy ju∣stice, and confessing that our destru∣ction is of our selves, abhor our selves, and repent in dust and ashes. And when by this greater deliverance thou hast put us in capacity of a lesse, then be thou pleased to be jealous for thy land, and pity thy people, and whatever other judgment we must groan under, Lord deliver us not up to that barba∣rism and irreligion, which hath al∣ready made too great a breach in up∣on us. We cannot but confesse it most just in thee to permit us, who have so
long resisted the power of godlinesse, to proceed now to cast off even the very form, and that we who would not receive the love of the truth, should be given over to strong delusions, to believe lies: And this saddest effect of thy wrath hath already overtaken many among us, and doth universal∣ly threaten the rest. For since thou hast laid waste the wall of thy Vine∣yard, what can we expect, but that it should be trodden down: thou hast broken our two staves, Beauty and Bands, all order and unity, the neces∣sary supports of a Church, at once pe∣rishing from among us. The solemn feasts are forgotten in Sion, her El∣ders sit upon the ground and keep si∣lence, whilest they, whom thou hast not sent, run; whilest those to whom thou hast not spoken, prophesie. We, O Lord, who might once have gone with the multitude to the house of God, are now interdicted the more private exercises, and celebrations of thy service. This, this, O Lord, is the unsupportable part of our afflicti∣ons, the sting of all our misery; if
we had been onely sold for bond-men and bond-women, we could have held our peace; but thine abhorring thine Altar, and casting off thy Sanctu∣ary, this is for a lamentation, and must be for a lamentation. Thy ser∣vants think upon the stones of Sion, and it pitieth them to see her in the dust: O let not all those tears and prayers that are poured out for her, return empty: and because thou hast thy self recommended to us the effica∣cy of importunity, be thou pleased to give us that grace, to excite and stir up all that make mention of the Lord, that they may give thee no rest, till thou establish our Jerusalem again a praise in the earth. To that end, O Lord, give us Pastors after thine own heart, such Priests whose lips may preserve knowledge, and make us diligently to seek the Law at their mouthes; and grant that we being by this deprivation taught the value of such precious advantages, and the sin of our former contemning them, may unanimously contend for the regaining them, by a cordial for∣saking
those sins, which have turn∣ed away these good things from us. Grant this gracious Lord for his sake whom thou hast set forth to be our propitiation Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
CHAP. III. A view of the second part of the Ob∣jection. The perishing of the righ∣teous. §. 1. I Now proceed to the second and more principal part of the Answer (in reference to the latter part of the Objection) which on the grounds premised must be this, That the improsperousnesse and persecutions, and even subver∣sion and eradication of a particular Church, is no way an evidence, nay, not so much as a probable ar∣gument, that that was nocent, which thus perisheth, but only that they were unworthy, which are thus de∣prived, and that too good to be en∣joyed by them. §. 2. An indication of this the Text referred to in the proposal of the Objection doth expresly afford us; The whole verse runs thus, An Host was given him against the dai∣ly Sacrifice by reason of transgression, and it east down the truth to the ground, and it practised and prospe∣red.
§. 3. Here indeed transgression is the one procatarctick, external im∣pulsive cause, moving God to give that destroying Host to the little Horn: and to continue so prodigi∣ous a successe, and presperity to it, and this transgression, not that of the Horn, or Host, (which yet oft provokes God even in judgement, to give them such kinde of destructive prosperities, whether to be present∣ly out of their debt (to pay Nebu∣chadnezzar that hire, which is due to him for being instrumental to some of Gods purposes) or to allow them, like Dives their good things in this life; but I suppose the trans∣gression of those, against whom the Host prospers, just as in our case it is. §. 4. But then still it is the daily Sacrifice, and the Truth, which it is thus impowred to cast down. The Sacrifice we know of Gods own pre∣scribing, and such as was an act of his special favour to that, above any other Nation, that he so pre∣scribed it; and this worship so true, so acceptable to God, that as he ex∣acted
it daily, loved to have it al∣wayes before him, came constantly to meet with them at the seasons of offering it, and was propitiated there∣by; so 'tis there, by way of excel∣lence, and in the abstract, styled truth, and the truth it self. And this the fittest as for that Host to cast to the ground, so for those trans∣gressors to be deprived of, such as for whom no ill thing being too bad, any good thing was too preci∣ous to be continued to them. §. 5. In like manner, when the Temple was kept from being re-edi∣fied, when the Sanctum Sanctorum was profaned, will any man affirm that these prosperities and great suc∣cesses, whether of Tobiah and San∣ballat, or of Pompey, were a deci∣sion of God's, a verdict of Heaven brought in against the Temple, and Services? §. 6. If there were need of more instances to evince this, the whole History of the Turkih successes and victories over the Christians would not misse to do it, that great Vo∣lume would croud together, and
condensate into one undeniable argu∣ment; the sum whereof is this, that Christianity hath been foiled, and Mahomedisme set up in many hun∣dred Cities and Regions; where∣soever that false Epileptick Prophets Banners were displayed, the En∣signes of truth and God himself , were presently banished, or put to flight. And yet sure God hath not thus decided the contro∣versie against Christian Religion (to which his promise was long ago sealed, that the gates of Hell should never prevail against it) If he have, he hath also yeelded the Great Sul∣tan the honour of his own throne; for to that he hath as just a title, that of long, peaceable possession, and prescription, having put it suc∣cessefully, and as prosperously main∣tained it among his titles, to be King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Gods verdict was herein intelligible enough, against the factions, and divisions, and intestine broiles of the Christians among themselves, too busily and ambitiously ingaged in wars against one another, to attend
the designes, and obviate the moti∣ons of that common Enemy. And many other sins there were that fitted them for those deprivations. §. 7. If this be not sufficient, I shall then ascend but one step fur∣ther in this argument ab Exemplo, and demand whether Satan, that great Adversary hath not some∣times been prosperous in his at∣tempts against the Church, and true Faith: and whether that be not the meaning of his beingRev. 20. loos∣ed a little season, after the deter∣mining of the thousand years, and his deceiving the nations before the commencing of them, and whether in both those periods of time, wherein he had his desired successe in the , deceiving the Nations, God have decided the que∣stion for him, and given judgement against the truth? If so, then was Simon of Samaria no longer a Ma∣gician, but a God, and all the pow∣ers of heaven it self submitted to him, when he prevailed with the Emperour to have a Statue so in∣scribed to him, Simoni summo Deo,
To Simon the highest God: and the Strumpet Helena transformed from the stray Sheep into the Queen of Heaven, when once she obtained to be adored as his prima . And then did Arrianisme com∣mence Orthodox (and Apostolical truth become the onely Heresie) when by the favour of the Emperor Constantius it triumpht through all the East over the Catholick Doctrine; it being known in story, how upon that Emperours great prosperities, and successes, particu∣larly upon the overthrow of Mag∣nentius, and joyning the Western Empire to the Eastern, which for∣merly he possest, he frequently boasted, Probatam divino calculo suam fidem, That God himself by those victories decided the contro∣versie on the Arrians side against the Fathers of Nice, and determi∣nedNisi Catholica esset fides Arii. hoc est, mea, nisi placitū esset Deo, quod illam perse∣quar fidem quam contra me scrip∣serunt apud Nicae∣am, nunquam pro∣fectò adhuc in im∣perio florerem. their belief to be the true, (which presumption Lucifer Cala∣ritanus confuted in a Treatise for that purpose, and entituled De Re∣gibus Apostatis) And then (in brief) prosperity is not, as the Ro∣manist
but modestly pretends, one of his many markes of the true Church, but like Aarons rod, in the midst of those of the Magici∣ans, devoures, and supplies the place of them all, neither Antiquity, nor purity shall any longer signifie any thing, nor Christ himself, if he have ever been so improsperous, as to be crucified, the Jewes, and Judas, and Pilate must have been in the right for three dayes, till he conquered, and so confuted them a∣gain at his resurrection. §. 8. These few I suppose may serve for some competent Topicks of reasoning, to repel all the force of this first Objection, though if there could be need of it, the whole Christian Religion it self, which bears the Crosse for its Stan∣dard, and hath no assurance of conquest, but by constancy in suffe∣ring, and gives us no promise of this life, but cum mxtu â crucis, with the excepn, or mixtre o the Cross, would abundantly demonstrate such Ob ect m as this to be per∣fectly unchristian
CHAP. IV. A second Objection answered. Where is now the Protestant English Church? §. 1. THe next Objection is prepa∣red and aimed against us from another coast, and will be, most for their advantage, put into this short question [Where is now your Protestant English Church] when your Church doors and even Parlors themselves are shut up a∣gainst those of you, which are the ancient remaining Bishops, and Pres∣byters of the Church of England, Officers regularly entred into, and continuing in that Function? §. 2. To this (not to examine the truth of the suggestion, which I suppose to fail in many respects) the answer will bee the same, as if the Heathens should ask, as once they are supposed to have askt the Psal∣mist, in a state of the like captivity, [Where is now your God?] viz: that as our God, so our Church is now,
where it was before, ere this inter∣dict came out against us. §. 3. Or if it may tend to the satisfaction of any that I should a little inlarge on this theme also, I shall then as before first demand, where the Church of the Israelites was, when the people were carried into Assyria or Chaldea; were they not then removed as far from their own solemne place of worship, the Temple at Ierusalem, and from all their numerous synagogues ere∣cted in Palestine, and that by the very same meanes, a visible force; by which wee are discharged from the publick, and even more private exercise of our functions? and con∣sequently was not the lot of that people the same with the worst, which can be suggested, or affirm∣ed of ours, viz: to be sheep kept out of their pastures upon the interdi∣cting of their shepherds? §. 4. Secondly, Whether in the most prosperous times of Arianism when the Catholick Bishops were driven out of their Churches, bani∣shed out of Constantiu's dominions,
and forced to fly to the West, as to a hiding place, a refuge from those sad calamities, it be by the Object∣ers imagined, that there was no Catholick or Orthodox Church in those regions, wherein the Arrian Emperour thus persecuted the truth? §. 5. Thirdly, Whether in the time of Anastasius the Emperour, who was an Eutychian Heretick, and a bitter enemy, and persecuter of the Orthodox, through the whole Eastern Empire, the Gothes and Vandals, Arian Princes, mean while domineering in Italy, Spain, and Africk, and Pagan Kings bearing rule in France, England and Germany: Whether, I say, in this place, there were not yet an Orthodox Church remaining, though persecuted, in all those places: or whether there were at that time any part of the Church which en∣joyed the , exempt from that black persecuted condition? Much might be added of the particular state of the African Church under the Vandals, out of Victor Ʋticen∣sis,
but the Argument is too co∣pious. §. 6. Fourthly, whether when the Othoman race of Mahometan Em∣perours subdued so great a part not onely of Asia but Europe also, and therein so many eminent Christian Churches, setting up Mahomedism for the publick worship, yet permit∣ting Christians to live, though but as under Sawes and Harrowes and Axes of Iron, instead of utterly depopulating their Cities, it can with truth be suggested, that these Christian Churches were all destroy∣ed? I speak not of later times, wherein some liberty of Assemblies is at a dear rate sold to them. But before they came to purchase, or finde so much mercy at their con∣querours hands, whilest all exer∣cise of Christian Religion was under close interdicts, all their Churches filled with their false worshippers; yet even then hath not this sad captivity been deemed sufficient to unchurch all the Chri∣stians under those proud Tyrants dominions.
§. 7 Lastly, what will these Dis∣puters pretend, as to the Romanists themselves, who have continued for some yeares in this Kingdom without publick assemblies, and ac∣knowledge willingly, I suppose, that their state hath been all this while a state of persecution, that no Priest of theirs is allow'd to ce∣lebrate Masse among them, that they can have no Bishop or Ordina∣ry residing here, and (as is suppo∣sable at least) do not all receive in∣fluence either immediately or medi∣ately from their supreme Bishop? Will not their union with the Catholick Church over the world, and their sincere desire to injoy the liberty of Assemblies, &c. preserve them with∣in the bosome of the Church, though they do not injoy these felicities? §. 8. Tis vain to pay any larger, or more solemn attendance to this Objection, to which I haveTr. of Schism. Ch. 11. else∣where spoken more punctually, and do now onely suppose, that all that hath since been added to our pres∣sures hath infused no fresh vertue into the Arguments.
§. 9. The truth is, these and the like wayes of their demurest argu∣ings, or suggestions at this time, are but acts of diligent observers of opportunity, which think to gain more by the seasonable applicati by addressing their Fumes, Medicaments, tempore congr when the pores are open, or the bo in any special manner recepti then by the intrinsick virtue, energie of them. §. 9. The argument I suppose, th very same, which threescore yeare since was frequently prest again us of this nation, that ever sinc our departure from the Romish yo we have ceased to be a Church onely now the darknesse of o present condition makes them ho that their Sophistry shall not be easily seen through, as formerl it hath been, and that either w shall be found lesse diligent or less dextrous to defend a persecuted pro¦fession, or else more inclinable to part with it. §. 10. It is meet therfore we shold be instructed by them, and learn
warinesse from their wiles, and as Antidotes and Prophylactick me∣thods, which are at all times of like power and vertue, are yet most necessary to be produced, in time of a general distemper, so I suppose a more particular discourse on this matter, though it will not now have more real force, or conse∣quently hope for better successe up∣on those that are imperswasible, then formerly it had, may yet be more seasonable to the wants of some weak seducible members of our per∣secuted communion, in tendernesse to whom it may not be amisse more distinctly to consider the argument it self, that was now only to be new drest, and furbushed, and re∣ceive some aid from the condition of our present pressures, and to be∣gin with examining, what, and how many things there are, which may by the disputers be thought suf∣ficient to unchurch, or destroy any particular Church. §. 11. And I suppose them reducible to these four. 1. Aposta∣sie; 2. Heresie; 3. Schism; 4. Con∣sumption
and utter vastation. §. 12. For the First, that of A∣postasie, or renouncing the whole Faith of Christ, I hope of that we shall not be deemed guilty, who are by our greatest enemies ac∣knowledged to retain many bran∣ches of that Faith, which was once delivered to the Saints. §. 13. For the Pourth, that of utter consumption, it can as little be pretended, as long as so many Bi∣shops, Presbyters, and duly baptized Christians among us remain alive, and constant to their first faith. §. 14. For the Third, that of Schism, the Fathers which aggra∣vated the sin of it to the highest, do not yet allow it the force of un∣churching, but call them brethren, i. e. fellow Christians, which were most obstinately guilty of it: But howsoever it be, of that I have in a discourse on that subject, and in a first and second defence of that discourse said as much as yet ap∣pears necessary to be pleaded in de∣fence of our Church. §. 15. There remaines then on∣ly
the Second, that of Heresie, to which also some preparative matter hath been laid down in the Tract of Fundamentals, but not in so par∣ticular a relation to the present que∣stion, as will excuse the Reader from all addition of trouble at this time. §. 16. I shall therefore on this account, and to perfect the answer to the present objection, transgresse the bounds of my first designe, and inlarge awhile upon this inquiry. What may be defined the Formalis ratio, wherein heresie, properly so called, must necessarily consist, and without which no person or Church can justly be deemed guilty of that dangerous sin, that piece of carnality.
CHAP. V. Of the nature of Haeresie. Our Church secured from the guilt of it. Sect. I. The use of the word in Scripture. 1. ANd first to prevent mis∣takes, which may arise from the ambiguitie of the word , even in Scripture it self; It is certain that this is sometimes used more loosely in an indifferent sense, for any considerable distin∣ction betwixt men of the same Pro∣fession, as when the several Schools of Philosophers, and the courses they took in them are— Phavorin p. 74. l. 4. called  their Heresies and waies of discipline, especially when any. Phavor. Ibid. great number of men of such or such a denomination, doe hold and keep together in maintenance of such a way.
2. Thus when the Sadduces were indeed the most eminent false teachers in the Iewish Church, yet not onely their false doctrine is styled  their heresie, Act. 15.17. but even that of the Pharisees Act. 15.5. and that by S. Paul, even when he looks on it , as the strictest, and most exact Sect of the Iewish religion, Act. 26.5. 3. And thus I suppose Chri∣stianity is called by the Iewes at Rome, Act: 28.22. This heresie, without any evil character set upon it, as into which they desired then to make inquirie, and be in∣structed, knowing no more of it at present, than by the partial and passionate rumors of men, by which they past no judgement of it, but onely said that it was every where spoken against. 4. But of this notion of the word we do not now speak; If we did, it is visible that the style would belong to the way of the Romanists, were they never so purely Orthodox, as well as to any
other sort of either true or errone∣ous Christians, the consideration of the verity or Falsity of the doctrines being no ingredient in this usage any more then in the origination of that word. 5. But the Scripture more fre∣quently useth the word in an ill sense, with connotation of some Fault either really inherent, or by them that use the word thought chargeable on that way, which they expresse by it. 6. Thus Acts 24.5. in Ter∣tullus's speech the  Heresie of the Nazarenes is lookt on as an erroneous, dangerous, punishable way, and so. v. 14. in Paul's resuming of the accusation, where he acknowleges himselfe guilty of that which they thus called Heresie, i. e. deemed to be such. 7. Thus in the Epistles it con∣stantly signifies infusions of ill; sometimes divisions and breaches of Charity and Christian Communion, as 1 Cor. 11.19. where  He∣resies are but the interpretation of  Schismes or Fractures
v. 18. and so Gal. 5.20. where in the midst of uncharitable breaches, hatred, variance, emulations, wraths, strifes, seditions, before, & envyings, murther after,  Heresies are inclosed, and so must receive their Tincture from the Society, wherein they are found, and so denote Schismatical divisions peculiarly, in a very ill sense indeed, as unque∣stionable workes of the flesh, v. 19. yet not precisely those, that now we are to treat of, but, as Heresie and Schisme are sometimes promis∣cuously used the one for the other. 8. As for the strict, Separate notion of the word, wherin it hath from the Apostles times come to ours, and is generally understood among men, that still remains to be fetcht from one singular use of it. 2 Pet. 2.1. whereof the false Teachers among the Christians, bearing, saith he, a proportion with the false Prophets among the Jewes (those two words  and  Teachers and Prophets without any connotation of predicting future events, signify∣ing
in sacred dialect one and the same thing; and so likewise false Teachers and false Prophets) he foretels them , that they shall bring in, either by the by, or (as  oft signifies) in contrariety to sound Doctrine, Heresies of destruction, or destructive ruinous Heresies, destru∣ctive of that foundation laid by the Apostles; for such the Doctrines appear to be of which he there speakes, being the denyal of the great Article of our belief concern∣ing our Redeemer, and such the Gnostick Heresie is confest to be, which is evidently there spoken of by S. Peter. 9. That all Heresies should be equally destructive with this, we have no indications from that text, nay several inhaunsing circumstances are there discernible (if now that were any part of the inquiry) which may justly make a difference gradual both in respect of turpi∣tude and danger betwixt that there specified, and sundry other Here∣sies. Thus much onely must be
thence concluded, that all the Heresies that can be deemed Pro∣portionable, or parallel to that Character, which, in that singular place, the Scripture gives us of , are doctrinal breaches or Se∣parations from the faith as that signifies the true Christian doctrine, by Christ or his inspired and im∣powered servants, the Apostles, once or at once delivered to the Saints. , Heresie is an untrue or false opinion or doctrine concerning the Faith, was duely and fully re∣solved by Phavorinus, meaning by  any part of the Faith truly so called, the difference be∣twixt heresie on one side, and In∣fidelity or Apostacie on the other∣side, being visibly this, that the two latter are the denying or re∣nouncing the whole Faith of Christ, but the Former of any single part of it.
Sect. 2. Of matter of Faith. 1. Herein then the definition of Heresie (in our present no∣tion) being completed, viz. in its opposition to the faith of Christ in any one or more branches of it, and the disposition of the person, guilty thereof, being but extrinse∣cal to the nature of the thing it selfe (as whether it be caused bare∣ly by ignorance, or whether it have in it some mixture of obstinacie, pride, or any other kind of carnali∣ty, whether it be onely in the heart, contrary to believing with that, or else proceed farther to profession with the tongue, as Faith also doth, Rom. 10.10.) these I say, and the like being prescinded, and taken off from our present inquirie, as they must be from the examina∣tion of the Formalis ratio of every other sin (which being once found out what formally it is, is allowed to be capable of many aggravating or extenuating circum∣stances,
and degrees, without vary∣ing of the Species) All that can now remain to be establisht in this first part of the inquirie, is, to discerne how far the faith of Christ may duely be extended, to what sorts of things it can properly belong, that so by the law of Contraries, we may safely conclude, to what sorts of errors it is, that the word Heresie to be extended. 2. And 1. we must distinguish between matters of Faith and rites or practices or customes of all, or any of the Apostles, for these latter being prudentially designed to some persons at some times, for some particular, occasional, and those mutable ends, as they are not foun∣ded in any universal precept, or doctrine of Christs, so neither are they obliging to all future times, but onely so far as they that so ordered, did designe them. 3. Thus we know the Canon of the Apostles, and the Church as∣sembled at Ierusalem concerning things strangled and things offered to Idols, Act. 15. are promulgate
to the Gentiles at that time of Antioch, Syria and Cilicia, from whom the occasion of that Coun∣cil and Canon was taken; but when they passe farther, they pro∣mulgate them not, as appears by 1 Cor. 8.9. Where, in that of Ido∣lothyta he acknowledges the Co∣rinthians liberty not retrenched, save onely in case of scandal. 4. AndAn. 51. n. 58. Baronius extends this observation to the Thessalonians al∣so (though the evidence be not so convincing) upon force of that Text, 1 Thess. 4.2, 3. where repeat∣ing what Commandments he had gi∣ven them by the Lord Iesus, he spe∣cifies onely ut abstineatis à fornica∣tione, that ye abstain from fornicati∣on, without any mention of the other parts of the Canon. 5. But without relying on such arguments as this last, of his (nega∣tive, and so unconcludent) such or∣dinances as these, accommodated to particular times, and places, and persons, are in the nature of them, temporary and variable, nay, not al∣wayes the same at the same time.
The Church stories give us little reason to doubt, but the contro∣versie concerning the time of keep∣ing Easter, which at last brake out into such a tempest in the Church, had its original in the different tra∣ditions of the Apostles, S. John and S. Philip produced by Polycrates for the Asiatick, as S. Peter and others by Victor for the other side. 6. And from thence as Polycarp and Anicetus, though each reso∣lutely adhering to their several wayes, did yet communicate one with another (as Irenaeus tels Victor in his Epistle to him, concerning this matter) so 'tis evident that such ritual differences disturb not the faith, nor infer Heresie on ei∣ther side, the words ofEpist. ex Reg. l. 1. Indict. 9. Ep. 41. Pope Gre∣gory the first are expresse for it, In unâ fide nihil officit sanctae Ecclesiae consuetudo diversa, Difference of cu∣stomes is reconcileable with the unity of Faith, and no detriment comes to holy Church by this difference. This might be much more largely evinced, if there were need of it. 7. First then, confining our
selves to the Faith only, Its gran∣ted on all hands, that by faith here is meant the Object or matter of a Christians belief; not the belief it self: so it is visibly used in that eminent place of Jude 3. , the faith delivered to the Saints, i. e. the particular doctrines which all together made up the Saints belief. 8. Secondly, that this object of belief is nothing but the revealed doctrine of God, actually proposed by him, and preached to men, on purpose that they that have so much reverence to God, and confi∣dence of his veracity, that they question not the truth of any of his affirmations, may by faith receive, and believe, and act according to them. 9. For this belief being a duty of the first Commandment, and so as all other parts of divine worship ter∣minated ultimately in God (or else it is not divine, but at the most but humane faith) as it truly compre∣hends all that is, or shall ever be thus conveighed to us by divine
revelation; so can it not be any farther extended, so as to comprize those things even of God, which are unrevealed. 10 Many verities no doubt there are in God's secret Cabinet, which though most true in themselves, and most worthy of belief, in case they were revealed to us, yet are never like to come out from under that veil, and so can never be Ob∣jects of our belief. 11. Thirdly, that even of those things that have at any time been revealed, all are not incumbent on us, so as to lay obligation on every man to comprehend, or believe them; many passages of Holy Writ, though, when they are pro∣posed to us convincingly as such, they may not be dis-believed, may yet safely be unobserved, or not understood, or escape out of our memory. , The Faith by way of emphasis and excellence, that was once delivered to the Saints, and ought by all such to be contended for, is that which was set out by Christ or his Apo∣stles
from him,Rom. 10.10. to be by all men be∣lieved to their righteousnesse, and confest to their salvation. Sect. 3. The two wayes of conveying the Faith to us. 1. THis then being the adequate object of the Christian's Faith, those verities which have been revealed to us by God to be thus believed to righteousnes,1 Tim. 6.3. called therefore , words not onely true, but wholesome: the beliefe whereof is required in order to our soules health; the next inquirie is, how we that live in the same distance from Christ and his Apostles in respect of time, that we are situate from heaven, which now containes Christ, in respect of place, may come within any reach of these revelations of Christ, or to any competent undoubted assu∣rance, that those are such indeed, which are pretended to be so.
2. And to this also my conces∣sion shall be as liberal as any Roma∣nist can wish, that there areBasil. de spir. Sanct. c. 27. . two wayes of conveighing such revela∣tions to us; one in writing, the o∣ther by oral tradition, the former in the Gospels and other writings of the Apostles, &c. which makes up the sacred writ, or anon of the New Testament; the latter in the Apostles preachings to all the Churches of their plantations, which are no where set down for us in the Sacred Writ, but conserved as1 Tim. 6.20. 2 Tim. 1.14. Deposita by them to whom they were intrusted. 3. And although in sundry re∣spects the former of these be much the more faithful, steady way of conveighance, and for want there∣of many things may possibly have perished, or been changed by their passage through many hands, thus much being on these grounds con∣fest
by Bellarmine himself, thatS. Scrip. regu∣lam credendi cer∣tissimam tutissi∣mam{que} esse. De verbo Dei. lib. 1. cap. 2. The Scripture is the most certain and safe rule of belief; yet there be∣ing no lesse veracity in the tongues, than the hands, in the preachings, than the writings of the Apostles; nay, Prior sermo quam liber, prior sensus quam stylus, saithDe testim. an. c. 5. Tertul∣lian, the Apostles preacht before they writ, planted Churches, be∣fore they addrest Epistles to them. On these grounds I make no scru∣ple to grant, that Apostolical tra∣ditions, such as are truly so, as well as Apostolical writings, are. Basil. de Spir. Sanct. c. 27. equal∣ly the matter of that Christians be∣lief, who is equally secured by the fidelity of the conveighance, that as one is Apostolical writing, so the o∣ther is Apostolical tradition.
Sect. 4. The testimony from which we receive the Faith. 1. NExt then the inquiry must proceed by examining what is this equal way of conveighance, common to both these, upon strength of which we become obli∣ged to receive such or such a Tra∣dition for Apostolical. 2. And this again is acknow∣ledged not to be any Divine testi∣mony; for God hath no where af∣firmed in Divine Writ, that the Epistle, inscribed of Paul the Apo∣stle to the Romans, consisting of so many periods as now it is in our Bibles, was ever written by that Apostle, nor are there any inward Characters or Signatures, or beams of light in the writing it self, that can be admitted, or pretended for testimonies of this, any more then the like may exact to be admitted as witnesses, that the Creede called the Apostles, was indeed, in the
full sense of it, delivered to the Churches. 3. It remains then, that herein on both sides we rest content with humane testimonies of undoubted au∣thority, or such as there is not any rational motive to distrust, and of which alone the matter is capable. For as in case of question concern∣ing the Epistle to the Romans, whe∣ther this be it, which was addrest by S. Paul to that Church, the on∣ly regular way of satisfying the question, is 1. By divolution or ap∣peal to the authority of those Fa∣thers and Councils, to whom it was de facto sufficiently testified, and approved (viz. by examination of the Records of that Church to whom it was written, and by whom received, through the hands of some trusty messenger of that Apo∣stle, such as Phebe that ministred unto him, and by other creditable wayes of confirmation) and Se∣condly, and by that consequence, to those very original records and proofs of undoubted fidelity: So the way of tryal of any tradition,
pretended to be Apostolical, whe∣ther it be such or no, is by devol∣ving it to those same, or the like Fathers, and Councils, which ha∣ving occasion and commodity to examine the truth of the matter by the Records or Testimonies of those Churches, to which it was delive∣red, found it sufficiently testified by them, that it was in truth ac∣cording as is pretended. 4. And from hence it followes, that as we of this age have no o∣ther way of judging of the Canon of Scripture, or of any Book, or Chapter, or Period contained in it, but by the affirmation and authori∣ty of those testifiers in the first ages of the Church, either by their writings, or by the unquestioned relations of others, brought down and made known to us; so are we as unable to judge of Apostolical traditions unwritten, whether this or that doctrine be such or no, un∣lesse it be thus by the undoubted affirmations of the antients (who are presumable by their antiquitie to know the truth, and by their
uniform consent, neither to mistake themselves, nor to deceive us) com∣municated and conveighed to us. 5. 'Tis not possible for any man or men of the greatest under∣standing or integritie, to see or know what is not done within the reach of their faculties, unlesse either they be inspired by God, or otherwise informed either mediately or immediately from those, who had really knowlege of it. Stories of former times are not wont to be written by the strength of mens natural parts, invention, or judge∣ment, but onely by consulting of those records, either dead or living by whose help such matters of fact have been preserved. Every thing else is but conjecture, and that very uncertain, the utmost probability in such matters being little worth, that being oft times done which really was (and much more to us, who know not the motives of actions far removed from us, is) of all things least pro∣bable to have been done. Onely a creditable witnesse, such as no pru∣dent
man hath reason to distrust either as nescient or false, is worth considering, or able to found be∣lief in this matter. Sect. 5. The qualifications of such Testi∣monies. 1. NOw then comes the upshot of the inquirie, what quali∣fications there are of a testimonie, or testifier, without which, it or he may not be thus deemed creditable, or , worthy to be believed by a sober Christian: and where these qualifications are to be found: which when we have once resol∣ved, it will also be possible for us to passe some judgment of Tra∣ditions duely styled Apostolical, which as such must be allowed to be the object of our Faith. 2. And herein I shall hope also that the resolution will be unque∣stionable, if it be bounded by those three termes to whichCont. Har. c. 3. Vincentius Lirinensis in his defense of the Ca∣tholick
Faith against Heresies and innovations hath directed us, Vni∣versitas, Antiquitas, Consensio, Ʋ∣niversality, Antiquitas, Consent, viz. That the Testimonie, we depend on be the result of All, the Antients, Consenting, or without any consi∣derable dissent. Or, in yet fewer words, a Catholick Testimonie, tru∣ly such, i. e. vniversall in all re∣spects; 1. Of Place, 2. Of Time, 3. Of Persons. 3 For first, If it be not testified from all places, it is not qualified for our belief, as Catholick in respect of place, because the Faith being one, and the same, and by all and every of the Apostles preached, and deposited in all their plantations, what was ever really thus taught, by any of them in any Church, will also be found to have been taught, and received in all other Apostoli∣cal Churches. 4. To which purpose the words of Irenaeus are expresse, lib. 1. ca. 3.Hanc praedica∣tionem eum acce∣perit & hanc fidem Ecclesia, & quidem in u∣niversum mun∣dum disseminata, diligenter custo∣dit quasi unam do∣mum inhabitans, & similiter cre∣dit, his quasi unam animam habens, et unum cor, & con∣sonanter haec pre∣dicat & docet & tradit, quasi unum possidens os. Nam etsi in mundo loquelae dissi∣miles sunt, sed tamen virtus traditionis una est & eadem— The church disseminated over all the
world, having received this preach∣ing and this Faith, preserves it dili∣gently, as the inhabitants of the same house, believe them alike, as having the same soule and heart, and teach and preach and deliver them alike, as having the same mouth, for though their languages are unlike, the vir∣tue of Tradition is one and the same, and neither doe the Churches which are founded in Germanie believe or deliver otherwise then those which were constituted in Spain, in France, in the Orient, in Egypt, in Africk, in the middle of the world, but as one and the same Sun shines through the whole world, so doth the light and preaching of the truth in every place, where it is received, disperse it self. 5. SoSinim igitur Apostoli—primum per Judaeam con∣testat â fide in Je∣sum Christum, & Ecclesiis institu∣tis, dehinc in or∣bem profecti, ean∣dem doctrinam e∣jusdem fidei nati∣onibus promulga∣verunt, & proindè Ecclesias apud u∣namquam{que} civi∣tatē condiderunt, à quibus tradu∣cem fidei, & semina doctrinae caetera deinde Ecclesiae mutuatae sunt, & quotidiè mutuantur ut Ecclesia flant. also Tertullian de Pre∣script: c. 20. Presently therefore the Apostles having first in Iudea testified the Faith and instituted Churches, and then taken their journey over all the world, made known to the nations the same doctrine of the same Faith, and so
planted Churches in every City, from which the rest of the Churches after∣ward borrowed their seeds of Faith and doctrine, and so daily con∣tinue to doe and are formed into Churches. 6. From which premisses his con∣clusion is just, that, which I here deduce;Si hac it sint, constat proin∣de omnem doctri∣nam, quae cum il∣lis Ecclesiis Apo∣stolicis matricibus & originalibus fidei conspiret, ve∣ritati deputandā, id sine dubio te∣nentem quod Ec∣clesiae, ab Aposto∣lis, Apostoli à Christo, Christus à Deo suscepit, re∣liquam autem omnem doctrinam de mendacio praejudicandam quae sapiat contra veritatem Ecclesiarum, & Apostolorum, & Chri∣sti, & Dei. Ibid. If so, then 'tis evident that every doctrine must be deemed true which conspires with the Apostolical Churches, which are the wombs and Originals whence the Faith came out, as maintaining that without any que∣stion which the Churches received from the Apostles, the Apostles from Christ, and Christ from God; and that all other doctrine is under the prejudice of being false, which is contrary to the truth of the Churches of the Apostles, of Christ, and of God. 7. 'Tis true indeed that what∣soever one Church professeth to have received from the Apostle that planted it, is of it selfe suffici∣ent, without the confirmation of all
others, to beget and establish belief in him, to whom it thus testifies: whereuponAge jam qui voles curiositatem melius exercere in negotio salu∣is tuae, percurre. Ecclesias Apostolicas; proxima est tibi Achaia? habes Corinthum; Si non longè es à Macedoniâ, habes Philip∣pos, habes Thessalonicenses; si potes in Asiam tendere, habes Ephesam; si tamen Italiae adjaces, habes Romanam. D. Prescr. cp. 36. Tertullian refers the inquirer to that Apostolick Church that is next him, be it Corinth, if he live in Achaia, Philippi or Thessalo∣nica, if in Macedonia, Ephesus if in Asia, or if he be neer Italie, Rome. But this is no farther to be exten∣ded, then while we suppose without inquirie, that other Apostolical Churches have received, and are ready to testifie, the same, which presumption, or supposal must then cease, when upon inquirie we find the contrarie; there being then none of this first kind of univer∣sality, viz. of place, and so far no validity in the Testification. 8. Secondly for the Vniversality of time, that must be cautiously understood; not so as to signifie it a prejudice to any doctrine, if in some one or more ages it have not
been universally received; for then there could be no Hereticks at any time in the world, but so as to ex∣tend to the first and purest, and not only to the latter ages of the Church. 9. That which was delivered by the Apostles was certainly received in that first age, wherein they li∣ved; and by careful inquiry will be found from their monuments to have been then among them. And that which by this trial is discer∣ned to be of later date, not to be descried in the first times, nor te∣stified by sufficient authority to be derived from thence, falls short again of this second part of univer∣sality in respect of time. 10 Thirdly, for the consent of Testifiers, that is also necessary to the rendring it a Catholick and au∣thentick testimony; any considera∣ble number of dissenters being of necessity to weaken our belief, and infuse reasons of doubting, and a preponderancy of dissenters the other way to weigh down (at least to in∣cline) the belief to the contrary.
Sect. 6. Where these qualifications may be found. Of the consent of ancient Doctors, and definitions of Coun∣cels truly general. 1. THis therefore being thus e∣stablisht, and the conjunction of all the three sorts of universality being in all reason required to the authentick testifying of tradition; It is soon defined, where these quali∣fications are to be lookt for, and where they may be found. 2. Questionless not in any one Bishop, or succession of Bishops in any See for many latter ages, not in∣cluding the Apostles; for what∣ever his pretensions may be to au∣thority and Supremacy over all o∣ther Churches, this can never con∣vert a particular whether Man or Church, into the Ʋniversal, nor make his Testimony authentick ac∣cording to those rational and Chri∣stian Rules, which we have learn'd from Lirinensis. 3. There are many Apostolick
Churches beside that of Rome: Great difference of Rome in these later ages from the Primitive Apo∣stolick Rome, to which the Deposi∣tum was intrusted. And there are many dissenters to be found, who have alwayes lived and flourished in the Catholick Church, which ne∣ver acknowledged those doctrines to be delivered to them by the A∣postles, which the Church of Rome hath of late assumed to be such. And for any priviledge annexed to that Bishops Chair, or to that soci∣ety of men, which live in external communion with him, that he or they can never define any thing to be (de fide) part of the Faith, which is not so. As that is, be∣yond all other their pretensi∣ons, most denied by us, and least attempted to be proved by the Ro∣manist, and not so much as consen∣ted on among themselves; so must it in no reason be supposed in this dispute, or taken for granted by them, but is rejected with the same ease that it is mentioned by them. 4. As for other pretenders, I know not
any, save onely that of the Ʋniver∣sal consent of the Doctors of the first ages, or that of an Ʋniversal Coun∣cel. And both of these we are wil∣ling to admit with such cautions only as the matter exacts, and the grounds of defining already laid. 5. The Universal consent of the Doctors of the first ages, bearing testimony that such or such a Do∣ctrine was from the Apostles prea∣chings delivered to all Churches by them planted, or their General con∣form testimony herein, without any considerable dissenters producible, is, I acknowledge, , au∣thentick or worthy of belief, and so hath been made use of by the. Epist. Orthodox. Episc. Synodi Antioch. Paul. Samosat. Missae. Bib. Gr. Pat. Tom. 1. pag. 30. &c. , &c. Dionys. Alexand. Epist. contr. Paul. Samosat. in Bibl. Pat. Gr. To. 1. p. 275. E. Or∣thodox of all times, as sufficient for the rejecting of any new doctrine. 6. So likewise is the declaration of a General Councel, free, and ga∣thered
from all quarters, and in such other respects, truly so called, founded in the examination of the monuments of the Several Apostoli∣cal Plantations, either produced in Councel, or authentically confirmed from the Letters of the several Churches, either formerly prepared in Provincial and National Coun∣cels, or otherwise sufficiently con∣firmed to them, and this Decla∣ration conciliarly promulgate, and after the promulgation Vniversally received and accepted by the Church diffusive; Or else 'tis evident all this while, that it is not a Catho∣lick (truly so styled) Testimonie. 7. For that any Councel of Bishops, the most numerous that ever was in the world (much lesse a but major part of those few, that be there present) is not yet really the Vniversalitie of Christians, is too evident to be doubted of. 8. It can onely then be preten∣ded, that it is the Vniversal Repre∣sentative, or such an Assembly, wherein is contained the virtue and influences of the whole Vniversal
Church. And thus indeed I sup∣pose it to be, as often as the Do∣strines there established by Vniver∣sal consent (founded in Scripture and Tradition) have either been before discuss'd and resolved in each Provincial Councel, which have sent their Delegates thither from all the parts of the world, or else have Post factum, after the promulgation, been accepted by them, and acknowleged to agree with that Faith which they had originally received. 9. That the former of these is a considerable ingredient in a General Councel, appeares to be S. Au∣gustines judgment in l. 7. de Bapt. contra Donatist. c. 53.Nobis tutum est in eum non pro∣gredi aliqua teme∣ritate sententiae, quae nullo in Ca∣tholico regionali concilio coepta, nul∣lo plenario concilio terminata sunt. Id autem sit cura se∣curae vocis assere∣re, quod in Guber∣natione Domini Dei nostri & sal∣vatoris Iusu Chri∣sti universalis ec∣clesiae confessione roboratum est. 'Tis safe for us not to proceed rashly to those things which have not been begun in any Catholick Provincial Councel, and determined in a plenary or Vniversal. That we must, if we will be safe in our pronouncing, take care to affirm that which in the Regiment of our God & Christ Iesus our Saviour is confirmed by the Confession of the Vniversal Church. Where as the Confession of
the Vniversal Church (or their Testimony that such a doctrine hath bin delivered to the Church by the Apostles) is that which gives va∣lidity to a doctrine, so this universal confession is then truly such, when it is the determination of a Gene∣ral Councel prepared for in the Provincial Councels, of which that General is made up. And what hath not been according to this course established, or the truth whereof (as heIbid. l. 2. c. 4. else where speaks) is not first Eliquata, streined out, or extracted by Provincial Councels, and so Solidated or put together by a General Councel, may very safely be disbelieved; for saith he,Ibid. Quomodo potuit istares—ad plenarii Concilii luculen∣tam illustrationem confirmationem{que} perduci, nisi primo diutius per orbis terrarum regiones multis hinc atque hinc disputationi∣bus & collationibus Episcoporum pertractata constaret? How could that obscure controversie be brought to a clear declaration and confirmation of a general Councel, if it were not first throughly handled and cleared by the conferences and disputes of Bishops through all the regions of the world?
10. And this seemes to be ac∣knowledged byTom. 6. An. 451. n. 20. Baronius, who speaking of the Provincial Synods called in the West, before the meet∣ing of any Vniversal Synod in the East; not onely affirmes it to be Vsus pristinus, the antient custome, but withall takes notice of this end or designe of it, that those Bishops of the West, which could not all reasonably take such a journey, might yet by some mennes give their suffrages,Aliquo tamen mo∣d suum ferren Suffragium. supposing, as it was rea∣son, that the Councel could not be truly Vniversal, in which all the Regions in the world did not some way give their votes; and farther, that this was the way by which the Pope was inabled to send his Legates à latere, not onely in his own name, but of the whole Western Church, viz. by the Metropolitans in the Provincial, Synods sending Letters to the Pope, which contain'd their sense in that matter which was to be debated in the General Councel. 11. Many evidences of this cu∣stome and reasons of the observing of it, in order to the rendring a
Councel truly General, might be farther added, but this is I sup∣pose, sufficient. 12. Only by the way, I adde, That by this expedient the want of General Councels might in some degree be supplied, the concordant declarations of each Provinciall Councel compared and communica∣ted, being (for the testifying of Apostolical tradition, or the Catho∣lick sense of the Church) equiva∣lent to the voice of a General Coun∣cel. 13. So we finde the practice inEuseb. Eccl. Hist. l. 6. . Eusebius; whereupon the rising of Novatus a Roman Presbyter, first a Provincial Councel at Rome, , and severals in the se∣veral Provinces in every Region, the Pastors or Bishops conciliarly consi∣dering of the matter, , the resolution was made by all of them against Nova∣tus. Then follow the Letters of Cornelius Bishop of Rome to Fabius of Alexandria, giving him the re∣lation both of the Roman Synod,
and of the determinations of all the Bishops through Italy and Africk, and those Regions; and others of Cyprian, and those with him in Africk, declaring , the concordance of their judgement herein. But this by the way in passing. 14. And for the latter of these there can be as little doubt, there being no possibility without it, that the voice of a Councel never so general, should be the testimonie of the whole Church. 15. When a doctrine is concili∣arly agreed on, it is then promul∣gate to all, and the Vniversal, though but tacit approbation and reception thereof, the no considerable con∣tradiction given to it in the Church, is a competent evidence, that this is the judgment and concordant Tra∣dition of the whole Church, though no such resolution of Provincial Sy∣nods have preceded. 16. But if that be also wanting, if the sentence of a major part of Bishops in a Councel be not (when it comes to be declared to the world)
admitted or received in the Church, as consonant to the doctrine of the Apostles, written or unwritten, if the grounds whereon it hath been by the Councel defined, (for so the suffrages are conciliarly to be deli∣vered together with their grounds, and reasons of them, out of Scrip∣ture or tradition) be by others which sat not in that Councel, found to be false or vain, and are as such contradicted and protested against. This evidently prejudiceth the au∣thority of that Councel, and shewes their incompetency for the work (in hand) of Ʋniversal testification. 17. On which grounds it is, thatSiquid rectū at∣que ex doctrinis Apostolicis depre∣hendetur—vos an Catholica, an hae∣retica, sint, fidei. vestrae judicio cō∣probate. p. 220. S. Hillary in his tract of Synods against the Arians, setting down all the Creeds which after the Ni∣cene Councel had been set out in se∣veral times and places, desires all the Bishops of France & Britain, &c. to whom he writes, to give their judgement whether they be Catho∣lick or Heretical.
Sect. 7. The benefit from General Councels. Reverence due to them. To the first four especially. 1. FRom these premisses thus brie∣fly deduced, it now appeares 1. What it is that we owe to the Councels of the Church; I shall most safely expresse it in the words ofC. 32. Quid unquam aliud Conciliorum decretis enisa est, nisi ut quod antea simpliciter credebatur hoc idem postea diligenti∣us crederetur? quod antea lentius praedicabatur, hoc idem postea instantius praedicaretur, quod antea securius celebratur, hoc idem postea sollicitius excoleretur. Hoc, inquam, semper, neque quic∣quam praeterea haereticorum novitatibus excitata Conciliorum suo∣rum decretis Catholica perfecit Ecclesia, ut quod prius à majori∣bus solâ traditione susceperat, hoc deinde posteris etiam per Scrip∣turae chrirographum consignaret. Vincentius, What hath the Church ever brought forth by the decrees of Councels, save onely that what was before simply believed, the same should after be believed more diligently; what was before lesse vigorously preacht, that same should after be preacht more instantly; what was before more securely ob∣served, that same should after be more
sollicitously drest or cultivated? This, I say, and nothing but this hath the Catholick Church stirr'd up by Here∣tickes new doctrines done by the de∣crees of Councels; what before it had received from the Ancestors by tra∣dition onely, it hath after committed to writing, and as an obligation under its own hand consigned to po∣sterity. 2. In a word, that which was before the constant beliefe of the whole Church received from the Apostles times and preaching, and by conciliar discussions and search, found to be so, is thus delivered down to us by those Councels, and testified by them to be that which they found in the Church Vniver∣sally. This I suppose the meaning of the , in the thirty seventh Apostolick Canon; Let them in their Councels discusse, and examine the doctrines of piety, enquire, and discern what have been delivered to them as such, and then , let
them answer or satisfie the incidental objections which shall happen to be made to them in the Church. And so no new doctrine ever received from their authority or power of defining, but the ancient Apostoli∣cal Catholick pious doctrine testified to us. 3. Secondly, It is hence mani∣fest also, what is the ground of that reverence that is by all sober Christians deemed due and paid to the four first General Councels, which Vincentius lookes on, as the great Conservatories of tradition, wherein he might fitly instance, and whichIn Saba. Suidas in verb. . Pope Gregory the Great professeth to believe as he doth the four Gospels, and Theodosi∣us Cenobiarcha so much commen∣ded bySee Baron. An. 511. n. 33. Si quis quatuor san∣ctas Synodos non tanti esse existi∣mat quanti qua∣tuor Evangelia, sit anathema. Cyril and others, anathe∣matizeth all, who are not of that opinion, viz. because. 1. As Theo∣doret Hist. l. 1. c. 8. out of Athana∣sius declares of the Nicene, that they set down and convinced the truth of their doctrine , out of the Scripture words understood
with piety, i. e. So as the pious Or∣thodox Fathers, had alwayes under∣stood them , not inventing words or phrases for themselves, but having testimony from the Fathers, for what they wrote (saith he) the Bi∣shops of Rome and Alexandria for almost CXXX years had found fault with them, who affirmed the Son to be  a creature, , & not of the same sub∣stance with the Father) so it was true of all the other three; they fetcht their definitions regularly from Scripture, and that sense thereof, which the general Churches had re∣ceived down from the Apostles, and so were approved and received universally in all Churches; not as those which had formed any new Articles, but which conserved the Deposita intrusted to the Churches, and in time of need brought them forth and discovered them, to the securing of the truth against He∣reticks. 4. Secondly, Because these being
so neer the Apostles times, and gathered as soon as the Heterodox opinions appeared, the sense of the Apostles might more easily be fetcht from those men & Churches, to whom they had committed it, and it was not in the power of Subtilty and Craft to infuse their poison undiscernibly into those Fountatnes. 5. This account is also given by Lirinensis, where speaking of the way of confuting HeretickesC. 39. Prolatis atque collatis ve∣terum Magistrorū concordantibus si∣bimet sententiis. by producing and comparing the concordant doctrines of the old Fa∣thers, he puts in this among other cautions.Sed neque sem∣per neque omnes haereses hoc modo impugnandae sunt, sed novitiae recen∣tes{que} tantummodo, antequam infalsa∣rint vetustae fidei regulas. All Heresies are not al∣waies thus to be impugned, but onely those that are fresh risen, and have not yet had time to vitiate the vo∣lumes of the Fathers, or falsifie the rules of the antient Faith: Wise∣ly forseeing that in this case there is no course of dealing with, or convincing of Heretickes,Aut sola Scrip∣turarum authori∣tate, aut jam anti∣quitus Ʋniversa∣libus Catholicorū Conciliis. unlesse it be * either by the sole authority of Scriptures, or by the Councels of Catholickes, which were long ago Vniversal.
6. Thirdly, Some consideration may also be had of the special matter of the definitions of those four Councels, which were all spent upon the Deitie and incarnation of Christ, and the Trinity, the great Fundamental Doctrines of Christia∣nitie; and to that also Vincentius directs us, in another caution of his,Ibid. Antiqua Sanctorum Patrū consensio, non in omnibus divinae legis quaestiuncu∣lis, sed solum cer∣tè praecipuè, in fi∣dei regulâ—inve∣stiganda & est sequneda. The antient consent of the holy Fathers is not to be sought and followed in all the little questions of the Divine law, but onely, sure principally, in the rule of Faith, those which the Apostles thought necessarie to be believed, and so taught them vniversally. 7. And therefore of the Scrip∣tures, of the Creed (that Regula fidei una, sola immobilis & irrefor∣mabilis, that one, only immovable and unreformable rule of Faith, as Tertullian calls it, De vel. Virg. c. 1.) and of those four Councels, as the Repositories of all true Apo∣stolical tradition I suppose it very regular to affirm, that the intire body of the Catholick Fai h, is to be establisht, and all Heresies convin∣ced,
or else that there is no just reason, that any doctrine should be condemned as such. 8. This I haveReply to Cath. Gent. Ch. VIII. Sect. 2. n. 4, 5, 6, 7 elsewhere clea∣red both out of the expresse words of the Councel of Ephesus, the third of those four, that no man should produce, or offer to any convert whe∣ther from Gentilisme, Iudaisme, He∣resie, any other belief beside that which was establisht by the Fathers at Nice: From the Greeks in the Councel of Florence, that no man, except he were mad, would charge that Faith of Imperfection. From the Latines, who acknowleged there, that all difference as well as contrariety of Faith was forbidden by those Fa∣thers, and that a bare explication of the same for the whole Church was not lawfull for any to attempt, but an Vniversal Councel: From the Epistle of Celestine there cited, that the faith delivered by the Apo∣stles admits neither increase nor diminution: and Lastly from the Catechisme collected out of Coste∣rus, Petrus à Soto, and others, set ut by command of the Archbishop
of Triers, that there was never any Heresie which might not be con∣demned by the Apostles Creed. Sect. 8. Of the subsequent General Councels. The Romanists deference to them. 1. IF after all this it be still far∣ther demanded, what reverence is due to all other Vniversal Coun∣cels, and why not the same as to these four? I answer, First, that the reasons of a difference have been sufficiently given already, and so as is, Ad homines, to the Romanists, unreprovable, it being most evident that among them there is difference made between some of those, which yet they deem to be all Oecumenical Councels. 2. For First, it is certain that they reckon above eight of these; And yet even the Bishops of Rome themselves in their exaltation to the Papacy, who would sure be supposed to undertake the maintaining of
the whole Catholick Faith, do pro∣fesse to maintain no more than the eight first of them. The words of this profession we have set down out of their own Day-Book, in the Corpus Juris Canon. In this form,Decret. Par. 1. dist. 16. c. 8. Sancta cto universalia Conci∣lia, i. e. Primum Nicenum—immutata servare & pari honore & veneratione digna habere, & quae praedicaverunt & statuerunt modis omnibus sequi & praedicare, quaeque condemnaverunt ore & corde condemnare profiteor. I professe to keep whole to a tittle the eight holy universal Councels, the first at Nice—& to esteem them worthy of like honour and venerati∣on, and by all means to follow and preach all that they have promulga∣ted and decreed, and with heart and mouth to condemn all that they have condemned. 3. Secondly it is as evident, that all Bishops of Rome in former times, have not (at least with equal re∣verence) received all these eight, which these now thus receive. I shall give an instance or two. 4.Ep. 7. c. 1. Con∣cil. To. 6. p. 496. Pope Nicolaus the First, in the damnation of Photius, after the authority of God and the Princes of
the Apostles Peter and Paul, men∣tioning that also of all the holy and venerable universal Councels, numbers butOmnium simul sanctorum at{que} ve∣nerandorum sex Conciliorum au∣thoritate. six of them; and this Anno Ch. DCCCLXII. that is, LXXX years after the holding of the seventh Councel. 5. And so also dothNihil audemus judicare quod possit Nicen Concilio & quinque caeterorum conciliorum regulis—obviare. Vide Concil. Tom. 6. pag. 690. Pope A∣drian II. his successor Epist. 26. ad Carolum Calvum. 6. And Binius that in hisIbid p. 496. mar∣gint takes notice of these two pas∣sages, andCur hic Nico∣laus, & infra Ha∣drianus sex tantū Oecumenicas Sy∣nodos nominent, dicam infra in no∣tis Conc. Rom. III. Sub. promiseth to render a reason thereof afterwards, when he comes to theNot. in Conc. Rom. III. Tom. 6. Conc. p. 655. due place of perform∣ing that promise, speaks not a word of that matter, unlesse this be it, that Anastasius Bibliothecarius saith of two Archbishops; Epistolas Pontificis ad libitum falsâsse, that they falsified at their pleasure the Epistle of Pope Nicolaus. Which if it were granted to be true, yet neither concludes it that they thus falsified this particular passage in this Epistle, which indeed nothing con∣cern'd
the cause of those Arch∣bishops, nor can be any way deemed applicable to Pope Adrian doing the same, of whom neither Ana∣stasius nor Binius himselfe so much as suggest any such thing, and therefore this was certainly a most gainlesse artifice of evasion, and an indication that there was no better to be found, to salve this business. 7. Baronius in his reciting that Epistle of Nicolaus, hath in effect the sameTo. 10. p. 275. An. Ch 863 n. 5. Cur tam Nicolaus hic quàm ejus successor Adrianus—sex tantum Oecumenicas Synodos nomi∣net, inferius ab authore aliâ occasione dicetur. Marginal observation, be∣fore Binius, and promiseth to render the reason of it, afterward on another occasion, not directing us where that should be lookt for; yet he deferres it not long, for he doth it in the very next Section, rendring this only account of it. 1. ThatIn reliquis omnibus Ecclesiis Patriarchalibus Orientis, Con∣stantinopolit anâ excepta, sex tantum Oecumenicas Synodos in publicis confessionibus nominari consuevisse. in all the other Patriarchal Churches, but Constantinople, there were only six Oecumenical Councels named in their publick Confessions, citing
Photius's Epistle for it; and thence concluding that what Nicolas did, was done by the other Patriarchal Sees, even by his enemies confes∣sion. Secondly, that the like cause was to be rendred for both, that still Anastasius helpt them to a translation of the Acts of that Sy∣nod out of pure Copies, theyNon eodem prae∣cento nempe titulo Oecumenico fne∣runt eā prosecuti. Baro. an. 863. n. 6. did not give it the title of an Oecumeni∣cal Councel, and accordinglyNicolaus judi∣cium suspendit su∣um ex dictâ causâ Ni∣colas thus long also suspended his judgement. 8. But Binius which surely saw these answers of Baronius, could not (though he were much distrest, as hath appeared) think fit to make use of either of them, or re∣fer the reader to them, though he bids Vide Baron. An. 863. n. 20. &c. which belongs to another matter. 9. And indeed the first part of the Cardinals account doth con∣fesse that no other Patriarchal See but Constantinople did at this time receive this Councel. And so Photius then Patriarch of Con∣stantinople, which most zealous∣ly asserted it, doth acknowledge,
in hisEp. 2. p. 60.  (so it should be read, not ; and . Ibid. Encyclical Epistle to the Archbishops of the Orient. And these Patriarchal Sees had great reason so to forbear; for they were none of them present either in person, or by Legates, or Proxyes, at that Councel, as may well ap∣pear by the sameAn. 785. n. 40. Baronius in his setting down the History of it: confessing that Tarasius's Legate, could not come to them, that when they were as far as Palaestine, they heard of the death of Theodorus Patriarch of Jerusalem; and were advertised by some Monks, how dangerous it was to go either to the Patriarch of Antioch or. Alexan∣dria, and consequently were per∣swaded to give over the attempt. As for the pretended Legates of those Sees, they were evidently but Im∣postors, Iohn and Thomas the Pres∣byters were not sent by the Patri∣archs of Alexandria and Antioch
(and for the See of Jerusalem, it was void, as was said, by the death of Theodorus) but were sent only by those Monks or Hermits of Pa∣laestine, as appeares by the Letters, which they brought with them, be∣ginning thus, , &c. . Having read your Letters, We the mean, and last or lowest of those that have desired to live in the De∣sert, or the Hermetick life.— SeeConcil. Tom. 5. p. 594. E. Concil. Ni. 2. Act. 3. And so this being most true, is very far from an answer to the objection; 'tis a large addition to the force of it, as far as concernes the authority of that Councel. 10. And for the other part, that the Latines as yet wanted pure Copies of it, that can as little be pretended so many years after the holding of that Councel, espe∣cially when the Acts of it had now long since, immediately after the making them, been discuss'd in the Councel of Frankfort, and by Pope Adrian I. defended against that Councel.
11. That whichDe Imag. lib. 1. cap. 22. Bellarmine adventures on in this matter is yet more strange, and unreconcileable with the confession of Baronius; for Baronius had confest that Anasta∣sius had translated that Councel out of a pure Copy, and so brought it to Rome; and yet this other Cardinal would perswade us, that long after Anastasius, even after the time of Thomas Aquinas, and Halensis, the Acts of VII Councels lay hid, and so were not produced till that last age wherein himself had lived; which if it were gran∣ted him to be true, it would sure be little for the dignity and authority of that Councel. 12. Farther yet; In the Corpus Juris Canonici set out emendate by the command of Pope Gregory XIII, there is no mention of any more than six General Councels, save on∣ly in that one passage out of the Lay-Book of the Popes profession to maintain the eight, which is to me an argument, that all General Coun∣cels are not so revered by them, as that all their Canons are obliging among them.
13. I shall not need to adde more evidences to infer so obvious a Conclusion, that among the Ro∣manists themselvs, all General Coun∣cels have not had the same reception and Veneration, when in their Corpus Iuris Decret. Par. 1. the 17 Distinction is thus prefaced; Gene∣ralia Concilia quorum tempore cele∣brata sint, vel quorum authoritas caeteris praemineat, sanctorum au∣thoritatibus supra monstratum est, In whose time the General Councels have been celebrated, or which of them hath a more eminent authority than the rest, hath been shewed by the authorities of Holy men, re∣ferring to Dist. 16. wherein yet, as I said, there is no mention of any more than the first six, save onely that the Pope professeth to maintain Eight.
Sect. 9. Our Reverence to all General Coun∣cels. The Fifth and the Sixth. 1. THis might make any second or farther answer unneces∣sary; yet I shall not doubt to proceed some steps farther, and 1. allow the same credit, though not the same degree of Reverence (for the reasons premised) to all Assemblies of Christians, which have served the Church in this of∣fice of conveighing Apostolicall Truths to us, and which are accor∣ding to right reason, and by the grounds premised, qualified for a good Christians reception, or as are not under some very just prejudice: Nay 2. though I make it no mat∣ter of Faith, because delivered neither by Scripture nor Apostolick Tradition, yet I shall number it among the Piè credibilia, that no General Councel, truly such, 1. duly assembled, 2. Freely celebrated, and 3. Vniversally received, either
hath erred, or ever shall erre in mat∣ters of Faith. 3. The expresing my selfe more fully in which particulars, will be a meanes to bring this whole mat∣ter to such an issue, as I shall hope no adversarie will with any colour of reason, or truth, be able to gainsay. 3. And 1. for the Fift Gene∣ral Councel, it being for the Doctri∣nal part of it, but a Corroboration of the fourth, Our Church makes no more doubt of that, than of the fourth it doth. Onely after the example of Vincentius Lirinensis, that famous propugnator of the Catholick Faith against all Heresies, and by strength of the premised Ephesine Canon, we believe the four First Councels to be the conserva∣tories of all truly Catholick, i. e. A∣postolick tradition, from whence together with the Scripture all Heresies may be oppugned, and confuted, and so have no such need of, or benefit from this fift, as from the former four Councels. 4. So 2. for the Sixt, as far
as that concernes the error of the Monothelites, which denyed the two wills in Christ, so it is duly founded in Scripture, and the same Apostolick tradition, which had asserted the two natures against Eutyches, and we willingly receive it, thinking it unnecessary to pro∣ceed to those others Acts, that go under the name of that Councel, but were written afterward, and which theSee Corp. Jur. Can. Decret. 3. par. Dist. 16. c. 6. Not. Ha∣e librum. Et Ibid. c. 7. Romanists acknowlege to be corrupt, and not to savour of Apostolical Tradition.Conc. Tom. 5. p. 8. Circumferentur autem nonnulli Canones nomine sextae Synodi in Trullo, veruntamen editi sine Legatis Apostolica sedis, nec ab eâ comprobati, in quibus & nonnulla sunt qua minus Apostolicam sapiunt traditionem. There are, saith the History of that Councel, carried about some Canons in the name of that Sixt Synod in Trullo, but they were set out without the Le∣gates of the Apostolick See, and not approved by them, wherein there be also some things which savour not of Apostolical tradition.
5. From which words I sup∣pose I may conclude the reason of the Legates not confirming them to be this, because they did not sa∣vour of Apostolical tradition. And then these two inferences are clear. First, that 'tis the Romanists judg∣ment unquestionably (and that appears not only by this, but by many other instances, especially by that of Chalcedon, about the priviledges of New Rome) that the Decree of a General Councel is not valid from it self, or any innate authority (for if it were, it would not need the authority of the Pope himself to give it that validity) but receives its force from subsequent approbation, or else is not a Catho∣lick decree. 6. And then what reason can be rendred, why the want of the ap∣probation of other Apostolicall Churches should not have the same efficacy to prejudge the Ʋ∣niversality of a Decree: for sure they are Christians and Bishops, as well as the Bishop of Rome, and consequently their Negatives as
evident exceptions and prejudices to, and as utterly unreconcileable with an Ʋniversal affirmative as the Popes can be; and the suppo∣sing that the Pope hath power for the whole Church, and that infalli∣ble, for the approving or repudia∣ting Decrees, is still the removing all authority and Ʋniversality from the Councel, and placing it in the Pope, making him, and not the Councel the Grand Representative Church, and so is the destroying the whole doctrine of the authoritie of Councels. 7. Secondly, That the Reason or Rule of the Romanists judgment may certainly be drawn into exam∣ple, and prove imitable to other Christians, and then it must be law∣ful for the Church of God, as well as for the Bishop of Rome to inquire whether the Decrees of an Vniver∣sal Councel have been agreeable to Apostolical Tradition, or no, and if they be found otherwise, to reject them out, or not to receive them into their belief. 8. And then still it is the matter
of the Decrees, and the Apostoli∣calness of them, and the force of the testification, whereby they are approved and acknowleged to be such, which gives the authority to the Councel, and nothing else is sufficient, where that is not to be found. 9. Agreeable to which isTo. 6. p. 733. D. Nec ego Nicenum, nec tu debes Ariminense— proferre Concilium, nec ego hujus autoritate, nec tu illius detine∣ris, scripturā authoritatibus non querum{que} propriis, sed utris{que} com∣mmunibus, res cum re, causa cū causa, ratio cū ratione concertet. S. Augustines practice, Contr. Maxi∣min. l. 3. c. 14. Neither, saith he, doe I produce the Nicene Councel, nor should you that of Ariminum, neither am I obliged to the authority of this, nor you of that: By the authorities of Scripture, which are not proper to one but common to both, let the matter be debated, reason contending with reason—and then divolving all the authority of that most antient truely General Nicene Councel, as well as of that other of Ariminum, to the Apostolical grounds of truth, and those expresly in the written word of God (I and
my father are one, as the ground of ) from whence they framed their decrees. 10. To which belongs that saying ofSynod. Arimin. & Seleuc. Tom. 1. p. 873.. Athanasius himself of the manner of Subscriptions in the Councel of Nice, who though in the matter of Easter (being not a doctrine, but a rite) they thought good to use this form, , It seemed then good to us that all should obey or observe that time, which they had defined; yet concerning the mat∣ters of Faith, , They wrote, not [It seemed good to us] but [Thus the Catholick Church Commands] presently set∣ting downe the Confession it selfe, that they might demonstrate that their sense was not new but Apostoli∣cal, and that what they wrote was not invented by themselves, but was the very same which the Apostles had taught..
Sect. 10. Of the Seventh General Councel. 1. AS for the Seventh Councel, that second of Nice, I have already more then intimated the Reasons, why no Romanist can blame him that allowes not the authority thereof. 2. Yet because those testimonies, though of Popes themselves, are indeed but Negative Testimonies, and being designed only Ad Ho∣minem, to the Romanist, may still stand in need of some farther con∣firmation to others; That also is ready at hand, and may be dedu∣ced from two heads. 1. From the Councel of Eliberis, 2. From the Councel of Frankfort, which pre∣sently after the publishing of the Decrees of Nice for the worshipping of Images, opposed and refuted that doctrine. 3. For the first of these, the Councel of Eliberis, that yeelds us an irrefragable proof, that the Do∣ctrine of the second Nicene Councel
was not testified by all the Church of all ages to be of Tradition Apo∣stolicall. 4. The 36. Canon of that Coun∣cel lyes thus, Placuit Picturas in Ec∣clesia esse non debere, ne quod cole∣tur aut adoretur in parietibus depin∣gatur. 'Tis resolved that Pictures should not be in the Church, lest that which is adored be painted on walls. Which though it be but a Canon of a Provincial Councel, and that in a matter of rite, and so hath no power of obliging all o∣thers beyond that Province, and might also be there after retracted again; yet being in the year of our Lord 305. twenty years before the first Nicene Councel, and so 482 years before the second, is a convincing argument, That what was in the second Nicene defined, was not the language of Apostolical tradition, uinversally testified to be such; for then these Fathers at Eliberis, & among them the great Hosius, which sat after in the first Councel of Nice, and Liberius, whose name we have in the Councel
of Arles, would never have made this Decree so directly contrary to such pretended tradition Aposto∣lical. 5. In this matter 'tis worth ob∣serving how Cardinal Baronius hath behaved himself. In his first Volume Ad an. Ch. 57. n. CXIX.P. 626. being troubled that 19 Bishops in a corner of the world, should decree otherwise then (as he is concerned to believe) the Universal Church of all places profest, he attempts to annul this Councel, rendring his reason, Pleraque enim in eo sunt quae fines Novatiani erroris visa sunt prope attigisse, There were ve∣ry many Canons in it, which seemed almost to touch upon the borders of the Novatian Heresie: and if they were but the borders of Heresie, and these Canons did onely touch upon those borders, or indeed but seem, and that again but almost seem, then these Canons might be very Catholick and Orthodox for all that. 6. The truth is, those Canons that deny only Communion to the
Lapsi, but deny them not repentance and absolution, are far enough from Novatian, and so presently after he acknowledges, Caeterum quod sciamus ejus conventus Episcopos fe∣cisse Catholicos, de Novatianâ haeresi nulla suspicio esse debet, cum praeser∣tim hi licèt communionem, tamen poenitentiam non negarent, ut de eo Innocentius Papa tradit: But seeing we know that the Bishops of that Councel were Catholick, they must not be suspected of Novatianism, es∣pecially seeing though they denied communion, they did not deny repen∣tance, as Pope Innocent affirmes of that Councel. 7. Here then in the same Para∣graph he hath freed them from that suspition, which he was willing to have affixt on them; and it seems Pope Innocent was to be thankt for it, who appeared on their side, or else Hosius, &c. must have gone for Novatians, and then never have been worth heeding in any other matter. This farther appears by the same Baronius in his Second Volume Ad An. 305. n. 41. Where
having the same words again, of the Propemodum visi S. Novationo∣rum limites attigisse, that they al∣most seem'd to touch upon the borders of the Novatians; he renders that, as the cause that there is no mention of this Synod by name a∣mong the antients, and so that it remain'd almost antiquated, and therefore (saith he) he remembred he had spoken elsewhere (in the place forementioned) Paulo Libe∣rius, a little too freely of that Coun∣cel; but seeing their resolutions herein were excused by Pope In∣nocent, Nemo sit qui accusare prae∣sumat, No man may presume to ac∣cuse that Councel. And then sure this Cardinal had been too bold in thus presuming. 8. What other arts he now be∣takes himself to, to deliver him from the force of that Canon a∣gainst Images, I shall not now exa∣mine; there being nothing of any force to supersede my conclusion, that this Canon is sufficient preju∣dice to the Ʋniversality of the te∣stification, that the Nicene Ca∣nons
for Images are of Apostolical Tradition. 9. As for the Councel of Frank∣fort, that makes it as plain, that the Decrees of these Nicene Fa∣thers were not received, but reje∣cted by other parts of the Christian Church in France, in Germany, and Italy, if not in Spain also. 10. This Binius would fain conceal; and accordingly in the title of that Councel of Frankfort, was willing to anticipate the Rea∣ders judgement, by telling him that these 300. Bishops there con∣venedActa Nicaeni Concilii II. in causâ imaginum confirmant. Con∣cil. Tom. 6. p. 163 p. 185. Confirmed the Acts of the Councel of Nice in the matter of Images. 11. For this he afterwards gives his reasons such as they are, but acknowleges that both the great Cardinals, Bellarmine and Baronius, were of the contrary minde. To them therfore, and to the evidences, whereby they were convinced, I may be allowed to appeal. 12. And indeedTom. 9 p. 539. An. Chr. 794. n. 27 Tantum abest ut negemus Nicaenam secundam Synodū candemque septi∣mam Oecumeni∣cam dictam dam∣natā dici in Fran∣cofurdiensi Conci∣lio, ut etiam augeamus numerum testium id profitentium, & qui∣dem haud dubiae fidei aut authoritatis. Baronius is so
farre from doubting it, that he solemnly professeth by undeniable testimonies to put it beyond all question, and so he doth, out of Walafridus Strabo, Amalarius, Hincmarus, Anastasius, and many others. 13. What he determineth con∣cerning the invalidity of that Coun∣cel of Frankfort, is not now pertinent to examine; my conclusion is sufficiently evinced without that inquiry, viz. That that Councel of Nice was no Vniversal Testimonie of Tradition Apostolical, or indeed of the whole Church of that age, when it was so farre from being received and approved by all the world, that as soon as the Newes of the Acts thereof came to the eares of the Councel, then assem∣bled at Frankfort (three hundred Bishops, of Germany, France, and Italy, saith Surius; others adde, out of Spain also 124.) the Coun∣cel solemnly oppugned and refuted them. 14. Of this the Reader may have the clearest prospect in several
places of the workes of G. Cassan∣der, both in hisPag. 977. Consultation, and especially in hisPag. 1103. 29. Epistle, where he gives Iob. Molinaeus a full account of the IV. Bookes writ∣ten by the authoritie, and under the name of Charles the French King, and approved by that whole Councel of Frankfort, and so sent to the Pope against the Decrees of the Councel of Nice in the matter of image-worship, pronouncing both of those bookes, and that Synod, and other eminent persons of that age, of the same sense with them,Qui libros hosce damnandos aut reprobandos putet, idem neces∣sario & ipsam Synodum Francofordiensem, & alios insignes  aetate scriptores damnandos esse fatetur, quod neque factum est unquam; neque futurum certè à sanis hominibus puto. Ibidem pag. 1104. that they never were condemned, nor, as he thinks, will ever be by those men that are in their wits. 15. Some question I know there is made by others; whether this Councel of Frankfort rightly under∣stood the Decrees of that Councel of Nice, and whether those IV. Bookes compiled, as it is probable,
by Aloninus, and approved by that Councel, did not confound the two Seventh Councels, the true, that at Nice, and the false, that of the Iconoclastae at Constantinople. 16. But neither are we concern'd in either of those questions. For still it remains certain, and unquestioned, that the Councel of Nice (whether by their mistake, or otherwise) was not by all men universally received. The CCC. Bishops at Frankfort received it not, but profestly oppo∣sed it. 17. And if the Canons of Frank∣fort were not approved by the Pope (as 'tis again suggested) yet still this is a sufficient prejudice to the Vniversalitie of those Nicene Canons (without the Popes being one of those that condemned them) which cannot be Vniversal testifiers, whilst they want Vniversal consent, and are oppugned, and disclaimed by Charles the King, and the CCC. Bishops which were there convened at Frankfort, and by as many, as adhered to the sentence of those but CCCXXX. which were assembled at Nice.
18. And indeed we that in this matter approve of the doctrine of the Frankfort Decrees, as that is summ'd up in those few words, which theVide Cass. p. 977. Epistolam Gregorii ad Serenum adducit Carolus l. 2. c. 23. Cujus hoe est argumentum. Imagines à B. Gregorio Romanae Ʋrbis Antistite & adorari prohibentur & frangi. Vide Greg. Ep. ex Reg. ep. 9. Quia eas adorari vetuisses, laudamus, fregisse verò reprehendimus. And, Frangi non debuit, quod non ad adorandum. Bookes in Charles's name deduce from Pope Gregorie, in his Epistle to Serenus Bishop of Massiles, viz. That Images are neither to be broken nor worshipt, that they be lawfully used in the Church, but must not by any meanes be adored, can never be blamed for rejecting the doctrine of any General Councel. For if that of Nice, which is deemed such, define not for adoration of Images, then it is not rejected by us; and if it doe define for it, then was it rejected by Frankfort, and if so, then was it no General Councel. The Dilemma is con∣cludent herein without any farther inquiries, either it is not rejected by us at all, as teaching no more
than we professe to acknowlege, or else it may be lawfully rejected by us, because we have this evidence on our sides from the oppositions of the ccc. Fathers at Frankfort, and of many more, as hath been said, that it was not Vniversal. Sect. 10. Of the eighth General Councel. 1. AS to the Eight and last of that number, to which the Popes profession extends, I desire the Reader will passe his judgment of it, by that which he will find in theConcil. Tom. 8. p. 598. Sixt Session of the Councel of Florence in the year of Christ, MCCCCXXXIX. 2. There in the passages be∣tween Marcus Ephesius, and Julian the Cardinal about the Antient Councels, the Cardinal desired a sight of the Acts of the VIII. Councel, and complaines that the Book was denyed him. Marcus an∣sweres that it was not easie for him
to give him the Book, but if it were, there (it should be, I suppose,  Ib. was no necessitie that they should number among the Oecumeni∣cal Councels one that was not approved, but rather reprobated, or annull'd; for this Synod, said he, had Acts against Photius, in the time of Pope John and Pope Adri∣an▪ and after it there was another Synod. which restored Photius, and annull'd that former Synod; that this Synod called also the eighth, was under Pope John, who wrote Epistles for Photius, and those still extant, that they (the Romans) were not ignorant (he be∣lieved) either of that Synod or of those Epistles: And seeing * the Acts of that Synod were abrogated, it was not reasonable that they should seek for it, but rather for that which was after it, which from that time to this very day (of the Florentine meeting) was read in. Ibid.
the great Church of Constantinople, in these words, Let all that hath been written or spoken against the ho∣ly Patriarchs, Photius, or Ignatius be anathema. Wherefore, saith he, it is not fit that. those Acts which were abrogated, should be produced. 3. To this full Declaration and recognition of Marcus, appealing to the Romanists own knowledge for the truth of it, the Cardinals answer is very short, in these words, I will, saith he, free you from this fear that any thing shall be read from the VIII. Councel: We desire that the Book which we deman∣ded may be brought, that we may consult some passages out of the VI. and VII. Councel, and of. the VIII, We say nothing. 4. Here 'tis evident, 1. That the VIII. Synod was soon retracted again: and so not universally re∣ceived, or approved: 2. That the Greek Church from that time to the Councel of Florence, i. e. for the space of almost DC. yeares, re∣ceived it not, but the contrary, viz. that which abrogated it. 3. That
this being vouched in a Councel to the Romans, could not in any part be denied by them, and therefore the matter was wholly waved if not confest. And then sure I need say no more concerning the no-au∣thority or obligingness of that Coun∣cel. 5. But then to this I shall adde, that this Councel being convened on purpose for the censuring and depriving of Photius Patriarch of Constantinople, not for any heretical departure from the Faith, so much as pretended against him, but for some other (as they are called) excesses, of which his enemies deemed him guilty, especially because from a Senator, and so a Lay-man, he wasVide Anastasii Histor. VIII. Sy∣nodi, Concil. Tom. 6. p. 706. immediately advanced to that Patriarchate (though very much against his will, as his Epistles sufficiently testifie) the Faith of Christ is little concernd in the Decrees of this Councel, here being no testimonie of the Church to be found either for or against any doctrine pretended to be derived from the Apostles.
6.Ibid. The arguments which Ana∣stasius Bibliothecarius offers for the proving the Vniversalitie of this Councel where, as he saith, he was present, will hardly prevaile with any. 7. First, saith he, 'tis Vniversal, because the Catholick Faith and Holy Lawes, which ought to be reverenced not onely by all Priests, but by all Christians, were in it uniformely defended against the enemies thereof: which if it had any force in it, then sure every Orthodox assembly, were it never so particular, a Provincial Synod of the Bishops of any one Province, or a Diaecesan of the one Bishop and Presbyters of that Diocess, as long as they be in the right, or are by the Romanist sup∣posed to be so, as (indeed that VIII Councel. Act. 10. Can. 1. Concil. Tom. 7. p. 977. professeth to re∣tain and observe the Lawes delive∣red in the Catholick and Apostolick
Church, not onely from the Apo∣stles and all Orthodox Councels both Oecumenical and Provincial, or To∣pical, but even from any divinely speaking Father, Doctor of the Church) must passe for a General and Oecumenical Assembly, just by the same Logick, that the particu∣lar Church of Rome doth passe with them for the whole Catholick Church of Christ. 8. Secondly, saith he, 'Tis an Ʋ∣niversal Councell, because seeing Christ hath in the Church placed as many Patriarchal Sees, as there are senses in mans body, if all those con∣sent, there wants no more to the Ge∣nerality of the Church, than there wants to the motion of the body, when all the five senses are intire in it. 9. To which I answer, 1. That if this were true, then the second Councel of Ephesus was a valid Ge∣neral Councel, for there wereConcil. Tom. 3. . 61. per∣sonally the Patriarchs of four Sees, and Julian as proxie of the fifth. 2. It must then follow that a Sy∣nod of five men (for such sure are the V. Patriarchs) to which no
sixth person in the world was ever so much as invited or summond, may go for an assembly of the whole world. 3. That when one of the five Patriarchs was here deposed, and never contented to his own deposition, 'twill be very hard to finde the consent of these five Pa∣triarchs to all the Acts of this Councel, and consequently to de∣fend the perfection of it from the forementioned analogie with that of the body of man, unlesse when one of the five senses is shut out by the other four, the remaining four be either sufficient to represent the fifth also, which is cast out (and never consents to this Law of repre∣sentation) or to substitute another sense in the place of that fifth. 4. That this same Author in his very next period tels us, that soon after the exaltation of this Photius, Solomon also a Lay-man was made Patriarch of Jerusalem, and then it is no way probable, that this Sa∣lomon, or whatsoever other Bi∣shop of that See, which was another of these five senses, should ever
consent to those Canons, which are so contrary to that practice, and must infer the deposing of that Solo∣mon, as well as it did of Photius. 10. The truth is, in the sub∣scriptions of the seventh Act, there is no name of any of the five Pa∣triarchs, save only of Pope Adri∣an, and the Archbishop of Perga in the name and stead of Ignatius the deposed, but now by this Councel restored Patriarch of Constantino∣ple. And though in the tenth Acti∣on we now have the names of Pro∣xies to all the rest of the Patriar∣chies; yet sure somewhat there was in it, that after the naming of them and the Emperours Proxie, BiniusConcil. Tom. 6. p. 853. thinks necessary to insert an Annotation, lest, as he saith, the Reader observing the paucity of subscribers should be scandalized at it, and therefore by way of pre∣vention he offers an account of it from the multitude of Photius's fa∣vourers, who, he confesseth, were all excluded from this Councel, and so theHaec paucitas gregi illi pro suâ justitiâ compara∣tur cui Dominus dicit, nolite time∣ro pusillus grex. Ibid. Subscribers fit to be compa¦red to Christs little flock, which
sure is a competent prejudice to the universality of it. 11. And so likewise Anastasius's sage observation by which he backes his argument in that place, viz. That of the five Senses the Bishop of Rome is proportionable to Visus the Sight, whichProfecto cunctis sensibus praemi∣net, acutior illis existens, & com∣munionem, sicut nullus eorum, cum omnibus habent. hath, saith he, the preeminence of all the other Senses, being acuter than they, and having communion with all as none of the rest have] is a shrewd intimation of his sense, that it was the Single authoritie of the Pope, that both condemn'd Photius, and gave the whole Vniversalitie to this Councel, and then we have a very fair account of a General Councel, rendred such by the bare virtue of one person therein, and then I doubt not good store of Vniversal Coun∣cels may be found in the world, even as may as there have ever been assemblies or Conclaves, wherein Visus, the most eminent Sense, i. e. the Pope hath had any efficacious influence by himself, or his proxie. 12. To which purpose it may
deserve here to be remembred what type or Copie of celebrating a Councel the Learned Cardinal Ba∣ronius conceives himselfe to have found in the New Testament andAn. 33. n. 17. Hic pedem sistat atque Paulum at∣tendat diligens le∣ctr rem animad∣versione digniss∣mm. requires the Reader of his Annals to stop and take notice of it, as of a thing most worthy of his ob∣servation.) Such as whereinPetrus talem fert sententiam, ut causam ipse definiat, & quid ab omnibus sentiendum esset, erudiat at{que} decernat, ac fider ca∣nonem perpetuo permansutum constituat, ut nihil fermè jam esset opus consulere caeteros tunc Apostolos, ac rgare quanam essent a∣liorum de eâ re sententiae ac opiniones. Idcirco enim satis fuit Christo, Petrum fuisse locutum, ac quid de fide sentiendum esset, lavum finisse. St. Peter (and from his example the Bishop of Rome his successor, in a cause of the greatest moment, so delivers his opinion, that he defines the matter in debate, and teaches and decrees what all must think, and constitutes a Canon or Rule of Faith which must remain forever, so that, as he saith, there is almost no need to consult the rest of the Apostles, or ask their sentiments or opinions, it being sufficient for Christ, that Peter spake, and determined what was to be resolved in point of Faith.
13. Here indeed is a fair foun∣dation laid of a most magnificent Structure, S. Peters privilege in a Councel of all the Apostles, Ʋt Sen∣tentium ipse definiat; that he, with∣out consulting of any other, should give the definitive sentence. 14. Onely it was a little un∣happy, That Christ himself should be present there, and one of the interlocutors in this Councel (if such it were) for it is he that proposeth the question which Peter answers, and if in the one 'twere a type of celebrating a Councel, so 'twas in the other also, and then here were two conciliar Offices, the one of proposing doubts in Councels, the other of answering them; the first belonging to Christ, the second to S. Peter, and certainly the latter a place of the more eminence. 15. 'Tis strange, what submissi∣ons Learned men are forced to, that are resolved to serve their Hypo∣thesis. I shall onely demand why the very next parcell of discourse betwixt Christ and his Disciples, wherein again S. Peter was the
onely speaker, V. 21, 22, 23. of this Chapter, Mat. 16. was not as signal a type of celebrating a Coun∣cel, as the former? And yet there, in two very eminent branches of the Christian Faith the Passion and Resurrection of Christ, the same S. Peter, whose successor the Pope pretends to be, differed in opinion from Christ himself, took him and began to rebuke him, and sure de∣livered a very uncatholick sentence, no other then the deniall of both of those grand Articles, not only in words of aversion, which are not enunciative, the [Far be it from thee Lord,] but even in plain form of definition or decree, , This shall not be unto thee. 16. What Christ there returnes unto him, that he was an offence unto him, and savoured not the things of God, but those that were of men, may well serve for conclusion of this matter, that in an Assembly where Christ himself was present, S. Peter, and so his pretended suc∣cessor, may, if he be not very care∣ful
to adhere to the word of Christ, fall into error also, but is not in any reason then to be deemed the re∣presentative of the whole Church. 17.An. 58. n. 119. Si quis ejus rei ipsum exordiū re∣petat, inveniet non tam ab Apostolis, quā ab ipso Chri∣sto duxisse princi∣pium, atque sump∣sisse authoritatem, quando scilicet, &c. This institution of Councels in the Church of Christ, the great Cardinal had so phansied, that af∣terward he refers the original of them not to the Apostles Synod at Jerusalem; but, by all means, to this of Christ, asking his Disciples, Whom say men that I am? Onely the uhappinesse of it was, he had there forgotten the principal thing, which had recommended this pat∣tern unto him, S. Peters peculiar priviledge, Ʋt sententiam ipse defi∣niat, for there he is pleased to re∣solve on another form, viz.In unum Patres coirent, ficque fi∣mul collectis, sin∣gulorum sententia rogaretur, ac de∣nique quod ob om∣nibus servandum esset, sanctè ac le∣gitimè communi∣bus suffragiis fir∣maretur. Ibid. That every Fathers Suffrage should be ask∣ed, and the Decree made in an holy and Canonical manner, by the com∣mon votes of all, and not only of S. Peter; which I should hope, concludes it his opinion, that the former course of definiat ipse] was neither legal, nor holy. 18. His third argument for the univorsality of this Councel, is, be∣cause
Cum Photius tot excessuū suorū mrbo universalē ecclesiam macula∣verit, universalis curatio adhibita est, ut totum cu∣raretur quod totū suerat maculatum. Conci. T. 6. p. 706 Seeing Photius had by his so many excesses blotted the universal Church, an universal cure was used, that all might be cured where all was blemished. But sure there is little force in this argument, which ren∣ders a reason, why it was so; but doth not offer at any evidence, that so it was, is founded in a supposi∣tion that the cure (as the disease) was universal, which was the thing he should have proved. And even for the universality of the disease we have here no farther offer of proof, but only that soon after Pho∣titu's ascending from the Senate to the Patriarchate, one Salomon a Laick was made Bishop of Jerusa∣lem. And some Laicks at Constan∣tinople lived virtuous lives; only, as he will have it supposed, that there∣by they might aspire to the Patriar∣chate: Both which might be al∣lowed to be true, and yet this eighth Councel of CII Bishops be far from being thereby concluded to have been a General Councel. 19. The short is, Anastasius Bi∣blithecarius, who was, as he saith,
present at this Councel, and so may be allowed to have kindnesse to it, doth also dedicate his History of it to Pope Adrian, who was the prin∣cipal Actor in it, and a bitter ene∣my to Photius. And then his au∣thority in this matter will be of as little weight, as his arguments have appeared to be, even no more than a testimony given to an in∣teressed person by a very partial friend, and party. 20. If there were force in such witnesses, there would be as much credit due to Photius himself, E∣pist. 117. desiring Theodosius; not to wonder that profane persons sit superciliously in judicature, and the illustrious High Priests of God are convented before them, that they judge who are themselves condem∣ned (for so was Ignatius the depo∣sed, but now restored Patriarch) but that. the innocent were judg'd
being incompast with Swords, lest they should dare offer to speak any thing in their own defence, giving him antient examples of the like judicatures, that of Annas and Cai∣aphas and Pilate and the Sanhedrim, by whom Christ was condemned; and so also Stephen and James the Bishop of Jerusalem, and Paul. And so in many other passages of his Epistles, which demonstrate him to have been another manner of man, than Baronius, An. 871. n. 24. pre∣tends him. 21. But I need not such fallible testimonies as these, to confirm the point in hand, That one of Mar∣cus in the Councel of Florence, con∣tested to Cardinal Julian, and not denied by him, is sufficient. 22. And it was but necessary wisdom in Binius (that knew it well, and could not but discern what a just prejudice it was to the univer∣sal reception of this Councel) that he purposely omitted to give us any story of that Councel, as of others he accustomed to do, discreetly designing Anastasius's Preface to
Pope Adrian, to supply, as heNon proponitur; ut in aliis factum, historia VIII. Concil. quod eam Anastasii Praefatio complectatur. Concil. Tom. 6. pag. 602. saith, the place of it. For as A∣nastasius would not probably re∣veal this secret, nor could fore-see what Marcus would say in the Councel of Florence; so Binius that published one as well as the o∣ther, could neither be ignorant, nor yet with any safety take notice of it, there being no possible way left but this of silence, to salve this Objection, or support the reputation or universality of that Councel, which was so neerly concerned in it. Sect. 11. Of the rest of the Councels which the Romanists call General; particu∣larly that of Trent. 1. I Shall not now, as I said, need to descend to a view of the other Councels by the Romanists styled Oecumenical, or defend our practice in not accepting them as
such. And that for these few, among many, reasons; 2. First, Because, as we said, the Popes profession, which must in reason be supposed to extend to the whole Faith, to every part of Apo∣stolical Tradition, duely testified; yet doth not extend to all these, or to any more than Eight of them. 3. Secondly, Because those parts of them, which agree not with their pretensions, are freely and Vniversally disallowed by them, as is notorious by the in∣stances of the Councel of Constance, and of Basil (and even of the fourth great Councel, that of Chalcedon) each styled in their Collections Oe∣cumenical Councels, and yet each ex parte reprobatum, in part rejected and reprobated; and then why may not the Greek Church by the same law reject the Councel of Florence, and both the Gallican Church, and ours, the Councel of Trent, if we finde it not a faithfull reporter of Tradition Apostolical? 4. Thirdly, Because when ever any Councel hath by them been
thought to fail, they have made no scruple to affirm it was not a lawfull Councel. 5. Thus we know it was in that at Ariminum, where, asDial. cont. Lu∣cif. S. Hierome saith, the whole world allmost admired to see it self become Arrian, and yet this I hope hath no authority with them. 6. So. likewise the II. Councel of Ephesus, though it were General, though honoured with the presence of all theVide Act. 1. Concil. 1. Chalced. Concil. Tom. 3. p. 61. five Patriarchs, four in person; the fifth by his Proxie, and (Imperatori Valentini∣ano) . Leontius de Sect. . p. 511. A. pertinaciously maintain'd by the Emperour Theodosius: yet be∣cause it confirmed Eutyches's Do∣ctrine, it is justly rejected by them. 7. And then why may not the same reason hold for us, and authorize our questioning the Legitimacy of those Councells, whose Decrees with reason we allow not? nor discern any te∣stimony of the truth of their Do∣ctrine,
or delivery from the Apostles. 8. Fourthly, Because in the Councel of Trent the Popes them∣selves, as many as lived in the time thereof, would never consent; though it were earnestly desired of them, that that Councel should be affirmed to represent the Ʋniversal Church; foreseeing prudently, that if that were granted (as in the Councel of Constance it was, to the Popes cost) the Councel, being the whole, would put off its subjection, and depend no longer on him that was but a part of it. From whence I conceive this Dilemma must have irresistible force in it, Ad Homi∣nem, being produced to a Ro∣manist. 9. Either the General Councel be∣fore the Papal confirmation is the representative of the whole Church, or it is not: If it be the representa∣tive of the whole, then it needs not the confirmation of the Pope to render it, what it was before. And again, whensoever the Pope hath refused to confirm the Decrees of any such, I must in charity to him,
suppose that those Decrees have been erroneous, and as such repudi∣ated by him, and then the univer∣sal Church representative may erre. And then who can have any secu∣rity in believing or relying on it. 10. But if it be not the repre∣sentative of the whole Church, then is not the testimony of an Oecu∣menical Councel the testimony of the whole Church, nor consequently qualified for any belief upon that score of universality. 11. Having given the Romanist this account, which he hath obli∣ged himself not to dislike, of our not obliging our selves to the be∣lief of all those Councels, which he calls General, I shall not need adde, what hath been so fully done by o∣thers, the many eminent nullities of some of them, especially of that of Trent, which is most magisteri∣ally imposed upon us. 12. The matter is clear, There can be no colour of pretence that that was an Oecumenical Councel. It had not sure, at the time, that integrity of the five Senses, which
Anastasius told us of, nor yet after it was promulgate, the approbation and reception of the whole Chri∣stian world, not of the Eastern Church, nor in the West, of the Gallicane and Britannick, and ma∣ny others. And then how can it be any universal testifier of Apo∣stolick tradition, or in any other capacity binde all to the imbracing of it? 13. This therefore is the one (but that very sufficient) prejudice to a Councel pretending to deliver to us Apostolick traditions and matters of faith, and exacting them to be received as such, that it is not in∣deed what it pretends to be, an universal Councel; & consequent∣ly that it is not duly qualified, by Vincentius his rules, to give a va∣lid testimony of matters of Faith or Doctrines truly Christian. To which it is but proportionable and regular that we that imbrace, and uniformly accept all Apostoli∣cal tradition, sufficiently i. e. uni∣versally testified to be such, do not think our selves obliged to receive
that, which is not thus testified. 14. If therefore, as hath hither∣to appeared, Heresie be to be thus defined by the opposition to the Faith of Christ, sufficiently revealed and testified to us, if Vniversalitie be one qualification of the testifier, and if the Romanists Oecumenical Councels do evidently fail of that Vniversality, then cannot our non-reception of all their Councels, thus evidenced not to be Vniversal, or of those their Doctrines which have no other surer Basis, than that of the Definitions of those Councels, be any way competent to charge or affix the note of Heresie upon us. 15. Nay on the contrarie, we that never disbelieved any word of God, written or unwritten (by any meanes made knowne to us to be such) particularly never questioned any voice or testimonie of the whole Church concerning such word, but are ready to believe that to be Apostolical, which shall be to us universally testified to come from the Apostles, and perswade our
selves that God will never permit any such Vniversal Testimonie con∣cerning the Faith to conspire in con∣veighing error to us, and upon the strength of that perswasion, as we have never yet opposed any Vniver∣sal Councel, nor other voice of the whole Church, such as by the Ca∣tholick Rules can be contested to be such; so for the future we professe never to doe, are by our grounds thus farre secured from all heretical pravitie, that unlesse we destroy in the retail what we have built in the grosse, and untill we shall be proved, by the particular view of our doctrines, to have thus failed in some particulars, we cannot with any justice, or without great un∣charitableness be accused of it.
Sect. 12. Of the inerrability of a General Councel. That it is no matter of faith. 1. OF the last part of this our profession, it is now meet, that I adde some few words, viz. what our opinion is of the inerrabili∣ty of a General Councel, truely so called, and qualified as hath been formerly described. 2. And 1. we have learn'd to distinguish between Theological verity, and Catholick Faith: some things we believe to be true, which yet pretend not to be any part of that necessarie Fundamental doctrine, which was once delivered unto the Saints, but are offered to our belief upon grounds of reason, which, Suppositâ fide, carry great weight of probabilitie with them, for which yet we neither have, nor pretend any divine revelation. And such, I conceive, this proposition to be, [A General Councel, cannot or shall not erre.] For that this is no where either affirmed by the
word of God written, or unwritten, or regularly deduced from thence, may easily appear by a view of the very few places, which are by the Romanist pretended to conclude it. 3. First, those words of Christ are pretended for it, Mat. 18.20. Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there I will be in the midst of them.] But 1. those words doe not in any peculiarity belong to Councels convened to define, but more generally to any Assemblies that come together to hear or pray to God, or more parti∣cularly in that place, to excommu∣nicate an offender. 2. If they be∣long to Councels, they would e∣qually belong to the most particu∣lar, as to the most Oecumenical Councel; for none can be more di∣stant from Catholick, than that where no more than two or three are met together. 3. That Text be∣longs onely to those Assemblies, which are truly convened in Gods Name, with hearts sincerely bent to the honouring of him; whereas
many Assemblies among men have been, and still may be convened with mixtures of worldly and car∣nal interest, and then no part of the promised presence belongs to them. 4. Christ may by his power and illumination, and even directive grace be present, and in the midst of those, who yet through the cor∣ruption, and blindnesse, and obstina∣cy of their own hearts, do not make use of his guidance to the finding out of truth, but oft resist the con∣viction and light which is offered them by Christ. And so there is not the least colour of force in that Argument. 4. Secondly, that place is pro∣duced of John 16.13. That when the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide them into all truth, and a∣gain, that he shall abide with them for ever. But neither hath that any propriety to General, or indeed to any kinde of Councels. Every par∣ticular Christian, since the descent of the Holy Ghost is as much ren∣dred infallible by these Texts, as any the most numerous Assembly;
for to each of those this promise made to the Apostles is as regular∣ly appliable, as to any of these. And the matter is notorious, that be∣fore there ever was any Oecume∣nical Councel in the world, the Church of God was lead into all truth: The great foundations of Faith being by the Apostles preach∣ing, from the very first plantation, long before the Councel of Nice, deposited in every Church. 5. Thirdly, They produce the form of the Conciliar Decretal Epi∣stle, Acts 15.28. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us. But that can be of no force in this matter: 1. Because the Apostles, that cer∣tainly did not erre, & were so assisted by the Spirit, that they should not erre in the discharge of their office Apostolical, can be no president to every, or any other humane Assem∣bly. 2. Because this Decree of theirs belonging to matters of practice, not of belief, that form of it can no farther be imitable to other Councels, than that in like matters of practice, such are rites and
ceremonies and usages in a Church, they assume authority of defining, and commanding, and deem that backt by the Holy Ghost, who hath given them their authority, but in matters of Faith they must have nothing from themselves. And ac∣cordingly this hath been the pra∣ctice in the Church, as hath * for∣merly appeared from ‖ Athanasi∣us, to prefix their Canons of Or∣der and Rites; this form [Visu est] It seemed good to us, or , these things seem∣ed good to us; but for matters of Faith, , so the Catholick Church believes; neither inserting mention of their own judgement, nor yet pretending to any other Revelation from the Holy Ghost, then what was from the beginning sound to have been in the Church. To which purpose also was, I suppose, the second Versicle in the Doxology (the Orthodoxal form of acknowledging the Trinity) Sicut erat in principio, As it was in the beginning, as it stood by Originall Tradition Apo∣stolical,
is now and ever shall be world without end. No new Do∣ctrine ever to be brought into the Church by whatsoever Councel, but onely that which the Apostles had delivered. 6. Fourthly, Some places they bring, & apply to Councels, which the Scripture delivers onely of the Church in general, as, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it,— which can no way belong to this matter, unlesse all the mem∣bers of the Church were met toge∣ther in that Councel; for if there be any left out, why may not the promise be good in them, though the gates of hell should be affirmed to prevail against the Councel. The first Nicene was by the acknow∣ledgement of all an Oecumenicall Councel, yet was not the whole Church of God convened in that Assembly. In case all the cccxviii Bishops which were there assem∣bled, had in one minute been ta∣ken up to heaven, or by any vio∣lence of the Arian party massa∣cred; could it with any truth be
said, that the whole Church of God had then been destroyed? Infallibly it could not; and no more could it be said, in case a major part of them had agreed in any errour, that the , the power or gates of Hell, or Death, or Destru∣ction had prevailed against them; because as it is clear there were many thousands of Bishops & Pres∣byters, many Millions of Brethren or believing Christians, without the walls of that Councell, which had not been involved in that er∣rour. And indeed the very suppo∣sal, that the Councel assembled represents the Church diffusive, and and was never intrusted by them to define any errour at their con∣vention, is an evidence that there is without the doores of that Councel an universal, which those few there present were designed to represent. And those that have given their Proxies for certain uses, are not imagined so to have put their lives or soules in the hands of those Proxies, as that by the death of the Proxies they shall be supposed to dye also.
7. And as there is no evidence from the written word of God whereon this may be grounded, as a matter of Faith, that a General Councel cannot erre, so neither is there any part of the Apostles De∣positum intrusted to the Church, from which the Conclusion can with any semblance of reason be inferred, or that is by any Ro∣manist, that I know of, made use of to that purpose. 8. The main thing that is pre∣tended, is the Conciliar practice and custome of annexing Anathema's to their Definitions, which it were not reasonable for them to doe, if they did not verily believe their Definitions were infallibly true. But to this the answer is obvious, 1. That they may think themselves infallible which are not, and so their own belief is not argumentative. 2. That they that knowing them∣selves fallible, doe yet perswade themselves that they have successe∣fully sought out, and found the truth in some particular, may think it useful to propagate this truth to all their flock and secure
the peaceable possession of that doctrine by denunciation of Censures Ecclesiastical; and, that is the meaning of Anathemas. 3. 'Tis supposeable, that in this, or that doctrine, the Councel hath had so clear a discovery (viz. from the uniform consentient testimonie of all Churches with which they have consulted) that they do finde reason verily to believe, that that par∣ticular definition is tradition Apo∣stolical. And so in that they may define dogmatically, not from any opinion of their own universal in∣errablenesse, but from a duely grounded perswasion, that for this time they are in the right. Lastly, It may well be noted as an excesse in many Later Councels, to be thus forward with their anathemas, or to affix them to any other their definitions, but such as are un∣doubted branches of that Apo∣stolical doctrine, which was preached to all those  in the Apostles 27 Canon, the dis∣belief whereof may obstruct, or hinder good life here, and Salvation hereafter.
Sect. 13. That it is one of the Piè credibilia, That a General Councel shall not erre. 1. THis then of the inerrableness of General Councels being thus far evidenced to be no matter of Faith, because not founded in any part of Scripture, or Tradition (nor consequently the contrary any matter of Heresie) the utmost that can be said of it, is, that it is a Theological verity, which may piously be believed. 2. And so I doubt not to pro∣nounce of it, That if we consider Gods great, and wise, and constant providence, & care over his Church, his desire that all men should be saved, and, in order to that end; come to the knowlege of all necessary truth, his promise that he will not suffer his faithfull servants to be tempted above what they are able, nor permit Scandals, and false teachers to prevail to the feducing of the very elect, his most pious,
godly servants; If, I say, we con∣sider these, and some other such like general promises of Scripture, wherein this question seemes to be concern'd, we shall have reason to believe, that God will never suffer all Christians to fall into such a temptation as it must be, in case the whole Church representative should erre in matter of Faith, by way of Ellipsis (define against, or leave out of their Creed any Article of that body of Credenda, which the Apo∣stles delivered to the Church) and therein finde approbation, and re∣ception among all those Bishops and Doctors of the Church diffused, which were out of the Councel. 3. And though in this case the Church might remain a Church (and so the, destructive gates of Hades not prevail against it) and still retain all parts of the Apostles Depositum in the hearts of some faithful Christians, which had no power in the Councel to oppose the Decree, or out of it to resist the ge∣neral approbation, yet still the te∣stimony of such a General Councel
so received and approved, would be a very strong argument, and so a very dangerous temptation to eve∣ry the most meek and pious Christi∣an, and it is piously to be believed, though not infallibly certain (for who knowes what the provocations of the Christian world, of the Pa∣stors, for the Flock, may arrive to, like the violence of the old world, that brought down the deluge up∣on them?) that God will not per∣mit his Servants to fall into that temptation. Sect. 14. A Recapitulation and Conclusion of this matter concerning Heresie. 1. 'TIs time now to draw to a conclusion of this whole matter; and from the premisses to compleat and abbreviate that plea, which will, I doubt not, secure the Church of England from all co∣lourable charge of Heresie: For that 2. First, It confestly receives the whole word of Christ, the in∣tire
Canon of the New Testament. 3. Secondly, It retains intire the Symbole of the Apostolick Faith, as that was delivered to the Churches in all the Apostolick plantations. 4. Thirdly, It understands both Scripture, and Creed, according to that Traditive interpretation, which the first Four, or, if you will, Six, or indeed any of the Oecumenical Councels, truly so called, have dis∣covered and declared to be the sense of all the Apostolick Churches in the world, and were universally received by all Churches in such their declaration. 5. Fourthly, That we never re∣jected any Catholick Testimony (of∣fered in behalf of any Doctrine) nor Councel, but such as even our enemies grant, or evidence of the matter proclaimes, not to have been Oecumenical. 6. Fifthly, That we do not be∣leeve that any General Councel, tru∣ly such, ever did, or shall erre in any matter of Faith, nor shall we farther dispute the authority, when we shall be duly satisfied of the universality of any such.
7. Lastly, That we are willing to proceed, and inlarge all this, from the Church collected in a Councel, to the Church diffused, or the principal Pastors thereof, out of Councel, and are ready to re∣ceive, and acknowledge as doctrine of Faith every proposition, which the Fathers that lived in any com∣petent distance from the Apostles, do uniformly, or without any con∣siderable dissent, deliver down to us, as the truths of God, Traditions Apostolical. 8. Herein I may not now fitly inlarge, by proceeding to a view and defense of all, or any such particular doctrines, nor indeed can I without the spirit of divination, not knowing what one Doctrine, denyed by us, any Romanist will assume to assert upon these termes (contest by these measures of uni∣versality, antiquity, and consent) to be Apostolical Tradition. 9. As for the authority of the present Roman Church, which is by them so much insisted on, as we cannot deem that sufficient to
impose upon all Christians any new book of Scripture; so neither can we by force of any Catholick rules (such as Vincentius is confest to have furnisht us with sufficiently) receive from that sole testimony of theirs (which is but the testimony of one part, and of one age of the Church, and not of the universal Church of all ages) any part of Christian doctrine, though by them never so earnestly contested to be Apostolical. 10. The sure way of judging a∣right in any particular debate, must be by appealing to the Fountains, Apostolical, Original Doctrine, and Tradition, and for that, to those that are competent testifiers in the matter, to Councels universally re∣ceived, or to such other testimony as is truly universal. And as by this one test we professe to deal with every adversary of the Faith, whom we shall dare thus to accuse, and not to deem any person an Heretick, whom we cannot de∣monstrate to be such, by this sure  (and therefore are not
forward to judge every Romanist to be such, who mainteines the whole Faith, and erres onely in his Super addition) so we are most willing to submit to this way of judgment our selves, and whatso∣ever we shall be convinced to be disagreeable thereto, we shall most willingly and explicitly renounce, for the glory of God, and for the restoring the peace of the Church, and do so already implicitly, by binding our selves to be judged, and concluded by these rules, by unfeigned prayer to God for his light and guidance in his path; and by exacting of all Christians in the world that fraternal debt of necessary charity to our soules, in admonishing us, either 1. What particular there is, maintained by our Church, which is not found to have truth: or 2. What disbelie∣ved, which is able to approve it self, being judged by these rules: or 3. What is defective in these rules, in order to our judging a∣right, what is by a Christian to be believed, or imbraced as De Fide,
and so as the disbelieving thereof will be chargeable upon him. 11. And if, after all this, and without the Charity of any such admonition, we shall still by un∣relenting adversaries be censured and condemn'd, as Hereticks, (and upon that account cast out as refuse-branches, and unchurched members; and so that unity and communion, which Christ hath commanded to continue among his Disciples, become unattainable by us) herein we complain of great unkindness and injustice in the Church of Rome, and in those that joyne, and adhere to her in that sentence, which by Papal Bull was long since sent out against us; and upon these premised grounds we resolve still to retain that degree of charity to our most implacable enemies, as to pray for them, and to admonish them of the eminent danger of their uncharitableness, in case those hindrances be not upon due judgment removed on their part, which obstruct the union and peace of Christendome. It being
most unreasonable that among them which Communicate in every branch of the one Apostolical Faith, that sacred band should yet be violated, upon vaine and empty pretences of diversities of opinion or usages in such matters, which are farre removed from the great foundation of Apostolical doctrines, and practices, or which are not sufficiently testified to come from them, who yet are justly presuma∣ble to have delivered carefully (and appointed the Church to preserve faithfully though all ages) all those things, which are fundamentally necessarie for a Christian to believe or practice to his Soules health. 12. If reason herein will not be heard, to the repairing of breaches and demolishing the , that Sept or Wall of Separation, which was once in the Temple set up betwixt Iewes and Gentile worshippers, but received its decretorie sentence in the death of Christ, never to be re-edified among Christians, If that enmity that was nailed to his Crosse, must
be revived, and quickened to a life immortal among his members. If whilst we faithfully retain the whole Faith of Christ, we must still be lookt on, as Traditors and muti∣lators of it. 'Twill yet be manifest to all that consider the premisses, that this is to be numbred among our calamities, not our guilts, that these darts of the tongue were not directed at us, with any special aime, or judgment (we might have been called Magicians as well, and so banished out of Rome, upon the Old Edict, Contra Mathematicos, with as much propriety as upon the new, contra Haereticos) and in fine, that the objection hath received its answer according to the utmost improvement, of which it is capable, whether as the low ebbe of our present persecuted estate, or as our pretended departure from the Catho∣lick Faith, is, or can, with any colour of reason, be suggested to have unchurched us.
CHAP. VI. A third difficulty, raised from Acts 4.19. and 1 Cor. 9.16. satified. §. 1. AFter this so large a sur∣vey of those two sorts of Objections from others, there re∣mains a third, which our own breasts are ready to suggest, by way of scruple; whether the words of S. Peter and S. John, Acts 4.19. and of S. Paul 1 Cor. 9.16. be not of some force, to lay obligation on us Ministers of the Gospel at this time, and how we shall quit our selves of that obligation. §. 2. In the former Text ver. 6. and 15. When the Sanhedrim cal∣led those Apostles, and commanded them not to speak at all, nor to teach, ver. 18. their answer is in these words, Whether it be right in the sight of God to harken unto you, more than unto God, judge ye; For we cannot but speak—where sure the phrases of hearkening unto God, obeying him, and, we cannot but speak,—noted an obligation lying
upon them from God to speak and to teach, such as no countermand from the Sanhedrim could take off from them. §. 3. And so in the latter Text a necessity is acknowledged by S. Paul to lye upon him, a moral ne∣cessity (and that sure denotes an obligation) and woe is unto him, if he preach not the Gospel. §. 4. For the answering of this, some (of the many) differences must be observed, which at first sight offer themselves, betwixt the con∣dition of the Apostles then, and those now, which are under this in∣terdict. A first difference may be discerned in respect of the matter of their preaching, which was then so indispensably required of the A∣postles: What that was, will ap∣pear by the Commission given to the Eleven, Matth. 28.19. Go therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost; teach∣ing them to observe all things what∣soever I have commanded you. As for S. Paul, though he were none
of this number, yet his assumption to the Office Apostolical, exprest by his being a chosen vessel unto Christ, to bear his Name before the Gentiles and Kings—Acts 9.15. And the command of the Holy Ghost to separate him to that work, Acts 13.2. did doubtless binde the same bands on him, and so this same in∣gagement of publishing the Christian doctrine through all the world to those that were ignorant of it, of receiving Proselytes, all that should come in to that faith of Christ, and of building them up in it. §. 5. Here then to those as to a select number of  Apo∣stles, or Proxies of Christ on earth, was a Commission given, and there∣in a command to publish the Gospel over all the world; and had they neglected it willingly, or by any ter∣rors been affrighted from it, that message (which Christ came in so stupendious a manner from Hea∣ven to publish) had consequently never been revealed to the world, and then this so precious talent de∣posited with them, being thus laid
up unoccupied, would have brought on them regularly the guilt, and woe of wicked, as well as unprofita∣ble servants. And this is the ground of that obligation, that lay on them, and is exprest in those two Texts in the objection. §. 6. But the Bishops of our Church, and the Inferiour Officers, the Presbyters under them, though they are in some degree the Proxies of those Proxies, the successors of those Apostles; yet the Commission to go and preach, belongs not to them, in the same extent, as it did to the Apostles, nor to all the same purposes: Our Commission is limi∣ted, and so the obligation incum∣bent on us is limited also. §. 7. The Gospel being long ago by the Apostles travails solemnly preached over all the world, and ei∣ther received by Faith, or rejected by obstinacy, or cast off by Aposta∣cy, there was a period, and conclusi∣on of those travails, their doctrine being deposited in all their planta∣tions, and in the written word con∣signed for the perpetual uses of the
Churches, it was no longer incum∣bent Ex Officio on every spiritual person, to trace all the steps of those, that thus travailed for the first planting them. 'Tis sure the Indies and Chinois are none of our Province now, though they once were of some of the Apostles. §. 8. Nay, even in those first times we read of some, whom they fixt in Setled Stations,  appointing them to abide, and  leaving them in such or such a Province. 1 Tim. 1.3. and Tit. 1.5. beyond which they were not obliged to journey, but as the same Apostles directed them upon emergent occasions. §. 9. Nay, the Appostles them∣selves at length made an end of their travailes, sat down, S. Iohn at Ephesus, S. Peter at Rome—And after them in the words of the 15. and 16. Canons Apostolical it was soon forbidden, that any man should , or , go or meddle beyond his
own line, move out of that circle, wherein he was fixt. And yet certainly obedience to those Canons, though not written by the Apostles, but by the first Bishops, Apostolical men, and so (in the words of that text, wherein the objection is founded) a harkening unto men, will never be deemed an offending or sinning against God; If it were, all order and unitie would soon be banished out of the Church, as by this  we see it in some Churches at this time. §. 10. Here then is a first diffe∣rence, in respect of the matter of their preaching, and their immediate mission to that work, which brought the Vae si non; They were by Christ obliged to promulgate the Gospell; we, that are come into their labours, where it is promulgate already, are not under the same causes, and so neither under the same strictness of that obligation? The ingagements that now lye upon us arise from some other heads, the designations, and trusts of our superiors in the Church, the
wants of the flock, over whom we are placed, or the opportunities of Charity, which offer themselves to us, but not the Preceptive Com∣mission of Christ of going, and preaching the Faith to all nations. §. 11. But if this were the intire answer, some farther objection would lye against it. For the Apo∣stles task being not onely that of witnessing the resurrection of Christ, and so the whole Christian religion, confirmed by it, but particularly that of calling unrefor∣med sinners to repentance (as we see their sermons summ'd up in the Gospel, as Iohn Baptists and Christs also were, Repent for the kingdom of heaven is at hand) it is obvious thus to inforce the former argu∣ment, that the sins of these nati∣ons, and our impenitent continuance therein are sufficient to remove this difference, there is now as much need of Sermons, of repentance, as there was then of preaching the Faith of Christ; and why then should not the obligation lye as in∣dispensably upon us, as it then did upon the Apostles?
§. 12. To this Objection the an∣swer must be, not by denying the truth of the suggestion in either of the premisses, for it is certain, that was the style of the Baptists, of Christs, of the Disciples, and so af∣terwards of the Apostles preach∣ing; and 'tis indeed hard to con∣ceive how or when there should be greater need of preaching reforma∣tion, and of imploying all our spi∣ritual artillery, the keenest weapons of our warfare for the demolishing of strong holds, of bringing down obdurate hearts to the obedience of Christ, then there is most visibly in these nations at this time. But by examining the force of the con∣sequence, which from thence infers the necessity of our withstanding the present interdict, and continu∣ing to preach. That this conse∣quence is most irregular, soon ap∣pears by survey of the premisses, which neither severally nor joyntly have power thus to infer, or to make up any regular Syllogism, of which this shall be the conclusion. The fairest Syllogism that the mat∣ter
is capable of will be this, The Apostles by Christs command preached Repentance to impenitent sinners, But the people of this nati∣on are impenitent sinners, There∣fore, the Ministers here are obli∣ged not to give over preaching, what ever interdict, or menace of violence restrain them from it. But this is far from a regular Syllogism, not capable of being reformed, or reduced, to any figure or mould of reasoning, artificial, or inartificial, nether of the premisses having any influence upon the conclusion, nor indeed connexion within themselvs. Christs precept of preaching repen∣tance to impenitent sinners, even then when it did oblige, did not oblige them never to intermit, or give it over, whatsoever the consequences were. When they had preached, and were not received, but persecu∣ted, they were allowed to leave such obstinate impenitents to shake off their dust against them, and so to denounce judgements by depart∣ing from them, to preach most loudly, by not preaching.
§. 13. And for impenitence, sure that layes not obligation, where Christs command had said none, i. e. where it is obstinate against light, and means of reformation. It was our Saviours speech put by him in∣to the mouth of Father Abraham, They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them: And if they hear not them, neither will they re∣pent or bee perswaded though one should come to them from the dead. §. 14. When sins have been com∣mitted, and are gone on in, for want of light, there preaching of repentance, and convincing the ignorant world of Sin, is the Gospell-method, and be their sins the great∣est in the world, and the most unnatural, such as the Gentiles were, yet God can  so far look over, or not see such rebelli∣ons, as to send out his Heralds of peace, and command them all every where to repent, yea, and sometimes to work miracles for the opening such mens eyes, who,Acts 17.30. as S. Paul saith of himself, being blasphemers, persecuters and injurious, yet are
discerned by him that knowes the secrets of hearts,1 Tim. 1.13. to doe it ignorantly in unbelief. John 3.19.§. 15. But when it is not thus imputable to ignorance, but resist∣ance of the light, to loving and coveting of darkness,Prov. 1.22. to the Scorners delighting in that trade, and the fooles hating knowlege, it may then be seasonable with God, and not contrarie to dutie in man, to let them alone, no longer to importune them, who will not receive instru∣ction. §. 16. And this is too visibly the present condition of this people, our sins have not the Apologie or extenuation of ignorance, our deeds of darkness, that have clothed themselves in the thickest cloud, and deepest secrecy, are of all others most unquestionably sins against light, and knowledge, and consci∣ence. And our riots, and oathes, and perjuries, and profanations; in a word, all our sorts of pollutions both of flesh and spirit, are certain∣ly such; and those are they that denominate us an impenitent peo∣ple
on supposal of which the in∣forcement of that argument was founded. §. 17. And to such blinde people that have eyes, which  see very perfectly,Isa. 43.8. Acts 28.27. but will not perceive, that have steel'd their foreheads against reproofs, it were but regular, and that which we learn from the Apostles practice, as to shake off dust against them, so to mark and avoid, and not to have fellowship with such, much lesse to pursue them with the importunity of more Sermons, but rather to for∣sake them, without being driven from them; there being no reason, why they should hear, any more then preach Gods word, take his co∣venant into their ears, or mouthes, who thus despise instructions, and hate to be reformed. §. 18. And if it be interposed, that sure all men and women a∣mong us, are not to be put into this forlorn Classis of hopelesse impe∣nitents, there being many thou∣sands now, as in Elias's dayes, that are not ingulpht in the corruptions
of the times, I reply by a most wil∣ling, joyful confession, and only re∣quire it be remembred, that then there was no strength, as far as con∣cernes these, in that inforcement of the argument, which took rise onely from the consideration of the unreformed impenitent sinners, which exacted our Sermons of re∣pentance. §. 19. As for those then, that are in a middle and more improveable estate, to whom the exercise of our functions are, or probably may be, real charity; there, I shall ac∣knowledge the Ministers of the Word to lye under engagements, not such as arise from Christs com∣mand to his Apostles, To go and preach, wherein the objection was founded; but on other heads, espe∣cially those of charity, and mini∣string to the wants of souls. And though the example of Grego∣ry Nazianzen, that great and pi∣ous Bishop, might justifie some other resolution, who in such evil times, being without any pretence of crime removed out of his Bishop∣rick,
. Greg. Naz. Vit. N 3. Resisted many importunities, took his leave of the Emperour, retired to Arianzum, and in. Ibid. N. 5. rest and divine poesie ended his dayes; yet I shall not lay hold on that ad∣vantage, but in compliance with the interests of charity rather than with any other of any meaner al∣lay, I shall deem this account most Christian, that we oblige our selves never to be wanting to them, that are thus capable, in any duty of ne∣cessary charity, that no fear of men, or other worldly consideration, de∣ter us from such performances, that whensoever our Ministery be cal∣led, for by the real and pressing wants of the meanest of Christs lit∣tle ones, like Craesus's dumb Son, in an important exigence, we stretch the string of our tongues, rush through any obstacle, and re∣solve with the Apostle in the obje∣ction, We cannot but speak,—
§. 20. So that still the resoluti∣on of conscience must be by level∣ling the particular case according to the Rule or Square that belongs to it, the command of our great Master, incumbent on us. And though that lay not obligation to preach, Rations Officii, yet if it lay obligation of charity to minister to the necessities of any Christians soul, in whatsoever instance, our love will prove very imperfect & maim∣ed, if it do not cast out fear, set about its work, whatsoever the dangers be. And so generally our direction must be not by that which is most safe, but most charitable; and by attending to that, we shall have advanced a good step toward the solution of the difficulty. §. 21. But then thirdly a farther difference there is observable be∣twixt the Apostles case, and ours, in respect of the occasions and cir∣cumstances of delivering the words. For the words in S. Paul, 'tis evident they lookt not on persecu∣tion, but onely want of wages for his preaching, and the utmost impor∣tance
of, or inference from his words is, that though he have no kind of subsistence from his audi∣tors, no part of their offertorie v. 13. yet he is (under a sad Vae si non) obliged to treach to them. And then if we by any outward discou∣ragements, the no reward for our labours, the not reaping of carnal things, be thus cooled in discharge of our duties, and dispensing our spiritual things, then are we with some reason to apprehend the Va denounced by S. Paul on this neglect, which that it cannot by analogie be extended to this other case of forcible interdict, apeares by the expresse words of Christ even while he requires perseverance in his Disciples, Mat. 10.23. When they persecute you in this city, flee ye to another, and is exemplified by S. Paul 2. Cor. 11.32. §. 22. And though still the other example of S. Peter and Iohn seem contrarie, yet certainly that must be capable of such an interpretation as shall be reconcileable with these two, the expresse words of Christ,
and practice of their fellow Apostle. §. 23. For sure there is some more then shew of difficulty in this, how those two Apostles should be, under a command of God, obliged not to give over preaching in Ierusalem, when they were thus interdicted and threatened by the Sanhedrim, as that signifies perse∣cuted from that city, when yet the Disciples are allowed by Christ, in that case of persecution to remove to some other city, i. e. to obey that unchristian interdict so armed with force; and when Paul upon the like occasions professeth once to have been let down by a basket, and by flight (and so preaching no longer in that city) to have escaped their hands 2. Cor. 11.33. And at another time to have been for a time with-held, or kept from the Thessalonians, 1. Thess. 2.16, 17, 18. by the violent oppositions, and interdicts, of his adversaries. And what answer soever shall be thought satisfactorie to this, will, I doubt not, be applicable to our present case.
§. 24. For First, If the account should be, that this was an Heroi∣cal act of zeal in those two Apo∣stles (. and , to imitate Christ so farre as to adventure the utmost dangers for his sake) yet not under divine precept, and so not part of Strict duty, then that absolves us from being under such duty, and leaves it onely an act of Christian mag∣nanimity, when the circumstances of the action render it truly such, i. e. whensoever the great ends of Charity may best be served by our preaching and suffering, and thus much is willingly acknowledged. §. 25. But the truth is, this seems not to come home to S. Peters words of [hearkening to God] and [we cannot but teach—] which seem to suppose some com∣mand of God binding on their shoulders an indispensable necessity of doing what they did. §. 26. Secondly then, If the answer be, that the threatning them at that time was visibly but an empty terror, being joyned with
a releasing them out of custodie v. 3. and 21. and so but an expression of their dislikes, and their feare of them, rather than a persecuting them, and that in that case the duty of propagating the Gospell, and beginning that at Ierusalem, was in full force incumbent on them at this time, Non obstante the dispensation granted them Mat. 10. 23. of flying when they were per∣secuted. Then likewise will it be in force by analogie to us, that we should not be amated by empty terrors, but pursue the discharge of our functions, as farre as violence will permit us; nor feigning Mormoes to our selves, or making the phansie or shadow of the Lion in the way, the motive or excuse of our real sloth, or neglect of our callings. §. 27. Or thirdly, If it be an∣swered, that that advise for flight in persecution was given to the disciples Mat. 10. before their re∣ceiving their Apostlolical Charge, & Commission Mat. 28. Iohn 20. and so that these Apostles might be
now under precept of not yielding to this violence, though the disciples were not. Then again, though that will not be made good by any grounds of Scripture, nor prove reconcileable with the practice of S. Paul at Damascus, who was an Apostle also (having allready que∣stionless his mission from heaven to that office) yet will that be of use also to our present difficulty, for then all officers, howsoever intrusted by Christ, are not presently under the same obligations, that S. Peter, and those other Apostles were, and so their example is not farther to be extended, than other Scri∣ptures, and examples, and the con∣sideration of all circumstances give reason to extend it. §. 28. Of one of these two Apo∣stles, S. John, the Scriptures tells us that he was at length banished to Patmos an Island, for the testimony of Jesus:Rev. 1.9. It was not certainly any fault, or but  in him, that he did not resist this Edict, but yeeld to that force which executed it upon him. And yet when he
was there, we finde not that he had opportunity for any office of his Apostleship, save that of praying and communicating in the tribulati∣ons and patience of the kingdom of Christ, and receiving and writing of visions; and nothing contrary to duty in this, the violence that carried him to that Island, was his very reasonable account, that he laboured not now in the Word and Gospel. §. 29. The like may be said of S. Chrysostome, twice banished from his Patriarchate of Constantinople, & of many others in all evil times, dis-seised of their Chaires and Fun∣ctions, for no other cause, but as John,  for the testimony of Jesus, and their depri∣vations were one way of testifying of Christ, as their preaching had (and, if they might have enjoyed that liberty, still would have) been another. §. 30. Some disparity there is in∣deed between these examples & the case, which is now before us; John was actually transported to that
Island, and we are onely interdict∣ed under the penalty of the like transportation, which being yeel∣ded, it yet must follow, that either the whole weight of the objection must be founded in this disparity, or else that it will receive its full answer by this consideration. §. 31. This disparity, if it have any real weight in it, it must be on one of these two accounts; either, First, That what is now threatned, ought not to be feared, till it be present, and that this remoter fear is not Metus qui potest cadere in vi∣rum fortem, such as is incident to a valiant man; or else, Secondly, that those performances which will now actuate the threats, and bring that punishment upon us, are, or may probably be of some considerable weight, or benefit, to the glory of God, or good of soules. §. 32. For the former of these; 1. That is not a question of duty, but of prudence, and so layes not obligation till the question of pru∣dence be first stated. 2. For the prudentiall part, there are no
grounds on which to establish that. 'Tis not (without the Spirit of pro∣phecie) within our reach to compre∣hend, how likely, or unlikely it is, that this punishment will be really inflicted; none but God can know the hearts of the interdictors, or re∣strain their power, and he hath not rvealed to us, either that they will not, or shall not execute their lawes, and so it is neither cowardice nor imprudence, not. Origen. cont. Cels. pusillanimity but rational foresight, to expect, that they who have been so severe to promulgate this interdict, may not be so kinde as to rescind, or suspend the execution of the penal∣ties denounced by it. Or if any man have reason to think other∣wise, he may then be obliged to act by that reason, but not to impose it Sub periculo animae on every o∣ther man, who discernes no cause for such perswasion. 33. For the 2. It is visible in the interdict on one side, that the first single exercise of our functions brings imprisonment; the second a second imprisonment, and the third
the deportation parallel to that which was S. Iohns portion: But the advantage on the other side is not visible; For 1. There is no duty of piety in our prospect, no confession of Christ (which was wont to innoble the Primitive Sufferings) our not preaching for a while is by no kind of interpretation a denying of Christ. Nor 2. Obedience either to any command of Christs (as I suppose hath already been cleared) or yet to the trusts or commands of those that have committed any part of Gods flock unto us, for all those trusts and commands reserve place for outward accidents, for Sickness, for urgent avocations, &c. Nor 3. Obligation or motive of charity; It is not discernible what real advantage it will bring to any of our brethren, that he that hath preacht a thousand Sermons al∣ready, should preach two Sermons more, which may not be equally provided for, by some other safer meanes. 34. And then as the Apostles repeated exhortation hath its place,
so that is exprest to be, in such  evil dayes, or times, viz. that we should , gain or buy out the season:Tom. 4. p. 148. l. 12. S. Chrysostome interprets it by the contrariety to , un∣dergoing unnecessary and gainlesse dangers, such as no obligation ex∣acts nor charity invites, andApoph. Scipion. Plu∣tarch paraphrases it by , buying the safety of the time, i. e. avoiding the present danger, and reserving our selves for opportunities of more profitable services. 35. Such opportunities as these, are as gifts of God, and it cannot be either wise, or pious, or charita∣ble to forfeit or sell them for no price: That we should set some va∣luation upon them we have S. Cy∣prians example, and that commen∣ded, as a special act of generosity and self-denial in him, that having in his prospect some service which he might perform to God by living,Maluit praecep∣tis Dei obedire, quàm vel sic coro∣nari. Pontius Di∣ac. in vit. Cypr. he made choice of longer life by sub∣ducing himself in time of danger,
rather than of the Martyrs Crown when it was fairly offered him. 36. Beside these, there is also a competent number of present im∣ployments for our Christian & Mi∣nisterial talents still remaining to us notwithstanding the present in∣terdict: I shall not need enume∣rate them, but only mind my Bre∣thren, that continual prayer for all men, and particularly for our un∣kindest enemies, is one seasonable part of that task; and though that might be performed also in Pat∣mos, yet others there are, of which a strange land, or wildernesse is not capable; and between these wee may profitably and comfortably di∣vide this vacancy, and busily and charitably, and to very excellent purpose, exercise our selves, till God shall in mercy return our wonted taskes, call us back to the constant labour, and full businesse of his vine∣yard again. 37. And if herein we be not scandalously wanting to these oppor∣tunities, which how improbably so∣ever they look at a distance, God
can convert, and hath certeinly in his wisedome designed for the greater advantages of his servants, and to more abundant fruit to our account. This will be matter of full Satisfaction, and more than so, even of comfort and joy to conscience, and supersede all necessitie of farther answer to this scruple.
CHAP. VII. The beneficial uses of our present condition. Sect. I. First, Contempt of the world. 1. THus far I have proceeded by way of retrospect, or reflecti∣on on the sad matter of our present condition, and endeavoured to foresee and forestall those scandals, to which it is principally liable, that no man may be ensnared, or offen∣ded, or so much as discouraged by it. 2. 'Tis now time, that I look forward on some few of the many great uses, we are to make of this state, the beneficial exercises, which seem most peculiarly apportion'd to it; that so we may according to S. Pauls direction , give a stretch forward to the things which are before, and so , make that a latter stage in our present course toward the great , the prize (of all,
and so) of our present agonies. 3. And the first step, that we ad∣vance, as it cannot misse to furnish us with an armature against all the vastest changes that this mutable world can subject us to, with an O passi graviora, giving us an assu∣rance, that what next shall come cannot be more strange, and un∣expected, lesse within the diviners power to foresee, or indeed much more vast and horrid at the nearest approach, than this which we al∣ready discern that God hath chosen for us; so it may be very proper to wean us, and mortifie in us all fondnesse to that, which hath now nothing left that is lovely or desira∣ble in it. 4. We know David's Vnicum petij, Psal. 27.4. the one thing that he counted worth desiring of the Lord, and without which all the rest had no relish in it. And this hath God seen fit to rend from us at this time, that we may have never an hostage left to ingage our kindness to the world. 5. When all that deserves to be
rejoiced in in this life, is most strict∣ly warded from us (such sure are the fruits of that Paradise, from which we are now exiled) what Christian Spirit of the coursest mould, that hath most of allay in his composition, can in earnest sollicite a reprieve of the severest sentence, court this world, or dread a final parting with it, when by any farther summons he that hath cast him into these briers and thornes, shall mercifully call and invite him out of them? 6. The Eremite or Anchoret that hath pass'd so great a part of his journey toward heaven, as to be come within a pace of his non ultra (like Simeon Stylita in Theodoret, immured in his pillar, and become already but his own Statue and monument, as it were) and hath but the patience of one step more required of him, to conclude his travaile, to lodge him in Abrahams bosome, were surely very unkind to heaven and treache∣rous to his own aimes and interests, if he should then stop, or start, or think of a retreat.
7. And the like contradiction were it to our own greatest con∣cernments, when we are divested of all the vivendi causae the comforts or causes of living (the chiefe of which is that gladsome newes in the Psalmist, when they said unto him, let us goe up to the house of the Lord, whereupon he could revive himselfe out of any dumps with this one cordial, My feet shall stand in thy gates, O Ierusalem, and Ierusalem is as a Citie at unity within it selfe) when, I say, we are cast out of this presence of the Lord, this comfortable, though but ambulatorie tent of his, where for a time he hath allowed us an accesse unto him, to tremble at the sight of that officer, which comes but to returne us to our home and ioyes, and to secure the firmness of our future abode, that it shall be ascertain'd to us for ever. 8. Shammatha and Maranatha we know were the Significative titles of the Iewish exterminations, and the interpretation of them the approach of destruction from the Lord; The Sanhedrins casting out
of the assembly, was, saith Iosephus, the frequent forerunner of that other out of the land of the living. And the like abode was thought to attend the Druids censures, when they interdicted any man the liberty of sacrificing, quae poena apud eos gravissi na est, saithDe Bell. Gall. l. 6. Caesar, the heavyest punishment that could befall the Galles or Britanes. And though this of ours be no parallel, yet it may be usefull thus farre to mind us of our duty, to prepare us so, as not to be Surprised, what∣soever God shall next send. 6. Meanewhile one comfort this of ours is capable of, above any real, though meekest censures of the Church ( and  the reproofes or admonitions Ecclesiasti∣cal) that it is not Futuri judicii praejudicium, inApol. c. 39. Tertullians phrase, hath no inauspicious influence on our future weale, the binding us on earth, though it never be rescinded here, will be farre from interdicting, or excluding us from heaven: there was, I hope, never more truth inIn Levit. Hom. 14. Origens resolution, Qui ante non
exiit nihil laeditur, unde interdum fit, ut ille qui foras mittatur, intus sit, He that was not gone out before, is not harm'd by this interdict, he that is cast out, is still within. 10. Let us by the help of God, and in obedience to these, and all other his gratious chastisements, retain, or timely get our clean nuptial garments about us, and then though we be gathered up from the Lanes and Hedges, we shall have no reason to doubt of our call to, and reception at the mariage. Sect. 2. Secondly, Ʋniversal Reformation. 1. BUt then Secondly, as in the Censures of the Church, those last methods of Apostolical and divine Charity, designed for the ransome and reduction of the most inthralled captive, and obstinately bent to bring him home to God, though it were by the ministry of Satan himself, there was no peace to be hoped, or obtained from this
importunity, no truce from these merciful scourges, these wounds of the perfectest friend, whilest there remained one excesse unhumbled, one lust unpurged, one rage un∣mortified, one , be it high or strong hold, pride or habit of sin, unlevelled, or unsubdued; so must we reckon of it at this time, while we are under these shadowes and false images of it. 2. The rebukes of heaven that are now upon us, are as inexorable as his unwearied love of soules can make them, we must not in kind∣nesse to our selves beg their remove, till they have finisht the saving work for which they are as surely sent, as Christ came into the world upon the same errand; and then what an inauspicious Symptome must it be, if the application shall increase the Paroxysms, if the sinnes that brought these judgements to cha∣stise them, should make a shift to thrive under them, if the fruitful parent should become also the ince∣stuous birth of its own progeny. 3. The intimations which Scrip∣ture
gives us of such charitative se∣veritis (such certainly are Gods now unto us, designed wholly to ends of mercy) all look this way; Bi∣shop Titus's rebukes must be whet,Tit. 1.13. till they advance to the  to be sharp and cutting, and never lose the edge, till they have ob∣tain'd their designe () till they have by lancing fetcht out the very core of the Imposthume, the dregs and sediment of the dis∣ease. 4 The Apostle elsewhere expres∣ses it by very comprehensive phra∣ses, by , subdu∣ing and bringing to nothing the very thoughts,2 Cor. 10.5, 6. disputes, or reaso∣nings in the breast, , e∣very elation, or unevennesse in the heart, that doth but  lift it self up against the knowledge of God or Christian practice,  very conceit or notion, and in fine  to act revenge, to punish capitally so as it never revive a∣gain)  every not hearkening or disobedience; and till this be done effectually, Timothy
must not be too hasty to impose hands, absolve,1 Tim. 5.22. or loose those cen∣sures, lest he bring upon himself the guilt of those sins which it was the duty of his censures to reform in others; the , consequent sins,Vers. 24. those that are still continued in after the hand of discipline is upon a man, have a fearful aggravation belonging to them, that of thundering back a∣gainst heaven, the most unagree∣able return to the utmost charity, the most prodigious anomalie, or ir∣regularity in the world. 5. We know the dresse that be∣longed to the excommunicated per∣son, both in the Jewish and Primi∣tive Christian Church, the same, that of the strictest profoundest Mourners, and all the Assembly were to accompany him in the same doleful habit; S. Paul expresses it by Gods2 Cor. 12.21. humbling the very Apo∣stle that inflicts it, and his2 Cor. 2.1 coming  in a mournful guise unto the offender. And in this also the parallel may hold, the mourning weeds in many respects very well
become us at this time. And shall he that is a mourning for himself, a celebrating as it were his own obse∣quies (and should in reason begin the  the doleful Elegie to others in an accent of exemplary sorrow) forget the business in hand so prodigiously, as to mistake an oath or execration for it, to aim that shaft against Heaven, that should have been designed at his own breast, bewaile his excesses in new riots, and as the deluge to the old world, overwhelm the sinner, in∣stead of purging away the sin? 6. Were this tolerably fit to be the return but to humane discipline, to him that speaketh (though it be Oracles, so  signifieth) on earth; yet it were most intolera∣ble madnesse thus to turn away from him that speaketh from heaven,Heb. 12.25. and that is our case at this time. 7. 'Tis vaine to question the instruments, when by its being fallen upon us, we know the Coun∣sel and hand of God , hath preordained it shall be done, not onely permitting it thus
to fall, but also designing it charita∣tively to our greatest good, the mortifying every sin, that still lives among us. And if we doe not now qualifie our selves for our returne to this glorious kingdome of his on earth (into which there is no regular entrance for any thing that defileth,Rev. 21.27. or that worketh abomina∣tion, or lye, I meane either for car∣nality or hypocrisie) just as we would think our selves obliged to doe for our admission into the kingdome of heaven, that vision which may not be approacht with∣out all kind of purity, we are still fitted for severer methods, and cannot without a kind of sacriledge covet, or wish a libertie of accesse to Gods holy things, which cannot be injoyed without being defiled also, and profaned by us. 8. What is here said thus gene∣rally, ought to be as distinctly and particularly applied to every leprous spot, or plague-sore in each unreformed sinners heart among us, as if I had delivered by retaile the most perfect catalogue of them.
Let us search and try our waies,Lam. 3.40. and now if ever perfect our vowes of returning to the Lord. 9. And this must be indeavour∣ed by all the most probable remain∣ing means, that may any way be ordinable to it, sure not by mens taking advantage of the times, and casting off all even form of Godliness, this is the sad fruit of the reprobate Soile,Heb. 6.8. the forerunner of curse and burning. But the more desolate our condition is, the more sollicitously to indeavour to gain God to our society and assistance, to keep close to him in constant frequent returnes of converse on our knees, or on our faces (to that our closets are much better accommodated, than our Churches, or more publick as∣semblies, and our exclusion from them may well mind us of that posture either of Christ, Mat. 26.39. or of the  or how-long poenitentiaries in the Primitive times) talking with him, and re∣ceiving both aids and directions from him, handling him and seeing him in his word (and those much
more faithfull meanes of converting spiritual food into spiritual nourish∣ment, than the Eare hath been experimented to be) and so with more advantage filling our selves out of the Ocean, without repining that the drop of the bucket is taken away from us. 10. 'Tis possible we may be found to have somewhat by us in store, that may prove food, when the famine hath Cookt it for us; That Prayer which Christ gave us (as once God by Moses did Manna, from heaven) may, when 'tis better considered, then our plenty ever yet permitted it to be, prove an help to all our infirmities, that one plate of pure Gold be beaten out into a great deal of Wire, increase like the widowes Oil and Meal, by a deliberate effusion (as I have heard of a pious man, that made it his whole private office) not by giving it the number of the Romanists Rosarie, but by impressing on his own heart first, and from thence pouring out to God, the weight and full Commentarie (as far as his and
his brethrens known wants sug∣gested) of every petition. And I doubt not but it may prove like Manna in that respect also, agree∣able to every good Christians tast, and proper to his stomack, if he come now with a vigorous appetite to make use of it. 11. And if but the several articles of the Creed might be used as they were meant, to inforce on us the many great ingagements of sincere reformation, and to mind us of the mercy of the second Covenant, the merit, and example of his sufferings, and the power and blessed influence of his resurrection, &c. we should need no more outward aides (though there be innumerable still ready at hand for any that could have received benefit by those, which are now taken from us) but those which 'tis very hard for us to misse, the severall branches of our duty, very legible in the most perspicuous parcells of Scripture, the Decalogue and the Sermon in the Mount, to direct us in that way, wherein, by Gods helpe,
instantly implored, we may be secure from stumbling. 12. However, if a trusty guide may adde either to the comfort or safety of this journey, there are such now at leisure, that may be had without hire, 'tis pitty (if they may be imployed to thy benefit) they should be suffered to be idle, being indeed never more proper and profitable in any case, than in this of overlooking thy performances of this first branch of Repentance, in the duties of mortification. Sect. 3. Thirdly, Fruits of Repentance. A∣mong them, First, Perfect content∣ment: Discernible by two trials. 1. BUt for the loosing of sinners, and restoring them to the peace of the Church, the bare mor∣tification is not sufficient. The res∣cuing from the jawes or Gates of Hell doth not presently secure us of our right to Heaven. There must be the building of Houses and planting of Ortyards (saith
S. Hierome on Jer. 29.5.Tom. 4. p. 292. D.) taking Wives, and begetting of Sonnes and Daughters, Cum ex Jerusalem, i. e. Ecclesia ejecti fuerimus, When we are cast out of Jerusalem, i. e. the Church. There must be the , good workes, in the plural ( the penitential Canons usually style them,1 Tim. 5.25. the li∣ving in more than one single trade of goodnesses) and those manifest or discernible (there being in that case no rule given for the concealing, but rather publishing them) before it can be seasonable with God or profitable for us to have his discipline removed. 2. Some of these that have most peculiarity of agreeablenesse to our present condition, may not unfitly be specified. 3. First, that of a perfect con∣tentment and unfeigned submission to the good will and choises of God, with what sharpnesse soever they come mixt to us: In the words of Micha, which S. Hierome recom∣mends to him particularly,Si de congrega∣tione fratrum & domo Dei ejici∣mur—in Ezec. ca. 17. To. 4. p. 381. on whom the censures of the Church
are fallen, Mich. 7.9. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him ('tis sure we have sins enough to own this, or whatever worse thing shall happen to us) until he plead my cause and ex∣ecute judgement for me. 4. To this plenitude of chearful contentment, beside many others, one eminent motive suggests it self, by considering, that when we were so richly furnisht with variety of infamous matter, any least of which might fitly have own'd, as having most justly provoked, the fiercest of Gods revenges, and, if he had so pleased, made us doubly mi∣serable, once under the smart of his rod, and a second turn under the reproach of the scandalous sin, which it signally was directed to point out, and visit; God hath given to us () out of his special un∣deserved favour vouchsafed to us to suffer for well doing, at least not for evil doing (and that—Chrys Ep. γ Tom. 7. p. 73. l. 17. &c. —l. 21. such shall not lose its reward, the examples of Job and Lazarus will secure us) and so to bear in our bodies no o∣ther
() brands, or marks, but onely those of the Lord Jesus. This, I say, if applied, and brought home by every man to his own in∣dividual, and the foulest sins he hath at any time been guilty of, and might have been surprized in, will be found more then a contented acquiescence in Gods present choises for us, even oblige us severally (as S. Peter thought most just upon this consideration) to sanctifie the Lord God in our hearts, to magnifie the mercy, not repine at the severi∣ty of his methods toward us. 5. And for the judging of this, whether it be sincerely what it ought, it must be observed, First, Whether we have any very unkind reflections on those that are the instruments of it. Abishai that would have had Davids dis∣pleasure break out against him that cast stones at him and all his servants,2 Sam. 16.6. did not look through Davids Optick, if he had, he would have discerned what David did, that possibly the Lord had said unto him, curse David, and who shall then
say, wherefore hath he done so. It is as sure as any thing can be in the world, that God meant no real curses or mischiefes to David at this time, yet because David had sins enough, for which this, and much more might justly be permitted by God to fall upon him, and by his not withholding Shimei, 'twas evident God had thus chosen to permit it, the holy man is forward to take it as coming directly from God, and quarels nothing but the impatience of Abishai,Vers. 10. What have I to doe with you ye sonnes of Zerviah, so let him curse, because the Lord— 6. The pious man under Gods discipline hath impatience to none, but those that would have him impatient, as our Saviour, that ex∣presseth not the least displeasure to the instruments of his death, to Caiaphas, to Pilate, to the Souldi∣ers, to Iudas, to the Devil himself, doth yet rebuke Peters kindnesse that would have averted his suffe∣ring it: He is the onely Satan that would rob him of his chearful, and
joyful submission to the Fathers will, for the accomplishing of which Satan himself is but a kinde of Dis∣ciple: Judas and he do him a very acceptable service; the former is styled friend, and called upon only to make haste,John 13.27. in thus ministring unto him. 7. Secondly, the sincerity of the contentment may be judged by the quiet and stilnesse and constancy in that posture, into which God hath cast us. An uncontented minde is alwayes removing and lossing upon the bed, from one side to the other, as in a continual posture of the greatest uneasinesse: And so is he, that hath any inward regrets to the condition, that God hath placed him in, whereas the pious man can be content to wait. Chrys. Ep. . To. 7. p. 173. l. 27. God's leisure, and with steadiness of fixed eyes to look for him, till he shall please to discover his face. 8. Such indeed are wont to be times of temptation,Mat. 24.11. wherein as false Prophets are wont to arise, so they have many advantages, by the assistance whereof to deceive many,
and the greatest and most prevalent of those is the reproach of our solitude. He that is cast out will be ready to hearken to any that ten∣ders him an hospitable reception, and those that have least of reason to produce for his entring into their society, will be most forward to make use of such an advantage, which may supply the place of argument. 9. And thus an error that hath but the luck to be gotten in fashion, may by the pompe or  of many followers, probably enough get his companie, that finds himselfe left alone, and is not very well pleased with the state, and satisfied of the reasons of his solitude. 10, This therefore is the second trial of our contentment, if being cast out by men, we can satisfie our selves with Gods company (and the man that was born blinde will yeeld us a good omen in this mat∣ter; when the Jews had cast him out,John 9.3. presently Jesus heard it and found him) if being in the wilder∣nesse we be not one of those Reeds
there, which our Saviour tells us are shaken with the winde. 11. This were the way to cast our selves out indeed, and so to have that character of real Here∣ticks or Schismaticks, in S. Paul, so far as to be , condemned by our own sentence, which is much worse than to be more severely handled by other men; and nothing but the grace of God and a contemplation of his wisdom, and an acquiescence in his choices (which sees persecution fit∣ter for some servants of his, than the greatest calm or grandeur of the most prosperous profession) can secure us (if temptations choose their seasons) from being thus sha∣ken.
Sect. 4. Secondly, Peace with all men. 1. OUr second vital imployment, very fitly apportion'd to our solitude, is our ardent desires of, and Prayers for the peace of Ie∣rusalem: We know what was re∣quired of the captive Israelites, when they were carried into a strange land,Jer. 29.7. to seek the peace of that City, whither they were carried a∣way captive, & to pray to the Lord for it. And we now know, I hope, assu∣redly, whither it is that we are ba∣nished, even just thither, where we were before, into the bosome of the holy Catholick Church of Christ. 2. And therefore as those, that serve God in an Hermitage, have not thereby their thoughts confined to that narrow compasse wherein they corporally move, but intercede hourly for the most common con∣cernments of all others; so must our Oratories be now designed, like Daniels Chamber in Babylon, with our windows wide open toward Jeru∣salem,Dan. 6.10.
our devotions and bended knees (his three times a day at least) ingaged in that one great interest of all Christians, the glory, i. e. the peace and true piety of that new Ie∣rusalem, which is come down from Heaven; that like that which re∣maines there, it may be at unity within it self. 3. There cannot be a more. Basil. Hom. xxix. Tom. 1. pag. 620. amazing dismal prospect in the world, then that vast rupture and chasme betwixt the East and West (the effect of that winde, those tormina, of pride and ambition, and aerie speculation, gotten long since into the bowels of the great body, and causing this Ecclesiastical , this Earthquake first, and thence this Hiatus or aperture, which could never have the skill to close again) and then the many Subdivisions, lesser rents and fra∣ctures, which are multiplyed infi∣nitely
in this one Western part of it, a new carnificina or act of cruelty to the mystical body of Christ; first, cut asunder in the midst, and then so much life secured to each moity, as to make it capable of the Rack and Torture in every limb of it, and of continuing for ever howling and laughing at once under those torments, till at length it cannot without fits of the most phrenetick rage be besought to come out of this condition. 4. 'Tis a strange Romance, and to any that partakes but of in∣genuous nature, an incredible Fable, that the one Heir of the Othoman Familie, having possession of so great a part of the world, far greater then any other Potentate, should therein reigne a Sullen, Solitarie Tyrant, consecrated first in the blood of all his Brethren, and then thriving and prospering into a vast bulk by keeping himselfe to this one Canibal diet, (full hausts of the blood of men) receiving this tribute from his own, as well as others subjects, all his vassals living
to no other designe, but of killing and dying at his direction, and to secure them of the continuance of this trade, the Christians not deemd sufficient, his fellow Mahomedans (if they do but differ from him in the question of [who is the right successor of their great Prophet] and affirme Hali to be the man) become as unsufferable enemies, as lawfull prize, as necessarie to be invaded and overrunne with his hosts of Locusts, as any. And all this while no newes of the one designe, and business of power and dominion, distribution of justice to others or examples of it in himself: As if all the rest of the world, but he that hath the luck to strangle his brethren, were born to no other purposes, but those of the gladiators in the Roman Theatre, onely to fight and die, with their heart-blood, yea and their soules also, to minister to his ambitions, or rages, or frantick devotions; paid to his Sanguinarie Prophet, to passe through the fire to this Moloch, to run like mad dogges through the
world, sowing death, wheresoever they come, till at last they fall themselves. 5. And for all this there is certainly no other account to be given, but that the Dragon, the old Serpent, the Divel and Satan being according to prediction let loose for a time, this their Epileptick prophet was pitcht on for his General, entertain'd, and inspired by him, to prescribe this course for the prosperous managing of those battells, which are mentioned Rev. 20.8. And accordingly it hath succeeded. 6. But that in the Politie of Christ, that real Theocratie, where∣in God personally and visibly descended to settle (and to preside in) it himself, the fundamentals whereof were laid in a grand pacification betwixt earth and heaven, the Statute-lawes first and last (the Old and the New Com∣mandment) the very same, for our loving one another, and the whole body or Codex most exactly con∣formable; first peace, then mercy,
then patience, and long suffering, then bowells of compassion, loving and laying down the life, a tribute of that love, extending to affections, to actions, toward brethren, toward strangers, towards enemies, both our own, and Gods enemies, toward heathens, toward all mankind, never projecting other contentions or victories, but that one of abounding in goodness, and overcoming evill with good: That, I say, in a Go∣vernment thus establisht upon such principles and by such rules as these, there should yet be so much of the contrarie temper, nothing but warres and fightings among Christi∣ans, eternal feuds among children of peace, that the whole host of Angels of light should transform themselves into legions of darkness; that the Mahomedan, that is other∣wise impregnable, should be onely thus conquered by the Christian, that this hath more warres a mana∣ging than he, and those warres more cruell, reaching to the Soul, anathematizing of brethren, casting out the Greek Church, the whole
East, for Heretickes, upon no other quarel, but the Filioque; and a great part of the West (without pretence of any word in the Old Creeds) for not accepting the Trent Articles, or differing with them about their one Monarchick Successor of our great Prophet: That all Religion should be placed in the beliefe of those doctrines, which if they were true, are no least part of the Christian Faith: That all those things, whereon certainly our eternal state depends, Iudgment, and Mercy, and Faith, should, by consent of parties, be left out of the Scheme; little or none of our zeal laid out on them, or for them, but all mis-spent on that, which is not bread, that brings no vital nourishment to any. Lastly, That those that rebuke Tyrannie, and bitterness in others, under no meaner a charge than that of Antichristianisme, should out-goe all these patternes themselves, pro∣claim libertie to the Captive, to get the crosse off from their own shoulders; and when they have
done so, inslave, and bind it fast on the shoulders of all others, and (after all these contradictions both to Religion, and reason, and but ingenuous nature, to the goodness and joyfullness of brethrens living together in unity) men that are guilty of all these, proclaim God the inspirer or favourer of all, transform the Prince of peace into the Inciter, or friend of Confusion: These are a whole Chaos of prodigies, a Landskip of wilde ap∣pearances, above all that the African Merchants, or Scriptores Mirabilium have ever furnisht us with, and yet make up but a part of those Monsters and fish heads, which adorn our Maps of Europe at this day. 7. And then what Armies of Vo∣taries can be sufficient to keep off that wrath of God, that threatens no lesse than all Christendome, for that one unchristian piece of her temper; what Floods and Rivers of teares, to slake the rage of this one sin, which is more probable, than all the powers of darknesse be∣side,
to bring it low to the , which yet we have assurance shall never wholly prevail against it. 8. How can we at such a vacan∣cy as this, be more profitably im∣ployed, then in learning and practi∣sing our postures in this sacred Mi∣litia, in wrestling and combating with Heaven for this one blessing, this comprehensive donative, this grace beyond all other graces (1 Cor. 13.13. the greatest of these is charity) this duty above all other duties (1 Pet. 4.8. above all things have fervent charity among your selves) this utmost pitch of ce∣lestial joy, this Divinity it self (God is love, and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him) the blessing of Catholick unity, uni∣versal peace; and with Iacob never give over the combat, till we have prevailed with God for this bles∣sing. A Form of Prayer to this purpose the Reader will finde at the end of the Treatise of Fundamen∣tals.
9. And that it may not be , in Hierocles, or Mu∣liebre supplicium, inSalust. Portius Cato, an unactive prayer, or Womanish sup∣plication, that our hearts and hands, our utmost endeavours may herein be semblable to our tongues and prayers, 'tis very much our duty first to cleanse our own hearts from every degree of this pollution, not to leave alive in us one animosity either to any Person, or Society, or portion of Christians in the world, to resolve with the Fathers in their dealing with the Donatists, that those shall be our brethren, which will not admit us to be their bre∣thren, and according to this begin∣ning, to set out industriously, and indefatigably, in the wayes of peace, every man to contribute his Sym∣bolum toward so good a work, and every man, as God shall enable him, to do it freely and cheerfully (for in nothing more then in this doth God love the chearful giver.) 10. And would we but take the Apostles counsel herein, Thess. 4.11. , be as emulous
and ambitious, and as zealously sol∣licitous in our contention for quiet (i. e. never contend with any but the implacable and unreconcileable) as the most passionate broiler or boutefeu is wont to be for his  his beloved strife and con∣tention, that brings him in no other reward but blowes and woe, a Tophet here, and a Hell hereafter, I should not doubt but some valuable con∣tribution might be made to this sacred treasurie at this time by the poore widow Church of England, with her few mites: which if they cannot hope for thanks from men, have yet a full assurance of being not despised nor unrewarded by him, who still sits looking what is cast into the treasurie.
Sect. 5. Thirdly, Frequency of Synaxes. 1. IT is not my purpose to E∣numerate all the several parts of duty, which this Season exacts from us. Yet one must not be omitted, which in such times the Apostle very diligently warnes us of, that of the , not giving over the assembling our selves together,Heb. 10.25. as oft as we can gain opportunities for them, holding up the Synaxes, how thin soever they are fain to be. 2. And this in reason now more zealously and. Ignat. Ep. ad Ephes. . Chrysost. Ep. . T. 7. p. 172. l. 20. . Id. Ep. . p. 180. l. 15. Sic & Ep. . p. 186. li. 3. There is nothing fitter for suffering Church∣mens turns, then those Epistles of S. Chrysostome to Olympias and others, to be meditated on, for the fort-fying of themselves, and for their direction and consolation. frequently then ever, for that I conceive some part of the designe and importance of the Apostles addition there, , but calling upon one
another, minding of the necessity and benefit of this duty. And though the insuing [, by so much the more] be there expressy founded on the approach of their ex∣pected deliverance, yet among the Primitive Christians the continu∣al expectations of their dangers ap∣pears to have had the same effect, putting them upon their constant,In periculo—Grex omnis in unum congregetur—ut quos exci∣tamus ad praelium, non inermes & nudos relinquamus, sed prote∣ctione sanguinis & corporis Christi muniamus—Cypr. Ep. 54. Quotidie calicem sanguinis Christi bibere, ut possiunt et ipsi prop∣ter Christum sanguinem fundere. Id. Ep 50. daily Synaxes, as not knowing how long they should live to enjoy them. 3. The quality of the sin, and the judgment that is there threa∣tened to those that voluntarily neglect such opportunities, is very
considerable. It is there, First, set opposite to holding fast the profession of our hope v. 23. and so is it self a degree of renouncing the Christi∣ans Anchor, a wavering (as is im∣plyed in the , ver. 23.) and a drawing back, ver. 39. and that noted to be very dangerous and destrustive. And accordingly we see inAffirmabant hanc fuisse summam culpae suae, quod essent soliti stato die ante lucem convenire—quod ipsum facere desiissent post edictum meum, quo secundum mandata tua hetaerias esse vetue∣ram—Dilata cognitione ad consulendum te decurri. Plin. l. 10. p. 97. Pliny, that they, who quitted the Hetaeriae upon the Em∣perours prohibitions, were by the Heathen Inquisitors thought capa∣ble of mercy, as well as they that denyed Christ. Secondly, It is there included in the number of the , the voluntarie or willfull sins, in them (I must suppose he meant) who having the opportunities, whe∣ther more or lesse publick, wholly withdrew from them. Thirdly, It goes for an , ver. 27. a branch of secret contrariety to God and piety, a preferring the world
before either. Fourthly, 'Tis of the nature of those sins for which there remaines no sacrifice, and hath its part in those other aggravations, and fearfull expectations that there follow in that text. 4. The obligation that the Primitive Christians conceived themselves under, in this respect, is visible by the frequent mention of those Hetariae, and Antelucani Conventus, and Cryptae Arenariae, meetings in upper roomes, in suburbs, in prisons—in times of the Heathen persecutors. And so also when Heresie, or Schisme prevailed, and drave the Orthodox Obedient main∣tainers of Catholick Truth and peace, out of the Churches. For though in these cases they abstained from the publick assemblies, and indeed thought it strict duty to do so;, &c. Tom. 2. Ep 69. p. 698. See al∣so Baronius, An. Ch. 370. n. 20. from some additions to S. Ba∣sil, Ep. 11. Malè vos parietum amor cepit, malè Ecclesiam Dei in tectis aedificiis{que} veneramini, malè sub his pacis nomen inge∣ritis—Hilar. contr. Arian. & Auxent. in fine, Edit. Basil. p. 216. (The Epistle of S. Basil and others to the Bishops in Italy,
and France, and S. Hilaries disswasives in the former, that of prosperous Haeresie, and the practice ofVide Georg. Alexandin. vit. Chrysost. Eton. Edit. Tom. viii. p. 239. l. 15. &c. & p. 241. l. 13. &c. Et Chrysost. Epist. . Tom. vii p. 139 l. 1. &c. Et Ep. . p. 170. li. 44. Et Ep. . p. 185. li. 8. Holy men in the case of S. Chrysostomes deposition, doth, for the latter, make that clear) yet the assembling of the Orthodox, and the moreMontes mihi, & sylvae, & lacus, & carceres, & voragines sunt tutiores. In his enim prophetae aut manentes aut det usi, Dei spiritu prephetabant. Hilar. Ibid. p. 217. , &c. Chrysost. Ep.  To. 7. p. 190. li. 35. . Basil. Ep. 69 Ibid. private offices were not to be neglected. AndCaute hoc, & non glomeratim. nec per multitudinem simul junctam puto esse faciendum, ne ex hoc ipso invidia concitetur, & intrecundi aditus denegetur, & dum insatiabiles volumus esse, totum perdamus. Consulite ergo & providete, ut cum tempera∣mento hoc agi tutius possit. Ep. 5. S. Cyprian, that advises the prudent and cautious managerie of such, doth it expressely on this designe, that they might be more sure not to be kept from them.
5. Ecclesiastical History is full of this kinde of matter; take one for all set down byEccl. Hist. l. 7. . Eusebius from the Epistles of Dionysius concern∣ing the persecution in Valerians time, and. Ibid. . Aemylianus's Ed ct, and the—Iibd. Christians constant practice. 6. The sum of it is, That the Assemblies were never intermitted, but observed , the more diligently and industriously, and God gave his blessing to it, a greater liberty than they had reason to looke for, , and many. Ibid. Advantageous opportunities to glorifie God under their restraint, many alienes brought home to heaven by these means.
7. The same Good will of him that dwelleth in the (burning but not consuming) Bush, whose power doth so presentiate it selfe to them that are in afflictions, that it is said1 Cor. 12.9.  to pitch the Tent, to dwell, as. Iohn 1.14. Christ did by his in∣carnation, upon or among such, as are thus tempted, inspire and inflame with the same pure zeal, and crown with the like successes, all that are now so neerly concern'd to tran∣scribe their copie, to receive benefit by this exhortatory. Now the God of all grace who hath called us into his eternal glorie by Christ Iesus, after that ye have suffered a while,: him∣self restore you, stablish, strengthen, settle you. Zeph. 3.28. I will gather them that are sorrowful for the solemn Assembly, who are of thee, to whom the reproach of it was a burthen. The End.
Errata. Pag. 19. lin. 13. r.  l. 21. r. mundi, dicens, p. 22. marg. l. 2. r.  p. 25. l. 4. r. through. l. 7. r. reserved. p. 35. l. 14. r. this p. 44. l. 17. r. life) p. 52. l. 20. r. this space p. 59. marg. l. 9. r.  p. 68. l. 20. r. fide; The p. 72. marg. l. 2. r.  p. 85. l. 19. r. so, as p. 88. marg. l. 2. r. in ea p. 90. l. 23. after Provincial dele, p. 91. l. 16. r. where, upon p. 94. marg. l. 4. r. cole∣batur p. 96. l. 17. to Pope Gr. adde in marg. l. 1. Ep. 24. l. 21 to others set in marg. uidas, &c. to anathematizeth set in marg. See Baron. &c. p. 97. l. 8. r. wrote, (for saith he, l. 18. r. several Churches p. 99 marg. l. 9. r. & sequenda est. p. 105. l. 7. r. till marg. l. 2. r. praeconio p. 106. marg. l. 6. r.  p. 107. l. 7. r.  l. 9. r.  p. 108. l. 12. r. of this seventh Councell p. 112. marg. l. 3. r. circumfe∣runtur p. 115. marg. l. 3. r. scripturarum p. 118. l. 6. r. co∣litur & adoratur p. 120. l. 5. r. fuisse p. 123. l. 25. dele 124 p. 135. marg. l. 7. r. habens l. 23. r. many p. 136. marg. l. 3. r. paulum l. 14. r. clavum fixisse p. 155. marg. l 9. adde * Sect. 8. n. 10. l. 10. adde ‖ De Syn. p. 873 p. 162. l. 9. r. or the p. 194. l. 6. r.  p. 196. l. 5. r. account, p. 198. l. 1. r. agones. p. 204. l. 24. r. every p. 214. l. 8. r. will found Pag. 125. lin. 28 after the word those r. Bishops, in opposition to those.
Books written by H. Hammond, D. D. A Paraphrase and Annotations upon all the Books of the New. Test. by Hammond D. D. in Fol. 2. The Practical Catechism with all other English Treatises of H. Hammond D. D. in two volumes in 4. 3. Dissertationes quatuor, quibus Episcopatus Jura ex S. Scrip∣turis & primaeva Antiquitate adstruuntur, contra sententiam D. Blondelli & aliorum. Authere H. Hammond, in 4. 4. A Letter of Resosution of six Queries, in 12. 5. Of Schism. A defence of the Church of England, against the exceptions of the Romanists, in 12. 6. Of Fundamentals in a notion referring to practice, by H. Hammond D. D. in 12. 7. Six books of late Controversie in defence of the Church of England, in two volumes in 4. newly published. The names of several Treatises and Sermons written by Ier. Taylor D. D. 1. , Course of Sermons for all the Sundayes in the year, together with a Discourse of the Divine Instituti∣on, Necessity and Separation of the Office Ministerial, in Fol. 2. Episcopacy asserted, in 4. 3. The History of the Life and Death of the ever blessed Jesus Christ, 2. Edit. in Fol. 4. The Liberty of Prophesying in 4. 5. An Apologie for authorised and set-forms of Liturgie, in 4.
6. A discourse of Baptism, its institution and efficacie upon all Beleevers, in 4. 7. The Rule and Exercises of holy living, in 12. 8. The Rule and Exercises of holy dying, in 12. 9. A short Catechism for institution of young persons in the Christian Religion, in 12. 10. A short institution of Grammar composed for young Scholars in 8. 11. The Real Presence and spiritual of CHRIST in the Blessed Sacrament proved against the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, in 8. 12. The Golden Grove, or, A Manual of daily Prayers fit∣ted to the daies of the week, together with a short Me∣thod of Peace and Holiness. 13. The Doctrin and practise of repentance rescued from Popular Errors, in a large 8. Newly published. London Printed for R. Royston at the Angel in Ivie-Lane.
