i30 e296_3 99861005 113132
The Great Turkes LETTER, SENT VNTO THE PRINCE OF TRANSILƲANIA. Containing many impious, and un∣heard of Blasphemies, against our Savi∣our CHRIST; and fearefull threatnings against all Christendome. Translated out of the French Copy Printed in PARIS. And Re-printed here according to Order. LONDON, Printed by T. FORCET, 1645.
IBRAHIM the Sonne of the most famous, and most re∣nouned of the Empe∣rours, Son of GOD, Emperor of the Turks, of Greece, Ma∣cedonia, and Moldavia; King in Sa∣maria, Anglian, and of the Great and little Egypt, King of all the Inhabi∣tants of the Earth, and of the earthly Paradice, a Consecrated Prince, preser∣ver of the Cities of Hungaria, Provost of the earthly Paradice, Keeper of the Sepulcher of thy God, Lord of all the
Emperours in this World, who are from the East to the West, King of all Kings, Lord of the Tree of life, Conquerour of Melonia, Anglian, Of the City of Por∣cheviz. Great Persecuter of the Chri∣stians, and of all the wicked, the joy of the flourishing Tree. Provost, and Keeper of thy Crucified God; The Lord and hopes of the Pagans. LET Our Greeting be given to the Prince of Transilvania, if thou doest desire it: & if thou art our friend, and of our Magistrate also, unto whom we have given great Power. Thou hast a while since violated, and persecuted Our friendship; though we have given thee no cause thereof; neither by Warre, nor by Battell: So that thou hast taken a secret counsell with other Kings and thy Counsellors, to free thee from our Power: in which thou hast done indiscreetly. And
therefore, Thou, and thy people ought to feare, & must expect nothing else, but death, which thou hast prepared unto thy selfe. For, I tell thee, that I will get a victory upon thee, & pursue thee from the East to the West, and I will make my Majestie knovvn as fart as the end of the World. My designes shall be manifested unto thee, to thy owne ill for∣tune: Which I let thee know, and I will have thee to acknowledge my great Power. And forasmuch as thou puttest thy trust in some Townes, and Castles, I will destroy, & ruinat all thou canst behold with thy eyes: and it is in vaine for thee, either to expect any more amitie from Us, or to put any con∣fidence in thy Walles. For I will destroy thee with thy owne people without any hin∣derance I will plunder thee, and leave a me∣morie of my bloudy sword after me in the Countrey. That this thing may be known, and manifested to every one. I will moreover plant my owne Religion effectually therein, and destroy for ever thy Crucified God: whose wrath I feare not, and he cannot afloord you
any succour to free you from my hands. I will besides this couple thy Sacred Priests to Plowes: and make Dogs, and the wild beasts to sucke the breasts of women. Thou shalt doe well and wisely to leave the Reli∣gion thou hast; For, othervvise, I vvill have you all burnt. Be thou satisfied vvith vvhat I say unto thee for this time. Thou maist un∣derstand me (if thou vvilt) so far as I declare thee my Word, and intent against thee. Jbrahim, Hottoman, Trapetan. THese words ought to make us tremble: no, not tremble, but encourage us: not encourage us, but provoke our just wrath, to avenge the outrage and injury done to God, and his Son Iesus Christ our Savi∣our; by that Barbarian, who scornes Christs power, and seemes to challenge him to a combte. Shall we not be stirred through the example of our Prede∣cessours? That Gyant, that Goliah, is already at the gates of Transilvania, to passe from thence into Hun∣garia. He is in person, and hath sent his Army out of An∣drinopolis, to thunder upon his neighbours. What hopes can Germany have, when hee hath conquered those Countries? And who doubteth, but that hee will fall upon us, if Germany be once reduced under
his power? But one may say, that he hath great and vaste Countries to gaine, before he can come so farre. But shall we not take pitie of our brethren that are Christians? Shall we be so base as to let that Infidel in∣vade the Empire of the west, as he hath done that of the East? Shall our hearts be so frozen, as not to bee kindled with the zeale of avenging the injurie done to the Divine Majestie of God? Shall wee leave so shamfull a memory of us unto Posterity, as that they may accuse us, That wee were not able to keepe the deposite, which our Ancestors had left us? Let us then die like Christians, Let us spend our lives for the defence of his cause that dyed for us. God will di∣rect our hands in the day of battell, and will make our Armies to prosper: So that one shall pursue ten, ten an hundred, an hundred a thousand, and a thou∣sand shall pursue ten thousand. You may have read in my Exchange Intelligencer, that the Grand Signor had a designe upon the Isle of Maltha: but I have not as yet related unto you the occasion, which had moved him to entertaine such a designe. I will impart it unto you now. There was a Russia Gentlewoman, who did waite upon one of the Grand Signors Sultanesse of a rare beauty, and of extraordinary parts. He fell in love with the Gentlewoman, and got a sonne by her. The Sultaness grew Jealous, for the extraordinary favours the Russia Gentlewoman did receive from the Grand Signor, and above all the rest her owne Mistrisse. So that they did all conspire against her life, and did give her Poyson: which being not strong enough could
not make so soone an end of her, as they did expect. The Grand Signor took the Gentlewomans languish∣ing sicknesse unto heart: and was exceedingly grieved to see that her young Babe was in danger of his life as well as the Mother. Hee therefore sent them in Pilgrigmage unto Mequa, to his false Prophets Tombe, both to be healed, and the Child to be Cir∣cumcised there. The Knights of Maltha mett with them upon the Sea, whilest they were a going to Mahumets Sepulchre, tooke and carried them both Prisoners into Maltha. Whereupon, the Grand Signor demanded Counsell of his Mufty, or high Priests, to know what hee was to doe in that busi∣nesse. The Mufty, who doe alwaies give his Coun∣sels and Answers, according as he knowes which way the Grand Signor is inclined. Counselled him, that since his Love, and his Sonne were taken by the Maltesi, in an Hostile way, he was to set them at li∣berty by force of Armes. We that are Christians, doe use to pay a ransome for our brethren; to redeem them from under the Turkish slavery. FINIS.
