I41 E132_23 99870108 156368
IGNATIVS HIS PROPHECIE Concerning these Times. Sent from France where it was prophecied 159. into England and found in the Abby of St Benedict neere the City of Norwich in Norfolke. Containing the Praedivination concerning the various Distempes and Divisions of this Kingdome, which was in this Prophecie prae∣dictated, and now perfectly fulfilled. Expressing likewise every thing that should succeed betweene the Reigne of Queene Elizabeth, unto King Charles now Reig∣ning, concerning the Crowne and Royall Empire. LONDON, Printed for IOHN GREENSMITH, 1642.
IGNATIUS HIS PROPHECIE Concerning these Times. THe Inundation of Heresie which is harbred in the breasts of the Schismaticks in our days deserve a second Cicero to exclaim against the same. But the praeposterous tumult in our Age re∣quires not onely a Prophet, to praedictate the sub∣sequent verity, and predetermination of the errours which we are fallen in, but also to elevate us from that sinck of impiety wherein we are now fallen. As for that Prophecy, which I am at this time to describe, it is apparently demonstrated what should follow in after times, and now it is most truly per∣fected, and really come to passe, all that was prophe∣cied. Prophecy is the key of heaven, that opens the mysticall doore of those secrets, which none but God himselfe hath praedestinated. Prophecy is the Toer of humane knowledge, that defends morta∣lity, and preserveth Kingdomes from destructive ru∣ine Prphecy is a divine inspiration, that discloseth the mystery of heavenly things, determined to bee
acted on earth, suggested by the divine providence of God. When the prophet Jonah related the pro∣phecy of God to the City of Nineve, it repented, and God turned away the indignation of his spirit, and his predetermined resolution. And would to God this famous and tenowned City would exactly consider this prophecy which is here mentioned: most part whereof is already fullfilled, and therfore I am more suspitious, that all the subsequent will likewise hereafer come to passe. My resolution was once fully intended to make an apparent exposition of the same: but now my resolution is altered, in respect that some things are intended of persons, be¦ing of higher Majesty, and greater Dignity, then I dare presume to gaze upon: wherefore I will com∣mend the mythologie, and apologization thereof to the Censure of better judgments. The Prophecie. IF Eighty eight be past, then thrive Thou mayst, till thirty foure, or five. After the E is dead, a Scot Shall governe there: and if a plot prevent him not, sure then his sway Continue shall till many a day. The ninth shall dye young, and the first perhaps shall reigne: but (oh) accurst Shall be the time, when thou shalt see To sixteene joyned twenty three; For then the Eagle should have helpe By Craft to catch the Lyons whelpe, And hurt him sore; except the same Be cured by the Maidens name.
In Iuly moneth of the same yeere Saturne conjoynes with Iupiter. perhaps false prophets shall arise, And Mahomet shall shew his prize. And sure much alteration Shall happen in Religion. Beleeve this truely, if then you see. A Spanyard a Protestant to bee The lines (I confesse impartially) are very my∣sterious, and withall they are involved in a stupen∣dious obscurity. They seeme as aenigmaticall, as Sphynk his hidden Riddle, yet J doubt not but that your judicous minds will prove as auspicuous vnto this, as Oedipus did to his. You may enucleate the genuine sence, and signi∣fication of the words, if yov doe but seriously re∣volve them. When the formidable Armado was dissipated in 88. this Kingdome did flourish a long time in peace and prosperous tranquillity, unto one thousand sixe hundred and thirty foure or five: After Queene Elizabeth dyed, King James came out of Scotland, and inherited the Imperiall Crowne after her. A plot all men know was most nefariously hatched in his Reigne, to wit, the Gunpowder trea∣son: which not preventing him, hee swayed the Scepter very peacefully in a great succession of fu∣ture time.
Prince Henry the 9. of that name dyed young, & King Charles the first of that name reigned next in Majesty (whom God long preserve, and protect from the wicked Plots of his enemies.) The beginning of these perillous times, begin in 1639. The next 4 verses I will la  to the exposition of the Reader hereof. The Philosophers have given their unite a stipu∣lation, & withall the Astrologians have affirmed in their solid assertions, that when Saturne hath any coniuction with Iupiter, great wars and bloudy times shall ensue, and I am sure their opinions have not proved fallible in this respect. Many false Prophets are now risen amongst us, and doe prophecy false things to the people, who dare presume to preach in Tubs to their schismaticall Auditors: whom they delude and suggest vaine imaginatios unto them, that they are sent from heaven, and have the spirit of God, when they have nothing but the spirit of error and falshood. Mahomet hath shewne indeed his prize sufficiently amongst us, for too many (I suppose) in our times rather Mahometans, then true Christians. The alteration of Religion hath bin very great, and tossed too and fro by the various wind of every ones opinion. The last two verses I refer to the judgment of the Reader: for I will nominate no man particularly. This prophecy is stupendious, and as it includes a mistry, so it includes verity withall: as by the former it is involved in obscurity, so by the latter it is illuminated in apparent Truth.
The demonstration of prophetick divination, praedictates the future estate of a Kingdome, and whatsoever hath bin expressed in this lately menti∣oned, is already fullfilled in exemplary relations. But the distracted opinions of most men are still so promiscuous, that we want Prophets enough to exclaime against them; for some they will not heare, others they neglect, others they in a despica∣ble detestation doe contemne. But God of his infinite mercy grant, that we may hereafter all make true use of the sincere prophecy of him, and his holy Gospell, that these various mists of errors may be expelled, these roaring waves of Schisme may be calmed, and the distem∣pers of the whole Realme cured perfectly. FINIS.
