L2826 E764_6 99866176 167148
THE PROCEEDINGS OBSERVED In Order to, and in the Consecration OF THE Twelve Bishops, AT St. PATRICKS CHURCH, DUBLIN On Sunday the 27. of January 1660. Being an Account given by Dr. Dudley Loftus, Vicar General for the Kingdom of Ireland. LONDON, Printed by J. C. for John Crook, at the Ship in in St. Pauls Church-Yard. 1661.
The Proceedings observed in order to, and in the Con∣secration of the Twelve Bishops, at St. Patricks Church Dublin, on Sunday the 27. Jan. 1660. THe Lord Primate his Grace being desirous to cele∣brate the said Consecration, as Decency and the Dignity of so holy an Office did require, was pleased to give Order unto Dudley Loftus, Doctor of the Laws, and Vicar General, to cause Notice to be given unto the said Twelve Bishops Elect, viz. James Mar∣getson, Doctor in Divinity, Archbishop Elect of Dublin; Samuel Pullein, Doctor in Divinity, and Archbishop Elect of Tuam; Michael Boyle, late Dean of Cork, Doctor in Divinity, and Bishop Elect of Cork; Jeremiah Tayler, Doctor in Divinity, and Bishop Elect of Down; Robert Pryce, Doctor of the Laws, and Bishop Elect of Fearnes and Laughlin; George Wilde, Doctor of the Laws, and Bishop Elect of Derry; Edward Sing, Doctor in Divinity, and Bishop Elect of Limerick; John Parker, late Dean of Killalowe, Doctor in Divinity, and Bishop Elect of Elphin; Henry Hall Doctor in Divinity, and Bishop Elect of Killalla, and Aghconry; George Baker, Doctor in Divinity, and Bishop E∣lect of Waterford; Robert Lesly, Doctor in Divinity, and Bishop Elect of Drumore; Edward Worth, Doctor in Divinity, and Bishop Elect of Killalowe; that they should attend his grace, and the other Bishops, Consecraters, Viz. The Bishop of Raphoe, the Bishop of Ossory, and the Bishop of Kilmore, for they only did impose hands, the Bishop of Clogher, according to his desire then holding, and presenting the Bible to the
Lord Primate, he being the Junior of all the then Bishops, at seven of the Clock of the Morning, of the said Day, in their Albs and Caps, at the Dean of Christ Church his House, as also to the other Bishops, Consecraters, that they should re∣pair thither at the same time and place in their Corner'd Caps, Rochets, and Chimers, which they all did respectively. Doctor Masson, and Doctor Fuller, Deans of the two Ca∣thedrals, also upon the like notice given unto them, repaired thither in their formalities. Likewise all other the Dignitaries, Prebendaries, Canons, Petit Canons, Vicars Choralls, and Choristers of the said two Churches, attended in their formalities then and there, as they were directed. The Pro-Vice-Chancellour also of the University, all Doctors of Divinity, and of Law, Baccalours of Divinity, as also all other inferiour Graduats, by the like direction and no∣tice given, attended at, and near the West gate of Christ Church in their Gownes and Formalities to their respective de∣grees and Offices appertaining. The Order of proceeding was as followeth. The Mayor and Aldermen in Scarlet, with the Sheriffs and Common Councill of the City in their respective habits. The General Convention of Ireland led by their Speaker, Sir William Dumvill, having the Mace carried before him, both which were so desirous to shew their respect to the Bishops, as they voluntarily gave their presence to the whole solemnity without any the least invitation. The Pursuivant of the Court of Praerogative, and Appari∣tor, General, bare-headed. The Virgers of the said two Cathedralls also bare-headed. The Choristers two and two, and the rest of the Procedents also in order two and two as followeth.
Vicars Choralls. Petit Canons: Prebendaries. Dignitaries. The said two Deans. The Bishops Elect in their Albs; the Junior pre∣ceeding. The Lord Primates Gent. Ʋsher and Secretary bare-headed. The Lord Primate. The other Bishops Consecraters two and two. The Beadle of the Ʋniversity. Dr. Loftus sustaining the Office of Vicar General, and Pro-Chancellour of the Ʋniversity. Deans Doctors, &c. The above said orders proceeded with a silent solemn, and slow paced gravity, untill the time of entrance into the West Gate of St. Patricks Church, when the Vicars and Choristers did proceed singing into the Quire and there continued singing, the Te Deum, accompanied with the Organ untill the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, and the rest of the principal Procedents were placed and setled in their respective Stalls and Seats, and the Vicar General, had placed the Deans, Doctors of Divinity, and others of the principal Clergy in order on each side of the inclosure from the first assent, toward the Altar unto the East end. The Office of Common Prayer was then Celebrated by the Dean of the said Church, &c. Which ended, Dr. Jeremiah Taylor, Lord Bishop Elect of Down designed to preach the
Concio ad Clerum did ascend the Pulpit, during the singing of the praeveni nobis. After the said Bishop of Down had ended his Sermon he was conveyed by the Virger to his Stall. Upon his Lordships descent from the Pulpit an Anthem was sung. At the end of that Anthem the voice of the Organ was heard, and continued untill the Lord Primate, and the other Bishops, who were to consecrate, ascended unto the inclosure within the Rayles, and somewhat longer, untill the noise occasioned by the usual motion of the People from their places after Sermon did cease. After the Primate, and the Bishops Consecraters were seated in their Chairs, and the sound of the Organs continuing, the Vicar General as sent by the Lord Primate, went to the Lords Elect, sitting in their Stalls, and so with the Dean of St. Patricks, did conduct their Lordships to the said inclosure, and there ranged them in their order, according as direction was be∣fore given by the Primate. Then the Office of Consecration was celebrated according to the Canon of that Office, which ended, the Anthem to that purpose composed by the Dean of S. Patricks called Quum denuo exaltavit Dominus Coronam, was sung as it here followeth. Anthem after the Consecration Treble. NOw that the Lord hath re-advanc'd the Crown; Which Thirst of Spoyl, & frantick zeal threw down: Tenor. Now that the Lord the Miter hath restor'd Which, with the Crown, lay in the dust ahhor'd:
Treble. Praise him ye Kings, Tenor. Praise him ye Priests, Chor. All Sing, Glory to Christ, our High Priest, Highest King. Treble. May Judah's Royal Scepter still shine clear! Tenor. May Aarons Holy Rod still Blossoms bear! Treble and Tenor. Scepter and Rod, Rule still, and Guide our Land! And These whom God Anoints, feel no Rude hand, May Love, Peace, Plenty wait on Throne and Chair, And may both share in Blessings, as in Care. Chorus. Angels look down, and Joy to see Like that above, a Monarchie. Angels look down, and Joy to see Like that above, an Hierarchie. During the time Veni Creator was in singing, the Bishops to be Consecrated, had their Rochets and Chimers put on, which done, and the consecration ended, the said Anthem Quum denuo, &c. was lung, then the Communion followed with a solemn Offertory, and after the Communion the Blessing was pronoun∣ced by the Lord Primate. After the Consecration ended, the whole Procession did at∣tend the Primate to his lodging.
The Laetificetur cor Regis was sung before the Lord Primate as he went from the Quire to the outward gate of the Church. In the return of his grace from Church the Procession was al∣tered, that the new Consecrated Arch-bishops and Bishops were disposed with the other Bishops Consecraters according to the respective dignities of their Sees, quality and seniority of Con∣secrations. It is not to be forgotten that the Lords, Justices and Councill, and all the Nobility in the City were present at the solemnity. It is also worth observation, that though the multitude of people in the streets, who came to behold the passing to the Church seemed to be so great as to deny Rome for a regular and solemn proceeding, yet so much respect did they shew, as that they did with an extraordinary reverence open so wide a passage for the intire proceeding, that there was no interruption given from first to last, nor any noise heard in the streats, save that of Eulogies and Benediction from the people of all sorts to the Lord Primate, &c. all the way. The Bishop of Downes Sermon was such as gave great and ge∣neral satisfaction, being elegantly, religiously, and prudently com∣posed, and so convincingly satisfying the judgments of those who have opposed the order and jurisdiction of Episcopacy, as that the Lords, Justices, the Lord Primate, and the general Convention have all of them severally ordered and desired the speedy im∣pression thereof, which is the cause that no more shall be said in this place of Commendation, it being so soon to appear in the lustre of its own excellency. FINIS
