M797 E359_3 99861713 113855
Die Jovis 29 Octob. 1646. ORdered by the Lords in Parlia∣ment Assembled, That Mr. Mar∣shall, one of the Assembly of Divines, is hereby Thanked for his great paines ta∣ken in his Sermon the last Fast, Preached before the Lords of Parliament, in the Abbey Church Westminster: And he is hereby desired to Print and Publish the same; which is to bee Printed onely by Authority under his own Hand. Joh. Browne Cler. Parliamentorum. I doe hereby appoint Stephen Bowtell to Print my Sermon. Stephen Marshall.
A Tvvo-edged Svvord OUT OF THE MOVTH OF BABES, TO Execute vengeance upon the Enemy and Avenger. Presented in a Sermon to the Right Honou∣rable the House of Lords assembled in Parliament, in the Abbey-Church at Westminster, Octob. 28. 1646. the solemn day of their Monthly FAST. By STEPHEN MARSHALL B. D. Minister of Gods Word at Finchingfield in Essex. Esa; 41. 14, 15. Feare not thou Worme Jacob, thou shalt thresh the Moun∣taines, and beat them to dust. Jer 31. 22. The Lord hath created a new thing in the earth, a Woman shall compasse a Man. Revel. 11. 5. If any man will hurt them, fire proceedeth out of their mouth and devoureth their enemies. London, Printed by R. Cotes for Stephen Bowtell, at the Bible in Popes-head-alley, 1646.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE THE LORDS Assembled in Parliament. Right Honorable, THis Sermon published by your Order, holds out an instance of what St. Paul preached 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28. God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to con∣found the wise; the weake things of the world to confound the things which are mighty; and base things of the world, and things which are despised hath God chosen; yea, and things which are not, to bring to nought things that are.1 Cor. 1. 27, 28. What Creature so simple, weake, or base as a Worme, a crea∣ture which no man values, loves, or feares? yet here's a worme beats great Mountaines to dust, and makes the hills as chaffe. What so shiftlesse and unable to de∣fend it selfe, or offend an Enemy, as a Babe or Suck∣ling? yet behold here are Babes and Sucklings quelling and destroying the strongest enemies, even the Enemy and Avenger. Your eares have not onely heard these things preached, but your eyes do see them fulfilled in this our day: O that these things might perswade your hearts of these Two things; 1 That
it is better, more excellent and honourable to be one of Christs Babes, one of his weake, simple, and despised ones, then to bee one of the Zanzummims, the Nim∣rods, or men of renowne of the world. 2 That the greatest support and strength to Families, Cities, or Kingdomes, proceeds out of the mouth of these Babes, that their hearts and tongues can doe more then an host of Men. The first would make you with Theo∣dosius, rejoyce more in being the meanest Christian, then in being the greatest earthly Potentate. The latter would provoke you both to plant the Kingdome with faithful Ministers, who are Fathers to beget these Babes unto Christ; and to encourage and cherish the godly party of this Kingdom, who with Mordecai will seek the wealth of the Kingdom, and as so many shields under God, defend this Nation against all its enemies, These Innocents will deliver the Iland, and it shal be delivered by the pureness of their hands;Job 22. 30. Yea it would provoke you to get such about you, and with David,Psal. 101. 6. make your eyes set upon the faithfull of the Land, that they may dwel with you, and serve you, and conclude that you and your Family shall be blessed in them. My Lords, I beseech you let this bee your choice, it is the earnest prayer of Your Honours most obliged Servant, STEPHEN MARSHALL.
A SERMON PREACHED Before the Right Honourable House of Lords at their Monethly FAST, October 28. 1646. PSALME 8. 2. Out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings hast thau ordai∣ned strength, because of thine enemies, that thou mightest still the Enemy and the Avenger. Introduction shewing the scope and parts of the Psalme. THe 4th. Verse of this Psalme, is the key of the whole Psalme, What is man that thou art mind∣full of him? or the son of man, that thou visitest him? And it fully manifests, that the whole scope of this Psalme is to glorifie God for the singular dignity that God hath put upon Man above all other Creatures; and this dignity or glory of man is exemplified in Two particulars. First, That God hath chosen out this creature Man, whose origi∣nall
is from being a Babe and a Suckling to bee his Champion, whereby he will quell and destroy all his enemies; that is in this second Verse. The other Branch is, 2. That God hath chosen this creature Man to be his Viceroy, his Deputy, to rule and govern all the workes of his hands: God hath trusted him so farre, as to put all that hee hath made under Mans feet; and having done these two things for him, made him his Champion to conquer his enemies, and the Ma∣ster of his house for the governing of his friends; what re∣maines more to bee done for him, this is to bee a little inferi∣our to God himselfe; Lord, what is man, that thou art thus mind∣full of him? or the sonne of man, that thou shouldest thus visit him? Analysis of the Text. The first of these two, Mans being chosen to bee Gods Cham∣pion, to still or quiet Gods enemies; I have chosen to speake of this day: and in it there are these two things to bee han∣dled. First, 1. Who it is upon whom this great honour is conferred, descri∣bed in these words, Babes and Sucklings. Secondly, 2. The dignity or honour that is put upon them in the other words, Out of the mouth of these Babes and Sucklings thou hast or∣dained strength, because of thine enemies, to still the Enemy and the Avenger: And this second Branch hath two remarkable parti∣culars. First, 1. The dignity it selfe which is put upon him, or what the sa∣vour is, that hee hath received, and that is strength, and such strength as shall quell all Gods enemies, the enemy and the aven∣ger. 2. The way and manner how this strength is exercised, that is, by the mouth; Out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings hast thou ordained strength. For the interpretation of the words, all doe agree that Man is the subject here meant, but of what Man, is a great question. Interpretation of the Text, what is meant by Babes and Sucklings.I finde the greatest part of Interpre∣ters to agree, that it is meant of the first Adam, Adam in his Creation, who was lifted up above all the rest of the creatures, as Lord and King over them; and so it is nothing, (as they conceive) but the praising of God for the excellency that Man was endued with in the day wherein God created
him, or formed him out of the dust of the earth: but whoso∣ever will seriously consult the New Testament, where this Psalme is three severall times quoted, shall evidently finde, that this is meant, Esay. 53. 3. not of Man in his creation, but of Man in his renovation, not of the first Adam, but of the second Adam, of the Lord Christ, primarily I say; who grew up as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground, a poore despicable beginning, made like the sonnes of Men, partaker of their na∣ture; and secondarily, of his brethren and seed with him, who though they have their originall from being Babes and Suck∣lings, as all other men have, yet they are the prime and the choice of all the sonnes of Men, and upon them hath the Lord bestowed this great honour, as to ordaine strength out of their mouth, to quell all his and their enemies. And that this is the meaning, I shall first demonstrate to you out of the Scripture; Matth. 21. 9 15, 16. opened and explained.Consider the 21 of Matthew, verse 15, 16. there you will finde that when our Saviour Christ rode upon an Asse into Jerusalem, which was but a little before his passion, God did then inspire the multitude of all Christs Disciples to owne him for their Messiah; and accordingly both by the way as hee came into the City, and in the Temple, after hee was come into the City, all the Disciples, yea, the very young ones, who had but newly learned to know him, did all sing, Hosanna to the sonne of David, which was an acclamation taken out of the 118 Psalme, verse 25, 26. the words there are, Save now I beseech thee O Lord, O Lord I beseech thee send now prosperity; blessed is bee that commeth in the Name of the Lord. This the Scribes and Pharisees did take to bee such an intolerable blasphemy, that they should ascribe unto Christ that Divine acclamation which was peculiar to God, that they come to Christ, and aske him, Hearest thou what these say? canst thou being but a man endure this, that Hosanna should bee sung unto thee, that the praises and glory due to God, should bee attributed to thee who art a man? Yes, (saith Christ) I doe heare it; but have not you read, That out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings thou hast ordained praise, &c. which I confesse some Interpreters doe conceive to bee meant
onely thus, that now was fulfilled that of the Psalme, that Babes should acknowledge him, when Rulers rejected him; but that cannot bee all the meaning, for it is cleare that the Scribes and Pharisees did intimate, that Christ ought not to permit them them thus to blaspheme; it was blasphemy to ascribe that to him that was peculiar onely to God; and Christ alledges this Text as an apology for himselfe, why he did receive that acclamation, which hee might not have done, if the Psalme had not acknowledged it to bee his due; and had not this been a due acknowledgement of theirs, Christ could not thus have excused them, children may not be allow∣ed to speak blasphemy: But the other Scriptures will yet make it plainer,Heb. 2 6, 7, 8. Heb. 2. v. 6, 7. this Psalme is brought to prove, that Jesus Christ as Man hath all things put under him. One in a certaine place testified, What is Man that thou art mind∣full of him? or the sonne of Man that thou visited'st him? Thou madest him a little lower then the Angels, and crow∣nedst him with honour, and didst set him over the workes of thy hands, thou hast put all things in subjection under him; and then goes on, We see not all things yet put under Man, but wee see Jesus, who was made a little lower then the Angels for the suffering of death, crowned with honour and glory; though this dignity of having all things put under his feet, is not made good to other men, we see it is made good of Christ. And as plaine you'll finde this in 1 Cor. 15. ver. 25, 27. there it is said of Jesus Christ, ver. 25. Hee must reigne untill bee hath put all his enemies under his feet, Ʋ. 26. Yea, the great enemy death it selfe, The last enemy which shall bee dstroyed is death; and the proofe of all this is in verse 27, taken out of this Psalme, For hee hath put all things under his feet.1 Cor. 15. 25, 26, 27. And these two last Scriptures are so cleare, that I finde many Lear∣ned Interpreters agree that the latter part of this Psalme, from the 4 Verse to the end, is meant of Christ, and can bee meant of none but Christ; but so must the whole Psalme also, for the Prophet speakes of the same Adam, or race of men, throughout the Psalme: besides, there is no word in all this Psalme, of subduing of enemies, but onely in this second
verse. Now to this I might adde, that some other expressions in this Psalme doe further cleare it, as verse 5. Thou maedest him a little lower then the Angels, so wee translate it, but in the He∣brew it is, Thou madest him a little lower then God,Phil. 2. 6. 7. the word is Elohim, which is parallel to that expression of the 2 of the Philippians, Though our Lord was in the forme of God, and thought it no robbery to bee equall with him, yet hee made himselfe of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, & was made in the likenesse of men: And some Criticks conceive, (though I build not upon it) that there is a further proofe out of the very Title of the Psalme, Psal. 81. Ps. 84. it is a Psalme up∣on Gittith, the word from whence it is derived, signifies a Winepresse; and they conceive that this Psalme, and the rest which beare this Title, were usually sung vindemiarum, or torcularium tempore, at the time of treading their Winepresses, which was about the feast of Tabernacles, the feast which ty∣pified the Incarnation of Jesus Christ. Yea, they note fur∣ther, that the rest of the Psalmes upon Gittith, are Psalmes which relate to the Incarnation of our Saviour. This then I suppose wee may take as cleare, that by the Babes and Suck∣lings here meant, are our Lord Christ, and his seed; the second Adam, the seed of the woman: The rest is easie, To these Babes and Sucklings the Lord hath ordained strength, that they shall quell Gods enemies, because of thine enemies, and the enemy and the avenger. If it bee demanded, who? and what are these enemies? the answer is ready, plainely, if by the Babes and Sucklings bee meant the seed of the Woman; What is meant by enemies, and the enemy, and avenger.by enemies, and the enemy and the avenger, can bee understood none, but the seed of the Serpent; the one is the Church militant, the o∣ther is the Church malignant, Satan and all his children, his. Instruments, and his followers, these are the opposite party; and elsewhere is Satan called the enemy and the avenger, as Psalme 44. By reason of the enemy and the avenger all this is come upon us; idest, through the malice and power of the Devill and his instruments. But that lie and his seed, are the known and onely enemies of God and his Christ, his Church, and his people, is so cleare, that it is altogether needlesse to adde
any further proofe. To these babes and sucklings (saith my Text) the Lord hath given strength: What is meant by strength.Strength, what is that? the Lxx. Interpreters render it, thou hast ordained praise, and so it is quoted in the 21 of Matthew, but the word plainly sig∣nifies strength; and as the Learned doe observe, it is robur ce∣lebrandum, robur laude dignum, eminent strength, praise-wor∣thy strength, glorious strength, such strength as shall still thy enemies; What by still or quell.still, that is the next word, That thou mightest still the enemy; the word that is translated still, is sometimes render'd silentium imponere, to stop their mouthes, these Babes shall bee able in disputing, to stop the mouthes of the adversaries, that they shall cease to blaspheme; but frequently it signifieth, remo∣vere, cessare facere, perdere, redigere in nihilum, to remove, destroy, wholly to take away, and because it is here used in reference to enemies, I conceive this latter here to bee intended, that these babes and sucklings have received strength to overcome, and wholly to destroy all Gods and their enemies. What is meant by mouthLastly, for the meaning of this other word mouth, Out of the mouth of babes, &c. the cleare meaning is, as shall (Godwilling) sully appeare afterward, that all this strength whereby they thus overcome their enemies, proceeds out of their mouth. So then the summe of it all amounts to thus much, Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings hast thou ordained strength, because of thy enemies, that thou mightest quell the Enemy and the Avenger; that when Satan the Devill had cast Man from that excellency that God had given him at his Creation, even the Lordship and dominion over the creatures, and brought him into spirituall slavery and bondage, and had him∣self become the Lord of the world, ruling and domineering in the hearts of all: God having a purpose to quell & destroy the power of this adversary, chuses out a Champion, raises up a generation to undertake him, and in his choice did not pitch upon the seed of Angels, who might seeme equall matches for the Devill and all his followers, but chuses out the Creature, Man, (whose original is from being a babe suckling, an unlike∣ly Creature to cope with such an enemy) and sends his owne Sonne to bee borne, and to become even a babe and suckling,
and so in all, other things like unto men, except their sinne, and culls out a certaine number of sinfull men to joyne with, and under him, and these hath hee endued with such valour and strength, that (how unlikely soever it appeare to flesh and blood) they shall tread under feet all the power of Gods and their enemies; and the peculiar way and manner of their figh∣ting and overcomming, is by a force proceeding out of their mouth. The words thus interpreted, doe afford two excellent Instructions. Doct. 1. That though it bee very unlikely to flesh and blood, to sense and reason; yet Christ and his seed have sufficient strength wholly to rout and destroy all their enemies. The second is, Doct. 2. That all that power and strength which Christ and his followers are endued with, proceeds out of their mouth: Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings hast thou ordained strength to quell thy enemies. The first of these hath two Branches: 1 Doctrine in two branches. That to sense and reason it is a most unlikely thing, that babes and sucklings should ever quell the enemy and the avenger; that Christ and his followers should ever bee able to cope with the adversaries that are engaged against thems. 2. That though it doe appeare most unlikely to sense and reason, yet so it is, they have sufficient strength to quell and subdue all their ene∣mies; That it is an unlikely thing to sense and reason, I ground it upon the expression which the holy Ghost hath chosen, Out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings: 1 Branch. It's an unlike∣ly thing to sense and rea∣son that Christ and his Church should be able to overcome their enemies.Christ and his followers are here called babes and sucklings, not onely because their originall is from being babes, but principally because the Lord would shew the disproportion which to reason doth appeare between them and their enemies, they are babes, and the other are Gyants; they are poore sucklings, the other are the enemies of God; yea, the enemy, the great enemy and the avenger: so that little David with his sling did beare more pro∣portion to the Gyant that was armed in brasse, then babes and sucklings can beare unto those whom God calls his professed
enemies; and you may observe in the Scripture, the Lord uses to set it out by the most unequall matches that can bee found; Jer. 31. 22, 23. opened and explained: Proved by the comparison which sets out the unlikeli∣hood of it.First consider that expression, Jer. 31. 22. How long wilt thou goe about, thou backsliding daughter; for the Lord bath created a new thing in the earth, a woman shall compasse a man. God had promised them deliverance, and now hee blames them for going about to seeke other helpes, and would not rest on his word, because they saw no hope or probability of its com∣ming to passe; hee tells them this should bee no barre to be∣lieving, for the Lord will create a new thing, a woman shall com∣passe a man, the church was a weake woman, destitute of armes, of strength, of skill, the enemy from whom they should be de∣livered, were as a man, yea, a strong man, (so the word signi∣fies) and such was the Babylonian Empire at that time; yet this woman shall compasse, i. e. besiege this man, so as to overcome and take him: Now how improbable this was to sense and reason, that a weake woman should bee able to doe this to an armed man, any man may judge. Consider also that com∣parison in the 41 of Isaiah, verse 14, 15, 16. when the Lord would set out the opposition betwixt the Church and the E∣nemies, the Church is called a worme, the enemy is called a mountaine, yea, mountaines, in the plurall number; Fear not thou worme Jacob, I'll make thee my threshing instrument to beate the mountaines to dust. Now what proportion is there be∣twixt a mountaine and a worme? one bit of a mountaine would kill 10000 wormes; but here is one worme to cope a∣gainst a great many mountaines, a most unlikely thing; Psal, 22. ver. 6. Christ compares himselfe and his people to a worm, I am a worme, and no man, a reproach of men, and despised of the people;Psal. 22. 6. 13. 16. 202. and his and their enemies hee compares to fat Bulls of Bashan, to ravening and roaring Lyons, to madde and fierce dogs: Thus also our Saviour told his Disciples, they were as sheepe among wolves, Behold I send you out as sheepe among wolves.Luke 10 3. A handfull of sheep goe to fight with a whole multi∣tude of Wolves, is there any probability to sense or reason, that they should carry the victory? Proved 2 by some instancesBut it will bee yet clearer in a few instances:
First, take that of the Lord Christ himself, who is the head and Captain-generall of the Party, when hee came into the world to undertake this grand enemy, even the enemy, and the avenger; marke how hee appear'd, the state of the world then stood thus, the Devill and his Angels in all places were worshipped as so many Gods, the Empires and Kingdomes of the world were all at the Devills dispose, hee was then the God of the world, and ruled in the hearts of all; the Lords friends lived in one onely corner of the world, in the Land of Judea, and they were at that time brought into captivity to the great red Dragon, the Roman Empire, the professed enemy of the God of Heaven, and these were his vassalls; Among them commeth Christ as a Champion to undertake this great adversary; and thus he enters the Lists, borne in a sta∣ble, wrapped up in rags, bred a poor Carpenter, lives 30 yeares in the world almost untaken notice of, when hee did come to shew that hee was the Saviour who had undertaken the re∣demption of his people from their thraldome, they who should have owned him, and joyned with him, scorn'd him, rejected him; none but a few women and children, and fishermen, would so much as acknowledge that hee was sent of God, yea, they never leave him till Jewes and Romans, (fol∣lowing the counsell of the Devill) had agreed together to de∣stroy him, they tooke him, hung him upon a crosse, crucified him, and there let him remaine a shame and a reproach, and curse, and laughing-stock to all the world, and now was the time hee was to fight the field; thus was hee accomplished for the warfare, and now was hell let loose upon him: who that should have looked upon Christ at that time, would ever have thought that deliverance should have come by him? would not all have said of him, as some of the sonnes of Belial did of Saul, and with a great deale of more reason toe, How can this Man ever save us? fiesh and blood, I dare say, would have given up the Cause as lost. Secondly, take another instance in the first Champions whom Christ sends out in his Name, his Apostles, and the rest of
his Disciples, taken out of Fisher-boates, and from other the like conditions, and hee sends them to reduce the world un∣der his subjection: see what probability there was, that they should ever speed: they goe out a Company of weake men, without money in their purse, without a sword by their side, unto a prejudiced world, where all were engaged against them, and thus must they go to subdue the world, and how I pray? by preaching such a Doctrine as was for the greatest part utterly a∣bove the capacity of man, ridiculous to mans reason, that they should beleeve in a crucified God, and appoint them a way of selfe-deniall, plucking out their right eye, and cutting off their right hand, and their right foot, and forsaking all, and ta∣king up a crosse, and following a crucified God, and when they had done all, then they should looke for that which no man ever saw, a reward in a place where no man ever was that they had heard of, a reward of glory in another world, after they had undergone nothing but misery in this world, and with this Doctrine must they overcome the world. When Mabomet came out, hee had a Doctrine that suited Mans reason and his lusts. And when Antichrist came, hee had a way that would please whatsoever was in a carnall heart, but these must go out with that, against which every man hath as many prin∣ciples as hee hath lusts in his heart. Would ever any man thinke, that all this project and undertaking would not have fallen presently into the dust? I could goe on (but that I have many things to handle) and shew you that in all the Churches conflicts it hath been so. When God sent a shepheard to fetch 600000 men out of the land of Egypt, where they were in bon∣dage, how ridiculous an attempt would it appeare to flesh and blood? When they were to come out of the Captivity of Ba∣bylon; when Athanasius was to undertake the Arrian world; when Luther and a few company of Fryers and Monkes that came out of their Cells, undertooke to destroy the master∣piece of policy that ever the Devill had, was there any likely∣hood to flesh and reason they should carry it? I adde further, every particular Saint who is brought home to Christ, is a
sufficient proofe of this, when grace comes first into their heart, as a sparke of fire into a well of water, as a graine of mustardseed cast into a barren ground, a poore weake Crea∣ture, who hath onely learned to know the way to life, present∣ly assaulted with all the power of the world and hell it selfe. No man that should looke upon it with the eyes of reason, but would conclude, it will never come to any thing. The reason why it's so un∣likely to sense and reason. And there is this reason for it, because the principles of sense and reason can behold and view all the power that is against them, the temptations and allurements of the Devill, the world and the flesh, are all agreeable to our corrupt nature, and wee can discerne what strength is in them, the opposition which the wisdome, authority and power which all the King∣domes and men of the world make against the Saints, appeare in its full strength, as clearly as the Army sent to take Elisha the Prophet, did unto his servant.2 Kings 6 15 But on the part of the Babes and Sucklings, sense and reason sees their weaknesse, but sees nothing, of their strength, that's no more discerned then the fore mentioned servant saw the mountaines full of Chari∣ots and Horses of fire, before the Lord opened his eyes, that is, a hidden, secret thing can be beheld and known only by the light of faith, and the revelation of God, which they have no under∣standing of; there is the first. The second Branch is, 2 Branch. Yet they have strength to doc it, and shall doe it. How unlikely soever it appeare, yet so it is, they have a strength, whereby they shall and will quell all their enemies, even the enemy and the avenger, the victory is sure enough: For the proofe of this, nothing is more cleare in the Book of God. First, Proved first by many promi∣ses that it shall bee so. All the promises are for it, a thousand promises have decla∣red it must bee so, The seed of the Woman must breake the Ser∣pents head;Gen. 3. 15. I will build my Church, the gates of hell shall not pre∣vaile against it.Matth. 16. 18. No weapon that is formed against thee shall ever prosper; Every tongue that rises up against thee, in judgement thou shalt condemne;Esay 54. 17. Feare not thou worme Jacob, thou shalt thresh the Mountaines, and beat them to dust:Esay 41. 14. Arise and thresh O daughter of Zion, and I will make thy borne iron, and thy hoofes brasse, and thou fhalt breake in pieces many Nations:Micah 4. 13. I will make Jerusalem
a burdensome stone, for all people that burden themselves with it, shall bee cut in pieces, though all the people of the earth bee gathe∣red together against it:Zach. 12. 3. God will tread Satan under your feet shortly:Rom. 16. 10. All that is borne of God overcomes the world:1 John 5 4 I write unto you little children, because yee have overcome that wicked one:1 John 2. 13. who hath not read abundance of such promises as these are? 2 By experi∣ence it ever hath been so. And experience hath found it thus, see it in a few examples: First, our Lord Jesus Christ himselfe at that time, when hee appeared so unlikely, as you have heard, then did hee breake all his enemies, and led captivity captive; and hath hitherto so farre prevailed, that all the Empires which have risen against him, the Assyrian, Persian, Greeian, Roman, whether the Roman bee considered as Pagan, or Arrian, or Antichristian, Christ hath got the victory over them all, he hath broke them all, no power of Devill or world hath not been able to stand against him; this stone cut out of the mountaine without hands, hath smitten and broken the great image of Gold and Silver, Brasse and Iron,Dan. 2. and he must reigne till all his enemies are made his foot∣stoole.Psal. 110. And not onely Christ, but the Fishermen and the rest of their companions that have been spoken of, serve for a se∣cond experiment; I will bee bold to say it, that Alexander and all the Caesars never conquered so many, as those simple men subdued to Christ in a very little time. In one age their line went into all the corners of the world, the Sunne did hardly shine upon a place, where they did not set up Trophees of their Victories, as unlikely a thing as it was. Yea, all the Saints of God that have lived hitherto, have all found, that whatsoever Tongues or Spirits have risen up against them have been con∣demned, the woman hath compassed the man, the worme hath destroyed the Mountaine, and they have at the long runne been able with Paul to triumph, not onely over poverty, and hunger, and nakednes, and persecution, and such outward troubles, but over Principalities and Powers,Rom. 8. 35, 38 and all spirituall wickednesses too, the Devil himself hath bin trod under all their feet. And shal be so more & more.And as there hath been experience of it hitherto, so whosoever reads
the Scripture will finde, that the older the world growes, the more experience there will bee of it continually, because now begin the times of Christ and the Churches manifest conquest: hitherto they have carryed it, but not so visibly alwayes before the eyes of men; but we expect the dayes to bee at hand, where∣in the Saints shall take the Kingdome,Dan. 7. 18. and all the Kingdomes of the world shall bee the Lord Christs, and hee shall reigne over them;Revel. 11. 15. and that Kingdome that will not serve Christ, shall bee destroyed, and they shall with joy and comfort bring all their glory, and conferre it upon the head of Christ, and put it in∣to the hands of these Babes: So that the Babes and Sucklings must carry it; Reasons of it.and if you'll have a ground or reason for it, 100 might bee added. First, 1. It is Gods onely designe, the onely great project that the Lord hath laid from eternity, that the Babes and Sucklings should carry the day against all their enemies; it is the master∣piece of his contrivement, wherein hee will not indure to bee disappointed. And then secondly, 2. His heart is with them, his love is set upon them, they are his children, the apple of his eye, they are written upon the palmes of his hands, they are continually in his sight, he loves them as hee loves himself. 3. Thirdly, and his power is with them, his Almighty power, that power which can as easily make a World, as it can up∣hold a straws all that power is engaged, that no man shall ever bee able to prevaile against them. These, and many more such reasons as these are, have been so frequently set before this Honourable Assembly, in the times of your greatest extremi∣ties, to uphold your hearts, that I shall not need to say any more, neither in truth doe I know what to adde to that which hath been spoken by other men. I come therefore to a short application of both the branches, and among many excellent Uses wee might make of the first, That it is an unlikely thing to sense and reason, that Christ and his Church should bee able to conquer their enemies, I shall observe onely this one, To teach you all not to wonder, why the wisest men, and
Vse of the first branch, not to wonder though so few wise men own the Churches cause. greatest men of the world, the most politique and wary men of the world, in all ages have, and doe most of them re∣ject the cause of Christ and his Church, seldome willing to venture themselves for it: ou know Paul observed it in his dayes, 1 Cor. 1. 26. Brethren, you see your calling, not many no∣ble, not many wise men after the flesh, not many learned, and all ages have proved it so. And when multitudes followed Christ himselfe, the Pharisees demanded, Doe any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees beleeve on him? John 7. 48. And Hierome ob∣served in his dayes, that when one Paulinus a brave young no∣ble man imbraced Christian Religion, there was more won∣dering at it, than if a Mule had cast a foale: now this lesson may fully instruct you in the reason of it, so farre as any of their principles are able to make up a judgement, the cause of the Church is a lost cause, Christ and his Saints are but like David against Goliah, they are but wormes against a Moun∣taine, and what wise man would ever engage himselfe in such a foolish and unlikely businesse? who that hath understanding would put his fortune into a Ship that hee thinkes will sinke in the Sea, which will dash against the next rocke, or bee split with the next wave? Indeed when the Church is smiled up∣on, and countenanced by Kings and Princes, it's no marvaile though wise, rich, and great men doe joyne with it; but when warres and persecutions are raised against it, which hath most-what been the Churches lot hitherto, wonder not though wise men withdraw from it, when they can see nothing but ruine at∣tend them who take with this side; and this is the very reason of their withdrawing, and this also abundantly satisfies mee in our present trouble, wherein we have had so many Lords, so many Gentlemen, so many Learned men, so many great and rich men to have deserted the Cause that the Parliament was engaged in. I solemnly professe, I rather wonder that any wise man, if not sanctified, hath stayed, that any Man not guided by the Spirit of God, should venture himselfe in a Cause that appea∣red so desperate as this Cause of Christ hath done to the eyes of flesh and blood. I justly call it the Cause of Christ and his
Church, because it's apparent that the Parliaments engaging themselves for reformation of Religion, as well as preserving civill Liberties, hath provoked most of these enemies against them. Therefore let this satisfie you abundantly, when the multitude of the world generally goe against the Cause of Christ, they thinke it folly to owne it, because they looke up∣on it as a lost Cause. But the other Branch affords many excellent Uses: One is, Uses of the se∣cond branch, Consolation to whom; who joyne with the cause of Christ and his Church This may hold up and content the heart and spirit of every one that hath given up his name to Christ and his Cause, ente∣red his name into Christs Muster-booke, is enrolled amongst the souldiers of the Lambe; I know flesh and blood, sense and reason, thinkes wee have the worser end of the staffe, but let such know, what dayes soever may come, hee shall never have cause to repent that hee engaged himselfe on this side, the victory is sure enough: some men in these conflicts of ours, have solemnely protested, that their plot was onely to bee on the safest side, that they might bee sure to stand, whoso∣ever fall. In the name of God, I promise it to every one that hath undertooke with Christ, in the Cause of his Church, they shall succeed well. They used to say in Rome, in Germa∣nieus his dayes, Salvus Germanicus, salva Roma, salva omnia, Germanicus is well, and the City is well, and all is well: I say it with better confidence, Christ is well, his Church is well, their Cause is good, a succeeding Cause, a prosperous Cause, and all shall bee well, the worme must beat the mountaine to dust, the Woman must compasse the man. It may for a while seeme to goe very hard with the Church, but the end will bee comfortable; it was of old said of the Romans, they were sometimes praelio victo nunquam bello, they lost many a bat∣tell, but in the conclusion they conquered every Nation which warred against them: This most undoubtedly is the fate of the Church, & might hold us up in all our present difficulties: I know many of you are yet at your wits end, and wonder what will bee the end and event of these things; the pillars of the Earth, the pillars of the Land, the pillars of Truth as
well as of Peace, are shaken, ready to fall; wee are wofully divided into minutula srustula, and the young childe of Refor∣mation in danger to bee swallowed up, a Hydra, a Dragon watcheth for it, a malignant party on the one hand, Blasphe∣mies, heresies, and divisions on the other hand; but there is a Spirit working wil subdue all, the zeal of the Lord wil bring all well to passe, therefore hold up your Spirits and fear nothing, I cannot but commend unto you that excellent speech of Luther to Melancthon, when the Protestants were in a very low estate, when Melancthon was affraid, Come (saith Luther) to him, let the Pholips, let the Bishops, let the Turks, and the Devill him∣selfe doe his worst against us, nos filii regni sumus, wee are the children of the Kingdome, Dominus prope adest, the Lord is at hand, wee are engaged with Christ, whom they have cruci∣fied and spit upon, wee must carry the day from them: So I say to thee, Feare thou nothing, the Barque wherein thou art may be tost, it will never be split, troubles may come, the pre∣sent may continue, new ones may come, but nothing shall come, but such as that Christ contrives purposely, that things may appeare difficult to us, that his glory may bee the more in his carrying us through them all, and in the name of Christ, I pro∣mise you the event shall bee successefull. 2 Use of conso∣lation to every particular Saint. And as this is comfortable in reference to the whole Church, so it is wonderfully comfortable to every particular soule that feares the Lord Christ, and may uphold them in all their tem∣ptations and afflictions, crosses and desertions. I am perswaded many a soule who heares mee this day, wonder how they shall subsist one weeke longer, their spirituall pressures, temptations, desertions, are so strong, another findes their outward afflicti∣ons so intolerable, and their pressures more and more breaking in, so that they are ready every moment to sinke under their burthen, and know not what will become of them; ready eve∣ry day to conclude as David did in his haste and feare, I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul, I shall never hold out, I shall never be able to stand against these impetuous assaults; but cheare up thy heart, if there bee any thing of Christ in thee,
though it bee but as smoking flax, it shall never bee quenched, though but as a bruised reed, it shall never bee broken, though it bee but a babe and suckling, thou shall quell all thy enemies. I tell thee, I know it, that all the power of hell is engaged against thee, because thou art for Christ, whether there bee any power of hell in thy heart, in thy lust, or in thy family, in thy father, in thy husband, in thy mother, in thy brethren, or about thee, all will bee against thee; but as this power is against thee, so I assure thee, all the power in Heaven is engaged for thee, all the power that the God of Hea∣ven hath, all his Attributes are for thee, and therefore doe thou conclude, though thou art a worme, a woman, &c. the worm shall thresh the mountaine, the woman shall compasse the man, the lambe shall overcome the wolfe, and what is said in the 17 of the Revelations, of all the Kings of the earth, that they should set against the Virgin Company, who follow the Lamb, but the Lambe should overcome them, for hee is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and those that are with him, who are called, and chosen, and faithfull, the like is true of every soule who is a follower of the Lord Christ, they must over∣come, and by the helpe of the Lord tread all their enemies un∣der their feet. 3 Vse, exhor∣tation to all, to have nothing to doe against these Babes & Sucklings. Secondly, because how unlikely soever the thing bee, the Babes and Sucklings must queil all their enemies; let me teach you all this point of wisdome, never have any thing to doe a∣gainst the Lord Christ, or any of his children; beware how thou have thy hand in any contrivement against any of those that are the Lambes followers: I cannot give it you better, then in an expression of Solomons, in Proverbes 24. 15, 16. to a wicked man; Lay not maite, O thou wiched man, against the babitation of the righteons, spoile not his resting place; For the righ∣teons falls seven times a day, riseth agains; but the wicked fall into mischiese:Prov. 24. 15, 16 I take the plaine meaning to bee this, Solomon tells wicked men, hee knows they cannot but bee like themselves, plotting and contriving mischiese against those that feare God, and possibly it is, that through their contrivements they may
cause the people of God oftentimes to fall, to fall into afflicti∣ons, under many crosses, but let them fall never so often, they will bee like the corke, thrust it under the water, you cannot keep it under the water, it will rise againe, so shall it bee with godly men, they will get out of their troubles: but when the wicked falls, hee falls to the purpose, hee will fall into mischief, and never rise againe, God will deale with them as hee did with Moab, in the 16 of Isaiah, Wee have heard of the pride of Moab, (he is very proud) even of his haughtinesse and his pride, and his wrath, but his lyes shall not bee so; therefore shall Moab howle for Moab.Isay 16. 6, 7. Moab thought to make my children mourn and howle, but I'll make Moab howle for himselfe: So thou maist thinke to carry on a plot or designe against Religion, a∣gainst the servants of God, either their Cause in generall, or some particular person of them, but forbeare it, as Gamaliel said to them, Forbeare these men, middle not with them, lest yee bee found fighters against God;Act. 5. 38. they may fall into trouble, but God will bring them out. I conclude this with that speech of David, Psal. 37. The wicked plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth, the Lord shall laugh at him, for hee seeth that his day is comming.Psal. 37. 12, 13 This is the first Lesson, now I proceed to the second. Which is the manner how these Babes and Sucklings doe ex∣ercise this their great strength, Out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings; You know that every creature which God hath endued with any strength, hath a peculiar way of bringing out its strength'; the Lions strength lies in his jawes, the Beare in his pawes, the Eagle in her talons, a Man by his armes, the Bull by his hornes, the Scorpions have their power in their tayle'; thus every creature that hath any notable strength, hath some eminent way to exercise it: Now would you know which way doe these Babes and Sucklings, exer∣cise their strength, it is out of their Mouth, Out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings. The Lesson I propound to handle from it, is this, That the peculiar way, whereby Christ and all his seed doe
Doct. 2. The strength whereby the Babes & Suck∣lings doe over∣come their E∣nemies, pro∣ceeds out of their mouth. Thus Christ himselfe. overcome their enemies, is by a power that comes out of their mouth: That's the peculiar way of fighting, power comes out of their mouth: For the truth of it, see it, First, in Christ himselfe, when it was prophesied of him in the 11 of Isaiah, v. 4. how hee should reigne and rule over all Nations, the Spirit of God layes it downe thus, He shall smite the Earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips hee shall slay the wicked.Esay 11. 4. It was a rod of his mouth, and the breath of his lips, that's the staffe of his power, that which is called in the 110 Psalme, the rod of his strength,Psal. 110. 2. is in this 11 of Isaiah called the rod of his mouth, so also in the 19 of the Revelations, v. 15. where hee is brought on horseback, fighting his battaile in the field, and destroying all his enemies; it is said, Out of his mouth came a two edged sword, that with it hee should smite the Nations; and if you read his story while hee was upon earth, you may observe that all in a manner which he did, came out of his mouth; some∣times by a word of command, thus his miracles were wrought, be healed, be opened, be cleansed, &c. sometimes by preaching, con∣verting some, convincing others; sometimes by prayer, that is one reason, as some thinke, why he is called , the Word of God; because all that hee did was by a word. Se∣condly, 2. Thus also all the Saints o∣vercome. See it likewise in his servants, all the servants of Christ; these Babes and Sucklings that are his brethren and his seed, they all overcome by a power that comes out of their mouth; And to cleare this, consider first some passages of Psalme 68. a Psalm, which I confesse deserves to be more fully cleared, then a short Sermon will allow, being so full to this purpose, the whole Psalme being a full declaration of the way and manner how Christ and his followers doe overcome all their enemies; The first verse of the Psalme is, Let God arise, and his enemies bee scattered; and the close of the Psalme is, God hath given strength to his people, blessed bee God, that is the drift of it, to give glory to God for the strength hee hath given to his Sonne, and the followers of his Sonne to subdue all their enemies, and how is this performed? to say nothing of Christ himselfe, you
may see the way of his Saints overcomming, notably described, ver. 18. Thou bast ascended on high, thou hast led captivity ca∣ptive, thou hast received gifts for men; even for the bellious also, that the Lord God may dwell amongst them:Psal. 68. 18. When Christ ascended, then hee gave such gifts to his children and servants, that by them they should bee so farre able to tame the most rebellious that the Lord God might dwell among them, set up his throne and habitation in the midst of them; what these gifts were, the Apostle tells you expresly in the 4 of the Ephesians; When hee ascended up on high, hee gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors, and Teachers,Ephes. 4. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. these were the gifts which were powred out upon the day of Pentcost, all which were represented by the similitude of cloven Tongues,Acts 2. 3. whereby the Lord would teach you, that all the gifts which Christ hath powred out upon his Church, there is nothing so lively a resemblance of them all as the Tongue: out of the mouth by the tongue, comes all the power that the Saints have; Rev. 11. 5 6. explained.you'll finde it as plain, if you look into the 11 of the Revelati∣ons, ver. 5, 6. where the two Witnesses of Christ their manner of overcomming is described. These two Witnesses are by the best Interpreters judged to be the small number of true belie∣vers, who followed Christ all the time of the Antichristian Apostasie, against these all the world fights, for the space of twelve hundred and sixty yeares, these two Witnesses ever car∣tyed the victory, and there are they compared to Moses and Aaron, to Elias and Elisha, to Joshna and Zerubbabel, so that looke what Moses and Aaron did in their time of Israels com∣ming out of Egypt, what Elias and Elisha in the time of that Apostasie, and Joshua and Zerubbabel in the time of that Reformation, these two VVitnesses should doe the same; but how? even as Moses, Aaron, Elias, and the rest overcame all enemies and difficulties, by a power proceeding out of their mouth, as appeares in their stories; so doe these, these can smite the earth with plagues, these can turn waters into blood, these can shut and open heaven, these can destroy their enemies, who would hurt them; but all this proceeds out of their mouth
out of their mouth comes fire that destroyes their enemies, all is done by their mouth; Rev. 12. 11. explained.and in the 12 of the Revelations, verse 11. you may there read a great battail described, that is fought between the Saints, Christ and his Saints, and the great red Dragon, but Michael and his Angels overcome the Dragon and his Angels; at the 11 Verse it's said, They (that is, the Saints) overcame the Dragon by the blood of the Lambe; that was the meri∣torious cause, but the instrumentall cause was the word of their te∣stimony; They overcame him by the blood of the Lambe, and the word of their testimony; but you will bee better satisfied after I have opened unto you, Qu. Wherein lyes the power which proceeds out of their mouth, what is it? or what doth their mouth? Resp. 5 Things pro∣ceeding our of these mouths of Babes and Sucklings whereby they overcome. Possibly I shall not bee able to name every particular branch, but there are five things that are most cleare, which all are the fruit of the mouth, and by them in all ages, these babes and sucklings have overcome the enemy and the a∣venger. First, 1. Preaching. 2. Confessing, or professing the Name, Truth, and Cause of God and his Christ. 3. Praising, singing out praise, and Psalmes, and hymnes to God. 4. Praying. And, 5. Covenanting. You shall see how by all these the Saints from time to time have carryed the victory, First, 1. By Preaching. Preaching; when Christ sent his Apostles out to goe con∣quer the world, what was their apparatus? what was their fur∣niture? their instruments of warre? it was onely thus, Its, praedicate, Goe out into the world and Preach:Mat. 28. 19, 20. And when hee sent out the Lxx Disciples, Luke 10. as lambes among wolves, without sword, or money, or scrip, this was the great wea∣pon hee furnished them withall, Preach unto them; and by that time they had been a little trying the power of this weapon, they had led captivity captive, and returne with great spoiles; and tell their Master, Lord, (say they) the very Devils are subject to
us. True (saith Christ) I saw Satan falling like lightening downe from heaven, by preaching they could shoot the Starres downe from heaven, and fetch the Devill out of his Throne: It were an endlesse task for mee to recount unto you, what preaching hath done; what strong Castles have been demoli∣shed by preaching; how many thousand enemies have been made friends by preaching; how many Kingdomes have been subdued by preaching; how many thousands, and ten thou∣sand times ten thousand, have been taken out of the roaring Lyons denne by preaching; how before Pauls death the preaching of the Word had gone into all the earth, and unto the ends of the world,Rom. 10 18.Psal. 19. and rent in pieces the Kingdome of the Devil. This, this is Christs Arms, this is the power of God to sal∣vation, a thousand tongues are not able to set forth the excel∣lency and efficacy of it; this is the great Monster queller, which is able to batter down all the strong bolds of Satan,2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. which can cast downe every high thing which exalts it selfe against the knowledge of God, and bring into captivity eve∣ry thought to the obedience of Christ: In a word, preaching is that whereby Christ destroyes the very Kingdome of Anti∣christ, though it is the Devills master-piece laid the deepest in policy, and founded not onely in States but in mens conscien∣ces, yet Christ destroys it by the Word of his mouth, that is, the preaching of the Gospel in the mouthes of his Ministers. Preaching is one, and Secondly, 2. By confessing and professing the Truth. Confessing is another; Preaching, though it belong to the whole Church, as a gift given to them for their good, yet it is to bee exercised but by the Officers of it, it's given to all, not to bee exercised by all; but all the rest of these wayes of over∣comming are to bee exercised by all these babes, whether in office or not, whether men or women, old or young, learned or simple, and confessing or professing the truth is one of them, one of the things which proceed out of the mouth, whereby the Saints overcome their enemies, I'll give you but one text for it, the Lord Christ tells his Disciples,Luke 21. 15. Luke 21. 12. what usage they should finde in the world, That they should be carry∣ed
before Kings and Princes for his sake, this might be looked upon as a terrible thing to them who had been brought up a∣mong rude and common people, to be brought before Kings and High Courts, whose splendor and majesty would dash them out of countenance and amase them, so that they would not bee able to speake, and whose wisdome, understanding and subtilty was like to bee such, as would quickly put them to si∣lence; but feare not this, saith Christ, why? I will give you a mouth, I will give you a mouth (that is his promise,) that none of your adversaries shall bee able to stand before it; that mouth is nothing but a bold confession of the truth and cause of God: a notable instance hereof wee have Acts 4. 13. the Councell or Synedrion had called the Apostles before them, and deman∣ded by what authority, or by what Name they had done this? they presently made a bold Confession of the Lord Jesus, and saith the Text, When they saw the boldnesse of Peter and John, and perceived they were unlearned and ignorant men, they mar∣vailed,Acts 4 13. yea, they could say nothing; and whosoever hath but read the stories of the Church may find that the Confessions which the Saints, yea sometimes women and children have made, have repressed the enraged adversaries, have sometimes wonne, the hearts of them, yea, have converted thousands: that is a se∣cond weapon out of the mouth. Thirdly, 3. Singing of Psalmes. Singing of Psalmes, though this you would thinke the un∣likelyest of all, yet the Scripture is plaine for it; in the 149 Psalme,Ps. 149. 4, 5, 6, &c. there you have a promise, vers. 4. God will beautisie them with salvation, yea, such salvation, that they shall execute vengeance upon the heathen, bind their Kings in chaines, and their Nobles with fetters; this glory have all Gods Saints. How shall this bee done? Let (saith the Prophet) them sing aloud, let the high praises of God bee in their mouth, and a two edged sword in their hand: whatever bee meant by a two edged sword, plain it is, that the high praises of God in their mouth is one of their weapons: And in Psalm. 68. the place before mentioned, about vers. 22, 23. &c. you have a description of Gods terrible march before his people, the very fight whereof was dreadfull to his
enemies; They have seene thy goings, O God, even the goings of my God, my King in the Sanctuary; and how was it? you have it verse 25. The singers went before, the players on instruments followed after, among them were the Damosels playing with timbrels, all singing Hallelujah, blesse yee the Lord in the Congregations, even the Lord from the fountaine of Israel.Psal. 68. 23, 24, 25. And you have an instance of it in 2 Chron. 20. when the children of Edom and Moab, and Mount Seir came against Jehoshaphat, when he & his people went against them, they went singing of Psalmes; and it's said, vers. 22. When they began to lift up their voice, and to sing praise to God on High; the Lord set ambushments against the children of Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir, which were come out against Jehoshaphat, and they were smitten, and they destroyed one another.2 Chron. 20. 22 Many o∣ther instances there are in the Ecclesiasticall story, of the strength which Gods people have found in singing of Psalmes; there is one famous one, of the Protestants in Mountaban in France, who when they (being besieged) were compelled to fight in their owne defence, alwayes went out to fight singing of Psalmes, and grew so terrible to the besiegers, that in the end, as soone as they heard their singing voice lifted up within the Towne, before the Portcullis was drawne up, or the gates were opened, their hearts would faile them, and they used to cry out, They come, they come, and even fled away for feare, This is a third weapon out of the mouth; but then there is a fourth which is super-excellent in many respects beyond all, like Goliahs sword, there is none to that, that is, 4. Prayer. Prayer: The wonders which the Prayers of Gods people have wrought, no time is sufficient to tell: Prayer uses to fetch in all things they need, it removes all evills which lye upon them; Prayer is the key of Heaven, the conqueror of God him∣selfe, the scourge of Satan, the out-gate from all distresses; you finde, Psalme 107. five sorts of men in misery: 1 Wanderers out of their way. 2 Troubled and brought low with sick∣nesse. 3 Prisoners. 4 Tossed at sea with tempests. 5 Op∣pressed by enemies: but Prayer is a medieamentum eatholicum, a remedy for all these; then Psal. 107. 6, 13, 19, 28.They cry unto the Lord in their trou∣ble,
& he delivers them out of their distresse; This Solomon begg'd,1 Kings 8. per totum. 1 Kings 8.When thy people go to war, when they are opprest with their enemies, &c. if they humble themselves and pray, heare thou in Hea∣ven and deliver them; and God promised Chap. 9. 3. that it should bee so;1 Kings 9. 3. and this innumerable multitudes of Gods peo∣ple in all ages have found to bee so; when Moses hands are lift up in prayer, Amalek is routed;Exod. 17. 10. when Samuel prayes, the Philistims are disconifited;1 Sam. 7. 9. when David prayes, his enemies flee, When I pray, my enemies are turned backe; this I know, (said hee) for God is with mee.Psal. 56. 9, 11. The time forbids me to tell of the thundering Bands of Gods servants, and what their prayers have done: but in a word I am assured, that what the Apostle saith, Heb. 11. 32, 33. of the power of faith, The time would faile me to tell of Gedeon, of Barak, Samson, Jephthah, &c. who through faith subdued Kingdomes, wrought righteousnesse, obtai∣ned promises, stopped mouths of Lyons, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weaknesse were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight Armies of aliens, &c.Heb. 11. 33. hath all beene made good of Prayer: Prayer hath done as much as all this; yea, it hath made the Sunne stand still, the Rivers runne back, what is it that Prayer hath not been a∣ble to do? Never did these Babes and Sucklings in the time of their distresse, seek God by Prayer in vaine. This is a fourth weapon out of the mouth. Fifthly, 5. Covenanting. Covenanting, is another, and for that you have abun∣dance of evidence in all the ages of the Church, from the days of Moses goe on to Joshua, and the Judges, and Asa, and Jeho∣shaphat, and Hezekiah, and Josiah, and Ezra, and Nehemiah, all these in their great extremities, (when nothing did prosper, but all went contrary to them) used to renew their Cove∣nants with God, entred into Oath and Covenant with him, and God ever prospered them after it. The stories of these things are so fully knowne, that I shall not need to insist upon them. Reason of all this, when they are made so, mighty in wor∣king.If now you aske the reason of all this, why should this power of the Mouth, Praying, and Preaching, and Confessing, and Co∣venanting, and Singing bee thus mighty in operation, whence grow these Samsons locks. I answer, many excellent Reasons
might be given for every one of them, but I will goe no sur∣ther then my Text, which I know will satisfie you: My Text saith, Out of the Mouth of Babes and Sucklings thou hast or∣dained strength, or thou hast founded strength, so the Hebrew word signifies, constituted, made, appointed; and that word when it is applyed to God, ordinarily signified one of these two things; sometimes his Counsell, or what his Decree hath appointed, but most commonly it signifies his making or crea∣ting a thing. The Lord by wisdome founded the Earth, Prov. 3. 10. the same word that is in my Text; so also Psal. 102. 25. Thou Lord from the beginning hast founded the earth; and Psal. 104. 5. Thou hast founded the earth, or, laid the foundation of the earth; so that this is Gods appointment and his creation, God hath decreed it shall bee so, and the Lord hath created it, and therefore it is so; and truly you must resolve all other things into the same reason, Why hath the Lyon that strength in his jaw? God hath founded it there; why hath the Bull that strength in his horne? why hath Man such strength in his armes? why the Serpent in his sting? God hath founded it: Philosophers will carry you on from rea∣son to reason, and shew how these arise out of their compositi∣ons and natures; but when all is done, it must be resolved into this, God hath appointed it, and made it so and so, God hath founded this strength in them, and thus to bee exercised by them. And now I should think this Lesson were very fit for application, did I not know it necessary to remove one great stumbling block out of the way, which when I have done in a few words, I shall endeavour to set it home in 2 or 3 Uses. Ob. All this by some is used as an argument a∣gainst our de∣fensive Armes. All this which I have said of the Armes of Christians, is by some retorted upon our selves against our present warre, as if we held not our selves within the bounds of Christianity for say they, If these be all the weapons and strength whereby the Saints doe overcome, why doe you use any other meanes to overcome your enemies? why rest you not contented with this? either these are not all, or you are not Christians, not true to your own Principles; Indeed (say they) the time hath been when such a Sermon as this was owned as Divinity, in
the time of the Fathers, when preces & lachrymae, prayers and teares, were all the weapons which the Church did use; but now when you have spoke all these things of the power of Preaching, and Praying, and Confessing, and Covenanting, you are glad to betake your selves to Armes, to see what they will doe, to helpe these out, whence it's apparent you dare not rest in these as sufficient helpes; and so they throw this as a stumbling block in our way; but this is easily removed. I answer therefore, Resp. 1. First, that many of those who object this against us, doe it onely, that thereby they might the better spoile us, as Julian the Apostate, when he would expose Christians to all manner of injuries, and discourage them from seeking or using any lawfull way to right themselves against any spoile or wrong, hee endeavoured to tye their hands by their owne Principles of Religion; and would scoffingly tell them, that Christianity taught them, If any man struck them on one eare, they must turn the other; and that if any man did take their coat, they must let him have their cloake also. Howsoever, I know this answers not the Objection I therefore answer, Secondly, 2. Wee acknowledge, that as we are Christians (in that capa∣city) wee use no other weapons then these I have told you of, these onely are proper and peculiar to us as wee are Christi∣ans; but the weapons which wee enjoy as wee are Christians, doe not deprive us of those that wee enjoy in the capacity of Men; looke whatsoever belongs to us in the capacity of Men, or in the capacity of Subjects, or of Freemen, Christianity doth not take them away, but super-addes these unto them. I say therefore, that wee have all the same meanes of defence against unjust violence, that are common to us with other men, as we are Men, and wee have the same meanes of defence, as wee are Freemen, which other Freemen have; and wee challenge in this no more then wee might lawfully use, if wee were Papists or Turks, if we were Pagans, Jews, or Indians: we challenge not this to belong to christianity, as peculiar to it, we have lear∣ned that by the law of Nature and Nations, men may defend
themselves against unjust violence; if the Turkes should in∣vade a Countrey of Christians, they will tell him, that as they are Christians, their Praying, and Professing, and Singing, and Covenanting, these spirituall weapons out of their Mouth will quell them; but as they are Men, they have a liberty to defend themselves against him, & vim vi repellere; or if a Chri∣stian man were travailing upon the highway, & a Thief should demand of him, how as he is a Christian, hee defends himselfe from his enemies; he would tell him by Faith, by Prayer, by the Word of God, by weapons out of his Mouth; but if the Thiefe assault him, to take his life or his purse, as hee is a man, hee will use his sword, and his Christianity will sanctifie this use of his sword to him. The like instances might bee given in other things which concerne Christianity. If any man de∣mand, how live you as a Christian? I would answer, by faith, by every word that comes out of Gods mouth; but yet as wee are Men, wee must eate our bread by the sweat of our browes, and as wee are Christians our Christianity sanctifies these other meanes of life unto us, it takes them not away from us: So when unjust violence is offered to us, contrary to the laws of the Land, looke what defence is lawfull by our Lawes, Christiani∣ty deprives us not of that, it sanctifies that, and wee have all these which I have spoken to boot: And so is it in our present businesse, when the Parliament (the highest Court of Judi∣cature, the Court where all controversies between the King and his Subjects receive their finall judgement and determina∣tion) were proceeding to reform abules, and call some grand Delinquents and Incendiaries to a legall tryall, a force was raised to protect these Offenders, and consequently to compell the Parliament to desist from their work: (and let once the authority of Parliaments bee overthrowne, wee are an in∣slaved and conquered people;) thereupon the Parliament, the representative body of the Kingdome, takes Armes to defend themselves, and to bring in these evill doers to condigne pu∣nishment; this (say wee) wee doe according to the Funda∣mentall Lawes of the Kingdome, and were the Kingdome and
Parliament Papists or Protestants, Christians or Heathens, the case is the same as to the matter of the warre, the Lawes of the Land warranting this just defence; now our being Christians, and true beleevers, deprives us not of this defence which wee enjoy as Englishmen, but super-addes these five things which I have spoken of, to sanctifie our other lawfull meanes of de∣fence, and to make them the more effectuall; and blessed be the name of God, wee have found it by experience. Now I pro∣ceed to apply the Doctrine for our good. Vse 1. Exhortation to to take notice of the comfor∣table experi∣ence wee have had of this, in our present troubles. Is this the great power whereby Christians doe overcome their enemies, a power that comes out of their Mouth? O how good is it for us to take notice, how God hath made all this good to us in our experience, in the great conflicts and deliverances which wee have lately had? we must thankfully acknowledge, God hath raised us up Coun∣sellors who have done their part, and Commanders and Souldiers that have done their part too; the mouth of the Sword hath done its part, but (I say) the sword of the Mouth hath done more: Wee may say of the mouth of the Sword, as it is said of Saul, that hee had slaine his Thousands, but the sword of the Mouth hath slaine its ten Thousands. Wee in our extremities have sought God, Prayed to him, Covenanted with him, Humbled our selves before him, owned his Truth, and professed it; and God hath carryed all our affaires so, that when oftentimes our wise Councellors have failed, and our Armies have failed, and all other helpes have come in, and have told us, that wee are like to bee ruin'd, the Babes and Sucklings never failed to carry it in the times of our extremities: And I have begged it from God, and said it in this place, and cannot but say it againe, I would thinke it a wonderfull glory to God, to have it truly Written and Recorded, how in all our extremities, the power that hath come out of the Mouth of Babes and Sucklings hath saved us from utter ru∣ine: Our adversaries have laughed at these things, and e∣steemed all the weapons of our Mouth to bee but wind,
but God hath made them such a wind as hath scattered them. And (Right Honourable and Beloved) it becomes us well to observe it, and to stand amazed, and say with the Psalmist here, Lord, what is Man, that thou shouldest be thus mindfull of him? O Lord our God, how excellent is thy Name in all the world? Ʋse 2. Exhortation to maintaine those Forces for time to come. Secondly, because this is the great way of our conquering our enemies, I beseech you (I principally speake to your Lordships, and to those that are interested in being the great Councell of the Kingdome) take care that this Magazine of the Mouth, the powers that come out of the Mouth of Babes and Sucklings may bee preserved and recruited, and not any wayes disbanded; It is now a great dispute among you that are wise Statesmen, what wee should doe with our Armies? whether (there being no visible enemy in the Field) it would not bee fittest to disband our present Armies? A dispute I have nothing to doe with; but this I have to doe with, and make bold to tell you, whatsoever you doe with other Armies, you must not disband the Forces of the Babes and Sucklings, out of whose Mouth comes your strongest helpe. You are farre from having your worke done as yet, Ireland is in a sad condition, England is wofully unsetled, terrible divisi∣ons are found every where; looke to it, that you have a force about you; what other Forces are needfull, I leave to your wisdomes, but sure I am these Babes and Sucklings, are the Triarii, the Veterani, the old Souldiers, the Life-guard of England, disband them once and you are lost. Therefore for the Lords sake, see that this power that my Text drives at, may have all the encouragement that may bee: To this end be carefull of two things.And to this end, your Lordships must be carefull of these Two things. First, 1. To give all the assistance possible, that these Souldiers may bee encouraged and multiplyed in all parts of the Land, I meane, that the Gospel may spread, the Preaching of the Go∣spel, that Saints might bee wonne, and that the Church might bee inlarged, bee setled in peace, that there might be free∣dome to seek God, and to serve him according to his will; and
know you for certaine, that every soul which shall be wonne to Christ, be it the soule of a woman, or of an old man that stoops for age, or of a childe, yet every soule wonne to Christ, and so numbred among these Babes and Sucklings will bee as stout a souldier as ever you did employ, and will in your extremity doe more then all the experienced Captains that tread on En∣glish ground, because God is with these, and these must carry it; the power of heaven is engaged with them, therefore for the Lords sake further Religion, the propagation and settling of it; you are wise, and can think of the wayes which have been often set before you, God Almighty blesse you in it, and ever let these parties be deare in your eyes, who have such in∣terest in Heaven, let them bee owned as the Souldiers who will never fail you, though others may and will. The other thing I humbly advise is this, 2. That you would alwayes carry this in your wise thoughts, never to engage in any cause, wherin you should not be accom∣panyed with the power that comes out of the Mouthes of these Babes and Sucklings: you have found, (though it may be carnall eyes see it not) that the prayers and teares of Gods people, and their cleaving to God, and their interest in your Cause, hath been the greatest meanes under heaven to keepe your Lordships to be a Parliament House to this day; and the Lord keep you, that whatsoever businesse you have, what con∣test or warre soever you may have, that your Cause bee such, that these Babes and Sucklings bee not constrained to with∣draw from your assistance; my meaning is, that the Cause bee ever good, and such a Cause as God will own, and as God cals you to; hitherto your Cause hath been manifest, and your way hath been cleare; the Lord keep you, that you and the Babes and Sucklings of my Text may live and dye together, and then wee are well enough; but when ever you engage a∣gainst them, or without them, you will be worsted. 3. Exhortation to all these Babes and Sucklings to use their power against Christand their enemies. 2. To the rest; who is there among you that belongs to this party who are of Christs number, I beseech you give us your help, come all of you and helpe the Lord against his enemies,
helpe in the great worke that now is in hand; doe not say you can contribute nothing, it may bee some of you have no Money or Lands, no wisdome or authority: I am sure thou hast that which Gods people may receive benefit by, Christ hath given thee a mouth, which is a quiver full of choice arrowes; thou canst professe Christs truth, thou canst sing his praises, thou canst call him Abba father, thou canst be one of his remembrancers, thou canst pray for the peace of Zion, thou canst say, Our Father which art in heaven, let thy kingdome come; and little doest thou know what great things thou maist doe, in thy Closet, in thy Chamber, in the Fields at thy work; no tongue can utter what admirable helpe thou maist give; thou maist reach Rome and Spaine, and Ireland, suc∣cour the one, and destroy the other: O for the Lords sake lay out your strength to the utmost; come out (I say) and helpe the Lord all that are able; Solomon saith, Hee that in a famine withholds Corne, the people will curse him; what will thy con∣dition be, if thou withholdest thy help in the needfull time of trouble; you know Mordecai's speech to Hester, Who knowes but thou camest to the Kingdome for such a time as this? I say to thee without any if or and, I know thou art indued with all this strength, for such a time as this, O therefore fill thy mouth with praises, with confessions, with prayers, and with whatever else may quell the Lords and thy enemies, even the enemy and the avenger. 2 Rules how to use this power of the mouth, so as to make it effectuall. But take this in, thou must bee carefull so to use this power, that it may take and speed, thinke not that every one that pre∣tends to pray, or pretends to Covenant, or professe Gods name can doe it: I could give you abundance of instances, where the Lord hath aborninated al these things, & they have bin curses to them who have used them, have you not often read of such spee∣ches as these, What hast thou to do to take my Name into thy mouth? when yee make many prayers, I will not heare you; when they pray, I will destroy them with sword, famine, and pestilence; and many other the like, know therefore its not bare Preaching or Con∣fessing, or Singing, or Praying, that will doe any thing, these
must be used and done aright; and there are excellent Rules for every one of these, to teach us how to use them, so as to make them effectuall, but a Sermon will not beare the hand∣ling of them, I shall at the present commend onely two directi∣ons which are common to them all: 1. 1 See that that Mouth out of which all this strength must be exercised, bee a sanctified Mouth, a Mouth separated to, and engaged in Gods Cause onely; let it not bee the Mouth that St. James speakes of, Out of the same Mouth comes cursing and blessing;James 3. 9. 10. let it not be a Mouth that shall sing Hosanna to Christ in the Temple, and crucifie him in the Court; that shall sing a Psalme to him in the Congregation, and a bawdy Catch in an Alehouse or Tavern; that shall blesse his Name in the assembly of his people, and blespheme him in the company of prophane ones; that shall talk of Heaven and holinesse in one compa∣ny, and uncleannesse and luxury in another, this is a Mouth end a Mouth, a double Mouth, that the Lord takes no more pleasure in, then in a double heart: No, let the Mouth, that is such an excellent instrument as this, and the tongue in it, let it (I say) bee for the Lord, and for the Lord onely, let it bee a sanctified Mouth. And secondly, 2. 2 That though all this power must be exercised out of the Mouth, yet it must come further then from the Mouth, the Mouth is the instrument, it is the gun if you will, or the sword, but the Mouth it is not the magazine, it is not the store-house; though the tongue is the glory for execution, there must bee another thing that must be the fountaine: A double store-house, whence the Mouth must be sup∣plyed with strength.and therefore this sanctified Mouth must fetchall from another treasury, & there is a double store-house whence it must be furnished. 1 Christs Me∣rits.1 Christs merit, the meritorious cause of all the conquest, is the blood of the Limbe; goe not thou out in the force of thy prayer, say not, I can pray, I can preach, I have a bold Spirit to confesse Christ, and I have taken the Covenant, and will stand to it: God for∣bid thou shouldest thinke this can contribute any thing because it is in thee; no, but let the blood of the Lambe be the merito∣rious cause upon which thou relyest, faith in it will make the
sling stones, able with David to kill these Goliahs; take this a∣way, and thou canst doe nothing. 2 From a san∣ctified heart.2 See that all come out of the good Treasury within, from a sanctified heart; when thy Mouth makes consession, see that it come out of a heart that beleeveth; if thou sing to Gods glory with thy mouth and voice it must bee with grace in thy heart; if thou wilt pray, see to it, that it be not lip-labour, or onely a company of words or sentences well composed, but let it bee the powring out of the heart, the crying with the heart, with an humble heart, with a beleeving heart; and so let thy Covenanting bee, thou wilt sweare a Covenant, let thy heart stand to it, and hold it out, and main∣taine it; this is the way to use these Mouth-weapons aright. I should have inlarged my Discourse upon them, but I rather feare I have been burthen some already to your patience. Consider what I have said, and the Lord give you understanding in allthings: And I shall end. FINIS.
