M601 45097839 171421
The Mariner's Delight, OR, The Seaman's SEAVEN WIVES. Being a pleasant new Song; shewing how a Seaman call'd Anthony courted a young Maid whose Name is Susan, in London: and (with great difficulty) gain'd her affection; Notwith∣standing he had seaven Wives, all alive at that time: and at last was discovered, to the great advan∣tage and satisfaction of the Vertuous Maid and all her Relations. From which every Woman, Wi∣dow and Maid may learn how to be wary, and cautions in their Courting. To the Tune of, Hail to the Mirtle Shades. MY Dearest I must to the Sea; I'm come now to bid thee adieu: But pray thee be constant to me, as I shall prove real, and true: The Wind and the Storms may blow. and make a tempestuous Sea; But (whithersoever I go my heart it remaineth with thee. Dear Anthony, Susan reply'd, I love you with Soul, and with Life; But (I'm sure) you are basely belie'd If you reckon to make me your Wife. I'm told that you have a whole score of Sweethearts therefore 'tis in vain, To think that you'l make me a Whore, My credit to blemish, and stain. He seem'd as ore'helmed with care; And since by all that is good: The Fowls that Fly in the Air; and Fishes that swim in the Flood Before that he prov'd a false Lover To her that he had by the hands No Water the Ocean should cover, nor green Grass grow on the Land.
Then Susan began to look grave, and sorry for doubting his Love And modestly Pardon did crave; perswaded he real would prove. Then after a Glass of Canary, and such as the house could afford The Seaman could no longer tarry, but kiss'd her and streight went aboard. Poor Susan (for Grief) she did cry, to think that her Sweet-heart was gone, And left her to sigh and to die in love and in sorrow alone. But (thinking upon his returning) to languish she thought it in vain? Therefore she left off her fond mourning, expecting to see him again. But 'ere a Month was overpast, the hopes of her Marriage was gone, And Sorrow her Face did o'recast, her Heart was as cold as a Stone, A Maid that was with her acquainted inform'd her of Anthony's Life; Her shame and disgrace she prevented, and kept her from being his Wife. A wife in Virginia he had, and three more in England and Waile; In Holland a Phraw he did Wad, a couple he marri'd in Cailes. But Anthony brave he was brisk, and past for a Batchellor still; And ready was for the next Frisk, and Women he had at his Will. Then Maids that are honest and chast, and you that are light (like the Wind And Widows that still are confest To be ever loving and kind Learn wisdom from what I have told For words they are made but of Air A Vertuous woman's worth Gold; and Men that are honest are rare. Printed for J Conyers at the Raven in Duck-lain.
