p1445 e459_25 99864541 116771
The Peoples ECCHO To the Parliaments DECLARATIONS, Concerning a Personall Treaty with the KING. Containing a Collection of some few passages out of severall Declarations and Expresses of the LORDS and COMMONS assembled in Par∣liament at Westminster, concerning a Personall Treaty with the KING. Together with an humble enforcement of the equity and justice of the said Expresses; Humbly presented, not only to the review of the Honourable Parliament: but also to the serious consideration of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of LONDON in Common-Councell Assembled. Isa. 59.9. Judgement is farre from us, neither doth Justice overtake us. We wait for light, but behold obscurity; for brightnesse, but we walke in darkenesse. LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons. 1648.
The Peoples Eccho to the Parlia∣ments Declarations concerning a Personall Treaty with the KING. Declaration of the Lords and Commons of the 4th of March, 1647. in answer to the papers of the Scotch Commissioners, page 20. WEE aske what reason have we to expect better satisfa∣ction in the way of a Treaty, then formerly wee had therein at Uxbridge, or in a Personall Treaty at Oxford,unlesse we be resolved before hand to treat away all that we have fought for, and to be treated out of all that wee could not be fought out of; or at least what can we expect of a Treaty, but that un∣der pretence of satisfying all Interests, one Interest shall be set up against another to divide us: And that thereby having laid no foundation of safety before-hand, the King might set up His Interest a∣bove them all. Ibid. If wee cannot have Peace but upon these termes, viz. The will of the King, and the advantage of the Crowne in the Kings esteeme. Ʋpon these termes we needed not to have any Warre, which had been much the more Christian resolution, and would have saved the effusion of much blood; whereof if we proceed upon such principles as those, wee must needs draw the whole guilt upon our owne selves. Decl. of the 4th of March, 1647. pag. 24. If the way of reason and perswasion be the only equall, faire,and just way to obtaine a well grounded Peace, &c. we have gone in a very foule way hi∣therto, which should have been taken into consideration, before we had en∣gaged our selves and the Kingdome in so much cost and blood, which was not only spent unnecessarily, but also very unlawfully, if wee must goe no way but that of perswasion, &c. who doth not see that these Principles doe not only BRING ƲPON ƲS ALL THE BLOOD THAT HATH BEEN SHED IN THIS WAR, but also plucketh up the founda∣tion of any hope of ever setling a Peace with the King, which shall be both just and sure, seeing we cannot have it justly but upon his termes; which no man
that hath his eyes in his head can believe, that they will be other then such as tend to the apparent destruction of the persons which have engaged, and the losse of the ends for which both Kingdomes have engaged in this war. Decl. of the 24th of March, 1647. pag. 25. The bringing of the King to London for a Personall Treaty with the Par∣liament before the maine points in difference between them be setled & assu∣red, is to no other purpose, but to encrease that fond humour of confidence in misled and deceived people, which prevaileth in them too much already before they have assurance; which they and their posterity may after rue and repent, when it is too late to help it. Decl. of the 4. of March, 1647. pag. 21. The Scotch Commissioners mistake their aime, if they thinke the Kings presence with the Parliament necessarily implieth his presence at London, which HE and THEYso much desire; THAT HE MIGHT HAVE OPPORTUNITY TO CAJOLE THE CITIZENS, &c. His re∣turne to his Parliament with the same affections and intentions; that is, to destroy and undermine his Parliament, and to renew the warre against them is as great a reason for his absence from it, as his absence formerly from it in order to destroy it, and to begin a warre against them was then a reason for his presence. Decl. of the 4. of March, 1647. pag. 86. How BASE and DISHONOURABLE a thing would it have been for the houses of Parliament being in that condition they are, to have treated un∣der the Gallowes, to have treated as Traytors, their Cause being not justifi∣ed, nor the Declarations against them as Rebels recalled: And how FOO∣LISH a thing would it have been, being possessed of the sword according to their right, not to secure it even from his owne claime to the contrary, to themselves and posterity before they treated of any thing, to the end that nei∣ther they nor their Posterity might be put to play another bloody game for the same thing. The Parlia∣ments & Scots Commissio∣ners answer to his Majesties Letters of the 26. & 29. of Decemb. 1645. Concerning the Personall Treaty desired by your Majestie, there having beene so much innocent blood of your good Subjects shed in this warre BY YOUR MAJESTIES COMMANDS AND COMMISSIONS. I∣rish Rebels brought over into both Kingdomes, and endeavours to bring over more into both of them; as also forces from Forreigne parts; Your Majestie being in Armes in these parts, the Prince in the head of an Armie in the West, divers Townes made Garrisons, and kept in hostility by your Majestie against the Parliament of England. There being also forces in Scotland a∣gainst that Parliament and Kingdome BY YOUR MAJESTIES COMMISSION. The warre in Ireland FOMENTED AND PRO∣LONGED BY YOUR MAJESTIE, whereby the three Kingdomes are brought neer to utter ruine and destruction; VVe conetive that untill satis∣faction
and security be first given to both your Kingdomes; Your Majesties comming hither cannot be convenient, nor by us assented unto. Answer of the Lords & Com∣mons to His Majesties mes∣sage of the 25. of Aug. 1642. The Lords & Commons in Parl. assembled, having received your Majesties Message of the 25. of August, doe with much griefe resent the dangerous & distracted state of this Kingdom, which we have by all means endeavored to prevent, both by our severall Advices and Petitions to your Majestie, which have been not only without success: but there hath followed that which no ill Councell in former times hath produced, or ANY AGE HATH seen, namely those severall Proclamations and Declarations against both the hou∣ses of Parliament, whereby their actions are declared treasonable, and their persons Traytors, and thereupon Your Majestie hath set up your Standard against them; whereby YOU HAVE PUT THE TWO HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT, AND IN THEM THIS WHOLE KINGDOME OUT OF YOUR PROTECTION: So that UNTILL your Majestie shall recall those Proclamations aad Declarations, whereby the Earle of Es∣sex and both Houses of Parliament, and their Adherents and Assistants, & such as have obeyed and executed their Commands and Directions, according to their duty, are declared Traytors, or otherwise Delinquents: And untill the Standard set up in pursuance of the said Proclamations be taken downe, YOUR MAJESTIE HATH PUT US INTO SUCH A CONDI∣TION; that whilst we so remaine, we cannot by the fundamentall privi∣ledges of Parliament, the publique trust reposed in us, or with the generall good and safety of this Kingdome, give your Majestie any other answer to this Message—which was a denyall of a Treaty according to his Majesties Message untill as afoesaid. In the begin∣ning of the Declaration o the 11. of Feb. 1647. Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons in Par∣liament assembled: That they doe declare that they will make no further addresses or applications to the King. Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons: That no application or addresses be made to the King by any person whatsoever, without the leave of both Houses. Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons: That the person or persons that shall make breach of this Order, shall incurre the penalties of HIGH TREASON. Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Common: That they doe declare that they will receive no more any Message from the King: and doe enjoyne that no person whatsoever doe presume to receive or bring any Message from the King to both or either of the Houses of Parliament, or to any other Person.
Eccho. No more addresses or applications to be made to the King, no mess∣age to be brought from the King to both, or either of the Houses of Parliament, or to any other Persons? What meanes then the com∣mon bleating of the common people of a Personall Treaty with the King? Is it the uncertaine voyce of unsetled multitudes, or the cer∣taine Vote of our present Parliament? If true as 'tis reported; how do our Councels ring changes? whose hearing ears we humbly crave to hearken to the ECCHO of their own language. Honoured Sirs, we aske what reason have you to expect better satisfaction in the way of a Trea∣ty, then formerly you had therein at Uxbridge, or in a Personall treaty at Oxford. Can it enter into our hearts that THIS, EVEN THIS PARLIAMENT, whose Declarations, Protestations, Votes, Or∣ders, Ordinances, Vowes, Covenants, Promises, have fil'd the eares of all Europe, and the Christian-world with words of gallantry, pie∣ty, just liberty and freedome in the behalf of them that have betrusted them. THIS PARLIAMENT, whose severall Expresses, and fre∣quent promises to make us a happy & free Nation, raised up the peo∣ple, and be-spirited the Kingdome, to stand by them in their hopefull endeavours to this end? THIS PARLIAMENT, in whose just Warre against an unjust enemy, so many Widows and Fatherlesse have been made, so many families undone, so many houses, Villages and Towns sack'd and burnt, so many Hospitals fill'd with lame and maimed Souldiers; such leadings into captivity, prisons and dungeons; such shedding of teares, wringing of hands, sorrowes, miseries, and tribu∣lations of many kinds have been endured, and that after all THIS, THIS, EVEN THIS PARLIAMENT should be resolved to treate away all that they have sought for, and to be treated out of what they could not be fought out of? We beseech you satisfie our judgment so lately instru∣cted by your owne Declarations; What can you NOW expect of a treaty (especially as things stand) but that under pretence of satisfying all In∣terests, one Interest shall be set up against another, to divide us: and that thereby having laid no foundation of safety before-hand, the King might set up his Interest above them all. They are your owne words, published on put pose (as we conceive) for our information: Be not offended if we tell you, your hands have found out their enterprize; for your words have taken such hold upon our hearts, that we cannot easily let them goe. We beseech you what foundation of safety is laid? Is there any thing yet concluded between his Majestie and Parliament securing the peace and sasety of the Kingdome as prævious to a Treaty? If none, shall
you not have the way and termes of your peace cut out unto you? And what can that be but the laying a foundation of utter slavery and vassalage to this poore Nation? If you cannot have peace but upon such termes, viz. the will of the King (as doubtlesse you cannot if you must treat as Traytors, and the Kings printed Expresses so branding you, unre∣called) beare with the Eccho of your owne language. Ʋpon THESE termes you needed not have any Warres, which had been much the more Christian resolution, and would have saved the effusion of much blood; whereof if we proceed upon such principles as these, WEE MUST NEEDS DRAW THE WHOLE GUILT UPON OUR SELVES. The weight of your lines doe depress our spirits: and certain it is that they are the words of trueth and sobernesse: And let that day be darknesse wherein, even this Parliament, shall draw the whole guilt of the blood (shed in these Warres) upon themselves.Job 3.3, 4. Let not God regard that day, neither let the light shine upon it. Let darknesse and the sha∣dow of death staine it; let a cloud dwell upon it, Job 10.16, 17. let the blacknesse of the day terrifie it. How will these lines of yours be (as Job saith) Gods witnesses against you, and make him increase his indignation upon you; changes and warre will be upon you, and hunt you even at a fierce Lyon. Shall Englands Parliament, that Parliament of Parliaments, that eight yeares Parliament; which profest more of God, Reformation, Religion, then all Parliaments before them, with whom God did more visibly appeare; for whose defence, safety, and protection, many a time did the Lord breake the heavens, and come downe, making mountaines plaines before them: That Cove∣nant-making Parliament, that Sermon hearing Parliament, that have charged the blood of the late Warres upon their adverse party, draw the whole guilt thereof upon themselves, even by their owne confes∣sion? Can you suppose the way of reasons and perswasions by a Trea∣ty the only faire and just way to a well-grounded Peace? Surely then your selves being Judges, you have gone in a very foule way hither∣to, which should have beene taken into consideration before you had engaged your selves and Kingdome in so much cost and blood (as your owne words are) which was not only spent unnecessarily, but very unlawfully. And you further adde, who doth not see that these principles doe not only bring upon us all the blood that hath beene shedde in this Warre, but also plucketh up the foundation of any hope of ever setling a Peace with the King, that shall bee both just and sure, seeing wee cannot have it justly but upon his (viz the Kings) termes, which no man that hath his eyes in his head,
can beleeve that they will be other then such as tend to the apparent destru∣ction of the persons which have engaged, and losse of the ends for which both Kingdomes have engaged in this warre. Can you beare your owne words, and stand in the day of such a visitation? Will you take such a course and way after eight yeares striving and struggling in fire and blood, to settle the Kingdome, which shall pluck up the foundation of a∣ny hope of ever setling a peace with the King which shall be both just and sure? Hath not God given you such wonderfull advantages by sub∣duing your enemies under your feet, to settle not onely a just, but a sure peace, and will you neglect the day of such grace? Will you now at last take such a way to settle peace, viz. by having it upon the Kings tearms, which no man that hath his eye in his head, can beleeve that they will be other then such as tend to the apparent destruction of the persons which have engaged, and losse of the ends for which both Kingdomes have engaged in this warre? Will not the blood that hath been already shed in these warres, bring in judgement enough, and wrath enough, but that those of the well-affected party that doe yet remain alive, must likewise apparently be destroyed for adhering unto you? Have we spent our estates, our trades, our limbs, our lives for you, and must appa∣rent destruction be our reward? Is this your requitall of us? Is this that just freedome which you promised? Well, if it must be so, Fiat voluntas Domini. The expence of our former treasure and blood is so far from being matter of repentance unto us, that we resolve through the strength of our God, to chuse rather to let this apparent destru∣ction triumph over us, and even hurry us into the pit of silence, rest & peace, in confident expectation of a most advantagious resurrection, then to turn head upon our just principles, and strike hands with a revolting and apostatizing generation; but must not onely the PER∣SONS that have engaged, but the ENDS also for which they have en∣gaged, in joyning with you, be apparently destroyed? Is not the blood of men sufficient to provoke God, and bring wrath, but must the life even of truth it selfe, viz. the Kingdomes cause and ends of our engagement, assist herein? We are not absolutely against a treaty, your wisdoms judging it meet as the case stands; in whom we acquiesce: but that you should resolve to treat before those things necessarily prævious to a treaty be cōclu∣ded upō, we would gladly see a reason for it, that we might be satisfi∣ed with it: For though we hold our selves bound in conscience to satisfie our selves with vour iudgment in things disoutable and con∣troversall;
troversall; yet in things obvious and plain, we expect to have better' satisfaction then the vote of the Houses, especially themselves having so sully informed us about the absolute necessity of those things. We are not ignorant, but that you may lawfully vote, and revoke, and re vote again, order, un order, and re order, ordaine, repeale, and re ordaine the same things over & over, all conducing in your best apprehensions to the cōmon safety; yea that Religion, reason, peace, justice, safety, and faithfulnesse to your trust may require you so to doe, because it is the end, viz. Common safety, & not the means, viz. Your Votes, Orders, Ordinances, &c. must prostrate and command you; yea, and as the case may stand, wee may be bound in conscience to acquiesce therein: but when you have præpossessed our reasons & judgements not by bare Votes, Or∣ders, and Ordinances, but by strong and vigorous reasons, debates & arguments a∣gainst such and such things (not only affirmed, but argued to our full conviction) as bringing upon you the blood that hath been shed in these Wars, yea as plucking up the foundation of any hopes of ever setling a peace with the King, which shall be both just and sure; yea tending to the apparent destruction of the Persons which have engaged, and losse of the ends for which both Kingdomes have engaged in this Warre. Blame us not if we cannot rest satisfied in your doing such things, which in your owne judgments are so conducing; you may happily perswade and argue downe your reasons which have seized upon us, but you cannot order and vote them downe; we can prostrate our opinion, but not our reason to your determination; Neither doe we take upon us to judge what is meet to be done for publique good, having chosen you to judge for us; but we rather rest in your judgements enforc'd by arguments, then evidenced by meer votes, there we have your reason, here your will; we cannot presume you would have us content our selves with your meere will and pleasure, though to the apparent destruction of the wel affected of the Nation, contrary to all principles of reason and equity. You that have told us that a Kingdome must not be ruined at the meer will of the King, have taught us to inferre, that neither should it be sacrificed to the meer pleasure of the Parliament, if it be not even sa∣lus regis, much leffe then can it be volunas Parliament, but salus populi; that is, suprema lex. Surely that God that did never appoint the lives, liberties and estates of millions to be at the meer will and pleasure of the King, did never ordaine like∣wise that these should be at the meere will and pleasure (contrary to expresse judg∣ment and reason) of the Parliament: It is very possible that your Honours have ve∣ry good reasons, and that to satisfaction for what you doe, touching your resoluti∣on of a personall Treaty with the King before satisfaction and security given: if so, we humbly crave to see them, and we have done. But if not, we beseech you consider, How base & DISHONO∣RABLE a thing it would be for the Houses of Parliament, being in that condition they are, to treat under the Gallowes, to treat as traytors, their cause being not justified, nor their Declarations against them as rebels recalled; and how FOOLISH a thing would it have been, being posses∣sed of the Sword according to their right, not to secure it from the Kings claim to the contrary to themselves and posterity, before they treated of any thing, to the end that neither they nor their posterity might be put to play a∣nother
nother bloody game for the same thing? Will you doe things sentenced by your selves for base and dishonorable? Have you wrested the Sword from him and them that would have forced you to the Gallowes, and after all this will you be treated to the Gallowes? Have you not jud∣ged it a FOOLISH thing, that having possession of the Sword, ac∣cording to your right, not to secure it to your selves and posterity before you treat? Or must your selves and posterity either resolve for ever here∣after to let the Sword be alwayes held over your neckes, to keep you under, or else to play another bloody game for the same thing? You could not be cudgel'd into a treaty, and will you be caiol'd and chanted in∣to a treaty before security and satisfaction given? We beseech you inform us (for our judgements lye freely open'd to receive any im∣pressions of reason from you) hath there not been so much innocent blood of his Majesties good subjects shed in this war by his Commands and Commissions? Were not Irish Rebels brought over into both Kingdomes, as also Forces from forraigne parts? Was not the warre in Ireland fomented and prolonged by his Majesty, whereby the three Kingdomes were brought neere to utter ruine and destruction? Were not these strong reasons here∣tofore why you should conceive, that untill his Maty had given satisfacti∣on and security there should be no treaty? Have you not many times attempted to prevaile with the King by severall advices and petitions, which were not onely without successe, but that hath followed, which no ill counsell hath in former times produced, nor any age hath seen; namely, those severall Proclamations and Declarations against both Houses of Parlia∣ment; whereby your actions have been declared treasonable, and your persons traytors? Did not the King set up his Standard against his Parliament; whereby he did put the two Houses of Parliament, and in them the whole Kingdom out of his protection? Did he volūtarily take down his Standard? Hath he recalled his said Proclamations and Declarations, making you & all that stuck to your traytors and rebels? If not, will you treate with him before he hath done it? we are not insensible of your present distractions through the great defection, and almost incredible re∣volting of severall parts of this kingdome, some ships at Sea, and espe∣cially of severall in the Citie of London, and many great zealots in the kingdomes cause, striking hands with Malignants, in promoting their designes, motions, and petitions, to the apparent prejudice of the Parliaments cause, and the kingdomes interest, most strangely and hypocritically pleading conscience of Covenant, and yet breaking the expresse letter of the sixth Article of the Covenant, wherein they
have sworn, not to suffer themselves directly or indirectly, by whatsoever combination, perswasion, or terror, to be divided and with drawn from this blessed union and conjunction, whether to make defection to the contrary part, or to give themselves to a detestable indifferencie or newtrality in this cause, which so much concerneth the glory of God, the good of the King∣domes, and the honour of the King, but have sworn that they shall all the dayes of their lives zealously and constantly continue therein against all oppositions, and promote the same according to their power, &c. We observe likewise the most base, abominable, and horrible de∣fection of some Scots, that have invaded this kingdome, to the ever∣lasting staine of their nation, and abhorring and hissing at them for a most detestable, dishonorable, and dissembling people by all the na∣tions round about them, to the perpetuall scandall of Religion, and the profession thereof, and the sottishnesse, basenesse, un-Englishnesse of many of our English Nation, who most stupidly suffer a most false and treacherous, covetous and covenant-breaking people to bring their wives and children, and driue out the English out of their houses and possessions, as if these (poore souls) came out of meere pie∣ty and love to help up reformation by an army of prophane wretches, commanded by known Cavaliers and Malignants, and to settle the King in a sufficient posture to destroy the Parliament, according to their Covenant, and by his authority to establish Presbytery, which his soule abhorres according to the covenant, to maintain a firme peace between the two Nations by a bloody warre, according to co∣venants and treaties, &c. We are not, we say, unmindfull of these distractions thus befalling you, which we confesse may not onely put you to many straits and difficulties, but provoke you to resolve, that since the people will be deceived, they should be deceived; and since they would be enslaved, after God by the Parliament and their forces had freed them from it, they should be enslaved, &c. But give us leave humbly to reply. First of all, if the people for want of wisdome and conscience to themselves and posterity, should resolve to enslave themselves, since they cannot doe it but by your Concurrence; will your wisedome and consciences suffer you to consent thereunto? Is it their sinne so to doe, and your vertue to help it on by your resolves? Are not you the Fathers of the Kingdome, and will you consent to the childrens madnesse: and because they will destroy themselves in a peltish fit, you will vote them a power to bring it about? Put the Militia into
their owne hands, that they may effect their owne destruction. Will they not destroy you as well as themselves: and must they be enabled to doe all this by authority of Parliament? Doe you not see that men are mad, else would they doe as they doe? spread their garments and palm-branches, and cry hail to them that doe thirst for their blood? and attempt with swords and staves to apprehend and crucifie them, viz. the Parliament and Army, that under God have been their Sa∣viours? And will you put the sword into mad mens hands that would destroy all but their enemies; will not our neighbour-Nations that are lookers on, say we are all madde? Have not you beene fighting all this while for the Militia; and having gotten it by Victory, will you loose it againe by Vote? Shall the Militia of the City or Coun∣ties be put into the hands of reall Malignants, though some of the second Edition, who are the most dangerous, because degenerate and desperate? If a froward people will bring their owne blood, and the blood of the Kingdom: upon themselves, let themselves by them∣selves bring it about, and let not our Parliament joyne with them in that unnaturall act. Secondly, Had you not alwayes a party against you, yea as great, as strong, as mal gnant as now appeares; though they are more da∣ring, bold, and visible; were you not in a worse posture many a time since these warres began, then even now you are in? Petitions appear out of Surrey, Kent, Essex, &c. shewing their malignancy: but not∣withstanding all arts and tricks to get subscriptions. Look upon their numbers, and see whether you have not as great a cause to judge a better, a more united and resolved party for you, then against you? As for the Seas, is not God the God of the Seas, as well as of the Land? doth not he exercise his wonders for his people in the deepe as well as on the dry ground? doth not hee as well hold the waters in the hollow of his fist, as weigh the mountains in a ballance? Did not he as well lead Israel through the Sea, as through the Wildernesse? Hath he not road his circuit round the confines of the Kingdome for you: and can he not, or will he not, thinke you, ride upon the proud waves of the Sea for you, if you trust in him? Is not the Sea his as well as the Land? Or can you thinke that our God is the God of the Land, and your enemies God the God of the Seas? And that as our God hath had his day by Land, so wil theirs have his day at Sea? Is not the Sea sinfull as well as the Land: and may not God be now a purging the Sea, as wel as he hath been in purifying the Land? Can we
thinke that he that hath punished the tyranny of Kings and Nobles by Land, will now indulge the pyracie of Princes & Traitors by Sea? It cannot enter into our hearts, that those that have escaped the righ∣teous vengeance of God by Land, shall be now able to revenge them∣selves on God by Sea? He that hath slain the Dragon by Land, hath power enough to deale with the Leviathan by Sea? If you believe, you shall see the glory of God by Sea as well as by Land. Be not discouraged; If you doe not decline and revolt from your just Cause, God will ac∣compt with your Revolters both by Sea and Land, and their revol∣ting shall be their repentance, and your perseverance & courage, your rejoycing. Thirdly, will you have no work for your faith to act upon? Hath not God driven backe your enemies hundreds by your tennes; hath he not often times divided the red Sea for you, broken the head of Dragons for you, caused mountains to be made plaines before you, thrown downe the walls of Jerico for you, redeemed you out of sixe troubles, and out of seven? Hath hee not delivered you many a time out of your distresse? Looke back we beseech you upon your severall Orders and Ordinances for dayes of Thanks-giving, and the causes thereof: and remember what Balaack often-times consulted, and Balaam answered from Mount-Pisga to Mount-Peor from time to time. Shall your hands now hang downe, and your knees waxe fee∣ble, and your hearts wither like grasse, causing you to throw by that Cause with which God hath so frequently appeared for you. Review all Scripture stories, and other authentique writings, and compare all with these dayes of Gods appearances for you, and see if our eyes have not seene the Almighty renewing his works of old for you, and now will you faint? What, have all your Experiences, and all your Sermons begot no greater a faith, but that you should be ready to faint and fall at your present troubles? Hath your faithfull God after all your experiences of his truth and goodnesse so little credite with you? Vide Article 4. of the so∣lemne league and covenant.4ly. Doe your enemies multiply? who is the cause of it? Is it not your indulgence to them? Have not you saved many a thiefe from the Gallows, that is now striving to cut your throats? Did you not vow and sweare with hands lifted up to the most high God, that you would with all faithfulnesse endeavour the discovery of Incəndiaries, Ma∣lignants, and evill Instruments, &c. that they may be brought to publique tryall, and receive CONDIGNE punishment. And have you done thus?
what means then the beating of poor sheep in many Counties against the oppressing Malignants, admitted for Deputi-Lieutenants: yea into severall Committees, where they have vexed your friends for their faithfulnesse to you. Are not these the men that prove goades in your sides, and thorns in your eyes? Doth not God seem to resolve to re∣ject you from retaining your wonted authority in the Kingdome, as he did Saul from being King: And is it not for the same cause, viz. your sparing of Agags, whom you should have hewen in pieces by the sword of Justice for that blood which they have shed, making many women childlesse in this Kingdome? Shall the feare of the people de∣ter you as it did him from doing Justice? Is not God to be feared more then the people? Doth not the cry of blood, Irish-blood, Scot∣tish-blood, and English-blood make a noise in your eares? Will not God make inquisition for blood? Was there ever so much blood spilt, and so little inquisition made for blood as there hath beene since this Parliament began? And have you not just cause to feare, lest your lives should goe for theirs? Considering what Promises & Covenants you have made, to bring such bloody Delinquents unto condigne pu∣nishment: and what opportunities have you had to perform the same. Shall not Agag, and the fattest Malignants be only spared against all lawes of justice and equity: but must these have swords put into their hands again? Will they not hew you in pieces before the Lord, for sparing them contrary to Gods command, and the expresse letter of the So∣lemn League and Covenant? We beseech you consider, were there ever such horrible things committed: so many Riots, Rebellions, Treasons, Murthers, and blood-shed, perpetrated in this Kingdome and so little justice done upon such Delinquents, as there have beene since you have had the government of the Kingdome in your hands? 'Tis true indeed, before this Parliament, those were smitten, which should have been spared: and since this Parliament, have not many been spared, which should have beene smitten? Then the righteous were condemned, and now are not the wicked justified? And is not the one as well as the other an abhomination unto the Lord? Did not punishing the innocent by our former Rulers make them & their government despised of God? And doth not sparing the guilty by our present Rulers, make them and their government scorned of men, and displeasing to God? And can these be long liv'd that are rejected both by God and men? Looke upon your Petitioners, especially the capitall among them of Kent, Essex, Surrey, and send for an informa∣tion
of those grave and wel-affected Citizens, that you hear of, so fre∣quently soliciting the Common-councel of London to Petitiō you for a Personall Treaty at London: and enquire who in the said Common-Councell are such sticklers for the said Petitions, and you will easily find who they are that trouble you: and whether your indulgence to Malignants, and those that are yours, and your Armies enemies are not the great cause of your present troubles both from Scotland, and in our owne Kingdome. Were those cast out of the Common-Councell upon whom the plaine characters of malignancy are stampt, viz. 1. Those that did not contribute voluntarily for the service of the Parliament, according to their Propositions. 2. Those that have been disarmed. 3. Those that have been imprisoned for Ma∣lignancy. 4. Those that have had a hand in the Treasonable en∣gagement. 5. Those that have beene, and are most notorious ene∣mies to your Forces, contrary to their solemn Vow and Covenant. 6. Those that did abett the horrible force upon the two Houses, &c. You should quickely see another face, both upon the Common-Councell, and whole Citie, then now you doe: Neither should such lying Pamphlets, scurrillous Ballads, scandalous Libels, and slande∣rous Papers, made on purpose to cast dirt into the face of the Parlia∣ment, be suffered to be sold in the most publique places, even at the Exchange, and else-where as now they are; never was there such con∣tempt cast upon Authority as is now, even in the great Citie it selfe: And no marvell, since the quondam awfull authority of Parliament it selfe is so scorned and abused, and no justice done upon offenders in this kind, insomuch that it is almost dangerous for a man to plead for the Parliaments authority, and for a Parliament souldier that fights for their Cause, to ride through the City: and who can won∣der at it, when no man suffered for that horrible force made upon the Houses to the amazement of all beholders. Nay, it is to be wisht that there were not of those reverend gown-men that encouraged those villains in that Rebellion, sitting in Common-councell, and contriving their ruine. If you will suffer your authority thus to lan∣guish, the peace and welfare of the whole Kingdome will also languish and perish. Are not Murders, Felonies, Treasons, Burglaries, Mutinies, Insurrections, committed even in the great Citie, so that blood lies upon it, and disquiets it (though we minde not the cause of our pre∣sent troubles) & no justice at al done: A noyse we hear of a Commis∣sion
of Oyer and Terminer for the trials of those horrible things, as also of votes making such as rise up fomenting a new warre in the seve∣rall Counties, guilty of high treason, that those that invited the Scots into this Kingdome, are traytors, &c. But though you have severall in your hands, yet the worst that comes to them is, that they are se∣cured in prison (it may be but for some few dayes neither) from the hands of the Souldiers that would give them their due if they could meet them in the field; so that your Votes, and Orders, and Ordinances, and Declarations threatning such and such things a∣gainst Delinquents, what are they but Fulmina bruta, the crackling of gun-pots, and no more regarded; paltry Pamphlets, prophane Bal∣lads, to the dishonour of God, scorn and scandall of the Parliament, sold and sung in open streets. Is not the Parliament made the Drun∣kards song, tost up and down in the lewd lips of idle tiplers, in every Taphouse and Tavern? whereas in severall Countries you shall scarce heare a man to open his mouth against the Parliament, the reason is, because they are presently snapt up by order of some diligent Com∣mittee or other. Were the same course taken in the Citie, would not the same effect follow thereon? Neither can it be said that you can∣not execute iustice, the people are so tumultuous, &c. for the longer you suspend it the more unable you will be for it, and if you doe well, who will harm you? Is not justice Gods ordinance, and will he de∣cline his own ordinance? Did he ever deny his assisting you in the ex∣ecution of justice (at least if you did exercise that authority and po∣wer in doing it as you might? Was not the Parliament of England the dread of Princes, and is it not now the scorn of Pesants? Did not the execution of justice even upon Princes, make them the dread of the one, and the neglect of justice even upon peasants (rogues and vagrants abusing you in open streets) make you the scorn of the o∣ther? Nay, would you even now blind your eyes to all carnall fears, & discouragements, and feare not the face of man, professe and practice, we say again, PRACTISE principles of justice and righteous∣nesse in the Kingdome, God would subdue the people under you, and your friends would multiply and love you, your enemies would moulder away, and feare and tremble before you, and you would yet cause the peace and welfare of this kingdom (which is now withe∣ring under your hands) to flourish and prosper, and both our pre∣sent times, and ages to come, would call you Blessed. FINIS.
