p2212b 43077560 151646
THE RELIGIOUS CAVALIER. Done out of French. By Gideon Pierreville, Gent. LONDON, Printed by J. H. for John Cripps, at the Black Lyon Post-Office, between the two Temple Gates in Fleetstreet. 1683.
TO THE Right Honourable KATHARINE Countess of KILDAKE. Madam, THE Ambition Writers have to flourish with some considerable personage in the Head of their Productions, would be less liable to Censure,
if this Conduct of theirs were regulated by judgment, or in∣fluenced by good fortune. But we many times see the Patro∣nage they make Choice of, has no other desert than that of a Glorious Title, nor no other Claim to their Eulogies than onely Eminent Extraction. But these addresses of mine how∣soever blame-worthy for their presumption are at least autho∣rized by the Contemplation of such Extraordinary Qualities as create a veneration in all mankind for your Ladiship, and have made me throng with this Offering to your Feet. My Design is onely, Madam, your
Entertainment, which I thought this Religious Cavalier capa∣ble of affording, and that the merits of his Story would ob∣tain him the honour of Natu∣ralization from your Ladiship's hands. I will leave to others, Madam, the vanity of endea∣vouring to give the world an Idea of so charming a Character as that of your Ladiships; the vanity of pretending to draw and copy an Inimitable Beauty, and of proclaiming Ʋertues which can never be better expres∣sed than by their effects, and which even out-shine the Glories of your Birth, and the lustre of your alliance. All I aspire to is
the having one Voice in the Ge∣neral Consort, and leave to de∣clare the profound respect and submission wherewith I am, Madam, Your Ladiships Most Humble and Most obedient Servant; Gideon Pierreville.
THE RELIGIOUS CAVALIER. EƲrope was in a Calm, Mars and Bellona weary of sowing slaughter and horrour had de∣livered up to the delights of a sedate and rural life one of their Bravest Ministers. A Nobleman did pleasingly enjoy the satisfaction of the Vintage of the most delicious Wines of France, which grew near his Castle in the Province of Cham∣pagne; when that Heaven thought fit to recompence his Heroick La∣bours by giving him in Placidia and Damis an accomplisht Daughter and a worthy Heir of his Great Heart:
this last received an Education Con∣formable to his Extraction, and Placidia, who shared deepest in the inclination of her Parents, was brought up in all the Exercises of a person of her Rank. The Peace did not last long, some Bickerings ari∣sing between Spain and France, the Count, Placidia's Father, was re∣called to Court while she took Les∣sons upon the Lute and Guittar from an Italian Master who taught her to perfection the Italian Tongue, to which she had a natural inclina∣tion. That Illustrious Cavalier had order to march at the Head of a Re∣giment to the Siege of Lisle, where having been wounded mortally by a Granado, he found in the Ditch of that Town the usual Tomb of Great Men. Placidia was then but twelve years old, when the Countess her Mother received news of the Death of her Illustrious Husband. That
Lady imparted the sad tidings to her Daughter of the tragical end of the Count her Father, who though in so tender an age had nevertheless sense enough to be infinitely grieved for the loss: they both afforded for some time Tears to the Memory of the Deceased, which were still trick∣ling when the Countess took an Oath usual to young Widows, never to think of a second Marriage. They mourn'd for a season in the Countrey, where all the Nobility came to Court to them, as to the Principal Family of the Province. Placidia being lookt upon as a rich Match had many Votaries, but as she was not onely yet too young, the Countess her Mother fancied she could no where so well receive the Breeding of a person of her Quality as at Paris, which we may call the School of politeness. Whereupon she took a resolution of going to spend the Winter there; and some
few days after, going thither accor∣dingly, she took a House ready fur∣nished in the Fauxbourg de Saint Germain, which is the part of the Town most frequented by Stran∣gers who live at a great rate. The Countess made so great a figure, and Placidia was so beautifull as to at∣tract to their Lodging many gallant Men. Their House became in a few months the Rendevous of an infinity of Courtiers, who persuaded the Countess to allow of Gaming at her Lodgings. She was of too great Qua∣lity to give occasion to any suspici∣ons of self-interest and libertinism. It seems as if persons who are distin∣guished by their Extraction are un∣capable of giving of themselves any low sentiments, and it is commonly onely those who have neither much good nor ill fortune that Calumny attacks. Amongst that Crowd of young Sparks, who paid Visits of Complai∣sance
to the Countess, and assiduities to the blooming Charms of Placidia, two Cavaliers distinguisht them∣selves amongst the rest, insomuch that it seem'd as if Colonel Fragel and the Marquis de Phare, were born, the one as the older of the two for the Countess, and the other for the Daughter, though indeed the Colonel and the Marquis had onely Eyes for Placidia. The Cha∣racter of the genius of those two Gentlemen was very different: the Colonel was a man naturally reser∣ved, and did not, like the Marquiss, take a pride in proclaiming himself the Favourite of Placidia though he really was so: the Marquis on the contrary gloried in being thought the Lover of so beautifull a person; and that all the world might flatter him with so fine a Conquest, he let no opportunity escape of promoting the Opinion of his being her Gallant. He went neither to the Play-house,
Park, nor any other publick place, but in her Coach; he never stirred from her House, and was always making her some considerable Pre∣sent, which she accepted by her Mothers leave, who would not have been sorry that a Young Man of that Quality were entred into her alliance. The Colonel for his part being very much persuaded, that how favoura∣ble soever Placidia's might be to the Marquis her Heart belied her Eyes, and her complaisance did husband his addresses to her with so much art and nicety, that he became the onely object of her tender Inclinati∣ons. He had indeed a Rival in ap∣pearance, but was convinced Pla∣cidia had for that concurrent no∣thing beyond indifferency. The Marquis having much of the indiscretion of the age, and reckon∣ing the kind looks of his pretended Mistress as certain Favours, having contracted some acquaintance at the
Countess's House with the Colonel, who came thither every Evening, did without much scrutiny engage so far in friendship with him, as to make him the Confident of all his se∣crets. Their commerce of friendship was encreased by Parties of Divertise∣ment which they made together; the Colonel appearing indifferent to the Marquis in all that concerned Placidia: the Marquis did not think he ran any risque by unbosoming to him his disposition for that lovely person. The Colonel, who was ad∣mirably perfect in the art of dissimu∣lation, did outwardly espouse his Cause, flattered him more and more with his having insinuated himself into his Mistress's heart, and made use of his weak side to promote his own affairs. And indeed the Coun∣tess, whom her Daughter and the Marquis had prepossessed with the good intentions of the Colonel, did willingly admit of his entring into
something private Conversations with Placidia; at his coming from which, the Colonel made the Mar∣quis a description of so tender a love, that this Cavalier fancied him∣self passionately beloved. In the mean while the Colonel took ad∣vantage of the liberty that was granted him of approaching Placi∣dia. He found the secret to surprize that young Heart, whereof he ren∣dred himself so absolutely the Ma∣ster, that that Divine Creature onely acted by him, and had no more mo∣tion than those he inspired into her: the little inclination the Countess had for the Colonel, at least in re∣gard of all alliance, was sufficiently known by our two Lovers. They vowed to one another an Eternal Fidelity, being resolved to wait a seasonable opportunity, and contrived the means together of making a property of the Marquis's easiness, and of diverting themselves
at his Cost. It was but too easie for them to render him their laugh∣ing-stock, and the subject of their pastime, he went very open to Placi∣dia, and concealed nothing from the Colonel. Some years passed in this inno∣cent Commerce for the one, though not so for the other. Placidia with age became more cautious and rational, when Love, who is always the Authour of some disorder, and glories in keeping to himself the Subjects he has once sub∣dued to his Empire, came to disturb the pleasures our Lovers had hardly tasted. A Member of the Parlia∣ment, who though a Gown-man, was not the less amourously inclin'd, frequented the Countess's House, and had for some months made Love to her; when time and occa∣sion had worn out of the memory of that beautifull Widow the Oath she had taken, if for his part he
made known to her his passion, she for hers did not prove insensible. A little thing does revive those flames that are newly extinguished; the delights that are enjoyed in the sa∣cred bond of Marriage did renew their traces in the Countess's imagi∣nation: The Gallant did so power∣fully promote the recalling of those tickling Idea's, that theirs would not have been deferred, so vehement was their reciprocal passion, if her Lover had not represented to her, that it was first of all convenient to secure themselves from the insults of the Family by giving an account of Damis and Placidia's Estate, whose Guardian she had been. He could have wish'd he might have rid him∣self of them both, by confining them to a Cloister; but Damis being the onely Heir of his Father's Name, it was necessary he should continue in the world; and this made them a∣gree to employ their Friends to have
him received as one of the King's Pages. They did not think Placi∣dia so necessary a Moveable in the world, how beautifull soever she was in her Curls, they thought a Nuns dress would not unbecome her; whereupon they condemned her to the obscurities of a Cloister with precipitation, and conferred afterwards seriously of the means to make her desirous of a Monastical life. The Deceased Earl had a Religi∣ous Sister in the Convent of Avenay, some Leagues from the City of Rhemes, and very near his Castle. The Countess's Gallant thought that Sanctuary very worthy of Pla∣cidia's Vows, and told the Countess that without sounding her upon the business, it was requisite to steal her away from the sight of her Adorers, and under a pretext of a return, carry her to the Castle, and from thence cunningly deliver her to her
Aunt. This Resolution was accor∣dingly taken, and the Gallant staid at Paris to solicit for a considerable Place, and likewise that he might not be thought to have had any hand in the matter, while the Coun∣tess took all the exactest measures possible for the execution of her en∣terprize. Placidia, who had not had the least hint of all these contrivances, was extremely surprized that with∣out having the time to take her leave of any body, she saw her self obli∣ged to take Coach with her Mother, who told her she took that course to avoid the importunate civility of the taking leave of a hundred per∣sons who would have come to see them. Whereupon they took the Road to Rhemes in order to their going to their own Castle, when the Colonel, whom they had not seen in two days, and who had had notice of their sudden departure
met them as returning Post from Louvoy for particular affairs. The Countess fearing if she should flatter him with a speedy return, it would engage him to wait on them to the Castle, told the Colonel that some Domestick affairs called her for a fortnight to her House, and that about that time her Daughter and she should be returned to Paris. This Cavalier took this specious rea∣son for a real truth, and offered with so good a Grace to guard them at least as far as the Castle, that this favour could not be refused him: whereupon he dismissed his Postboy, and took place in the Coach, where he was so much master of his Eyes, that it was impossible the Countess should perceive they kept any cor∣respondence with those of Placidia's. At their coming to the Castle, the Countess being taken up with re∣viewing her House, the Colonel had the opportunity to take a turn in the
Garden with Placidia, going from Walk to Walk they at length came to an Alley that was shaded and co∣vered with Trees, and where no body could see or overhear them; they seated themselves, and began to make the most tender declarati∣ons imaginable, and renew their for∣mer Oaths of an inviolable fidelity, when the discovery of a Footman's coming slowly to them, interrupt∣ed their Conversation, and oblig'd them to go partake of a Collation. During all the Evening, and the next Morning untill eleven a clock that the Colonel departed, our Il∣lustrious Lovers had neither time nor opportunity to converse, the Mo∣ther undesignedly proving to them a troublesome Argus. But what do not Lovers say when they are ne∣cessitated to hold their peace, and what is more pathetical and expres∣sive than their silence? Before the Colonel took Horse, he told Placi∣dia
after a gallant manner in her Mothers presence, Well! Queen of Beauties, when will the Marquis have the pleasure of seeing you again? whereto that innocent Victim re∣plied ingenuously, My Mother gives me hopes it will be within fifteen days. That time will not be over long if it be the term of your return, reassumed he, But if your absence, fair Placidia, should last fifty days it would be uneasie to you, and a mortification to your Lovers. On the morrow the Countess proposed to her Daughter to go make a Visit to her Religious Aunt: Never having seen her, she seemed very desirous to accompany her Mother to the Convent. Immediately after their arrival there, the Aunt came into the Parlour, where after some ghost∣ly conversation the discourse became more free, at the end whereof our Ladies were invited to a Collation which was prepared for them in a∣nother Parlour. The good humour
of both sides the Grate did partake in the Entertainment, from which the Countess got up to discourse her Religious Sister-in-law upon the de∣sign she had upon her Daughter. That voluntary Captive, who ac∣cording to the Cloister Maximes look'd upon the most innocent plea∣sures of the age as forbidden fruit, did applaud the Countess's Dectara∣tion, and promised her to doe all that was possible to prevail with Placidia to give her Mother the satisfaction she expected from her submission. There remained now nothing more than to make the Daughter desirous to see the innerside of the Convent, and to make her resolve to spend some days there. The Nuns are but too ingenious at inspiring such kind of inclinations: they proposed the matter so cunningly to the innocent Placidia, that the Doors were not soon enough open. This Religious House being one of the finest of the
Province, upon the first proposition that was made to Placidia of spend∣ing some days there she accepted the offer, and consented to stay a week; whereupon in she went, and her Mother having pass'd her word to send for her back at the time appoin∣ted, she took Coach and return'd to the Castle. The honest Nun in the mean while did dexterously try how her Niece stood affected, and made her such fine descriptions of a retired life, that if she had not a natural horrour for solitude she would have immediately complied and deman∣ded the Veil. As she had not the least disposition to a retired life, fol∣lowing the facetiousness of her gay humour, she did but make a jest on't when they proposed her re∣nouncing the world: Her free reper∣tees which pall'd those who endea∣vour'd to reduce her, did not dis∣courage the Aunt, who daily seem'd to insinuate to her that the Countess
her Sister-in-law had onely left her with her that she might relish the pleasure of a Cloister-life, and how easie it was to attain Heaven in that retreat. This old piece of Con∣tinency one day seeing that all those rich Images she laid before her Nieces eyes seem'd to her hideous, and that she seem'd to be extremely disgusted with the little she had tasted of a Monastical life, full of an indiscreet zeal, she told her, My dear Niece, I must at present open my heart to you, and declare what is absolutely the will of your Lady Mother. What is her will, interrupted Placidia laughing, is it that I change my Hood into a Veil? Yes, replied the Aunt gravely, and she brought you hither for no other purpose. Placidia who thought it was onely a trick to try her made answer after a drolling way, that she was yet too young, and uncapa∣ble of judging of the consequences of a choice of that importance; that
she would take time to think of it, and that if Heaven inspired her with a love of solitude she did assure her that she was so well pleas'd with their Convent as that she should pre∣fer it before any other. The old one continued still to insist, and Pla∣cidia to defend her self, till the next day when she expected a Coach to fetch her home, she was much sur∣prized to see a Servant of her Mo∣thers enter the Court with a Cart laden with all manner of things ne∣cessary for the furnishing a Cham∣ber neatly: As soon as the Servant saw her, he came up and delivered her this Letter from the Countess. I do not doubt, my dearest Daughter, but that the Convent of Avenay does please you extremely, and that it will be joyfull news to you that Heaven destins you for that place: your Aunt will have informed you of my good in∣tentions, listen to the voice of the di∣vine
spirit which calls you in secret, let not those holy ardours cool in your heart, and be assured that being a good Mother, there shall be nothing wanting on my part for your spending a calm and happy life in the land of the Saints, where you are at present. I send you wherewith to furnish your Chamber; your Aunt will take care to provide you with all the other little things you shall have occasion for. Be carefull to write to me from time to time, and be persuaded that I shall ever be your best friend. Placidia was seiz'd at the reading of this Letter with so great an asto∣nishment, that she had like to have fallen into a swoon; nevertheless she made a great effort upon her self, and surpassing the sentiments of her age, she turn'd towards her Aunt, and told her with tears in her Eyes, I perceive, reverend Mother, I must be sacrificed to Family-interests, by
burying me all alive in a place, where for want of calling, I can never take delight in; but no matter, no matter; God the revenger of oppressed innocence, will free me out of the Captivity I am brought under by a criminal self-inte∣rest. I consent to stay here till the Divine Providence shall otherwise or∣der it. They unloaded the Cart, and Placidia sent back the Coach∣man without giving him any answer for the Countess her Mother. All the Nuns, as soon as he was departed, assembled round Placidia, assured her of their good will, and strove who should give her the most diversion. She supported her self in that tribulation untill the mor∣row, when grief got so much the upper hand of her, that it cast her into a languishment, which was followed by a Fever that lasted above four months.
In the mean while the Countess return'd to Paris, gave an account to her Lover, who had gotten a considerable Place at Court, of what had pass'd, and told him she believ'd Heaven conspir'd with them, and that her Daughter was really born for a Cloister-life. This Gallant, upon this testimony looking upon Placidia's having professed her self a Nun as a thing certain, represented to the Countess that nothing hin∣dred their Marriage, to which he found that fair Widow so ready dis∣posed, that the Nuptial Ceremonies were completed, and the Marriage consummated. She had changed her Lodgings, and having taken the House of her new Husband in the Street called Richlieu, she went eve∣ry day to Mass to a Convent hard by; the Colonel being one day there, was extremely surprized to see the Countess, whom he hardly knew again, for that she had chan∣ged
her Mourning into Cloth of Gold. He approach'd one of her Lacquayes who wore her Husband's Livery, and inquired of him, with∣out being perceived by the Lady, after the health of Mademoiselle Pla∣cidia, and after the place where she was. The Footman not having been forewarned, made presently answer, that they had left her sick in the Convent of Avenay, where she did not seem to be overwell pleased. The undiscreet easiness of this Fellow, making the Colonel pry farther into the business, he was inform'd of the Countess's alliance with the Courtier, and the place of their abode. Having heard too much for his repose, he withdrew in a pensive humour, and went directly to his own House for the taking Resolutions there becoming the fi∣delity of his Love.
In a moment he form'd the de∣sign of taking Post to go to Avenay in all haste; he arrived there the next morning. He asked for Ma∣demoiselle Placidia at the Grate, who came thither all languishing as she was in the company of an old Matron, according to the Cloister custome. After some words purely of civility, that poor Lover told his dear inclinations, with an air which bore the character of indifferency. Well, Mademoiselle, the Divine Spi∣rit is willing to have you of the number of his well beloved Spouses. Since when have you received such salutary inspi∣rations? truly the conduct of Provi∣dence is admirable upon the Elect. I cannot sufficiently admire how that in so short a time a person could be pre∣vailed with to leave the Court for a Desart, and such a person as seem'd naturally inclin'd to the splendour of the world. I can hardly conceive the force of the motions that have prompted
you to come bury your self all alive in a House, which nevertheless we may with justice call the Temple of Vertue. He would still have continued his witty descant upon this Point, had not Placidia, who feared he would in∣sensibly pass on to some matter which might have given suspicion to her old Companion, interrupted him with a sigh, and said, That in∣deed her Call had something impure, that she held it from a secret intenti∣on of her Mothers, who had by arti∣fice got her into the Cloister; but that God who commonly makes use of the self-interested designs of men for the working his will, made her daily more and more passionate for a Religious life, for which she had then as much inclina∣tion, as she had in the beginning hated its Maximes. Our Cavalier, partly guessing at the reason she thus dis∣guised her sentiments, made a shew as if he had the same sense too. He began to make a hideous description
of the Age, and to extoll the advan∣tages of a retired life with so much eloquence, as to say he himself de∣signed to die in a Convent, that the old Nun was disposed to leave them at liberty. And truly that zealous Old one hearing him discourse after so religious a manner, fancied this Gentleman was the person who had married the Countess, and that he came thither onely to inflame Pla∣cidia's passion for the Veil. Possess∣ed with this opinion, she thought convenient to leave them alone to converse together, and retired un∣der pretext of some regular exercise which demanded her appearance in the Dormitory. She was no sooner out of the Parlour than that Placi∣dia's Lover seemed quite struck dumb, and she for her part could not speak to him a word. They look'd upon one another for some time without speaking, the Eyes alone being the faithfull Interpreters
of the disposition of their Hearts. Placidia's fears gave liberty to their mutual grief. She related to her Lover the procedure and ill designs of her Mother, and conjured him to believe that she had hot any incli∣nation for a retired life, though she outwardly seem'd to have for the obtaining the liberty of the Parlour which otherwise she would have been deprived of. Upon this de∣claration our Cavalier told Placidia with such a tone of voice as insinua∣ted to her the state of his passion. Do you then still love me, charming Placidia? may I presume that the ma∣lice of the world has not been capable to break those ties that Heaven has join∣ed? Yon ought to be persuaded, re∣plied she, that I love you, and that what violences soever I may be made to suffer, they shall never ravish from me a liberty which I have engaged to you, and which if you do not enjoy, you your self shall be onely to blame. Her tears
stifled the rest, and excited those of the Cavalier, who was little accu∣stomed to shed any. Nevertheless they held up at length, and the Ca∣valier renewing the discourse, said to Placidia, What can I doe, my dear Demoiselle, in the present conjuncture? Command, I am ready to undertake all things to the prejudice of my Interests, of my glory, and of my life. Continue to love, resum'd she, and that is suf∣ficient. The advice you give me, ad∣ded the Colonel hereupon, is injuri∣vous to my fidelity. I have made a vow to love you eternally, and I do not believe that death can be capable of destroying my inviolable passion. Does the business lie in hazarding my estate, my employments, my honour and my life for the freeing you out of pain, I am ready to expose all, and even to sacrifice my self for your satis∣faction? Placidia seem'd to be per∣suaded that her Lover spoke sincere∣ly, when she made him answer, That
it was not yet time to come to extre∣mity, that they were to wait the issue of things, that perhaps Heaven chan∣ging her Mothers heart, would restore them to one another without their being obliged to run any hazard: she added, that without doubt she should be for∣ced to take the Veil, but in the in∣terval between the taking the Habit and the Profession they might take mea∣sures and contrive her escape if it be∣came necessary. The Colonel, who was just a going into the Campagne, and had laid out all his money for the putting himself in a fine equi∣page, what inclination soever he had for Placidia's freedom, yet had not so much forgot his obligations, and his duty, but that he was glad to see her disposed to take patience for some time. He engaged his Faith for all she had a mind to, and took his leave of her, after having passed his word to come and com∣fort her in a short time.
He was no sooner returned to Pa∣ris than that he met with the Mar∣quis, more passionate than ever for Placidia, whom he had been newly informed was detain'd by her Mo∣thers command, in the Abbey of the Benedictine Nuns at Avenay. This young man having invited him to Supper, they went together into the Balcony, when all their discourse was of Placidia's absence. I shall know the end of the Intrigue, said the Marquis, I have spies abroad, and my Valet de Chambre, a cunning fel∣low, has already got the length of the foot of one of the Countess's Domesticks, who has already told him several things. I shall he revenged, on that unnatural Woman, and at the peril of my life, I will free that adorable Creature from so disagreeable way of living: I intend to go Post three days hence to the place where she is, and I shall he informed from her her self what designs they have upon her: If you will be of the
Party, I offer to be at the charges of the Journey, and to spare nothing for your good diversion. The Colonel pretending some business which tied him indispensably to the Court, told him that he would not advise him to undertake that Journey, and that undoubtedly the Mother, who had caused her Daughter to be confined, would have so much wit as to for∣bid she should have the freedom of the Grate, and that thus he might, perhaps, go very far to seek in a re∣fusal a greater matter of vexation. This remonstrance of the Nun did but irritate the Marquis's passion, who bethought himself at that in∣stant of an expedient which prov'd successfull. I will carry a Coat to be made like the Countess's Livery, said he, and I do not doubt but that such a Casaque will procure me entrance into the Parlour. This was the onely expedient he could employ, that his design might have a favourable issue.
He executed what he had concei∣ved, and under that disguise he ob∣tained a private conference with Placidia, though the Abbess had re∣ceived order but two days before not to suffer her to speak to any bo∣dy, upon the notice the Countess had had that a Cavalier had been to make a Visit to her Daughter; but she could not nevertheless discover who he was by the imperfect de∣scription that had been sent her of the person. The Abbess, not in the least doubting but that this preten∣ded Servant was a Domestick of the Countess's Family, allowed Placidia to see and stay some time with him. That charming person knew him immediately under that borrowed Habit, and like to those who a∣drowning seize on all those they meet with, she made Caresses to that travestied Cavalier, in hopes, that if the Colonel happened to fail
in his word, she might make use of the ministry of this Spark for the re∣covery of her liberty. It is not to be conceived how much the Mar∣quis's passion was encreased by this Interview; he spoke of nothing but of carrying her away at that very time, and would have pusht on his indiscretion much farther, if Placi∣dia had not checked his furious fal∣lies, by remonstrating to him, that precipitation in a business of that na∣ture was rather capable of spoiling things, than to procure them suc∣cess according to their desire. That Illustrious Captive knew so well how to curb the boiling temper of the young Cavalier, that she pre∣pared him for all she had a mind to. They took together the same Reso∣lutions that she had taken with the Colonel, that is to say, they pro∣jected her escape m case the issue of things constrained them to that ex∣tremity. This Conference which
would have lasted much longer, was interrupted by the coming in of the Abbess, who inquired of the Mar∣quis of the Countess's health. He understood himself well enough to satisfie exactly to all her demands, and had likewise a moments time to discourse Placidia, whom Supper deprived him of, after having recei∣ved from her a thousand protestati∣ons of an immortal fidelity. This travestied Lover having ta∣ken Post again, in a few hours space got to Paris, where impatient to impart to the Colonel the success of his Voyage, he sought for him im∣mediately after his arrival but sought for him; in vain; that Officer had received Orders the Evening before to goe incessantly to his Regiment at Peronne, for to march elsewhere. The young Marquis, who had not yet made a Campagne, and who had made his interest at Court for a Troup of Horse obtained that very
day the Commission, with Orders to go join the Troups near: St. Quin∣tin. This new Dignity did a little deface out of his mind the Ideas of Placidia, and instead thereof, traced the image of glory, which made him depart at that very instant. In the Neighbourhood of Arras was the Rendesvouz of the whole Army designed for Flanders. Our young Captain met there with, the Colonel, Placidia's Lover, to whom he gave an account of what had pas∣sed between him and his Mistress, and of the design he had to procure her Escape, at his return, from the Campagne, if they forced her to make her Vows. The Colonel, ap∣prehending that the boiling youth of this Officer might prevent his de∣signs, contracted with him a greater commerce of Friendship, and: de∣stiny would have it that they often made use of the same Ten, ir Regiments never separating. The
Campagne was severe, and gave not any repose to those Military Sparks, who had no sooner began to relish the refreshments of the Winter∣quarters than the Marquis's passion was so reinflamed, that he had no∣thing in his mouth but the lovely name of Placidia. Our Colonel perceiving that this passion degene∣rated into fury, and fearing it might make him attempt something to the prejudice of his own, besides foresee∣ing that this young man was upon the point of obtaining three months leave, which he solicited for the going to see Placidia, he fell out with him upon a positive dispute that happened at play. He had also an inclination to rid himself of this rash Rival, and for that purpose Chal∣lenged him to meet him half a league from Peronne. The Mine was dis∣covered; they were betrayed by one of their Seconds, insomuch that they were taken into Custody when
they were upon the point of fighting, and by his Majestie's Order confined at Peronne. They stayed there near two months, where they had time enough to be reconciled. Placidia was in the mean while clothed with the Habit of the Novi∣ces, and the time of her Profession grew near, which cast her into a mortal sadness, and her grief did with so much the more reason aug∣ment, in that she received no tidings of her Lovers. When that our two Cavaliers were set at liberty, the young Officer obtained six weeks leave for to go settle some affairs, but he destined it for the going to give Placidia assurances of the con∣tinuation of his flames. The Colo∣nel, whose passion was no less strong to go see the worthy object of his Love, infinitely troubled to see that this young Man prevented him in a Visit, which he had for above a year projected to pay Placidia, did not
however shew the least concern to his Rival, and onely conjured him To present his humble Service to that charming Prisoner. The Li∣very Coat, whereof we have already made mention, did the Marquis one good Office more: It gave him a free access to the beautifull Novice, to whom, in the several Conversa∣tions they had had together, he ne∣ver spoke of the Colonel, but as of a Man who had for a long time been confiscated into the Chirurgeons hands for the cure of a shamefull Disease. He enjoyed the Conversa∣tion of that illustrious Captive for above fifteen days, always pretend∣ing that the Countess being, at the Castle, did still give him in charge some new Commission for her Daughter, at the end of which time fearing to give some occasion of dis∣trust, he took leave of Placidia, af∣ter having engaged by inviolable Oaths to steal her away though she
were professed Religious of twenty years standing. The impatience he was in made him return with all speed to his Quarters, where he did not find the Colonel, whom with grief he heard was gone to Paris. But as he did not think him his Ri∣val, his absence did not oblige him to entertain any such suspicion, as to oblige him to quit his Post; but he impatiently expected the Colo∣nel's return. The Colonel having never been but once at the Grate, being per∣suaded that he could not be known by any of the Nuns, sent word to the Abbess, that the Governour of his Majestie's Pages, who had Sister Placidia's Brother under his Disci∣pline, did on purpose alight there to make her a Visit, and that being very much in haste, he desired my Lady Superiour to have the goodness to allow him to pay her and Sister Placidia his respects Our beauti∣full
Novice was then walking with the Abbess in the Garden, her La∣diship having taken Physick that day, when that Sister Touriere ac∣costed her. This good natur'd Ab∣bess being indisposed, and seeing Placidia just ready to make her Vows, would not deprive her of this slight satisfaction. She sent her to the Parlour, charging her to pay her civilities, and make her excuses to this Gentleman, and assigned her the Sub-prioress for a Companion. Our cunning Cavalier imagining that she would not come alone to the Parlour, had taken his measures, and had written a Letter for to. slip into Placidia's hand, wherein he ac∣quainted her with the true dispositi∣on of his Heart, and his sincere sen∣timents. Placidia conjecturing by the qua∣lity which the Colonel affected, that he was not willing to be known, seem'd very indifferent at his appea∣rance,
and hardly rais'd her eyes up∣on him. A secret joy rendring her mute, the Sub-prioress, who took her silence for an effect: of her mo∣desty, entertained the Cavalier, whose discourse was suited to her circumstances. This discreet Lover did not shew any motion of the im∣patience he was in to entertain Pla∣cidia in private, who for her part did not in the least make appear how desirous she was of a particular con∣versation. The old and troublesome Confident after an hours discourse got up, having told the Novice that it was time to retire. She was for∣ced to obey, and all that she could doe was, in drawing the Curtain be∣fore the Grate to receive subtly her Lover's Letter, which contained what follows. I am always the same, lovely Pla∣cidia, and though you should cease to love me, I could not resolve to change.
Let what will happen you are not bound to be eternally unhappy, or fate shall involve me in the same misfortune. O∣bey still for some time the caprichiousness of Destiny; you will suddenly triumph over its malice, and will find the calm is very pleasing when it is usher'd in by a tempest. Your Captivity is near its period, venture all for all. Do not fear that new Vows can weaken your first Promises. The God who knows that you have given me your saith in exchange with mine, does be∣forehand discharge you from the perfor∣mance of Promises which the inhuma∣nity and passion of a Mother will force you perhaps to make. There is great talk of a Peace, but whether according to the good pleasure of God the King will be∣stow it upon Europe, or that the War continues, I will take such a course that in the midst of a general trouble we will enjoy the delights of a sedate life. You may promise your self that in a short time you will recover your liberty,
or at least will see the most faithfull of all Lovers perish in this Enter∣prize. The reading of this Letter did something pacifie Placidia's mind, who was very desirous to have had a particular Conversation with her dear Colonel. He had promised her before parting, that at his return from the Castle of Syllery, whither he was going, he would come-take the Letter which she was desirous to write to her Brother; an expedient which he had on purpose invented that she might have time to make him an Answer. And indeed she made him a very kind one, which she slipt into his hand instead of the Letter which with the Abbess's leave she wrote to her Brother. He had no sooner received it than that pre∣tending to be very much in haste, he took his leave of Placidia and her too faithfull Companion. You
may easily imagine he did not car∣ry it sealed up to his Garrison. A passionate love is always impatient. Now to reade this pretious Letter with all the attention which its mat∣ter deserved, twenty paces from the Village he alighted from his Horse, which he tied to a Tree, and after having kissed the Interpreter of Pla∣cidia's sentiments, he read this Let∣ter two or three times, its Contents being as follows. Would to God, my dear Colonel, that you were as invulnerable as you are faithfull to me, I should not then live thus in mortal apprehensions: there is not an hour either day or night hut that I figure to my self that you are brought back to your Tent full of a hundred glorious wounds. A true Lover ought to be something a Coward: Pardon me for inspiring into you such base sen∣timents. I am willing that you should follow the impetuosity of your great
heart, but I would willingly run with you to glory, and fall under the same blow. You promise me my freedom: If it is at present in your power, who will be security that the tragical end of Heroes with which you are threatned will not to morrow ruine your good in∣tentions? Steal from glory what you are owing to Love, and be assured that there is nothing but your absence that renders me unhappy. This Letter very much mov'd our Cavalier, and made him make reflexions which cast him into some trouble. Placidia being got into the Belfrey of the Church to follow him with her eyes as far as her sight could bear, observed that in his res∣verie, he turned his eyes above twen∣ty times towards the place from whence he came, which shewed that he did not part from her but with extreme regret. He returned to Peronne, went to his Quarters,
where he impatiently expected the Spring, when that charming season calls to Arms. The Marquis lived in very good understanding with him, and was always discoursing him of Placidia, of the return of whose passion he flattered himself with very little reason. The Army in the midst of March marched into Flanders and deprived our Lovers both of their hopes, and convenien∣cy of seeing again, so soon as they could have wished, the person by whom they were so diversly char∣med. Placidia, whose year of Novici∣ate being revolved, and having given her self up as a prey to her profound sadness, because that she did not re∣ceive any news of her Lovers, made a vertue of necessity: and animating her self still with couragious hopes, consented to make her Vows. Her Father-in-law and the Countess her Mother came to make her a Visit a
fortnight before the Profession, to whom she testified an extraordinary inclination for a Religious life. They applauded her Resolution, and gran∣ted all she demanded of her Father's Estate for the rendring her recepti∣on the more pompous, even to the giving her to the value of two thou∣sand Crowns in Jewels, which she said was to be employed for the ad∣ding to the Ornaments of the Altar, but which she never parted with. Nothing was wanting of all that could render the Ceremony the more solemn: the Mother had brought with her an Abbot from Paris, a very eloquent man, who made a Discourse very suitable to the occasion, and in whose hands Placidia made her Vows. All these pass'd without the knowledge of that lovely Maids Lovers, who ne∣vertheless did expect this unvolun∣tary Sacrifice. The War being more than ever re-inflamed, his Majesty
made an express prohibition upon pain of being Cashiered from the service to all Officers of what quality soever they were, not to quit the Garrison upon any pretext, and this prohibition subsisted during two Winter Quarters consecutively; for which reason neither the Marquis nor the Colonel durst for two years budge from their Regiments to go comfort the poor Placidia, who shed every night a torrent of tears upon the remembrance of the Colonel her Lover. And indeed she could not persuade her self any thing else, than that he and the Marquis had lost their lives, since after such strong promises they kept so obstinate a silence. As she was one day con∣ferring with one of her most inti∣mate Friends, of those who had for∣merly an esteem for her, she spoke of the Colonel whom she imagined was kind, and the knowledge of whose Destiny she would have pur∣chased
with half her life. This Con∣sident not wanting wit, though she had been from her infancy in the Cloister, remonstrated to her that it was very easie to know what was become of him, and that there nee∣ded no more than to write directly to him at the Army in Flanders. Placidia following her counsel wrote a Love-letter with reproaches to the Colonel, and found the means to have the Letter carried to the Post without being seen, for that being now Professed she had more liberty. This Letter came safe to the Colo∣nel's hands, eight days before the Cassation of the Troups, which was made upon the conclusion of the Peace. It was conceived in these terms. Those who love but little, do not love at all. This is your vice, per∣jur'd Lover, the ambition and glory whereof you are too greedy, make you
forget what you are owing to Love: you do not love at all, because you love but little. An absence of above two years, assures me, that you have for me, if not contempt, at least some∣thing more than indifference. I con∣jecture from so prodigious a silence, that your heart has engaged it self to another. Be not surprized if I call you perjur'd, for either you are so to me or to her, whom you are now making Oaths to of fidelity. Oblige me to change my Opinion. Have I not waited suffici∣ently? will it be seasonable, for we to give my self up to the sweets of love, when with a declining age they will be become insipid to me? Will you be sen∣sible to the pleasures of happy Ʋnion, when Fatigues and military labours shall have as much ruined your Body as they have hardened your Heart? If you are still alive, my dear Colonel, come bring me the happy news your self, and if you are not bold enough to undertake the freeing me from the Cap∣tivity
I am in, come at least and set at liberty the person who has loved you with the most violent of all passions, and is the most constant and most faith∣full of her sex, Placidia. If ever man was surprized, our Colonel was so then when this Let∣ter was delivered him. He received it as a present come from Heaven, he read it over and over, and it had such an effect upon his Soul that he departed immediately for Paris, with a resolution to go think then seriously of the means of bringing to pass the enterprize of stealing away his Mistress. The young Marquis, over whom he had got great credit, and who seem'd absolutely to depend on his counsel, did not quit him. He accompanied him with his own Horses as far as Paris, where ne∣vertheless
they lodged together. When they had reposed there for eight days they got new Cloathes, and the Colonel pretending to go a Journey into the Countrey for three or four days, during which the Marquis, who caused a Coat to be embroidered, was expecting its being finish'd that he might go to Avenay in the equipage of a Court∣like Spark. But the Colonel preceded him, attended onely by one Servant, a robust man, who had been a Soul∣dier in his Regiment. Though he might have askt for the Reverend Mother Placidia at the Parlour without apprehending being denied the sight of her, he nevertheless still took the ancient quality of Gover∣nour of the Pages, by which he was already known in the Abbey. Pla∣cidia had notice of his arrival, which surprized her to that degree, that she
could hardly go a step. She came alone to the Grate, and expected there, almost without the Colonel, who had mistaken one Parlour for another; when that having percei∣ved him to enter into that wherein she was, she was so seized with joy at the sight of him, that she fell in∣to a fainting fit, which deprived her of speech for above half a quarter of an hour. Never was Lover in a greater perplexity than our Colonel, seeing that young Maid without any motion, and without any sign of life extended after a negligent man∣ner, and in the posture her swoon had laid her upon a Chair. His wishes to give her help were all in vain, a troublesome Grate not lea∣ving it in his power. He thought that in so mortifying an adventure there was no remedy but patience, not thinking it convenient to call people, for fear of giving an occa∣sion to a suspicion which would
have broke his measures. Placidia recovered from her swoon, gave a great sigh, and said, addressing her self to the Colonel with a lan∣guishing voice, Do you live still, my dear—but was not able to pro∣ceed any farther, a torrent of tears for joy stifling her speech. Her tears excited those of the Colonel, and rendred him mute. They viewed one another for some time, their eyes doing the office of the tongue; and the Colonel at length, as being stronger than Placidia, re∣plied, Yes, my lovely Child, I still live for you more than for my self, and I am come hither to assure you that I am ready to expose a thousand lives to free you from slavery. Do but suggest to me the surest means for your delive∣ry. Let us not lose time in useless dis∣courses, I impatiently long for those happy moments, and those Lands still unknown, whither we will make a happy retreat. To which our young Re∣ligious
having made answer that she consented to all, and was resol∣ved to run all manner of hazards; it was concluded between them without any farther debate, that on the Thursday come fortnight follow∣ing, at eleven a clock in the even∣ing exactly, the Colonel should come within a hundred paces of the Abbey, near the ruined of a little House, which stood upon the side of a High way, that from thence he should send his Servant with a Suit of Mens Cloaths to the Walls of the Convent Garden, that she should dress her self by favour of the night, and in that disguise come to him. And that they might not fail in this design, the Colonel had on purpose brought his Servant with him, who was instructed with what he had to doe. They both parted after some soft and melting farewells, and the Colonel made haste to Paris for the putting of all things in order. The
Marquis having notice of his return, came to take his leave of him, de∣signing to go visit Placidia, whose Mother he had seen at the Play the day before. The Colonel in no∣wise fearing the conduct of this imaginary Rival, desired him that he would present his most humble respects to that Fair one, and con∣sult with her the means of procu∣ring her the satisfaction which he did not doubt but she had a long time sighed for. Our Marquis arrived at Avenay, discoursed Placidia, who seem'd at first much astonished, he made no mention of the Colonel. In that first interview, whether that she thought the better to conceal the design she had contrived, or that she really apprehended that the Co∣lonel would fail his word, she a∣greed to be stollen away by the Mar∣quis, but appointed the time three days after that projected with the
Colonel. The Marquis at his re∣turn alighted from his Horse at his secret Rival's Inn, gave him a descrip∣tion of Placidia's new charms, and a relation of what had passed and was concluded between her and him. He spent the Afternoon with that Friend, with whom he made a De∣bauch, wherein they drank several times to the good success of his En∣terprize. While that they amused them∣selves after Supper in playing at Picquet, their Servants drank libe∣rally, and the Wine getting into their Noddles, they laid open their hearts to one another. The Marquis's Man Embracing his Camrade told him, Faith I am mad we must part so soon; to whom the other replied, and I am so too, perhaps for all our lives. Yet it is commonly said that the mountains never meet, but of men the contrary often happens. Whereupon he asked him where his Master was
going? Into Italy, replied he soft∣ly: And mine so too, replied the Colonel's Servant, without doubt in the Company of— pursued the other who had a mind to pump him. In the company, added this indiscreet fellow, of young Mother Placidia, whom he is to steal away on Thursday come sev'night, and for whom he had already caus'd a Man's suit of Apparel to be made, which I make no scruple to reveal to you, because I be∣lieve you capable of keeping it secret. I am so, continued he, and s'death I had rather be hanged than obliged to betray a secret. This was sufficient for the Mar∣quis's Servant, who as he put his Master to Bed that Evening gave him the whole History of the Colo∣nel's voyage into Italy. He made him repeat it the next Morning, and enquired exactly of all the circum∣stances he had learnt of the Colo∣nel's enterprize, and of the time he
was to execute it, which having learnt conformably to the truth, he forbid this fellow upon pain of being turn'd away, not to say a word to a∣ny body whomsoever that he knew the intrigue, and ordered him to ab∣stain from his Cronie's company. This young Cavalier conversed with the Colonel since that time with as much equality, though he look'd upon him in his Soul as a perfidious Rival, as if he had known nothing of his treachery. The day ap∣pointed being come, the Colonel came to take his leave of him. The Marquis knew so well then how to command his resentment, that he let not the least sign appear as might discover his fatal resolution, but wisht his friend a happy Journey. The Colonel departed on a Spanish Horse for Rhemes, attended by his Servant, who rid on a Mare loaded with a heavy Portmantoe. The Marquis outraged at the Colonel's
perfidiousness followed him at half a leagues distance attended by his Servant. He so well observ'd the traces of him, who went before him, that he departed from Rhemes a quarter of an hour after him. The Colonel not suspecting any thing, being arrived at the place of the Rendesvouz, sent by his Servant the Cavalier's apparel to Placidia, who had no sooner received it, than that she gave order to the fellow to go rejoin his Master, and give him hopes he should see her presently. This Servant being oh foot, had hardly got to the Chapel, near which the Colonel his Master was expecting on Horseback, when he heard two Cavaliers coming full gal∣lop a-cross the Field, of whom the one said to the other, Here they are, here they are. He was opening his mouth to give notice to the Colo∣nel, when the Marquis, followed by his Man, fired a Pistol in the
Air, crying, It is thee, perfidious Rival, that I seek for. The Colonel sur∣prized to hear the Marquis's voice, was putting himself in a posture to Parry the insult; when he received in his Stomach three Bullets from a Musqueton, which that young Ca∣valier let fly at him before he had time to ward the danger. These wounds fell'd him from his Horse, and he expired in a moment after. These Assassinates had time to withdraw before that the Colonel's Servant, being in a maze, did think of succouring his Master. He ran to him, and having neither found in him breath nor sense, he re∣assembled all his strength to carry him into the little Desart Chapel, where he laid him at length. Then went he, out of his wits, to go meet Placidia, when he saw her coming towards him so nimbly as did suffi∣ciently speak the joy she had at her Deliverance. She asked him im∣mediately
all transported, Where is my Lover? the fellow struck dumb, not being able to give her an an∣swer, took her by the hand, led her into the Chapel, to contemplate there the most fatal of all spectacles. Placidia near her Lover, whom she thought asleep, thuncht with her hand to wake him; but the insensi∣ble, sleeping an eternal sleep, was without any motion. She put her hand a second time upon him, as it were to tickle him, which she drew back all over bloudy, without con∣jecturing any thing of what had happened, turning towards the Ser∣vant, she asked him if he had not killed his Master, and if he was re∣solved to make her an accessory to the Murther? to which the poor fellow made answer, No, Madam, I am not the Authour of my Master's death, but the Marquis, who has a long time sigh'd for you, was not able to suffer a Rival in a Friend. At
these words, Placidia giving a shriek, bid him hold her up, and then fain∣ted away in his Armes. She remai∣ned sometime in that condition, from which being recovered, she cast her self upon the Body of her departed Lover, whom she deified and embraced with fentiments of so mortal a regret, that she would doubtless have expired upon him, if the Servant, who foresaw whither the passion of this tender Maid would tend to, had he not forced her from the Corpse, and had he not carried her with some violence out of the Chapel, into which he would not suffer her to return untill he saw her something recollected from her first motions. A hundred co∣gitations agitated Placidia's mind in that moment. She first design'd to return into the Convent, which might have been done without scan∣dal, and a moment after changing her resolution, she turned her
thoughts towards a thousand places whither her destiny might conduct her. She abandoned her self at length to blind fortune, and encou∣raging her self against the tyranny of fate, she returned into the Cha∣pel, commanded the Servant to empty his Master's Pockets, and ha∣ving taken his Table-book, wrote therein by favour of the Moon these harsh lines which she addressed to the Abbess, who was the Lady of the place. Madam, Your self-interested zeal has occasio∣ned this Murther. You ought not in concert with an unnatural Mother have put me in Chains. If you will take a just revenge on me, tear out the Heart of this too faithfull Lover, and plunge therein a Poignard. It is the Heart of Placidia.
This energick Invective took up near four Pages of the Table-book. She laid them open upon the dead man's Stomach; which being done, the Servant helped her to get on Horseback, and followed her, after she had promised him, that to what place soever they went, she would make his fortune. She went eight leagues afterwards without re∣freshing, after which, having ta∣ken a morsel, she took Horse a∣gain, and continued by great days Journeys her way as far as Lyons, where she refreshed her self after in∣credible fatigues. She caused there very magnificent Mourning Appa∣rel to be made for her, and put her Servant in a good equipage. As she went every Evening to take the di∣vertisement of the Play-house, she could not but be taken notice of there. All people considered a young Cavalier so well made as a man of high condition. The Qua∣lity
of Count de la Mark, which he took, fortified this belief. She li∣ved at a high rate, which made some Rogues resolve and agree to∣gether to rob her. For that pur∣pose they waited till about nine a Clock in the Evening that she came from the Comedy, and attackt her upon a little Bridge. Her Servant stood stoutly to it, while that Placi∣dia, whom we will henceforward call the Count de la Mark, or plainly the young Count, made her escape. This faithfull Servant resisted these Robbers the best he was able, untill at length being surrounded by them, he was thrown by those Rogues from off the Bridge into the River where he was drowned. Our young Count lost a great deal in this Servant; he seem'd for some days extremely grieved for his misfortune, and inferred from all these accidents that he was the mark of destiny, against which he
took a resolution to struggle. He took a Valet de Chambre who knew nothing of all his affairs, whom he carried with him to the Court of Savoy, whither he went immediate∣ly after his arrival at Turin to pay his respects to her Royal Highness. That August Princess, charmed with the happy Physiognomy of this young Count, took an affection for him, and ordered him not to quit the Court. He became very assi∣duous there, appearing after a very gallant manner, which mov'd Ma∣dam Royal to give him testimonies of her benign inclination. And in∣deed he had not been at Court above two months when she gratified him with a Company of Foot; the Or∣ders being that the Officers should not abandon the Garrison: the Re∣giment wherein the Count de la Mark had a Company being at Verceil, when that he wrent to take leave of her Highness, she gave him leave
to return to Court after 3 months residence. He employed that time in taking tinctures of all the exerci∣ses becoming his Profession, both of Riding and Fencing. The three months being expired, he returned to Court, where having passed seve∣ral months without that any Beauty being able to triumph over his indif∣ference, Madam Royal told him one day smiling: But, Count de la Mark, how long will you continue in an indif∣ference injurious to the fair Ladies? How, will you be all mays insensible? or rather is this Court so barren in objects worthy any passion, that there is not one capable of staggering your resoluti∣ons? This obliging way of speak∣ing from so Illustrious a Princess seem'd to him to merit a just answer, and as he had an infinite deal of wit, he told Madam Royal: Madam, the Graces make their residence in this Court, and if I have so long deferred to sacrifice to some one of those Divi∣nities,
the reason is, because I cannot without rendring my self culpable of an injurious preference determine my self to any one in particular, the most part of the Ladies, who have the honour to approach your Royal Highness, having all I know not what that's singular to my eyes; Insomuch, Madam, that I am all ready to love, and should not think my self deceived in my choice, if I had the advantage of receiving an in∣clination from the hands of your Royal Highness. This Disposition, reassu∣med Madam Royal, is rather an in∣disposition to love, than the mark of a real passion. People ought onely to fol∣low, in the choice of an object, the motions of a natural inclination: sym∣pathy is the mother of Love, and it is onely from it that it can take its rise. Nevertheless, if you can conceive a Love more than one of complaisance for her I might propose to you, love Ma∣demoiselle Berenice, shewing her to him, but love her sincerely, if it be
possible, and you will without doubt find how highly she does merit it. As the sex of our young Count did not cause any greater emotion in him in the presence of the one than of the other, he would needs shew by dwelling upon this election the esteem he had of her Royal Highness's choice. He turned to∣wards the beautifull Berenice, and made her a declaration of Love, with so much wit that all the Court was surprized and charmed with its justness. And indeed he laid to her a great many pretty things, and conjured her, through the respect he had for Madam Royal, that she would accept of his Compliments for the future. This young Lady, who had been born and bred at Court, and was no less witty than handsome, repartie'd very ingeniously to the young Count, whom she already lov'd by inclination, and told him very gallantly that he ought not to
amuse her to no purpose, but to li∣sten to what her heart should say to him of her, and to give her a faith∣full account of it. Thus the Con∣versation ended, this new Mistress following Madam Royal, who with∣drew into her Cabinet. The Count de la Mark being thus engaged, when he least thought of courting a Mistress, imagining that an amorous commerce which should take its rise from an unforeseen oc∣casion would onely follow an ordi∣nary train, and would not so sudden∣ly be terminated, returned the same evening to Court, where he had onely eyes for Berenice, and agree∣able replies for the propositions of that facetious Mistress. He told her that very moment so many nice and pleasant things, that being char∣med with his wit, she immediately grew familiar with him, which ren∣dred him afterwards something more reserved. This illustrious Travesty
thinking himself obliged to live at something a higher rate, because since the honour he had received from Ma∣dam Royal he was respected by all people, he quitted his Inn to go take a Lodging in the principal place of the Town, and where commonly all strangers of Quality lodge who travel to Turin. Sitting down one day to Table at an Ordinary, he per∣ceived the Marquis, the Colonel her Lover's Murtherer, who seated himself opposite to her. He was arrived some days before at Turin from Germany, whither he retired after the assassination of his Rival. He had there heard so advantageous an account of the Count's Qualities, that he had a strong inclination to be of his acquaintance, and this was what had invited him thither. Our young Count knew him immedi∣ately, but the Marquis had not pre∣served any Idea of him, insomuch that during Dinner the discourse was
wholly upon indifferent things. The Marquis having observed by the Count's conversation, that the deli∣cacy of his wit was answerable to the pourtraict all the Court made of it, courted his familiarity, and engaged with him in a commerce of Friendship which outwardly see∣med very intimate. The Count nevertheless kept in the bottom of his heart sentiments of revenge which suddenly broke forth by the death of that ambitious Rival, for see what followed afterwards. Since the Marquis was arrived at Court, his young heart not being able to remain in repose, he made visits to the lovely person, for whom the Count seemed to sigh. He fan∣cied himself very far in her esteem, though Berenice had no inclinations but for our illustrious Travesty. He knew the Count visited her, but ne∣ver having met him at her apart∣ment, he thought himself onely be∣loved,
and it was this ridiculous o∣pinion that cost him his life. The young Count, who onely made his vows to Berenice at Court, not pre∣suming that sentiments declared in publick would be taken for sincere, upon her reproaching him one day that he told all the world except her self that he was in love with her, because he never went to give her assurances of it at her Chamber, he went on the morrow morning and found her in Bed. There it was that he found himself obliged to en∣tertain her with soft and amarous Dis∣courses, which had so sensible an effect upon Berenice, that she told him gal∣lantly after an hours familiar con∣versation, Count, the rest to morrow. Though this manner of assignation seem'd to him something too liber∣tine, he did believe that at Court, where affairs are a long time before they come to consummation, in ca∣ses of Love they were terminated
expedited so soon. He returned on the morrow at the same hour, with a design to take his leave of Bere∣nice for a month, which he said he was to employ in reforming some a∣buses in his Company, flattered with the hopes this space of time might stifle the flames of that young Maid. But he was too tardy, and will have another sort of Journey to take. Be∣renice, who had impatiently expec∣ted him in her Bed, had garnished her head with Cornets of point of Venice, with gawdy Ribbons, mixt with Gris∣delin, white and blue, whose colours were as many symbols: she had, in short, decked her self with all the ornaments that could render her a∣greeable in the state she was. The Count seeing her in that posture did make but ill conjecture of the suc∣cess of his visit, made her a very Gentleman-like Compliment, and told her though the company of two Officers would have engaged him
to take Horse that morning for Ver∣seil, he was nevertheless unwilling to depart without coming to pay her his civilities; that his friends wait∣ed for him with all imaginable im∣patience, and that he desired her to give him leave to obey the Orders of her Highness. Berenice at any others time would have contented her self with a Compliment, but the amorous passion which ruled her put into her mouth such engaging words, that our Count cruelly per∣plext could not civilly dispence from entertaining her for a moment. He approach'd her Bed-side, near which having found no Chair, because she had caused them all to be taken a∣way on purpose, she prevented him, and gave him the liberty to sit upon her Bed. If ever Lover was in a consternation it was the Count, who seem'd at that moment without speech, motion or sense. Berenice perceiving the distraction
he was under, ask'd him what ren∣dred him so pensive? to which this Lover against his will made her no other answer than by a smile, which gave her occasion to believe that he was burnt with the same amorous desire as her self. When she saw him seated by her, her fire mounted into her face, she ask'd the Count with a confidence which was but little allayed by modesty: Is it true, Count, that you love me? you have sworn you do a thousand times, but the faith of a Cavalier, having always been suspected by me, you may now un∣bosome your self to me, and make me know if the force of your love is answera∣ble to the vehemence of mine. The Count put to his trumps by these ad∣vances, ready to obtain what any other would have called the highest favour, pretended he would make her a very soft and amorous answer. He said, Why has not Heaven, Ma∣dam— when that he got up hastily
and went towards the Door, as if it were to surprize some body who had the curiosity to listen to their discourse. He proceeded on as far as the Stair-case, from whence be∣ing returned, pretending anger to Berenice, he cried, My God, Madam, your Servants are very curious, I hate such people like the Pest. Whether that Berenice guessed he had really heard some body, or that she was scandalized at his freedom, she seem'd netled to the quick at this disappoint∣ment of the Count's, whom from that time she treated with, the great∣est neglect and scorn. From that very moment she took an aversion to him, and told him with a tone as did sufficiently speak her vexation, Without doubt, my Lord, the thoughts of your being expected, took from you all other application, and you fancied by preoccupation the arrival of some body: besides, we said nothing but what might have been heard without
scandal by all the world, at least unless you were upon the point of beginning some silly idle discourse. The Count de la Mark who was offended at the words, yet did seem to take notice of the reasons which animated her to use them, to him. He ask'd her pardon for die fault he had commit∣ted, and took his leave, of her, lea∣ving her in an alteration capable of framing designs of the most cruel revenge. As she was deliberating in her self about the means of drawing sa∣tisfaction for a contempt which pass'd in her mind for the most sig∣nal of all outrages, the Marquis, who seldom fail'd to see her at her dressing, entred her Chamber, where he remain'd some time without be∣ing able to get a word from her. It was to no purpose for him to inquire of the state of her health, and of the occasion which obliged her to sigh. She made him no answer but by re∣doubling
of sobs, which cast him into the like consternation. After having acted a long time the part of a Woman, whom excess of grief had deprived of her senses, having shed tears that had as it were resto∣red her to her usual serenity, she her self reanimated her displea∣sure, and ask'd the Marquis with such an accent of voice as was the interpreter of her despair, if he lo∣ved her sincerely enough to em∣brace her interests, and help her to stab a Ponyard in the breast of the most criminal of all men. Yes, Ma∣dam, replied the Marquis; those who vex-you, or have the disadvantage of displeasing you, offend me mortally, and there is nothing but what I would undertake and hazard for the drawing a just satisfaction. Who is this perfi∣dious person you complain of? tell me onely his name, without declaring to me his crime; he is culpable since you judge him so, and he must either take
away my life, with the tranquillity which he has ravished from you, or wash in his bloud the crime he has committed. The disposition wherein Berenice saw the Marquis to revenge the insult which she said had been done her, did suffi∣ciently flatter her resentment so as to give him liberty to continue speak∣ing. That young Count de la Mark, added she, whose insipid Courtship I ne∣ver heard but at Court, being flatter∣ed with a vain hopes, that one of my ways of saying things after a gallant manner did yesterday inspire him with, came early this morning to make me a visit, entred my Chamber, saluted me, sate familiarly upon my Bed, and after having entertained me romantickly of the flames which devoured his heart, approached his head to my Pillow, and by surprize kissed me, and his hands would have taken other liberty if I had not vigorously repulsed them, and if the shriek which I gave had not made him desist from his insolent enterprize.
See, pursued that malicious Maid, what has put me in the trouble you see me under; judge, my dear Marquis, if I am without reason in a rage, and if it is not with justice, that I demand satisfaction for so criminal a freedom. The Marquis, giving credit to the words and tears of Berenice, took vigorously her part, declared against the Count's temerity and insolence, which he judged worthy of being checked, and which he offered to punish immediately. Berenice after having made him promises capable of making him venture at all, re∣mitted the interest of her offended honour into his hands and manage∣ment, conjuring him not to defer taking a just satisfaction. This was sufficient to inflame the already boi∣ling bloud of the Marquis, he left Berenice without saying to her a word more, and flew to the Count's Lodging, who was at Breakfast with one of his Friends. He invited him
to partake with them; they drank some glasses of Wine together, and then having taken the Count aside, he told him nevertheless aloud e∣nough: You know, my Lord, what has passed between Mademoiselle Be∣renice and you; if you are as couragi∣ous as you are passionate you will meet me with your Friend, who shall serve for a witness of the action, in the Wood behind the White House, about eleven a clock, and there we will end the quarrel in which I am concerned. The Count de la Mark, having a hun∣dred times sought an occasion to quarrel with the Marquis, in whom that beautifull Travesty had never been able to resolve to pardon the murther of her Lover, did joyfully accept the Challenge, gave him his hand, invited him to doe the same, after which the Marquis withdrew. The Cavalier who had been present at the Challenge, instead of endea∣vouring a reconciliation, did still
animate the Count the more, and very luckily lent him a pair of Buff∣skin Gloves. The Marquis had waited some time for the Count de la Mark, when he very luckily came to the Rendesvouz. These two il∣lustrious Combatants embraced one another, and immediately took Sword in hand. This last having learnt but three months, and having not so strong a hand as his Adver∣sary, did not stand very stiff to it at first, which made the Cavalier believe, who was present at the Com∣bat, that they were not equally matcht, and made him resolve to strike down their Swords to part them, when that of the Marquis pointed unluckily into the Buff∣glove, wherewith the Count's left hand was armed and left this last time to run him in a mortal wound which rendred the Marquis uncapa∣ble of pursuing the fight. The Count de la Mark having thus gained
the Victory, bid the wounded man ask his life. The Marquis begg'd it accordingly, but it was too late, he fell down upon the ground, and lost in∣sensibly his life with his bloud, when our young Conquerour told this un∣happy dying man. I would I could restore it thee, though thou dost not deserve it. But since thy ill destiny does rather deprive thee of it than my dexterity, know it is with delight that I deprive thee of it, and that it is from Heaven that my Arm receives the force of revenging my Lover to day. If thy agony leaves thee still any sense and knowledge, open thy eyes, look and know Placidia under the just inclinati∣on which proves thy fall, and go tell my dear Colonel, whose base and exe∣crable assassinate thou wert, that I love him still, and that he is revenged. At the name of Placidia the Mar∣quis opened his eyes again; he re∣collected all the strength he had left in that extremity and told this
young Conquerour: Are you Pla∣cidia? and exhaled with these words his last gasp. The last service which our young Count could render to this unfortunate Cavalier was to lend him his Arm to draw him some∣thing farther into the Wood, where he covered his Body with Leaves. After an accident of this nature he did not think it safe for him to tar∣ry any longer at Turin. He went in all haste to the City, where he went to declare what was done to Madam Royal, into whose hands he remitted his life. That generous Princess, who honoured him with her good will, ordered him to ab∣sent from Court, and for a mark of her clemency caus'd Letters to be dispatched in favour of him to her Resident at the Court of Rome. What inclination soever he had to see that Court, he had the curiosity to know the City of Genoa, and to make some abode there for that pur∣pose.
Whereupon he set forwards for that Town, after having enga∣ged the person by Oath, who had been present at the Duel, and a witness of his Victory, not to engage his search. And then he changed his Quality of Count de la Mark into that of Chevalier de Saleuze, and ar∣rived at Genoa. The destiny to which he had abandoned himself en∣tirely, furnished him with an oppor∣tunity of making acquaintance with one of the principal inhabitants of the City whither he was going, whose wit and humour were of a man of his Quality, and not of his Age of seventy years. In speaking of several things, that venerable old man finding that this young Cava∣lier, with whose conversation he was charmed, designed to make some stay at Genoa for his diversion, and knowing the Town, he offered him his House, and engaged to board him for three months. Our Cheva∣lier
having found that he was no self-interested man, accepted his offer and alighted at his House, where he found none but respectfull domesticks cloathed in mourning, by reason their Master had been a Widower about six months. He had two Chambers appointed him in the finest Apartment over those of the Daughter of the family, whom her Father had newly carried to Turin to spend some time with a Lady a friend of hers. The Cheva∣lier de Saleuze did not abuse the fa∣miliarity of his Host, but treated him always with the highest respect. These regards did extremely please the Magistrate, who judged by the Gentile and civil carriage of his Pen∣sionary that he was a person of con∣siderable extraction. He took an affection for him, and without ex∣amining to the bottom who he was he fancied he should not be disho∣noured by his alliance. As they one
day came back from walking and en∣tred the House, Mademoiselle Scho∣lastica being newly returned from Turin came to embrace her Father, who commanded her to present her Cheek to the young Chevalier. She executed this order with a very good grace, and afterwards gave an account to her Father of what she had done since their separation. Supper was in the mean while pre∣pared, which being served upon the Table, and the Chevalier thinking he was obliged to shew something more than indifference, took a seat very near that of Mademoiselle Scho∣lastica, who was a Maid of a singular beauty, and though she had hardly attained the sixteenth year of her age, was likewise very ingenious and witty. Amongst other things which she said to have heard at Court, she said that a Cavalier had flattered her with being capable of inspiring, and receiving the impres∣sions
of Love. Her Father attribu∣ting this freedom of speaking her sentiments to her innocence, enqui∣red of her the name of the person from whom she had received this Compliment. From a young Cava∣lier of this Gentleman's age, replied she, shewing the Chevalier, who ad∣ded too that he wish'd he could be so happy as to make me in love. Schola∣stica's Governess, who knew the Cavalier, spoke his name aloud, who being very well known by the Fa∣ther, he said that that young Spark was accustomed to make Court to all young Women, and that credit was not to be given to all gallan∣tries. This old man took delight in observing the eyes of his Pensionary, who held them almost always sixt upon Scholastica, to whom he thought it was his devoir so to doe out of policy. After some discourses which sufficiently shew'd the character of his Daughter's simplicity, he askt
the Chevalier, Well, Sir, what do you think of this innocent Creature? Is she worthy to be look'd upon by a Ca∣valier? Whereupon our young Spark replied, That Mademoiselle Schola∣stica was sovereignly amiable, and that there were Princes who should esteem themselves perfectly happy to be in her favour. This answer flattered the weak side that this old man had for his Daughter, and put the Che∣valier more into his mind than ever. During three months that our Che∣valier spent in Scholastica's familiari∣ty and company, as a Brother with a Sister, the old man having obser∣ved nothing in the conduct that me∣rited the least reproach, he concei∣ved for him so extraordinary an e∣steem, that without knowing him otherwise he designed him his Daughter. As he was very glad she should be beloved, he took him one day aside, and sounded his disposi∣tion as to her. This illustrious Tra∣vesty
who could have wish'd to have been capable of so fine an uni∣on? did modestly declare to Scho∣stica's Father that he had always e∣steemed Mademoiselle his Daughter worthy of being courted, and that if he had never appeared passio∣nate for her, the reason was not that her charms had left his heart in repose, but because he knew the inviolable fidelity which was due to hospitality. So wise and prudent an answer charm'd the old man, who told the Chevalier, that if he had any inclination for his Daughter, he might freely declare to him his sen∣timents, and that he would prepare her to listen to him favourably. Our Chevalier since this notice had all the complaisances imaginable for Mademoiselle Scholastica, to whom he acquitted himself of all the devoirs of a real Lover. The Carnaval time being very near, the old man, who was of a
strong complexion, that had not yet loft the relish worldly pleasures, being accustomed to go every year to Venice to take his share there in the publick Divertisements that are just before Lent, proposed the jour∣ney to his Boarder whom he found disposed to all he had a mind. Amongst the general debauches our Chevalier knew how to keep a temperament between dissolution and too much reservedness, and his conduct seem'd in all things to the old man so full of wisedom, that he jud'gd he could not find a more wor∣thy Husband to his Daughter. As he was lookt favourably upon by the Great Duke, going one day to pay him his devoirs, that Prince askt him what was become of his Daughter, and if she was married? to which the old man repertie'd, that he was upon the point of giving her in marriage to a foreign Gentleman, in whom he ob∣served such fine qualities, that he guess'd
at the greatness of his extraction by the purity of his manners. The Prince testified that he should be ve∣ry glad to see him, which mov'd the old man to engage him to come kiss his most serene Highnes's hands, which he had the honour to doe, and the Grand Duke seem'd very well satisfied with him, and told the Magistrate in his presence that he did not believe he would be deceived in his choice, that he would be at the charge of the Wedding, and would honour them with his presence. Such obliging offers from so great a Prince did quite deter∣mine the resolution of Scholastica's Father, who promised her in the Grand Duke's Chamber to our Che∣valier, who found himself too much honoured with so ticklish a prefe∣rence as not to give his consent to a Match so glorious for him, which was projected for a certain day. As soon as our old man was returned
to his home, he call'd for his Daugh∣ter, and as he was the absolute Ma∣ster of her will, he commanded her to give her hand and faith to our Chevalier. Scholastica obeyed her Father's orders with great satisfacti∣on, and likewise embraced very a∣morously the Chevalier, who for his part vow'd to her an eternal fideli∣ty: the Nuptial Ceremonies were prepared without much hurry, and all was made ready by orders from the Great Duke in one of his most stately Houses of pleasure for the day of Marriage. Destiny conducted things to such a term as gave a great deal of dis∣quiet to our illustrious Travesty. He sufficiently sought the occasion to steal away during the hurry of the Ceremonies, but some or other of the Company never leaving him hindred him for putting his designs in execution, insomuch that it came to the Solemnities of the Marriage,
which were celebrated in the Chapel of the Castle, with all the pomp ima∣ginable. Our Chevalier resolved a∣gainst fate, had not the time to dis∣pute with himself, and saw himself constrained to pass from the Church to the Banquets prepared in Services of the Prince's gilt Vermillion. He lent his good humour to the Feast, which the Grand Duke honoured with his presence, and at the Desert drank to the happiness of the Bride and Bridegroom. The Afternoon was spent in conversations, in sports and walks, which were followed by a splendid Supper, and worthy of the Prince's magnificence. The Ball came afterwards, at which all the Court was present, and wherein all the young Lords disputed who should present the hand to the young Bride. Though that our uneasie Husband foresaw that the Company would Dance till the morrow morning, he judged he had waited but too long,
and that it was time to make his Escape. Thus he vanisht insen∣sibly from the Hall under pretext of some necessity, took his Ser∣vant at the Door, and so went out of the Castle without having been distinguished by the Centinel, a∣midst a crowd of persons, who went in and out there every mo∣ment. He having informed his Servant of his design, he had caus'd Horses to be ready hard by, which they mounted, after having chan∣ged Clothes in the very place where they were expected. They travel∣led all the Night, during which the Assembly of the invited, and the Prince inquired for him, and had him sought for every where. It not being possible to find him, all the Company thought that he might have found himself indisposed through some excess, which might have obliged him to withdraw into
some private place. His absence was the cause that they put an end to their mirth much earlier, and filled the Father and Daughter with cruel thoughts. They were in hopes to see him again at least on the morrow, but their hopes were deceived, for they met with no bo∣dy who could give the least tidings of him. In the mean while they were forced to digest their vexati∣on. All the Town went to com∣fort the old man for this mortify∣ing adventure, at which Scholastica was so concerned, that she ask'd and obtain'd from her Father the li∣berty of going to deplore in a Cloister so surprizing a Widowhood. True it is, that she did not first put on the Nuns attire, and that she still expected very impatiently her Husband's return.
Our Chevalier de Saleuze in the mean while arrived at Rome, where he called himself plainly Monsieur de la Motte. He clothed himself there very modestly, and went to pay a Visit to the Resident of Savoy, to whom he presented the Letters that Madam Royal written in his favour, who in consideration of the Prin∣cess made him all manner of good reception, and offered him his Ta∣ble. He enquired after his designs, if he was resolved to stay in that Court, and what figure he intended to make there. The Sieur de la Motte having made him answer, that he was not in a condition to be at any expence, the Resident told him, that if he had a mind to sub∣sist on some Benefice it lay in his power to procure him one of some small consequence, untill that an occasion of some more considerable one was offered. Our illustrious
Travesty listened to this proportion, and thought that he ought to afford himself likewise this sort of fortune, told him that he was shaved, and that he should have the highest ob∣ligation to him if he would employ his credit to provide him the place of a Canon. About a week after∣wards there fell one vacant. The Resident had notice of it, requested it of his Holiness, who gratified the Sieur de la Motte with it, whom he recommended very particularly to his Bishops. Whereupon he went to take possession of his new Dignity, in a City twenty miles distance from Rome, called Cesano, where he arri∣ved at the time of a very famous Fair, which was kept every year in that place, and which invited thither almost all Italy. Then he went to the Cathedral, and assisted at Divine Service, which he recited with the rest; when by the treache∣ry
of his ill Destiny which had brought Scholastica's Father thither, he was known by him. The truth is, that this old man looked upon him a long time before he could be persuaded that it was he, and it was his blushing that did most betray him. All aided to the con∣viction of his Father-in-law; for ha∣ving inquired if he had been long a Canon, he learnt that he had been so but one day, and that he had been received by the Chapter upon the solicitation of the Resident of Sa∣voy. No longer doubting but that it was he, he enquired after his Lodging, from whence he caus'd him to be taken by virtue of a War∣rant, which he had obtained against him. The credit of the Resident his Protectour obtained his removal to Rome, where being put again in∣to Prison, two hours afterwards our old man in the highest rage against
him went to render him a Visit. At first he fell into invectives against him, called him Cheat and Decei∣ver, and swore he would make him suffer for the affront with which he had tarnished the honour of his Fa∣mily. Our Canon let him say all that passion suggested to him, and after having seen him return'd into the state of his usual tranquillity he discours'd him in this manner. I do not doubt. Sir, but that you have rea∣son to complain of me, for having expo∣sed you to the becoming the May-game of the Countrey, and for having re∣nounced the alliance of the Person in the world who seem'd the most to merit my affection: But when I shall have acquainted you with the Reasons which mov'd me to so precipitated a Retreat, I believe you too reasonable, not to, I will not say applaud, but at least, not to something moderate your resentment. I had a passionate love, pursued he,
for Mademoiselle, your Daughter, and I thought her sensible to my passi∣on, flattered my self that I should a∣lone enjoy the sweets of her Embraces; and nevertheless my ears have acquain∣ted me that I was not the onely Object of her Vows, and that she had a much greater inclination for another. To∣wards the midst of the Ball, having ob∣served that Mademoiselle Scholastica entertained familiarly a young Lord, near whom she took a Seat: after ha∣ving danced, I had the Curiosity to hear what might be the subject of so familiar a Discourse. I slipt, to sa∣tisfie my self upon that point, behind the Hangings, and those two Lovers spoke very softly: I nevertheless heard distinctly that they said to one ano∣ther an hundred amorous things. I could wish, for your repose, for her honour, and the half of my bloud I had been deaf in that occasion, or that the Vapours of Wine and Meats had
not given them such a longing to enter∣tain one another so privately. But what is there more indiscreet than a violent love! This young Lord said to Ma∣demoiselle Scholastica, That happy time is at length come, that we shall enjoy those pleasures which the estate of Maiden forbid us the use of. Hea∣ven does at present favour our mutual flàmes, and it will onely depend on that we may live in the finest intelli∣gence imaginable. To which Made∣moiselle, your Daughter, made an∣swer: That he ought to be persuaded that she was wholly his; that how great a horrour soever she might always have had to marriage, she had onely consen∣ted to it, that it might serve for a cloak to their amorous Commerce, and that they needed onely to seek sure means to entertain it. The Sieur de la Motte could not make this recital without shedding tears, which in∣deed melted the old man, but did
not render him entirely satisfied. They were at:this pass when the Resident, Protectour of Monsieur de la Motte arrived, who was fully in∣formed of the things, and created Arbitratour of the Dispute. This wise Mediatour seeing that the Ca∣non confessed the desertion he was accused of, did at first make him some remonstrances, and told him afterwards that he must absolutely resolve to return to Genoa, to live there in a perfect concord with his dear Wife, and upon his observing that he had an extreme repugnance to consent to this offer, he told the Father-in-law that he thought con∣venient for the satisfaction of both Parties, that he should make a Set∣tlement upon his Daughter, and al∣low her to accompany her Husband into some other Town or City, where, not being known, they might live in a happy Union. The
old man subscribed to the proposi∣tion, consented to the setting free of his Son-in-law, whom the Resi∣dent engaged to re-deliver him when that things were in a readi∣ness. Whereupon he departed for Genoa, and our Canon went to lodge at the Resident's House, who had commanded secretly to one of his Domesticks, to have always an eye upon him. The Sieur de la Motte counterfeited for some time, and seem'd to have no other design than of expecting with patience the arri∣val of his Father-in-law, though he meditated his retraction to Portu∣gal. The old man at his return to Ge∣noa went to see his Daughter, dis∣coursed her for the space of two hours, and put her an hundred times out of countenance, and made her a hundred reproaches, which had like to have put that innocent
Creature into despair, though her Tears and her Candour, which was known to him, and her Oaths did persuade him of the contrary of what he had learnt of her: He made her resolve nevertheless to comply with the design of her Hus∣band, who intended to go pass with her at Venice the rest of his life; of whose return he was assured, be∣cause he powerfully flatter'd him∣self with the hopes of it. Thus she expected, without letting any thing be known of her design to the Nuns and her Companions, the time of her change of State; But she learnt with a redoublement of grief that proposition accepted by the Chevalier her Husband had onely been a slur by which her Father had suffered himself to be surprized, which made her demand the habit of a Nun, which was not refused, though that the year of
the Noviciates being revolved, they would not receive her vows. And indeed the Old man having setled his affairs, by Letters informed the Resident of their disposition, who was upon the point of Communi∣cating it with the Sieur de la Motte, when word was brought him that he had made his escape in the morning without any bodies know∣ing what was become of him. He had abandoned Rome and the Quality of Sieur de la Motte, to take upon him that of Chevalier, and went in all haste to Civita Vecchia, when he embarked in a little Vessel which he found there ready to make sail for Lisbon. And indeed as soon as he was got on board, they weighed Anchor; and when that he saw himself at some distance from the Port, and free from all fears, he began to breathe a∣gain, and accost a Portuguese Gentle∣man,
called Don Alphonso, who took a singular pleasure in his Conver∣sation: they sail'd with so fair a Wind, that they were not long at Sea, and descended at the Port of Lisbon, where Don Alphonso invited our young Traveller to take up his Quarters at his House, untill that he was something acquainted with the Town. He accepted the offer of that officious Portugal, staid some days at Lisbon, and went in his Company to pay his most humble respects to the Queen, whom he had the honour to ac∣quaint with the favours he had received from Madam Royal. Her Majesty took an affection for him from that very moment, assured him of her Protection, and recom∣mended him to Don Alphonso, whose Father had the office of her Gen∣tleman of the Horse. The Fami∣ly of this Nobleman dwelt com∣monly
four Leagues from the Town, and consisted in a Vertu∣ous Lady, Mother of two Daugh∣ters, extremely beautifull, of eigh∣teen and seventeen years of age, and of a Child of eight, Brother of Don Alphonso. This obliging family neglected nothing of all that might serve to the Diversion of our Chevalier, who divided his time between good Chear, Walk∣ing, Hunting and Fishing. Though he had not in the bottom of his Soul any greater inclination for the one, than for the other, of those two lovely Ladies: He observed so much sweetness and conformi∣ty in the humour of the youngest with him, that he conceived for her a Love of Sympathy, which he made pass with her for a real passion. The eldest, whose Mother could have wish'd to have been first provided▪ with a Husband,
though the youngest was her Darling, saw with a singular de∣light, that our Chevalier had an Esteem for her: This eldest, I say, became jealous of their familiari∣ty, to that degree, of not allowing them the least conveniency of be∣ing able to confer together. Her young Sister, who was not very much in Love, but took a pride in being belov'd, perceiving that she bore her a grudge for the af∣fection that the Chevalier testified for her, Counselled her pretended Favourite to disguise his Senti∣ments, to make Love to her Sister; and told him that she should take for her self all that he should say to her Sister that was touching and tender, and that thus they might divert themselves agreeably upon her jealousie. The Chevalier consented to her request. But this young Lady was so in∣discreet,
as to Confide this Amo∣rous Cheat in her Chamber-Maid, who went and told it immediate∣ly again to the eldest Sister; who conceived so furious a resentment upon it, that she resolved not to prescribe bounds to her revenge, but to assassinate him in his way to Lisbon, whither he was to go on the morrow to Don Alphonso, whom some affairs had called thither some days before. She gave for this execution a Ring of value, and Money, to a Peasant, formerly a Soldier, and always of a cruel and barbarous temper, who was to have lain in Ambuscade, and so have shot him dead. The Chevalier de∣parted about five a Clock in the morning, in the cool, for Lisbon, and was met upon the way by the hired assassinate. This rusty fellow being on foot, let him pass by, and then fired a Pistol very near
him behind, but missed him. Our Chevalier being startled at the noise, turned towards the Tray∣tour, who had but one Bullet more to fire, and him he threatned to kill if he charged again, and left him not, untill by the help of some Passengers he had seized on him, and made sure of his person. When he saw him in his power, he que∣stioned him, and learnt that the eldest Sister of Don Alphonso had moved him to commit this Crime. He was not willing to put this Mercenary Criminal into the hands of Justice, nor to sacrifice him to a just resentment; he contented himself with giving him good re∣monstrances without bitterness, and encharged him with a Letter for her, who would have sacrificed him to the passion of a detestable jealousie. Now this Letter con∣tained onely these lines.
Love will be extremely free in its choice. Your youngest Sister has Charms, and I know not what, which you have not. A Maiden capable of so black and so criminal a design as is that you have brewed against me does not merit my esteem. Live for some o∣ther who shall have as wicked a soul as you have a base one. Take again from this clumsey, though barbarous, wretch, a Ring which he has not gain∣ed, it will reproach you eternally with your perfidiousness. Adieu. This generous Conquerour of himself, who apprehended some o∣ther extremity, and who besides found not any Charms in the Court of Portugal, went a walking upon the Port; where having learnt that there was a Bark which weighed Anchor for Marseiles, he went on Board after having written a Letter
of Thanks and Excuses for what had passed to Don Alphonso, whom he thought not convenient to see, that so he might not be obliged to acquaint him with the enraged ma∣lice of his Sister. He stay'd not long at Marseilles, but departed for Turin, where he went immediately after his Arrival to make his Compliments to Ma∣dam Royal, who let him know that she had been acquainted with the adventure of Genoa. Then it was that our Illustrious Travesty being weary of the world, tired with act∣ing so many different parts, and in∣wardly inspired to return to God, and to her self, gave the History of her Life to the Princess, whose pie∣ty she conjured to favour the de∣sign she had of finishing her days in a Cloister. Then it was that this August Princess shed tears for joy upon the return of this lovely
person, as the Angels of Peace up∣on the Conversion of a sinner; and that she made her sensible of the effects of her goodness and her truly Royal Compassion. For ha∣ving caused her to be attired con∣formably to her Sex, and sutably to her Condition, she proposed to her to enter into a famous Nunne∣ry of her nomination. Placidia testified all imaginable gratitude to Madam Royal, and acquainted her with the inclination she had for another House of Religiouses, where she had often assisted at Divine Ser∣vice at the time of her abode at Genoa. This August Princess very far from opposing her choice, gave her Letters written with her own hand for the Abbess of the Place; to whom her Highness recommen∣ded her, as if she had been her own Daughter, even to the engaging to furnish her apartment. Placidia,
blessed with such favourable Letters, was received with an extraordina∣ry and universal joy by the Abbess and the Community, who look'd upon her as a person of a peculiar merit. A strong reason had moved her to chuse this Sanctuary; she had learnt that the Daughter of the Magistrate, whom she had played upon by her disguise was there in the rank of Novices, that she had long demanded to make her vows, and that she could not have the li∣berty granted her without a decla∣ration of Nullity of Marriage, or without certain Conjectures of the Death of her Husband; possessed with the thought that she should free her out of pains, she made choice of that place, where she took the Veil, and declared fifteen days before her profession, what she had been in regard of the poor Schola∣stica, who had mistaken her till
then, that she hugg'd her with transports of joy, that are not to be expressed. She was the Com∣panion of her Sacrifice, as she is, at present, the Emulatrice of her Vertues. THE END.
