S163 E603_4 99858754 165649
The Great PREPARATION MADE IN HOLLAND, FOR The KING of SCOTS, GOING INTO SCOTLAND. ALSO, The D. of Buckingham, M. Hamilton, and the E. of Newcastle, to be sent Embassadors into Germany, Sweden, and Denmark; With the large promises of Col. Massey, and Ald. Bunce, to the foresaid King. Together, with a great Fight at Sea, between the English and French; where (after two days and nights dispute) the French Admiral (and 300 men) was taken, with 50 Guns, 100 Barrels of Powder, and great store of Ammunition. June 12th LONDON, Printed by Robert Wood. 1650.
The Preparation made for the King of Scots going into Scotland; and what number of men, and ships are to attend him in his Voyage. SIR, YOurs of the second instant I have receiv'd, and being bound to make retalliation, I presume to present you with these ensu∣ing lines; But before they will have the happiness to kiss your hand (I fear) the King of Scots (the chief subject of my discours) will be landed there; being forced thither through meer necessity, not transported with affection: and though he hath no other way to turn himself but that, yet had the news of their execution of Montross come but a little sooner, he might perhaps have taken other re∣solutions; at the first hearing of it he was much a∣maz'd, and 'tis a wonder he will trust himself with them (who have executed his General, a man signa∣lized with several marks of his special favour, and one who acted by his Commission) specially when he brings them no greater assistance, for attaining their ends upon you; but they must make their own way to it both for themselves and him. His arrival there will presently begin a War, which may pose the best fore-sight to tell when it will end; though perhaps it
may not be hard to guess what Catastrophe it may cause. There are again Embassadors to be sent, more honourable then the former; Hamilton is to go into Sweden; Buckingham into Germany; and Newcastle into Denmark: They say, the Scots Commissioners had rather the errand had been only for money; for they in Scotland can better tell how to multiply men than furnish treasure. Their kinde of Merchants use not to raise great estates; and they cannot drive so good a trade of Begging any where, as they have done here∣tofore in England: yet the wisest here, think these Legations are rather to furnish them with honourable pretences (to be absent from Scotland till they may get better assurance they may be welcome thither) than out of hope to procure any money there. The Dane hath no money (not having yet recovered out of the debts of his father) and (if there were) the States there have uses for it nearer home. The State of Sweden is also exhausted; and (particular men have sufficiently raked poor Germany; who) though they may speak big (which they do naturally) must be content to do nothing; 'twill be well for them if they keep their new acquiess in Germany; little assurance can be had of Treaties, let them look to the Russian—And for Germany, poverty, jealousie and uncertainty how that peace may settle, will keep off those Princes from such Contributions as he will have need of: But this being impertinent, I shall proceed to intelligence. After the King of Scots had been two days at Hounslaer-dyke (most of which time he spent in conference with the Prince of Orange) he went back to Breda, and took order for a present departure: He had some small sums to pay his Chaplains, who are to stay behinde, and
must not passe over into that gude land; [lest they should prophane it.] Some money is also given to 150 poor Officers, who are to (go with him and) ride in a Troop, till they can raise men for them to com∣mand. He is now come back again to Hounslaer-dyke, and these two or three days, all the baggage for him∣self (and those who go with him) is sent to be shipt at Ter-hay and Schevelinge; and now he stays for nothing but the winde, as soon as that serves he will be gone, if your ships come not upon the Coast in the mean time to hinder him, which they extreamly fear. The Ships [his Convoy] are said to be of Zealand, which Province is desperatly your enemy, and it is wondred here that you are not more sensible of it, and make them be so too; 'tis in your power to change their temper: They are pitifully enslaved to the Prince of Orange, whose interest they have with greatest zeal caried on, and fullest opposition to Holland; who on∣ly have seen their danger, and laid a foundation for re∣covery of the Liberty of the United Provinces, which was ready to be lost to the will of their Servant, whom they had at severall times given so much power, out of gratitude, to the merit of the two first of that Fa∣mily (without respect had to the event, in case there should not be in them a succession of probity and vir∣tue) as made him forget his own condition, and able to change theirs; which they would have found before this time, if the troubles in England had not made that assistance a lye, which that Marriage was made to pro∣cure. Since my coming hither, I have had opportunity to discours with very knowing men, who freely con∣fess they were well nigh lost, and till the business of the Cassation be setled, they are not sure they are safe.
They say they had not made their peace with Spain, but that they might be free from the power of their own Militia, and let their General know, That he was not absolutely necessary: that they cashier the strangers (not out of dis-respect to them, they having served faithfully, but) because they had given the Prince a greater power in them, than in the Dutch: That they are still in a Paroxism, and expect a Crysis at the next meeting of the Provincial-States. They yet hope, notwithstanding the Princes anomalous peram∣bulation of the Cities of Holland, they will stick to their interest, and pursue the Cassation: and that if the rest of the Provinces will be slaves, they will not. If the bundle of Arrows must be unbound, they of Holland know into what quiver to put their arrows. By this means you may be sure the King of Scots will have no assistance hence, that may be proportionable to his wants; and it is observable, that who'ever have a minde to assist him, become presently unable to help themselves; of which France, and the Prince of Orange, are two notable examples. Yesterday, the Scots King came to the Hague, to take leave of the Princess Dowa∣ger of Orange, who hath a young Daughter, to whom (some say) the Scots Commissioners are content to match him; but the uncertain condition of the Prince of Orange, will cool that prosecution: Besides, here are some say, Argyle hath a daughter to whom he must be married, a Gentlewoman of rare parts and education; and that this will unite all interests there, and make up the breaches. But it is the opinion of many juditi∣ous men, that Princes affections are not conciliated by pawning of children, nor doth it always cement, but sometimes widens differences. The close Treators (so
called here) Collonel Massey, Alderman Bunce, Collo∣el Graves, and Titus, make the King of Scots believe, that they keep the key of the London Treasury, and that they will be able to furnish all his wants: And without doubt, they hold a constant correspondence there, but not with so great effects; for though there are great numbers—that their money and they are soon parted, yet they curse your High Court; and by the sense of their danger from it, have learned some more wit, than to lose their money and hazard their necks at once: you cannot look too strictly after their secret correspondence, nor proceed too severely upon discovery. There hath been lately Commissions given out for the raising of Strangers for the K. of Scotland; one Harder hath Commission for two Regiments, and Carp the Landgravinne of Hessen's General, is also enga∣ged; but there is yet no apparent money. I hear the Scots have no minde Strangers should be brought into Scotland, lest their King should make use of them, to put himself out of their Pupillage, and so free himself of the Breda shackles; therefore they advise, that they may be ready to land in England, when they have once gotten up their party there into Insurrections. And indeed, if you let slip your present opportunity, and that your affairs should decline, you would be sure to have all the colluvies and scum of Germany upon you: but do your work well this year, and you have done it for ever. We doubt not but you see your point, be∣cause all men else do; and if you should not pursue it, you should be less happy then you have been: Your reputation grows abroad, starve it not; you have not many friends; but most begin to think you con∣siderable.
The 9th instant the King of Scots was at Hounslaer-dyke, where the Prince of Orange came to take his leave of him, which being done, that evening he went to Schevelinge (whither was brought much baggage ye∣sterday) there to be embarqued in three great ships, riding (between Ter-hay and Scheveling) at anchor in open view, and are bound [they say at Court] for Scotland: There is a report, that some Danish and Swe∣dish ships should be at Sea for his better convoy, but there is no certainty thereof. I am advertiz'd by a French Gentleman, who came the last night to this Town from Paris, That the King of Spain having gi∣ven Commissions to two English Frigots (viz. the Hun∣ter and Spie, one of 20, the other 16 guns) they sail'd into the Mediterranean Sea, where the French Fleet be∣ing accidentally dispersed, they happened to encoun∣ter with their Admiral, and between them began a very fierce and bloudy fight, which continued (off and on, one chasing the other) two days and nights; in all which time, it was dubious to which side the vi∣ctory would encline; but in the end, the English Fri∣gots came up so close to the French Admiral, that (Fast∣ning their grapling-irons) they presently boorded him, who (seeing themselves brought to such a strait) durst not dispute their decks, but immediatly threw down their weapons and cry'd for quarter, which was granted: There was in this ship (living and dead) 300 men, 50 guns, 60 barrels of powder, and great store of Ammunition; all which they carried into Naples. This (Sir) for the present, be pleased to accept of, from the hands of him, who unfeignedly is The humblest of your creatures: T. S. FINIS.
